3D Virtual Reality Experiments To Promote
Electrical Engineering Education
M. Travassos Valdez, Maria João M. Martins F. P. Maciel Barbosa
C. Machado Ferreira Academia Militar Departamento de Engenharia
Instituto Superior de Engenharia de DCTE & INESC-ID Eletrotécnica e de Computadores
Coimbra Lisboa, Portugal Faculdade de Engenharia da
IPC/ISEC mariajoaomartins2@gmail.com Universidade do Porto (FEUP) and
Coimbra, Portugal INESC TEC
valdez@isec.pt Porto, Portugal
fmb@fe.up.pt
Abstract—3D Virtual Labs are the support of learning, a tool acquire special importance to allow learning beyond the classroom
of education in the future. Learning in a 3D environment allows time and space.
greater interaction with contents in a unique way as students
perceive it as being really there. Simulations are being designed, a Keywords—e-learning, interactive application, software
combination of real-world environment with the information packages, training and education, virtual reality prototype, 3D lab
supplied by devices, where measurements can be replicated and internet.
data analyzed. This study presents a virtual scenario of a
Measurements and Instrumentation laboratory. I. INTRODUCTION. E-LEARNING
Team work, communication, project management, learning
Electrical Engineering courses aim to train students to succeed to learn and leadership are some of the requirements an engineer
in meeting the challenges within competitive and ever-changing
must meet, besides the basic technical knowledge. Engineering
professional contexts. In order to prepare undergraduate students
students also look for flexible ways to attend high quality
for ongoing success, the courses must provide effective training in
courses and have an efficient access to the most appropriate
the application and development of practices, typically
educational facilities. On the other hand, the teaching-learning
implemented in large projects and organizations. Developing high
process should be student-centered, with the possibility of
quality engineering course units is definitely a challenging task.
customizing the learning process and its outcomes.
Courses can be provided remotely, but careful planning is E-learning uses the internet as a platform for learning
required to design quality course units because problems may
activities, which include real-time virtual interactions between
occur in meeting quality targets. The developments in information
learners and educators or three dimensional environments,
and communication technologies (ICT), including multimedia and
increasing the learning applications. The e-learning environment
internet-based education platforms, facilitate the creation of
is considered an important resource to help traditional learning
reliable solutions to these challenges. Studies show that a smart
formats and is transforming the nature of higher education. E-
application of multimedia technologies and web-based education
learning platforms present several advantages as they enhance
platforms can provide great results towards better quality of
student-centered learning; students become more self-sufficient
engineering courses. Many challenges on how to suitably approach
while educators take on innovative roles; the e-learning
the educational process have already been put forward. Higher
Education institutions use multiple approaches to teaching and environment encourages educators to be more reflective and
learning, combining a range of methods, including e-learning, systematic in preparing better e-learning resources and,
videoconferencing, face-to-face teaching and hard-copy resources ultimately, provides learners with the ability to adapt to an ever-
in course delivery. changing technologically driven world. While face-to-face
learning is better for ordinary discussions, contributing to an
The authors present a software model for engineering, which active environment, e-learning enables students to receive
is based mainly on the Wirefusion® software, and a virtual-reality learning activities from educators at a distance, allows larger
platform called VEMA. The project intends to improve the quality classes and it is easier to identify and record behaviors and errors
of teaching and learning in higher education through effective to improve learning activities.
application of information technologies and the sciences of
learning. Today teachers are challenged to design effective learning
activities that incorporate on- and off-campus resources across
3D virtual learning environments arise as solutions to the physical and virtual environments. Virtual Learning
extent that, in addition to offering features associated with Environments (VLEs) provide teachers and students with a
communication and information sharing, they promote flexible framework within which students can access learning materials
learning spaces and moments. At the level of higher education, and and teacher support. The fundamentals of a VLE include
in accordance with the paradigm of Bologna, virtual environments controlled access to a curriculum divided into small sections, a
system of tracking learner activity, access to learning resources,
978-1-4799-1756-3/15/$31.00© 2015 European Union
assessment and guidance, and a means of communication among The goal of the project was to design and organize
teachers and students. Virtual laboratories are not meant to distributed online laboratories that allow teams of students to
replace the need for hands-on laboratory sessions. However, virtually access laboratories and to have remote collaboration in
these laboratories provide complementary benefits when used in performing experiments. The aim of the project was also to
addition to hands-on labs, or where the latter are unavailable. create software modules for online virtual laboratories using
Virtual laboratories are advantageous as they give students technologies and setting up online lab workbenches. The Lab
greater flexibility of when and where to conduct experiments platform enables students to open laboratories for virtual access.
and allow them to complete or repeat experiments in their own They will use a virtual breadboard and virtual instruments to
time. perform laboratory work from home. Tests and measurements
are done using virtual instruments via the internet.
Distance learning (DL) uses the internet as a platform for
learning activities. Students can access the online activities using All the images of the numerous models of laboratory objects
individual workstations or group facilities. These activities may were constructed in the environment of 3Ds Max, a 3D modeling
include: interactive quizzes, the presentation of assigned work, program that supports rendering images and animations. It was
self and peer assessment, giving information on various issues, necessary to reduce the size of the 3D models and CAD files
such as notes and deadlines, peer interaction, real time virtual before being imported to WireFusion, while preserving visual
interaction between students and teachers, three-dimensional quality. A powerful and precise polygon repair and reduction
images, interactive video and other applications [1-4 ] . tool, the VizUp Ultimate, was used to achieve it.
E-learning support technology is developing rapidly and the The next step was to import the resources to a program used
introduction of broadband internet allows the use of more to create interactive presentations targeted to the Web.
complex information at faster rates to support an increasing Wirefusion® was chosen to use and develop performances
array of applications for learning [5]. The learning environment through visual means. WireFusion® technology allows the
is often considered an important complement to traditional prompt creation of interactive 3D presentations for the internet.
forms of learning [6], and Information Technology (IT) is It is regularly used by designers, programmers, architects,
changing the nature of higher education [7]. Several advantages creating 3D configurations, visualizing product design and
of e-learning platforms were identified: e-learning can improve architectural design. The final procedure was the introduction of
student-centered learning due to the greater mobility between all presentations on the Web or as offline presentations.
courses, institutions and places of study [8]; electronic
3D models are a set of polygons that can be represented
assignments can be sent to students more quickly; students
geometrically in a variety of ways, in addition to having volume,
become more independent and self-taught while the teachers’
color and texture. The algorithms and validation mechanisms
role is related with assistance and innovation [9]; the e-learning
that contribute to improve the processing, the rendering process
environment encourages teachers to be better communicators
and the mechanism used to get a good picture of the description
and better organized in the preparation of e-learning resources
of a 3D scene are very complex.
[10]; it may be a more inexpensive way to offer learning
activities that ensure the access to information [7]; and it While the process reached a high level of realism, the main
provides students with the ability to adapt to an ever changing problem remains in the time spent in its execution. The objects
technological world [8]. require a lot of computer processing, and it is necessary to use
methods to reduce the time spent with the rendering process.
Research indicates that while face-to-face learning is best for
Thus, in order to combine the best way to optimize performance,
class discussion, e-learning allows students to receive high
it is important to choose the software, the rendering engine, and
quality distance learning activities, it allows larger classes and,
the model of the operating system.
at the same time, it is easier to identify and record behaviors and
errors so as to improve the learning activities. As an e-learning The creation of a 3D model follows a series of steps: first,
environment, it is more demanding for teachers as well [11]. To the object is constructed using polygons and other geometric
overcome some of the challenges and maximize its benefits, it is elements; then, it is necessary to build the texturing and lighting
of great importance the training and mentoring of teachers and because the visual reaction of the object to light is essential for
students as well as the monitoring of the students’ progress. the environment of a 3D model; as objects are heavy, it is
essential to subject each one to a polygonal reduction;
It is also necessary an analysis of the tools and techniques
additionally, it is necessary to build the animation and rendering
currently in use, due to the high demand and complexity in
of the object in a scene. Once the 3D model is built, it must be
building 3D virtual environments in which the speed,
able to perform all the steps to build each experiment, in order
complexity and knowledge is crucial. It is a challenge for higher
to create a 3D animation and produce a realistic virtual
education to train new generations of engineers in the use of
environment. Therefore, it is also necessary that the program
these tools.
used for the template is able to design a virtual camera view
II. AVAILABLE METHODS AND SOFTWARE point, so that the scene obtains the desired effect.
This paper proposes better practices related to the design, 3D Studio Max was used to produce the 3D model
size and animation of 3D environments that simulate phenomena prototypes with better indicators. This software is easy to use,
related to specific topics of electrical circuits, in order to increase reliable, efficient and easy to test, flexible, reusable, and
the skills and knowledge by students in higher education portable. However, the models could have been built in Maya or
institutions. Blender (Figures 1, 2 and 3).
978-1-4799-1756-3/15/$31.00© 2015 European Union
Figure 1. 3D model based on geometric shapes with textures using 3D Studio
Max Figure 3. 3D model developed in 3D Max Studio, with elements and rendering
III. METHODOLOGY
A total of 5 experiments in 10 menus were conducted using
the model of a 3D virtual lab environment called VEMA (Virtual
Electrical MAnual). Workbench mounts were made for each
experiment in order to obtain the rendering of the 3D model,
according to the established parameters. Each experiment was
defined by specific features, resistance values, applied voltage
or current delivered; moreover, different combinations of
resistors were made to develop relevant experiments (Figure 4).
Figura 4. VEMA homepage
These sets of simulations consist of a series of experimental
designs, where all tests have different parameters.
Figura 2. Power supply (real object and rendering in 3DS Max, after polygonal
reduction using VizUp)
3D construction aims at replicating actual objects in the
computer's memory, preserving their physical characteristics,
such as size, shape and volume. To create the virtual
environment, it is essential to consider all the different
requirements that it will contain, such as: size, animation,
effects, weather, lighting and cameras. There are several
methods with different characteristics and properties to the Figure 5. 3D model developed in 3D Max Studio, with the elements and
rendering using Vray
rendering process [12].
978-1-4799-1756-3/15/$31.00© 2015 European Union
Figure 5 shows the use of the MentalRay rendering engine therefore, be used for both e-learning and computer-based
to generate a processing technique. training (CBT-computer based training) in a friendly and
intuitive manner, in order to create educational applications.
Based on comparisons generated in this study, it is essential
to use a standard process to understand all the steps necessary Teaching management platforms based on e-learning
for the ideal development of the 3D environment and to generate methodologies can contribute to the creation of new learning
better applications with the best tools. A process that helps environments that foster interaction and collaboration and,
generate these paths is proposed, as shown in Figure 6. generally, facilitate teaching and learning.
The simulation on a computer is an efficient technique for
practical work applications. These simulations minimize the
concerns of teachers regarding time, costs or risks that involve
the choice of inappropriate, inefficient, or potentially dangerous
experimental strategies. The conclusions show the benefits of
Figure 6. 3D virtual application development model integrating this innovative model in an engineering course. Not
only does this approach reinforce the acquisition of current
The first step is to create all the necessary resources: 3D
engineering practices, but also opens new possibilities in the
models, images, animation, sound, etc.
design of training courses.
The next step is to upload these 3D models to a polygon
reduction program. VizUp was used, which allowed the REFERENCES
reduction and conversion of models without damaging the
[1] K. Bijlani, P. Manoj, P. Venkat Rangan. “A Framework for Interactive
representation of the object. It reduces polygons of entities in eLearning in a Virtual World”. BIS (Workshops), pp 177-187. 2008.
VRML format, and makes it possible to import complex entities, [2] M. Auer, Pester A., Ursutiu, D., Samoila C., Distributed virtual and
without sacrificing the speed of the computer and accelerating remote labs in engineering, IEEE International Conference on Industrial
the rendering process [13]. This was important for the Technology, vol. 2, pp. 1208-1213. 2003.
publication of contents on the internet. [3] D.Gillies, Student perspectives on videoconferencing in teacher education
at a distance. Distance Education, 29(1), pp 107118. 2008.
The third step is to import these resources to WireFusion 5.0 [4] E. Stacey and F. A Wiesenberg. “Study of face-to-face and online
® and develop presentations through visual means [14]. This teaching philosophies in Canada and Australia”. Journal of Distance
software is the simulation scenario editor. In this editor, all Education. 22(1), pp 1940. 2007.
entities and their respective behaviors, made in 3DS Max within [5] E. J. Burge, C. C. Gibson and T. Gibson. “Flexible pedagogy, flexible
the scenarios (maps), are imported; furthermore, the editor practice: Notes from the trenches of distance education”. s.l.:Athabasca
University Press. 2012.
allows the attachment of lighting, textures and other aspects
[6] G. J. Hwang and H. F. Chang. “A formative assessment-based mobile
related to the creation of virtual sets.
learning approach to improving the learning attitudes and achievements
The fourth and final step is the production of interactive of students”. Computers & Education, Volume 56, pp. 1023-1031. 2011.
contents using HTML5, CSS3 and Javascript with the aim of [7] C. Normand, A. Littlejohn, and I. Falconer. “A model for effective
implementation of flexible programme delivery”. Innovations in
creating standard presentations that may be used on the web,
Education and Teaching International, 45(1), pp. 25-36. 2008.
online or offline [15-16].
[8] M. A. Kamba. “Problems, Challenges and Benefits of Implementing
Elearning in Nigerian Universities: An Empirical Study”.
IV. CONCLUSION
The use of 3D models has become a common practice. Due [9] A. K. Manir. “The Internet as tool for Interactive Learning, Teaching and
to the large number of tasks to be processed, advanced computer Research”. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning 2
(3). 2007.
equipment is required. Furthermore, the integration of new
technologies allows the work to be performed without affecting [10] K. Purcell et al., “How Teachers Are Using Technology at Home and in
Their Classrooms”. (Washington, DC: Pew Research Center’s Internet &
the processing speed and/or the quality of results. As the creation
American Life Project, 2013.
of 3D environments for higher capacity computers involves time
[11] J. L. Bishop and M. L. Verleger. “The Flipped Classroom: A Survey of
and resources, this is a factor that will cause many institutions to
Research”. Paper prepared for the Association for Engineering Education
restrict their expectations in generating more interesting 120th Conference, Atlanta, GA, June 2013.
projects. [12] 3Ds Max. Autodesk® 3Ds Max Design®. Available from:
Finally, due to its usefulness in higher education, it is
[13] VizUp software company – Optimize 3D models. [on line] Disponível
intended that 3D virtual labs are to be developed along with
other learning materials for better performance in the teaching
and learning of higher-level processes. 3000-6677_4-10808107.html. Acessível em 27 junho 2010.
[15] M. M., Travassos Valdez, C. M., Machado Ferreira and F. P. Maciel
A desirable scenario will have courses and/or curricular units
Barbosa,, “Software Packages to Support Electrical Engineering Virtual
given in distance learning mode, allowing students to access
Lab”. International Journal on Emerging Technologies in Learning,
practical laboratory work from home or from work. iJOE2012. ISSN: 1861-2121. Volume 8, Special Issue 2: exp.at'11, pp.
19-23, Special Focus Pa.pers. 2012.
With WireFusion, it is no longer necessary to plug-in to
[16] M. T. Valdez, C M. Ferreira, F. P. Maciel Barbosa. "Software Packages
operate 3D presentations. The focus was transferred to the
to Support Electrical Engineering Virtual Lab," International Journal of
creation of 3D presentations. Presentations in WireFusion can, Online Engineering (iJOE), pp. 19-23. 2012.
978-1-4799-1756-3/15/$31.00© 2015 European Union