1v7204030/sc:viXra
“I’m sorry Dave, I’m afraid I can’t do that”: Linguistics, Statistics,
and Natural Language Processing circa 2001∗
LillianLee, CornellUniversity
It’stheyear2000,butwherearetheflyingcars? Iwaspromisedflyingcars.
–AveryBrooks,IBMcommercial
According to many pop-culture visions of the future, technology will eventually produce the Machine that
Can Speak to Us. Examples range from the False Maria in Fritz Lang’s 1926 film Metropolis to Knight
Rider’s KITT (a talking car) to Star Wars’ C-3PO (said to have been modeled on the False Maria). And,
ofcourse, there isthe HAL9000 computer from 2001: ASpace Odyssey; inone ofthefilm’smostfamous
scenes, the astronaut Dave asks HAL to open a pod bay door on the spacecraft, to which HAL responds,
“I’msorryDave,I’mafraidIcan’tdothat”.
Naturallanguageprocessing, orNLP,isthefieldofcomputersciencedevotedtocreatingsuchmachines
— that is, enabling computers to use human languages both as input and as output. The area is quite
broad, encompassing problems ranging from simultaneous multi-language translation to advanced search
enginedevelopmenttothedesignofcomputerinterfaces capableofcombiningspeech, diagrams,andother
modalities simultaneously. A natural consequence of this wide range of inquiry is the integration of ideas
from computer science with work from many other fields, including linguistics, which provides models of
language; psychology, which provides models of cognitive processes; information theory, which provides
modelsofcommunication; andmathematicsandstatistics, whichprovidetoolsforanalyzing andacquiring
suchmodels.
The interaction of these ideas together with advances in machine learning (see [other chapter]) has re-
sultedinconcertedresearchactivityinstatisticalnaturallanguageprocessing: makingcomputerslanguage-
enabledbyhavingthemacquirelinguisticinformationdirectlyfromsamplesoflanguageitself. Inthisessay,
wedescribe thehistory ofstatistical NLP;thetwistsandturnsofthestoryservetohighlight thesometimes
complexinterplay betweencomputerscienceandotherfields.
Although currently a major focus of research, the data-driven, computational approach to language
processing was for some time held in deep disregard because it directly conflicts with another commonly-
heldviewpoint: humanlanguageissocomplexthatlanguagesamplesaloneseeminglycannotyieldenough
informationtounderstand it. Indeed,itisoftensaidthatNLPis“AI-complete”(apunonNP-completeness;
see [other chapter]), meaning that the most difficult problems in artificial intelligence manifest themselves
in human language phenomena. This belief in language use as the touchstone of intelligent behavior dates
back at least to the 1950 proposal of the Turing Test1 as a way to gauge whether machine intelligence has
been achieved; as Turing wrote, “The question and answer method seems to be suitable for introducing
almostanyoneofthefieldsofhumanendeavour thatwewishtoinclude”.
∗ToappearintheNationalResearchCouncilstudyontheFundamentalsofComputerScience.ThisisanApril2003version.
1Roughlyspeaking,acomputerwillhavepassedtheTuringTestifitcanengageinconversationsindistinguishablefromthatof
ahuman’s.
Thereadermightbesomewhatsurprisedtohearthatlanguageunderstandingissohard. Afterall,human
childrengetthehangofitinafewyears,wordprocessingsoftwarenowcorrects(someof)ourgrammatical
errors, and TV ads show us phones capable of effortless translation. One might therefore be led to believe
thatHALisjustaroundthecorner.
Such is not the case, however. In order to appreciate this point, we temporarily divert from describing
statistical NLP’shistory — which touches upon Hamilton versus Madison, the sleeping habits of colorless
green ideas, and what happens when one fires a linguist — to examine a few examples illustrating why
understanding humanlanguage issuchadifficultproblem.
Ambiguity and language analysis
Atlast,acomputerthatunderstands youlikeyourmother.
–1985McDonnell-Douglas ad
The snippet quoted above indicates the early confidence at least one company had in the feasibility of
getting computers to understand human language. But in fact, that very sentence is illustrative of the host
ofdifficulties thatariseintryingtoanalyze humanutterances, andso,ironically, itisquiteunlikely thatthe
system being promoted would have been up to the task. A moment’s reflection reveals that the sentence
admitsatleastthreedifferent interpretations:
1. Thecomputerunderstands youaswellasyourmotherunderstands you.
2. Thecomputerunderstands thatyoulikeyourmother.
3. Thecomputerunderstands youaswellasitunderstands yourmother.
Thatis, thesentence isambiguous; andyet wehumans seem toinstantaneously rule outallthe alternatives
except the first (and presumably the intended) one. We do so based on a great deal of background knowl-
edge, including understanding whatadvertisements typically trytoconvince usof. Howarewetogetsuch
information intoacomputer?
A number of other types of ambiguity are also lurking here. For example, consider the speech recog-
nition problem: how can we distinguish between this utterance, when spoken, and “... a computer that
understands your liecured mother”? Wealsohave awordsense ambiguity problem: howdo weknow that
here “mother” means “afemale parent”, rather than the Oxford English Dictionary-approved alternative of
“a cask or vat used in vinegar-making”? Again, it is our broad knowledge about the world and the context
oftheremarkthatallowsushumanstomakethesedecisions easily.
Now, one might be tempted to think that all these ambiguities arise because our example sentence is
highly unusual (although the adwriters probably did not setout tocraft astrange sentence). Or, one might
argue thatthese ambiguities are somehow artificial because the alternative interpretations aresounrealistic
that an NLPsystem could easily filterthem out. But ambiguities crop up in manysituations. Forexample,
in “Copy the local patient files to disk” (which seems like a perfectly plausible command to issue to a
computer),isitthepatientsorthefilesthatarelocal?2 Again,weneedtoknowthespecificsofthesituation
in order to decide. And in multilingual settings, extra ambiguities may arise. Here is a sequence of seven
Japanese characters:
2Or,perhaps,thefilesthemselvesarepatient?Butourknowledgeabouttheworldrulesthispossibilityout.
Since Japanese doesn’t have spaces between words, one is faced with the initial task of deciding what
the component words are. In particular, this character sequence corresponds to at least two possible word
sequences, “president, both, business, general-manager” (= “a president as well as a general manager of
business”)and“president,subsidiary-business, Tsutomu(aname),general-manager” (=?). Itrequiresafair
bitoflinguistic information tochoosethecorrectalternative.3
Tosumup,weseethattheNLPtaskishighlydaunting,fortoresolvethemanyambiguitiesthatarisein
tryingtoanalyzeevenasinglesentence requiresdeepknowledge notjustaboutlanguagebutalsoaboutthe
world. AndsowhenHALsays, “I’m afraid Ican’t dothat”, NLPresearchers aretempted torespond, “I’m
afraidyoumightberight”.
Firth things first
ButbeforeweassumethattheonlyviableapproachtoNLPisamassiveknowledgeengineering project,let
usgobacktotheearlyapproachestotheproblem. Inthe1940sand1950s,oneprominenttrendinlinguistics
was explicitly empirical and in particular distributional, as exemplified by the work of Zellig Harris (who
started the first linguistics program in the USA). The idea was that correlations (co-occurrences) found in
languagedataareimportantsourcesofinformation,or,astheinfluentiallinguistJ.R.Firthdeclaredin1957,
“Youshallknowawordbythecompanyitkeeps”.
Such notions accord quite happily withideas put forth by Claude Shannon in his landmark 1948 paper
establishing the field of information theory; speaking from an engineering perspective, he identified the
probability of a message’s being chosen from among several alternatives, rather than the message’s actual
content, asitscritical characteristic. Influenced bythiswork,WarrenWeaverin1949 proposed treating the
problem oftranslating between languages asanapplication ofcryptography (see[other chapter]), withone
language viewed as an encrypted form of another. And, Alan Turing’s work on cracking German codes
during World War II led to the development of the Good-Turing formula, an important tool for computing
certainstatistical properties oflanguage.
In yet a third area, 1941 saw the statisticians Frederick Mosteller and Frederick Williams address the
question of whether it was Alexander Hamilton or James Madison who wrote some of the pseudonymous
Federalist Papers. Unlike previous attempts, whichwerebased on historical data andarguments, Mosteller
andWilliamsusedthepatterns ofwordoccurrences inthetextsasevidence. Thisworkleduptothefamed
Mosteller and Wallace statistical study which many consider to have settled the authorship of the disputed
papers.
Thus, we see arising independently from a variety of fields the idea that language can be viewed from
a data-driven, empirical perspective — and a data-driven perspective leads naturally to a computational
perspective.
A “C” change
However, data-driven approaches fell out of favor in the late 1950’s. One of the commonly cited factors is
a 1957 argument by linguist (and student of Harris) Noam Chomsky, who believed that language behavior
shouldbeanalyzed atamuchdeeperlevelthanitssurface statistics. Heclaimed,
3TotakeananalogousexampleinEnglish,considerthenon-word-delimitedsequenceofletters“theyouthevent”. Thiscorre-
spondstothewordsequences“theyouthevent”,“theyouthevent”,and“theyouthevent”.
It is fair to assume that neither sentence (1) [Colorless green ideas sleep furiously] nor (2)
[Furiously sleep ideas green colorless] ... has ever occurred .... Hence, in any [computed]
statistical model ... these sentences will be ruled out on identical grounds as equally “remote”
fromEnglish.4 Yet(1),thoughnonsensical, isgrammatical, while(2)isnot.
That is, we humans know that sentence (1), which at least obeys (some) rules of grammar, is indeed more
probable than (2), which is just word salad; but (the claim goes), since both sentences are so rare, they
will have identical statistics — i.e., a frequency of zero — in any sample of English. Chomsky’s criticism
is essentially that data-driven approaches will always suffer from a lack of data, and hence are doomed to
failure.
This observation turned out to be remarkably prescient: even now, when billions of words of text are
available on-line, perfectly reasonable phrases are not present. Thus, the so-called sparse data problem
continues to be a serious challenge for statistical NLP even today. And so, the effect of Chomsky’s claim,
togetherwithsomenegativeresultsformachinelearningandagenerallackofcomputingpoweratthetime,
wasto cause researchers to turn awayfrom empirical approaches and toward knowledge-based approaches
wherehumanexpertsencoded relevantinformation incomputer-usable form.
This change in perspective led to several new lines of fundamental, interdisciplinary research. For ex-
ample, Chomsky’s work viewing language as a formal, mathematically-describable object has had lasting
impactonbothlinguisticsandcomputerscience;indeed,theChomskyhierarchy,asequenceofincreasingly
more powerful classes of grammars, is a staple of the undergraduate computer science curriculum. Con-
versely, the highly influential work of, among others, Kazimierz Adjukiewicz, Joachim Lambek, David K.
Lewis,andRichardMontagueadoptedthelambdacalculus,afundamentalconceptinthestudyofprogram-
minglanguages, tomodelthesemanticsofnaturallanguages.
The empiricists strike back
By the ’80s, the tide had begun to shift once again, in part because of the work done by the speech recog-
nition group at IBM. These researchers, influenced by ideas from information theory, explored the power
ofprobabilistic modelsoflanguagecombinedwithaccesstomuchmoresophisticated algorithmic anddata
resources than had previously been available. In the realm of speech recognition, their ideas form the core
of the design of modern systems; and given the recent successes of such software — large-vocabulary
continuous-speech recognition programsarenowavailableonthemarket—itbehoovesustoexaminehow
thesesystemswork.
Givensomeacoustic signal, whichwedenote bythevariable a,wecan think ofthe speech recognition
problemasthatoftranscription: determining whatsentence ismostlikelytohaveproduced a. Probabilities
arise because oftheever-present problem ofambiguity: asmentioned above, several wordsequences, such
as“yourliecuredmother”versus“youlikeyourmother”,cangiverisetosimilarspokenoutput. Therefore,
modernspeechrecognitionsystemsincorporateinformationbothabouttheacousticsignalandthelanguage
behindthesignal. Morespecifically, theyrephrasetheproblemasdeterminingwhichsentencesmaximizes
theproductP(a|s)×P(s). Thefirsttermmeasureshowlikelytheacousticsignalwouldbeifswereactually
thesentencebeinguttered(again,weuseprobabilitiesbecausehumansdon’tpronouncewordsthesameway
all the time). The second term measures the probability of the sentence s itself; for example, as Chomsky
noted, “colorless greenideassleepfuriously” isintuitively morelikelytobeutteredthanthereversal ofthe
4Interestingly,thisclaimhasbecomesofamousastobeself-negating,assimplewebsearcheson“Colorlessgreenideassleep
furiously”anditsreversalwillshow.
phrase. It is in computing this second term, P(s), where statistical NLP techniques come into play, since
accurate estimation of these sentence probabilities requires developing probabilistic models of language.
These models are acquired by processing tens of millions of words or more. This is by no means a simple
procedure; even linguistically naive models require the use of sophisticated computational and statistical
techniques because ofthesparse data problem foreseen byChomsky. Butusing probabilistic models, large
datasets,andpowerfullearningalgorithms(bothforP(s)andP(a|s))hasledtoourachievingthemilestone
of commercial-grade speech recognition products capable of handling continuous speech ranging over a
largevocabulary.
But let us return to our story. Buoyed by the successes in speech recognition in the ’70s and ’80s
(substantial performance gains over knowledge-based systems were posted), researchers began applying
data-drivenapproachestomanyproblemsinnaturallanguageprocessing,inaturn-aroundsoextremethatit
hasbeendeemeda“revolution”. Indeed, nowempiricalmethodsareusedatalllevelsoflanguage analysis.
This is not just due to increased resources: a succession of breakthroughs in machine learning algorithms
hasallowed ustoleverage existing resources muchmoreeffectively. Atthe sametime, evidence frompsy-
chology shows that human learning may be more statistically-based than previously thought; for instance,
workbyJenny Saffran, Richard Aslin, andElissaNewportreveals that8-month-old infants canlearntodi-
vide continuous speech into wordsegments based simply onthestatistics ofsounds following one another.
Hence,itseemsthatthe“revolution” isheretostay.
Of course, we must not go overboard and mistakenly conclude that the successes of statistical NLP
render linguistics irrelevant (rash statements to this effect have been made in the past, e.g., the notorious
remark,“EverytimeIfirealinguist, myperformance goesup”). Theinformation andinsight thatlinguists,
psychologists, and others have gathered about language is invaluable in creating high-performance broad-
domain language understanding systems; for instance, in the speech recognition setting described above, a
better understanding of language structure can lead to better language models. Moreover, truly interdisci-
plinary research hasfurthered ourunderstanding ofthehumanlanguage faculty. Oneimportantexampleof
thisisthedevelopment ofthehead-driven phrasestructure grammar(HPSG)formalism—thisisawayof
analyzing natural language utterances that truly marries deep linguistic information with computer science
mechanisms,suchasunificationandrecursivedata-types, forrepresenting andpropagatingthisinformation
throughout theutterance’s structure. Insum,computational techniques anddata-driven methodsarenowan
integral part both of building systems capable of handling language ina domain-independent, flexible, and
graceful way,andofimprovingourunderstanding oflanguage itself.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to the members of the CSTB Fundamentals of Computer Science study — and especially Alan
Biermann — fortheir helpful feedback. Also, thanks to AlexAcero, Takako Aikawa, Mike Bailey, Regina
Barzilay,EricBrill,ChrisBrockett,ClaireCardie,JoshuaGoodman,EdHovy,RebeccaHwa,JohnLafferty,
BobMoore,GregMorrisett, FernandoPereira,HisamiSuzuki,andmanyothersforstimulating discussions
and very useful comments. Rie Kubota Ando provided the Japanese example. The use of the term “rev-
olution” to describe the re-ascendance of statistical methods comes from Julia Hirschberg’s 1998 invited
addresstotheAmericanAssociation forArtificialIntelligence. IlearnedoftheMcDonnell-Douglas adand
someofitsanalyses fromaclassrunbyStuartShieber. Allerrorsareminealone. Thispaperisbasedupon
work supported in part by the National Science Foundation under ITR/IM grant IIS-0081334 and a Sloan
Research Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed above are
thoseoftheauthorsanddonotnecessarilyreflecttheviewsoftheNationalScienceFoundationortheSloan
Foundation.