“Meaning” as a sociological concept:
A review of the modeling, mapping, and simulation of the
communication of knowledge and meaning
Loet Leydesdorff
Amsterdam School of Communications Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam
Kloveniersburgwal 48, 1012 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
The development of discursive knowledge presumes the communication of meaning as
analytically different from the communication of information. Knowledge can then be
considered as a meaning which makes a difference. Whereas the communication of
information is studied in the information sciences and scientometrics, the communication
of meaning has been central to Luhmann’s attempts to make the theory of autopoiesis
relevant for sociology. Analytical techniques such as semantic maps and the simulation
of anticipatory systems enable us to operationalize the distinctions which Luhmann
proposed as relevant to the elaboration of Husserl’s “horizons of meaning” in empirical
research: interactions among communications, the organization of meaning in
instantiations, and the self-organization of interhuman communication in terms of
symbolically generalized media such as truth, love, and power. Horizons of meaning,
however, remain uncertain orders of expectations, and one should caution against
reification from the meta-biological perspective of systems theory.
Keywords: semantic map, anticipation, self-organization, communication, meaning
Introduction
The communication of meaning as different from the communication of information can
perhaps be considered as the differentia specifica of social systems. Whereas biological
systems are sometimes able to provide meaning to information and thus shape a semantic
domain (Maturana, 1978; Maturana & Varela, 1980), and human minds can reflexively
change the meaning of information, the capacity to communicate both information and
meaning can be considered as an evolutionary achievement in inter-human languaging
(Luhmann, 2002). When meaning can be communicated, this communication can further
be codified and discursive knowledge also developed.
The issue is beset with conceptual difficulties. First, the distinction between information
and meaning can be conflated by defining information in terms insufficiently independent
from meaning: as “meaningful information” or, in Bateson’s (1972: 489) formulation, as
“a difference which makes a difference.” Shannon-type information is defined as a series
of differences (in a probability distribution), whereas such differences can only make a
next-order difference for a receiving (or observing) system that is able to provide the
information with meaning. Secondly, “meaning” in the sociological tradition is often
considered primarily as a subjective category and is not sufficiently understood in terms
of inter-subjective communication.
Third, the distinction between the communication of meaning and the communication of
knowledge needs further elaboration. I shall argue that knowledge can be considered as
“a meaning which makes a difference,” whereas meaning is generated when first-order
differences (Shannon-type information) make a difference for a receiving system.
However, the communication of knowledge requires the relative closure of the discourse
in terms of specific codes of communication.
These issues and distinctions are particularly salient nowadays, given the emergence of a
knowledge-based economy (Foray, 2004; Leydesdorff, 2006a). Unlike a political
economy, which can be considered as based on interactions among (i) economic
exchange relations and (ii) political arrangements, the additional dynamics of (iii)
knowledge-based communication requires the structural organization of the sciences
(Whitley, 1984; Dasgupta & David, 1984). A third structured subdynamics can then be
added to inter-human communication at the level of society. This third subdynamics
potentially disturbs the relative stabilization of political economies in nations and tends to
globalize and meta-stabilize existing market relations (Leydesdorff & Zawdie, 2010).
The distinction between information and meaning
Shannon (1948, at p. 3) provided a lucid distinction of meaning from information at the
beginning of his paper entitled A Mathematical Theory of Communication:
Frequently the messages have meaning; that is, they refer to or are correlated
according to some system with certain physical or conceptual entities. These
semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the engineering problem. The
significant aspect is that the actual message is one selected from a set of possible
messages.
Two systems of reference are distinguished in this quotation: the formal one of the
electrical engineer or, in other words, Shannon himself as a mathematician, and the
possible meanings provided by substantive discourses. Shannon considers the latter as
irrelevant for the definition of information, but he notes the significance of potentially
different selection mechanisms.
Shannon-type information is defined as yet content-free (Theil, 1972). This condition of
“still-to-be-provided-with-meaning” by a system of reference is also manifested in the
units of measurement (e.g., bits of information) which are dimensionless. Shannon-type
information does not yet contain meaning other than the mathematical definition of the
expected information value contained as uncertainty in a message as a finite series of
differences—in other words, a probability distribution. What the expected information
content of the distribution means can only be defined by an observing system using its
own selection mechanism. Meaning is defined “in use” (Wittgenstein, 1953). Note that
selection by an observing system is deterministic and system-specific, whereas variation
can be stochastic.
The meaning provided to the (Shannon-type) information can sometimes reduce
uncertainty. Reduction of uncertainty can be measured as negentropy (Brillouin, 1962):
this possibility originates from the difference which the difference (or a series of
differences, that is, a probability distribution) can make for a receiving system. Thus, “a
difference which makes a difference” (Bateson, 1972) can also reduce the uncertainty
that prevails and be identified as meaningful or observed information, given the
specification of a system of reference.
Weaver (1949, at p. 116) noted that Shannon’s abstract definition of information as
uncertainty might sound “bizarre,” but that this level of abstraction might also be needed
to develop a theory of meaning. Meaning is generated in use by specific systems that are
able to receive and/or process meaning. This receiving system, however, does not have to
be an observer, but can also be a discourse. Information is then provided with meaning
which may contain a supra-individual and coordinating function. In other words, the
meaning is codified among human beings, that is, at the intersubjective level.
The systems-theoretical tradition has focused on the observer as the individual unit of
analysis (e.g., Edelman, 1989). For example, Von Foerster (1979) ascribed to Maturana
as his “Theorem Number One” that “Anything said is said by an observer,” and added his
own corollary that “Anything said is said to an observer.” He concluded that the two
observers share a language. From this perspective, however, language is considered only
as a meta-biological domain.
Maturana (1978, at p. 49), for example, noted that for an observer a “second-order
consensual domain […] becomes indistinghuishable from a semantic domain.” However,
understanding in language (as both an observer and a participant; Giddens, 1979) was set
aside by him as the language of a human “super-observer” (pp. 58f.). From this biological
perspective, languaging—linguistic behavior—can be observed. The dynamics of human
language as different from communication among insects cannot properly be analyzed
from these meta-biological perspectives (Epstein and Axtell, 1996).
Human language—and more generally, communication—connects not only observers,
but also their observational reports, that is, the translation of their observations into
communication provides the messaging with intersubjective meaning, and this
codification allows for the communication of subjective meaning at the supra-individual
level (Mead, 1934; Pask, 1975). Distinguishing the observational reports in language
from the observers making these “utterances”1 moves us from the realm of mathematical
biology and psychology into the sociological realm of communication as interhuman, that
is, meaningful and potentially knowledge-based coordination.
Language and symbolic mediation
Meaning is generated in a system when different pieces of information are related as
messages to one another, for example, as words in sentences (Hesse, 1988; Law &
Lodge, 1984). The information is then positioned in a network with an emerging (and
continuously reconstructed) structure. This positioning can be done by an individual
who—as a system of reference—can provide personal meaning to the events, but
meaning can also be provided at the supra-individual level, for example, in a discourse.
In the latter case, meaning is discursive, and its dynamics can therefore be expected to be
different from those of psychological meaning.
Whereas a psychological identity can be expected to strive to integrate a plurality of
meanings that could be provided to single events (for example, in order to avoid
“cognitive dissonance”), the social system—as a dividuum (Fuchs, 1998, at pp. 225 ff.;
cf. Latour, 2002; Nietzsche, 1878: I, §57)—can tolerate the entertainment of different
meanings, and has the additional option to differentiate itself into subsystems which
codify these meanings differently. This plurality in rationalities can be functional to the
processing of complexity in a pluriform society (cf. Boudon, 1979; Bourdieu, 2004).
For example, politicians and economists can discuss “shortages of energy” although
among physicists “energy” is considered as a conserved quantity. Codifications facilitate
and speed up the communication by making the communication system-specific. At the
market, for example, one can simpy pay the price of something without having to
negotiate. The price codifies the value of the commodity. Prices make it possible to
abstract from the underlying values in another semantic domain (for example, that of
banking).
This possibility of functional differentiation in the codes of communication and the
potentially symbolic generalization of meaning was first elaborated in the tradition of
1 Luhmann ([1984], 1995) defined communication in terms of three elements: (1) utterance, (2)
information, and (3) understanding. Such a definition, in my opinion, does not distinguish sufficiently
between communication among animals (e.g., insects) and human beings (Leydesdorff, 2006b). Luhmann’s
theory can be considered as unnecessarily non- or even anti-humanistic (Leydesdorff, 2000, 2010c).
social-systems theory by the sociologists Talcott Parsons and Niklas Luhmann. Building
on Durkheim’s argument that norms function as integrative at the supra-individual level,
Parsons theorized the possibility of functional differentiation among the roles of agents in
different subsystems of society. According to Parsons (e.g., 1961, at p. 41), collectivities
of roles can complement one another in fulfilling various functions in society. However,
Parsons himself did not make a connection to what I consider as his other major
contribution, namely, the theory of the symbolic generalization of the media of
communication (Parsons, 1968). In his scheme, differentiation remains confined to four
major meta-biologically derived functions (adaptation, goal-attainment, integration, and
latency).
Following Merton (1957), Luhmann ([1984], 1995) historicized social functions and
proposed that they develop as specific rationalities in the different and historically
variable processings of meaning in social subsystems. Luhmann added the evolutionary
perspective that new forms of codification can be invented; for example, at first coins
were used, then banknotes, and much later credit cards. Each communication subsystem
develops further by overwriting and repositioning the previous versions of its coding.
The prime example of this cultural evolution of communication has been provided by
Kuhn’s (1962) notion of paradigm shifts. “Phlogiston,” for example, was backgrounded
in scholarly discourse once “oxygen” was constructed as a new concept (Priestly, 1774-
1777). The new paradigm (in chemistry) opened domains for puzzle-solving and further
communication with a code that is different from the previous one. However, both
“oxygen” and “phlogiston” use a code of communication very different from exchange
processes on the market, which obey economic mechanisms of exchange. Analogously,
the truth of a scientific statement is different from the religious truth of a dogma. Other
dimensions of interhuman communication (e.g., affection, power) always also play a role,
although the institutional setting may facilitate the functionality of specific codes among
these symbolically generalized media more than others. For example, it is transgressive to
favour one scientific theory over another for political reasons, or to bribe a judge.
Interhuman communication can thus be considered as a fabric woven in many directions:
each communication can be provided with meaning in terms of power (Foucault, 1966),
economic utility, affection, scientific truth, etc. These latent dimensions of
communication resound and operate selectively in all interhuman communication.
However, in specific communications some selections can be expected to operate more
strongly than others because of the functionality of coding. Symbolically generalized
codes enable us to be specific in our communications and thus to process more
complexity.
The selecting codes of communication are not a given, but enacted and reconstructed in
use as the culturally and therefore supra-individually constructed dimensions of
communication. Historically, the gradual disintegration of the Holy Roman Empire at the
end of the Middle Ages, first in the Investiture Contest and then during the Reformation,
generated an additional degree of freedom in which the prevailing form of differentiation
among the codes was changed from a hierarchical (stratified) one to another in which the
codes could be reconstructed more freely as a function of the communication.
The tight coupling between institutions and functions could then gradually be loosened to
the extent that institutions could also be reorganized in terms of their functions. For
example, during the Scientific Revolution of the 17th century and after the trial of Galileo,
scientific truth could be differentiated from religious truth. Analogously, the trias
politica—developed during the 18th century (Montesquieu, 1748)—regulates the
differentiation among political discourses in modern constitutions. This functional
differentiation in the communication has been institutionalized in national constitutions
since the American and French Revolutions.
Herbert Simon (1973) hypothesized that any evolving system can be expected to operate
with an alphabet. Thus, one might hypothesize 20+ symbolically generalized media of
communication possible in interhuman communications. These codes of communication
should not be reified: they are historically constructed and enacted bottom-up in
interhuman communications, but as they are reconstructed recursively over time, they can
be expected to function as control mechanisms at the level of society that enable us to
enrich our communication by allowing for greater precision. Note that the “top” or next-
order level is not yet defined or fixed in terms of these bottom-up (re)construction
processes.
The codes operate as selection mechanisms by enabling us to focus the communication.
Selection mechanisms can reinforce one another in processes of mutual shaping
(McLuhan, 1964). Thus, selection mechanisms can be expected to shape historical
trajectories that are relatively stable (for example, in institutions). A next-order selection
may drive a local stabilization into global meta-stabilization, or into regimes which
function with dynamics that differ from—since they counteract as feedback mechanisms
on—the dynamics of historical developments. Such further differentiation among
selection mechanisms (stabilization and globalization) can uncouple the communication
reflexively from the historical process in which it emerges.
For example, communication with money first speeds up the communication on the
market to the extent that local forms of capitalism can be shaped. Bank notes, stock
exchanges, and credit cards provide means for worldwide transactions with
correspondingly increasing speeds and precision. Marx already identified this emerging
mechanism in capitalism as “alienating.” Luhmann ([1984], 1995) proposed to study the
dynamics of communication (cf. Marx’s “exchange value”) as analytically different from
the dynamics of human or group behavior (“use value”). The systems of reference are
altered by the change of perspective caused by the newly emerging code of
communication. This potential globalization is an attribute of the communication and not
of the communicators.
In the terminology of autopoiesis theory (Maturana & Varela, 1980), the two dynamics of
processing meaning—at the level of agency and at the social level—remain “structurally
coupled” and “interpenetrate” each other reflexively (Luhmann, 2002). However, one can
expect the cybernetics of communication to be different from the dynamics of human
(group) behavior. Communications, for example, can travel worldwide without the
communicators as carriers having to move.
Horizons of meaning
Interhuman communication is based on interactions among both communicators and
communications. The meanings interact in a non-linear dynamics which is not hardwired
and therefore no longer necessarily subject to the second law of thermodynamics. The
redundancies generated by the processing of meaning, for example, can structure and
reconstruct the information processing from the perspective of hindsight. The possibility
of such non-linear dynamics is enabled by language as an evolutionary achievement:
meaning can proliferate discursively at a speed much faster than its instantiations in
language (e.g., in fantasies and wishes; cf. Weinstein and Platt, 1969) because of the
possible feed-forward loops between individual experiences and expectations, and
communication in language.
Whereas the biological autopoiesis processes the history of the communications in terms
of their structural sediments—for example, in terms of differentiations among organs or
species—the orientation toward horizons of possible communication is provided by the
additional communication of meaning in language. The linguistically or symbolically
mediated communication channels are changed by the historical communication in terms
of the communications possible thereafter. In other words, redundancies—sets of
possibilities—are generated. Unlike the biological autopoiesis of the living (Maturana &
Varela, 1980), meaning can be communicated reflexively and with reference to and in
anticipation of “horizons of meaning.” I use the plural of this Husserlian concept in order
to emphasize that one can expect the horizons of meaning to be structured by
symbolically generalized codes of communication.
Luhmann (1986) criticized Schultz’s (1932; 1953) interpretation of Husserl’s
phenomenology because of the emphasis on observable instantiations of the cybernetics
of behavior in the life-world (cf. Habermas, 1981; Habermas & Luhmann, 1971).
Husserl himself had formulated his philosophy as a “transcendental phenomenology”
with an emphasis on expectations (as different from observations). From the perspective
of hindsight, this focus on intentions, meanings, and expectations can be considered as
“mathematical” in the sense that it enables us to intuit other possible dimensions which
resound in the empirical events that have happened to occur historically (Derrida, 1974;
Heidegger, 1962; Husserl, [1935/6] 1962). We have no access to the possible other than
by placing what exists reflexively between brackets. Husserl used the Greek word epochè
( ε’ποχη) for this “suspension” of all judgments about the existence of an external world.
The analytical specification of expectations before proceeding to actual observations
enables us to specify whether observed differences (variation) can be considered as
significant. This is formalized, for example, in the chi-square test of statistical
significance using a theory of measurement. Husserl (1935/6) noted that the positivistic
focus on observables had eroded this basis of the modern sciences, and that one should
instead return to the reflexive position of Descartes, but reconstruct it in order to ground
the social sciences in reflexivity.
Not incidentally, therefore, Husserl (1929) called the book in which he explained his
intersubjective “horizons of meaning” Cartesian Meditations. Husserl’s reference is to
Descartes’ distinction between res extensa and res cogitans. The Cartesian Cogito knows
him/herself as uncertain and different from the external world. In this act of doubt, the
contingent Cogito finds the transcendent environment as the Other or a personal God.
However, Husserl doubted this next step: the cogitatum of the Cogito is not necessarily
God, but can also be considered as an intersubjective domain to which we all have
personal access: the horizons of meaning that we share (to different extents). This domain
is not in the res extensa, but remains res cogitans. In other words, the meaning that we
provide to the events does not “exist” physically, but incurs on us as one among a set of
culturally possible meanings.
In the social sciences—as in the other theoretical sciences—one can use models to
specify the expectations. The specification of expectations makes future states available
in the present as potentially meaningful. The model—as different from the individual
intuition—enables us to communicate about these future states with greater precision by
invoking the symbolic codes of scholarly discourse. A model thus is part of discursive
knowledge; it can be improved by argumentative contributions. However, this providing
of new meaning is highly codified; only those who understand the model can contribute
meaningfully. The model enables these participants to entertain a communication among
specialists in which further knowledge can be developed and exchanged. In other words,
the model is part of a communicative reality.
This communicative reality that the communicators shape over time and reflexively
reconstruct cannot be considered as res extensa, but belongs to the res cogitans; it is not
stable like matter, but remains in flux like language. It enables us to communicate in
terms of uncertainties (e.g., possibly relevant questions) and expectations. Husserl (1929)
recognized this realm as cogitatum, that is, the substance about which the Cogito remains
uncertain. Our mental predicates provided to the world in intersubjective exchanges with
intentional human beings, shape our culture and therewith ground what Husserl also
called a “concrete ontology” or, in other words, “a universal philosophy of science”
(1929, at p. 159).
This philosophy of science enables us to understand scientific models and concepts as
specifically coded meanings that we attribute to an external reality at the intersubjective
level. Note that from this perspective, the external world is not a social construct as in
post-modernism; it is a cognitively hypothesized and highly codified construct that can be
accessed reflexively and perhaps partly reconstructed by individual agency, but only in
terms of further communications. In the res extensa, resources can be mobilized (for
example, at the institutional level), but such policies can succeed only insofar as they
enable us to access, deconstruct, and reconstruct the self-organization of cultural
constructs in the res cogitans.
The models and not the modeled substance shape the sciences as cultural artifacts.
According to Husserl’s (1935) The Crisis of the European Sciences, however, an
empiristic self-understanding prevails in the modern sciences. In order to move the social
sciences forward, one has to stay with the transcendental that one can retrieve in one’s
self and thus recognize the sciences as part and parcel of a realm of cultural expectations
that can be communicated. The “naturally” observed or perceived at the individual level
is shaped by and rewritten in a realm of intersubjective expectations and their possible
communication. Note that this res cogitans is also res, that is, real, and thus a possible
subject of empirical investigation. The predictions on the basis of the models, for
example, can be expected to feed back (e.g., technologically) on our material life.
The structuration of expectations
The scientific model as an exchange mechanism of cognitive expectations can provide us
with a heuristics to understand the communication of other, for example, normative
expectations. Normative exchanges can be expected to shape, for example, political
discourse. In political discourse, events are provided with meanings that differ from those
given be scientific discourse. In other words, social order is not a given, but a set of
variously codified expectations that interact and self-organize in the res cogitans. This
order of expectations can be sustained by institutions which function as instantiations
(Giddens, 1984). Political discourse, for example, can be focused in a parliamentary
debate, whereas scholarly discourse can be retrieved in scientific journals. The complex
and internally differentiated order of expectations remains latent; the instantiations can be
considered as their co-variations at specific moments of time.
The codes can be considered as the latent dimensions that structure the discourses in
analytically different directions. Two levels can be distinguished in this structuration: the
codes operate as the internal axes of meaning-providing structures. This operation is
recursive: meaning is provided to the information contained in the events, and meaning
can further be codified—that is, provided with symbolic meaning—in the
communication. Under the condition of functional differentiation the axes can be
expected to span horizons of meanings in increasingly orthogonal directions. Some codes
can in a next selection be generalized symbolically or, from the perspective of their
stabilization along trajectories, be globalized as horizons of meaning that feed back on
the local meaning processing in interhuman communication.
Luhmann (1986) provided a thorough elaboration of Husserl’s concept of
“intersubjectivity” in sociological terms. Three levels were distinguished in the
communication of meaning: (i) local interactions, (ii) organization of meaning in
historical instances, and (iii) the self-organization of the codes of communication. In
modern, pluriform societies self-organization in different directions can be expected to
prevail—communications are no longer coordinated at the center—while in pre-modern
societies communication was organized in terms of institutions. Organization integrates,
while self-organization tends to differentiate the functions of the communication.
Organization operates at specific moments of time—according to Luhmann (2000), by
making decisions—and self-organization of meaning operates over time as codification in
fluxes of communication.
The two cybernetic mechanisms of organization (integration at interfaces) and self-
organization (differentiation of codes) can be considered as the woof and warp of the
evolution of the cogitatum in a multidimensional space. This evolutionary development is
driven bottom-up by variation in the interactions, while the codes operate in terms of
selection mechanisms. For example, economic exchanges are organized in terms of local
markets, but can self-organize a global market equilibrium if left sufficiently free to do
so. Scientific communication is organized within communities and institutions, but these
communities compete in hypothesizing and following the dynamics at the level of
scientific fields (Bourdieu, 1976, 2004). Love and affection can be organized in terms of
marriages, but also otherwise (Luhmann, 1982). Organization of meaning is historically
contingent.
The factor model and latent semantic analysis
Functionally differentiated codes of communication cannot be observed directly, but their
operations can be reconstructed reflexively as latent variables. Not incidentally, it was
Paul Lazarsfeld, Merton’s colleague at Columbia University, who first made the
connection between the latency of communication and the factor model. A
communication network can be rewritten as a matrix. The matrix representation of this
network allows us to decompose the main dimensions of a communication system using
factor analysis. In other words, the network is composed in terms of relations, but it
contains a structure (technically, a so-called “eigenstructure”) in which every relation can
be positioned. Factor analysis enables us to investigate this latent structure in terms of the
so-called eigenvectors of the matrix.
For example, words can be considered as meaningful information when they are placed in
relation to one another in sentences. The sentences can be expected to contain meaning
because information is specifically related. (Note that this can also be done by an
observer, but my focus here is on language as communication.) A textual unit can be
provided with specific meanings, for example, in scholarly, political or other discourses.
The symbolically generalized codes operate as next-order selection mechanisms shaping,
for example, paradigms. Three selection mechanisms can thus be hypothesized as
operating in parallel: a first one positioning the relational information in an observing
system (at each moment), a second one coding meaning in potentially different directions
(over time), and a third one potentially globalizing the stabilizations of meaning in terms
of different codes of communication (Lucio-Arias and Leydesdorff, 2009a).
At first, this problem may seem intractable: when both the variations and the (factorial)
structures change over time, one obtains a system of partial differential equations with no
easy solution. However, the problem can be decomposed. The factor model can bring
latent dimensions into view. By reorganizing the data in this multi-dimensional space,
one can draw a semantic map in terms of the observables (e.g., words). The organizing
principles (that is, the dimensions) remain latent, but can, for example, be penciled into
the map.
Figure 1: Semantic map among 56 title words connected at cosine ≥ 0.1 among 149 titles
of documents in Social Science Information 2005-2009.
Figure 1, for example, shows a semantic map using the title words of 149 documents
which were published in Social Science Information during the period 2005-2009. In
these titles, 69 words occurred three or more times, of which 66 were related in the
normalized word-document matrix 2 at a level of cosine > 0.1.3 Factor analysis of this
word-document matrix enabled me to color the main dimensions into the map as shown
here for the first three factors with red, green, and blue, respectively. (These first three
factors explain in this case only 10.8% of the common variance).
2 The words were normalized using the observed/expected ratios instead of the raw data (Leydesdorff &
Welbers, 2011). One can add the margin totals and grand sum to the word-document matrix and compute
the expected value for each cell (e ) from the observed ones (o ) using e  i ij j ij . The routine
ij ij ij  o
3 I use the non-parametric cosine instead of the Pearson correlation for the representation of the multi-
dimensional space (Salton & McGill, 1983; Ahlgren et al., 2003). All distributions are skewed because of
the prevailing selection pressures.
Note that this is not a relational map as in social network or co-word analysis. The words
“science” and “social,” for example, co-occur most strongly by far in this domain of
titles, viz., 12 times. However, the similarity in the distributions of occurrences among
“capital” and “trust” (which co-occur only four times) is much greater than that between
“science” and “society”. In this dataset, the relation between “trust” and “capital” is more
important—as a correlation in the semantic space of correlations—than the relation
between “science” and “society.” Technically, this semantic space can also be called a
vector space, as against the relational space of the observable network of relations. A
vector space is generated when a network of relations is spanned from which an
architecture necessarily emerges.
One can take this reasoning one step further and also position the factors (or so-called
“eigenvectors”) in the vector space. Figure 2 shows the result of this projection for the
same data. The (orthogonally rotated) factor matrix is used as input to a network
visualization program. (Negative factor loadings are indicated with dotted lines.4)
Figure 2: Three-factor solution of 40 words in titles of 149 documents published in
Social Science Information 2005-2009 (words with factor loadings between -0.1 and 0.1
excluded; Fruchterman & Rheingold, 1991).
4 Factor loadings between -0.1 and +0.1 were suppressed (in SPSS) in order to enhance the visualization.
Figure 2 enables us to designate more easily the three specialties involved: Factor 1
focuses on issues of organizational sociology, Factor 2 on ethnological studies, and
Factor 3 on migration studies and the Mediterrenean. In other words, these clusters are
reconstructed as representations of the three dominant repertoires publishing during this
period in Social Science Information. Note that there are no positive correlations between
Factor 1 and Factor 2. Between Factor 1 and Factor 3, however, the words “Role” and
“Capital” provide articulation points; between Factors 2 and 3 the word “Ethology” is an
articulation point between the star-formed graphs representing the discursive
differentiation. The various discourses are organized within the context of this journal.
The knowledge-based dynamics
Factor analysis provides a static representation of the multi-dimensional space in an
instantiation; in the case above, this was the aggregate of a five-year period.
Dynamically, the next question is whether these factors of meaning organization are
integrated into a single body of knowledge or whether differentiation is indicated. In the
case of differentiation, a synergy can sometimes be found despite a lack of integration
among the main dimensions. Thus, one can oppose coherence and synergy: coherence is
an indicator of organization, and synergy an indicator of self-organization. Using this
distinction, the variables (words) and structures (factors) are considered as a system, and
thus a systemic measure is needed.
Mutual information in three or more dimensions—sometimes called “configurational
information”—can be used as an indicator of the potential synergy (e.g., Abramson,
1963; Ashby, 1964; Jakulin, 2005; Leydesdorff & Sun, 2009; McGill, 1954; Ulanowicz,
1986). Although this information measure is expressed in bits, it is not a Shannon-type
information (Krippendorff, 2009; Yeung, 2008, at p. 59). However, Garner & McGill
(1956, at p. 227) suggested that the information measure is more useful than the
interaction variance which behaves similarly, but assumes a normal distribution.
Both interaction variance and mutual information in three (or more) dimensions can be
either positive or negative (Garner & McGill, 1956; Leydesdorff, 2010d). Negative
values indicate a reduction of uncertainty at the systems level. This reduction cannot be
expected historically (because the second law is equally valid for probabilistic entropy),5
but has to be self-organized within the system against the axis of time. A decrease in
uncertainty (that is, a negative value for this entropy) means that redundancy generated
by evolutionary self-organization in the globally organized knowledge base is prevalent
over the historical organization. Note that these are systems measures which cannot be
attributed to individual components without using aggregation rules (Leydesdorff et al.,
2006; Leydesdorff & Fritsch, 2006; Theil, 1972).
The mutual information among the three factors in the system of title words studied
above was +50.6 millibits. The positive value indicates that the synergy among the three
5 The second law of thermodynamics holds equally for probabilistic entropy, since S = k H and k is a
constant (the Boltzmann constant). Because of the constant, the development of S over time is a
function of the development of H, and vice versa.
factors is not found in the historical organization and integration in the titles of the
journal. When the analysis, however, is repeated for the 187 documents that cite one of
the 149 documents published in Social Science Information, I obtain Figure 3, and mutual
information in three dimensions of –106.2 millibits of information.6
Figure 3: Three-factor solution of 40 words in the titles of 187 documents citing Social
Science Information 2005-2009 (factor loadings between -0.1 and 0.1 excluded;
Fruchterman & Rheingold, 1991).
The citing articles belong to different literatures: Factor 1 indicates evolutionary
theorizing, Factor 2 represents studies about technology and society, and Factor 3 studies
about evolving systems. “Digital” and “Evidence” function as articulation points between
Factors 2 and 3, and only “Approach” between Factors 1 and 3. Although these three
citing literatures are not integrated, a synergy in their differentiation is indicated by the
negative value of the mutual information in three dimensions (Lucio-Arias &
Leydesdorff, 2009b).
In other words, the evolutionary differentiation is reduced in the organizational
integration of title words in Social Science Information. In addition to this organization,
6 Krippendorff’s (2009) information interaction measure I was 120.0 mbits and 89.9 mbits for
ABC→AB:AC:BC
the original documents and the citing ones, respectively. Thus, the two sets are not so very different in this
respect (Leydesdorff, 2010d).
the self-organization can be made visible in a map as differentiation because it is
instantiated. However, the differentiation develops over time and has therefore to be
measured algorithmically. The dynamic development of the virtual structure can thus be
indicated using these information measures.
III. coding rules; reflexive meaning
→self-organization of discursive knowledge
changing configurations
structuration
of meaning
II. latent structures organize different
meanings into structural components;
positional meaning; significance
grouping; decomposition;
structuring
data reduction
I. Observable human actions and
inter-human interactions
Figure 4: A layered process of codification of information by the processing of meaning,
and the codification of meaning in terms of discursive knowledge. (Adapted from
Leydesdorff (2010a), at p. 405.)
Figure 4 summarizes my argument hitherto. At the lowest level (I), one can use the
results of measurements. For example, one may use data from questionnaires about what
a stimulus means to respondents, or—closer to our example—relations among articles
such as citations, co-authorship relations, or shared co-occurrences of words. The
distributions of observable relations contain expected information about the social and
intellectual structures operating upon this data. Organization reduces uncertainty in the
data at each moment of time; self-organization generates an overlay of expectations that
can feed back on the present and thus potentially reduce uncertainty within the system.
The structuring of the information processing is provided by positioning the information
as in a factor model (level II). Meaning is generated in the recursive relations among
information contents. Structuration is provided in terms of (next-order) codes of
communication (level III) which can be used to relate different meanings. Whereas the
positioning of the information at level II takes place at each moment of time,
structuration (at level III) is based on the development of the organizing structure over
time. The operations over time can be structurating because the relevant data is structured
at each moment of time. Structures are reproduced and modified along trajectories, and
restructuring can be reinforced or counteracted upon at a next-order regime level.
The algorithmic model of meaning processing
I noted above that meanings incur on events. In other words, events are understood from
the perspective of hindsight, but with reference to possible future events. The time axis is
thus a crucial dimension. It is often pictured as an arrow flying from the past via the
present to the future, but the retrospective perspective of hindsight also operates in the
processing of meaning, and thus time can be considered as yet another dimension or a
degree of freedom. A model can provide us with a prediction about future states because
it remains in a res cogitans in which future moments of time can be simulated in the
present.
The mathematical biologists Rosen (1985) defined as “anticipatory” a system that is able
to entertain a model of itself. The model can provide the system with one or more
representations of future states in the present. These representations can be used for the
active reconstruction of the system. Dubois (2003, at pp. 112f.) further distinguished
between weakly and strongly anticipatory systems: a system that is weakly anticipatory is
able to use its predicted states at future times for adaptation or intervention, while a
system which is strongly anticipatory can use its anticipated states at time t + 1, t + 2,
etc., for its present reconstruction.
Within this category of strongly anticipatory systems, Dubois (1998) further
distinguished between incursive and hyper-incursive systems. Incursive systems use both
their historical states and present or future states for their reconstruction, whereas hyper-
incursive systems operate exclusively on the basis of expectations. In Leydesdorff (2009,
2010b), I described the cogitans as an embodied system that uses also historical states for
the computation of a next one (in the present), whereas the social system or Husserl’s
cogitatum uses only future states, that is, expectations and their organization in systems
of expectation. Such hyper-incursive cybernetics would operate against the axis of time
and thus reduce uncertainty. Note that this is not yet a system, but a mechanism which
requires anchoring in historical time by other (incursive) mechanisms.
As noted, a cogitatum cannot be instantiated without a cogitans to instantiate it; the two
systems are structurally coupled and intertwined by reflexive interpenetration. Thus, there
is always historical production of uncertainty in the “life-world” involved, but this
forward arrow is counteracted by a feedback arrow from the self-organization of the
codes. The latter is an evolutionary mechanism that operates in history, but against the
arrow of time because redundancies are generated.
A hyper-incursive system cannot exist and be observed in the res extensa. The definitions
are analytical and should not be reified in an external world. In other words, these are
relevant subdynamics for the specification of the dynamics of communication of meaning
and knowledge. However, the domains to be studied from this perspective are very
different from biological or even psychological ones (Giddens, 1979). For example, it
could be shown (Leydesdorff & Franse, 2009)—using the logistic equation (which can be
used for modeling processes of growth and decline in biology) and its equivalent
formulation in the hyper-incursive domain—that the biological and sociological domains
are separated at the value of four of the so-called bifurcation parameter, and that this
separatrix can only be crossed by invoking an incursive routine (that is, a psychological
cogitans or human agency).
This is not the place to repeat the derivation of the various equations (Leydesdorff, 2009,
2010b). My crucial point is that the three cybernetic mechanisms specified by Luhmann
can be operationalized as different mechanisms of incursion and hyper-incursion. When
the various equations are solved, the conclusions are the following:
Interaction—hyper-incursively modeled as the interaction of two mutually expected
selection mechanisms:x b (1 x )(1 x )—leads to turn taking in the
communication of meaning and thereby variation from the perspective of the social
communication system. By extending this model parsimoniously only with a single
(third) selection mechanism, one obtains two options which model self-organization and
organization of meaning, respectively. When three anticipatory sources of variance can
operate selectively upon one another, this might be modeled as follows:
t t1 t1 t1
Organization instantiates the interfaces historically, and one can analogously model this
as follows:
t t1 t1 t
The difference between the organization of meaning (Equation 2) and its self-
organization (Equation 1) is provided in the third term: is the processing bent back to the
present, or does this term in the model remain a reference to a future state? Organization
can reduce uncertainty by instantiation in the present.
Equation 1 (modeling self-organization) has two imaginary roots and one real root. The
real root can be considered as a constant operating in the coding. Equation 2 models a
system (organization of meaning) that can be expected to perish after a finite number of
historical instantiations. In other words, organizations of meaning emerge and disappear
historically. Long-term stability is provided to the system meta-historically by the
evolutionary mechanism of self-organization in the communication of meaning. The third
mechanism—interaction—provides variation. Organization and self-organization are
coupled to each other as Equations 1 and 2, but the results of these two mechanisms
operating provide different solutions.
Conclusion: society as not a system
The metaphors of systems theory have been tainted by the biological discourse from
which they emerged. Unlike biological systems, however, a social system cannot exist;
the various cybernetics reconstruct orders of expectations that can be accessed
reflexively. In an email conversation, Krippendorff (June 9, 2010; at
suggested to distinguish between systems theory as a meta-biological generalization and
the specification of cybernetic mechanisms for explaining social order and
communication in language.
For example, the metaphor of “self-organization” suffers from the biological origins of
this theorizing (Maturana & Varela, 1980). The “self” needs quotation marks because an
order of expectations cannot be expected to contain an identifiable self; it remains an
order of distributions that operate on one another. Luhmann ([1984], 1995), for example,
proposed distinguishing among the social, the temporal, and the substantive as three
dimensions in which these distributions can be extended (Latour, 2002). The
uncertainties contained in the distributions can over time be considered as expectations.
Thus, the modeling of the communication of meaning and information is deeply
entrenched.
My insistence on specifying expectations in the social sciences is not meant to imply that
sociology is an impossible—since non-empirical—science about non-observables.
Uncertainties can be hypothesized, and we explored the various mechanisms that can be
specified with reference to expectations. The specification of expectations enriches the
research design beyond a behaviouristic focus on agency and institutions. Understanding
and interpretation of language and knowledge require reflexive communication.
These cybernetic mechanisms need to be specified in a mathematical language that is yet
content-free such as the language of information theory and cybernetics, since otherwise
one is easily deluded by the biological or sometimes psychological connotations of the
metaphors. One is in need of fresh metaphors, such as Giddens’ (1979) notion of
“structuration” (Leydesdorff, 2010b). Sociology becomes fundamentally different from
biology and psychology as soon as one begins to focus on the communication of meaning
and knowledge. In this context, one should remember Luhmann’s dictum that society is
not made up of human beings, but constructed in terms of their communications
(Luhmann, 1996; cf. Marx [1858], 1973, at p. 265).
Unfortunately, in some of his later writing Luhmann (e.g., 1997) departed from these
sociological assumptions and succumbed to the attraction of developing a general theory
of observation. This is countrary to the sociological project, in my opinion, because a
meta-biological assumption is introduced (Habermas, 1987; Leydesdorff, 2006b and
2010c). Following these later writings of Luhmnann, one would leave the deeply
humanistic appeal which transpires from Husserl’s philosophy in favour of considering
the social as an automaton in which the Greek gods operate in the disguise of
“performative media of communication.”
I have wished to argue that symbolically generalized media of communication codify our
expectations and thereby empower our performances reflexively in terms of handling
complexity in terms of expectations. Performance, however, remains an attribute of
human agency. The reflexive understanding of horizons of meaning made possible by
communication provides us with access to a social reality in which knowledge-based
anticipations play an increasing role. The (self-)organization of meaning at the above-
individual level no longer “structurates” only our actions (Giddens, 1979, 1984), but
more importantly our expectations.
References:
Abramson, N. (1963). Information Theory and Coding. New York, etc.: McGraw-Hill.
Ahlgren, P., Jarneving, B., & Rousseau, R. (2003). Requirement for a Cocitation
Similarity Measure, with Special Reference to Pearson's Correlation Coefficient.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 54(6),
550-560.
Ashby, W. R. (1964). Constraint analysis of many-dimensional relations. General
Systems Yearbook, 9, 99-105.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: Ballantine.
Boudon, R. (1979). La logique du social. Paris: Hachette.
Bourdieu, P. (1976). Le champ scientifique. Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales,
2(2), 88-104.
Bourdieu, P. (2004). Science of Science and Reflexivity. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Brillouin, L. (1962). Science and Information Theory. New York: Academic Press.
Dasgupta, P., & David, P. (1994). Towards a new economics of science. Research Policy,
23(5), 487-522.
Derrida, J. (1974). Edmund Husserl’s origine de la géometrie. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Dubois, D. M. (1998). Computing Anticipatory Systems with Incursion and
Hyperincursion. In D. M. Dubois (Ed.), Computing Anticipatory Systems, CASYS-
First International Conference (Vol. 437, pp. 3-29). Woodbury, NY: American
Institute of Physics.
Dubois, D. M. (2003). Mathematical Foundations of Discrete and Functional Systems
with Strong and Weak Anticipations. In M. V. Butz, O. Sigaud & P. Gérard
(Eds.), Anticipatory Behavior in Adaptive Learning Systems (Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence Vol. 2684, pp. 110-132). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Edelman, G. M. (1989). The remembered present: a biological theory of consciousness.
New York: Basic Books.
Foray, D. (2004). The Economics of Knowledge. Cambridge, MA/London: MIT Press.
Foucault, M. (1966). Les mots et les choses: archéologie des sciences humaines. Paris:
Gallimard.
Fruchterman, T., & Reingold, E. (1991). Graph drawing by force-directed replacement.
Software—Practice and Experience, 21, 1129-1166.
Fuchs, P. (1998). Das Unbewußte in Psychoanalyse und Systemtheorie. Frankfurt a.M.:
Suhrkamp.
Garner, W. R., & McGill, W. J. (1956). The relation between information and variance
analyses. Psychometrika, 21(3), 219-228.
Giddens, A. (1979). Central Problems in Social Theory. London, etc.: Macmillan.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Habermas, J. (1981). Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
Habermas, J. (1987). Excursus on Luhmann's Appropriation of the Philosophy of the
Subject through Systems Theory. In The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity:
Twelve Lectures (pp. 368-385). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Habermas, J., & Luhmann, N. (1971). Theorie der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie.
Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Die Frage nach dem Ding. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer.
Hesse, M. (1980). Revolutions and Reconstructions in the Philosophy of Science.
London: Harvester Press.
Husserl, E. (1929). Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge [Cartesian
meditations and the Paris lectures]. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1973.
Husserl, E. ([1935/36] 1962). Die Krisis der Europäischen Wissenschaften und die
Transzendentale Phänomenologie. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoff.
Jakulin, A. (2005). Machine learning based on attribute interactions (Vol.
Ljubljana.
Krippendorff, K. (2009). W. Ross Ashby’s information theory: a bit of history, some
solutions to problems, and what we face today. International Journal of General
Systems, 38(2), 189-212.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Latour, B. (2002). Gabriel Tarde and the end of the social. In P. Joyce (Ed.), The social in
question: new bearings in history and the social sciences (pp. 117-132). London:
Routledge.
Law, J., & Lodge, P. (1984). Science for Social Scientists. London, etc.: Macmillan.
Leydesdorff, L. (1994). Uncertainty and the Communication of Time. Systems Research,
11(4), 31-51.
Leydesdorff, L. (2000). Luhmann, Habermas, and the Theory of Communication.
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 17(3), 273-288.
Leydesdorff, L. (2006a). The Knowledge-Based Economy: Modeled, Measured,
Simulated. Boca Raton, FL: Universal Publishers.
Leydesdorff, L. (2006b). The Biological Metaphor of a (Second-order) Observer and the
Sociological Discourse. Kybernetes, 35(3/4), 531-546.
Leydesdorff, L. (2009). The Non-linear Dynamics of Meaning-Processing in Social
Systems. Social Science Information, 48(1), 5-33.
Leydesdorff, L. (2010a). The Knowledge-Based Economy and the Triple Helix Model.
Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 44, 367-417.
Leydesdorff, L. (2010b). The Communication of Meaning and the Structuration of
Expectations: Giddens’ “Structuration Theory” and Luhmann’s “Self-
Organization”. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 61(10), 2138-2150.
Leydesdorff, L. (2010c). Luhmann Reconsidered: Steps towards an empirical research
program in the sociology of communication. In C. Grant (Ed.), Beyond Universal
Pragmatics: Essays in the Philosophy of Communication (pp. 149-173). Oxford
Peter Lang.
Leydesdorff, L. (2010d). Redundancy in Systems which Entertain a Model of
Themselves: Interaction Information and the Self-organization of Anticipation
Entropy, 12(1), 63-79,
Leydesdorff, L., Dolfsma, W., & Panne, G. v. d. (2006). Measuring the Knowledge Base
of an Economy in terms of Triple-Helix Relations among 'Technology,
Organization, and Territory'. Research Policy, 35(2), 181-199.
Leydesdorff, L., & Franse, S. (2009). The Communication of Meaning in Social Systems.
Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 26(1), 109-117.
Leydesdorff, L., & Fritsch, M. (2006). Measuring the Knowledge Base of Regional
Innovation Systems in Germany in terms of a Triple Helix Dynamics. Research
Policy, 35(10), 1538-1553.
Leydesdorff, L., & Sun, Y. (2009). National and International Dimensions of the Triple
Helix in Japan: University-Industry-Government versus International Co-
Authorship Relations. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 60(4), 778-788.
Leydesdorff, L., & Welbers, K. (2011). The semantic mapping of words and co-words in
Leydesdorff, L., & Zawdie, G. The triple helix perspective of innovation systems.
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 22(7), 789-804.
Lucio-Arias, D., & Leydesdorff, L. (2009a). The Dynamics of Exchanges and References
among Scientific Texts, and the Autopoiesis of Discursive Knowledge. Journal of
Informetrics, 3(2), 261-271.
Lucio-Arias, D., & Leydesdorff, L. (2009b). An Indicator of Research Front Activity:
Measuring Intellectual Organization as Uncertainty Reduction in Document Sets.
Journal of the American Society for information Science and Technology, 60(12),
2488-2498.
Luhmann, N. (1982). Liebe als Passion. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
Luhmann, N. (1986). Intersubjektivität oder Kommunikation: Unterschiedliche
Ausgangspunkte soziologischer Theoriebildung. Archivio di Filosofia, 54(1-3),
41-60.
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social Systems. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1996). On the scientific context of the concept of communication. Social
Science Information, 35(2), 257-267.
Luhmann, N. (1997). Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt a.M.: Surhkamp.
Luhmann, N. (2000). Organisation und Entscheidung. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Luhmann, N. (2002). How Can the Mind Participate in Communication? In W. Rasch
(Ed.), Theories of Distinction: Redescribing the Descriptions of Modernity (pp.
169–184). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Marx, K. ([1857] 1973). Grundrisse: foundations of the critique of political economy
(rough draft) Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Maturana, H. R. (1978). Biology of language: the epistemology of reality. In G. A. Miller
& E. Lenneberg (Eds.), Psychology and Biology of Language and Thought.
Essays in Honor of Eric Lenneberg (pp. 27-63). New York: Academic Press.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the
Living. Boston: Reidel.
McGill, W. J. (1954). Multivariate information transmission. Psychometrika, 19(2), 97-
116.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: the Extension of Man. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Mead, G. H. (1934). The Point of View of Social Behaviourism. In C. H. Morris (Ed.),
Mind, Self, & Society from the Standpoint of a Social Behaviourist. Works of G.
H. Mead (Vol. 1, pp. 1-41). Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Merton, R. K. (1957). Social theory and social structure, rev. ed. Glencoe, IL: The Free
Press.
Montesquieu, Charles de Sécondat, Baron de (1748). De l’esprit des lois. Paris.
Nietzsche, F. (1878). Menschliches, allzumenschliches: ein Buch für freie Geister.
Parsons, T. (1961). Theories of society: Foundations of modern sociological theory. New
York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Parsons, T. (1968). Interaction: I. Social Interaction. In D. L. Sills (Ed.), The
International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (Vol. 7, pp. 429-441). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Pask, G. (1975). Conversation, Cognition and Learning. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Priestley, J. (1774-1777). Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air.
London.
Rosen, R. (1985). Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, mathematical and
methodological foundations. Oxford, etc.: Pergamon Press.
Salton, G., & McGill, M. J. (1983). Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval.
Auckland, etc.: McGraw-Hill.
Schutz, A. (1953). Die Phaenomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissenschaften (Ideas
III by Edmund Husserl). Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 13(4), 506-
514.
Schütz, A. (1932). Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt (G. Walsh & F. Lehnert,
Trans. Vol. 1932). Vienna: Springer.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System
Technical Journal, 27, 379-423 and 623-356.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The Organization of Complex Systems. In H. H. Pattee (Ed.),
Hierarchy Theory: The Challenge of Complex Systems (pp. 1-27). New York:
George Braziller Inc.
Theil, H. (1972). Statistical Decomposition Analysis. Amsterdam/ London: North-
Holland.
Ulanowicz, R. E. (1986). Growth and Development: Ecosystems Phenomenology. San
Jose, etc.: toExcel.
Von Foerster, H. (1979). Cybernetics of Cybernetics. In K. Krippendorff (Ed.),
Communication and Control in Society (pp. 5-8). New York: Gordon and Breach.
Weaver, W. (1949). Some Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of
Communication. In C. E. Shannon & W. Weaver (Eds.), The Mathematical
Theory of Communication (pp. 93-117.). Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Weinstein, F., & Platt, G. M. (1969). The Wish to be Free: Society, Psyche, and Value
Change. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Whitley, R. D. (1984). The Intellectual and Social Organization of the Sciences. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmillan.
Yeung, R. W. (2008). Information Theory and Network Coding. New York, NY:
Springer.