1v2001040/sc:viXra
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES
JOSHUA HOLDEN
Abstract. The author taught two courses on cryptography, one
at Duke University aimed at non-mathematics majors and one at
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology aimed at mathematics and
computer science majors. Both tried to incorporate technical and
societal aspects of cryptography,with varying emphases. This pa-
per will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of both courses and
compare the differences in the author’s approach.
1. Introduction
This paper is a description, and to some degree a comparison, of two
coursesoncryptographythatIhavetaught. Onewasacoursein“Cryp-
tography and Society” at Duke University, aimed at non-mathematics
majors and intended to explore both technical and societal aspects of
cryptography. The other was a course in cryptography at my current
school, theRose-HulmanInstitute ofTechnology, anundergraduateen-
gineering college in Indiana. This course was more technically oriented
and aimed at mathematics and computer science majors.
2. “Cryptography and Society”
Duringthefallof2000, Itaughtanewcourseentitled“Cryptography
andSociety”atDukeUniversity. Thiscoursewasintendedtointroduce
the student to the basic ideas of modern cryptography and its applica-
tions. Itwasprimarilyaimedatnon-mathematicsmajors; mathematics
majors were allowed to enroll but did not get credit towards their ma-
jor. The course was suggested to me by my chair, Richard Hain, and
was designed in part to fit a new university requirement in Science,
Technology, and Society, and thus had a combination of technical and
social topics. I also made an effort in the course to engage the stu-
dents by bringing in examples from their daily lives. My approach to
this course and many of the materials used were strongly influenced by
courses taught by Stephen Greenfield at Rutgers University [5], Susan
Key words and phrases. teaching cryptography,course development, cryptogra-
phy and society.
2 JOSHUAHOLDEN
LandauattheUniversity ofMassachusetts atAmherst [6], andWilliam
Pardon at Duke University [12].
The course was a seminar, and by university policy thus had an en-
rollmentcapoffifteen. Fifteenstudentsstartedthecourse, andthirteen
completed it. All levels of undergraduate from first-year through se-
niorwere present. Thestudents’ majorsincluded Biological Anthropol-
ogy and Anatomy, Biology, Economics, Mathematics, Political Science,
Public Policy Studies, and undeclared. The published prerequisite was
high school algebra only. Roughly half the students seemed to have
no significant amount of college mathematics, while the others had
varying amounts up through most of a mathematics major program.
Students were required to buy four textbooks for the course: Joseph
Silverman’s A Friendly Introduction to Number Theory [17], Albrecht
Beutelspacher’s Cryptology [1], Whitfield Diffie and Susan Landau’s
Privacy on the Line [2], and Simson Garfinkel and Gene Spafford’s
Web Security & Commerce [3]. (Mathematics and Computer Science
professors who are used to assigning only one textbook for the course
should keep in mind the range of topics addressed and the fact that hu-
manities courses generally assign more textbooks than technical ones.)
More information about the course may be found at my archived copy
of the course web page [7].
Threemainthemes wereaddressedthroughoutthecourse: howmod-
ern cryptographic protocols are implemented and their strengths and
weaknesses; how one encounters (and will increasingly encounter in the
future) cryptography in one’s daily life; and the implications of wide-
spread use of cryptography in the digital age both for individuals and
for society. In addition to studying the mathematics behind modern
cryptographic systems, we also examined the impact that the invention
of modern cryptographic systems has had and will have on political,
economic, philosophical, and sociological aspects of society. In order
for the students to fully grasp this third theme, of course, they needed
to something about the mathematics of cryptography, how it works
and how it is used.
I tried in the course to schedule one day of mathematics, one techni-
cal day, andoneday ofsocietal issues ineach week rather thansplitting
thecourseinto blocks. (The coursewas taughtonMonday, Wednesday,
and Friday.) Of course, this could not be followed strictly for various
reasons. I also scheduled three guest speakers, including someone from
the Duke Medical Center, a Duke Law professor, and the Mathematics
Department system administrator.
The mathematical partofthecourseintroduced basicnumber theory
and work with congruences, up through the Euler phi function and
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 3
Euler’s Theorem. The goal was to get all of the mathematics necessary
to understand the RSA system of public-key encryption. There was
also a short introduction to finite fields as a prequel to the discussion
of the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES/Rijndael). My goals here
were twofold. Firstly, I wanted to make sure students understood the
mathematics behind the cryptosystems. Secondly I wanted them to
see some of the basic ideas of number theory and abstract algebra,
notablytheconceptofnumbersasthingswhichcouldbehavedifferently
depending on their context, that is, as an example of abstract elements
in a field or ring.
I did my best to introduce the mathematics gently, using A Friendly
Introduction to Number Theory supplementedbyafewhandouts. How-
ever, the material quickly became quite hard for many of the students
with less mathematics background, and many seemed to feel that the
textbookdidnothelp. Inretrospect, Ithinkthatthelackofmathemat-
ical prerequisites may have given them the impression that the course
was going to be less mathematically intense than it turned out to be.
More mathematical sophistication would have made the course easier,
but I feel that it was important to teach a course which students of all
backgrounds could take. Perhaps the answer was simply to be more up
front (and more aware myself) about how much mathematics there was
going to be and how hard it was going to get. Also, some topics, such
as AES and elliptic curve cryptography (ECC), required special math-
ematical material to be introduced just for that topic. Some students
thought this wasn’t well integrated into the class.
Cryptosystems coveredinthecourseincludedshiftandaffineciphers,
Hill ciphers, linear feedback shift registers, DES, AES/Rijndael, RSA,
Diffie-Hellman key exchange, and ECC. The more technical systems
were covered only in overview; notably DES, AES, and ECC. We also
covered anumber ofrelatedprotocolsandtechnical matterswhich were
not cryptosystems, including digital signatures, message digests, sub-
liminal channels, zero-knowledge proofs, and systems for secure e-mail
and secure web browsing. A certain amount of cryptanalysis was also
discussed, including the different types of information that a cryptana-
lyst might have available. There were three main goals for the selection
of this group of topics. Firstly, I wanted to introduce a large selection
of different types of ciphers and other systems. Secondly, I wanted
ciphers which reinforced the mathematics concepts I thought the stu-
dents should know. Thirdly, I wanted the students to see at least some
ciphers which they might encounter in their daily lives.
In addition, I tried to keep this aspect of the course grounded in
what cryptography could and could not be used for in practice, with
4 JOSHUAHOLDEN
an emphasis on the limitations of algorithms in the face of the real
world. The textbook Cryptology was used for this part of the course
along with a large number of handouts and web sites. Many of the
students were quite comfortable with programming and computers and
this seemed to be the easiest part of the course for them.
Discussions of the impact of cryptography on society were roughly
grouped into political, economic, and philosophical spheres. Politi-
cal implications that were discussed included the impact of cryptog-
raphy on law enforcement, on patent law, the possibility of electronic
voting, and the debate over personal privacy versus national security.
Economic aspects centered around the startling growth of electronic
banking and electronic commerce in the last few years, as well as the
possibilities of legally binding digital signatures and the use of “dig-
ital cash”. Philosophical and sociological implications included out-
growths of many of the above areas, especially the need to balance
personal privacy with the public interest. In particular, we discussed
law enforcement and the ability of the government to eavesdrop on
private communications, government and corporate access to medical
and banking records, and the ability to track electronic purchases or
prevent them from being tracked.
Readings from Privacy on the Line were assigned to guide the dis-
cussion of the political and philosophical issues, while that book and
Web Security & Commerce were used for economic issues. A number
of handouts and web sites were also used in this part of the course.
(A fairly complete list of readings for the course may be found in the
course syllabus [8].) Classes for this part of the course were generally
conducted as open discussions, as opposed to the more lecture-oriented
classes in the rest of the course. This was a new experience for me
as a mathematics professor, and as you might guess, student interest
waxed and waned depending on the topic, the point in the course, the
weather, and so on. In general, however, I felt that the discussions
were useful and informative for everyone, myself included. Students
also seemed very positive about the discussions. Many (though not
all) students also liked the readings used in this part of the course.
Assignments for the course included weekly homework, a reading
journal, a term paper, an in-class midterm, and a take-home final.
There was also a small part of the grade based on classroom participa-
tion. (I did not, in the end, feel it necessary to penalize anyone for lack
of participation.) The first weekly homework was an ungraded student
survey, which included some basic information about the students, a
pretest on some of the mathematical content of the course, and an
opinion survey with four questions:
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 5
(1) You should be able to copy any picture or music that you find
on the Internet.
(2) Suitable government authorities should be able to have access
to your e-mail.
(3) Personal financial and medical information should be totally
secure from every inquiry.
(4) Math is needed to build rockets. In order to make decisions
about business or government policy, most people don’t need
to know very much math or even very much about what math
can do.
(These questions, and several others on the pretest, were taken from a
similar pretest used by Stephen Greenberg in his course.) I asked for a
rating of how strongly they agreed or disagreed and some justification.
There was a wide range of responses, which were also reflected in the
way the students responded during class discussions. In retrospect, it
wouldhave beenvaluabletohave re-donethesurvey attheendofclass;
I suspect that student answers would have changed somewhat, though
probably not completely. (It might also have been interesting to see
how a mathematics post-test went!)
Other weekly assignments included cipher problems to encode, de-
code, or break, purely mathematical problems, andessays ranging from
paragraphs to 2–3 pages. There was also an assignment in which they
had to use the computer program PGP to send, receive, and sign en-
cryptede-mailmessages. Studentsseemed toenjoythecipher problems
most, althoughsomealso gotrathercreative withtheir essays. Igraded
the essays on aspects of composition as well as content; on the whole
I was quite happy with the student writing. The mathematics prob-
lems seemed to cause the most problems. I allowed student to work
in groups and had some difficulties early on with students who were
clearly copying.
The reading journal consisted of paragraph summaries collected ev-
ery week. The articles were supposed to be related to cryptography
and published in a newspaper or newsmagazine during the previous
month. Most students in fact got these articles off of the web. I did
not insist that the article originate in a print publication, but I did try
to make it clear that it should come from a professional news organi-
zation rather than a weblog or similar site. I also tried to focus these
journals on summarizing the article rather than commentary, although
I encouraged them to use their thoughts on the articles in their essays
(perhaps not as much as I could have).
6 JOSHUAHOLDEN
The term paper assignment was a 1–2 page proposal followed by two
drafts of an 8–12 page paper. The topic was left open; it could be ori-
ented towards mathematics, towards programming or software design,
or towards discussions of policy and social aspects of cryptography. I
gave a list of some examples. Many of the students chose to write on
historical topics such as the Enigma cipher or the ADFGVX cipher.
(The movie U-571, which was tangentially related to the Enigma ci-
pher, had recently premiered at the time.) The class focused largely
on modern ciphers rather than historical ones and some students, who
were more historically minded, used the term paper as an opportunity
to bring more of their interests to the course. This seemed quite ap-
propriate to me, as I was interested in historical topics myself but did
not feel that there was sufficient time to cover them in the course.
Boththein-classmidtermexamandthetake-homefinalweredivided
into short answer questions, mathematics problems and ciphers, and
an essay. Short answer problems included:
(1) Name two requirements mandated by HIPAA.
(2) Name two public-key cryptosystems. Name two symmetric-key
cryptosystems. (Specify which are which!)
(3) Define operations intelligence and give an example.
(4) What is Kerckhoff’s Principle? Why is it important when de-
fending against known-plaintext attacks?
(5) In a paragraph, describe three ways in which Rijndael is similar
to DES and three ways in which Rijndael is different from DES.
Be complete and thorough.
(6) In a paragraph, describe the difference between wiretaps, pen
registers, andtrapandtrace. Whatsortofauthorization(under
normal circumstances) does a law-enforcement officer need in
order to use each of these techniques?
(7) In a paragraph, describe the differences between symmetric-
key cryptosystems, message digests, and message authentica-
tion codes. Include the name of a system that you might use
for each of these, and the mode of use if appropriate.
(8) In a paragraph, describe three different uses we have made of
“cut-and-choose” or “sealed envelope” techniques. Why were
the envelopes sealed in each case? Why in each case did we
choose some of the envelopes to open and others to remain
sealed?
(9) In a paragraph, explain how digital watermarking is a form of
steganography. Then explain one form of steganography other
than digital watermarking.
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 7
The mathematics and cipher section of the final exam had two long
problems:
(1) Your organization has just captured the secret plans (shown
below) for the nonlinear feedback shift register that the enemy
has been using to encrypt his communications. Unfortunately,
the nonlinear table of values was smeared when your operative
(Mallet) was forced to hide the plans in her mouth. However,
Mallet was also able to learn that when the initialization string
1001 was used, the the letters “MA” (in ASCII) were encrypted
as ciphertext 11010000 11011100. Mount a known ciphertext
attack by using subtraction mod 2 to find the output of the
nonlinear feedback shift register. Then work your way back-
wards, using subtraction mod 2 again where necessary, to fill in
the missing table.
(2) In this problem we will learn why we use modular arithmetic in
the Diffie-Hellman key exchange system.
(a) You are Eve, and have captured Alice and Bob and impris-
oned them. You overhear the following dialog.
Bob: Oh, let’s not bother with the prime, it will make
things easier.
Alice: Okay, but we still need a base s to raise things to.
How about s = 3?
Bob: All right, then my result is 27.
Alice: And mine is 243.
What is Bob’s secret b and Alice’s secret a? What is their
secret combined key?
(b) Alice and Bob continue:
Bob: How should we use our new secret key?
Alice: Oh, that’s easy; we’ll use it as a one-time pad.
Divide the key into 2-digit groups. Use our cipher table
(shown below) to change the plaintext letters into num-
bers, and write the plaintext numbers left to right under
the key groups. Then add modulo 26 and convert it back
to letters.
Bob: I can do that. (Shouts) Eve is a TQYR!
What did Bob say?
(c) Alice and Bob really should have reduced all their answers
modulo some prime, such as p = 37. If they had done
that, how would theexchange inpart (a) have gone? What
would have been their secret key?
8 JOSHUAHOLDEN
(d) What advantages did you, as Eve, have in part (a) that
Eve would not have in part (c)?
(e) Would having a subliminal channel in part (a) have helped
Alice and Bob? Why or why not?
Inretrospect, choosingtwolongproblemsseemstohavebeenamistake.
For each of the two problems, most students got either all of the points
or none of them, which did not allow for fine evaluation. Also, there
was not much room for different ways of phrasing the answers, which
made it easier to grade but difficult to tell if there was copying going
on. (Intheend I amstill not certain in thecase of oneincident whether
copying occurred.)
The midterm exam essay asked the student to write at least three
good-sized paragraphs on one of the following topics:
(1) The U.S. recently instituted new rules on export controls for
cryptography. What are the main points of the new rules? Was
the NSA for or against the new rules? Why? What about the
Department of Commerce? Why?
or:
(2) Amajorcryptographicpatentrecentlywasreleasedbyitsholder.
What was it? Why was it released? In your opinion, should the
patent have been granted in the first place? Why or why not?
What do you think the impact will be of this patent passing
into the public domain? Why?
The final exam essay asked the student to revisit one of the questions
from the opinion survey conducted during the first week of class.
3. “Cryptography” at Rose-Hulman
More recently, I have been teaching a course entitled “Cryptogra-
phy” at the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology. This was taught
once before I arrived at Rose-Hulman, by Prof. David Mutchler of the
Computer Science department. Prof. Mutchler and I then team-taught
the course during the Spring Quarters of 2002 and 2003. The course
was listed as a topics course in Computer Science during 2002, and
was cross-listed in both the Computer Science and Mathematics De-
partments in 2003 (and will be in the future). This course is primarily
aimed towards majors in the two departments, and could be can be
counted toward major programs in the departments in which it was
listed. The topics in this course were fairly similar to those in the
Duke course, but the tone was much more technically oriented. We did
try to introduce some issues in the societal impact of cryptography.
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 9
In 2002, thirty-three students started the course and thirty-one com-
pleted it. (The official institute enrollment cap was thirty.) In 2003,
twenty-five students started the course and twenty-one completed it.
(The official institute enrollment cap was twenty-five.) In both cases,
sophomores (including advanced standing first-years), juniors, and se-
niors were all represented, with more of the more advanced students.
Majors were predominantly computer science or computer science/
mathematics double majors, with a few each of computer engineering,
mathematics, and physics/computer science majors. The published
prerequisites were one quarter of discrete mathematics (taken any time
after the completion of calculus) and two quarters of computer sci-
ence courses. The discrete mathematics prerequisite was waived in one
case, which proved not to be a good idea. Students were required to
buy two textbooks for the course: Williams Stallings’ Cryptography
and Network Security [18] and Stephen Levy’s Crypto: How the Code
Rebels Beat the Government — Saving Privacy in the Digital Age [10].
(Once again, two textbooks were necessary because of the incorpora-
tion of both technical and non-technical subjects.) More information
about the course may be found at the course web page [9].
This course focused primarily on the mathematical background and
practicalimplementationofmoderncryptographicprotocols. Although
not formally a seminar, we tried to encourage an attitude where learn-
ing interesting material was primary and grades were secondary. To
this end, there were no tests in the course and assignments were de-
signed to allow students to focus on topics they found most interesting.
As in the course at Duke, the mathematics and the technical details
were intertwined with each other and with some discussion of societal
issues. A typical four-class week might have one day concentrating
on mathematics, two on cryptosystems or other protocols, and one on
(recent) historical or societal issues.
The mathematical part of the course was very similar to the Duke
course. The students were somewhat more mathematically sophisti-
cated and had an easier time absorbing the topics, although the topics
themselves were still mostly new to all but a few of the students. We
spent more time on finite fields and elliptic curves than I did in the
Duke course and thus were able to go into more detail with AES and
elliptic curve cryptography. The goals of the mathematical part of the
course were similar to those at Duke, although we also aimed to impart
a degree of practical knowledge that the students might need in their
future careers.
Cryptosystems coveredinthecourseincludedshiftandaffineciphers,
Hill ciphers, Simplified DES, DES, Simplified AES, AES/Rijndael,
10 JOSHUAHOLDEN
RSA, Diffie-Hellman key exchange, and elliptic curve cryptography.
The more technical background of the students allowed us to cover
DES and AES in quite a bit more detail than I could at Duke. We
used the simplified versions of these two algorithms created by Ed
Schaefer (Santa Clara University) and his students [11,14] in order
to give our students hands-on experience with these ciphers. We also
covered digital signatures, subliminal channels, zero-knowledge proofs,
and a discussion of the information-theoretic idea of perfect secrecy.
The mathematical and technical aspects of the course used Cryptog-
raphy and Network Security as a textbook, along with some handouts
and web sites. Some students seemed to think that a cryptography
reference book would be more useful than a traditional textbook, and
we may recommend one in the future, although I do not think we will
require students to buy it. (Bruce Schneier’s Applied Cryptography [15]
is one possibility.)
Discussions of cryptography and society revolved around readings
from Crypto: How the Code Rebels Beat the Government — Saving
Privacy in the Digital Age. This is a popular, if somewhat sensational,
account of the development of modern cryptography fromroughly 1970
to the present. The story told in the book includes the development of
many of the key ideas and protocols we discussed in the course. It also
explores the reactions of government, business, and society to these
developments, giving us a handle on which to hang class discussions on
some of the same political, economic, and philosophical ideas covered
in the Duke course. The book is certainly more lively than the books
used in the Duke course. However, the overtly political tone put off
some of the students in the course.
Assignments for the course included weekly homework, an oral re-
port, and a research proposal. Students were also given points for read-
ings and class discussions on Crypto. In the 2002 version of the course
students were not given enough weekly homework and I think this was
detrimental to their learning, especially of the more advanced topics.
In the 2003 version students were given homework slightly less than
weekly (six times during the ten-week course). Each homework was
divided into “mathematics-inspired problems” and “computer science-
inspired problems”. The “mathematics-inspired problems” rangedover
mathematical, algorithmic, and protocol-based topics but were all in-
tended to be solved with paper and pencil and perhaps the assistance
of a small computer program or a computer algebra system such as
Maple. Many, but not all, were taken from Cryptography and Net-
work Security. The “computer science-inspired problems” were slightly
larger programming projects and included implementations of various
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 11
cryptosystems and protocols discussed in the class, investigations of
cryptanalytic techniques, and the gathering of empirical evidence for
various theorems and conjectures related to the course.
More homework problems were made available than students could
possibly be expected to do. Each was assigned a number of points,
and a certain minimum number of points was required on each part
(“mathematics”and“computerscience”)ofeachhomeworkassignment
for a passing grade. Students could increase their grade beyond the
minimum by earning points on any part of any assignment, without
restriction. Our object was to encourage students to find problems
which interested them, while still making sure they had some basic
understanding of all areas of the course. Most students found the
mathematics part of the homework more difficult than the computer
sciencepart,whichwasnotsurprisingsincemostwerecomputerscience
majors.
Therewerealsoseveralin-classprojectswhichgavestudentsahands-
on experience with some of the more important cryptosystems. The
students worked through worksheets in small groups with assistance
from the instructors. Most of these could also be turned in for home-
work credit. The topics included Simplified DES, the cryptanalysis of
Simplified DES, Simplified AES, and RSA. (The RSA worksheet fo-
cused on the algorithms for fast exponentiation and fast probabilistic
primality testing.)
The oral presentation was based on a technical article on cryptog-
raphy chosen by the students with help from the instructors. Sug-
gested sources included Cryptologia, the Journal of Cryptology, and
the proceedings of CRYPTO, EUROCRYPT, ASIACRYPT, and simi-
lar conferences. Presentations were 20 minutes long and were intended
to show that the student understood the basic technical ideas of the
article and could communicate them in a way that impressed their
importance upon the audience. Students were encouraged to use Pow-
erPoint or similar presentation software. The difficulty of the material
varied widely, depending on the level of the student. We took this into
account to a degree when grading the article, but more emphasis was
placed on making sure the student understood the material, regardless
of difficulty. Quantum cryptography was a popular subject during the
2002 version of the course. Primality testing was very popular during
the 2003 course, with three students collaborating on a series of pre-
sentations about the AKS deterministic primality test. Image-based
steganography was a popular subject during both years. Quality of
presentations varied quite a bit, to the degree that we had to ask some
12 JOSHUAHOLDEN
of the students in 2003 to repeat their presentations in order to get
credit.
The research proposal was a 2–5 page paper which was intended to
give students a chance to think about open problems and a taste of
academic research in the field of cryptography. Students were asked to
formulate and clearly state an open problem, explain why solving the
problem would be valuable, and propose some promising directions for
solving the problem. The students were told that the proposal would
be considered a success if the student could convince the instructors
that he or she had promising ideas that had a reasonable chance of
contributing to the solution of the problem. Students were encouraged
to get their open problems from the presentations of other students,
althoughthiswasnotstrictlyrequired. Studentswerediscouragedfrom
choosing a famous unsolved problem in the field, e.g., a proof of the
security of RSA. Students were not required to carry out any of the
actual research, of course.
Some proposals made by students included designing switching net-
works for use with quantum cryptography, the use of “cwatsets” [16]
in symmetric-key cryptography, finding new ways to attack the one-
time pad statistically, detecting cheating in translucent cryptography
systems, and detecting image steganography using statistical methods.
This was the first time most students had ever been asked to consider
finding a significant problem of their own to investigate, and many
students had to be encouraged to apply some creative and original
thought. Also, few had any experience judging what made an idea
likely to work in solving a research problem. In the end, some of the
proposals were rather pedestrian, but some included some genuinely
creative ideas. On the whole we thought the experience was very valu-
able for students, especially those who were nearing graduation and
the “real world”.
The final portionof the grade was based onthe readings fromCrypto
and the accompanying classroom discussions, which were conducted in
a similar fashion to the Duke course. At the beginning of each discus-
sion, students were asked to do a “two-minute essay” answering two
easy questions from the reading. Often, the questions asked the stu-
dents what found most interesting on a certain topic. These “essays”
were use to judge whether the students had done the reading and also
sometimes to stimulate the classroom discussions. Students were also
given points for being present on the day of the discussion. Not all stu-
dents participated actively in the discussions, but many contributed
comments and there was a certain amount of heated debate. In gen-
eral, students in the Rose-Hulman course did not seem as inclined to
A COMPARISON OF CRYPTOGRAPHY COURSES 13
argue about these topics as the students in the Duke course. This was
probably due to a combination of the difference in the course and the
difference in the student body as a whole.
4. Conclusion
One of the striking things about these two courses is how a fairly
similar set of material can produce two entirely different courses de-
pending on the emphasis of the instructor and the abilities and inter-
ests of the students. Obviously, the stronger technical background of
the Rose-Hulman students allowed a greater amount of depth in the
technical areas of the course. On the other hand, the less technically
oriented non-mathematics majors at Duke were perhaps better able to
come to grips with the social aspects and implications of cryptography
which we tried to bring out in both courses. One of the things that
I hoped to achieve in the Duke course was to demonstrate that there
was value in bringing technical material on cryptography to students
with a limited background but a strong interest. This was not as suc-
cessful as I would have liked, and a comparison of my experiences in
the two courses makes it clear that a stronger technical background
does lead to a better understanding of the material. This is perhaps
no surprise. I still feel, however, that introducing the Duke students to
technical aspects of cryptography also enhanced their understanding of
the non-technical aspects.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my department chairs, Richard Hain at Duke
and Allen Broughton at Rose-Hulman, for giving me the opportunity
to teach these courses. I also would like to thank Stephen Green-
field, Susan Landau, William Pardon, and of course my co-teacher
David Mutchler for showing me how to teach a course in cryptography
and providing materials which were invaluable to me in teaching these
courses. I would like very much to thank all of the students who have
taken my courses for their contributions, comments, and enthusiasm
when appropriate. Finally, I would like to thank Brian Winkel for sug-
gesting that I write this article, and for his helpful comments on an
early draft.
References and Other Resources
[1] Beutelspacher, A. 1994. Cryptology, MAA Spectrum. Washington DC: Math-
ematical Association of America.
14 JOSHUAHOLDEN
[2] Diffie, W. and Landau, S. 1998. Privacy on the Line. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
[3] Garfinkel, S. and Spafford, G. 1997. Web Security & Commerce. Sebastopol
CA: O’Reilly.
[4] Garfinkel, S. and Spafford, G. 2001.Web Security, Privacy & Commerce, 2nd
ed. Sebastopol CA: O’Reilly.
~greenfie/currentcourses/math103/math103_index.html
Duke/Math65S/
holden/Duke/Math65S/syllabus/
rose-hulman.edu/class/ma/holden/Math479/
[10] Levy, S. 2002. Crypto: How the Code Rebels Beat the Government — Saving
Privacy in the Digital Age. New York NY: Penguin Books.
[11] Musa, M., Schaefer, E., and Wedig, S. 2003. A simplified AES algorithm and
its linear and differential cryptanalyses. Cryptologia. 27(2): 148–177.
[13] Phan, R. C.-W. 2002. Mini Advanced Encryption Standard (Mini-AES): a
testbed for cryptanalysis students. Cryptologia. 26(4): 283–306.
[14] Schaefer, E. 1996. A simplified Data Encryption Standard algorithm. Cryp-
tologia. 20(1): 77–84.
[15] Schneier, B. 1996. Applied Cryptography, 2nd ed. John Wiley and Sons.
[17] Silverman,J.1996.A Friendly Introduction to Number Theory. PrenticeHall.
[18] Stallings, W. 2003. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Prac-
tice, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall.
Biographical Sketch
Joshua Holden is currently in his third year in the Mathematics De-
partment of Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, an undergraduate
engineering college in Indiana. He received his Ph.D. from Brown Uni-
versity in 1998 and held postdoctoral positions at the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst and Duke University. His research interests
areincomputationalandalgebraicnumbertheoryandincryptography.
His teaching interests include the use of technology in teaching and the
teaching of mathematics to computer science majors, as well as the
use of historically informed pedagogy. His non-mathematical interests
currently include science fiction, textile arts, and choral singing.
Department of Mathematics, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technol-
ogy, Terre Haute, IN 47803, USA
E-mail address: holden@rose-hulman.edu