1v0130.0101:viXra
StatisticalScience
2009,Vol.24,No.3,361–385
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2009
A Conversation with Leo Goodman
Mark P. Becker
Abstract. Leo A. Goodman was born on August 7, 1928 in New York City. He received his
A.B. degree, summa cum laude, in 1948 from Syracuse University, majoring in mathematics
and sociology. He went on to pursue graduate studies in mathematics, with an emphasis
on mathematical statistics, in the Mathematics Department at Princeton University, and
in 1950 he was awarded the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees. His statistics professors at Princeton
were the late Sam Wilks and John Tukey. Goodman then began his academic career as a
statistician, and also as a statistician bridging sociology and statistics, with an appointment
in 1950 as assistant professor in the Statistics Department and the Sociology Department at
the University of Chicago, where he remained, except for various leaves, until 1987. He was
promoted to associate professor in 1953, and to professor in 1955. Goodman was at Cam-
bridge University in 1953–1954 and 1959–1960 as visiting professor at Clare College and in
the Statistical Laboratory. And he spent 1960–1961 as a visiting professor of mathematical
statistics and sociology at Columbia University. He was also a research associate in the Uni-
versity of Chicago Population Research Center from 1967 to 1987. In 1970 he was appointed
the Charles L. Hutchinson Distinguished Service Professor at the University of Chicago,
a title that he held until 1987. He spent 1984–1985 at the Center for Advanced Study in
the Behavioral Sciences in Stanford. In 1987 he was appointed the Class of 1938 Professor
at the University of California, Berkeley, in the Sociology Department and the Statistics
Department. Goodman’s numerous honors include honorary D.Sc. degrees from the Uni-
versity of Michigan and Syracuse University, and membership in the National Academy of
Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the American Philosophical So-
ciety. He has also received numerous awards: From the American Statistical Association,
the Samuel S. Wilks Medal; from the Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies, the
R. A. Fisher Lectureship; and from the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the Henry L.
Reitz Lectureship; also, from the American Sociological Association, the Samuel A. Stouf-
fer Methodology Award and the Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award; and from the
American Sociological Association Methodology Section, the inaugural Otis Dudley Duncan
Lectureship. Earlier he had received a Special Creativity Award from the National Science
Foundation, and fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation, the Fulbright Commission,
theSocialScienceResearch CouncilandtheNational ScienceFoundation. In2005 theAmer-
ican Sociological Association Methodology Section established the Leo A. Goodman Award
to recognize contributions to sociological methodology, and/or innovative usesof sociological
methodology, made by a scholar who is no more than fifteen years past the Ph.D.
Key words and phrases: Categorical data analysis, survey data anal-
ysis, panel studies data analysis, log-linear analysis, latent structure
analysis, statistical magic and/or statistical serendipity, mathematics
background for statistics, bridging sociology, demography, economic
time series and more.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article
Mark P. Becker is President, Georgia State University, published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
Office of the President, P.O. Box 3999, Atlanta, Statistical Science, 2009, Vol. 24, No. 3, 361–385. This
Georgia 30302-3999, USA e-mail: mbecker@gsu.edu. reprint differs from the original in pagination and
typographic detail.
2 M. P. BECKER
The following conversation took place on January were outstanding teachers, and each of them pro-
10, 2008, at Leo Goodman’s home in Berkeley, Cal- duced mathematics of top quality.
ifornia. I should stop here right now to say that I am
Becker: Leo, you frequently refer to me as your partly jokingwhenI say that Icould think of myself
academic grandson, as you were the thesis advisor as, in a certain sense, a first generation academic
of my thesis advisor, the late Clifford Clogg. And, descendant of Bers. [Smile/Laughter] Bers was an
over the years, as good grandfathers do, you have important person in my life, but he was not the ad-
told me many stories about the people whom you visor on my Ph.D. thesis; and, as you know, being
have had the pleasure of learning from and working thePh.D.thesis advisoris,strictly speaking,thege-
with. Who got you started in thinking about math- nealogical criterion that defines this kind of kinship.
ematics, about a career as a statistician and also As you of course also know, Sam Wilks and John
about a career as a statistician bridging sociology Tukey were the ones who approved my Ph.D. the-
and statistics, and how did all this come about? sis.
Goodman:Mark, yes, I dothink of you with pride But now let me return for a moment to Bers and
asasecondgenerationacademicdescendantofmine, Loewner.HereisabriefdescriptionofLoewnerwrit-
and I would also like to say here that I could think ten by Bers, in words that could be used to describe
of myself as, in a certain sense, a first generation Bers as well:
academic descendant of my first real mathematics “He ... was a man whom everybody liked, per-
teacher, Lipman (Lipa) Bers. He had been a stu- haps because he was a man at peace with him-
dent of Charles Loewner at the Charles University self. He conducted a life-long passionate love affair
withmathematics....Hiskindnessandgenerosityin
in Prague, Czechoslovakia, and, during my under-
scientific matters, to students and colleagues, were
graduate years at Syracuse University, both Bers
proverbial. He was also a good storyteller, with a
andLoewnerwerefaculty membersin theMath De-
sense of humor.... But first and foremost he was a
partment there, having extricated themselves from
mathematician.”
Europe just one step ahead of the Holocaust. I took
Mark, you asked me who got me started in think-
some courses with Bers and with Loewner. (By the
ing about math. I would say that Bers and Loewner
way, Bers once told me,many years after I had been
were responsiblefor that. But, before them, I would
oneofhisstudents,thatheandLoewnerweredirect
say that I got started in math because I actually
academic descendants of Gauss; Bers was a sixth
got started as an undergraduate major in sociology.
generation and Loewner a fifth generation descen-
[Smile/Laughter] During my undergraduate days at
dant of Gauss. Also, it turns out that Bers was a
fourth generation and Loewner a third generation
descendant of Weierstrass.) Both Bers and Loewner
Fig. 1. Leo Goodman and Mark Becker. Fig. 2. Lipman Bers.
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 3
Chicago. Bers, when he made his suggestion, also
told me that no mathematics undergraduate from
SyracuseUniversityhadeverbeenacceptedforgrad-
uatestudybytheMathematicsDepartmentatPrince-
ton; and, with respect to Faris’ suggestion, I was
aware of the fact that he had been a graduate stu-
dent in sociology at the University of Chicago, and
his Ph.D. thesis, when it was published, turned out
to be a kind of sociological classic. So I applied for
graduate study in math to Princeton, and for grad-
uate study in soc to the University of Chicago.
Now let me tell you a bit about Faris. He was
a strong social psychologist, and he was also very
muchagenuinesociologist.Inbothspheres,hismany
contributions were informed by his strong commit-
menttosociology asadiscipline.Inaddition,hewas
anaccomplished painter,apretty good violinist and
Fig. 3. Charles Loewner.
an enjoyable pianist. We became good friends.
Faris was a member of a four-generation line of
Syracuse,sociology majorswererequiredtotakethe sociologists. His father, Ellsworth Faris, had served
course in statistics given by the Sociology Depart-
for fourteen years as the first chairman, after the
ment,andthesociologyfacultymemberwhowasas-
foundingchairman, of the University of Chicago So-
signed to teach the course was Robert E. L. (Bob)
ciology Department, and he ranks high in the final
Faris. He taught this course for the first time the
hierarchy of those whoachieved major results in the
year that I took it. When he entered the classroom
building of American sociology during the first half
the first day of class, he announced that he was as-
of the twentieth century. The father served as Pres-
signed by the Sociology Department to teach this
ident of the American Sociological Association in
course because he had written a book a long time
1937, and the son in 1961; the father served as Ed-
ago that had some tables in it, and also because he
itor of the American Journal of Sociology, and the
did know a little bit about statistics, but he con-
son as Editor of the American Sociological Review.
fessed that he didn’t really know very much about
Bob Faris’ son, Jack, received his Ph.D. in sociol-
statistics, and he hoped that students in the class
ogy from the University of Chicago; and Jack’s son,
wouldbeabletohelphimtogetthroughthecourse.
Robert W., received his Ph.D. in sociology from the
Well, ithappenedtoturnoutthatIwas abletohelp
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Jack is
out. When the course came to the end, Faris told
now the President of the Washington Biotechnology
methat hethought that I had a talent for statistics,
& Biomedical Association (earlier he had been the
and,ifIwouldliketogainstillmorestrengthinthat
UniversityofWashingtonVicePresidentforUniver-
subject, he would suggest that I first strengthen my
sity Relations); and Robert W. has just now com-
mathematics background by taking some courses in
pleted his first year as an Assistant Professor in the
the Mathematics Department. And so, that is what
Sociology Department at University of California at
I then did.
Davis.
Later on, when I was in my undergraduate senior
year, it turned out that I had taken just enough Becker: Well, Leo, Faris gave you rock solid ad-
courses in math and just enough courses in soc to vice for launching a career in sociology, but you ul-
graduateasajointmath/socmajor.Butwhatwould timately followed LipmanBers’suggestionandwent
I do when my senior year would come to an end? I on to Princeton to studymathematics. How did you
didn’t know. decidetodothat,andhowdidyoudecidetoempha-
Bers then suggested to me that I should apply for size mathematical statistics while you were a grad-
graduate study in mathematics at Princeton Uni- uate student in mathematics?
versity, and Faris suggested that I should apply for Goodman: Well, after I had mailed out the appli-
graduate study in sociology at the University of cation to Princeton in math and the application to
4 M. P. BECKER
the University of Chicago in soc, I did wonder what
would happen next.
Sometime during my senior year, when I was vis-
iting my parents in New York, I decided to take the
train from New York to Princeton Junction, just
in order to see what the Princeton campus looked
like. After the train arrived in Princeton Junction,
I walked from thereto the campus,and then walked
aroundthecampus,andwasimpressedbyhowbeau-
tiful it was. Then I just happened to come across
Fine Hall, the Mathematics Department building,
andittoowasbeautiful.Itwaslocated inthesouth-
eastern corner section of the campus, and it har-
monized with the other structures in this, the “red
brick section” of the campus. Red brick and lime-
stone were used in the Collegiate Gothic architec-
tural style of these structures, and they presented
a unified appearance. I was also aware of the fact Fig. 4. Sam Wilks.
that, when the Institute for Advanced Study was
first founded in Princeton, it had temporary quar- wanted to first make a phone call. He then phoned
ters in Fine Hall. All this left its impression on me. a fellow faculty member, Fred Stephan, who was a
Fine Hall was in the shape of a box (a rectangu- distinguished sociologist, statistician and demogra-
lar parallelepiped). [Smile] The hallway inside the pherintheSociology Departmentthere,andhetold
buildingwasrectangularinshape,anditwentaround Stephan over the phone that an undergraduate se-
theinsideofthebuilding,withroomsoneachsideof nior at Syracuse University who had applied to be-
the hallway. I walked around the hallway, and then come a graduate student in the Mathematics De-
Iwalked arounditasecond time,andmaybeathird partment at Princeton was now in his office, and he
time. (Einstein, I thought, must have worked at an thought that Stephan would be interested to meet
earlier time in one of the offices located right off this student. He then gave me directions on how
this hallway.) Then, a secretary, whose office door to get to Stephan’s office, and off I went. I found
had been open, noticed that there was this strange Stephan’s office, and he and I also had a very nice
young man (me) walking around the hallway, and conversation.
she came out of her office and asked me if she could After all this, I felt elated, and I thought that, if
be of any help. I told her that I was an undergrad- it turns out that I am accepted by the Math De-
uate senior at Syracuse University, and had applied partment here at Princeton, here is where I will go.
to Princeton for graduate study in math. She then I then started walking back to Princeton Junction,
asked me to wait there for a moment, and she went walkingon cloudnine,andIgot onthenexttrainin
into another office, which was adjacent to her office. ordertoreturntoNew York.ButIsoonrealized, af-
Then she came out of the other office with a man ter the train had pulled out of the train-station and
who said he was Sam Wilks. was on its way, that it was heading in the wrong di-
Heinvited meintohis office, whichwas also beau- rection, heading for Philadelphia. [Smile/Laughter]
tiful. It was spacious, with carved oak paneling and Sothat’showImadethedecisiontobeagraduate
a splendid fireplace. The office contained a large student in math if it turns out that I am accepted
conference table with chairs all around it, and also at Princeton, and not a graduate student in soc at
a large desk, and wooden bookshelves filled with the University of Chicago.
books from floor to ceiling. Wilks asked me to sit By the way, Mark, I have been telling you here
down, and we then talked for maybe an hour or about my feelings and thoughts while on the trip
more. He had a very pleasant Texan drawl. After that I made from New York to Princeton just in or-
about an hour or more, I began to think that I der to see what the campus looked like. Please keep
must be taking up too much of his time, and I got in mind that I was nineteen years old at that time
up to leave; and he asked me to wait a minute, he (anditisnowaboutsixty yearsaftertheevents that
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 5
I have been describing), and I am trying to convey hallway, and Tukey happened to be walking in the
to you, as honestly as I can, what that nineteen- hallway too, and our paths happened to cross. He
year-old felt and thought at that time. stoppedmeand asked, “How areyou doing?” Ithen
Yes, I made the trip to Princeton just in order said, “I don’t know how I’m doing.” He then said,
to see what the Princeton campus looked like, and “Follow me.” He opened the door of an empty class-
it just happened that I came across Fine Hall, and room, and he asked me to go up to the blackboard
whenIwaswalkingaroundandaroundinaweinthe at thefrontof theroom,andhetook aseat near the
Fine Hall hallway, the secretary whose office door backoftheroom.Hethenaskedmeamathquestion
just happened to be open just happened to come to explain something or other, and I tried to answer
out of her office and just happened to ask me if she the question writing on the blackboard. I could see
could be of any help, and she just happened to be that, while I was trying to answer his question at
Wilks’ secretary. Mark, itseems to methat all these the blackboard, he was doing something else seated
happenings might be viewed as examples of what
there near the back of the room, possibly writing an
one might call dumb luck. I have always thought
article. (It was well known that Tukey was able to
of myself as a very lucky person, and I feel deeply
do two things at the same time.) When I finished
grateful for all the lucky events that have occurred
trying to answer the first question, he didn’t com-
tomeinmy life.Justimagine whatmight havehap-
ment on my attempted answer, and he asked me a
pened if, when I was walking around and around
second math question. I then tried to answer that
in the Fine Hall hallway, the secretary whose office
question writing on the blackboard. Then a third
door was open was the secretary of, say, Solomon
math question; and the questioning and attempted
Lefschetz, who was the math department chairman
answering continued for maybe an hour or more.
atthat time.(I willsay moreaboutLefschetz later.)
Finally the questioning stopped. Tukey then got up
If that had happened, I suppose it is possible that
from his seat near the back of the room, he didn’t
I might have ended up deciding to be a graduate
say anything, and he walked very slowly toward the
student in sociology at the University of Chicago.
front of the room. The expression on his face was
that of a man thinking about serious matters. He
Becker: Leo, let’s talk about your student expe-
had his hand on his chin, which was a typical place
riences at Princeton. Wilks and Tukey were your
where he put his hand when he was thinking about
major professors at Princeton. What are your re-
serious matters. And this is what he finally said to
membrances of these two luminaries of statistics,
me, speaking very slowly: “Well, [long pause] what
and their respective contributions to your develop-
I think you really need, [extra long pause] is some
ment as a scholar?
Goodman: Let me begin by telling you about two folk dancing.”
Mark, this comment by Tukey is a good example
very nice experiences that I had with Tukey during
ofhisspecialkindofsenseofhumorandhisattimes
myfirstyearasagraduatestudent:AsIsaidearlier,
elliptical mannerof speech.Hewas telling me,in his
when I graduated from Syracuse, it turned out that
own way, that I was doing fine, that my ability to
I had taken just the smallest number of courses in
answer math questions was fine,and that I ought to
math and the smallest number of courses in soc to
take time out for folk dancing or for whatever else
graduate with a joint major, and I had the impres-
sion, after being a graduate student at Princeton might please me. He then told me when and where
for just a short time, that all of the other first year thefolkdancingwouldtakeplace,andheinvitedme
math graduate students had been studying mathe- to come to it, which I then did. (Mark, by the way,
matics intensively full time when they were under- when Tukey invited me to come to the folk danc-
graduates, and also possibly when they were in high ing, he didn’t tell me that the folk-dancing group
school, and maybe even when they were in elemen- met under his direction, that he was the folk-dance
tary school. [My cohort of graduate students in the leader, and that he and some of his friends demon-
math department included the future Nobel Laure- strated folk-dancing steps for beginners, which is
ate John Nash (the “Beautiful Mind”) and many what I was.) Later that year, Tukey met his future
other brilliant students.] One day, sometime after wife, Elizabeth Rapp, at a folk dancing session.
I had been at Princeton for maybe two or three Here now is the second very nice experience that
months, I happened to be walking in the Fine Hall I had with Tukey during my first year: Attached to
6 M. P. BECKER
the wall in the hallway just outside the Math De- A day or so later, Tukey asked me to come by his
partment office in Fine Hall were the mailboxes for office.WhenIcametohisoffice,hetoldmethatthis
the math faculty members. One day, sometime af- workwasverygood,andthatitshouldbepublished
ter I had been at Princeton for maybe four or five as is in the Annals of Mathematical Statistics right
months, I happened to be walking past the math away. He started to write my name on the paper as
office, and Tukey happened to be standing there the author, but I said no, that he and I were the
reading a postcard that he had just taken out of authors—he gave me the problem and he gave me
his mailbox. Written on the postcard was a sta- his help. He said no, that I was the author, and this
tistical problem sent to Tukey by someone named was my work.
Allen Wallis. (I will say more about Wallis later.) All this happened sometime near the end of 1948
Tukey handedmethepostcard,andthensaidsome- or the beginning of 1949, and my paper was pub-
thing that I didn’t understand about the statistical lished in the Annals of Mathematical Statistics in
problem written on the postcard. He said just one December 1949.
sentence about the problem. Without him explic- Now,letmetellyouaboutWilks.AsIsaidearlier,
itly saying so, I realized that he wanted me to work it was after I first met Wilks, and had a chance to
on the problem that was described on the postcard. talk with him in his office, that I thought that, if it
(Tukey was a New Englander, and he spoke with a turns out that I am accepted as a graduate student
sort of “down-east” accent. He also spoke in an el- bytheMathDepartmentatPrinceton,thatiswhere
liptical, enigmatical, oracular fashion, and he liked I will go. I will give up the notion of becoming a
graduatestudentinsocattheUniversityofChicago.
to coin his own words.)
Mark, as you of course know, Wilks was the fa-
Ithenwentoffwiththepostcardinordertobegin
ther of mathematical statistics at Princeton and a
to think about the statistical problem and about
major leader in the development of this discipline;
what Tukey had meant in his one sentence about
andmanyofthepeoplewhohadtaken their Ph.D.’s
the problem. After thinking about this for a while,
under Wilks (for example, Fred Mosteller, Ted An-
I found that I still just couldn’t figure out what he
derson, Don Fraser, Ted Harris, Will Dixon, Alex
had meant, and I finally just gave up trying to do
Mood) also had important roles in this develop-
so. But I didn’t give up working on the problem.
ment. Wilks was very friendly and very fair. Ev-
I worked on this for maybe three or four weeks, and
eryone liked him. He was a quiet, penetrating and
then I wrote up the results that I had obtained in
influentialleader in thework of many organizations,
theformofapaper,butwithoutputtinganauthor’s
especially in mathematics, statistics and social sci-
nameonit.AndIputthepaperinTukey’smailbox.
ence. To these organizations, he brought wisdom,
commitment and persistence. He had a remarkable
senseof whatwas importantandwhatwas not.One
of the many important contributions he made to
statistics was his work, for a period of about thir-
teen years,as thefirsteditor oftheAnnals of Math-
ematical Statistics, when it became a publication of
the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS). (He
was also one of a small group of statisticians who
foundedandorganized theIMS,and,fromits incep-
tion, hewas a leading member of this organization.)
During the period of Wilks’ editorship of the An-
nals, he turned it into the foremost, internationally
recognized, journal of mathematical statistics; and
this had an important influence on the subsequent
development of the field of statistics.
I mentioned here Wilks’ editorship of the Annals
in part because, during my first year and a half at
Princeton, Wilks would from time to time give me
Fig. 5. John Tukey. a research manuscript, which had been submitted
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 7
to the Annals, for me to referee; and I think that Now, back to Wilks. What I am about to tell you
this experience of refereeing manuscripts really con- happened, I think, a few years after I had received
tributed to my education and training as a statisti- my Ph.D. degree, butit is possible that it happened
cian. sometime before I received the degree: I received a
Sometime during the first half of my second year letter from the University of Texas informing me
at Princeton, Wilks asked me to select any, more or thatWilks wasbeingconsideredforanappointment
less, contemporary statistics article, by any statis- as the President of the University, and asking me to
tician, and then study the article and give a talk send them a letter of reference about Wilks. Well,
on it, explaining the results that were in the article. I wrote the most affirmative thumbs-up letter that
I don’t recall how I went about trying to select an I have ever written about anyone. And I remember
author and an article, but it turned out that I se- that it gave me great pleasure to be able to do this.
lected a recently published article by Charles Stein. ItthenturnedoutthatWilks wasinvited tobecome
(Stein had received his Ph.D. at Columbia under the President of the University, he did consider the
AbrahamWaldabouttwoyearsearlier,andhisarti- offer, but in the end he turned it down.
cles,whichhehadwrittenduringtheperiodstarting Mark, earlier I had mentioned to you that Wilks
fromtwoyearsbeforehereceived hisPh.D.untilthe had a pleasant Texan drawl. But there is more to
time when I was trying to select an article, were all say aboutWilks, whowas very much a Texan, turn-
very exceptional.) I studied the selected article and ing down the Presidency of the University of Texas:
prepared the talk that I would present, but there Wilks was born in a small town bordering on a
was a small part of one section in the article that nice lake in North East Texas, and he was raised
I just couldn’t understand, and I decided to leave with his two younger brothers on a 250 acre ranch,
that section out of my talk. On the day that my which his father farmed, outside of the small town.
talk was scheduled to take place, I entered the lec- Wilks and his brothers and his parents had very
ture room at the appropriate time, the members of close family ties, and,after he was settled in Prince-
the audience were in their seats, and just as I was ton, he would take advantage of whatever oppor-
about to begin my presentation, in walked Wilks tunities would turn up for him to revisit Texas and
and Tukey escorting a third person I didn’t know. visitwithhisfamily.Also,Wilks’son,Stanley,would
The three of them sat down in the last row of the go to Texas whenever possible (for example, dur-
lecture room. (The third person turned out to be ing his summer vacations from school) in order to
Willy Feller, a distinguished mathematician special- visitwithhistwo unclesandtheirfamilies, andwith
izing in probability theory, who was at that time a his grandparents; and, when Stanley was a senior in
professor at Cornell University, and was visiting the high school in Princeton and was considering where
Princeton Math Department for a few days. Wilks, to go to college, he decided to go to Texas as an un-
TukeyandtheMathDepartmentweretryingtoper- dergraduate at North Texas State college, the same
suadeFeller toleave Cornellandbecome aprofessor undergraduate college that his father had attended,
inthePrinceton Math Department.) Ipresented my and not too far away from where his two uncles and
talk, and,immediately after it was over, Feller came their families, and his grandparents, lived. So you
rushing right up to me. He introduced himself, and, can imagine how surprised and disappointed Wilks’
with a really big smile on his face, he told me that family must have been when he told them that he
he really enjoyed the talk and found it to be very had decided to turn down the job offer and remain
interesting. Well, Mark, I was of course pleased that in Princeton.
Feller liked the talk, and I also was pleased when I HerenowisastoryabouthowWilks’familyviewed
foundoutaweekorsolaterthat,afterhisshortvisit allthis.Ican’trememberwhotoldmethisstory,and
to Princeton, Feller did decide to join the Princeton I can’t vouch for its veracity. I am telling this to you
Math Department. because I think it is amusing: Wilks’ two brothers
By the way, many years later, in a conversation had good jobs in Texas, and his parents thought
that I had with Charles Stein, I told Charles that I that, with three grown-up sons, it isn’t so unusual
just couldn’t understand a small part of one section that one of the sons might just not be as able as
in the article of his that I had studied when I was the other two, and just might not be able enough to
a graduate student, and he then told me that there obtain a good job in Texas. When the parents first
was a mistake that he had made in that section. heard that Wilks had been offered this job at the
8 M. P. BECKER
University of Texas, they were very pleased to hear
the news, and they could then see that this son too
was able enough to obtain a good job in Texas. We
arethenleft tospeculateaboutwhatWilks’ parents
thought about his decision to turn down this offer
of a good job in Texas.
Becker: Princeton has long had one of the world’s
finestmathematicsdepartments.Youwerefortunate
tohavestudiedtherewithstatisticalgreatslikeJohn
Tukey and Sam Wilks, but what about your inter-
actions with mathematics professors who were not
statistically inclined? Do you have any particular
remembrances of those?
Goodman: Math graduate students at Princeton
at the time when I was there were not required to
attend any courses. All you had to do was pass an
oral exam, called the general exam, covering four
subfieldsofmath,usuallytaken whenyourfirstyear Fig. 6. Salomon Bochner.
as a graduate student was completed, or sometime
after that. You then had to submit a thesis, and
Poland. Fearful of a Russian invasion at the begin-
have the thesis approved. Also, there was a foreign
ning of World War I, his family moved to Germany,
language requirement,two foreign languages of your
seeking greater security. Bochner was educated at
choice, and, for each of these languages, you had
the University of Berlin, where he wrote his disser-
to demonstrate to a math faculty member of your
tation, and he then lectured and made very impor-
choice that you had a reasonable ability to read or-
tant contributions on a surprising variety of topics
dinary mathematical texts that were written in the
inanalysisinGermany,attheUniversityofMunich,
foreign language. (There seemed to be a general un-
forabouttenyears.HisacademiccareerinGermany
derstandingamongthemathgraduatestudentsthat
came to an abruptend a few months after the Nazis
the math faculty didn’t take the language require-
came to power, when laws were established provid-
ment very seriously.) As a math graduate student
ing for the removal of Jewish teachers (and those of
at Princeton, you had the feeling of having almost
Jewishdescent—thosehavingatleastonegrandpar-
complete freedom.
ent of Jewish descent) from the universities, and he
Although it wasn’t required, I actually did take
then received a timely offer of a position at Prince-
some courses duringmy firstyear as a graduate stu-
ton, which he accepted. He was a very important
dent: I remember taking a course in analysis given
faculty member at Princeton for the next 36 years.
bySalomonBochner,andapartofacourseinmath-
Mark, now you might find it interesting to com-
ematical logic given by Alonzo Church, and I think
pare what I have just now told you about Bochner
that I also may have taken a course in point-set
with what I will now tell you about Alonzo Church
topology given by Ralph Fox, but I am not sure
about that. I remember that I was very impressed and his pedigree: Church was a mathematician who
with both Bochner and Church, by their great skills was an early pioneer in and major contributor to
as teachers, by the depth of their understanding of the field of mathematical logic, and he was also re-
their subjects, and also by their unforgettable per- sponsible for some of the foundations of theoretical
sonalities. (If I did attend Fox’s course, I just don’t computer science. His great-grandfather, Alonzo S.
remember what it was like. I will tell you a little bit Church,was a professor of mathematics and astron-
about Fox a little later.) omy, and then became the president of the Univer-
Bochnerwasoneoftheforemosttwentieth-century sity of Georgia for a period of thirty years. Alonzo
mathematicianswhoseresearchprofoundlyinfluenced Church’s grandfather, Alonzo W. Church, was at
the development of many different areas of analysis. one time Librarian of the U.S. Senate. His father,
He was born into a Jewish family in what was then Samuel R. Church, was a Justice of the Municipal
a part of Austria–Hungary, and is now a part of Court of the District of Columbia, but he resigned
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 9
day long, every working day. And, while you are do-
ing this during all that time, [extra long pause] you
can also simultaneously spend all that time proving
interesting theorems!!!” [Smile/Laughter] Bochner
was a civilized and erudite mathematician, also a
lover of music and art.
Mark, earlier in our conversation, I told you that
there was a language requirement, two foreign lan-
guages of your choice, and, for each of these lan-
guages, you could ask a math faculty member of
your choice to test you on that language. I selected
FrenchandGerman,andBochnerpassedmeinFrench,
andSolomonLefschetzpassedmeinGerman.Ihave
just now been telling you here about Bochner, and
I would like now to tell you about Lefschetz. (Mark,
before we move on, I should say here right now
that, with respect to the language requirement, if
Fig. 7. Alonzo Church.
the pass/fail decision had been in the hands of the
corresponding Princeton language departments, in-
from that post because of failing vision and hear- stead of the math department faculty, I would have
ing. The family then moved to ruralVirginia, where had a much harder time trying to pass the language
AlonzoChurchandhisyounger brothergrewup.He requirement.)
wasanundergraduateatPrinceton,graduatingwith Now about Lefschetz: When he was 23 years old,
an A.B. in mathematics, and then he continued as a he was working as an electrical engineer in the U.S.,
graduate student, completing his Ph.D. there. Fol- and, in a terrible industrial accident—a transformer
lowing a two-year post-doctoral National Research explosion—helostbothhishandsandapartofeach
Fellowship, which he spent at Harvard University forearm.Fortherestofhislife,heusedapairofarti-
the first year, and the University of Gottingen and ficial hands (wooden hands, gloved)—his prosthetic
the University of Amsterdam the second year, he hands—thatfitover theremaining partsof the fore-
was invited to return to the Princeton Math De- arms. Three years after the accident, he enrolled as
partment, to begin his academic career there. He a doctoral student in mathematics at Clark Univer-
was a very important faculty member at Princeton sity in Massachusetts, and he received his Ph.D. a
for the next 39 years. year later with a thesis on algebraic geometry. In
Here now is a nice story that I would like to tell the next thirteen years, he produced many research
you about Bochner: Sometime during my first year articles of striking originality and importance in al-
as a graduate student, during the period of time gebraic geometry and algebraic topology. He then
when I was taking his course, he once told me that, was invited to be a visiting professor at Princeton,
if he had his life to live all over again, he definitely and,at the end of his firstyear there, hewas offered
would not choose to be a professor. So I asked him a permanent post, which he accepted.
whatwouldhechoosetobeinstead.Hethentoldme At Princeton, he profoundly affected the develop-
that he would choose to be a laundry-truck driver. ment of mathematics in the U.S. as the editor of
I then asked him why would he make that choice. the Annals of Mathematics during a thirty-year pe-
“Well,”hesaid,“whenyou’realaundry-truckdriver, riod. During his editorship, the journal became one
you drivethe truck to thefirsthouseon thedelivery of the principal journals of research mathematics in
schedule, then you deliver packages of clean diapers the world. Also, during Lefschetz’s chairmanship of
to the housewife, and you pick up packages of dirty thedepartment,eightnewfacultymemberswereap-
diapers from her, then you drive the truck to the pointed, all of first rank. A mathematics faculty of
second house on the delivery schedule, and you re- firstrankbecameanevenlargerfacultyoffirstrank,
peat the same procedure there, then you drive to one of the world’s great centers of mathematical re-
the third house ... and you continue to do this all search and teaching.
10 M. P. BECKER
en route to the Ph.D. When did you take your oral
general examination, and what was that like?
Goodman:I took my oral general exam soon after
the very beginning of my second year as a grad-
uate student. This exam covers two required sub-
jects, algebra and real and complex variables, and
twospecialadvanced topics oftheexaminees choice;
mathematical statistics and point-set topology were
what I chose.
The examinee is not told beforehand who his ex-
aminers will be. He finds out when he enters the
examination room and sees the examiners sitting
there. When I opened the door to the room, sitting
therewereSalomonBochner,EmilArtin,RalphFox
and Sam Wilks.
I haven’t yet told you anything about Artin and
Fox. First, about Artin:
Fig. 8. Solomon Lefschetz. He was one of the leading algebraists of the twen-
tieth century. He was broughtupin atown that was
mainly German speaking, in what was then a part
LefschetzwasborninMoscowintoaJewishfamily
of the Austrian Empire, and is now in the northern
(his parents were Turkish citizens), and soon after
part of the Czech Republic. He received his doctor-
hisbirththeymovedtoParis.Hewaseducatedthere
ateinmathematics inGermany,fromtheUniversity
in engineering, and he emigrated to the U.S. when
of Leipzig, and he began his academic career at the
he was 21. Two years later, there was that terrible
University ofHamburg.Helecturedandmademany
industrial accident. When he first came to Prince-
veryimportantcontributionstoawiderangeoftop-
ton in the 1920’s, he was one of the first Jewish
ics in algebra there over a period of eleven years be-
faculty members on the Princeton campus, and it is
fore Hitler came to power. His position at the uni-
reported that he felt that people avoided him in the
versity was not affected by the laws established a
hallways and on campus on that account. He said
few months after Hitler came to power providingfor
that he was an “invisible man” there at the time.
the removal of Jewish teachers from the universi-
It is also the case that he could be rude, imperious,
ties, since he wasn’t Jewish. However, since Artin’s
idiosyncratic and obstreperous, with a commanding
wife was Jewish, his position at the university was
(bossy)personality.Healsowasamanwhohadare-
affected four years later by a new law that provided
ally great amount of energy, a supercharged human
for the removal from the universities of those teach-
locomotive.
ers related to Jews by marriage. He then came to
Lefschetz was sometimes accused of caving in to the United States, taught at Notre Dame for one
anti-Semitism at Princeton for refusing to admit year, at IndianaUniversity for eight years, and then
manyJewishmathstudents—hisrationalebeingthat at Princeton.
nobody would hire them when they completed their Now about Fox: He was an American mathemati-
degrees. (It is my impression that Lipman Bers was cian who devoted most of his career to the field
implicitly alluding, in part, to this kind of problem of topology, and, in particular, to knot theory. He
at Princeton when he told me that no mathematics taught and advised many of the later contributors
undergraduate students at Syracuse University had to topology, and he played an important role in the
ever been accepted for graduate study by the Math- modernization and development of knot theory. Af-
ematics Department at Princeton and he suggested ter receiving his Ph.D. from Princeton, he spent the
to methat I should apply for graduate studythere.) following year at the Institute for Advanced Study
Times have really changed at Princeton since the inPrinceton,andhethentaughtattheUniversityof
bad old days. Illinois and Syracuse University before returning to
Becker: Leo, many academics have rich or humor- Princeton, six years after having received his Ph.D.
ous stories relating to the exams they experienced there, to join the math faculty.
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 11
“Tell me what you do know about complex man-
ifolds.” So I went up to the blackboard and pro-
ceeded to write on the blackboard (facing the black-
board), trying to repeat what I had been told ear-
lier about complex manifolds by the more advanced
graduate student.After awhile, as I was proceeding
with the exposition, I suddenly heard someone (one
of the examiners), with an authoritative-sounding
voice, say, “That is incorrect!” I then turned from
facing theblackboard to facing theexaminers, andI
could tell that the examiner with the authoritative
voice was Artin. Then Bochner said, “No, that is
correct.” And the two of them, Artin and Bochner,
then started to argue with each other as to whether
whatIhadsaidwasincorrectorcorrect.Meanwhile,
I backed up, and leaned against the blackboard un-
til the argument came to an end. After that, Artin,
Fig. 9. Emil Artin. Fox and Wilks, each of them in turn, asked me his
own questions, and I did my best to try to answer
them correctly.
OneofFox’sstronginterestswastheancientJapa-
ThenIwasaskedtoleavetheexamroomandwait
nese board game of Go. He represented the United
outside the room. After a little while, Wilks came
StatesinthefirstinternationalGotournament,held
out with a nice smile on his face, and he congratu-
in Tokyo, and he popularized the playing of Go at
lated me, and said that in his experience he’d never
thePrinceton Math Department. Go was oneof two
seen an examinee answer questions so calmly, and
favorite board games that were played in the Fine
that I did a nice job. Well, Mark, I was of course
Hall common room just about every day by some of
very pleased to hear this, especially since, when I
themathgraduatestudentsatteatimeandatother
left the exam room, I wasn’t sure that I had passed
times too.
the exam! [Smile]
Sometime beforethetime whenItook thegeneral
ThinkingsomemoreaboutWilks’commentabout
exam, Iwas sitting aroundintheFine Hall common
examineesansweringquestionscalmly,Iamreminded
room, chatting with another graduate student who
of something amusing that Wilks’ wife, Gena, had
was then in his third year at Princeton and who
told me about a former Wilks student and his gen-
had taken his general exam the year before, and he
eral exam. This conversation with Mrs. Wilks took
asked me how was I preparing for the part of the
place sometime near the end of my first year as a
examoncomplexvariables.SoItoldhimwhatIhad
graduate student at a time when I was supposed to
beenstudyingincomplexvariables,andheaskedme
bestudyinginpreparationformygeneralexam.My
what did I know about complex manifolds. I said
studying was interrupted by a sudden appendicitis,
that I didn’t know anything about complex mani-
with surgical removal of the inflamed appendix car-
folds.He then offered to tell meabout it. Sothe two ried outjustin thenick of time, and witha required
of us went into one of the empty classrooms, I sat stay in the hospital for a few days to recover from it
down, and he went to the blackboard and started all. Mrs. Wilks came by to visit with me there, and
to tell me about complex manifolds writing on the sheasked me how I was feeling. I told her that I was
blackboard. After about an hour or so of his ex- recovering justfine,butIwasn’tabletofocusonmy
position, I thought that that was enough, and we studies for the general exam. She then told me this
stopped. story:Therewasthiswell-known,verygoodstatisti-
Well, sometime later, on the day when I went into cian,aformervery goodWilks student(whomIwill
that exam room, and was facing the four examin- callstudentX),who,afewdaysbeforehewassched-
ers, the first one to ask me a question was Bochner. uled to take the general exam, came into Wilks’ of-
He said: “What do you know about complex mani- fice, and said the following to Wilks, “Sam, I don’t
folds?” I then said, “Not very much.” And he said, know a thing! I’m not going to take the exam.” So
12 M. P. BECKER
WilkstoldstudentXthattheexamwouldbeputoff paragraphs, I couldn’t. Well, I then worked on the
for two months. Then, two months later, a few days dream document for a few months, developing and
before student X was supposed to take the resched- extending it; and, when I was finished doing that,
uledexam,heagaincameintoWilks’office,andthis I wrote it all up in the form of a Ph.D. thesis, and
time he said the following: “Sam I still don’t know I put a copy in Wilks’ math department mailbox,
a thing! I’m not going to take the exam.” So Wilks and a copy in Tukey’s. After a week or so, Wilks
told student X that the exam would be put off this told me that it was nice work and that he approved
time for one month. Then, one month later, a few it, and Tukey told me that, first, I should include
days before student X was supposed to take this in the thesis a numerical example that illustrates
rescheduled exam, he again came into Wilks’ office the statistical method introduced and developed in
andagainsaidthesamethingthathehadsaidtwice the thesis; and, second, I should give a talk on the
before. Wilks then told student X that he should thesis in August at the annual Summer Seminar in
take it easy, go out to a movie or do something else
Statistics, which would take place in Connecticut
that would be relaxing and fun, and that he should
(it turned out that Tukey was one of the organizers
drop by Wilks’ office the next day at 10 AM. Stu-
and leaders of the Summer Seminar); and, third, he
dent X then came by Wilks’ office the next day at
approved the thesis.
the appointed time, and he found the four-member
Sometimes, Mark, when someone happens to ask
examination committee ready to proceed with the
meaboutthewritingofmyPh.D.thesis,Iliketosay
exam. Student X passed the exam, and then went
simply that the thesis was given to me in a dream.
on to become a well-known, very good statistician.
[Smile] It turns out that there is some truth in my
Becker: Once you had your examinations behind
saying that; and, to the person asking me about the
you, how did you obtain a dissertation topic, and
writing of the thesis, I am willing to clarify what I
how did you proceed to write your Ph.D. thesis?
mean, if clarification is what is called for. [Smile]
Goodman:Aftermygeneralexamwasover,Istar-
Becker: You opted to take your first faculty posi-
ted to try to think about possible thesis topics. One
tion at the University of Chicago, and yet at that
day, while I was thinking about statistical problems
timethere was notaformalstatistics departmentat
that had been discussed in manuscripts that I had
Chicago. What or who motivated you to accept the
refereed earlier for Wilks, an idea just happened to
offer at Chicago?
come to me by free association, and with this idea
Goodman:DuringtheWinter/Springof1950,while
there came a statistical problem that I thought I
I was completing my work on the Ph.D. thesis, I be-
wouldtrytoworkon.Ithenworkedonthisproblem
gan to think about what I might do when the thesis
for a few weeks, butI didn’tseem to begetting any-
was done. A short time before that in 1949, Allen
where with the problem. Then, it crossed my mind
Wallis (about whom I will say more later), who was
that,duringthetimeperiodwhenIslepteachnight,
at the University of Chicago at that time, had per-
I may have been dreaming about the problem that
suaded the Chancellor of the university to permit
I had been working on during the daytime; but, if
himto establish a “Committee on Statistics,” which
I had been dreaming, when I awoke each morning
was to be essentially a nascent department, but the
the dream was gone. So I put a pad of paper and a
Chancellor at that time was unwilling to approve a
pencil on the night-table next to my bed, and that
night, I awoke in the middle of the night and pro- “Department of Statistics.” When I visited the Uni-
ceededtowritedownonthepadofpaperwhatIhad versity of Chicago to look it over, I was intrigued by
been dreaming—a very long dream. I then fell back the idea of being a part of a small group of statis-
to sleep, and I slept for a long time. When I awoke, ticians that could grow into a pride of statisticians,
I noticed the pad of paper lying next to me on the and I was also aware of the fact that the Sociology
bedwith a lot of writing on it, and I wondered what Department at the university had been for many
the writing was about. years, and still was, a very distinguished depart-
After looking over the dream document, I could ment. I also had the impression that the University
make out that it was about the problem that I had of Chicago was a good place to be an assistant pro-
been working on during the daytime. I could make fessor, and I liked the spirit of the place. So that is
out, in some of the paragraphs, what were the ideas why I opted to go there, rather than to one of the
or results contained in them; and in some of the other good universities where I might have gone.
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 13
Becker: Your research collaborations at the Uni- The joint work that Bill and I did grew out of a
versity of Chicago with Bill Kruskal on measures of conversation that wehad at aNew Year’s Eve party
association for cross-classifications spawned a cita- thateachofushappenedtoattendatTheQuadran-
tion classic. How is it that you and Kruskal came to gle (Faculty) Club at the university. Our conversa-
workonmeasuresofassociationforacross-classifica- tion at the party was about our earlier experiences
tion of counts? serving as statistical consultants after we arrived at
Goodman: Bill Kruskal and I arrived at the Uni- the university. As beginning faculty members, Bill
versity of Chicago at about the same time, in time had been asked to serve as a statistical consultant
for the beginning of the 1950–1951 academic year. toBernardBerelsonintheGraduateLibrarySchool,
We became colleagues and good friends, and we andIhadbeenasked toserveas astatistical consul-
workedtogetherveryharmoniouslyandproductively tant to Louis Thurstone in the Psychology Depart-
as colleagues, and also as co-authors, over a very ment.
long period of time, even after we completed our se- Berelson was the Dean of the Graduate Library
School at that time and later became the President
ries of four joint articles and after Bill became the
of the Population Council. He also was an impor-
DeanoftheSocialScienceDivisionattheuniversity,
tant figure in the social and behavioral sciences at
and even after I left the university in 1987 to begin
that time, and later he became an even more im-
working at the University of California, Berkeley.
portant figure. Thurstone was a distinguished pro-
Bill and I started to work together in the early
fessor in the Psychology Department where he was
1950s on the introduction and development of vari-
the founder and director of the Psychometric Lab-
ous measures of association for the analysis of cross-
oratory. He had been instrumental in the develop-
classifiedcategoricaldata,andwepublishedourfirst
ment of the field of psychometrics, and was at that
joint article on this subject in 1954, followed by a
time the major figure in the development of factor
series of three other joint articles on the subject
analysis.
in 1959, 1963 and 1972; and the four articles were
Well, the conversation that Bill and I had at that
brought together in a single volume in 1979. Bill
party took place after Bill had met with Berelson
and I worked on the first article—the core article—
and after I had met with Thurstone and some other
on and off for about two years before we submit-
members of his Psychometric Laboratory. Bill and I
ted it for publication, and the series of four articles
were describing to each other what happened when
evolved over a 20-year period. The 1979 volume ap-
he met with Berelson and I met with Thurstone
peared in print 25 years after the publication of the
andhis group.Andwe observed inthis conversation
first article.
that the kinds of statistical problems that Berelson
was concerned with and the kinds of problems that
Thurstone and his group were concerned with could
be viewed as problems concerning the measurement
of association for cross classifications. We discov-
ered that each of us had been independently think-
ing about similar kinds of questions. So, right then
andthere,atthatparty,BillandIjoinedforces,and
we were off and running.
As I said earlier, Bill’s and my first joint article—
thecorearticle—was publishedin1954. In1979, the
InstituteforScientificInformation(ISI)informedus
thatthisarticlehadbeenselectedasaCitationClas-
sic, and we were invited to write a commentary on
thatarticle,whichtheISIpublishedinCurrent Con-
tents, Social and Behavioral Sciences. It turns out
that, according to the ISI, our 1954 joint article has
been cited about 1125 times so far. This article still
continues each year to be cited in a wide range of
Fig. 10. Bill Kruskal. different articles in journals that cover a very wide
14 M. P. BECKER
range of different fields of study. In each of the past recognition of this by the Institute for Scientific In-
three years, the number of citations of this article formation (ISI). What was that special recognition
was greater than the corresponding number in each from the ISI?
of the twenty years prior to those three years. Goodman: A few years ago, the ISI informed me
Mark, let’s go back for a moment to when Bill that I have been identified as an “ISI Highly Cited
and I submitted the manuscript for our 1954 joint Researcher.” The institute stated that it has identi-
article for possible publication in the Journal of the fied the “250 most cited researchers in the last two
American Statistical (JASA):Eachoftherefereesof decades, for their published articles in the Mathe-
the manuscript said that the manuscript should be matics category.” For the Mathematics category, ci-
shortened, and the main referee said that it should tationsoftheresearcher’sarticlespublishedinmath-
be shortened by 50%! If we had followed the refer- ematics journals areconsidered,with statistics jour-
ees’ instructions, our joint article definitely would nals included in that category.
not have reached the large and wide audience that Well, Mark, I have been around for quite a long
it has actually reached and continues to reach. We time, and I have written quite a few articles—over
decided not to follow the referees’ instructions. In- 150 articles so far—and I have had published four
stead, Bill wrote a very long, detailed letter to the different books (each book a gathering of my arti-
editor explaining why the manuscript should not be cles on a particular topic, with one of the books a
shortened at all—why it should be published as is. gathering of Bill’s and my joint articles).
The editor, after reading Bill’s letter, accepted the Becker: Leo, the eminent quantitative sociologist,
manuscript for publication as is. (By the way Mark, Otis Dudley Duncan, has published comments on
the editor of JASA at that time was Allen Wallis, your statistical contributions in four different re-
who was also at that time the first chairman of our search areas that are of interest to sociologists and
nascent Department of Statistics.) [Smile] to some other social and behavioral scientists. How
Becker: There is another joint article that you did this come about?
wrote,thisonewithTedAnderson,thatalsocontin- Goodman:TheAmericanSociological Association
ues to be highly cited. What is that article about? (ASA) had selected Dudley and me to share their
Goodman: Ted and I are the coauthors of an arti- main methodology award, the Samuel A. Stouffer
cle on “Statistical Inference about Markov Chains” Methodology Award. When I heard this news, I felt
(Ann. Math. Stat. 1957). This joint article is Ted’s pleased and honored,especially since I thought very
most cited article and my second most cited article. highly of Dudley’s research work. However, Dudley
Our joint article developed and extended the the- had aquite different reaction to this news.He wrote
ory and methods presented earlier by Ted in a 1954 a statement, which was published in the ASA Foot-
article, and it also presented some newer methods, notes, that commented on my research work in four
which were first presented by me in a preliminary different areas of interest, and he said that it would
report at the 1955 meeting of the Institute of Math- be a great honor to share the award with me, but
ematical Statistics. According to the ISI, our joint he felt strongly that I should be the sole recipient of
article has been cited around 600 times so far. As theaward,andthatthehonorshouldnotbediluted.
was the case with the 1954 joint article that Bill He turned down the award.
and I wrote, Ted’s and my 1957 joint article still Becker:WhatwereDuncan’scommentsaboutyour
continues each year to be cited by a wide range of work in those four areas of interest?
different articles in journals that cover a very wide Goodman:Thefourareaswerethefollowing:(1)so-
range of different fields of study. In each of the past cialstratification andmobility,(2)surveydataanal-
two years, the number of citations of our 1957 joint ysis,(3)panelstudiesdataanalysis,(4)latentstruc-
article was greater than the corresponding number ture analysis.
in each of the fifteen years prior to those two years, With respect to social stratification and mobility,
except for one of those fifteen years. Dudley said that my work on methods for analyzing
Becker: You have written many other articles on socialmobility tableshadsolved aproblemthathad
many other topics over these many years, in addi- plaguedresearchworkersinthisfieldforatleasttwo
tion to the joint article that you wrote with Bill decades; and, in solving this problem, my work had
Kruskal and the joint article that you wrote with rendered obsolete a substantial corpus of previous
Ted Anderson. And you have received some special work.
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 15
With respect to survey data analysis, he said that and mobility, and in many other areas that make
my collection of models for survey analysis had pro- use of survey data and/or panel studies data, and
vided for the first time a set of statistical methods in the empirical study of latent types, latent vari-
that were adequate to the tasks posed by the “lan- ables and latent structures. The exposition in that
guage of social research” hitherto associated with article does not make use of any mathematical for-
theColumbiaschool andkindredapproaches to sur- mulas. Simple numerical examples, constructed for
veyanalysis;andthatthepracticeduserofmymeth- expositorypurposes,areusedasanaidindescribing
ods could accomplish with ease everything that this CDAconcepts,includingquasi-independence,quasi-
school attempted, and a great deal more. He also symmetry, symmetric association and uniform asso-
said that almost any complex body of data previ- ciation, which are concepts useful in the analysis
ously analyzed by even skilled practitioners of sur- of social mobility tables, log-linear models useful in
vey analysis, of the kind associated with the the analysis of survey data, recursive models useful
ColumbiaSchoolandkindredapproaches,yieldsdif- in the analysis of panel studies data and latent class
ferentconclusionsfromthoseobtainedwithmymeth- models useful in the analysis of latent structures.
ods, and that it is easy to see after the fact how the Becker: You told us earlier about your two most
practitioner fell into error. citedarticles,the1954jointarticlewithBillKruskal
With respect to panel studies data analysis, he andthe1957jointarticlewithAnderson.Whatabout
said that I had put panel analysis on a sound foot- other works, which ones stand out in your mind as
ing for the first time, in a similar way to what I had having had a particularly significant impact?
done with survey analysis, and, as a consequence, Goodman:Thethirdmostcitedhasbeenmymain
a substantial body of previous misguided literature article introducing log-linear models, “Multivariate
that provided erroneous, misleading or merely use- Analysis of Qualitative Data: Interactions Among
lessproceduresformanipulatingpaneldataandsur- Multiple Classifications” (JASA, 1970). It has been
vey data could now be ignored. cited around 450 times so far.
And,withrespecttolatentstructureanalysis,Dud- Mark, while I was writing my 1970 JASA article,
ley said that I had provided a substantial statistical I also developed a computer program in order to
foundation for latent structuremodels,and that the apply the log-linear models, which were introduced
methodsofanalysis thathadbeensuggested earlier, in the article, to analyze in the article the set of
and that had been applied over the preceding 25 or data in the multidimensional contingency table pre-
30 years by various research workers, had not been sented there.(Thiscomputerprogramwas alsothen
satisfactory; butnow,usingthemethodsintroduced used in some of my other articles on log-linear mod-
in the statistical foundation that I had presented, it els in order to analyze the different sets of data in
was possible to begin to understand correctly what the multidimensional contingency tables presented
is at stake. inthosearticles;e.g.,inTechnometrics,1971;Amer-
Dudley’s statement referred to work done by me ican Sociological Review, 1972; American Journal
in those four different but related research areas, of Sociology, 1972, 1973; Biometrika, 1973; JASA,
published in various statistics journals and sociol- 1973.) When I was developing the computer pro-
ogy journals. I have continued to work in one or gram, I wanted to make it easy to use by anyone—
more of these four research areas from time to time, even someone who had no familiarity with statistics
and also in other research areas as well, and I re- or hardly any familiarity with the subject. One of
cently returned to all four of those research areas our graduate students at that time, Robert (Bob)
when I was invited by the Editorial Committee of Fay, helpedmemakethecomputerprogramasuser-
theAnnual Review of Sociology to writethelead ar- friendly as was possible at that time. The computer
ticle for their 2007 volume. I then wrote an article programwascalledECTA:Everyman’sContingency
for the Annual Review on “Statistical Magic and/or Table Analyzer. (Mark, perhapsI shouldhave called
Statistical Serendipity: An Age of Progress in the it“Everyperson’s”or“Everyman’sandEverywoman’s”
AnalysisofCategoricalData.”Thisarticledescribes rather than just “Everyman’s”; but at that time,
in simple terms some of the major concepts of cat- I viewed “Everyman” to mean also “Everyperson”
egorical data analysis (CDA) that have been use- and/or “Everyman and Everywoman.”) [Smile]
ful in the analysis of sociological data, examples of Copies of ECTA were then sold at cost by our
whichincludedataintheareaofsocialstratification statistics department at the University of Chicago.
16 M. P. BECKER
It is my impression that, over the years, as many as I discuss two different methods that I have used to
fivehundredpeoplefrommanycountriesalloverthe obtain the results presented in those many articles
world purchased copies. Now most statistical com- on modeling formulations, namely, statistical magic
puter packages include a log-linear program. and statistical serendipity. [Smile/Laughter]
Fiveyearsaftermy1970JASAarticleappearedin First, let me comment on magic: By a magical
print,Shelby Haberman’smonograph, The Analysis result, I don’t mean here a result obtained by magic
of Frequency Data, was published, and it made sub- or by some other supernatural means, but rather a
stantial theoretical contributions to log-linear mod- result obtained as if by magic.
eling,ThismonographwasbasedontheearlierPh.D. When the great Michelangelo was sculpting his
thesis that Shelby wrote when he was a graduate colossalfigureofDavid,heworkedunderthepremise
student in our statistics department at the Univer- that the image of David was already in the block of
sity of Chicago. (I was the advisor on his Ph.D. marble that he had selected, and his task was to
thesis.) And starting six years after my 1970 ar- release the image from the block. Now, faced with
ticle appeared in print, and continuing until now, a set of categorical data of interest, say, a multi-
many good textbooks, covering log-linear analysis dimensional cross-classification of counts, data an-
and other related topics in the analysis of categor- alysts can work under the premise that there is an
ical data (frequency data, qualitative data), were image, ormorethanoneimage, embeddedintheset
published; and many statistics departments began of data, and their task is to release that image, or
to introduce courses covering these subjects in their those images, using suitable tools.
curriculum. The tools might include the kinds of modeling
Mark,returningnowtoyourquestionaboutwhich frameworks developed in some of my articles and
of my other works (besides the Goodman/Kruskal also other kindsof tools of categorical dataanalysis.
article and the Anderson/Goodman article) had a Theresults obtained by usingthese tools sometimes
significant impact, in addition to my 1970 JASA ar- seem magical—the sudden release of form formerly
ticle on log-linear models, there are also eleven arti- hidden, embedded in a block of dense data.
cles of mine, each of which has been cited between Now,letmecommentonserendipity:Byaserendip-
200and400timessofar.Ithinkitisinteresting,and itous result, I don’t mean here a result obtained
sometimessurprising,toseewhicharticlesappearin simply by accident or chance, but rather a result
this group, and which do not. obtained by an accidental exposure to information
Becker:Leo,Iwillincludethearticlesinthishighly and an application of the prepared mind. Perhaps
cited group, and also some of the articles that are serendipity, rather than magic, better describes the
not in this group, as an Appendix to this interview, way in which the modeling frameworks were de-
which will be located at the end of the interview. veloped. [By the way, Mark, I discuss the possible
Here now is a question about another important set meanings of serendipity in “Notes on the Etymol-
of your articles: ogy of Serendipity and Some Related Philological
You have written many articles developing mod- Observations” (Modern Language Notes, 1961).]
eling frameworks, and the corresponding statisti- WhenIfirstdevelopedthegeneralconceptofquasi-
cal methods, for the analysis of multidimensional independenceandthecorrespondingiterativeproce-
cross-classifications of counts. I have in mind here dure needed to apply this modeling formulation in
yourevolutionarypathfromlog-linearmodelstothe the analysis of data in a cross-classification of in-
recursive-models modeling framework, the latent- terest, and, in particular, in the analysis of social
class modeling framework, the association-models mobility tables (see, e.g., JASA,1968), the informa-
(log-bilinear) modeling framework and the tion to which I was exposed in my work on this one
correspondence-analysismodelingframework.Ahall- statistical problem, and on the corresponding set of
markoftheseworksisthattheyareexpertlycrafted substantive areas of interest, then led me to look at
and exquisitely illustrated with insightful applica- a second set of substantive areas of interest and to
tions. What has been your approach to developing develop the general concept of the log-linear model
these modeling frameworks? and the corresponding iterative procedure needed
Goodman: In my 2007 Annual Review of Sociol- to apply this modeling formulation in the analysis
ogy article on “Statistical Magic and/or Statistical of data in a multidimensional cross-classification of
Serendipity: ...,” which I mentioned briefly earlier, interest, and, in particular, in the analysis of survey
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 17
data (see, e.g., JASA, 1970). And the information Goodman: Mark, the following experience took
to which I was exposed in my work on this statisti- place having, as the background setting, the Cold
cal problem, and on the correspondingsecond set of WarbetweentheSovietUnionandtheUnitedStates:
substantive areas of interest, then led me to look at [Smile] In the late 1950s, I wrote a number of sta-
athirdsetofsubstantiveareasofinterestpertaining tistical articles pertaining to Markov chains (Ann.
to recursive models, and to develop the correspond- Math. Stat., 1958a, 1958b, 1959; Biometrika, 1958),
ing iterative procedure needed to apply this model-
and after those articles were published, I happened
ing formulation in the analysis of data in a multi-
to come across a 1957 note by V. E. Stepanov on
dimensional cross-classification table in which some
Markov chains, written in Russian and published in
variables (dimensions) are posterior to other vari-
the Soviet journal,Teoriya Veryatnostei i ee Prime-
ables (dimensions), and, in particular, in the analy-
neniya (The Theory of Probability and Its Appli-
sisofpanelstudiesdata(see,e.g.,Biometrika,1973).
cations). (Stepanov was one of the Russian math-
And the information to which I was exposed in my
ematician/probabilists who worked in the famous
work on this statistical problem and on the preced-
Russianschoolofprobability,foundedbyKolmogorov,
ing statistical problem, and on the corresponding
Markov, Kinchin and Lyapunov.) I wasn’t able to
sets of substantive areas of interest, then led me to
read the Russian in the Stepanov note, but I could
look at a fourth set of substantive areas of inter-
readtheformulas,andI could seefromtheformulas
est pertaining to latent types, latent variables and
that the topic covered in the Russian note was very
latent structures, and to develop the corresponding
similar to the topic that I had covered in some of
iterative procedure needed to apply this modeling
formulation in the analysis of data in a multidi- my articles. So I had the Russian note translated,
mensional cross-classification table in which some and I then studied the translated version. And I
variables (dimensions) are observable, and some of found that there was a serious error in the note,
the variables (dimensions) are unobservable(latent) and that the main result was incorrect. I then wrote
(see, e.g., Biometrika, 1974). Then the log-linear “A Note on Stepanov’s Test for Markov Chains,”
models formulation applied to the two-way cross- showing what was incorrect in Stepanov’s note and
classification of interest and the corresponding iter- also showing how what was incorrect could be re-
ative procedure led me to develop the log-bilinear placed by a corresponding correct result. I sent it
models (viz., the association models) formulation to the Editor of the Soviet journal for submission,
and the corresponding iterative procedure needed and received a very quick response saying that it
to apply this modelingformulation (see, e.g., JASA, would bepublished“in the nearest possiblefuture.”
1979). And the association models formulation ap- When the galley proof arrived, I noticed that my
plied to the two-way cross-classification of interest
Abstract had been deleted and replaced by a Rus-
then led me to develop the correspondence-analysis
sian Abstract in which any reference to the error in
model formulation applied to the two-way and the
Stepanov’s note and the correction in my note had
m-way(m>2)cross-classificationofinterest,andto
beendeleted.TheRussianAbstractwas misleading.
develop further the association models formulation
SoI had my Abstract translated into Russian,and I
applied to the m-way (m>2) cross-classification of
sentit to theEditor informinghim that theRussian
interest, and the corresponding iterative procedure
Abstract that was in the galley proof needed to be
needed to apply these modeling formulations (see,
replaced by my RussianAbstract. Now, Mark, what
e.g.,Ann.Stat.,1985;International Stat. Rev.,1986;
do you think the Editor did about this?
JASA, 1991).
Well,theEditordidn’trespondtomyrequest,and
This step-by-step movement from one statistical
hedidn’tpayanyattention tomyRussianAbstract.
problem to the next statistical problem, and from
When my note was published in the Soviet journal,
the corresponding iterative procedure appropriate
I then saw that the note included the misleading
for the one statistical problem to the corresponding
iterative procedure appropriate for the next statis- Russian Abstract that was in the galley proof, and
tical problem, might be described as step-by-step it also included something else that really surprised
evolutionary elaboration. me. In addition to the misleading Russian Abstract,
Becker: What are some of the interesting experi- it also included a second Abstract, my original Ab-
ences you have had in connection with the writing stract (which had been written in English) printed
of some of your articles? in English in my note!
18 M. P. BECKER
Here is my conjecture as to why the Editor in- 1961, and it was reprinted in 1966 in a volume on
cluded the two Abstracts in the published note: I Readings in Mathematical Social Science.
think that he included the misleading Russian Ab- Next is another interesting experience that I had:
stractbecausehedidn’twantany nontechnical Rus- Ittookplacehaving,asthebackgroundsetting,James
sian readers to know that an American statistician Bond, Agent 007. [Smile] In the early 1950s, I came
was critical of work done by a Russian mathemati- across an article that described how the Allies in
cian/probabilist; and he included my Abstract in WorldWarIIanalyzedserialnumbersobtainedfrom
English because he wanted technical readers, who captured German equipment in order to obtain es-
might be interested in the topic, to know as much timates of German war production and capacity.
as possible about the topic. Within the limits of its capabilities, this method of
Here now is another interesting experience that analysis turned out to be superior to more abstract
I had: This experience takes place having, as the methods of intelligence. After reading that article,
I thought that I would try, for the fun of it, to see
background setting, the early 19th century French
if I could improve on the method of analysis of the
philosophers.[Smile]In1819,theMarquisdeLaplace,
serial numbers that was described in that article.
inAPhilosophical Essay onProbabilities (titletrans-
Well, it happened to turn out that I could improve
lated fromFrench), discussedtheattempts that had
onit.Withmymethodofanalysisoftheserialnum-
been made still earlier to explain the excess of the
bers,Iwas abletointroduceasimpleestimator that
birthof boysover thoseof girls by thegeneral desire
was the mostefficient unbiased estimator of thecor-
of fathers to have a son. Laplace’s results suggested
responding total number of pieces of equipment in
that the sex ratio at birth of boys to girls will be
the population of pieces of equipment from which
unaffected by this general desire. In the early 1950s,
theobserved serial numberscame. I was also able to
the statistician Herb Robbins arrived at a similar
showthatthemethodof estimation describedinthe
conclusion. However, in the early 1960s, I found, in
article on the World War II method of analysis pro-
the sociological literature, first, an article by a soci-
vided an estimator that was unbiased, and that the
ologist who suggested that, for the particular group
efficiency of that estimator was relatively high for
of families he had studied, the prevalence of the de-
large or moderate sized samples of serial numbers.
sire for male offspring on the part of parents, to-
I wrote up these results, together with some other
gether with their knowledge of methods of birth-
statistical results on this subject, in “Serial Number
control, appeared to be significant in relation to the
Analysis”(JASA,1952). Aboutfiveorsoyears after
high sex-ratio at birth of boys to girls; and, second,
the publication of that article, although he should
an article by another sociologist who proved that
not have told me about this, someone whom I knew
the sex-ratio at birth of boys to girls will be either
told me that there was a group of people in the gov-
decreased or unaffected by the preference for male
ernment in Washington, D.C., who were using what
offspring, if certain assumptions can be made con-
they called the “Goodman method,” making use of
cerning the way in which this preference affects the
the results in that article. I was surprised by this
parents’ decisions as to whether or not to have an-
news, although perhaps I should not have been.
other child.
Now let me tell you about just one more interest-
Taking all this into account, I was able to recon-
ing experience, which I had just last year: [Smile]
cile the different conclusions obtained by these dif- The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
ferent authors in an article that I wrote on “Some is the largest of the thirteen U.S. circuit courts of
Possible Effects of Birth Control on the Human Sex appeals. Over the past thirty years or so, many dif-
Ratio,”inwhichIpresentedageneralframeworkfor ferentlegislative proposalstosplittheNinthCircuit
the study of these possible effects that included as have been introduced in the U.S. Congress (in both
special cases each of the possible assumptions that the Senate and in the House of Representatives),
mightbemadeinthis context, andI introducedfor- and each of these proposals has failed to become
mulas that show under which possible assumptions law. There has been no consensus within Congress.
the sex ratio would be unaffected, under which as- The debate on this subject was revisited a year ago
sumptions it would be decreased, and under which in The Los Angeles Times (Opinion, July 11, 2007),
assumptions it would be increased. The article was this time with a statistical argument purporting to
publishedin the Ann. Human Genetics (London) in conclude that the Ninth Circuit Court should be
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 19
split. Then the Circuit Executive of the Ninth Cir- for example, my 2002 article, “Latent Class Anal-
cuitCourtcontactedmetoinquirewhetherIthought ysis: The Empirical Study of Latent Types, Latent
that there could be a rejoinder to the statistical ar- Variables, and Latent Structures,” which is the lead
gument in the LA Times. I replied that there could article in Applied Latent Class Analysis, edited by
be, and I then wrote a rejoinder in the form of an Jacques Hagenaars and Allan McCutcheon.)
OpEd statement that I submitted for publication Becker: You were a member of the Population
in the LA Times. It was rejected. I then submit- Research Center at the University of Chicago, and
ted it in turn to two law newspapers, and it was you’ve published in demography. I know that you
also rejected by each of them. (The newspapers’ re- wrote one article with (the eminent demographer)
jections were explained this way: The Republicans Nathan Keyfitz who was also at Chicago at some
are no longer the majority party in Congress, and it time. Was he there when you and he wrote that
wasprimarilyRepublicansinCongresswho,overthe joint article? And was the work that you did in de-
past thirty years or so, had tried to split the Ninth
mography inspired by him in any ways?
Circuit. So there is less interest in this subject now Goodman: Nathan Keyfitz was at the University
that the Democrats are the majority party.) I then
of Chicago from 1963 to 1968. The Goodman/
wrote an article, “To Split or Not To Split the U.S.
Keyfitz/Pullum article on “Family Formation and
NinthCircuitCourtofAppeals:ASimpleStatistical
theFrequencyofVariousKinshipRelationships”was
Argument, Counterargument, and Critique,” which
publishedinTheoretical Population Biology in1974.
has now beenpublishedin theJournal of Statistical
Nathan and I started working on that article dur-
Planning and Inference (JSPI, 2008).
ing the time period when he and I were colleagues
Becker: Your 1974 article in Biometrika,
at the University of Chicago. The third coauthor of
“Exploratory latent structure analysis using both
that article, Tom Pullum, had been a graduate stu-
identifiable and unidentifiable models,” is one of my
dent in the sociology department at the University
personal favorites. It brought clarity to an area of
of Chicago during a part of the time when Keyfitz
dataanalysisandmodelingthatwasclutteredatthe
was there, and he received his Ph.D. degree in 1971.
time, and in a very straightforward way you used
(I was the advisor on his Ph.D. thesis.) In 1974,
what we know today as the EM-algorithm to both
when our joint article was published, Nathan was
provide a computational devise and theoretical in-
a professor at Harvard, and Tom was an assistant
sights. You must be pleased to have both “antici-
professor there.
pated” the EM-algorithm and to have exploited it
Nathan has had a very interesting career, and
for theoretical gain.
Goodman: Mark, as you know, the first article on I would like now to tell you about it. He gradu-
atedwithadegreeinmathematicsfromMcGillUni-
the “EM-algorithm” was written by Art Dempster,
versity in Montreal in 1934, and in 1936 he be-
Nan Laird and Don Rubin, and was published in
gan working for the Dominion Bureau of Statistics,
1977 in the J. Roy. Stat. Soc. And, as you said just
the precursor to Statistics Canada, in Ottawa, as
now,myarticlewaspublishedin1974inBiometrika.
a research statistician and later as a mathematical
Whenthedatainatwo-way orinanm-way(m>2)
andseniorstatisticaladvisor.HeanalyzedCanadian
cross-classification are analyzed using a latent-class
censusschedulesandcensusresults,andheprepared
model, the “EM-algorithm” described in the 1977
article is essentially the same as the iterative pro- statistical surveys that examined various character-
cedure introduced earlier in my 1974 article. And isticsoftheCanadianpopulation.Heremainedwith
so, with the 1974 article iterative procedure avail- thebureauforthenext23years.In1952 hereceived
able, the 1997 article “EM-algorithm” isn’t needed afellowshiptoattendtheUniversityofChicago,and
to analyze a two-way or an m-way (m>2) cross- he graduated with a Ph.D. in Sociology. (I was one
classification using a latent-class model. The 1997 of the examiners on his oral exam, and I can attest
article “EM-algorithm” is useful in other contexts. to the fact that he did very well indeed.) In 1963, at
I am pleased that, with my 1974 Biometrika arti- the age of 50, he was invited to join the Sociology
cle and the 1997 J. Roy. Stat. Soc. article available, Department faculty at the University of Chicago,
the appropriate computational device is now widely and he accepted the invitation. At that point, as far
used, and the theoretical insights are now widely as I know, he had not expressed any special inter-
understood, in the study of latent structures. (See, est in the field of mathematical demography nor in
20 M. P. BECKER
the application of mathematical tools and computer article related to a joint article that Wallis wrote
technology to the analysis of demographic data. with Geoffrey Moore, an expert in economic statis-
After Nathan’s arrival in Chicago, in one of our tics and business cycle research, and you also wrote
first conversations, I happened to mention to him some other articles of special interest to economists.
that I had written an article in mathematical de- How did this come about?
mography ten years earlier on the “Population Goodman: One day, sometime in the second half
Growth of the Sexes” (Biometrics, 1953), and that of the 1950s, Allen happened to be telling me about
I thought that much more work could be done on this joint article that he had written with Geoffrey
this topic and in other areas of mathematical de- Moore about fifteen years earlier, which introduced
mography as well. He and I then began to stimulate a time-series significance test concerning the corre-
each othertodoresearch inthisfield.Hethenwrote lation between themovements in two differenttime-
many very good articles and some very good books series, based on the signs of the first differences in
in this field, and I also wrote some articles in this each of the time-series. He told me that, in the joint
field, and in some other related fields too. He and I article,heandMooredescribedtheconditionsunder
became good friends. He became a very important whichtheirtestwouldbevalid,butthey wereaware
leader in the field of mathematical demography and ofthefactthatthoseconditionswereactuallynotre-
a pioneer in the application of mathematical tools alisticconditions—thoseconditionswouldn’tbesat-
and computer technology to the analysis of demo- isfied by real economic time-series. He and Moore
graphic data. noted in their article that more research was needed
AfterNathantaughtattheUniversity ofChicago, in order to find out how their test would need to be
he then taught at the University of California at modified so that the modified test would be valid
Berkeley for four years (1968–1971), and then he under more realistic conditions. Allen then told me
taught at Harvard for twelve years (1972–1983). He that, even though about fifteen years had now gone
then spent ten years (1984–1993) as the Project by since the publication of the joint article, no one
Leader of the Population Project at the Interna- yet had successfully solved this problem.
tionalInstituteofAppliedSystemsAnalysis(IIASA) And so I then worked on this problem for a while,
in Austria, before returning to Cambridge. Between and I happened to solve the problem. I then invited
1973 and 1993, seven different universities awarded a good friend of mine, an economist, Yehuda Grun-
himhonorarydoctorates, andin1997 hewas named feld, to join me in writing a joint article that would
the International Union for the Scientific Study of introduce an appropriately modified time-series sig-
Population (IUSSP) Laureate. Isn’t it interesting, nificancetestconcerningthecorrelationbetweenthe
Mark, that all this began after Nathan’s arrival at movements between two different time-series (a new
the University of Chicago as a faculty member at testvalidunderrealisticconditions),andthatwould
the age of 50? He is now over 95 years of age, and applythistesttosomeeconomictime-seriesofinter-
in good shape considering his age. est. We then wrote our joint article on “Some Non-
I wrote twelve articles in demography and related parametric Tests for Comovements Between Time-
fields, one of which was the 1974 joint article with Series” (JASA, 1961).
NathanandTom.Thetwelvearticlesappearinseven About eight months before our joint article ap-
different journals, and they cover a wide range of peared in print, a terrible tragedy occurred: Yehuda
topics. Two of the articles were published before died in a drowning accident at the age of 30. At the
Nathan’s arrival on the faculty at the University of timeof hisdeath,hewas LecturerinEconomics and
Chicago, and seven of the articles were published Statistics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
during the six year period when he and I were col- and earlier he had been a graduate student and
leagues there. then an Assistant Professor in the Economics De-
Becker:Leo,Iwillincludeareferencetoyourarti- partment at the University of Chicago. In memory
clesindemographyandrelatedfieldsintheAppendix. of Yehuda, a volume was published, Measurement
Now let us move from demography and related sub- in Economics: Studies in Mathematical Economics
jects to economics. and Econometrics, in 1963. Authors contributing
W. Allen Wallis, the first chairman of the Statis- to this volume included the Nobel Laureate Milton
tics Department at the University of Chicago, was Friedmanandothertopeconomistsandeconometri-
both a statistician and an economist. You wrote an cians. A section on Econometric Methodology was
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 21
includedinthevolume,andIwroteon“Tests Based whichwasaffiliatedwiththeuniversityandwiththe
ontheMovementsinandtheComovementsbetween Economics Department. At the Cowles Commission
m-Dependent Time-Series,” which was included as at that time, there was great interest in recent work
the first article in that section. bytheeconomistKenArrow,whohadearlierbeena
The results presented in my article on movements Research Associate at the Cowles Commission and
in and comovements between time-series were a fur- an Assistant Professor in the Economics Depart-
ther development and extension of results presented ment at the university. (Arrow was also awarded a
in the earlier joint article that Yehuda and I wrote Nobel Prize in Economics for his pioneering contri-
on comovements, which could be viewed as a fur- butions to general economic equilibrium theory and
ther development and extension of results presented welfare theory.)
in the Wallis/Moore joint article. The work by Arrow that was of great interest at
Mark, I would like now to tell you about Allen the Cowles Commission in the early 1950s was his
Wallis. During World War II, Allen, in his early
research on Social Choice and Individual Values, in
30s, served as director of research in a Statistical
which he described five apparently reasonable prop-
Research Group of the U.S. Office of Scientific Re-
ertiesthatanyvotingsystemorother“socialwelfare
search, and he recruited a stellar group of young
function” should have, and he demonstrated math-
statisticians, mathematicians and economists who
ematically that no voting system (or other social
contributed significantly to the war effort in many
welfare function) could possibly have all of these
ways. Before the war, Allen taught very briefly at
properties. Harry and I, in our joint article, “So-
Yale, Columbia and Stanford universities; and after
cial Welfare Functions Based on Individual Rank-
the war, he went back very briefly to Stanford, and
ings” (Am. J. Soc., 1952), demonstrate that one of
then he became a faculty member at the University
Arrow’s required properties is questionable, and, if
of Chicago. As I said earlier, Allen was responsi-
this property is modified,then many voting systems
ble for establishing our statistics department at the
become acceptable. The joint article also considers
University ofChicago,andhewasthefirstchairman
which of the many voting systems, considered ac-
of the department. He then became the dean of the
ceptable by us, seem most reasonable.
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business,
Becker: You mentioned the Cowles Commission
and then he moved to the University of Rochester
for Research in Economics. What was your relation-
as president and then chancellor, and after he re-
ship with the Commission, and with some of the
tired there, he served as Under Secretary of State
other members of the Commission?
for Economic Affairs in the Reagan administration.
Goodman: The Cowles Commission was founded
He also served as an economic advisor to four U.S.
to advance the scientific study and development of
presidents, Eisenhower, Nixon, Ford and Reagan.
economic theory in its relation to mathematics and
Well,Mark,let’sreturnnowtoyourquestionabout
statistics, and it played a major role in promoting
the work that I did of interest to economists. In ad-
the use of mathematics and statistics in economics.
dition to my article on movements in and comove-
Innovative and seminal work in mathematical eco-
ments between time series,andmy jointarticle with
nomics and econometrics took place at the Com-
Yehuda, I also wrote a joint article with another
mission in the years 1943–1955, years in which the
economist,HarryMarkowitz,wholaterwasawarded
a Nobel Prize in Economics. (Strictly speaking, the research directors were first Jacob Marschak and
prize in Economics is actually the “Bank of Sweden thenTjallingKoopmans.Theresearchoutputatthe
PrizeinEconomicSciencesinMemoryofAlfredNo- Commission over that period of time was extraordi-
bel.”) The prize was for Harry’s pioneering work in nary.Nineeconomists whowereattheCowlesCom-
financialeconomics, in modernportfolio theory, and mission at some time during the 1943–1955 period
in studying the effects of asset risk, correlation and were later awarded Nobel Prizes, and I am quite
diversification on expected investment portfolio re- sure that there would have been ten such Nobel
turns. Laureates if Marschak had lived a little bit longer.
In the early 1950s, Harry was a graduate stu- TheninewereKen Arrow,Tjalling Koopmans,Her-
dentintheEconomicsDepartmentattheUniversity bertSimon,LawrenceKlein,GerardDebreu,Franco
of Chicago, and he was also a Research Fellow at Modigliani,TrygveHaavelmo,HarryMarkowitzand
the Cowles Commission for Research in Economics, Leonid Hurwicz.
22 M. P. BECKER
Fig. 11. Map of authors co-cited with Leo Goodman in at least 100 articles.
Jacob(Yascha) MarschakandIweregoodfriends, excellent questions. I was very impressed. He then
and he would from time to time ask me statistical invited me to meet with him for lunch at the Har-
questions that he needed to deal with in his eco- vardClubinNewYork.(Iwasatthattimeavisiting
nomics research, and from time to time I knew the professor at Columbia University in New York, on
answerstohisquestions orIcould figureoutthean- leave from the University of Chicago.)
swers. Some other economists at the Cowles Com- At our firstlunch meeting, we considered the pos-
mission would also ask mestatistical questions from sibilityofestablishingastatisticsdepartmentatYale,
time to time. In 1955, the Commission moved from and it seemed pretty clear to me that Brewster was
the University of Chicago to Yale where it was re- very uncertain about moving ahead with this. He
named the Cowles Foundation for Research in Eco- was the Provost, and he was being groomed to be-
nomics. Yale at that time did not have a statistics come possibly the next President of Yale. If he, as
department, and there weren’t any statisticians at the Provost at Yale, were to establish a new depart-
the university who could help Cowles Foundation ment in some field, it would, of course, need to be
members with statistical questions that came up in thebestdepartment,oratleastamongtheverybest
their economics research. departments,inthatfieldinthecountry.Atanother
In 1960, Kingman Brewster was selected by the lunch meeting, hewas telling me at one point in our
Yale President, A. Whitney Griswold, to be the conversation that, when he was an undergraduate
Provost at Yale, and the Cowles Foundation then at Yale, in order to be considered a Yale man—a
asked Brewster to establish a statistics department Yale educated man—there was a special course in
there. TheFoundation also invited me to give a talk philosophy that one would need to complete, taught
at their Economics Colloquium. When I came to by a very special professor (whose name I have now
Yale to give the talk, I was introduced to Brewster, forgotten). And I responded as follows: “Well, that
and he came to the talk. In the question and an- was in your day at Yale. But now, in the second
swer period following the talk, Brewster asked some half of the twentieth century, in order to become
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 23
an educated person, a Yale man could use a good an author appears on the map is based on the num-
course in statistics, in part, in order to help him to ber of co-citations of the author with me and also
avoid being misled by statements read in newspa- on the number of co-citations of the author with
pers or heard on radio or television, or more gen- each of the other authors on the map. It turns out
erally communicated by any medium.” After that, that the authors on the right side of the map are
Brewster seemed no longer to be uncertain about mainly statisticians, and there also are some math-
moving ahead with the possibility of establishing a ematician/probabilists and some others there; and
statistics department, and we began to discuss in theauthorsontheleftsideofthemaparemainlyso-
detail what was needed in order for this to happen. ciologists, and there also are some statisticians and
At our next lunch meeting, Brewster offered me the some others there.
job of building the department, and I thanked him Becker: Leo, I can see how this kind of map could
fortheoffer.Ithoughtabouttheofferforafewdays, be useful in many different contexts. Thanks for
and then told Brewster that I was turning the offer bringing this to my attention. Now there is just one
down. He then asked me whom would I recommend moretopicthatIfeelIneedtobringupwithyoube-
for the job, and I recommended Frank Anscombe fore our conversation comes to an end. I know that
who was at Princeton at that time. Brewster then you are a cancer survivor, now more than 30 years.
offered Anscombe the job, and Anscombe accepted How did your battle with and victory over cancer
the offer. influence your work?
Becker: In this conversation, we have talked to Goodman: After the course of treatment for my
some extent about your working relationships with cancer was completed, I then wrote my main ar-
some statisticians and social scientists, sociologists, ticle introducing and developing association mod-
demographersandeconomists,andaboutsomejoint els: “Simple models for the Analysis of Association
work that you have done with some of these people. inCrossClassifications Having OrderedCategories”
You had mentioned to me in some earlier conversa- (JASA, 1979). I view the contents of this article
tion thattherewas away of showingpictorially who as a big step forward in categorical data analysis
were some of the people in these fields whose works (CDA). Somehow, having my mind completely fo-
were related to your works and/or who were some cused, during the course of the cancer treatment,
of the people in these fields to whose works your on doing whatever I could to increase the chances
works were related. I would be interested to see this that I might become a cancer survivor, this focus-
pictorial representation. ing of my mind then helped me later to clear my
Goodman: Here it is—a map of authors who are mind, after the course of treatment was completed,
co-cited with me in at least 100 articles. The infor- and to take a big step forward when I was able to
mation that was used to create this map was ob- return to statistical work. [In Alan Agresti’s first
tained from the Institute for Scientific Information and second edition of his book on Categorical Data
(ISI) Web of Science, based on 5678 articles that Analysis (Agresti, 1990, p. 505, and 2002, pp. 631),
cite articles written by me. The creator of this map my 1979 JASA article is included in his list of 25
was Olle Perrson, Professor of Sociology, at Umea articles that convey a sense of how CDA methodol-
University in Umea, Sweden. ogy had evolved during the twentieth century. (By
The size of the ball associated with each author the way Mark, Agresti also lists, in the second edi-
on the map is proportional to the number of cita- tion of his book on Categorical Data Analysis, Karl
tions of that author’s articles in the 5678 articles; Pearson, G. Udney Yule, Ronald A. Fisher and Leo
so we see here that the largest balls were for W. H. Goodman, as “Four leading figures in the develop-
Kruskal, T. W. Anderson, Y. M. M. Bishop, S. J. mentofcategorical dataanalysis.”)]My1979article
Haberman, C. C. Clogg, O. D. Duncan, A. Agresti, was included as the core article in my 1984 book on
S. E. Fienberg, M. G. Kendall; and the next largest The Analysis of Cross-Classified Data Having Or-
balls were for P. F. Lazarsfeld, D. R. Cox, J. Cohen, dered Categories, and I also extended the work pre-
J. A. Davis, R. A. Fisher, W. G. Cochran, D. B. sentedinthe1979articleinsomeofmylaterwork—
Rubin, G. G. Koch, A. P. Dempster; and the next JASA, 1981a, 1981b, 1991, 1996; Ann. Stat., 1985;
largest balls were for H. M. Blalock, P. McCullagh, International Stat. Rev., 1986; Amer. J. Soc., 1987.
N. M. Laird, R. M. Hauser, P. M. Blau, C. R. Rao, Mark, with respect to the cancer, here’s an inter-
J. S. Coleman and M. S. Bartlett. The place where esting experience that I had. This experience leads
24 M. P. BECKER
metosay sometimes thatit was statistics that saved cal evidence presented in the articles themselves did
mylife.[Smile]Here’swhathappened:Afterthesur- not warrant the recommendation presented in the
gical removal ofthecancer inNewYork,therewas a abstracts. SoI returnedto the Chicago group to ask
disagreement between my New York oncologist and themsomequestionsaboutthearticles,andtheirre-
a group of oncologists in Chicago as to what should sponsesto the questions left mewith the impression
be done next. The New York oncologist said that, that they had read the abstracts but they had not
fortheparticularkindofcancerthatIhave,acourse studied carefully the articles themselves. I then de-
of chemotherapy and immunotherapy should be ad- cided to follow the New York oncologist’s regimen.
ministeredatonce;andtheChicagogroupofoncolo- It turned out that the New York oncologist’s reg-
gists said that,for theparticular kindof cancer that imen was somewhat similar to what was done at
I have, a course of radiation should be administered that time in France for this kind of cancer, and the
at once, and that chemotherapy and immunother- Chicago group’s regimen was similar to what was
apy should not beadministered. TheChicago group done at that time in Britain. A few years after I
of oncologists gave me a number of articles to read had completed the New York oncologist’s regimen,
on this subject. These articles had been published it turned out that an international medical confer-
invarious British medicaljournals,andtheabstract ence was held on “Cancers of the Mid-East,” and
in each of the articles stated that, with this kind of comparisons were made there, for those who had
cancer, radiation was recommended. I then studied the kind of cancer that I had, between mortality
carefully the text of each of these articles, and it statistics for those receiving the British regimen in
seemed to methat the detailed medical and statisti- Britain and those receiving the French regimen in
Karl Pearson G. Udny Yule
Ronald A. Fisher Leo Goodman
Fig. 12. Four leading figures in the development of categorical data analysis. Source: Alan Agresti, “Categorical Data Anal-
ysis” 2nd edition, 2002; and “An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis” 1st and 2nd edition, 1996 and 2007.
A CONVERSATIONWITH LEO GOODMAN 25
France. For the British patients, the death rate was an article on some methods for dealing with the
reallyterrible,whereasthedeathratefortheFrench ecological-correlation problem, “Some Alternatives
patients was not as bad. Mark, imagine what might to Ecological Correlation” (AJS, 1959); (11) an ar-
have happened if I had just read the abstracts in ticle introducing exact formulas for the variance of
the various British medical journals, and had not products, and formulas for estimating this variance,
botheredtostudycarefullythedetailedmedicaland “OntheExactVarianceofProducts”(JASA,1960).
statistical evidence presented in the articles them- There are twelve articles each of which has been
selves? [Smile] cited between 100 and 200 times so far. These ar-
Becker: Leo,thank you forbeingsogenerouswith ticles will be described next (but not necessarily in
yourtimeandreflections onyouralmostsix decades the order pertaining to the number of citations of
statistical career. And what a career it has been— each article): (1) the Henry L. Rietz Memorial Lec-
the experiences and relationships that you have had ture,“TheAnalysis of Cross Classified Data Having
have been nothing short of amazing. Ordered and/or Unordered Categories: Association
Models. Correlation Models, and Asymmetry Mod-
APPENDIX A
els for Contingency Tables With or Without Miss-
ing Entries” (Ann. Stat., 1985); (2) an article intro-
Aswasnotedearlierinthisconversation,thereare
ducing correspondenceanalysis models, “Some Use-
eleven articles each cited between 200 and 400 times
ful Extensions of the Usual Correspondence Analy-
so far. These articles will bedescribed here (but not
sis Approach and the Usual Log-Linear Models Ap-
necessarily in the order pertaining to the number
proach in the Analysis of Contingency Tables” (In-
of citations of each article): (1) the R. A. Fisher
ternational Stat. Rev., 1986); (3–4) two articles in-
MemorialLecture,“TheAnalysisofCross-Classified
troducing recursive models for panel analysis, “The
Data: Independence, Quasi-Independence, and In-
Analysis of Multidimensional Contingency Tables
teractions in Contingency Tables With or Without
When Some Variables Are Posterior to Others: A
Missing Entries” (JASA, 1968); (2–3) two articles
Modified Path Analysis Approach” (Biometrika,
introducing new methods for the analysis of latent
1973), and “Causal Analysis of Data from Panel
structures, “Exploratory Latent Structure Analysis
Studiesand Other Kindsof Surveys,”Amer. J. Soc.
Using Both Identifiable and Unidentifiable Models”
(AJS, 1973); (5) an article introducing methods for
(Biometrika, 1974), and “The Analysis of Systems
ofQualitativeVariablesWhenSomeoftheVariables the analysis of data obtained by snowball sampling,
AreUnobservable:AModifiedLatentStructureAp- “Snowball Sampling” (Ann. Math. Stat., 1961); (6)
proach,” Amer. J. Soc. (AJS, 1974); (4) an article ajointarticlewithCliffordClogg,introducinglatent
introducing association models, “Simple Models for structure models for analyzing simultaneously more
the Analysis of Association in Cross-Classifications than one multidimensional contingency table, “La-
Having Ordered Categories” (JASA, 1979); (5) an tentStructureAnalysisofaSetofMultidimensional
article introducing various procedures for using log- Contingency Tables” (JASA, 1984); (7) an article
linear models to fit contingency-table data, “Anal- introducing additional methods for analyzing mo-
ysis of Multidimensional Contingency Tables: Step- bility tables, “How to Ransack Social Mobility Ta-
wise Procedures and Direct Estimation Methods for blesandOtherKindsofCross-ClassificationTables”
BuildingModelsforMultipleClassifications”(Tech- (AJS, 1973); (8) an article introducing new meth-
nometrics,1971);(6–7)twoarticlesintroducingmul- ods for analyzing scales, “A New Model for Scaling
tiplicative models to analyze categorical data, “A Response Patterns: An Application of the Quasi-
General Model for the Analysis of Surveys” (AJS, IndependenceConcept”(JASA,1975);(9)thefourth
1972), and “A Modified Multiple Regression Ap- joint article with Bill Kruskal, “Measures of Asso-
proach to the Analysis of Dichotomous Variables,” ciation for Cross Classification IV: Simplification of
Amer. Soc. Rev. (ASR, 1972); (8–9) the second and Asymptotic Variances” (JASA, 1972); (10) an arti-
third joint articles with Bill Kruskal, “Measures of cle describing the relationship between RC associa-
Association forCrossClassifications II:FurtherDis- tion models and canonical correlation, “Association
cussion and References” (JASA, 1959), and “Mea- Models and Canonical Correlation in the Analysis
suresofAssociationforCrossClassificationsIII:Ap- of CrossClassifications Having OrderedCategories”
proximate Sampling Theory” (JASA, 1963); (10) (JASA, 1981); (11–12) two articles on simultaneous
26 M. P. BECKER
confidence intervals, “Simultaneous Confidence In- chain model, “Statistical Methods for the Mover-
tervals for Contrasts Among Multinomial Popula- Stayer Model” (JASA, 1961); (8) an article present-
tions” (Ann. Math. Stat., 1964), and “On Simulta- ingexplicitformulasforanalyzingthree-factorinter-
neous Confidence Intervals for Multinomial Propor- action in contingency tables, “Simple Methods for
tions” (Technometrics, 1965). Analyzing Three-Factor Interaction in Contingency
There are fifteen articles each of which has been Tables” (JASA, 1964); (9) an article on simulta-
cited between 50 and 100 times so far. Ten of these neous confidence-limits, “Simultaneous Confidence-
articles will be described next (but not necessarily Limits for Cross-ProductRatios inContingency Ta-
in the order pertaining to the numberof citations of bles”(J. Roy. Stat. Soc., Ser. B,1964); (10) an arti-
cle developing further some statistical methods pre-
each article): (1) an article, based on an invited lec-
sented in an earlier article by Ted Anderson and in
ture, presented at the invitation of the Amer. Stat.
the earlier joint Anderson/Goodman article, “Sta-
Assoc. Social Statistics Section, on correspondence
tisticalMethodsforAnalyzingProcessesofChange”
analysis models and related topics, with comments
(AJS, 1962).
by J. P. Benzecri, the founder of and major figure
in the “French school of data analysis” (the school
APPENDIX B
of correspondence analysis), and also comments by
D.R.Cox,C.R.Rao,S.J.Haberman.H.Caussinus, Twelve articles in demography and related fields:
C. C. Clogg, and by three others, and a rejoinder Biometrics,1953,1969;Ann.HumanGenetics(Lon-
by me, “Measures, Models, and Graphical Displays don), 1961, 1963; Demography, 1967, 1968; J. Roy.
in the Analysis of Cross-Classified Data” (JASA, Stat. Soc., Ser. A, 1967; Biometrika, 1967, 1968;
1991); (2) a joint article with Nathan Keyfitz and Ann.Math. Stat.,1968;Theoretical Population Biol-
Tom Pullum on kinship relationships, “Family For- ogy,1971,1974(thejointGoodman/Keyfitz/Pullum
mation and the Frequency of Various Kinship Re- article).
lationships” (Theoretical Population Biology, 1974);
APPENDIX C
(3) an article in mathematical demography, “Popu-
lation Growth of the Sexes” (Biometrics, 1953); (4)
PhotoCredits:ThephotosofLipmanBers,Alonzo
an article introducing multiplicative models for mo-
Church, and Emil Artin are based on photographs
bility table analysis, “Multiplicative Models for the
by Paul R. Halmos, from I Have A Photographic
AnalysisofOccupationalMobility TablesandOther
Memory,copyright1987AmericanMathematicalSo-
Kinds of Cross-Classification Tables” (AJS,1979);
ciety, with permission from the AMS. The photo of
(5) an article on the relationship between the RC
Salomon Bochner is based on a photograph from
association models and the bivariate normal dis- the Collected Papers of Salomon Bochner, Part 1,
tribution, “Association Models and the Bivariate R.C.Gunning,ed.,copyright 1992 AmericanMath-
Normal for Contingency Tables with Ordered Cat- ematical Society, with permission from the AMS.
egories” (Biometrika, 1981); (6) an article on addi- The photo of Bill Kruskal is based on a photograph
tional methods for analyzing multidimensional con- from the 2005 IMS Bulletin, with permission from
tingencytables,“Partitioning ofChi-Square,Analy- the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. The photo
sis of Marginal Contingency Tables, and Estimation of John Tukey is based on a photograph by Eliza-
of Expected Frequencies in Multidimensional Con- beth Menzies, Princeton photographer. The photos
tingency Tables” (JASA, 1971); (7) an article on of Charles Loewner, Sam Wilks, and Solomon Lef-
the analysis of certain kinds of panel data using the schetz are based on photographs from the archives
mover-stayer model, a generalization of the Markov of the University of St. Andrews, Scotland.