]rehto.tam-dnoc[
2v7867040/tam-dnoc:viXra
A conjecture on the distribution of firm profit
Ian Wright∗†
A common assumption ofpolitical economy isthat profit rates across
firms or sectors tend to uniformity, and often models are formulated in
which this tendency is assumed to have been realised. But in reality this
tendency is never realised and the distribution of firm profits is not de-
generate but skewed to the right. The mode is less than the mean and
super-profits are present. To understand the distribution of firm prof-
its a general probabilistic argument is sketched that yields a candidate
functional form. The overall properties of the derived distribution are
qualitatively consistent with empirical measures, although there is more
work to be done.
Key words: firms, profit, economic, distribution, probabilistic
1 Introduction
Farjoun and Machover [2], dissatisfied with the concept of mechanical equilib-
riumappliedtopoliticaleconomyandthe concomitantassumptionofarealised
uniformprofitrate,outlinedaprobabilisticapproachtopoliticaleconomy,which
replacedmechanicalequilibriumwithstatisticalequilibriumandauniformprofit
rate with a distribution of profit rates. They reasoned that the proportion of
industrial capital, out of the total capital invested in the economy, which finds
itselfinanygivenprofitbracketwillbeapproximatedbyagammadistribution,
by analogy with the distribution of kinetic energy in a gas at equilibrium. The
gammadistributionisaright-skeweddistribution. TheyexaminedUKindustry
datafrom1972andconcludedthatitwasconsistentwithagammadistribution.
Wells [6] examined the distributions of profit rates defined in a variety of ways
of over 100,000 UK firms and found right-skewness to be prevalent, but did
not investigate their functional form. Wright [7] measured the distribution of
firm profits in an agent-based model of a competitive economy, and found that
the distribution was right-skewed,although not well characterisedby a gamma
∗iKuni Inc., 3400 Hillview Avenue, Building 5, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. Email:
wrighti@acm.org, URL: ianusa.home.mindspring.com. Fax: +1 650 320 9827. Phone: +1
6507395355.
†Iam grateful to JulianWells forexplaining his workon firmprofits, and an anonymous
reviewerforhelpfulcriticisms.
distribution, even when capital-weighted. Analysis of the model suggestedthat
the profit distribution may be explained by general probabilistic laws.
The remainder of the paper outlines some theoretical assumptions and de-
rives a candidate functional form for the distribution of firm profits.
2 A probabilistic argument
Under normal circumstances a firm expects that a worker adds a value to the
productthatisboundfrombelowbythewage. Afirm’smarkuponcostsreflects
thisvalueexpectation,whichmayormaynotbevalidatedinthemarket. Wages
are normally paid in installments of between a week and one month, but the
markup on costs is validated in the market at a frequency that depends on the
rateatwhichafirm’sgoodsandservicesarepurchasedbybuyers. Thefrequency
ofpaymentstoafirmdifferwidelyanddependonthecomplexityoftheproduct
and the details of payment schedules (for example, compare a firm that sells
sweets to a firm that sells battleships). The frequency mismatch between wage
payments and revenue payments can be mitigated in many different ways, not
least by the arrangement of capital loans. But whatever the frequency of sale
or the complexity of the product a revenue payment to a firm partially reflects
the valueaddedbythe firm’sworkersduringa periodoftime. Assume thatthe
revenue from the sale of a firm’s product consists of a sum of market samples
whereeachsamplerepresentsthevalue-addedbyaparticularemployeeworking
for a small period of time, say an hour. Obviously, there are multiple and
particularreasonswhyanindividualworkeraddsmoreorlessvaluetothefirm’s
total product, most of which are difficult to measure, as partially reflected in
the large variety of contested and negotiable compensation schemes. Although
each worker normally adds value there is a great deal of local contingency. A
workermaybeaslackeroraworkaholic,aneasilyreplaceableadministrator,ora
unique,currentlyfashionablefilmstar. Therefore,theprecisevaluecontribution
of an individual worker to the product is highly complex and largely unknown,
particularly when it is considered that the productive co-operation of many
workers cannot be easily reduced to separate and orthogonal contributions, as
is the case in highly creative industries with production processes that have
yet to mature into separable, repeatable and well-defined tasks. This local
contingency and indeterminacy is modelled by assuming that the value-added
perworker-hourisarandom variable. Considerthataworkeriaddsamonetary
value, X , to a firm’s product for every hour worked, where each X is an
independent and identically distributed (iid) random variable, with mean µ
and variance σ2 . The added value is assumed to be globally idd to reflect the
common determinants of the value-creating power of an hour of work, but also
random to model local contingencies. Negative X represents negative value-
added,correspondingto casesinwhichthe worker’slabourreducesthe value of
inputs,forexampletheproductionofunwantedgoods,oraslowerthanaverage
work pace, and so forth.
Assume that the distribution of X is such that the Central Limit Theorem
(CLT) may be applied. Consider a single firm that sets in motion a total of n
worker-hoursduringasingleyear. The firm’stotalvalue-added,S , maythere-
fore be approximatedby a normal distribution S = n X N(nµ ,nσ2 ).
n i=1 i ≈ X X
The CLT approximation will improve with the sizePof the firm, but even for
small firms the number of iid draws is large given the stated assumptions.
Inrealitytheproductivityofworkerswithinfirmsiscorrelated. Forexample,
employees of firms that employ state-of-the-art machinery, or are exceptionally
well-organised, will all tend to add more value than employees of firms that
employ out-of-date machinery or are badly organised. Although competitive
processestendtohomogenisethevalue-addedperworker,newinnovationsnever
cease, so that at any moment in time the employees of particular firm will be
more or less productive than the average. A more accurate representation of
value-addedisobtainedifeachX isconsideredtobedrawnfromadistribution
indexed by the firm that employs worker i, at the expense of a considerable
increase in model complexity. However,the correlationof value-addedwithin a
large firm, which employs diverse skills and machinery to produce a variety of
products,willbeweak. Althoughahugemultinationalisnormallyconsidereda
single entity for the purpose of reporting profits, in reality it sets into a motion
alargesampleofdifferentkindsoflaboursutilisingdifferentkindsofmachinery
and tools. Hence, for large firms the assumption that X is sampled from a
single,economy-widedistributionisareasonableapproximation,forsmallfirms
lessso. Anadvantageofmodellingvalue-addedperworkerasarandomvariable
isthatitispossiblethattotalvalue-addedbyafirm,S ,ismuchhigherorlower
than the norm, but this event has low probability. The assumption of a single
distribution that determines the value-addedper workeris able to approximate
the diverse productivities of individual firms.
Each worker costs a certain amount to employ during the year. This cost
includes the wage, the cost of inputs used by the worker, the cost of wear and
tear on any fixed capital, the cost of rent, local taxes and so forth, all of which
may be differently reported due to local accountancy practices. Again, there is
agreatdealofcontingency. Hence costsper worker-hourarealsomodelledasa
randomvariable. Assumethataworkericostsamonetaryvalue,Y ,toproduc-
tively employ per hour worked, where each Y is an idd random variable with
mean µ and variance σ2. This cost includes both the wage and capital costs
per worker, and therefore effaces the distinction between variable and constant
capital. Costsperworker-hourarealsocorrelatedatthefirmlevel: theemploy-
eesofdifferentfirmsproductivelycombineagreaterorlesseramountofcapital.
A more accurate representation of costs would therefore consider the distribu-
tion of constantcapitalacrossfirms conditionalon localcircumstances,such as
firm size, but this extension is not pursued here. The assumption that cost per
worker-houris statistically unifrom across firms is an approximation, which, as
for the case of value-added, improves with firm size, under the assumption of a
tendency toward homogenisationdue to competitive pressures.
Assume that the distribution of Y is such that the CLT may be applied.
Henceafirmthatsetsinmotionnworker-hoursduringayearhastotalcoststhat
maybeapproximatedbyanormaldistribution,K = n Y N(nµ ,nσ2).
n i=1 i ≈ Y Y
This approximation also improves with the size of the firm.
Differentfirmsemployeedifferentnumbersofworkersandhencetheamount
ofhoursworkedforeachfirmduring ayearwillvary. Define the profit, P ,ofa
firm that sets in motion n hours of labour in a single yearas the ratio of value-
added to costs, P =S /K , andassume that S and K are independent. P
n n n n n n
is the ratio of two normal variates. Its probability density function (pdf) may
derived by the transformation method (or alternatively see [5]) to give:
f (p n) = −2 X X Y Y
(cid:18)√n 1 2λ 2 (cid:18) r2√λ (cid:19)(cid:19)
Equation (1) is the pdf of the rate-of-profit of a firm conditional on n, the
number of hours worked for the firm per year.
Axtell [1] analysed US Census Bureau data for US firms trading between
1988and1997andfoundthatthe firmsizedistribution, wheresize is measured
by the number of employees, followed a special case of a power-law known as
Zipf’slaw,andthisrelationshippersistedfromyeartoyeardespitethecontinual
birthanddemiseoffirmsandothermajoreconomicchanges. Duringthisperiod
thenumberofreportedfirmsincreasedfrom4.9millionto5.5million. Gaffeoet.
al. [4] found that the size distribution of firms in the G7 group over the period
1987-2000 also followed a power-law, but only in limited cases was the power-
law actually Zipf. Fuijiwara et. al. [3] found that the Zipf law characterised
the size distribution of about 260,000 large firms from 45 European countries
during the years 1992–2001. A Zipf law implies that a majority of small firms
coexist with a decreasing number of disproportionately large firms. Firm sizes
theoretically range from 1 (a degenerate case of a self-employed worker) to the
whole available workforce,representing a highly unlikely monopolisation of the
whole economy by a single firm.
The empiricalevidenceimpliesthatatanypointintime the firmsize distri-
bution follows a power-law, and that this distribution is constant, despite the
continualchurningoffirmsintheeconomy(birth,death,shrinkageandgrowth).
Firms hire and fire employees, and therefore the number of hours worked for
a firm during a year depends on its particular historical growth pattern. To
simplify, assume that the average number of employees per firm per year also
followsapower-law. Thisapproximationisreasonableifthegrowthtrajectories
of firms do not fluctuate too widely during the accounting period. Assume also
that every employee works the same number of hours in a year, which is a rea-
sonable simplification. The firm hours per year is therefore a constant multiple
of the number of firm employees. Firms with more employees proportionately
set in motion more hours of labour. A constant multiple of a power-law vari-
ate is also a power-law variate. Hence, the firm size distribution has the same
power-law form whether firm size is measured by employees or by the total
number of hours worked by employees.
The unconditional rate-of-profit distribution can therefore be obtained by
considering that the number of hours worked for a firm during a year is a
random variable N distributed according to a Pareto (power-law) distribution:
where α is the shape and β the location parameter. Assume that firm sizes
range between m hours, which represents a degenerate case of a self-employed
worker who trades during the year, to m hours, which represents a highly
unlikely monopolisation of all social labour by a single huge firm (m >>m ).
The truncated Pareto distribution
g (n)=f (n m <N m )= N = 1 2
N N | 1 ≤ 2 F (m ) F (m ) mα mα
N 2 − N 1 2 − 1
f(n)=F (n)
isformedtoensurethatalltheprobabilitymassisbetweenm andm . Assume
that m is largeso that the discrete firm size distribution can be approximated
by the continuous distribution g .
By the Theorem of Total Probability the unconditional profit distribution
f (p) is given by:
Expression(2) defines the g (n) parameter-mix of f (p N =n). The rate-of-
profitvariateisthereforecomposedofaparameter-mixofaratioofindependent
normal variates each conditional on a firm size n, measured in hours per year,
distributed according to a power-law. Writing (2) in full yields the pdf of firm
profit:
f (p) = −2 X X Y Y
(cid:18)√n 1 2λ 2 (cid:18) r2√λ (cid:19)(cid:19)
1 2 dn (3)
Thisdistributionhas7parameters: (i)µ ,themeanvalue-addedperworker-
hour, (ii) σ2 , the variance of value-added per worker-hour, (iii) µ , the mean
cost per worker-hour, (iv) σ2, the variance of cost per worker-hour, (v) α, the
Paretoexponent of the firmsize power-lawdistribution, where size is measured
in worker-hours per year, (vi) m , the number of hours worked by a single
worker in a year, and (vii) m , the total number of hours worked in the whole
economyduringayear. Bothpercentageprofit, R=100P,andthe growthrate
ofcapitalinvested, G=1+P, are simple lineartransforms ofthis distribution.
The parameters can be estimated from economic data and the resulting
distribution compared to empirical rate-of-profit measures, under various sim-
plifying assumptions about how profit is defined (e.g. see Wells [6]). A good
fit would imply that the assumptions made in the theoretical derivation are
empirically sound. Alternatively, best-fit parametersmay be directly estimated
fromempiricaldata,forexamplebythemethodofmaximumlikelihoodestima-
tion,todeterminehowwellthetheoreticaldistributioncanfitasetofempirical
distributions. A good fit compared to other candidate functional forms would
imply that a parameter-mix of a ratio of normal variates with parameters con-
ditional on a power-law captures some essential structure of the determinants
of firm profit, but it would not validate the theoretical derivation.
Equation (3) is difficult to analyse so numerical solutions are employed.
Figure1graphssomerepresentativenumericalsamplesofthedistribution. The
samples range from sharply peaked symmetrical curves, in which most of the
probability mass is concentrated about the mode, to less peaked distributions
thatareskewedtothe right. Wells’[6]varietyofprofitmeasuresyielddistribu-
tions that share these characteristics, and therefore there is qualitative agree-
mentbetweenthe theoryandthe empiricaldata. Butclearlyafullquantitative
analysis is required.
Figure2graphsasampleoff (p)inlog-logscale. Theapproximatestraight
line in the tail is the signatureofa power-lawdecayofthe probabilityof super-
profits. Super-profit outliers are found in the empirical data, although it has
not been investigated whether they decay as an approximate power-law.
Furtheranalysisofthepdff (x)isrequired. Butthequalitativeformofthe
distribution is sufficiently encouraging to consider it a candidate for fitting to
empirical profit measures and for comparison with other candidate functional
forms. To go beyond models that assume a realised uniform profit rate it is
necessary to investigate empirical data on firm profit and propose theoretical
explanationsofits distribution. This paper isa tentativestepinthatdirection.
3 Conclusion
Ageneralprobabilisticargumentsuggeststhattheempiricalrate-of-profitdistri-
butionwillbeconsistentwithaparameter-mixofaratioofnormalvariateswith
means and variances that depend on a firm size parameter that is distributed
according to a power law.
2=1a=0.5m1 =1m2 =100
2=1a=1m1 =1m2 =100
2=1a=2.5m1 =1m2 =100
2=1a=4.5m1 =1m2 =100
2=1a=0.5m1 =1m2 =100
2=1a=4.5m1 =1m2 =100
(a) Samplesplottedonseparatescales.
(b) Thesamesamplesplottedonasinglescale.
Figure 1: Representative numerical samples of the probability density function
f (p).
1 2 5 10 20 50
m =4s 2=4m =1s 2=1a=1m =1m =100
X X Y Y 1 2
Figure 2: A sample of f (p) plotted in log-log scale. Note the long power-law
tail.