A computational model of cell polarization and motility coupling
mechanics and biochemistry
Ben Vanderlei, James J. Feng, Leah Edelstein-Keshet
March 5, 2022
The motion of a eukaryotic cell presents a variety of interesting and challenging problems from both
amodelingandacomputationalperspective. Theprocessesspanmanyspatialscales(frommolecularto
tissue)aswellasdisparatetimescales,withreactionkineticsontheorderofseconds,andthedeformation
and motion of the cell occurring on the order of minutes. The computational difficulty, even in 2D,
resides in the fact that the problem is inherently one of deforming, non-stationary domains, bounded
by an elastic perimeter, inside of which there is redistribution of biochemical signaling substances. Here
we report the results of a computational scheme using the immersed boundary method to address this
problem. Weadoptasimplereaction-diffusionsystemthatrepresentsaninternalregulatorymechanism
controlling the polarization of a cell, and determining the strength of protrusion forces at the front of
its elastic perimeter. Using this computational scheme we are able to study the effect of protrusive and
elastic forces on cell shapes on their own, the distribution of the reaction-diffusion system in irregular
domains on its own, and the coupled mechanical-chemical system. We find that this representation of
cell crawling can recover important aspects of the spontaneous polarization and motion of certain types
of crawling cells.
1 Introduction
Eukaryotic cell crawling is a complex process that involves interactions between mechanical forces and
dynamics of biochemically active signaling molecules. The deformation and motion of such cells are
governed by a dynamic internal structure (the cytoskeleton) that is regulated by numerous kinds of
proteins and lipids. Unlike bacteria, whose motility is powered by flagella, eukaryotic cells move by a
combination of protrusion, retraction, and contraction. To crawl in a directed way, the cell has to first
polarize and form a front, where the cytoskeleton assembles and leads to protrusion, and a rear, where
either contraction or passive elastic forces dominate. The determination of front and rear depends on
external stimuli (e.g. gradients of chemo-attractant) and has to be dynamic, sensitive, and yet robust.
How cells manage this complex task is a question of great interest in current cellular biology.
Mathematicalandcomputationalresearcherscanprovidetechniquesthathelptodissectthiscomplex
process into simpler, more easily understood modules. Prototypical “in silico” cells that share certain
qualitativefeatureswithcrawlingcellsallowustoaddressimportantquestionsthatarenotasaccessible
inrealcells. Forexample, insimulations, wecaneasilyaskhowmechanicsdecoupledfrombiochemistry
(orviceversa)affectsthechangingshapeofacellasitpolarizesandcrawls,andhowthecouplingbetween
the two leads to emergent properties not present in each on its own. We can explore the feedbacks
between cell shape and the internal reaction-diffusion system that determines the chemical distribution.
Such questions are difficult to probe in experimental systems, and easy to test computationally.
In order to investigate the mechanical-chemical coupling in cell shape and cell motion, we need
suitable models and computational algorithms. Simulating the motion of a eukaryotic cell is a difficult
undertaking because it leads to solving chemical equations on a moving and deforming domain. Such
problemsarerecognizedasnumericallychallenging. Herewepresenttheresultsofsimulationsthataimto
meet this challenge at an intermediate level of complexity. We describe a simulation package, developed
from a composite of well-established techniques, that allows us to simulate the chemical polarization of
the cell (determining front and back), the forces of protrusion at the front (based on implicit growth of
the cytoskeleton), and deformation of the cell, culminating in its motility in two spatial dimensions.
]BC.oib-q[
1v0425.1101:viXra
We are not the first to simulate the motion of a eukaryotic cell. In [6] a 1D continuum model is
developed describing viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm in response to internal stresses generated
by the contraction. Treating the cell as a two-phase reactive fluid is a well-studied idea in which the
cytoplasm is treated locally as being a mixture, one phase of actin network and another of cytosol
[31, 8, 7]. The immersed boundary method has been used to model explicitly the actin network and its
adhesive links to a substrate [2]. The cell was modeled as a 2D elastic plate in [23]. Level set methods
havealsobeenusedtoincludechemistrydynamicsonadeformingcelldomain[33,32]. Inmostofthese
models, the asymmetries that lead to the motion of the cell are imposed rather than self-organized.
Other models such as [24] couple chemical distribution on the cell edge with protrusion from a central
hub. A previous work [16] using the Potts model approach includes more detailed biochemistry, with a
Hamiltonian approach where mechanical forces are implicit, rather than explicit.
Our simulations belong to the class of mechanical/fluid-based models with the following features:
(1) The perimeter of our cell is elastic. This elasticity is attributable to the cortex, that part of the
cytoskeletondirectlyadjacenttothecellmembrane, generallycomposedofanetworkofactinfilaments.
Whilewedonotrepresentthatnetworkexplicitly,weassignitselasticpropertiestothe“cellboundary”.
(2) We model explicit forces, representing protrusion of the cytoskeleton, to the cell edge. Thus, we
can also study the interplay between elastic and protrusive forces. This differs from level set models
(or cellular Potts models) that do not explicitly represent these mechanical properties of the edge of
the cell. Level set methods can prescribe a velocity, e.g. see [33, 32], but the boundary curve has
no mechanical properties of its own. (3) Our platform is one of fluid-based computations. We can
simulate both the diffusion and advection of substances inside the cell. In Potts models and many other
simulations, net flows of substances inside the cell are not tracked. (4) Our simulation currently has a
simple but effective module that represents the internal self-organization of the cell. Other models have
included simple or more detailed internal biochemistry. For example, Zajac et. al. studied the effect
of the balanced inactivation model of [14] in their 2D level-set cell, and Mare´e et. al. included three
interacting regulatory proteins of the small GTPase family, and later added lipids such as PIP PIP
etc [16]. Keeping the regulatory system simple but biologically faithful (to small GTPases) allows us
to establish overall qualitative properties of the system, while pointing to the emergent aspects of the
coupling between chemistry and mechanics.
Inthispaperwedescribehowthesimulationpackagewasassembledandpresentsomeitsfirstresults.
Themathematicalmodelatthecoreofthesimulationcomprisestwocoupledsystemsofequations. The
first system is the mechanical model which describes the fluid flow and the motion of the elastic cell
edge. The second system is a set of reaction-diffusion equations that describe a reduced model for cell
polarization analyzed in 1D in [18]. These equations will be solved on the two-dimensional deforming
domain that represents the model cell. The solution of the reaction-diffusion system will be directly
coupled to the forces that the cell generates to crawl and deform. The shape of the cell domain will, in
turn, influence the solution of the the reaction-diffusion system.
We use our platform to probe three distinct but interrelated regimes of behaviour. In the first, we
consider the effect of mechanical forces that are artificially prescribed, and investigate the shape of the
cell for various force and elastic regimes. We show that even such simple cases lead to shapes and
motility relevant to some cell types. Next, we consider the regulatory reaction-diffusion system on a
static but irregular domain. We show how the shape of the domain influences the distribution of peaks
of activity, and in particular, the effect of curvature on the ability of multiple peaks to persist. Finally,
wecouplethemechanicalandregulatorysystems,assigningforcestothecellboundaryindirectrelation
to the local level of the active molecules. We show that such cells have very well-defined self-organized
polarization and reasonable shapes, and that they move in a realistic manner.
2 Model Equations
2.1 Mechanical model
Our model is a two-dimensional (2D) representation of a cell, viewed from the top-down perspective.
(See Fig. 1a,e). We follow the common convention of ignoring the cell body and nucleus as a passive
load. This is reasonable in view of the fact that cell fragments (e.g. of keratocytes) devoid of nuclei
can still migrate [30]. The cell is assumed to be resting on and adhering uniformly to a flat substrate.
Typical dimensions of cell fragments are 10-30 µm diameter, and 0.1-0.2 µm thickness.
The regulatory module represents proteins (Rho GTPases) that have an active form, a, bound to
the cell membrane (grey surface in Fig. 1b,c), and an inactive form b, in the fluid cytosol (white portion
of same panels). The interconversion a↔b is regulated by other proteins (GEFs, GAPs, not explicitly
modeled) with positive feedback from a assumed in b→a (dashed arrow in Fig. 1c). The membrane vs
cytosolicresidenceoftheproteinsaffectstheirratesofdiffusionD (cid:29)D ,butisnotexplicitlymodeled,
i.e. we abstract the view in Fig. 1 panel (c) by the simpler representation in (d).
Thecellisrepresentedasa2DdomainΩ (t)(Fig.1c). Weassociateaconcentrationofthesignaling
chemicals a and b to every element of area in Ω (t), since every such element corresponds to a small
“sandwich” of cytosol and membrane. This description is in contrast with many current models [17, 15,
12, 3] that model chemicals distributed only along the 1D cell boundary ∂Ω . The thinness of the “cell”
is taken to mean that no significant gradients form in a direction orthogonal to Ω (t).
Mechanically, the cell domain has an elastic perimeter enclosing a viscous incompressible fluid. The
elastic perimeter represents the cell cortex as previously defined. For the purposes of the mechanical
descriptionofthecell, itisonlytheperimeterofΩ thatisendowedwithelasticityandbearsforcesdue
to the actin network. So long as it is unstimulated, the model cell is symmetric, assuming a circular
shape with homogeneous internal chemical distribution; its perimeter is then under no elastic tension.
Atthispointinmodeldevelopment,theactinnetworkandthecelladhesiontothesubstrateareassumed
implicitly,ratherthanmodeledexplicitly. Thatis,weconnecttheinternalactin-regulatingbiochemistry
directly to forces of protrusion at the cell perimeter, rather than modeling the regulated growth of the
actin network that actually produces the force (but see [16, 23, 22]).
Figure 1: (a) Schematic diagram of a crawling cell in top down view (with nucleus and cytoskele-
ton). (b) Side view of a cell fragment with diameter ≈10µm, and thickness ≈0.1−0.2µm showing
membrane (grey) and cytosol (white). Rectangular region from (b) is enlarged in (c) to show the
interconversionoftwoproteins,atheactivemembrane-boundformandbtheinactivecytosolicform.
The regulatory system includes (in)activation (with positive feedback, dashed arrow) and diffusion
of a,b everywhere inside thecelldomain Ω . (d) Inthe simulation, we do not distinguish membrane
from cytosol in the interior of Ω , so a,b occupy the same “compartment”, with D (cid:29) D . (e) We
modelthe2Dtop-downprojectionofthecellΩ ,devoidofnucleusandotherstructures,withelastic
boundary representing the cortex, assuming a uniform thickness. The cell moves in the direction of
the outward normal forces.
The mechanical model represents the interaction of the elastic membrane of the cell with a viscous
incompressiblefluid. Tomodelthisphysicalsystem,weusethewellknownformulationoftheImmersed
BoundaryMethod(IBM)[21]. Thekeyideaofthismethodistoreplacethephysicalboundaryconditions
at the cell edge with a suitable contribution to a force density term (3) in the fluid equations (1)-(2),
that are then solved by more conventional means. To compute fluid flows, we use Stokes’ equations.
This utilizes the well-known fact that at the cellular scale, the flow is at a very low Reynold’s number,
and inertial effects are negligible. The other distinguishing feature of the IBM is the use of Lagrangian
marker points to track the boundary of Ω (t) for the purposes of computing a numerical solution. The
evolution of these material points are then used to compute the elastic stresses in the membrane.
Figure 2: The cell domain Ω is the interior of a closed loop defined by X , a discrete collection
of Lagrangian marker points. The RD polarization model is defined only on Ω , while the fluid
equations are defined both inside and outside Ω .
ThepositionofthemembraneisgivenbyavectorfunctionX(s,t),wheresisarclengthwithrespect
tosomereferenceconfiguration,andtistime. TheboundaryconditionatX(s,t)isreplacedbyasingular
force density term in the fluid momentum equation. In order to satisfy the no-slip boundary condition
along the membrane, the boundary moves with the local fluid velocity u (4). Then the immersed
boundary equations are
where p is pressure, and µ viscosity. The function F(s,t) is the magnitude of the singular force density
(units: forceperunitarclengths)definedalongtheboundary,Γ,ofthedomainΩ (t). Itiscomposedof
aforceduetotheelasticityofthemembrane,andaprotrusiveforceduetothe(implicit)polymerization
of network, represented by h(a). We take
el net el net
where F is the elastic force, and F is the protrusive network force. In F , the quantity τ(s,t) is a
unit vector in the tangential direction, T is the elastic modulus, and T is the tension, assumed to take
(cid:18)(cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:19)
(cid:12)(cid:12)∂X(cid:12)(cid:12)
T(s,t)=T 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:12)−1 . (6)
(cid:12)(cid:12) ∂s (cid:12)(cid:12)
In F , n(s,t) is the outward unit normal vector and h(a) is a constitutive relationship between the
local concentration of the activated signaling system and the force generated by the network. At this
point, the mechanics equations are coupled to the biochemical reaction-diffusion equations that depict
the cell polarization and signaling.
2.2 Biochemical model
In[16]weconsideredamulti-layersignalingbiochemistrythatregulatesthecellpolarization,andcontrols
the growth and decay, protrusion and contraction of the actin cytoskeleton. Those models include such
proteins as Rho GTPases (Cdc42, Rac, Rho), phosphoinositides (PIP, PIP , PIP ), actin, and Arp2/3.
However,forthepurposesofestablishingpolarizationanddeterminingfrontandbackofthecell,welater
showed that a far simpler model, consisting of a single Rho GTPase in active/inactive forms, suffices.
That model, described in [18] in 1D, suits our purposes here. It is sufficiently simple for the preliminary
tests of our simulation platform, while producing results in 2D that have inherent features of interest.
Recall that the computational cell is a two-dimensional projection of a thin three-dimensional cell.
The active form of the signaling protein, a(x,t), and the inactive form b(x,t), diffuse in the domain Ω
with disparate diffusion coefficients D and D . The two forms exchange at rate g(a,b). The dynamics
of our signaling model are thus governed by a pair of reaction-diffusion advection equations
The advection terms in (7, 8) account for the fact that the domain Ω (t) moves with respect to lab
coordinates, and carries the biochemistry along. For g(a,b), we assume positive feedback enhancing the
conversion of the inactive form b to the active form a, but a constant rate δ for converting a to b:
(cid:18) γa2 (cid:19)
In this term k is a basal rate of activation and γ is the magnitude of the feedback activation rate. The
parameters k , γ, and δ all have dimensions s−1. The parameter K has units of concentration of a and
we normalize concentrations so that K =1.
As shown in 1D in [18], under appropriate conditions, the system (7-9) supports solutions in the
form of a travelling wave that stalls inside the domain (The wave is then said to be “pinned”). In a
pinned wave, the domain is roughly subdivided into one region that supports a high plateau of a, while
the remaining region has a low a plateau; a sharp interface separates these zones, while the level of b is
relatively uniform throughout. We refer to the high (low) levels of a as a+ (respectively a−). Such a
solution will be our description of a polarized cell, with a+ the front portion and a− the rear portion
of the cell. Two features of the model essential for this kind of polarized outcome are D (cid:29) D and
conservation of total a and b. We therefore impose no flux conditions for both a and b at the boundary
of Ω . A third necessary condition is that for a fixed b = b within some range of values, the function
g(a,b ) has three steady-states (a−,a ,a+), the outer two of which are stable i.e. that the well-mixed
system is bistable in the variable a. We choose initial conditions that place b within the appropriate
range and a close to the value a−(b).
2.3 Coupling biochemistry and mechanics
We approximate the complex mechanical-biochemical coupling by assuming a direct link between the
concentration of the activated signal protein a and the local force normal to the cell membrane. This
assumption shortcuts the dynamics of growth of the actin cytoskeleton and replaces the actin polymer-
ization force by an “effective force of protrusion” due to local activation of the Rho GTPase. That
is, when a is above some threshold value a , we assume that there is a local force directed outwards.
For our study we take the force magnitude h(a) to be a piecewise quadratic function, with adjustable
parameters H and a . A convenient form for the relationship of force to the level a of the activated
protein is
(cid:40) (cid:16) (cid:17)
0 otherwise.
This type of force distribution parallels experimentally observed distribution of actin filament ends
that push on the leading edge in cells such as keratocytes [11]. However, we stress that for now, our
representation of the force distribution is meant to be qualitative.
3 Numerical Methods
The primary difficulty in solving the model equations numerically is that the immersed boundary equa-
tions are coupled to the reaction-diffusion system through the specification of the cell domain. The
solution of the immersed boundary equations determines the locations of marker points, X , which
comprisethediscretizationoftheimmersedboundary. ThelocationofthesemarkerpointsdefineΩ on
which the reaction diffusion system is to be solved. The solution of the reaction-diffusion system is then
coupled to the immersed boundary model since it appears in the forcing term f(x,t). To further add to
the difficulty, the reaction kinetics happen on the time scale of seconds, much faster than the motion of
the cell (typically on the order of minutes or longer).
We couple together several known and tested numerical methods and tools in the solution of our
modelequations. Weusetheimmersedboundarymethodfortheformulationofthemechanicalboundary
condition and discretization of the boundary [21], the method of regularized stokeslets for the flow
computation [4], and the immersed interface method for the solution of the reaction-diffusion system on
the cell domain [10]. In order to represent the interface and track its location, we compute a level-set
function. In addition, we use adaptivity locally in time in order to make the computation robust.
The solution of the model equations is carried out in the following steps:
1. Computetheforcedistributionalongthecellboundaryduetomembraneelasticityandprotrusion.
2. Computetheflowfieldattheboundarymarkerpointsandonaninternalcartesiangridthatholds
the signal concentrations.
3. Advect the membrane using the computed velocity.
4. Advect the solution of a and b according to the current fluid velocity.
5. Evolve the solution of a and b according to the reaction-diffusion system.
We define the three time steps ∆t , ∆t , ∆t for the coupled system. These represent the dis-
cretizationoftimeinthefluidequations,thecouplingadvectionterm,andthereactiondiffusionsystem
respectively. The motivation for this method of splitting is that there is a wide seperation among the
time scales of the different processes and a time step restriction that is a result of the stiff immersed
boundary equations. We allow for the possibility of taking multiple time steps in the fluid equations
before updating the reaction-diffusion system. A further reason for this split is that there is further
computational overhead in the advection of a and b. This will be discussed shortly. The time-marching
scheme is thus comprised of the following steps.
1. Carry out m time steps of the immersed boundary system.
2. Carry out a single time step of the advection of the signal concentration.
3. Carry out n time steps of the reaction-diffusion system.
We will take m∆t =n∆t =∆t and set each of the time steps small enough to accurately capture
the associated physical phenomenon. We discuss each of these steps in detail.
3.1 Fluid velocity
The simulation of the immersed elastic membrane is a well documented canonical problem that is
treated by the immersed boundary method [19, 20, 25, 28]. We discuss here only the computation of
the terms in (5) that comprise F(s,t) in our model. The restoring elastic force of the membrane, F , is
treated identically with other immersed boundary models. We take a centered difference discretization
of derivatives comprising F , T(s,t), and τ(s,t):
F (s ,t) = , (11)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
T(X ,t) = T k+1 k −1 , (12)
k+1/2 0 ∆s
Substituting (12) and (13) into (11), one can rewrite the formula for F as follows.
F (s ,t)= k (cid:88) +1 T 0 (|X −X |−∆s) (cid:18) X i −X k (cid:19) 1 . (14)
el k ∆s i k |X −X | ∆s
From(14)weseethattheelasticforceisequivalenttoaforceproducedbydiscretespringsconnecting
the point X with its neighbors. The resting length of the springs is ∆s, taken in our calculation to be
the spacing of the initial discretization of the immersed boundary points. We define the spring constant
σ = T0. Note that while T has units of force, σ has units of force/length. To compute F , we
determine the local value of a using a piecewise constant reconstruction evaluated at X .
The analytic representation of the Stokes flow that results from a single point force in the absence
of external boundaries is known as the Stokeslet. This velocity field is singular at the location of the
Figure 3: Inordertoenforcetheconditionofzeroflowfarawayfromthecell,additionalimmersed
boundary points, W , are included in the computation as the representation of a fixed wall.
point source. For the purpose of computing the Stokes flow that results from a discrete collection of
point forces F located at X , we use the method of regularized Stokeslets [4]. The method replaces the
singular force with a regularized force and computes an approximation of the true flow, which does not
have the singularity. We use the following regularization found in [27].
f (cid:20) 1 (cid:15)2 (cid:21) f (cid:20) 1 (cid:21)
4πµ 2 r2+(cid:15)2 4πµ 0 0 r2+(cid:15)2
Here, f is the strength of the regularized singularity positioned at x , r is the distance between x
and x , and (cid:15) is the regularization parameter. Based on linearity of the Stokes’ equations, we obtain
the velocity due to a collection of point forces by simple superposition. (See [5] for an example of the
application of the method to a three-dimensional model of a swimming microorganism.)
In typical immersed boundary models, the solution of the fluid equations is found on a periodic
rectangular domain with standard Stokes solvers. In some models, fixed boundaries are included by
means of another discretized boundary, along which forces are distributed in order to produce zero flow
at the boundaries. In this formulation, the problem is ill-posed when the integral of the forces does not
vanish. Furthermore, thesolutionisonlyuniqueuptoanarbitraryconstant. Theworkin[26]discusses
this problem and presents a solution method.
A similar issue arises with the use of regularized Stokeslets due to the logarithmic growth of the
Stokeslet as r → ∞. If the integral of the forces is non-zero, the velocity will be non-zero at infinity
due to Stokes’ paradox. The inclusion of protrusive forces in our model means that we must take
additional measures to ensure that the flow will decrease to zero away from the cell domain Ω (t). For
this purpose, we include fixed walls in our computation, at which we enforce the condition that the flow
velocity vanishes. This is achieved by discretizing the wall and distributing forces that cancel the flow
due to the logarithmic term.
The computation of the flow velocity due to a collection of N point forces is the superposition of
their individual contributions due to the linearity of the equations. The velocity at a point X due to
the point forces F positioned at X is thus a sum,
Inthissum,theS arethetermsin(15)thatmultiplytheforcesF . Alternatively,thismaybewritten
as a matrix multiplication where f is a vector of the forces, u is a vector of the unknown velocities, and
S is a 2N ×2N matrix,
Sf =u. (17)
Theinverseofthisproblemcanalsobeconsidered,wherethevelocityatacollectionofpointsisspecified,
and the forces that produce the velocity are unknown. The flow around a cylinder is demonstrated in
[4] using this method.
In our model, we include a collection of wall points W as shown in Fig. 3, at which the velocity will
be zero. To compute the flow at a given point in the fluid domain due to the point forces F at X , we
take the following steps.
1. Compute the velocity at the wall points W . Call this velocity u .
2. Solve a linear system for unknown forces G positioned at W that will produce −u at W .
3. Sum over contributions to the velocity from F and G .
AlthoughwemustsolveadensesystemforG ateverytimestep,thematrixremainsthesamesince
thepositionofthewallpointsdoesnotvary. WecanthereforecomputeaCholesekydecompositiononce,
and perform back substitution to obtain the solution needed at each time step. We use the standard
routines in LAPACK for these calculations.
3.2 Reaction-diffusion equations
Next, we describe the solution of the reaction-diffusion system on the irregular cell domain. We will
address the motion the domain shortly, but for now, we focus on approximating the solution of this
system subject to no flux boundary conditions on a static domain of arbitrary shape. The approach
we take is that of the immersed interface method. The irregular domain is embedded in a rectangular
domainonwhicharegularcartesiangridisused. Weproduceanumericalsolutionatallgridpoints. For
gridpointsoutsidetheirregulardomain,wesetthenumericalsolutiontozero. Forgridpointsinsidethe
domain,awayfromtheirregularboundary,weusethestandardcenteredfinitedifferenceapproximations
to the second derivatives in the Laplacian. It remains to deal with grid points inside the domain next
to the boundary, where the standard discretization fails. These are denoted irregular points. At these
irregular points we must use a special finite difference formula that incorporates the no flux condition
and the local geometry of the boundary. To reiterate, the solution of the reaction-diffusion system will
be nonzero only on grid points determined to be inside the closed loop defined by the current location
of the marker points.
(a) acceptable (b) acceptable (c) unacceptable (d) unacceptable
Figure 4: Thepointsincludedinthefinitedifferenceschemeatantypicalirregularpointareshown
in(a). Ψ andΨ arethe(unknown)valuesofthesolutiontotheRDsystemonthe“cellperimeter”.
Ψ for i = 0...3 are the values of the solution at the grid points inside the computational domain
Ω . The configuration in (b) is treated similarly. At times when the boundary is in unacceptable
configurations,weinterpolatethesolutiontoafinermeshinordertoproceedwiththecomputation.
We use the discretization scheme presented in [10] and refer the reader to that work for the details
of the derivation. We summarize here the main idea and comment on the robustness with respect to
geometry. SeeFig.4forthetypicalirregularpointgeometry. IftheboundaryconditionswereDirichlet,
we would know the solution values Ψ and Ψ at the Lagrangian marker points. We could then write
a discretization of Ψ using Ψ and the unknowns Ψ and Ψ and a discretization of Ψ using Ψ
xx E 0 1 yy N
and the unknowns Ψ and Ψ . However, for our model, we must employ Neumann (no flux) boundary
conditions. Thus, we do not have the values of Ψ and Ψ . Instead, these values must be interpolated
from Ψ ,Ψ ,Ψ , and Ψ using the fact that Ψ =0 along the boundary.
A system of two algebraic equations can be written down for the unknowns Ψ and Ψ . We solve
this system analytically and write down Ψ and Ψ explicitly in terms of Ψ ,Ψ ,Ψ , and Ψ . In order
N E 0 1 3 4
tomakethemethodrobust, weenforcealowerboundonthedeterminantofthesystem. Thisprecludes
caseswherethegeometryisnearlydegenerateasisthecasewhentheinterfaceisverynearagridpoint.
This is a common problem observed in similar numerical methods.
The matrix of coefficients depends on the positions of the projections Ψ and Ψ as well as the
unit normal vectors at these points. We must therefore have some continuous representation of the
boundary constructed from the immersed boundary points X . The representation we use is a level set,
as discussed in the next section.
Afurthercomplicationwefaceinmakingthecomputationrobustisthatwemusthandleallpotential
configurations of the boundary with respect to the grid. For example, the discretization scheme just
described will fail for configurations such as those indicated in Fig. 4c,d. One approach would be to
writeoutdiscretizationsforallconfigurations[1]. Wechooseinsteadtouseanadaptivegridtoavoidall
casesexceptforthetwoconfigurationsshowninFig.4a,b(andtheirrotations). Weperformrefinements
of the grid and bilinear interpolations of the solution until the unwanted cases are eliminated. The
refinements are performed globally in space but locally in time. That is, for any time step we check for
unwanted configurations. If any are found, we refine the grid everywhere, interpolate the solution to
the fine grid, and repeat if necessary. Once we have a satisfactory grid, we evolve the system and then
project the solution back to the original grid.
With the spatial discretization established, it remains to choose a suitable temporal discretization.
We use a fully implicit time method for the diffusion operator in order to alleviate the otherwise pro-
hibitiverestrictiononthetimestepsize. Weuseanexplicitstepforthereactionterm. Thismeansthat
we must solve two sparse linear systems at every time step
A an+1 = an+∆tg(an,bn),
A bn+1 = bn−∆tg(an,bn).
We use a GMRES method that is implemented in the library IML++.
3.3 Advection and coupling
In order to couple the mechanical system and the chemical system, we use a method first described
in [29] for the computation of multi-fluid flows. The idea is to construct a regularized version of an
indicatorfunctionforthecelldomain,thatis,afunctionthatisequaltooneinΩ ,zerooutsideΩ ,and
varies smoothly within a transition region near the boundary. Having such a function eliminates the
need to do complicated routines to track which of the cartesian grid points are inside Ω at any given
time, knowing only the trajectories of the Lagrangian markers X . We can further use this indicator
function to compute a level curve to use as a convenient representation of the boundary of Ω when
finding the discretizations needed for the irregular points in the Immersed Interface Method.
Given only the location of the marker points, we compute I (x), the regularized indicator function
which defines the domain on which the reaction-diffusion system will be solved. The gradient of the
discontinuousindicatorfunctionI(x)iszeroeverywhereexceptattheinterface,whereithasasingularity.
Forthepurposeofapproximation,thissingularityisrepresentedagainwiththeregularizeddeltafunction
δ and the gradient is then written as
(cid:15) (cid:15) k k k
We then take the numerical divergence of ∇I to find ∆I . There only remains to solve the following
(cid:15) (cid:15)
Poisson problem in order to obtain I .
This problem will be solved on a rectangular domain which contains Ω . We position the rectangular
domain such that its boundary is not near ∂Ω , so that the Dirichlet data for (19) is zero.
NoteherethatacoarsediscretizationoftheboundaryofΩ relativetothecartesiangridwillproduce
an I with a level curve that is oscillatory. For this reason it is important that (19) is only solved once
on the coarsest grid. This solution is then interpolated to any refinements necessary for the solution of
the reaction-diffusion problem.
Thefinaldetailthatremainsistospecifyhowtodeterminethesolutionofaandbatnewpointsthat
enterΩ asitevolveswithtime. Weneedawaytomapthesolutionofaandbfromthepreviousdomain
Figure 5: The known concentration at grid points in the domain Ωn get advected with the fluid
velocity to the grid points in the domain at the next time step Ωn+1. As the cell perimeter moves,
newgridpoints(markedwithcrosses)enterΩ . Theadvectiondefinesvaluesofthesolutionatthese
points in a way that is consistent with the model equations.
to the current domain (Fig. 5). We use an upwind discretization of the advection term that couples the
reaction-diffusion equations to the flow equations. Our Stokeslet solution to the fluid equations allows
us to compute the flow anywhere. Specifically we can compute the velocity on the same grid as we are
using for a and b. At each grid point x in the current domain we use the fluid velocity to approximate
the previous location of the material.
xn−1 =xn −∆t un. (20)
ij ij ad ij
The location xn−1 will normally not lie on a grid point, but we can now use solution value of a and b
at neighboring grid points to interpolate their value at xn−1. We have found that a simple piecewise
constant interpolation is accurate enough to preserve the solution profile through this mapping.
The advection scheme should conserve the total mass of the system M = (a + b)dx. We
approximate this integral with a discrete sum M , again making use of the smooth indicator function:
M = I (x ,y )(a(x ,y )+b(x ,y ))h2. (21)
h (cid:15) i j i j i j
(xi,yj)∈Ωc
In the sum, points that are near the boundary of Ω are weighted with a value less than h2 since the
area inside Ω that is associated with boundary points is less than h2. When preforming the advection
we want to preserve the quantity M as well as the profile of the solution. That is, we do not want
to destroy internal gradients through the advection step. It is also important to keep the zero outward
normalderivativethatisconsistentwiththediscretizationofthediffusionoperatorforboundarypoints.
For our application, we focus on preserving the solution profile and modify the advection step so as
to preserve M by adding or subtracting a small constant amount that may be lost in the upwinding
scheme. We found that by so doing, we could retain the correct total mass to within 1% of its fixed
value at any given advection timestep. The mass change due to the diffusion discretization is orders of
magnitude smaller. Thus, by implementing the small correction, we find that the average total mass
is well-preserved. Experimenting with a variety of other advection schemes that preserve the mass, we
found that other small oscillations in the solution profile would tend to occur, leading to a magnified
loss from the diffusion scheme.
We present numerical experiments to illustrate separately the effects of protrusive forces along the
domainedge∂Ω , theinternalreaction-diffusionsolveronastaticirregulardomainΩ , andthecoupled
system with self-organized forces emanating from the reaction-diffusion system.
t = 0 t = 10 t = 100 t = 200 t = 360
Figure 6: Mechanical model on its own. A time-sequence showing the initial configuration of the
model cell, and its evolving shape over time. Simulation was carried out using an elastic modulus
T = 0.1pN/µm, protrusion force H = 12pN/µm, and viscosity µ = 0.01g/cm·s. By time t = 360s,
the cell is in steady-state motion at speed v =12µm/s with the shape shown
4.1 Mechanical model
In our current simulations, the computational fluid is a means for distributing forces and determining
marker point motion. At present we use a fluid of similar viscosity inside and outside the domain. Real
cells have a much higher internal viscosity than their ambient environment, a feature that is not yet
represented.
We first consider a domain with no internal chemistry. Starting in each case with a disk-shaped
domain Ω(0), we prescribe half of the cell boundary to be the “front” and apply the protrusion force
along this portion for the duration of the simulation. We assign an outwards normal force whose
magnitude has a parabolic profile that varies from a maximum of H at the front center to zero at the
cell sides.
As our curved domain edge is elastic, we can experiment with a variety of physical edge properties
and examine how these affect the evolving shape of the domain. Note that this is one feature that
makes the immersed boundary method distinct from level set methods, wherein the domain edge has
no mechanical properties in and of itself. The protrusive forces cause the perimeter of the domain to
deform, and to move in the direction of the force. The front edge that is under forcing tends to stretch
asittranslocates,whiletherearedge(onwhichnoforceisprescribed)respondspassivelyviatheelastic
tension along the edge. Figs. 6-7 illustrate solutions with typical shapes that are produced. Fig. 6
illustrates the transition in time between the initial circularly shaped cell and its steady-state shape.
The transition in this example occurs over a time span of 360s. For cells with a smaller value of H, a
steady-state shape is reached in less time.
To determine how mechanical parameters influence the shapes, and if such mechanics-only solutions
achieve a steady-state. To study this, we varied the three parameters in our mechanical system, the
fluid viscosity µ, the membrane elasticity T , and the protrusion force H. The ranges over which these
parameters are varied include estimates for membrane elasticity, and the forces and fluids relevant to
them, since we are aiming to tailor our computation to solving problems on the scale of cell size and
motion. We use the viscosity of water (µ=0.01g·cm/s) since the fluid is most analogous to the cytosol,
and typical forces (in pN) and edge tension (pN per µm) estimated in [11].
Fig. 7 illustrates the variety of shapes obtained by varying the force on the leading edge, and the
elasticity of the membrane keeping the viscosity 0.01g/cm·s constant. For a relatively small value of
T ≈ 0.1pN/µm, we see a variety of cell shapes. At low force magnitude, H ≈ 1pN/µm, cell shape
resembles a teardrop (top left). At higher protrusive force, H ≈ 5pN/µm, the teardrop develops a
longer tail, often resulting in cusp-like endpoint. At yet higher protrusion, the cell flattens out into a
“canoe”shape,andthenanarrowcrescent. OurcurrentimplementationoftheIBMdoesnotproducean
accurateresultwhenthemagnitudeoftheprotrusiveforceismuchgreaterthantheforceduetoelasticity.
For example, when T =0.1pN/µm, values of H greater than 12pN/µm lead to large deformations that
arenotadequatelyresolved,andsteadyshapesthenfailtoform(bottomleftisatransientshape,beyond
the range of applicability of the method).
When the elastic modulus is larger T ≈ 5−100pN/µm, the transition between shapes as H is
increasedislessdramatic,sinceprotrusionforcesarecounterbalancedbyincreasingtendencyto“round-
0.1 1.0 10 100
Figure 7: Mechanical model on its own. A plot of cell shapes obtained as the protrusion force
magnitude,H,andtheelasticmodulusT vary,forafixed,prescribedforcedistributedparabolically
along the nodes that form the front half of the domain edge at time zero. The direction of steady-
state motion of these shapes is towards the top. Viscosity was 0.01g/cm·s. Note that the shape
in the bottom left is a transient shape included only for completeness. For force in the range of
1-25pN/µm, shapes obtained resemble a variety of biological cell phenotypes, from neutrophils to
keratocytes.
up”. Shapes produced for reasonable protrusion forces of 1-50pN/µm and reasonable membrane elas-
ticity ranges of 0.1-100pN/µm resemble a transition of shapes of cells such as neutrophils (teardrop) to
keratocytes (flattened canoes), cells whose motility is commonly studied experimentally.
Varying the viscosity (of the computational fluid inside and outside the domain) has little effect on
the shapes that develop. The dominant effect is to stretch the timescale over which those shapes are
established. Werantestsfortherange0.01≤µ≤10g/cm·sandfoundsimilarshapesforcorresponding
values of the force and elasticity.
4.2 Biochemical model
We next tested the reaction-diffusion solver on its own. To do so, we selected a number of typical static
domain shapes with various features and solved a set of pattern-forming PDEs on the given domain.
We considered a circular, star-shaped, and ellipsoidal “cell” shape. Shown in Fig. 8 are solutions to
the “wave-pinning” system Eqs. 7-9 [18]. The initial state of the system is spatially homogeneous with
a = 0.27 and b = 2.0. At t = 0 a temporary gradient is introduced via a transient reaction term
s(x,y,t)b(x,y,t) that is added to (9), with
S(1+x) for 0<t and −1≤x≤1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
s(x,y,t)= S(1+x) 1− t−t1 for t ≤t<t and −1≤x≤1 (22)
≤t.
where S is a parameter that controls the magnitude of the stimulus.
This gradient stimulates a portion of the cell to become activated, meaning a = a+ locally, and a
travelling wave is initiated. As discussed in [18], as the level of b is reduced by the reaction, the speed
of the wave slows and eventually stalls midway through the cell. Based on related studies [18, 16] we
anticipatesolutionstothereaction-diffusionsystemwithrelativelyflat(loworhigh)plateaus,separated
by a sharp interface. As shown in Fig. 8, solutions have this character. In 2D with no flux conditions
on the boundary of the cell domain, ∂Ω , the level curves (shown in Fig. 8) also have to meet the curve
∂Ω orthogonally.
The most interesting feature to observe is that the geometry of the domain influences the nature of
the solutions. This is related to phenomena studied by Mar´ee et al (personal communication) showing
the tendency of the kind of RD system considered here to minimize the curvature and the total length
of the interface. (Mar´ee et al consider a related but more biochemically detailed wave-pinning system,
but oursimple caricature has similar properties. See also [9]). Inthe star-shaped domain, three distinct
peaks of activation can be maintained in three “arms” of the star, a phenomemon that would not occur
in the simple circular domain. We can understand this as heuristically as the energy of the interface
beingatsomelocalminimum. AnapplicationofsimilarideastothedynamicsofplantRho-GTPasesin
the pavement-cells of leaves has been proposed by V Grieneisen et al. On the elliptical domain, in the
Figure 8: Thechemicalmodelonitsown. Solutionstothereaction-diffusionwave-pinningsystem
given by Eqs. (7)-(9) are shown in a variety of static geometries. (a) circular disk (b) domain with
convex and concave edges (c) ellipses. Time increases from top to bottom with snapshots shown
at t = 20s,50s and 200s. The first row is the transient phase, during which there is a travelling
wave. Themiddlerowshowsthesolutionafterthewavehasbeenpinned. Thebottomrowshowsthe
solutionsafteralongtime. TheRD-solutioncorrectlytrackstheexpectedwave-likeandstalledwave
position, and shows the effect of concavity of the domain on the eventual location of its maximum.
Reaction parameter values used were: γ = δ = 1s−1 and k = 0.067s−1. Initial conditions were:
a=0.27andb=2.0. Atransientgradientterm(22)wasappliedwithS =0.07,t =5,andt =15.
short time-scale, the peak of activation is in the direction of the polarizing stimulus. Once the stimulus
is turned off, the polarization persists for a long time in this meta-stable configuration. Eventually
however, the peak reorients to occupy the high curvature pole of the ellipse: this allows for the interface
length to shrink, and ultimately creates a stable configuration.
4.3 Coupledmechanical-chemicalmodel: self-organizedcellshapesandmotil-
Having tested the mechanical and chemical models separately, we now combine the two and allow the
forcesonthecelledgetobedetermineddirectlybythesolutionsoftheRDsystem. Asdescribedearlier,
this leads to a number of new challenges, which are associated with solving a RD system on a moving
domain,thatareaccountedforusingthesolutionalgorithmdescribedearlier. Weusedparametervalues
as in Fig. 7 for the mechanical properties, and values as in Fig. 8 for the RD system of Eqs. (7-9).
Initially, the system is in equilibrium both mechanically and chemically. This means the membrane
isrelaxedtoitsequilibriumconfigurationandthecellisdisk-shaped. Bothbandaarespatiallyuniform
inside Ω , and the active form is at a low steady-state level, a(x,t)=a−. At t=0, the same temporary
gradientaswasusedinFig.8isintroducedviathetransientreactionterminthesignalingsystem. The
inactiveprotein,bdiffusesrapidlyandisalmostspatiallyuniform(butdecreasinginlevel)aspolarization
proceeds. As discussed in [18], as the level of b is reduced by the reaction, the speed of the wave slows
and eventually stalls midway through the cell. Here the forces are not prescribed; rather, they depend
directly on the local magnitude of the active protein a(x,t) through (10).
Fig. 9 is a time sequence showing the evolution of the cell shape and internal chemistry. The RD
system rapidly becomes polarized on a timescale of 30-60s and the cell starts to move and deform as a
result. The teardrop shaped outline and constant speed is then a steady-state moving solution to the
combined RD-mechanical system.
To illustrate the distribution of the fluid flow and pushing force, Fig. 10 shows two snapshots at the
early stages of motion and polarization. The fluid velocity is highest at the front of the cell where the
forcesarelargest. Circulationsintheflowthataredirectedfromthefrontofthecellaroundtothesides
giverisetochangesinthemembraneshape. Afterthistransientregime,theflowbecomesapproximately
Figure 9: Mechanical and chemical model combined. Forces on the “front” edge are determined
by the reaction-diffusion system inside the evolving, moving cell domain. Top: A time sequence of
cell shapes and positions, from t=0s to t=800s at intervals of 100s starting from the circle at the
left. The distance scale is in cm (10−4cm = 1 µm). Bottom: Sample shots of the same moving cell
atintervalsof200sshowingtheinternalchemicaldistribution. Thecellisinitiallydisk-shaped,with
homogeneous internal concentrations of a,b. At t=0 a stimulus (biased towards the right) leads to
chemical polarization. RD equations (7-9) were solved in the domain Ω using parameter values as
in Fig. 8. The RD system very rapidly polarizes and maintains the polarization of the cell. There is
a slight change in the cell’s direction of travel over long times.
Figure 10: Computational fluid speed (red arrows) and chemically-regulated forces on the cell
edge (green arrows) are shown at two times, close to the start of cell motion.
constant in the vicinity of the cell. Since the membrane moves with the local fluid velocity, the steady
cell shapes are observed.
We asked how varying the mechanical parameters (elastic modulus T , viscosity µ, and maximal
force H) affect resulting shapes for the coupled system. Recall that H sets the maximal level of force
for a = a+= maximal chemical concentration. Fig. 11 shows the results, analogous to Fig. 7. The
chemical distribution within these “cell” outlines are similar to those of Fig. 9, with rapid polarization
on a timescale of 30−60s and steady-state shapes by about 400s.
0.1 1.0 10 100
Figure 11: Steady-state shapes predicted by the full mechanical-chemical system: As in Fig. 7
but with the leading edge regulated by the signaling system. Cell shapes are much less sensitive to
the magnitudes of H in this self-organized system.
Fig. 11 shows that increasing the maximal force magnitude in the chemistry-regulated cells tends
to produce a transition from oval to teardrop shape. Fig. 11 similarly shows how varying the elastic
modulus and the maximal force affects the behaviour. As expected, with larger elastic modulus T , the
steady-stateshapesarerounder. Astrikingchangeseenfromthemechanicaltothemechanical-chemical
system(Fig.7vs. Fig.11)isthattheself-organizedchemistrymakesformuchmorestableandpersistent
cellshapes. Wecanunderstandthisasfollows: withinternalchemistrythatisaself-organizedpolarized
distribution, the nodes that are assigned protrusion forces are governed by the fraction of nodes at high
concentration of the reactant a. If the front stretches, nodes previously experiencing large protrusive
force leave the region of high a, and no longer carry such forces. This means that the self-regulated
system is much more stable, and resists forming wide fronts or narrow crescent shapes.
5 Discussion
As described, the implementation of the immersed-boundary method leads to a convenient way to
represent forces along the interface of the cell boundary. Thus, we can capture actual forces and elastic
deformations of the cell boundary (depicting the cytoskeletal cortex of the cell). This allows us to track
the cell shape deformation and the motion of the cell that results from a coupling between internal
reaction-diffusion and boundary forces. Regions of highest activity (largest values of a(x,t)) develop
spontaneously, determine the front, and result in distributed forces. The linear elastic cell boundary
reacting to the protrusion force, deforms to produce steady-state cell shape and motion.
Thesimulationswithmechanicalforcesalone,intheabsenceofinternalregulationproduced,avariety
of shapes spanning morphologies of cells from neutrophils (teardrop shapes) to keratocytes (canoe or
crescentshapes)asprotrusionforcesincreaserelativetoelasticforces. Thissuggeststhattheproperties
of the cortex and the strength of actin-generated protrusive forces differ from one cell type to another,
and at least broadly define the cell’s morphology. Interestingly, once the simple regulatory system is
incorporated, cell shapes are less varied and settle into a round/elliptical shape or teardrop, with no
crescents(compareFigs.7and11). Wecanexplainthisfactbasedonthenatureofthereaction-diffusion
system, (7-9), as previously discussed. The two key features of this system is that (1) it tends to form a
sharpinterfacewhoselengthtendstobeminimizedbyitsdynamics(2)theinterfacemeetstheboundary
orthogonally (by the no-flux condition). When forces tend to push nodes apart at the cell front, the RD
interface gets stretched. It reacts by finding a new configuration satisfying (1) and (2). This returns
the peak of activity to nodes that are not too far apart, and hence avoids the continual broadening of
the front edge of the cell. The interaction of the RD with direct outwards forces on the boundary thus
self-regulates the shape of the front, even as the force or membrane properties are varied. Needless to
say, other RD systems with interesting dynamics would, we predict, lead to other cell shape dynamics
and steady-state shapes.
Inthecurrentsimulations,theIBMisusedasacomputationaldevicetoupdatethecelledge,andto
trackthechemicaldistributioninsidethecelldomain. Wedonotinterprettheinternalfluidascytoplasm,
and the cell is not swimming. Indeed, a limitation of the current platform is the equal viscosity inside
and outside the cell that makes such interpretations flawed. Forces are present only along the boundary
curve, so that stress fibers of some cell types (e.g. fibroblasts) that lead to internal contractions are not
yet simulated. This could be done by including “negative pressure” terms in future fluid computations.
ThesimulationismuchmorecostlythanaPottsmodel,butcomparableorlesscostlythanfiniteelement
or level set methods. Part of the cost stems from the need for an indicator function that tracks the cell
inside and outside, and is recomputed at each time step. Such computational costs tend to limit the
exploration of parameter space or sets of assumptions that can be effectively explored.
Applyingthenumericalschemeinitsmechanical,chemical,andcoupledvariants,wefoundanumber
of intriguing results.
1. Cell shapes generated by protrusion mechanics and passive elasticity, on their own, already lead
to morphologies that resemble some cell shapes.
2. Higherprotrusionforces(distributedalongthefronthalfofthecell)leadtoflatter, morecrescent-
shaped cells, whereas larger elastic modulus leads to rounder cells (Fig. 7).
3. The wave-pinning mechanism of Mori et al [18] suffices to polarize the cell once a small bias is
introduced transiently. Previously, this system was studied in a 1D setting and in a rectangular
domain [9], and we explore it here for the first time in irregular and deforming domains.
4. The shape of the domain feeds back on the chemical distribution. Parts of the domain with
higher curvature tend to “attract” the peaks of the active chemical (Fig. 8.) This phenomenon
was discussed by AFM Mar´ee in a related (but more biochemically detailed) cell biology context
(personal communication).
5. Couplingthechemicalandmechanicalsystemsleadstomorestablecellshapesthatarelesssensitive
to variations in such parameters as the magnitude of the protrusion force.
Here we concentrated on shapes produced exclusively by the wave-pinning biochemical model. These
tend to form robust, broad plateaus of activity at the “cell front”. Changing the internal regulatory
module is a future step of interest, as it would reveal how qualitative aspects of the regulatory system
would affect qualitative aspects of cell shape.
These results can be compared with the recent work of Zajac and Wolgemuth [32]. They effect
cell deformation by modifying the spatial variation in an adhesion coefficient. The primary factor that
determinesourcellshapesisthestrengthofthepolymerizationforcerelativetothemembraneelasticity.
We also observed a dramatic difference in shape between cells in which the pushing force on the front
was imposed, and cells in which the front was regulated by the chemistry. In [32] a velocity with a
hyperbolic tangent profile is assumed. Prescribing this velocity is most similar to our mechanical model
without any chemistry, in which we prescribed a front and the profile of protrusive forces acting upon
it. In our coupled system we have gone one step further and produced a cell that polarizes in response
to a transient signal, and then maintains a steady shape and direction, without specifying the front of
the cell in advance.
Future development of such simulations will aim at addressing a number of questions. First, we
will explore how contraction at the rear of the cell affects cell shape (recall that here contraction is
absent). We plan to investigate a variety of internal regulatory modules, including those that have a
greater diversity of spatio-temporal dynamics. As a later step, we plan to introduce a more explicit
representation of the actin cytoskeleton and of the lipids and proteins that regulate it. By gradually
including such features one by one, we hope to learn how tuning specific aspects of cell mechanics and
biochemistry can lead to the repertoire of responses, deformation, and motility observed in real cells.
6 Acknowledgements
LEK is funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC discovery and ac-
celerator grants) Canada. LEK is also funded by a subcontract from the National Institutes of Health
(Grant Number R01 GM086882 to Anders Carlsson, Washington University, St Louis). JJF acknowl-
edges support by the Petroleum Research Fund, the Canada Research Chair program, NSERC (Discov-
ery, Accelerator and Strategic grants) and the Canadian Foundation for Innovation. The computation
wasdoneatWestGrid. WegratefultoLisaFauci,RicardoCortez,AFMMare´e,VGrieneisen,AJilkine,
and A Mogilner for helpful discussions.