Li, S.; Shuai, L.; Cheng, X.; Tang, Z. & Yang, J. / A Descriptive Model of Robot Team and the Dynamic Evolution of
Robot Team Cooperation, pp. 139 - 143, International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, Volume 2, Number 2
(2005), ISSN 1729-8806
A Descriptive Model of Robot Team and the Dynamic Evolution of
Robot Team Cooperation
Shu-qin Li1,2, Lan Shuai1, Xian-yi Cheng 1, Zhen-min Tang1 & Jing-yu Yang1
1 Department of Computer Science of
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, P.R. China
2 Department of Computer Science of
Beijing Information Science &Technology University,Beijing, P.R. China
lishuqin_de@126.com
Abstract: At present, the research on robot team cooperation is still in qualitative analysis phase and lacks the
description model that can quantitatively describe the dynamical evolution of team cooperative relationships with
constantly changeable task demand in Multi-robot field. First this paper whole and static describes organization model
HWROM of robot team, then uses Markov course and Bayesian theorem for reference, dynamical describes the team
cooperative relationships building. Finally from cooperative entity layer, ability layer and relative layer we research
team formation and cooperative mechanism, and discuss how to optimize relative action sets during the evolution. The
dynamic evolution model of robot team and cooperative relationships between robot teams proposed and described in
this paper can not only generalize the robot team as a whole, but also depict the dynamic evolving process
quantitatively. Users can also make the prediction of the cooperative relationship and the action of the robot team
encountering new demands based on this model.
Keywords: robot team, cooperation, dynamic evolution.
1. Introduction Recursive Organization Model (HWROM). Based on
Markov processing and evolutionary computing, this
At present, the research of multi-robot has been one of paper proposed a dynamic evolutional model on robot
the most popular topics in the robotics realm. In a team cooperation, in order to give a quantitative
dynamic, complicated and unknown environment, it is description on the dynamic evolving process of robot
challenging to organize and control robots to finish a task team organization and relationships. Composition of the
that individual robot hardly do. To make the multi-robot robot team is described in section 2, team cooperation of
system operate effectively, we should organize it and the robot teams is discussed in section 3, dynamic
control it with proper mechanisms. The issue on how to evolution model of the cooperation between robot teams
organize and control the multi-robot system has been is proposed and discussed in section 4.
extensively studied in [Wei-Min Shen & Behnam Salemi
2002] [Torbjorn S.Dahl Maja J. Mataric etc 2002][Tang
zhen-min 2002]. But most of these works only focus on 2. General description on robot teams
individual behavior, cooperation between individuals and
between individual and groups, with few works on the Through the evolution and development, human society
cooperation in teams. In the same time, the description has been developed into a local and hierarchical
methods or models are also very rare, that can structure. The basis of the society is individuals with
qualitatively describe how the robot teams are organized various backgrounds, abilities, knowledge levels and
in the changing dynamic environment. specialties. The behavior and efficiency of the local team
From the social means of topology, structure and decided by different individuals, cultural backgrounds,
organization, this paper studies the multi-robot technology- levels and different management
organization formation and running mechanisms. It mechanisms. This character, in some sense, provides the
presents and describes in detail a Hierarchical-web organization forms of Multi-robot group bionic evidence.
Definition 1 During the cooperation, the multi-robot team changes
Automatic moving robot: automatic moving robot is a with the environment and the demands of tasks. In the
robot that can sense the state of itself and the local same time, the organization of the robot team can change
environment through the sensors, bringing limited in the same level and also between different levels.
communication equipment, moving toward the goals Besides, the robot members in the same autonomous
automatically in the environments with obstacles (static domain can coordinates based on the grounds, and form
or moving) and finishing certain works. The robot can be the organization and architecture that is adaptive to the
made of electromechanical devices (action unit, environment. In sum, the robot team is a kind of
executing unit, sensing unit and control units), computer dynamically, which can keep a dynamic balance.
and information processing system (intelligent decision-
making, action control, moving control, environment
3. A formal description of the cooperative
sensing and communicating mechanics). We use R to
relationship in the robot team
represent automatic moving robot. And we call robot as
individual robot. 3.1 A formal description of the robot team
The robot team is a problem-solving machine of loose
Definition 2 coupling networks, which are beyond the ability of
Robot team: Robot team is an organic group with tight individual. Each robot in the network is an independent
connections, organized temporarily by individual robot problems solving machine. Because none of these
based on tasks, can be seen as an autonomous domain. problem-solving machines has enough specialties,
The cooperation of the robots in the autonomous domain resource and information to solve the question, and
is called inter-layer cooperation. And the cooperation different problem solving machines have different
between the autonomous domains, tight or loose, is specialties to solve different aspects of the question; so to
called out-layer cooperation. The robot acts as the center cooperate is a necessity.
of the organization with stronger communicating and
organizing ability is called the group leader. The Definition 4
computing actions and a coordinating wills defined by The individual robots and team leaders in different levels
the group leader represent the actions and wills of this are unified called cooperate robots, abbreviation CR.
group. The number of the robots in the robot teams is Cooperative robots have to have certain abilities and
changing dynamically; any individual robot can join or make one's own income maximization. It uses a unified
quit dynamically. frame to describe CR:
Definition 3 CR=<id_cr,Capability,Resource,,Interface>
Robot society: the robot society is organized by all of the
individual robots and robot groups that have connections, 1.id_cr, a identifier of the cooperative robot.
which is a large group with organization. 2.Capability, the ability of CR.
The top: the topology of cooperation organization of the To a moving robot its ability mainly includes moving
robot team is shown in Fig.1. In considering the special ability, action ability, sensible ability, communication
status of the ultimate user in the actions of the robot ability, organization ability and learning ability, etc.
group, we list it as a single node in the top left in Fig.1. 3.Resource, the robot has to need things for finishing his
This model not only represents that the multi-robot job.
system organization has the static and hierarchical 4.Interface, interface way between the cooperative
character, but also embodies the dynamic character of the robots.
forming and cooperating process of the robot team. Definition 5. The multi-robot team structure formed with
finite cooperative robots is a hierarchical-web structure.
Rorg = < {CR}, Re >
1. {CR } , a set of the cooperative robot who carry out
certain work in team .
2. Re , a dualistic relation set between CR robots,
including the control relation structure in the vertical
level and the cooperation relation in the horizontal
direction.
Definition 6.
A hierarchical-web multi robot organization structure is a
recursive structure.
ROS(i,j) = {ROS (i,j), ROS (i,j),..., ROS (i,j),}
ROS(i,j) = < id_ros, id_robot,ROS(i+1,l), T(i,j), CA (i,j)
Fig.1 Sketch map of organization topology in multi-robot k def k k
C (i,j) ,R(i,j),, EU(i,j) >
system cooperation k k k
1. id_ros , a marker of team structure. cooperation or not. If the cooperative relationship exists,
2. id_robot, a marker of robot who bears sub-team, then we set the state as 1; otherwise, the state is 0. If the
namely the robot Team Leader by former identify. cooperative relationship exists in time t0, then when
Before the robot social organization structure form , the confronting new environment demands at t1, the
marker is null. relationship has the probability of P11 to still exist, while
3.ROSi,j)——a sub-team which lies the ith level and the there is a probability of P10 that the relationship dies.
jth position in multi-robot team structure. ROS(i,j) is the Here, 0≤ P11,P10≤1 andP11+P10=1. If there is no
kth element in (i,j)’s sub-team structure and maybe also a cooperative relationship exists in time t0, then when
sub-team structure . ROS 0 (i,j) is the leader of the sub-team confronting new environment demands at t1, the
structure. On the one hand ROS 0 (i,j) carries through probability of having the cooperative relationships is
coordinates with others, responsible division complicated p01, while there is a probability of P00 that the
task and team analysis of the result, on the other hand it relationship is still not exist. Here, 0≤ P00,P01≤1
also does some work that can be finished. There are
andP00+P01=1. Then we can use the following
several sub-teams in a multi-robot society. While i = 0 it
transition matrix P to describe the cooperative
means the highest level of robot society. While ROS(i,j)=
relationships between any robots.
φ and i ≠0, it means a minimum unit of the team structure
, namely individual robot.
R = < id_ros,ψ,φ, T(role), C(role), R(role), EU(role) > 1 P11 P10
id_ros is a individual robot marker. ψ is a null robot
Table 1. The probability of the cooperative relationships
identifier and ф is the null set.
4. T(i,j), the goal set of corresponding cooperative robot.
k The element of the transcription matrix is derived from
Division T(i,j) as
k Bayesian theorem.
T(i,j) = { t (i+1,j),..., t(i+1,j) ,...,t (i+1,j) } We suppose whether or not the cooperative entities
cooperate with others is an independent event. And the
t (i+1,j) is a sub-goal of sub-team and it can be broken action set of cooperative relationship between entity CRi
down further according to the request of the task and the relating entity CRj when confronting new
complexity.
environment demands is set to
(i,j), a relationship set which ROS
(i,j)cooperate and
restraint with corresponding cooperative robots in the A a a ……a
i i1 i2 in−1
same level.
6. R(i,j), the behavior norm (or behavior rule) set of the a represents a certain action of constructing a
robot team organization and distribution rules. All robots
in the corresponding robot team must observe.
cooperative relationship between CRi and relating CRj .
(i,j), benefit of cooperative result corresponding The priori probability of CRi choosing to cooperate or not
cooperative robot. It gets from multi-robot teams on or to cooperate with CRj is Pij(c1) and Pij(c0) respectively.
from external environment after cooperative robots have
completed their goal tasks.
There are a lot of the cooperative behaviors that refer to When there is a cooperative relationship between CRi
the sets of the cooperation relationship and restraint and CRj , then in confronting new demands of tasks,
relationship existing between the cooperative robots.
These cooperation behaviors form a dynamical net,
there is a probability of P(c1|aij) to observe the action
called cooperative relationship web of multi-robots. aij . When there is no cooperative relationship between
CRi and CRj , then in confronting new demands of tasks,
3.2 A description based on Markov processing
cooperative relationships
there is a probability of Pij(c0|aij) to observe the action
The dynamic evolution process of the robot team aij . Obviously,
cooperative relationship can be seen as the process of
robot team changing with the environment and the 0≤P(c1|aij) Π P (c0|aij)≤1Π P(c0|aij)+P(c1|aij)=1
changing demands of tasks, and the adjustment process Then the posteriori probability for CRi taking action
of the goals, entities and the cooperative relationship aij is
between them. The model of the cooperative goals can be
embodied by the changing goals in the environment. The P(aij)=P(aij|c1) Pij(c1)+P(aij|c0) Pij(c0)
pith of the description of the robot cooperative
With Bayesian formula, we can get
relationships is to describe whether robots can form
cooperative relationships under the new demands of tasks
in the environmental tasks. So we use finite Markov P (c1|aij) =
chain in transition matrix to describe whether the entities
cooperate under new demands of tasks. For any two
entities, they are always in one of two states, in In a similar way,
P(a |c )•P(c ) solved. It is called the dynamic evolution of the team
= ij 0 ij 0
P(c0|aij) cooperative relationship.
ij ij Because the team cooperation system is an open system,
environment restrictions and the goal of problem solving
So the elements in the transition matrix are
will change continuously. So the team cooperative
relationship with dynamic evolution ability should adapt
P11=∑P(a |c ) P(c |a ) to environment better, with better problem solving
efficiency and lower computational complexity.
Dynamic evolution of the cooperative relationship
between robot teams can be recognized by the following
P01=∑P(a |c ) P(c |a ) characters: temporary cooperation between teams with
same goals, in order to complete complex tasks and share
risks and interests. Each robot team focus on the core
ability of the team itself and take on the strategies to
After the former transitions, and the synthesis of the cooperate with outside teams. The dynamic evolution
cooperation of all the cooperative entities, we can get the realization of the cooperative relationship between the
description of whether or not the cooperative relationship robot teams does not mean to organize one more layer
between the entities really changing dynamically with the beyond the team structure, but to decrease the cost of
environment demands. forming a team by deepen inner cooperation and the
interacting system between teams.
4. Dynamic evolution model of the cooperation Dynamic evolution of the cooperative relationship
between robot teams between robot teams is formed by more than two teams
cooperating in a limit period of time to benefit each
The dynamic evolution of the cooperative relationship other, get maximum benefits and sense the unknown
between robot teams is an adaptive means to solve environment most quickly with the minimum costs. It
questions of environment and demands of tasks. optimizes the team and dies with the finishing of the
According to the adaptation to the solving environment, common goal. Fig.2 gives a dynamic evolution model of
there are two ways to form the team. One is to design the the cooperative relationship between teams, in which the
team structure in advance, based on the question solving cooperative relationship between teams plays an
demands and various constrains. The team structure does important role.
not change in the whole problem solving process. And to This model consists of three layers: cooperative entity
solve interaction between robots, the task segregation layer, ability layer and the relational layer. Robots in the
problem and the load balance problems is relatively cooperative entity layer have the ability to finish
simple because of the static robot team structure. The assigned tasks in a given time with limited recourses and
shortcoming is that it can not solve problems well in the maximize its benefits. Robots in the ability layer treat
open environment or when goals are changing during the “objects” with strong operability as core. In fact, the
problem solving process. And the problem solving ability computation from the Ce layer to Ab layer is an object-
will decrease or even inaccessible when environment is oriented design process. Team is the basic unit of
changing. Another way to organize the robot team is to relational layer and it can make each team exert its own
change the team structure after it has formed by advantages to finish the common task quickly and
environment and the demands of the problem to be efficiently between different teams.
Fig. 2. Dynamic evolution model of the cooperative relationship between teams
Integration, optimization and cooperation are cores of 5. Conclusion
this layer. The dynamic evolution of this cooperative
relationship model between teams is finished in the A good robot organization model should be able to
relational layer. Major factors that can effect the improve the efficiency of the system, reduce the
cooperative relationship formation between teams are the complexity of robot interactions, and detract the
types of the cooperative entities under new environment difficulty of computation. From the sociology aspect of
demands, which are called payoff function. Suppose the topology, structure and organization, this paper first
actions behaved in the environment tasks of the robot studies the multi-robot organization formation. It
team are connect to each other, then how to define the presents and describes in detail a Hierarchical-web
best action set based on the payoff function when Recursive Organization Model. It defines individual
cooperative entities confronting new environment robots and team leaders in different levels as the same
demands becomes a necessary decision-making problem structure by the united framework and describes the
that must be solved during the dynamic evolution process organization model by the recursive structure, so it is
of the cooperation between robot teams. The basis of the helpful to represent the formation of various
decision-making can be divided into two kinds—to organizations in the dynamic surroundings.
maximize payoff function of the whole robot team and to Second this paper aims at the situation that most of the
maximize payoff function of members in robot team. research on the cooperation between robot teams is still
Suppose new-formed robot team is formed by n on the stage of quantitatively analysis, with few works on
cooperative entities, and each entity can build a descriptions and forecasts on the dynamic evolution
cooperative relationship with other n-1 entities. We set process of cooperation with the changing demands of
aij as the action relating with the formation of tasks. We proposed a cooperative mechanism from the
cooperative entity layer and ability layer to the relational
cooperative relationship during the interaction of robot
layer of the robot teams, using Markov process and the
CRi and CRj under new demands of tasks.
evolutionary computation. We also described a dynamic
Ai Π Π ai1 Π ai2 Π ain−1 Πrepresent the action vector evolving model of the cooperative relationship between
of cooperative relationship when robot CRi interacts with robot teams, which is novel now. This model can not
only describe the cooperative relationship status between
other n-1 entities. We set uij (c1,aij ) as the payoff
robot teams, but also using finite Markov chain and
function of CRi cooperating with CRj when CRi takes evolutionary computation to describe whether the
action aij under new demands of tasks, and uij (c0,aij ) is dynamic evolution process really forms in the
cooperation qualitatively. With this model, users can
set as the payoff function of CRi not cooperating with
both handle the cooperative situation globally and
CRj when CRi takes action aij under new demands of dynamically and predict the new cooperative relationship
tasks. Pij(c1|aij) is the probability of CRi choosing to and the actions of robot teams when they confronting
new demands of tasks.
cooperate with CRj when CRi takes action aij , and
Pij(c0|aij) is the probability of CRi not choosing to 6. References
cooperate with CRj when CRi takes action aij .The
Wei-Min Shen & Behnam Salemi(2002).Distributed and
whole payoff function of the robot team when taking
Dynamic Task Reallocation in Robot
action set Ai under new demands of tasks is:
Organization,In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
n−1 n−1 international Conference on Robotics
C (A)= ∑ P (c /a ) u (c ,a )+ ∑ P (c /a ) u (c ,a ) &Automation ,Washington DC, May 2002,1019-
i i ij 1 ij ij 1 ij ij 0 ij ij 0 ij
Torbjorn S.Dahl Maja J. Mataric etc.(2002).Adaptive
Considering the maximization of the robot team member spatio-temporal organization in groups of robots,
payoff function and the whole robot team, A*
should Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE/RSJ international
Conference on Intelligent Roboticsand systems
meet the following two demands:
,EPFL Lausanne,Switzerland, October 2002,1044-
C(A* i)=max{Ci(Ai)} and C(A* i)=max{ ∑ Ci(Ai)} Tang zhen-min(2002). Research on Essential Techniques
for Mobile Intelligent robot and robot team,
Ph(cid:31)D(cid:31)Dissertation, 2002
Zhang Yan & Shi Mei-lin(2003), A Description Model
Here the evolving question of the team formation is
for virtual Enterprise Cooperative Relationships
converted to the combination optimization question to
Evolution.Computer Integrated Manufacturing
seek the action set A* i when Ci is maximized. The Systems. Vol.9 No.11 ,966-971
search space of the optimization question is a discrete Li shu-qin,Tang zhen-min etc. (2004). A self-
finite mathematical structure that can be represented by organization model and formation algorithms of
binary coding, to use evolutionary computation to multiple mobile robot.Application Researchof
analysis the evolving process of the team cooperation. computer,Vol.21,No.1 2004