A Decentralized Interactive Architecture for Aerial and Ground Mobile
Robots Cooperation
El Houssein Chouaib Harik1, François Guérin2, Frédéric Guinand1,
Jean-François Brethé2, Hervé Pelvillain3
Abstract—Thispaperpresentsanoveldecentralizedinteractive technological topics from mapping to communication and
architectureforaerialandgroundmobilerobotscooperation.The collaborative navigation using multiple aerial and ground
aerialmobilerobotisusedtoprovideaglobalcoverageduringan
mobile robots.
areainspection,whilethegroundmobilerobotisusedtoprovide
The authors in [8] also use a group of UAVs to provide
a local coverage of ground features. We include a human-in-
the-loop to provide waypoints for the ground mobile robot to an aerial coverage to a group of UGVs used to clear a path
progress safely in the inspected area. The aerial mobile robot through that area.
follows continuously the ground mobile robot in order to always We can find in [9] a surveillance scheme including a
keep it in its coverage view.
group of six UGVs and four UAVs. An interagent cohesion
and separation and a velocity synchronization scheme were
I. INTRODUCTION
combined into a control and communication strategy for
Unmanned Aerial and Ground Vehicles (UAVs, UGVs)
mobile robots navigation. Another work of the same authors
cooperationattractsincreasinglytheattentionofresearchers,
[10] present an AGC scheme for target detection mission.
essentially for the complementary skills provided by each
The size of the navigation area is related to the number of
type to overcome the specific limitations of the others.
the deployed mobile robots. A set of grid points is defined
UAVs provide a global coverage and faster velocities, and
for UGVs. An interagent potential force based approach is
UGVs provide a higher payload and stronger calculation
used for the UGVs navigation towards the grid points. Once
capabilities, adding a local coverage for the unseen areas
the UGVs reached their grid points the aerial mobile robots
from an aerial perspective. In addition, deploying both types
start scanning the field.
together ensure faster and more reliable results within a
Theauthorsin[11],[12]useaUAVasaremotesensorthat
shorterframeoftimecomparedtothedeploymentofasingle fliesaheadtheUGVtoprovidegeo-referenced3Dgeometry,
type of mobile robots.
inordertohelptheUGVfornavigatingintheareaavoiding
Air-Ground-Cooperation (AGC) in mobile robots systems
obstacles.
can envisage a large panel of applications. Our focus in this
In the previous related works, a first flight of the drone
paper is on Surveillance or Inspection (SI) missions. The
overtheinspectedareaisalwaysperformedbeforethebegin-
authorsin[1],[2],[3]useaDecentralizedDataFusion(DDF)
ning of the mission. A traversability map is then processed
technique [4] for exploring a specific area. The task of both
toprovideatrajectorytotheUGV.Themaincontributionof
airandgroundbasednodesistomakeobservationsofterrain
ourworkconsistsinprovidingareal-timenavigationscheme:
features and identify moving or stationary targets.
theUAVfliesovertheareatoprovideaglobalcoverage,and
The authors in [5] useAGC for target searching missions.
to assist a UGV in real-time to navigate safely avoiding ob-
Their testbed is composed of three layers: a high altitude
stacles. To provide the real-time navigation scheme without
UAV (a planner) to determine the motion of the mobile
the need to have a per-processed map, a human operator is
robots based on the desired goals, medium altitude UAVs
usedtoprovidewaypointsbymonitoringtheglobalandlocal
(Blimps) to track the group of Unmanned Ground Vehicles
coverages,makingthearchitectureinteractive,andapplicable
(UGVs) and try to maintain them in their field of view,
to real scenarios. Indeed, for numerous reasons, monitoring,
and the UGVs that navigates for exploration or other tasks.
surveillance and inspection of industrial sites belonging to
Another interesting work can be found in [6], where the
Seveso category (highly critical sites) cannot be performed
authors present a system that allow to deploy a significant
without a constant and careful attention of human experts.
number of ground mobile robots monitored by aerial mobile
The paper is organized as follows: In section II we
robots (aerial shepherds) for target searching.
introduce the problem statement and define the objectives of
An urban environment surveillance application can be
ourwork.SectionIIIpresentstheUGVandUAVcontrollers
found in [7]. The authors of this work cover a large set of
design. We discuss in section IV and V the simulation and
experimental results, and we conclude in section VI the
1LITIS, University of Le Havre. 25 Rue Philippe Lebon, 76600 Le
present work and discuss future perspectives.
HavreCedex(France)-(el-houssein-chouaib.harik,frederic.guinand)@univ-
lehavre.fr
2GREAH,UniversityofLeHavre.75,RueBellot,76058LeHavreCedex II. PROBLEMSTATEMENT
(France)-(francois.guerin,jean-francois.brethe)@univ-lehavre.fr
A UAV is used to monitor a given area where a UGV
3IUT GEII, University of Le Havre. Rue Boris Vian, 76610 Le Havre
Cedex(France)-herve.pelvillain@univ-lehavre.fr is present to perform the inspection task. The images taken
4v2928.0141:viXra
from the camera mounted on the UAV are sent continuously by DJI [14] with a sufficient payload to carry an open
to the ground station. The images are processed in real time platformdevice(androidphone)thatisusedtotakethevideo
to provide localization information to the UGV to navigate flow and send it to the ground station continuously via Wifi
in the area through the on-the-go waypoints selected by a (IEEE 802.11). The received flow is processed to extract
human operator (Figures 1 and 2). the position and orientation (pose estimation) of the UGV
relative to the selected waypoint.
B. Pose estimation of the UGV
To successfully navigate in a given area, the relative pose
oftheUGVshouldbeknown(orientationandlocation).The
authors of AGC applications ([15], [16], [17], [18]) used a
single colored marker to define the relative location of the
UGV to theUAV, and a digital compassto communicate the
orientation which generally gives inaccurate measurements
(digital compass is sensible to electromagnetic field varia-
tions). To overcome this issue, we added a second marker to
also estimate its orientation.
We consider X and Y the axis of the image (camera)
taken from the UAV (Figure 3). In order to locate the UGV,
Fig.1. Problemstatement
we used a color tracking algorithm to extract the position of
colored markers: R (red marker) fixed on the center of the
To successfully inspect a given area within a reasonable driving wheels, and R (blue marker) fixed on the head of
frame of time, global and local coverages must be acquired the UGV. The position (in pixels) of R and R along X
simultaneously, which can be possible if we deploy both and Y axis are respectively: Y , X and Y , X . We
c Rc Rc Rh Rh
types of mobile robots (aerial and ground) simultaneously. assume that the center of the camera (center of the image)
In this direction, our architecture is composed of a UAV is the center of the UAV, thus we assume that the camera
equipped with a down-facing camera, and a UGV equipped frame (X ,Y ) and the UAV inertial frame (X , Y ) are
with a horizontal-facing camera. Both video flows are sent superimposed.
continuously to a ground station running our developed
Human-Machine-Interface (HMI). A human operator super-
vises the video flows, and selects progressively navigation
waypoints for the UGV. As the UGV navigates through the
given waypoints, the UAV follows continuously the UGV in
ordertokeepitinitscoverageview(thecenteroftheimage
plan) using visual servoing.
Fig.3. TheUGVintheimageplan
The orientation α of the UGV to a given waypoint w, can
be computed as α=θ−β with:
θ =atan( w Rc ) β =atan( Rh Rc ) (1)
w Rc Rh Rc
Note that by using the colored markers on the UGV, we
Fig.2. Overallarchitecture can extract its orientation without knowing the orientations
of the UAV and the UGV in the world frame. The distance
III. UGVANDUAVCONTROLLERSDESIGN d that separates the UGV and the waypoint w has to be
expressed in the world frame. It can be written as follows:
A. Hardware configuration
We consider in this work a non-holonomic, unicycle-like, (cid:112)
WheeledMobileRobot(WMR)thathasbeendesignedinthe
GREAH laboratory of the University of Le Havre (France) Where x ,y ,x ,y represent (in meter) the coordi-
[13].TheUAVisaquadcopter(Phantom2Vision)developed nates of the R marker and the waypoint in the UAV or
camera frame previously supposed to be the same. They can Where rL corresponds to the linear velocity of R (blue
becomputedusingtheclassicalPinholemodelofthecamera marker).
[19]. The example is given for the waypoint:
TV and TV are null since the target of the UGV is
  a waypoint. We propose then the following error dynamic
  X Y w w . . z z  =   G 0 x G 0 y 0 0 z z . . X Y 0 0      x y z w w    (3) equations:
XR XR YR YR
G = f G = f Where K > 0 is the proportional gain of the UGV’s
controller. It is chosen to get a first order dynamic behavior
Where: for the control objective:
f: Focal distance - ∆ ,∆ : Dimensions of a pixel.
X 0 ,Y 0 : Projection (in pixels) of the camera optical center e˙ XR +K.e XR =0 e˙ YR +K.e YR =0 (8)
in the image plan. They are assumed to be null.
The numerical value given to K allows to define the de-
X ,Y : Projection (in pixels) of the waypoint in the image
w w creasingspeedofthedistanceerrorse ande .Notethat
plan.
forlargevaluesofthedistanced,asaturationisimplemented
We note as well that using the pinhole model we can
toconsiderthelimitationsoftheelectricaldrivesthatcontrol
estimate the altitude of the UAV using the distance between
the UGV’s left and right wheels.
the two colored markers (red and blue).
Starting from (7) we propose the following non-linear
C. Design of the UGVs controller kinematic controller:
The UGV receives d and α via a radio module from u=K.(d.cos(α)−L)
the ground station. The goal is to use these information to (9)
generate u and r that respectively represent the longitudinal
D. Design of the UAV controller
and angular velocities of the UGV (Figure 4). The control
objective is to regulate the distance d and the steering angle To hover the UAV over the UGV during its waypoints
α as follows: navigation, we need to control the UAV movements along
X and Y axis (Figure 3) since the UGV moves on a 2D
lim d(t)=L lim α(t)=0 (4) plan (assumed to be flat). We need to develop a navigation
t→∞ t→∞ controller that takes as input the location of the UGV (R ),
andgeneratesthenecessarypitchandrollanglestokeepthe
UGV at the center of the image plan (visual servoing).
We consider four inputs φ ,θ ,ψ and z . They represent
respectively the desired roll, pitch, yaw angles, and the
desired altitude. Note that the UAV attitude (roll, pitch, yaw,
altitude) is controlled by the internal autopilot. We suppose
thattheUAVfliesatafixedaltitude,andafixedyaw:z =z
and ψ = 0. z is chosen to have a sufficient coverage (3)
of the inspected area (z < z), and to keep the track
of the UGV (z < z ). z and z can be defined
max min max
experimentally.
TodesigntheUAVcontroller,weusedthedynamicmodel
Fig.4. DesignoftheUGVcontroller of a quadcopter [20]. Starting from this dynamic model,
the movements along X and Y axis can be described as
Let us consider the following distance errors on X and follows:
Y axes respectively:
x¨ D =(cosφ d sinθ d cosψ d +sinφ d sinψ d ) m U 1
YR y¨ =(cosφ sinθ sinψ −sinφ cosψ ) U
D d d d d d m 1
The time derivative of the distance errors (5), which
x¨ and y¨ correspond to the acceleration along X and
depends on both the UGV’s velocities (u,r) and the target’s D D D
Y axis respectively. (10) can be as:
velocities along the X and Y axes, denoted as TV and D
TV YR , are given by:
XR XR (6) 1
−rL y¨=u YDm U 1
With: steering angle α, and the projection of the red marker X ,
Y is given as follows:
u =(cosφ sinθ cosψ +sinφ sinψ )
XD d d d d d
u =(cosφ sinθ sinψ −sinφ cosψ )
YD d d d d d
where u XD ,u YD represent the orientations of the total S mn =γ m .m n +(1−γ m ).(S mn−1 +b mn−1 ) (19)
thrust (U ) responsible for linear motions of the quadcopter
s.
.
verage view
b mn =λ m .(S mn −S mn−1 )+(1−λ m ).b mn−1 (20)
(the center of the image plan), let us consider the following
Where:
distance errors (Figure 3):
m is the value of (d,α,X , Y ) at nth sample instant.
S is the smoothed values of (d,α,X , Y ).
e =X −X e =Y −Y (13)
XD Rc 0 YD Rc 0 b
is the trend value of (d,α,X
).
Note that X ,Y are assumed to be null. The control
objective is to regulate the distance errors as follows: Equation (19) smooths the value of the sequence of
measurements by taking into account the trend, whilst (20)
e XD (t)=0
e YD (t)=0 (14) smooths and updates the trend.
The initial values given to S ,b are:
To fulfill this control objective, we propose the following mn mn
error dynamic equations:
S =m b =m −m (21)
m1 1 m1 2 1
XD 1XD XD 2XD XD XD D
Usually, γ (0 ≤ γ ≤ 1) is called the data smoothing
YD 1YD YD 2YD YD YD D
factor and λ (0 ≤ λ ≤ 1) is called the trend smoothing
WhereK arepositivegains.Theyarechosen
(1,2),(XD,YD) factor. A compromise has to be found for the values of
togetasecondorderdynamicbehaviorwithoutdampingand γ and λ. High values make the DES algorithm follow the
oscillations for the control objective:
trend more accurately whilst small values make it generate
smootherresults.Thesmoothedvaluesareusedinsteadofthe
XD 2XD XD 1XD XD
(16) direct noisy measurements in the proposed controllers. DES
YD 2YD YD 1YD YD algorithmhasbeenusedsuccessfullyinapreviouswork[13]
TA andTA aretheaccelerationsoftheUGValong for vision based target tracking.
X ,Y axis. They are neglected compared to x¨ and y¨
since the UAV moves much faster than the UGV. Starting
IV. UGVRESULTS
from (15), we propose the following controller:
m Wewillpresentinthissectionsimulationandexperimental
XD U 1 XD 2 xD results concerning only the UGV, the UAV is piloted by a
m professional.
YD U 1 YD 2 yD
To find the desired roll and pitch angles needed to track A. Simulation results
the UGV, we combine (17) in (12) taking a fixed yaw angle
Wesimulatedareal-likeschemetonavigateinagivenarea
ψ =0, the desired angles are then:
avoiding obstacles. For the UGV we have used the dynamic
φ =asin(−u ) model fully described in [13] and [19]. Simulations have
u (18) been carried out with Matlab-Simulink software (sampling
d cosφ period:10ms).FortheUGVnon-linearkinematiccontroller
we used the following parameters: L=15cm,K =0.1.
We note that the steady state error will be null (when the
UGV stops) since it is a position control. Figure 9 shows that the UGV is able to follow the
givenwaypoints,whichvalidatestheproposedcontroller(9).
E. DES algorithm The results concerning the control objective (4) have been
Furthermore, the Double Exponential Smoothing (DES) checked experimentally.
algorithm [21] has been implemented to smoothen the un-
certain measurements given by the vision system. The DES
B. Experimental results
algorithm runs approximately 135 times faster with equiv-
alent prediction performances and simpler implementations We created a user interface running on the ground station
compared to a Kalman filter. The DES algorithm at time using Processing [22]. The human operator can supervise in
instant n.T , where T is the sampling period and n is real time both video flows received from UAV and UGV
the discrete-time index, implemented for the distance d, the (Figure 5).
Fig.8. Steeringanglevariation
Fig.5. AerialandgroundperceptionontheHMI.Left:Theglobalview
fromtheUAV.Right:thelocalviewfromtheUGV.
V. UAVRESULTS
The human operator can select waypoints in the image
We present in this section only simulation results of the
(globalviewside)byasimpleclick.Asexplainedinsection
UAV following the UGV in its waypoints tracking because
(III-B), the software extracts and sends the distance d and
we do not yet have access to the UAV’s position mea-
the steering angle α to the UGV via ZigBee module (IEEE
surements in the inertial frame (for example VICON MX
802.15.4) at a frequency of 50Hz (real time interrupt).
system). That is why quantitative results are presented for
The experiments were carried out with a smartphone
thesimulationtrialsonly.Pleaserefertothelinksmentioned
mounted under the quadcopter. For safety reasons, the UAV
in section IV for experiments videos.
was piloted by a professional, but we carried out as well
other experiments without a pilot using an AR Drone 2.0.
Videos can be found in [23] for the experiment with a pilot, A. Simulation result
and [24] for the newer version without a pilot .
We used for simulation the parameters of an open-source
quadcopter developed by [25]. The parameters have been
obtained thanks to experimentations fully described in [26]:
parameter significance values
m mass 1.4kg
b thrustcoefficient 1.3e-5Ns2
d drugcoefficient 1e-9Nms2
Jr rotorinertia 6e-7kg.m2
L armlength 1m
Ix inertiaonxaxis 0.02582kg.m2
Fig.6. Waypointtrackingexperimentation.
Iy inertiaonyaxis 0.02616kg.m2
Iz inertiaonzaxis 0.04543kg.m2
K1 Positivegain1 1.5
Figure 6 illustrate the UGV experimentation: The pilot K2 Positivegain2 3
(1) manipulates the UAV (2) that takes and send to the
groundstationavideoflow(3).Theoperator(4)selectsnew
UAVPARAMETERS
waypoints to guide the UGV (5).
Figures 7 and 8, represent the distance d and the steering
angle α variations over time for a rectangular path selected
by a human operator through the mission (send a new
waypoint each time the UGV reaches the old one). Each
peakonbothgraphsrepresentanewclickbytheuser,which
gives a new distance d and a new steering angle α. We can
see that according to (7) the distance and the steering angle
decrease exponentially and respectively to d = L = 0.15 m
and α = 0◦ which confirms the efficiency of our developed
controller (9).
Fig.7. Distancevariation Fig.9. Inspectionschemesimulation
[4] James Manyika and Hugh Durrant-Whyte. Data Fusion and Sensor
Management: a decentralized information-theoretic approach. Pren-
ticeHallPTR,1995.
[5] Luiz Chaimowicz and Vijay Kumar. A framework for the scalable
controlofswarmsofunmannedgroundvehicleswithunmannedaerial
vehicles. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
RoboticsandRemoteSystemsforHazardousEnvironments,2004.
[6] LuizChaimowiczandVijayKumar. "Aerialshepherds:Coordination
among uavs and swarms of robots". In Distributed Autonomous
RoboticSystems6,pages243–252.Springer,2007.
[7] MAniHsieh,AnthonyCowley,JamesFKeller,LuizChaimowicz,Ben
Grocholsky,VijayKumar,CamilloJTaylor,YoichiroEndo,RonaldC
Arkin,BoyoonJung,etal. Adaptiveteamsofautonomousaerialand
ground robots for situational awareness. Journal of Field Robotics,
24(11-12):991–1014,2007.
[8] HerbertGTannerandDKChristodoulakis. Decentralizedcooperative
control of heterogeneous vehicle groups. Robotics and autonomous
systems,55(11):811–823,2007.
[9] HGTannerandDKChristodoulakis. Cooperationbetweenaerialand
groundvehiclegroupsforreconnaissancemissions. InDecisionand
Control, 2006 45th IEEE Conference on, pages 5918–5923. IEEE,
2006.
[10] Herbert G Tanner. Switched uav-ugv cooperation scheme for target
Fig.10. UAVanglesandUGVmovement detection. In Robotics and Automation, 2007 IEEE International
Conferenceon,pages3457–3462.IEEE,2007.
[11] AnthonyStentz,AlonzoKelly,HermanHerman,PeterRander,Omead
Figure 9 shows that the UAV takes-off from an initial Amidi,andRobertMandelbaum.Integratedair/groundvehiclesystem
position(-6,-9)andfliestohoverat3maltitude,wesuppose forsemi-autonomousoff-roadnavigation. RoboticsInstitute,page18,
2002.
thatatthisheighttheUGVwithaninitialposition(-8,-8)is
[12] AnthonyStentz,AlonzoKelly,PeterRander,HermanHerman,Omead
in the coverage view of the UAV. We can see that the UGV Amidi, Robert Mandelbaum, Garbis Salgian, and Jorgen Pedersen.
movesfollowedbytheUAV.Figures(10)showthattheUAV Real-time, multi-perspective perception for unmanned ground vehi-
cles. AUVSI,2003.
changes its pitch and role angles according to the motion of
[13] François Guerin, Simon G. Fabri, and Marvin K. Bugeja. "double
the UGV. exponential smoothing for predictive vision based target tracking of
a wheeled mobile robot". In Decision and Control (CDC), 2013
VI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK IEEE52ndAnnualConferenceon,pages3535–3540,Florence,Italy,
December2013.
Wepresentedinthispaperanoveldecentralizedinteractive [14] DJI. Quadcopter phantom 2 vision, 2014. URL:
[15] Jae-YoungChoiandSung-GaunKim.CollaborativeTrackingControl
areainspection.AUAVisusedtoprovideaglobalcoverage
of UAV-UGV. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technol-
where a UGV is located to provide a local coverage. A ogy,71,2012.
human operator is introduced to provide waypoints for the [16] Luiz Chaimowicz, Ben Grocholsky, James F Keller, Vijay Kumar,
and Camillo J Taylor. "Experiments in multirobot air-ground coor-
UGV in order to safely navigate in the area. Our future
dination". InRoboticsandAutomation,2004.Proceedings.ICRA’04.
work goes towards implementing an autonomous waypoints 2004IEEEInternationalConferenceon,volume4,pages4053–4058.
selection through free-space navigation extraction, which IEEE,2004.
[17] RenéVidal,OmidShakernia,HJinKim,DavidHyunchulShim,and
allowthetestbedtobeextendedinmorethanoneUGV,and
Shankar Sastry. Probabilistic pursuit-evasion games: theory, imple-
let the human operator focus on other coordination tasks. mentation, and experimental evaluation. Robotics and Automation,
IEEETransactionson,18(5):662–669,2002.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS [18] HJinKim,ReneVidal,DavidHShim,OmidShakernia,andShankar
Sastry. Ahierarchicalapproachtoprobabilisticpursuit-evasiongames
The authors would like to thank Le Havre Town Coun- withunmannedgroundandaerialvehicles. InDecisionandControl,
2001.Proceedingsofthe40thIEEEConferenceon,volume1,pages
cil CODAH for their support under research grants, and
634–639.IEEE,2001.
"DroneXTR"forpilotingthedrone.Theywouldlikeaswell [19] FrançoisGuerin."commandeconjuguéed’unrobotmobile,modélisa-
to thank Upper Normandie Region through their support to tiondynamiqueetvisionartificielle",thèsededoctoratdel’université
duhavre-eue–isbn978-613-1-54896-3. 2004.
PCMAI project.
[20] Samir Bouabdallah and Roland Siegwart. Full control of a quadro-
tor. In Intelligent robots and systems, 2007. IROS 2007. IEEE/RSJ
REFERENCES internationalconferenceon,pages153–158.IEEE,2007.
[21] Joseph J LaViola Jr. "an experiment comparing double exponential
[1] MatthewRidley,EricNettleton,SalahSukkarieh,andHughDurrant-
smoothingandkalmanfilter-basedpredictivetrackingalgorithms". In
Whyte. Tracking in decentralised air-ground sensing networks. In
VirtualReality,2003.Proceedings.IEEE,pages283–284.IEEE,2003.
Information Fusion, 2002. Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conferenceon,volume1,pages616–623.IEEE,2002.
[23] Experimentation 1: Pilot aided flight, 2015. URL:
[2] BenGrocholsky,RahulSwaminathan,JamesKeller,VijayKumar,and
George Pappas. Information driven coordinated air-ground proactive
[24] Experimentation 2: Autonomous flight, 2015. URL:
sensing. InRoboticsandAutomation,2005.ICRA2005.Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on, pages 2211–2216.
IEEE,2005.
[26] El Houssein Chouaib Harik. "stabilisation par backstepping d’un
[3] Ben Grocholsky, James Keller, Vijay Kumar, and George Pappas. quadrirotor", mémoire de master recherche de l’université de mont-
Cooperative air and ground surveillance. Robotics & Automation pellier2. 2013.
Magazine,IEEE,13(3):16–25,2006.