1v4643.4011:viXra
TheAnnalsofAppliedStatistics
2011,Vol.5,No.1,551–577
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2011
A DYNAMIC BAYESIAN NONLINEAR MIXED-EFFECTS MODEL
OF HIV RESPONSE INCORPORATING MEDICATION
ADHERENCE, DRUG RESISTANCE AND COVARIATES
By Yangxin Huang, Hulin Wu, Jeanne Holden-Wiltse and
Edward P. Acosta
University of South Florida, University of Rochester, University of
Rochester and University of Alabama
HIVdynamicstudieshavecontributedsignificantlytotheunder-
standing of HIV pathogenesis and antiviral treatment strategies for
AIDS patients. Establishing the relationship of virologic responses
with clinical factors and covariates during long-term antiretroviral
(ARV) therapy is important to the development of effective treat-
ments. Medication adherence is an important predictor of the effec-
tiveness of ARV treatment, but an appropriate determinant of ad-
herencerate based on medication eventmonitoring system (MEMS)
data is critical to predict virologic outcomes. The primary objective
of this paper is to investigate the effects of a number of summary
determinants of MEMS adherence rates on virologic response mea-
sured repeatedly over time in HIV-infected patients. We developed
a mechanism-based differential equation model with consideration
of drug adherence, interacted by virus susceptibility to drug and
baseline characteristics, to characterize the long-term virologic re-
sponses after initiation of therapy. This model fully integrates viral
load, MEMS adherence, drug resistance and baseline covariates into
thedataanalysis.Inthisstudyweemployedtheproposedmodeland
associatedBayesiannonlinearmixed-effectsmodelingapproachtoas-
sesshowtoefficientlyusetheMEMSadherencedataforpredictionof
virologicresponse,andtoevaluatethepredictingpowerofeachsum-
mary metric of the MEMS adherence rates. In particular, we intend
toaddressthequestions:(i)howtosummarizetheMEMSadherence
dataforefficientprediction ofvirologic responseafteraccountingfor
potentialconfoundingfactorssuchasdrugresistanceandcovariates,
Received May 2009; revised September2009.
1SupportedinpartbyNIAID/NIHGrantAI080338andMSP/NSAGrantH98230-09-
1-0053 to Y. Huang, and NIH Grants AI50020, AI078498, AI078842 and AI087135 to H.
Wu.
Key words and phrases. Bayesian mixed-effects models, confounding factors, HIV dy-
namics,longitudinaldata,MEMSadherenceassessment,time-varyingdrugefficacy,virus
resistance.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2011,Vol. 5, No. 1, 551–577. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
2 HUANGET AL.
and (ii) how to evaluate treatment effect of baseline characteristics
interacted with adherence and other clinical factors. The approach
is applied to an AIDS clinical trial involving 31 patients who had
available data as required for the proposed model. Results demon-
strate that the appropriate determinants of MEMS adherence rates
are important in order to more efficiently predict virologic response,
andinvestigationsofadherencetoARVtreatmentwouldbenefitfrom
measuring not only adherence rate but also its summary metric as-
sessment. Our study also shows that the mechanism-based dynamic
modelispowerfulandeffectivetoestablisharelationshipofvirologic
responses with medication adherence, virus resistance to drug and
baseline covariates.
1. Introduction. Therevolutioninhumanimmunodeficiencyvirus(HIV)
treatment has broughtdiagnostic tests that can accurately measurelevels of
HIVinblood.Resultingdatashow(plasma)viralload(HIV-1RNAcopiesor
RNAcopies)tobeanimportantpredictoroftheriskofprogressiontoAIDS.
The antiretroviral (ARV) agents, which include potent protease inhibitors
(PIs)are,however,notacureforHIVinfection.Whilemanypatientsbenefit
from ARV treatment, others do not benefit or only experience a temporary
benefit.Thereare several reasons why treatment fails, of which poor patient
adherence to ARV therapy is a leading factor [Ickovics and Meisler (1997);
Paterson et al. (2000)]. Thus, assessment of adherence within AIDS clinical
trials is a critical component of the successful evaluation of therapy out-
comes. Maintaining adherence may be particularly difficult when the drug
regimen is complex or side-effects are severe, as is often the case for current
HIV therapy [Ickovics and Meisler (1997)].
Themeasurementofadherenceremainsproblematic;astandarddefinition
of adherence and completely reliable measures of adherence are lacking.
Nevertheless, there has been substantial progress in both of these areas in
the past few years. First, it appears that higher levels of adherence are
needed for HIV disease than other diseases to achieve the desired therapeu-
tic benefit [Paterson et al. (2000)]. Second, better appreciation of the value
and limitations of different adherence measurements has been addressed
[Bova et al. (2005)]. In AIDS clinical trials adherence to medication regimen
is currently measured by two methods: by use of questionnaires (patient
self-reporting and/or face-to-face interview) and by use of electronic com-
pliance monitoring (Medication Event Monitoring System [MEMS]) caps.
The MEMS is often used as an objective adherence measure. It consists of
a computer chip in the cap of a medication bottle that records each time
the bottle is opened. The results can be downloaded, printed out and ana-
lyzed. It demonstrates that medication-taking patterns are highly variable
among patients [Kastrissios et al. (1998)] and that they often give a more
precise measure of adherence than self-report [Arnsten et al. (2001)]. How-
ever, MEMS data are also subject to error and are not widely available in
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 3
the clinical setting. Adherence assessment by self-report is usually evalu-
ated by a patient’s ability to recall their medication dosing during a specific
time interval. Finally, it is important to note that the measurement of viral
load levels is of special utility as an indirect measure of adherence in HIV
therapeutics. It has been argued that this is not an adherence measure be-
cause other factors may influenceviralload (drugresistance, etc.). However,
there is a tight correlation between viral load and adherence [Paterson et al.
(2000); Haubrich et al. (1999)].
Viral dynamic models can be formulated through ordinary differential
equations (ODE), butthere has been only limited development of statistical
methodologies for assessing their agreement with observed data. Currently
there also are substantial knowledge gaps between theoretical HIV dynam-
ics and the role of many clinical factors. In developing long-term dynamic
modeling, this paper will address these problems by utilizing time-specific
information, such as drug adherence and susceptibility factors, on the bio-
logical mechanism of HIV dynamics to achieve more realistic and accurate
characterization of the relationship between clinical/drug factors and viro-
logic response. Several studies [Arnsten et al. (2001); Levine et al. (2006)]
investigated the association between virologic responses and adherence as-
sessed by both questionnaire and MEMS data. The results indicated that
the MEMS cap adherence data may not be correlated better to virologic re-
sponsecompared to the questionnaire adherence data unless the MEMS cap
data are summarized in an appropriate way. Further, Huang et al. (2008),
Labb´eandVerotta(2006),Liuetal.(2007)andVrijensetal.(2005)modeled
the relationship between virologic response and adherence rate using ques-
tionnaire data and MEMS data averaged by each interval between study
visits or weekly basis, but no significant differences were found in predicting
virologic response. Along with this line, this paper will investigate different
determinantsoftheadherenceratebasedonMEMSdatafromanAIDSclin-
ical trial study [Hammer et al. (2002)] and compare their performance for
predicting a virological response. We employed the proposed mechanism-
based dynamic model to assess how to efficiently use the adherence data
based on MEMS to predict virological response. In particular, we intend
to address the questions (i) how to summarize the MEMS adherence data
for efficient prediction of virological response after accounting for potential
confounding factors such as drug resistance and baseline covariates, and (ii)
how to evaluate treatment effect of baseline characteristics interacted with
MEMS adherence and other clinical factors.
The purposeof this paper is to describe a reparameterized ODE dynamic
model (with identifiable parameters) which fully integrates viral load, medi-
cation adherence,drugresistanceandbaselinecovariates datafromanAIDS
clinical trial study into the analysis. Thus, our dynamic model will be able
to characterize sustained suppression or resurgence of the virus as arising
4 HUANGET AL.
from intrinsic viral dynamics,and/or influenced by factors such as drugsus-
ceptibility and adherence during the treatment period of the clinical trial.
TheBayesian nonlinear mixed-effects (BNLME) modeling approach [David-
ian and Giltinan (1995)] is employed to estimate dynamic parameters and
identify significant clinical factors and/or covariates on virologic response
to ARV treatment. The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section
2 introduces reparameterized viral dynamic models with time-varying drug
efficacy which incorporates the effects of drug adherence, drug resistance
and baseline covariates, and briefly describes the BNLME modeling ap-
proach, implemented via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedures,
followed by defining the deviance information criterion (DIC) for compari-
son of models. In Section 3 we summarize the motivating data set from an
AIDS clinical trial study includingthedata of plasma viralload, medication
adherencefromMEMScap,drugresistanceandbaselinecovariates; thepro-
posed methodology is applied to these data and the results are presented.
The method is evaluated via a simulation study in Section 4. Finally, we
conclude the article with some discussions in Section 5.
2. HIVdynamicmechanism-basedODEmodelsandstatisticalapproaches.
This section aims to introduce long-term viral dynamic models based on
a system of ODE with time-varying coefficients but without closed-form
solutions, and to investigate associated methodologies to demonstrate the
application of these models to an AIDS clinical trial study. Long-term vi-
ral dynamic models can be used to describe the interaction between cells
susceptible to target cells (T), infected cells (T∗) and free virus (V) by
considering time-varying drug efficacy [Huang and Wu (2006); Huang et al.
(2006)]. These three compartments (variables) are described as follows.
HIV virions (V) will infect target cells (T) and turn them into infected
cells (T∗) at an infection rate k. Due to the intervention of antiviral drugs,
we assume that drugs reduce the infection rate in the infected cells (T∗) by
1−γ(t) [0≤γ(t)≤1]. The infected cells will die at rate δ after producing
an average of N virions per cell during their lifetimes, and free virions are
removed from the system at rate c. In addition to the dynamics describing
virus infection, we have to specify the dynamics of the uninfected cell pop-
ulation. The simplest assumption is that uninfected cells are produced at
a constant rate λ at which new T cells are generated from sources within
the body, such as the thymus and die at a rate d . Thus, the HIV dynamic
model, after initiation of antiviral therapy, can be written as
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 5
where the time-varying parameter γ(t) (as defined below) quantifies the
time-varying drug efficacy. If the regimen is not 100% effective [i.e., 0≤
γ(t)<1], the system of ODE cannot be solved analytically. The solutions
to (1) then have to be evaluated numerically. When γ(t)=γ (an unknown
constant), the model (1) becomes the model developed by Perelson and
Nelson (1999). In particular, when γ(t)=0 (the drug has no effect), the
model (1)reduces to the modelin the publications [Bonhoeffer et al. (1997);
Nowak et al. (1995, 1997, 2000); Stafford et al. (2000)]; while γ(t)=1 (the
drug is 100% effective), the model (1) reverts to the model discussed by
Nowak and May (2000) and Perelson and Nelson (1999).
However, it is challenging to estimate all the parameters in the model (1)
and to conduct inference because the model (1) is not a priori identifiable
(i.e., multiple sets of parameters obtain identical fits to the data), given
only viral load measurements [Cobelli et al. (1979)]. To obtain a model
with a priori identifiable parameters [Labb´e and Verttoa (2006)], this paper
investigates mechanism-based reparameterized ODE models to quantify the
long-term viral dynamics with ARV treatment and the associated statistical
methods for model fitting.
2.1. Reparameterized model with time-varying drug efficacy. Following
the studies [Perelson and Nelson (1999); Nowak and May (2000); Labb´e and
Verttoa(2006)],wereparameterizethemodel(1)usingtherescaledvariables
rescaled version as follows:
d e δ d e e e
de k d e e e
where R=kNλ/(cd ) represents the basic reproductive ratio for the virus,
definedasthenumberofnewlyinfectedcellsthatarisefromanyoneinfected
cell when almost all cells are uninfected [Nowak and May (2000)]. Note that
the rescaled model (2) has fewer parameters than the ‘original’ model (1).
The identifiability of the model (2) is guaranteed [Cobelli et al. (1979);
Labb´e and Verttoa (2006)] and parameters of the model can be uniquely
identified. If R<1, then the virus will not spread, since every infected cell
will on average produce less than one infected cell. If, on the other hand,
R>1, then every infected cell will on average producemore than one newly
6 HUANGET AL.
infected cell and the virus will proliferate. For the HIV virus to persist in
the host, infected cells must produce at least one secondary infection, and
R must be greater than unity [Nowak and May (2000)].
Assuming steady state before the beginning of drug therapy, initial con-
ditions for the model can now be expressed as simple functions of the initial
conditions for viral load (V ): T =1/(1+V ),T∗ =V /(1+V ),V =V(0)
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
[Cobelli et al. (1979); Labb´e and Verttoa (2006)]. The assumption of initial
e e e e e e e e
steady state is necessary to guarantee identifiable (none of the models re-
ported or referenced here is identifiable if the initial states are unknown),
and is often justified by the clinical trial protocol. For example, in ACTG
398, individual patients were taken off the drug before the initiation of the
new therapy (washout period to eliminate the effect of previously adminis-
tered drugs and to guarantee that all individuals started from steady-state
conditions). Finally, viral load [V(t)] in model (1) is related to an equation
output of viral load amount [V(t)] in model (2) as follows: V(t)=ρV(t),
where ρ, which is equivalent to a volume of distribution of pharmacokinet-
ics, is a viral load scaling (proportionality) factor (10,000 copies/ml) to be
estimated from the data [Nowak and May (2000)]. The set of ODE (2) will
be used to construct the BNLME model.
2.2. Time-varying drug efficacy model. Within the population of HIV
virions in a human host, there is likely to be genetic diversity and corre-
sponding diversity in susceptibility to the various ARV agents. In clinical
practice, genotypic or phenotypic tests can be performed to determine the
sensitivity of HIV-1 RNA to ARV agents before a treatment regimen is
selected. Here we use the phenotypic marker, IC [Molla et al. (1996)], to
quantify agent-specific drugsusceptibility. Because experimentaldatatrack-
ing development of resistance suggest that the resistant fraction of the viral
population grows exponentially, we propose a model of log-linear function
to approximate the within-host changes over time in IC as follows:
log S + t for 0<t<t ,
log(S ) for t≥t ,
where S and S are respective values of IC (t) at baseline and time point
t at which the resistant mutations dominate. In our study, t is the time
of virologic failure which is observed from clinical studies. If S =S , no
new drug resistant mutation is developed during treatment. Although more
complicated modelsformedianinhibitoryconcentration havebeenproposed
basedonthefrequenciesofresistant mutations andcross-resistance patterns
[Wainberg et al. (1996); Bonhoeffer, Lipsitch and Levin (1997)], in clinical
studies or clinical practice it is common to collect IC values only at base-
line and failure time as designed in ACTG 5055 [Acosta et al. (2004)] and
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 7
ACTG 398 [Hammer et al. (2002); Pfister et al. (2003)]. Thus, given that
IC is only measured at baseline and at the time of treatment failure, this
function may serve as a good approximation in terms of data availability.
Poor adherence to a treatment regimen is one of the major causes of
treatment failure [Ickovics and Meisler (1997)]. The following model is used
to represent adherence for a time interval T <t≤T :
1, if all doses are taken in (T ,T ],
(cid:26)r , if 100r % doses are taken in (T ,T ],
where 0≤r <1, with r indicating the adherence rate computed for each
assessment interval (T ,T ] between study visits based on the question-
naire or MEMS data; T denotes the kth adherence assessment time.
Inmostviraldynamicstudies,investigators assumedthateither drugeffi-
cacy was constant over treatment time [Perelson andNelson (1999);Wu and
Ding (1999)] or antiviral regimens had perfect effect in blocking viral repli-
cation [Ho et al. (1995); Perelson et al. (1996)]. However, the drug efficacy
may change as concentrations of ARV drugs and other factors (e.g., drug
resistance) vary during treatment. A simple pharmacodynamic sigmoidal
E model for dose–effect relationship is [Gabrielsson and Weiner (2000)]
whereE isthemaximaleffectthatcanbeachieved,C isthedrugconcen-
tration,andEC isthedrugconcentrationthatinducedaneffectequivalent
to 50% of the maximal effect. Many different variations of the E model
havebeendevelopedbypharmacologiststomodelpharmacodynamiceffects.
E modelsincludethesigmoid E model,theordinary E modeland
max max max
compositeE models[GabrielssonandWeiner(2000);DavidianandGilti-
nan (1995)]. The ordinary E model describes agonistic and antagonistic
(inhibitory) effects of a drug, the sigmoid E model is more flexible for
the steepness or curvature of the response–concentration curve compared to
the ordinary E model, and composite E models are used for multi-
ple drug effects. More detailed discussions on E models can be found in
the book by Gabrielsson and Weiner (2000) and the paper by Huang et al.
(2003). Here we employ the following modified E model to represent the
time-varying drug efficacy for two ARV agents within a class,
(4) γ(t)= 1 50 2 50 ,
where A (t) and ICk (t) (k=1,2) are the adherence profile of the drug as
measured by MEMS data and the time-course of median inhibitory con-
centrations for the two drugs, respectively; φ=exp(β +β w +β w ); w
0 1 1 2 2 1
8 HUANGET AL.
and w are observed baseline viral load and CD4 cell count, respectively;
β =(β ,β ,β )T are unknown covariate effect parameters to be estimated
from clinical data. If β =β =0 (without considering effect of covariates),
φ=exp(β ) can be used to quantify the conversion between in vitro and in
vivo IC which is the case discussed by Huang et al. (2003). If γ(t)=1,
the drug is 100% effective, whereas if γ(t)=0, the drug has no effect. Note
that, if A (t), ICk (t), w and w are measured or obtained from a clinical
studyand β can beestimated fromclinical data,then thetime-varying drug
efficacy γ(t) can be estimated for the whole period of ARV treatment.
2.3. Bayesian modeling approaches. A number of studies investigated
various statistical methods, including Bayesian approaches, to fit viral dy-
namic models and to predict virological responses [Han et al. (2002); Huang
et al. (2006); Perelson et al. (1996); Wu et al. (1998); Wu and Ding (1999)].
The Bayesian approach to viral dynamic modeling is particularly appealing
from a biological perspective, as it allows informative prior distributions to
be incorporated. From a statistical estimation point of view, a Bayesian ap-
proach is preferable because of the difficulties which are often encountered
from a classical approach when models involve the large numbers of param-
eters, and complex nonlinearity of the subject-specific models. A Bayesian
nonlinearmixed-effects(BNLME)modelallowsustoincorporatepriorinfor-
mation at the population level into the estimates of dynamic parameters for
individualsubjects.WebrieflysummarizethemainconceptsintheBayesian
approach to inference and the presentation is, of course, far from exhaus-
tive [Davidian and Giltinan (1995); Gelfand and Smith (1990); Huang et al.
(2006); Wakefield et al. (1994); Wakefield (1996)].
In reference to the model (2), we denote the number of subjects by
n and the number of measurements on the ith subject by m . Let µ =
(logc,logδ,logd ,logρ,logR,β ,β ,β )T,Θ={θ ,i=1,...,n},θ =(logc ,
T 0 1 2 i i i
logδ ,logd ,logρ ,logR ,logφ )T and Y={y ,i=1,...,n;j =1,...,m }.
i Ti i i i ij i
Let f (θ ,t )=log (V(θ ,t )), where V(θ ,t ) is proportional to the nu-
ij i j 10 i j i j
merical solution of V(t) in the differential equations (2) for the ith subject
at time t . Let y (t) and e (t ) denote the repeated measurements of viral
load in log scale and a measurement error with mean zero, respectively.
Note that log-transformation of dynamic parameters and viral load is used
to make sure that estimates of dynamic parameters are positive and to sta-
bilize the variance and convergence, respectively. The BNLME model can
bewritten in the following three levels [Gelfand and Smith (1990); Davidian
and Giltinan (1995); Huang and Wu (2006); Wakefield (1996)].
Level 1. Within-subject variation:
i i i i i i mi
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 9
where y =(y (t ),...,y (t ))T, f (θ )=(f (θ ,t ),...,f (θ ,t ))T,
i i1 1 imi mi i i i1 i 1 imi i mi
e =(e (t ),...,e (t ))T.
i i 1 i mi
Level 2. Between-subject variation:
where b are random effects with mean zero. It is noteworthy that, for
β = (β ,β ,β )T, no log-transformation is required as they are not nec-
essarily positive. W = (I ,J ,J ), where I is an identity matrix and
i 6 1i 2i 6
J =(0,0,0,0,0,w )T (s = 1,2;i =1,2,...,n) are 6×1 vector, with w
and w being (standardized) individual baseline viral load (in log scale)
andCD4cellcount,respectively.Forβ=(β ,β ,β )T,weareonlyinterested
in estimating them at population level. Thus, the individual parameter φ
is related to them as follows, logφ =β +β w +β w +b , where b is
i 0 1 1i 2 2i i6 i6
the last element of b (i=1,2,...,n).
Level 3. Hyperprior distributions:
where the mutually independent Gamma (Ga), Normal (N) and Wishart
(Wi)priordistributionsarechosen to facilitate computations [Davidian and
Giltinan(1995)].Thehyper-parametersa,b,η,Λ,Ωandν canbedetermined
from previous studies and literature.
TheBayesian approachisdevelopedinthepresenceofobservationswhose
value is initially uncertain and described through a probability distribution,
which depends on some parameters. In the applications we assume that
the researcher has some knowledge about at least some of the parameters
which often represent characteristics of interest describing the process. The
Bayesian approach incorporates this information through prior distribution
into observed data to obtain its posterior distribution. While computation
of the posterior distribution involves solving multidimensional integrals, the
introduction of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods such as the
GibbssamplerandMetropolis–Hastings algorithm openedtheway toanaly-
sis of complex models through decomposition and sampling from full condi-
tionaldistributions;seeGamerman(1997)andGilksetal.(1995)forgeneral
theory and implementation details. Some more specific discussion of the
Bayesian dynamic modeling approach, including the choice of the hyper-
parameters, the iterative MCMC algorithm and the implementation of the
MCMC procedures can be found in publications by Huang and Wu (2006)
and Wakefield (1996). The Bayesian approach was developed and tailored
as required by the unique features of the proposed HIV dynamic models.
The basic principles of these proposed methodologies were well established
in thestatistical literature [Gamerman (1997); Gilks etal. (1995);Wakefield
(1996)], but the applications of these methods in this paper are nonetheless
10 HUANGET AL.
innovative within the context of a system of nonlinear ODE of time-varying
coefficient, but without a closed-form solution.
TheprogressinBayesianposteriorcomputationduetoMCMCprocedures
has made it possible to fit increasingly complex statistical models [Huang
and Wu (2006); Wakefield (1996)] and entailed the wish to determine the
best fitting model in a class of candidates. Thus, it has become more and
more important to develop efficient model selection criteria. A recent publi-
cation bySpiegelhalter et al. (2002)suggested ageneralization of theAkaike
information criterion (AIC) [Akaike (1973)] and related also to the Bayesian
information criterion (BIC) [Schwarz (1978)] that is deviance information
criterion (DIC). In this paper we demonstrate its usefulness to compare
BNLME models for longitudinal HIV dynamics discussed previously. For
completeness, a brief summary of DIC follows. More detailed discussion of
DIC and its properties can be found in publications by Spiegelhalter et al.
(2002) and Zhu and Carlin (2000).
Assume that the distribution of the data, Y, depends on the parameter
vector Ψ. Most recently, Spiegelhalter et al. (2002) suggested examining the
posterior distribution of the deviance statistics defined by
for Bayesian model comparison, where p(Y|Ψ) is the likelihood function,
that is, the conditional joint probability density function of the observed
data Y given the parameter vector Ψ, and g(Y) denotes a fully specified
standardizing term that is a function of the data alone (which thus has no
impact on model selection). Based on the posterior distribution of D(Ψ),
DIC consists of two components as follows:
effective number of parameters, defined as the difference between the poste-
rior mean of the deviance and the deviance evaluated at the posterior mean
Ψ¯ of the parameters. As with other model selection criteria, we caution
that DIC is not intended for identification of the ‘correct’ model, but rather
merely as a method of comparing a collection of alternative formulations.
In our model with different baseline characteristics and/or the MEMS ad-
herence summary metrics, DIC can be used to identify the most significant
covariate and MEMS adherence summary metrics in contribution to viro-
logic response. Under the model (5), in the absence of any standardizing
function g(Y), the deviance is
i i i i i i i
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 11
As discussed above, our MCMC approach to estimating DIC first draws
{(σ−2,Θ)(g)}G values from the posterior distribution, and then calculates
corresponding {D(g)}G values from (9), where G is the number of samples
ofposteriordistribution.Finally,weestimateDICas2D¯−D(σ¯−2,Θ¯),where
G g=1 G g=1 i G g=1 i i
1,...,nP}. P P
3. Analysis of AIDS clinical data.
3.1. Motivating application and observed data. The subject sample in
our analysis was drawn from the AIDS Clinical Trials Group (ACTG) 398
study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 4-Arm trial study of
amprenavir(APV)aspartofseveraldualproteaseinhibitor(PI)regimensin
subjects with HIV infection in whom initial PI therapy had failed. Subjects
in all arms received APV (PI), three reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTI):
efavirenz(EFV),abacavir(ABC)andadefovirdipivoxil(ADV)plusasecond
PIorplacebo:ArmA(saquinavir=SQV),ArmB(indinavir=IDV),ArmC
(nelfinavir=NFV)andArmD(placebomatched foroneofthesethreePIs).
Subjects are HIV-infected individuals with prior exposure to approved PIs
andwhohave exhibitedloss of virologic suppressionas reflected byaplasma
HIV-1 RNA concentration of ≥1000 copies/ml. Subjects were scheduled for
follow-up visits at study (day 0), at weeks 2, 4, 8, 12, 16 and every 8 weeks
thereafter until week 72, andat thetime of confirmed virologic failure.More
detailed descriptions of this study and data are given by Hammer et al.
(2002) and Pfister et al. (2003).
As indicated previously, the primary objective of this paper is to inves-
tigate the effect of adherence interaction with drug resistance and baseline
covariatestoprescribedARVtherapyonvirologicresponsemeasuredrepeat-
edly over time in HIV-infected patients. We construct a novel HIV dynamic
model (which is parameter identifiable) with consideration of drug adher-
ence assessed by use of MEMS data, drug susceptibility (IC ) and baseline
covariates to link plasma drug concentration to the long-term changes in
HIV-1 RNA observation after initiation of therapy. In the model we incor-
porate the two clinical factors (drug adherence measured by MEMS data
and drug susceptibility) and baseline viral load and CD4 cell count into a
function of treatment efficacy (see Section 2.2).
Because phenotype sensitivity testing was performed only on a subset of
randomlyselected subjects,thenumberofsubjectsavailable forouranalysis
was greatly reduced. We chose to consider only the subjects within Arm C
for our analysis because this arm afforded the greatest number of subjects
(n=31) with available phenotypic drug susceptibility data on the two PIs
(APV and NFV) and had available MEMS adherence data, as required for
12 HUANGET AL.
our model. A summary of measurements of data to be used in our analysis
is briefly described below.
Plasma viral load: Plasma viral load was measured in copies/ml at de-
signed study time by the ultrasensitive reverse transcriptase–polymerase
chain reaction HIV-1 RNA assay (Roche Molecular Systems). Only mea-
surements taken while on protocol-defined treatment were used in the anal-
ysis. The exact day of viral load measurement (not predefined study week)
was used to compute study day in our analysis. A log transformation was
used in the analysis of viral load data. The graph in Figure 1 (up-left panel)
shows the viral load trajectories of those subjects. Note that some viral load
measurements at designed study time were not observed due to laboratory
and other problems (for example, viral load measurement was not observed
at week 12 for the subject displayed in Figure 1).
Medication adherence: Medication adherence was measured by two meth-
ods: by the use of questionnaires and by the use of MEMS [Pfister et al.
(2003)].Subjectscompleted anadherencequestionnaireatstudyweeks.The
questionnaire was completed by the study participant and/or by a face-to-
face interview with study personnel. For MEMS, an MEMS cap was used to
monitor APV and EFV compliance only. The subjects were asked to bring
their medication bottles and caps to theclinic at each studyvisit, wherecap
data were downloaded to computer files and stored for later analysis. The
MEMSadherencerateforAPVwasdeterminedasthesumofpositivedosing
events divided by the sum of prescribed dosing events during the specified
time interval. In our analysis, we assumed that NFV had the same MEMS
Fig. 1. The profiles of viral load measurements (in log scale) from the 31 patients
(up-leftpanel)andonetrajectory ofviralload(solidcurve) andassociated adherence rates
(stairsteps) over time from the thirteen summary measures of MEMS data with the APV
drug for one subject from ACTG398.
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 13
adherence rate as APV since both APV and NFV were prescribed with the
same dosing schedule (twice daily), a prescribed AM and PM dosing period
was defined for each subject and, hence, the bottles were opened twice per
day [Pfister et al. (2003)]. As discussed previously, this study focuses mainly
on investigating optimal strategy to summarize adherence rates determined
byMEMSdataforefficientproductionofvirologicresponses.FortheMEMS
data analysis,itwas notpossibletomodeldaily adherencerates andinstead
the adherence rate was computed with the following scenarios to consider
effects of both interval length and time frame (delay of timing) for MEMS
assessment.
To determine the best summary metric of the MEMS adherence rate, we
evaluated different assessment interval lengths (averaging adherence dosing
events over 1, 2 or 3 week intervals) and different assessment time frames
(fixing the assessment interval times to end either immediately or 1, 2 or
3 weeks prior to the next measured viral load). Table 1 summarizes the
MEMS assessment interval notation and definitions for the 13 scenarios. As
an example, M2.2 in Table 1 denotes an MEMS adherence interval length
of 2 weeks fixed to end 2 weeks prior to the next viral load measurement;
for instance, the MEMS adherence rate for a subject at study week 8 (day
56) was calculated as the number of nominal dosing events divided by the
numberofprescribeddosingevents overstudydays29–42andthisvaluewas
used to represent adherence from the previous study visit to the study visit
at theday 56for modeling.Thecase Mserves asareferenceandaverages all
the available MEMS data between viral load measurements. As an example,
Summary of the MEMS interval definitions and other information
Adherenceintervaldefinition
Case MEMS adherence Timeframe length Interval Example for week8
interval name (weeksprior toviral load length (day56), adherence
measurement) computedover days
1 M 0 week visit time 28–55
2 M0.1 0 week 1 week 49–55
3 M0.2 0 week 2 weeks 42–55
4 M0.3 0 week 3 weeks 35–55
5 M1.1 1 week 1 week 43–49
6 M1.2 1 week 2 weeks 36–49
7 M1.3 1 week 3 weeks 29–49
8 M2.1 2 weeks 1 week 36–42
9 M2.2 2 weeks 2 weeks 29–42
10 M2.3 2 weeks 3 weeks 22–42
11 M3.1 3 weeks 1 week 29–35
12 M3.2 3 weeks 2 weeks 22–35
13 M3.3 3 weeks 3 weeks 15–35
14 HUANGET AL.
Fig. 2. The baseline ( ) and failure time ( ) IC for APV/NFV drugs (upper panel)
with baseline IC mean, standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of variation (CV), re-
spectively, and the baseline viral load in log scale and baseline CD4 cell count (lower
panel) withmean, SDandCV,respectively, forthe 31subject-specific individualsfromthe
ACTG398 study. Note that for a subject, if a single measurement of IC is observed at
baseline only, there is no sign appearing in the upper panel of the plot.
theviralload(inlog scale)andadherenceratesovertimefromthethirteen
cases of MEMS data with APV drug for the one representative subject are
presented in Figure 1.
Phenotypic virus susceptibility to drug:Thephenotypicvirusresistanceto
drug were retrospectively determined from baseline samples. Patients were
selected to have samples assayed based on receiving study treatment for
at least 8 weeks and having available sample. Some patients had virologic
failure and phenotypic susceptibility testing done on samples at the time
of failure. Testing was done via the recombinant virus assay (PhenoSense,
ViroLogic Inc., South San Francisco, CA). For analysis, we used the phe-
notype marker, IC [Molla et al. (1996)], to quantify agent-specific drug
resistance. We refer to this marker as the median inhibitory concentration.
The baseline (◦) and failure time (×) IC ’s of 31 subject-specific individu-
als for the APV and NFV drugs are displayed in Figure 2 (upperpanel) and
are used to construct IC (t). Note that some subjects have only baseline
IC due to the fact that they maintained viral suppression or dropped out
from the study. If no IC measurement is observed at failure time for a
subject, IC (t) becomes a constant in this case.
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 15
Baseline characteristics: The baseline viral load in log scale (VL) and
the baseline CD4 cell count were chosen as covariates in the model for data
analysis.Thelog-transformationofviralloadisusedtostabilizethevariance
of measurementerrorandestimation algorithm. Thebaselinecharacteristics
of 31 subject-specific individuals with mean, standard deviation (SD) and
coefficientofvariation(CV)aredisplayedinFigure2(lowerpanel).Toavoid
very small (large) estimates which may be unstable, we standardized these
covariate values. For baseline log (RNA), for instance, each log (RNA)
valueissubtractedbymean(4.71)anddividedbystandarddeviation (0.70).
3.2. Model fitting and parameter estimation results. In this section we
apply the BNLME modeling approach to fit the data described in Section
3.1. Based on the discussion in Section 2, the prior distribution for µ was
assumed to be N(η,Λ) with Λ being a diagonal matrix. Following the idea
of Huang and Wu (2006) for prior construction, as an example we discuss
thepriorconstructionforlogδ.Thepriorconstructionsforotherparameters
are similar and so are omitted here.
Hoetal.(1995)reportedviraldynamicdataon20patients;thelogarithm
of the average death rate of infected cells (logδ) is −1.125. Wei et al. (1995)
used two different models with a group of 22 subjects to estimate death
rate of infected cells and obtained logδ with −0.84 and −1.33, respectively.
Following these two studies, Nowak et al. (1995) estimated logδ =−0.934
based on 11 subjects with one possible outlying subject excluded. It can
be seen that four estimates of logδ from these studies are −1.125, −0.84,
−1.33 and −0.934, respectively. The individualestimates of logδ from these
studies approximately follow a symmetric normal distribution. Thus, we
chose a normal distribution N(−1.0, 100.0) as the prior for logδ (the large
variance indicated that we used a noninformative prior for logδ). Similarly,
the values of the hyper-parameters at population level are chosen as follows
[Ho et al. (1995); Nowak et al. (1995); Nowak and May (2000); Perelson
et al. (1996, 1997); Perelson and Nelson (1999); Verotta (2005); Wei et al.
(1995)]:
a=4.5, b=9.0, ν =10.0,
Λ=diag(100.0,100.0,100.0,100.0,100.0,100.0,100.0,100.0),
η=(1.1,−1.0,−2.5,1.2,1.0,1.0,0.5,0.5)T,
Ω=diag(2.5,2.5,2.5,2.5,2.5,2.5).
We decide that one long chain is run for MCMC implication with con-
siderations of the following two issues: (i) a number of initial “burn-in”
simulations are discarded, since from an arbitrary starting point it would
be unlikely that the initial simulations came from the stationary distribu-
tion targeted by the Markov chain; (ii) one may only save every kth (k
16 HUANGET AL.
being an integer) simulation sample to reduce the dependence among sam-
ples used for parameter estimation. Because the antiviral responsemodeling
involves numerically solving nonlinear differential equations, thus compu-
tational burdens would be more pronounced with the Bayesian approaches
via MCMC procedure. Utilizing efficient computer algorithms are critical in
this regard. Therefore, we are going to adopt these strategies in our MCMC
implementation usingFORTRANcodethatcalls adifferentialequationsub-
routinesolver(DIVPRK)intheIMSLlibrary(1994),whichusestheRunge–
Kutta–Verner fifth-order method. The computer codes are available from
the corresponding author upon request. An informal check of convergence
is conducted based on graphical techniques according to the suggestion of
Gelfand and Smith (1990). Based on the results, we propose that, after an
initial number of 20,000 burn-in iterations, every 4th MCMC sample was
retained from the next 80,000 samples. Thus, we obtained 20,000 samples
of targeted posterior distributions of the unknown parameters.
We fitted the model to the data from 31 subjects discussed in Section
3.1 using the proposed BNLME modeling approach. We incorporate the
two clinical factors, drug adherence assessed by MEMS cap data and drug
susceptibility (phenotype IC values), as well as baseline covariates into a
function of drugefficacy. For modelfitting, adherencerates weredetermined
from MEMS data with 13 different scenarios. For model fitting and the
purpose of comparisons, we set up a control model as the one without using
any drugadherence,resistance and covariate information whichcorresponds
for this case, our model reverts to that discussed by Nowak and May (2000)
and Perelson and Nelson (1999). Theother 13 models are specified based on
the combination of drug resistance (IC ), baseline covariate data and 13
different adherence summary metrics listed in Table 1.
In order to assess how adherence rates, determined from 13 different sce-
narios,interacted withdrugsusceptibility andcovariates tocontributetovi-
rologicresponse,wefittedthemodelstoall13scenariosaswellasthecontrol
modelandcomparedthefittingresults.WefoundbasedontheDICcriterion
(see Figure 3) that, overall, the model with adherence rate determined from
MEMS dosing events, taken time frame length of 2 weeks prior to a viral
load measurement with over either a 2 week assessment interval (M2.2) or a
3 week assessment interval (M2.3), provided the best fits to the observed
data, compared to the other 12 models for most subjects. The reference
model with adherence rate averaged by all the available MEMS data be-
tween viral load measurements gave a moderate fit to the observed data.
We clearly see that all models fit the early viral load data well, but the
control model, lacking factors for subject-specific drug adherence and sus-
ceptibility as well as baseline covariates, failed to fit viral load rebounds
and fluctuations, and provided the worst fitting results for the majority of
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 17
Fig. 3. Comparison of the DIC values for the models from 13 different determinants of
MEMS adherence, interacted by drug resistance and covariates, with the control model.
The two horizontal lines represent the DIC values for the control model and the reference
model with adherence rate determined by case M, respectively.
subjects. For the purpose of illustration, the model fitting curves from the
control model (solid curves), the best fit model (M2.2: dotted curves) and
the reference model (M: dashed curves) are displayed in Figure 4 for the
three representative subjects.
Forthepurposeofcomparison,Figure5presentedthepopulationposterior
meansandthecorresponding95%equal-tailcredibleintervals(CI)oftheeight
parametersforthecontrolmodel,thebestfitmodel(M2.2)andthereference
model (M). For the six dynamic parameters (c,δ,d ,ρ,R,β ), it is shown
that the population estimates for the control model have higher clearance
Fig.4. Theestimateofviralloadtrajectoryfromthemodelfittingwiththe3differentde-
terminants ofadherence: (i)Control model (solidcurves), (ii) M2.2model (dotted curves)
and (iii) reference (M) model (dashed curves) for the three representative subjects. The
observed values are indicated by circles.
18 HUANGET AL.
Fig. 5. A summary of the estimated posterior means ( ) of population parameters and
the corresponding 95% equal-tail credible intervals (CI) for the models from 3 different
determinants of adherence.
rateoffreevirions(c),lowerdeathrateofinfectedcells(δ),higherdeathrate
oftargetT cells(d ),smallerviralloadscalingfactor(ρ),higherbasicrepro-
ductive ratio for the virus (R) and larger φ than those for the best fit model
(M2.2) andreference model(M), whilethepopulation estimates forthebest
fit model and reference model are generally similar. These differences may
result from the effects of drug adherence interacted with drug resistance
and covariates in the models. For the other two covariate effect parame-
ters (β ,β ) which are relevant to treatment effect, we will discuss them
separately in Section 3.4. In terms of the individual parameter estimates, a
large between-subject variation in the estimates of all individual dynamic
parameters was observed (data not shown here). Overall, the coefficient of
variation ranges from 15.4% to 88.9% for all parameters.
3.3. Effects of adherence rates determined by different MEMS summary
metrics. Figure 3 in Section 3.2 displayed a comparison of the DIC val-
ues for the models from 13 different determinants of MEMS adherence, in-
teracted by drug resistance and covariates, with the control model. The
observed patterns shown in Figure 3 provided information to answer the
following questions: (i) what MEMS assessment interval length is best and
(ii) what MEMS assessment time frame (delay effect of timing) is best?
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 19
WecanseethatwhenthetimeframeforMEMSassessmentisfixed,mod-
els with a 2 week MEMS assessment interval length generally outperform
models with an assessment interval length of 1 or 3 weeks except for the
time frame length with 3 weeks prior to viral load measurement where the
model with a 3 week MEMS assessment interval length performs best.
Regardless of the assessment interval length, models which assess compli-
ance 2 weeks prior to viral load measurement generally outperform models
which assess compliance immediately beforeviral load measurement, 1 week
before or 3 weeks before viral load measurement. Overall, the model with a
MEMS assessment interval length of 2 weeks measured from 4 to 2 weeks
prior to viral load measurement (M2.2) was significantly a better predicator
of viral load over time than any other models, with the exception of the
M2.3 model which shows no significant difference from the M2.2 model in
terms of DIC values.
3.4. Treatment effects of baseline characteristics interacted with clinical
factors. Figure 5 summarized the population posterior means and the cor-
responding 95% equal-tail CI of the covariate effect parameters β and β
for the best fit model (M2.2) and the reference model (M). It can be seen
that estimates of β (coefficient of baseline viral load) are negative, while
estimates of β (coefficient of baseline CD4 cell count) are positive. In fact,
other models also provided the same scenarios for the estimates of these two
parameters (not shown here). As an example, we reportresults based on the
bestfitmodel(M2.2). WecanobservefromFigure5thattheestimates of β
and β are βˆ =−0.67 with 95% CI (−1.056, −0.193) and βˆ =0.719 with
95% CI (0.371, 1.058). It indicates that, according to antiviral drug efficacy
model (4), the baseline viral load (βˆ =−0.67) has a significant positive
effect on drug efficacy γ(t), while the baseline CD4 cell count (βˆ =0.719)
has asignificant negative effect on γ(t) sincethecorresponding95% credible
intervals do not contain zero for both parameters. These findings could sug-
gest us with the following different ways. The lowest value of γ(t) [highest
φ as displayed in Figure 6(b)] occurs in the subjects with the best prognosis
(higher baseline CD4cell count andlower baseline viralload). Alternatively,
the highest value of γ(t) (lowest φ) occurs in those with the worst prognosis
(lower baseline CD4 cell count and higher baseline viral load). A possible
explanation is that there is a floor effect of viral load (or ceiling/floor effect
of CD4 cell count) that is not captured in the model. Further, given that
baseline CD4 cell count and viral load are jointly used to make treatment
decisions andareknown tobenegatively correlated as shownin Figure6(a),
the result based on the combination of baseline viral load and CD4 count
in γ(t) indicates that the baseline CD4 cell count and viral load have the
opposite effect on drug efficacy which might be intuitively understandable.
20 HUANGET AL.
Fig. 6. (a) Correlation between (standardized) baseline log (RNA) andCD4cellcount.
Thecorrelationcoefficient(r)andp-valueareobtainedfromtheSpearmanrankcorrelation
test. The line is a robust (MM-estimator) linear regression fit. (b) Estimated φ values for
the 31 subject-specific individuals.
4. A simulation study. In this paper we investigated the association be-
tween virologic outcomes and medication adherence with confounding fac-
tors based on the data from 31 subjects. As both one referee and the asso-
ciate editor suggested thatasimulation studymaybeusefultoevaluate how
our method performs, in this section we conduct a limited simulation study
here due to intensive computations involved. The scenario we consider is as
follows.
We simulate a clinical trial with 31 patients receiving antiviral treatment.
For each patient, we assume that the designs of this experiment, in particu-
lar, the sampling times for viral load, were the same as those in the ACTG
398 study. The data for the phenotype marker (baseline and failure IC ’s),
medication adherence and thebaseline viral load/CD4 cell count were taken
from the ACTG 398 study, where medication adherence was calculated by
theM2.2 summarymeasure.The“true” values of unknownparameters were
the same as those estimated from the data set of 31 subjects which were re-
portedinSection 3.With generatedindividualtrueparameters basedonthe
equation (6), known data [IC (t),A(t),w and w ], we generated random
samples for response (viral load) based on model (2). The values of hyper-
parameters are chosen to be the same as those in Section 3. For each simu-
lated data set, we fit the model using the Bayesian approach. The MCMC
techniquesconsistingofaseriesofGibbssamplingandM–Halgorithmswere
the same as those in the real data analysis. We performed 50 replications
and obtained the mean estimates (ME) of population parameters together
with the corresponding relative bias (RB), which is the difference between
the mean estimate and the true value of the parameter divided by absolute
value of the true parameter, and the standard error (SE), defined as the
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 21
The true values (TV) of parameters and mean estimates (ME) of population parameters
with 50 replications as well as the corresponding relative bias (RB), defined as
100 (ME TV)/TV , and standard error (SE), defined as 100 √MSE/TV
Parameter TV ME RB(%) SE (%)
logc 0.767 0.771 0.522 9.127
logδ 0.977 1.013 3.685 7.971
logdT 4.086 4.101 0.367 5.871
logρ 0.433 0.388 10.39 18.03
logR 1.040 1.100 5.769 3.089
β 2.615 2.604 0.421 4.902
β 0.670 0.665 0.746 10.13
β 0.719 0.698 2.921 13.09
square root of mean-squared error divided by the absolute value of the true
parameter.
In Table 2 we summarize the true values (TV) of parameters and the ME
of population parameters with 50 replications as well as the correspond-
ing RB and SE. The percentage is based on the absolute value of the true
parameter. It can be seen from Table 2 that the RB (%) for population
parameter estimates are very small, ranging from 0.522 to 10.39, and the
SE (%) ranges from 3.089 to 18.03. The simulation results indicate that our
method with considering the M2.2 model performs reasonably well in terms
of estimates of parameters except for the viral load proportionality factor
logρ which has larger RB and SE. That is, our method produces a substan-
tially biased estimate and may severely underestimate logρ. This may be
explained by the fact that it is probably caused from inaccurate numerical
solutionstothesystemofODE(2)whichwasusedtoconstructtheBNLME
model.
5. Concluding discussion. In developing long-term dynamic modeling,
this paper introduced a dynamic mechanism specified by a system of time-
varying ODE to (i) establish a link between success of ARV therapy in
virologic response and MEMS adherence confounded by drug resistance and
baseline covariates, (ii) fully integrate viral load, MEMS adherence,drugre-
sistance andbaselinecovariates data intothestatistical inferenceandanaly-
sis, and (iii) provide a powerful tool to evaluate the effects of MEMS adher-
ence determined by a different summary metric on virologic response using
the BNLME modeling approach. This approach cannot only combine prior
information with current clinical data for estimating dynamic parameters,
but also deal with complex dynamic systems. Thus, the results of estimated
dynamic parameters based on this model should be more reliable and rea-
sonable to interpret long-term HIV dynamics. Our models are simplified
22 HUANGET AL.
with the main goals of retaining crucial features of HIV dynamics and, at
the same time, guaranteeing their applicability to typical clinical data, in
particular, long-term viral load measurements. The proposed model fitted
theclinical data reasonably wellfor mostpatients inourstudy,although the
fitting for a few patients was not completely satisfactory because of unusual
viral load fluctuation patterns for these subjects.
We have explored the practical performance of DIC for the comparison
of developed models. DIC, a Bayesian version of the classical deviance for
model assessment, is particularly suited to compare Bayesian models whose
posterior distribution has been obtained using MCMC procedures and can
beusedincomplexhierarchicalmodelswherethenumberofunknownsoften
exceeds thenumberofobservationsandthenumberoffreeparametersisnot
well defined. This is in contrast to AIC and BIC, where the number of free
parameters needs to bespecified [Zhu and Carlin (2000)]. Overall, combined
withmoretraditionalresidualanalysisandposteriorpredictivemodelchecks
as discussed in this paper, DIC appears to offer a comprehensive framework
for comparison and evaluation within a complex model class.
Several studies investigated the association between virologic responses
and adherence assessed by MEMS data only without considering other con-
founding factors such as drug resistance using standard modeling methods
including Poisson regression [Knafl et al. (2004)], logistic regression [Vrijens
et al. (2005)] and the linear mixed-effects model [Liu et al. (2007)]. In this
article we employed the proposed dynamic model and associated BNLME
modeling approach to assessment of effects of adherencedeterminants based
on MEMS dosing events in predicting virologic response. In particular, we
investigated (i) how to summarize the MEMS adherence data for efficient
prediction of virological response after accounting for potential confound-
ing factors such as drug resistance and baseline covariates, and (ii) how to
evaluate treatment effect of baseline characteristics interacted with MEMS
adherence and other clinical factors. Note that a further study in comparing
the performance of these different methods may be important and war-
ranted, although some challenges are observed in terms of different model
structures and data characteristics.
The results indicate that the best summary metric for prediction of viro-
logic response based on DIC criterion is the adherence rate determined by
MEMS dosing events averaged over an assessment interval of 2 or 3 weeks,
and 2 weeks prior to the next measured viral load observation (denoted by
M2.2 or M2.3). We found that the best MEMS adherence predictor (M2.2)
of the effectiveness of ARV medications on virologic response is consistent
with that reported in Huang et al. (2008) in which, however, the next best
MEMS adherence predictor (M1.2) is different from what is obtained in this
paper. This difference may be due to the various reasons as follows. In the
study by Huang et al. (2008), (i) it directly applied the model (1) to fit data
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 23
and, thus, some assumptions were made due to parameter unidentifiable is-
sues; (ii) the analysis used the mean of the sum of squared deviations as a
criterion to evaluate model fitting results; (iii) it assumed IC data were
extrapolated linearly to the whole treatment period instead of a log-linear
extrapolation offered in this paper which is considered more reasonable bi-
ologically; and (iv) it did not incorporate baseline covariates in the model.
In addition, the superiority of the M2.2 model, associated with the MEMS
adherence rate based on time frame length of 2 weeks prior to a viral load
measurement with over a 2 week assessment interval, may be explained by
the fact that it probably reflects how long it takes for resistance mutations
tofirstariseandthencometodominatetheplasmapopulationofavirus.As
pointed out by an anonymous referee, this finding may also be interpreted
as follows. Low adherence two weeks prior to the viral load measurement
may not have had sufficient time for viral rebound to occur.
In this paper we set up a connection between subject-specific baseline
characteristics with interaction of clinical factors and drug efficacy. We also
found that, according to antiviral drug efficacy model (4), the baseline viral
load had a positive effect on drug efficacy, while the baseline CD4 cell count
had a negative effect on it. Our results may be explained by the fact that
for those patients with higher baseline viral load, the drug efficacy needs
to be higher than that for those with lower baseline viral load. Therefore,
a strong treatment is recommended for those patients with higher baseline
viralload. Ontheother hand,patients withhigher CD4cell countmay need
lower drugefficacy sothatamorepotentARVdrugregimenisnotnecessary
for these patients to avoid side-effects of drug use. The results may suggest
thebenefitof initiating ARVtherapy with alower baselineviral load and/or
a higher baseline CD4 count. These results coincide with those investigated
by Notermans et al. (1998) and Wu et al. (2005) whose results were ob-
tained usingcorrelation analysis. Note that given the estimated parameters,
the subject with both a high baseline CD4 cell count and a relatively high
baseline viral load [upper right quadrant of Figure 6(a)] has a very different
φ than that with a similar baseline CD4 cell count, but a low baseline viral
load [upper left quadrant of Figure 6(a)]. It is possible that the subject in
the upperright quadrantwas more recently infected (hence the higher base-
line CD4 cell count) or perhaps with a drug resistant virus and would not
be a candidate for a regimen with a “less potent drug efficacy.”
Ourfindingsneedtobeinterpretedinlightof thestudylimitations. First,
intheACTG398study,becausephenotypesensitivitytestingwasperformed
only on a subset of randomly selected subjects, we chose 31 patients who
have available data for analysis in this paper.Second, dueto reasons such as
lost caps and malfunction of caps, there were inaccurate MEMS data across
the treatment period which may not reflect actual adherence profile for in-
dividual patients and, thus, the data quality could have some impact on the
24 HUANGET AL.
results.Third,becauseoftechnicallimitations,theundetectablevaluesofvi-
ral load were replaced with 25 copies/ml for analyses, which could introduce
somebiasduetoaclusterofties ofdatapoints.Finally, thispapercombined
newtechnologiesinmathematicalmodelingandstatisticalinferencewithad-
vances in HIV/AIDS dynamics and ARV therapy to quantify complex HIV
disease mechanisms. The complex nature of HIV/AIDS ARV therapy will
naturally pose some challenges including missing data and measurement er-
ror inclinical factors andcovariates. Thesecomplicated problems,which are
beyond the scope of this article, may be addressed, for example, using the
joint modelmethod [Wu (2002)] and other techniques [Carroll et al. (1995)],
and are warranted for further investigation. Nevertheless, these limitations
would not offset the major findings from this study.
As the Associate Editor pointed out, we assumed that the distributions
of the random error and random effects are normal, which is a common as-
sumption in the literature for statistical inference. However, due to the na-
ture of AIDS clinical data, it is possible that the data may contain outliers
and/or depart from normality and, thus, statistical inference and analysis
with normal assumption may lead to misleading results [Verbeke and Lesaf-
fre(1996); Ghoshet al. (2007)]. Specially non-normalcharacteristics such as
skewnesswithheavyrightorlefttailmayappearofteninvirologicresponses.
Thus, a normality assumption may be too restrictive to provide an accurate
representation of the structure that is often present in repeated measures
and clustered data. Thus, it is of practical interest to investigate nonlinear
modelswithaskew-normaldistributionortdistributionfor(within-subject)
randomerrorandrandomeffectswhicharemorerobusttooutliersandskew-
ness than those with a normal distribution. In our recent study [Huang and
Dagne (2010)] we addressed a Bayesian approach to nonlinear mixed-effects
models in conjunction with the HIV dynamic model and relaxed the nor-
mality assumption by considering both random error and random-effects to
have a multivariate skew-normal distribution. The proposed model provides
flexibility in capturing a broad range of non-normal behavior and includes
normality as a special case. The results suggest that it is very important to
assume models with a skew-normal distribution in order to achieve robust
and reliable results, in particular, when the data exhibit skewness. We are
actively applying this methodology into the data investigated in this paper
and will report the results in a future study.
In summary, the mechanism-based dynamic model is powerful and effi-
cient to characterize relations between antiviral response and medication
adherence, drug susceptibility as well as baseline characteristics, although
some biological assumptions are required. It is important to find a way to
incorporate subject-specific information with regard to drug susceptibility,
medication adherence and baseline characteristics in predicting long-term
virologic response. Since each of these factors may only contribute a very
DYNAMICBAYESIANNONLINEARMIXED-EFFECTS MODEL 25
small portion to virologic response and they may be confounded through
complicated interactions, the appropriate modeling of the combination ef-
fects of these factors is critical to efficiently utilize the information in viro-
logic response predictions. The viral dynamic model and associated statis-
tical approaches discussed here provide a good avenue to fulfill this goal. In
particular, MEMS adherence rate summarized by an optimal way in terms
of assessing both interval lengths and time frame lengths prior to viral load
measurement is an important factor that significantly determines the effec-
tiveness of ARV treatment and needs to be taken into account in analy-
sis of virologic responses. Our results demonstrate that MEMS adherence
data may not predict virologic response well unless the MEMS cap data are
summarized in an appropriate way as reported in Section 3.3. Additionally,
although this paper concentrated on HIV dynamics, the basic concept of
longitudinal dynamicsystems and the proposedmethodologies in this paper
are generally applicable to dynamic systems in other fields such as biology,
medicine, engineering or PK/PD studies as long as they meet the relevant
technical specification—a system of ODE.
Acknowledgments. The authors are extremely grateful to the Editor,
an Associate Editor and one referee for their insightful comments and con-
structive suggestions that led to an improvement of the article. We grate-
fully acknowledge ACTG 398 study investigators for allowing us to use the
clinical data from their study. The authors are indebted to Dr. Susan L.
Rosenkranz from Frontier Science & Technology Research Foundation and
SDAC of Harvard School of Public Health for her informative discussions
and data preparations.