]NG.nif-q[
1v43760.1151:viXra
A Generalized Probability Framework to Model Economic Agents’
Decisions Under Uncertainty
Emmanuel Haven and Sandro Sozzo
School of Management and IQSCS
University of Leicester
University Road LE1 7RH Leicester, UK
E-Mails: eh76,ss831@le.ac.uk
September 17, 2018
The applications of techniques from statistical (and classical) mechanics to model interesting prob-
lemsineconomicsandfinancehasproducedvaluableresults. Theprincipalmovementwhichhassteered
this research direction is known under the name of ‘econophysics’. In this paper, we illustrate and ad-
vancesomeofthefindingsthathavebeenobtainedbyapplyingthemathematicalformalismofquantum
mechanics to model human decision making under ‘uncertainty’ in behavioral economics and finance.
Starting from Ellsberg’s seminal article, decision making situations have been experimentally verified
wheretheapplicationofKolmogorovianprobabilityintheformulationofexpectedutilityisproblematic.
Those probability measureswhich by necessity must situate themselves in Hilbert space (such as ‘quan-
tumprobability’)enable afaithfulrepresentationofexperimentaldata. We thusprovideanexplanation
for the effectiveness of the mathematical framework of quantum mechanics in the modeling of human
decision making. We want to be explicit though that we are not claiming that decision making has
microscopic quantum mechanical features.
1 Introduction
Roughly speaking, ‘econophysics’ concerns the application of classical (and statistical mechanical) physics
theories to model the behavior of economic and financial systems. The econophysics movement has been
leaded by several brilliant physicists (see, e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]). This article aims to bring to the attention
of econophysicists a novel emerging domain where the application of methods and techniques inspired by
quantum physics has been successful in the last years. This domain, known in the scientific community as
‘quantum cognition’, was born as a bold proposal to solve a specific problem.
The quantum cognition domain applies the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics to model
situations and processes in human cognition, decision making and language that have resisted traditional
modeling techniques by means of classical structures, i.e. Boolean logical structures, Kolmogorovian prob-
ability spaces, Bayesian updateof probabilities, commutative algebras, etc. (please seeSect. 2). Therefore,
the results obtained in quantum cognition have a deep impact on behavioral economics and finance. This
domain has attracted in the last years the interest of high impact factor and top journals, media and
popular science and funding institutions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. To better clarify the
boundaries of quantum cognition it is worth mentioning two important aspects of it, which are as follows.
1See, e.g,. thearticles “Quantum minds: Why we think like quarks”, New Scientist 05 September2011, by M. Buchanan,
and “Physics goes social: How behaviorobeys quantumlogic”, New Scientist 11 July 2013, by A.Khrennikovand E. Haven.
(i) The success of this quantum modeling is interpreted as due to the ‘descriptive effectiveness of the
mathematical apparatus of quantum theory as a formal tool to model cognitive dynamics and structures in
situations where classical set-based approaches are problematical’, ‘without any’ a priori direct or precise
connection with the validity of quantum laws in the microscopic world.
(ii) There is no need, in order to guarantee the validity of the obtained results, to introduce any
compelling assumption about the existence of microscopic quantum processes at the level of the human
brain. Hence, quantum cognition shouldnot beconfused with ‘quantummind’or ‘quantum consciousness’.
What are the possible advantages of quantum cognition in economics? In this respect, the application
of normative models of decision making to the behavior of economic agents has produced a variety of
sophisticated mathematical frameworks, the most important of which are ‘expected utility theory’ (EUT)
[18] and ‘subjective expected utility theory’ (SEUT) [19]. The former is designed for decisions under
‘risk’, that is, a choice among different gambles defined on an objective probability measure, whilst the
latter is designed for decisions under ‘ambiguity’, that is, a choice among different acts defined on a
subjective probability measure. Both theories implicitly assume that ‘probabilities are Kolmogorovian’,
thatis, probabilities areassigned to events according torules obeyingtheaxioms of Kolmogorov. However,
sincetheworkofMauriceAllais [20],decisioneconomists systematically produceempiricalsituationswhere
concrete human decisions violate the axioms of EUT. Moreover, since the work of Daniel Ellsberg [21],
decision economists are also able to generate empirical situations where concrete human decisions violate
theaxioms ofSEUT.Finally, recent work ofMark Machina [22]reveals thatthemostrecognised extensions
of EUT and SEUT able to cope with ‘Allais’ or ‘Ellsberg paradoxes’ are highly problematical in specific
decision making situations, i.e. ‘Machina paradox’ (please see Sect. 3).
Inspired by our quantum cognition approach, we have recently elaborated a complete modeling of the
‘Ellsberg paradox’ by using the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics [14, 23, 24]. We have also
faithfully represented the data collected in an experiment we performed on a typical Ellsberg paradox
situation with real decision makers [14]. In this paper we further inquire into our quantum-theoretic
framework for the Ellsberg paradox, showing that our results go beyond the mere theoretical modeling and
representation of a set of empirical data. We also provide sufficient arguments to claim that, not only in
the Ellsberg paradox, but also in other situations affected by ambiguity, such as the ‘Machina paradox’,
structurallythereisarealneedforanon-classicalprobabilitymodel. Wewouldliketoadvancetworeasons.
(i) In an Ellsberg-type decision making process, the agent’s choice is actualized as a consequence
of an interaction with the cognitive context, exactly like in a quantum measurement process where the
outcome of the measurement is actualized as a consequence of the interaction of the measured particle
with the measuring apparatus. Therefore, in cognitive entities, as well as in microscopic quantum entities,
measurementsdonotrevealpreexistingvaluesoftheobservedpropertiesbut,rather,theyactualizegenuine
potentialities. Classical Kolmogorovian probability can only formalize lack of knowledge about actualities,
hence it is generally not able to cope with a decision making process. We have proven that this is possible
by usinga complex Hilbert space, and by representing probability measures by means of ‘projection valued
measures’ on a complex Hilbert space [7, 16, 17]. A projection valued measure is essentially different from
a single Kolmogorovian probability measure, since the latter is a σ–algebra valued measure, whilst the
former is not.
(ii) The notion of ambiguity, as introduced in economics, is completely compatible, both at a mathe-
matical and an intuitive level, with the representation of states of cognitive entities as vectors of a Hilbert
space. Indeed, just like in standard quantum mechanics the state vector incorporates the ‘quantum un-
certainty’ of a microscopic particle, also in an Ellsberg-type situation, the agent’s subjective preference
towards ambiguity is naturally formalized by representing the state of the cognitive entity under study by
means of such a Hilbert space vector (this perspective is getting more and more accepted in the scientific
community, including mainstream psychologists; please see [25]). In this respect, it is worth mentioning
that Ellsberg called ‘ambiguity aversion’ the ‘irrational’ factor inducing decision makers to deviate from
SEUT. In our approach, ambiguity aversion is only one – albeit an important one – of the conceptual
landscapes surronding the decision maker’s choice in a situation where ambiguity is present. This result
is compatible with the experimental findings confirming Ellsberg’s prediction about the human attitude
towards ambiguity [26], but also with some recent experiments where such attitude is more controversial
[27].
Points (i) and (ii) provide an intuitive explanation for the identification of genuine quantum structures
in the Ellsberg paradox. Those structures are typically characterized by notions such as ‘contextuality’,
‘interference’ and ‘superposition’, which will be discussed in more detail in Sect. 4.
In concluding this section, it is important to mention that our model which aims to represent human
decision making in economics is a descriptive model: it describes what economic agents actually do, not
whattheyshoulddo,underuncertainty. However, italreadycontainssomeinsightsonhowtheconstruction
of an axiomatic framework of what we could call ‘contextual expected utility’ as based on a non-classical
probability can be able to cope with human ambiguity, or ‘contextual risk’, as we could call it. If we
wanted to embed our approach into the fundamentals of microeconomics, then a natural generalization of
EUT and SEUT may simply consist in requiring that economic agents maximize their contextual expected
utility. An important achievement in that regard would require a representation theorem which provides
for a rigorous proof of the equivalence between the existence of a preference relationship and an order
inequality between utility functions embedding this type of expected utility.
Ourgeneralization of the probability models employed in an expected utility framework has a profound
impact on any economics or financeproblem wherethis basic microeconomic framework is used as an input
in its modeling objectives. Indeed, an important assumption in general equilibrium based macroeconomic
modelsis the‘rational expectations hypothesis’whichexactly rests on theexpected utility hypothesis. The
consistency of the models imposed by rational expectations has profound implications on the design and
impact of macroeconomic policy-making [28, 29].
2 On the effectiveness of quantum mathematics in human cognition
Classical Boolean logic andKolmogorovian (or Bayesian) probability theory have exercised along influence
on the way in which scholars formalize human behavior under uncertainty. However, empirical evidence,
accumulated in the last thirty years in cognitive psychology, clearly indicates that these classical structures
do not provide the most general modeling framework for human decision making.
There are three major domains of cognition where deviations from classical logical and probabilistic
structures have been observed.
The first of these two domains is ‘concept theory’. Cognitive scientists know that concepts exhibit
‘graded’, or ‘fuzzy’, ‘typicality’, e.g., humans estimate an exemplar such as Robin as more typical than
Stork as a typical example of the concept Bird. A problem arises when one tries to formalize the typicality
of the combination of two concepts in terms of the typicality of the component concepts which form that
combination. One is intuitively led to think that the standard rules of classical (fuzzy set) logic and
probability theory apply in such combinations. However, Osherson and Smith showed in 1981 that this
intuitionisnotcorrectforconceptconjunctions. Humansscorethetypicality ofanexemplarsuchasGuppy
with respect to the conjunction Pet-Fish as higher than the typicality of Guppy with respect to both Pet
and Fish separately (‘Guppy effect’) [30]. One realizes at once that typicality violates standard rules of
classical (fuzzy set) logic. A second set of human experiments on concept combinations was performed by
James Hampton. He measured the membership weight, i.e. normalized membership estimation, of several
exemplars,e.g., Apple, Broccoli, Almond, etc., withrespecttopairsofconcepts, e.g., Fruits, Vegetables, and
their conjunction, e.g., Fruits and Vegetables, or disjunction, e.g., Fruits or Vegetables. These membership
weights again showed systematic deviations from standard classical (fuzzy set) rules for conjuction [31] and
disjunctionoftwoconcepts[32]. Theconclusionisimmediate: onecannotexpressconceptualgradenessina
classical(fuzzy)set-theoreticmodel. Inmoregeneralterms,onecannotrepresentexperimentalmembership
weights in a single classical probability space satisfying the axioms of Kolmogorov [7].
The second set of empirical findings showing unexpected deviations from classicality pertains to ‘deci-
sion theory’ and can be traced back to the work of Kahneman and Tversky in the 1980’s. Their famous
experiment on the ‘Linda story’ revealed that situations exist where the participants estimate the prob-
ability of the conjunction of two events as higher than the probability of one of them, thus violating
monotonicity of classical probability (more generally, Bayes’ rule) [33]. This ‘conjunction fallacy’ is an
example of a ‘human probability judgement’ (a ‘disjunction fallacy’ has also been observed where humans
estimate the probability of the disjunction of two events to be less than the probability of one of them)
and classical Kolmogorovian probability is again not appliable in these cases [10]. A ‘disjunction effect’
was also identified by Tversky and Shafir in the nineties [34]. In the latter effect, people prefer action A
over action B if they know that an event X occurs, and also if they know that X does not occur, but
they prefer B over A if they do not know whether X occurs or not. The disjunction effect violates a
fundamental principle of expected utility theory, Savage’s ‘Sure-Thing principle’ [19] (more generally, the
total probability law of classical probability), revealing that humans show an ‘uncertainty aversion’, as we
will see in Sect. 3.
Thesesurprisingfindingsled several scholars to explore alternatives to traditional modeling approaches
that could better cope with the effects, fallacies and paradoxes above. As we already have tried to argue
in Sect. 1, a major alternative can be the so called ‘quantum cognition approach’, which applies the
conceptual and mathematical framework of quantum mechanics to model cognitive processes [6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 15, 17].
Quantum mechanics provides a specific mathematical framework to formalize microscopic phenomena.
More concretely, any entity is described in the quantum formalism by a specifically structured linear space
over complex numbers, called ‘Hilbert space’. The state of an entity is represented by a vector belonging
to this Hilbert space, while a measurement performed on an entity by means of a measurement apparatus
is represented by a specific operator, called ‘self-adjoint operator’, mapping a vector of this Hilbert space
into another vector of the same space. The measuring apparatus provides a ‘measurement context’ for
the measured entity and induces an ‘indeterministic change of state’ of the entity itself, in which a single
outcomeisactualizedinasetofpossibleoutcomesasaconsequenceoftheinteractionbetweenthemeasured
entity and the measuring apparatus. Heisenberg called this change of state a ‘transition from potential
to actual’, since the quantum state incorporates these intrinsic and unavoidable aspects of ‘contextuality’,
‘purepotentiality’and‘uncertainty’. Thestatisticsofrepeatedmeasurementsisdescribedbyaprobabilistic
rule, called the ‘Born rule’, and the ensuing quantum probability model does not satisfy the restrictions of
classical Kolmogorovian probability. This mathematical formalism naturally copes with very fundamental
quantum effects, such as ‘interference’, ‘superposition’ and ‘entanglement’.
Whatwas aprioricompletely unexpectedis thatthemathematical formalism sketched above, which we
call ‘quantum mathematics’ to emphasize that it is used for modeling purposesoutsideof physics, has been
very powerful to represent human decision making. In particular, the theoretical framework of quantum
probability, which is more general than classical Kolmogorovian probability, has been able, not only to
cope with all the cognitive situations above, where traditional probability models are problematical, but it
has also shown a capability to predict the results of new experiments which have been performed in recent
years. In our opinion, those outcomes do show that there is a serious rationale for arguing that genuine
quantum structures may exist in the mechanisms of conceptual combination [7, 11, 12, 16, 17], human
probability and similarity judgments [6, 9, 10, 15, 35], and thereby also in behavioral economics/finance
[8, 13, 14, 35, 36].
The success of the quantum cognition approach goes beyond its modeling effectiveness. Indeed, there
are deep analogies between the interactions (of a physical nature) occurring in a quantum measurement
process, and the interactions (of a cognitive nature) occurring in a decision process. More concretely, in
a quantum measurement process, the measurement context actualizes one outcome among the possible
outcomes, thus provoking an indeterministic change of state of the microscopic quantum particle that is
measured. Similarly, whenever a person is asked to give a preference, or to make a choice, or to take a
decision, contextual influence (of a cognitive type) and a transition from potential to actual occur in which
an outcome is actualized froma setof possibleoutcomes. Onecan say that, in bothquantumand cognitive
realms, measurements ‘create’, rather than just ‘record’, properties of the measured entities. A second
important common aspect of quantum and cognitive realms is that each measurement changes the state of
the measured entity in a different way, that is, the probability of getting a given pair of outcomes in two
sequential measurements depends on the order in which the measurements are performed. One typically
says that measurements are generally ‘non-commutative’, or ‘non-compatible’, in the quantum jargon.
Cognitive experiments frequently provide significant examples of non-compatible sequential questions. At
variance with classical Kolmogorovian probability, quantum probability enables coping with this kind of
contextuality, purepotentiality andordereffects occurringinbothphysicalandcognitive realms [7,10,12].
Theresultisthatweareatatheoretical crossroadinhumancognition, havingeithertocontinuerelying
on classical probability theory and accept the observed deviations as fallacies or aversions, or to look at
alternative approaches that allow for the provision of better descriptive and normative accounts of human
decision making. The chosen path may have an impact on human life in general, as economics, financial
and political decisions strongly depend on decision making models.
Inthisframeworkwecansituatethethirdsetofempiricaldifficultiesoftraditionalclassicalprobabilistic
approaches to human decision making, namely, those characterizing behavioral economics. This will be
discussed in the next section.
3 The Ellsberg paradox
Itis usually maintained that individualsbehave in uncertainty situations in sucha way that they maximize
their wealth which, according to ‘expected utility theory’ (EUT) [18, 19], can be achieved by maximizing
expected utility. The simplicity, mathematical tractability and predictive success of EUT make it the
predominant economics model of decision making under uncertainty. However, starting from the work of
Maurice Allais [20], significant empirical deviations from this ‘expected utility maximization rule’ have
been systematically observed in specific types of situations, and these deviations are traditionally referred
to as paradoxes.
EUT was originally developed by von Neumannand Morgenstern [18]. Theyformulated a setof axioms
that allow to represent decision maker preferences over the set of ‘acts’ (functions from the set of states
of nature into the set of consequences) by a suitable functional E u(.), the ‘expected utility’, where u is
a ‘Bernouilli utility function’ on the set of consequences, and p is an objective probability measure on the
set of states of nature.
How does EUT cope with uncertainty? Knight pointed out the difference between ‘risk’ and ‘uncer-
tainty’ reserving the term ‘risk’ for situations that can be described by objective probabilities, and the
term ‘uncertainty’ to refer to situations in which agents do not know the probabilities associated with each
of the possible outcomes of an act [37]. Von Neumann and Morgenstern’s formulation of EUT did not
contemplate the latter possibility, since all probabilities are objective in their scheme. For this reason,
Savage extended EUT allowing agents to construct their own subjective probabilities when objective prob-
abilities are not available [19]. Hence, according to Savage’s extension of EUT, or SEUT, the distinction
proposed by Knight would be irrelevant. Ellsberg instead showed in a series of ‘thought experiments’ that
Act red yellow black
f1 $12 $0 $0
f2 $0 $0 $12
f3 $12 $12 $0
f4 $0 $12 $12
Table 1: The payoff matrix for thetypical Ellsberg paradox situation.
Knightian’s distinction is empirically meaningful, thus pointing out some limitations of Savage’s SEUT
[21]. In particular, Ellsberg presented the following experiment.
Consider one urn with 30 red balls and 60 balls that are either yellow or black, the latter in unknown
proportion. One ball will be drawn at random from the urn. Then, free of charge, a person is asked to
bet on one of the acts f1, f2, f3 and f4 defined in Tab. 1. When asked to rank these gambles most of
the persons choose to bet on f1 over f2 and f4 over f3. This ‘Ellsberg preference’ cannot be explained by
SEUT. Indeed, preferences must be consistent under SEUT, in the sense that f1 is preferred to f2 if and
only if f3 is preferred to f4. Rephrasing, individuals’ ranking of the sub-acts [12 on ‘red’; 0 on ‘black’]
versus[0on ‘red’; 12 on‘black’] dependsuponwhethertheevent ‘yellow’ yieldsapayoff of 0or 12, contrary
to what is suggested by the Sure-Thing principle, one of the axioms of Savage’s SEUT. The conclusion
follows at once. There is no way to define an utility function u, associated with the given payoffs, and
subjective probabilities, associated with the events ‘red’, ‘yellow’ and ‘black’, such that the preferences
observed in the Ellsbergsituation are satisfied. Nevertheless, these choices have a direct intuition: f1 offers
the 12 prize with an ‘objective probability’ of 1/3, and f2 offers the same prize but in an element of the
‘subjective partition’ {‘black’, ‘yellow’}. In the same way, f4 offers the prize with an objective probability
of 2/3, whereas f3 offers the same payoff on the union of the unambiguous event ‘red’ and the ambiguous
event ‘yellow’. Thus, in both cases the unambiguous bet is preferred to its ambiguous counterpart. This
preference for known probability over ambiguous bets is now called ‘ambiguity aversion’. Interestingly
enough, the deviation from classical logical reasoning observed in the Ellsberg paradox is deeply connected
withthedisjunctioneffectintroducedinSect. 2,bothbeingcharactedrized byaviolation oftheSure-Thing
principle.
Extensions of SEUT were worked out to tackle the issues of SEUT raised by Ellsberg-type preferences.
These generalizations are primarily axiomatically formulated and consist in replacing the Sure-Thing prin-
ciple by weaker axioms. We briefly summarize the most known extensions of SEUT, as follows.
(i)‘Choquetexpected utility’. Thismodelconsidersasubjectivenon-additiveprobability (or, capacity)
overthestatesofnatureratherthanasubjectiveprobability. Thus,decisionmakerscouldunderestimateor
overestimate probabilities intheEllsbergexperiment, andambiguity aversion isequivalent totheconvexity
of the capacity (pessimistic beliefs) [38, 39, 40].
(ii) ‘Max-Min expected utility’, or ‘expected utility with multiple priors’. The lack of knowledge about
the states of nature of the decision maker cannot be represented by a unique probability measure but,
rather, by a set of probability measures. Then, an act f is preferred to g if and only if min p∈P E p u(f) >
min p∈P E p u(g), where P is a convex and closed set of additive probability measures. Ambiguity aversion is
represented by the pessimistic beliefs of the agent which takes decisions considering the worst probabilistic
scenario [41].
(iii) ‘Variational preferences’. In this dynamic generalization of the Max-Min expected utility, agents
rank acts according to the criterion inf p∈△{E
u(f) + c(p)}, where c(p) is a closed and convex penalty
2The Sure-Thing principle was presented by Savage by introducing the ‘businessman example’ and can be rigorously
formalized within SEUT, but it can be intuitively stated as in Sect. 2.
Act Red Yellow Black Green
f1 $0 $50 $25 $25
f2 $0 $25 $50 $25
f3 $25 $50 $25 $0
f4 $25 $25 $50 $0
Table 2: The payoff matrix for the ‘Machina reflection example with lower tail shifts’.
function associated with the probability election [42].
(iv) ‘Second order probabilities’. This is a model of preferences over acts where the decision maker
prefers act f to act g iff E φ(E u(f)) > E φ (E u(g)), where E is the expectation operator, u is a von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function, φ is an increasing transformation, and µ is a subjective probability
over the set of probability measures p that the decision maker thinks are feasible. Ambiguity aversion is
here represented by the concavity of the transformation φ [43].
The approaches (i)–(iv) have been extensively applied in economic and financial modeling. Given the
enormous challenge of formalizing human decision making, it does not come as a surprise that the four
above approaches do have shortcomings ([22, 44]). It should also be stressed that in fact none of these
models can satisfactorily represent more general Ellsberg-type situations, e.g., ‘Machina-type paradoxes’
[22, 45]).
In 2009 Mark Machina proposed new thought experiments, the ‘50:51 example’ and the ‘reflection
example’, which seriously challenged the approaches (i)–(iv) [22, 45]). In particular, the reflection example
questions the ‘tail separability’ assumption of Choquet expected utility exactly as the Ellsberg three-color
example questions the Sure-Thing principle of SEUT. A version of the Machina reflection example can be
formalized as follows.
Consider one urn with 20 balls, 10 are either red or yellow in unknown proportion, 10 are either black
or green in unknown proportion. One ball will be drawn at random from the urn. Then, free of charge, a
personis asked to beton one of the acts f1, f2, f3 and f4 definedin Tab. 2. Machina introducedthe notion
of ‘informational symmetry’, that is, the events “the drawn ball is red or yellow” and “the drawn ball is
black or green” have known and equal probability and, furthermore, the ambiguity about the distribution
ofcolors is similarinthetwoevents. Underinformationalsymmetry, peopleshouldpreferactf1 over actf2
and act f4 over act f3, or they should prefer act f2 over act f1 and act f3 over act f4. This is in particular
inconsistent with the predictions of Choquet expected utility in (i). A recent experiment confirms the
preference of f1 over f2 and f4 over f3, consistently with informational symmetry [46].
We do not insist on the Machina paradox in the present paper, for the sake of brevity – we will briefly
come back to it in Sect. 4 within our quantum-theoretic approach. We limit ourselves to mention that
further investigation is still needed towards the construction of a satisfactory framework for representing
ambiguity, ambiguity aversion and, more generally, human preferences under uncertainty [46].
4 Quantum structures in the Ellsberg paradox
We expose in this section our approach to economic agents decision making based on the mathematical
formalism of quantum mechanics. We do not present the technical details of our modeling, but instead
we aim to be as intuitive and explicative as possible.The reader interested to the technical aspects of our
approach can refer to our papers [14, 23, 24].
The first insight towards the elaboration of a quantum probabilistic framework to model Ellsberg-type
situations came fromour conceptual and structuralinvestigation of how theapproaches generalizing SEUT
cope with ambiguity and ambiguity aversion [38, 41, 42, 43]. As we know, ambiguity characterizes a situa-
tion without a probability model describing it, while risk characterizes a situation where one presupposes
that a classical probability model on a σ–algebra of events exists. The generalizations in (i)–(iv), Sect. 3,
considermoregeneralstructuresthanasingleclassical probabilitymodelonaσ–algebra. Weareconvinced
that this is exactly the point: ambiguity, due to its contextual nature, structurally needs a non-classical
probability model. To this end we have elaborated a general framework for this type of situations, based
on the notion of ‘contextual risk’ and inspired by the probability structure of quantum mechanics. The
latter is indeed intrinsically different from a classical probability on a σ–algebra, because the set of events
does ‘not’ form a Boolean algebra (see Sect. 2).
Thesecondinsightcamefromtheapplicationofourquantumcognitionapproachtothedecisionmaking
process occurring in an Ellsberg-type situation. In such a decision process, there is a contextual influence
of a cognitive, not physical, nature having its origin in the way the mind of the person involved in the
decision, i.e. a choice between two acts, relates to the situation that is the subject of the decision making,
i.e. the Ellsberg situation. This led us to represent both the Ellsberg and Machina paradox situations by
using the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics in Hilbert space [14, 23, 24].
Let us firstly introduce what we call the ‘cognitive Ellsberg entity’, namely, the situation of an urn
containing 30 red balls and 60 black and yellow balls, the latter in unknown proportion. We assume that
this entity is in a specific state p , represented by a unit vector |vi of the Hilbert space
on the field of
complexnumbersC. 3 Letusthenconsidera‘color measurement’ontheEllsbergentity, withthreepossible
outcomes, ‘red’, ‘yellow’ and ‘black’, which we describe by the context g and represent by the self-adjoint
operator G. The corresponding probability of getting one of these three outcomes in a measurement of g
in the state p can be interpreted as a subjective probability, but such a probability is calculated by using
standard rules for quantum probability. Of course, the probability of getting ‘red’ must be 1/3, if we want
to represent the canonical three-color Ellsberg example. We realize at once that, already at this stage, the
presence of ambiguity is formalized by means of a quantum state and a quantum probability measure for
theevents occurringinthisstate. Moreover, thisstatecanchangeundertheinfluenceofaspecificcognitive
context, whichreflectsthedifferentpreferenceofagents towardsambiguity (thisperspectiveisgettingmore
and more accepted in the scientific community, including mainstream psychologists; please see [25]). Let
us then come to the acts f1, f2, f3 and f4. They are represented by the self-adjoint operators F1, F2, F3
and F4, respectively, on
. We can calculate the expected utility associated with each act f
, i= 1,...,4,
in terms of the expected values of the operators F in the Ellsberg state p , again by following standard
quantum probabilistic rules. One can then show that, while the expected utility associated with the acts
f1 andf4 is independentof the Ellsbergstate, that is, this expected utility is ‘ambiguity-free’, the expected
utility associated with the acts f2 and f3 depends on this Ellsberg state, hence on subjective preferences
towards ambiguity. This means that it is possible to find suitable ‘Ellsberg superposition states’, that is,
superpositions of two states incorporating different attitudes towards ambiguity, such that the expected
utilityoff1 isgreater(less)thantheexpectedutilityoff2 andtheexpectedutilityoff4 isgreater(less)than
the expected utility of f3. This is in perfect agreement with the typical pattern of response of individual
agents in Ellsberg-type paradoxes [14, 23, 24]. One recognizes here a major novelty of our approach. The
subjective probabilities are not calculated through a fixed mathematical rule assigning to individual events
the same probability in each act. The subjective probabilities instead ‘change’ depending on the state of
the cognitive Ellsberg entity, which incorporates subjective attitutes towards ambiguity.
The construction above shows that the Ellsberg situation can be represented in a quantum-mechanical
probability framework. But, to have an explicit representation we needed to perform a real experiment on
human participants. This is exactly what we did, reporting its results in [14]. To perform the experiment
3The choice of a 3-dimensional space is justified by the fact that three elementary and independent events appear in this
Ellsberg urn.
we sent out a questionnaire to several people, including friends, relatives and students, to avoid statistical
selection biases. An extract of the text is as follows.
...Imagine an urn containing 90 balls of three different colors: red balls, black balls and yellow balls.
We know that the number of red balls is 30 and that the sum of the the black balls and the yellow balls
is 60. The questions of our investigation are about the situation where somebody randomly takes one ball
from the urn.
(i) The first question is about a choice to be made between two bets: bet f1 and bet f2. Bet f1 involves
winning ‘10 euros when the ball is red’ and ‘zero euros when it is black or yellow’. Bet f2 involves winning
‘10 euros when the ball is black’ and ‘zero euros when it is red or yellow’. The question we would ask you
to answer is: Which of the two bets, bet f1 or bet f2, would you prefer?
(ii) The second question is again about a choice between two different bets, bet f3 and bet f4. Bet f3
involves winning ‘10 euros when the ball is red or yellow’ and ‘zero euros when the ball is black’. Bet f4
involves winning ‘10 euros when the ball is black or yellow’ and ‘zero euros when the ball is red’. The
second question therefore is: Which of the two bets, bet f3 or bet f4, would you prefer? ...
Let us now analyze the obtained results. Our test on the Ellsberg paradox problem involved 59 par-
ticipants. The answers of the participants were distributed as follows: (a) 34 participants preferred acts
f1 and f4; (b) 12 participants preferred acts f2 and f3; (c) 7 participants preferred acts f2 and f4; (d) 6
participants preferred acts f1 and f3. This makes the weights with preference of act f1 over act f2 to be
0.68 against 0.32, and the weights with preference of act f4 over act f3 to be 0.69 against 0.31. Hence,
46 participants over 59, that is, 78%, chose the combination of act f1 and act f4 or act f2 and act f3.
This inversion of preferences cannot be explained by SEUT,and our findingreplicated the most commonly
observed choice pattern in the three-color urn.
Participants’ choices above can be represented in a quantum-mechanical framework. Indeed, let us
firstly consider the choice to bet on f1 or on f2. This is a choice with two possible outcomes, say o1 and o2,
hence it can be described as a measurement giving o if act f is chosen, i = 1,2. The simplest outcomes
are o1 = +1 and o2 = −1. We represent the measurement associated with the first bet by the self-adjoint
operator O12. Let us then consider the choice to bet on f3 or on f4. This is a choice with two possible
outcomes too, say o3 and o4, hence it can be described as a measurement giving o
is chosen,
i = 3,4. The simplest outcomes are o3 = +1 and o4 = −1. We represent the measurement associated
with the second bet by the self-adjoint operator O34. We proved in [14] that the operatorial relation
O12·O34 = O34·O12 holds. This means that the corresponding ‘choice measurements’ are compatible, or
commutative, in the sense that they can be measured together, and no order effects should appear if we
reverse the order of questions in our experiment (see Sect. 2). But, we also proved that the possibility of
representing our experimental data by compatible measurements for the bets relies crucially on our choice
of the Hilbert space C3 over complex numbers C as a modeling space. Indeed, if a Hilbert space over
real numbers is attempted, no compatible measurements for the bets and the data can be constructed any
longer [14].
The above result is relevant, in our opinion, since it shows that quantum structures can be validly
invoked in the Ellsberg paradox. Indeed, the existence of compatible measurements to represent decision
makers’ choices among the different acts in our experiment is a direct consequence of the fact that we used
a complex Hilbert space as a modeling space. If one instead uses a real Hilbert space, then the collected
experimentaldatacannotbereproducedbycompatiblemeasurements. Hence,twoalternativesarepossible.
Either one requires that compatible measurements occur in an Ellsberg-type situation, and then one has to
accept a complex Hilbert space representation where ambiguity is incorporated into superposed quantum
4This is the typical number of participants in experiments on psychological effects of the type investigated by Kahneman
and Tversky, such as the conjunction fallacy, and the disjunction effect [33, 34]. We think that ambiguity aversion shares
many features with these psychological effects, as discussed in Sect. 2.
states, and these superpositions are of the ‘complex type’. Hence entailing genuine interference since
whenever a superposed state vector is constructed with complex (non-real) coefficients, the quantum effect
ofinterferenceisalwaysatplay. Alternatively, onecanusearepresentationinarealHilbertspacebut,then,
one should accept that an Ellserg-type situation cannot be reproduced by compatible measurements. In
either case, the appearance of quantum structures, i.e. interference due to the presence of genuine complex
numbers, or incompatibility due to the impossibility to represent the data by compatible measurements,
seems unavoidable in the Ellsberg paradox situation.
Letusbrieflysummarizethenovelties andpossibleadvantagesofusingaquantum-theoreticapproachto
model economic agents’ decisions under uncertainty. By introducing a more general quantum probabilistic
framework we are able both to reproduce the typical pattern that is observed in an Ellsberg paradox
situation,andtomodelarealdecisionmakingexperimentonthisparadoxicalsituation. Therepresentation
of the decision maker’s subjective beliefs and probabilities by means of respectively a quantum state vector
and a quantum probability measure naturally capture the presence of ambiguity in this type of situations.
And, more important, ambiguity aversion is accounted for by describing the decision maker’s choice as the
result of a contextual interaction with the cognitive context. In this respect, ambiguity aversion is one of
the cognitive landscapes driving human decisions under uncertainty, but other cognitive contexts may well
be present, and those can be modeled in our quantum framework. The latter remark is important, and we
think it deserves further explanation.
Firstly,ourquantum-theoreticapproachworkswellinthetraditionalEllsbergexperiment(‘singlethree-
colorurn’),butitperfectlyreproducestheotherexperimentsconsideredbyEllsberg(‘singlefour-colorurn’,
‘double two-color urn’).
Secondly, our approach is general enough to cope with different empirically based human attitudes
towards ambiguity. Indeed, many experiments were performed after Ellsberg and, while most of them
confirmed ambiguity aversion [26], some experiments could be explained in terms of ‘ambiguity neutrality’
and even ‘ambiguity attraction’ [27]. This seems to confirm our insight that other cognitive contexts may
play a role in driving human decision making in these situations.
It is worth mentioning, to conclude, that our quantum-theoretic modeling is also sufficiently general
to cope with various generalizations of the Ellsberg paradox, which are problematic, such as the Machina
paradox and other similar ‘ambiguity laden’ situations [22, 24, 45]. In this respect, the preferences in the
Machina reflection example in Sect. 3 can be described by assuming that the cognitive context, mainly
driven by ‘informational symmetry’, determines a change in thestate of the‘cognitive Machina entity’. We
have recently worked out a quantum-theoretic model of the Machina paradox situation where the state of
the cognitive Machina entity is represented by a unit vector of the Hilbert space
– here we have four
elementary events – and is bijectively associated with a subjective probability distribution. In other words,
also in the Machina paradox situation, the subjective probability changes with the state and is influenced
by the cognitive context. Our quantum-theoretic model in
reproduces informational symmetry and
perfectly agrees with the data collected in [47].
We are currently investigating the possibility of a contextual generalization of EUT and SEUT based
on a quantum probability framework, which would provide a normative status to our approach.