A Hierarchical fuzzy controller for a biped robot.
Abdallah Zaidi , Nizar Rokbani, and Adel. M. Alimi, Senior Member IEEE
REGIM Lab.: REsearch Groups on Intelligent Machines
National Engineering School of Sfax,
University of Sfax, BP 1173, Sfax, 3038, Tunisia
{Abdallah.zaidi, nizar.rokbani, adel.alimi}@ieee.org
Abstract—In this paper the investigation is placed on the four. Finally, paragraph five include the conclusions and
hierarchic neuro-fuzzy systems as a possible solution for biped further work.
control. An hierarchic controller for biped is presented, it
includes several sub-controllers and the whole structure is II. NEURO-FUZZY AND HIEARCHIC FUZZY SYSTEMS
generated using the adaptive Neuro-fuzzy method. The proposed
A. Neuro-fuzzy systems
hierarchic system focus on the key role that the centre of mass
position plays in biped robotics, the system sub-controllers Artificial neural networks (ANN) and fuzzy inference
generate their outputs taken into consideration the position of system (FIS) are generally considered to be complementary
that key point. areas of research. The combination of FIS and ANN define a
neuro-fuzzy system in such a way that the parameters of FIS
Keywords: biped robot; Neuro-fuzzy systems; hierarchical fuzzy
are determined by using the neural network learning
systems.
algorithms [14].
The neuro-fuzzy system uses the linguistic knowledge of
I. INTRODUCTION
fuzzy inference system and the learning capability of neural
The control of a humanoid robot is a challenging task
network. To describe the architecture a neuro-
due to the hard-to stabilize. In recent years, the control of
fuzzy system, consider Fig1. For simplicity, we assume
biped robots has made great progress. The control of a biped
that our fuzzy system has two inputs and one output.
walking robot is to find a control law that allows the
Furthermore, we assume that the defuzzification of the
coordination of movements of the various members of the
variables is a linear combination of the first order of input
articulated mechanical structure [2]. This enables the
variables [14, 15].
movement of the robot on a ground. Different methods were
developed for the control of biped robots with a focus on the
stabilization of biped locomotion system [3, 4].
Biped robots are a typical case of non-linear complex
system; the control of such systems is addressed using
classical methodologies such as the PID and also intelligent
techniques such as PSO, fuzzy sets, neural networks and
neuro-fuzzy systems [4, 5, 6, 7].
The IZIMAN is a research projects that conducting in
REGIM laboratory, “Research group on Intelligent
Machines”. The main challenge of the project is to propose an
intelligent architecture and controller that are “humanly”
inspired [8]. Within this project several gait generation Fig1. neuro-fuzzy system architecture
methodologies focusing on PSO [9, 10, 11, 13], and also
neuro-fuzzy was investigated [7], PSO based biped control B. Hierarchical fuzzy systems
was implemented on a small size robot [12]. Hierarchical fuzzy systems have been created to address
In this paper the investigation is placed on the hierarchic one of the major problems of standard fuzzy systems which is
neuro-fuzzy systems as a possible solution for biped control.
essentially the impact of the number of input variables on the
An hierarchic controller for biped is presented, it includes
number of rules of the system [16, 17]. The use of a
several sub-controllers and the whole structure is generated
hierarchic structure allowed designing a set of sub-controllers
using the adaptive Neuro fuzzy method.
with limited number of variables for each one, see Figure 2.
This paper is organized as follows: the first section include
the description of neuro-fuzzy and hierarchical systems. In the Complex structures including a hierarchic organization
second section, the hierarchical fuzzy controller for biped are the typical target of the HFLC design concept. In bio-
robot is presented. In the third section, we present the inspired systems, such as the human locomotion system, a
controllers design, obtained results are presented in paragraph
hierarchic design could be directly inspired from the system. The overall architectural design is given in figure 4,
For such systems the HLFC have a build in justification. where a set of neuro-fuzzy controllers integrated into a
Hierarchical structure centered on the COM position of the
biped robot. The system generates the needed joints rotations
for a given COM reference position, a supervision system is
then used to compute the estimated position of the COM.
Due to the symmetry of the walking system, the design of
the left and right legs are the same, a leg include four
controllers. The left leg controllers are HFLC1, HFLC3,
HFLC5 and HFLC7, the right leg controllers are HFLC2,
HFLC4, HFLC6 and HFLC 8. Since the controllers design is
similar only the left leg controllers are described in this paper.
The overall design appears in figure5, a brief description of
the sub-controllers is given bellow:
 For HFL1, the controller inputs are the vector
(x0, y0) coordinates of the center of mass and the
angle angel (beta_left), the output is the same leg
angle (gamma_left).
 For HFL3, the controller inputs are the vector
(x0, y0) coordinates of the center of mass and the
Fig2. Hierarchical fuzzy systems architecture as in [20]
angle angel (gamma_left), the output is the
vector (xcl,ycl) coordinates of left ankle.
III. AN HIEARCHICAL FUZZY SYSTEM FOR BIPED ROBOT  For HFL5, the controller inputs are the vector
(x0, y0) coordinates of the center of mass the
A planar biped model is used, the model includes a knee vector (xcl,ycl) coordinates of left ankle. The
rotation, a hip rotation, and the remaining of the body is output is the angel (beta_left).
represented by a punctual mass with a motion, see figure3,
such a model is close to the “Bipsim” proposed in [22].
Fig4. Structure of the biped robot
The training Data-set needed to generate the controllers Fig5. Hierarchic fuzzy controller for biped robot
using the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy System method is obtained
IV. RESULTS
from a classical dynamic model similar to [18]. Separated
A. Controllers Responses
Data-sets of 10, 30, 40, 60 and 120 samples are created in
order to evaluate the impact of the training set size on the In this paragraph we presented the controllers response
quality of the controllers. Test data set relative to training data surface, representing controller output in accordance with its
sets are separately managed. inputs. The controller’s behavior corresponding to the left leg
and using a training data set of 10 samples appears in figure 6.
Fig6. Controllers Design, from top to bottom HFLC1, HFLC2 and HFLC3
controllers responses.
B. Effect of the training data size
The controllers are generated using a set of training Data
including respectively 10, 30, 40 and 120 samples; t
are evaluated using a set of test Data. The cumulative scare
error for all test data is computed, it is used as an evaluation
criteria of the HFLCs. RReessuullttss aarree pprreesseenntteedd in figures 7, 8 and
9.
.
Fig7. representation of the eerrrroorr of the proposed HFLC1
Fig8. Representation of the error of HFLC3
, HFLC2 and HFLC3
Fig9. RReepprreesseennttaattiioonn ooff tthhee error of HFLC5
The controllers are generated using a set of training Data TThhee rreessuullttss sshhooww tthhaatt tthhee bbeesstt ttrraaiinniinngg sseett ssiizzee ffoorr aallll
including respectively 10, 30, 40 and 120 samples; then they ccoonnttrroolllleerrss iiss mmaaddee ooff 3300 ssaammpplleess. HFLC1 had an error of
(2255)) ffoorr aa ttrraaiinniinngg sseett ooff ((4400)) ssaammpplleess,, aa ssiimmiillaarr rreessuulltt iiss
are evaluated using a set of test Data. The cumulative scare
oobbsseerrvveedd iinn HHFFLLCC55 wwhheenn ttrraaiinneedd wwiitthh ((6600)) ssaammpplleess iittss eerrrroorr iiss
error for all test data is computed, it is used as an evaluation about (3.5).
For a training set of 30 samples the error is about (0.001) [12] N. Rokbani, A. Zaidi, and A.M Alimi, “,Prototyping a Biped Robot
for HFLC1, (0.00001) for HFLC3 and (0.0001) in the case of Using an Educational Robotics Kit.", International Conference on
HFLC5. Education and E-Learning Innovations, ICEELI", 2012.
[13] N. Rokbani, Adel M. Alimi, “Inverse Kinematics Using Particle Swarm
V. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK Optimization, A Statistical Analysis.”, Procedia Engineering, Volume
64, 2013, Pages 1602-161.
In this paper, we have proposed a hierarchical fuzzy [14] L. A. Zadeh, "Fuzzy Logic, Neural Networks, and Soft Computing,"
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 37,No. 3, pp. 77-84, March 1994.
controller of the biped robot. The generation methodology as
[15] D. NAUCK, R. KRUSE. “What are Neuro-Fuzzy Classifiers?”,
well as the test procedure is explained. An investigation on the University Of MADENBURG, 1997.
effect of the number of training samples is also conducted and [16] M.T Jelleli, , A.M Alimi, “Automatic Design of a Least Complicated
Hierarchical Fuzzy System”, Proceedings of the FUZZIEEE 2010
allowed to fix the optimal size to (30) experimentally.
conference, WCCI 2010 IEEE World Congress on Computational
The paper detailed only the generation and test of the left- Intelligence, July, 18-23, 2010 - CCIB, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 807-813.
[17] Joo, M.G., Lee, J.S., Universal approximation by hierarchical fuzzy
leg since the right leg has a symmetric Behavior. The obtained
system with constraints on the fuzzy rule, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol.
results are interesting with a limited error for the main 130, 2002, p. 175-188
A comparative test between the full controller and a
classical one such in [18] will be developed soon.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial
support of this work by grants from General Direction of
Scientific Research (DGRST), Tunisia, under the ARUB
program.