A jetlet hierarchy for ideal fluid dynamics
C. J. Cotter, D. D. Holm, H. O. Jacobs, and D. M. Meier
(Dated: May 29, 2022)
Truncated Taylor expansions of smooth flow maps are used in Hamilton’s principle to derive a
multiscale Lagrangian particle representation of ideal fluid dynamics. Numerical simulations for
scattering of solutions at one level of truncation are found to produce solutions at higher levels.
These scattering events to higher levels in the Taylor expansion are interpreted as modeling a
cascade to smaller scales.
PACSnumbers: numbers
Particle-likesolutionssuchaspointvorticesareanim-
portant tool in fluid dynamics [1]. This paper discusses
thedynamicsofthemultiscalehierarchyoflocaldeforma-
tionsofafluidflowaroundanysetofLagrangianparticles
embedded in the flow introduced in [2, 3]. This hierar-
chy carries the information found in a truncated Taylor
series of the flow in the local regions around the chosen
Lagrangianreferencepoints. TruncatingtheTaylorseries
ofafunctionatk-thorderproducesapolynomialthatis t = 0 t = 1
called the k-jet of that function. We call each one of the
embedded particles a ‘0-jetlet’. The hierarchy of multi-
scaleinformationcarriedinthelocaldeformationsofthe
flow provided by truncating the Taylor expansion of the
flow around one of the 0-jetlets at k-th order is called
a ‘k-jetlet’. This paper derives the dynamical equations
thatgoverntheinteractionsamongmembersofthismul-
tiscale hierarchy of local deformations around embedded
particles in a fluid flow. The paper also provides reveal-
ing numerical simulations of these interactions. Its main t = 2 t = 4
results are:
FIG. 1: (color online) A jetlet collision. The initial flow
1. We explicitly construct Hamiltonian dynamical field is made up of two jetlets that belong to the lowest
equations for a hierarchy of jetlets in a regularized level in the hierarchy. The jetlet locations are shown in
model of ideal incompressible fluid flow. red, while the arrows in the top left panel represent the ini-
tial linear momenta. At first, the jetlets propagate at con-
stant speed; when they get close, they spiral in towards each
2. We find that these equations predict that jetlets
other and combine to form a jetlet at the next higher level.
carry their linear and angular momentum along a
The resulting structure propagates to the left and rotates,
Lagrangian flow path while conserving their circu-
which is due to conservation of linear and angular momenta
lation. (see equation (10) below). A video is available online at
3. In numerical simulations we investigate the tion of the previous video with a second video of single 1-
particle-like behavior found in jetlet collisions and jetletdepictshowafinitetimemergercouldapproximatethe
discovernewtypesofnonlinearinteractionsamong infinite time mergers given by the dynamics. This video is
them.
In deriving the equations of motion for this hierarchy
of jetlets we use Lagrange multipliers to enforce a set of tionofthewell-knowncascadetofinerscalesthatoccurs
kinematicconstraintsthatspecifyhowthevariousterms in nonlinear fluid flows [5].
in the expansion evolve. We find that (a) the hierar- Themotionofafluidinndimensionscanbedescribed
chyischaracterizedbycanonicalHamiltonianequations, by a time-dependent flow map ϕ, which specifies how
(b)thesolutionsobeymomentumconservationlawsthat each point x in the reference configuration follows its
canbeunderstoodaslocalizedmanifestationsofKelvin’s path q(t) = ϕ(x,t). Consequently q˙i = ui(q), where u
circulationtheorem,and(c)apairofcollidingjetletscon- is the Eulerian flow field and i=1,...,n is a coordinate
verges asymptotically in time to a jetlet at a higher level index. Thetimeevolutionoftheflowfieldcanbederived
in the hierarchy. We interpret (c) as a new representa- from Hamilton’s principle, δ (cid:96)(u)dt = 0, where (cid:96) is
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
3v6800.2041:viXra
the kinetic energy Lagrangian. For an ideal incompress- and Qi = ∂2ϕi/∂xj∂xk. As the flow map evolves in
ible fluid we have (cid:96)(u) = 1(cid:107)u(cid:107)2 = 1(cid:82) |u|2dnx. How- time, t j h k ese quantities evolve correspondingly. Namely,
ever, in order to ensure sufficient regularity, we consider the time derivatives of the first deformation gradients
instead the regularized Lagrangian (cid:96)(u) = 1(cid:107)u(cid:107)2 + evaluated at a point x in the reference configuration are
1 (cid:107)divu(cid:107)2 = 1(cid:82) u·Audnx, where the mome 2 ntum Hk op-
e 2 r (cid:15) a 2 tor A i H s k given 2 by Q˙i =ui (q)Qk and
Q˙i =ui (q)QrQ(cid:96) +ui (q)Q(cid:96) ,
(cid:18) σ2 (cid:19)k(cid:18) 1 (cid:19) jk ,r(cid:96) j k ,(cid:96) jk
k (cid:15)2 where sums are implied over repeated indices and we re-
call that q(t) = ϕ(x,t). Similar expressions can be de-
We will comment on the parameters σ and (cid:15) shortly. As
rivedforhigherorderdeformationgradients. Weenforce
for k, note that the flow field belonging to a Dirac-delta
these relations as constraints in Hamilton’s principle by
distributedmomentumisk−(n+1)/2timescontinuously
introducing Lagrange multipliers. That is, we define the
differentiable in space [6]. That is, if the momentum
constrained action integral
m(x) = Au(x) is equal to pδ(x−y) for some constant
vector p, then the flow field u is in Ck−(n+1)/2. (cid:90)
Hamilton’s principle for this Lagrangian leads to the i i j ,r j
EPDiff equation [7] governing the time evolution of the +Pjk(cid:0) Q˙i −ui (q)QrQ(cid:96) +ui (q)Q(cid:96) (cid:1) +... (cid:3) dt
flow field i jk ,r(cid:96) j k ,(cid:96) jk
∂ m+u·∇m+(∇u)T ·m+m(divu)=0 and require δS = 0 with respect to arbitrary variations
(1) of u, q, p, Q, P, Q, P, etc. Whenever we keep track of
several points x , ···, x in the reference configuration,
where ∗ denotes convolution and K is the Green’s func- we will index them using Greek indices and write Qi
tion for the operator A. Recently, it was shown that and Qi for the deformation gradients at x . The cor-
smooth solutions of these equations exist for all time so responding Lagrange multipliers will be denoted by Pj
long as σ > 0 and k is large enough. Moreover, these and Pjk. Sums over Greek indices will be stated explic-
solutions converge to solutions of the incompressible Eu-
itly.
ler equation when both (cid:15) and σ tend to zero, with error
The action integral above can be truncated so as to
bounds proportional to (cid:15) and σ2 [6]. Some other inter-
involve deformation gradients up to a certain order only.
estingchoicesofparametersarethefollowing: For(cid:15)=∞
Each such truncation corresponds to a level in the hier-
andk =1oneobtainsthen-dimensionalCamassa–Holm
archy of jetlets. For instance, truncating at zeroth order
equation[4]; for(cid:15)=0andk =1oneobtainstheEuler-α
model for incompressible fluids [8].
In the present paper our main interest lies with PDEs S = (cid:2) (cid:96)(u)+ (cid:88) p (q˙i −ui(q )) (cid:3) dt,
that approximate ideal incompressible fluid dynamics. 0 αi α α
Hence we consider the limit in which k →∞ and (cid:15)→0.
In this limit the (matrix-valued) Green’s function for A andtherequirementδS =0leadstothefollowingequa-
in two spatial dimensions becomes tions of motion,
Kij(x)= 1 (cid:18) e− 4 r σ 2 2 − 2σ2 (cid:16) 1−e− 4 r σ 2 2 (cid:17)(cid:19) δij q˙ α j =uj(q α ), p˙ αj =−uk ,j (q α )p αk , (3)
4πσ2 r2 (cid:88)
+ 1 (cid:18) 4σ2 (cid:16) 1−e− 4 r σ 2 2 (cid:17) −e− 4 r σ 2 2 (cid:19) xixj , (2) Au(x)= α p α δ(x−q α ). (4)
4πσ2 r2 r2
The third equation implies that
wherer =(cid:107)x(cid:107),andsimilarexpressionscanbederivedfor
higherdimensions[6]. Byappropriaterescalingsofspace uj(x)= Kjk(x−q )p . (5)
and time we may set σ = 1 as a proxy for any σ > 0. α
TheGreen’sfunction(2)wasrecentlyproposedin[9]for
We can substitute the right hand side of (5) into (3) to
incompressible diffeomorphic image registration.
obtain a finite dimensional ODE in the variables q and
Having specified the fluid model, we proceed to con- α
p . It is straightforward to verify that this ODE can be
struct an infinite hierarchy of jetlets that solve (1). Our α
written as a set of canonical Hamiltonian equations with
approach involves spatial Taylor expansions of the flow
the kinetic energy Hamiltonian
map ϕ. The spatial derivatives of ϕ are called ‘defor-
mation gradients’ in the theory of nonlinear elasticity 1(cid:88)
[10], a convention we follow here. The first two de- H = 2 p αi Kij(q α −q β )p βj .
formation gradients are thus given by Qi = ∂ϕi/∂xj α,β
Using the Green’s function K from (2) we conclude that
Asconcernstheequationsofmotionforq,p,QandP one
can verify that they are a set of canonical Hamiltonian
equations with the kinetic energy Hamiltonian
H = p Kij(q −q )p +2p Pr Qk Kij(q −q )
−Pr Qn Ps Qk Kij (q −q ).
NotethatthisHamiltonianisinvariantunderthevariable
transformation
FIG. 2: (color online) First and second levels of the jetlet
hierarchy. Panel A depicts a velocity field obtained from (5) Qi αj →Qi αk g α k j , P α i j →(g α −1)i k P α k j (8)
with p = (1,0). A video of the resulting dynamics for this
of unit deter-
Panels B, C, and D depict velocity fields obtained from (7) minant. This means that the equations of motion can
with p = (0,0) and matrices µ B ,µ C ,µ D given in equation be written in terms of the reduced variables (q α ,p α ,µ α ),
(11). The video associated to panel D is available online at
µi =Qi Pk .
Upon integrating these equations to obtain q (t) and
α One finds that
p (t), one can invoke (5) to obtain a time-dependent ve-
locityfield,u,whichsolves(1),see[7]. Inotherwords,we
have found a class of solutions to (1) parametrized by a α α αi ,i α αj ,ki α αj
finite-dimensional subspace of initial conditions. We call µ˙j =uj (q )µk +µj uk(q ).
αi ,k α αi αk ,i α
these solutions 0-jetlets and interpret q (t) and p (t) as
the positions and momenta of the 0-jetlet, respectively. By Noether’s theorem the quantities
Fortwospatialdimensionstheseparticlesarecalled‘vor-
tons’in[6]andhavethedipole-likestructurethatcanbe M α j i =(Q− α 1)j (cid:96) µ(cid:96) αk Qk αi (9)
seen in panel A of Fig. 2. The width parameter, σ,
are constant in time.
provides a spatial resolution to the velocity fields in (5).
Single jetlet solutions of this type can therefore be con- Thesymmetrytransformationin(8)isalocalizedman-
sidered to model fluid velocity at scales greater than σ. ifestationoftheparticlerelabelingsymmetryofthefluid.
To get the next level of the jetlet hierarchy we include This can be seen as follows. If the flow map ϕ is mul-
deformation gradients up to first order in the action in- tiplied from the right by a volume preserving diffeomor-
tegral, which then becomes phismψthatleavesthepointsx α invariant,thenthefirst
deformation gradients transform as
+Pj (cid:0) Q˙i −ui (q )Qr (cid:1)(cid:3) dt. αj ∂xj α ∂xk α ∂xj α αk∂xj α
These transformations are indeed of the form given in
A calculation shows that Hamilton’s principle implies
(8). The conservation law associated with the particle
(cid:88) relabeling symmetry is the circulation of the flow field
i αi α αi αj ,r α around a closed loop advected by the fluid. Hence, the
conservationofthequantitiesin(9)isalocalizedversion
where δ (x−q ) is the distributional derivative of the of Kelvin’s circulation theorem, a fact previously noted
Dirac delta function. That is, for any test function φ we in [2].
In addition to the previous symmetry, there are also Thetruncatedexpansionholdswhenxissmallcompared
translationandrotationsymmetries,whichyieldthecon- toalengthscaleσ providedthederivativesoff(x/σ)are
served linear and angular momenta of order O(1). Thus, we obtain a notion of scale for a
given function f based on its derivatives. In particu-
J i = p αi , lar, a function f which is described accurately in some
α neighborhood by a first-order Taylor expansion depends
qjp −qip +µj −µi . on finer scales than a function which is described suf-
i 2 α αi α αj αi αj ficiently well by its zeroth-order Taylor expansion (i.e.
a constant function). When the fluid velocity u is de-
Panels B,C, and D of Fig. 2 illustrate single jetlet flow
scribed well by its zeroth-order Taylor expansion, colli-
fields of the form (7) with p=0 and
sion events will yield new velocity fields which are not
(cid:18) 1 0 (cid:19) (cid:18) 0 −1 (cid:19) (cid:18) 0 1 (cid:19) describedwellbyzeroth-orderTaylorexpansions,butin-
µ = , and . (11)
B,C,D 0 −1 1 0 0 0 steadarewell-describedbyfirst-orderTaylorexpansions.
From this perspective, the collision behavior observed
The first two choices µ B and µ C yield stationary solu- here describes a cascade towards finer scales.
tions of (1), while for the third choice µ D the flow field In this paper numerical simulations of the particle-
evolves by rotations about the jetlet location. Angular like behavior found in jetlet collisions have revealed new
momentum is non-zero for the second and third cases. types of nonlinear interactions among jetlets that pro-
Before we comment on the higher levels in the jetlet duce higher-level jetlets from the collisions of lower level
hierarchy, let us show what happens during jetlet colli- jetlets. The equations of motion for the first levels in
sions. Asolutionoftheform(4)thatcontainstwojetlets the jetlet hierarchy can be extended in a straightforward
satisfies manner to the higher levels. The resulting equations of
motion have the same character as the ones described
above. Namely, they are finite-dimensional ordinary dif-
whose integral against a vector valued test function φ is ferential equations in canonical Hamiltonian form that
satisfyalocalizedversionofKelvin’scirculationtheorem.
φ(x)·Au(x)dnx=p ·φ(q )+p ·φ(q ). (12) Moreover,whentwojetletsofthesamelevelcollide,they
combinetoformasinglejetletatthenexthigherlevelin
We define the difference vector δq = (q −q )/2 and set the hierarchy.
q = (q +q )/2, so that q = q−δq and q = q+δq. If We thank Dorje Brody, Martins Bruveris, Jaap Elder-
q and q are close to one another, we can approximate ing,SarangJoshi,andStefanSommerforhelpfulremarks
the right hand side of (12) by and clarifying conversations. DDH, HOJ and DMM are
grateful for partial support by the European Research
1i 2i 2i 1i ,k Council Advanced Grant 267382 FCCA.
A comparison with (6) suggests that if δq tends to zero
asymptotically,thesetwo jetletsmergeintoasingle jetlet
at the next higher level in the hierarchy with
[1] A. J. Chorin. J. Fluid Mech. 57(4):785–796 (1973)
p = lim [p +p ] and
i t→∞ 1i 2i [2] H. O. Jacobs, T. S. Ratiu and M. Desbrun. Physica D
µj = lim [(p −p )δqj]. 265:40–56 (2013)
i t→∞ 2i 1i [3] S.Sommer,M.Nielsen,S.DarknerandX.Pennec.SIAM
J. Imaging Sci. 6(1):341–367 (2013)
Such mergers are consistent with angular momentum
[4] R. Camassa and D. D. Holm. Phys. Rev. Lett.
conservation, as one can verify using (10).
71(11):1661-1665 (1993)
Numerical experiments demonstrate that these colli- [5] U. Frisch. Turbulence: The Legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov
sionsindeedoccur. Anexampleofsuchaneventisshown Cambridge Press, Cambridge, UK (1995).
inFig. 1: Asthejetletsapproachoneanother,thediffer- [6] D. Mumford and P. W. Michor. J. Geom. Mech. 5:319–
encebetweentheflowfieldsfromthetwo0-jetletsolution 344 (2013)
[7] D. D.HolmandJ. E.Marsden.Progr. Math.232:203–
andthecorrespondingsingle1-jetletsolutionatthenext
235 (2004). In The Breadth of Symplectic and Poisson
higher level falls below machine precision. This behav-
Geometry,AFestschriftforAlanWeinstein,Birkha¨user,
ior can be interpreted as the first step in the cascade of
Boston, MA.
energy to smaller scales. [8] D. D.Holm,J. E.MarsdenandT. S.Ratiu.Adv.Math.
To elaborate on this interpretation, we recall the defi- 137:1–81 (1998)
nition of a Taylor expansion of a function f, [9] M.MicheliandJ. A.Glaun`es.Geom. Imag. and Comp.
1:(1) 57–139 (2014).
f(x)=f(0)+xf(cid:48)(0)+ x2f(cid:48)(cid:48)(0)+o(x2). [10] J. E.MarsdenandT.J.R.Hughes.MathematicalFoun-
2 dations of Elasticity, Dover, New York (1993).