A linear elimination framework
Jeremy Gunawardena
DepartmentofSystemsBiology,HarvardMedicalSchool
200LongwoodAvenue,Boston,MA02115,USA.
jeremy@hms.harvard.edu
Key insights in molecular biology, such as enzyme kinetics [25], protein
allostery [26, 20] and gene regulation [1], emerged from quantitative analy-
sis based on time-scale separation, allowing internal complexity to be elimi-
natedandresultinginthewell-knownformulasofMichaelis-Menten,Monod-
Wyman-Changeux and Ackers-Johnson-Shea. In systems biology, steady-
stateanalysishasyieldedeliminationsthatrevealemergentpropertiesofmulti-
componentnetworks[34,38,37]. Hereweshowthattheseanalysesofnonlin-
earbiochemicalsystemsareconsequencesofthesamelinearframework,con-
sistingofalabelled,directedgraphonwhichaLaplaciandynamicsisdefined,
whose steady states can be algorithmically calculated. Analyses previously
considered distinct are revealed as identical, while new methods of analysis
becomefeasible.
]NM.oib-q[
1v1326.9011:viXra
The linear framework
Biologicalsystemsmaysometimesbeinsteadystate,aswhensynthesisorgrowthis
balancedbydegradationorloss. Typically,thisholdsonlyforalimitedtimeperiod.
Itmayalsosometimesbereasonabletoassumeanexplicitseparationoftimescales,
inwhichasub-systemisoperatingfastcomparedtotherestofthesystem. Thefast
components may then be treated as if they are at steady state relative to the slow
components. In either context, steady-state analysis is required. The framework
introduced here provides a systematic way to calculate steady states, with broad
applicabilitytobiochemicalsystems.
Westartfromagraph,G,consistingofvertices,1,···,n,withlabelled,directed
edges i → j and no self loops, i (cid:54)→ i (Figure 1A). The vertices represent compo-
nents of a system, on which a dynamics is defined by treating each edge as if it
were a first-order chemical reaction under mass-action kinetics, with the label as
rateconstant. Thisgivesasystemoflinear,ordinarydifferentialequations(ODEs),
where x is a column vector of component concentrations and L(G) is the Lapla-
cian matrix of G. Such matrices were introduced by Kirchhoff [19] and resemble
discretisationsoftheLaplacianoperator(seetheAppendix).
Since material is neither created nor lost, the total concentration, x = x +
···+x ,remainsconstantatalltimes,sothat1†.L(G) = 0,where1istheall-ones
columnvectorand† denotestranspose.
Nonlinearity can be encoded either in the vertices or, more commonly, in the
labels. Labels are real numbers, a ∈ R, which may be algebraic expressions over
a set of symbols, {µ ,···,µ }. Symbols may be rate constants, k, or concentra-
tions, [X], of chemical species X. For instance, X may be a slow component in a
time-scale separation. All calculations are in terms of symbols, whose numerical
valuesdonothavetobeknowninadvance,therebyavoidingproblemsofparameter
estimation. Labelsmusthavedimensionsof(time)−1 andbepositive,a ∈ R .
A crucial restriction is that if a concentration symbol, [X], appears in a label in
G, then X must be an external species and not correspond to a vertex in G. This
“uncoupling condition” is essential to preserve linearity and is the key requirement
forapplicationsoftheframework.
The Laplacian, L(G), is a n × n matrix over R. The interest lies in the steady
states of (1), for which dx/dt = 0, or, equivalently, x is in the kernel of the Lapla-
cian, x ∈ kerL(G). The kernel can be determined in two steps, first for a strongly
connectedgraphandthenforanygraph.
A strongly connected graph is one in which any two distinct vertices can be
joined by a series of edges in the same direction. While this depends only on the
edge structure and not on the labels, the sign of a label determines the direction of
flux. Forstrongly-connectedgraphswithpositivelabels,thedimensionofkerL(G)
is one, [37]. In this case, Tutte’s Matrix-Tree Theorem (MTT) describes a basis
element, ρ ∈ kerL(G), [40]. To calculate ρ , take the product of all the labels
on a spanning tree of G rooted at vertex i and add the products over all such trees
(Figure 1B, box). A spanning tree is a fundamental concept in graph theory; it is a
subgraphofGthatcontainseachvertexofG(spanning)whichhasnocycleswhen
edge directions are ignored (tree); it is rooted at i if i is the only vertex with no
outgoing edges in the tree. Spanning-tree calculations are shown in Figure 1B and
Figures1and2oftheAppendix.
The kernel could have been calculated using determinants. The significance of
theMTTisthatitexpressesρ asapolynomialinthelabelswithpositivecoefficients
(Figure 1B). This resolves the alternating signs that arise with determinants and
ensures that steady-state concentrations remain positive, so long as the labels are
positive. Being able to algorithmically calculate steady states in terms of labels
is the essence of the framework. The MTT has been frequently rediscovered in
biologyinvariousguises,[18,12].
If x is any steady-state, then, since dimkerL(G) = 1, we know that x = λρ,
where λ ∈ R. The undetermined λ reflects the amount of matter in the system. It
canberemovedbynormalisingindifferentways:
(cid:32) (cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:33)
1. x = x 2. x = x . (2)
In 1, one of the vertices, by convention vertex 1, is chosen as a reference. In 2, x
playsasimilarrole,withρ = ρ +···+ρ .
Equation (2) shows that the n components in the system can be eliminated in
favourofrationalexpressions,ρ /ρ orρ /ρ ,thelabelsofwhichmayinvolvethe
concentrations of other components. This dramatic simplification is a consequence
of strong connectivity and is central to the time-scale separation applications dis-
cussedbelow.
If G is an arbitrary graph, it can be decomposed into strongly connected com-
ponents (SCCs), which inherit from G a directed graph structure, G, that has no
directed cycles (Figure 1C). Since there is no net flux of material into the initial
SCCs in G, it can be shown that only the terminal SCCs contribute to any steady
state (Appendix). For each terminal SCC, t, let ρt ∈ Rn be the vector which, for
vertices in that SCC, agrees with the values coming from the MTT applied to that
SCCin isolation,whilefor anyothervertex,j (cid:54)∈ t,(ρt) = 0. Thesevectors forma
basisforthekerneloftheLaplacian:
whereT isthenumberofterminalSCCs. Byconstruction,ifiisanyvertex,
(ρt) (cid:54)= 0 if,andonlyif,i ∈ t (4)
A description of kerL(G) appears in the Appendix of [9]. The construction given
here goes further in using the MTT to give explicit expressions for the basis ele-
mentsintermsofthelabels.
Four applications are discussed next. The first stands apart from the rest in not
beingatime-scaleseparation. Itillustratesthewidescopeoftheframework. There-
mainingapplicationsshowhowtheMTTsystematisestheeliminationsarisingfrom
time-scale separation. In each case the framework integrates classical and modern
analyses of biochemical systems. The intention is not to reveal new results in each
area but to show that, rather than being different calculations, they are all the same
calculation, made manifest in the labelled, directed graphs that appear in Figures 2
to5. Followingtheseapplications,anextensiontotheframeworkisintroducedthat
allows for synthesis and degradation of components (Figure 6). Some specialised
resultsforthermodynamicequilibriumareoutlinedintheAppendix.
Chemical Reaction Network Theory
ForareversiblechemicalreactionbetweenspeciesS ,···,S andspeciesP ,···,P ,
1 1 k k 1 1 l l
mass-actionkineticsimpliesaHaldanerelationship[6]atequilibrium,
Formula (5) may also be deduced from thermodynamics and, here, kinetics is con-
sistent with thermodynamics. However, a network of reactions may have kinetic
equilibriathatdonotsatisfythermodynamicconstraints[22]. Theconditionof“de-
tailed balance” was introduced to avoid such paradoxes [22, 23]. This plays an
importantroleatequilibrium,asexplainedinthenextsection.
In a seminal paper [14], Horn and Jackson, sought to extend thermodynamic
properties like (5) to steady states far from equilibrium. Under mass-action kinet-
ics, any reaction network gives rise to a system of nonlinear ODEs, dc/dt = f(c).
To disentangle the nonlinearity, the expressions that appear on either side of a re-
action were treated as new entities called “complexes”, so that a chemical reaction
network, N, with m species, gave rise to a labelled, directed graph, G , on n
complexes(Figure2). Thenonlinearfunctionf onspeciesisreplacedbythelinear
Laplacian,L(G ),oncomplexes,withthelabelsbeingjusttherateconstantsofthe
corresponding reactions. Here, the nonlinearity is entirely encoded in the vertices.
(HornandJacksondefinedthefunctiononcomplexeswithoutbeingawareofitsin-
terpretationasagraphLaplacian.) Thetwofunctions,oneactingonspeciesandthe
other on complexes, are linked by a linear function Y : Rn → Rm and a nonlinear
function Ψ : Rm → Rn (Figure 2, caption). These encode the stoichiometry of the
speciesinthecomplexesinsuchawaythatthatthediagraminFigure2commutes,
f(c) = YL(G )Ψ(c). Only Ψ is nonlinear, revealing a substantial linearity within
the dynamics, arising from the graph-theoretic structure. This decomposition is the
startingpointofCRNT,[8,11].
Formula (3) applies to L(G ) and plays a fundamental role. If c is positive,
c ∈ (R )n, then, by definition, so is Ψ(c) ∈ (R )m. Hence, a positive steady
state, with f(c) = 0, can arise in only one of two ways: either L(G )Ψ(c) = 0 or,
ifnot,thenYL(G )Ψ(c) = 0. Inthefirstcase,cissaidtobe“complexbalanced”.
Itthenfollowsfrom(3)that
where λ ∈ R. Let u and v be two complexes in the same terminal SCC of G , say
t = t∗. Suppose that the multiplicity of species i in u is u and in v is v . Using (4)
andthedefinitionofΨ(Figure2,caption),
1 n = u = u . (6)
Thetermontherightdependsonlyontherateconstantsandthis“quasi-thermostatic”
property[14]generalisestheHaldanerelationshipin(5). WiththeMTT,thegener-
alised “equilibrium constants” can now be explictly calculated in terms of the rate
constants.
Horn and Jackson showed further that complex balancing satisifies other prop-
ertiesexpectedofthermodynamicequilibria,justifyingitasanon-equilibriumgen-
eralisationofdetailedbalancing[14].
Formula (3) has also provided modern insights. For instance, (6) shows that
complex-balanced steady states are generated by polynomials with only two terms
(binomials),
v 1 n u 1 n
andthereforeformatoricalgebraicvariety[10,7],similartothosearisingfromlog-
linear models in algebraic statistics [30]. This, and other recent results, [24], have
introduced methods of algebraic geometry to the analysis of molecular reaction
networks.
Formula(3)remainsusefulevenwithoutacomplex-balancedsteadystate. Inthe
simplestcase,kerYL(G )containsonlyoneadditionalbasiselementcomparedto
kerL(G ). Ifcisapositivesteadystate,then
where χ is the additional basis element and λ ∈ R. Because χ may be non-zero at
any complex, the Haldane-style formulas in (6) can no longer be deduced, except
in the case where u and v are not in any terminal SCC. If u and v also differ only
in a single species k, so that u = v for i (cid:54)= k, then c depends only on the rate
(cid:32) (cid:33) 1
and exhibits “absolute concentration robustness”. This is the Shinar-Feinberg The-
orem [34], which has particular applications to bifunctional enzymes, where the
robustnessissupporedbyexperimentalevidence[2,35,36].
Reversible ligand binding
Reversible binding of ligands to a substrate is a feature of many cellular processes,
such as gene regulation, [1], and protein allostery, [26]. The linear framework may
be readily applied by assuming that the time-scale of binding is well-separated be-
tween faster upstream interactions, such as ligand dimerisation, and slower down-
streamprocessesthatreacttothebinding,suchasgeneexpression(Figure3).
Consider a substrate that may exist in multiple states. These may, for instance,
be states of DNA looping or nucleosome organisation at a promoter or conforma-
tional states in an allosteric protein. Ligands may bind reversibly to the substrate
withpotentiallyoverlappingsitepreferences,cooperativityanddependenceonsub-
strate state. A labelled, directed graph can be constructed as follows (Figure 3).
The vertices correspond to microstates, consisting of the patterns of ligand bind-
ing in each substrate state. The edges correspond to transitions between substrate
states,withligandbindingunaltered,ortobindingorunbindingoftheligands,with
substrate state unaltered. Of these edges, ligand binding has a label of the form
k[L], where k is a rate constant and [L] is a concentration, taken either at steady
state or as slowly varying when L is a slow variable; all other edges have only a
rate constant as label. Provided the substrate is not a ligand for itself, so that the
uncouplingconditionissatisfied,andthegraphisstronglyconnected,asisthecase
in most applications, the MTT allows the microstates to be eliminated in favour of
the ligands. Most quantities of biological interest can be calculated in terms of the
resultingexpressions(Figure3andtheAppendix).
Animportantspecialcaseiswhenthesystemcanreachthermodynamicequilib-
rium (Appendix). In this case, detailed balance (DB) provides a simpler alternative
to the MTT. According to DB, which follows from the fundamental reversibility of
microscopic dynamics at equilibrium [23], each edge is reversible and any pair of
reversible edges, i → j and j → i, is independently at kinetic equilibrium. Hence,
givenanysteadystatex,x = (a/b)x ,irrespectiveofanyotheredgesthatimpinge
on i or j. Since each edge is reversible, the graph is strongly connected. Starting
from a reference microstate, 1, and taking a path of reversible edges to j, we find
that x = α x . Just as in (2), each x can be eliminated in favour of rational ex-
pressions in the labels. At equilibrium, DB cuts down the rooted trees of the MTT
toasinglepathfrom1.
There may be many such paths. However, the rate constants are not free to
vary arbitrarily. DB requires that they yield the same α no matter what path is
taken from 1 to j. These constraints may be summarised in the “cycle condition”:
for any cycle of reversible edges, the product of the rate constants on clockwise
edges equals the product on counterclockwise edges (Figure 3A). This condition is
necessary and sufficient for α to be independent of the path taken and for every
equilibriumstatetosatisfyDB(Appendix).
Equilibrium ligand binding has usually been analysed by statistical mechanical
methods, [13, 42], as in protein allostery, [26, 28], and gene regulation, [1, 33, 3].
The linear framework gives identical results from a more kinetic perspective. Its
main advantge is that it also applies away from equilibrium. For instance, in the
yeastphosphatecontrolsystem,nucleosomeorganisationatthePHO5promoterin-
fluences its gene regulation function (GRF) in response to the transcription factor
Pho4, [16]. Nucleation and disassembly of nucleosomes is a dissipative process.
However, the GRF may still be calculated from the appropriate graph—Figure 4B
in [16]—using the MTT. The linear framework is well suited to the modern pro-
grammeofunravellingcomplexGRFs,[3,17]
Enzyme kinetics
The fundamental basis of enzymology is that enzymes act through intermediate
enzyme-substrate complexes, [25, 4], (Figure 4). Under in-vitro conditions, in
which substrate is in excess, a time-scale separation may be assumed, with the in-
termediate complexes quickly reaching steady state, while conversion of substrate
to product takes place more slowly. This is the quasi-steady state approximation, a
version of which goes back to Michaelis and Menten, [25, 6]. A labelled, directed
graph can be constructed in which the vertices correspond to the intermediates and
thefreeenzyme,withedgesderivedfromthereactionmechanism. Thelabelscanbe
chosen so that the differential equations of the linear Laplacian dynamics coincide
withthefullnonlinearODEs. Sincefreesubstrateandfreeproductaredistinctfrom
theintermediatecomplexesandtheenzyme,theuncouplingconditionisreadilysat-
isfied. Becauseintermediateseventuallybreakuptoreleaseenzyme,thegraphsare
naturally strongly connected. The MTT and formula (2) can then be used to elim-
inate the intermediates and the free enzyme in favour of substrates and products,
fromwhichtheenzymaticratefunctioncanbecalculated(Figure4andAppendix).
In the biochemical literature, such calculations are done by the King-Altman
procedure,[18,6],whichisarestatementoftheMTT.King-Altmanhasbeenwidely
used to calculate rate functions for complex enzymatic mechanisms with multiple
ligands, affectors and intermediates, [32, 6]. The linear framework both encom-
passes this and shows how it can be integrated into the analysis of multi-enzyme
systems,asdescribednext.
Post-translational modification (PTM)
Manyproteinsarecovalentlymodifiedbytheattachmentofsmallchemicalorpep-
tide moieties, such as phosphate or ubiquitin, to specific residues, [41]. PTM may
involve multiple types of modifiers on multiple sites. Different global patterns of
modification,or“modforms”,mayhavedifferentdownstreameffects,whilethedis-
tribution of modforms is dynamically regulated by forward modifying and reverse
demodifyingenzymesactinginopposition,[31],(Figure5). PTMisbelievedtoim-
plement adaptive cellular information processing on physiological time scales, as,
for instance, in “PTM codes”, [15, 39]. The linear framework enables quantitative
analysisdespitetheresultingdynamicalandcombinatorialcomplexity[38,37].
Consider a single substrate, S, that supports multiple types of modification at
multiple sites by multiple forward and reverse enzymes. Combinatorial explosion
may lead to enormous numbers of modforms, depending on the numbers of sites
andtypesofmodification. Adirectedgraphcanbeformedinwhichtheverticesare
themodformsandthereisanedgebetweentwomodformsifthereissomeenzyme
(theremaybeseveral)thatcatalysesthecorrespondingchangeinmodificationstate.
Itistypicallythecasethatanymodificationcanbeeventuallyundonebysomeother
enzyme,sothismodformgraphisnaturallystronglyconnected.
The labels emerge from a separation of time scales. The donor molecules,
such as ATP in the case of phosphorylation, and their breakdown products, such
as ADP and phosphate, are assumed to be kept at constant concentration over the
timescaleofthemodificationdynamicsbycellularprocessesthatarenotexplicitly
modelled. The modifier species can then be ignored as dynamical variables and
enzyme reaction schemes can be simplified to involve only formation and break-
down of intermediate complexes and conversion between intermediate complexes
(Figure 5). Realistic enzyme mechanisms may be assumed that vary for different
substrate modforms. The mechanisms can be analysed using the linear framework,
asexplainedintheprevioussection,yieldingexpressionsfromwhichthelabelsfor
themodformgraphcanbeassembled(Figure5,caption). Theuncouplingcondition
becomesrestrictivehere,sinceitrequiresthatnosubstrateisalsoamodifyingorde-
modifyingenzyme. ThedifferentialequationsarisingfromtheLaplaciandynamics
thenrecapitulatethefullnonlinearODEs.
Because the modform graph is strongly connected, the MTT can be applied to
eliminate the modforms in favour of the enzymes. This is hierarchical elimination:
the intermediates are first eliminated in favour of the modforms and the enzymes;
themodformsaretheneliminatedinfavouroftheenzymes. Wededucethat,despite
the overwhelming combinatorial complexity arising from multisite modifications,
thenumberofalgebraicallyindependentquantitiesatsteadystateisjustthenumber
of enzymes. This is usually very much smaller than the number of modforms.
All other steady state concentrations are rational expressions in the free enzyme
concentrations, with the expressions coming from (2). As for the enzymes, the
total amount of each enzyme is conserved, which gives sufficiently many algebraic
equationsforthefreeenzymevaluestobedetermined.
We see that the steady states of a PTM system can be calculated algebraically,
without the need for numerical simulation, and without prior knowledge of any
parametervalues. Thismaybedoneirrespectiveofthenumberofmodifications,the
numberofmodificationsitesandthecomplexdetailsoftheenzymemechanisms.
This capability has yielded several insights, [38, 24]. For instance, it has iden-
tifiedthe firstbiochemical mechanismcapable ofimplementinga “PTMcode” and
shownthatitsinformationcapacityispotentiallyunlimited,[38].
Synthesis and degradation
The linear framework also provides a foundation for new types of analysis. An
aspect of the applications above is that synthesis and degradation were ignored.
This is tantamount to another assumption of time-scale separation, since cellular
componentsarealwaysbeingturnedover. Wenowanalysewhathappenswhenthis
assumptionisdropped.
Consider, as before, a labelled, directed graph, G, on vertices 1,···,n. Allow
each vertex, i, to have a partial labelled edge leading in, →
i, and out, i →
corresponding to zero-order synthesis or first-order degradation of i, respectively
(Figure 6A). By allowing a = 0 or d = 0, each vertex may have any combi-
nation of synthesis and degradation, including neither or both. The degradation
label d has the usual units of (time)−1 but the synthesis label a must have units of
(concentration)(time)−1. Call this “partial graph” G+. As before, there is a linear
dynamicsonG+,whichmaybedescribedbythesystemofdifferentialequations
Here, ∆ is a diagonal matrix with ∆ = d and A is a column vector with A = a .
Note that, unlike (1), the equations in (7) are non-homogeneous: if x is a steady
state of (7), it does not follow that λx is also a steady state. Because 1†.L(G) = 0,
ifxisasteadystateof(7),then
1 1 n n 1 n
whichreflectsthefactthatsynthesisanddegradationmustbeinoverallbalance.
When there is neither synthesis nor degradation, a general graph may have sev-
eraldegreesoffreedomatsteadystate,reflectedinthesizeofthebasisin(3). These
free quantities are ultimately determined by the initial conditions. With synthesis
and degradation, some of these degree of freedom may be lost, as the total amount
ofmatterisnolongerconserved. Thisisreflectedinthelossofhomogeneityin(7).
The system may not reach a steady state unless synthesis and degradation can find
abalance.
Construct a new labelled, directed graph G∗ by adding a vertex ∗ to G (Fig-
ure 6B). For each partial edge →
i with a > 0 or i →
with d > 0, introduce the
edges ∗ → ai i or i → di ∗ in G∗, respectively. Unlike G+, G∗ is a directed graph with
positivelabels,whoseLaplaciandynamicsaregovernedby(1). Itiseasytoseethat
(x ,···,x ) is a steady state of G+ if, and only, (x ,···,x ,1) is a steady state of
G∗. The condition for vertex ∗ to be at steady state in G∗ corresponds exactly to
equation(8)forsynthesisanddegradationtobeinbalanceinG+.
ThisenablesacompletedescriptionofthesteadystatesofG+ butwefocushere
on the case that is most relevant to the applications. If G∗ is strongly connected, so
that the MTT gives ρ as a basis element for the kernel of L(G∗), then G+ has a
uniquesteadystatexforwhich
The single degree of freedom in G∗ has been used in (9) to ensure that x = 1.
NoticethatG∗ maybestronglyconnectedeventhoughGitselfisnot(Figure6),so
that(9)appliestoabroaderclassofgraphsthandoestheMTTitself.
Equation(9)maybeusedtorevisittheapplicationsabovetounderstandtheim-
pactofsynthesisanddegradation. Italsoopensupforanalysisabroadrangeofnew
biological contexts. For instance, regulated degradation is a frequently used mech-
anism in several signal transduction pathways, such as the Wnt/beta-catenin and
death-receptor pathways, [21, 29], which also make abundant use of reversible lig-
and binding and post-translational modification. Analysis of these using the linear
frameworkisworkinprogress.
Conclusions
Time-scale separation, leading to elimination of internal complexity, has been a
fundamental method for analysing biochemical systems, from the earliest days of
single-enzymebiochemistrythroughmolecularbiologytomodernstudiesofmulti-
component systems. The framework shows that these calculations, which were
previously considered distinct, are, in fact, the same. Moreover, they are all linear.
The linearity hinges on the uncoupling condition, which allows nonlinearity in the
dynamicalvariablestobetradedforalgebraiccomplexityinthelabels. Thefactthat
uncoupling is feasible in so many different contexts indicates a remarkable degree
of linearity concealed within nonlinear biochemistry, a surprising insight that is
amplified by the results of CRNT in Figure 2. The framework brings systematic
techniques, clarityand pedagogical coherenceto the fieldand lays afoundation for
developingnewmethodsofanalysis.
One intriguing direction to explore is the extension of the framework from the
steady state to the dynamics. The problem of whether time-scale separation yields
a good approximation of the dynamics can be studied by the method of singular
perturbation, [11]. However, this has only been undertaken for a limited number
of biological examples. The framework provides the means to formulate such an
analysisinafarmoregeneralway.
Incontrasttosimulations,forwhichalldetailsmostbespecifiedinadvance,the
framework yields results that hold irrespective of the underlying molecular com-
plexity. It is, therefore, well suited for distilling biological principles without be-
comingmiredinthemoleculardetails,amuchneededfacilityformodernbiology.
Laplacian matrices and the MTT
Matrices similar to the Laplacian in equation (1) were first introduced for unla-
belled, undirected graphs by Gustav Kirchhoff in his 1847 paper, [19], whose title,
in English translation, “On the solution of the equations obtained from the inves-
tigation of the linear distribution of galvanic currents”, suggests its origins in his
well-knownstudiesofelectricalcircuits. Inthisform,theLaplacianmaybeseenas
a discrete version of the continuous Laplacian operator but the same name is used
for different versions and normalisations, [5]. The concept of a spanning tree and a
resultsimilartotheMatrixTreeTheoremalsomaketheirappearanceinKirchhoff’s
paper. ThisseemstobethefirstofmanysubsequentMatrixTreeTheorems;see[27,
Chapter5]forhistoricalreferences. Severaldeeppropertiesofgraphsemergefrom
thespectraltheoryofLaplacianmatrices[5]. BillTutte,oneofthefoundersofmod-
ern graph theory, extended the concepts to directed graphs and proved the version
oftheMTTusedhere,[40].
Kernel of the Laplacian for a general graph
Wesketchaproofofequation(3)whichgivesabasisforthekerneloftheLaplacian.
While the essential ideas are introduced we leave it to the reader to fill in some of
the details. Let G be an arbitrary labelled, directed graph on the vertices, 1,···,n.
As always, we assume that G has no self loops. Choose x ∈ kerL(G). Let G be
the acyclic directed graph on the strongly connected components (SCCs) of G, as
in Figure 7C. Suppose that the vertices of G are c ,···,c and that c is an initial
SCC that is not also terminal. By construction, there must be some vertex, i ∈ c ,
with an edge leaving c , i → k, where k (cid:54)∈ c . If x > 0, there is a positive flux
of material along this edge. For x to be a steady state, this flux must be balanced
by some flux coming into i . This can only arise from some edge i → i with
x > 0. Taking all such vertices, recursively, yields a subset of vertices that can be
theonlysourceofthebalancingfluxintoi . However,becausei isaninitialSCC,
this subset is entirely contained in c . Since this SCC has only a limited amount
of material, it cannot indefinitely balance the outgoing flux on the edge i → k. It
follows that x ≤ 0. However, if x < 0 then there is positive flux coming into i
alongtheedgei → k. Thiscanonlybebalancedbyanedgei → i withx < 0.
Arguing recursively in a similar way as above yields a similar contradiction. We
conclude that x = 0. But then x = 0 for any vertex j with j → i . Since c is
strongly connected, it is then easy to see that x = 0 for any j ∈ c . It follows that
x has no support on any initial SCC that is not also terminal. (The support of x is
thesubsetofvertices,i,suchthatx (cid:54)= 0.)
It is now easy to argue by induction over those SCCs that are not terminal to
showthatthesupportofxcontainsonlyverticesthatareinterminalSCCs. Consider
eachterminalSCC,t,asalabelled,directedgraph,G ,initsownright,inisolation
from the rest of G. Assume that G has n vertices. Let xt ∈ Rnt be the vector
obtained from x by restricting x to those vertices lying in t. Since x has no support
outside the terminal SCCs and there are no edges between the terminal SCCs, it
should be clear that xt ∈ kerL(G ). Let vt ∈ Rnt is the vector coming from the
MTT applied to Gt. Since t is strongly connected and dimkerL(G ) = 1, it must
be that xt = λtvt, for some λt ∈ R. Now let ρt ∈ Rn be the vector constructed for
equation(3),
(vt) ifi ∈ t
i 0 otherwise.
Since the terminal SCCs are disjoint, the vectors, ρ1,···,ρT, are linearly indepen-
dent by construction. Evidently, x = (cid:80)T λtρt. Hence, these vectors form a basis
forthekerneloftheLaplacian,
whichprovesequation(3).
Ligand binding at thermodynamic equilibrium
Consider the labelled, directed graph, G, arising from the binding of multiple lig-
andstomultiplesitesonasubstratethatmayexistinmultiplestates,asdiscussedin
the paper. The microstates are assumed to be encoded in some way, as in Figure 3,
andareenumeratedsimplyas1,···,n. Edgescorrespondeithertochangesinstate
of the substrate, with ligand binding unaltered, or to ligand binding or unbinding,
with substrate state unaltered. Assuming that the system can reach thermodynamic
equilibrium,eachedgeisreversibleandedgescanthereforebetreatedinpairs,
i →i,j j j →i,j i
Aligandbindingedgeisassumedtohavealabel,a+ = k+[L ],wherek+ isarate
i,j i,j u i,j
constant and [L ] is the concentration of one of the ligands, treated either at steady
stateorasslowlyvarying. Forallotheredges,thelabelisarateconstant.
If x is a steady state of G—in other words, if x ∈ kerL(G)—then x satisfies
DB if each reversible edge is independently at kinetic equilibrium. In other words,
wheneverthereisareversibleedge,theforwardandreversefluxesarebalanced,
a+ x = a− x . (10)
i,j i i,j j
The cycle condition on G states that, for any cycle of reversible edges, the product
of the rate constants on the edges going clockwise is equal to the product of the
rateconstantsontheedgesgoingcounterclockwise. Wewanttoshowthatthecycle
conditionholdsonGif,andonly,ifeverysteadystatesatisfiesDB.
Suppose first that x satisfies DB. Since the net flux through any reversible edge
iszero,thenetfluxaroundanycycleofreversibleedgesisalsozero. Weknowfrom
x = K x , (11)
where K = a+ /a− . Choose any cycle of reversible edges and pick any two
i,j i,j i,j
vertices on it, say i(cid:48) and j(cid:48). The cycle can be broken into a pair of directed paths
from i(cid:48) to j(cid:48). Applying (11) repeatedly on each path gives two expressions for
x in terms of x . Equating these expressions, cancelling ligand concentrations
j(cid:48) i(cid:48)
and clearing denominators, yields the cycle condition. Since the cycle was chosen
arbitrarily,thisprovesthefirstpart.
Now suppose the cycle condition holds. Let x be any steady state. We need to
showthatxsatisfiesDB.Weconstructanalternativesteadystatey,whichweshow
to satisfy DB, and then prove that y = x. Assume that the reference microstate, 1,
has no ligands bound, and set y = x . For any other microstate j, choose some
path of reversible edges from 1 to j and use (11) to express y in terms of y . Now
choose some other path from 1 to j and obtain a second expression for y in terms
of y . The two paths together form a cycle of reversible edges, to which the cycle
condition applies. Reorganising the cycle condition and putting in the appropriate
ligand concentrations shows that the two path expressions give the same result for
y . Hence,thisquantityiswelldefined,irrespectiveofthepathchosen.
We have unambiguously defined a state, y, of G but we have yet to show that
it is a steady state. Consider any reversible edge between the microstates i and j.
Choose a pair of reversible paths from 1 to i and from 1 to j. Together with the
reversibleedgebetweeniandj,thisgivesacycleofreversibleedges. Applyingthe
cyclecondition,itiseasytoseethat,inthestatey,thereversibleedgebetweeniand
j must be in kinetic equilibrium. This not only implies that y is a steady state but
alsothatysatisfiesDB.Butnow,GisstronglyconnectedandsodimkerL(G) = 1.
Hence, y = λx for some λ ∈ R. Since y = x , λ = 1. Hence, y = x and therefore
xsatisfiesDB.Thiscompletestheproof.
If the reference vertex, 1, has no ligands bound, then, in any steady state x, the
quantity x /x is a monomial in the ligand concentrations and the power to which
[L ] appears is the number of L molecules bound in microstate i. Hence, the
concentrationofstatesinwhichL isboundisgivenby
and the “fractional saturation”, or average concentration of states bound by L , is
thelogarithmicderivative,
(cid:32) (cid:33)
Morecomplexaggregateconcentrationscanbeworkedoutinasimilarway.
The calculation of x can be simplified by suitably decomposing the graph, as
illustratedbythesumandproductformulaebelow.
DB implies that any steady state xG of G gives, by restriction, a steady state
xR of any subgraph, R. If R and T are subgraphs that are disjoint (no vertex in
common),whichtogetherspanG,wegetthesumformula
tot tot tot
Ifligandsbindindependently,sothatthesite-specificrateconstantsareindepen-
dent of the microstate in which ligand binds, then the graph may be decomposed
into a product of the graphs for single site binding. The product of two graphs is
defined as follows. Suppose that G is a labelled, directed graph on the vertices
g ,···,g and that H is a labelled, directed graph on the vertices h ,···,h . The
productG×H isthelabelled,directedgraphontheverticesg ×h inwhichthere
g ×h → g ×h
i1 j1 i2 j1
wheneverthereisanedgeg → g inGand,symmetrically,thereisanedge
g ×h → g ×h
i1 j1 i1 j2
wheneverthereisanedgeh → h inH. TherearenoedgesinG×H otherthan
these. This construction captures the fact that a change in state of either factor is
independentofthestateoftheotherfactor.
The steady state of a product may be obtained from those of its factors as fol-
lows. Define the normalised total steady state by π(G) = x /x , where x is any
steady state. It follows from equation 2 that π(G) is independent of x, although it
maydependonthechoiceofreferencevertex. With1×1asthereferenceinG×H,
itisnotdifficulttoprovetheproductformula,
Independentbindingallowsπ(G)tobefactorised.
Formulae (12), (13) and (14) are helpful for the typical calculations arising in
studiesofgeneregulationorproteinallostery.
Enzyme kinetics
The details of the calculation of the enzymatic rate formula in Figure 4 are shown
inFigure7. Therateofproductformationisgivenby
dt p+1 p p+1
UsingtheorderinginFigure7,inwhichvertexp+1correspondstoE,theelimina-
tion formula in equation (2) gives [Y ] = (ρ /ρ )E and [E] = (ρ /ρ )E .
p p tot tot p+1 tot tot
(cid:32) (cid:33)
dt p+1 p p+1 p+1 ρ
The spanning trees of an isolated cycle are easily enumerated (Figure 7C) and the
MTT shows that ρ = γ and ρ = α [S] + β [P], for i < p, where γ,α ,β are
p+1 i i i i i
polynomialsintherateconstants. Hence,
(cid:32) p (cid:33) (cid:32) p (cid:33)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Comparingthespanningtreesforverticespandp+1revealssubstantialcancellation
whencalculatingthepre-factorin(16)(Figure7C).Thissimplifiestothedifference
betweentheproductofthelabelsgoingclockwisearoundthecycleandtheproduct
ofthelabelsgoingcounterclockwise,
p+1 p p+1 p+1 1 2 p+1 1 2 p+1
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
labelsonCWedges labelsonCCWedges
Notethatthetermontherightin(15)isthesteady-statenetfluxaroundtheisolated
cycle in Figure 7B. When this is zero, (18) shows that the product of the clockwise
labels equals the product of the counterclockwise labels. This gives another proof
ofthecyclecondition,discussedin§,whichholdsatthermodynamicequilibrium.
Combining(17)and(18)andnormalisingappropriatelyyieldstherateformula
(cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:105)
d[P] = v S K [S S ] −v P K [P P ] E tot , (19)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
where v , v , K , K are rational expressions in the rate constants. This is the
reversible Michaelis-Menten formula [6]. Note that this has the same form irre-
spectiveofthenumberofintermediates.