]hp-ssalc.scisyhp[
1v5376.8031:viXra
A linear nonequilibrium thermodynamics approach to
optimization of thermoelectric devices
Henni Ouerdane
Laboratoire CRISMAT, UMR 6508 CNRS, ENSICAEN et Universit´e de Caen Basse Normandie, 6
Boulevard Mar´echal Juin, F-14050 Caen, France, and Universit´e Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris
Cit´e, Institut des Energies de Demain (IED), 75205 Paris, France
Christophe Goupil
Laboratoire CRISMAT, UMR 6508 CNRS, ENSICAEN et Universit´e de Caen Basse Normandie, 6
Boulevard Mar´echal Juin, F-14050 Caen, France, and Universit´e Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris
Cit´e, Institut des Energies de Demain (IED), 75205 Paris, France
Yann Apertet
Institut d’Electronique Fondamentale, Universit´e Paris-Sud, CNRS, UMR 8622, F-91405 Orsay,
Aur´elie Michot
CNRT Mat´eriaux UMS CNRS 3318, 6 Boulevard Mar´echal Juin, F-14050 Caen Cedex, France
Adel Abbout
Laboratoire CRISMAT, UMR 6508 CNRS, ENSICAEN et Universit´e de Caen Basse Normandie, 6
Boulevard Mar´echal Juin, F-14050 Caen, France
1 Introduction
At the standard macroscopic scale various technologies exist for waste energy harvesting and con-
version: heat exchangers for energy storage and routing, heat pumps, organic Rankine cycle, and
thermoelectricity. Depending on the specific working conditions, one technology may be viewed as
more efficient than another; for instance, thermoelectricity is more appropriate in cases where the
temperature difference between the heat source and sink is not too large. Efforts are invested in the
improvement ofthermoelectric devices in termsof propertiesandrangeof applications becausetheir
conversion efficiency is not size-dependent and the typical device does not contain moving parts.
These qualities, of paramount importance in view of applications at the mesoscale in the micro-
electronics industry, recently provided a new impetus for research in the field of thermoelectricity.
Tremendous progress in the understanding and mastering of thermoelectric systems has been made
since the pioneering works of Seebeck [1] and Peltier [2], but much remains to be done in order to
improve the energy conversion efficiency at maximum outputpower. Indeed, even at the macroscale
the best energy conversion efficiency of thermoelectric devices typically are of the order of 10 % of
the efficiency of the ideal Carnot thermodynamic cycle.
A “good” thermoelectric material has a large thermopower and a high electrical conductivity
to thermal conductivity ratio. The properties of a given material may usually be qualified as good
in a very limited range of temperatures though. Recent advances in the physics and engineering of
Table 1: Examples of linear phenomenological laws.
variables transport coefficient expression and name
electrical current density and electric field electrical conductivity J = σE ≡ −σ∇ϕ
particle flux and density diffusion coefficient J = −D∇n
Fick’s law
energy flux and temperature thermal conductivity J = −κ∇T
Fourier’s law
semiconductors and strongly correlated materials have permitted great progress by way of optimiza-
tion of the materials’ characteristics, thus offering interesting prospects for device performance and
range of operation. But, with practical purposes in mind, one must consider that a real device is
not a perfect theoretical system, and that its thermal contacts, through heat exchangers, with the
temperaturereservoirsareusuallyfarfromidealtoo. Apoordevicedesignandneglectofthequality
of the thermal contacts can only yield poor device performance however good is the thermoelectric
material. This clearly means that there are a number of truly important technological challenges
which must be met; high quality brazing is one of them. From a theoretical/modeling viewpoint,
it is also necessary to develop models that capture the essential characteristics of thermoelectric
devices operating in realistic working conditions. Indeed, to make the best possible use of the best
materials available, one needs to understand how the internal laws of a device may be appropriately
associated to the laws that govern its interaction with its environment. We propose here a reflection
along these lines.
The link between the intrinsic properties of a thermoelectric device and its performance usually
is given by the so-called figure of merit. While much work is devoted to find means to increase
the figure of merit, our present work rather focuses on how to achieve optimal working conditions.
Thermoelectric devices can be described as heat engines connected to two temperature reservoirs.
In these systems, transport of heat and transport of electric charges are strongly coupled. Not
too far from equilibrium these transport phenomena obey linear phenomenological laws such as
those given in Table 1; so a general macroscopic description of thermoelectric systems is in essence
phenomenological. Linearnonequilibriumthermodynamicsprovidesamostconvenientframeworkto
characterize the device properties and the working conditions to achieve various operation modes.
As we shall see in this chapter the approximations we make, which are well controlled, are used
to obtain analytical expressions that facilitate the analysis, discussion and understanding of the
physical concepts we study.
Ourapproach,presentedhereforamodelofathermoelectricgeneratornon-ideallycoupledtothe
temperature reservoirs through finite-conductance heat exchangers, is quite an appropriate starting
pointforanextensiondowntomesoscopicscale. Assumingasimpleresistiveloadandintroducingan
effective thermal conductance for the device, we show first that, in addition to electrical impedance
matching, conditions that permit thermal impedance matching must be also satisfied in order to
achieve optimal device performance. The problem of efficiency at maximum power is central in our
work, but it becomes quite tricky as soon as it is addressed at a fundamental level. It is fortunate
that the model system we study allows derivation of simple formulas at the cost of approximations
that are perfectly reasonable in the framework of linear response.
The thermodynamic formulation that we use is that of Callen1 [3]: in its modern form, due
1Forconvenience,Callen formulates thepostulates ofthermodynamicsonlyforsimple systems,definedassystems
to Callen in 1960, the equilibrium thermodynamics can be summarized by the main postulate of
the existence of an entropy maximum. The postulates, which will be detailed in the next section,
assume an understanding of: (i) the distinctions between macroscopic and microscopic variables,
and between extensive and intensive macroscopic variables; (ii) the concept of a system surrounded
by boundaries that restrict, i.e. hold constant, some or all of the extensive variables of the system;
(iii) the definitions of internal energy U and work done on a system W, and the concept of heat Q,
defined through the first law of thermodynamics: δQ = dU −δW.
Westartthis Chapterwitharecapof linear nonequilibriumthermodynamics: abriefoverview of
some of the basics concepts and tools developed by Onsager [4, 5] and Callen [6] is necessary to set
the scenery. A short presentation of thermoelectric effects in absence of magnetic fields will follow.
We will see that the force-flux formalism provides a net description of thermoelectric processes [7].
Then, we will turn to our analysis of device optimization. The Chapter ends with a discussion on
efficiency at maximum power, and an outlook on thermoelectricity at the mesoscopic scale.
2 Basic notions of linear nonequilibrium thermodynamics
For the sake of clarity in the next sections of the chapter, it is useful at this stage to start from the
basic definitions and notions. Before getting into nonequilibrium physics, it is useful to remind here
some notions concerning equilibrium.
Athermodynamicsystem isusuallydefinedasacollection ofagreatnumberofobjectscharacter-
ized by fundamentalquantities called extensive and intensive variables that describeits macroscopic
properties. A thermodynamic state is defined by the specification of some macroscopic physical
properties of the system (all the properties are not necessary for a study). Therefore one physical
system may correspond to many thermodynamic systems. We will precise these points below, when
the postulates of equilibrium statistical mechanics are stated.
To each set of extensive variables associated to a thermodynamic system, there is a counterpart,
i.e. a set of intensive variables. The thermodynamic potentials are constructed from these vari-
ables. For example, for a gas of noninteracting molecules, one may consider the following extensive
variables: entropy S, volume V, and particle number N, and their coupled intensive variables: tem-
perature T, pressure P, and chemical potential µ. The internal energy, which is a thermodynamic
potential, is given by: U = TS − PV + µN. The thermodynamic equilibrium is obtained when
thermal, mechanical, and chemical equilibria are reached. This may be reformulated as follows: an
equilibrium state is reached whenall thethermodynamicpotentials are minimum. This implies that
if the thermodynamic system is in equilibrium, all the parts of this system are in equilibrium.
2.1 Postulates and origin of irreversibilities
Thermodynamics is useful to describe equilibrium states, but physical processes are rather charac-
terized by irreversibility and nonequilibrium states. A thermodynamic description of equilibrium
states may onlyyieldveryincompleteinformationontheactualprocessesatwork, andthusneedsto
beextendedto account fortherates ofthephysical processes. Irreversiblethermodynamicsprovides
links between the measurable quantities, and nonequilibrium statistical physics provides the tools
to compute these.
The framework of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics is essentially rooted in three postulates,
two of which concern equilibrium:
1. Athermodynamicsystem, isolated and inequilibrium, is characterized by avery large number
ofaccessible microstates; spontaneoustransitions occurcontinually between thesemicrostates.
that are large enough, macroscopically homogeneous, isotropic and uncharged; the surface effects can be neglected,
and noexternal electric, magnetic, or gravitational fieldsacts on these systems.
2. Each of the accessible microstates has equal a priori probability.
For a given system, the ensemble of microstates with same energy forms a statistical ensemble
called a microcanonical ensemble. The a priori probability relates to the principle of indifference:
during the course of its evolution, an isolated system in an equilibrium state will experience all the
accessible microstates at the same recurrencerate. Therefore, one may assumethat the average of a
physicalquantityoverlongtimesisequaltotheaverageofthesamequantityoverthemicrocanonical
ensemble. In other words, for a stationary system, there is an equivalence between the performing
of many identical measurements on a single system and a single measurement on many replicas of
the system. This is the ergodic hypothesis.
The third postulate, in its simplest form reads:
3. Time symmetry of physical laws: in absence of applied magnetic or Coriolis force fields, their
mathematical formulation remains unchanged if the time t is everywhere replaced by −t.
The state of a macrocospic system is defined by its macroscopic parameters, but a macrostate
gives no information about the state of an individual component; so if the macroscopic properties
of two stationary systems take the same values, these two systems are thermodynamically indis-
tinguishable. The probability that a certain macrostate is realized is determined by the number
of microstates that correspond to this macrostate; this number is called the multiplicity of the
given macrostate. Since thermodynamicsystems are large, macrostates multiplicities are immensely
large. Some macrostates are more probable than others so, in a nutshell, irreversibility of pro-
cesses in macroscopic systems appears as the evolution from the less probable to the more probable
configuration in phase space.
Now, why are some macrostates more probable than others? As a matter of fact, irreversibility
emerges as a result of different but tightly connected factors [8]. The first of these is the very large
numberofdegreesoffreedominathermodynamicsystem. Adirectconsequenceofthislargenumber
is that the relation between the probability of the thermodynamic system to be in a macrostate
and the occupied phase space volume can only be based on probabilistic arguments. Moreover,
the trajectories in phase space are extremely sensitive to the conditions in which the system was
initially preparedby application of some constraints; this implies that, after thelifting of some or all
of thesaid constraints, thedynamicsthatdrives therelaxation of thesystem towards an equilibrium
state is by essence chaotic, and hence, in the course of the system evolution, the probability to pass
again through the initial macrostate can only decrease and come to be extremely small. Though
arguments against irreversibility such as Zermelo’s paradox based on Poincar´e’s recurrence, and
Loschmidt’s paradox based on microreversibility were put forward, it is obvious that on the one
hand, a Poincar´e’s recurrence time is overwhelmingly large for a thermodynamicsystem and, on the
other hand, there is no such thing as a real, perfectly isolated system: perturbations, as small as
they may be but strictly nonzero, are unavoidable.
2.2 Principle of maximum entropy and time scales
At the macroscopic scale, the equilibrium states of a system may be characterized by a number
of extensive variables X . If the system is composed of several subsystems, relaxation of some
constraints yieldschangesinthevaluestakenbythevariablesX ,whichcorrespondtotheexchanges
between the subsystems. For each equilibrium state, one may define a function S that is positive,
continuous and differentiable with respect to the variables X :
S : X 7→ S(X ) (1)
The function S, called entropy, is extensive: S is the sum of the entropies of the subsystems. The
values finally taken by the variables X after relaxation of constraints, are those which characterize
equilibrium, and which correspond to the maximum of the function S.
The extensive variables X , macroscopic by nature, also differ from the microscopic variables
because of the typical time scales over which they evolve: the relaxation time of the microscopic
variables being extremely fast, the variables X may be qualified as slow in comparison. In fact, one
may distinguish four well separated time scales:
1. The duration of one single collision, τ
2. The collision time, which is the typical time which passes between two consecutive collision
3. The relaxation time towards local equilibrium τ
4. The time necessary for the evolution towards the macroscopic equilibrium, τ
These characteristic times satisfy the following inequalities:
0 col relax eq
Therefore, since the variables X are slow, one may define an instantaneous entropy, S(X ), at
each step of the relaxation of the variables X . The differential of the function S is:
dS = dX = F dX , (3)
where each quantity F is the intensive variable conjugate of the extensive variable X .
2.3 Forces and fluxes
The notions which follow are best introduced in the case of a discrete system2. Now assume an
isolated system composed of two weakly coupled sub-systems to which an extensive variable taking
the values X and X′, is associated. One has: X +X′ = X (0) = constante and S(X )+S(X′) =
i i i i i i i
S(X ). Then, the equilibrium condition maximizing the total entropy is given by:
∂X i X i (0) ∂X i i X i (0) ∂X i ∂X i ′ i i
(cid:12) (cid:12)
The equation above tells (cid:12) us that if the differen (cid:12) ce F = F −F′ is zero, the system is in equilibrium;
(cid:12) (cid:12) i i i
otherwise an irreversible process takes place and drives the system to equilibrium. The quantity F
thusactsasageneralized force (oraffinity)allowingtheevolution ofthesystemtowards equilibrium.
In addition, we introduce the rate of variation of the extensive variable X , which characterizes the
response of the system to the applied force:
And we see that a given flux cancels if its conjugate affinity cancels. Conversely, a non-zero affinity
yields a non-zero conjugated flux. In other words, the relationship between affinities and fluxes
characterizes the changes due to irreversible processes.
2Onemayimagineforinstancetwoseparatehomogeneoussystemsinitially preparedattwodifferenttemperatures
and then put in thermal contact through a thin diathermal wall. The thermalization process will trigger a flow of
energy from on system to theother.
2.4 Entropy production and local equilibrium
For a given out-of-equilibrium system, it is useful to study the rate of variation of the total entropy
in order to determine the appropriate forces and fluxes. Retaining the same notation as above, we
have:
This rate of variation also is called entropy production. It can be rewritten as:
This rate exhibits a bilinear structure: it is the sum of the products of each flux by its conjugate
affinity. Note that this property can be generalized to continuous media.
Large systems may be treated as continuous media, which are assumed to be in equilibrium
locally. More precisely, a system may be divided in cells of intermediate size, i.e. small enough
so that the variables vary only little, but large enough to be considered as thermodynamical sub-
systems in contact with their environment. It is then possible to define local thermodynamical
quantities that are uniform within each separate cell, but different from one cell to another. With
the assumption of local equilibrium, the local entropy σ(r), as a function of local thermodynamical
quantities, has the same form as the entropy S and the local intensive variables are defined as
functional derivatives of S. Note that the local equilibrium cells are open to energy and matter
2.5 Entropy balance and miminum entropy theorem
Entropy is an extensive quantity that is not conserved. The global balance for entropy reads:
= − J ·n dΣ+ σ d3r ≡ exch + int , (8)
where dS /dt is the contribution to dS/dt due to entropy exchange between the system and its
environment (thermostat) and dS /dt is the entropy production related to the internal changes
of the system. The quantities J and σ are the entropy flux and the entropy source respectively.
The entropy production characterizes the rate of variation of the entropy of the global system:
{system;environment}. Irreversible phenomena that contribute to an entropy production are called
dissipative phenomena.
In some circumstances, non-equilibrium states are steady states in the sense that they are char-
acterized by state variables X which are time-independent. In this case, we can write:
and, since
int = σ d3r ≥ 0 (10)
then dS /dt ≤ 0. This implies that in order to maintain a system in a non-equilibrium steady
state, entropy must continually be transferred from this system to its environment. As shown by
Prigoginein1945, thenon-equilibriumsteadystatescorrespondtoaminimumofentropyproduction
since in a time-dependent system, the rate of entropy production can only decrease monotonically
as the system approaches equilibrium [9].
2.6 Linear response and reciprocal relations
In a continuous medium in local equilibrium, the fluxes depend on their conjugate affinity (direct
effect), but also on the other affinities (indirect effect). At a given point in space and time (r,t),
the flux J can be mathematically defined as dependent on the force F , but also on the other forces
F :
J (r,t) ≡ J (F ,F ,...) (11)
Close to equilibrium, J (r,t) can be written as a Taylor expansion:
∂J 1 ∂2J 1
J (r,t) = k F + k F F +... = L F + L F F +... (12)
k j i j jk k ijk i j
∂F 2! ∂F F 2
j i,j k i,j
The quantities L are the first-order kinetic coefficients; they are given by the equilibrium values of
the intensive variables F . Thematrix [L] of the kinetic coefficients characterizes the linear response
of the system.
In the linear regime, the source of entropy reads:
σ = L F F (13)
Since σ ≥ 0, the kinetic coefficients satisfy
L ≥ 0 and L L ≥ (L +L ) (14)
ii ii kk ik ki
Ifsomeprocessesinducerapidvariations oftheaffinities inspaceandtime, therecannotbeanylocal
equilibrium. The kinetic coefficients of linear theory acquire a non-local and a retarded character:
the fluxes at a given point and a given time, depend on the affinities at other points in space, and
at previous times.
In 1931, Onsager put forward the idea that there exist symmetry and antisymmetry relations
between kinetic coefficients [4, 5]: the so-called reciprocal relations must exist in all thermodynamic
systems for which transport and relaxation phenomena are well described by linear laws. The main
results can be summarized as follows [10]:
• Onsager’s relation: L = L
• Onsager-Casimir relation: L = ǫ ǫ L
• generalized relations: L (H,Ω) = ǫ ǫ L (−H,−Ω)
whereH and Ω respectively denote amagnetic field and an angular velocity associated to aCoriolis
field; the parameters ǫ denote the parity with respect to time reversal: if the quantity studied is
invariant under time reversal transformation, it has parity +1; otherwise this quantity changes sign,
and it has parity −1. Onsager’s reciprocal relations are rooted in the reversibility of the microscopic
equations of motion.
The response of a system upon which constraints are applied, is the generation of fluxes which
correspond to transport phenomena. When the constraints are lifted, relaxation processes drive
the system to an equilibrium state. Energy dissipation and entropy production are associated to
transport and relaxation processes.
3 Forces and fluxes in thermoelectric systems
3.1 Thermoelectric effects
A naive definition would state that thermoelectricity results from the coupling of Ohm’s law and
Fourier’s law. The thermoelectric effect in a system may rather be viewed as the result of the
mutual interference of two irreversible processes occurring simultaneously in this system, namely
heat transportandcharge carrier transport. Inthermoelectricity, threeeffects areusuallydescribed:
1. The Seebeck effect, which is the rise of an electromotive force in a thermocouple, i.e. across a
dipolecomposedoftwoconductorsformingtwojunctionsmaintainedatdifferenttemperatures,
under zero electric current.
2. The Peltier effect, which is a thermal effect (absorption or production of heat) at the junction
of two conductors maintained at the same temperature.
3. The Thomson effect, which is a thermal effect that goes together with the steady electrical
currentthat flowsthrougha resistive dipolebecauseof theexistence of a temperaturegradient
applied to the dipole.
It is important to realize here that these three “effects” all boil down to the same process: At the
microscopic level, an applied temperature gradient causes the charges to diffuse3, so the Seebeck,
Peltier and Thomson effects are essentially the same phenomenon, i.e. thermoelectricity, which
manifests itself differently as the conditions for its observation vary. Broadly speaking, when a
temperature difference is imposed across a thermoelectric device, it generates a voltage, and when
a voltage is imposed across a thermoelectric device, it generates a temperature difference. The
thermoelectricdevicescanbeusedtogenerateelectricity, measuretemperature,coolorheatobjects.
For a thermocouple composed of two different materials A and B, the voltage is given by:
where the parameters α are the Seebeck coefficients or thermopowers.
3.2 The Onsager-Callen model
The main assumption of Onsager’s work is based on the hypothesis that the system evolution is
drivenbyaminimalproductionofentropywhereeachfluctuationofanyintensivevariableundergoes
a restoring force to equilibrium [11]. This permits the use of a stationary description with a clear
definitionofallthethermodynamicalpotentials,thoughthesystemitselfproducesdissipation. From
a thermodynamic point of view this is no more than a definition of a quasi-static process since the
system is considered to back to local equilibrium at each time. This leads to the very important
result that the classical quasi-static relation between heat and entropy variation dS = δQ /T may
be extended to finite time response thermodynamics in the following flux form:
J = Q (16)
which allows a continuous thermodynamical description of the system: the thermodynamical equi-
librium, with all average fluxes equal to zero, just becomes one possible thermodynamical state for
the system.
The domain of validity of Onsager’s description is thus limited to processes where entropy pro-
duction is always minimal. By minimal we do not mean that the system will always take the overall
3Onemay see an analogy with a classical gas expansion.
minimal entropy production state, but only the minimal entropy production with respect to the ex-
ternalappliedconstraints,whicharecalledworking conditions. Thesemaybefulfilledornot,leading
to an overall minimal entropy production that can be very far from its optimal value. Finally one
may notice thatOnsager’s description is nomorethan a generalization of thefluctuation-dissipation
theorem, which assumes that the linear response of a system in a stationary state, and the noisy
response of this system are related through the same underlying mechanisms[10, 11, 12, 13].
3.3 Coupled fluxes
The Onsager force-flux derivation is obtained from the consideration of the laws of conservation of
energy and matter. The expression of the relation between the energy flux J , the heat flux J ,
and the particle flux J :
is established by application of the first principle of thermodynamics. Each of these fluxes is the
conjugate variable of its thermodynamic potential gradients. In the case of an electron gas, the
correct potentials for energy and particles are respectively 1/T and µ /T, and the corresponding
forces are: F = ∇(−µ /T) and F = ∇(1/T). Then the linear coupling between forces and
fluxes may simply be described by a linear set of coupled equations involving the so-called kinetic
coefficient matrix [L]:
N = NN NE T (18)
J L L ∇(1)
(cid:20) E (cid:21) (cid:20) EN EE (cid:21)(cid:20) T (cid:21)
where L = L .
The symmetry of the off-diagonal terms is a fundamental aspect of Onsager’s analysis, since
it is equivalent to a minimal entropy production of the system in out-of-equilibrium conditions. It
shouldbenoticedthattheminimalentropyproductionisnotageneralpropertyofout-of-equilibrium
processes at all so that Onsager’s assumption should be present inside the kinetic matrix [L]. It is
known from linear response theory that linear response and fluctuations inside a dissipative system
are closely linked. Then each of the fluctuating potentials experiences a restoring force derived from
the others in a symmetric form. From a purely thermodynamic point of view this coincides with
the Lechatelier-Braun principle. The equality L = L is nothing else but the manifestation of
the intrinsic symmetry of the coupled fluctuations process. From a microscopic point of view this
equality also implies the time reversal symmetry of the processes4. By extension, at the microscopic
scale processes should be “microreversible”, and “irreversible thermodynamics” becomes “reversible
dynamics”.
3.4 Energy flux and heat flux
To treat properly heat and electrical currents it is more convenient to consider J instead of J as
the pertinent quantity to be analyzed. Using J = J +µ J we obtain:
N = 11 12 T e (19)
J L L ∇(1)
(cid:20) Q (cid:21) (cid:20) 21 22 (cid:21)(cid:20) T (cid:21)
with L = L . Since ∇(−µ /T) = −µ ∇(1/T)−1/T∇(µ ) the heat and electronic currents read:
12 21 e e e
N = NN NE e NN T (20)
(cid:20) Q (cid:21) (cid:20) NE e NN NE e EE e NN (cid:21)(cid:20) T (cid:21)
4This time reversal symmetry is broken underthe application of Coriolis or magnetic forces.
with the following relationship between kinetic coefficients:
L = L (21)
12 NE e NN
22 EE e EN e NN
Note that since the electric field derives from the electrochemical potential we also obtain
4 Thermoelectric coefficients
The thermoelectric coefficients can be derived from the expressions of the electronic and heat flux
densities depending on the applied thermodynamic constraints: isothermal, adiabatic, electrically
open or closed circuit conditions.
4.1 Decoupled processes
Under isothermal conditions the electrical current flux may be written in the form,
This is an expression of the law of Ohm since with J = eJ we obtain the following relationship
between the electrical current density and the electric field:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
which contains a definition for the isothermal electrical conductivity expressed as follows:
σ = L (27)
Now, if we consider the heat flux density in the absence of any particle transport or, in other
words, under zero electrical current, we get:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
so that the heat flux density under zero electrical current, J , reads:
1 L L −L L
J = 21 12 11 22 ∇(T) (29)
(cid:20) 11 (cid:21)
This is the law of Fourier, with the thermal conductivity under zero electrical current given by
1 L L −L L
11 22 21 12
(cid:20) 11 (cid:21)
We can also define the thermal conductivity κ under zero electrochemical gradient, i.e. under
closed circuit conditions:
It follows that the thermal conductivities κ and κ are simply related through:
4.2 Coupled processes
Let us now shed some light on the coupled processes. In the absence of any electron transport, the
basic expression is already known since it is given by Eq. (28). We may now define the Seebeck
coefficient as the ratio between the two forces that derive from the electrochemical and temperature
potentials:
Underanisothermalconfigurationthecouplingtermbetween electroniccurrentdensityandheat
flux is obtained from the two following expressions:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
which yield a definition of the Peltier coefficient Π:
J = 12J = ΠJ (36)
Now the equality
is obvious. The close connexion between Peltier and Seebeck effects is illustrated by this compact
expression. In echo to what was said at the begining of Section 3, this shows, from a fundamental
point of view, that all thermoelectric effects are in fact different expressions of the same quantity
S , called the “entropy per carrier” defined by Callen [3]:
4.3 Kinetic coefficients and general expression for the law of Ohm
Theanalysisandcalculations developedaboveallow toestablishacomplete correspondencebetween
the kinetic coefficients and the transport parameters:
L = T (39)
22 e2 T J J
so that the expressions for the electronic and heat currents may take their final forms:
J = T T − e + T J ∇( ) (42)
N e2 T e2 T
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Q e2 T e2 T J J T
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:18) (cid:19)
Since J = eJ , it follows that
from which we obtain:
where ρ is the isothermal conductivity. This is a general expression of the law of Ohm.
4.4 The dimensionless figure of merit ZT
The off-diagonal terms of the kinetic matrix [L] represent the coupling between the heat and the
electrical fluxes. The question is now to consider the way to optimize a given material in order to
get an efficient heat pump driven by an input electrical current or electrical generators driven by a
heat flux. The procedure can be derived for both applications, and we propose here to consider the
case of a thermoelectric generator (TEG).
Let us first look at the optimization of the fluxes. Since a thermoelectric system is an energy
conversion device, the more heat that flows into the material, the more electrical power may be
produced. In order to achieve this, we expect a large thermal conductivity for the material. Unfor-
tunately, thiswillalsoleadtoaverysmalltemperaturedifferenceandconsequentlyasmallelectrical
output voltage and power. This configuration can be called the short-circuit configuration since the
fluxes are maximized and the differences of the potentials minimized.
Let us now consider the coupled processes from the potential point of view. In order to get
the larger voltage, the material should experience a large temperature difference between its edges.
Then the thermal conductivity of the material should be as small as possible, leading to a very
small heat flux and consequently, again, a small electrical output power. This configuration can be
called the open-circuit configuration since the potential differences are maximized and the fluxes
minimized.
It is worth noticing that both short-circuit and open-circuit configurations lead to an unsatisfac-
tory situation. Moreover they are in contradiction since the thermal conductivity is expected to be
maximum in the short-circuit configuration and minimum in the open-circuit one. The relationship
between the thermal conductivities derived above, and written again here:
offers a way to solve this contradiction. Since it was established under zero current condition, the
conductivity κ correspondstotheopen-circuitconfigurationwhiletheconductivity κ corresponds
to the short-circuit configuration. From the previous developments we expect the ratio κ /κ to be
maximal to get the maximal output electrical power from the TEG. The explicit expression of the
ratio contains a definition of the figure of merit ZT:
A maximal value of the ratio κ /κ implies that reaching the highest possible value of ZT is a
necessary condition to qualify a material as optimal. The thermoelectric properties of the material
are summarized in the figure of merit ZT, as proposed by A. Ioffe [14]. This quantity gives a
quantitative information on the quality of the material, and hence for practical applications. Since
only the material parameters enter into its expression, the figure of merit is clearly the central term
for material engineering research. In addition it should be noticed that the present description
does not consider at all the anions of the crystal lattice of the thermoelectric material but only the
electronic gas5. This is due to the Onsager description which follows the linear response theory that
does not include the lattice contribution to heat conduction. However, this contribution may be
accounted for in the general conductance matrix by considering a parallel path for the heat flux.
5 Device optimization: case of a thermoelectric generator
5.1 Device characteristics
We consider a single-leg module with section s and length L placed between two heat reservoirs
that act as thermostats. The proposed thermogenerator configuration includes the presence of heat
exchangers, one between the hot thermostat at temperature T and the hot side module, the other
between the cold side of the module and the cold thermostat at temperature T . It should be
noticed that this configuration cannot be reduced to a simpler one limited to the module, since
the hot side, T , and cold side, T , module temperatures may vary during the operation of the
module.
We assume that the two thermal contacts on both sides of the module are completely character-
ized by the constant thermal conductances K andK . Thetotal contact conductance, K ,
cold hot contact
is K−1 = K−1 + K−1. An extension to varying thermal conductances may be considered in
contact cold hot
the case of non-linear convection or radiative processes. For the sake of simplicity we restrict our
analysis to constant heat exchangers thermal conductances. It should also be mentioned that in the
case of very efficient heat exchangers, it is tempting to fully neglect their presence and consider a
perfect coupling to the thermostats. This consideration is wrong by principle, since, in a dissipative
process, a non-zero resistance is always infinitely larger than a truly zero resistance.
Theinternalelectrical resistanceisgiven byR =L/σ s.Thethermalconductanceofthemodule
may be given by a current-dependent expression of the type: K (I) = κ(I)s/L, but we will
show below how an expression for the TEG thermal conductance K can be derived using two
different ways. As depicted in Fig. 1, the open voltage is simply given by V = α∆T where
∆T = T −T , which is some fraction of the total temperature difference ∆T = T −T .
TEG hM cM hot cold
The TEG is also characterized by its isothermal electrical resistance R, and the Seebeck coefficient
α. The thermal conductance K reduces to the conductance K , under zero voltage (electrical
shortcircuit), and to theconductance K , at zero electrical current(open circuit). Note that both
electrons and phonons contribute to the thermal conductance. The figure of merit ZT is given by :
ZT = α2T/RK .
5.2 Thermal and electrical currents
For a temperature difference across the TEG, ∆T , that is not too large, it is safe to assume that
theincoming andoutgoing heat fluxesarelinear in thetemperaturedifference ∆T . Thispermits
a description of the TEG characteristics with the force-flux formalism, which yields the following
equations:
I 1 1 α ∆V
(cid:18) I Q (cid:19) R αT αT +RK I=0 ! (cid:18) ∆T TEG (cid:19)
where I is the delievered electrical current that flows through the load, which is assumed to be
simply resistive, and I is the thermal current through the TEG; ∆V is the voltage across the
TEG. The open-circuit voltage is V = α∆T . The average temperature in the module is simply
taken as T = (T +T )/2.
5An analogue situation would beconsidering a steam engine without any boiling walls.
Figure 1: Nodal representation of the thermoelectrical (left) and thermodynamical (right) pictures
of the thermoelectric module and the load.
The thermal current is the sum of the contributions of convective heat transfer, i.e. heat
transported within the electrical current, and steady-state conduction [15], usually associated with
Fourier’s law:
Ohm’s law applies as follows: ∆V = −R I and the electrical current I reads:
I = = (49)
After substitution of the electrical current I into Eq. (48), the TEG thermal conductance K can
be defined with:
Q R +R I=0 TEG TEG TEG
(cid:18) load (cid:19)
It is important to note that the dependence of the thermal conductivity K on the electrical
operating point since its expression contains the load electrical resistance. It is useful at this point
to obtain an expression of K in a different fashion. We start from the relationship between the
two thermal conductances K and K of the TEG [16]:
K = K 1+ZT (51)
which may be extended to the following formula: (cid:0) (cid:1)
K (I) = K 1+ ZT , (52)
(cid:18) sc (cid:19)
where we introduced the short circuit current I = α∆T /R such that K (I ) = K .
sc TEG TEG sc V=0
Equations (52) and (50) yield exactly the same expression for K . It is important to see that
since the short circuit current I does depend on the effective temperature difference across the
TEG, ∆T , there is no closed form solution for the global distributions of electrical and heat
currents and potentials in the device.
Figure 1 shows that the electrical part of the TEG may be viewed as the association of a perfect
generator and a resistance which is the physical resistance of the generator. By definition, the
open circuit voltage of the TEG depends on the temperature difference across the TEG. Because of
the presence of finite thermal contact conductances ∆T depends on the electrical load and V
cannot be considered as the output voltage of a perfect Th´evenin generator since its characteristics
depend on the load:
V = α∆T contact −IR ≡ V′ −IR′ (53)
oc K +K 1+K /K oc
I=0 contact contact I=0
The first term on the right hand side is independent of the electrical load, the second depends on
the electrical current delivered. Now, the open-circuit voltage V′ and the internal resistance is
R = R+R′ thus introduced permit the rigorous definition of a perfect Th´evenin generator.
5.3 Computation of the temperature difference across the TEG
The analysis developed so far assumes an explicit knowledge of ∆T , but for practical and mod-
eling purposes it is more useful to obtain expressions of power and efficiency to be optimized as
functions of the temperature difference between the two reservoirs, ∆T = T −T . To determine
∆T, the easiest option is to start from Ioffe’s approach [14] to the definitions of the incoming heat
flux Q˙ and outgoing heat flux Q˙ :
in hM 2 I=0 hM cM
out cM 2 I=0 hM cM
Since we also have Q˙ = K (T −T ) and Q˙ = K (T −T ), these equations define a
in hot hot hM out cold cM cold
2×2 system which links T and T to T and T :
cM hM cold hot
T hot + 2K hot M 11 M 12 T hM
1 RI2 M M T
 −T cold − 2K  21 22 cM
where the four dimensionless matrix elements are given by: M = K /K + αI/K + 1,
11 I=0 hot hot
M = −K /K , M = K /K , M = αI/K −K /K −1.
12 I=0 hot 21 I=0 cold 22 cold I=0 cold
The analytic expressions of the temperatures T and T are easily obtained by matrix inversion,
but the exact expression of ∆T as a function of T and T is cumbersome, and truly not
TEG hot cold
necessary for the discussions that follow in the Chapter. However, an approximate but straightfor-
ward relationship between ∆T and∆T certainly is worthwhile. Usingan analogue ofthevoltage
divider formula, this relationship may be obtained by assuming that the thermal flux is constant in
the whole system:
TEG contact
6 Maximization of power and efficiency with fixed ZT
6.1 Maximization of power by electrical impedance matching
The electrical power produced by the TEG can be simply expressed as
P = oc load , (58)
which shows that maximization of the produced output power for a given thermal configuration is
achieved when
R = R (59)
Expressed in a more traditional way using the ratio m = R /R defined by Ioffe [14], the condition
for maximization reads:
P=Pmax K /K +1
contact I=0
Because of the presence of an additional part in the equivalent resistance R of the TEG due
to the finite thermal contact coupling, the electrical impedance matching condition (60) does not
correspond to the condition m = 1 (or, equivalently, R = R) of the ideal case. This was seen
previously by Freunek and co-workers [17].
When the electrical resistance matching is achieved, the maximum ouput power reads:
(K ∆T)2 ZT
P = , (61)
4(K +K )T 1+ZT +K /K
I=0 contact contact I=0
6.2 Maximization of power by thermal impedance matching
The choosing of the thermal properties of the TEG so that a maximum output power is obtained
directly relates to the general problem of the optimization of the working conditions of a non-
endoreversible engine coupled to the temperature reservoirs through finite conductance heat ex-
changers. For endoreversible engines the heat exchangers are the only location for entropy pro-
duction, a process thus governed by only one degree of freedom. For non-endoreversible engines,
entropy is produced inside the engine because of the Joule effect and the thermal conduction effect;
so this confers two additional degrees of freedom to the system. The framework presented in this
Chapter thus extends the classical so-called Novikov-Curzon-Ahlborn configuration [18, 19, 20, 21]
specialized to endoreversible engines.
If the total conductance K is fixed by an external constraint, optimization of power may
be achieved with respect to K through the following condition:
which corresponds to the satisfaction of the equality:
K = K (63)
contact TEG
The above equation is similar to that derived by Stevens in Ref. [22] who saw that the thermal
impedance matching corresponds to the equality between the thermal contact resistance and that of
theTEG.Thedifference withourresult, Eq. (63), is thatthethermalresistance usedinRef.[22]for
the thermoelectric module is obtained under open circuit condition and hence does not account for
theconvective partofthethermalcurrent, whileK definedinEq.(50)does. Toendthis section,
we emphasize the similarity between electrical and thermal impedance matchings respectively given
by equations (60) and (62).
10-4 10-2 100 102
I = 0 contact
finite ZT = 10
10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 100
K (W.K -1)
Figure 2: Maximum power as a function of the ratio K /K for various ZT values at fixed
I=0 contact
K (notice the use of a logarithmic scale for the abscissa axis). In the inset, the curves (with
ideal and finite thermal contacts) are computed with the data of Ref. [24] where the authors studied
P for three values of K : 3×10−3, 6×10−3 and 1.2×10−2 W·K−1.
6.3 Simultaneous thermal and electrical impedance matching
For a particular configuration imposed by the environnement, the optimal point for the operation
of a TEG may be found by joint optimization of the electrical and thermal conditions, which we do
by solving equations (60) and (62) simultaneously. We find:
m = ZT +1 (65)
Note that Eq. (64) was presented by Freunek and co-workers [17], and that Yazawa and Shakouri
obtained both equations [23]. With these two impedance matching conditions, we find that the
maximum power produced by the TEG is given by:
K ZT (∆T)2
P = , (66)
(cid:16) p (cid:17)
6.4 On the importance of thermal impedance matching
The variations of the maximum power P as a function of the ratio K /K [Eq. (61)] are
max I=0 contact
shown in Fig. 2 for three values of the figure of merit ZT. Though, as expected, higher values of
ZT yield greater values for the maximum of P and larger widths at half maximum, the curves
displayed in Fig. 2 highlight the importance of thermal impedance matching: a high value of ZT
doesnotguaranteeagreater P forany valueofthethermalconductanceatzeroelectrical current
K ; for instance, P at K = K for ZT = 1 is greater than P at K = 5K
I=0 max I=0 contact max I=0 contact
for ZT = 10.
In the inset of Fig. 2, two curves represent the maximum power as a function of K for finite
and perfect thermal contacts respectively; these permit an understanding of why the TEG with the
highest K presents the largest performance degradation, a fact that was observed by Nemir and
Beck [24]: to analyze theimpact of thermal contacts on device performance, they considered various
configurations giving thesame value for the figureof merit ZT. They foundthat for a given value of
10-4 10-2 100 102 104
contact I = 0
Figure 3: Variations of the optimal parameters m (dashed line) and m (dashed-dotted
line) as functions of K scaled to K , for ZT = 1 and ZT = 3. The shaded areas corresponds
contact I=0
to the region of best optimization.
contact thermal conductance, the device performance is strongly influenced by how the fixed figure
of merit of the thermoelectric module is achieved.
6.5 Maximum efficiency
We nowturntotheefficiency thatcharacterize theconversion of theheatcurrentI intotheelectric
power P: η = P/I . An explicit expression for η is
contact TEG
η = , (67)
contact TEG
considering Eqs. (50) and (57). This expression reduces to
−1(1+m)2−η
in the case of ideal thermal contacts.
The value of m which maximizes the efficiency (67) is:
m = 1+ZT 1+ZT I=0 (69)
η=ηmax s (cid:18) K contact +K I=0(cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
It explicitly depends on the thermal conductances K and K .
contact I=0
6.6 Analysis of optimization and power-efficiency trade-off
If, as for liquid-gas heat exchangers, the working conditions lead to modifications of K , the
operating point of the thermoelectric device necessarily changes. It is then worth checking whether
m is bounded or not when the ratio K /K varies. The mean temperature T varies
η=ηmax I=0 contact
very little with K so we may safely consider that the figure of merit is fixed without loss of
generality for the discussion that follows.
We saw that the optimal values of the electrical load to achieve maximum power or efficiency
are different from those of the ideal case when finite thermal contacts are accounted for in the TEG
model. Considering two values of the figure of merit: ZT = 1 and ZT = 3, the optimal parameters
m [m for maximum efficiency in Eq. (69), and m for maximum power, in Eq. (60)]
opt η=ηmax P=Pmax
are plotted against K (scaled to K ) in Fig. 3. For a given value of ZT and conditions close
contact I=0
to perfect thermal contacts, i.e. K ≫ K , the maximum power and maximum efficiency are
contact I=0
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35
efficiency
contact I = 0
contact I = 0
Figure 4: Power versus efficiency curves for two cases with a fixed figure of merit ZT = 1. Only the
value of K varies.
well separated: m −→ 1+ZT, and m −→ 1. Note that the separation between both
can only increase with ZT.
In the opposite limit, i.e. for K ≪ K we see that m −→ 1+ZT, which is the
contact I=0 η=ηmax
upper bound to m too: both optimal parameters coincide. The convergence of these two
optimal parameters towards the same value could be seen as interesting in the sense that this fact
implies that there is no need for a trade-off between efficiency and power; however this also implies
a significant performance decrease. As a matter of fact, the optimal regions to satisfy the power-
efficiency trade-off are those lying between each pair of curves, and we see that the narrowing of
these zones, which also comes along with lower values of ZT, is undesirable since, consequently, less
flexibility in terms of working conditions of the thermoelectric generator is allowed.
The figure 4 displays two power-efficiency curves, one for K = 10K , the other for
contact I=0
K = 50K . As the contact thermal conductance decreases, we observe a narrowing of the
contact I=0
optimal zoneinaccordance with ouranalysis ofFig. 3. Thearrows indicate themaximal valuesthat
P and η may take. As the quality of the thermal contacts deteriorates the power-efficiency
curve reduces to a point located at the origin.
7 Summary and discussion on efficiency at maximum power
We presented the force-flux formalism developed by Onsager [4, 5] and later adapted to thermoelec-
tricity by Callen [6] and Domenicali [7]. This formalism provides very convenient tools to obtain
and analyze in simple terms the thermal and electrical conditions which allow the maximum power
production by a thermoelectric generator non-ideally coupled to heat reservoirs. These conditions
are expressed very simply for the thermal impedance matching: the equality of the contact thermal
conductances and the equivalent thermal conductance of the TEG. It is crucial to see that the qual-
ity of the contacts between the TEG and the heat reservoirs is important since high values of ZT
are of limited interest otherwise. We also saw that the nontrivial interplay between the thermal and
electrical properties of the TEG makes difficult the search for the optimum conditions for maximum
output power production since both electrical and thermal impedance matching must be satisfied
simultaneously. Note that this is also the basic idea underlying the compatibility approach [25] for
ideal thermoelectric systems.
Searching for ways to increase the efficiency of thermoelectric conversion processes in devices
operating in various environmental conditions boosts a variety of research activities spanning from
materials sciences to nonequilibrium statistical mechanics at the mesoscale, and device modeling.
All these areas of research are highly topical. Approaches based on the concept of minimization of
entropy productionhave beendeveloped andproved succesfulinvarious sectors of thermalengineer-
ing and sciences [21]; new contributions continue to feed this field with, e.g., the recent introduction
of thethermoelectric potential [16,25,26]. Sinceone is interested in power rather than energy, ther-
moelectric efficiency has been analyzed in the frame of finite-time thermodynamics [27, 28, 29, 30],
focusing on the efficiency at maximum power [31, 32]. Such efficiency was initially shown to be
bounded by the so-called formula of Curzon and Ahlborn (CA) in the specific case of endoreversible
heat engines [20]. The analysis of Curzon and Ahlborn was later put on firmer grounds in the
frame of linear irreversible thermodynamics assuming a strong coupling between the heat flux and
the work [33] and further discussed by Apertet and co-workers [31, 32]. Analyses of efficiency at
maximum power for nanoscopic quantum dot systems [34] and extension to stochastic heat engines
[35] are also being developed.
The work presented in this Chapter and in research papers focusing on thermoelectric devices
[31, 32, 36, 37] significantly advance the understanding of the central concept of energy conversion
efficiency of heat engines. Since the advent of finite time thermodynamics, the Curzon and Ahlborn
efficiency has become a paradigm. Given the utmost importance of the physics of heat engines,
which are ubiquitous in the sense that they are systems useful to model biological cells, mesoscopic
solid-state systems, macroscopic devices, we think that the CA efficiency, though well established
through the years, deserves close inspection. A very important work was initiated by Schmiedl and
Seifert (SS), but the crucial question of the discrepancy between their result and the CA efficiency
remained without answers until now. The answer, far from trivial, required an in-depth analysis
on the nature of irreversibilities in heat engines [31, 32]. If one overlooks some of the subtleties
that we put forth, one may not succeed in providing a sound and clear framework that explains in
a transparent fashion the energy conversion efficiency of heat engines. Our work, to some extent,
provides a shift in paradigm: we have come not only to propose clear definitions of both CA and
SS efficiencies but also show that a system may undergo a continuous transition from one type of
efficiency to the other by tuning the different sources of irreversibility. These facts are crucial for
any optimization work.
8 Outlook on the next frontier: the mesoscopic scale
Mesoscopic systems offer an interesting field of play at the crossroads of quantum and classical
physics, to experimentalists as well as theoreticians. Indeed, the study of mesoscopic systems can-
not be reduced to practical work aiming only at miniaturization of transistors for microelectronics
applications. From a fundamental viewpoint, it is in these systems that the size of fluctuations
become sufficiently important as compared to averages, so that their influenceon the systems’ prop-
erties emerges. The onset of quantum effects at the mesoscopic scale depends on the size of the
considered system, its temperature and external constraints that depend on the interactions with
its environment.
Over the last 30 years great strides were made in fabrication of artificial structures down to
very small scales. Operation of a number of modern devices rely on a proper understanding of the
physics of nano- and mesoscale structures such as, e.g., semiconductor quantum wells, superlat-
tices, and quantum dots, which today are routinely produced as high quality custom-made samples.
Mesoscopic systems are characterized by a great number of constituents. For some applications or
fundamental studies involving conversion of transfer of energy, they can be considered as heat en-
gines; so it is tempting to describeand analyze them usingthe concepts and terminology that derive
from classical thermodynamics. As a matter of fact, such notions as, e.g., entropy and entropy pro-
duction, whichwesaw inSection 2, mustberevisited consideringthatmesoscopic devices operatein
regimes far from equilibrium where fluctuations are strong. This implies that transport phenonema
and the related measurable quantities in these systems must be identified and understood properly.
The experimental study of electron transport, which is typically ballistic and coherent in meso-
scopic systems, can be performed with the so-called quantum point contacts (QPCs); these narrow,
confining constrictions are made up between wider conducting regions of the system under con-
sideration, and their width is comparable to the electrons’ wavelength at low temperatures. The
quantization of ballistic electron transport through such constriction demonstrates that conduction
is transmission. Because of conductance quantization [38] in quantum point contacts, the Seebeck
coefficient was analyzed at the threshold energies of the conductance plateaus, where the change
in the conductance is very important. Van Houten and co-workers obtained the Seebeck coefficient
in a system based on QPC in a two dimentional electronic gas of a GaAs-AlGaAs semiconduct-
ing heterostructures [39]. They concluded that the thermopower exhibits quantum size effects and
oscillates each time a new mode opens up in the QPC.
For thermoelectric systems at this scale, this calls for the development of recent approaches such
as, e.g., finite time thermodynamics [27, 28, 29, 30] and stochastic thermodynamics [40, 41, 42, 43],
and their association to those which proved fruitful for the computation and measurement of the
thermoelectric transport coefficients. The Landauer-Buttiker formalism provides necessary tools
to consider nano-systems placed between several reservoirs and study the multichannel scattering.
Sivain and Imry used this approach to compute and study linear transport coefficients of a thermo-
electric sample characterized by some disorder in a case where the connections to the chemical and
temperature reservoirs are achieved with ideal multichannel leads [44]. Dissipation processes due to
inelastic scattering were assumed to occur only in the reservoirs. By looking at the thermopower
near the mobility edge, they pointed out some deviations of the kinetic coefficients from Onsager’s
relations and the Seebeck coefficient from the Cutler-Mott formula.
More recent works [45, 46, 47] challenge the view that thermoelectric heat engines are by nature
irreversibleintheiroperation. Thepurposeoftheseindeedistofindwaystoallowreversiblediffusive
transportin thermoelectric materials andtheproposedrouteis thatof nanostructures,whichif they
are sufficiently well tailored, permit the narrowing of the charge carriers’ densities of states (DOS).
The idea is that if electron transport is limited to a narrow energy band which corresponds to an
energy such that the two Fermi functions characterizing the hot and cold reservoirs respectively, are
equal, then together with a weak electron-phonon, coupling, friction effects are drastically reduced.
While delta-function may represent an ideal limit, quantum confinement effects generate a finite
lower bound to the DOS widths, and hence limit the efficiency of the device.
Our view on the matter of irreversibility derives from the main message of finite time thermo-
dynamics: trading a part of the efficiency for the ability to produce power is possible only if irre-
versible processes are introduced in the thermodynamic cycle. Further, using numerical simulations
we demonstrated, in the case of a two thermally coupled macroscopic heat engines, that efficiency
at maximum power is increased when the hot-side Joule heating is favoured [32]. We interpreted
this result as a recycling of the degraded energy: if it is evacuated to the hot heat reservoir, this
energy becomes available to be used again, while if it is evacuated to the cold side, it is irretrievably
lost. These considerations must be examined at the mesoscale, where irreversible thermodynamics
has not completely given way to reversible dynamics. Finally, we showed that optimization of the
operation of a TEG must simultaneously satisfy electrical and thermal impedance matching. At
the mesoscale the notion of impedance matching must be considered with care. Adapation of our
analysis to mesoscale thermal engines is underway, and we have every reason to be optimistic.