A Mathematical Model of Flavescence Dorée
Epidemiology
Federico Lessio1, Alessandro Portaluri1, Francesco Paparella∗2,3
and Alberto Alma1
1Department of Agricultural, Forest and Food Sciences, University
of Torino, Italy.
2Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica “Ennio De Giorgi”,
University of Salento, Italy.
3INFN sez. di Lecce, Italy.
October 14, 2018
Flavescence dorée (FD) is a disease of grapevine transmitted by an
insectvector,Scaphoideustitanus Ball. Atpresent,noprophylaxisexists,
so mandatory control procedures (e.g. removal of infected plants, and
insecticidal sprays to avoid transmission) are in place in Italy and other
European countries. We propose a model of the epidemiology of FD by
taking into account the different aspects involved into the transmission
process (acquisition of the disease, latency and expression of symptoms,
recovery rate, removal and replacement of infected plants, insecticidal
treatments, and the effect of hotbeds). The model was constructed as a
system of first order nonlinear ODEs in four compartment variables. We
perform a bifurcation analysis of the equilibria of the model using the
severity of the hotbeds as the control parameter. Depending on the non-
dimensionalgrapevinedensityofthevineyardwefindeitherasinglefamily
of equilibria in which the health of the vineyard gradually deteriorates
for progressively more severe hotbeds, or multiple equilibria that give
rise to sudden transitions from a nearly healthy vineyard to a severely
deterioratedonewhentheseverityofthehotbedscrossesacriticalvalue.
Theseresultssuggestsomelinesofinterventionforlimitingthespreadof
the disease.
keywordsFlavescence dorée Grapevine epidemiology Critical transition
Fold bifurcation Scaphoideus titanus Ball
1 Introduction
Flavescence dorée (hereafter FD) is a serious disease of grapevine, widespread
in many European countries, caused by phytoplasmas belonging to 16SrV-C
∗francesco.paparella@unisalento.it
]EP.oib-q[
1v3004.7041:viXra
and 16SrV-D ribosomal groups [1]. Symptoms of FD include leaf yellowing or
redness, lack of lignification of canes, lack of blossom, and so on. The infected
plants stop to produce grapes, and die after a few years. Symptoms of FD are
usually shown after a latency period of 1-3 years from infection; young plants
are more likely to show symptoms just one year after infection [3, 2].
FDistransmittedvine-to-vinebyaninsectvector, Scaphoideus titanus Ball
(Hemiptera: Cicadellidae),nativetoNorthAmericaandintroducedintoEurope
in the late 1950s [4, 17]. S. titanus feeds and reproduces only on grapevine
(Vitis spp.), has a single generation per year, and overwinters in the egg stage,
laid under the bark of grapes [5, 17]. Eggs start to hatch during spring, and
the insect over-goes through five nymphal instars before becoming adult during
summer [5, 6]. Nymphs from the 3rd and later instars acquire phytoplasmas
when feeding on infected plants, and after a latency period lasting 4-5 weeks
(meanwhilebecomingadults)theyareabletoinoculatephytoplasmastohealthy
plants[7]. Onceinfective,insectsretainvectorcapabilitythroughtheirlifetime;
on the other hand, no transovarial transmission has been proved for S. titanus
at present, therefore newly born insects have to feed on infected plants in order
to acquire phytoplasmas [8]. Other insects are acknowledged to be occasional
vectors [9], however their role in the spread of Flavescence dorée to date is not
considered to be important.
Infected plants may be subject to recovery, with symptoms disappearing
within a few years after the infection with recovery rates that depend on culti-
var and age of plants, the youngest being the less able to recover [3]. Observed
recovery rates are highly variable and range from 1% to 70% of the infected
plants, but show a strong inverse dependence on the abundance of the vector
insect, with the highest recovery rates observed in vineyards subject to aggres-
siveinsecticidetreatments,andthelowestinvineyardssubjecttonotreatments
[3, 10]. This supports the notion that recovered plants are not immune from
reinfection. However, recovered plants are not a source of phytoplasmas for
insects [11].
In Italy FD is subject to mandatory control procedures, including sprays of
insecticideagainstthevectorandremovaloftheinfectedplants,which,however,
may have higher cost than insecticide treatment. In many vine-growing areas
abandoned vineyards and woods containing wild grapevine act as hotbeds of
both phytoplasmas and S. titanus [12, 13]. Adults of S. titanus are able to
move from untreated to treated vineyards up to a distance of about 300 m [13].
In this paper we model the dynamics of the spread of FD over time, by
considering the different aspects involved into (or influencing the) transmission
process. The model could be used for forecasting the epidemiology of FD in
a vineyard, given the knowledge of some parameters. More importantly, it
highlights the key ecological factors involved in the infection process, and thus
it offers guidance for planning an adequate response.
Fromamathematicalpointofview,themodelisasystemofnonlinear,first-
order,ordinarydifferentialequationsinthecompartmentsS,L,I,G,modelling
thedynamicalbehaviourofhealthyfull-grown,latent,infectedandyoung(nurs-
ery) plants, respectively.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we formulate the
model and present the main mathematical results. In Section 3 we discuss the
ecological significance of those results. Conclusions are given in Section 4. The
Appendix 5 contains proofs and other mathematical details that, for brevity
Full-grown Grapes Aging Young Grapes Replacement
ef Hotbeds ε
Latent Grapes Incubation Infected Grapes Extirpation
Figure 1: Graphical representation of the model. The grapevine population
in a vineyard is split into four compartments, representing healthy, full-grown
plants (S), healthy, young plants (G), latent plants (L) and infected plants (I).
The solid black arrows represent the processes that increase (inward arrow) or
decrease(outwardarrow)thepopulationofeachcompartment. Thedashedgray
arrows represent the effect of infection hotbeds close to the vineyard, triggering
the infection fluxes in initially healthy vineyards.
and clarity, were omitted in the main text.
2 The model
2.1 Formulation
Previousmodelingeffortshavefocusedonthelife-cycleoftheS.titanus withthe
goalofoptimizingthetimingofpestmanagementoperations[14]. Modelsofthis
kindencompassatimeframeoflessthanoneyearandareunabletodescribethe
long-termevolutionofaninfestedvineyard. Inspiteofthecomplicatedlifecycle,
the year-to-year population levels of S. titanus in a vine growing area remains
roughly constant, or at least of the same degree of magnitude, if all known
relevant factors (e.g. timing, number and effectiveness of insecticidal sprays,
the presence of nearby hotbeds of infestation) are kept constant. [15, 16, 14].
Therefore, for time scales longer than one year, it seems to be reasonable to
formulate a continuous-time model whose variables are representative of plants
densities in a vineyard, and where the insect vector does not appear explicitly,
but is parameterized by a coupling term between the infected and the healthy
plants.
Our model splits the grapevine population of a vineyard in four compart-
ments(orstages),asshowninFigure1. ThevariableS representsthedensityof
healthy, full-grown plants (number of vines per unit area), and I represents the
density of infected plants. Because of the lack of transovarial transmission [8],
individuals of S. titanus become vectors of the phytoplasma by feeding on in-
fected plants. Thisoccursatthenymphstage, whentheinsectlackstheability
to move from plant to plant [17]. Therefore, after the eclosion, the abundance
of mobile, phytoplasma-carrying adults will be proportional to the number of
infected plants. Thus infection rate of the healthy plants should be modeled by
a term of the form
Infection rate=f(I)S (1)
where f is an unknown function that quantifies the efficiency of phytoplasma-
carrying adults at infecting healthy plants. Obviously, f must be a monotoni-
cally growing function of the density of infected plants, with f(0)=0. Labora-
toryexperimentsshowthatasmall,butnon-negligiblefractionofplantsremains
healthy, after a relatively long exposure to a population fully composed by in-
fectedinsects[18]. Thissuggeststhatmanyprobesfrominfectedadultsmaybe
requiredforaplanttoeventuallycontractFD.Ifthishypothesisiscorrect,then
small numbers of infected plants in a vineyard should not be very effective at
spreadingthedisease,becausethesmallnumberofphytoplasma-carryingadults
originatingfromthoseplantswouldfeedonmanydifferenthealthyplantsduring
their lifespan, and only rarely return on the same plant enough times to infect
it. Thus we argue that also the derivative of f vanishes for I → 0. Of course,
if the density of infected plants is large, the probability of recurrent feeding on
the same healthy plant of phytoplasma-carrying insects must be large as well.
Thus we argue that f should grow faster than linearly with I, at least at mod-
erately low values of I. The simplest mathematical expression that captures
these assumptions is
Infection rate=qSI2 (2)
where q is a constant whose value depends on the susceptibility to the infection
oftheparticularcultivarwhichisbeingconsidered, andonthelocalabundance
of S. titanus. The value of this constant is subject to large uncertainties. We
estimateq ≈10−6 ha2 plants−2 Y−1 ,butreasonablevaluesrangefrom10−7 to
10−5 ha2 plants−2 Y−1 (see Appendix 5.1 for details). The effect of insecticide
treatments is that of lowering the value of q. This is discussed in Section 3.2.
Because direct laboratory measurements of f are presently lacking, we have
resisted the temptation of using more complicated functional forms that, for
example, let f taper off (and maybe approach a horizontal asymptote) as I
increases. AttheendofSection3wediscusstheeffectofchoosingf proportional
to I.
Inthepresenceofhotbedsofinfectionnearbythemodeledvineyard(suchas
infectedwildgrapesoranabandonedinfectedvineyard),thedensityofinfected
plantsthatentersintheinfectionratetermsshouldnotbeI,butrather(I+ε),
wheretheparameterεquantifiesthephytoplasma-carryinginsectscomingfrom
the hotbeds, which appears to decay exponentially with the distance of the
hotbed [13].
In time, some infected plants have a chance to recover from the disease,
and to return symptom-free. Furthermore, they may be re-infected, thus recov-
ered plants do not require a separate compartment. The process of recovery is
modeled by a flux from the I to the S compartments quantified as k I. Exper-
imental data, taken in vineyards where insecticide treatments had brought to a
negligibleamountthepresenceofS. titanus, showthattheconstantk−1 ranges
between 2 and 3 years for the popular Barbera and Sauvignon cultivars [10].
For other cultivars these figures should be taken as representative of the order
of magnitude, and not as accurate estimates of the recovery rate.
Infull-grownplants,thesymptomsofFDdonotusuallyappearimmediately
after the inoculation. Inoculated individuals may remain in a latent, symptom-
sretemarap
stnalpdetcefnifonoitacidareetaidemmiylatInI ralimiS
.)0002/24423
noitnevretni
ah/stnalp00011ot0002
s’drayeniV
1−Y2−stnalp2ah)5−01ot7−01(6−01
yhtlaeh-detcefni
)0002/24423
)sdrayenivdeganam(
).nivdeganamnu(
less state for up to a few years. In our model the density of latent plants is
quantified by the compartment L. The amount of latent plants that develops
symptomsisquantifiedbythefluxk LfromtheLtotheI compartments. The
time scale k−1 of the process is estimated to be approximately 3 years [2, 3].
Weassumethatthefarmerextirpatesactivelytheinfectedplants,onatime
scalek−1 =τ. Thiscausesamortalityoftheinfectedplantsquantifiedas−k I.
On the same time scale, the manager attempts to maintain a constant density
D of plants in the vineyard, by planting healthy, young plants, whose density is
quantifiedbythevariableG. Thisprocesscontinuesaslongastheactualdensity
of the vineyard (which is S+L+I +G) doesn’t match the desired density D.
The constant τ quantifies the reaction time of the farmer. While τ can’t be
smaller than one year (infected grapes are roughed at the end of summer, and
nursery grapes are usually planted in the next spring in order to be productive
in autumn) it may occasionally be larger, when economic constraints force a
delay of the extirpation and replacement procedures. Young plants are subject
toinfectionjustinthesamewayasfull-grownones,withtheonlydifferencethat
they do not have a phase of latency, but develop the symptoms rapidly after
acquiring the phytoplasma [3]. Thus, the process of infection produces a flux
from G to I (rather than to L). The infection rate of young plants is quantified
as qG(I + ε)2, analogously to (2). In principle we could model a different
susceptibility to the infection for the young and the full-grown plants by using
different values of the constant q for the two compartments. However, lacking
a direct empirical evidence of an evident disparity in susceptibility between
young and full-grown plants, for simplicity, we prefer to use the same value
of q for both. Young plants that do not become infected eventually turn into
full-grown plants by aging. This process is modeled as a flux from the G to the
S compartment quantified as k G. For most cultivars the aging time is about
k−1 ≈5 years [3].
The model as described by the above considerations is embodied by the
following system of first-order ordinary differential equations:
where the dot denotes differentiation with respect to time.
InTable1wesummarizetheabovebest-guessesofthevalues(orvaluerange)
of the constants, deduced from evidence given in the accompanying references.
The system (3) may be brought to non-dimensional form by using τ as the
scale of time and (qτ)−1/2 as the scale of grapevine density. Defining the non-
dimensional quantities
Figure 2: Equilibria of the vineyard model (4) as a function of (cid:15) for three
different values of the vineyard density D. Panels (A), (B), (C), (D) repre-
sent, respectively, thedensityofhealty, full-grownplants(theS compartment);
healthy,youngplants(theGcompartment);latentplants(theLcompartment);
infectedplants(theI compartment). Dark/lightcolorshadesrepresent,respec-
tively, stable and unstable equilibria. The dashed lines are the approximate
expressions (16) of the equilibria close to the state (5) of healthy vineyard.
the system in non-dimensional form reads:
˜ (cid:16)
where the dot denotes derivation with respect to the non-dimensional time,
and the (positive) constants are c = k τ, c = k τ, c = k τ, c = k τ,
1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4
D =(qτ)1/2D, (cid:15)=(qτ)1/2ε. For typographical clarity for now on we shall omit
thetildeshavebeenomitted,andallquantitieswillbeinnon-dimensionalform,
unless otherwise specified.
2.2 Equilibria and their bifurcations
ForinitialdatasuchthatS,L,I,G≥0andS+L+I+G≤Dthenthesolutions
of (4) obey the bound 0 ≤ S,L,I,G ≤ D for all positive times (see Appendix
5.2 for a proof). If the initial condition is such that S + L + I + G > D,
then unacceptable solutions with negative values may develop. However, the
only occurrence in which the density of the vineyard could be higher than the
desired density D is when a farmer decides to thin out the vineyard in order to
attain a lower desired density. Modeling this process is, of course, well beyond
the aim of equations (4).
For (cid:15)=0 the system (4) has the obvious equilibrium
correspondingtoanuninfectedvineyard. Imposingtheright-handsideof(4)to
be zero, after some algebraic manipulations, the other equilibria of the model,
forI+(cid:15)(cid:54)=0,maybeexpressedassolutionsofthefollowingsystemofnon-linear
algebraic equations:
 c I c c I
)2 (cid:16) c 3
(cid:16) (cid:17)
c 2 c c +(I+(cid:15))2 . (6)
By substitution the first three equations of (6) into the fourth, one finds that
the admissible equilibria (namely, those that do not have negative values in
any of the four compartments) are determined by the non-negative roots of a
fifth-order polynomial in the variable I. For (cid:15) = 0 one of the roots is I = 0,
which leads to the healthy vineyard equilibrium (5). For small values of (cid:15) there
exists only one equilibrium at sufficiently small densities D, and up to three at
higher densities. No root exists with I ≥ D. Appendix 5.3 gives more details
on these statements. The smallest positive root gives, for small non-zero (cid:15),
an equilibrium very close to (5). A perturbative analysis confirms that very
weak (or very far) hotbeds have almost no effect: if (cid:15) (cid:28) 1, then there exists
an equilibrium which differs only by O((cid:15)2) from the healthy vineyard. Explicit,
approximate expressions of this equilibrium are given by eq. (16) in Appendix
5.4.
Families of equilibria depending on a parameter may be computed numeri-
cally [19, Chapter 10]. Using (cid:15) as the control parameter, the equilibria of the
model (4) are shown in Figure 2, for several values of the vineyard’s desired
density D, and with c =0.4, c =1/3, c =1, c =1/5.
The linear stability of these equilibria is assessed by computing the eigen-
values of the linearization of equations (4) evaluated at the equilibrium. The
healthy vineyard equilibrium (5) has four negative real eigenvalues λ =
(−1,−c −c ,−c ,−c ), and is therefore a stable node. For the other equilib-
ria,showninFigure2,theeigenvalueswerecomputednumerically. ForD (cid:46)3.9
there is only one equilibrium for each value of (cid:15), which is stable. At higher
densities, there is an interval such that, if (cid:15) is within the interval, then there
are three equilibria (two stable nodes and a saddle); if (cid:15) is outside the interval,
then there is only one stable equilibrium; if (cid:15) is at one of the extremes of the
interval, then the saddle and one of the two nodes coalesce in a saddle-node bi-
furcation(namely,thefoldsinFigure2wherethecurveshaveaverticaltangent
and a stability change occurs). Only for intermediate values of the density D
both extremes of this interval occur at positive values of (cid:15). For higher values
of D, the branch of stable equilibria that passes through the healthy vineyard
equilibrium (5) folds at a positive (cid:15), the other stable branch folds at a negative
(cid:15).
Thecriticalvalueswherethestablebranchoriginatingfromthehealthyvine-
yardstate(5)loosesstabilityhavethefollowingsimpleapproximateexpressions
for large D (see Appendix 5.5 for details):
(cid:15) ≈ 1 3, I ≈ 1 3. (7)
fold 4D fold 4D
The critical values S , L , G are found by using (7) in (6). Figure 3
fold fold fold
showsacomparisonbetweenthecriticalvaluesdeterminednumericallyandthe
approximation (7).
2.3 The case of an abandoned vineyard
Sometimes,foreconomicreasons,vineyardsareleftunmanaged. Intheabsence
of insecticide treatments and of active replacement of infected plants, unman-
agedvineyardsmaybecomehotbedsofinfection. Asimilarroleisplayedbywild
grapevines living in woodlands and shrublands. Equations (4) may be used to
model these cases, simply by omitting the G compartment of the young plants.
The equations then read
5 10 15 20 25 30
5 10 15 20 25 30
5 10 15 20 25 30
Figure 3: Panels (A) and (B): values of (cid:15) and of I at the saddle-node bifurca-
tion between the healthy vineyard branch and the saddle branch of equilibria
for several values of D. Panel (C): value of I at the saddle equilibrium with
(cid:15) = 0. The red dots are values computed numerically, the blue lines are the
approximations discussed in the Appendix 5.5.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Figure 4: Numerical solution of equation (8) with the initial conditions S(0)=
5.6,L=0.2,I =0.2. Theconstantsc ,c ,c arecomputedfromtheparameter
values given in Table (1).
The values of the constants c and c may be taken the same as before. The
mortalityrateoftheinfectedplantsc is,instead,muchsmaller,becauseplants
are not actively eradicated once a year by a farmer, but rather die after several
years of infection. We estimate that a single full-grown plant, when infected,
should last about 10 years before dying (Table 1). In this very simplified ap-
proach we have omitted to introduce terms modeling the reproduction and the
naturalmortalityofhealthygrapevines. Owingtothelonglifespanofgrapevine
plants, these processes occurs on time scales which are much longer than those
involving the spread of FD, and should therefore be negligible in the present
context. For simplicity, we have also omitted any coupling term with other
nearby hotbeds: we assume that the abandoned vineyard is already infected,
and we are interested in the time evolution of the most virulent phase of the
infection, during which the abundance of infected individuals of S. titanus is
determinedbythelocaldensityofinfectedplants, andanyinflowfromexternal
sources becomes negligible.
The set of states without infection H = {S = S , L = 0, I = 0} where
S is an arbitrary constant, are the equilibria of the system of equations (8).
By linearizing the equations around the equilibria we find that H is a normally
hyperbolicmanifoldhavingtwonegativeeigenvalues(namely,λ =−c −c and
λ = −c2). It is also the center manifold of each equilibrium [19, Chapter 5].
Therefore,initialconditionsinvolvingaverysmallnumberofinfectedandlatent
plants tend to fall back to an infection-free state in H without experiencing an
appreciable growth of infected plants.
If the initial density of infected plants in the initial conditions is not very
small, a more complicated dynamics, illustrated in Figure (4), will occur: from
(8) we have
thus, if initially it is SI > c + c , then the density of latent and infected
plants will continue to grow as long as the latter inequality is satisfied. This
produces, in the span of a few years, a dramatic decrease of the density of
healthy plants mirrored by a corresponding rise of infected and latent plants.
As the number of infected plants increases, so does the number of plants that
recover and become healthy again. The epidemic peaks when the recovered
plantsbecomeasubstantialfractionofthehealthyplants. Thisisinqualitative
agreement with the results of the experiments of Morone et al. [3]. After this
rapid, virulent phase, the density of healthy plants has dropped so much that
SI <c +c . Thedensityoflatentandinfectedplantsslowlydecreases,whereas
the density of healthy plants experiences a slow growth, thanks to the recovery
ofpreviouslyinfectedplants. Eventually,afteranalmostcentury-longtransient,
the abandoned vineyard returns to a healthy state, but with a drastically lower
plant density.
3 Discussion
3.1 Practical implications of the structure of the bifurca-
tion diagram
ThebifurcationanalysisofSection2.2showsthecrucialimportanceofinfection
hotbedsindeterminingthestateofanearbyvineyard. Ifthehotbedsareabsent
or weak (that is, if the value of (cid:15) is small), then there is always a stable state
which doesn’t differ much from the healthy vineyard state: infected plants are
very few and replacing them with young ones keeps the infection at very low
levels.
If (cid:15) increases, the outcome depends on the value of the parameter D (the
non-dimensional design density of the vineyard). For densities D (cid:46)3.9 (which,
accordingtoourestimateofq,correspondtoD (cid:46)3900plantsha−1)thenumber
of healthy plants decreases gradually with increasing (cid:15): one would observe a
progressive worsening of the vineyard’s health as the hotbeds become stronger
(seethebluecurveinFigure2). Forhigherdensities,thegradualdecreaseoccurs
only up to the critical value (cid:15) . When the strength of the hotbeds becomes
such that (cid:15) > (cid:15) , then the stable fixed point, corresponding to a vineyard
with just a few infected plants, disappears. As a consequence, the vineyard
undergoesatransitiontowardstheonlystablefixedpointleft,correspondingto
a state dominated by infected and latent plants.
After the transition, if the strength of the hotbeds eventually decreases and
returnstozero,theoutcomealsodependsonthedesigndensityofthevineyard.
If D (cid:46) 4.8 (corresponding to D (cid:46) 4800 plantsha−1) then there exists another
critical value of (cid:15), such that, when the strength of the hotbeds is lower than
this critical value, the system experiences a transition back to the state with
just a few infected plants (see the green curves in Figure 2). In this case, one
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
= 3.0 = 4.5 = 6.0
Latent 5 5
Young 4 4 10ǫ
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Figure 5: Time evolution of of a vineyard with design density D = 3 (A),
D = 4.5 (B), and D = 6 (C) exposed to hotbeds with a time-varying strength
(cid:15). Note that, for clarity, the value of (cid:15) (represented by the dotted black line) is
multiplied by ten.
would observe a classic hysteresis cycle. For higher densities (see the red curves
inFigure2)performingacompletecycleisimpossible: thesecondcriticalvalue
of (cid:15) is negative, which is impossible to attain, because it would correspond to a
meaningless negative density of infected plants in the hotbeds. Therefore, even
ifallthehotbedswereremoved(thatis,(cid:15)=0)thevineyardwouldremainstuck
in the stable state with very few healthy plants.
In order to further elucidate this dynamics, and to show how the structure
of the bifurcation diagram shapes the time evolution of a vineyard exposed to
a nearby hotbed, we have solved numerically the equations (4) with a time
varying (cid:15). We have set (cid:15) = c I , where I is the density of infected plants in
an abandoned vineyard according to the model (8), with the parameters and
initialconditionsofFigure4. Thestrengthofthehotbedpeaksabouttenyears
after the beginning of the simulation, then slowly returns to zero. By setting
c = 0.1, and keeping all the other parameters of the managed vineyard as in
Figure 2, we obtain the results shown in Figure 5.
At low densities (Figure 5 A) there is only one stable fixed point for each
valueof(cid:15). Thus,as(cid:15)variesintime,thestateofthevineyardchangesgradually,
withonlyamoderatelossofhealthyplants. When(cid:15)returnstozero,thevineyard
returns to a healthy state.
At intermediate densities (Figure 5 B), after the initial transient during
which the number of healthy plants decreases very slowly, the strength of the
hotbed crosses the bifurcation point. The vineyard then experiences a rapid
transition to the state with very few healthy plants. When the strength of
the hotbed decreases below the second critical value, then the vineyard slowly
recovers, and returns to a healthy state, closing the hysteresis cycle.
At high densities (Figure 5 C), there is also a rapid transient to the state
withfewhealthyplants,butthenthevineyardneverrecoversthehealthystate,
even for vanishingly low strengths of the hotbed, because the second critical
point is unreachable and the hysteresis loop can not be closed.
3.2 The effect of the insecticides
Because insecticides cause a drop in the number of adults of S. titanus, they
diminish the strength of the coupling between the infected and the healthy
plants. In our model this translates in a decrease of the value of the parameter
q which appears in equations (3).
The consequences of this decrease are best understood by recalling that q
appearsinthescaleofdensityusedtodefinethenon-dimensionalcompartments.
In particular, the non-dimensional design density and the dimensional one, are
linked by the following identity
Itfollowsthatadecreaseinq isequivalenttoadecreaseinthenon-dimensional
valueofthevineyard’sdesigndensityD. Thus,thepersistentuseofinsecticides
may have the effect of changing the shape of the bifurcation diagram of a given
vineyard from, say, one that looks like the red curves in Figure (2) to one that
looks like the blue curves.
In this respect, insecticides should be seen as beneficial, because, by poten-
tially removing the fold bifurcations, they avoid catastrophic transitions from a
state in which the vineyard is close to the healthy state, to one in which most
of the plants are either infected or latent. However, the insecticide treatment
cannotbeinterruptedwhiletherearestillnearbyhotbedsofinfection, because
thebifurcationdiagramwouldspringbacktoitsoriginalshape,andthestateof
thevineyardwouldrapidlydeteriorate,evenifithadattainedanalmostperfect
recovery during the years of insecticide treatment.
Ontheotherhand,ifthehotbedsofinfectionweregraduallyeliminated,any
vineyardstillinrelativelygoodhealthwouldreturntothehealthystate,without
theneedofinsecticides,thanksjusttothecontinuedactionofextirpationofthe
infectedplantsandreplacementwiththeyoungones. Therefore,theelimination
of hotbeds as a source of inoculum seems to be crucial in maintaining a healthy
status in vineyards.
In the situations in which a decrease of the value of D is desirable, this
can also be achieved by decreasing the design density D of the vineyard. In
order to do so, a farmer may replace with young plants only a fraction of those
eradicated because infected. This procedure has the added benefit of reducing
the number of young plants in the vineyard, which, being not subject to a
latency period, may immediately become infected, thus helping spreading the
disease. Obviously, the decision of decreasing the design density of a vineyard
has to be evaluated also on the basis of economic considerations, but it seems
unwisetounconditionallyexcludethisoption,andrelyexclusivelyoninsecticide
treatments.
3.3 The functional form of the infection rate
We have argued that the function f appearing in the infection rate (1) should
grow faster than linearly with I at low numbers of infected plants. In order to
support our argument we have also investigated the case in which the infection
Infection rate=qˆSI (10)
where qˆ is expressed as haplants−1Y−1. Thus a scale of grapevine density is
(qˆτ)−1. Using (10) in place of (2), the non-dimensional model (4) becomes the
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where Dˆ,(cid:15)ˆ = qˆτ(D,ε). The state of healthy vineyard (5) is obviously an
equilibrium also for equations (11). A linear stability analysis shows that the
linearizationaroundthisequilibriumhasthreenegativeeigenvalues. Thefourth
eigenvalue is
2 1 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
λ = .
The healthy vineyard is the unstable if λ >0, that is if
D >c +c . (12)
A bifurcation analysis analogous to that of Section 2.2 shows that the state of
healthy vineyard is part of a family of equilibria which exists for any (cid:15)≥0 and
is not subject to any bifurcation.
When (12) is satisfied, this family of equilibria is unstable. In addition, the
Gcompartmentassumesnegativevaluesfor(cid:15)>0,whichmakestheseequilibria
ecologically meaningless. For the same parameters, there is a second family of
equilibriawhichisstable,ecologicallyacceptable,andcorrespondstoavineyard
dominated by infected and latent plants.
If (12) is not satisfied, and D < c +c holds, then the family of equilibria
containingthehealthyvineyardisstable,andnocompartmentassumesnegative
valuesforanyvalueof(cid:15). Forincreasing(cid:15),thedensityofhealthyplantsgradually
decreases and that of latent and infected plants gradually increases.
An analysis analogous to that reported in Section 5.1 leads to an estimate
of qˆin the range 10−3 to 10−2 haplants−1Y−1. Estimating c +c ≈ 1.4 (see
Table 1), this suggests that the typical healthy vineyard should be unstable to
infinitesimal perturbations. As a consequence, even a small number of infected
adults of S. titanus would precipitate a healthy vineyard into the stable state
dominated by infected plants, on a time scale proportional to λ−1. If, on the
other hand, qˆ were as small as to make stable the state of healthy vineyard,
thenavineyardwouldneverbecomedominatedbyinfectedplants,exceptwhen
surrounded by very strong and virulent hotbeds.
These findings are at odds with the observed phenomenology of infestations
of FD. If the model (11) were correct, when exposed to FD, a well-managed
vineyard would either develop just a small number of infected plants, without
further progresses (stable healthy state), or, more likely, rapidly experience a
destructive infestation (unstable healthy state). A transition from the first to
the second situation (as shown in Figure 5 B, C) appears to be impossible
if one accepts the expression (10) for the infection rate. An example of this
Table 2: For seven Italian regions we report the date of the first known ap-
pearence of Flavescence Dorée, and the date of the beginning of the epidemics.
In the region Marche, as of today, three well-established hotbeds have been re-
ported, but not a widespread epidemics. For Valle d’Aosta the beginning of the
epidemics is estimated from personal communications.
First known Beginning of the
appearence epidemics
Veneto 1976 [21] 1980-82 [27]
Trentino 1985 [22] 1992 [28]
Friuli uncertain 1986 [25]
Marche 2001 [26] not yet [30]
Piemonte 1978 [23] 1998 [3]
Valle d’Aosta 2006 [24] 2010
Lombardia 1972 [20] 1985 [29]
transitionisreportedforSerbia, whereseveralvineyardsofcultivar“Plovdina”,
very sensitive to FD, raised up to a 100% symptomatic grapes in three years
starting from an infection rate lower than 5% [31].
Table 2 shows that, in Italian wine-making regions, there has always been
a delay of several years from the date of the first report of FD, to the date of
the beginning of the epidemic status. The latter may be defined as when FD
startstospreadallovertheterritorywithoutbeingconfinedtoafewhotpoints.
Generally, the epidemic status is recognized when a consistent part of the vine-
yards has more than 30% of infected plants, and eradication is not considered
possible anymore. For instance, in Piedmont, the territory is classified as: free
but vulnerable areas (FD absent, but very likely to occur); hotspot areas (FD
present but not settled, possible to eradicate); settlement areas (FD settled,
impossible to eradicate).
If healthy vineyards were unstable with respect to small inflows of infected
adults of S. titanus, one would expect a much more rapid development of the
epidemics. The observed slow progression of the infestation, together with the
factthat,inthepresenceofanepidemics,theinfestationinavineyardisunlikely
toremainlimitedtoasmallportionoftheplants,butgenerallyprogressesupto
a state dominated by infected plants (sometimes even if insecticides are used),
strongly points to the existence of a critical transition between two alternative
stable states of almost-healthy vineyard and completely infested vineyard, as
suggested by the bifurcation diagram of Figure 2.
4 Conclusions
We have developed a model for the time evolution of a FD epidemics in a
vineyard. Thepresenceofthevectorofthedisease(theleafhopperScaphoideus
titanus Ball) is not explicitly modeled, but is parameterized as an interaction
term between the infected and the healthy grapevine plants. The presence of
infection hotbeds near the vineyard appears as a parameter in this interaction
term. In addition to infection, the model takes also into account incubation,
recovery and aging processes, and also extirpation and replacement of infected
2009 2010 2011 2012
q=1.0E 05, ε=98 − q=1.0E 06, ε=420
q=1.0E 07, ε=1500
2009 2010 2011 2012
sselmotpmyS
q=1.0E 05, ε=60 400 q=1.0E − 06, ε=300
q=1.0E 07, ε=1100
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Figure 6: Comparison between observed data (dots) and the model (lines) for
different values of the parameter q. In panels (A), (C) the dots represent the
observed density of infected plants in an experimental vineyard, the lines are
the I compartment. In panels (B), (D) the dots represent the observed den-
sity of symptomless plants, the lines are the sum of the S and L compart-
ments. In panels (A), (B) the numerical solution starts in 2009, and uses the
(cid:0) ha2plants−2Y−1(cid:1)
(cid:0) plantsha−1(cid:1)
values given in the inset of panel (A).
In panels (C), (D) the solution starts in 2008 and the q, ε values are given in
the inset of panel (C).
plants, operated by the farmer.
Themodelshowsthat,inthepresenceofabundantpopulationsofS.titanus,
or, equivalently, for vineyards with high plant density, two stable equilibria are
possible. Oneofthesecorrespondstoasituationwithjustafewinfectedplants,
where the infection is kept under control by the extirpation and replacement
process. Theotherequilibriumcorrespondstoavineyarddominatedbyinfected
plants, where extirpation and replacement is ineffective. When the strength of
thehotbedscrossesacriticalthreshold,onlythelatterequilibriumsurvives,and
the former disappears. Therefore, vineyards infected with FD may undergo an
irreversible transition from a near-healthy state to a severely compromised one.
Themodelsuggeststhatinsecticidetreatments, togetherwithcontinuedex-
tirpationandreplacementofinfectedplants, maybeaneffectivewaytorecover
from a severe infestation. However, the model also demonstrates that insec-
ticides are just a stopgap measure. Without the elimination of the hotbeds,
FD would not disappear from an infested vineyard, and any weakening of the
treatments may precipitate the situation again. This finding calls for a proac-
tive search and removal of any infection hotbeds as soon as the presence of
FD becomes apparent in a grapevine-farming territory. These preventive mea-
sures, if successful, could avoid the need of extensive insecticide treatments on
productive vineyards.
Acknowledgements
This research was conducted within the frame of the project: "Elaborazione
e stesura di un protocollo di lotta guidata alla Flavescenza dorata e al suo
vettoreScaphoideustitanusnellazonadiproduzionedell’Astidocg",fundedby
"Consorzio per la tutela dell’Asti docg". We thank Jost von Hardenberg for a
helpful discussion on this problem.
5 Appendix
5.1 An estimate of the value of q
As part of an experiment in the province of Cuneo (Italy), a small vineyard of
0.475 ha was monitored from 2009 to 2012. The vineyard had an initial density
D = 3000 plants/ha and no infected plants. Flavescence Dorée was already
well established in the surrounding territory. However we lack quantitative
data allowing for the estimation of the appropriate value of ε. No insecticide
treatments, nor extirpation of infected plants was performed. Every year, the
number of infected and simptomless plants was assessed (the red dots in Figure
6 (A), (C) and (B),(D), respectively). The assessment would not distinguish
between healthy and latent plants, both classified as symptomless.
In order to determine a reasonable range of values of q, we apply the model
(3) by setting G=0 and dropping the last equation (which models the replace-
ment of infected plants with young ones). Figure (6) shows a comparison be-
tweenthemodelresultsandtheobserveddata,forseveralchoicesoftheparam-
eters q and ε. The other coefficients are those of Table 1. The density of symp-
tomlessplantsiscomparedwiththesumoftheS andLcompartments. Theini-
tialconditionisS =D,L=I =0. InFigures6(A),(B)thenumericalsolution
starts in 2009, the last year without infected plants. In Figures 6 (C), (D) the
solution starts in 2008. This allows for the hypothesis that for one year all the
inoculated plants remained in the latent state, or with symptoms as weak as to
evade detection. In the first case, q ≈10−6ha2plants−2Y−1 gives a reasonable
fit of the data, while in the second a value as high as q ≈10−5ha2plants−2Y−1
yields a more convincing fit. Values as low as q ≈ 10−7ha2plants−2Y−1 also
giveanacceptablefit,iftheinitialconditionrefersto2009,butshouldprobably
be ruled out, because they require unrealistically high values of ε.
5.2 Boundedness and non-negativity of the solutions
For non-negative initial conditions such that S+L+I +G ≤ D the solutions
of the model equations (4) remain non-negative and bounded by D at all later
times. In fact, by adding together the four equations in (4), and defining the
total vineyard density x=S+L+I+G, we obtain
Considering I as a known function of time, we have that the solution of (13) is
(cid:18) t (cid:19)
This shows that, if the initial vineyard density is x(0) ≤ D, then, as long as
I remains non-negative, it will be x(t) ≤ D. But if at any time t we have
S,L,I,G ≥ 0 and x(t) ≤ D, then from (4) we deduce S = 0 ⇒ S˙ ≥ 0,
L = 0 ⇒ L˙ ≥ 0, I = 0 ⇒ I˙ ≥ 0, and G = 0 ⇒ G˙ ≥ 0. Therefore, none of the
four compartments can become negative. Thus we have that 0 ≤ x(t) ≤ D at
all times, which implies 0≤S,L,I,G≤D.
5.3 Determination of the equilibria of the model
By substituting the first three expressions of (6) in the fourth, and then mul-
(cid:16) (cid:17)
tiplying by c (I+(cid:15))2 (I+(cid:15))2+c we obtain that the equilibrium densi-
ties of infected plants are the non-negative roots of the fifth-order polynomial
P(I)= (cid:80)5 q In, whose coefficients are
q =−c D+4q (cid:15)
3 2 3 4 1 3 2 4 4 5 (15)
q =−c c D+2q (cid:15)−2q (cid:15)2
q = c (c +c )c +2q (cid:15)−3q (cid:15)2+4q (cid:15)3−5q (cid:15)4
1 2 3 1 4 2 3 4 5
q =−c c D(cid:15)2−c D(cid:15)4
Recalling that c ,...,c >0 and D >0, from the last equation in (3) it follows
that there are no equilibria with I ≥ D and S,L,G ≥ 0. Because from (6) it
followsthattoanynon-negativerootofP correspondsanequilibriumwithnon-
negative values for all the four compartments, then we deduce that P cannot
have real roots larger than D.
Note that the coefficients q ,...,q are polynomials in (cid:15). We observe that,
foranygivenD,therearesufficientlysmallvaluesof(cid:15)sothatthecoefficientsof
the odd powers are positive and those of the even powers are negative. Then,
from Descartes’ rule of signs, it follows that P has no negative roots. Hence,
being an odd-degree polynomial, it must have at least one non-negative real
root. In the special case (cid:15) = 0 then q = 0, and a real root is I = 0, which
yields the equilibrium (5). We also observe that for any positive value of (cid:15) as
small as to make q ,q >0, 2q >q (cid:15), there exist sufficiently small values of D
such that q ,q > 0. Then, from Descartes’ rule of signs, it follows that P has
one, and only one positive root.
An extensive numerical exploration for reasonable values of the parameters
has never yielded more than three positive real roots for P. Neither we found
numerical evidence of limit cycles or deterministic chaos. We therefore are
confident that the bifurcation diagrams shown in Figure 2 determine all the
qualitative dynamics of the model equations (4).
5.4 Approximateexplicitexpressionsfortheequilibrianear
the state of healthy vineyard
For (cid:15)(cid:28)1, explicit, approximate expressions for the equilibria of the model (4)
may be sought perturbatively, assuming an expansion of the form
whichrepresentsasmallcorrectionuponthehealthyvineyardequilibrium. The
perturbative analysis reveals that S = L = I = G = 0. That is, weak
hotbeds at first perturbative order have no effect on a healthy vineyard. The
second and higher orders are non-zero, and the information that they carry is
best conveyed by using Padé approximants. The (2,1) Padé approximation of
theequilibriumcomputedwiththeperturbativeexpansionuptothethirdorder
is the following
S((cid:15))=D− 2 3 4 1 2 3 2 (cid:15)2
c c (c +c −2(cid:15)D)
L((cid:15))= 1 3 (cid:15)2
c (c +c −2(cid:15)D)
2 1 3 (16)
G((cid:15))= 3 (cid:15)2
c (c +c −2(cid:15)D)
5.5 Approximate position of the saddle-node bifurcation
If the vineyard’s desired density D is sufficiently high, for (cid:15)=0 there are three
equilibria: the healthy vineyard stable node (5) (with no infected plants), a
saddle (with an intermediate number of infected plants), and another stable
node (with a high number of infected plants). As the parameter (cid:15) grows, the
branchofstablenodeswhichpassesthrough(5)andthebranchofsaddlesmove
close to each other, and meet in a saddle-node bifurcation at (cid:15) (e.g. Figure
2(D) for D =6). The value of (cid:15) and of the corresponding equilibrium value
ofinfectedplantsI maybeapproximatedwithexplicitexpressions,asshown
in Figure 3.
First we observe that for positive (cid:15) and sufficiently large D the polynomial
P has one real positive root of size O(D). The other roots, as D →∞, tend to
the solutions of
I4+c I2+c (cid:15)2+(cid:15)4 =0
(where we have used the expressions (15) divided by D). But this polynomial
does not have real solutions. Therefore we conclude that for fixed (cid:15) > 0 and
asymptotically large D, the polynomial P has only one real root, which is posi-
tive.
For (cid:15) = 0 the polynomial P has the root I = 0. The other equilibria are
given by the solutions of
q q c c (c +c )
5I4−c I3+ 3I2−c c I+ 2 4 1 3 =0 (17)
D 2 D 2 4 D
where q ,q ,q are given by (15) with (cid:15) = 0. For D → ∞ one of the solutions
of (17) approaches zero. Therefore it may be approximated by neglecting the
terms of order higher than the first, yielding
I| ≈ 1 3. (18)
(cid:15)=0 D
For 0 ≤ (cid:15) ≤ (cid:15) , a smooth family of equilibria connects the equilibrium
correspondingto(18)tothehealthyvineyardequilibrium(5),changingstability
at(cid:15) . ButforD →∞itmustbe(cid:15) →0becauseforlargeDandpositive(cid:15),
P hasonlyonerealsolution. Thus,ifthefamilyofequilibriaisasmoothcurve,
asymptotically for large D, it must be 0<I < I| and (cid:15) ∝I . We
fold (cid:15)=0 fold fold
have verified numerically for a large number of values of c , c and D, that
I =(cid:15) = (cid:15)=0
fold fold 4
is a very good approximation for the position of the saddle-node bifurcation,
except for the values of D so low that for (cid:15)=0 , P has only the real root I =0
(e.g. the case D =4.5 in Figure 2(D)).