A methodology for internal Web ethics
Michalis Vafopoulos Petros Stefaneas Ioannis Anagnostopoulos
National Technical University of Athens National Technical University of Athens University of Central Greece
9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 9 Heroon Polytechneiou st. 2-4 Papasiopoulou st.
15773, Zografou Campus, Greece 15773, Zografou Campus, Greece 35100, Galaneika – Lamia, Greece
+302107722538 +302107721869 +302231066937
vaf@aegean.gr petros@math.ntua.gr janag@ucg.gr
Kieron O'Hara
University of Southampton
University campus, Southampton
SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
+4402380592582
kmo@ecs.soton.ac.uk
ABSTRACT update its content. Controversies have been also transferred to the
legal battlefields. Contentious legal initiatives (e.g. SOPA) are
The vigorous impact of the Web in time and space arises from the
causing both small and gigantic power games among
fact that it motivates massive creation, editing and distribution of
governments, industries and non-governmental organizations.
information by Users with little knowledge. This unprecedented
Concerns about identity, privacy and security are more often in
continuum provides novel opportunities for innovation but also
the headlines. Although technically right solutions exist, these are
puts under jeopardy its survival as a stable construct that nurtures
have not been adopted yet (e.g. PKI, P3P, eID). HTML5 seems to
a complex system of connections. We examine the Web as an
gain interest well beyond technological outsets, and Open Data
ethics determined space by demonstrating Hayek’s theory of
initiatives are revolutionizing science, business and government.
freedom in a three-leveled Web: technological, contextualized and
Diverse debates and discussions are indirectly or directly
economic. Our approach accounts for the co-dependence of code
connected to the Web ecosystem and outspread across the social
and values, and assumes that the Web is a self-contained system
discourse. Symbolically, all these issues are gathered under the
that exists in and by itself. This view of internal Web ethics
rhetoric of online access as an emerging universal human right.
directly connects the concept of freedom with issues like
Lately, national constitutions have started to incorporate it as a
centralization of traffic and data control, rights on visiting log file,
basic right (e.g. Norway). Internet and Web pioneers share
custom User profiles and the interplay among function, structure
different views on the issue, thus driving a creative dialogue about
and morality of the Web. It is also demonstrated, in the case of
our live with the Web. This dialogue has raised, in various
Net Neutrality, that generic freedom-coercion trade-offs are
different ways and on as many different occasions, the following
incomplete in treating specific cases at work.
question: what kind of Web is more beneficial for society? Surely,
Categories and Subject Descriptors as the transformational impact of the Web across society grows,
WSSC: “webscience.org/2010/E.4.3 Ethics in the Web” the pressure to define its technological principles and the
underlying moral values will escalate. Otherwise, we run the risk
Keywords of ending up with a restrained, fragmented and autistic Web.
Web ethics, freedom, economic Web, contextualized Web,
2. THE NEED FOR WEB ETHICS
centralization of traffic and data control.
Generic questions about Web’s transformational potential have
1. INTRODUCTION been brought into the agenda of many disciplines. Philosophical
The amount of information on the Web is growing exponentially. thinking and engineering should be in the front line by forming
Only in YouTube, 48 hours of video are uploaded every minute or the main questions and setting the research framework. On this
nearly 8 years of content per day. Users’ demands for a fast, campaign single-sided analysis (i.e. technological or social) is not
secure, reliable, all-inclusive, trustworthy and general-purpose sufficient to tackle these complex and multifarious issues.
Web are uncontrollable. In 2010, the top 10 Web sites accounted Domain-specific analysis should be orchestrated by more generic
for about 75 percent of all US traffic, compared to the 31% in approaches, expanding the solution range. Having defined
2001. Business controversies on issues like the monetization of existence, time and space in the Web [36], the next relevant quest
links and excessive market power in searching and mobile is to consider its moral aspects.
applications are coming to the fore, whilst novel business models
Ethics is the branch of philosophy that deals with the study of
are changing the market rules (e.g. peer production,
good and evil. Its fundamental questions are often repeated
crowdfunding). Some executives and interest groups are still
through time, adaptive to the historical and social conditions.
trying to conquer the Web by limiting the freedom to connect and
These fundamental questions include the definition of good and
PhiloWeb2012 workshop in 21st World Wide Web Conference’12 evil, the relation between morality and truth, the limits of freedom
(WWW 2012), April 17, 2012, Lyon, France. of will, the definition of right and wrong etc. Applied ethics is the
branch of philosophy concerning the application of ethics to
specific problems or classes of problems. From 1960’s till today should be thoroughly investigated in order to become a handy
the field of applied ethics has seen remarkable growth. Business compass for Users, entrepreneurs and governments to direct their
ethics, biomedical ethics, computer ethics, animal rights and decisions towards prosperous ways.
environmental ethics are some of the most active areas in modern
3. INTERNAL WEB ETHICS
applied ethics [21]. The Vietnam War, the great progress in
technology, the wide spread of drugs and contraceptives, the Web has been evolved from a piece of software code to a
degradation of the environment, have raised a series of questions dynamical ecosystem of Users and multi-purpose functionalities.
that could not be answered by traditional theories of ethics. An Despite its profound importance, Web ethics is still an unexplored
important contribution of applied ethics to the field of law is “A research field. As such, it requires systematic research by
Theory of Justice” [33]. Computer ethics is the branch of applied determined experts.
ethics, which examines the social and ethical impact of
The core of our methodology consists of two parts, firstly, the
information technology [18, 23]. More particularly, it focuses on
historical evolution of the Web and, secondly, a three-leveled
the social impact that information technology has on our lives, the
approach thereof as this will be introduced below. The Web in its
nature of such impact, and the utilization of technology in an
early stages was meant to address mainly technological needs,
ethical manner. Examples include issues related to the cybercrime,
such as an interlinked bulleting board with low levels of
the protection of privacy, copyright and patents, the digital divide,
interaction. In subsequent years, though, the Web evolved and
and the use of computers in the workplace. The variety of
became a construct of multiple interlocking contexts, and was
technological applications creates new and unexpected situations
even used to enable financial transactions. Users not only post and
and possibilities, thus causing new ethical dilemmas and values to
link digital content, but also communicate, comment, work,
emerge. For example, protection of personal data by electronic
advertise, exchange information and physical goods in and
devices is of particular relevance to our society - to remember that
through the Web. The social aspects of the Web are fashioned as
only fifteen years ago the relative sensitivity was rudimentary.
the ability to create contexts, and an important part of them,
Lately, information ethics [12, 13] shed new light on many
economic contexts. Intense social and economic online
traditional ethical issues in computing.
transactions result into a dynamic magma of values and code. This
The last twenty years there is a growing literature on the study of fundamental standard implies that Web ethics should be studied
the ethics of the cyberspace encompassing all kinds of interactions under the assumption of inherent codependence between User and
among Users and the Internet [14, 31, 35]. Indicative topics System (or equivalently Actor and Network [22]). Also, a sound
include the ethics of blogging, free Speech and anonymity, definition regarding existence, time and space is necessary to
pornography, censorship, intellectual property, privacy and describe the moral values tied to the Web as a system [36] In
regulation, spam and advertising, Internet as a medium of order to focus on our the methodology we propose in this paper,
communication, accountability and trust, hacking, and the Internet we assume that the Web is the only system existing in the
access as a basic human right. universe (“manna from heaven” hypothesis”). Let us call this
methodology the internal Web ethics analysis. Our approach
The Web has been built on the Internet stack, enabling the inter-
extents the Web science perspective, which investigates the Web
linkage of digital beings. Despite the fact that it shares some
as a self-standing techno-social artifact [5, 38].
common characteristics with its underlying technologies, creates a
new feasibility and actuality space. The Web is sufficiently 3.1 Magma of Users and code
unusual, transformative and necessary to human existence, and as Till the mass dissemination of Web 2.0, the main point in the
such it requires more systematic philosophical thinking to ethics of computation took for granted that there was clear
describe its ethically-relevant properties [28]. Initial motivation distinction between the technological and the social
behind the development of the Web was based on ethical methodologies analyzing related phenomena. Technology was
principles like esteem, pride, excellence, absence of guilt, considered an autonomous force that changed society, and its
rewards, and indignation [28]. Originally it was more a closed methodology had a simple cause/effect form (technological
“Aristotelian world” than a space governed by rules, roles, determinism). Others believe the opposite, i.e., society is an
hierarchies and deliverables. We believe that the above-mentioned autonomous force that changes technology (social determinism).
virtues are the core driving forces of its exponential impact. These Web 2.0 created a de facto indissoluble magma of Code and Users
classic values that inspired the inventor and early Web Users and (techno-social evolution). Hence, the classic technology-society
supported its massive dissemination, have now become more division is irrelevant in capturing the essence of the active User
specific in practice. For instance, the discussion about freedom of participation. The evolving interdependence between Code and
expression incorporates the issue of Net Neutrality and self- Users can be addressed by models, which are built on the co-
determination that is connected to the privacy of online data. dependence of human moral values and engineering principles.
One of the first questions for Web ethics should be a more 3.2 Being, time and space in the Web
comprehensive identification of the values that motivated its
Applied ethics methodologies refer to well-defined application
creation. An open conjecture in this line of inquiry has to do with
domains. We believe that for the purposes of Web ethics a
the question whether different magmas of values and code could
suitable framework is the definition of Web space [36]. A theory
initiate similar decentralized information systems. Another
about existence in time and space is necessary to frame a tractable
question is how these evolving values affect the impact of Web in
approach for the moral analysis of the Web. In [36] it has been
diverse social contexts and under what sort of prerequisites they
proposed a notion of existence in the Web, based on a pragmatic
can be sustainable.
definition of Being in general: “a Being exists if and only if there
It is now the time for scholars to look deep in the heart of the Web is a communication channel linking to it”. Being in the Web
creation, to propose and engineer perspicacious solutions that will implies that the communication channel is concrete, identifiable
benefit the entire society. The quest for new requirements should and visible. Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is the most
directly address the needs, and promote human values. Web ethics profound and stable technology about creating communication
channels in the Web. It requires the minimal description of Web Beings enabled the emergence of business models that are
invariant elements in communication through the Web and acts based on exchanges – financial or other – among Users (economic
like the “fingerprint” of the Web Being because it is directly level).
connected to existence (birth, access, navigate, edit and death).
Note here a point made by [30] who argues the importance of the
Thus, a Web Being is defined as follows: “Web beings are defined
distinction between trustworthiness/trust and reliability/reliance.
to be Beings that can be communicated through the Web.”. The
He locates the distinction in the nature of the interactions between
source of value for Web Beings is concentrated on how digitality
trustor and trustee. Where the interactions are ‘static’, we merely
is mutated by the linking potential, enabling them to be anywhere,
have a case of reliance (as someone may rely on a bridge that has
at anytime. Users are “potential” owners of every Web Being, in
been well-built, or on a clock that is correct). The emergence of
the sense that the Being may not reside in the hardware but can be
trust out of reliance is an important signal for the move up from
downloaded almost instantly. This expansion of the concept of
the technology level.
existence is captured by the concept of virtualization, which
describes the augmented potentialities of Web Being as a digital For Pettit, trust only comes when the interaction is interactively
and distributable unity. The Web Space could be considered as a dynamic – i.e. trustworthy agents understand they are trusted, and
division of position and place of online content, created by the trust gives them additional motive for behaving in a trustworthy
links among the Web Beings. Each Web Being is occupying a manner. He argues on this basis that trust over the Internet (and
specific locus in the Web network. Identification in the Web ipso facto the Web) is impossible without supporting offline
Space is given by the URI namespace. Location is specified by a relationships and information, and therefore impossible on the
triplet of URIs, namely the URIs of the Web Being and the ‘manna from heaven’ assumption discussed above. The reason for
incoming and outgoing links. These links provide orientation by Pettit’s rejection of trust as a possibility in this context is the
acting as a three-dimensional “geographic coordinate system” in fluidity of identity online – how could a trustor come to believe
the Web. The act of creation or deletion of a Web Being or a link, that a virtual contact fulfilled the requirements for interactive
alters the Web Space. Hence, the evolving Web Space is fully dynamism?
describable by the lifetime processes of Web Beings and links. Without getting too deeply into this issue, [25] moves the focus
Except for the “book-keeping” clock time defined in Physics, time for trustworthiness away from the trustee’s attitude to the trustor,
could be a series of choices in space. Web time is a series of and toward the claims about her intentions, capacities and
choices (visits) in the Web Space that can be defined as motivations the trustee makes. In particular, it is an attractive
Bergsonian durations, since visiting selections attach meaning and suggestion that the shift from reliability to trustworthiness
define casual relationships among Web Beings. This approach of happens as these claims become less deterministic, more implicit
time as duration is characterized by indeterminism, heterogeneity and less precise. There is no exact borderline or tipping point, but
and irreversibility. In the Web, durations are becoming this conveys the importance of the agency and the choice for the
discoverable, observable, traceable, able to process and massive. trustee.
3.3 The “manna from heaven” 3.5 Hayek’s theory of freedom
The study of codependence among Code and Users is really According to [17], “liberty” or “freedom” is defined to be the
complicated. Initially, we suggest that on the first level the Web absence of coercion of some humans by other humans. This does
can be studied as the only existing system in the world. Human not mean that one has unlimited options including all physical
beings are communicating and working solely through and with potentialities of the world. Likewise, it does not account for the
the Web. Α compassionate ‘God’ provides the necessary quantity internal states of being and any metaphysical notion of freedom or
of ‘manna’, fulfilling all human needs, with no cost and effort. power. The main focus is on the mitigation of coercion as a set of
This strong and unrealistic assumption will help us to comprehend restraints or constraints to human will, imposed by others. As
bottom to top the moral values and their inter-connections to the Hayek explains (p.133), “Coercion occurs when one man’s
complex actualities of the engineering principles. The analytical actions are made to serve another man’s will, not for his own but
outcome of the first level will prepare us to study the effects of the for the other's purpose. It is not that the coerced does not choose
Web in the entire human society. A characteristic domain of at all; if that were the case, we should not speak of his “acting.”
application of this assumption can be Net Neutrality issues. It will Similarly, Hayek defines important facets of coercion like
include the comparative analysis between established and deception and fraud, as forms of controlling the information upon
emerging of new theories in the social, technological and which a human counts; this information makes a human do what
economic domain. Analyzing the internal Web ethics at the first the deceiver wants him to do. Despite the fact that coercion
level will provide us with the necessary insights about neutrality suggests both the threat of inflicting harms and the intention
as the interplay of core values and the engineering of the Web. thereby to cause certain outcomes, it does not necessarily involves
all influences that humans can exercise upon the acting of others
3.4 Technology, context and economy
and acquire full control of the environment. Coercion is
The Web can be analyzed on three levels: the technological, the undesirable because it “prevents a person from using his mental
contextual and the economic, since they reflect its historical powers to the full and consequently from making the greatest
evolution from plain software to living ecosystem. The Web contribution that he is capable of to the community.” (p.134). On
technology is built on the Internet, resulting huge amounts of data the contrary, freedom is desirable “because every individual
created by billions of Users (technology level). On top of this knows so little and, in particular, because we rarely know which
software, various new contexts have expanded initial of us knows best that we trust the independent and competitive
functionalities. Context, being a set of tasks or a general efforts of many to induce the emergence of what we shall want
framework of attitudes, enables Users to extent the range of when we see it.” (p.29). It is freedom that releases the
information exchange and collaborative action, mainly through unforeseeable and unpredictable; these little accidents in human
trust mechanisms (context level). The establishment of beliefs and behavior, which are so vital for innovation. As Hayek argues
attitudes regarding the trustworthiness of Users and associated (p.31) “lt is because we do not know how individuals will use
their freedom that it is so important.” and “Freedom granted only namely: lack of central authority, openness, variety of choices,
when it is known beforehand that its effects will be beneficial is distributed empowerment of individuals and liberal underpinning.
not freedom.” These accidents are the resultant of knowledge and Hayek’s approach is not the only theory of freedom that can be
attitudes, skills and habits, formed by human interaction and, in used to analyze Web ethics. Its clarity and generality enable us to
most cases, they do not simply occur but evolve. In order to build a starting point that will be extended and refined with other
flourish they must be supported by the existence of theories to capture the ethical aspects of the Web.
complementary concepts like some personal sphere, property,
Freedom creates more options to solve problems collectively and
state, rules, competition and responsibility. The emergence of
to innovate, but some of these options may be used in ways that
personal sphere and property assists individuals to avoid coercion
cause coercion (“freedom-coercion” tradeoff). Thus, the question
from others. The only means to prevent coercion is the potential
enveloping each theory is how to construct a system that selects,
threat tied to coercion. States typically monopolize coercive
with minimum social cost which positive options to sacrifice in
power. In free societies, the State exercises minimal enforcement
order to minimize coercion (or the dual problem). Hayek’s
of coercive power, which nurtures individual creativity and
approach could be considered to offer one of the systematic
competitive markets based on just distribution of property and
answers in this question. In particular, his theory is briefly
responsible individual behavior. Particularly, “Since coercion is
transcribed as follows:
the control of the essential data of an individual’s action by
another, it can be prevented only by enabling the individual to o State posses the monopoly to enforce coercive power through
secure for himself some private sphere where he is protected General Rules.
against such interference. … It is here that coercion of one o Personal Sphere and Property counterweight state power.
individual by another can be prevented only by the threat of o General Rules are enforced equally and describe the
coercion assured free sphere.” (p.139). The acquisition of borderlines between state and Personal Sphere.
property is the first step towards the limitation of personal sphere o Property is a basic realization of General Rules.
and against coercive action. The next steps include the initiation o Competition is possible by the dispersion of Property.
of general rules governing the conditions under which behaviors o Mutually advantageous collaboration is based on
and attitudes become part of such individual spheres (it is clear Competition in service provision.
that carefully-crafted data protection rules are vital for both steps, o An effective anti-monopolistic policy is to require from the
which makes the lack of cooperation, or even of an agreed monopolist (including the state) to treat all customers alike.
framework, between the EU and the US, not to mention India and o Individuals should be responsible and accountable for their
China, all the more disturbing). It is crucial to ensure that the actions.
range and content of these rules is not determined by the
deliberate assignment of particular things to particular persons. In the following Subsections we consider some “freedom-
“The decisive condition for mutually advantageous collaboration coercion” tradeoffs on three levels of abstraction (technology,
between people, based on voluntary consent rather than coercion, context, economy) according to Hayek’s conceptualizations, in
is that there be many people who can serve one’s needs, so that order to gradually build a set of important issues about living with
nobody has to be dependent on specific persons for the essential the Web.
conditions of life or the possibility of development in some
4.1 The Technological Web
direction. It is competition made possible by the dispersion of
The Web is an engineered artifact, not some natural phenomenon.
property that deprives the individual owners of particular things
It has been created as an Internet application and its building
of all coercive powers.” (p.141). The degree of freedom in a
blocks are crafted in software code. In this sense, technological
society is directly related to the minimal enforcement of coercive
underpinnings are vital for its existence.
power by the state according to general and no discriminative
rules and the safeguarding of competitive market conditions.
4.1.1 Internet infrastructure
Competition as the existence of an efficient number of alternative
Internet has been evolved from communication architecture for
offers is fundamental in the case of providing life-critical services.
computers to generative system for innovative software, basically
Generally, “whenever there is a danger of a monopolist’s
because it was built on simple principles that transfer the power of
acquiring coercive power, the most expedient and effective
choice to equally trusted single Users. The absence of central gate
method of preventing this is probably to require him to treat all
keeping and the unprecedented decentralized power in action is
customers alike, i.e., to insist that his prices be the same for all
coming with two major costs: (a) inefficient personal identity
and to prohibit all discrimination on his part. This is the same
management and thus, lack of security and (b) not guaranteed
principle by which we have learned to curb the coercive power of
quality of transmission.
the state.” (p.136). Having argued about the strategic role of state
in minimizing coercion does not connotes that individuals enjoy The notion of Internet freedom is related to the free access and
only the opportunity and the burden of choice; it also highlights inter-connection of any compatible software code developed by
that individuals must accept the consequences of their choices and Users over the Internet network. Coercive powers are mainly
the resulting approbation or censure for them. In a free society arising due to badware applications (e.g. computer-zombies),
freedom and responsibility should be interlocked. traffic censorship (e.g. “Snooping” - accessing information within
Internet packets [4]) and inadequate quality of transmission.
4. THE WEB AS A SPACE OF FREEDOM
Personal sphere for Internet Users is described by their IP address
For many philosophers, freedom is not just one of the values but whenever they are connected to Internet. IP addresses are traffic
constitutes the source and prescribes the conditions of most moral data that can only be processed for certain reasons (e.g.
values [3]. Hence, a theory about freedom is necessary in order to payments). Ordinarily, they are considered by Data Protection
explore the internal Web ethics. In the present article, Hayek’s Authorities and courts to be personal data, despite the fact that
analysis about freedom is adapted because is adequately courts in some countries (e.g. France) have reached conflicting
consonant to the main architectural principles of the Web artifact, decisions [20].
O’Hara has argued that the revolutionary aspect of the World flows, such as “who” sends/receives a specific “class” of
Wide Web is that it is a decentralised information structure. This information.
democratic decentralisation is a key factor in the added value that
4.1.3 The Web software
the Web provides, because it facilitates the serendipitous reuse of
information in new and unanticipated contexts. However its basic The notion of freedom in the Web software is to freely navigate,
principle, of free flow of information packets and a very simple create and update Web Beings and links. Its cornerstones are
set of rules and standards underpinning these complex structures, universality, openness and separation of layers in engineering,
is being undermined by attempts to restrict information flow. As editing, searching and navigating. [4] argues that “Keeping the
use of the Web has spread, illiberal regimes feel threatened, but web universal and keeping its standards open help people invent
thanks to the hands-off approach of the 1990s, there are no new services.” Coercive powers can be directly injected into the
affirmative globally-recognised principles governing the flow of network by Internet infrastructure (e.g. NN). Badware-infected
information online. Currently, China is still focusing on a Web Beings [41], central control and censoring of Web traffic are
censorship-based approach to information control, using methods main sources of internal coercion in the Web. The emergence of
in direct opposition to the Web’s essential governing principle of “walled gardens” in cabled TV and Social Networks [4, 41] are
decentralisation. The liberalism of the Web has two distinct based on isolated or malformed (i.e. without exclusive or open
levels: first, the free flow of information and unrestricted linking URI) Web Beings that strengthen coercive potential through
helps make the valuable network; secondly the engineering privacy threats and fragmentation. Furthermore, any effort to
principles of the Web facilitate the efficient flow of information manipulate for own benefit the results of indexing and searching
and enables the basic structure to attain balance. In this way, processes (e.g. spamdexing [24]) is a form of coercion because it
ethical principles (and a strong stand on a political dispute) distorts searcheability and navigation.
influence directly even Web infrastructure [26]. Navigation in the Web space results in traffic. Web traffic is
recorded in the Web Being’s log file. Actually, this is the first
4.1.2 The case of Net Neutrality (NN)
time that humanity has introduced a universal event log in such a
The definition of NN and its technical consequences as Internet
stratified and heterogeneous system. The resulting log file is under
traffic subject to no hindrances could be further elaborated by
common ownership by design. Both the Editor who administers
using Hayek’s ideas. The “first-come first-served” model with no
and updates the particular Web Being and the Navigator, who
other restriction is extended to Quality of Service (QoS)
visits it, share the same information about this event. Although,
discrimination as long as there are no special and exclusive
the Editor has direct access to the log file residing in the Web
contracts at work (limited discrimination and QoS). Hence, in the
server, the Navigator should install particular software to process
one hand, no one may have exclusivity to end points, but on the
the source file of his visiting history. Thus, this log file is the core
other hand, anyone can pay to have higher QoS in its end point.
architectural element that manifests the co-operative nature of the
Alternatively, limited discrimination without QoS tiering can be
Web artifact and should be further analyzed. For the moment,
applied. According to some lawmakers in the US, QoS
legal and illegal cookies are censoring our moves with or without
discrimination is allowed, subject to no particular charge for
our consent [1] and “toolbar” applications exchange their services
higher-quality service [10]. The underlying technical challenge is
for recording all our navigation history.
to engineer solutions that ensure NN in combination with higher
QoS. This can be achieved by designing Internet infrastructure During the first Web era, the majority of Users were Navigators
that allows for implicit traffic differentiation and prioritization of and just a small portion of them was editing the Web. At the
a select traffic, but without any kind of User, network operator or current Web 2.0 era, 70% of Users are both Navigators and
ISP intervention. Such a proposal, which involves an implicit kind Editors, who can easily edit, interconnect, aggregate and comment
of datagram separation rather than an a-priori explicit flow upon text, images and video. The underlying structure of the Web
graph is characterized by four major characteristics: 1) on-line
prioritization, is called FAN (Flow-Aware Networking) [19, 34].
property (the number of Web Beings and links changes with
FAN may ensure neutrality along with the awareness of QoS [9].
time), 2) power law degree distribution with exponent higher than
This is because it does not aim to explicitly categorize data flows
two, 3) small world property (the diameter is much smaller than
in distinct classes (e.g. premium, basic), but only to create an
the order of the graph) and 4) many dense bipartite sub-graphs [6].
occurrence, upon which the implicit separation will be performed
In order for the Web to be an advantageous multi-purpose space,
solely based on the current link status (e.g. dataflow congestion,
it should consist of a critical mass of Web Beings and links in an
traffic bottleneck etc.). Therefore, all datagrams are forwarded
appropriate structure to facilitate navigation. Intuitively, it should
unconditionally in the pipeline, but they are also “equal”, subject
be connected, not fragmented, to ease navigation from any Web
to be separated or even dropped when the network tolerance
Being to the entire network. The analysis of the interplay among
demands it. The main advantage of FAN-based architectures is
functions, subsequent structures and moral values is an open
that they differentiate the data flow, taking into account only the
question for internal Web ethics.
traffic characteristics of the currently transmitted information.
Hence, apart from data discrimination, it is not possible to Treating all Navigators equally is an engineering principle. It is
comprehensively discriminate certain applications, services and violated (or enriched) by profile customization. Treating all
end-Users. Such NN-QoS symbiosis does not violate NN and data Editors alike is achieved through open technological standards
discrimination principles. It however demands a global developed by independent bodies (e.g. W3C). Public and private
implementation approach in infrastructure level, involving contribution to these institutions is necessary to sustain open and
common standards in prediction and limitation mechanisms for effective standards. Apart from the first class principles of
controlling the quality of transmitted information in the pipeline. universality, openness and separation, “quality-related” issues
The limitation mechanisms may provide a sudden separation of could be relevant to Web freedom if navigation and searching is
flow, but the decision should be made upon specific network severely degraded. Despite the fact that the explosion of bits in
tolerance metrics rather than individual properties of specific Web 2.0 increased the number of available Web Beings,
incommoded the discovery of meaningful answers. This overload
of unstructured content is partially tackled by Search Engines. that a trust relation is morally acceptable provided that the trustee
Semantically structured data (aka Web 3.0) are engineered to may express her motives truthfully; this is an important insight,
anticipate it through machine-processable meaningful reasoning. but it must be vulnerable to Pettit’s worry that such expression, in
The quality of content also includes factors like diversity, the world we are envisaging, could only be mediated by Web
credibility, accuracy and informativeness of online content and technologies.
stability of links.
Nevertheless, communication is central to establishing trust, as
4.2 The Contextualized Web Habermas argued [15], and so the rich connectivity of the Web is
bound into its function. Antitrust and coercion may well be prices
The Web became a techno-social space for innovation and inter-
we have to pay for widespread and beneficial trust (repeating
creativity because it has been transformed from a bulletin board to
Hayek’s point that freedom may at all times produce bad
a context-aware system. It is not only the number of options the
outcomes). The point of a Web ethics is to try to ensure not that
Web is providing, but also it is the quality and the usefulness of
antitrust happens, but that it is outweighed by beneficial trust to as
these options that matters. The Web context emerges as a bridge
great a degree as possible consistent with Hayekian notions of
in the traditional public-private dichotomy. The privatized (or
freedom.
publicized) space arises between the private realm of intimacy and
individualism and the public realm of citizenship and active 4.3 The Economic Web
participation for the societal good [29]. On the contrary, in the
Most needs are better fulfilled through collective effort. In
industrial economy, where consumers are mainly exercising the
practice, incentives, capabilities, preferences and realizations of
right to use resources, Web Users exercise the full range of
effort are heterogeneous and difficult to be synchronized. A
property rights, namely: (1) to use, (2) to form, modify and
powerful metaphor to achieve synchronization is setting efforts
substantiate (3) to benefit from use and (4) to transfer Web
and the products of them under a common valuation scheme, a
Beings.
uniform numeraire. This numeraire is money, supported by a set
Context, as a set of tasks or general framework of roles and of institutions and practices (e.g. the market). It is far beyond the
attitudes, enables Users to extent the range of information scope of this paper to analyze related economic theory. We limit
exchange and collaborative action, mainly through trust ourselves to the reassurance that economizing a system is an
mechanisms. For instance, in Web 2.0, what Users create is not important factor for its viability, usability and development. The
simply content (e.g. reviews) but context. This new contextual issues posed in preceding layers could be viewed through the
framework emerges through the aggregation and collaborative economic aspect (e.g. NN as two-sided pricing [11]). The question
filtering of personal preferences in massive scale [39]. More is how the above-mentioned freedoms can be efficiently
importantly, it facilitates connected Users to search and navigate engineered and disseminated across Users in particular techno-
the complex Web more effectively, amplifying incentives for social contexts.
quality. Of course, there are many open issues to be solved such
The Web has not emerged as a business project with hierarchical
as the fashioning of more effective forms of online identities and
structures. It has been crafted as a creative and open space of
trusting processes. According to [25], trust is an attitude toward
volunteers, predominantly outside traditional market and pricing
the trustworthiness of an agent. In our Web-only hypothetical
systems. In our point of view, markets would have never invested
world (“manna from heaven” assumption), agents are the Users
such amounts in labor costs to develop this gigantic system. But to
who control specific Web Beings. Representations, intentions,
be fair, market mechanisms provided the necessary motives and
capacities, motivations and contexts are established and expressed
tools to initiate a high-risk idea like Web. Furthermore, the lack of
exclusively by Web technologies. Hence, freedom in the
direct compensation and the temporal disconnection between
contextualized Web is to establish specific contexts in order to
effort and rewards are the shared characteristics among Peer,
form beliefs and attitudes that some Users and their underlying
Procurement and Patronage production models. In the Web, Peer
Web beings are trustworthy. Coercive powers can arise from un-
production has been established as a basic form of production,
trustworthy technologies and governments, social hacking,
extending David’s taxonomy [7] with the fourth P [37] .
badware and malicious representations.
The explosion of Web Users occurred as a result of symbiosis
However, it is also important to take account of the bad forms that
between non-financial and financial incentives [37]. Accordingly,
trust can take [2]. The links between coercion and trust are
freedom in the economic Web pertains to the removal of any
sometimes uncomfortably close. Note, for example, that when
possible barrier to economize. Each User should be allowed to
[16] describes his theory of encapsulated trust informed by
apply any business models. Apart from the preceding levels,
rational-choice ideas in social science, he argues that “I trust
coercive powers are coming from two economy-related sources:
someone if I have reason to believe it will be in that person’s
the concentration of power in a minority of Web Beings and Users
interest to be trustworthy in the relevant way at the relevant time
and the inability of some Users to benefit from the Web economy.
… [and if that person] counts my interests as partly his or her
As the economic Web grows, state faces unprecedented and
own interests just because they are my interests” (p.19). What
complex trade-offs between private interest and social welfare.
strikes the reader is how close this definition of trust is to Hayek’s
Three of those are referred as the “Link economy”, the “App
definition of coercion quoted earlier.
economy” and the excessive market power in Search Engine
This brings in Baier’s notion of antitrust [2], where trust is market. Recently, the formation of links, a fundamental
harmful to the society at large. In this case the focus is on areas characteristic of the Web, became the center of business
where trust shades into coercion, but it is clear that there are other controversies. As traditional content creators (e.g. TV) are losing
spheres of life where freedom undermines trust, or allows a large part of their revenue streams from User-Generated
corrosive examples of trust to emerge – cybercrime is an obvious substitutes (e.g. micro-blogs), the need for the institution of
example, where trust among criminals is essential to prevent regulation issues in free reference linking appears. On the other
police infiltration, and where trust among Web users is exploited hand, it is argued that Search Engines create exploitable traffic for
by criminals. Baier’s expressibility test [2] (pp.123-124) asserts content creators and that all online content must be open, with
permanent links, so that it may receive in-links, since links are a reflects nicely the codependence among the architectural
key to securing efficiency in creating and finding information. engineering principles of the Web and moral values. This
However, the economic implications of reference links on correspondence can be summarized as follows:
attention and revenue have not been analyzed yet, despite their
o centralization of traffic and data control, rights on visiting
influence over consumer’s utility, competition and social welfare.
log file, custom User profiles and interplay among functions,
[8] concluded that: “link equilibria often do not form, even though
structures and moral values are directly connected to the
their formation can lead to higher aggregate profits and better
quality of freedom in the Web,
content. This, in the view of the authors constitutes a negative
side-effect of the culture of “free” links that currently pervades o issues about freedom in lower levels of the Web ecosystem
the web…” (i.e. technology) have crucial impact on the subsequent levels
Despite the fact that Web 2.0 multiplied the pool of Users and of higher complexity (i.e. context, economy) and
content, the direct use of Web technologies has become shallower.
o generic freedom-coercion trade-offs are useful in framing the
Contrastingly to early stages of Web’s inception, modern Users
feasibility space but incomplete in treating more specific
are mainly using the Web through established services (e.g.
cases in practice (e.g. NN).
Search Engine, Social Network) and not directly, for instance, by
creating their homepage or concentrating and controlling personal As the Web grows, it becomes essential to balance the need for
data in a privately owned domain. [4] reasons that the tendency efficient efforts and the stimulus for more competitors in creating
for some companies to develop native applications for specific and economizing content and search provision. A basic
devices (e.g. “app stores”) instead of Web applications sterilizes prerequisite in this effort is to identify and engineer its core moral
and fragments the Web. [32] demonstrates that the already large values in order to account for an extensive range of User
levels of concentration in the Web search market are likely to functionalities and pervasiveness in social discourse. This ongoing
continue. He argues that since the market mechanism cannot work can be further inspired by philosophical theories and historic
provide socially optimal quality levels, there is space for periods [27] (pp.207-209). Also, it will be placed and compared
regulatory engagements which may involve the funding of basic with regards to relevant research about the interplay between
R&D in Web search, or more drastic measures like the division of technology and society. Providing deeper insights in Web ethics
Search Engines into “software” and “service” parts. It seems that requires the supplementary specification of the suggested model
massive use is coming with the cost of centralization of both with sound theoretical foundations and more realistic
traffic and data control. The balance point between innovation assumptions. Therefore, the next steps should include the
coming from large Web companies and innovation from single enrichment of contextualized Web with theories and technologies
Users or voluntary groups should be thoroughly examined. In our about identity, privacy and trust. The study of the ethics of the
point of view, this fast evolving centralization is directly against economic Web should be extended to the study of inequality and
the core values of the Web ecosystem and must be addressed in distribution theories and detailed business models. During the
the direction of transferring back to individual User part of data next phase of this research project, the “manna from heaven”
control. This can be achieved through technologies and business assumption will be relaxed and the three-levels model will be
practices that are transparently enabling the User to process and augmented by a fourth level to capture Web’s interaction with
economize personal data. In this campaign, the primer difficulties other real systems. At a latter stage the Web ethics should be able
arising from the fact that now the Web is partly governed by to address more pragmatic questions like: “Can the Web protect
economic forces and traditional institutions, which are itself as a liberal society? How do we manage online identities
characterized by irrelevant or conflicting moral principles. ethically? How can I deal fairly with people if I don’t know their
Therefore, one of the fundamental issues for Web ethics is to put expectations? If I don’t even know they are people? ” [28]. How
this debate to the foreground through the employment of concrete the Web’s function, structure and evolution are affected by ethics?
architectural and policy structures (for example, with reference to
The Web is a unique piece of technology not only because of its
the conditions, formats and licenses under which Public Sector
breakthrough technological innovation, but mainly because it
Information for reuse is made available to citizens).
provides a new basis for expressing human creativity, and reveals
5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION “inactive” parts of human nature. Apart from understanding its
morality, it is an inspiring challenge to transfuse the essence of
We believe that the Web engineering principles are ethically-
our experience and the values of the Web to reassess concepts like
relevant and they should be systematically analyzed as such, in
freedom, choice, participation, inequality and development. We
order to realize their potential in promoting human values. Web
agree with [40] that “It is not just information that must be free,
ethics raises the question about what could be a better future with
but the knowledge of how to use it. The test of a free society is not
the Web and how we can engineer it. As an emerging field of
the liberty to consume information, nor to produce it, nor even to
applied ethics, it discerns the core values of Web’s inception and
implement its potential in private world of one’s choosing. The
their evolution process in diverse social contexts. Our main
test of a free society is the liberty for the collective transformation
arguments are based on the codependence of code and values. The
of the world through abstractions freely chosen and freely
Web is seen as a new form of existence [36] and it is assumed that
actualised.” The role of Web ethics could be to elaborate and
it is the only existing system. The proposed methodology
specify the motives and engineering of this new version of utopia.
gradually analyzes the Web’s complex reality by enriching
underlying technology with human behavior aspects. Our three-
levels analysis (technology, context and economy) reflects the
historical evolution of the Web from software to a social
ecosystem. As the concept of freedom is a prerequisite of most of
the moral values, we introduce our methodology on internal Web
ethics by demonstrating Hayek’s theory of freedom in the three-
levels analysis of the Web. We Hayek’s approach because it
6. REFERENCES [17] Hayek, F.A. 1960. The constitution of liberty. University
of Chicago Press Chicago.
[18] Johnson, D. 2003. Computer ethics. Prentice Hall.
[1] d’ Aquin, M. et al. 2010. Personal monitoring of web
information exchange: Towards web lifelogging. Web
Science 2010: Extending the Frontiers of Society On- [19] Kortebi, A. et al. 2004. Cross-protect: implicit service
Line (2010). differentiation and admission control. High Performance
Switching and Routing, 2004. HPSR. 2004 Workshop on
(2004), 56-60.
[2] Baier, A. 1994. Trust and antitrust. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA.
[20] Kuner, C. et al. 2009. Study on Online Copyright
Enforcement and Data Protection in Selected Member
[3] Bay, C. 1965. The structure of freedom. Stanford
States.
University Press, Stanford, California, USA.
[21] LaFollette, H. 2002. Ethics in Practice: an anthology.
[4] Berners-Lee, T. 2010. Long Live the Web: A Call for
Wiley-Blackwell.
Continued Open Standards and Neutrality. Scientific
American, November. 22, (2010).
[22] Latour, B. 2011. Networks, Societies, Spheres:
Reflections of an Actor-Network Theorist. International
[5] Berners-Lee, T. et al. 2006. A Framework for Web
Journal of Communication. 5, (2011), 796-810.
Science. Foundations and Trends® in Web Science. 1, 1
(2006), 1-130.
[23] Moor, J. 1985. What is Computer Ethics.
Metaphilosophy. (1985).
[6] Bonato, A. 2005. A survey of models of the web graph.
Combinatorial and algorithmic aspects of networking
(2005), 159–172. [24] Ntoulas, A. et al. 2006. Detecting spam web pages
through content analysis. Proceedings of the 15th
international conference on World Wide Web (2006), 83–
[7] David, P. 1992. Knowledge, property, and the system
92.
dynamics of technological change. World Bank Research
Observer. 7, (1992), 215–215.
[25] O’Hara, K. 2012. A General Definition of Trust.
[8] Dellarocas, C. and Katona, Z. 2010. Media, aggregators
and the link economy: Strategic hyperlink formation in [26] O’Hara, K. 2009. “Let a Hundred flowers blossom, a
content networks. Working Papers. (2010). hundred schools of thought contend”: ”: Web
Engineering in the Chinese Context. China’s Information
and Communications Technology Revolution: Social
[9] Domzal, J. et al. 2009. Qos-aware net neutrality. First
changes and state responses. Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, ed.
International Conference on Evolving Internet, 2009
Routledge. 121-135.
(INTERNET’09). (2009), 147–152.
[27] O’Hara, K. 2010. The Enlightenment: A Beginner’s
[10] Dorgan, B. 2007. A bill to amend the Communications
Guide. Oneworld, Oxford.
Act of 1934 to ensure net neutrality. Library of Congress
Bill S. (2007).
[28] O’Hara, K. 2010. The Web as an Ethical Space.
Proceedings of the British Library Workshop on Ethics
[11] Economides, N. and Tåg, J. 2007. Net neutrality on the
and the World Wide Web, 16th November 2010, British
Internet: A two-sided market analysis. SSRN eLibrary.
Library, London. (2010).
[12] Floridi, L. 2010. 5 Information ethics. The Cambridge
[29] O’Hara, K. and Shadbolt, N. 2008. The spy in the coffee
Handbook of Information and …. (2010).
machine: the end of privacy as we know it. Oneworld,
Oxford.
[13] Floridi, L. 2005. Information ethics, its nature and scope.
ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society. (2005).
[30] Pettit, P. 2008. Trust, Reliance, and the Internet.
Information technology and moral philosophy. (2008),
[14] Godwin, M. 2003. Cyber rights: Defending free speech
161.
in the digital age. MIT press.
[31] Ploug, T. 2009. Ethics in cyberspace: how cyberspace
[15] Habermas, J. 1984. The Theory of Communicative
may influence interpersonal interaction. Springer-Verlag
Action. Polity Press, Cambridge.
New York Inc.
[16] Hardin, R. 2006. Trust. Polity Press, Cambridge.
[32] Pollock, R. 2010. Is Google the Next Microsoft: [38] Vafopoulos, M. 2011. Web Science Subject
Competition, Welfare and Regulation in Online Search. Categorization (WSSC). Proceedings of the ACM
Review of Network Economics. 9, 4 (2010), 4. WebSci’11 (2011), 1-3.
[33] Rawls, J. 1999. A theory of justice. Belknap Press. [39] Vafopoulos, M. and Oikonomou, M. 2012.
Recommendation systems: bridging technical aspects
with marketing implications. Studies in Computational
[34] Roberts, J.W. and Oueslati, S. 2000. Quality of Service
Intelligence (forthcoming). I. Anagnostopoulos et al.,
by Flow Aware Networking. Phil. Trans. Royal Society
eds. Springer.
London. 358, (2000), 2000.
[40] Wark, M.K. 2004. A hacker manifesto. Harvard
[35] Spinello, R.A. 2011. Cyberethics: Morality and law in
University Press.
cyberspace. Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
[41] Zittrain, J. 2008. The future of Internet and how to stop
[36] Vafopoulos, M. 2012. Being, space and time in the Web.
it. Yale University Press.
Metaphilosophy (forthcoming). (2012).
[37] Vafopoulos, M. 2012. The Web economy: goods, users,
models and policies. Foundations and Trends® in Web
Science (forthcoming). (2012).