The MIT Press BOOK NEWS
A Natural History of
Natural Theology
The Cognitive Science of Theology and £27.95 / $40.00
Philosophy of Religion February 2015
6 x 9, 264 pp.
1 b&w illus.
Helen De Cruz and (CLOTH)
ISBN: 9780262028547
Johan De Smedt
Questions about the existence and attributes of God form “In A Natural History of Natural Theology the enduring
the subject matter of natural theology, which seeks to gain tradition of natural theology meets an academic new-
comer, the cognitive science of religion. In this unique
knowledge of the divine by relying on reason and experience
meeting, De Cruz and De Smedt offer a bold, fascinating,
of the world. Arguments in natural theology rely largely on
and remarkably clear account of the cognitive basis of
intuitions and inferences that seem natural to us, occurring theological arguments. A Natural History of Natural
spontaneously—at the sight of a beautiful landscape, per- Theology will not only be appreciated by cognitive
haps, or in wonderment at the complexity of the cosmos— scientists and theologians, but will be of interest to
anyone who has ever considered arguments for or against
even to a nonphilosopher. In this book, Helen De Cruz and
the existence of God.”
Johan De Smedt examine the cognitive origins of arguments
—Richard Sosis, James Barnett Professor of Humanistic
in natural theology. They find that although natural theologi- Anthropology, University of Connecticut; cofounder and
cal arguments can be very sophisticated, they are rooted in coeditor of Religion, Brain & Behavior
everyday intuitions about purpose, causation, agency, and
“Science has long forced theological thinkers to respond
morality. Using evidence and theories from disciplines
to new evidence about the nature of the world. De Cruz
including the cognitive science of religion, evolutionary and De Smedt go a step further: what happens to theol-
ethics, evolutionary aesthetics, and the cognitive science of ogy when the science in question is the science of theo-
testimony, they show that these intuitions emerge early in logical thought itself? This ambitious book represents an
exciting new chapter in the science–theology dialogue.”
development and are a stable part of human cognition.
—Justin L. Barrett, Thrive Professor of Developmental
Science, Fuller Graduate School of Psychology; author
De Cruz and De Smedt analyze the cognitive underpinnings of Born Believers: The Science of Children’s Religious
of five well-known arguments for the existence of God: the Belief
argument from design, the cosmological argument, the moral
“Why is religion culturally universal? Why do our senses
argument, the argument from beauty, and the argument from
of order, design, and beauty lead us to infer a Designer?
miracles. Finally, they consider whether the cognitive origins De Cruz and De Smedt lucidly and seamlessly join
of these natural theological arguments should affect their philosophy with cognitive science to provide accessible,
rationality. empirically based answers. Their huge achievement
greatly advances religious studies.”
—Stewart Elliott Guthrie, Professor Emeritus of
Helen De Cruz is Assistant Professor at the VU University
Anthropology, Fordham University; author of Faces in
Amsterdam. the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion
“A new and illuminating look at arguments for the
Johan De Smedt is a postdoctoral fellow at Ghent University.
existence of God. Brings to bear up-to-date knowledge
of cognitive science to show that the staying power of the
traditional proofs is no accident; they are deeply rooted
in the ways we cognize the world.”
—Howard Wettstein, Professor of Philosophy,
University of California, Riverside; author of The
Significance of Religious Experience
Orders can be placed via our website: mitpress.mit.edu
Sign up for regular bulletins on new titles and MIT Press offers: mitpress.mit.edu/subscribe