]MB.oib-q[
1v7402150/oib-q:viXra
q-bio.BM/0512047
A new series of polyhedra as blueprints for viral capsids
in the family of Papovaviridae
T. Keef1 and R. Twarock1,2
1Department of Mathematics
University of York
3 Department of Biology
University of York
York YO10 5DD, U.K.
In a seminal paper [1] Caspar and Klug established a theory that provides a family
of polyhedra as blueprints for the structural organisation of viral capsids. In particular,
theyencodethelocationsoftheproteinsintheshellsthatencapsulate,andhenceprovide
protection for, the viral genome. Despite of its huge success and numerous applications
in virology experimental results have provided evidence for the fact that the theory is
too restrictive to describe all known viruses [2]. Especially, the family of Papovaviridae,
which contains cancer causing viruses, falls out of the scope of this theory.
In [3] we have shown that certain members of the family of Papovaviridae can be
describedviatilings. Inthispaper,wedevelopacomprehensivemathematicalframework
for the derivation of all surface structures of viral particles in this family. We show that
thisformalismfixesthestructureandrelativesizesofallparticlescollectivelysothatthere
exists only one scaling factor that relates the sizes of all particles with their biological
counterparts.
The series of polyhedra derivedhere complements the Caspar-Klugfamily of polyhe-
dra. It is the first mathematical result that provides a common organisational principle
for different types of viral particles in the family of Papovaviridaeand paves the way for
an understanding of Papovaviridae polymorphism. Moreover, it provides crucial input
for the construction of assembly models along the lines of [4, 5].
1 Introduction
Icosahedral symmetry plays a fundamental role for the structure of viruses because it con-
straints the organisation of the proteins in the viral capsids that protect the viral genome.
Based on this observation, Caspar and Klug have developed a landmark theory [1] in which
they derive a family of icosadeltahedra, i.e. polyhedra with icosahedral symmetry and faces
given by equilateral triangles, that act as blueprints for the organisation of viral capsids. In
particular, the corners of the triangular faces of these polyhedra encode the locations of the
protein subunits in the capsids. This implies that proteins are organised in clusters of 5 or 6
protein subunits, called pentamers and hexamers, respectively. The polyhedra consist of 20T
triangular facets, where T = h2+hk+k2 with h N 0 , k N denotes the triangulation
1E-mail: tk506@york.ac.uk
2E-mail: rt507@york.ac.uk
number that parameterises the family of polyhedra. As a consequence, there are precisely
12 pentamers and 10(T 1) hexamers in a viral capsid corresponding to the polyhedron of
triangulation number T in this family, and the corresponding capsid contains 60T protein
subunits.
The family of polyhedra established in Caspar-Klug Theory is fundamental in virology
and has a plethora of applications ranging from image analysis of experimental data to the
construction of assembly models. Despite its huge success experimental evidence has shown
that it is too restrictive to account for all known viruses. In particular, viruses in the family
of Papovaviridae fall out of the scope of Caspar-Klug Theory and their organisation has
therefore been a long-stand open problem in virology [6, 7], which has been formulated by
Liddington et al. in 1991 as follows: “The puzzle is how do the coloured pentamers fit into
the hexavalent holes?”. In particular, the experiments show that also the protein clusters
located off the global 5-fold axes of icosahedral symmetry can be pentamers, which is by
construction excluded by the approach of Caspar and Klug because they are working with a
hexagonal lattice.
We have provided a solution to this puzzle based on tiling theory in [3, 8], where we
have constructed a polyhedron that describes the surface structure of the viral particles
observed in [6, 7]. By construction, these models not only encode the locations of the protein
subunits but also those of the inter-subunit bonds that connect different pentamers in the
capsid. These results have provided the basis for the construction of assembly models for
Papovaviridae in [4, 5], and the tiling approach has moreover paved the way for the study of
crosslinking structures [9].
It is the purpose of this work to develop a mathematical framework for the systematic
construction of polyhedra associated with viral capsids composed of pentamers throughout,
and hence to derive a family of polyhedra that constitute the exceptional cases needed to
complement the Caspar-Klug series of polyhedra for the description of viruses.
Since we are seeking polyhedra that encode the locations of pentamers off the 5-fold axes
of the icosahedral group, it is not possible to work with a hexagonal lattice as in the case
of the Caspar-Klug construction, and a completely different mathematical approach is hence
required. Inparticular,thecoordinatesoftheverticeshavetoberetrievedfromanicosahedral
lattice, i.e. a lattice that is invariant under the action of the icosahedral group. Such a
lattice does not exit in three dimensions, but can be inferred from a six-dimensional space
via projection. This procedure is known from the study of aperiodic structures [10], which
describethe locations of atoms in alloys called quasicrystals [11]. An additional complication
arises due to the fact that such projections only lead to discrete point sets if the number of
lattice pointsprojectedfromthehigher-dimensionalspaceisrestrictedinanappropriateway.
We use here a restriction that is rooted in the structure of the icosahedral group itself, and
can be obtained via a so-called affine extension of that group. It can be used to construct a
family of finitedimensionalpointsets thatact as blueprintsforthe coordinates of thedesired
polyhedra.
We obtain three types of polyhedra in this way that correspond to the three species of
particles observed in the family of Papovaviridae. The ratios of their radii are completely
determined by the mathematical formalism, so that there exists only one scaling parameter
that relates the geometries of all polyhedra collectively to the biological setting. It can be
used to test the predictions of our theory as we discuss in section 6.
Thesmallestpolyhedronintheseriesisatriacontahedron, andwethereforecallourseries
of exceptional polyhedra the triacontahedral series. The 30 faces of the triacontahedron are
rhombs. By subdividing each rhomb into two triangles, it can be seen that the triaconta-
hedron is structurally similar to the T = 3 capsid in Caspar-Klug Theory. However, the
coordinates of the vertices are of a different type: while the coordinates of the triacontahe-
dron can be obtained from a higher-dimensional icosahedral lattice via projection, this is not
the case for the T = 3 Caspar-Klug structure. Moreover, the vertices of the polyhedra in
the triacontahedral series are located on nested spherical shells rather than a single spherical
shell, so that these particles are only approximately spherical. For example, the triacontahe-
dron has 12 vertices (corresponding to an icosahedron) located on one shell and 20 vertices
(corresponding to a dodecahedron) located on a different shell within.
The polyhedra corresponding to the medium and large sized particles have vertices on
three different nested shells. The vertices at which 5 faces meet mark the centres of the
pentamers, and the locations of the protein subunits correspond to the angles of the corre-
sponding faces. In combination with the tiling approach citeTwarock:2004a,Twarock:2005a
it is moreover possible to deduce the bonding structure of the viral capsids they represent as
we discuss in section 6.
Our mathematical set-up moreover provides a framework for the study of the scaling
transformations and rotations that map the coordinates of the polyhedra on other points
induced from the higher-dimensional icosahedral lattice by projection. This is important be-
cause viralcapsids arethree- rather than two-dimensional objects, andthese transformations
can be used to associate a three-dimensional structure with the two-dimensional surfaces of
the polyhedron that provides the blueprint for the capsid. This has been demonstrated in
[12] for the case of Human Rhinovirus. The viral capsid of this virus follows the blueprint of
our small shell, the triacontahedron. It has been shown in this reference that the viral capsid
is contained between two copies of the triacontahedron that are related by a scaling by the
irrational number τ := 1(1+√5), which corresponds to a transformation of the type we are
considering here. In section 5 we show how these transformations can be derived within our
formalism for all viruses in the triacontahedral series. This paves the way for a construction
of three-dimensional structures associated with the blueprints provided by the polyhedra for
allvirusesinthis series, andhencetoderivethelocations alsoof theproteinsthatarelocated
within the capsid and delimit the cavity filled by the genetic material. Such information is
invaluable for example for the study of scaffold mediated assembly.
The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we outline the projection formalism
that connects a generalised lattice (or quasi-lattice) based on the simple root vectors of
the non-crystallographic Coxeter group H with the root lattice of D . In section 3 we
derive finite dimensional subsets of this generalised lattice based on an affine extension of the
non-crystallographic Coxeter group H . In section 4 we use these sets for the construction
of the triacontahedral series of polyhedra. The projection picture is extended in section
5 and a formalism is established that allows us to determine the range of possible scaling
transformations, rotations and combinations thereof that map the vertices of the polyhedra
on other points in the generalised lattice obtained via projection, because this provides the
basis for the construction of three-dimensional models associated with these polyhedra along
the lines of [12]. A comparison with experimental results is provided in section 6. Finally,
we conclude with a discussion of the mathematical and biological implications of our results.
2 Points sets induced from an icosahedral lattices by projec-
We are seeking polyhedra that are symmetric under the icosahedral group. Since the icosa-
hedral group does not stabilize a lattice in three dimensions, a 3-dimensional generalised
lattice or quasi-lattice has to be inferred from a higher dimensional crystallographic lattice
via projection.
We use the fact that the icosahedral group is crystallographic in 6 dimensions, and con-
struct our quasi-lattice from the root lattice of D via projection. We remark that it would
also have been possible to construct a quasi-lattice in three dimensions via a projection from
Z6 rather than D as in [12]. However, our approach is more general, because the root lattice
of D allows for an embedding with maximal symmetry [13].
Let e = e j = 1,...,6 denote the standard basis in 6 dimensions with (e ,e ) = δ ,
i, j = 1,...,6. The root lattice of D corresponds to the Z-linear span of the 6 simple root
vectors (or roots in short) of the Coxeter group D . They can be expressed in terms of the
standard basis e as follows:
a = e e a = e e
1 2 1 2 1 3
a = e e a = e +e (1)
3 3 6 4 5 6
a = e e a = e e
5 4 5 6 4 5
We choose a projection to 3 dimensions that maps the basis e on the vectors pointing to
the six non-aligned vertices of an icosahedron. The coordinates of these vectors are given in
terms of the 3 dimensional standard basis below, using τ = 1(1+√5):
e 1(1,0,τ) e 1(τ,1,0)
1 7→ 2 2 7→ 2
3 7→ 2 4 7→ 2 −
e 1(0, τ,1) e 1(τ, 1,0).
5 7→ 2 − 6 7→ 2 −
Hence, by virtue of (1) and (2), the vectors a , j = 1,...,6, project on the vectors in
(3). Coordinates are again expressed in terms of the standard basis in 3 dimensions, with
the notation τ′ = 1(1 √5) for the Galois conjugate of τ and the identity τ +τ′ = 1:
1 7→ 1 2 − − 2 7→ 2 2 − −
3 7→ 3 2 − − 4 7→ 2 2 −
τ′).
a , a and a correspondeto the root vectors of the non-crysteallographic Coxeter group H .
The projection π in (3) is illustrated in terms of the Dynkin diagrams of D and H
ien Feig. 1. Oen the left, the Dynkin diagram of D is shown, in a folded and hence slightly
unconventional form, to illustrate how the simple root vectors of D project on the root
vectors of H . In particular, the 5 above the link in the Coxeter diagram of H on the right
indicates that the angle between the corresponding root vectors is π π, with the 3 over the
other link omitted by convention. We remark that this procedure is similar to the projection
from E on H considered in [14].
TherootlatticeofD isgivenbyZ-linearcombinationsofthesimplerootsa ,j = 1,...,6.
Correspondingly, its projection into R3 via π is given by Z[τ]-linear combinations of the
α 1 α 2 α 3 a 1 a 2 τa 3
◦ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ◦ ...... . .. . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . .. . ... . .. ◦ ... − π → k e ◦ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .e . . ◦ .... . ... . ... . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . ... . .. ◦ ... e ⇒ ............................................................ 5 ..........................
Figure 1: Figure illustrating the projection π of the simple roots of D on those of H .
e e e e e e
simple root vectors a , j = 1,...,3, of H , where Z[τ] denotes the extended ring of integers
Since Z[τ] is dense in R, the Z[τ]-linear combinations of the simple root vectors of H are
dense in R3. Thus it is necessary to select subsets thereof which are suitable to guide the
search for the vertex sets of the polyhedra. Such sets will be derived in the following section
based on an affine extension of H .
3 Nested shell structures via an affine extension of H
The simple root vectors a , j = 1,...,3, in (3) form a basis of the root system of H [15].
The complete root system ∆ is given by [16]
( 1,0,0) and all permutations
1( 1, τ, τ′) and all even permutations
(cid:26) 2 ± ± ± (cid:27)
The root vectors in ∆ point to the vertices of an icosidodecahedron. They encode the
generators of the Coxeter group H as follows. Let α ∆ and let (..) denote the scalar
product in R3. Then
r :x x | for x R3 (6)
is the Euclidean reflection in the plane orthogonal to the root vector α. The icosidodecahe-
dron representing the root system ∆ and two of the reflection planes that are encoded by
the root vectors are illustrated in Fig. 2. The intersection of the two planes in the figure
corresponds to an axis of 5-fold symmetry, which intersect with the sphere at two of the 12
5-fold vertices of a (spherical) icosahedron. The other reflection planes are not shown, but
their intersections with the surface of the sphere are indicated as geodesics (i.e. as spherical
arcs obtained as intersections of planes through the centre of the sphere with the surface of
the sphere). The intersections of the geodesics mark the locations of all symmetry axes, and
one can hence reconstruct the locations of all 6 five-fold, 15 two-fold and 10 three-fold axes
of rotational symmetry of the icosahedral group.
Note that in contrast to the case of Weyl groups 2(α|β) Z[τ] (instead of Z) for all α,
β ∆. Therefore, Z-linear combinations of root vectors in ∆ do not form a crystallographic
lattice, and∆isthereforecallednon-crystallographic. However, itispossibletoselectsubsets
which form generalised lattices such as the quasi-lattices known from quasicrystals [10].
Inordertoextendtherootsysteminaway compatiblewithoverall icosahedralsymmetry
thebasisofsimplerootvectors hastobeextended. Forthis,weusethefactthattherelations
Figure 2: The root polytope (left) encoding the locations of the planes of reflection (right).
between the simple root vectors are encoded in the Cartan matrix C,
C := | = 1 2 τ . (7)
(cid:18) j | j (cid:19)ij 0 τ 2
We extend this matrix by an additional row and column via a formalism known as affine
extensions in the theory of Kac-Moody algebras. The only difference here is that entries
stem from the set Z[τ] rather than Z. We have shown in [17] that the affine extended Cartan
matrix of H is given by
0 0 τ 2 
The additional row and column encode a further root vector corresponding to an affine
reflection that acts as a translation T by the highest root vector α = τα +2τα +τ2α .
The three other reflections are cyclic operations of order two and the products of any two of
them correspond to rotations around the origin as follows:
M = 1 if c = 2
M = 2 if c = 0
(r j r k )M = 1 where  jk (9)
M = 3 if c = 1
M = 5 if c = τ .
The affine extended group is hence generated by the three reflections r , r , r and the
translation T.
Itisnowpossibletoconstruct,basedontheseoperations,finitepointsetswithicosahedral
symmetry such that all points in the sets have a counterpart in the root lattice of D . In
this sense, they are finite subsets of generalised lattices induced by projection from D and
correspond to potential candidates for the locations of the polyhedra we are seeking.
The point sets are generated iteratively via the action of the generators of the extended
groupontheorigin 0. Iftheaction of thetranslation operator T isnotrestricted, oneobtains
aninfinitepointsetsthatdenselyfillsR3 . However, ifT actsonlyafinitenumberoftimes, N
say, while the action of all other operations is not restricted in order to guarantee icosahedral
symmetry of the overall configuration, finite dimensional point sets (N) are obtained which
become larger and more dense with increasing N.
Dueto thefact that T acts as atranslation by thehighestrootvector ithas beenpossible
to derive a simple expression for the point sets (N) in terms of the root system ∆ [18]:
(N) = n α n N 0 , n N . (10)
In particular, (N) consists of all N 0 -linear combinations of up to N root vectors in ∆.
N is called the cut-off parameter because it limits the number of points in the set.
The sets (N) play a crucial role in the following for the construction of the polyhedra.
4 Construction of the triacontahedral series of polyhedra from
H -induced shell models
By construction, the sets S(N) contain the vertices of the polyhedra in the triacontahedral
series. Due to the fact that we are looking for polyhedra that represent viral capsids given
in terms of pentamers that are (with a certain experimental error) equidistant from their
neighbouring pentamers, the vertices of the desired polyhedra follow (in a good approxima-
tion) the vertices of the Platonic and Archimedean solids, because they correspond to the
polyhedrawith equidistant edge lengths. They can hence beused as templates for the search
of the coordinates of the polyhedra within the sets S(N). Moreover, since we are looking for
polyhedrathat mark the locations of pentamers, only those Platonic and Archimedean solids
are relevant that have 5-coordinated vertices, i.e. vertices at which 5 edges meet. The three
solids thatfulfilthis criterion aretheicosahedron, thesnubcubeandthesnubdodecahedron.
We have computed the sets S(N) up to N = 5 explicitly. The points are organised
on 181 nested shells of radii between R 0.2361 and R = 5. S(5) contains all point sets
S(N) with N 5 by construction, and has been chosen because it is sufficiently dense to
provide coordinates for the polyhedra. We have used the icosahedron, the snub cube and the
snub dodecahedron, respectively, as a template to search for subsets of S(5) with the desired
distribution of points. We have thus obtained those coordinates of our polyhedra, that
mark the locations of 5-coordinated vertices. We have then determined further vertices (not
necessarily on a shell of the same radius) which together with these vertices from the vertex
set of the polyhedron. The procedure is discussed explicitly in the following subsections for
theindividualcases andthecoordinates of thevertices correspondingtocentres ofpentamers
are provided in the Appendix.
4.1 The small species
The vertex set of the icosahedron occurs for the first time in the set S(3) on a shell of radius
R 1.1756. There are two ways of obtaining polyhedra that match this vertex set. One of
them is the icosahedron itself and corresponds to the start of the Caspar-Klug series. The
other one is the rhombic triacontahedron with 30 rhombic faces. The remaining vertices of
this polyhedron correspond to the vertices of a dodecahedron located on shell of a radius
R 1.0705 (i.e. there is a scaling factor of about 1.098 between the shells that contain the
two different types of vertices). The triacontahedron is shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 3: The triacontahedron corresponding to the polyhedron of the small species.
Since only those vertices at which 5 faces meet mark the locations of pentamers, both
cases correspond to capsids with 12 pentamers located on the axes of 5-fold symmetry of
the icosahedral group. However, only the centres of the pentamers coincide in both cases,
and the orientations of the pentamers are different: because the proteins are located in the
corners of the faces (shown schematically as dots in Fig. 4) they differ by a rotation by an
angle of 2π as illustrated in this figure. It shows a face of the icosahedron with three protein
subunits on the left versus three faces of the triacontahedron on the right with 2 protein
subunits each. A superposition of both figures shows that the respective proteins are rotated
with respect to each other.
Figure4: Thelocationsofproteinsonthetriangularfacesoftheicosahedron(left)arerotated
by an angle of 2π with respect to the locations of the proteins on the rhombs (right).
This difference has far-reaching consequences for the structure of the capsids. In par-
ticular, in one of the cases crosslinking structures are possible while they cannot occur for
geometrical reasons in the other case, as has been demonstrated in [9].
The case of the triacontahedron is hence essentially different from the T = 1 case in the
Caspar-Klug family and marks the start of a different series of polyhedra.
4.2 The intermediate species
Due to the fact that the snub cube has octahedral rather than icosahedral symmetry, we
need to use the geometric inclusions illustrated in Fig. 5 in order to locate its vertices within
the point set S(5).
Figure 5: A cube inscribed into a dodecahedron (left) and an octahedron into a cube (right).
The points of S(5) that are closest to the vertex set of the snub cube occur on a shell of
radius R 2,3199, which appears in S(4) for the first time (i.e. it is not contained in a set
S(N) with N < 4). The edges are not equidistant in the case of the snub cube as expected,
but the deviations are small. In particular, one obtains the following values for the three
different distances A, B and C between neighbouring points in the set.
A 1,7481, B 1,6625, C 1,8783. (11)
The point set is illustrated in Fig. 6 (using the 3d-Grapher software) in relation to the
locations of the 2-, 3- and 4-fold symmetry axes of the octahedral group. Moreover, the
triangle ∆ formed from the distances A, B and C has been superimposed.
Figure 6: The triangle ∆ in the octahedral case.
From the triangle ∆ the polyhedron is constructed via the following argument. The
line denoted as C is centred on a global two-fold axis of the symmetry group. The face
containing that edge is hence 2-fold symmetric about that axis. We compute the intersection
ofthisaxiswiththeedgeC,anddeterminealinethatgoesthroughthatintersection point,is
perpendicular to C and intersects the sphere in two points equidistant from the intersection
point. We then determine the intersection of this line with the line through the global 4-fold
axis (marked as anencircled 4 in Fig. 6) andthecentre of edge B. Theintersection is located
within the sector of the sphere that is characterised by the triangle ∆ and determines
one further type of vertex of the polyhedron that does not correspond to the centre of a
pentamer. A third type of vertex is located on the global 3-fold axis, that is indicated as an
encircled 3 in Fig. 6. There is flexibility in the construction in that the vertices on the global
3- and 4-fold axes do not need to be located on a shell of the same radius as the vertices
representing pentamers. However, due to the fact that they are not marking locations of
pentamers, their exact location is not important for our purpose. It is important to note
though that a variation of the radii of the shells on which they are located causes changes in
the angles of the faces.
One hence obtains the polyhedron illustrated schematically in Fig. 7. The fundamental
domain of the octahedral group corresponds to the triangle between the 2-fold, 3-fold, and 4-
foldaxesmarkedasencircled2s,3sand4sinFig.6andtheentirepolyhedroncanbeobtained
from it via the action of the octahedral group. Therefore, only a part of the polyhedron
overlapping with the fundamental domain is shown, because the rest of the polyhedron is
implied by symmetry. It is a schematic representation in that the vertices not marking the
locations of the pentamers have been drawn on the same shell. However, this illustration
shows all features of the polyhedron that are needed to read off the locations of the protein
subunits, which are located in those corners of the faces that meet in multiples of 5 at a
vertex.
Figure 7: Schematic representation of the polyhedron corresponding to the medium species.
It is a polyhedron in terms of rhomb- and kite-shaped faces. The coordinates of the
vertices that mark the centres of the pentamers are given in the Appendix. We remark that
the angles of the tiles around these vertices are not equal, but the deviations are small. In
particular,theanglesonthekitesarelargerthanthoseontherhombs. Thisfactmayaccount
fortheexperimentalobservation thatviralparticles correspondingto suchapolyhedronhave
only been obtained in vitro, but have never been observed in vivo.
4.3 The large species
The construction of the polyhedron corresponding to the large species is analogous to the
procedure used before. In this case, we use the vertex set of the snub dodecahedron as a
template. The subset of S(5) closest to it is located on a shell of radius R 3,1247 and
appears in S(5) for the first time.
Figure 8: The triangle ∆ in the octahedral case.
The three different distances between neighbouring points are given in (12).
A 1,3708, B 1,7520, C 1,4364. (12)
They define the triangle ∆ in Fig. 8. We start again by fixing the rhomb on the
2-fold axis containing C, as well as the angles of the kite-shaped faces around the 5-fold
axes. This determines the vertex within the sector corresponding to the triangle ∆ as
before. The radius of the shell that determines the locations of the global 5-fold vertices can
be computed such that the angles on the kite-shaped faces at the vertices meeting rhombs
match those of the rhombs containing C. Finally, the angles of the rhombs around the global
3-fold axes can be adjusted by varying the radius of the shell on which they are located. In
this way, the polyhedron in Fig. 9 is obtained. As before, it is a schematic representation
that encodes all important information about the polyhedron. The fundamental domain of
the icosahedral group corresponds to the triangle between the 2-fold, 3-fold, and 5-fold axes
marked as encircled 2s, 3s and 5s in Fig. 8 and the entire polyhedron can be obtained from
it via the action of the icosahedral group. It is hence sufficient to represent only part of
the polyhedron, provided that this contains the fundamental domain, in order to specify the
polyhedron completely.
The coordinates of the vertices that mark the locations of the pentamers are given in the
Appendix. Theycorrespondto12verticeslocatedonthe5-foldaxesoficosahedralsymmetry,
as well as further 60 vertices off these axes.
Finally, we remark that the set S(5) contains the vertices of all three types of polyhedra.
Hence, the geometrical formalism fixes the sizes of the three different species of particles
in relation to each other, so that there is indeed only one free parameter that relates the
overall mathematical structure, i.e. the small, medium and large polyhedron collectively, to
the biological setting. We determine the corresponding scaling factor in section 6.
Figure 9: Schematic representation of the polyhedron corresponding to the large species.
5 Scaling transformations and rotations
In order to determine the range of possible scaling transformations, rotations and combina-
tions thereof that map thevertices of the polyhedraonto other points ina set S(N)(possibly
with different N) one needs to extend the projection picture presented in section 2.
5.1 The extended projection picture
Under the action of the icosahedral group, R6 decomposes into two irreducible orthogonal
subspaces, which we denote as E and E . This decomposition induces a projection of the
root lattice of D onto two different copies of the root system of H , which are located in E
and E , respectively.
The projection of the simple roots of D onto E has been considered in Fig. 1 in section
2. Analogously, weobtainasecondprojection, denotedasπ , whichacts asshowninFig.10.
α 1 α 2 α 3 a 1 a 2 τ′a 3
◦ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ◦ ...... . .. . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . .. . ... . .. ◦ ... − π → ⊥ b ◦ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b. . ◦ ..... . ... . .. . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . ... . .. ◦ ... b ⇒ ............................................................ 5 ..........................
Figure 10: Figure illustrating the projection π of the simple roots of D on those of H .
b b b b b b
The coordinates of the vectors in E are given in (13).
1 2 − − 1 2 − −
2 2 − − 2 2 −
τ′,1,τ′2).
A comparison of b(13) and (3) shows that thebcopies of H
are related by
an interchange of τ and τ′ in the coordinates of the root vectors. Hence, each simple root
vector a , j = 1,...,3, of the H -copy in E has a counterpart a , j = 1,...,3, in one of the
simple root vectors of the H -copy in E and vice versa, related by an exchange of τ and τ′
in theirecoordinates. This applies also to the root system ∆ in (b5). The root systems of the
two H -copies in E and E are shown superimposed onto each other in Fig. 11 as dark and
light dots, respectively, to demonstrate the geometric implications of this relation.
Figure 11: The root systems of the two H copies on E and E .
As mentioned in section 2, the root lattice of D is given by Z-linear combinations of the
simpleroots a , j = 1,...,6, anditsprojection π (D )ontoE correspondstotheZ[τ]-linear
combinations ofthesimplerootvectors a , whereZ[τ]istheextendedringofintegers defined
in (4). It is a dense set in R3 due to the properties of Z[τ]. Hence, a formalism is required
to select a discrete subset of π k (D 6 ). e
This is possible via the cut-and-project method known from the study of quasicrystal
[10]. In particular, we define an automorphism ∗ as a mapping from π (D ) to π (D ) that
acts on a vector x π (D ) by exchanging τ and τ′ in all coordinates. For any connected,
bounded area Ω E we define point sets Σ(Ω) by
n (cid:12) o
The construction is illustrated in (15). (cid:12)
The point sets Σ(Ω) have been extensively studied in the quasicrystal literature, where they
are used to model the locations of atoms in alloys [11, 10].
5.2 Scaling transformations and rotations via the projection picture
The sets S(N) in (10) are by construction finite dimensional subsets of the cut-and-project
quasicrystals Σ(Ω) in (14), i.e. one has the set inclusion S(N) Σ(Ω) for suitably chosen
areas Ω. A canonical choice for Ω is the Voronoi domain of the root lattice of D projected
to E [19]. It corresponds to a rhombic triacontahedron centred about the origin with edge
length 1/√2 and inradius R 5.32.
Thecoordinates of thevertices of ourpolyhedrathatmark the locations of pentamers are
provided in the Appendix. They can be used to check that this choice of Ω is large enough
to contain their counterparts in E under the mapping ∗. Let , j 1,2,3 , denote these
vertexsetsforthepolyhedracorrespondingthelarge,mediumandsmallparticle,respectively,
and let ∗ := x∗ x be their counterpart in E . Then one obtains the following radii
for the shells in E on which the sets ∗ are located:
∗ : R 3.77, R 4.16
∗ : R 2.76 (16)
∗ : R 1.9.
SincetheseareallsmallerthattheinradiusR 5.32of thetriacontahedron thatcorresponds
to Ω, the vertex sets of the polyhedra are indeed contained in Σ(Ω).
Following [12] we call a transformation crystallographic if it can be expressed as an N-
dimensional matrix with integral entries in an N-dimensional vector space. All transfor-
mations that map the vertex sets of our polyhedra on points in Σ(Ω) are by construction
crystallographic in this sense. It is hence possible to determine the corresponding scaling
transformations, rotations and combinations thereof via the projection picture. In particu-
lar, they can be studied as transformations in E and correspond to those transformations
that map ∗ onto points in π (D ) Ω.
Scaling transformations:
Alltransformations thatact as contractions inΩ, thatisscalings byz = z +τz Z[τ]
(cf. (4)) with modulus z < 1 correspond to crystallographic scaling transformations.
In particular, they map ∗ on a set ∗ := zx∗ x∗ ∗ . Using z∗∗ = z this induces
Vj Vjz { | ∈ Vj}
a scaling of by z∗ E , which acts as a stretching transformation since z∗ > 1.
Hence, every z Z[τ] with z < 1 induces a stretching transformation T on in E .
An example is z = 1 τ = τ′ which induces a scaling of the index set by τ.
Rotations:
Rotations can again be studied as rotations in Ω. Since the shells on which the sets
∗ are located are entirely contained within the inradius of the triacontahedron that
defines Ω, any rotation in Ω that maps ∗ on points in π (D ) Ω again induces a
transformation of in π (D ).
The same holds for combinations of rotations and scaling transformations. In particular,
alsothepolygrammaltransformationsthatplayanimportantrolein[12]caneasilybestudied
via the projection formalism in this way.
6 Validation against experimental results
Our approach can betested based on the following two criteria: the predictions for the ratios
oftheradiiofthedifferentspeciesofparticleswhicharefixedcompletelybyourmathematical
formalism, as well as the predictions concerning the locations of the inter-subunit bonds in
the capsids that are implied by the structure of the polyhedra.
6.1 Predictions concerning the relativeradii of particles indifferent species
Ourconstructionfixestheradiiofthedifferentpolyhedrawithrespecttoeachother,andthere
is henceonly one freeparameter, α say, that relates thegeometries of all particles collectively
with their biological counterparts. In particular, we obtain a radius of R = 3.1247 for the
large particle, of R = 2.3199 for the medium particle and of R = 1.1756 (using the radius
at the global five-fold vertices where the pentamers are located) for the small particle. The
ratios of these are
1.9734, 2.658. (17)
The polymorphic assemblies of the major capsid protein of Simian Virus 40, which is a
member of the family of Papovaviridae, has been studied in [20]. They report the occurrence
of three different types of particles: a large particle with a diameter of approximately 40 to
45 nm, a medium sized particle with a diameter of size 25 to 35 nm and a small particles
with a diameter of approximately 20 nm. It has not been possiblein that work to distinguish
whether the medium sized particles correspond to the octahedral particles consisting of 24
pentamers reported in [21]. The radii of these particles are, taking averages, approximately
RK 21.25nm, RK 15nm, and RK 10nm. (18)
Since these are approximate values, we test whether any combination with small devi-
ations from these values is compatible with the ratios obtained theoretically in (17). One
finds that the combination
RK = 21.26nm, RK = 15.79nm, and RK = 8nm (19)
corresponds to the ratios in (17). The correspondence with the values in (18) is remarkably
close. It implies that the ratio between large and medium size particles are in excellent
agreement with the experimental results. Moreover, given that the exact value of the small
sized shell is more difficult to determine experimentally than those of the larger ones, a
deviation of 2nm from the experimentally measured average can be considered as an equally
good agreement with experimental results.
Based on (19), it is possible to compute the scaling factor, that relates the geometry of
the shells of radii R , R and R in the theoretical model collectively with the biological
system, as
α= λ 6,80nm with λ S,M,L . (20)
6.2 Predictions concerning the bonding structure
The polyhedra provide information on the locations of intersubunit bonds between the pro-
teins in different pentamers in the capsid. Based on the tiling approach developed earlier
[3, 8, 9], the faces of the polyhedra encode the locations of these interactions as follows:
a face with three corners corresponding to centres of pentamers in the capsid represents a
trimer interaction between the proteins located in these corner; respectively, a face with two
such cornersrepresents adimer interaction between these two protein subunits. Thebonding
structureimplied by the polyhedraof the medium and large species are illustrated in Fig. 12,
where the locations of the bonds are shown schematically by spiral arms.
Figure 12: The bonding structure of medium and large particles implied by the tiling ap-
proach.
The combination of dimer and trimer bonds predicted by our theory for the large shell in
Fig.12ontherightcoincideswiththeexperimentalresultsforthelocations oftheC-terminal
arm extensions observed in [22]. It would be interesting to validate also the predictions for
the bonding structure of the other species experimentally.
7 Conclusions
The results in this paper provide answers to the two open mathematical questions stated in
the conclusion of [12].
Firstly, we have addressedthequestion of how theseries of polyhedrathatstarts with the
triacontahedronandcontainsallpolyhedracorrespondingtoall-pentamerconfigurations,can
be completed. For this, we have derived a mathematical method that combines a projection
of the root lattice of D with an affine extension of the non-crystallographic Coxeter group
H in order to determine finite subsets of generalised lattices that encode the vertices of
these polyhedra. In this way, we have been able to establish the triacontahedral series that
complements the family of polyhedra in Caspar-Klug Theory.
Secondly, the mathematical formalism developed here provides a framework for the sys-
tematic analysis of crystallographic scaling transformations and rotations for polyhedra with
vertices in the triacontahedral series. These are important as they can be used to associate
three-dimensional structures with the blueprints provided by the surface structures of the
polyhedra as demonstrated in [12] for the case of Human Rhinovirus, which corresponds to
the small particle in our tricontahedral series. In this respect, our results pave the way for an
analysis of the interior organisation of all viral capsids corresponding to the triacontahedral
series.
From the biological point of view, our triacontahedral series closes an important gap
because it complements the series of Caspar-Klug polyhedra. Similar as the in the case of
the Caspar-Klug series, this paves the way for a broad spectrum of applications in virology.
In particular, due to the fact that Papovaviridae contain cancer-causing viruses, a better
understanding of their structure is highly desirable to assist the development of new anti-
viral drugs. For example, based on the structure of the polyhedra it is possible to develop
assembly models that explain how viral capsids self-assemble from their capsid proteins. The
theory developed here provides a framework for the generalisation of earlier work [4, 5] to the
case of simultaneous assembly of different species of particles. Such models are important in
order to study how viral assembly can be misdirected as a means to interfere with the viral
replication cycle.
Acknowledgements
RThasbeensupportedbyanEPSRCAdvancedResearchFellowship. TKhasbeensupported
by the EPSRC grant GR/T26979/01.