A Novel EM Gradiometric Surveying System for Geophysical Reconnaissance
Alexey V. Veryaskin1,2, Francis A. Torres2, Timo P. Vaalsta1,2, Ju Li2, David G. Blair2
Trinity Research Labs1
School of Physics2, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Nedlands
Perth WA6009, Australia
INTRODUCTION
In traditional audio-band electromagnetic (EM) deep-looking carrier-centred systems based on
transmitter-target-receiver EM propagation chain, the in-phase component at the receiver station is
normally orders of magnitude larger than the quadrature, which is 90 deg shifted with respect to the
primary EM field (Lee, 2010). However, the latter component contains valuable information as it
relates to the phase shift between the primary and secondary EM fields. As shown in (McNeill, 1980)
the phase shift is directly proportional to the conductivity of the target in the so-called low induction
limit and/or within the Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) band when the ability of a target to store EM
energy can be neglected.
The appreciation of the information contained in the quadrature component of the secondary EM field
resulted in the first frequency domain surveying systems built from the early 1950s to late 1970s. For
example, the F-400 series quadrature airborne EM system is described in (Seiberl, 1974), which
showed an equivalent phase noise of 0.5 ppt (part per thousand).
The first frequency domain systems, which were capable of measuring both the in-phase and
quadrature components of the secondary field, were also being built. In order to cancel out the
overwhelming disproportionality of the in-phase to quadrature EM components at the receiver station,
some active compensation methods were used. For example, in the Barringer Research frequency
domain system, the primary in-phase component was nulled out by a secondary transmitter, which was
used to generate an EM field of opposite sign compared to the main transmitter.
In these early systems and in modern conductivity metres (or metal detectors), the quadrature
demodulation principle is used (Horowitz and Hill, 1989). The same principle is used in lock-in
amplifiers. In quadrature demodulators, the phase shift between the primary and secondary EM field is
a result of calculating the ratio between the demodulated quadrature and the demodulated in-phase
components of the secondary EM field, which are the measured quantities. The best equivalent phase
noise performance that can be achieved in quadrature demodulation based devices is a few tens ppm
(part per million), or about -100 dBc/√Hz, at the low-end of Very Low Frequency (VLF) audio band
(see www.geonics.com).
In advanced phase sensitive interferometric systems, the inherent phase noise floor can be orders of
magnitude lower compared to that of standard quadrature demodulation based systems (Ivanov et al,
1998; Rubiola, 2002). Below, a novel EM surveying system based on an interferometric principle and
operating in the ELF audio-band is described. The ELF frequency range is most attractive in the case of
surveying over highly conducting overburden. A gradiometric receiver configuration can also be used
in this case.
INTERFEROMETRIC PRINCIPLES APPLIED TO ELECTROMAGNETIC SURVEYING
There are a few different types of classic interferometric measurements. In Fig.1 below, the Mach-
Zehnder type of RF & microwave interferometer is shown as an example (Ivanov et al, 1998). A single
EM power carrier-centred source is used to pump in, through a power splitter, two arms of the
interferometer. The measurement arm contains a Device Under Test (DUT) and the compensation arm
contains precision balancing components, a phase shifter and an attenuator. These components are used
for vector subtraction of the two EM signals propagating through each arm of the interferometer. A 4-
port power combiner (CB) is used to redistribute the EM power in such a way that the output EM
signal at the “dark port” (DP) of the interferometer is near zero. It is further amplified by a low noise
amplifier (LNA) and mixed with a reference signal taken from the “bright port” (BP) of the power
combiner. The reference signal is 90 degree phase shifted (by an additional phase shifter) compared to
the matched signals in each arm of the interferometer. Any phase variations in the DUT will result in
an imbalance of the matched arms of the interferometer and, therefore, in a voltage output directly
proportional to the phase change in the DUT.
Figure 1. The typical RF & microwave architecture of the Mach-Zehnder type of interferometer.
A single frequency signal from a pump source is split in two signals that propagate through two
arms of the interferometer. In the measurement arm (the upper arm) one passes through a
Device Under Test (DUT). Another one, in the reference arm (the bottom arm) of the
interferometer, passes through a precision phase shifter (f) and a precision attenuator (a). These
components are used to balance the interferometer by making both the phase and the amplitude
of the two signals equal with a high precision. As a result of the vector subtraction of the two
signals at the power combiner station (CB) the EM power is near zero at the “dark port” (DP) of
the interferometer. The carrier is heavily suppressed at this point so further amplification, by
means of a low noise amplifier (LNA), is possible. The LNA output is then mixed with the
reference signal coming through the “bright port” (BP) of the power combiner. If the reference
signal is 90 degree phase shifted (by an additional phase shifter) before being mixed with the
LNA output, any phase variation in the DUT will result in the mixer output signal directly
proportional to the phase change in the DUT.
In optical, microwave and RF interferometers it is desirable that both the measurement arm and the
compensation arm of an interferometer have the same length. This is because the EM wavelength can
be comparable with the size of the interferometer. In the audio band region the EM wavelength is many
orders of magnitude larger than any practical transmitter-target-receiver EM propagation scale. This
makes it possible to apply the Mach-Zehnder type of interferometric phase sensitive measurements to
active source EM geophysical surveying (Veryaskin, 2010).
Below, in Fig.2, a block diagram of a practical realisation of an ELF EM interferometer (or phase
bridge) adopted for EM surveying is presented. In this symmetric configuration both arms of the
interferometer are measurement arms. The transmitter (Tx) plays the role of the EM power splitter and
the target acts as a DUT as it introduces a phase shift between the primary (Bp) and the secondary (Bs)
EM fields.
Each arm consists of a receiver (any low noise magnetic-field-to-voltage converter can serve to the
purpose), a precision digital phase shifter, a hard limiter and a low pass filter. The low pass filter
selects the first harmonic of the saturated signal at the output of the limiter. Its phase is the measure of
the presence of the quadrature component of the secondary EM field at the corresponding receiver
station. The limiter cancels amplitude variations of either signal in either arm of the interferometer.
Another mechanism of seeing only phase variations between the primary and the secondary EM fields
at the receiver stations is inherent to the mixer stage of the interferometer. It provides the phase-only
sensitive output, which is used to maintain a closed loop operation that keeps the balance between the
two arms of the interferometer unchanged. As depicted in Fig.2, a digital PI controller interface (DPI
Ctr) is used to control a digital phase shifter, which compensates any phase imbalance between the two
arms with a resolution of a few tens ppb (part per billion). The complimentary phase shifter is used for
calibrating the interferometer output in the radian units.
The signals in either arm of the interferometer are combined at the combiner station and cancel each
other if their phases and amplitudes are precisely matched. Typically one part in ten thousand of the
phase balance is achieved, and one part in a hundred of the amplitude balance is enough to provide a
reasonable “phase gain” in front of the traditional mixer stage.
Figure 2. A symmetric realisation of the EM ELF interferometric system adopted for EM
surveying. It is a close analogy to the Mach-Zehnder type of RF & microwave interferometer
depicted in Fig. 1. An EM power source pumps energy into a transmitter (Tx), which acts as a
power splitter. Direct EM coupling between the transmitter and the receivers (Rx1, Rx2) creates
identical signals in either arm of the interferometer. Target changes the phase of either signal
and is equivalent to a dual function DUT. Two hard limiters (LIM) in each arm of the
interferometer are precisely matched and controlled by the same voltage reference. This removes
the need of having a precision attenuator for the amplitude balance that is inherent to the classic
(non symmetric) interferometer architecture shown in Fig.1. Low pass filters (LPF) select the
first harmonic of the saturated signals, which is insensitive to any possible amplitude variations
of the primary (Bp) and the secondary (Bs) EM fields at the receiver stations. The phase
difference between the measurement arms of the interferometer at the combiner station (CB) is
the measure of the presence of the quadrature component of the secondary EM field at the
corresponding receiver station.
The interferometer inherent phase noise is inversely proportional to the EM power pumped into it
(Ivanov et al, 1998). Therefore, it is desirable to build up the EM power at the receiver stations to a
reasonably high level that provides the best noise performance. This situation is radically different
from the traditional quadrature demodulation based systems, which can only deal with weak signals at
the receiver stations. In fact, the direct transmitter-receiver coupling and the overwhelmingly large in-
phase component of the secondary EM field (if any) both become positive factors in terms of providing
the required EM power to either arm of the interferometer. As both arms are identical (the static
dispersion imbalance error is typically one part in a few hundred), the frequency fluctuations in the
carrier, which result in the direct frequency-to-phase-noise conversion, cancel each other at the output
of the interferometer.
Another advantage of using the interferometric phase-sensitive detection in the ELF audio band is that
the traditional mixer stage and the final signal processing stage (including the DPI controller interface)
can both be shifted into a digital signal processor (DSP), which is a software based environment. This
cannot be done in microwave and RF interferometers where the whole interferometer architecture is
built of hardware.
If the receiver stations Rx1 and Rx2 are spatially separated and aligned along the same axis, the system
becomes a phase gradiometer. However, a non-gradiometric configuration can easily be arranged if one
of the receivers (say Rx1) is isolated from the secondary EM field. In this case the corresponding arm
becomes the traditional reference arm of the interferometer.
A NOVEL EM ELF GRADIOMETER
A fully deployable prototype of the EM ELF gradiometer has been built and tested in the field. The
instrument’s mobile transmitter-receiver section consists of two concentric transmitter coils (Tx1 and
Tx2, see Fig. 3 below) mounted together on a solid non-conducting and non-magnetic concentric frame,
with two pairs of induction coils (Rx1, Rx2, Rx3 and Rx4) separated spatially by a 0.5 m baseline. The
coils are wound on high magnetic permeability cores with about 1 kHz operational corner frequency.
They are firmly mounted inside the cylindrical space, occupied by the transmitter loops, in such a way
that reduces to a minimum the effect of any possible mechanical motion of the receiver coils relative to
the transmitter coils.
Figure 3. The transmitter-receiver section of the EM ELF gradiometer. Tx1, Tx2 – transmitter
loops wound on circular wooden frames with 1.4 metres in diameter, 100 turns each. The typical
operation current is 10 A peak. Rx1, Rx2, Rx3, Rx4 – receiver coils.
The system enables the detection of four AC gradients, namely Bxz, Byz, Bxx and Byy, dependent on
the orientation of the transmitter-receiver section with respect to a coordinate reference frame. A classic
(non symmetric) interferometer configuration was built and used in the prototype under test, similar to
that of shown in Fig.1 (see www.trinitylabs.com.au).
The EM ELF gradiometer was tuned to operate at an ELF (~19 Hz) carrier frequency as it was intended
for a field trial over an area with highly conducting overburden. During the field test, only one pair of
the receiver coils (Rx1, Rx2), connected in a gradiometric configuration, was used. Their sensitivity
axes were aligned along with the motion of a custom built trolley (with no metal parts), which was
towed behind a 4WD vehicle loaded with the rest of the gradiometer hardware. The trolley-mounted
transmitter-receiver section of the EM gradiometer is depicted in Fig.4.
Figure 4. The EM ELF gradiometer field trial with Regis Resources Pty Ltd commenced in July
2009.
The monitoring system (CPU, oscilloscope, power amplifier, adjustable power supply, laptop) powered
by a small generator was temporarily set up in the back of a Landcruiser trayback. This was connected
to the transmitter-receiver unit, which was towed 5 metres behind the vehicle, mounted on the wooden
trolley.
Initially the gradiometer survey was completed across several known EM conductors located at the
field trial area. On most survey lines the data was collected using 2 methods:
1. readings were taken while the vehicle was run at a constant speed ~4 km/hour,
2. 10 second readings were collected at each station at 5m station spacings.
Both methods worked well if the surface was graded along the grid line. Where the grid line was rough
the trolley-mounted transmitter-receiver section experienced vibration and the speed of safe travel was
reduced. Five second reading times were tested, but were found to be too short, as the transmitter-
receiver did not have enough time to stabilise. The condition of the track or grid line ultimately
determined which method was most practical. Some runs were tested twice using the above methods to
assess the repeatability of the data. Several known anomalies and a large EM conductor were easily
identified.
The EM gradiometer was then trialled in an area with highly conductive overburden, including the
Giles Nickel Prospect. The first line tested a known carbonaceous shale where an obvious target was
detected. The system was then run across several lines at the Giles Nickel Prospect. A number of
anomalies were discovered when the data were processed after completing the field trial. Previously,
the area was surveyed with moving loop TEM (MLEM) using single turn 200m x 200m loops and base
frequency 2.08 Hz. Analysis of the data showed a distinct lack of obvious deeper conductive features.
An example of real time data recorded with the EM ELF gradiometer in an area with highly conducting
overburden is shown in Fig.5.
Figure 5. Real time data recorded from the EM ELF gradiometer looping along the same line
with a constant speed (~4 km/hour). Red and blue data sets show data from the same line but
collected separately at different times. Strong correlation between the red and blue data sets
indicates that real conductivity gradients were measured, not random noise.
It is worth noting that signal drift was found to occur in the mornings, and was less severe in the
afternoon. It was later discovered that the receivers were not completely covered and therefore
exposed to sunlight in the morning. The transmitter-receiver unit would need to be completely
protected from direct sunlight in order to avoid this problem.
Polarity of the output signal was found to be different on several lines and one was the reverse to
another. Polarity across the Giles Nickel Prospect area remained constant indicating that the conductive
overburden is consistent in this area.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper describes a new ELF interferometric technique for the purpose of EM geophysical
surveying. However, the full understanding of the potential of the novel EM ELF gradiometer is yet to
be achieved and reported elsewhere. Especially, extensive modelling is required in order to convert raw
data into fully informative commercial grade data sets. A newer version of the EM ELF gradiometer,
enabling the more advanced symmetric interferometer architecture (see Fig.2), has been built and
tested in the laboratory. The test results, a calibration strategy and the system performance will be
published in due course.
The EM ELF gradiometer system can be deployed from a small helicopter or towed behind a 4WD
vehicle of medium size in reasonably flat terrain. A towed version has been tested in regional outback
Australia in relatively difficult terrain. The results of the field tests have been positive. The system was
able to identify known EM conducting targets in the trial area and a number of anomalies were detected
in the data collected in an area where geochemical signatures had indicated the likely potential of a
massive nickel sulphide deposit.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors would like to thank Prof Eugeney Ivanov for his interest and helpful discussions in relation to
advanced interferometric phase measurements. Authors would also like to thank Mr Howard Golden
for his interest and overwhelming help in the process of developing the EM ELF technology and in
writing this article. One of the authors (Alexey Veryaskin) would like to thank Mr Marc Kaye for his
outstanding technical support in developing a commercial implementation of the EM ELF
interferometric system. He also would like to thank Mr Jens Balkau, Ms Tara French and Mr Nathan
Litchfield for an exciting field trial.