Proceedings of National Conference in AIRES-2012, Andhra University
A Novel Approach for Intelligent Robot Path
TIRTHARAJ DASH GOUTAM MISHRA
Department of Information Technology Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
National Institute of Science and Technology National Institute of Science and Technology
Berhampur-761008, India Berhampur-761008, India
Email: tirtharajnist446@gmail.com Email: goutamishra@gmail.com
TANISTHA NAYAK
Department of Information Technology
National Institute of Science and Technology
Berhampur-761008, India
Email: tanisthanist213@gmail.com
Abstract— Path planning of Robot is one of the challenging fields Recently, there has been an increase in demands to enhance
in the area of Robotics research. In this paper, we proposed a intelligence of automation systems for construction operations
novel algorithm to find path between starting and ending position in hazardous work environments such as underwater, in
for an intelligent system. An intelligent system is considered to be chemically or radioactively contaminated areas, and in regions
a device/robot having an antenna connected with sensor-detector with harsh temperatures. An automated construction system
system. The proposed algorithm is based on Neural Network
consists of several pieces of hardware like mobile robots and
training concept. The considered neural network is Adaptive to
software for operating these robots. In developing an intelligent
the knowledge bases. However, implementation of this algorithm
mobile construction robot, a navigation system that can
is slightly expensive due to hardware it requires. From detailed
produce an effective and efficient path-planning algorithm is a
analysis, it can be proved that the resulted path of this algorithm
very important element for this purpose. The purpose of a path-
is efficient.
planning method for a mobile construction robot is to find a
continuous collision-free path from the initial position of the
Keywords-Path Planning; Robot; Intelligent System; Adaptive
Neural Network; Training; Hardware; construction robot to its target position. Another example like,
a mobile robot could be used to transport details and sub-
assemblies between a store and production lines; this task
I. INTRODUCTION
implies repeated traversal between the store and the production
Over the last decade, Intelligent robots are driven by cells. A mobile robot can also be used for surveillance; this task
complex control systems. Different modules in these control implies visiting certain checkpoints on a closed territory in a
system provides different control task. Major module in the predefined order [2, 3].
intelligent robot or vehicle is the path planning module. The
The goal of this work is to demonstrate some works related
concept becomes more challenging in the field of path planning
to intelligent robot path planning. The methods are described in
if the path and the environment are totally unknown. However,
brief below. The source of these works is mainly Google
path planning refers to deriving a shortest path for the robot’s
Scholar. Finally, we have given a demonstration of our
movement. Different methods and algorithms have been
proposed algorithm for the same purpose based on Adaptive
proposed in this area [1]. Evolutionary and meta-heuristic
Neural Network (ANN).
algorithms have been developed and used as search and
optimization tools in various problem domains, including
science, commerce, and engineering. Their broad applicability, II. SURVEY
ease of use, and global perspective may be considered as the
A. Adaptive Constrained Distance Transformation
primary reason for their success. The Swarm-based approach to
optimization has a great role on the intelligent robot path Horng and Li proposed a method to solve the problem of
planning. When selecting the best subset of observation vehicle path planning. Their technique was based on the
locations subject to constrained resources viz. limited time or adaptive constrained distance transformation. This technique
battery capacity it is an important problem to trade off uses incremental distance, vehicle characteristics, spatial
exploration like gathering information about the environment properties of the terrain data etc. and later on this is interpreted
and exploitation using the current knowledge about the in terms of incremental cost. As claimed, this technique of
environment effectively for efficiently. Even the non-adaptive path planning proved to be far more efficient than the
setting, where paths are planned before observations are made, Euclidean distance and constraint based techniques [1]. The
is NP-hard, and has been subject to much research [1,4]. output of this method is given in Figure-1 below. Here the
Proceedings of National Conference in AIRES-2012, Andhra University
black area resembles with the considered robot or vehicle and These schemes in this work have stated that they have aimed
bar is the obstacle to the robot. So, the robot has to travel to reduce path length and determination of hill climbing
without colliding with the obstacle. through random search [3]. The figure-3 shows the result of
this work.
Figure-3: Result of scheduled optimization
D. Personal Robot Planning
Figure-1: Output of Horng and Li’s Technique [1]
Rowe and Alexander in their work towards contribution to
path planning have provided a description regarding path
B. UAV Tracking Method
planning of a personal robot. In their work they have provided
Lee et al. had also contributed to a method closely related to description of the personal robot and have also mentioned
the solution for vehicle path planning problem. Their work regarding a type of path planner which uses a global path
was based on strategies of path planning for UAV to track a potential field approach which has also been accompanied
ground vehicle. In this technique it has been stated that the with an optimization criterion. This technique of their boasted
ground vehicle’s motion dynamics is arbitrary at any time that using this technique the robot maintains safe distance
instant whereas on the contrary the motion dynamics of the from the obstacles and simultaneously obtaining an optimal
UAV is fixed and at all time instants it has to maintain its path by using stored partial knowledge about terrain data. [4]
motion parameters for an efficient tracking performance. Their
E. Contemporaty Logic Design
algorithm has taken wind disturbance as one of the key
parameters for causing off-course in direction of UAV’s Katz and Borriello have provided a description regarding
motion and has rendered an effective solution to counteract usage of search based algorithms and discrete environments
with such disturbances during any in flight operation [2]. The for mobile robot’s path planning. In this technique they have
algorithm can be viewed using the figure below. implemented Breadth for Search in both hardware and
software environments. This technique claimed that when
tested the time gain in hardware was more than software and
thus stated that due to this fact along with the advantage of
hardware reconfigurability multiple tasks could be
implemented with a possibility to use suitable task befitting
for the application. [5]
F. Robot Path planning for Earth-work operation
Kim et al. in their work have described about a navigation
system for intelligent mobile construction robot. Their work
claimed that the navigation system devised by them has been
implemented with an improvised Bug based algorithm named
Sensbug, which is capable of producing an effective path in an
unknown environment which involved both stationary and
movable obstacles. [6]
Figure-2: UAV Tracking algorithm [2]
G. Trajectory Generation Method
C. Scheduled Optimization for Multi-Robot System
Lian and Murray in their work have described about
LaVlle and Hutchinson, in their work towards contribution to
Cooperative Path Planning design methodology for multi
path planning problem solutions proposed optimized schedules
vehicle systems and a Non linear trajectory generation
for a prioritized path planning in the case of Multi Robot
algorithm. In this work they have taken examples of three
Systems. The work claimed its efficiency over conventional
scenarios of multivehicle tasking in CPP framework and have
prioritized and decoupled planning techniques by basing its
used the Non Linear Generation algorithm for production of
importance by implementation of optimized priority schemes.
Proceedings of National Conference in AIRES-2012, Andhra University
real time trajectory based upon desired vehicle characteristics. L. Use of Probability Recursive Function
[7]. Figure-4 shows the methodology of this work.
Khalil and Kazem in their work towards vehicle path planning
have stated an efficient path planning software modeling
technique using Beziers curve method for mobile robot path
planning. The work has claimed that has improvised the
Beziers curve method approach by overcoming its major
drawbacks. The work has stated regarding the implementation
of the Up and down direction and the Probability Recursive
Function (PRF) techniques to overcome the drawbacks. The
PRF technique has claimed that it has been successful by
making a robot traverse from its starting point to end point
with full percent obstacle avoidance and selection of optimal
path without making any comparison between different paths
Figure-4: Trajectory Method [7]
[12]. However, the theory of computation can be applied to
H. Ontology based method save the state of the robot at different time. For this purpose,
an efficient computing model viz. Quantum Turing Machine
Provine et al. in their work towards contribution towards
(QTM) can be used [13, 14].
vehicle path planning have used an ontology that supports
reasoning out obstacles for improvisation of capabilities and
The next section shows a brief description of our proposed
performance of onboard route planning in autonomous
algorithm for intelligent robot path planning based on the
vehicles. In their work they have also used rules that act in
concept of Adaptive Neural Network (ANN). However,
conjunction with the ontology that’s capable of estimating the
Adaptive Resonance Theory can be applied for this purpose
damages that incurs from collision against different objects in
also [15].
different environments. The implementation of this automated
reasoning helps in deciding that whether to plan or to avoid III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
the obstacles. [8]
We have used Adaptive Neural Network to be trained by
I. Optimal path planning for known environment the state and position of the robot. The position is considered
Stentz in his work towards to contribution to vehicle path to be the pixel value of the current position or target position.
planning has used an effective algorithm named D* which is A diagram is given in Figure-5 below to show the
capable of generating path planning in unknown, partially demonstration.
unknown and changing environments in optimal and complete
manner. The work claims to resolve issues in an exploratory
robot by the help of this algorithm. [9]
J. Path planning for Deformation robots
Gayle et al. in their work have represented a path planning
algorithm for flexible robots in complex environments. The
work boasted that the algorithm is able to compute a collision
free path by taking into consideration of various parameters
into account such as various geometric and physical
constraints, obstacle avoidance, non-penetration constraint,
volume preservation, surface tension energy preservation etc..
The work has also claimed that the algorithm has also been
implemented in practical environments such as path planning
of catheters in liver chemoembolization. [10]
K. Honey bee mating optimization algorithm Figure-5: Proposed Methodology using ANN
Sahoo et al. in their work towards contribution to vehicle path
planning have implemented Honey Bee Mating Optimization However, the robot should have a sensor and detector
technique for Navigational Planning in the case of Multi system attached to its antenna as given in Figure-6.
Robot environment. Their work has also claimed that this
technique has exhibited the same performance as that of prior Algorithm:
evolutionary techniques and so also the work also claims 1. Put the Robot in its starting position
certain level of high better performance than the previous prior 2. Set the Finishing Point (End)
techniques [11]. 3. Set a boundary for the robot
4. For each sliding (distance x)
Proceedings of National Conference in AIRES-2012, Andhra University
5. Do [6] Kim S.K., Russelle J.S., Koo K.J., “Construction Robot Path-Planning
6. Rotate the rotating bar at angle a0 for Earthwork Operations”, Journal of Computing in civil engineering,
April-2003, pp. 97-104.
7. Sense the point corresponding to the angle ‘a’.
[7] Lian F.L., Murray R., “Real-Time Trajectory Generation for the
8. Feed the point to the ANN Cooperative Path Planning of Multi-Vehicle Systems”, 2002 Conference
9. Use Steps 6-8 for the limit of the boundary. on Decision and Control.
[8] Schlenoff, C., Balakirsky, S., Uschold, M., Provine, R., and Smith, S.,
10. End Step-4.
"Using Ontologies to Aid in Navigation Plannig in Autonomous
11. Process the ANN operation to select the winner based
Vehicles," to appear in the Special Issue on Ontologies and Distributed
on the interlayer weight (W) of the ANN. Systems in the Knowledge Engineering Review, 2004.
12. Selected winner is the Next position of the Robot. [9] Stentz A., “Optimal and Efficient Path Planning for Partially-Known
Environments”, In Proceedings IEEE International Conference on
13. If (Next Position = = Finish)
Robotics and Automation, May 1994.
[10] R. Gayle, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Constraint based motion planning
15. Else Goto-16. of deformable robots,” IEEE Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2005.
16. Repeat Steps 4-12 to get the Next Position. [11] Sahoo R.R., Rakshit P., Haidar M.T., Swarnalipi S., Balabantaray B.K.,
Mohapatra S., “Navigational Path Planning of Multi-Robot using Honey
Bee Mating Optimization Algorithm (HBMO)”, International Journal of
Computer Applications (0975 – 8887), Volume 27– No.11, August
2011, pp. 1-8.
[12] Khalil E.H., Kazem B.I., “Mobile Robot Path Planning Utilizing
Probabilit y Recursive Function”, World Academy of Science,
Engineering and Technology 49 2009, pp. 1059-1069.
[13] Nayak T., Dash T., A Comparative Study on Quantum
Pushdown Automata, Turing Machine and Quantum Turing
Machine, International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Technologies, Vol.-3(1), 2012, pp. 2932-2935.
[14] Nayak T., Dash T., Quantum Finite Automata, Quantum
Pushdown Automata & Quantum Turing Machine: A Study,
International Journal of Computer Science and Information
Technologies, Vol.-3(2), 2012, pp. 3765-3769.
[15] Dash T., Nayak T., Chattopadhyay S., “Offline Verification of Hand
Figure-6: Hardware Organization of the Robot for this method
Written Signature Using Adaptive Resonance Theory Net (Type-1),”
ICECT-2012, Vol-2, pp. 205-210, 2012.
The basic criterion for application of this approach is when
the considered area is homogeneous with respect to color. So,
that the sensor can sense the obstacle but will not use that
position to train the network.
IV. CONCLUSION.
In this work, we proposed a novel algorithm for intelligent
path planning. But for the implementation purpose, expensive
hardware is required. The advantages of this method are that
the finding the next position of the robot is fast due to use of
the Neural Network concept and use of Sensor/Detector
system. However, this algorithm may not guarantee a shortest
path, but it will prove itself to be the best to give an efficient
path. Obviously, for future work, implementing such a
hardware to test the efficiency of this algorithm will be crucial
to the area of Robotics and Embedded System.