A novel method for calculating relative free energy of similar molecules in two
environments
Asaf Farhi 1∗ and Bipin Singh 2
1 Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy,
Faculty of Exact Sciences, Tel Aviv University, IL-6997801 Tel Aviv, Israel and
2Center for Computational Natural Sciences and Bioinformatics (CCNSB),
International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad (IIIT-H), Gachibowli, Hyderabad, 500032, India
(Dated: January 17, 2023)
Calculating relative free energies is a topic of substantial interest and has many applications
includingsolvationandbindingfreeenergies,whichareusedincomputationaldrugdiscovery. How-
ever, there remain the challenges of accuracy, simple implementation, robustness and efficiency,
whichpreventthecalculationsfrombeingautomatedandlimittheiruse. Herewepresentanexact
andcompletedecouplinganalysisinwhichthepartitionfunctionsofthecomparedsystemsdecom-
poseintothepartitionfunctionsofthecommonanddifferentsubsystems. Thisdecouplinganalysis
isapplicabletosubmoleculeswithcoupleddegreesoffreedomsuchasthemethylgroupandtoany
potential function (including the typical dihedral potentials), enabling to remove less terms in the
transformation which results in a more efficient calculation. Then we show mathematically, in the
context of partition function decoupling, that the two compared systems can be simulated sepa-
rately,eliminatingtheneedtodesignacompositesystem. Wedemonstratethedecouplinganalysis
and the separate transformations in a relative free energy calculation using MD simulations for a
general force field and compare to another calculation and to experimental results. We present a
unified soft core technique that ensures the monotonicity of the numerically integrated function
(analytical proof) which is important for the selection of intermediates. We show mathematically
that in this soft core technique the numerically integrated function can be non-steep only when we
transform the systems separately, which can simplify the numerical integration. Finally, we show
that when the systems have rugged energy landscape they can be equilibrated without introducing
anothersamplingdimensionwhichcanalsoenabletousethesimulationresultsforotherfreeenergy
calculations.
Keywords: Free energy, decoupling partition functions, monotonicity of free energy
derivative, replica exchange
I. INTRODUCTION (in practice usually more complex transformations are
used as will be explained later on). In these methods,
Calculatingfreeenergydifferencesbetweentwophys- the hybrid system is simulated at a set of λ interme-
icalsystems,isatopicofsubstantialcurrentinterest. A diates and average values are calculated. Then, using
variety of advanced methods and algorithms have been these values, the free energy difference is calculated.
introduced to answer the challenge, both in the context ThecommonlyusedmethodsincludeExponentialAver-
of molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo (MC) aging/ Free Energy Perturbation (FEP) [15] and Ther-
simulations [1–7]. Applications of these methods in- modynamic Integration (TI) [4, 16, 17]. Two methods
clude calculations of binding free energies [8–10], free toestimatefreeenergieswhichareconsideredequivalent
energiesofhydration[11],freeenergiesofsolvation[12], areBennettAcceptanceRatio(BAR)[18]andWeighted
chemical reactions [13] and more. Free energy methods Histogram Analysis Method [19] (WHAM).
are extensively used by various disciplines and the in- Anotherapproachwhichenablestoaccessdirectlythe
terest in this field is growing - over 3,500 papers using free energy is the Wang-Landau method, in which ran-
the most popular free energy computation approaches dom walk is performed in energy space [20, 21]. Other
were published in the last decade, with the publication approaches such as λ Metadynamics and adiabatic MD
rate increasing ∼17% per year [14]. [22,23]suggesttoconsiderλasacoordinateofthesys-
Free energy difference between two systems can be tem and to enable the system to wander between λs.
calculated using equilibrium methods (alchemical free This is performed by introducing in the Hamiltonian a
energy calculations) and non-equilibrium methods. In potential term which depends on λ which ensures that
equilibrium methods a hybrid system is used to trans- thesystemspendsmoretimewherethesamplingofthe
form system A into B, e.g with the transformation free energy as a function of λ is more challenging.
In non-equilibrium methods the work needed in the
hybrid A B process of switching between the two Hamiltonians is
measured. These methods include Jarzynski relation
[24] and its subsequent generalization by Crooks [25].
∗ asaffarhi@post.tau.ac.il Calculating binding free energies is fundamental and
]hp-mehc.scisyhp[
81v2112.0131:viXra
has many applications. In particular it has potential to energy difference using TI can be performed as follows:
advance the field of drug discovery which has to cope
withnewchallenges. Inthelastyearsthenumberofin- (cid:52)F (β )= A→B hybrid dλ=
novativenewmolecularentitiesforpharmaceuticalpur- A→B 1 dλ
poses has remained stable at 5−6 per year. This situa- (2)
- (cid:90) 1(cid:90) [H
bacteria. Virtual screening methods, in which the 1060 0
possible molecules are filtered out, play a large role in where Ω denotes the vector of all coordinates. It can
modern drug discovery efforts. However, there remains be seen that at λ = 1 for example H does not affect
thechallengeofselectingthecandidatemoleculesoutof thesystems’behaviorbutitsenergyvaluesareaveraged
thestillverylargepoolofmoleculesinreasonabletimes. over, which can result in large magnitudes of the inte-
Equilibrium methods show great potential in enabling gratedfunction. Thus,whenthesystemshavelowphase
thecomputationofbindingfreeenergieswithreasonable space overlap there are significant changes in the inte-
computational resources. In these methods instead of gratedfunctionandlargevarianceandhencelargecom-
simulating the binding processes directly, which would putational cost. This is especially dominant when the
requireasimulationmanytimesthelifetimeofthecom- two compared molecules have different covalent bond
plex, the ligand is transmuted into another through in- descriptionwhichresultsinaverylowphasespaceover-
termediate, possiblynon-physicalstages. Thisisinfact lap(inthenaivesetup). Moreover,sincemolecularforce
relative free energy calculation in which the difference fieldsincludeelectrostaticandVDWtermsthatdiverge
between free energy of a process of one molecule and at small atom-atom distances, the average energy can
another molecule is calculated. If the free energy differ- diverge at λ→0,1.
ences between the ligands in the two environments are A variety of approaches and techniques have been in-
calculated, the relative binding free energy between the troduced to address the challenges in the field. These
two ligands can be calculated (this cyclic calculation is include the topologies for simulating the system, that
called the Thermodynamic Cycle). usuallytakeintoaccountthefactthatthecomparedsys-
tems have similarities to generate a hybrid system with
higher phase space overlap (see Fig. 2). The topologies
areusuallycombinedwithremovingVDWandCoulomb
terms of the different atoms which is called decoupling
in order to further enhance phase space overlap (see e.g
Fig. 2). Softcore potentialsweresuggestedtoavoidsin-
gularities at small λs. Common sampling techniques to
overcomehighenergybarriersincludeTemperatureand
Hamiltonian Replica Exchange methods [27–29]. We
will explain these methodologies in the course of the
derivation of the method.
However, the calculations in the existing practices
have several limitations. First, they are notoriously dif-
ficult to implement correctly [30]. Such complications
ariseforexamplefromthefactthatthehybridsystemis
composedofbothsystemsandhenceitusuallyhastobe
designed (see for example dual topology in Fig. 2 and
Figure1. Thestandardfreeenergydifferencesschemeinthe Ref. [31]). Moreover, the interactions between atoms
calculation of binding free energy in the existing methods fromthetwocomparedsystemshavetobeignoredinor-
der for the calculations to be reasonable. Second, since
theprocessoftransformingonesystemintotheotheris
In Fig. 1 a scheme of the free energies in the calcula-
differentforeachcomparisonandhasnoaprioriknown
tion of binding free energies in the standard methods is
properties, the choice of intermediates remains a chal-
presented (L ,L and R represent the ligands and the
1 2 lenge. In the context of TI this is equivalent to a func-
receptor respectively). For solvation there is a similar
tionthatneedstobenumericallyintegratedwithoutany
schemeinwhichinsteadofareceptorthereisasolvent.
knownproperties. Inaddition,sincebothsystemsinter-
Free energy calculation methods already have suc- act simultaneously with the environment the behavior
cessesindiscoveringpotentdrugs[26]. However,despite oftheintermediatesystemscannotbepredicted. Third,
the continuing progress in the field from the original eachtypeofhybridtopologyhassmallphasespaceover-
concepts, the methods have restrictions which prevent lap in one aspect [31]. Fourth, the existing decoupling
them from being automatic and limit their use in com- analysis, while explaining several important principles,
putational drug design. A naive calculation of the free involves approximations and does not treat all the po-
solvated or bounded vs. unbounded) compared to the
free energy difference of another molecule in these two
states. WhileTeIhasmanyadvantages,thatwillalsobe
apparent in this method, it cannot be directly applied
to MD. MD simulations at very high temperatures are
impractical due to the very high velocities which will
necessitate very small time steps for the integration of
the equations of motion. In addition in TeI due to the
simplicity of the energy models considered, effectively,
λ=1 λ=0.5 λ=0 all the energy terms are completely removed.
The presented method is based on TeI and is guided
A B by the goal is to address the challenges previously men-
tioned - namely accuracy, simple implementation, ro-
bustness and high phase space overlap. First, in order
Figure 2. A scheme of the transformation in a hybrid sys- to avoid reaching high temperatures (used in TeI), we
tem in the dual topology that compares Benzoic Acid and useanadditionalvariableλthatwilltransformthesys-
Toluene at λ values of 0,0.5 and 1 (one system). The trans- tem, keeping the temperature constant. Second, in or-
parentatomsintheendstatesAandBaredecoupledatoms der to enahnce phase space overlap we will keep some
-atomswhoseVDWandCoulombinteractionsareremoved.
terms constant in the transformation.
At λ=0.5 the different atoms between the two subsystems
The method is based on first identifying in each of
are partly interacting. These calculations are often used
the compared systems (e.g molecule and environment)
when the compared systems have a relatively small differ-
acommonsubsystem(e.gsubmoleculeandtheenviron-
ence (e.g molecules that differ in few atoms). The transfor-
mationrepresentsthetoporbottomtransformationsinFig. ment) and a different subsystem (e.g a submolecule).
1 where A and B represent L and L respectively. Then, each of the systems is transformed in each envi-
ronment (e.g vacuum or water environment) by remov-
ing certain potential terms, into a system in which the
partition functions of the common subsystem and the
tentials[32](suchasnon-quadraticterms,methylgroup
different subsystem can be decoupled. This decoupling
etc.). Fifth,thesoftcoretechnique,whilebeingefficient
is not trivial as the atoms in one decoupled subsystem
inremovingsingularitiesfromthecalculations, hasvar-
will still interact with atoms in another decoupled sub-
ious disadvantages. One of them is difficult implemen-
system via potentials that relate between 2, 3 and 4
tation due to the complicated functions involved and
atoms. However, this will turn exact due to the fact
the requirement to transform first the Coulomb terms
that this is decoupling of the two integrals of the parti-
andthentheVDWtermsinordertoavoidsingularities.
tion functions. This novel analysis is applicable to any
In addition, since it involves changing the shape of the
potentialfunctionandtosubmoleculeswithcoupledde-
functionsitresultsinlowerphasespaceoverlapbetween
grees of freedom, enabling to remove less terms in the
intermediates. It is worth noting that the free energies
transformation. Removing less terms in the transfor-
associated with the transformations (Fig. 1) are often
mation results in a smaller free energy difference which
much larger than their difference. Thus, these calcula-
needstobeintegratedoverandhigherphasespaceover-
tionshavetobeveryprecisetoproducereliablerelative
lap (smaller statistical error), which are related to the
free energy values.
efficiencyofthecalculation. Sinceeachtransformedsys-
TemperatureIntegration(TeI)wassuggestedinRefs. tem is simulated in two environments and the different
[33, 34] as an efficient method to calculate free energy subsystemcanbetreatedasnon-interactingsystem,the
differences. TeI is based on calculating for each system free energy associated with the different subsystem will
the lnZ difference (where Z is the partition function), analytically (exactly) cancel out in the thermodynamic
between the temperature of interest and a high tem- cycle. Thus, instead of transforming between the com-
perature using a Parallel Tempering procedure. Since pared systems to calculate the relative free energy dif-
at the high T limit the two systems with the same de- ference, each system is transformed separately into its
grees of freedom have the same partition function, the replica with some energy terms relaxed (removed) and
free energy difference can be calculated. In TeI in or- we avoid having ingredients (such as atoms and possi-
der to ensure the equation of the partition functions bly force fields) of the two systems in the simulation.
when β → 0, we capped the potential terms - that is This ingredient is in fact a scheme for two separated
if E was larger than E it was set to E (denoted topologies. Transforming the systems separately has
in TeI by E ). It is emphasized that the free en- beensuggestedinrecentworks[35,36]andisgivenhere
ergy difference calculated in TeI is between two differ- inadetailedmathematicaldescriptioninthecontextof
ent molecules while in relative free energy calculations partitionfunctiondecoupling. Itisnotedthatthesepa-
the goal is to calculate free energy difference between rate simulations are used here to calculate relative free
the same molecule in two states (e.g solvated vs. un- energy (difference between two solvation/binding pro-
cesses) and not only to calculate absolute solvation free This decoupling scheme is applicable to all topologies.
energy (e.g Ref. [37]). We demonstrate the decoupling The common subsystem is defined as an identical sub-
analysis and the separate transformations in MD cal- molecule and the environment and the different sub-
culations of relative free energies which agree with ex- system is defined as the different submolecule between
perimental results. This decoupling analysis is also in the compared systems. We will maximize the phase
agreement with our MD simulations in Ref. [38]. We space overlap between the original and the transformed
then present a unified soft core technique that will re- systems by removing as few terms as possible in the
sult in less steepintegratedfunction. We prove analyti- transformation (the phase space overlap is related to
cally that the soft core technique ensures that the inte- the number of intermediate systems needed in order to
gratedfunctionismonotonic. Thisstatementregarding calculate the free energy difference).
themonotonicityoftheintegratedfunctionisnoveland Theexistingdecouplingschemeforthehybridtopolo-
wethenfurtherextendedtonon-lineartransformations. gies is based on the rigid rotor approximation and the
Sinceformonotonicfunctionsthenumericalintegration HJR technique [32]. In this scheme potential terms
errorlimitisknowntheintegrationresultwillberobust. are removed in a transformation and then the system’s
Inadditionthemonotonicitywillenablesimpleselection partition function is decomposed into eight partition
of intermediates. We also show mathematically that in functions - the partition function of the subsystem in
thissoftcoretechniquethenumericallyintegratedfunc- common between the compared systems, the partition
tion can be non-steep only when we transform the sys- function(s) of the different subsystem(s) (according to
tems separately (novel result). Finally, we show that if theirdefinition)andapolymer-like partwhichconnects
the systems have rugged energy landscape, instead of between them and decomposes into six partition func-
using the sampling techniques such as H-REMD in an- tions [32, 40]. In case that the connecting part is not
other λ or T dimension, we can use only one sampling polymer-like, the potential terms which differentiate it
dimension. frombeingpolymer-likeare removed inthetransforma-
Themethodisdividedtoitsindependent ingredients. tion. Forexamplethemethylgroupismodeledwithsix
Namely, the decoupling analysis is applicable to the ex- bondangletermsandfiveofthemneedtoberemoved in
isting topologies. The topology ingredient can be used the transformation in order to conform to this require-
with the existing soft core schemes and the soft core in- ment [32, 40]. In addition, the calculation of the six
gredient can be used with the existing topologies. Each partition functions is considered and the potentials as-
ingredient will be presented in a separate section with sociated with them are required to be quadratic [32, 40].
referencestosimulationsthatdemonstrateitandtothe Thus, non-quadratic potential terms such as dihedral
state of the art corresponding ingredients. In Section terms (and possibly bond stretching and bond angle
II present an exact and complete decoupling analysis. terms) are removed in the transformation to enable the
In Section III we explain mathematically that the two decoupling [12, 40]. This results in atoms which are
systemscanbesimulatedseparatelytogivethefreeen- bound to move on a sphere relatively to another atom
ergy difference. This ingredient is related to topology instead of being properly located. When performing
and can be called Two Topologies. In Section IV we a larger transformation (removing more terms in the
demonstrate the decoupling analysis and the separate transformation), the computation time increases.
transformations in MD simulations for a general force Herewepresentanexact analysisinwhichwedecou-
field. In Section V we present a unified soft core tech- plethepartitionfunctionofthetransformedsysteminto
nique[34,39]andprovemathematicallythemonotonic- two partition functions - the partition functions of the
ity of the integrated function. In Appendix D we show common and different subsystems. This analysis is ap-
mathematicallythatwhenusingthissoft-coretechnique plicabletoany potentialfunctionandthusthedihedral
it is advantageous to transform the systems separately terms which are usually non-quadratic do not need to
since the integrated function can be non-steep. In Sec- be removed inthetransformation. Inaddition, weshow
tion VI we explain how we can equilibrate the systems that when the different submolecule includes bond an-
by using only one sampling dimension. In Section VII gletermswithcoupleddegreesoffreedom(e.gamethyl
we summarize and discuss the method. group) it can also be exactly decoupled. Thus, coupled
bond angle potentials do not need to be removed in the
transformation. Removing less terms in the transfor-
II. DECOUPLING THE PARTITION mation results in a smaller free energy difference and
FUNCTIONS higher phase space overlap. Since the free energy dif-
ference and the phase space overlap are related to the
In this section we explain how by removing certain the number intermediates and to the statistical error
terms in the transformation, the partition function of respectively, it is expected to reduce the computational
the transformed system can be exactly decoupled into powerneededtoperformthesimulations. Wenotethat
two partition functions. One partition function will be in this analysis there is no need to consider calculation
identical between the transformed systems at each en- of integrals.
vironment and one will be of the different subsystem. Molecularmodelingincludescovalentbond,bondan-
gle, dihedralangle, improperdihedral, electrostaticand
VDW potentials (see [41–44] and Appendix A). Co-
valent bond, bond angle and dihedral angle potential
terms depend on the coordinates of two, three and four r
nearest covalently linked atoms respectively. Electro- k+2 rr k+1
static and VDW potentials relate between every atom kk a
pair in the system. Thus the energy terms can be sep-
arated into short range terms (covalent bond, bond an-
gle, dihedral angle and improper dihedral angle) and
long range terms (electrostatic and VDW). In the ter-
minology of the field they are called bonded interac-
tions and non bonded interactions respectively and we
use these names in order to emphasize this difference r’
between them. 1
To obtain the equilibrium constant, the standard
Gibbsfreeenergiesareusuallycalculated. Thestandard Figure 3. An example of the new coordinates of the atoms
state is the hypothetical state with the standard state in Benzoic Acid in comparison to Toluene. The short range
concentration but exhibiting infinite-dilution behavior interactions that include the different atoms are plotted -
the bond angle, dihedral and improper dihedral terms are
(the interactions between e.g the solute molecules are
marked by arcs, arcs with arrows and three intersecting
negligible). Hence, when we are interested in the prop-
dashed lines respectively.
erties of one substance a single copy of the molecule of
interest can be simulated either in vacuum or solvent
environments.
ringandfewdifferentatoms. Themethodpresentedcan
We write the partition function of the system, which
beappliedtomoleculesinwhichthereisoneseparation
includesthemoleculeofinterestandpossiblythesolvent
point between the common and different submolecules
molecules as follows:
(the different atoms do not form a loop that starts at
(cid:90) (cid:90) l one atom and ends in another atom in the molecule).
Z = e−βH(Ω)dΩ= e−βH(Ω)dr(cid:48) i , The numbers of atoms of the two compared molecules
i can be different since the free energies associated with
the different subsystems will cancel out in the Thermo-
whereΩisthecoordinatesvectorofalltheatomsinthe
systems, r(cid:48) is the coordinate of atom i, β = 1 and dynamic Cycle (Section III, Fig. 9). The decoupling
i kBT analysis will be demonstrated in a relative free energy
k is Boltzmann constant. The integration is over all
possiblevaluesofthevectorsr(cid:48). Wedefinethevariables calculation with two other molecules in Section IV.
as follows: In Fig. 3 an example of the new coordinates of the
atomsinthemoleculeBenzoicAcidinitscomparisonto
Ω={r(cid:48) 1 ,r 2 ,...,r k ,r k+1 ,...,r n ,r(cid:48) n+1 ,...,r(cid:48) l } Toluene is presented. The vector a denotes the relative
coordinate of the top atom in the ring, and it is used
since r represents the relative position of this atom
r ≡r(cid:48) −r(cid:48) , (3) withrespecttoanotheratom. Wewillusethenotations
i i i−1 on Benzoic Acid in the figure in the next explanations
which will be chosen as the position of atoms relative and the following analysis is applicable also to Toluene.
to covalently bounded atoms (bold letters denote vec- We will now turn to explain how the system’s parti-
tors). r(cid:48) representsthepositionofthelastatomthatis tion function can be separated into two partition func-
common between the compared systems and r(cid:48) rep- tions identically - the partition function of the com-
resents the position of the first atom in the different monsubmoleculeandtheenvironmentandthepartition
submolecule. n denoted the index of the last atom in function of the different submolecule.
the molecule and (cid:8) r(cid:48) n+1 ,...,r(cid:48) l (cid:9) ≡ Ω env denote (if nec- We first define the coordinates of the atoms of the
essary) the solvent molecules. The partition function common submolecule as (r(cid:48),r ,...,r ) and the coor-
can now be written as follows: dinates of the atoms of the different submolecule as
(r ,r ,r ). In the following analysis it is as-
(cid:90) k n l k+1 k+2 k+3
Z = e−βH(Ω)dr(cid:48) (cid:89) dr (cid:89) dr (cid:89) dr(cid:48) , sumed that in the transformed state the interactions
of the common submolecule with itself and the envi-
ronment are kept constant. We will also assume that
Integration over these degrees of freedom will of course there are no improper dihedral and long range terms
give the same result. that couple atoms from the two subsystems. In Section
To illustrate the technique we compare the molecules III it will be explained how these terms are removed in
Benzoic Acid and Toluene which include an aromatic the transformation.
When a system can be separated into two groups of
particles that are not interacting with each other it is
well known that its partition function can be separated
into the partition functions of the two groups of parti-
cles and be written as their multiplication. Thus, it is
clearthatinthetransformedstatetheexistenceofinter-
actions between the atoms in the different submolecule
will not prevent us from separating the partition func-
tion into two partition functions. Hence, terms that
involve only atoms of the different submolecule can re-
mainconstantinthetransformation. Thisalsoincludes
thelongrangetermsbetweentheatomsinthedifferent
submolecule (in agreement with Ref. [40]). It is worth
noting that transforming the molecule into a molecule
Figure4. Anillustrationthatshowsthecorrespondencebe-
with a different charge in the context of MD can result tween the dihedral angle and φ angle. The triangles are in
infreeenergychangeduetoartifactsthatoriginatefrom the planes between which the dihedral angle is measured.
the periodicity of the system [45]. The rectangles are perpendicular to the line of intersection
We now turn to explain that three types of short oftheseplanes. Thevectorsarebothintheseplanesandin
range terms that involve atoms from the different the planes which are perpendicular to the intersection line.
submolecule, including ones that couple the different In the molecule on the right, the bottom vector is placed
next to the one on top in order to show the correspondence
and common submolecules, can remain constant in
between the angles.
the transformation and will enable us to decouple the
partition function into the two. In standard molecular
modeling there are the following covalent bond terms
We define Ω = (r(cid:48),r ,...,r ,Ω ) and H as
that depend on the positions of the different atoms: com 1 2 k env com
all the potential terms that depend on the coordinates
V (r ),V (r ) and V (r ). The bond angle
c k+1 c k+2 c k+3 oftheatomsinthecommonsubsystemΩ . Wewrite
terms that depend on the position of the different com
the partition function as follows:
atoms are: V (r ,r ),V (r ,r ),V (r ,r )
b k k+1 b k k+2 b k+1 k+2
and V b (r k+2 ,r k+3 ) . Only one (cid:90) (cid:90) k+3
of the following dihedral terms Z = e−βHcom(Ωcom)dΩ e−βVc(rj)×
V (r ,r ,r ),V (r ,r ,r ),V (a,r ,r )
d k−1 k k+1 d k−1 k k+2 d k k+1 j=k+1
and V (a,r ,r ) is usually used since they model
the rotation of the different submolecule in which
the bond angles are kept constant . We will as- e−β[Vd(xˆ,zˆ,rk+2)+Vd(zˆ,rk+2,rk+3)]dr
sume for the following explanation that the dihedral
term V (r ,r ,r ) is used. The dihedral term We now notice that given a set of coordinates of the
d k−1 k k+2
V (r ,r ,r ) usually also exists. In addition the common submolecule, the only information used in the
d k k+2 k+3
improper dihedral term V id (r k ,r k+1 ,r k+2 ) usually integration over Ω dif = {r k+1 ,r k+2 ,r k+3 } is the orien-
exists and will be removed in the transformation (see tationofxandz axes. Thisinformationdoesnotaffect
Fig. 3). the integration result since the different submolecule
If we define does not have a preferred direction. In other words,
foranysetofcoordinatesofthecommonsubsystemthe
zˆ≡−rˆ, integrationresultoverΩ isthesame(seeFig. 5). We
can thus write:
the bond angle terms that depend on r can depend
k (cid:90)
instead on zˆ. Z = e−βHcom(Ωcom)dΩ Z =Z Z , (5)
com dif com dif
Thedihedralpotentialtermdependsontheanglebe-
tween two planes (see Appendix A for details) which
where Z and Z denote the partition functions of
canbedefinedastheanglebetweenthevectorsinthese com dif
thecommonanddifferentsubsystemsrespectively. Note
planes that are perpendicular to the intersection line
thatZ isaconstantanddoesnotaffecttheintegration
of these planes. We notice that the dihedral angle dif
over Ω . See detailed proof in Appendix B.
φ(r ,r ,r ) is equal to φ angle in spherical coor- com
k−1 k k+2 Hence, the bond stretching, bond angle and dihedral
dinates defined with respect to zˆand
angle energy terms, effectively, do not couple the par-
r −(r ·r )rˆ tition functions. This is despite the fact that some of
these terms involve atoms from the two submolecules.
k−1 k k−1 k
This decoupling of the partition functions does not
(see Fig. 4). Hence the corresponding dihedral term depend on the potential function but only on the vari-
depends on xˆ,zˆand r . ablesitdependson. Moreover,thepartitionfunctionof
denotes the partition function of the different sub-
molecule that does not interact with the environment
k+3 and the arrow symbolizes the transformation in which
k+2 r r r energy terms are relaxed. We define A and B to be the
x z r k+3 k+2 z r compared systems in a certain environment and A(cid:48) and
rr k+1 x k B(cid:48) as their transformed replicas (the systems without
k-1 a the terms that couple the partition functions as previ-
r ously explained). It can thus be written (see Fig. 6):
A(cid:48) A(cid:48) A(cid:48)
commonint diffnonint
B(cid:48) B(cid:48) B(cid:48)
r’ r’ commonint diffnonint
1 1 Itisnotedthatinfactthedihedralandbondangleterms
that include atoms from the common and the different
Figure 5. Two sets of coordinates of the common subsys- submoleculesareassociatedwithZ (r r ).
diffnonint k+1,..., n
tem. The transparent atoms represent atoms whose long The orientations of the r ,r vectors that are in
range and improper dihedral interactions with the common thecommonsubmolecule,arealsoeffectivelyassociated
subsystem are removed. The atoms of the common subsys-
with the different submolecule in the form of arbitrary
tem, including the water molecules in the case of explicit
orthogonalxandz axesfortheseparatetheoreticalcal-
solventcanenterthevolumeofthedifferentatomssincethe
culation of free energy.
longrangeinteractionsbetweenthemarerelaxed. Z isthe
dif In the case of totally different molecules it can thus
same in both cases.
be written:
Z →Z .
submolecules with coupled degrees of freedom such as diffnonint
the three bond angle terms associated with the vectors
In the terminology of the field removing the long range
r ,r and r decouple exactly.
k k+1 k+2 energy terms is called decoupling and the decoupled
In case there will be a dihedral potential term that
atomsarecalleddummy. Inthiscontextwecancallthe
depends on the vector r (e.g the dihedral term de-
k−1 differentsubsystemdummysubsystem sincewecankeep
fined by r ,r and r ) and a dihedral term that
k−1 k k+2 theinternalenergytermsinthedifferentsubsystemcon-
depends on a (e.g the dihedral term defined by a,r
k stant in the transformation. In addition, in some cases
and r ), there will be dependence between the par-
k+1 in binding the long range terms between the different
tition functions since the coordinates of the atoms in
subsystem and the common environment (water) may
the common submolecule will determine x,z axes but
bekeptconstantandmayhaveasmalleffectonthefree
also another vector in the xy plane which is related to
energy. However,thisassumesthatthewatermolecules
theconfigurationofthecommonsubmolecule. However,
that are interacting with the different subsystem are
usually only one dihedral angle energy term is used to
weakly interacting with the common submolecule and
relate between such subsystems and this explanation is
is therefore not recommended in the general case.
given for generality.
A similar analysis applied to the improper dihedral
termsthatrelatebetweenatomsinthetwosubmolecules F = F +F
shows that the partition function of the different sub-
system does depend on the coordinates of the atoms in
thecommonsubsystem. Thus,itissuggestedthatmod-
eling the planarity of the molecule with dihedral angle
terms rather than improper dihedral terms (optional in
Gromacs manual [44]) will result in less removed terms
in the transformation. F = F +F
We can write in terms of the partition functions:
Z(r(cid:48),r ,..,r ,Ω )→ (6)
Z (r(cid:48),r ,..,r ,Ω )Z (r r ),
commonint 1 2 k env diffnonint k+1,..., n
Figure 6. A scheme of the free energy of the transformed
where Z denotes the partition function of the Toluene in two environments (F denotes free energy)
common subsystem in which the common submolecule
interacts with the environment, Ω denotes the coor- In standard molecular modeling the force field pa-
dinates of the molecules of the environment, Z rameters of the common subsystems are identical, and
diffnonint
hence the common subsystems are identical. In Fig. 6 forcefieldsfromthetwocomparedmoleculesinthesim-
a scheme of the free energies of the transformed repli- ulation (see Fig. 2). These separate simulations can fa-
cas of Toluene in vacuum and water environments are cilitate automation as it eliminates the need for human
presented. It can be seen that in both environments intervention in setting up the simulation. Transform-
the free energy of the transformed replica can be de- ing the systems separately has been suggested in recent
composed into the free energy of the common and the works [35, 36] and is given here in a detailed mathe-
different subsystems. The free energy of the different matical description in the context of partition function
subsystem is equal in the two environments since it ef- decoupling.
fectively does not interact with the rest of the system. The idea in this section is to first identify in each of
To summarize the following terms can remain con- thecomparedsystemsacommonsubsystemandadiffer-
stant in the transformation and yield an exact calcula- ent subsystem. Then, to transform each of the systems
tion, independently of the potential function: in each environment (e.g vacuum and water for solva-
tion) by relaxing the Hamiltonian H , into a system in
1. Bond stretching and bond angle terms. whichthepartitionfunctionsofthecommonsubsystem
and the different subsystem can be decoupled. In this
2. Dihedral energy terms, as long as terms that in-
sectionweassumethatthepotentialtermsthatdiverge
volveatomsfromthetwosubmoleculesareassoci-
at r → 0, such as the VDW and electrostatic interac-
atedwithtwocovalentbondsinthecommonsub-
tions, when we are close to the transformed state, do
molecule (e.g r and r ).
k k−1 not play a role. In the next section we will justify this
assumption. In Fig. 7 a scheme of the two separate
3. Potentialtermsthatinvolveonlyatomsofthedif-
systems suggested in this section is presented. We now
ferent subsystem.
We now denote the Hamiltonian with all the terms
that are removed in the transformation by H . This
Hamiltonian includes the VDW and electrostatic inter-
actionsofthedifferentatomswiththerestofthesystem
and improper dihedral terms (in case they are defined
in the usual manner) that relate between atoms from
the different and common submolecules. We denote by
H theothertermsinthesystem. Thesedefinitionswill
be used in the next section.
Verification of the analysis with MD simulations
Theanalysispresentedinthissectionisinagreement B B’
with the MD simulation results in Ref. [38] in which
free energies associated with non-quadratic potentials
for a methanethiol molecule were calculated. The free
energies associated with bond angle potential, methyl
group with coupled bond angle potentials and dihedral
angle potential in the transformed state were the same
in vacuum and water environments. This means that
thepartitionfunctionswhichincludethesetermsdecou-
ple. This is in agreement with the analysis presented in
this section according to which such terms do not have
to be removed in the transformation in order for the λ=1 λ=0.5 λ=0
partition functions to decouple.
Figure 7. A scheme of the transformations in the novel
method (two systems). A and B are the compared systems
III. TWO SEPARATE SIMULATIONS andA(cid:48)andB(cid:48)arethetransformedreplicas-theoriginalsys-
temswiththetermsdenotedbyH removed. Thetranspar-
In relative free energy calculations the difference ent submolecule is the decoupled submolecule as previously
between solvation/ binding processes of two similar explained.
molecules is calculated. Our goal here is to calculate
the relative free energy by transforming each system explainhowthefreeenergydifferencebetweentheorigi-
separately withouthavingingredientssuchasatomsand nalsystemsandtheirtransformedreplicascanbecalcu-
latedinthecontextofTI.Weemphasizethatitcanalso
be calculated with other free energy calculation meth-
ods (FEP, BAR etc.). The λ dependent Hamiltonians
canbewrittenasfollows(pleasenotethateachequation
transforma !on transforma !on
includes a definition for the system A and a definition 1
for the system B):
Binding Binding
A/B Ar/Br Ac/Bc proc ess proc ess
wheretheHamiltonianwiththetermsthatareremoved
inthetransformationandtheHamiltonianincludingall
transforma !on transforma! on
the other terms are denoted by H r and H c respectively 1 1 2 2
as previously explained.
The free energy between each system and its trans-
formed replica can be written as follows:
A/B→A(cid:48)/B(cid:48) Figure8. Aschemeofthefreeenergydifferencesinthenovel
(cid:2) (cid:3)
presented. R + L ,R + L denote the ligands bound
to the receptor. L ,L denote the unbound ligands
(cid:90) 1 dlnZ A/B (β,λ) (cid:90) 1 (cid:10) (cid:11) in an environment that does not include the receptor.
B dλ Ar/Br The unbound receptor does not have to be simulated
since it is the same in both L and L end states. The
Each system is simulated at a set of λs in the range ligand L / L is transformed into its replica L(cid:48)/ L(cid:48)
[0,1] that interpolates between the original and trans- with the H terms completely relaxed. The end states
(cid:10) (cid:11) r
formed systems. The average energy H is calcu- L ,L ,L(cid:48),L(cid:48),R+L ,R+L ,R+L(cid:48),R+L(cid:48) correspond
Ar/Br 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
lated in the simulation at each λ value. Thus, we can to the end states A ,B ,A(cid:48),B(cid:48),A ,B ,A(cid:48),B(cid:48) respec-
numerically integrate and get the free energy difference 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
tively.
betweentheoriginalandtransformedsystems. Itisem- ThefreeenergydifferencebetweenL(cid:48) andL(cid:48) isequal
phasized that the free energy difference calculated here tothefreeenergydifferencebetweenR 1 +L(cid:48) an 2 dR+L(cid:48)
is between A and A(cid:48) or between B and B(cid:48) as opposed 1 2
(∆F = ∆F ), since the free energy of
L(cid:48)→L(cid:48) R+L(cid:48)→R+L(cid:48)
to the standard calculation in which the free energy is 1 2 1 2
the common subsystems in each environment are equal
calculated between A and B as in Eq. (1).
and the free energy of the different subsystems is the
We now denote the first and second environments
sameinbothenvironments. Thiscanbewrittenexplic-
by 1,2 respectively. Examples for two environments
itly as follows:
are vacuum and water for solvation free energy and
water and protein+water for binding free energy. We ∆F =
L(cid:48)→L(cid:48)
denote the compared systems in each environment 1 2
by A ,B ,A ,B and their transformed replicas by
1 1 2 2 (cid:16) (cid:17)
A(cid:48),B(cid:48),A(cid:48),B(cid:48). According to the explanations in the −k T lnZ +lnZ −lnZ −lnZ =
1 1 2 2 B wid L(cid:48) wid L(cid:48)
previous section, taking into account that the partition 2dif 1dif
functions of the different subsystems are not coupled to
(cid:16) (cid:17)
the environment, we write:
−k T lnZ −lnZ =
B L(cid:48) L(cid:48)
(cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48)
A →A ,B →B A →A ,B →B , (10)
1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2
(cid:16) (cid:17)
−k T lnZ +lnZ −lnZ −lnZ =
B wpid L(cid:48) wpid L(cid:48)
2dif 1diff
Z =Z Z , Z =Z Z ,
1identical A(cid:48)
(cid:48) 1identical B
Z =Z Z , Z =Z Z .
2identical A(cid:48)
(cid:48) 2identical B
where the subscripts “w” and “wp” stand for water en-
(12) vironment and water protein environment respectively.
It can be seen that the partition functions of the trans- The subscripts “id” and “dif” denote the identical and
formed replicas are decomposed to sub partition func- different subsystems respectively. The relative free en-
tionswhichareequaltosubpartitionfunctionsofother ergy can now be written as follows:
transformed replicas (having the same names). In Fig.
8 a scheme of the free energies in the novel method is ∆F =
Asolvation/binding→Bsolvation/binding
∆F −∆F = ulations we have only the atoms and force fields of the
L1→R+L1 L2→R+L2
original molecule. Thus human intervention in order to
integratebetweenthesystemsandtheirforcefieldsand
∆F L1→L(cid:48)
→L(cid:48)
to disable the interaction between the systems is not
required. Here we achieve a considerable simplification
over the simulation in the hybrid system setup, and a
(cid:0) (cid:1)
R+L(cid:48)
simplification and significantly better phase space over-
lap as compared with the dual topologies setup since
less terms are removed.
L1→L(cid:48) 1 L2→L(cid:48) 2 It is noted that this ingredient is different from the
single reference comparison schemes [12] in which all
(cid:0) (cid:1) themoleculesarecomparedwithonereferencemolecule.
− ∆F −∆F =
2 This is since the single reference comparison is defined
for a specific group of molecules and the reference sys-
(cid:90) 1 (cid:90) 1 tem has to be given as an input and is not generated
(cid:104)H (cid:105)− (cid:104)H (cid:105) from the compared molecules. Using the two origi-
0 0 nal systems for the comparison allows generality and
flexibility - can be used for any group of two or more
(cid:90) 1(cid:68) (cid:69) (cid:90) 1(cid:68) (cid:69) molecules. The use of the molecules themselves as a
+ H − H . reference ensures maximal phase space overlap. The
Asolvated/boundedr
Bsolvated/boundedr
separation of the system into the common and different
submoleculesensuresthatwemaintainthelargestcom-
Thus we perform in each environment (in vacuum and
mon subsystem untransformed. This is as opposed to
in solvent for solvation and in solvent and in solvent-
previous works in which the reference molecule is not
protein environment for binding) one transformation of
the largest common subsystem (e.g Ref. [12]).
eachofthecomparedmolecules. Thatis, eachmolecule
is simulated at a set of λs and the free energy be-
tween the original and transformed systems is calcu-
IV. DEMONSTRATIONS OF THE
lated. These free energy differences will allow us to get
DECOUPLING ANALYSIS AND THE
the relative free energy difference. Fig. 9 is a summary SEPARATE TRANSFORMATIONS
scheme of the transformations and free energy cancel-
lations. As previously mentioned the cancellations of
We now demonstrate the decoupling analysis and
the free energies are exact. It is emphasized that (in
the separate simulations in calculating the free energy
all topologies) there is no restriction on the number of
difference between solvation of para-Cresol and para-
atomsofthecomparedmoleculessincethesefactorscan-
Cholorophenol. In the force field we used all the po-
celoutintheThermodynamicCycle. Ineachofthesim-
tential terms that depend on the spherical variables are
non-quadratic
A 1 A’ 1 B’ 1 B 1
V = 1 k (cid:0) r2−r2(cid:1)2 , V = 1 k (cosθ−cosθ )2,
c 2 c 0 b 2 θ 0
d ijkl φ s
Therefore, the calculation presented here can be per-
formed only when using the decoupling analysis pre-
sented in Section II.
Instandardforcefieldstheparametersofthecommon
A 2 in water A’ 2 in water B 2 ’ in water B 2 in water subsystems are usually identical between the compared
systems. We consider here the general case in which
the molecules are individually parametrized by Quan-
tum Mechanics computations [46]. Thus the common
submolecules do not necessarily have the same terms.
Figure10isanillustrationofthetransformationsinto
systems in which the common subsystems are identical
andthepartitionfunctionsofthedifferentandcommon
subsystem decouple. The VDW and electrostatic po-
tentials of the different atoms as well as the improper
Figure 9. A summary scheme of the transformations and dihedral term (three connected green lines) couple be-
free energy cancellations (context of solvation)
tween the two subsystems and are therefore relaxed in
0.453 0.439 solute (the p-CH3 or p-Cl molecule) and the box edge
-0.604 -0.604 to prevent interactions of the molecule with its periodic
0.188 -0.356 0.446 0.188 0.166 0.36 0.166 copyintheadjacentcell,wasused. Therhombicdodec-
ahedron was selected since it provides a more effective
-0.356 -0.276 -0.276
-0.003 -0.053 -0.003 -0.003 -0.003 p te a r ck m in in g im of iz p a e t r i i o o n di a c n i d m e a q g u e i s li t b h r a a n tio r n ect ( a 2 n 00 gu p la s) r , b 2 o 0 xe n s s . a A n f d -
0.125 0.125 0.125 0.125
fc=530 fc=530 fc=530 fc=530 1 ns of MD simulations were performed in vacuum and
-0.15 water respectively under NVT and NPT ensembles, at
eachofthe19equi-spacedintermediatestates(λstates)
0.439 0.439
including the initial (λ = 0) and final states (λ = 1).
-0.610 -0.604 For each of the λ states, first the coulomb terms were
0.166 0.36 0.166 0.166 0.36 0.166 relaxed followed by VDW terms. We have computed
the free energy difference between solvation of p-CH3
-0.276 -0.276 -0.276 -0.276
-0.235 0.189 -0.235 -0.003 -0.003 and p-Cl using the BAR (Bennett’s acceptance ratio)
0.156 0.156 0.125 0.125 method [18].
fc=560 fc=560 fc=530 fc=530
0.123 0.123
0.123 B. Results and comparision
Figure 10. Illustration of the transformations. The partial
WefirstcalculatedHelmholtzandGibbsfreeenergies
charges written in black and green belong to the common
correspondingtoNVTandNPTensemblesrespectively,
anddifferentsubsystemsrespectively. Thelightbluedashed
according to the decoupling analysis in Sec. II. To this
line denotes the dihedral term. The three connected green
endweassociatedthebondangleoftheC/Clatomwith
lines represent the improper dihedral term. In case there is
thecommonsubsystemandthetheC-C/Cl-Catomdis-
no term its value is zero.
tancewiththedifferentsubsystem(therestoftheanal-
ysis follows from Sec. II). We then performed an addi-
the transformation. The bond angle terms marked on tional transformation of p-CH3 and p-Cl molecules in
thefigurehavethesameθ anddifferentk (correspond- which bond angle terms were removed according to the
ingtof ),whichafterthetransformationsarethesame. existing decoupling analysis. To perform the additional
The VDW terms are not presented since they are the bonded transformation we defined for p-CH3 molecule
same for the same atoms. the CH3 group atoms as the different subsystem and
Similar transformations apply for a group of 3,4 etc. we removed the five bond angle terms and the dihedral
para-phenols. Inthatcasethetermsofallthemolecules angle term which involve atoms from the common and
have to be taken into account and average parameter different subsystems. In the additional bonded trans-
value can be chosen to minimize the transformations. formation of p-Cl we defined Cl as the different subsys-
tem and removed the two bond angle terms which in-
volve atoms from the two subsystems. The simulations
A. Simulation Protocol have been performed with bond length constraints that
should have a minor effect on the dynamics. In the ad-
We have used the Gromos53a6 force field parame- ditionalbondedtransformationofp-Clinvacuuminor-
ters from ATB server [46] for both p-Cresol and p- der to reduce the standard deviation we also performed
Chlorophenol (p-CH3 and p-Cl) along with spc water in some of the intermediates a transformation without
model during the simulations. The rhombic dodecahe- constraints.
dronbox,withaminimumdistanceof1nmbetweenthe The results obtained are the following (in kJ/mol):
vacuum water vacuum water
p-CH3 140.18±0.00 147.44±0.14 155.78±0.03 164.2±0.23
p-Cl 19.74±0.01 29.95±0.65 46.78±0.02 59.06±0.28
p-CH3 bonded terms -25.51±0.10 -25.89±0.37 -25.72±0.25 –26.87±0.22
p-Cl bonded terms -7.68±0.78 -7.51±0.24 -8.27±0.79 -7.36±0.07
p-Cl bonded, no costraints -7.42±0.25 -7.27±0.04
It can be seen that the free energy difference associ- ated with the removal of the bonded terms is the same
(within less than a standard deviation) in vacuum and use in MD simulations. We also show mathematically
waterinNVTensembleasexplainedinSectionII.Gibbs that that the monotonicity of the integrated function is
free energy, which is usually similar to Helmholtz free ensured.
energy [44], in vacuum and water was different by 1.15 This soft core technique does not introduce depen-
kJ/mol for p-CH3 and the same for p-Cl. In the follow- dencyonλandhencethepotentialanditsderivativeare
ing table we present Helmholtz and Gibbs relative free relativelysimpletoimplement. Inaddition,theoriginal
energies of solvation (in kJ/mol). shape of the potential constant, which is good in terms
of phase space overlap. Moreover, the need to remove
decoupling
inc. bonded firsttheelectrostatictermsandthentheVDWtermsto
analysis avoid singularities is eliminated.
constraints no const.
∆F -2.95±0.66 -3.5±1.12 -3.24±0.84
p−Cl→p−CH3
∆G -3.86±0.28 -5.92±0.91 -4.92±0.44 A. The value of the capping energy
p−Cl→p−CH3
It can be seen that ∆F is the same
(within less than a standard p− d C e l→ vi p a − ti C o H n 3 ) when we re- Sinceatλ=0theenergytermsthatdivergeatr =0
moved additional bonded terms. Thus, a smaller trans- cause the average energy to diverge, capping is used in
formationand asimpler implementation resultedin the the long range energy terms (if E > E cap , E = E cap ).
same relative free energy with a shorter simulation and Thus, the terms at λ → 0 are no longer dominant and
asmallerstandarddeviation. Thisimpliesthatinorder decoupling is achieved. The proposed calculation of the
to obtain the same standard deviation using the exist- free energy difference between the two systems is legit-
ing decoupling analysis a longer simulation is required. imate only if the choice of the capping energy has a
Forsimilartransformations(inanothercontext)seeRef. negligible effect on the free energy value of each of the
[38]. twosystemsatλ=1. TheHamiltonianwiththecapped
The experimental free energy difference is [47] : long range energy terms H(cid:48) is written as follows:
diff A/B Alr/Blr Asr/Bsr
It can be seen that there is good agreement between
where H(cid:48) and H denote the capped long
the calculation and the experimental free energies. The Alr/Blr Asr/Bsr
range and the short range terms respectively. The re-
total simulation time using the decoupling analysis in
quirement stated above can be written explicitly as fol-
Sec. II was ∼ 42 days (on a single core). Hence, im-
lows:
provement in the efficiency of the calculation is signifi-
cant in terms of computation time.
V. REMOVING SINGULARITIES AT SMALL In order for the capping to have a negligible effect on
λS the partition functions at λ = 1 it has to be set to a
value that satisfies:
The potential in the standard soft core technique is
given by: e−E k c T ap (cid:28)1. (17)
(cid:34)(cid:18) (cid:16)r(cid:17)6 (cid:19)−2
H(λ,r)=4(cid:15)λn α(1−λ)m+ + Thus at λ values satisfying e−λE k c T ap ≈ 1 the diverging
interactions, including the steric, become transparent.
InFig. 11energyandexp(−E/kT)asafunctionofdis-
tance for the potential r−12−r−6 are plotted at λ=1
(cid:18) α(1−λ)m+ (cid:16)r(cid:17)6 (cid:19)−1 (cid:35) . and at λ=0.01. It can be seen that the capping of the
σ energy has a negligible effect on the probability distri-
bution at λ = 1 and that at small λs the interactions
Here we present a soft core technique in which we are transparent.
cap the diverging energy terms at high energetic values Itissuggestedthatsincetheprobabilitytobeinami-
in order to remove the singularities at small λs. This crostatedecaysexponentiallywiththeenergywithtypi-
is a unification of the approach in Ref. [34] in which caldecayscaleofk T andsincethedensityofstatesfor
accessible capping energies with a negligible effect on E >E isverylow,cappingtheenergyatavaluesev-
the free energy are suggested, resulting in integrated eral times k T higher than the equilibrium total atom-
functions that are less steep, and Ref. [39] in which atom long range energy will have a negligible effect on
the derivative of the potential is continuous, enabling the free energy value at λ=1.
0.8 0.9 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
]lom/laCk[
Energy with capping
exp(−E/kT) without capping
exp(−E/kT) with capping
0 0.5 1 1.5
Distance [A]
]lom/laCk[
gratedfunction. Thismonotonicitywillenableasimple
selection of intermediates for the calculation of the free
energy difference. For example of integrated functions
that are not monotonic see Ref. [12], Fig. 3.
This monotonicity for the soft core technique when
used with the transformation of Eq. (8) can be under-
stood by recalling that the integrated function (cid:104)H (cid:105) Ar
in Eq. (9) is calculated with the governing Hamilto-
nian H +λH . A system will spend time in each
configuration proportional to the Boltzmann weight of
thatconfigurationwhichisdeterminedbythegoverning
Hamiltonian. When energy terms are multiplied by a λ
value smaller than 1, the energy heights and valleys of
Distance [A]
that terms will appear smaller. Thus, the system will
spend more time in these heights and less time in these
valleys. In the calculation of the average energy, the
energylandscapedidnotchangeastheHamiltonianre-
mained the same. Thus, since the system now spends
more time in less favorable states, the calculated aver-
age energy will be higher. This is similar to heating the
system as λ plays the role of β. Thus low values of λ
correspond to high temperatures, leading to higher av-
erage energies. This is expressed in the known result
(cid:68) (cid:69)
−∂U = (∆E)2 [48]. However, hereλmultipliessome
of the terms so it can be regarded as “partial heating”
(seeEq. (8)). Also,inthiscasetheaverageenergy(cid:104)H (cid:105) r
is only of the removed terms.
We now prove that the integrated is monotonic for
transformationswhichdependlinearlyonλ. Itiseasyto
showthatfor
=0(seedetailedproofinAppendix
Figure11. Energyandexp(−E/kT)asafunctionofdistance
for the potential r−12 − r−6 with E cap =7kcal/mol (a) at
(cid:19) (cid:42)(cid:20)
(cid:29)(cid:21)2 (cid:43)
Demonstrations (cid:28)(cid:104) (cid:68) (cid:69)(cid:105)2 (cid:29)
It has been demonstrated that E values of ∼ Hence, the suggested soft core technique, which does
5kcal/mol enable accurate free energy calculations [34]. not introduce dependency on λ combined with linear
In this reference the free energy calculation results for transformations in λ such as the transformations of Eq.
E = 5kcal/mol and E = 4.4kcal/mol were similar (1) or Eq. (8) results in a monotonic change in the
(see Fig. 29 there). In addition in Ref. [35] the free integrated function.
energy difference calculation between two systems com- Interestingly, this also shows that the variance of
posed of two atoms with E cap = 7kcal/mol was very dH(λ) isproportionaltotheslopeoftheintegratedfunc-
accurate(seeSupplementaryMaterialwhichappearsin tio d n λ . Thus, steep slopes of the integrated function are
the same document). See also Fig. 11. Note that in challengingbothtosampleandtonumericallyintegrate.
Ref. [34] β is varied rather than λ. However, the soft
The monotonicity is important for the integration
coretechniquepresentedthereismathematicallyequiv-
since at two adjacent intermediates there can be no ex-
alent to the one presented here. The conditions for the
tremum point, which can cause a free energy difference
capping energy here involve λ rather than β.
that is not taken into account in the numerical integra-
tion. Themonotonicityofthefunctionenablesaccurate
numerical integration and facilitates the selection of in-
B. The monotonicity of the integrated function termediates.
Setting λ → λn preserves monotonicity in both hy-
In this subsection we explain why the suggested soft brid and separate transformations. When performing
core technique ensures the monotonicity of the inte- separatetransformationsthereisa“softcoretransition”
(steep integrated function) near λ=0. When perform- the standard long range potential and the flat potential
inghybridtransformationstherearetwo“softcoretran- is needed. This has been developed independently and
sitions” - near λ = 0 and near λ = 1. Setting λ → λn implementedinMDwithacubicswitchingfunctionand
when n > 1 results in a less steep integrated function an energetically inaccessible capping energy (reaches a
near λ = 0 and more steep integrated function near state in which E >E once every 1014 moves), which
λ = 1. This is useful in separate transformations but validates the use of the capping in the context of MD
not in hybrid transformation in which it will improve for high energetic values (40kcal/mol) [39]. This use of
thesamplingforonetransitionbutworsenfortheother a switching function with E = 40kcal/mol as a soft
transition. (see Appendix D for more details). core techniques appeared to perform marginally better
This statement regarding the monotonicity of the in- compared to the standard soft core technique [39].
tegrated function is in agreement with Ref. [39] (Fig.
5),inwhichthesoftcoretechnique(forinaccessiblecap-
pingenergy)withalineartransformationofthetypeof E. Unifying the approaches
Eq. (8) results in a monotonic change in the integrated
function (has not been pointed out). Thus a unified approach that uses a switching func-
tion and a capping energy that is accessible and has
a negligible effect on the free energy (e.g E =
C. The effect of the capping energy on the 7kcal/mol) is suggested as a soft core technique. This
integrated function condition results in significantly lower value of E as
compared with the one needed in order to ensure in-
We now analyze the effect of the capping en- accessibility and thus sampling is much easier (see the
ergy value on the integrated function. We choose comparison of the behavior of the integrated function
two legitimate capping energies E cap =7kcal/mol and for two different E cap values in Ref. [34] Fig. 28). Now
E =15kcal/mol. For simplicity in the following para- Eq. (14) can be written as follows:
graph we omit the units. The free energy change asso-
ciated with the transition to "transparent" VDW and ∆F Asolvation/binding→Bsolvation/binding =
electrostatic interactions is concentrated in the range
0.05(cid:46)exp(−βλE )(cid:46)0.95.Takingβ →1forsimplic-
cap (cid:90) 1 (cid:90) 1
ity,wegetthatthefreeenergychangeisconcentratedin (cid:10) H(cid:48) (cid:11) − (cid:10) H(cid:48) (cid:11)
0.05 (cid:46) λ (cid:46) 3 . This translates into 0.007 (cid:46) λ (cid:46) 0.42 Br Ar
Ecap Ecap 0 0
and0.003(cid:46)λ(cid:46)0.2forE =7andE =15respec-
tively. It can thus be seen that the range in which the
(cid:90) 1(cid:68) (cid:69) (cid:90) 1(cid:68) (cid:69)
free energy changes is smaller and the change occurs + H(cid:48) − H(cid:48) .
at smaller λs as E cap is higher. Since (cid:82) 0 1(cid:10)d d H λ A (cid:11) dλ is 0 Asolvated/boundedr 0 Bsolvated/boundedr (19)
the same to a good accuracy for both capping energies
(equal area), the integrated function reaches a higher
value at λ=0 for high E values.
cap VI. SAMPLING RUGGED ENERGY
LANDSCAPE IN ONE λ DIMENSION
Demonstrations
When the systems, between which the free energy
difference is calculated, have rugged energy landscape
It has been demonstrated in molecular MC simula-
in conformational space (as a function of the coordi-
tionsthatthereisatrade-offwhenchoosingE . That
cap nates of the atoms), one can use techniques such as
is, high E value results in a more accurate calcu-
cap H-REMD/H-PT (Hamiltonian Replica Exchange MD/
lation but an integrated function that is steeper and
Hamiltonian Parallel Tempering, variant of Parallel
reaches a higher value. See Ref. [34] (Fig. 28) in
Tempering/Replica Exchange [27–29]) to alleviate sam-
which the integrated functions for E = 5kcal/mol
cap pling problems [49]. In this technique the system is
and E =4.4kcal/mol are compared. See also the in-
cap simulatedatasetofλsandexchangesofconfigurations
setinFig. 5inRef. [39]inwhichtheintegratedfunction
between them are performed every certain number of
with E =40kcal/mol is plotted (MD simulations).
cap steps according to the Metropolis criterion. Thus, the
systems at the low λs, that can cross energetic barri-
ers, helpthesystemofinteresttobesampledwell.This
D. Continuity of the potential and its derivative technique,eventhoughishighlyefficient,introducesan-
other sampling dimension since the simulations of the
In order to have continuity in the derivative that replicas at a set of λs are performed at each intermedi-
will enable the integration over the equations of mo- ate of the hybrid system (sampling the dimensions of λ
tion in MD to be valid, a switching function between that interpolates between the systems and of λ of the
replicas that are used for the equilibration). Here, the and guiding principles in choosing the intermediates in
simulations at the different λs will be used also to cal- the H-REMD/PT procedure see Refs. [33, 50, 51].
culate the free energy difference by integration and the
need for another sampling dimension is eliminated.
In order to equilibrate the entire system, the energy VII. DISCUSSION
terms that are not multiplied by λ can be written as
follows: Anovelmethodforcalculatingrelativefreeenergiesis
(cid:40) presented. Themethodcanbeusedtocalculatethefree
H →f(λ)H , f(λ)= eq (20) energydifferencebetweensolvation/bindingfreeenergy
λ eq λ<λ eq , of two molecules with any number of atoms and is ap-
plicable to MD and MC simulations and to all types of
whereλ denotestheminimalλforequilibrationinthe
eq molecularmodelings. Thearticleiscomposedofseveral
H-REMD procedure. Here we transform all the terms
independentingredients. First,weshowedthatthepar-
only up to λ in order to have a minimal transfor-
eq titionfunctionsofthecommonanddifferentsubsystems
mation. Thus the H-REMD procedure is in its origi-
decouple exactly and hence there is no error involved.
nal form in the range λ = [1,λ ] and the systems at
eq Thisanalysisisapplicabletoallpotentialfunctionsand
λ = [λ ,0], in which only H is lowered, can be simu-
eq r to submolecules with coupled degrees of freedom. Then
lated separately since the energy barriers are accessible
wesuggestedtousethetwoseparatesystemsinsteadof
for these λ values. See Fig. 12.
one system that includes ingredients of the two systems
in order to calculate the relative free energy. This has
theadvantageoflargephasespaceoverlapsincethesys-
tems are inherently correlated and simplicity since the
simulationsareperformedonlyonthetwo(almost)orig-
inalsystemsintwoseparatesimulationsandtheneedfor
extensivedesigniseliminated. Thethirdingredientisa
unified approach to soft core potentials. This technique
issimpletoimplementandresultsinmonotonicchange
of the integrated function. The monotonicity enables
simple selection of intermediates and ensures accuracy
in the numerical integration and hence a robust result.
λ=1 λ=λ =0.9 λ=0 We also show how if the systems have rugged energy
eq landscape, instead of using the sampling techniques in
anotherλorT dimension,wecanuseonlyonesampling
B B’ dimension. since the λs used in the H-REMD/H-PT
procedure are also used as intermediates in the calcu-
lation of free energy difference, a convergence for sys-
tems with rugged energy landscape is achieved without
introducing another sampling dimension. Both in the
calculation of the integral for the free energy difference
and in the H-REMD/H-PT procedures, the chosen in-
tervals between the λs have to be smaller where the
internal energy varies significantly, in the free energy
difference calculation in order to have good sampling of
thefunctionandinH-REMDinordertomaintainopti-
λ=1 λ=λ =0.9 λ=0 mal acceptance rates. Thus, no additional unnecessary
λs have to be sampled.
IthasbeenshownanalyticallyandinMDsimulations
Figure 12. A scheme of the two transformations suggested. that less terms need to be removed in the transforma-
At λ=λ all the energy terms that need equilibration are tion as compared to the existing methodology such as
multiplied by λ . At λ = 0 H is removed and the other the dihedral terms. Since each removal of a term in
terms remain multiplied by the same λ as when λ=λ eq . the transformation has a free energy energy value as-
sociated with it, removing less terms necessarily means
H-REMD, which is in its standard use here, is ex- that the free energy difference in the transformation is
plained and demonstrated in Ref. [49]. A general ex- smaller and less intermediate systems are required. In
amplewhichdemonstratesfreeenergycalculationofsys- addition the monotonicity of the integrated function in
tems with rugged energy landscape in one λ dimension the soft core technique has both been proved analyti-
with further methodological advances can be seen in cally and backed up in existing MD simulations. The
Ref. [35], Supplementary Material. For methodologies monotonicityoftheintegratedfunctionensuresthatthe
functionwillnothaveextremaandenablestoknowthe
upper limit of the numerical integration error. Thus
it is expected that less intermediates will be needed
to sample the function. The relation between the free
energy difference and the number of intermediates re- k
quired can be understood for example from the upper
limit of the numerical integration error of a monotonic
function ∆x∆y/2 which depends linearly on this differ-
ence. Thus,forintegrationresultwithinagivennumeri-
calerror,lessintermediatesareexpectedtoberequired.
Finally,cappingthepotentialatanenergyvaluethatis
energeticallyaccessibleinthesoftcoretechnique,which
has been demonstrated in MC simulations, results in a
function that is less steep and reaches a lower value as
compared to the case of an energetically inaccessible
capping energy. Thus, again, less intermediates are re-
quired. Sincethenumberofintermediatesisdirectlyre-
latedtothecomputationalpowerneeded,theprinciples Figure 13. Benzoic Acid molecule with atom indices that
presentedhereareexpectedtoincreasetheefficiency of suit the defined dihedral terms
the calculations.
Theseadvantagesareofhighimportanceforautomat-
ingfreeenergycalculationsandcomputationaldrugdis- imk atoms. The atoms in this case have different co-
covery. Thus, using this method, preceded by virtual valent connectivity. The Coulomb and VDW terms are
screeningfiltering,anautomatedfreeenergycalculation
definedbythe1/randr−12−r−6potentialsrespectively.
thatwillresultinthebestcandidatesmaybeperformed. Thecoefficientsfortheseinteractionsaredeterminedby
Itisnotedthatthemethodmayhaveotherapplications the VDW coefficients/charges of both atoms.
in physics, where the environment for example can be
external electric or magnetic field.
Appendix B: Decoupling the partition function -
detailed proof
Appendix A: Molecular potentials
Since we vary over all possible values of Ω the in-
Here we briefly describe the molecular potentials. tegration result does not depend on xˆ and zˆ.
The covalent bond between two atoms is modeled We can change the coordinate system of the different
with the following potential: subsystem so that xˆ and zˆand accordingly yˆwill be its
newaxesxˆ =O−1x =xˆandsimilarlyforyand
V c =k c (r−d)2, (A1) z axes, wh n e e r w e O−1 is t (0 h , e 0,1 r ) otation matrix that rotates
thepreviouslydefinedaxes[(0,0,1),(0,1,0),(1,0,0)]to
where r is the distance between the atoms. The bond
xˆ,yˆ,zˆ.Ω isrotatedwithO inordertoberepresented
angletermbetweenthreeatomsisusuallymodeledwith in the ne d w if system of coordinates Ω˜ = OΩ . The
the following potential: Jacobianofrotationis1dΩ˜ =dΩ di . f Theinte d g if ration
V b (θ)= 1 2 k θ (θ−θ 0 )2. (A2) l t i h m e it n s ew of s x˜ y j s , t y e ˜ m j a o n f d co z˜ o j r a d r i e na − te ∞ s a t r o e ∞ (0, . 0 xˆ , n 1 e ) w a a n n d d (1 zˆ , n 0 ew ,0) in .
We can thus write
The commonly used dihedral angles potential is of the
following type:
(cid:90) (cid:90)
d ijkl φ ijkl s
where φ is defined by the angle between the plane
formed by the ijk atoms and the plane formed by the (cid:90)
jkl atoms. The improper dihedral term that is used to e−βHcom(Ωcom)dΩ Z =Z Z .
com dif com dif
enforce planarity is defined as follows:
Alternatively,wecanswitchΩ torelativespherical
V (φ ijkm )= 2 k(φ ijkm −φ s )2, (A4) variables and this integration will not depend on Ω com .
Here we define xˆ,zˆ for every atom in the different sub-
where φ is defined by the angle between the plane moleculesimilarlytothedefinitionsabove. Wecanthus
formed by the ijm atoms and the plane formed by the write
Appendix D: Setting λ→λn preserves monotonicity
(cid:90) and results in improved behavior of the integrated
Z = e−βHcom(Ωcom)dΩ × function when used in separate transformations
Wenowexplainthatwhenperformingseparatesimu-
e−βHdif(rk+1,rk+2,rk+3,θk+1,θk+2,θk+3,φk+1,φk+2,φk+3)× lationswecanchooseatransformationthatwillpreserve
the monotonicity and result in improved behavior of
the integrated function. We will investigate free energy
k+3 functions which can be mapped from the free energy
r2sinθ dr dθ dφ = functions with linear transformations. For example the
j=k+1 free energy for the separate and linear transformation
H (λ)=λH +H canbemappedintothisofthetrans-
ms r c ls ms
e−βHcom(Ωcom)dΩ com Z dif =Z com Z dif The integrated function of a mapped function F m (λ)
from a linear function F (λ) for any λ → λn,λ ∈ [0,1]
mapping is monotonic
Appendix C: Detailed proof of the monotonicity of
the integrated function
− m =− l =
d (cid:18) dF (cid:19) (cid:82) e−βH(λ)
− d2 d H λ ( 2 λ)
dΩ − d2F l (λn) (cid:18) dλn(cid:19)2 =− d2F l (λ)(cid:0) nλn−1(cid:1)2 >0.
dλ dλ Z(λ)
It can be readily seen that the hybrid and linear
− (cid:90) e−βH(λ) dH(λ) dΩ d (cid:104) Z(λ)−1 (cid:105) . (C1) t m ra a n p s p f e o d rm in a t t o ion th H e l t h r ( a λ n ) sf = orm λ a H t r io + n ( H 1 m − h λ 1 ) (λ H ) c = can λ n n o H t r b + e
dλ dλ (1−λ)2H . For example for n = 2, λ = 0.1 we have
Differentiating Z(λ)−1 with respect to λ we get: H mh1 (λ=0.1) = 0.01 · H r + 0.81 · H c which has no
corresponding value in F . F can be mapped into
d (cid:104) Z(λ)−1 (cid:105) =−Z(λ)−2 dZ =−Z(λ)−2 d (cid:82) e−βH(λ)dΩ = H m M h a 2 p = pi λ ng nH of r λ + → (1− λn λ r n e ) s H ul c t . s in (cid:0) nλn−1(cid:1)2 factor which
dλ dλ dλ (cid:113)
equals 1 at λ = n−1 1 and for n > 1 increases with λ.
dΩ.
For example for n = 2 this factor equals 1 at λ = √1
.
dλ Thismeansthattheslopeoftheintegratedfunctionwill
be smaller for λ< √1 and larger for λ> √1 compared
And finally: 2 2
to the original one. Such a mapping will result in less
(cid:82) e−βH(λ) (cid:20) β (cid:16) dH(λ) (cid:17)2 − d2H(λ) (cid:21) dΩ steep integrated functions for transitions at small λ s
d (cid:18) dF (cid:19) dλ dλ2 but steeper integrated functions for transitions at high
− dλ dλ = Z λ s. Thus d d F λ ls in which the transition occurs at small
λ s will benefit from such a mapping but dFlh which
(cid:28) (cid:29)(cid:28) (cid:29) includes a transition near λ(cid:119)1 will experience steeper
−β . (C2) changes in the region of this transition (see for example
[35] Fig. 3 (a)). In conclusion, λ→λn,n>1 mapping
For H that depends linearly on λ the second derivative in separate simulations will result in both monotonic
vanishes and we can write: integrated function and more equally spaced intermedi-
ates.
(cid:19) (cid:34)(cid:42)(cid:18)
(cid:19)2 (cid:43) (cid:28)
(cid:29)(cid:28)
(cid:29)(cid:35)
Appendix E: Sampling rugged energy landscape in
one λ dimension - additional explanations
(cid:42)(cid:20)
(cid:29)(cid:21)2 (cid:43)
dλ dλ ThefreeenergydifferencecalculatedintheH-REMD
procedure, whichisintherangeλ=[1,λ ]canalsobe
(cid:28)(cid:104) (cid:68) (cid:69)(cid:105)2 (cid:29) usedforcomparisonstoothermoleculesthathaveasub-
dλ dλ system in common. The simulations in the range λ =
[λ ,0] can be used for comparison to other molecules with lowered energy barriers. Thus only when we relax
that have the same common subsystem as the one in terms up to a value in which the states can be sampled
the transformation that was performed. Covalent bond well will the simulations converge. This option is thus
and bond angle energy terms may not need equilibra- possible only when using the topology and soft core in-
tion(multiplicationbyλ)astheyarenotexpectedtobe gredients presented before.
associated with rugged energy landscape. It is empha-
sized that any transformation can be combined with H-
REMD.However,itusuallydoesnotensureconvergence Acknowledgments
of the simulations and another dimension is needed.
Sincehereweuseonlytheoriginalmoleculeinthetrans- D. J. Bergman, A. Nitzan, G. Falkovich, D. Harries,
formation it can be performed in such a way that will andR.Peledareacknowledgedfortheusefulcomments.
ensure convergence. This originates from the fact that I. Khavrutskii, M. Shirts, K. Vanommeslaeghe, F. Bue-
in order to achieve convergence the system needs to ex- lens and C. Junghans are acknowledged for the fruitful
change configurations with its replica in a Hamiltonian discussions.
[1] M.P.Allen,D.J.Tildesley,etal.,Computersimulation 1011 (1992).
of liquids (Clarendon press Oxford, 1987). [20] F. Wang and D. Landau, Physical review letters 86,
[2] K. Binder and D. W. Heermann, Monte Carlo simu- 2050 (2001).
lation in statistical physics: an introduction (Springer, [21] D.Landau,S.-H.Tsai, andM.Exler,AmericanJournal
2010). of Physics 72, 1294 (2004).
[3] D. P. Landau and K. Binder, A Guide to Monte Carlo [22] P. Wu, X. Hu, and W. Yang, The journal of physical
Simulations in Statistical Physics (Cambridge Univer- chemistry letters 2, 2099 (2011).
sity Press, 2014). [23] J. B. Abrams, L. Rosso, and M. E. Tuckerman, The
[4] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding molecular sim- Journal of chemical physics 125, 074115 (2006).
ulation: from algorithms to applications (Academic [24] C. Jarzynski, Physical Review Letters 78, 2690 (1997).
Press, Inc. Orlando, FL, USA, 1996). [25] G. E. Crooks, Physical review E 61, 2361 (2000).
[5] M. Newman and G. Barkema, Monte Carlo Methods [26] W.L.Jorgensen,Accountsofchemicalresearch42,724
in Statistical Physics chapter 1-4 (Oxford University (2009).
Press: New York, USA, 1999). [27] A.FerrenbergandR.Swendsen,Physicalreviewletters
[6] C. Chipot and A. Pohorille, Free energy calculations: 61, 2635 (1988).
theoryandapplicationsinchemistryandbiology,Vol.86 [28] U. Hansmann, Chemical Physics Letters 281, 140
(Springer, 2007). (1997).
[7] D. M. Zuckerman, Annual review of biophysics 40, 41 [29] D. Earl and M. Deem, Physical Chemistry Chemical
(2011). Physics 7, 3910 (2005).
[8] P. Kollman, Chemical Reviews 93, 2395 (1993). [30] M.R.Shirts,inComputationalDrugDiscoveryandDe-
[9] Y. Deng and B. Roux, The Journal of Physical Chem- sign (Springer, 2012) pp. 425–467.
istry B 113, 2234 (2009). [31] D.A.Pearlman,TheJournalofPhysicalChemistry98,
[10] C.Woods,M.Malaisree,S.Hannongbua, andA.Mul- 1487 (1994).
holland,JournalofChemicalPhysics134,4114(2011). [32] S. Boresch, F. Tettinger, M. Leitgeb, and M. Karplus,
[11] T.StraatsmaandH.Berendsen,TheJournalofchemi- TheJournalofPhysicalChemistryB107,9535(2003).
cal physics 89, 5876 (1988). [33] A. Farhi, G. Hed, M. Bon, N. Caticha, C. Mak, and
[12] I.V.KhavrutskiiandA.Wallqvist,Journalofchemical E. Domany, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
theory and computation 6, 3427 (2010). Applications 392, 5836 (2013).
[13] W. L. Jorgensen, J. M. Briggs, and J. Gao, Journal of [34] A.Farhi,M.ScThesis,Arxivpreprint1212.4081 (2011).
the American Chemical Society 109, 6857 (1987). [35] A. Farhi, arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.1620 (2013).
[14] J.D.Chodera,D.L.Mobley,M.R.Shirts,R.W.Dixon, [36] S. Liu, Y. Wu, T. Lin, R. Abel, J. P. Redmann, C. M.
K.Branson, andV.S.Pande,Currentopinioninstruc- Summa, V. R. Jaber, N. M. Lim, and D. L. Mob-
tural biology 21, 150 (2011). ley,Journalofcomputer-aidedmoleculardesign27,755
[15] R. Zwanzig, The Journal of Chemical Physics 22, 1420 (2013).
(1954). [37] H. Schäfer, W. F. Van Gunsteren, and A. E. Mark,
[16] J. Kirkwood, The Journal of Chemical Physics 3, 300 Journal of computational chemistry 20, 1604 (1999).
(1935). [38] A. Farhi and B. Singh, New Journal of Physics 18,
[17] T.StraatsmaandJ.McCammon,TheJournalofchem- 023039 (2016).
ical physics 95, 1175 (1991). [39] F.P.BuelensandH.Grubmüller,JournalofComputa-
[18] C. Bennett, Journal of Computational Physics 22, 245 tional Chemistry 33, 25 (2012).
(1976). [40] M.L.MugnaiandR.Elber,Journalofchemicaltheory
[19] S.Kumar,J.Rosenberg,D.Bouzida,R.Swendsen, and and computation 8, 3022 (2012).
P. Kollman, Journal of Computational Chemistry 13,
[41] S.L.Mayo,B.D.Olafson, andW.A.Goddard,Journal [46] A. K. Malde, L. Zuo, M. Breeze, M. Stroet, D. Poger,
of Physical Chemistry 94, 8897 (1990). P. C. Nair, C. Oostenbrink, and A. E. Mark, Journal
[42] J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, of chemical theory and computation 7, 4026 (2011).
E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, [47] R. C. Rizzo, T. Aynechi, D. A. Case, and I. D. Kuntz,
L. Kale, and K. Schulten, Journal of computational Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2, 128
chemistry 26, 1781 (2005). (2006).
[43] B. Hess, C. Kutzner, D. Van Der Spoel, and E. Lin- [48] R. K. Pathria, Statistical mechanics (Butterworth-
dahl, Journal of chemical theory and computation 4, Heinemann, 1972) pp. 69–70.
435 (2008). [49] H.Fukunishi,O.Watanabe, andS.Takada,TheJour-
[44] M. Abraham, D. Van Der Spoel, E. Lindahl, and nal of chemical physics 116, 9058 (2002).
B. Hess, GROMACS User Manual version 5 (2015). [50] S. Trebst, M. Troyer, and U. Hansmann, The Journal
[45] P.H.HünenbergerandJ.A.McCammon,TheJournal of chemical physics 124, 174903 (2006).
of chemical physics 110, 1856 (1999). [51] W. Nadler and U. H. Hansmann, The Journal of Phys-
ical Chemistry B 112, 10386 (2008).