A Novel C2C E-Commerce Recommender System
Based on Link Prediction: Applying Social
Network Analysis
Mohammad Dehghan Bahabadi Alireza Hashemi Golpayegani
Department of Computer Engineering and Information Department of Computer Engineering and Information
Technology Technology
Amirkabir University of Technology Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran Tehran, Iran
Dehghan.Bahabadi@aut.ac.ir Sa.Hashemi@aut.ac.ir
Leila Esmaeili
Department of Computer Engineering and Information Technology
Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
Leila.Esmaeili@aut.ac.ir
Abstract— Social network analysis emerged as an important Recommendation based on best-selling items, demographic
research topic in sociology decades ago, and it has also attracted information of users, and user’s past behavior analysis, are
scientists from various fields of study like psychology, samples of techniques used by Recommender systems in e-
anthropology, geography and economics. In recent years, a commerce websites [2]. These techniques can be considered as
significant number of researches has been conducted on using different types of personalization, since they help the website
social network analysis to design e-commerce recommender to adapt itself to the customers. Although most of commercial
systems. Most of the current recommender systems are designed websites use B2C e-commerce, some of them support C2C e-
for B2C e-commerce websites. This paper focuses on building a
commerce. Ebay.com, Bizrate.com, etc. are instances of
recommendation algorithm for C2C e-commerce business model
websites in which customers can be buyer and seller at the
by considering special features of C2C e-commerce websites. In
same time. Current recommendation algorithms (e.g.
this paper, we consider users and their transactions as a network;
collaborative filtering, content based algorithms, and hybrid
by this mapping, link prediction technique which is an important
algorithms) can be most useful for B2C e-commerce websites.
task in social network analysis could be used to build the
Since these algorithms only concentrate on items and
recommender system. The proposed tow-level recommendation
consumers (but not sellers), there is a lack of recommender
algorithm, rather than topology of the network, uses nodes’
features like: category of items, ratings of users, and reputation systems for C2C e-commerce websites [3].
of sellers. The results show that the proposed model can be used
The solution proposed in this paper for the mentioned
to predict a portion of future trades between users in a C2C
problem is based on social network analysis. Social network
commercial network.
analysis emerged as an important research topic in sociology
decades ago, and its first studies was focused on the adoption
Keywords— Recommender System; Commercial Network; Link
of medical and agricultural innovations [4]. It is a vast field of
Prediction; C2C Commerce; Social Network Analysis
research that has attracted researchers from anthropology,
economics, psychology, biology and geography, just to
I. INTRODUCTION
mention a few. Link prediction which is an important task in
In recent years, moving from mass production toward mass social network analysis, is the problem of predicting the
customization has been an important factor for success of existence of a link between two nodes in a graph where
companies in global markets. In other words, diversity and prediction is based on the attributes of the nodes and other
customization of products have replaced long life time and observed links [5].
standardized products. The emersion of electronic commerce
In this paper, we are going to design a recommender system
has facilitated their movement toward personalization of
which can be used in commercial networks. A commercial
products. In order to expand personalization, companies need
network is a graph which its nodes represent users of a C2C e-
to increase the amount of information that users should process
commerce website and edges represent the transactions
before choosing their ideal items. This phenomenon which is
between these users. If we presume transactions between users
known as Information overload problem, was the main reason
as edges of a graph, link prediction approaches can be used to
of developing recommender systems in e-commerce [1].
design the recommender system. But before using link
prediction techniques, the nature of network should be In, Arazy et al. [9] proposed a framework for improving
identified and analyzed. Since the context of links in social recommender systems using behavioral theories of
commercial networks are different from links in common advice-taking. They identified four factors that impact a user's
social networks, we must adapt link prediction approaches to decision when he receives a recommendation: Homophily,
our problem. So far, several nodes proximity measures are Trust, Reputation, and Tie strength. After computing these
introduced for link prediction in common social networks (e.g. relationship factors, the system should calculate a weighted
Adamic-Adar, FOAF, etc. [6]) but as we will discuss in section average of them in order to rate each recommendation source.
III, many of them are not applicable for being used in our Then these sources could be used to recommend items to users.
model. In [10], Guy et al. studied personalized recommendation of
social software items, including bookmarked web-pages, blog
The main goal of this paper is to propose a model for
entries, and communities. They focused on recommendations
predicting future trades between users in a commercial
that are derived from the user’s social network. In their
network. If G (U,E ) is the transactions graph in time t (U is
1 1 1 proposed model, Social network information is collected and
the set of nodes and E is the set of graph edges in time t ). We
1 1 aggregated across different data sources. A group
are going to predict edges of the graph in time t (t<t). So we
2 1 2 recommendation system is proposed In [11]. The system makes
should predict the graph G (U,E ) in time t where the
2 2 2 recommendations based on supervised entropy, association
difference between G and G is in their edges. Predicting these
1 2 rules and D-Tree classification method.
new links and using them in a recommender system could have
two benefits: first, such recommender system can accelerate Unlike item recommendation in C2C commercial networks,
formation of trades between users and this can benefit all a large number of researches has been done on link prediction
involving parties, i.e. buyers and sellers and third parties. and link recommendation in common social networks. Some
Second, recommending a user to buy an item from another user works have used only network’s topology for predicting new
can end up to a trade that was not going to happen in future at links. Nowell et al. in [5], state that link prediction could be
all. Another goal that we are going to seek is to predict items done just by using topological features. They used three
sold in future trades. Since the ultimate goal of this paper is different methods to predict missing links: Methods Based on
recommending items of sellers to target users, we should Node Neighborhoods, Methods Based on the Ensemble of All
choose the most appropriate item of the sellers to increase the Paths, and Higher Level Approaches. In [6], de Sá et al.
probability of accepting recommendations. investigated the effect of using supervised learning approaches
on weighted graphs. They used pairs of nodes as instances of
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section II,
binary classification problem in which the predictor attributes
we briefly review some of previous works on link prediction
were metrics computed from the network topology, and the
problem in social networks and recommendation algorithms for
target attribute was the presence or absence of a link between
C2C websites. Section III contains our proposed methodology
the nodes in future. Link prediction using hybrid approaches is
for solving the problem ahead. In section IV we discuss the
investigated in many of prior works. Yin et al. [12] proposed a
experiments we performed and the data used in experiments.
framework for link recommendation based on attribute and
Results are presented in section V, and finally in section VI we
structural properties in a social network. They enumerated six
present conclusions and future works.
criteria for link recommendation: homophily, rarity, Social
influence, common friendship, social closeness, and
II. RELATED WORK preferential attachment. In [13], Chen et al. compared the
So far, plenty of research has been done in the field of link performance of different people recommendation in predicting
prediction and item recommendation in common social and recommending potential friends. The comparison was
networks, but just a few of them has focused on commercial between four algorithms: content matching, content plus link,
networks. In [7], a recommendation model for C2C online friend of a friend, and SONAR.
trading is proposed. The author divides user’s behaviors in a
To the best of our knowledge, except [8], none of the
C2C website into four categories: browse, attention, bidding, previous researches about item recommendation in C2C e-
and purchase. Based on these criteria, a users’ preference
commerce websites are focused on choosing appropriate seller
matrix is built. Afterwards, similarity between current active
for target users, and this is one of the main difference between
users and other users is calculated. Finally Top-N
this work and previous works. Besides, this paper uses link
recommendation list is built for each user based on most prediction technique for recommending items in C2C e-
important items for his neighbors. Three-dimensional
commerce websites, an approach that has not been used in
collaborative filtering is another method for recommending
previous researches about C2C e-commerce recommender
items in C2C commercial networks which is introduced in [8];
system.
They extended the traditional collaborative filtering technique
to solve the recommendation problem in C2C e-commerce
websites. Their proposed recommender system firstly
III. PROPOSED MODEL
calculates seller similarities using seller features, and fills the In general, link prediction approaches are divided into three
rating matrix based on seller similarities. Then it calculates the categories: methods based on structural measures in the
buyer similarities using historical ratings, and defines network, methods based on the content or attribute similarity
neighbors of each user to predict unknown ratings. Eventually, between nodes, and methods based on probabilistic models. In
the system recommends the seller and product combinations this paper, measures based on structure of network and
with the highest prediction ratings to the target user. attributes of nodes are used for link prediction task. This choice
is according to the results of previous works which state the A. Computing structural similarity
more features of social network we use, the stronger
The first stage of our model is computing similarity of each
predictions we can make [13], [12]. Our proposed model for
pair of nodes according to network structural metrics.
link recommendation (i.e. recommendation of buying items
Considering definition of the problem, we cannot directly use
from sellers) in commercial networks is shown in Fig. 1. These
these metrics. Because unlike common social networks, there is
are the assumptions that we made to design the model:
no clear evidence that having more common neighbors or
 There is a network of users in which some users are being close to each other in graph, increases the probability of
forming a link between two nodes. So in this stage, a different
just seller, some are just buyer, and some are both.
approach must be used. SimRank is a similarity measures
 After every transaction, buyers can rate sellers proposed for directed graphs. This measure which is proposed
according to four aspects: overall satisfaction, quality by Jeh & Widom in [14], computes similarities based on an
of goods, delivery time, and seller support. intuitive concept: two objects are similar if they refer to similar
objects or they are referred by similar objects. Like PageRank
 Each item belongs to a certain category (number of
algorithm [15], SimRank computes similarity of graph nodes
categories are limited).
using their input and output edges. The first step is to calculate
As you can see in Fig. 1, the recommendation model user similarities according to SimRank measure. We use Eq.
consists of six stages. It should be noted that stage 2, 3 and 4 (1) to calculate similarity of target users to other users in
can be done in parallel, but other stages must be performed in transactions graph.
specified order.
1.
Candidate sellers Compute Transaction In Eq. (1), u and v are sample users, S (u,v) is the similarity
list for each user s s i t m ru i c l t a u r r it a y l graph st ructure of u and v, C is the damping factor, I(u) is the list of sellers that
user u have purchased items from and I(v) is the list of sellers
that user v have purchased items from. After computing
similarity of each target user like u to other users in graph,
2.
there will be a list of n similar users to u. We use the list of
Category category Category scores similar users to specify candidate sellers; for this purpose, we
of items scores choose sellers that have sold items to users in u’s similarity list
(but u has bought nothing from them) as candidate sellers.
Assume the graph in Fig. 2 as a commercial network. Nodes on
the left are buyers and nodes on left are sellers. Considering
3.
Value and Compute n=1 (size of u’s similar users list), candidate sellers for u in this
number of reputation Reputation scores graph would be d and e.
transactions
B. Computing Category Scores
Each item in the network belongs to a certain category. So
Seller 4. we can calculate proximity of users according to the categories
ratings C r o a m ti p n u g t e Ratings scores in which they have sold or bought items. I.e. we have a vector
scores of non-numeric values for each user. There are bunch of
algorithms for measuring similarity of such vectors. Here, the
significant note is the importance of different categories for
5. each user. For considering the importance of each category for
Recommended Compute each user, we used two factors:
sellers candidates’
total score a
6.
Choosing Recommended c
items from Items u
Fig. 1. Proposed Link Recommendation Model for C2C Commercial e
Networks. Rectangles represent input (yellow) or output (green) data, and
circles represent system processes.
Fig. 2. A sample commercial graph. Input edges imply buying and output
edges imply selling items by users.
1. The importance of each category in local network of a (5) shows how we calculate a seller’s reputation from
user which can be calculated using Eq. (2); perspective of a target user.
2. Number and value of items bought or sold in each
category. S(v)
reputation Q(v)
vN(u) S (u,v) is the reputation of user v from user u’s view.
reputation
Q(v) is total sales number of user v, R(v,i) is the average value
In Eq. (2), L(a) is the importance of category a in user’s
u of item quality, responsiveness, shipment cost, and shipment
local network, a is a sample category, and N(u) is the list of u’s
time rating that seller v have received in transaction i (a number
adjacent nodes. A(v,a) is equal to 1 if both u and v have bought
between [-1,1]). D(v,i) is the monetary value of user v’s sales in
or sold an item in category of a, and 0 otherwise; If u and v
transaction i. L(u,g(i)) is the importance of category in which
does not have any category in common, L u (a) is equal to 1. user v have sold an item and is computed similar to L u (a) in Eq.
Finally, we calculate ultimate score of each category for each
(2); If u has not traded in category g(i), L(u,g(i)) value will be
user using Eq. (3) in which Q u (k) and P u (k) are respectively equal to 1.
number and price of item k, and L(a) is computed using Eq.
(3).
D. Computing Ratings Scores
The other metric that can be used to find best sellers, is
u u u u sold items to users, in terms of ratings they have gained. We
assume that buyers rate sellers after each transaction, regarding
Now we can use similarity measures like Jaccard’s to the overall satisfaction, quality of goods, delivery time, and
coefficient to compute the score of candidate sellers for the seller support. These rating vectors can be used to choose best
target user according to category of items. Eq. (4) is the sellers for target users. Several metrics have been proposed in
order to compute similarity of two numeric vectors. Cosine
adapted form of Jaccard’s coefficient for our problem, Where
S (u,v) is the category score between u and v, c is a similarity [20] and Pearson correlation [21] are the most
category that both u and v have traded in, A(u) is the list of common ones. Here is the adopted version of cosine similarity
categories that user u have traded in, and w(a) is the category we used to compute rating scores:
score of attribute a according to user u:
   
In Eq. (6), S is the similarity of seller v to sellers of user
u according to their ratings, I(v) is the list of sellers that user u
C. Computing Reputation Scores
has bought items from, w is each user who has sold items to
Reputation is a quantity derived from the prior interactions user u, j is a rating component, and R is total number of rating
of individuals to others in a community which is globally components (which is equal to 4 in our problem), MR(v,j) is the
visible to all members of the network. Although the reputation average rating of user v according to rating component j in all
of sellers is not the most important factor of increasing number of his sales, and MR(w,j) is the average rating of user w
of sales, but it is one of the effective factors for buying items according to rating component j in all of his sales.
from them [16], [17]. So we should consider the reputation of
sellers in recommending items to target users. In commercial E. Computing Total Score of Candidates
networks, the information about previous transactions can be
The List of best sellers for a target user is built using three
used to calculate the reputation of users [18]. Generally,
metrics we discussed before (Category score, Ratings score,
reputation systems are divided into two categories: centralized
and Reputation score). Before using these 3 scores, they should
and distributed; In centralized reputation systems, a central
be normalized into a number between [0,1]. Eventually, total
authority is responsible for saving ratings or complaints and
score of each candidate is calculated by combining the scores
computing reputation of users, unlike distributed ones which
from previous stages:
there is no centralized authority for computing reputations [19].
The type of reputation system in our model is centralized but
unlike common centralized reputation systems, every seller S (u,v)S (u,v)S (u,v)S (u,v)  
may have a different value of reputation form the viewpoint of total cat rat rep
different users. To compute reputation of each seller, four
In Eq. (7), S (u,v) is the total score of seller v for
factors are considered: seller ratings from prior transactions, total
recommending his items to user u, α is category score
monetary value of each transaction, total number of seller’s
coefficient, β is ratings score coefficient, ϒ is reputation score
transactions, and importance of categories to target user. Eq.
coefficient, S (u,v) is category score of user v according to information retrieval, as the level of precision increases, the
user u, S (u,v) is rating score of user v according to user u, and level of recall decreases (and wise-versa). F-measure which is
S (u,v) is reputation score of user v according to user u. α, β the harmonic mean of precision and recall, can be used to
and ϒ must be chosen in range of [0,1] so that α+β+ϒ=1. By balance the two measures [23]. In order to compute precision,
changing value of these coefficients, one can change the recall and F-measure, we used 10-fold cross validation [24]. So
influence of each score in building best sellers list. the data is partitioned into 10 nearly equally sized folds and 10
iterations of training and validation is performed. In each
F. Choosing items from sellers iteration, a different fold is held-out for validation (validation
set) and the other 9 folds are used for learning (training set).
After creating list of sellers for each user, we must choose
The similarity of nodes and different scores (discussed in
one item from each seller’s selling items. Online stores use
section III) are computed using the training set. The average
several strategies for recommending items to users. These
value of precision, recall and F-measure obtained from these
strategies include suggestion of random items, suggestion of
iterations is considered as estimated values of these measures
best-selling items, using association rules (using algorithms
on unseen data. To compute precision, recall and F-measure in
like A-priori), collaborative filtering (using ratings of items),
each iteration 50 nodes that have least one edge in validation
content based filtering (using textual information of items),
set are randomly selected and for each node, 1 to 25 predictions
demographic filtering (using age, gender, job, living area) and
is made.
so on.
We could not use the last three methods listed above Hence V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
users’ demographic information, textual information about
We measured precision, recall and F-measure at two levels:
data, and ratings of users to items were not available in our
the first level, is to predict whether two users will show up in a
dataset. So in our experiments, we used these methods to
same transaction in future or not (as buyer and seller); the
perform the last stage of our model: choosing best-selling
second level is to predict sold items in future transactions. In
items, choosing random items, and using association rules for
other words, the first level is evaluating the model without
item selection. In random item suggestion, a random item from
performing stage 6. Obviously, size of precision, recall and F-
selling items of a seller is selected and in Best-selling item
measure of the model at stage 6 cannot be more than size of
suggestion, we select the best selling item of the seller. For
these metrics at stage 5. Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 shows the
applying association rules, we use the list of items that users
percentage of precision, recall and F-measure of the model at
have purchased so far. So we use a-priori algorithm to find
user level (M1). In M2, the scores computed at stage 2, 3 and 4
strong rules and considering these rules, we select items from
are not used; instead, random sellers are selected from
selling items each seller; If no rules could be used for item
candidate list created at stage 1 to form prediction list for target
selection, we use random selection for suggesting items. The
users. As you see in Fig. 5, for M1, the level of F-measure
simplest form of recommendation is suggesting a single item.
decreases as the number of recommendations for each user
A single item would increase the chance that the customer will
increases. This can be a result of low number of missing link
accept the suggestion. But most of the recommender systems
for each target user; in our experiments, this value was at least
provide a list of suggestions for customers. A list of items can
of 1 and at most 3 for each sample user. let Consider the
increase the probability that user’s desired item shows up in the
number of missing edges of a sample node is equal to 2; If we
list of items [22]. In our experiments, we select one item from
assume that all of its missing links are truly predicted at the
each seller in order to shorten the final recommendation list.
point of 5 prediction for the user, any other predictions for this
user will decrease the overall precision of the system, because
IV. DATA AND EXPERIMENTS there is no more missing links for the user to be recovered.
The best datasets that could be used for our experiments is
the transaction data of users in C2C e-commerce websites. So
we used a dataset of Bizrate.com to evaluate the performance
of our proposed model. The dataset contains information about
2066 transactions between sellers and buyers. Each record of
transaction includes: sellerID, buyerID, itemID, category,
price, and ratings that seller has received from buyer. The
ratings include four parameters: overall satisfaction, quality of
goods, delivery time, and seller support. The graph of sellers-
buyers graph has an average degree of 1.3, density of 0.001,
maximum in-degree of 17 (i.e. purchases), and maximum out-
degree of 167 (i.e. sales).
Precision and recall are the most common measures for
evaluating prediction algorithms. Precision of a prediction
algorithm is the number of truly predicted links divided by total
number of predictions, and recall is the number of truly
predicted links divided by total number of true links that can be Fig. 3. Precision (%) of proposed model. M1 and M2 respectively show the
precision of model with and without using scores obtained from stage 2, 3 and
predicted [12]. According to some studies in the field of
4 in fig. 1.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Online stores need an efficient e-marketing strategy.
Modeling users’ behavior and recommending items based on
their interests is one of the most efficient strategies in e-
commerce. Over time, recommender systems are becoming an
inseparable component of e-commerce websites. But
unfortunately, most of the current recommendation models
could only be used in B2C e-commerce websites. In this paper,
we proposed a recommender system for C2C e-commerce
websites using prior transactions of users, categories of items,
rating of users, and reputation of sellers. The goal of the system
is recommending items from most appropriate sellers to target
customers.
Fig. 4. Recall (%) of proposed model. M1 and M2 respectively show the The Results of our experiments show that the proposed
recall of model with and without using scores obtained from stage 2, 3 and 4 model can predict some of the missing links in commercial
in fig. 1.
networks. The portion of predicted links by our model may
seem to be low, but one should consider that even this low
percent can end up to a big number of new transactions in large
scale commercial networks. It should be noted that using
different datasets for experiments may have significant effects
on results, as the scale of our dataset was too large. Similar to
other recommendation models, a challenge for our model is
recommending items to new users (cold start). There are
several ways to deal with this problem: recommending items
from sellers who have sold most items in the network, sellers
who have best reputation in the network and recommending
items from random sellers are some common solutions for the
problem.
The proposed model can be improved in several ways. The
results of related works shows that considering time element in
recommendations, can improve performance of recommender
systems [10], [9]. So investigating the effect of using time in
Fig. 5. F-Measure of proposed model. M1 and M2 respectively show the F-
predictions is one of the future works. As the effect of using
Measure of model with and without using scores obtained from stage 2, 3 and
4 in fig. 1. weight of links in a graph for link prediction is not
deterministic yet [25], other possible future work can be using
The final form of the recommendation, is a list of items the weight of links between users for computing similarities at
from different sellers, so we should measure the performance the stage of creating candidates list.
of model at predicting items too. Table I shows the f-measure
of proposed model at item prediction using the three methods