A para-model agent for dynamical systems
*** 10 years of model-free control methodology ***
Lo¨ıc MICHEL
Consider a dynamical system u (cid:55)→ x,x˙ = f (x,u) where f is a nonlinear
(convex or nonconvex) function, or a combination of nonlinear functions
that can eventually switch. We present, in this preliminary work1, a
generalization of the standard model-free control, that can either control
the dynamical system, given an output reference trajectory, or optimize
the dynamical system as a derivative-free optimization based ”extremum-
seeking” procedure. Multiple applications2 are presented and the robust-
ness of the proposed method is studied in simulation.
by-nc-sa/4.0/. Email of the corresponding author : loic.michel54@gmail.com
2The control of the Epstein frame (described in §3.4) has been experimentally validated and the
results have been presented at the French Symposium of Electrical Engineering in Grenoble, Jun.
6v7074.2021:viXra
1 Introduction 1
2 General Principle 1
2.1 Definition of the closed-loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2.2 Definition of the PMA algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2.3 Performances in simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3 Applications of the C -control 6
3.1 Motor control in the dq frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.2 Control of switched non-minimum and minimum phase systems . . . 9
3.3 Ballistic and the fire control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4 Control of the HIV-1 model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5 Control of the Epstein frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4 Derivative-free & ”extremum-seeking” control 35
4.1 Proposed C -control scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2 Numerical applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5 Concluding remarks 37
1 Introduction
Based on the model-free control methodology, originally proposed by Fliess & Join
[1] [2] [3] ten years ago, which is referred to as a self-tuning controller in [4] and which
has been widely and successfully applied to many mechanical and electrical processes,
the para-model agent (PMA) aims to generalize the model-free control by not only
controllingnonlinearsystem, butalsoperformingan”extremum-seeking”control. On
theonehand, westudiedthedynamicperformanceswhencontrollinggenericswitched
minimum phase, non-minimum phase systems (e.g. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11]) as well
as the control of some nonlinear systems taken from applications in physics. On the
other hand, we present how the PMA can be used to find the optimum of some classes
of nonlinear functions. The proposed para-model agent3 is a simple derivation of the
discrete model-free control law [12]. The last progresses result in two contributions:
first, the substitution of the computation of the numerical derivatives in the original
model-freecontrolapproach[3], byaninitializationfunctionthatmakesthecontroller
more robust when stabilizing for example switched processes4. Then, we propose to
extend the properties of the model-free controller to include the extremum seeking
control of nonlinear systems without any computation of derivative or gradient. In
this case, instead of tracking a working point of nonlinear systems, an appropriate
choice of the output reference may stabilize nonlinear systems to their extremum.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the general principle of
the proposed para-model agent. In Section 3, some examples illustrate the control
of generic switched linear systems, the control of a three-phase motor, the control of
a ballistic fire, the control of a biological system and the control of the measure of
magnetic hysteresis in the framework of magnetic materials characterization (this last
application is also referred to as the control of nonlinear switched systems). Section 4
presents how the proposed PMA approach can be used as derivative-free optimization
/ ”extremum-seeking” control.
2 General Principle
We consider a nonlinear SISO dynamical system to control:
u (cid:55)→ y, nl (1)
where f is a nonlinear system, the para-model agent is an application (y∗,y) (cid:55)→ u
whose purpose is to control the output y of (1) following an output reference y∗.
3A justification of the proposed name ”para-model” is given in the note of the conclusion.
4Thefirststepstowardtheelaborationoftheproposedalgorithmweretoextendthecapabilities
of the model-free control regarding the control of switched non-minimum phase systems [13].
In simulation, the system (1) is controlled in its ”original formulation” without any
modification / linearization.
2.1 Definition of the closed-loop
Consider the control scheme depicted in Fig. 1 where C is the proposed PMA
controller.
Figure 1: Proposed PMA scheme to control or optimize a nonlinear system.
2.2 Definition of the PMA algorithm
For any discrete moment t , k ∈ N∗, one defines the discrete controller C such that
symbolically:
(cid:90) t (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:8) (cid:9)
C π : (y,y∗) (cid:55)→ u k = K i ε k−1 dτ(cid:12) (cid:12) ui k−1 +K p (k α e−k β k −y k−1 ) (2)
0 k−1(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
where: y∗ is the output reference trajectory; K and K are real positive tuning
gains; ε = y∗ − y is the tracking error; ui = ui +K (k e−k β k − y ) is an
k−1 k k−1 k k−1 p α k−1
internal recursive term where k e−k β k − y is the associated exponential tracking
error in which k e−k β k is an initialization function where k and k are real constants;
practically, the integral part is discretized using e.g. Riemann sums. The internal
recursion5 on ui is defined such as: ui = ui +K (k e−k β k −y ).
k k k−1 p α k−1
The set of C -parameters of the controller, that needs to be adjusted by the user, is
defined as the set of coefficients {K ,K ,k ,k }.
5We refine the definition of the PMA algorithm, for which we aim to optimize the construction;
inparticular,furtherinvestigationsconcernthestudyofadirectrecursiononu takingintoaccount
the K -integration and thus comparing internal recursion (involving ui,ui ) vs external recursion
(involving u ,ui )...
Practical algorithm A possible algorithmic implementation of the simple defini-
tion (2) is given below (for all ii ∈ N∗):
y_int(ii) = k_alpha*exp(-k_beta*ii); % exp. init. function
para_exp_err = y_int(ii-1) - y(ii-1); % exp. tracking error
para_stand_err(ii) = y_ref(ii) - y(ii-1); % stand. tracking error
para_u(ii) = para_u(ii-1) + Kp*para_exp_err; % internal recursion
para_G(ii) = Kint*para_stand_err(ii); % def. of the integral part
% trapezoidal integration
para_u_output = para_u(ii)*para_tr(ii);
% final product (integrator X internal recursion)
where:
• ii is the index of the sample in the (optional) vectorized process;
• exp is the exponential function;
• para exp err is the exponential tracking error;
• para stand err is the (standard) output tracking error;
• para u is the ”internal” recursion;
• para G constitutes the discrete integrator;
• para u output is the output of the controller that corresponds to the final
product between the discrete integrator and the internal recursive function.
and k alpha, k beta, Kp and Kint are real constants.
Remark The proposed PMA algorithm could been seen as a ”deformed” integrator
since the internal recursion ui multiplies directly the integrator
K ε dτ.
2.3 Performances in simulation
2.3.1 Optimization of the closed-loop
Optimizing the performances in simulation means that we want to solve the problem
of finding the most appropriate set of C -parameters relating to the minimization of
some performances index 6, that may quantify the dynamical performances of the
closed-loop. This problem is thus equivalent to an optimization problem for which
any optimization solver can be a priori used. In particular, meta-heuristic solvers or
derivative-free optimization solvers are preferred due to the pretty complexity of the
closed-loop nonlinear form (in general). We are interested in using the ”Brute Force
Optimization” (BFO) solver [14] that is very convenient and efficient to use. Figure
2 illustrates a closed-loop first order system, whose the controlled transient has been
BFO-optimized in Fig. 3.
Figure 2: Simulation with a set of C -parameters arbitrary fixed to ensure at least
asymptotic stability.
2.3.2 Sobol-based sensibility of the controlled transient
To investigate the interactions between the C -parameters that influence the mini-
mization of the performances index, we propose a preliminary study of the sensibility
of the C -parameters using the Sobol index methodology [15]. Consider a controlled
nonlinear system, for which the ISE index is evaluated under strict conditions w.r.t.
6The classical performance index that are available are IAE, ISE, ITAE,
18674-learning-pid-tuning-iii--performance-index-optimization/content/html/
optimalpidtuning.html) for a quick review (in the context of PID tuning).
Figure 3: Simulation with a set of C -parameters BFO-optimized to minimize a tran-
sient performance index.
the management of the C -parameters7, the Sobol-based sensibility is evaluated only
during the initialization / transient of the closed-loop.
Figure 4 shows that a priori the coefficient k does not influence the dynamical
performances during the transient.
Figure 4: Sobol-based analysis of the ISE index during the closed-loop initialization.
7case1: thevalueoftheevaluatedindexisboundedto100andatoleranceof±10%ispermitted
on the C -parameters; case 2 : the value of the evaluated index is not bounded and a tolerance of
±50% is permitted on the C -parameters. The results are very similar between the two cases and
the Sobol index for {K ,K ,k ,k } are respectively {0.3324,0.3318,0.3326,0.0002}.
3 Applications of the C -control
3.1 Motor control in the dq frame
Consider a three-phase motor driven in the dq frame; the motor is supplied by a e
voltagesourcerotatingatanω angularfrequencyandmodeledbyasimpleRC circuit
with an additional voltage source e that acts as an (internal) disturbance. Figure
5 depicts the proposed model (a single phase is represented) where P(θ) and Pi(θ)
are respectively the Park and the inverse Park transform. The purpose is to control
simultaneously the d and q axis with an a priori unknown disturbance e considering
also that the angular frequency ω is increasing according to the time.
Figure 5: Model of the motor in the dq frame including an explicit disturbance e .
The disturbance e is of the general form:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
d d2 2 (cid:0) d 3 (cid:1)
where the amplitude A and the angular frequency ω of each phase i could depend
on the time. The control structure is composed of two C controllers: the d axis
is ”maintained” close to zero (d∗ denotes the output ref. and d , the controlled
output) and the q axis tracks a specific reference (q∗ denotes the output ref. and
q , the controlled output).
The following figures illustrate some cases with different ”behavior” of the distur-
bance e . Figure 6 presents the most simple case where A = A = A = Cst and
ω = Cst; in Fig. 7 is considered a time-varying disturbance where A = A = A are
increasing according to the time; in Fig. 8, small variations of amplitudes of A ,A
and A are considered (symbolically, A ∼ A ∼ A ), and finally, Fig. 9 depicts the
case where ω is time-varying only over a short period of time.
Figure 6: Control in the dq frame with ”simple” disturbance e .
Figure 7: Control in the dq frame with an increasing amplitude of each component
of e .
Figure 8: Control in the dq frame with variation of amplitude of each component of
e .
Figure 9: Control in the dq frame with variation of the ω frequency of e .
3.2 Control of switched non-minimum and minimum phase
Consider the set Σ of stable linear systems such that Σ = {Σ },i = 1,2,···n, which
are minimum and non-minimum phase systems, and which are considered as unknown
in the sense that no explicit model has been identified for control purposes. Assume
now that for all systems, there exists an integer p = {1,··· ,8}, called the switching
index, such that during a short time window, we have:
p y = C x(t)
where u and y are respectively the input and the output of the system Σ (p is the
switching index). The step responses of these p systems are presented Fig. 10.
Figure 10: Step responses of each system Σ .
Figures 11 12 13 14 present some examples of the application of the C -control under
different arbitrary switching sequences that involve both minimum and non-minimum
phase systems. The first switching time is t , the second is t and the third is t .
Consider now the existence of a delay τ on y that modify (4) such that:
This delay can e.g. simulate the propagation delay inside a sensor network. Figures
15 and 16 present two examples of the application of the C -control under different
switching sequences that involve both minimum and non-minimum phase systems.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 11: Switched sequence #1 for t = 0.01 s and t = 0.05 s.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 12: Switched sequence #2 for t = 0.025 s and t = 0.072 s.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 13: Switched sequence #3 for t = 0.018 s, t = 0.035 s and t = 0.072 s.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 14: Switched sequence #4 for t = 0.35 s, t = 0.58 s.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 15: Switched sequence #5 for t = 0.015 s, t = 0.055 s. An addition of a
time-delay occurs at t = 0.06 s.
(a) Step responses of each system Σ .
(b) Controlled switched sequence.
Figure 16: Switched sequence #6 for t = 0.025 s, t = 0.072 s. An addition of a
time-delay occurs at t = 0.06 s.
Discussions
These results have been obtained with a single specific set of the C -parameters; to
improve the tracking performances, one may consider an on-line adjustment of the
C -parameters. Although resonances occur at the instants of switches, the stability
of the control is preserved (regarding the studied cases) when switching from the
different types of systems. In the same manner, a direct tuning of the C -parameters
could damp (ideally, could cancel) the resonant effects.
The presented simulation results show that the proposed control law is robust to
”strong” model variations and in particular when the model is a switching non-
minimum phase or minimum phase system that include eventually time-delay. More-
over, the proposed control law seems to have the same properties than the original
model-free control [2] [3] for which its performances have been successfully verified
especially in simulation.
3.3 Ballistic and the fire control
If one fire a projectile at an initial angle and an initial speed, then general physics
allows calculating how far it will travel... but would it be possible to control the initial
speed needed in such manner that the projectile reaches a precise distance? That’s
what we propose to do using the C -control.
3.3.1 Ballistic simplified model
We define first a simple model of the trajectory w(t) = (w (t), w (t)) of a projectile
of mass m in the usual frame of reference (Oxz) fired with an initial speed magnitude
v that makes a fire angle θ with the horizontal reference i.e. v(t) = v cos(θ)e +
v sin(θ)e . The origin (0,0) of the frame reference is considered as the initial position
of the projectile.
Denote a the acceleration vector and v the speed vector of the projectile. From
Newton law, considering the action of the gravity g and the air resistance cv2, we
have:
m = ma = mg−cv2 (6)
with the initial conditions:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(t)(cid:12) dw
(cid:12) = v cosθ, (cid:12) = v sinθ (7)
dt (cid:12) dt (cid:12)
Considering no air resistance i.e. c = 0, (6) is simplified:
  m x = 0
whose solution reads:
w (t) = v cosθt+cte
  w (t) = v sinθt− gt2 +cte
From (9), the range (or the target) of the projectile x at z = 0 can be easily
deduced. We have:
2v2cosθsinθ
d = 0 . (10)
3.3.2 Ballistic-fire control methodology
Proposed strategy Consider by hypothesis that a ”virtual” trajectory w∗ of the
projectile hits a target x∗ from an initial speed v∗ and an initial fire angle θ∗.
Consider now the ”true” projectile to fire with a trajectory w. To hit the target x∗
(at z = 0) from a small initial speed v , one controls the projectile in such manner
that the projectile reaches quickly the initial speed v∗ and the initial fire angle θ∗
required to hit the specified target x∗ according to (10). During such ”launching”
phase, that we define as the ”launching” distance ∆x for which the trajectory of
the projectile is fully controlled, we start from an initial condition that prevents the
projectile to reach its target x∗ i.e. :
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(t)(cid:12) dw
(cid:12) = v cosθ , (cid:12) = v sinθ (11)
dt (cid:12) dt (cid:12)
where v < v∗ and θ ≤ θ∗ are positive resp. initial speed magnitude and fire angle.
Figure 17 illustrates simulation examples of a ”virtual” trajectory (subj. to v∗ and
θ∗) and a ”true” trajectory (subj. to v and θ∗) that is not controlled; the simulations
of the trajectories considering c (cid:54)= 0 are presented in Fig. 17(b).
The goal is to accelerate the projectile using a specific mechanical device in such
manner that the references v∗ and θ∗ are reached quickly. We consider therefore
controlling the trajectory w(t) of the projectile over the launching distance ∆x .
(a) Case c=0
(b) Case c=0 and c(cid:54)=0
Figure 17: Example of comparison of the uncontrolled ”true” projectile (subj. to v
and θ∗) and the ”virtual” trajectory (subj. to v∗ and θ∗), considering c = 0 and c (cid:54)= 0.
We took c = 0.05, θ = θ∗ = π/3, v = 10 m/s and v = 9 m/s.
Controllable ballistic model
To simulate a controllable model of the trajectory w of the projectile, we consider
adding an external acceleration force in (6) that represents the mechanical action of
the specific mechanical device over the distance ∆x . We have:
m = mg−cv2 +aext (12)
where aext(t) = (aext(t), aext(t)) is equivalent to the external force provided by the
mechanicaldevice. Sincesuchdeviceactsonlyover∆x ,thenweassumethataext = 0
for all x > ∆x .
3.3.3 Implementation of the C -controller
A possible control scheme is to consider controlling the trajectory w that must be
”as close as possible” to the reference w∗ over the distance ∆x . Therefore, w is
physically measured and the external acceleration aext is driven by the C -controller,
through the specific mechanical device.
We build a closed-loop that creates a feedback between (2) and (12). We have ”sym-
bolically”, for all x ≤ ∆x :
 (cid:90) t (cid:12)
      u k = ae k xt = 0 K i (w k ∗ −1 −w k−1 )dτ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) k−1(cid:124) (cid:8) ui k−1 +K p (α (cid:123) e (cid:122) −βk −w k−1 ) (cid:9) (cid:125)
  d2w(t)
   m dt2 = mg−cv2 +u k
Determination of the distance ∆x ∗
Since we expect that the projectile is fired from ∆x with a speed that is very close to
v∗ (and follows, via the C -control, the same trajectory i.e. w ≈ w∗ over ∆x ), then,
weproposeapossibledefinitionofthetheoreticallaunchingdistance∆x∗, (considered
only over the x axis) that corresponds to the solution in w of:
Geometrically, the theoretical launching distance ∆x∗ is associated to the speed v
that is reached by the projectile (launched with the initial speed v < v∗) when v is
close to v∗ .
3.3.4 Numerical simulations
Case ∆x > ∆x ∗
Consider the simulated ”virtual” trajectory, presented in Fig. 17, as the control
reference w∗; to simplify, we consider θ as constant. Figure 18 presents the case
where the fire is controlled considering c = 0 over ∆x = 0.11 m. In particular, Fig.
18(a) presents, at the top, the evolution of the controlled trajectory w in comparison
withthereferencew∗, and, atthebottom, thecalculatedspeeddw /dtincomparison
with the initial speed v cosθ. Figure 18(b) presents the complete ”true” controlled
trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory. Figure 19 presents the same
simulations in the case c (cid:54)= 0.
Case ∆x ∼ ∆x ∗
Consider the simulated ”virtual” trajectory, presented in Fig. 17, as the control
reference w∗; to simplify, we consider θ as constant. Figure 20 presents the case
where the fire is controlled considering c = 0 over ∆x∗. In particular, Fig. 20(a)
presents, at the top, the evolution of the controlled trajectory w in comparison with
the reference w∗, and, at the bottom, the calculated speed dw /dt in comparison
with the initial speed v cosθ. Figure 20(b) presents the complete ”true” controlled
trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory. Figure 21 presents the same
simulations in the case c (cid:54)= 0.
Discussions
These results have been obtained using the same set of the C -parameters. The
properties of stabilization of the control law, like in the previous case when deal-
ing with switching systems (§3.2) , seem to be preserved and ensure good tracking
performances in particular when considering c = 0 and c (cid:54)= 0.
Further generalizations would allow using multiple and parallel C -controllers in
order to control simultaneous physical quantities. In particular, the speed profile v
could be controlled simultaneously with the trajectory w...
(a) Atthetop,controlledtrajectorywrelatingtothereferencew∗;atthebottom,calculatedspeeddw /dt
relating to the initial speed v cosθ.
(b) Complete controlled ”true” trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory.
Figure 18: Example of controlled trajectory considering c = 0 over ∆x = 0.11 m.
We took θ = θ∗ = π/3, v = 10 m/s and v = 9 m/s.
(a) At the top, controlled trajectory w relating to the reference w∗; at the bottom, calculated speed
dw /dt relating to the initial speed v cosθ.
(b) Complete controlled ”true” trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory.
Figure 19: Example of controlled trajectory considering c (cid:54)= 0 over ∆x = 0.11 m.
We took c = 0.05, θ = θ∗ = π/3, v = 10 m/s and v = 9 m/s.
(a) At the top, controlled trajectory w relating to the reference w∗; at the bottom, calculated speed
dw /dt relating to the initial speed v cosθ.
(b) Complete controlled ”true” trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory.
Figure 20: Example of controlled trajectory considering c = 0 over ∆x∗. We took
θ = θ∗ = π/3, v = 10 m/s and v = 9 m/s.
(a) At the top, controlled trajectory w relating to the reference w∗; at the bottom, calculated speed
dw /dt relating to the initial speed v cosθ.
(b) Complete controlled ”true” trajectory in comparison with the virtual trajectory.
Figure 21: Example of controlled trajectory considering c (cid:54)= 0 over ∆x∗. We took
c = 0.05, θ = θ∗ = π/3, v = 10 m/s and v = 9 m/s.
3.4 Control of the HIV-1 model
The problem is to control the predator-prey like model that describes the evolution
of the HIV-1 when subjected to an external ”medical agent”. From a mathematical
point of view, we study the possibility of controlling the model (15) for which the
purpose is to control the output y (corresponding to the viral load) using the double
inputs u and u in such manner that y converges rapidly to zero 8 [16] [17].
 1 1 1 1 3
2 1 1 3 2 (15)
 (cid:0) (cid:1)
 y = 0 0 γ x
where (mathematically) : d = 0.02,k = 100,s = 10,β = 2.4.10−5,µ = 0.24,c = 2.4.
γ is a scaling factor that allows normalizing the output. Figure 22 presents the
evolution of the output y in open-loop when u = u = 0 i.e. when no medical drug
is considered. Figures 23 and 24 illustrate the control of y considering two different
ratios between u and u .
Figure 22: Transient response of y considering u = u = 0.
8Since we are trying to control this model only from the mathematical point of view, we do not
take into account the constraints that are medically imposed.
(a) Output y
(b) Input u
Figure 23: Controlled output y (viral load) in correspondence with u = u = u.
(a) Output y
(b) Input u
Figure 24: Controlled output y (viral load) in correspondence with u = u = 1u.
3.5 Control of the Epstein frame
The Epstein frame (see Fig. 25 9) aims to characterize a magnetic material by de-
termining its B −H hysteresis curve. The principle is to create a magnetic field H
inside the material using a ”magnetizing” current i . The material gives a response
to the field H that physically corresponds to the measurable magnetic induction field
B. This B field creates a voltage v through magnetic induction and the quantities
v and i is a representation of the magnetic hysteresis curve B − H. To describe
experimentally the major B − H hysteresis loop, the material under study has to
be magnetized using a current i that is alternative and of enough magnitude in
order to describe the magnetic behavior at saturation. The purpose of the control law
implementation is to control i such that the output voltage of the Epstein frame v
remains ”as close as possible” to a desired reference waveform.
Figure 25: An experimental Epstein frame to characterize magnetic materials.
3.5.1 Epstein frame control
Proposed C -control scheme Consider the control scheme depicted in Fig. 26
where C is the proposed PMA controller. K and K are positive real gains.
Denote f the numerical Jiles-Atherton model that is associated to the magnetic
hysteresis B −H and f is the complete hysteresis to control.
Epstein_frame.jpg.
Figure 26: Proposed PMA scheme to control the electrical waveforms measured from
a magnetic hysteresis.
Jiles-Atherton based hysteresis model The Jiles-Atherton model [18] describes
a magnetic hysteresis cycle B −H. It reads:
dM 1 M −M c dM
where c, δk, M , α are physical coefficients well identified from magnetic hysteresis
measurement and we assume that the current i corresponds to the magnetization H
i.e. i ∝ H andthevoltagev correspondstothederivativeofthemagneticinduction
field response B = µ H + J (H) (where J describes the B − H hysteresis via
(16)).
Simplified model of the Epstein frame The Epstein frame admits a complex
model based on the Jiles-Atherton model that represents all electric phenomena that
occur inside the Epstein frame10. To simplify the model of the Epstein frame to
control, we consider controlling a nonlinear function f , which represents a modified
Jiles-Atherton model. Denote v = f (i ) the nonlinear dynamical system that
describes the B −H hysteresis as a function of i , and consider controlling directly
the hysteresis cycle in such manner that C controls i in order to get v = f (i )
π H H JA H
as close as possible to a reference waveform.
Todefinetheglobalf hysteresisfunctionthatiscontrolledbyC , whichincludes
the scaling coefficients needed by the C corrector, consider i = K u, y = K v
π H in out H
and a coefficient K such that:
y = f (u) = K K u+K J (K u). (17)
JA in e out BH in
10TheEpsteinframeisequivalenttoatransformerandthe”mutualinteractions”betweenprimary
and secondary coils must be taken into account in addition to the hysteresis behavior.
The small coefficient K #10−4 compensates the very small variations of f when
B is close to B . Such variations may induce time-delays in the response of the
C -controller that induce some distortions of the output signal y. The model (17)
could be seen as an ”affine” derivation of the original Jiles-Atherton model.
The B−H loops, obtained from the Jiles-Atherton model, are depicted in Fig. 27
consideringthefrequencies5Hz, 50Hz, 500Hz, 1kHzand10kHz. Sincethishystere-
sis model does not allow H > H , a limitation is necessary to bound the evolution
of H, that may occur eventually during the transient of the dynamic stabilization of
the control loop (ex. in Fig. 31).
.
Figure 27: Simulation of the Jiles-Atherton model for different operating frequencies.
3.5.2 Simulation results
Figures 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 depict the input u and the (rescaled) output y of the
control loop according to the time. Given a particular operating frequency, for which
a particular H −B hysteresis is studied (see Fig. 27), and assuming that the output
reference y∗ is a sinusoid, whose magnitude corresponds to the theoretical H of
the H − B hysteresis, different frequencies are considered (5 Hz, 50 Hz, 500 Hz,
1 kHz and 10 kHz) in order to highlight the behavior of the controlled voltage v
when the frequency changes. In particular, high frequencies (e.g. Figures 31 and 32)
introduce an important transient response on y due to the fact that the variations
of y∗ are too fast to get an immediate stabilization to the dynamic working point
of the hysteresis. The simulation show that the C -controller gives very interesting
dynamic performances over a wide range of dynamic working points relating to the
operatingfrequency. Anoptimizationalgorithm(see§2.3)hasbeenusedtoadjustthe
parameters of the C -controller in such manner that the shape of the output response
y is ”as close to” a sine shape11.
Remarks This hysteresis model is composed of three subsystems (the first magne-
tization branch, the increasing and decreasing branches) that switch depending on
the value of dH/dt. When H << H , the switch between the branches may not be
smooth and such ”connection” may induce a small transient on y. An illustration is
presented in Fig. 33 at a low frequency in comparison with Fig. 30.
The closed-loop has been also tested using a triangular shaped output reference
y∗. Figure 34 depicts the magnitude of the magnetic field H and the corresponding
(rescaled)magneticinductionB duringthecontrolloopprocessaccordingtothetime.
The frequency of 5 Hz has been considered as an example holding the parameters of
the simulation with the sine reference at 5 Hz.
Figure 28: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 5 Hz.
11Remember that the purpose of the optimization procedure is to minimize the tracking error
y∗−y in such manner that ideally y ≡y∗ for the particular sine output reference y∗.
Figure 29: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 50 Hz.
Figure 30: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 500 Hz.
Figure 31: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 1 kHz.
Figure 32: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 10 kHz.
Figure 33: Simulated u and y signals according to the time at 500 Hz (H << H ).
Figure 34: Simulated H and y signals according to the time at 5 Hz.
4 Derivative-free & ”extremum-seeking” control
To describe how the PMA could be used as a derivative-free optimization (DFO)
algorithm (e.g. [19] [20]) or as an ”extremum-seeking” (ES) control scheme (e.g. [21]
[22] [23]), we first define each element of the associated control scheme and then, we
derive the operating conditions that would allow to minimize nonlinear functions. We
assume that it is possible to derive a control scheme such that the PMA can be used
to minimize nonlinear functions.
4.1 Proposed C -control scheme
Definition of the closed loop Consider the control scheme depicted in Fig. 35
where C is the proposed PMA ”extremum-seeking” controller. K and K are
positive real gains. We consider either a static nonlinear function fs (regarding
DFO), which does not have any internal dynamical properties, or a nonlinear SISO
dynamical system (1) (regarding ES), to minimize. The function Q is e.g. a basic
first order transfer function.
Figure 35: Proposed PMA scheme to minimize a nonlinear function f .
Function to control
• Define the fs static function to optimize such that:
nl u(cid:48) (cid:55)→ y
or consider a nonlinear SISO dynamical system (1).
This function represents the ”nonlinear optimization problem”. Currently, the
assumption n ≤ 2 is considered and we denote u(cid:48) the input variable for n = 1.
• Q is a standard linear transfer function (typically of first order), such that:
Q : du(cid:48) (cid:12) (19)
dt (cid:12) k k
where γ is a time-constant, chosen in such manner that the step response of Q
is very fast. As presented in the Fig. 35, Q is associated with fs in order to
provide some minimal dynamical properties regarding the system fs to control.
Obviously, the Q function is not necessary when f is already a dynamical
function like (1)12.
A single C -controller13 drives a single input of f (eventually through Q), as
presented in Fig. 35.
4.2 Numerical applications
SincethePMAisdesignedfornonlinearsystemsanddoesnotcontainanyderivatives,
it is assumed that the ”extremum-seeking” control is possible considering a specific
definition of y∗ in order to reach and stabilize f to its minimum.
Let us assume that the following (eventually constrained) minimization problem
(described for a single variable):
min f (x), (x = u(cid:48)identically inside the control scheme) (20)
isequivalenttothecontrolschemedescribedinFig. 35, forwhichtheoutputreference
y∗ ”follows” the minimum value of f . We denote x = x the value that gives the
minimum of f .
Results For each case in 1D, are plotted: the difference between two iterations
y , y and the error between x and the evolution of x through the closed-loop. In
these cases, all the parameters of C have been set experimentally to give interesting
performances but are not optimal (the choice of the y∗ function may influence the
speed of the convergence). The following numerical cases are studied:
12Last investigations suggest that the linear transfer function Q may be not necessary even for
a fs function to control. The properties of the para-model algorithm are currently under study
considering nonlinear systems that are ”non-dynamical”.
13To extend this scheme to multi-input variables (n > 2) of f , one may consider the use of a
C -controller per input variable.
• See Fig. 36 regarding the minimization of a 1D convex function such that:
• SeeFig. 37regardingtheminimizationofa1Dconvexfunctionwithaminimum
that changes according to the time at an unknown instant t such that:
min(x−30)2 t →1? min(x−40)2 (22)
• See Fig. 38 regarding the minimization of a 1D non convex function such that:
min 10(1.5cos(x)−x)+exp(x−5)+100 subj. to : y ≥ 15x−60 (23)
5 Concluding remarks
We presented how the proposed para-model agent14, as a model-free and derivative-
freebasedcontroller,canbeusedtocontrolnonlinearsystemsorperformoptimization
/ ”extremum-seeking” control. Further investigations include extensive tests and
applications to complex systems as well as a complete study of the stability.
Acknowledgement
The author is sincerely grateful to Dr. Edouard Thomas for his strong guidance and
his valuable comments that improved this paper. The author is also sincerely grateful
to Olivier Ghibaudo, Ph.D. student at G2Elab-CNRS (Grenoble) France, for having
worked on the numerical version of the hysteresis model.
14Why ”para-model”? Based on the ”model-free” methodology, for which the model is not cor-
related to the controller in the sense that the controller does not need an explicit definition of the
modeltobeparametrizedandcanthusrebuildanultra-localmodelfrommeasurements,wepropose
the prefix ”para” to highlight the fact that the agent is ”in close proximity” to the model of the
processthathecontrols. AlthoughnospecificinformationisneededforthePMAcontrolpart,some
basic information may be needed to configure properly the PMA and the output reference y∗ in
the case of extremum-seeking control approach. The stability study is an essential part that should
formalize the proposed PMA approach in order to justify theoretically the operating conditions of
the C -control.
Figure 36: min(x−30)2 (initial condition in red spot).
Figure37: min f = (x−30)2 t →1? minf = (x−40)2 (initialconditioninredspot).
Figure38: min 10(1.5cos(x)−x)+exp(x−5)+100 subj. to : y ≥ 15x−60(ini-
tial condition in red spot).