A population-based microbial oscillator
Angel Gon˜i-Moreno1,∗ and Martyn Amos2
1 Natural Computing Group, Universidad Polite´cnica de Madrid, Spain
2 Department of Computing and Mathematics,
Manchester Metropolitan University, UK
∗ E-mail: agmoreno@gcn.upm.es, m.amos@mmu.ac.uk
Geneticoscillatorsareamajorthemeofinterestintheemergingfield
ofsyntheticbiology. Untilrecently,mostworkhasbeencarriedoutusing
intra-cellular oscillators, but this approach restricts the broader appli-
cability of such systems. Motivated by a desire to develop large-scale,
spatially-distributedcell-basedcomputationalsystems,wepresentanini-
tial design for a population-level oscillator which uses three different bac-
terial strains. Our system is based on the client-server model familiar to
computer science, and uses quorum sensing for communication between
nodes. Wepresenttheresultsofextensiveinsilicosimulationtests,which
confirm that our design is both feasible and robust.
1 Introduction
The growing field of synthetic biology [5,25,28] has the potential to impact
on many pressing areas of concern, such as health [20,26], energy [17] and the
environment [27]. By engineering bacteria (and sometimes other types of cell),
practitioners in the field hope to take advantage of their inherent “biological
nanotechnology”. This engineering is generally achieved by modifying the nat-
ural transcriptional mechanisms and regulatory activities of the bacterium of
interest. Collectionsofbacterialcellshaverecentlybeensuccessfullyengineered
toperformsimpletasks,suchasemulatinglight-sensitivefilm[19],orgenerating
simple patterns [4,29]. By harnessing and controlling communication and syn-
chronization mechanisms found in such systems, we hope to engineer scalable,
robust, fault-tolerant bacterial devices.
Ourobjectiveistodesignamulti-strainbacterialcommunitywithautonomous
behaviour. We model our system on the “client-server” architecture familiar to
computer science [6], with a single central server and two clients (one “red”
and the other “green”). The task we define is that of oscillation; by engineer-
ing feedback between three different strains, web obtain indefinite switching
]BC.oib-q[
1v3854.7001:viXra
between “red” and “green” outputs.
In this paper we first briefly review previous work on engineered cellular
oscillators. We then describe the architecture of the two clients and the single
serverstrain,whichallusestandardgeneticparts. Wedescribein silicocompo-
nent testing results, before demonstrating, using extensive simulation studies,
the feasibility of engineering multi-strain, population-based oscillators. Our re-
sults suggest that such distributed computations may become more common as
the field of synthetic biology matures.
2 Previous work
Synthetic biology is an emerging scientific discipline largely concerned with the
engineering of biological systems. The goals of synthetic biology include the
“optimization of existing biological systems for human purposes, and the de-
velopment and application of rational engineering principles to the design and
construction of biological systems. A significant amount of work on synthetic
biologyhasconcernedswitches[15]andoscillators; here, wefocusonthelatter.
In physics, an oscillator is a system that produces a regular, periodic “out-
put”. Familiar examples include a pendulum or a vibrating string. Linking
several oscillators together in some way gives rise to synchrony – for example,
heartcellsrepeatedlyfiringinunison, ormillionsoffirefliesblinkingonandoff,
seemingly as one [31].
Althoughsyntheticgeneticoscillatorsdatebacktotheearly1960s[16],these
so-called Goodwin oscillators werelimitedtosinglegenes. Thearchetypeof the
multi-gene oscillator is known as the repressilator, which is a “ring” of genes,
each repressing its successor [12,22]. A detailed discussion of synthetic genetic
oscillators is beyond the scope of this paper, but we refer the reader to a recent
extensive survey [24].
Recently, genetic clocks have been coupled to produce synchronised oscilla-
tions at the level of a cell population [9]. Following on from earlier theoretical
work [14,21], this paper demonstrated the feasibility of engineering population-
level oscillations. However, the population used was homogenous. In nature,
there exist bacterial communities known as biofilms [10], in which hundreds of
bacterialspeciesformarobustandstablecommunitythroughsignallingandco-
operation. Ifthepotentialofsyntheticbiologyistobefullyrealised, webelieve
that it is important to understand how to engineer communication in mixed
groups of cells. We therefore describe a scheme for obtaining population-level
oscillations using a three-component population.
3 A multi-strain bacterial oscillator
In this Section we describe in detail the structure of our population-based
client-server oscillator. We show how a three-strain community can, in prin-
ciple achieve oscillatory behaviour (switching from red to green light output)
in an autonomous, synchronous fashion. The basic architecture of our system,
depicted in Figure 1, is based on the “client-server” principle of modern com-
puting, inwhichdistributedclientnodescommunicatewithacentralserver. In
our system, we have one server strain and two client strains. We extend the
analogy by considering the role of a buffer, which is the nutrient solution in
which the cells live and grow (in computing, a buffer is a region of memory in
which temporary data are stored). Signals are transmitted between client and
serverviathis“sharedmemory”,throughtheactionsofsensinganddeposition.
Eachcell(“processor”)alsohasitsownprivateinternal“memory”,correspond-
ing to the space inside the membrane where local functions are performed. As
each bacterium is, in effect, an independent processor, the success of our de-
sign relies on our ability to make all processors react simultaneously to external
signals.
Quorum-sensing (QS) [2] has already been studied extensively in the con-
text of synthetic biology [1,3,14]. This mechanism facilitates inter-bacterial
communication via the generation and receiving of signal molecules [13]. Most
importantly, it enables a community-level response to emerge once a certain
concentration threshold has been reached. It is this mechanism that we will use
asthebasisofthecurrentstudy. Inwhatfollows, thereexistonlyfourdifferent
signals, labelled AHLg, AHLr, AHLs and AHLs’ (the precise definitions of each
will be made clear later). Each cell/processor reacts not to the absence or pres-
ence of a specific AHL signal, but to the signal level, or concentration. For that
purpose,athreshold,δ,forinputresponsesisdefinedineachcell. Iftheoutput,
O(B ) produced by cell B is required for activation of B , and some signal
level is denoted by |x|, we assert that when |O(B )|≥δB then cell B is acti-
vated. In this way, our model attempts to address one of the biggest problems
inherent to single-cell circuits; stochastic expression noise due to inappropriate
concentrations of signalling molecules.
In Figure 1, we show the server and two clients; the server is activated by
bothAHLsandAHLs’(producingeitherAHLrorAHLgrespectively);thegreen
clientisactivatedbyAHLg,producingAHLsandgreenfluorescentprotein,and
theredclientisactivatedbyAHLr,producingAHLs’andredfluorescentprotein.
WecanthereforeseehowthismachineliesdormantuntileitherAHLsorAHLs’
is added to the nutrient, after which the system enters a period of oscillation
(either red-green-red-... or green-red-green-... respectively). This is achieved
by the server cells switching “turns” between red and green client cells. The
intended behaviour of the server is shown in Table 1; the important thing to
note is that it acts as an XOR (exclusive OR) function, since it is only active
when receiving a single input (i.e., when one of the clients is active). If, for
somereason, eitherbothornoneoftheclientsareactive, thentheservershould
be inactive - this is central to the correct operation of the system.
Figure1: Overallsystemarchitecture. (a)ServeractivatedbyAHLs’. (b)Green
client activated. (c) Server re-activated by AHLs. (d) Red client activated.
We now describe in detail the internal structure of the client and server E.
colistrains. Inordertodoso,wefirstspecifytheAHLmoleculescorresponding
to the various signals within the system. These are listed in Table 2.
Thefourquorumsensingsystemswerechosencarefully, considering(1)sen-
sitivity, (2) bacterial class, and (3) potential conflicts. In [23] the four systems
are grouped together in terms of their sensitivity, in [18] the systems are all
characterised as being present in particular divisions of specific Proteobacteria,
and in [30] it is established that there exist no conflicts between the molecules
sensed by the different systems. We therefore strongly believe that the systems
we have chosen are appropriate.
AHLs AHLs’ AHLg AHLr S
Table 1: Truth table for server strain.
Signal System Molecule
AHLg LasI/R 3OC12AHL
AHLr Rh1I/R C4AHL
AHLs LuxI/R 3OC6AHL
AHLs’ SinI/R 3OC14AHL
Table 2: Specific molecules corresponding to signals.
3OC6AHL C4AHL
IPTG Cl434 RhlI
pLuxR pTac
pSinR pSalCl434
3OC14AHL 3OC12AHL
Figure 2: Server cell internal architecture.
3.1 Server cells
Theservercellslieattheheartofthesystem, astheyareresponsibleforimple-
menting the core switching behaviour. In order to implement this, we use two
hybrid promoters. These are promoters that are regulated by two inputs (one
inducer and one repressor), and careful design allows them to be combined. In
order to activate the red output signal from the server, it first requires an input
of AHLs.
The detailed structure of the server is depicted in Figure 2. When a server
bacterium detects via its membrane that the concentration of AHL molecules
exceedstheinputthresholdforthatQS system,theinduciblepromoterpLuxRs
is activated. As a result of this, the two downstream structural genes are ex-
pressed. The production of IPTG molecules is used to stimulate a positive
action in the hybrid promoter pTac [11] which, in turn, manages the expression
of AHL molecules by using the gene luxIr. At the same time, the expression
product of the second gene, CI434, represses the hybrid promoter pSalCI4341,
so the production of AHL is no longer possible due to the inhibitionof luxIg.
Thisgeneralsubsystemdesignisduplicatedintheservertoreactsymmetrically
to each of the inputs the server may receive: AHL and AHL .
s s(cid:48)
C4AHL 3OC12AHL
3OC14AHL 3OC6AHL
SinI rfp LuxI gfp
pRhlR pLasR
Figure 3: Client cell internal architecture (Left: red, Right: green).
3.2 Client cells
The detailed structures of the client cells are shown in Figure 3. These cells
haveamuchsimplerdesign,becauseofthelackofsynchronizationrequirements
on clients within this model. In the case of the green client, when it senses
a sufficient concentration of AHL molecules in the environment to raise the
threshold of the corresponding QS system, it activates the internal pathway
that concludes with the expression of AHL molecules and the reporter (gpf).
The first stage of this is the activation of the inducible promoter pLuxRg which
allowsthetranscriptionandtranslationofthegenesLuxI andgfp. LuxIs isused
toproduceend-turnsignals(inthiscase,AHL ),whichareplacedintheshared
memoryinordertonotifytheserverthatthegreenlightthatcorrespondstohalf
oscillation cycle has been satisfactorily expressed. The design of the red client
is exactly the same, only with SinI replacing LuxI, and rfp being produced
instead of gfp.
4 Experimental results
We now describe the results of simulation-based experiments to investigate the
behaviour of both the individual components, and the client-server system as
a whole. In order to achieve this, we run two sets of simulations, at different
levels of detail. The first (micro-level) set investigates intra-cellular behaviour
(i.e., at the internal level of gene regulation), and the second (macro-level) set
of experiments assesses the effects of inter-cellular interactions.
4.1 Component testing: single-cell experiments
Forsinglecomponenttesting,simulationsareperformedusingtheTinkercell[7]
CADtooltomodelthegeneticnetworksofboththeclientsandtheserver. This
simulation environment provides a framework for the study of the dynamical
behaviour of genetic circuits. The user specifies the different components of the
circuit (either taken from a standard library or defined on an ad hoc basis) and
their connectivity, as well as external inputs and outputs. The key detail lies
in the correct specification of the nature of connections between components.
These connections are represented by ODEs, which draw their terms from the
individual components. Tinkercell then solves the set of equations on behalf of
the user, producing dynamical time-series plots. The Tinkercell schematics for
theserverandclientsaredepictedinFigure 4. Theserverhybridpromoters(c2
and c3 in figure 4) have two different operator regions where the molecules can
bind,oneforinducibleforcesandoneforrepressibleforces. WhenAHLsexceeds
themembranethresholditbindsmoleculesm1(whicharealwayspresentinthe
cell) , and creates a AHLs (active AHLs molecules). Those molecules induce
promoter i1 activity. The same principle applies for AHLs2 (i.e., AHLs’, the
labelling is simply an restriction of the software).
Tinkercellprovidesdefaultequationsbywhichvariousstandardcomponents
are connected, and no changes were made to any of these. All concentrations
are measured in µM units. However, it is relevant to remark that the strength
of the RBSs and the promoters has been increased to a very high value in
order to detect possible irregularities in the system (RBS strength = 20; Pro-
moter strength = 4). That is why in this single component specification, we
observe high values for output responses. In this way, we artificially amplify
both “good” and ’“bad” signals, in order to easily detect aberrant behaviour.
However, this does not change in any way the overall behaviour of the system.
All the intermediate transcription factors of the system are set up to 0 µM at
thebeginningofthesimulation,andweincludeadegradationreactionforeach.
Wenowshowtheresultsofsingle-cellsimulationsforclientsandserver. We
vary the inputs to each in order to confirm that they only produce a threshold
output at the correct concentration levels. Figure 5 shows the behaviour of
the two client strains for different concentrations of input molecules. Molecule
C4AHL, which is the red-specific turn signal, induces the expression of ClientR
output. It is very important to note that the concentration of those molecules
which raise thresholds is denoted by a value of zero for C4AHL. That is the
momentinwhichClientR’sturnbegins,bylaunchingthecascadeofitsquorum
sensing system to produce 3OC14AHL (end turn signals) and red fluorescent
proteins (for system output). When C4AHL molecules exceed a concrete sat-
uration level (higher than the threshold), the production of ClientR’s output
reaches its maximum and the client reaches an steady state. We note that
ClientR’s operative machinery is completely indifferent to green-specific turn
signals (3OC12AHL). A similar behaviour affects the green client strain with
opposite molecular perception.
We now describe the simulation tests of the server component of the model.
Sincenoise-attenuationinsidetheserverisoneofthemostimportantfeaturesof
the model, this component is tested extensively with a wide range of values for
the degradation rates of the four transcription factors connected to the hybrid
promoters. The overall objective is to ensure that the server only ever emits
a single signal during any one ’“turn”. We first performed a set of runs using
random values for each degradation rate, which confirmed that the system per-
formedcorrectlyandrobustly. Wewere only able toobtainincorrectbehaviour
for the system by using abnormal and unrealistic degradation rates. In what
follows, we use the default degradation rate (-1) for each protein.
Figure 4: Tinkercell schematics. Top: Server. Middle: Green client. Bottom:
Red client.
Figure 5: Client behaviour. Top: Red client. Bottom: Green client.
Again, we vary the concentrations of both inputs in order to confirm that
the server yields the correct output. The graphs in Figure 6 illustrate the op-
eration of the server during each “turn”. Figure 6 (top) depicts the situation
in which the server receives red-specific end turn signals (3OC14AHL) and pro-
ducesgreen-specificturnsignals(3OC12AHL).Inordertomakethisgraphclear,
two important features must be highlighted. Firstly, a zero value for an input
signal(xandyaxes)represents,asintheclientgraphs,theinstantatwhichthe
concentrationofthecorrespondingmoleculeinthenutrientsolutionissufficient
to exceed the membrane threshold so that the server can start. However, the
mostrelevantattributeoftheserveristheinteractionofredandgreenendturn
signals inside the cell. As we observe in graph 6 (top), red-specific end turn
signals activate the expression of the green turn if and only if green-specific
end turn signals (3OC6AHL) are not present inside the server (or at a very low
concentration). This characteristic aids noise attenuation and, therefore, the
correct operation of the model in case of saturation of the system, by causing a
halt state.
These simulation tests confirm, in principle, the correct functioning of the
individual system components. We now describe the results of full-system sim-
ulations to assess the overall behaviour of our client-server model.
4.2 System-level experiments
Having confirmed the correctness of the individual component designs, we now
seek to investigate the overall system behaviour. In order to achieve this, we
treat each of the three components as a “black box” within a simulation based
on Michaelis-Menten kinetics [8] and performed using the BioBrick library for
Simulink (cite). The fundamental schematics foreach component arethe same
as in the Tinkercell simulation; the only difference lies in the manner in which
the system equations are solved by the software. In both of them, abiological
processes are represented by a set of ODEs:
Equation1describesthegenetictranscriptionprocessµ(t),wherep(t)isthe
production rate and δ the linear degradation rate. Equation 2 represents the
action of an inducible promoter (needed for the QS system), where FT is the
transcriptionfactor,γ asaturationconstant,β themaximumtranscriptionrate
and α a default transcription constant. For concluding protein production, the
model obeys equation 3 where λ is a constant and δ the degradation rate of
the final output η(t). Finally, equation 4 denotes a repressible promoter, which
is used to build in Simulink the negative operator of the hybrid promoters.
Figure6: Serverbehaviour. Top: Greenturnoutput. Bottom: Redturnoutput.
While Tinkercell uses an integrator (CVODE) to build the final system,
the BioBrick library eliminates nonlinearities by linearising the ODEs using a
frequency (Laplacian) domain.
We perform three sets of experiments to assess the system-level behaviour.
Inthefirst,weassumeanidealisedsituation,withzerocellgrowth. Thesecond
set of experiments investigates a rather more realistic situation, which accounts
for cell growth. The third set of experiments simulates the situation in which
one client has a different signal degradation rate to the other (in order to both
confirm correct system behaviour, and to open up the possibility of different
oscillatory patterns).
Before describing the experiments, we first make explicit some assumptions.
Given that the minimal concentration (c ) of molecules that a strain can pro-
duceisequalto0, andthemaximalconcentration(c )isequaltoapredefined
value(5intheselectedsimulations),concentrationvalueswithinthesimulation
lie in the interval [0...5]. (percentage proportion). Within that interval, the
numeric value of the membrane threshold can be specified within the interval
[(cid:39)0.7... (cid:39)3.7]whichrepresents60%oftheglobalmoleculeproduction(or2%
if repression forces are not considered). In this way, we hope to obtain robust
system behaviour across a range of environmental conditions. In what follows,
time units are dimensionless, as this parameter is dependent on the concentra-
tion value. We note that, in all of the graphs, the level of green fluorescence
is coupled to the concentration of AHLs, and the level of red fluorescence is
coupled to the concentration of AHLs’. We now investigate three different sce-
narios: (1) an idealised situation, with a static population, (2) a more realistic
situation, with a growing population, and (3) the situation where clients have
different degradation rates associated with them.
4.2.1 Scenario 1: Static population
We first study the simple situation in which the bacterial population is static
(i.e., there is no growth). This is an idealised example, in which we effectively
simulateasystemcontainingasingleserver, andoneofeachclient. Theresults
are depicted in Figure 7.
We observe the expected pattern of oscillation, starting with the red client.
This turn is denoted by a rise in concentration of AHLr. The important thing
to note is that the concentration of AHLg is basal until the end of the red turn
is signalled by a rise in concentration of AHLs’. This triggers the green client’s
turn,signalledbyariseinconcentrationofAHLg,theendofwhichisindicated
by a rise in concentration of AHLs. This last rise then triggers the activity of
the red client once more, and the cycle continues.
4.2.2 Scenario 2: Growing population
The second experiment considers the situation in the different strain popula-
tionsobservetheusualgrowthpatterns. Ratherthanexplicitlysimulatingeach
bacterium or coarse-grained sub-population (which would require a spatially-
Figure 7: Simulation results, static population. Key: AHLr(×), AHLg(◦),
explicit model, which is beyond the scope of the current study), we reproduce
the effect of a growing strain by multiplying the output of a single population
member according to the standard log phase growth function.
Figure 8: Simulation results, growing population. Key: AHLr(×), AHLg(◦),
Again, we observe the expected system behaviour, but see a gradual rise in
the overall maximum concentrations of AHLs and AHLs’, which is consistent
withpopulationgrowth. TheconcentrationlevelsofAHLgandAHLrarelower
than in the previous experiment because they correspond to “start” signals to
the clients. The server therefore has the capability of ”pausing” the oscillation
until the correct conditions are in place.
4.2.3 Scenario 3: Differential client behaviour
In the final experiment we investigate the effect of differential behaviour of the
client strains. We modify the degradation rate of the “red off” signal AHLs’,
so that it is removed much more slowly from the system. In Figure 9 we
observe the effect of this change. The red client finishes its turn, but the end-
turnmoleculesdegrademoreslowly,andarethereforestillpresentintheshared
memory. Theservernoticesthisredend-turn,andrepeatedlyyieldstheturnto
the green client until the AHLs’ molecules disappear. The system can therefore
adaptitsbehaviourtothisnewsituation. Wedonotobserveagreen-red-green-
red pattern, but instead see red-green-green-green-green-red.... Importantly,
the system dynamically reconfigures the oscillation pattern in a manner that is
completely consistent with correct architectural behaviour.
Figure 9: Simulation results, differential client behaviour. Key: AHLr(×),
5 Conclusions
In this paper we presented a design for a population-based cellular oscillator,
whichusesquorumsensing-basedsignallingwithinaclient-servermodel. Simu-
lationstudiesofourdesignsuggestthatitisrealisticandrobusttofluctuations
in environmental conditions. Such systems will become increasingly important
forsyntheticbiology, asthefieldseeksapplicationsin(forexample)distributed
bio-sensing or tissue engineering. Future work will focus on refinements of the
model, as well as its experimental validation.