]TS.nif-q[
1v4456.1021:viXra
A Random Matrix Approach to Dynamic Factors in macroeconomic data
Mal gorzata Snarska1,2,∗
1Marian Smoluchowski Institute of Physics and Mark Kac Complex Systems Research Centre,
Jagiellonian University, Reymonta 4, 30–059 Krak´ow, Poland
2Cracow University of Economics, Department of Econometrics
and Operations Research, Rakowicka 27, 31–510 Krak´ow, Poland
(Dated: October18, 2018)
Weshowhowrandommatrixtheorycanbeappliedtodevelopnewalgorithmstoextractdynamic
factors from macroeconomic time series. In particular, we consider a limit where the number of
random variables N and the number of consecutive time measurements T are large but the ratio
N/T is fixed. In this regime theunderlyingrandom matrices are asymptotically equivalent to Free
Random Variables (FRV).Application of these methods for macroeconomic indicators for Poland
economy is also presented.
PACSnumbers: 89.65.Gh(Economics;econophysics,financialmarkets,businessandmanagement),02.50.Sk
(Multivariate analysis), 02.70.-c (Computational Techniques;simulations), 02.70.Uu (Applications of Monte
Carlomethods)
Keywords: VARMA, random matrix theory, free random variables, dynamic factor models, historical esti-
I. INTRODUCTION
Macroeconomic time series are characterized by two main features:comovements and cyclic phases of expansion
and depression. Behind the econometric literature, especially on business cycle and VAR modeling there is an idea,
that essential characteristics of macroeconomic time series are adequately captured by a small number of nearly
independent factors.
Ontheotherhandmanyempiricalstudiessuggesttoanalyzemanyvariablesinordertounderstandthemicroeconomic
mechanisms behind the fluctuations, where both N- the number of variables and T the length of a time series are
typically large,and typically of the same order. Surprisingly most of the models developedin this field of science can
preciselydescribeonlystaticpropertiesofthecorrelationstructure. Thereisastrongneedformodelsandalgorithms,
that can accurately capture the above described features of macroeconomic time series,are dynamic and allow for a
reacher spatio – temporal structure. In this paper we present new algorithms, based on Random Matrix Theory
that countenance extracting potentially useful factors in macroeconomic time series. In the first section we uncover
external temporal correlationstructure, using the assumption that the characteristic of each individual time series is
meticulously depicted by the VARMA(q ,q ) structure with the same parameters. The second method encompasses
exposition of internal correlation structure between two different sets of variables, after the external correlations are
properly reduced.
II. UNRAVELING LAGGED EXTERNAL TEMPORAL CORRELATIONS FROM VARMA(P,Q)
Finite order vector autoregressive moving average models (VARMA) motivated by Wold decomposition theorem
[1] as an appriopriate multivariate setting for studying the dynamics of stationary time series. Vector autoregressive
(VAR) models are cornerstones in contemporary macroeconomics, being a part of an approach called the “dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium”(DSGE), which is superseding traditional large–scale macroeconometric forecasting
methodologies[2]. Themotivationbehindthemisbasedontheassertionthatmorerecentvaluesofavariablearemore
likely to contain useful information about its future movements than the older ones. On the other hand, a standard
∗Electronicaddress: snarska@th.if.uj.edu.pl
tool in multivariate time series analysis is vector moving average (VMA) models, which is really a linear regression
of the present value of the time series w.r.t. the past values of a white noise. A broader class of stochastic processes
used in macroeconomics comprises both these kinds together in the form of vector autoregressive moving average
(VARMA) models. These methodologies can capture certain spatial and temporal structures of multidimensional
variables which are often neglected in practice; including them not only results in more accurate estimation, but also
leads to models which are more interpretable.
A. Correlated Gaussian Random Variables
We will consider a situation of N time–dependent random variables which are measured at T consecutive time
moments (separated by some time interval δt); let Y be the value od the i–th (i = 1,...,N) random number
at the a–th time moment (a = 1,...,T); together, they make up a rectangular N T matrix Y. Firstly we will
assume, each Y is supposed to be drawn from a Gaussian probability distribution, and that they have mean values
zero, Y =0. A set of correlated zero–mean Gaussian numbers is fully characterized by the two–point covariance
function, Y Y iftheunderlyingstochasticprocessgeneratingthesenumbersisstationary. Thestationarity
ia,jb ia jb
conditionforVARMA(q ,q )stochasticprocessesimpliescertainrestrictionsontheirparameters;fordetails,werefer
to[3]. Wewillrestrictourattentiontoanevennarrowerclasswherethecross–correlationsbetweendifferentvariables
and the auto–correlations between different time moments are factorized, i.e.,
Y Y =C A . (1)
ia jb ij ab
1. Estimating External Cross – Covariances
The realized cross–covariance between degrees i and j at the same time a is Y Y , the simplest method to
estimate the today’s cross–covariancec is to compute the time average(named ”Pearsonestimator”),
c Y Y , i.e., c= YYT = √CYAYT√C. (2)
The random matrix c is called a “doubly correlated Wishart ensemble” [4].
It is obvious, that our estimator will reflect the true covariances only to a certain degree, with a superimposed
broadeningdue to the finiteness ofthe time seriesi.e., estimationaccuracywill depend onthe “rectangularityratio,”
the closer r to zero, the more truthful the estimate. Furthermore we will consider the situation, where
N , T , such that r=fixed. (4)
B. Free Random Variables Calculus Crash Course
1. The M–Transform and the Spectral Density
Let’s consider (real symmetric K K) random matrix H . The average of its eigenvalues λ ,...,λ is concisely
encoded in the “mean spectral density,”
≡ K h − i K h − i
On the practical side, it is more convenient to work with either of the two equivalent objects,
GH(z) Tr , or MH(z) zGH(z) 1, (6)
≡ K (cid:28) z1 H(cid:29) ≡ −
referred to as the “Green’s function” (or the “resolvent”) and the “M–transform” of H (“moments’ generating
function,”). The latter one serves better in the case of multiplication of random matrices.
2. The N–Transform and Free Random Variables
The doubly correlated Wishart ensemble c (2) may be viewed as a product of several random and non–random
matrices. The general problem of multiplying random variables in classical probability theory can be effectively
handledinthe specialsituationwhenthe randomtermsareindependent: then,the exponentialmapreducesitto the
additionproblemofindependentrandomnumbers,solvedbyconsideringthe logarithmofthecharacteristicfunctions
ofthe respectivePDFs,whichprovestobe additive. Inmatrixprobabilitytheorydue toD.Voiculescuandcoworkers
and R. Speicher [5, 6], we have a parallel commutative construction in the noncommutative world (c.f. table I). It
starts with the notion of “freeness,” which basically comprises probabilistic independence together with a lack of any
directionalcorrelationbetweentworandommatrices. This nontrivialnewpropertyhappens tobe the rightextension
ofclassicalindependence, asit allowsfor anefficientalgorithmofmultiplying free randomvariables(FRV), which we
state below:
Step 1: Supposewehavetworandommatrices,H andH ,mutuallyfree. Theirspectralpropertiesarebestwrought
into the M–transforms (6), MH (z) and MH (z).
Step 2: The critical maneuver is to turn attention to the functional inverses of these M–transforms, the so–called
“N–transforms,”
Step 3: The N–transforms submit to a very straightforwardrule upon multiplying free random matrices (the “FRV
multiplication law”),
NH 1 H 2 (z)= 1+z NH 1 (z)NH 2 (z), for free H 1 , H 2 . (8)
Step 4: Finally, it remains to functionally invert the resulting N–transform
NH H (z) to gain the M–transformof the product, MH H (z).
3. Extracting External Correlations
The innate potential of the FRV multiplication algorithm (8) is surely revealed when inspecting the doubly
correlated Wishart random matrix c=(1/T)√CYAYT√C (2). This has been done in detail in [7, 8], so we will
only accentuate the main results here, referring the reader to the original papers for an exact explanation. The idea
is that one uses twice the cyclic property of the trace (which permits cyclic shifts in the order of the terms), and
twice the FRVmultiplicationlaw(8)(to breakthe N–transformsofproductsofmatricesdowntotheir constituents),
in order to reduce the problem to solving the uncorrelated Wishart ensemble (1/T)YTY. This last model is further
simplified, again by the cyclic property and the FRV multiplication rule applied once, to the standard GOE random
matrixsquared(andtheprojectorP diag(1 ,0 ),designedtochiptherectangleYoffthesquareGOE),whose
properties are firmly established. Let us sketch the derivation,
cy ↓ clic FR ↓ V z cy ↓ clic
1YeAYeTC (z) =
1YeAYeT (z)NC(z) =
Classical Probability Noncommutative probability (FRV)
x - random variable, p(x) H - random matrix, P(H)
pdf spectral density ̺(λ)dλ
characteristic function g (z)≡ eizx Green’s function G (z)= 1 Tr 1
x (cid:10) (cid:11) H N D z·1−HE
or M - transform M(z)=zG (z)−1
independence freeness
Addition of independent r.v.: Addition of f.r.v.
The logarithm of thecharacteristic function, The Blue’s function
r (z)≡logg (z), is additive, G (B (z))=B (G (z))=z, is additive,
x x H H H H
r x1+x2 (z)=r x1 (z)+r x2 (z) B H1+H2 (z)=B H1 (z)+B H2 (z)− z 1
Multiplication of independentr.v.: Multiplication of free r.v.:
Reduced tothe addition problem The N - transform,
via the exponentialmap, owing to M (N (z))=N (M (z))=z,
ex1ex2 =ex1+x2 is multiplicative
H1H2 1+z H1 H2
TABLE I: Parallel between Classical and Noncommutative probability
cy ↓ clic z FR ↓ V z rz
1YeTYeA (rz)NC(z) =
This is the basic formula. Since the spectralpropertiesofc aregivenby its M–transform,M Mc(z), it is more
pedagogical to recast (9) as an equation for the unknown M,
It providesa means for computing the meanspectraldensity of a doubly correlatedWishart randommatrix once the
“true” covariance matrices C and A are given.
Inthiscommunication,onlyaparticularinstanceofthisfundamentalformulaisapplied,namelywithanarbitrary
auto–covariance matrix A, but with trivial cross–covariances, C=1
. Using that N1K (z)=1+1/z, equation (10)
thins out to
rM =MA , (11)
which will be strongly exploited below.
For all this, we must in particular take both N and T large from the start, with their ratio r N/T fixed (4).
More precisely, we stretch the range of the a–index from minus to plus infinity. This means that all the finite–size
effects (appearingatthe ends ofthe time series)are readilydisregarded. In particular,there is no need to careabout
initial conditions for the processes, and all the recurrence relations are assumed to continue to the infinite past.
C. The VARMA(q1,q2) Process
1. The Definition of VARMA(q1,q2)
One can define stochastic proces called VARMA(q ,q ) in the following way as a convolution of VAR(q) and
VMA(q) processes:
Y b Y = a ǫ . (12)
To be more specific, we consider a situation when N stochastic variables evolve according to identical independent
VARMA(q ,q )(vector autoregressive moving average processes, , which we sample over a time span of T moments.
VMA(q) (vector moving average) process is a simple generalization of the standard univariate weak–stationary
moving averageMA(q). In such a setting, the value Y of the i–th (i=1,...,N) randomvariable at time moment a
(a=1,...,T) can be expressed as
Y = a ǫ . (13)
ia α i,a−α
Herealltheǫ ’sareIIDstandard(meanzero,varianceone)Gaussianrandomnumbers(whitenoise), ǫ ǫ =δ δ .
ia ia jb ij ab
The a ’s are some (q+1) realconstants; importantly, they do not depend on the index i, which reflects the fact that
the processesareidenticalandindependent(no“spatial”covariancesamongthe variables). The rankq oftheprocess
is a positive integer.
TheVAR(q)(vectorauto–regressive)processespartissomewhatakinto(13),i.e.,weconsiderN decoupledcopies
of a standard univariate AR(q) process,
Y b Y =a ǫ . (14)
ia β i,a−β 0 ia
It is again described by the demeaned and standardized Gaussian white noise ǫ (which triggers the stochastic
evolution), as well as (q+1) real constants a , b , with β = 1,...,q. As announced before, the time stretches to
the past infinity, so no initial condition is necessary. Although at first sight (14) may appear to be a more involved
recurrence relation for the Y ’s, it is actually easily reduced to the VMA(q) case: It remains to remark that if
one exchanges the Y ’s with the ǫ ’s, one precisely arrives at the VMA(q) process with the constants a(2) 1/a ,
a(2) b /a , β = 1 ia ,...,q. In oth ia er words, the auto–covariance matrix A(3) of the VAR(q) process (14 0 ) is ≡ simpl 0 y
the inverseof the auto–covariancematrix A(2) of the correspondingVMA(q) processwith the describedmodification
of the parameters,
(cid:16) (cid:17)
This inverse exists thanks to the weak stationarity supposition.
The auto–covariance matrix A(5) of this process is simply the product (in any order) of the auto–covariance
matrices of the VAR and VMA pieces; more precisely,
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where A(1) corresponds to the generic VMA(q ) model, while A(4) denotes the auto–covariance matrix of VMA(q )
withaslightlydifferentmodificationoftheparameterscomparedtothepreviouslyused,namelya(4) 1,a(4) b ,
0 ≡ β ≡− β
for β =1,...,q .
The M–transform of A(5) can consequently be derived from the general formulas [8]. We will evaluate here the
pertinent integral only for the simplest VARMA(1,1) process, even though an arbitrary case may be handled by the
technique of residues,
1 z a a + a2+a2 b +a a b2
MA(5) (z)= a 0 a 1 +b 1 z  − a 0 a 1 + (1 b )2 (cid:0) z 0 ( 1 a + (cid:0) a 0 )2 1 (cid:1) (1 1 +b ) 0 2z 1 1 (cid:1) (a a )2 . (17)
1 0 1 1 0 1
D. Example from Macroeconomic Data
We apply the method described above to Polish macroeconomic data. The motivation behind is twofold. First
of all economic theory rarely has any sharp implications about the short-run dynamics of economic variables (so
called scarcity of economic time series). Secondly in these very rare situations, where theoretical models include a
dynamic adjustment equation, one has to work hard to exclude the moving average terms from appearing in the
implied dynamics of the variables of interest.
1. An Application to Macroeconomic Data
LetuspursuefurthertheaboveanalysisoftheVARMA(1,1)modelonaconcreteexampleofrealdata. Economists
naturally think of co-movement in economic time series as arising largely from relatively few key economic factors
like productivity, monetary policy and so forth. Classical way of representing this notion is in terms of statistical
factormodel,forwhichweallowthelimitedspatio–temporaldependenceexpressedviaourVARMA(1,1)model. Two
empirical questions are addressed in this section:
1. How the empirical data behave? Does the eigenvalues represent similar structure to financial market data?
In other words, does the macroeconomic data represent collective response to the shock expressed in term of
VARMA(1,1) model or are there any apparent outliers.
2. Shouldthenthe forecastsbeconstructedusingsmallfactormodelsorarethereanynon-zero,butperhapssmall
coefficients. If so, then the large scale model framework is appropriate.
WeinvestigateN =52variousmacroeconomictimeseriesforPolandoflengthT =118. Theyhavebeenselectedona
monthlybasisinsuchamannersoastocovermostofthemainsectorsofthePolisheconomy,i.e., themoneymarket,
domestic and foreign trade, labor market, balance of payments, inflation in different sectors, etc. The time series
were taken directly from the Reutersc3000Xtra database. Although longer time series for Poland are accessible,
we restrict ourselves to the last ten years in order to avoid the effects of structural change. We assume that each
economicvariableisaffectedbythesameshock(i.e.,the“globalmarketshock”)ofanARMA(1,1)typewithunknown
parameters, which we are to estimate; the AR part implies that the shock dies quite quickly, while the MA part is
responsible for the persistency of the shock. To preserve the proper VARMA representation, the original time series
were transformed using one of the following methods:
First, many of the series are seasonally adjusted by the reporting agency.
Second, the data were transformed to eliminate trends and obvious nonstationarities. For real variables, this
typicallyinvolvedtransformationtogrowthrates(the firstdifferenceoflogarithms),andforpricesthis involved
transformationto changes in growth rates (the second difference of logarithms).
Interest rates were transformed to first differences.
Finally,someoftheseriescontainedafewlargeoutliersassociatedwitheventslikelabordisputes,otherextreme
events, or with data problems of various sorts. These outliers were identified as observations that differed from
the sample median by more than 6 times the sample interquartile range, and these observations were dropped
from the analysis.
In fig. 1 we plot these time series (LEFT), and we make (RIGHT) a histogram of the mean spectral density ρc(λ),
which we compare to a theoretical prediction solving the FRV equation for (17) with the estimated values of the
parameters a , a , b . We have also plotted the standard Marˇcenko-Pastur(Bai-Silverstein) [9, 10]
2. Discussion
The resultis importantfor forecastdesign,but moreimportantly, it providesinformationaboutthe way macroe-
conomic variable interact. The empirical data as compared to the spectral density equation suggest that a lot of
eigenvalues, similarly to stock market data express marginal predictive content. One can suppose, that each of the
economic time series contains important information about the collective movements, that cannot be gleaned from
other time series. Alternatively, if we suppose that macro variables interact in the simplest low-dimensional way
suggested by VARMA(1,1) model,the conformity is nearly ideal (modulo the finite–size effects at the right edge of
the spectrum). The economictime seriesexpresscommonresponsetothe ”globalshock”processi.e., eacheigenvalue
nowcontainsusefulinformationaboutthevaluesofthefactors,thataffectco–movementandhenceusefulinformation
about the future behavior of economy. Thus, while many more eigenvalues appear to be useful, the predictive com-
ponent is apparently common to many series in a way suggested by our simplified VARMA(1,1) model. The above
analysis on a real - complex systems example - i.e. Economy of Poland, for which we have assumed, that each of the
time series under study is generated by the same type of univariate VARMA(q ,q ) process reveals a stunning fact,
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
number of observations
Macroeconomic time series for Poland
empirical data
Wishart Fit VARMA fit
Results for Wishart
Chi^2/DoF = 0.00298 R^2 = 0.90678
2.20174 –0.16702
0.10671 –0.06092
r 0.51852 –0.07015
Results for VARMA(1,1) model
Chi^2/DoF = 0.00298
R^2 = 0.90678
a0 1.01034 –0.36949
a1 -0.22006 –0.19862
b1 0.62501 –0.22171
eigenvalues
seulavnegie
FIG. 1: LEFT: The original N =52 time series of length T =118; they are non–stationary, with theseasonal components.
RIGHT: The histogram of the mean spectral density ρc(λ) (the solid black line) compared to the theoretical result obtained
by numerically solving the resulting sixth–order equation (17) (thesolid orange line) and the ”Wishart-fit” (purpleline).
that again the flawless correspondence between theoretical spectral density and empirical data is found. We are in
the position,where wecannotrejectthe hypothesis,thereareindeedno autocorrelationsamongmacroeconomictime
series. One may also argue, that all these time series are closely bounded with the process, which we will identify as
”global shock-process”i.e., all time series represent the global response complex system under study, to a distortion
and its adjustment to equilibrium state. This process is of univariate VARMA(q ,q ) i.e., ARMA(1,1) type with
hidden structure, that has to be revealed based on historical time series data. This crude empirical study allows
potentially forvariety ofextensions. Atleasttwoare possible. First, the approachusedhere identifies the underlying
factorsonlyuptoalineartransformation,makingeconomicinterpretationofthefactorsthemselvesdifficult. Itwould
be interesting to be able to relate the factors more directly to fundamental economic forces in the spirit of DSGE
models. Secondly,ourtheoreticalresultcoversonlystationarymodels,butsaynothingaboutintegrated,cointegrated
andco–trendingvariables. Weknowthatcommonlong-runfactorsareimportantfordescribingmacroeconomicdata,
and theory needs to be developed to handle these features in a large model framework.
III. UNRAVELING INTERNAL TEMPORAL CORRELATIONS VIA SVD TECHNIQUE
In order to investigate the temporal properties of the internal correlations between two data sets one is often
interested not only in the analysis of it’s static properties given by Pearson estimator (2), C = 1XXT but more
likely how this features behave overa certainperiod of time. Againthe primary wayto describe cross–correlationsin
a Gaussian framework is through the two–point covariance function (IIA),
C X X . (18)
ia,jb ia jb
Where X x x are mean adjusted data, that can be further collected into a rectangular N T matrix
R. The average ... is understood as taken according to some probability distribution whose functional shape is
stable over time, but whose parameters may be time–dependent. In previous sections we have used a very simplified
form of the two–point covariance function (IIA), namely with cross–covariancesand auto–covariancesfactorized and
non–random (1) ,
C =C A (19)
ia,jb ij ab
(wehaveassembledcoefficientsintoanN N cross–covariancematrixCandaT T auto–covariancematrixA;both
are taken symmetric and positive–definite). The matrix of “temporal structure” A is a way to model two temporal
effects: the (weak, short–memory) lagged correlations between the returns , as well as the (stronger, long–memory)
lagged correlations between the volatilities (weighting schemes, eg.EWMA [11]). On the other hand, the matrix of
spatial correlations C models the hidden factors affecting the variables, thereby reflecting the structure of mutual
dependencies of the complex system. The salient feature assumed so far, these two matrices were decoupled and the
assumption about the Gaussianity of random variables provides crude approximation, that variances of all random
variables always exist. This was sufficient to fully characterize the dependencies of the X ’s. However, in more
realistic circumstances (i.e., building efficient multivariate models,which help understanding the relation between a
large number of possible causes and resulting effects) one is more interested in the situations, where the spatio–
temporal structure does not factorize. Cross-correlations technique (sometimes alluded as ”time–lagged correlations
technique”) is most likely meets these critical requirements.
ia,ja+∆ ia ja+∆
The precise answer boils down to how to separate the spectrum of such a covariance matrix in the large N, large T
limit(i.e., thermodynamicallimit),whenonecanmakeuseofthepowerofFRVcalculus(see[12]forasolutionbased
on the circular symmetry of the problem and Gaussian approximation). In this chapter we will very closely follow
the method presented in [13], where the authors suggested to compare the singular value spectrum of the empirical
rectangular M N correlation matrix with a benchmark obtained using Random Matrix Theory results (c.f. [14]),
assuming there are no correlation between the variables. For T at N,M fixed, all singular values should be
zero, but this will not be true if T is finite. The singular value spectrum of this benchmark problem can in fact be
computedexactly inthe limit whereN,M,T , whenthe ratiosm=M/T andn=N/T fixed. Since the original
description is veiled, for pedagogical purposes we rederive all these results in the language of FRV presented in the
table I. Furthermore we extend the results obtained in [15] to meet encounter time-lagged correlations.
A. Mathematical Formulation of a Problem
Duetotheworks[2,16,17]itisbelievedthat,thesystemitselfshoulddeterminethenumberofrelevantinputand
output factors. In the simplest approachone would take all the possible input and output factors and systematically
correlate them, hoping to unravel the hidden structure. This procedure swiftly blow up with just few variables. The
cross- equationcorrelationmatrixcontainsallthe informationaboutcontemporaneouscorrelationina Vectormodel
andmaybeitsgreateststrengthanditsgreatestasset. Sincenoquestionableaprioriassumptionsareimposed,fitting
a Vector modelallowsdata–setto speak for itself i.e., find the relevantnumber offactors. Still without imposing any
restrictions on the structure of the correlation matrix one cannot make a causal interpretation of the results. The
theoretical study of high dimensional factor models is indeed actively pursued in literature [18–25]. The main aim of
this chapter is to present a method, which helps extract highly non-trivial spatio–temporal correlations between two
samples of non-equal size (i.e. input and output variables of large dimensionality), for these can be then treated as
”natural” restrictions for the correlations matrix structure.
1. Basic framework and notation
Wewilldivideallvariablesintotwosubsetsi.e., focusonN inputfactorsX (a=1,...,N)andM outputfactors
Y (α=1,...,M)with the totalnumber ofobservationsbeing T. All time series arestandardizedto havezeromean
and unit variance. The data can be completely different or be the same variables but observed at different times.
First one has to remove potential correlations inside each subset, otherwise it may interfere with the out-of-sample
signal. To remove the correlations inside each sample we form two correlation matrices,which contain information
about in-the-sample correlations.
CX = XXT CY = YYT (21)
The matrices are then diagonalized,provided T > N,M, and the empirical spectrum is compared to the theoretical
Marˇcenko-Pastur spectrum [10, 26–28]in order to unravel statistically significant factors.The eigenvalues,which lie
muchbelowtheloweredgeoftheMarˇcenko-Pasturspectrumrepresenttheredundantfactors,rejectedbythesystem,
so one can exclude them from further study and in this manner reduce somewhat the dimensionality of the problem,
by removing possibly spurious correlations. Having found all eigenvectors and eigenvalues, one can then construct a
set of uncorrelated unit variance input variables Xˆ and output variables Yˆ.
Xˆ = VTX Yˆ = UTY (22)
where V,U, λ , λ are the corresponding eigenvectors and eigenvalues of C , C respectively. It is obvious, that
C = XˆXˆT and C = YˆYˆT are identity matrices, of dimension, respectively, N and M. Using general property
of diagonalization, this means that the T T matrices D = XˆTXˆ and D = YˆTYˆ have exactly N (resp. M)
eigenvalues equalto 1 and T N (resp. T M) equalto zero. These non-zeroeigenvaluesare randomly arrangedon
a diagonal. Finally we can reproduce the asymmetric M N cross-correlationmatrix G between the Yˆ and Xˆ:
which includes only the correlations between input and output factors. In general the spectrum of such a matrix is
complex, but we will use the singular value decomposition (SVD) technique (c.f. [29]) to find the empirical spectrum
of eigenvalues.
2. The Singular Value Decomposition
The singular value spectrum represent the strength of cross-correlationsbetween input and output factors. Sup-
pose G is an M N matrix whose entries are either real or complex numbers. Then there exists a factorization of
where U is an M M unitary matrix. The columns of U form a set of orthonormal”output” basis vector directions
for G - these are × the eigenvectors of G†G. Σ is M N diagonal matrix with nonnegative real numbers on the
diagonal,which can be thought of as scalar ”gain controls” by which each corresponding input is multiplied to give a
correspondingoutput. These are the square roots of the eigenvalues of GG† and G†G that correspondwith the same
columns in U and V. and V† denotes the conjugate transpose of V, an N N unitary matrix,whose columns form
a set of orthonormal ”input” or vector directions for G. These are the eige × nvectors of GG†. A common convention
for the SVD decompositionis to orderthe diagonalentries Σ in descending order. In this case,the diagonalmatrix
Σ is uniquely determined by G (though the matrices U and V are not). The diagonal entries of Σ are known as the
singular values of G.
B. Singular values from free random matrix theory
Inordertoevaluate thesesingulareigenvalues,assumewithoutlossofgeneralityM <N. Thetrickis toconsider
the matrix M M matrix GGT (or the N N matrix GTG if M > N), which is symmetrical and has M positive
eigenvalues, each of which being equal to the square of a singular value of G itself. Furthermore use the cyclic
properties of the trace. Then non-zero eigenvalues of
are then the same (up to the zero modes) as those of the T T matrix
obtained by swapping the position of Yˆ from first to last. In the limit N,M,T where the Xˆ’s and the Yˆ’s are
independent from each other, the two matrices D and D are mutually free [30], and we can use the results from
FRV,where giventhe spectraldensity ofeachindividualmatrix,one is ableto constructthe spectrumofthe product
or sum of them.
1. FRV Algorithm for Cross-correlation matrix
As usual we will start with constructing the Green’s function for matrices D and D . Each of these matrices,
have off-diagonal elements equal to zero, while on diagonal a set of M (or N respectively) randomly distributed
eigenvalues equal to 1
G = 1 M + T−M = m + 1−m m= M;
G = 1 N + T−N = n + 1−n n= N;
DYˆ T z−1 z z−1 z T
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Then:
or equivalently
where:
From this, one easily obtains:
N m + 1−m 1 = z
+1 m 1 = z
(m+z)(n+z)
DXˆ ·DYˆ z2
and one readily gets the N–transform for the matrix D Xˆ D Yˆ
(m+z)(n+z)
Inverting functionally (31)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
i.e., solving the second order equation in z, one is able to find the Green’s function of a product D D
where we have omitted the subscripts for brevity. Subsequently mean spectral density is obtained from the standard
The final result i.e., the benchmark case where all (standardized) variables X and Y are uncorrelated, meaning that
the ensemble average E(C )=E(XXT) and E(C )=E(YYT) are equal to the unit matrix, whereas the ensemble
average cross-correlationE(G)=E(YXT) is identically zero, reads as in original paper [13]:
m=0.4 , n=0.2
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
FIG. 2: Simulation of a continuous part of the theoretical random singular value spectrum ρ(λ) for different values of n and
m.It is obvious to see that λ+ ≤ 1 for all values of n,m < 1. The upper bound is reached only when n+m = 1, in which
case theupperedgeof thesingular valuebandtouchesλ=1i.e.,forn=m thespectrum extendsdown toλ=0, whereas for
n+m→1,thespectrumdevelopsa(1−λ) −1/2 singularity,justbeforetheappearanceofaδ peakatλ=1ofweightn+m−1.
+ − − (35)
p πλ(1 λ2)
where s = n+m 2mn 2 mn(1 n)(1 m) are the two positive roots of the quadratic expression under the
squarerootIt is easyto discoveprthe fact, thatin the limit T atfixed N, M, allsingularvalues collapseto zero,
as they should since there is no true correlationsbetween X and Y; the allowedband in the limit n,m 0 becomes:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
When n m, the support becomes λ [0,2 m(1 m)] (plus a δ function at λ = 1 when n+m > 1), while when
m = 1, the whole band collapses to a δ funcption at λ = √1 n. For n+m 1− there is an initial singularity of
ρ(λ) λ=1 diverging as (1 λ)−1/2. Ultimately m 0 at fixe − d n, one finds th → at the whole band collapses againto a
δ function at λ=√n.
2. SVD cleaning technique and the MP2 case
The results from the previous section were obtained under belief there were no correlations between input and
output samples of infinite sizes. However, for a given finite size sample, the eigenvalues of C and C will differ
from unit, and the singular values of G will not be zero and instead cross-correlations between input and output
variables are involved. The SVD spectrum in that case is the convolution of two Marˇcenko-Pastur[10] distributions
with parameters m and n, respectively, which reads, for r=n,m<1:
withλ =(1 √r)2 The N-transformofthis densitytakesaparticularlysimpleform(cf. [7]foranexactderivation)
The singular values of G are obtained as the square-root of the eigenvalues of D = XTXYTY. Under assumption,
that XTX and YTY are mutually free, after having noted that the N-transform of the T T matrices XTX and
YTY are now given by: ×
N(z)= (39)
onecanagainusethemultiplicationruleofN-transformsandfindstheGreen’sfunctionofD bysolvingthefollowing
cubic equation for z:
which with little effort canbe solvedanalytically. Then Green’s function is readily obtainedby inserting the solution
of the eq.(40)
This will lead to a rather complicated form of the final function
2 1/3 3−1/2
(cid:16) (cid:17)
C. Example from the Data
The last decade has been a witness of an enormous progress in the development of small-scale macroeconomic
models. It’s not too muchan overstatementto say,that the statistical analysisof VAR models, Kalmanfilter models
etc. is nowadayscomplete. The majorissue withthese models is that they canaccuratelyapproximatesmallnumber
oftimeseriesonly. OntheotherhandCentralBanksmustconstructtheirforecastsinrichdataenvironment[31]. This
mismatch between standard macroeconometric models and real world practice has led to unfortunate consequences.
Forecasters have had to rely on informal methods to distill information from the available data, and their published
forecasts reflect considerable judgement in place of formal statistical analysis. Forecasts are impossible to reproduce,
and this makes economic forecasting a largely non-scientific activity i.e., formal small-scale models have little effect
on day-to-day policy decisions, making these decisions more ad hoc and less predicable than if guided by the kind of
empirical analysis that follows from careful statistical modeling. The goal of this research is to use the wide range
of economic variables that practical forecasters and macroeconomic policymakers have found useful, and establish
a direction that explicitly incorporates information from a large number of macroeconomic variables into formal
statistical models. We have focused on two different data sets, namely Polish macroeconomic data and generatedset
of data, where temporal cross - correlations are introduced by definition.The full data set is the same as it was used
in previous chapter.
1. Polish Macroeconomic data revisited
Polandis andinterestingemergingmarketwithunique socialandbusinessactivity inthe processofrapidgrowth
and industrialization. We hope our analysis might be helpful in understanding the factors that helped Poland to
surviveduringthe2008crisis. Themainproblemtobesolvedistochoosethecorrectvariablestoinclude. Thisisthe
familiar problem of variable selection in regression analysis. Economic theory is of some help, but usually suggests
large categories of variables (money, interest rates, wages, stock prices, etc.) and the choice of a specific subset of
variables then becomes an open problem. The analysis began with checking,whether the method described in [13] is
relevant for describing the relation between the inflation indexes for Polish macroeconomic indexes and other Polish
macroeconomicdatapublished by different governmentand non-governmentagencies. A consumer price index (CPI)
isameasureestimatingthe averagepriceofconsumergoodsandservicespurchasedbyhouseholds. Aconsumerprice
index measures a price change for a constant marketbasketof goods and services fromone period to the next within
the same area (city, region, or nation). It is a price index determined by measuring the price of a standard group of
goods meant to represent the typical market basket of a typical urban consumer. The percent change in the CPI is
a measure estimating inflation. It is commonly viewed as the indicator not only the measure of inflation, but rather
the indicates the change ofcosts ofmaintenance. The data set representa wide rangeof macroeconomicactivity and
were initially transformed to ensure stationarity and diminish the effects of seasonalcomponents. The same data set
we have already analyzed in the first part of the paper and the detailed list of all time series can be obtained from
the author upon request. This time, the whole set of 52 time series,observedon a monthly basis between Jan 2000
and Oct 2009 (T =118) was divided into two subsets i.e., −
WehaveusedmonthlyM =15changesofdifferentCPIindicatorsasourpredictedvariables(i.e. outputsample
The input sample X consisted of N = 37 monthly changes of economic indicators (eg. sectoral employment,
foreign exchange reserves, PPI’s) as explanatory variables.
The data were standardized and mean adjusted, but following the general idea of [13] the input and output samples’
factors were not selected very carefully, so the data could speak for themselves and system could be able to select
the optimal combination of variables. The resulting diagrams (see Fig.3) now demonstrate, that even standardized
35 −0.6 −0.2
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
FIG. 3: Correlation matrices representing generic in-the-sample correlations.The data were mean adjusted and standardized.
In a perfect situation, one is expecting that cross–correlations tends to zero, however still nontrivial correlations are present.
LEFT:Matrix with 37 inputvariables X.RIGHT: Matrix with 15 input variables Y - components of CPI.
and converted to stationary time series may represent nontrivial in-the-sample correlations. Short – term economic
forecasts build from these type data in consequence may be poor and show no sign of improving over time. The
next step involved cleaning internal correlations in each sample. To do it, we have used equation (21). The effective
matrices were then diagonalized and two sets of internally uncorrelated data were prepared.
2. Results for Equal-time spectra
From the uncorrelated data we create the rectangular matrix G and diagonalize it to calculate singular eigen-
values. Finally we have used the benchmark calculated in equation (22) to compare the data with the predicted
eigenvalue density. For the same data sets we have also created the set of correlated samples i.e., the set, where
internal spatial cross–correlations were not a-priori removed (see Fig. 4). Apparently there is enough idiosyncratic
variation in standard activity measures like the unemployment rate and capacity utilization, that removing noisy
components from these might provide a clearer picture of factors affecting inflation. We have excluded from further
analysis series responsible for reference NBP bill rate balance of payments, and from the set of explanatory variables
ordinary measures of inflation - CPI in food sector, beverages and tobacco ans services. This approach allows us to
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
Singular values
noitubirtsid
evitalumuC
singular values
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
0 2 4 6 8 10
seulavnegie
-0,5 0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5
2 eigenvalues for MP
empirical data
2 MP benchmark
eigenvalues s
FIG. 4: Comparison of cleaning techniques for equal–time SVD spectra. ABOVE: Cumulative singular density and ”heat
map” for the cleaned problem. BELOW LEFT: Empirical density of eigenvalues in the MP2 framework.BELOW RIGHT:
Benchmark calculated according to MP2 spectrum.
directly reproduce temporal cross–correlations.
The lack of symmetry condition endure us to focus only on out-of-the-sample correlationswithout mixing them with
inner ones and to study temporal properties of such matrix. The results show, that there exists some singular eigen-
values,whichdo notfitthe benchmark. Amongthem, the highestsingulareigenvalues =2.5andthe corresponding
singular eigenvector,represent standard negative correlationbetween expenses for electricity and net balance of pay-
ments in the energy and positive correlation between CPI in health sector and unemployment. In our approach we
can not only observe this relations, but also interpret them in terms of causality. That is, larger unemployment rate
causes increase in the CPI. There are other non-trivial relations between eg. CPI in telecommunication sector and
foreignexchangereserves. All ofthese correlationsarehoweverwellknownfromtextbooks orcanbe easily explained
by means of classical economic theory. When some of the eigenvalues become strongly related, zero modes emerge
- clearly the majority (around 80% of all eigenvalues are concentrated close to zero, meaning that there are strong
spatial correlations inside X and Y data set. If we are to use the MP2 benchmark then it is clear, that empirical
spectrum is affected by idiosyncratic components, again confirming, that spatial structure strongly interferes with
temporal, and it is crucial to ”remove” redundant factors to avoid spurious (confunding) correlations.
3. Solution for lagged spectra
Anaturalwaytoexaminemacroeconomicdataisviafactormodels. Inprevioussectionwehaveassumedthatthe
inflation can be accurately explained by the factor model using relatively small number of latent variables. Pushing
the factor model one step further, these latent factors might also explain the predictive relationship between current
valuesofvariablesandthoseofthepreviousmonth. Thenextstepofourstudyinvolvedshiftingtheinputandoutput
data set by one observation (one month). The Y were calculate from t=2,...,118 and X’s for (t=1,...,117). We
weremotivated bythe commonbelief, that itis the ”yesterday”shock,that affects ”today”changei.e., there is some
persistencyandlongmemorywithinthissystem. Thisisthesameapproach,thatunderliestheideaofVARMA(q ,q )
processes [3]. The temporal structure (Fig.5) manifests itself via the existence of significant non–symmetric relation
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Data vs Benchmark
singular eigenvalues
32 explanatory variables X(t−1)
Heat map for reduced G
5 10 15 20 25 30
FIG. 5: Results for lagged-by-one-month spectra.LEFT: There is a bunch of singular values that do not fit the benchmark.
The largest s≈0.77 represents the same correlation structure as within unshifted framework.RIGHT: Note, that now we can
see whole bunchof islands of non-trivialfactors, that affect CPI’s.
(represented by one singular eigenvalue, that does not fit the benchmark) between data sets X and Y, that are
shifted by one month. It is easy to notice, that only few factors are responsible for the model’s performance. CPI in
Y X Typeof correlation
CPI in communication sector completed dwellings negative
net balance of paymentsof goods
M3 money aggregate
Employment in manufacturing sector
employment in enterprize sector positive
Direct investments
Foreign exchangereserves
Official reserve assets
New heavy trucksregistration
Balance of payments- services
CPI in clothing sector Total export negative
CPI in restaurants and hotels Foreign exchangereserves positive
CPI in transport sector Foreign exchangereserves positive
Total production in manufacturing sector negative
Total export
TABLE II:Factors affecting theset of outputvariables for lagged spectra.
telecommunication sector is affected by the largest number of possible explanatory variables (c.f. Table II). Among
them the most unexpected is the correlation with heavy trucks. Two or three factors are useful for some categories
of series, but only a single factor is responsible for the predictability of prices in all sectors. Apparently, the first
factor is foreign exchange reserves level, and the results say that it is an important predictor of future prices in
telecommunication, manufacturing and transport sector. We can say that when forecasting inflation a large model
might be a clue, but if we remove redundant factors the inflation can be forecasted by using simple measures of real
activity like the unemployment rate, industrial production or capacity utilization. While the first factor is easy to
interpret, a complete understanding of the results requires an understanding of other factors as well. Unfortunately,
their interpretation and role in explaining future changes in the consumer prices is an open question.
D. Conclusions
We will now recap this illustrative study with few comments:
Ingeneralbothinputandoutputdatasetsmayrepresenthighlycomplexcorrelationstructurestronglyinterfered
byredundantnoisyfactors. Thissignificantamountofnoiseneedtobecarefullyeliminatedbyperforminginitial
decoupling of spatial correlations, so these large matrices become mutually free.
This is again precisely the case when FRV approach ”takes the stage” and reduces the solution to few lines.
Theproceduretestedonrealdatawithinthecaseofunshiftedvariableshasn’tshowanysignificantimprovement
in comparison to standard factor analysis known in econometric literature for similar data sets[32]. For data
lagged by one observation we have however recovered the sea of different non–trivial relations, and it might be
interesting to compare these results from a more general perspective of factor models, however no implicitly
close approach was found in the literature.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the Polish Ministry of Science Grant No. N N202 229137 (2009–2012).
[1] Wold, H. A study in the analysis of stationary time series. Tech. rep., Almquist and Wiksell, Uppsala, 1938.
[2] Sims C. A., Macroeconomics and reality, Econometrica 48 (1980) 1.
[3] Lu¨tkepohl H.,New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2005.
[4] WishartJ.,TheGeneralized Product MomentDistributioninSamplesfrom aNormalMultivariate Population,Biometrika
A 20 (1928) 32.
[5] Voiculescu D. V., Dykema K. J., Nica A., Free Random Variables, CRM Monograph Series, Vol. 1, Am. Math. Soc.,
Providence, 1992.
[6] SpeicherR.,Multiplicativefunctions on the lattice of non–crossing partitions andfree convolution, Math.Ann.298(1994)
611.
[7] BurdaZ.,Jarosz A.,Jurkiewicz J., Nowak M. A.,Papp G., Zahed I.,Applying Free Random Variables to Random Matrix
Analysis of Financial Data, QuantitativeFinance (2011)11 (7), 1103–114 .
[8] Burda, Z., Jarosz, A., Nowak, M., and Snarska, M. A random matrix approach to varma processes. New Journal
of Physics 12 (2010), 075036. [arXiv:1002.0934v1].
[9] Silverstein,J., andBai,Z. Ontheempiricaldistributionofeigenvaluesofaclassoflargedimensionalrandommatrices.
[10] Marcenko, V., and Pastur, L. Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices. Math. USSRSbornik 1, 4
[11] Pafka, S., Potters, M., and Kondor, I. Exponentialweightingandrandom–matrix–theory–basedfilteringoffinancial
covariance matrices for portfolio optimization. [arXiv:cond-mat/0402573], 2004.
[12] Thurner,S.,andBiely,C. Theeigenvaluespectrumoflaggedcorrelationmatrices. ActaPhysicaPolonicaB38 (2007),
4111. [arXiv:physics/0609053].
[13] Bouchaud, J., Laloux, L., Miceli, M., and Potters, M. Large dimension forecasting models and random singular
value spectra. The European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 55, 2 (2007), 201 – 207.
[arXiv:physics/0512090v1].
[14] Edelman, A., and Raj Rao, N. Random matrix theory. Acta Numerica 14 (2005), 233–297. [e-print].
[15] Snarska, M. Toy model for large non-symmetric random matrices. Acta Physica Polonica A 114, 3 (2008).
[arXiv:1004.4522].
[16] Granger, C. Macroeconometrics - past and future. Journal of Econometrics 100, 1 (2001), 17 – 19.
[17] Bollerslev, T., Engle, R., and Wooldridge, J. A capital asset pricing model with time-varying covariances. The
Journal of Political Economy 96 (1988), 116–131. [JSTOR:1830713].
[18] Geweke,J.Thedynamicfactoranalysisofeconomictimeseries.InLatentVariablesinSocialEconomicModels,D.Aigner
and A. Goldberger, Eds. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1997.
[19] Stock, J., and Watson, M. Macroeconomic forecasting using diffusion indexes. Journal of Business and Economic
[20] Stock, J., and Watson, M. Forecasting using principal components from a large number of predictors. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 97 (2002), 1167–1179. [JSTOR:3085839].
[21] Stock, J., and Watson, M. Implications of dynamical factor models for var analysis. working paper [NBER-eprint],
2005.
[22] Forni,M.,Hallin,M.,Lippi,M.,andReichlin,R.Thegeneralizeddynamicfactormodel:identificationandestimation.
[23] Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M., and Reichlin, R. The generalized dynamic factor model: Consistency and rates.
[24] Bai, J. Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions. Econometrica 71 (2003), 135–171.
[25] Bai, J., and Ng, S. Determining the numberof factors in approximate factor model. Econometrica 70 (2002), 191–221.
[26] Laloux L., Cizeau P., Bouchaud J.–P., Potters M., Noise Dressing of Financial Correlation Matrices, Phys.Rev.Lett. 83
(1999) 1467 [arXiv:cond-mat/9810255].
[27] Burda Z., Jurkiewicz J., Signal and Noise in Financial Correlation Matrices, Physica A 344 (2004) 67
[arXiv:cond-mat/0312496].
[28] Burda Z., G¨orlich A., Jarosz A., Jurkiewicz J., Signal and Noise in Correlation Matrix, Physica A 343 (2004) 295
[arXiv:cond-mat/0305627].
[29] Friedberg, S., Insel, A., and Spence, L. Linear Algebra. Prentice Hall, 2002.
[30] Voiculescu, D. V. Limit laws for random matrices and free products. Invent. Math. 104 (1991), 201.
[31] Bernanke, B., and Boivin, J. Monetary policy inadatarich environment. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (2003),
[32] Stock, J., and Watson, M. Forecasting inflation. Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (1999), 293–335. [SSRN:155850].