A RDF-based Data Integration Framework
Amineh Amini1, Hadi Saboohi2, Nasser Nematbakhsh3
1,2 Department of Computer Engineering,
Islamic Azad University, Karaj Branch, Karaj, Iran
{aamini, saboohi} @kiau.ac.ir
3 Department of Computer Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran
nemat@eng.ui.ac.ir
Data integration is one of the main problems in distributed data sources. An approach is to provide an
integrated mediated schema for various data sources. This research work aims at developing a framework for
defining an integrated schema and querying on it. The basic idea is to employ recent standard languages and
tools to provide a unified data integration framework. RDF is used for integrated schema descriptions as well as
providing a unified view of data. RDQL is used for query reformulation. Furthermore, description logic
inference services provide necessary means for satisfiability checking of concepts in integrated schema. The
framework has tools to display integrated schema, query on it, and provides enough flexibilities to be used in
different application domains.
Data Integration, Semantic Web, RDF, RDQL, Query Reformulation, Description Logic (DL)
source data sets (each one constituted by a schema and
1. Introduction actual data), and the goal is to provide an integrated and
reconciled view of the data residing at the sources,
Data integration is the problem of combining the data
without interfering with their autonomy [3]. We only deal
residing at different, heterogeneous sources and providing
with the so-called read-only integration, which means
the user with a unified view of this data, called mediated
that such a reconciled view is used for answering queries,
schema, which can be queried by users. A data
and not for updating information.
integration system frees the user from the knowledge of
Data integration can be either virtual or materialized.
where and how data are represented in the sources. The
In the first case, the integration system acts as an
interest in this kind of systems has been continuously
interface between the user and the sources [4], and is
increased in recent years by the fact that many
typical of multi-databases, distributed databases, and
organizations face the problem of integrating data
more generally open systems. In virtual integration, query
residing in several different sources. Specifically
answering is generally costly, because it requires
companies that build data warehouses, doing data mining
accessing the sources. In the second case, the system
and developing Enterprise Resource Planning systems
maintains a replicated view of the data at the sources [5],
must address this problem. Also, integrating data in the
and is typical, for example, both in information system
World Wide Web is a subject of several investigations
re-engineering and data warehousing. In materialized data
and projects nowadays [1]. Using Semantic Web
integration, query answering is generally more efficient,
concepts and services for data integration brings new
because it does not require accessing the sources, whereas
possibilities and challenges. For example adding semantic
maintaining the materialized views is costly, especially
to the data makes them processable by computer agents.
when the views must be up-to-date with respect to the
Also it is possible to check for consistency of concepts in
updates at the sources (view refreshment). In the rest of
the integrated schema.
this paper, we do not deal with the problem of view
Early works on integration were carried out in the
refreshment.
context of database design, and focused on the so-called
There are two basic approaches to the data integration
schema integration problem, i.e. designing a global,
problem, called procedural and declarative. In the
unified schema for a database application starting from
procedural approach, data are integrated in an ad-hoc
several sub schemata, each one produced independently
manner with respect to a set of predefined information
from the others [2]. More recent efforts have been
needs. In this case, the basic issue is to design suitable
devoted to data integration, which generalizes schema
software modules that access the sources in order to
integration by taking into account actual data in the
fulfill the predefined information requirements. Several
integration process. Here the input is a collection of
data integration (both virtual and materialized) projects,
such as TSIMMIS [6], Squirrel [7], and WHIPS [8] 2. Satisfiability checking on integrated schema.
follow this idea. They do not require an explicit notion of 3. For user, displaying integrated schema in various
integrated data schema, and rely on two kinds of software formats (e.g. Entity Relationship model) and mechanism
components: wrappers that encapsulate sources, for query execution.
converting the underlying data objects to a common data Following a short overview of the framework and its
model, and mediators that obtain information from one or components are described in separate subsections.
more wrappers or other mediators, refine this information In this framework, system administrator defines
by integrating and resolving conflicts among the pieces of required data sources as well as integrated schema. Those
information from the different sources, and provide the descriptions are converted to DL statements and are
resulting information either to the user or to other checked for satisfiability. Users can see a visual display
mediators. The basic idea is to have one mediator for of integrated schema and submit their queries. To respond
every query pattern required by the user, and generally to such queries, system extracts data from various
there is no constraint on the consistency of the results of sources, combines them into an integrated data collection,
different mediators. then executes query on it and returns results to the user.
In the declarative approach, the goal is to model the In this framework, wrapper-mediator model [12] for
data at the sources by means of a suitable language, to data integration is used. Also in the current
construct a unified representation, to refer to such a implementation, two types of data sources namely
representation when querying the global information database type (relational) and xml type (hierarchical) can
system, and to derive the query answers by means of be specified.
suitable mechanisms accessing the sources and/or the
materialized views. This is the idea underlying systems 2.1. System Components
such as Carnot [9], SIMS [10] and Information Manifold
Components of the model and their relationships are
[11]. The declarative approach provides a crucial
shown in Fig. 1. An explanation for components follows.
advantage over the procedural one: although building a
unified representation may be costly, it allows
2.1.1. Data Source Descriptor File
maintaining a consistent global view of the information
sources, which represents a reusable component of the System administrator defines data sources that are subject
information integration systems [12]. of integration. For data sources of database type, URL,
In this research a declarative approach is adopted and username and password together with descriptions of
two services namely conceptual modeling of the domain required tables are specified. It is also possible to define a
and querying on it are of main concerns. Following table as a view on database.
technologies are used for that purposes: If the data source type is "XML Data", local path or
1. RDF [13] is used for integrated schema description URL is specified, and typically an XSL Transformer [18]
as well as providing a unified view of data. RDF has a as a wrapper for converting to the appropriate structure (if
well-defined syntax and data type. Also it has reasonable needed) is definable.
processing complexity.
2. Description Logic (DL) [14] is used to find any 2.1.2. Integrated Schema Descriptor File
contradiction in the integrated schema (satisfiability of
Following a relational view of data, integrated schema is
concepts in DL terms). It has well-defined semantic and
defined in the form of (virtual) tables. Each field of such
decidable routines for basic services like satisfiability,
tables can be related to a field in a defined data source.
which makes it suitable for knowledge representation and
Also, relationships between tables are defined here. These
reasoning in this domain. We adopt the result of works on
relations can be equality of two fields or two field sets as
DL for databases [15] in this research.
well as equality relations of one field with a set of fields
3. RDQL [16] is used for re-formulation of queries. It
by equations like mathematical addition or string
is a query language for RDF in Jena [17] and provides a
concatenation.
data-oriented query model.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we
2.1.3. Satisfiability Checker
describe in more detail our framework for data
Integrated schema descriptor file may have contradictory
integration based on RDF. In Section 3, implementation
definitions. This module, checks definitions and reports
of the framework is explained and Section 4 is
any of such contradictions. In this framework, reasoning
conclusion.
procedure as explained in [12] is used.
2.1.4. Display Integrated Schema
2. Data Integration Framework
Integrated schema in Entity-Relationship (ER) diagram
Aims of any data integration systems are to build an
and XML formats are displayed. In ER-diagrams, tables,
integrated view of the data defined in various sources and
fields and relations between tables are shown graphically.
develop a mechanism for data extraction from it. To do
In XML format, in addition field’s data types are
so, the framework shall provide following services:
specified too.
1. For system administrator, it provides facilities to
define data sources and integrated schema.
Administrator
Source Data Data Source
Descriptor Source 1 Source n Descriptor
File 1 File n
Integrated
S chema Wrapper 1 Wrapper n
Descriptor
Satisfiability Data Extractor & Integrator
Query Processor
Display RDQL
Integrated
XML SQL to
RDF Converter
Fig. 1. Components of the model
SQL to RDQL Converter property name. A property name is in the
users, however, prefer SQL queries. Therefore in this format. Having property names, each field is represented
framework, "SQL to RDQL Converter” module is used to as a triple in the WHERE clause of RDQL query. Triples
convert SQL to RDQL queries. Following algorithm is are in “(?tableName propertyName ?fieldName)” format.
employed in it: 4- Finally, conditions in WHERE clause is added to
the AND part of RDQL query.
SQL to RDQL Converter Algorithm: For an example, conversion of following SQL
INPUT: a SQL statement over integrated schema. statement to corresponding RDQL statement is
OUTPUT: a corresponding RDQL statement demonstrated in Fig. 2:
METHOD: SELECT STUDENT.FIRSTNAME,
1- Create a unique name for any table in SQL query STUDENT.LASTNAME,
(in “?tableName” form). GRADE.AVERAGE,
2- For the fields in SELECT clause of SQL query, add STUDENT.DEBT
them to RDQL query with a "?" sign before them. FROM STUDENT, GRADE
3- For all the fields appearing in the query, create a ON STUDENT.ID=GRADE.STUDENTID
WHERE STUDENT.DEBT>2000
Step 1 creates following unique names: ?tbl_0, ?tbl_1
Step 2 results in: SELECT ?FIRSTNAME, ?LASTNAME, ?AVERAGE, ?DEBT
Step 3 creates following WHERE clause:
Step 4 adds following phrase to the AND clause of RDQL statement:
AND ?DEBT > 2000
Fig. 2. SQL to RDQL conversion steps
In the current implementation, SQL statements with
aggregation functions, sub queries, and those having
expressions in SELECT and ORDER BY clauses are
ignored. Those constructs are subject of our future
extensions.
2.1.5. Query Processor
This module uses Jena API to execute RDQL query on a
RDF store that is dynamically created by data extractor
and integrator.
2.1.6. Data Extractor and Integrator
This module accumulates data from data sources and
makes an integrated RDF store from them. The data that
only is needed to respond to the user query is
accumulated. This is done by considering the table
specifications in the query and mapping them, using
integrated schema, to actual tables in data sources.
Following algorithm is used for this purpose:
Data Extraction and Integration Algorithm
1. Read the <Integrated Schema Descriptor (ISD)
Fig. 3. Integration system main form
File> and find all table definitions (ISD tables) and do all
following steps for each of them.
Data sources should be defined. Currently the system
2. Make a new table in integrated data and name it
accepts data sources of type database and xml. Also, as
with the same name as the name of ISD, call this new
shown in the figure, user can specify the integrated
integrated data table as <IDT>
schema location and use “Edit” button to make changes
3. Read all ISD fields and do steps 4-7 for them
to it, if needed.
4. Name first ISD field as <master field>, and its data
For database sources, a wrapper description editor
source name as <master source> and its table name as
form is used as shown in Fig. 4. Following JDBC
<master table>
conventions, this form contains fields for defining
5. Scan all <master table> rows in <master source>,
connection properties. There are two methods for
and do steps 6 and 7 for them
defining data which are subject to integration. One
6. Read the value of all needed fields for ISD in
method is to directly refer to database tables and fields.
<master table> row, and add them in IDT with
Alternatively, it is possible to create a virtual view by
appropriate name
using a query statement.
7. For each field in ISD that its <source> and <table>
is different from <master field>, find a relation between
the source and table of it and the source and table of
<master field> and search for a row in that table that
meets this relation and add the value of requested field to
3. Implementation
The system is implemented as a toolkit in Java and
provides facilities for defining data sources as well as
integrated schema. Queries can be submitted both in SQL
and RDQL forms. If query is in SQL, it is first converted
to RDQL before submitted to the query processor which
executes the RDQL query using Jena. Results can be
stored as XML and RDF. A RDF data model can be
generated by Jena APIs from the output of "Data
extraction and integration algorithm" which also can be
subject of user queries. In what follows, main parts of the
system are explained.
First step is to create a new "integration project" as
shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4. Defining a database as a data source
If the data source is as a "XML Data", these data can In this form, total time for data extraction and
be viewed (Read only) as shown in Fig. 5. integration and query execution is displayed too.
4. Conclusion
This paper explained a RDF-based framework for data
integration. This framework provides some basic services
which can be used for data integration and management
of different data sources. These services include
satisfiability checking of definitions, displaying data
model of integrated schema, query facilities in SQL and
RDQL formats and data extraction in XML and RDF
formats.
RDF makes it possible to integrate data from different
data source types. Also a well-defined query language,
RDQL, makes it possible to make queries on such a data
model. Jena provides necessary APIs to work on RDF
Fig. 5. Viewing "XML Data"
data and execute queries. Therefore we believe the
implemented system and idea behind it have many
After defining data sources, integrated tables and
advantages over traditional data integration framework. It
fields should be defined and relations specified. One
is worthwhile to mention that end users (programmers)
example is shown in Fig. 6.
view the integrated data as like a relational database and
can query them using SQL statements, thought, the
original sources might not be of type relational data.
One challenge we have now is to make SQL to RDQL
converter as general as possible. When such a conversion
is fully implemented, there should be no limit on the
kinds of queries a user may submit to this system.
Another extension we like to work on is to cache
intermediate data extracted from sources. Such
intermediate data might be useful for responding to other
users’ queries. In a real data integration environment this
seems to be very useful, considering the fact that data
sources might be residing in different distant physical
locations.
Fig. 6. Integrated schema definition References
[1] Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Maurizio
Finally, having all definitions, user can submit queries Lenzerini, Description Logic for Information Integration,
and see the results in a grid which can be saved as XML Universita di Roma "La Sapienza"
and RDF. One example is shown in Fig. 7. [2] Batini, C., Lenzerini, M., & Navathe, S. B. (1986). A
comparative analysis of methodologies of database
schema integration. ACM Computing Surveys, 18(4),
[3] Ulman, J. D. (1997). Information integration using logical
views. In Proc. of the 6th Int. Conf. on Database Theory
(ICDT-97), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 19-
40. Springer-Verlag.
[4] Sheth, A. & Larson, J. (1991). Federated database
systems for managing distributed, heterogeneous, and
autonomous databases. ACM Computing Surveys, 22(3).
[5] Inmon, W. H. (1996). Building the Data Warehouse
(second edition). John Wiley & Sons.
[6] Chawathe, S., Garcia-Molina, H., Hammer, J., Ireland,
K., Papakonstantinou, Y., Ulman, J., & Widom, J. (1994).
The TSIMMIS project: Integration of heterogeneous
information sources. In Proc. of IPSI Conference
(IPSI'94).
Fig. 7. Query on integrated data
[7] Hull, R. & Zhou, G. (1996). A framework for supporting
data integration using the materialized and virtual
approaches. In Proc. of the ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. on
Management of Data, pp. 481-492.
[8] Hammer, J., Garcia-Molina, H., Widom, J., Labio, W., &
Zhuge, Y. (1995). The Stanford data warehousing project.
IEEE Bulletin of the Technical Committee on Data
Engineering, 18(2), 41-48.
[9] Huhns, M. N., Jacobs, N., Ksiezyk, T., Shen, W.-M.,
Singh, M. P., & Cannata, P. E. (1993). Integrating
enterprise information models in Carnot. In Proc. of the
Int. Conf. on Cooperative Information Systems (CoopIS-
93), pp. 32-42.
[10] Arens, Y., Chee, C. Y., Hsu, C., & Knoblock, C. A.
(1993). Retrieving and integrating data from multiple
information sources. Journal of Intelligent and
Cooperative Information Systems, 2(2), 127-158.
[11] Kirk, T., A. Y., Sagiv, Y., & Srivastava, D. (1995). The
Information Manifold. In Proc. of the AAAI 1995 Spring
Symp., on Information Gathering from Heterogenous,
Distributed Environments, pp. 85-91.
[12] Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Maurizio
Lenzerini, Daniele Nardi, Riccardo Rosati, Description
Logic Framework for Information Integration, Universita
di Roma "La Sapienza"
[13] Resource Description Framework (RDF), World Wide
Web Consortium Semantic Web Activity;
[14] Franz Baader, Werner Nutt, Basic Description Logics,
Description Logic Handbook, pp. 47-100
[15] Diego Calvanese, Giuseppe De Giacomo, Expressive
Description Logics, Description Logic Handbook, pp.
[16] RDQL - A Query Language for RDF, World Wide Web
Consortium;
[17] Jena – A Semantic Web Framework for Java;
[18] XSL Transformations (XSLT);