A Review of the Enviro-Net Project∗
November 20, 2021
Gilberto Z. Pastorello1
G. Arturo Sanchez-Azofeifa1
Mario A. Nascimento2
1 Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
1-26 Earth Sciences Buiding
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
gilbertozp@acm.org, arturo.sanchez@ualberta.ca
2 Department of Computing Science
2-32 Athabasca Hall
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
mario.nascimento@ualberta.ca
∗Textpublishedin:
G. Z. Pastorello, G. A. Sanchez-Azofeifa, M. A. Nascimento. Enviro-Net: From Networks of
Ground-BasedSensorSystemstoaWebPlatformforSensorDataManagement. Sensors. 2011.
Ecosystemsmonitoringisessentialtoproperlyunderstandtheirdevel-
opmentandtheeffectsofevents,bothclimatologicalandanthropological
in nature. The amount of data used in these assessments is increasing
at very high rates. This is due to increasing availability of sensing sys-
temsandthedevelopmentofnewtechniquestoanalyzesensordata. The
Enviro-Net Project encompasses several of such sensor system deploy-
mentsacrossfivecountriesintheAmericas. Thesedeploymentsuseafew
different ground-based sensor systems, installed at different heights mon-
itoring the conditions in tropical dry forests over long periods of time.
2v9845.6011:viXra
This paper presents our experience in deploying and maintaining these
systems, retrieving and pre-processing the data, and describes the Web
portal developed to help with data management, visualization and anal-
ysis.
1 Introduction
Monitoring ecosystems at high spatial and temporal resolutions still is a
challengingendeavor. Satellite-embarkedsensorsthatofferregularpasses
support only coarse resolution monitoring and on-demand high resolu-
tion satellite or airborne-based monitoring are still too expensive to be
consideredviableoptionsforfrequentdatacollections. Furthermore,vali-
dationofsatelliteandairbornemeasurementsagainstthevaluesobserved
at ground level is often difficult to obtain. Ground-based, or in-situ, sen-
sor systems for environmental monitoring have associated challenges as
well [1], but have undergone a considerable evolution recently. Such sys-
tems are now capable of collecting data at very high temporal resolution
for very specific ecosystems through long periods of time. In particular,
the use of wireless sensor systems has been shown to be very effective in
this type of monitoring [2], from the cost perspective and increasingly in
terms of performance and reliability as well.
There are many challenges associated with high resolution (both spa-
tial and temporal) in-situ environmental monitoring, many of which al-
ready well recognized in the literature. Rundel et al. [1], for instance,
discuss how these networks generate more data than can be managed by
traditional methods for field research data, with data quality assurance
and control surpassing capabilities of single individuals dealing with the
data,butstillbeingrequiredtoproducehigh-qualitydata. Thelargeva-
riety of problems impacting quality can be more easily detected by using
adequate cyberinfratructure for automating the detection, which also al-
lowsmoretimelyidentificationofproblemsinthedeploymentsthemselves.
They also argue that, although data storage and retrieval is reasonably
easytoattain,publishingandsharingdataisnotasstraightforward. Still
according to the authors, one of the advantages of this integrated ap-
proach for offering data from multiple sensors is the larger world view
generated,whichisnotpossiblewithsinglesensors—atleastnotatthese
spatio-temporal scales. The authors also acknowledge the importance of
trainingscientistsinusingin-situmonitoringtools,theflexibilityofpower
requirementsforthesesystems(especiallywireless)andtheuseofenergy
harvesting, problems related gaps in the data (from numerous causes),
difficultytoassessprecisionandfidelityinsuchsystems,andthevalueof
commercial availability for decreasing costs and scaling up deployments
sizes.
Hart and Martinez [3] discuss power management, large volumes of
data and required cyberinfrastructure, beginning of commercial efforts,
and data quality control as important issues concerning in-situ environ-
mental monitoring. They also raise additional points that require more
work, such as assessment of environmental conditions any equipment
needs to withstand them (e.g., temperature, pressure, vibration); stan-
dardization requirements related to data and metadata representation;
security requirements, preventing tampering with both equipment and
datasets within the data management systems; and, better means for
data interpretation (e.g., by using new methods for data mining). An-
other relevant effort can be found in the report from Estrin et al. [4],
whofocusoncyberinfrastructure. Keypointsinclude: theneedforbetter
prototyping and design of end-to-end test-beds to allow validation across
widerangesofenvironments,applicationsanddomains;creationofbetter
services regarding time synchronization, in-situ calibration, and adaptive
duty cycling, among others; seamless use of high performance computing
facilitiesfordataprocessing;toolstoimprovesupportformetadata;and,
collaboration efforts as a basis for training new scientists (from multiple
domains) and as a mechanism for sustaining long term deployments.
This paper distills our experience in deploying and managing in-situ
info/). Currently, Enviro-Net includes 39 deployments spread through-
outninesitesinsixdifferentcountries(Argentina,Brazil,Canada,Costa
Rica, Mexico and Panama), and is coordinated at the University of Al-
berta, in cooperation with local partner research teams at each site. The
initial goal of the deployments was to monitor vegetation phenology, the
study of climate effects on periodic biological activity [5], correlating it
withenvironmentalvariables,suchasavailabilityoflight,airtemperature,
etc. These and other variables are monitored by different types of sens-
ing systems, with the collected data being transmitted back to Internet
servers in Alberta either through a commercial satellite up-link or being
manuallyretrievedfromthedataloggersandthensentviaemail,FTPor
Enviro-Net’swebsite. Thefollowinggivesbutoneexampleoftheapplica-
bility and usefulness of such type of systems. From the data collected by
a combination of two types of specialized solar radiation fluxes sensors,
it is possible to derive different vegetation indexes, which can be used
as proxies to monitoring phenological responses. In order to distinguish
vegetationdistribution,particularlyfromperspectivessuchasspeciesdis-
tribution or successional stage, the areas to be monitored are numerous
andrelativelysmall. Similarly,shorttermeffectsofisolatedclimaticphe-
nomena(e.g.,arainstormorsharpchangesintemperature)requirehigher
ratesofdataacquisition. Thesecharacteristicsrequirehigherspatialand
temporal resolutions only achieved through in-situ monitoring of each
ecosystem.
In this context, detailed discussions of how we dealt with these chal-
lenges within the Enviro-Net Project form the main contributions of this
paper, particularly considering the scenario under which the project was
developed. The monitored sites are mostly tropical dry forests in remote
locations,whicharechallengingenvironmentsforbothequipmentperfor-
manceandpersonnel’sabilitytowork. Also,alldeploymentsarebasedon
inexpensive and commercially available technology, essential characteris-
tics to allow scalability and reproducibility of experiments. The hetero-
geneityofequipmentfromdifferentmanufacturersalsointroducedifficul-
ties,mainlyregardingsystemsmaintenance. Havinglongterm(multiple-
year) deployments impose extra management requirements. Integrated
datamanagement,afourthaspect,presentsnumerouschallengesranging
from data quality control to user interface usability. Finally, and maybe
the most relevant aspect, is the issue of high spatial and temporal reso-
lutions, considered not only within a single deployment, but also among
different deployments both in the same and different sites. Part of these
challengeshavesimpleindividualsolutions,however,fromamoreholistic
perspective,theintegrationofthesolutionsforallofthemiswhatactually
enables the use of sensors systems for in-situ environmental monitoring.
After a review of related work on Section 2, this paper describes our so-
lutionsregardingdeploymentsofin-situmonitoringsystemsinSection3,
pre-processing and treatment of data in Section 4 and data publication
and accessibility using a Web-based system in Section 5.
2 Related Work
Thissectiondividesrelatedworkdiscussionintoapplications(coveringthe
motivation for in-situ monitoring), deployments (showing experiences in
installing and maintaining sensor systems), and data management (com-
paring different efforts in dealing with the large amounts of sensor data
generated).
2.1 Applications
Environmentalmonitoringisoneofthedrivingforcesbehindtheadoption
ofground-based sensingsystems, pushingtheneed forhigherspatial and
temporal resolution. Examples of efforts in this direction include: (i) the
creation of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) [6],
which aims at studying climate change, land-use change and invasive
species on a continental scale using, among other methods and technolo-
gies, ground-based deployments of sensor systems; (ii) FLUXNET [7],
which use micrometeorological and flux towers to measure exchanges of
carbon dioxide, water vapor, and energy between terrestrial ecosystems
and the atmosphere. These initiatives heavily rely on long term ground-
based monitoring solutions. FLUXNET has a public data management
frameworkcalledFluxdata.org[8],whichalsooffersflexiblemetadatasup-
port. However,duetothediversityofequipmentandprotocolsfordeploy-
ment and data pre-processing, data integration within the Fluxdata.org
system is limited, mostly offering access to data on the original format
provided by the data producers. This limits the possibilities of apply-
ing filters and aggregation operations to the data or generating derived
data products within the system. Although our system also deals with
a variety of equipment, the deployment protocols are largely uniform,
and pre-processing protocols are developed using a centralized approach,
which allow us to achieve a considerable level of data integration within
Enviro-Net.
These and other initiatives, aiming at integration of ground-based
monitoringefforts,areleadingtoanevolutionfromsinglesiteenvironmen-
talmonitoringintonetworksforenvironmentobservation[3]. Thisevolu-
tion culminates with the current vision for a Sensor Web [9–11], encom-
passing several types of deployments of sensor systems, interconnecting
them globally through a Web-based integration strategy using standards
org/projects/groups/sensorweb) Working Group of the Open Geospa-
A small clarification on the definition for (wireless) sensor networks
maybeinorder. MainlywithinComputingScience(CS)research[12,13]
and in earlier Sensor Web related efforts [9], this definition is narrower
than what is used in this paper. In this more restrictive definition, a
(wireless)sensornetworkisbasedonnodes(alsoknownas“motes”)that
have sensing, data storage/processing, and communication components
plus a power source. These nodes are usually autonomous and oper-
atecooperatively—bycommunicatingamongstthemselves—tocollectand
process data, also being programmable, i.e., able to behave differently
according to, for instance, the type of application, power supply condi-
tions, environmental conditions, etc. Although we have used this type of
wirelessnodesinourdeployments,wedonotrequirethecapabilityofof-
feringcommunicationamongstnetwork’scomponents. Instead, weadopt
the centralized type of processing architecture as classified by [12], being
moreinlinewiththecurrentSensorWebapproachtonetworks[11]. Itis
sufficient for us, for instance, that the connection of sensing elements be
done at the level of integrated data products.
Applications of in-situ monitoring systems are also the topic of other
research efforts. Porter et al. [2] present a good review of the capabili-
tiesofwirelesssensornetworks(WSN)tobeappliedwithintheecological
domain. Hamilton et al. [14], while covering capabilities of networks of
sensorsappliedtoecologyaswell,alsohighlighttheideaofecologicalob-
servatories, adopted within NEON. An extensive review of in-situ moni-
toringeffortsispresentedbyRundeletal.[1],classifiedaccordingtotheir
area of focus: above ground, under-ground, and aquatic environments.
Porter et al. [15] discuss the state of the sensing technology, what can
already be accomplished and a few areas that require more development
(e.g., data management software and new types of sensors). Precision
agriculture is a particularly relevant application area for pervasive sens-
ingtechnology. Forinstance,Leeetal.[16]evaluatemonitoringappliedto
specialtycrop,whileMateseetal.[17]usewirelesssensornetworkinvine-
yardmonitoring,andAquino-Santosetal.[18]evaluatedatatransmission
protocols in small scale deployments in watermelon fields. In this paper,
we discuss aspects that apply to many of these scenarios, particularly if
considering them in a long term monitoring perspective. However, our
focus is on practical and logistics aspects of deploying and maintaining
equipment,retrievingandmanagingthedata,andsupportinganalysisof
data products.
2.2 Deployments
Other research groups have discussed their efforts with ground-based de-
ploymentsofsensorsystems,mostlyfocusingontheuseofwirelessequip-
ment. A pioneering effort in applying wireless sensor networks was the
habitatmonitoringexperimentintheGreatDuckIsland[19]inthecoast
of Maine in the United States, deployed to offer a less intrusive way
to study behavior and nesting of seabird colonies. The SensorScope
project [20,21] is another example, taking place mainly in Switzerland.
They have described their experience with developing the hardware and
softwarefortheirwirelesssystem,performingtests,andgoingondeploy-
ment expeditions, along with their architecture and communication pro-
tocols. With a focus on solar energy availability, AdaptSens [22] adopts
system-widelevelsofoperationtocopewithdifferentamountsofavailable
fort for monitoring an university campus urban forest close to Hangzhou
in China, using a large number of nodes. LUSTER [24] is a system for
monitoringecologicalvariablesthatimplementsfault-tolerantdistributed
storage over a delay-tolerant network using an hierarchical architecture;
the system also covers user interaction both in the field expeditions and
a web interface for data retrieval. Another effort [25], aiming at moni-
toring the UNESCO World Heritage site Mogao Grottoes in Dunhuang,
China, implemented a low power wireless monitoring system inside the
site’s caves with a tailored long distance connection to transmit the data
backtoanon-lineserver. AnotherWorldHeritagesite,arainforestecosys-
teminQueensland,Australia,wasmonitoredbyawirelesssensornetwork
project[26],whichservedasaprototypeforfuturelongtermdeployments
using similar configurations. Another interesting application, monitoring
theactivitiesofvolcanoesinEcuador[27,28],entailsaddressingissuessuch
as higher sampling rates (100 Hz or more), need for higher accuracy and
more expensive sensors. Changing the spatial scale a little, monitoring a
single redwood tree [29] in California in the United States, offered new
insight in understanding the microclimate surrounding this type of tree.
Reportsondeploymentexperiencesalsofocusonthediversityofproblems
faced when using wireless sensing equipment, such as the LOFAR-agro
project [30] that experienced problems ranging from hardware failures to
network protocols errors and software problems. While deployment re-
latedeffortsinourworkfocusonissuesrelatedtomanagingthelifecycle
ofground-basedsensordata,otherworks[31,32]bringevaluationsoftech-
nology for wireless sensor network equipment, including communication
protocols, power consumption and data transmission issues.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the deployment efforts re-
viewed here address the same scenario as ours: having (multi-year) long
termdeployments,basedoncooperativeeffortsofseveral(heterogeneous)
teams, using commercially available equipment from multiple manufac-
turers, with an integrated effort of data retrieval, quality control and
data availability through an easy to use Web-based platform. We believe
this is a more realistic scenario for ground-based environmental monitor-
ing efforts. The current efforts within the Life Under Your Feet project
having long term, spatially distributed deployments with a Web-based
datavisualizationinterfaceintegratedwithgeolocationinformation. How-
ever, they do not seem to deal with heterogeneous equipment and data
formats, nor offer filtering/aggregation options, derived datasets or qual-
ity information in their data management solution.
2.3 Data Management
Many of the challenges related to sensor data management have been
knownforawhile[4]. However,severaltechnicalandnon-technicalques-
tions still remain unaddressed. Broad scope projects for management of
earth observation data try to present a top-down approach to data man-
efforttowardsdistributedcyberinfrastructureforEarthobservationdata,
bringing together a multitude of data providers and consumers. Another
whichimplementsmeansforsharing(andinteractingwith)tools,datasets
andlibrariesofrecordswithintheEarthobservationdomain. Enviro-Net,
however,usesmoreofabottom-upapproach,offeringspecializedsolutions
for the types of data supported, expanding these types as needed. This
allows data management solutions that are geared towards specific needs
to answer specific science questions.
Although it is common to think about sensor data management as
stream data management, with the associated challenges (on-line aggre-
gation, classification, etc.) [34], at least within environmental research,
particularly in ground-based monitoring, this is not a frequent scenario.
Most of the current applications based on sensor data use the perspec-
tive of historical (or an archive of) time series data. Applications using
the stream data perspective are only beginning to appear, and the cur-
rent applications that do require that perspective—e.g., volcano moni-
toring [27]—are still the exception. Data manipulation for most of the
current applications is done after having the data collected and stored,
applying a variety of analytical operations in an offline fashion [8,35].
Middlewaresoftwareforautomatingcontrolofdeploymentsisalsothe
focus of current research efforts, in form of architectures for integrating
different network deployments [36], or Web-based interfaces for interac-
tion with and control of wireless deployments [37]. Our focus, on the
otherhand,isonmanagingthedataproductsratherthancontrollingthe
equipment from within our system.
The data archival aspect of data management involves not only stor-
age of data, but also retrieval, documentation, access control, among
other issues. Furthermore, data curation of long-term repositories in-
volves not only handling the data but also helping scientists answering
researchquestionsandalsomaintainingtheunderlyingcomputationalin-
frastructure [38]. Within Enviro-Net, although we are only beginning to
to devise our long term plans for infrastructure maintenance, our system
already offers data access with a number of flexibility aspects to foster
efficient use of the data. Efforts on applying digital library practices in
support of sensor data management are also gaining acceptance [39]. Is-
suesofdataqualityandintegrity,aswellastheelementsofdatacollection
that affect them, need to be an integral part of such efforts [40], particu-
larly from the perspective of making data documentation available along
with the datasets. In this scenario, metadata becomes as valuable as the
datasets themselves, from quality metadata about deployments [41], to
offering search and annotation options and enriching visualization [42].
Finally, Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) allow data to be ac-
cessedinaprogrammaticway,whichcanbeachieved,forinstance,using
Webservicesinterfaces(usingSensorWebEnablementstandards)orusing
specializedsolutionssuchasawrapper-basedmiddlewares[43]orREST-
basedAPIs[44]. DataqualityaspectsareanintegralpartofEnviro-Net,
andarebeingimproved,particularlyregardingdocumentationandmeta-
data coverage. Although data ingestion is largely automated and data
accessispossiblethroughtheWebuserinterfacewithinEnviro-Net,data
access using a programmatic interface is still under development.
3 Sensor Systems Deployments
Apart from a few test installations, all of our deployments are intended
tobelongterm,collectingdataforaminimumoftwotothreeyears. The
earliest deployments were installed in mid 2007, with the first wireless
deployments installed in mid 2008. All deployments suffered from inter-
ruption in data collection on some scale, usually from a few days up to a
coupleofmonths,dependingonhowearlytheproblemwasdetected. Ear-
lierdeploymentssuffered100%failurerateduetoequipmentdesignbeing
incompatiblewithtropicalenvironments. Manyproblemswererelatedto
unexpectedinteractionsofenvironmentalconditionswiththeequipment.
However,mostofthedeploymentsarestilloperationaltoday,withsecured
funding for maintaining them operational until at least 2013.
Currently,Enviro-Nethas39permanentdeployments,plustemporary
deployments in Edmonton, Canada for equipment testing and calibra-
tion. TheBiosphereReserveofChamela-CuixmalainthestateofJalisco,
Mexico has a tower (overlooking the top of the canopy) and a wireless
understorysensorsystem. Thenumberofnodesinawirelessdeployment
is usually 12, but there are deployments with as few as five and as many
as 20 nodes, each node having between three to six sensors each. The
Santa Rosa National Park in Costa Rica hosts two more towers. The
ParqueNaturalMetropolitanoinPanamahasthemostrecentdeployment
with 24 thermocouples monitoring leaf temperatures. In Brazil, three
sites have deployments: the Mata Seca State Park, the Serra do Cipo´
National Park, and the Environmental Protection Area of the Pandeiros
River, all located in the Minas Gerais state. The Mata Seca park hosts
fivetowersandeightunderstorydeployments(includingfourwirelessde-
ployments), all in the cerrado ecosystem, which is similar to a savanna;
threeunderstorydeploymentsareactiveclosetothePandeirosriver,also
a cerrado ecosystem; and, Serra do Cipo´ park has five towers plus seven
understory deployments, two of which using wireless systems, covering
natural grasslands and forest vegetation in the cerrado. Finally, three
deployments are operational in the province of San Luis in Argentina, a
phenologytowermonitoringagrasslandecosystem,andonetowerandone
wireless understory deployment installed in a adjacent chaco ecosystem.
Two more wireless towers are operational chaco and grassland ecosys-
tems in the province of Co´rdoba, Argentina. Three more deployments
are expected to start data collection in 2011 in the province of San Luis.
Although the ideal spatial scales for many applications requires higher
numbers of nodes deployed to be considered high spatial density—more
in line with our plans for future sensor networks—the intermediary step
with5–20nodesperdeploymentwasnecessarytoprovethiskindofscaleis
feasibleinremotelocationswithlongtermdeployments. Theseare,how-
ever, dense enough to characterize many ecosystem level behavior (such
asresponsetoclimaticevents),andevendifferencesbetweenneighboring
ecosystems. Theexperienceacquiredinthesesmallerdeployments,which
is the fundamental contribution of this text, serves as a basis for these
larger scales expeditions.
The main challenge of having deployments across an entire continent
iswithoutquestionmaintainingthem. Partnershipswithresearchgroups
basedclosertothedeploymentsitesprovedessential,withtheaddedissue
ofofferingtrainingtothepeopleperformingbasicmaintenance. Thesmall
amounts of time available for training leads to the choice of equipment
thatissimpletouseandmaintain. Handsonexperiencehasproventobe
the most efficient method to train new users, specially when focusing on
howtodealwithcommonproblems. Specialattentionneedstobegivento
dataretrievalandmanipulationmethodsinordertoallowtrackingofdata
problemslaterintheprocessingchain. Documentationofourowngroup’s
deployment protocols and data handling procedures complemented and
helped with equipment manuals and specifications.
Regularity in systems maintenance is key in keeping them running
within long term deployments. Life expectancy and calibration devia-
tion for sensors are usually a parameter specified by the manufacturer.
Enviro-Netdeploymentsusuallyhavetwomaintenancecycles: oneforba-
sic overall system check (and data retrieval for off-line deployments) and
another for complete verification of the equipment. The basic cycle has
intervalsrangingfromtwoweekstotwomonths,dependingontheacces-
sibilityofthesiteandregularityofvisitsforotherpurposes. Thistaskis
usually performed by a member of the local research teams and involves
cleaningthesensorsifneeded—mostlyfromdustbuild-uporobstructions
such as leaves, insect or bird nests, etc–verification of the general health
of the system, and data retrieval, usually the most relevant part in a ba-
sic maintenance cycle. The complete cycle intervals ranges from 6 to 12
months, and allows detection of a broader range of problems—e.g., bat-
tery charge retention capacity. This task is usually performed with one
more experienced technician.
3.1 Sensors and Loggers
Tables1and2listtheequipmentusedinourdeployments. Fordatalogger
systems, shown in Table 1, wired and wireless systems are available. In
wiredsystemsallthesensorsareconnecteddirectlytothedataloggerand
thecommunicationswithitaredonemostlythroughaphysicalconnection
using a cable (serial or USB, for instance) to connect to a laptop. For
onsetcomp.com/) data loggers; specifically the HOBO Micro Station, the
HOBO U12 Series and the HOBO U30 Series models were employed.
Wirelesssystems,ontheotherhandofferdifferentstrategiestoelimi-
natetheneedforcabledconnections. Asanexample,theequipmentman-
com/)offerstwotypesofnodes: acollectorandanaggregator. Theformer
is connected to the sensors and is responsible for wirelessly transmitting
the readings to the aggregator, which works as a centralization point for
the data collection also dubbing as a short term data logger. The ag-
gregator,however,requiresacableconnectionforsetupordatarecovery.
A different strategy is used by the equipment manufactured by MicroS-
node works as an individual data logger, but the connection to these
nodes for setup and data retrieval is done through a wireless connection.
Thestoragecapacityforsamplesinbothtypesofloggersusuallymatch
thepowerconsumptioncharacteristicstoachievesimilarlongevityinfield
deployments. As discussed later in this section a satellite up-link and a
continuous battery recharging capability (e.g., using solar panels), would
allow even longer time spans. However, since in practice maintenance is
necessary long before these limits are reached, battery and storage life-
times are not a limitation for most of these types of equipment.
Logger Model Connectivity Storage Memory Power (Battery Type) Est. Longevity(a)
OnsetU30 wireddataandsetup 512KB Int.(4.5or10Ah,4V)+Solar solarpanel(b)
OnsetU12 wireddataandsetup 43,000samples(64KB) Int.(CR-2032lithium3V) 10–12months
OnsetMicroStation wireddataandsetup 512KB Int.(4xAA1.5V) 10–14months
OlsonetCollector wirelessdata/nosetup 256KB Int.(2xAA1.5V) 4–5months
OlsonetAggregator wirelessdata/wiredsetup 2GB(remov. SDcard) Ext.(7–12Ah)+Solar solarpanel(b)
MicrostrainENV-Link wirelessdataandsetup 360,000samples Int. (650mAh)+Ext. (9Ah) 10–14months
Table 1: Dataloggers summary.
(a)Estimatedlongevitywith15minutessampling;(b)Dependentonsunlightavailability.
Table 2: Sensors summary.
Sensor Model Variable (Unit) Sensor Type Range Accuracy
SensirionSHT-75 Temp.(◦C) siliconbandgap −40.0–123.8◦C 0.3–1.5◦C
Rel.Hum.(%) capacitivehumidity 0–100%RH 1.8–4.0%RH
OnsetS-THB-M00x Temp.(◦C) siliconbandgap −40.0–75.0◦C 0.2–0.7◦C
Rel.Hum.(%) capacitivehumidity 0–100%RH 2.5–4.5%RH
OnsetRG3-M Rainfall(mm/h) tippingbucket max1,270mm/h 1.00%
OnsetS-LIA-M003 PAR(µmol/m2/sec)(a) photonsdetector 0–2,500µmol/m2/sec(c) 5.0%or5µmol/m2/sec
OnsetS-LIB-M003 SolarRadiation(W/m2) siliconphotovoltaicdetector 0–1,280W/m2(d) 5.0%or10W/m2
ApogeeSQ-110 PAR(µmol/m2/sec)(a) photonsdetector 0–2,000µmol/m2/sec(c) 5.00%
ApogeeSP-110 SolarRadiation(W/m2) siliconphotovoltaicdetector 0–1,100W/m2(d) 5.00%
DecagonECH2OEC-5 SoilMoisture(VWC(b)) 70MHzcapacitance/frequency 0–100%VWC 1.0–3.0%VWC
(a)PhotosyntheticallyActiveRadiation;(b)VolumetricWaterContent;(c)Forwavelengths
between400and700nm;(d)Forwavelengthsbetween300and1,100nm.
The biggest advantage of wired equipment is reliability, being in use
longer, and tested under many combinations of conditions. Besides lim-
itedspatialcoverage,whencomparedtowirelesssystems,themostprob-
lematic aspect of this technology is accessibility. Everything requiring a
physical connection between the logger and the laptop with the control
software, having to climb up a tower to perform tasks as routine as re-
trieving data is a somewhat serious limitation. Even using longer cables
forthesensors,whichstillhavealimitedmaximumlengthonaccountat-
tenuationoftheelectricsignal,towersforhighercanopiesrequireclimbing
to access the logger.
Forenvironmentalmonitoring,themajoradvantageofwirelesssensor
systems is the possibility of covering larger areas, without giving up high
spatial and temporal resolution, and at a reasonably low cost. One low
pointofthetechnologyisthatitisstillfairlynewasacommercialproduct,
andstillneedssomeadaptation. Errorsincommunicationprotocols,radio
rangelimitations,powermanagementrelatedissues,lackoffeaturesinthe
control software packages, and breaches in weather proofing cases weight
in at the cons for wireless systems. However, our experience shows the
technology has already reached the tipping point to becoming viable for
use in long term, harsh environment deployments.
Commercialavailabilityofwirelesssensor networks(WSN),asatech-
nology, is still limited. Although the original ideas for WSN—i.e., large
number of general purpose nodes distributed in very dense deployments,
randomly placed, almost weightless, and disposable—have yet to mate-
rialize [20,28,45], wireless technology used in conjunction with sensory
equipment is proving to be invaluable in monitoring larger areas at the
scale of a single ecosystem.
Table 2 lists the main sensors use in our deployments, which are are
wellknown,commerciallyavailable,inexpensive,andbasedonestablished
technologies. With the variables listed, it is possible to extract plenty
of derived information from them, such as vegetation indexes and light
absorption patterns for photosynthesis. In our deployments, we used so-
lar radiation sensors provided by Onset and Apogee Instruments, Inc.
set(TheOnsettemperatureandrelativehumiditysensorsusedarerepack-
aged Sensirion sensors); and, soil moisture sensors by Decagon Devices,
not offer calibration options for the user; they have their calibration ad-
justed at the manufacturer (who usually offer recalibration services).
3.2 Deployment Configurations
Within the Enviro-Net Project there are currently two main types of de-
ployments: phenology towers and understory installations. A phenology
tower uses two solar radiation flux sensors (also called pyranometers),
measuringwavelengths betweenapproximately300to 1,100nm, andtwo
PhotosyntheticallyActiveRadiationfluxsensors(orPARsensors),which
measure wavelengths between approximately 400 to 700 nm. Ratios of
these measurements can be used to derive vegetation indexes such as
NormalizedDifferenceVegetationIndex(NDVI)orEnhancedVegetation
Index (EVI)–see, for instance [46–49]. Such indexes can be used as prox-
iestomonitorvegetationphenology. Understorydeploymentsareusedto
monitortheconditionsbelowthecanopylevel,andusuallycoveralarger
area.
Figure 1 shows the schematics of a phenology tower on the left, with
twoPARsensorsandtwopyranometers,oneofeachmeasuringincoming
solar radiation and one of each measuring reflected solar radiation. The
right side of the figure is a photo of one phenology tower installed in
Brazil, which raises the sensors eight meters from the ground, six meters
above the canopy.
Figure 1: Phenology tower schematics (left) and a tower in Brazil (right).
Most radiation flux sensors have view angles of up to 85◦ from zenith
(when oriented up, i.e., measuring incoming radiation) or nadir (when
orienteddown),withauniform360◦ rotation. Withthat,theradiusthat
affectsthereadingsisuptoaroundtentimesthedistance(h)betweenthe
sensorpositionandthesurfacebeingmonitored(i.e.,radius=tan(85◦)×
h). For our deployment, weusually haveat leastfivemeters between the
topofthecanopyandthesensormeasuringthereflectedradiation(8to15
mintotal),leadingtoacoverageradiusofatleast50minthemonitored
area.
Obstructions within the range of a sensor interfere with the reading
andmightnotbeeasytoidentifyfromthedataonly—e.g.,highercanopy
of adjacent ecosystems or a nearby tower with other instruments may
interfere with sensor measuring incoming radiation. A sensor measuring
radiation reflected from the canopy is more susceptible to interference—
e.g., the positioning of solar panels, whose reflectiveness greatly affect
readings. Large panels should be positioned outside of the interference
radius, while smaller panels can be positioned at the same height as the
sensor for no interference. Note that it is difficult to position radiation
sensorsandsolarpanelsatdifferentorientations,sincebothshouldusethe
optimal exposure angle to the sun, roughly North, in southern latitudes,
or South, in northern latitudes.
Monitoringtheconditionsunderthecanopylevel,i.e.,understoryde-
ployments, allows assessing a different range of micro-climatic conditions
andalsosoilcondition—e.g.,temperatureandmoisturelevels. Understory
deployments are usually easier to access, and with that, they are useful
for validating the readings observed in a tower and also as a backup for
certain variables in case of sensor malfunction in a tower. Using wireless
systemssubstantiallyincreasesthespatialcoverageofunderstorydeploy-
ments with a fraction of the increase in cost and efforts to retrieve data
and maintain the system.
Figure 2 depicts an example of such a wireless deployment on its left
side. On the right side, it shows a node deployed in the chaco ecosystem
in Argentina. The height at which the sensors are installed in this case
is also determined by the canopy’s height, usually ranging from right
on the ground (e.g., for grasslands) to 1.5 m for taller canopies. One
example of application that relies on the spatial coverage and resolution
ofunderstorywirelessdeploymentsisderivingLeafAreaIndex(LAI)—see
[48,50],forinstance. LAI,alongwithPlant(PAI)andWood(WAI)Area
Indexes [51], are important indicators of vegetation productivity, being
also used as a reference for crop growth rates. Combining readings from
a phenology tower with understory readings of absorbed solar radiation
fluxes, it is possible to derive NDVI for the location of each node. Using
NDVI and knowing an appropriate conversion factor, characteristic to
each ecosystem, it is possible to calculate LAI for each node [48]. This
allows the creation of maps of very high spatial and temporal resolutions
for both NDVI and LAI.
Figure 2: Understory schematics (left) and a node in Argentina (right).
Having the option of deploying a large number of sensors in a given
area also raises the question of how to distribute these sensors. We have
adopted three different strategies to spatially distribute nodes and their
sensors. Figure 3 illustrates these strategies. The first approach, shown
intheleft,isintendedtomonitoralinearregionalongatransect. Thisis
particularly useful for monitoring transitions between ecosystems or ex-
positiontodifferentconditionswithinthesameecosystem. Thecenterof
thefigureshowsdistributionofnodesinconcentriccircles,whichissome-
timescalleda“star”deployment. Thistypeofdeploymentisusedmostly
tomonitorconditionsaroundapointofinterest,usuallycorrespondingto
thefootprintofphenologyorcarbonfluxtowers,allowingcombinationof
measurementsfrombothdeployments. Athirdstrategyistodeploynodes
in a grid, covering a potentially larger area of interest. Regularly spaced
grids are useful for uniform monitoring throughout an area. However,
irregular grids can also be useful when special conditions occur within a
region of interest. Examples include part of an area that is also being
monitoredby other experiments (e.g., leafcollectionfor chlorophyllmea-
surements);orpatchesaffectedbyfireandmonitoringtheirrecoveryisof
interest.
Figure 3: Deployment strategies: (a) transects; (b) concentric circumferences;
and (c) grids.
3.3 Deploying Sensors Systems
Fromalogisticsperspective,installingtowerandunderstorysystemshave
fairlydifferentcharacteristics. Phenologytowersreachedupto15minone
of our deployments, with 9 m being the most common height. Selecting
the location for installing a tower that high must take into account the
representativeness of the ecosystem, the impact of building it, and the
accessibility to bring its parts to the site. Another important issue is
the uniformity in the height of the canopy. Too much variation in the
tree heights will lead to scaling problems in the data, an area with taller
vegetation will be contributing significantly less to the readings. When
installing a phenology tower intended to be used in a long term data
collection,thegrowthofthevegetationshouldalsobetakenintoaccount.
Younger ecosystems might grow considerably at intervals as short as one
year, forcing height upgrades to a tower.
Theheightofthecanopyisalsoaconcernforunderstorydeployments.
Ecosystemswithlowercanopies,suchasgrasslands,requirethatsolarra-
diation flux sensors be positioned almost adjacent to the ground, while
tallercanopiesallowsensorsinahigherposition(0.60to0.10marecom-
mon heights). For wireless deployments, the node is usually installed in
a higher position to improve radio signal range, while the sensors are
deployed at the appropriate heights.
Althoughitmightseemlikeatrivialtaskatfirst,correctlypositioning
thesensorsshouldtakeintoconsiderationanumberoffactors. Oneissue
is the creation of unnatural sources of shade (e.g., from the pole where
thenodesits)intothesensor. Fordeploymentsinthenorthern(southern)
hemisphere, positioning radiation flux sensors South (North) of obstruc-
tionsavoidsthisissue. Airtemperatureandrelativehumiditysensorsare
alsoaffectedbytheirpositioning. Besidesbeinghostedatsolarradiation
shields and being positioned as to allow for air circulation, they should
also keep some distance from radiation absorbing materials. Most of the
weatherproofing cases, for instance, absorb non-negligible quantities of
solar radiation. We had cases of temperature deviations of up to 20 ◦C
because of a dark weatherproof case.
One crucial aspect to sensor systems deployments in tropical ecosys-
temsistheexposuretoconstantlyhighrelativehumidity. Valuesbetween
90%–100%arecommonintheseenvironments. Combinedwithhightem-
peratures,thisconditiontransformedmanyweatherproofcasingsintohu-
miditytraps. Themainproblemwasactuallythedifferenceofinternaland
external pressure in the cases. That made previously air tight cases ab-
sorbhumiditywhilebalancingthepressure,exposingtheinternalcircuits
and connectors. Both for loggers and sensors, even cases designed and
tested to work underwater were susceptible to this problem. Adopting
pressure relief valves significantly attenuated the problem, even though
sometimes they can get clogged with dirt and stop working. Another
adoptedpracticethatalsohelpedreducethisproblemwastousesilicone-
based adhesives to seal borders and openings, around sensor cables and
also around the sensors themselves.
For wireless sensor systems, testing the range of the radio system at
the actual deployment site is essential. Vegetation distribution and ter-
rain contours are difficult to predict beforehand and have a significant
impact in the radio range. Two major aspects have shown to be of par-
ticularrelevancewhenconductingthiskindoftest. Firstly,ifthetypeof
batteries used decrease the voltage offered to the system with time, the
testsshouldnotbeconductedwithnewbatteries. Amoreaccuratetestof
radio range is achieved using more realistic battery levels—e.g., levels of
batterysimilartowhenadeploymentrunningformorethanhalfoftheex-
pectedbatterylife. Incaseofrechargeablebatteries,thechargelevelused
should be the average level the batteries would have when going without
charge for the maximum foreseeable period. For tropical dry forests the
maximum period without non-negligible sun light exposure for charging
batteriesthroughsolarpanelsisaroundtwodays. Itisworthofnotethat
regular alkaline (zinc and manganese dioxide) batteries, widely adopted
topowernodesinsensornetworks,dochangetheirvoltagesdependingon
their level of charge.
The second aspect interfering with radio range is related to the veg-
etation density, particularly to changes in density throughout the sea-
sons. Radio range is greatly affected by branches and leaves in the line
of sight of the signal. Ranges of up to 300 m in a level and open field
can be reduced to as little as 15 m (a factor of 20 reduction) simply by
having a somewhat closed vegetation. In particular, radio frequencies
at 2.4 GHz are severely attenuated by trees and leafs. This frequency
is adopted by several wireless sensor systems, including the ZigBee Al-
theIEEE802.15.4WirelessPersonalAreaNetworkstandard),widelyused
inthesesystems. Furthermore,itisveryusualfordeploymentcampaigns
to take place in the dry season, when rainfall is less of a concern for the
schedule in deployment plans. However, foliage of deciduous vegetation
can be at much lower levels than it will be in the wet season, which can
significantly affect the range of radio signal. There is no definite solution
to address the vegetation changes, since simulating the conditions of a
different season is difficult. Monitoring the overall network health, which
canbedoneinitssimplestformbydetectinggapsinthedata,andrepo-
sitioningnodeswhennecessaryhasbeenthebestmeasuretoaddressthis
issue in new ecosystems. These, in turn, serve as a reference for future
deployments in similar ecosystems.
Seasonal change also can have an unexpected impact in the visibility
ofnodesandsensors. Wheninstallingsensorsinthedryseason,thereare
few obstructions and less color variability on the landscape. This makes
visibility reasonably good. However, areas that significantly change their
vegetationcoverageorareasthathavedensevegetationcanbecomequite
challenging from the point of view of visibility in the wet season. Using
colorfulmarkers—redoryellowribbonsorpaintareeffectiveforthis—can
save a lot of time when trying to find nodes and sensor that have been
deployedforawhile. NotrelyingsolelyontheGPStolocatesmallpieces
of equipment such as individual nodes and sensors can be the difference
between returning to base camp before or after sunset. One aspect of
using such markers that was not taken into account in this work is the
increasedattractivenesscolormakersmightexertonanimals(particularly
insects).
3.4 Retrieving Data
Datafromground-basedsensorsystemscanberetrievedeitherin-situor
remotely. Theformerinvolvesexpeditionstothedeploymentsites,which
can be very expensive. However, if the site is already being visited in a
regular basis for other reasons (collecting leaf samples, for instance), this
mightbecomemorefeasible. Mostofourcurrentdeploymentsareworking
in this scenario. This has proven to be quite an advantage from the
perspective of maintenance of untested systems, allowing early detection
ofproblems withequipment. With equipment proven toworkwell, using
a remote solution is probably more cost and time effective.
Collecting data remotely might be achieved in a number of ways.
One possibility is using a dedicated long range wireless communication
system—e.g., by using a WiFi connection with repeaters—to transmit
data at regular intervals to a computer installed in a location with per-
manent power supply. If there is also Internet connectivity, the data can
beforwardedtoon-linepermanentarchivalsystems. Thisalternativeusu-
allyhasasignificantoverheadofmaintainingthelocalcomputerandthe
long range communications system running.
Another alternative is to use cellular networks with data capabilities.
Althoughcellularcoverageisnotgoodinmoreremoteareas,someregions
have enough connectivity to allow data transmission in a fairly regular
fashion. Using higher gain antennas improves signal reception, but the
system must be prepared to go through reasonably long periods with no
connectivity,preservingalldatafordelayedtransmission. Sinceanactual
Internet connection is provided with a cellular connection, the data can
be transmitted directly to on-line archival servers.
Athirdtypeofremotedataretrievalsolutioninvolvesusingasatellite
up-link. This approach is also subject to communications failure (e.g.,
if there is too much cloud coverage). The connectivity provided here
usually is not to the Internet, but connectivity to a service provider that
receive the data from the satellite. This provider in turn makes the data
accessible,oftenofferingautomatedwaysofretrievingthedatafromtheir
on-lineservers. Inourcase,systemsthathaveproventoworkconsistently
well have been equipped with a satellite transmitter.
Remoteconnectivityallowsnotonlyautomateddataretrieval,butalso
some level remote operation of the equipment. Options of stopping and
startingthelogger,settingsamplingandstorageratesareoftenavailable.
In a few cases, it might be interesting to be able to set other parame-
ters remotely, particularly with wireless systems. Research projects have
exploredconfiguringdeploymentsremotely[37],evenreprogramminglog-
gersandcollectionnodesinsomecases[20,36]. Thislevelofflexibilityin
remotedeploymentconfiguration,however,isnotyetcommerciallyavail-
able.
4 Data Pre-Processing and Cleaning
When considering the volume of data generated by current sensor sys-
tems,automationofdatamanagementrelatedtaskswithinapropercom-
putational infrastructure is of paramount importance [1,3,4,10,33,52].
However,actualdatasetsgeneratedbysensorsystemsmightpresentava-
rietyofproblemsandexceptions,whichareoftendifficulttoforesee. This
is a severe drawback in attempts to automate the first data management
phase: ingestion of data into any computational data management sys-
tem. Thissortofproblemsareoftendismissedasbeing“implementation
details”,buttheirimplicationscanactuallyaffectdataqualityparameters
and models to store and distribute the data. In higher end (expensive)
and/or homogeneous equipment this sort of problems are usually easier
to tackle. However, in a setting like ours, using equipment from different
manufactures,inahighlydistributedeffort,withanaimatlowlimitsfor
equipment and maintenance costs, these issues are fairly commonplace.
The implementation of solutions for problems with raw datasets are
usually carried out within a data pre-processing (or data cleaning) phase.
Althoughthesetermsusuallyencompassexplicitdataqualityverification
or removal of erroneous readings (e.g., values outside the scale measured
by a sensor), this section only considers problems that actually prevent
(or are difficult to trace after) the ingestion of the data into a data man-
agement system. When compared to classification scales usually adopted
indescribingEarthobservationdataproducts,afterthecorrectionsinthis
section, the dataset should treated as “raw” data, or, as being at Data
Processing Level 2 in the National Research Council (NRC) Committee
onDataManagementandComputation(CODMAC)[53]classification,or
earth-science/earth-science-data/data-processing-levels-for-eosdis-data-products/).
Thenextparagraphdiscusstheproblemswehadtohandlewhenprepar-
ing our datasets.
4.1 Synchronization
Keepingcorrecttemporalinformationfortimestampingreadingsfromdis-
tributedsensorscanbereallychallenging,nottomentioncorrectingtime
deviations after recording the data [54]. Time synchronization is an is-
sue both at single deployment, with multiple collectors and/or loggers,
andacrossdeployments. Withinadeployment,hardwareimprecisionand
heterogeneousinitialsynchronizationmethodsarethetwomaincausesof
synchronizationproblems. Timekeepinginelectronicequipmentisbased
on crystal oscillators, which can deviate from their standard frequency
with environmental conditions, especially temperature. This causes the
timemeasurementstodeviateaswell,andaffectsalmostalltypesofdata
loggingequipments. Inthiscase,theerrorisproportionaltothesampling
rate, which for applications such as seismology, with high sampling rates
are, these errors are quite significant. For long term environmental mon-
itoring, this can also be a problem. One solution is to have an accurate
referencetimekeepingandamechanismtokeepthesynchronicityamong
loggers. Possiblesolutionsincludehavingmorepreciseequipmentkeptat
a less exposed location or using GPS time as references. A few wireless
communication protocols have time synchronization features embedded
within their message exchanging mechanism [55].
When dynamic time synchronization against a reliable reference is
not feasible, the initial synchronization method is the basis for all time
information within a deployment. This is the most common scenario for
our current deployments, with the usual mechanism for synchronization
being based on the time information from the computer with the control
software used to start a deployment. Therefore, the time information
in that computer should be synchronized (e.g., by using Network Time
Data comparison from different deployments at small temporal reso-
lutionsmusttakeintoaccountpotentialsynchronizationerrors. However,
since sampling rates are commonly higher than desired temporal resolu-
tion,mostdataanalysisisdonewithaggregateddatainsteadoftheentire
dataset, which attenuates the effects of the time synchronization related
errors, particularly when looking at hourly or even daily averages.
Similartootherreports[54],wealsoexperiencedpowersourcerelated
synchronization problems. Time measurement in some logging equip-
ments can be affected by power outages or low voltages from the power
source. Some types of equipment use the main power to keep time mea-
surement running and, although time measurement usually requires very
littlepower,ifthesupplyisinterrupted,theequipment’sclockgetsreset.
Current data logging equipment and control software offer poor sup-
porttoaddresstimesynchronizationproblems. Manyofthemdon’teven
let the user see what is the current time in logging system to manually
check for time drifts. But this is evolving in control software for wireless
systems, since these suffer more noticeably from time related problems.
4.2 Time Zones
Whendealingwithdeploymentsthataregeographicallydistributedthrough-
out various timezones, establishing the correct local time can become an
issue. Once again, relying on a computer’s time as a reference to times-
tampthereadingsisamajorcauseoferrors. Differentversionsofoperat-
ing systems have different levels of automation regarding time zones and
daylight saving time configurations, often allowing users to change these
manually. Therefore,besideshavingthecorrecttimeonthecomputer,as
alreadydiscussed,wrongconfigurationsoftimezoneandchangingconfig-
urationsfordaylightsavingtimescanalsoleadtoinconsistenciessuchas:
having data for a single deployment timestamped with different daylight
saving times, or difficulties determining which is the correct local time
when comparing data for deployments in different time zones.
For our deployments, when issuing field laptops, time configurations
always adopt the local standard time for the site, disabling automatic
changes to daylight saving time. However, even rugged field laptops fail,
and temporary misconfigured replacements can be used. Or, an even
less elaborate problem, which happens often, new users get confused by
seemingly “wrong” time settings and change the time configurations.
It is possible, however, to check time zone and daylight saving times
against sun time. This is done by comparing several days of sunrise time
from data collected by solar radiation sensors to expected sunrise times
for the location. This method is not accurate enough for correcting for
hardwaretimedrift,forinstance,butisgoodenoughtocorrectforoneor
more hours shift in the timestamps. This verification is performed on all
of our datasets before ingesting them into our data management system.
4.3 Data Format Variation
One burdensome problem of dealing with data from different types of
equipment is handling changing data formats or a variety of possible for-
matting errors.
The first of such types of problems to be addressed are changes in
the data format made by the equipment manufacturer. A considerable
amount of format changes from manufacturers are not documented ade-
quately with new versions or software updates. Unfortunately, this type
of problem needs to be addressed case-by-case.
Oneproblemthatwassurprisingtousisthatsometypesoffailuresin
the sensors themselves can generate errors in the data format by, for in-
stance,changingthenumberofdatacolumnsinarecord. Asanexample,
thiscouldmakearecordthatshouldhavethreedatacolumns(e.g.,read-
ingsontemperature,humidityandsolarradiation)actuallyhaveextraor
missing columns. Similar effects can be caused by connector designed to
begenericandsupportdifferentsensors: asensorbehavinginsomeunex-
pected way may cause the data collection node or the logger to perform
incorrect conversions or even generate software errors that will affect the
data format. In wireless equipment, we have also seen the data format
being drastically changed by problems in the transmission of the data.
In the presence of radio interference, usually created by the operation of
higher powered wireless equipment in proximity of the deployment, the
datatransmissiongetscompromised,generatingerrorsinboththevalues
of the readings and the structure of a record.
All these types of errors can cause failures in the ingestion software
or, worse, have errors introduced in the data ingestion process without
any warnings. Our solution to this was to make ingestion software moni-
tor for format changes and generate informative error messages, allowing
identifying problems before ingestion.
4.4 Provenance
Given the tailored nature of data pre-processing steps described in this
section, it is difficult to keep standardized provenance information and
even harder to automate collection of this type of information, as also
made evident in [40]. In our current data management solution, sim-
ple free text description fields are used to keep track of pre-processing
steps and choices. Nonetheless, with a flexible metadata specification
//www.geochronos.org/) [56], it would be possible to add specific fields
to document evolving aspects of the pre-processing steps.
Although difficult to obtain and maintain, documentation of the pre-
processing steps are important to identify not only errors in the pre-
processing itself, but also problems with the deployments. For instance,
theappearanceoftoomanyerroneousrecordsfromawirelessdatacollec-
tion node are potential evidence of problems with the sensors, the sensor
connections, the node hardware or radio interference sources in the sur-
roundings. Thelatterproblemmightevenindicateaffectedreadingsfrom
other nodes that would otherwise go unnoticed.
5 Web-Based Data Analysis
A resourceful and easy to use data management system is the last piece
ofoursolutionforlargescalein-situmonitoring. Thepre-processingstep
presented in the previous section allows the data to be ingested into the
system, being stored in an integrated representation. Then users can in-
teract with the system having access to data filtering, aggregation and
other more specialized processing operations. Data visualization and re-
trieval are offered for data at all processing levels after pre-processing,
providing a flexible mechanism for analyzing the data within the system
or using other tools with the data already narrowed down to the parts of
interest. Thissectiondiscussestheseissues, alsoconsideringdataquality
and user interaction aspects.
5.1 Uploading Data
Thetaskofdataingestioncanbeautomatedfordatasetsthatrequirepre-
processing steps known beforehand. Automated data ingestion methods
are particularly useful with deployments that have automated data re-
trieval,asisthecasefordataretrievalusingasatelliteup-linkandanthe
respectiveInternetserviceforgettingthedata. However,newdatasetsor
datasetsthatneededspecializedpre-processingbeforegettingreadytobe
ingestedneedaflexiblemechanismtomapavailabledatatotheintegrated
representation of the data in the system. Properly handling errors and
exceptionsinthedataingestionprocessingisnecessaryfrombothuserex-
perience and data quality perspectives. Automated data ingestion needs
timelyerrorgenerationsotheuserresponsibleforthedeploymentiskept
informed and and can take corrective action. Informative descriptions of
errorshelpstheuseridentifyanddiagnosetheerrorcauses,whichispar-
ticularly important for manual ingestion of data that was pre-processed
in any non-standard way.
Another aspect to be considered is the documentation of the pro-
cess for every dataset upload. Metadata regarding date and time, data
source, user, pre-processing options, among others, help identify sources
of error such as faulty time related correction or application of outdated
pre-processing methods. Most of these metadata can be collected auto-
matically by the system, which unburdens the user and prevents missing
information from less thorough users.
Only with an integrated data representation model it is possible to
offeracommonuserinterface,typesoffilters,aggregationoptionsandany
otheroperationformanipulationofdata. Datafromdifferentinstruments,
deployment configurations, retrieval strategies, etc., need to be stored
uniformly so all the system’s features are available for all datasets.
5.2 Interactive Filters and Operators
Having the data uniformly stored in a repository, the users can start tai-
loring datasets to their needs. The most basic functionality to allow this
tailoring is being able to apply filters (e.g., only data within a range of
values or with low error rates) and aggregation operators (e.g., showing
daily or monthly values) to the datasets. Without adequate computa-
tionalsupport,manyresearchersspenddaystoweeksinthistrivialtask.
Figure4showsourinterfaceforafewofthesefilterstoachievethetarget
data,fromthetop: whichsensorstoinclude,whichtimespantoconsider,
andwhichtimesofthedayareofinterest. Thescreenshownistoextract
and download a dataset to be used with other tools. Several other op-
tions are also available, including filtering out errors, showing raw values
(e.g.,ofvoltages,electricalcurrent,orunconvertedpulsecounts),fileand
content formats, including data derived from the sensor readings, among
others.
Offering quick and easy access to the (corrected and quality checked)
sensorreadingsfromadeploymentisoneofthemostessentialfeaturesof
our solution. However, also having data that can be derived from from
these readings as easily accessible is what shows the actual potential for
data management systems like ours. Our current implementation offers
the automatic calculation of vegetation indexes, NDVI and EVI, from
solar radiation flux sensors using different methodologies [46–49]. Other
products are currently being integrated into Enviro-Net, including LAI,
Vapour Pressure Deficit (VPD), spatial distribution for Fraction of Ab-
sorbed Photosynthetically Active Radiation (fAPAR).
Figure 4: Data retrieval options.
5.3 Visualization
After tailoring a dataset to specific goals, adequate visualization tools
allow easier understanding of events and trends within the monitored ar-
eas. Themostbasicvisualtoolisgraphingthesensorreadingsofdifferent
variables,allowingvisualcomparisonandinsightonthemeasurementsin
one deployment. However, two features in our web system proved to be
invaluable: graphing of datasets that went trough transformations (fil-
tering, aggregation and derived data) and graphing across deployments.
These graphing options are depicted on the left side of Figure 5, which
shows derived NDVI (using the methodology in [48]) for two different
deployments in the Mata Seca State Park, in Brazil, within a specific
time span, using only readings close to midday (between 10:00 AM and
2:00 PM local time), filtering out seemingly cloudy days (i.e., including
only data records when the measured incoming PAR is more than 900
microeinsteins per second per square meter—µE/m2/s), and aggregating
the data in daily averages.
TherightsideofFigure5showsanothertypeofvisualizationstrategy
based on the spatial distribution of the readings. The graph on the left
site uses a color scale to represent variation temperature across an area
coveredby12temperaturesensorsintheChamelaReserveinMexico. The
graphontherightshowsthecoverageoftheinstalledsensors(indicating
thereliabilityofthescale), highlightingsensorfailureswhentheseoccur.
Figure 5: Visualization of derived NDVI (left) and spatial distribution of tem-
perature and its reliability (right).
Withinthespecifiedtimespan,thesystemgeneratedasequenceofimages
whichareanimatedusingthecontrolsatthebottomtoshowtheevolution
of the temperature and reliability distributions through time. This is a
useful tool to observe cyclic (e.g., diurnal or seasonal) changes in the
monitored areas.
6 Concluding Remarks
ThispaperpresentedtheEnviro-NetProject,whichaddressesavarietyof
issuesrelatedtoin-situ(orground-based)monitoringofecosystems,from
the deployment of sensors to the delivery of processed data products. A
combinationoffactorsmakethisprojectunique: (i)acquisitionofdataat
ecosystemlevelwithhighspatialandtemporalresolutions;(ii)longterm,
ground-based monitoring; (iii) use of heterogeneous, commercially avail-
able, and inexpensive equipment, including wireless sensing technologies;
and (iv) integrated data management solution, with a Web-based user
interaction with data products.
This scenario, which is increasingly being adopted by other research
projects, is described in detail in the paper, discussing lessons learned
and pointing out aspects that require attention and could go unnoticed
before deployment efforts are well underway. The paper examines not
only technical issues of deploying ground-based sensor systems, but also
the logistics behind execution and maintenance of deployments, issues
related to data retrieval, verification and quality, and publication of data
products. The paper discussed evidence that this kind of research was
needed, integrating solution to from a number of research efforts and
offeringarealsolutionin-situlongtermenvironmentalmonitoringathigh
resolution temporal and spatial.
Current efforts include: improving our deployment protocols to deal
with arising problems and simplifying the maintenance related tasks; ex-
tendingourdatamanagementsysteminordertohandlelargeramountsof
data;andaddingnewdatamanipulationoperationstooffermorederived
data products. As future work, we intend to focus on data provenance
visualizationissues,toimproveunderstandingofhowdataproductswere
generated and allowing automation of reproducibility. Another aspect
to be explored in future releases of our data management system is the
integration of remote sensing data (from satellite and airborne instru-
ments) into our common interface [57], allowing analysis and comparison
of these types of data with ground-based data. We also plan to work on
implementing programmatic interfaces to allow software-based access to
our data by, for instance, using Open Geospatial Consortium protocols.
Lastly,wehaveplanstoincludemonitoringofequipmentlifeexpectancy,
particularly of sensors and wireless collector node equipment, in order to
create better models for maintenance of long term deployments—by, for
instance,increasingtheprecisionofrequiredreplacementratesforequip-
ment.
Acknowledgements
TheEnviro-NetProjectisfundedbytheCanadianFoundationforInnova-
tion and the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
CRN II # 021 which is supported by the National Science Foundation
(Grant GEO-0452325). It is also partially supported by Cybera and Ca-
narie (through the GeoChronos Project), as well as the National Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant
Program. The authors acknowledge and appreciate the contributions to
theEnviro-NetProject,receivedinvariousforms,bynumerousmembers
of the local and remote research groups, in particular the students and
staff at the University of Alberta, and our research partners at Federal
University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), State University of Montes Claros
(UNIMONTES), and State University of Sa˜o Paulo (UNESP), in Brazil;
AutonomousNationalUniversityofMexico(UNAM),inMexico;Technol-
ogy Institute of Costa Rica (ITCR), in Costa Rica; University of Buenos
Aires(UBA),andNationalUniversityofSanLuis(UNSL),inArgentina.