1v6006000/sc:viXra
A Real–Time Novelty Detector For A Mobile Robot ∗
Stephen Marsland, Ulrich Nehmzow and Jonathan Shapiro
Department of Computer Science
University of Manchester
Oxford Road
Manchester M13 9PL, U.K.
{smarsland, ulrich, jls}@cs.man.ac.uk
of a ‘clean’ area, which has been inspected by hu-
mans and is known to exhibit no undesirable fea-
Recognising new or unusual features of an environ- tures. The robot then explores the wider environ-
ment is an ability which is potentially very useful mentandmarksthosestimuliwhicharenotpresent
to a robot. This paper demonstrates an algorithm in the model and therefore were not in the original
whichachieves thistaskbylearninganinternalrep- environment.
resentation of ‘normality’ from sonar scans taken This paper demonstrates the behaviour of the
as a robot explores the environment. This model novelty filter when the inputs to it are sonar scans
of the environment is used to evaluate the novelty taken while a robot explores an environment using
of each sonar scan presented to it with relation to a wall-following behaviour. One property of the
themodel. Stimuliwhich have not been seen before, novelty filter which is investigated here is the abil-
and therefore have more novelty, are highlighted by itytoforget. Thismeansthatitwillstillfindtobe
the filter. The filter has the ability to forget about novel any stimuli which are seen only infrequently.
features which have been learned, so that stimuli Thisisusefulbecauseitensuresthatthesefeatures
which are seen only rarely recover their response arealwaysconsiderednovel,not learnedovertime.
over time. A number of robot experiments are pre- This can help the robot to deal with dynamic en-
sentedwhichdemonstratetheoperationofthefilter. vironments,where things may changeovertime. If
aneventhappensonlyoccasionallywewouldlikeit
Keywords: Novelty Detection, Habituation, Mobile to be considered novel, but without forgetting the
Robot, Self-Organisation robot will learn to recognise it no matter what the
time interval between occurrences.
1 Introduction
1.1 Related Work
Novelty detection, recognising when a particular The best known example of a novelty detector is
stimulus has not been seen before, is a very use- the Kohonen Novelty Filter [9, 8]. This is an au-
ful ability for both animals and robots. This pa- toencoder neural network which is trained using
per presents an algorithm which allows a robot to backpropagationoferror[2]. Oncethenetworkhas
detect novel stimuli. The novelty filter described been trained, presenting an input to the network
learnsarepresentationofanenvironmentandthen produces one of the learned outputs, and taking
detects deviations from that model by evaluating the bitwise difference between the two displays the
the novelty of each feature presented. novel components of the input.
Anoveltyfilterhasmanypotentialusesonamo- A number of other researchers have proposed
bile robot. For instance, it could be used as an novelty filters. Ypma and Duin [22] proposed a
attentionalmechanism,directingtherobot’satten- novelty detector based on the self-organising map.
tion to newer features, which may be important Training data was used to train the map, so that
and have not previously been learned [11]. This the data formed organised neighbourhoods. Then,
reduces the amount of processing needed to deal when any data caused a neuron to fire which was
with the robot’s sensory perceptions. The novelty beyond a predefined threshold from any of the
filter could also enable the robot to be used as an neighbourhoods, the data was considered to be
inspection agent. A model is built by the robot novel. Thistechniquedependsverystronglyonthe
∗In Proceedings of the EUREL European Advanced choice of threshold and assumes that the data pre-
RoboticsSystemsMasterclassandConference,2000 sented to the network formed strictly segmented
neighbourhood clusters. The technique has been
used by Taylor and MacIntyre [18] to detect ma-
chinery faults. The network was trained on data
recorded while the machine was operating without
problems,anddatadeviatingfromthispatternwas
taken as novel.
The technique of training the network on ‘nor-
mal’ data and then attempting to recognise
whether inputs come from the learned probability
distribution is a common one when there is little
datafromaparticularclass,suchasmachinefaults,
but lots ofdata fromthe other classes. It has been 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
usedfortopicsasdiverseasmammogramscans[17]
to machine breakdowns [12, 21].
An alternative method was proposed by Ho and
Rouat [6] whose model is based on an integrate-
and-fire network. The algorithm times how long it
takestheoscillatorynetworktosettletoastableso-
lution, reasoning that inputs which have been seen
previously will converge faster than novel ones.
2 The Novelty Filter
The novelty filter described in this paper works on
the principle that something is novel if it has not
been seen before. The question is how to recog-
nise that an item is new. If we know in advance
what everything in the environment will look like
then it is relatively simple to train the robot to
recognise each of those features. However, this is
usually not possible. Instead, if the robot learns
to ignore anything which it has seen before, then,
it will only respond to novel things. This is some-
thing which animals do quite well [14]. There are
then two parts to the desired system - learning to
recognise features that have been seen before, and
evaluating their novelty. The first part, recognis-
ing features, is a pattern recognition problem and
has been considered widely in the neural network
literature. One possible solution is the Kohonen
Self-Organising Map [8], which is described below.
The second problem, how to evaluate the novelty,
is considered in section 2.2.
2.1 The Self-Organising Map
The Self-Organising Map (SOM) of Kohonen [8] is
a clustering mechanism which clusters input vec-
tor in a topological way, so that perceptions which
are similar excite similar regions of the network.
The SOM is used here to perform Learning Vector
Quantisation,choosing a winning neuronthat best
matches the input and moving that neuron and its
neighbours closer to the input vector. It does this
byselectingtheneuronwiththeminimumdistance
Habituation Curves for Varying Tau
tau = 14.3
0.9 tau = 3.33
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Number of Presentations
Habituation Curves for Varying Tau
tau = 14.3
tau = 3.33
Number of Presentations
Figure1: Left: Anexampleofhowthesynapticefficacy
dropswhenhabituationoccurs. Inbothcurves,aconstant
stimulusS(t)=1ispresented,causingtheefficacytofall.
ThestimulusisreducedtoS(t)=0attimet=60where
the graphs rise again, and becomes S(t) = 1 again at
t=100, causing another drop. The two curves show the
effects of varying τ in equation 3. It can be seen that a
larger value of τ causes both the learning and forgetting
to occur faster. The other variables were the same for
both curves, α=1.05 andy0 =1.0.
between itself and the input. The distance is de-
fined by:
where v(t) is the input vector at time t, w i the
weightbetweeninputiandtheneuronandthesum
is overthe N components of the input vector. The
weights for the winning neuron and its eight topo-
logical neighbours are updated by:
whereηisthelearningrate,0≤η(t)≤1. Asquare
mapfield,comprising100neuronsarrangedina10
by 10 grid, was used in the experiments reported
here. Theneighbourhoodsizewaskeptconstantat
±1 unit and the learning rate η was 0.25, so that
the network was always learning.
2.2 Evaluating the Novelty
Once a feature has been classified using the SOM,
the novelty filter needs to assign a novelty value
to the reading. A simple counter could be kept on
each neuron, recording the number of times that
each neuron has fired, and the output reduced ac-
cordingly. Thisisbiologicallyimplausibleanddoes
notallowforanyforgettingofstimuli. Whenanan-
imal stops responding to a feature which has been
presentedtoitrepeatedly,theanimalissaidtohave
Output Neuron
Habituable Synapses
16 infrared
Figure 3: TheNomad 200 mobile robot.
2.3 Putting it all together
By attaching an habituable synapse to each of the
i 1 i2 i 3 i n neurons in the SOM, a novelty filter is produced.
Thenetworkisshowninfigure2. Theonlyremain-
Figure 2: Thenovelty filter. The inputlayer connects ingquestionishowtheconstantsαandτ shouldbe
toaclusteringlayerwhichrepresentsthefeaturespace,the chosen. In order for the network to learn quickly,
winningneuron(i.e.,theone‘closest’totheinput)passing the synapse of the winning neuron should habit-
itsoutputalongahabituablesynapsetotheoutputneuron uate rapidly. By choosing a value of τ = 3.33,
so that the output received from a neuron reduces with the synapse decreases to below 90% of its original
thenumberof times it fires. value within 5 iterations. The neighbourhood neu-
rons, which recognise similar perceptions, have a
smaller amount of habituation, τ = 14.33 and the
habituated to the signal. Habituation, thought to
other neurons, which are forgetting, have a longer
be one of the simplest forms of plasticity in the
time period, τ = 100. This is because we do not
brain[19],hasbeendetectedinawiderangeofani-
wantthe networktoforgetperceptionstoorapidly.
malsfromtheseaslugAplysia[1,4]tohumans[14].
Usingthisvalueaperceptionwillrecoverfromcom-
Theincreaseintheresponsetoanhabituatedstim-
plete habituation in about 280 presentations.
uluswhenthestimulusiswithdrawniscalleddisha-
bituation. It is thought to be a separate process
acting on the habituable synapses [5]. 3 Experiments
Several researchers have proposed models of the
phenomenon of habituation, including Groves [5], The experiments presented investigate the ability
WangandHsu[20]andStanley[16]. Itisthemodel
of the novelty filter to learn a model of an exter-
ofStanley,describedbelow,whichisusedhere. The nalenvironmentthroughperiodicsonarscanstaken
synaptic efficacy, y(t), decreases according to the
whileexploring,andtodetectdeviationsfromthat
following equation: model. Theeffectsoftheforgettingmechanismare
demonstrated.
3.1 The Robot
wherey0 istheoriginalvalueofy,τ andαaretime
constantsgoverningthe rateofhabituationandre- A Nomad 200 mobile robot (shown in figure 3)
coveryrespectively,andSisthestimuluspresented. was usedto performthe experiments. The band of
The activity of the winning neuron and its neigh- infra-redsensorsmountedatthebottomofthetur-
bours are propagated up the synapse, so the input retoftherobotwereusedtoperformapre–trained
is S(t) = d (d defined in equation 1). Using equa- wall–following routine [13], and the 16 sonar sen-
tion 3 we can control how strongly a synapse re- sors at the top of the turret were used to provide
sponds to an input. The first time a synapse fires perceptions of the robot’s environment. The an-
itsvalueishigh,buteachtimeitisuseditsstrength gle between the turret and base of the robot was
decreases, as can be seen in the graph in figure 1. kept fixed. The input vector to the novelty filter
Neuronswhichdonotbelongtothewinningneigh- consisted of the 16 sonar sensors, each normalised
bourhoodgive aninput of S(t)=0 to the synapse. to be between 0 and 1, were thresholded at about
This has the affect of causing the efficacy of the 4metres. Thereadingswereinvertedsothatinputs
synapse to increase, or ‘forget’ some of its inhibi- from sonar responses received from closer objects
tion, dishabituation. were greater.
3.2 Experimental Procedure highlightedinthelatertrials. Aftertwomorelearn-
ingtrials,thenoveltyfilter haslearnedanaccurate
The experiments eachconsistedofa number oftri-
representation of the environment, as can be seen
als. In each trial, the robot started from an ar-
from the lack of response from the output neuron
bitrarily chosen starting point, and moved using a
in trial 6.
wall–following behaviour. Every 10cm along the
Once the novelty filter stopped finding anything
route, the smoothed readings from the sonar sen-
novel in environment A, the robot was moved into
sorswerepresentedtothenoveltyfilter,whichpro-
environmentB. This is a similar environmentto A
duced a novelty reading. Once the robot had trav-
(see figure 4). The right of figure 5 shows the re-
elled10m it stoppedand savedthe neuralnetwork
sultsofthis. The onlythings whichthe robotfinds
weights. The robotwas then returnedto the start-
tobe novelinthisenvironmentarethe perceptions
ing point using manual control and the same pro-
ofthedoorways. Thisisbecausethedoorsareinset
cedurerepeatedwiththeupdatednetworkweights.
further intothe wallin this environment. The con-
After each training trial, where the novelty filter
troltrialdemonstratesthe responsesofthe novelty
learnedabout the environment,the learningmech-
filter when the robot is put into environment B af-
anism was turned off and a non-learning trial per-
ter training in a control environment. For this the
formed. The sonar inputs still generated output
robotwasdrivenaroundinanopenarea,travelling
fromthe noveltyfilter to recordthe novelty ofper-
closeto awall,intothe openspaceandbacktothe
ceptions, but the robot did not learn.
wall. It can be seen that the robot finds the en-
vironment to be considerably more novelafter this
3.3 Environments training.
Two environments were used in the experiments,
4.2 Experiment Two
together with a control environment for training.
The two environments are shownin figure 4. They
The secondpair ofexperiments (shownin figure6)
are similar sections of corridor on the second floor
were designed to show the behaviour of the forget-
oftheComputerScience buildingatthe University
tingpartofthenoveltyfilter. Twodifferentexperi-
of Manchester. The corridors are 1.7m wide and
mentswereperformed. Inboththenetworkweights
have walls made from painted breezeblock. Doors
learned when exploring environment A were used.
made of varnished wood lead from the corridors
The first trial shows that the novelty filter had
into offices.
learnedaboutthisenvironment,sincetherobotdid
notfindanythingnovel. Adoorintheenvironment
4 Results wasthenopened(shownasEnvironmentA*atthe
bottom of figure 6), and the robot learned about
thisnewenvironment. Acardboardboxwasplaced
4.1 Experiment One
in the doorway. This was of sufficient height to be
Thefirstexperimentaimedtodemonstratetheabil- seen by the infra-red sensors which were respon-
ity of the novelty filter to learn a representation sible for the wall-following, but not by the sonar
of an environment and recognise novel features, so sensors. After each learning trial in this environ-
thattherobotcouldbeusedasaninspectionagent. ment, the door was closed and a non-learning trial
Thenoveltyfilterwasinitialisedrandomlyandthen inenvironmentAwasperformed. Thefiguresshow
the robot was put into environment A. The left of that while no other features aredetected, the open
figure 5 shows the results of this. The figures show door is initially novel, but is learnedoverthe three
theresponseoftheoutputneurontotheinputvec- trials,andthecloseddoorisinitiallyrecognisedbut
tor of sonar readings that it receives every 10cm isfoundprogressivelymorenovelasthe noveltyfil-
along the route it travelled. At the top of the fig- ter forgets about this perception (since the filter is
ure is a diagramof the environmentthat the robot not learning when the robot perceives the closed
was travelling in at the time. Initially it can be door).
seen that everything is novel, but where the robot The right of figure 6 shows the second experi-
perceives only wall, it rapidly learns to recognise ment. Asimilartechnique wasused, againstarting
this. The next thing that it notices is the crack in with the network weights learned in environment
thewallonitsrightandthenthe doors. Itis inter- Ainthe firstexperiment. Therobotlearnedabout
esting to note that the robot finds the first crack environment B, and after each learning trial was
more novel in the third run than in the second. returnedtoenvironmentAforanon-learningtrial.
This is because perceptions of such small features Similarresultscanbeseen-therobotinitiallyfinds
varygreatlydependingupontheprecisepositionof parts of environment B novel, but learns to recog-
the robot. Only the cracks and the doorways are nise it over the trials, while environment A, which
Environment A
Rough Brick
Doors A and B Door C
Crack in wall Rough Brick Crack in wall
Environment B
Rough Brick
Door E Door F
Boxes on wall
Door G Door H
Rough Brick
Figure 4: Diagrams of the environments used. The robot is shown facing in the direction of travel adjacent to the
wall that it followed. The environments are two similar sections of corridor. The photographs show the environments as
theyappearfrom thestartingposition oftherobot. Thenoticeboardswhichcanbeseenin environment Bareabovethe
height of the robot’s sonar sensors, and were therefore not detected.
is recognised at first, becomes more novel. Obvi- fore being presented to the novelty filter to reduce
ously, only particularly features of environment A computational time. In addition, an investigation
arefoundnovel,thosewhicharenotalsoseeninen- intoalternativestotheSelf-OrganisingMap(SOM)
vironment B. These are the crack in the wall near usedinthis workis underway. Thereareanumber
thebeginningoftheenvironmentandthedoorway, of well documented problems with the SOM, such
which is set into the wall less than those in envi- as the fact that the size of the networkneeds to be
ronment B. pre-determined,whichmeansthatthe networkcan
fill up, so that novel stimuli are incorrectly recog-
nised as familiar. One possible solution is to use a
5 Summary and Conclusions
growing network such as the Growing Neural Gas
of Fritzke [3], another is to use a Mixture of Ex-
Theexperimentsdescribedhavedemonstratedthat
perts[7],witheachexpertlearningarepresentation
thenoveltyfiltercanbeusedtolearnamodelofan
ofa particular feature andvoting onthe noveltyof
environmentanddetectdeviationsfromthismodel.
perceptions. A committee of networks, where net-
The second experiment demonstrated the ability
worksofvaryingsizesandtrainingregimesvote on
of the filter to forget perceptions that have been
theresponsetoaparticularinput[10,15]couldalso
learnedpreviously. Thismeansthatthenoveltyfil-
be used.
terwillfindnovelfeatureswhichareseenonlyocca-
sionallyornotseenforalongtime. Thereforeitcan
betrainedindynamicenvironments,whereunfore-
Acknowledgements
seen and undesirable perceptions, such as people
walking past the robot, can occur.
There are a number of areas which need further This research is supported by a UK EPSRC Stu-
investigation. The integration of a number of ad- dentship.
ditional sensory systems will allow the filter to be
more widely applicable. In particular, the output
of a monochrome CCD camera will be used. The References
imageswillneedtobeextensivelypreprocessedbe-
Environment A Environment B
Robot Trajectory
Robot Trajectory
2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10
Output of Output Neuron Distance (m) Output of Output Neuron Distance (m)
Trial 1 (Learning) Trial 1 (Robot accustomed to env. A and not learning)
Trial 2 (Not Learning) Trial 2 (Learning)
Trial 3 (Learning) Trial 3 (Not Learning)
Trial 4 (Learning)
Trial 4 (Not Learning)
Trial 5 (Not Learning)
Trial 5 (Learning)
Trial 6 (Not Learning) Control Trial (Robot trained in different environment)
environment
trainingin
completely
environment.
thisareshownontheright,andarediscussedinsection4.1.
Thefinalpictureontherightshowstheresultsofinvestigating
noveltyfeatures(sothattheactivityoftheoutputneuronislow),therobotwasmovedintoenvironmentB.Theresultsof novelty
environment
learning.
5:
experiment.
Environment A Environment B
Robot Trajectory
Robot Trajectory
2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10
Output of Output Neuron Distance (m) Output of Output Neuron Distance (m)
Trial 1 (Not Learning - Env A)
Trial 1 (Learning and Forgetting - Env B)
Trial 2 (Learning and Forgetting - Env A*)
Trial 2 (Not Learning- Env A) 0.5 0.5
Trial 3 (Not Learning - Env A)
Trial 3 (Learning and Forgetting - Env B) 0.5 0.5
Trial 4 (Learning and Forgetting - Env A*) Trial 4 (Not Learning - Env A)
Trial 5 (Not Learning - Env A) Trial 5 (Learning and Forgetting - Env B)
Trial 6 (Learning and Forgetting - Env A*) Trial 6 (Not Learning - Env A)
Environment A
Environment A*
4.2.
morenoveltyin
thisfeature.
experiment
theright,butusingenvironments
AandB.
Theresults
newenvironment,withforgettingturnedon.
Itcanbeseenthataftereveryexploration,thetrialwiththedoorclosedfinds
A.
environment
Figure6:
Ademonstrationoftheeffectsofforgetting.
Inthefigureonthelefttherobotwasaccustomedtoenvironment
[1] Craig Bailey and M.C. Chen. Morphological [13] Ulrich Nehmzow. Autonomous acquisition of
basis of long-term habituation and sensitiza- sensor-motor couplings in robots. Technical
tion in aplysia. Science, 220:91–93,1983. Report UMCS-94-11-1, Department of Com-
puterScience,UniversityofManchester,1994.
[2] C.M. Bishop. Neural Networks for Pattern
Recognition. OxfordUniversity Press,Oxford, [14] JohnO’KeefeandLynnNadel. TheHippocam-
England, 1995. pus as a Cognitive Map. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, England, 1977.
[3] Bernd Fritzke. A growing neural gas network
learnstopologies. InG.Tesauro,D.S.Touret- [15] MichaelP.PerroneandLeonN.Cooper.When
zky,andT.K.Leen,editors,AdvancesinNeu- networks disagree: Ensemble methods for hy-
ral Information Processing Systems 7, pages brid neural networks. In R.J. Mammone, ed-
625–632,Cambridge, MA, 1995. MIT Press. itor, Neural Networks for Speech and Image
Processing. Chapman–Hall, 1993.
[4] S. Greenberg, V. Castellucci, H. Bayley, and
J.Schwartz. Amolecular mechanismfor long- [16] James C. Stanley. Computer simulation of a
term sensitisation in aplysia. Nature, 329:62– model of habituation. Nature, 261:146–148,
65, 1987. 1976.
[5] P.M. Groves and R.F. Thompson. Habitua- [17] L. Tarassenko, P. Hayton, N. Cerneaz, and
tion: Adual-processtheory. Psychological Re- M. Brady. Novelty detection for the identi-
view, 77(5):419–450,1970. fication of masses in mammograms. Artificial
Neural Networks, 1995.
[6] Tuong Vinh Ho and Jean Rouat. Novelty de-
tection based on relaxation time of a network [18] OdinTaylorandJohnMacIntyre.Adaptivelo-
of integrate–and–fire neurons. In Proceedings calfusionsystemsfornoveltydetectionanddi-
of the 2nd IEEE World Congress on Compu- agnosticsinconditionmonitoring.InSPIEIn-
tational Intelligence, WCCI’98, pages 1524– ternational Symposium on Aerospace/Defense
1529, 1998. Sensing, 1998.
[7] MichaelI.JordanandRobertA.Jacobs. Hier- [19] R.F. Thompson and W.A. Spencer. Habitu-
archicalmixtures of experts and the EM algo- ation: A model phenomenon for the study of
rithm. NeuralComputation,6:181–214,1994. neuronal substrates of behaviour. Psychologi-
cal Review, 73(1):16–43,1966.
[8] Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organization and Asso-
ciativeMemory,3rded.Springer,Berlin,1993. [20] DeLiang Wang and Chochun Hsu. SLONN:
A simulation language for modelling of neural
[9] TeuvoKohonenandE.Oja. Fastadaptivefor-
networks. Simulation, 55:69–83,1990.
mation of orthogonalizing filters and associa-
tive memory in recurrent networks of neuron- [21] K. Worden, S.G. Pierce, G. Manson, W.R.
likeelements.BiologicalCybernetics,25:85–95, Philp, W.J. Staszewski, and B. Culshaw. De-
1976. tection of defects in composite plates using
lamp waves and novelty detection. Interna-
[10] Anders Krogh and Jesper Vedelsby. Neural
tional Journal of Systems Science, 1999.
network ensembles, cross validation, and ac-
tive learning. In G. Tesauro, D.S. Touretzky, [22] AlexanderYpmaandRobertP.Duin. Novelty
and T.K. Leen, editors, Advances in Neural detection using self-organizing maps. In Pro-
Information Processing Systems 7, pages 231 ceedingsofInternationalConferenceonNeural
– 238. MIT Press, 1995. Information Processing and Intelligent Infor-
mation Systems, 1997.
[11] Stephen Marsland, Ulrich Nehmzow, and
JonathanShapiro. Noveltydetectionforrobot
neotaxis. In Proceedings of the 2nd Inter-
national Symposium on Neural Compuatation
(NC’2000), pages 554 – 559, 2000.
[12] Alexandre Nairac, Neil Townsend, Roy Carr,
Steve King, Peter Cowley, and Lionel
Tarassenko. A system for the analysis of jet
system vibration data. Integrated Computer-
Aided Engineering, 6(1), 1999.