1v4815060/htam:viXra
A remark on a relation between foliations and
number theory
Fabian Kopei
We interpret a formula for meromorphic functions on foliations by
Riemann surfaces as an analogue to theproduct formula of valuations in
algebraic numbertheory.
A meromorphic function on a compact Riemann surface has as many zeros as
poles. This well-known geometric fact has an algebraic analogue: for a smooth
algebraic curve C and an element f of its function field we have
In the algebraic context a similar formula holds for the valuations of an
algebraic number field (i.e. a finite extensions of Q) or a separable function
field:
p finite p infinite p prime p infinite
wheref isanon-zeroelementofthefieldandthesumsrunovertheequivalence
classes of the finite or infinite valuations, respectively the prime-ideals of the
ring of integers.
In this article we want to search a geometric analogue for this formula.
Neglectingforthemomenttheinfiniteprimes,thestructuraldifferencetoequa-
tion (1) is the factor logN(p). In an expected geometric analogon this is only
a property of the point P, not of the function f. Since it seems to be difficult
to assign real values to points in a canonical way, we may try to replace the
point by the next simple geometric object, a line, to which we assign its length
measured by a flow. But a meromorphic function has only isolated zeros and
poles,so this line shouldcome with a transversestructure. The simplestobject
realizing this seems to be a 3-dimensional foliation by Riemann surfaces. As-
suming that the flow and the foliation are compatible with each other, we may
therefore expect the following
Proposition. Let M be an oriented, closed 3-manifold, F a leafwise oriented
foliation by Riemann surfaces and Φ a transverse foliation-invariant flow. Let
f :M −→CP1
be a smooth function which is meromorphic on the leaves, such that the zeros
and poles lie only on finitely many closed orbits γ ,...,γ .
Then on these orbits ord f is constant and we have
l(γ )ord f =0,
where l(γ ) denotes the length of the orbit, i.e. the smallest return time.
Remark. The proposition is a special case of a well-known theorem for lam-
inations: the harmonic measure of zeros minus that of poles is equal to the
integrated Chern class, see [Gh 99]. For similar formulas see [Co 82], [Hu 88].
Remark. Foramoregeneraldefinitionofmeromorphicfunctionsseeforexample
[Gh 99], concerning their existence see [Gh 99], [De 04].
So for the case ofno infinite primes we found a geometricanalogue: here el-
ementsofthefieldcorrespondtomeromorphicfunctionsmoduloC∗ andprimes
correspond to closed orbits with length logN(p).
The infinite primes are something like a compactification of the finite ones.
For an analogue we may therefore try to take a noncompact space, which we
thencompactify. Thesimplestexampleis,thatwehavetocompleteourfoliation
by a finite number of compact leaves, on which the flow is not transverse. We
get then an analogue for the case of infinite primes:
Proposition. Let M be an oriented, closed 3-manifold, F a leafwise oriented
foliation by Riemann surfaces and Φ an foliation-invariant flow. We assume
that the flow is up to a finite number of compact leaves (L ) transverse.
j j=1,...,k
f :M \∪ L →CP1
be a smooth function which is meromorphic on the leaves, such that the zeros
and poles lie only on finitely many closed, transverse orbits γ ,...,γ . Let ω be
the on M \∪ L defined 1-form, which is zero on the integrable distribution of
the foliation and one on the vector field generated by the flow. We set
where d is the differential along the leaves. Let TL be pairwise distinct com-
pact tubular neighbourhoods of the leaves L , such that the γ and the TL are
pairwise distinct. Then
X i=1 X j=1 ∂TLj
The proof is a simple adaption of [Gh 99].
Proof. ItisaneasyapplicationofthetheoremofCauchy,thatord f isconstant
on the orbits.
For each γ we take distinct, orientationpreserving tubular neighbourhoods
whereD⊂Cisthe2-dimensionaldisc,whichrespectthefoliation,i.e. ι({t}×D)
lies in a leaf ([CC 00], p. 89). We have
where the last equation is a consequence of the theorem of the zeros and poles
counting integral.
So if Γ denotes the image of ι , we have on the one hand
X i=1 ∂Γi X i=1
On the other hand by the theorem of Stokes and the fact that η is closed we
The combination of these two equations proves the proposition. (cid:3)
Remark. In this article we wanted to point out a similarity between certain
foliations and number theory in a self-contained way. But of course this work
is strongly influenced by an elaborate conjecture, in which Deninger postulates
a deep relation between these objects (see for example [De 01]). The work of
Deninger suggests also a correspondence between infinite primes and compact,
non-transversalleaves.