A Spectral Graph Approach to Discovering Genetic
Ann B. Lee, Diana Luca, and Kathryn Roeder
August 2, 2021
Mapping human genetic variation is fundamentally interesting in fields such as anthropology
and forensic inference. At the same time patterns of genetic diversity confound efforts to
determine the genetic basis of complex disease. Due to technological advances it is now
possible to measure hundreds of thousands of genetic variants per individual across the
genome. Principal component analysis (PCA) is routinely used to summarize the genetic
similarity between subjects. The eigenvectors are interpreted as dimensions of ancestry. We
build on this idea using a spectral graph approach. In the process we draw on connections
between multidimensional scaling and spectral kernel methods. Our approach, based on a
spectral embedding derived from the normalized Laplacian of a graph, can produce more
meaningful delineation of ancestry than by using PCA. The method is stable to outliers
and can more easily incorporate different similarity measures of genetic data than PCA.
We illustrate a new algorithm for genetic clustering and association analysis on a large,
genetically heterogeneous sample.
Introduction
Human genetic diversity is of interest in a broad range of contexts, ranging from understand-
ing the genetic basis of disease, to applications in forensic science. Mapping clusters and
clines in the pattern of genetic diversity provides the key to uncovering the demographic
history of our ancestors. To determine the genetic basis of complex disease, individuals are
measured at large numbers of genetic variants across the genome as part of the effort to
discover the variants that increase liability to complex diseases such as autism and diabetes.
Genetic variants, called alleles, occur in pairs, one inherited from each parent. High
throughput genotyping platforms routinely yield genotypes for hundreds of thousands of
variants per sample. These are usually single nucleotide variants (SNPs), which have two
possible alleles, hence the genotype for a particular variant can be coded based on allele
1v9042.8090:viXra
counts (0,1 or 2) at each variant. The objective is to identify SNPs that either increase the
chance of disease, or are physically nearby an SNP that affects disease status.
Due to demographic, biological, and random forces, variants differ in allele frequency in
populations around the world [Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994]. An allele that is common in one
geographical or ethnic group may be rare in another. For instance, the O blood type is
very common among the indigenous populations of Central and South America, while the B
blood type is most common in Eastern Europe and Central Asia [Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994].
The lactase mutation, which facilitates the digestion of milk in adults, occurs with much
higher frequency in northwestern Europe than in southeastern Europe (Fig. 1). Ignoring
the structure in populations leads to spurious associations in case-control genetic association
studies due to differential prevalence of disease by ancestry.
Although most SNPs do not vary dramatically in allele frequency across populations,
genetic ancestry can be estimated based on allele counts derived from individuals measured
atalargenumberofSNPs. Anapproachknownasstructuredassociationclustersindividuals
to discrete subpopulations based on allele frequencies [Pritchard et al., 2000]. This approach
suffers from two limitations: results are highly dependent on the number of clusters; and
realistic populations do not naturally resolve into discrete clusters. If fractional membership
in more than one cluster is allowed the calculations becomes computationally intractable
for the large data sets currently available. A simple and appealing alternative is principal
component analysis (PCA [Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994; Price et al., 2006; Patterson et al.,
2006]), or principal component maps (PC maps). This approach summarizes the genetic
similarity between subjects at a large numbers of SNPs using the dominant eigenvectors of
a data-based similarity matrix. Using this “spectral” embedding of the data a small number
of eigenvectors is usually sufficient to describe the key variation. The PCA framework
provides a formal test for the presence of population structure based on the Tracy-Widom
distribution [Patterson et al., 2006; Johnstone, 2001]. Based on this theory a test for the
number of significant eigenvectors is obtained.
In Europe, eigenvectors displayed in two dimensions often reflect the geographical distri-
bution of populations [Heath et al., 2008; Novembre et al., 2008]. There are some remarkable
examples in the population genetics literature of how PC maps can reveal hidden structures
in human genetic data that correlate with tolerance of lactose across Europe [Tishkoff et al.,
2007], migration patterns and the spread of farming technology from Near East to Europe
[Cavalli-Sforza et al., 1994]. Although these stunning patterns can lead to overinterpretation
[Novembre and Stephens, 2008], they are remarkably consistent across the literature.
In theory, if the sample consists of k distinct subpopulations, k − 1 axes should be
sufficient to differentiate these subpopulations. In practice, finding a dimension reduction
that delineates samples collected worldwide is challenging. For instance, analysis of the four
core HapMap samples [African, Chinese, European, and Japanese; HapMap-Consortium,
2005] using the classical principal component map [Patterson et al., 2006] does not reveal
substructure within the Asian sample; however, an eigenmap constructed using only the
Asian samples discovers substructure [Patterson et al., 2006]. Another feature of PCA is its
sensitivity to outliers [Luca et al., 2008]. Due to outliers, numerous dimensions of ancestry
appear to model a statistically significant amount of variation in the data, but in actuality
they function to separate a single observation from the bulk of the data. This feature can
be viewed as a drawback of the PCA method.
SoftwareisavailableforestimatingthesignificanteigenvectorsviaPCA(Eigenstrat[Price
et al., 2006], smartpca [Patterson et al., 2006], or GEM [Luca et al., 2008]). For population-
based genetic association studies, such as case-control studies, the confounding effect of
genetic ancestry can be controlled for by regressing out the eigenvectors [Price et al., 2006;
Patterson et al., 2006], matching individuals with similar genetic ancestry [Luca et al., 2008;
Rosenbaum, 1995], or clustering groups of individuals with similar ancestry and using the
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test. In each situation, spurious associations are controlled better
if the ancestry is successfully modeled.
To overcome some of the challenges encountered in constructing a successful eigenmap
of the genetic ancestry, we propose a spectral graph approach. These methods are more
flexible than PCA (which can be considered as a special case) and allow for different ways
of modeling structure and similarities in data. The basic idea is to represent the population
as a weighted graph, where the vertex set is comprised by the subjects in the study, and
the weights reflect the degree of similarity between pairs of subjects. The graph is then
embedded in a lower-dimensional space using the top eigenvectors of a function of the weight
matrix. Our approach utilizes a spectral embedding derived from the so-called normalized
graph Laplacian. Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral graph methods are well-known and
widely used in machine learning but unfamiliar to many classically trained statisticians and
biologists. The goals of this work are to:
• demonstrate the use of spectral graph methods in the analysis of population structure
in genetic data
• emphasize the connection between PCA methods used in population genetics and more
general spectral methods used in machine learning
• developapracticalalgorithmandversionofLaplacianeigenmapsforgeneticassociation
We proceed by discussing the link between PCA, multidimensional scaling (MDS) and spec-
tral graph methods. We then present a practical scheme for determining the number of
significant dimensions of ancestry by studying the gap statistic of the eigenvalues of the
graph Laplacian. We conclude with a presentation of the new algorithm, which is illustrated
via analyses of the POPRES data [Nelson et al., 2008] and simulated data with spurious
associations.
Spectral embeddings revisited. Connection to MDS and kernel
PCA.
We begin by making the connection between multidimensional scaling (MDS) and the princi-
pal component (PC) method explicit: Suppose Z is an n×p data matrix, with rows indexed
by n subjects and columns indexed by p biallelic SNP markers. Center each column (marker)
to have mean 0; denote the centered data matrix X = AZ where A = I − 111t is an n×n
centering matrix. The elements of the ith row of X represent the genetic information for
subject i, x = (x ,...,x ).
A singular value decomposition of X gives
where Γ is a diagonal matrix with the singular values γ ,γ ,... as diagonal entries. The p×p
S = XtX = VΓ2Vt
is the sample covariance matrix of markers. The eigenvectors v ,v ... are called principal
components. (If the columns of X are furthermore normalized to have standard deviation 1,
then S is the sample correlation matrix of markers.) In population genetics, Cavalli-Sforza
and others compute the dual n×n matrix
H = XXt = UΓ2Ut,
and use the rescaled eigenvectors of H as coordinates of subject i,
where λ = γ2 and λ ≥ λ ≥ .... Geometrically, this corresponds to projecting the data x
onto the affine hyperplane spanned by the first d principal components, i.e. computing the
projection indices or principal component scores (x ·v ,...,x ·v ). Typically, eigenvectors
that correspond to large eigenvalues reveal the most important dimensions of ancestry.
The matrix H is often referred to as the “covariance matrix of individuals” but this is a
bit of a misnomer. In fact, some of the intuition behind the eigenmap method comes from
thinking of H as an inner product matrix or Gram matrix. In multivariate statistics, the
method of mapping data with principal component scores is known as classical multidimen-
sional scaling. Gower [1966] made explicit the connection between classical MDS and PCA,
and demonstrated that the principal components can be extracted from the inner product
matrix H. The approach is also directly related to kernel PCA [Scho¨lkopf et al., 1998] where
all computations are expressed in terms of H.
Onecanshowthatprincipalcomponentmappingsolvesaparticularoptimizationproblem
with an associated distance metric [Torgerson, 1952; Mardia, 1978]. Refer to the centered
data matrix as a feature matrix X where the ith row x = (z − z¯ ,...,z − z¯ ) is the
i i1 1 ip p
“feature vector” of the i:th individual. In the normalized case, the corresponding vector
is x = (zi1−z¯1,..., xip−z¯p), where z¯ and s , respectively, are the sample mean and sample
i s1 sp j j
standard deviation of variable (marker) j. The matrix H is a positive semi-definite (PSD)
matrix, where element h = x ·x reflects the similarity between individuals i and j. We will
refer to XXt as the kernel of the PC map. The main point is that the matrix H induces a
natural Euclidean distance between individuals. We denote this Euclidean distance between
the ith and jth individuals as m(i,j), where:
m(i,j)2 ≡ h +h −2h = (cid:107)x −x (cid:107)2. (2)
ii jj ij i j
Consider a low-dimensional representation Φ (i) = (φ (i),...,φ (i)) of individuals i =
1,...,n, where the dimension d < p. Define squared distances m(i,j)2 = (cid:107)Φ (i)−Φ (j)(cid:107)2
(cid:98) d d
for this configuration. To measure the discrepancy between the full- and low-dimensional
space, let δ = (cid:80) (m(i,j)2 − m(i,j)2). This quantity is minimized over all d-dimensional
i,j (cid:98)
configurations by the top d eigenvectors of H, weighted by the square root of the eigenvalues
(Eq. 1); see Theorem 14.4.1 in [Mardia et al., 1979]. Thus principal component mapping is
a form of metric multidimensional scaling. It provides the optimal embedding if the goal is
to preserve the squared (pairwise) Euclidean distances m(i,j)2 induced by H = XXt.
MDS was originally developed by psychometricians to visualize dissimilarity data [Torg-
erson, 1952]. The downside of using PCA for a quantitative analysis is that the associated
metric is highly sensitive to outliers, which diminishes its ability to capture the major di-
mensions of ancestry. Our goal in this paper is to develop a spectral embedding scheme
that is less sensitive to outliers and that is better, in many settings, at clustering observa-
tions similar in ancestry. We note that the choice of eigenmap is not unique: Any positive
semi-definite matrix H defines a low-dimensional embedding and associated distance metric
according to Equations 1 and 2. Hence, we will use the general framework of MDS and
principal component maps but introduce a different kernel for improved performance. Below
we give some motivation for the modified kernel and describe its main properties from the
point of view of spectral graph theory and spectral clustering.
Spectral clustering and Laplacian eigenmaps
Spectral clustering techniques [von Luxburg, 2007] use the spectrum of the similarity matrix
of the data to perform dimensionality reduction for clustering in fewer dimensions. These
methods are more flexible than clustering algorithms that group data directly in the given
coordinate system. Spectral clustering has not been, heretofore, fully explored in the context
of a large number of independent genotypes, such as is typically obtained in genome-wide
association studies. In the framework of spectral clustering, the decomposition of XXt
in PCA corresponds to an un-normalized clustering scheme. Such schemes tend to return
embeddings where the principle axes separate outliers from the bulk of the data. On the
other hand, an embedding based on a normalized data similarity matrix identifies directions
with more balanced clusters.
Tointroducethetopic, werequirethelanguageofgraphtheory. Foragroupofnsubjects,
define a graph G where {1,2,...,n} is the vertex set (comprised of subjects in the study).
The graph G can be associated with a weight matrix W, that reflects the strength of the
connections between pairs of similar subjects: the higher the value of the entry w , the
stronger the connection between the pair (i,j). Edges that are not connected have weight
0. There is flexibility in the choice of weights and there are many ways one can incorporate
application- or data-specific information. The only condition on the matrix W is that it is
symmetric with non-negative entries.
Laplacian eigenmaps [Belkin and Niyogi, 2002] find a new representation of the data by
decomposing the so-called graph Laplacian — a discrete version of the Laplace operator on
a graph. Motivated by MDS, we consider a rescaled parameter-free variation of Laplacian
eigenmaps. A similar approach is used in diffusion maps [Coifman et al., 2005] and Euclidean
commute time (ECT) maps [Fouss et al., 2007]; both of these methods are MDS-based and
lead to Laplacian eigenmaps with rescaled eigenvectors1.
The Laplacian matrix L of a weighted graph G is defined by
−w , if i (cid:54)= j,
L(i,j) = ij
d −w , if i = j,
where d = w is the so-called degree of vertex i. In matrix form,
where D = diag(d ,...,d ) is a diagonal matrix. The normalized graph Laplacian is a
matrix defined as
A popular choice for weights is w = exp(−(cid:107)x − x (cid:107)2/2σ2), where the parameter σ
controls the size of local neighborhoods in the graph. Here we instead use a simple trans-
formation of the (global) PCA kernel with no tuning parameters; in Discussion we later
suggest a local kernel based on identity-by-state (IBS) sharing for biallelic data. The main
point is that one can choose a weight matrix suited for the particular application. Entries in
the matrix XXt measure the similarity between subjects, making it a good candidate for a
weight matrix on a fully connected graph: the larger the entry for a pair (i,j), the stronger
the connection between the subjects within the pair. We define the weights as
(cid:26) √
x ·x , if x ·x ≥ 0,
w = i j i j
ij 0, otherwise.
DirectlythresholdingXXt guaranteesnon-negativeweightsbutcreatesaskeweddistribution
of weights. To address this problem, we have added a square-root transformation for more
symmetric weight distributions. This transformation also adds to the robustness to outliers.
1We have here chosen a spectral transform that is close to the original PC map but it is straight-forward
to associate the kernel with a diffusion or ECT metric.
Letν andu betheeigenvaluesandeigenvectorsofL. Letλ = max{0,1−ν }. Wereplace
the PCA kernel XXt with (I−L) , where I is the identity matrix and (I−L) ≡ (cid:80) λ u ut
+ + i i i i
is a positive semi-definite approximation of I − L. We then map the the i’th subject into
a lower-dimensional space according to Eq. 1. In embeddings, we often do not display the
the first eigenvector u associated with the eigenvalue λ = 1, as this vector only reflects the
square root of the degrees of the nodes.
In Results, we show that estimating the ancestry from the eigenvectors of L (which are
the same as the eigenvectors of I − L) leads to more meaningful clusters than ancestry
estimated directly from XXt. Some intuition as to why this is the case can be gained by
relating eigenmaps to spectral clustering and “graph cuts”. In graph-theoretic language, the
goal of clustering is to find a partition of the graph so that the connections between different
groupshavelowweightandtheconnectionswithinagrouphavehighweight. Fortwodisjoint
sets A and B of a graph, the cut across the groups is defined as cut(A,B) = w .
i∈A,j∈B ij
Finding the partition with the minimum cut is a well-studied problem; however, as noted
for example by Shi and Malik [1997] the minimum cut criterion favors separating individual
vertices or “outliers” from the rest of the graph. The normalized cut approach by Shi and
Malik circumvents this problem by incorporating the volume or weight of the edges of a set
into a normalized cost function Ncut(A,B) = cut(A,B) + cut(A,B), where vol(A) = (cid:80) d
vol(A) vol(B) i∈A i
and vol(B) = d . This cost function is large when the set A or B is small. Our
SpectralGEM algorithm (below) exploits the fact that the top eigenvectors of the graph
Laplacian provide an approximate solution to the Ncut minimization problem; see Shi and
Malik for details. Smartpca [Patterson et al., 2006] and standard GEM [Luca et al., 2008],
on the other hand, are biased towards embeddings that favor small and tight clusters in the
data.
Number of dimensions via eigengap heuristic
For principal component maps, one can base a formal test for the number of significant
dimensions on theoretical results concerning the Tracy-Widom distribution of eigenvalues of
a covariance matrix in the null case [Patterson et al., 2006; Johnstone, 2001]. Tracy-Widom
theory does not extend to the eigenvalues of the graph Laplacian where matrix elements
are correlated. Instead we introduce a different approach, known as the eigengap heuristic,
based on the difference in magnitude between successive eigenvalues.
The graph Laplacian has several properties that make it useful for cluster analysis. Both
its eigenvalues and eigenvectors reflect the connectivity of the data. Consider, for example,
the normalized graph Laplacian where the sample consists of d distinct clusters. Sort the
eigenvalues 0 = ν ≤ ν ≤ ... ≤ ν of L in ascending order. The matrix L has several
key properties [Chung, 1992]: (i) The number d of eigenvalues equal to 0 is the number
of connected components S ,...,S of the graph. (ii) The first positive eigenvalue ν
reflects the cohesiveness of the individual components; the larger the eigenvalue ν the
more cohesive the clusters. (iii) The eigenspace of 0 (i.e., the vectors corresponding to
eigenvalues equal to 0) is spanned by the rescaled indicator vectors D1/21 , where 1 = 1
if i ∈ S , and 1 = 0 otherwise. It follows from (iii) that for the ideal case where we have
d completely separate populations (and the node degrees are similar), individuals from the
same population map into the same point in an embedding defined by the d first eigenvectors
of L. For example, for d = 3 populations and n = 6 individuals, the n×d embedding matrix
could have the form
d 0 0 1 0 0
 √ d 2 0 0   1 0 0 
U = [D1/21 , D1/21 , D1/21 ] =   d 3 √ 0 0   ≈   1 0 0  .
S1 S2 S3  0 d 0   0 1 0 
 0 d 5 √ 0   0 1 0 
0 0 d 0 0 1
The rows of U define the new representation of the n individuals. Applying k-means to the
rows finds the clusters trivially without the additional assumption on the node degrees, if one
as in the clustering algorithm by Ng et al. [2001] first re-normalizes the rows of U to norm
1, or if one according to Shi and Malik [1997] computes eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian
I −D−1W instead of the symmetric Laplacian I −D−1/2WD−1/2.
In a more realistic situation the between-cluster similarity will rarely be exactly 0 and
all components of the graph will be connected. Nevertheless, if the clusters are distinct, we
may still use the eigenvalues of the graph Laplacian to determine the number of significant
dimensions. Heuristically, choose the number d of significant eigenvectors such that the
eigengaps δ = |ν −ν | are small for i < d but the eigengap δ is large. One can justify
such an approach with an argument from perturbation analysis [Stewart, 1990]. The idea
is that the matrix L for the genetic data is a perturbed version of the ideal matrix for
d disconnected clusters. If the perturbation is not too large and the “non-null” eigengap
δ is large, the subspace spanned by the first d eigenvectors will be close to the subspace
defined by the ideal indicator vectors and a spectral clustering algorithm will separate the
individual clusters well. The question then becomes: How do we decide whether an eigengap
is significant (non-null)?
In this work, we propose a practical scheme for estimating the number of significant
eigenvectors for genetic ancestry that is based on the eigengap heuristic and hypothesis
testing. By simulation, we generate homogeneous data without population structure and
studythedistributionofeigengapsforthenormalizedgraphLaplacian. Becausethereisonly
one population, the first eigengap δ is large. We are interested in the first null eigengap,
specifically the difference δ = |ν −ν | between the 2nd and 3rd eigenvalues (note that ν
is always 0). If the data are homogeneous, this difference is relatively small. Based on our
simulation results, we approximate the upper bound for the null eigengap with the 99th
quantile of the sampling distribution as a function of the number of subjects n and the
number of SNPs p. In the eigenvector representation, we choose the dimension d according
where f(n,p) = −0.00016+2.7/n+2.3/p is the empirical expression for the 99th quantile.
For most applications, we have that p (cid:29) n and f(n,p) ≈ 2.7/n.
Controlling for ancestry in association studies
Due to demographic, biological and random forces, genetic variants differ in allele frequency
in populations around the world. A case-control study could be susceptible to population
stratification, a form of confounding by ancestry, when such variation is correlated with
other unknown risk factors. Fig. 2 shows an example of population stratification. We wish
to test the association between candidate SNPs and the outcome (Y) of a disease. In the
example, the genotype distributions for Population 1 and 2 are different, as illustrated by
the different proportions of red, yellow and green. In addition, there are more cases (Y=1)
from Population 2 than 1, and more controls (Y=0) from Population 1 than 2. Let G1 and
G2, respectively, be the genotypes of a causal versus a non-causal SNP. The arrow from G1
to Y in the graph to the right indicates a causal association. There is no causal association
between G2 and Y but the two variables are indirectly associated, as indicated by the dotted
line, through ancestry (C). Ancestry is here a “confounder” as it is both associated with allele
frequency and disease prevalence conditional on genotype; it distorts the assessment of the
direct relationship between G2 and Y and decreases the power of the study.
Statistical techniques to control spurious findings include stratification by the Cochran-
Mantel-Haenszel method, regression and matching Rosenbaum [1995]. These approaches
assume that the key confounding factors have been identified, and that at each distinct level
of the confounders, the observed genotype is independent of the case and control status. In
this work, we estimate confounding ancestry by an eigenanalysis (PCA or spectral graph)
of a panel of reference SNPs. Under the additional assumption that the interaction between
ancestry and the genotype of the candidate SNPs is neglible, we compare different techniques
of controlling for ancestry.
The most straight-forward strategy to correct for stratification is to embed the data
using the inferred axes of variation and divide the population into K groups or strata that
are homogeneous with respect to ancestry. The Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) method
represents the data as a series of K contingency tables. One then performs a chi-squared test
of the null hypothesis that the disease status is conditionally independent of the genotype in
any given stratum. The precision in sample estimates of the CMH test statistic is sensitive
to the sample size as well as the balance of the marginals in the contingency table. This can
be a problem if we have insufficient data or if cases and controls are sampled from different
populations.
An alternative approach is to use a regression model for the disease risk as a function
of allele frequency. Effectively, regression models link information from different strata by
smoothness assumptions. Suppose that x is the observed allele count (0, 1 or 2) of the
candidate SNP, and that the eigenmap coordinates of an individual is given by φ ,...,φ .
Assign Y = 1 to cases and Y = 0 to controls and let q = P(Y = 1|x,φ ,...,φ ). For a
logistic regression model
(cid:18) (cid:19)
the regression parameter β can be interpreted as the increase in the log odds of disease risk
per unit increase in x, holding all other risk variables in the model constant. Thus, the
null hypothesis H : β = 0 is equivalent to independence of disease and SNP genotype after
adjusting for ancestry.
A third common strategy to control for confounding is to produce a fine-scale stratifi-
cation of ancestry by matching. Here we use a matching scheme introduced in an earlier
paper [Luca et al., 2008]. The starting point is to estimate ancestry using an eigenanalysis
(PCA for “GEM” and the spectral graph approach for “SpectralGEM”). Cases and con-
trols are matched with respect to the Euclidean metric in this coordinate system; hence, the
relevance of an MDS interpretation with an explicitly defined metric. Finally, we perform
conditional logistic regression for the matched data.
Algorithm for SpectralR and SpectralGEM
Algorithm 1 summarizes the two related avenues that use the spectral graph approach to
control for genetic ancestry: SpectralR (for Regression) and SpectralGEM (for GEnetic
Matching).
There are many possible variations of the algorithm. In particular, the normalization
and rescaling in Steps 3 and 7 can be adapted to the clustering algorithms by Shi-Malik
and Ng-Jordan-Weiss. One can also redefine the weight matrix in Step 2 to model different
structure in the genetic data.
Analysis of Data
A large number of subjects participating in multiple studies throughout the world have been
assimilated into a freely available database known as POPRES [Nelson et al., 2008]. Data
consists of genotypes from a genome-wide 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphism panel.
This project includes subjects of African American, E. Asian, Asian-Indian, Mexican, and
European origin. We use these data to assess performance of spectral embeddings. For more
detailed analyses of these data see [Lee et al., 2009].
These data are challenging because of the disproportionate representation of individuals
of European ancestry combined with individuals from multiple continents. To obtain re-
sults more in keeping with knowledge about population demographics, Nelson et al. [2008]
supplement POPRES with 207 unrelated subjects from the four core HapMap samples. In
addition, to overcome problems due to the dominant number of samples of European an-
cestry, they remove 889 and 175 individuals from the Swiss and U.K. samples, respectively.
Because PCA is sensitive to outliers, they perform a careful search for outliers, exploring
various subsets of the data iteratively. After making these adjustments they obtain an ex-
cellent description of the ancestry of those individuals in the remaining sample, detecting
seven informative axes of variation that highlight important features of the genetic struc-
ture of diverse populations. When analysis is restricted to individuals of European ancestry,
PCA works very well [Novembre et al., 2008]. Direct application of the approach to the full
POPRES data leads to much less useful insights as we show below.
Algorithm 1 SpectralR and SpectralGEM
1: Center and scale the allele counts. Let x be the genetic information for subject i.
2: Compute weight matrix W where w = (max{x ·x ,0})1/2.
3: Compute the normalized Laplacian matrix L = I −D−1/2WD−1/2.
4: Find the eigenvalues ν and eigenvectors u of L.
5: Define the PSD matrix H = (I −L) with eigenvalues λ = max{0,1−ν } and eigen-
vectors u . This is the kernel of our map.
6: Determine the number of significant dimensions d in the eigenvector representation
d = max{i;δ > −0.00016+2.7/n+2.3/p},
7: Let Φ (i) = (λ1/2u (i),...,λ1/2u (i)) be the new representation of subject i.
8: For regression (SpectralR):
9: Perform logistic regression with the the d eigenmap coordinates and the allele count
of the candidate SNP as covariates.
10: Compute p-values for the Wald test of no association between disease and SNP
genotype.
11: For genetic matching (SpectralGEM):
12: Compute the distance between subjects i and j using (cid:107)Φ (i)−Φ (j)(cid:107).
13: Find homogeneous clusters of individuals via Ward’s k-means algorithm [Luca et al.,
2008].
14: Rescale the data as described in the GEM algorithm [Luca et al., 2008].
15: Remove unmatchable subjects prior to analysis.
16: Recompute the eigenmap. Match cases and controls in d dimensions.
17: Perform conditional logistic regression and compute p-values for the Wald test.
Data Analysis of POPRES
Demographic records in POPRES include the individual’s country of origin and that of
his/her parents and grandparents. After quality control the data included 2955 individuals
of European ancestry and 346 African Americans, 49 E. Asians, 329 Asian-Indians, and 82
Mexicans. From a sample of nearly 500,000 SNPs we focus on 21,743 SNPs for in depth
analysis. These SNPs were chosen because they are not rare (minor allele frequency ≥ .05),
and have a low missingness rate (≤ .01). Each pair is separated by at least 10 KB with
squared correlation of 0.04 or less.
Outlier Dataset. It is well known that outliers can interfere with discovery of the key
eigenvectors and increase the number of significant dimensions discovered with PCA. To il-
lustrate the effect of outliers we created a subsample from POPRES including 580 Europeans
(all self-identified Italian and British subjects), 1 African American, 1 E. Asian, 1 Indian
and 1 Mexican. Smartpca removes the 4 outliers prior to analysis and discovers 2 significant
dimensions of ancestry. If the outliers are retained, 5 dimensions are significant. The first
two eigenvectors separate the Italian and British samples and highlight normal variability
within these samples. Ancestry vectors 3-5 isolate the outliers from the majority of the data,
but otherwise convey little information concerning ancestry.
WithSpectralGEM,leavingtheoutliersinthedatahasnoimpact. Themethodidentified
2 significant dimensions that are nearly identical to those discovered by PCA. In our cluster
analysis we identified 4 homogeneous clusters: 1 British cluster, 2 Italian clusters, and 1
small cluster that includes the outliers and 6 unusual subjects from the remaining sample.
Cluster Dataset. The ancestral composition of samples for genome-wide association stud-
ies can be highly variable. To mimic a typical situation we created a subsample from
POPRESincluding832Europeans(allself-identifiedBritish,Italian,SpanishandPortuguese
subjects), 100 African Americans and 100 Asian-Indians.
Usingsmartpca, 7dimensionsofancestryaresignificant. Thefirst2eigenvectorsseparate
the continental samples. The third and fourth eigenvectors separate the Europeans roughly
into three domains ( Fig. 3). The three European populations form three clusters, but they
are not completely delineated. The other continental groups generate considerable noise
near the center of the plot. The remaining 3 significant dimensions reveal little structure of
interest.
Using SpectralGEM 4 dimensions are significant (Fig. 4). The first two dimensions
separate the continental clusters. In the third and fourth dimensions, the European clusters
separate more distinctly than they did for PCA. For these higher dimensions, the samples
from other continents plot near to the origin, creating a cleaner picture of ancestry. Six
homogeneous clusters are discovered, 3 European clusters, an African American cluster and
2 Indian clusters.
Full Dataset. For the greatest challenge we analyze the full POPRES sample. Smartpca’s
6 standard deviation outlier rule removes 141 outliers, including all of the E. Asian and
Mexican samples. If these “outliers” were retained, PCA finds 12 significant dimensions:
the first 4 dimensions separate the 5 continental populations (African, European, Latin
American, E. Asian and S. Asian). Other eigenvectors are difficult to interpret. Moreover,
based on this embedding, Ward’s clustering algorithm failed to converge; thus no sensible
clustering by ancestry could be obtained.
With SpectralGEM no outliers are removed prior to analysis. The number of significant
dimensions of ancestry is 8. The first 4 dimensions separate the major continental samples;
the remaining dimensions separate the European sample into smaller homogeneous clusters.
Applying the clustering algorithm based on this eight dimensional embedding we discover
16clustersand3outliers. FouroftheseclustersgrouptheAfricanAmerican,E.Asian,Indian
and Mexican samples, so that greater than 99% of the subjects in a cluster self-identified
as that ancestry, and only a handful of subjects who self-identified as one of those four
ancestries fall outside of the appropriate cluster.
The remaining 12 clusters separate the individuals of European ancestry. For ease of
interpretation, we removed the samples obtained from Australia, Canada, and the U.S., and
focus our validation on 2302 European samples, which can be more successfully categorized
by ancestry based on geographic origin. These individuals were classified to one of the
34 European countries represented in the database (Table 1). Sample sizes varied greatly
across countries. Seven countries had samples of size 60 or more. Countries with smaller
samples were combined to create composite country groupings based on region; see Table 1
for definition of country groupings.
By using Ward’s clustering algorithm based on the spectral embedding, all but 81 of the
European sample were clustered into one of 8 relatively large European clusters (labeled A-
H, Table 1). Fig. 5 illustrates the conditional probability of country grouping given cluster.
Clusters tend to consist of individuals sampled from a common ancestry. Labeling the
resulting clusters in Fig. 5 by the primary source of their membership highlights the results:
(A) Swiss, (B) British Isles, (C) Iberian Peninsula, (D) Italian A, (E) Central, (F) Italian B,
(G) North East, and (H) South East. The remaining four small clusters show a diversity of
membership and are simply labeled I, J, K, and L. Cluster L has only 7 members who could
be classified by European country of origin.
A dendrogram displays the relationships between clusters (Fig. 6). For instance, it ap-
pears that the Italian A and B clusters represent Southern and Northern Italy, respectively.
ClustersIandJaresimilartotheCentralcluster,whileClusterKrepresentsamoreSouthern
ancestry.
Simulations for association
To compare smartpca with SpectralGEM and SpectralR using the POPRES data it is neces-
sary to create cases (Y = 1) and controls (Y = 0) from this undifferentiated sample. Disease
prevalence often varies by ancestry due to genetic, environmental and cultural differences.
To simulate a realistic case-control sample we wish to mimic this feature. We use cluster
membership, C = k, k = 1,...,K, as a proxy for ancestry and assign cases differentially to
clusters. In our previous analysis we identified 16 clusters, 12 of European ancestry and 4
of non-European ancestry. For simplicity we reduce the number of European clusters to 8
using the dendrogram and Table 1 to help group the small clusters: K with D, and I, J and
L with E.
To generate an association between Y and C we vary P(Y = 1|C = k) by cluster. Within
each cluster, case and control status is assigned at random. This creates a relationship
between Y and the observed SNPs that is purely spurious. Thus we can assess the Type I
error rate of smartpca and SpectralGEM to evaluate the efficacy of the two approaches in
removing confounding effects induced by ancestry.
To assess power we must generate SNPs associated with Y using a probability model.
To maintain as close a correspondence with the observed data as possible, we simulate
each causal SNP using the baseline allele frequencies, p , k = 1,...,12, obtained from a
randomly chosen SNP in the data base. For cluster k, when the individual is a control the
simulated genotype is 0, 1 or 2 with probabilities (1−p )2,2p (1−p ) or p2, respectively.
The association is induced by imposing relative risk R > 1 which corresponds with the minor
allele at a simulated causal locus. Case individuals are assigned genotype 0, 1 and 2 with
probabilities proportional to (1−p )2,2Rp (1−p ) and R2p2, respectively. We repeat this
process to generate M = 1000 SNPs associated with Y.
We wish to compare two approaches for estimating ancestry (PCA and spectral graph)
and two approaches for controlling ancestry (regression and matching). Luca et al. (2008)
conducted a thorough comparison between regression and matching using eigenvectors de-
rived from PCA. Here we focus on two key comparisons: (i) we control confounding using
regression and compare the efficacy of eigenvectors estimated using PCA versus the spectral
graph approach (Smartpca versus SpectralR); and (ii) we estimate eigenvectors using the
spectral graph approach and compare efficacy of matching versus the regression approach
(SpectralGEM versus SpectralR). Finally, we compare all of these methods to the CMH
approach which uses the clusters as strata.
We perform the following experiment: randomly sample half of the POPRES data; assign
case and control status differentially in clusters according the the model P(Y|C); estimate
the eigenvectors using the two approaches based on the p observed SNPs; assess Type I error
using the observed SNPs; generate M causal SNPs; assess power using the simulated SNPs.
From our previous analysis we know that all of the samples of Indian and Mexican ancestry
are declared outliers using the 6 sd rule for outliers. Most practitioners, however, would not
discard entire clusters of data. Thus we do not remove outliers in the simulation experiment.
We simulate a disease with differential sampling of cases from each cluster to induce
spurious association between Y and the observed genotypes. This experiment is repeated
for 5 scenarios (Table 2). In Scenario 1, P(Y = 1|C = k) varies strongly by continent,
but is approximately constant within Europe. In Scenarios 2 and 3 the tables are reversed,
with the variability most exaggerated within Europe. This could occur in practice due to
differential efforts to recruit cases in different regions. In Scenarios 3 and 4, P(Y = 1|C = k)
approximately follows a gradient across Europe with high prevalence in northern Europe and
low prevalence in southern Europe. In Scenario 5, P(Y = 1|C) = 0 for three of the small
clusters to simulate a situation where some controls were included for convenience, but no
cases of corresponding ancestry were included in the study.
All four approaches controlled rates of spurious association fairly well compared to a
standard test of association (Table 3). Overall, matching is slightly more conservative than
regression (Table 3). For Scenarios 1-4 this leads to a slight excess of control of Type I errors.
For Scenario 5, the advantages of matching come to the fore. When regions of the space have
either no cases or no controls, the regression approach is essentially extrapolating beyond the
range of the data. This leads to an excess of false positives that can be much more dramatic
than shown in this simulation in practice [Luca et al., 2008]. The matching approach has to
have a minimum of one case and one control per strata, hence it downweights samples that
are isolated by pulling them into the closest available strata.
Foreachscenariothenumberofsignificanteigenvectorswas6or7usingthespectralgraph
approach. With PCA the number of dimensions was 16 or 17, i.e the method overestimates
the number of important axes of variation. With respect to power, however, there is no
penalty for using too many dimensions since the axes are orthogonal. This may explain why
the power of smartpca was either equivalent or slightly higher than the power of SpectralR
in our simulations. Because matching tends to be conservative, it was also not surprising
to find that the power of SpectralR was greater than SpectralGEM. Finally, all of these
approaches exhibited greater power than the CMH test, suggesting that control of ancestry
is best done at the fine scale level of strata formed by matching cases and controls than by
conditioning on the largest homogeneous strata as is done in the CMH test.
Discussion
Mapping human genetic variation has long been a topic of keen interest. Cavalli-Sforza
et al. [1994] assimilated data from populations sampled worldwide. From this they created
PC maps displaying variation in allele frequencies that dovetailed with existing theories
about migration patterns, spread of innovations such as agriculture, and selective sweeps
of beneficial mutations. Human genetic diversity is also crucial in determining the genetic
basisofcomplexdisease; individualsaremeasuredatlargenumbersofgeneticvariantsacross
the genome as part of the effort to discover the variants that increase liability to complex
diseases. Large, genetically heterogeneous data sets are routinely analyzed for genome-
wide association studies. These samples exhibit complex structure that can lead to spurious
associations if differential ancestry is not modeled [Lander and Schork, 1994; Pritchard et al.,
2000; Devlin et al., 2001].
While often successful in modelling the structure in data, PCA has some notable weak-
nesses, as illustrated in our exploration of POPRES [Nelson et al., 2008]. In many settings
the proposed spectral graph approach, is more robust and flexible than PCA. Moreover,
finding the hidden structure in human populations using a small number of eigenvectors is
inherently appealing.
A theory for the eigenvalue distribution of Laplacian matrices, analogous to the Tracy-
Widom distribution for covariance matrices, is however not yet available in the literature.
Most of current results concern upper and lower bounds for the eigenvalues of the Lapla-
cian [Chung, 1992], the distribution of all eigenvalues of the matrix as a whole for random
graphs with given expected degrees [Chung et al., 2003], and rates of convergence and distri-
butionallimittheoremsforthedifferencebetweenthespectraoftherandomgraphLaplacian
H anditslimitH [KoltchinskiiandGin´e,2000;Shawe-Tayloretal.,2002,2005]. Atpresent,
we rely on simulations of homogeneous populations in our work to derive an approximation
to the distribution of the key eigengap.
Furthermore, the weight matrix for the spectral graph implemented here was motivated
by two features: it is quite similar to the PCA kernel used for ancestry analysis in genetics;
and it does not require a tuning parameter. Nevertheless we expect that a local kernel with
a tuning parameter could work better. Because the features (SNPs) take on only 3 values,
corresponding to three genotypes, the usual Gaussian kernel is not immediately applicable.
To circumvent this difficulty, a natural choice that exploits the discrete nature of the data
to advantage is based on “IBS sharing”. For individuals i and j, let s be the fraction of
alleles shared by the pair identical by state across the panel of SNPs [Weir, 1996]. Define the
corresponding weight as w = exp{−(1−s )2/σ2}, with tuning parameter σ2. Preliminary
investigations suggest that this kernel can discover the hierarchical clustering structure often
foundinhumanpopulations, suchasmajorcontinentalclusters, eachmadeupofsubclusters.
Further study is required to develop a data-dependent choice of the tuning parameter.
Acknowledgements. This work was funded by NIH (grant MH057881) and ONR (grant
N0014-08-1-0673).
A public domain R language package SpectralGEM is available from the CRAN website, as