5v4923.0180:viXra
A static Theory of Promises
Jan A. Bergstra∗
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Science Park 904, 1098 XH Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Mark Burgess†
Visiting Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
We discuss the concept of promises within a framework that can be applied
to either humans or technology. We compare promises to the more established
notion of obligations and find promises to be both simpler and more effective at
reducing uncertainty aboutmulti-agent behaviour.
1 Introduction 2
2 A motivation 3
2.1 Promisesaboutapieceoftechnology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Rangeofpromisertypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.3 Promisesand reductionofuncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.4 Thelogicalstatusofpromises: trust/reputationbacked action . . . . . 6
2.5 Extendingpromisetoprediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 The concept ofapromise 7
3.1 Implicitpromiseversusexplicitpromise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 Existingviewson promises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.3 Promisesindistributedcomputing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.4 Promisessubjecttoproduct/processambiguity? . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
∗Email: j.a.bergstra@uva.nl,janaldertb@gmail.com.
†MarkBurgesswassupportedbytheECIST-EMANICSNetworkofExcellence(#26854). Email:
mark.burgess@cfengine.com
4 Modeling the structure ofa promise 10
4.1 Promisesas documentedapparentintentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.2 Intentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3 Commitments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.4 Expressingintentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.5 Promises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.6 Deceptions–non-intendedpromises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.7 Positivepromises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.8 Promisesas specificationsintechnology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.9 Atechnical refinement oftheexample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.10 Aboutthephilosophicalliteratureonpromises . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.10.1 Promises inthephilosophyofLaw . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.10.2 Promisinginanthropology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5 Promisevaluation, assessment,reasoning, and logic 22
5.1 Promisevalue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.2 Promisestrength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3 Assessments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.4 Promiserelated reasoningprocesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.5 Promiserelated informallogic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.5.1 Specific linksbetween promisesand informallogic . . . . . . 26
5.5.2 Nonlogicalprocessingofpromisebodies . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6 Promises versus obligations 27
6.1 Obligationstrength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.2 Potentialprominenceofpromises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.3 Forand againsttheprimacyofobligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3.1 In favourofobligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3.2 Againstobligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3.3 Promises precedeobligations;localityprecedes globality . . . 32
7 Conclusions 32
1 Introduction
This paper1 is about the usefulness and importance of promises as a concept. For
something that is so abundant in daily life, the concept of a promise has been given
InthisversionremarksontheinstitutionofpromisinginthecontextofPhilosophyofLawhavebeen
added,aswellasareferencetoworkontheanthropologyofpromising. Varioussmallmistakeswere
remediedaswell.
onlyalimitedtreatmentinacademicliterature,and thenmainlyintheareas ofphilos-
ophy, law, and economics. Promises give way more often to the idea of obligations,
indeed many authors quickly do away with promises and replace them with apparent
obligations as if this were a necessity. No doubt this tendency originates in historical
matters, but it is unfortunate as promises have a plausible and practical value both in
theirmundanemeaningforhumansandinanextendedinterpretationthatcanapplyto
machinesand otherinanimateobjects.
The concept ofa promiseis not adifficult one– in fact we claimit to bea simpler
concept than an obligation – but it requires some care, and it leads to some compli-
cations. In this paper we present our understanding of promises and explain why in
some application areas there are both practical and theoretical advantages to their use
overobligations. To make ourcase unambiguously,we ask theforbearance ofreaders
inpresentingthefundamentalsandmotivationsat somelength.
We assume the existence of an emerging topic of promise theory, to which we
hope to make a contribution with our paper. The development of promise theory is
stil in an initial phase. We position promise theory as a branch of informal logic.
We mention [23, 20, 5] and [18] as introductions to informal logic and [39] for an
exampleofhowinformallogicmaybeappliedincomputing. Promisetheoryhasbeen
specificallydevelopedwithapplicationsindistributedsystemsinmind,butnotlimited
toapplicationsininformatics.
Promise theory may therefore be viewed alternatively as a topic in theoretical in-
formatics with foundations in informal logic and with a potential for application in
management science. Promise theory presupposes a theory of agents. It draws upon
the classical notion of reciprocity, that is agents modeling one another recursively
(see[16]). Forthenotionofan agent werefer to[26].
2 A motivation
For surely all readers the notion of a promise will be quite familiar. Our experience
of promisesmightbeboth positiveand negative,formany promisesthat are madeare
neverkept. Below are examplesofthekindsofstatementswe intendtocall promises.
Let us begin with everyday statements and progress gradually to the kinds of abstract
promisesthatwewouldliketo useinavarietyoftechnical scenarios.
• Ipromiseyouthat Iwillwalkthedog.
• Ipromiseyouthat Ifed yourcat whileyouwereaway.
• Wepromisetoaccept cash payments.
• Wepromisetoaccept validatedcredit cards.
• Ipromisetolock thedoorwhen Ileave.
• Ipromisenottolock thedoorwhen Ileave.
These examplesare quiteuncontroversial. They are easilyfound in every day life,
spokenbyhumansorpostedonsigns. Wenowwanttoarguethatitisusefultoextend
thenotionofpromisestoinanimateobjectsthathavebeendesignedorprogrammedto
behave in a certain manner. This is not a very large step, but it is easier to make with
someexamples.
Consider the following promises that might be made in the world of Information
Technology:
• The Internet Service Provider promises to deliver broadband Internet at a fixed
speed forafixed monthlypayment.
• The security officer promises that the system will conform to security require-
ments.
• Thesupportpersonnel promisetobeavailableby pager24hours aday.
• Supportstaffpromisetoreply toqueries within24 hours.
Againthesearestraightforwardpromises,whichcouldbedescribedfurthertobemore
specific. The final promise could also be restated in more abstract terms, transferring
thepromisetoan abstract entity: “thehelp desk”:
• Thecompanyhelp-desk promisesto replyto servicerequestswithin24hours.
2.1 Promises about a piece of technology
This latter example illustrates the way that we transfer the intentions of promises to
‘entities’that weconsiderto beresponsibleby association. It is asmallstep from this
transference to a more general assignment of promises to individual components in a
piece of technology. For example, we can document the properties of the following
toolsandtechnologiesinthespiritofthisargument:
• I am a logic gate and promise to transform a TRUE signal into a FALSE signal
and viceversa.
• I am a command line interpreter and promise to accept input and execute com-
mandsfromtheuser.
• IamarouterandpromisetoacceptpacketsfromalistofauthorizedIPaddresses.
• I am a compliance monitor and promise to verify and automatically repair the
stateofthesystembased onthisdescriptionofsystemconfigurationand policy.
• IamahighavailabilityserverandIpromiseyouservicedeliverywith99.9999%
availability.
From these examplewe see that the range of application of promises is quite gen-
eral. Indeed such promises are all around us in everyday life, both in mundane cloth-
ingaswellasintechnicaldisciplines. Statementsaboutengineeringspecificationscan
also profitably be considered as promises, even though we might not ordinarily think
oftheminthisway.
When an electronics engineer looks in a component catalogue and sees ‘resistors’
for sale promising to have resistance of 500 Ohms to within a tolerance of 5%, we
do not argue about who made this promise or whether the resistor is capable of inde-
pendent thought. The coloured bands on the component are a sufficient expression of
this promise, and we accept it by association. By this reasoning, we propose that the
conceptofapromiseshouldbeunderstoodinawaywhichallowsforalloftheseuses.
2.2 Range of promiser types
Withtheexpansionoftheuseofpromiseasjustadvocatedgoesaratherlargerangeof
typesofpromisersthatwewilladmit,wemention:
• Objects(tools,instruments)withoutintelligence,
• Non-humananimateagents,
• Intelligentartificial agents,
• Humanagents.
The definitionsbelow are intended to apply with intelligentartificial agents2 acting as
promisersandalsointhecaseofpromisinghumanagents. Theextensionofthesedefi-
nitionstothecasesofobjectswithoutintelligenceandtonon-humananimateagentsis
notcarriedoutindetail,buttheideaisthatinsuchcasesanintelligentagent(eitherhu-
manorartificial)isimaginedwhichpromisesonbehalfoftheseobjectsoragents. The
details of the concept of promising on behalf of another entity will not be considered
2.3 Promises and reduction of uncertainty
Promisesareentitiesthatweusetoformexpectationsofthebehaviourofallmannerof
things. Suchexpectationscontributetoreducingouruncertaintyabouttheirbehaviour,
2About appropriate definitions of the concept of an (intelligent) agents a significant literature has
beenaccumulatedinthefieldofartificialintelligence.
3Developingadefinitionofpromisethatappliesuniformlyforawiderangeofpromisertypesisleft
asaconceptualproblemforfuturework.
and this can apply as much to technology as to humans. We therefore take it as given
that the concept of a promise is a useful one, although still in need of a stable defini-
tion that is suitable as a basis for promise theory, and we consider next how one can
formalizepromisesin thesimplestand least assumingway.
Producing a promise may be more effective in reducing uncertainty than putting
forward an assertion that is stated with more certainty. Indeed if an expectation about
a piece of technology or about an human or artificial agent is asserted with absolute
certainty, or merely with some quantified probability of being valid, the question im-
mediately arises how that knowledge has been obtained, thereby possibly increasing
uncertaintyratherthan reducingit.
Such existential questions do not arise within a community of users for a piece of
technologythathasbeendeliveredincombinationwithabundleofpromisestoitsuser,
who may simply react to disappointing performance with a reduction of trust in the
promiser. Futurepromisesfrom that samesourcewillbereceived withless optimism.
Conversely,ifthepieceofequipmentoutperformsthepromisedperformancethat fact
may lead to increased trust in the original promiser, causing increased confidence in
forthcomingpromisesby thesameagent.
2.4 The logical status of promises: trust/reputation backed action
Defining what a promise is can hardly be done without examining definitions or at
leastapproximatedescriptionsofseveralsimilarnotions. Relatedbutdifferentnotions
are these:
• Takingadecision(rolebacked action).
• Beliefbased prediction(abeliefbacked action).
• Science basedprediction(a sciencebacked action).
• Announcingalegalclaim(legaltheory andcase historybacked action).
• Announcingamathematicalconjecture(reputation/trustbacked action).
• Specification ofpropertiesofan artifact (reputation/trustbacked action).
• Expressionofa mathematicalfact (a logicbacked action).
• Expressionofa quantifiedexpectation(reputation/trustbacked action).
A promise is an action with a primary and a secondary effect. The primary effect
concerns promisees and other observers who may adapt their actions and plans in
accordance with becoming aware of the content of a promise. A secondary effect
reflectsuponapromiserandimpactsonthetrustorreputationthatthepromiserenjoys
among those who noticed a promise being issued. Promising is an action backed by
credibility,and trust,thelattermediatedby reputation.
Other forms of backing for an action or an utterance exist as well: if a mathe-
matical theorem with its proof is communicated and the theorem is found to lead to
inconsistencieswithexistingtheory that fact will impact thetrustone has in theproof
rather than in the agent who puts forward the proof. Similarly if a scientific claim is
foundto contradictnewfindingsthesciencethatjustifiestheclaimwillbescrutinized
oncemore, ratherthanitsoriginator.4
Theseparationofanotionofpromisefromrelatednotionslikeprediction(withand
withoutquantified expectation),conjecture, legalclaim, anddecisionwillrequire sys-
tematic work that depends on the definitions of those other notions. That dependency
makes it infeasible to analyze these matters in detail within our paper. An exception
is the notion of a prediction. Predictions can be understood liberally (e.g. predictions
madebyartificial agents)justas promises. A predictiondiffers fromapromisein that
its assessment involves no past, present, or future activity or participation of its origi-
nator. A predictioncannotcreate an obligationforits creatorto complywiththebody
of the prediction, though issuing a prediction may create a responsibility to remedy
expected adverse consequences of the predicted event or state of affairs. Predictions
that don’t materialize are likely to be held against the reputation of their originators,
however.
2.5 Extending promise to prediction
When designing a theory of promises meant for use in informatics some discrepancy
with the concept of promise as used in that theory and the colloquial (or rather philo-
sophical) use of the term promise may be acceptable. Once a theory of promises
takes a formalized form dedicated to a specific application area, such as for instance
distributedcomputing,the emergence ofa gap between a mainstreaminformal under-
standing of promise and its meaning in that particular theory is almost unavoidable.
With this in mind it may be acceptable in principle that a theory of promises includes
includes predictions under promises as well in spite of the fact that a meaningful dis-
tinctioncan bemade.
Inthiswayatouroperatorcanpromise(ratherthanpredict)aclientthatatripnext
week willprofit fromgood whetherconditions,
3 The concept of a promise
Because oftheiroverridingubiquity,and practicalimportance,onewouldliketohave
anaccountofpromisesthatcapturestheirkeypropertiesandexplainsrelatedconcepts
4Ofcourserepeatedfindingsofproblemswithmathematicalorscientificresultsofthesameagent
willinvokequestionsaboutthatagent’scredibility,andsowillthediscoveryofmethodologicalflawsin
thatagentsworkingprocesses. Thepointwemakeisthatinlogicorsciencebackedactionthelogical
orscientificbackingofanactionitselfcanbescrutinized,anoptionthatisabsentwithtrust/reputation
backedactions.
suchascommitment,obligationandintention. Thereisasurprisinglackofdiscussion
about the meaning of promises in the literature as far as we can tell. Although the
concept orits relativeshavebeen mentionedinsuch diverseareas from logic, lawand
philosophy to economics, information science and computing, there is no agreement
on what constitutes the semantic content of the terms or if there is even more than a
tacit relationship between promise, commitment, obligation etc. The most attention
hasbeengiventotheconceptofobligationsespeciallyintheareaofdeonticlogic. We
believeontheotherhandthatthephilosophicalimplicationsofpromisesarefarwider
than is generally assumed and that there is both a need and a practical importance to
clarify them once and for all. Indeed, we will show that notwithstanding our lengthy
definitionstheconcept ofapromiseissimplerthan thatofan obligation.
3.1 Implicit promise versus explicit promise
By far the most ubiquitous usage of the term promise is in phrases like “the promise
of solar energy” or “the promise of nano-technology”. Such promises are implicit in
thesensethat theexistenceofa promiseris not assumedand theword promisemeans
approximately: expectation of usability and impact, where an author using the term
usuallyintendsto contributetoan assessmentofthementionedexpectation.
Incontrastanexplicitpromisecomesaboutfromanactionperformedbyapromiser
in an appropriate context. We will only focus on explicit promises below and we will
assumeby defaultthat promisesare explicit.
3.2 Existing views on promises
Wewillsurveysomeviewsthatotherauthorshaveputforwardonpromises,henceforth
understoodas explicitpromises.
Atiyah [1] suggests that any promise leads to an obligation to keep that promise
that is motivated by the threat of tit for tat reprisals. Reciprocation is thus coupled to
the idea of promises immediately, which seems to hop over fundamental definitions
directly to a discussion of the economics of keeping promises. The obligations are to
avoid injuryand to reciprocate goodwill. It mightbediscussedwhetherincentivesare
the same as obligations. Atiyah points out however that promising something cannot
be necessarily used to create obligation at will. Promises might cause obligations but
they can also represent obligations that already exist, i.e. to show commitment to an
existing obligation to pay the price of something. e.g. I promise to pay the bearer
the sum of 1 pound (in gold). This is only an existing admission of moral obligation.
Atiyahmaintains,plausibly,thatthemotivationforpromisinghaschangedthroughout
history. When people make promises, their intentions are culturally bound. Thus a
Victoriangentleman’sconceptionofapromisemightnotfit withthat ofapresent-day
childwho promisesto behomeintimefordinner.
Cartwright takes Atiyah’s view and asks what might be the point of promises if
not to generate the assumed obligation[10]. Why do people bother to make promises
about things to which they are already obliged? His answer includes the idea that it
is a face-saving measure: to mitigate their humility, suggesting that an obligation is
interpreted as a kind of attack or levy of force? Alternatively, perhaps the obligation
to keep one’s promises weighs heavier than the original obligation (I promise you
my word as a gentleman not to kill you, even though the law says I am forbidden).
Referring to Fried [14], Cartwright points out that the economics of contractual tit-
for-tat suggested by Atiyah is tied to promises and not to the obligations they might
confer.
The idea that promisesare an economicdriverof contracts or agreements as bilat-
eralexchangesofpromisesiscontinuedintheworkofGilbert[15]. ThenCarrilloand
Dewatriponthavearguedthatpromisescanbestbeunderstoodasamarketmechanism
for reducing the uncertainty in a moral-hazard game [9]. This work does not seem to
have been pursued. Does a promise increase the likelihood of voluntary cooperation?
A number of other works mention the concept of promises in the context of game
theory also. In these, the concept of a promise is tacitly assumed to be related to the
probabilityofchoosingaparticulargamestrategy.
Scanlon [30] meticulously analyses how and to what extent promises give rise to
obligationsunder a variety of combinationsof additionalassumptions. In his analysis
moralityplaysaimportantroleanditisimplicitlyassumedthatpromiserandpromisee
are humanbeingscapableofmoralreflection.
Zhao et al. [40] provide a comprehensive modal logic incorporating beliefs, ca-
pabilities and promises. Unfortunately it is difficult from that work to extant a clear
intuitionoftheconceptofapromisethattheauthorshadinmind. Itseemsthatthisdif-
ficultyisinpartcausedbytheformalistapproachtaken. InFraminanandLeisten[13]
order promising is displayed as a standard technical term in industrial workflow man-
agement, while at the same time that use of the term promise is considered lacking a
sufficientlycleardefinition.
Promises are often treated in the context of agreements, see for instance Schein-
man[31]. Agreementsmaybeconstructedoutofmutualpromises. Butpromisesmay
existwithoutbeingpart ofagreements.
3.3 Promises in distributed computing
More recently, a different motivation for promises was introduced by Burgess in the
context of distributed management [6]. Rather than focusing on morals or even eco-
nomicsastheprincipalmotivator,Burgessusesthepromiseasameasureof‘voluntary
cooperation’asawayofcircumventingwhatweconsidertobefundamentalproblems
with logics of obligation for determining system behaviour. Voluntary cooperation is
seen as a way of simplifying constraints and avoiding many-worlds paradoxes. He
pursuestheargumentfurtherbyemphasizingtheroleofautonomyoftheparts,andar-
guesfora‘promisetheory’inwhicheverycomponentinasystemthatcanhaveunique
informationorindependentactionshouldbeviewedasaxiomaticallyautonomous[7].
Any cooperation or even subordination of the parts that comes about in an organized
systemmustthenbeunderstoodastheresultof‘honouring’purelyvoluntarypromises
to do so. Burgess argues that no matter what one believes about the power to oblige
(evensoldierscanrefusetofolloworders),voluntarycooperationcanbeusedasaprag-
matic engineering methodology for mapping out the complexity of a control problem
ina waythat isinvariantwithrespect tocentralizationordecentralization ofsystems.
In computer science, particularly the field of Multi-Agent Systems the concept of
commitmentshasbeenusedforsometime[37,38]. Ithasbeensuggestedthatpromises
andcommitmentsarethesame. However,weshallshowthatthisisnotthecase. More
seriously,thesenseinwhichthetermcommitmentisusedinsuchdiscussionsismore
stylized than purposely considered and can only benefit from the discussion in this
paper.
3.4 Promises subject to product/process ambiguity?
Issuing a promise is an event, and one may say that A promised when A issued a
promise. More common is to view a promise as the outcome, that is a description
of what has been promised, rather than as an event. Nevertheless to some degree
the notion of a promise is subject to product/process ambiguity as described in [17]
and further references cited in that paper. Although [17] discusses the notion of an
argument, its conclusions may hold in the case of promising as well. In particular
the result of issuing a promise may be the awareness that a promise has been issued,
whichisratherremoteformaconventionalunderstandingof“product”. Theambiguity
is perhaps even deeper because after having been issued a promise creates a process
of credibility and trust assessment and various other reasoning processes, of which a
textual description of “what has been promised” constitutes merely an abstraction. If
awareness is understood as a process rather than as a state the matter becomes quite
comparabletothecaseofan argument.
4 Modeling the structure of a promise
Consider the following intuitive idea of what a promise might be: A promise is an
announcementoffactorbehaviourbyapromisertoapromisee,observedbyanumber
of witnesses (referred to as the scope of the promise), whose outcome has yet to be
assessed.
The promiser and promisee are both assumed to be ‘agents’, i.e. humans or inan-
imate objects to which we attach identity in the story of promises. This general de-
scription fits the examples that we have already given and gives some clues as to the
constitution of a promise, but it also opens up a number of questions that need an-
swering. Already we can see that thisapparently basicdefinition rests on anumberof
assumptions: thatwecanobservetheoutcomesofbehavioursandthattheoutcomeof
apromiseisclearatsomesinglemomentoftimeinthefuture,tobemeasuredandver-
ifiedbyanobserver. Afullaccountofthismightincludeatheoryofmeasurement,but
wewishtoavoidthislevelofdetailasitbindsustotoomanydetailsthathavenothing
directlytodowiththeissue. Letusinsteadtrytounderstandtoessentialcharacteristics
for promises and consider what distinguishes a promise from related matters, such as
obligations,commitmentsandotherterms.
Themodelworldinwhichweformulatepromisesmusthavethefollowingcharac-
teristics.
• Theremustbeagentsin orderforpromisesto exist.
• Theremustbeapromiser(orsourceagent).
• There must be a promisee (or recipient agent) which might be the same as the
source.
• Theremustbeabodywhichdescribes thenatureofthepromise.
Wemightsummarizetheseattributeswithanotationas in[6]:
promiser −→ promisee (1)
• Wecan leavethebodyunspecified, butitmustconsistofa quality(atype, topic
or subject for the promise) and a quantifier (which indicates how much of the
realm of possibility for that subject is being promised). For example: promise
quality: “traveltowork”,promisequantity“onMondayandFridayeachweek”.
Finally, what is implicit in the above is that a promise requires the transmission of a
message, or at least documentation in some kind of physical form, e.g. a speech act,
orawrittenstatement,elseitcannotbemadeknowntoanyoneexceptthepromiser. A
promisemustthereforehavedocumentationthatismadeintentionallyorotherwise.
Whatthenisapromisebeforewewriteitdown? Weshallrefertothisasapossible
intention. Anintentionisthebasicformulationofacourseofbehaviour,whichismade
internallyby(oronbehalfof)anagent. Whenan intentionismadepublic,itbecomes
a promise. If an intention is documented or leaked in some way then anyone has a
rightto assumeitisa promise.
Wetakeitasgiventhattherehastobeasourceforeverypromise. Apromiserdoes
not have to reveal its identity of course, so witnesses to the promise might not know
itssourcee.g. considertheanonymousthreat. Thereisnoreasontodenytheexistence
ofasourcehowever. Thelack ofsuchinformationaboutapromiserissimplyadefect
in the knowledge of the receiving agent, but one would normally prefer to assume a
consistentpictureofpromisesandinfertheexistenceofananonymouspromiser. This
justifiesourpostulatingthesource.
4.1 Promises as documented apparent intentions
Stoljar [34] writes that a promise is an announcement of an intention. and he argues
thatanyoffermustbeapromiseaswell. Indeedakeycharacteristicofapromiseisthat
it documents an intention, so let us explore the idea of intentions in more detail. In-
tentionsturnouttobealowestcommondenominatorforalloftheconceptsdiscussed
in this paper and thus have a special importance. Unfortunately from a document one
cannotconcludetowhatextenttheintentionexpressedinitisreal. Thatindeterminacy
givesrisetoan additionalcomplexityofourdefinitions.
Since promisesinvolvecommunicationwe require a notion of thespread of infor-
mation amongst the agents. We use the term scope (as used in computer science) for
this. A scope is simply defined to be a set of agents. For example, the scope of a
promise would typically refer to the promiser and a list of witnesses to the promise,
e.g. thosewhoheard toutteranceorthosewho sawthewrittendocument.
4.2 Intentions
In the realm of all possible formulations about agent behaviour the concept of an in-
tentionstandsoutas an importantfoundation.
Term 1(Current intention ofanagentA) A current intention of an agent A is de-
scription of a possiblebehaviour, or goal, or objective, or stateof affairs, that is con-
templated by A with the understanding that it can be and preferably (for A) will be
broughttorealization.
Term 2(Possibleintention foranagent A) A possible intention for an agent A is a
description of a possiblebehaviour, or goal, or objective, or state of affairs, that may
but need not currently (at the time of qualifying the description) be contemplated or
preferablybroughttorealizationbyA,andwhichmightbeinsome(possiblydifferent)
circumstancesa currentintentionofA.
Obviously a current intention is also a possibleintention. But if an utterance of A
announcesapossibleintentionthatneednotbeacurrent intention,itmayonlyappear
tobea current intention.
The components of an intention are as follows: a source agent who formulates
the intention, a target agent if the intention is directed at a potential subject, and a
body which explains the quality and quantity of the intention. Only the source of an
intention knows about the intention, i.e. the scope of an intention is the source only.
Thereare nowitnesses.
Now we must be careful: the set of all possibleintentionsshould be distinguished
from actual instances of intentions selected by an particular agent. We shall some-
times use the phrase “possible intentions” to mean this full set of abstract entities to
emphasize when we wish to signify a general description of behaviour rather than an
individualagent’s decision.
4.3 Commitments
To commit to something is to make a decision in favour of it. The issue of commit-
ments is therefore about the favourization of intentions. Commitment is a personal
decision and has nothing to do with physical representation or communication, thus
the issue of commitment precedes any discussion of promises. A commitment has a
source, a target and a body, i.e. it is an intention. Like an intention it has no physical
representationand does nothaveanon-trivialscope.
Once an intention becomes a commitment we often assume that some point of no
return has been passed in the act of committing (deciding) about the particular inten-
tion. i.e. adding the intention to a list of commitments. For example, in a game of
chicken in which two cars drive towards each other to see which one will swerve off
first, a driver has committed to not swerving when the decision to not back down has
been made [32]. This might have certain irreversible consequences, but it is difficult
to generalize the idea of irreversibility in examples of this kind. What commitment
essentiallyboilsdowntoistheelevationofsomeintentionbeyondanarbitrarythresh-
old. In other words, in the universe of intentions there is a subset of these which we
maycall commitments.
Term 3(Commitment) Commitments are current intentions that we are committed
to. We may call them intended intentions, or equivalently real intentions, intentions
that we hold, or committed intentions. The commitment of an intention exceeds its
merely being current in that it is stable and persists in time until some achievement
of the intention will take place or until some overruling considerations invalidate the
commitment.
When passing by a shop one may feel a current intention to buy a nice gadget,
only to be relieved of that intention (or rather its currency) after noticing its price. If
however, the price is quite good, but the shop is closed at the time of passing along,
then a current intention to buy the same item can become activated with the status
of a commitment, only to be terminated when the item has been acquired or when
unexpectedproblemsturnoutto standintheway.
4.4 Expressing intentions
Makingintentionsknowntootheragentsistheessence(meta-intention)ofpromising.
We will develop some terminology for such acts of expression. An intention is not
necessarily announced by the agent holding it to any other agents. Indeed, we may
now define any intention that is announced to be a promise. Conversely we notice
that any promise that has not been announced is merely a possible intention. Some
intentions are desirable while others are absolutely undesirable and an agent might
never choose them, yet they are possible intentions nevertheless. The fact that such
behaviourscan beintendedis enoughforthemtoqualify aspossibleintentions.
Intentions must always be thought of as belonging to a specific agent. Those in-
tentionswhichareactualplansoftheagentarecalleditscommitments. Otherphrases
foracommitmentthatwemay useare: intendedintention,orreal intention.
Duetothestaticnatureofouraccountwepaynoattentiontotheprocessbywhich
an intentionmightbecomeacommitmentorviceversa.
Term 4(Intention utterance) An agent a produces an intention utterance if A pro-
duces anexpression ofa descriptionofa possibleintention.
Whatmattersforourdiscussiononpromisesisintentionutterancesthatseemtobe
real. That leadsto theideaofan apparent intentionutterance.
Term 5(Apparent Intention utterance) An utterance expressing a possible inten-
tion (of a principal agent) with the contextual appearance of an intention. Apparent
intentions,maybedrawnfromthefollowingrange:
Real intention: (alternatively: commitment,trueintention,orintendedintention)what
is announced corresponds to wha the agent expects that will happen, or that
(s)hewilldo, orwhat holdsorwhat willhold.
Inotherwordstheapparentintentionisrealifitisacommitment(andtherefore
current).
Incidental intention: (alternatively: non-committing current intention) what is an-
nounced corresponds to why the agent expects that will happen, or that (s)he
willdo, orwhat holdsorwhat willhold,butonlya thetimeofexpression.
Indifferent intention: (alternatively: quasi-intention)theissuerhasnocurrentinten-
tioncorrespondingto theutterance,andno currentconflictingintentioneither.
An indifferentintentionis currentlycontemplatedas a possiblebehaviour,goal,
objective, or stateof affairs,but its bringing aboutis not preferred, and thus an
indifferentintentionisnota currentintention.
Deceptiveintention: (also: misleadingintention)theannouncementmightseemtobe
real foranaudienceinscopebutit isa liefromtheperspectiveofthepromiser.
Adeceptiveintentionisincompatibleregardingrealizationwithacurrentinten-
tion,thoughthismaybeonlyknown totheprincipalagent.
Invalidintention: (alternatively: manifestlie)allobserversmaynoticeadiscrepancy
between what isannouncedand thefacts.
Theinvalidityofaninvalidintentionwillbecomecleartoagentsinscopeofthat
utterance.
The idea of an apparent intention is that at face value it is like an intention from
theperspectiveofanobserverbutthereisaconsiderabledegreeoffreedominconnec-
tion with a so-called underlying intention, the existence of which we postulate in the
followingdefinition.
Term 6(Underlying intention (ofanapparent intention utterance)) Given an ap-
parent intention utterance of an agent, there is an underlying intention (which need
not becomprised in thesameutterance)as well. Wewill distinguishfivecases, corre-
spondingto thecasedistinctionofintentionutterances:
Real intention: The underlyingintentionofa realintentionisthatsameintention.
Incidental intention: Theunderlyingintentionofanincidentalintentionisthatsame
intentionwhichis known tobeconsistentbutisnon-committingas well.
Indifferent intention: Theunderlyingintentionofan indifferentintentionisempty.
Deceptive intention: Theunderlyingintentionofadeceptiveintentiondifferssignifi-
cantlyfromthe(deceptive)intention.
Invalidintention: The underlying intention of an invalid intention differs noticeably
(forobservingagents)fromthe(invalid)intention.
We willassumetheagents keep underlyingintentionsprivate. Otherwisenew lev-
els of complexityemerge as underlying intentionsmay turn out to split over the same
distinctionoffourcases recursively.
4.5 Promises
A promise is the physical publication of an intention within a certain scope. This
suggests that there must be someagent to observe the promiseand its outcome which
in turn requires the expensivenotionof a theory of observationso we shall tackle this
issueseparately (seesection5.3).
Term 7(Promise) A promise is an apparent intention of an agent, (the promiser or
promisingagent)theutteranceofwhichhasbeendocumentedwithinascopethatgoes
beyond thepromiser.
According to the definition of intention utterances, a promise brings with it an
apparent intention and an underlying intention, and five cases can be distinguished
forpromises: real, incidental,indifferent,deceptive, andinvalid.
Promises thus have scope. Formally intentions also have a scope, but the scope of
an intention held by an agent is by definition limited to the agent (source) itself. An
intentioncouldbeleakeddeliberately(e.g. tothepress,inordertoinfluencesomeone).
Thismightbeaformofleverage,oranattempttoimposeanobligationonsomeparty
in scope. However, at the instant an intention expands in scope to encompass more
agents it becomes a promise. A so-called letter of intent, for example, is a promise
ratherthan merelyan intention.
The time aspect of promises presents further challenges. Intentions can become
outdated by events. An event which is found to fulfill an intention documents the
implicit promise, since one must admit to the intention in a wider scope. Conversely,
the documentation for a promise does not have to last for ever; if documentation of a
promise disappears completely, it reverts to being an intention. A promise to oneself
isin excessofamereintentionbecause ithas been documented.
Thedistinctionbetweenthepromiseeandthescopeofthepromiseiskeytounder-
standing promises. Suppose someone intends to arrange a surprise birthday party for
their friend. Initially this is an intention. The intention is written in a diary or men-
tioned to a third party and it becomes a promise. The target is not in the scope of the
promisehowever, so the promiseremains unknownto the jubilant. However, suppose
that before telling anyone else, the promiser destroys all evidence of the promise by
tearing out the page of the diary, effectively withdrawing knowledge of the promise,
then the promise reverts to being just an intention. But as long as knowledge of the
promiseremains“out there”intheworld,it remainsapromisethathas been made.
Term 8(Keeping a promise(relativeto anobserving agent)) Apromiseiskept,for
the perspective of an agent A (e.g. the promisee), if an action is performed or a state
of affairs is reached that complies, according to A’s assessment or observation, with
the body of the promise. It is plausible but not strictly needed to require that once a
promiseis kept somecausalrelationwith promiserbehaviourcanbefound.
Although in a static theory of promises the keeping of promises is not center-stage,
havingsomesomecharacterizationofitishelpful. Criticaltothedefinitionofkeeping
a promise is relativity w.r.t. the observing agent. If a promiser assesses a promise p
as having been kept while a promisee B, perhaps supported by other agents in scope
of the promise doesn’t agree, that state of affairs casts no doubt on the status of the
promisep as such. On thecontrary thissituationmay havebeen precisely what Ahad
inmindwhen issuingpromisep.
Term 9(Keeping a promise(inabsolute terms)) Apromiseiskeptinabsoluteterms,
ifit iskept accordingtoall agentsinitsscope.
Term 10(Broken promise) A promise is broken if after it has been issued a state is
reachedatwhichthepromisehasnotbeenkept,fromanyconceivable(thoughreason-
able) perspective, and from which it will certainly not be kept anymore either, again
from any conceivable (though reasonable) perspective that an agent in its scope mint
have.
Wewillnowdiscusstherelation between promisesand obligationinsomedetail.
Term 11(Promissoryobligation) With each promise of an agent A an obligation is
connected,theso-calledpromissoryobligation. Itisthatobligationtowhichtheagent
hasbecomeobligedbymakingthepromise.
Promissory obligations are an important tenet of the philosophy of promises, and we
do not deny their existence. This definition allows significant freedom. It can be read
as follows: a promise theory will allow for a notion of a promissory obligation. That
notion may be doe weak that it provides empty promissory obligations only. It is not
assumedthatapromissoryobligationexplainsapromiseintermsofaphilosophically
grounded concept of an obligation. However, we will oppose to what we call obliga-
tionism.
Term 12(Obligationism) Withobligationismwedenotetheviewpointthat(i)promises
arecharacterizedbyauniquecapacityto(auto)generateanobligation(specificallythe
promissoryobligation)for the promisingagent, and that (ii) the essence or content of
a promiseisfullycapturedbyitspromissoryobligation.
An argument in favor of obligationism is found if one assumes that the promissory
obligation captures the essence of the obligation so that the concept of a promise can
be reduced to that of an obligation. Obligations being known from deontic logic and
form various strands of philosophy, one may consider this reduction to constitute a
worthwhile simplification rendering the construct of a promise redundant. We don’t
supportthisargument.
Term 13(Non-obligationism) Withnon-obligationismwedenotethebeliefthatobli-
gationismisfalse.
Term 14(Strong non-obligationism) With strong non-obligationism we denote the
belief that obligationism is false and that in addition the concept of promise may be
accountedfor withoutmaking useof theconcept of anobligation.
Preferring non-obligationism over obligationism, and convinced of the relevance of
strong non-obligationism, we will propose a strongly non-obligationist conception of
promises. Argumentsfor(strong)non-obligationismhavebeen detailed in[6].
Term 15(Restricted strong non-obligationism) Withrestrictednon-obligationismwe
denote the belief that obligationism is false, and that for a large class of promises,
thoughnotforall,theconceptofpromisemaybeaccountedforwithoutmakinguseof
theconceptof anobligation.
If in court a witness promises to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, an obligation
is created. Remarkably that obligation can only be created by means of a promise.
Restricted strong non-obligationism does not claim that this promise, though being
prior to its promissory obligation, can be fully understood without contemplating the
concept ofan obligation.
A recent argument can be found in [3] where payments in a peer-to-peer system
for financial transfer an store of value are considered autonomous actions to the ex-
tent that such payments cannot be obliged by definition. Payments can be promised
however, with the corresponding promissory obligation constituting no more than ac-
quiring some certainty that the payment could be effected if the agent wishes to do
so.
4.6 Deceptions – non-intended promises
Although we have distinguished five cases for promises, commitments stand out as
most important immediately followed by deceptions, with the other classes entering
the picture in order to have a complete story. We add some further comments on
deceptions.
Understanding deceptions (or lies) is also an important step in clarifying the rela-
tionship between intentions and promises, because it is possible for an agent to have
two different intentions in play at the same time: a commitment and an announced
intention (i.e. a promise) which are not compatible. Incompatibility means that striv-
ing for both intentions simultaneously is fruitless because their realizations cannot be
combined.
Inadeception,thereisalwaysasourceandalwaysatargetandthetargetcannotbe
the same as the source, as an agent cannot (intentionally)deceive itself. Furthermore,
wemaintainthatthetargetofadeceptionmustbeinscope,sotheremustbeaphysical
documentation and hence a deception necessarily involves a promise and not merely
an intention.
Term 16(Deception) A deceptionconsistsoftwo intentions: a documentedintention
(i.e. a promise)anda non-documentedcommitment,which areincompatible.
Thenon-documentedcommitmentwillalsobecalled thehiddenintention.
In a deception the hidden intention is more important than the witnessed one one
and we might refer to it as the dominant intention. This simply expresses that it is a
commitment while the promise contains merely a “possible intention”. It is the real
intention of the agent (“intended intention”), while the intention in the promise can
merely be described as non-real. If the dominant intention should be rescinded, a
deceptionwillrevertto beingapromise,butthisis onlyknownto thesource.
4.7 Positive promises
A deception is the augmentation of a promise with an incompatible intention. We
should like a name for the augmentation of a promise with a positive intention. We
mightcall thisapositivelyintendedpromise,ormorebriefly apositivepromise.
From these slightly strained terms, we can now appreciate why the concept of a
promiseis in fact so important. A promiseis simply a promise (the documentation of
anintention),regardlessofwhatliesbehindit. Anyinternalprioritiesorconsiderations
are hidden from the view of other agents and cannot be observed. Thus, promises are
anindependentlyimportantconceptbecausewecan(indeedmust)talkaboutpromises
withoutdiscussingthebasison whichtheyare made.
When a promiseisissued, weare neitherrequired norable toconfront thetruthor
falsity of the promise. Indeed, as soon as we ask such questions, new issues such as
trustandaplethoraofothersubjectiveissuescomeintoplay. Suchissuesareprobably
un-resolvableinalogicalsense. However,whatweassumeis herethatno matterhow
trustworthyapromisemightbe,itcanincreaseordecreaseourcertaintyofapromised
outcomeand thusitbears an influence.
4.8 Promises as specifications in technology
Suppose a user community takes an interest in machines M that compute a function
f from a finite domain D to a finite range R, with the only constraint that for each
d ∈ D, the result r = f(d) satisfies some criterion φ(r,d). Thus for f we have
an implicit definition that is likely to be satisfied by many different implementations.
A provider P of these machines may deliver the good (say machine M) in a box
equipped with the following promises: (i) the expected time of computing f(d) is
below E (d), (ii) the distribution of running times is normal, (iii) the spread is s, and
(iv)energy consumptionwhen runningisbelowe(perunitoftime).
ArethesefourassertionsaboutM bestviewedaspromises,oriscomputerscience
able to provide a better terminology in this case? We first notice that it is certainly
conceivable that the setting is so complex that it is implausible that any assertions
aboutM likethementionedpromisescanbeprovenaboutitascorrectnessassertions.
Thismaybethecaseinspiteofthefactthateachoftheseassertionsareinessencewell-
defined mathematical,logical,orcombinatorial,statements. No amountoftestingcan
compensateforthatdifficulty. Thesubjectivestatusofsuchpromiseswhenunderstood
as propositionsor assertions about the behavior of M will not go away simply by not
thinkingaboutthemin termsofpromises.
A very important flexibility results from viewing these assertions as claims about
M thathavebeen cast aspromises. Inordertoappreciatethisflexibilitywewillmake
the plausible assumption that the provider of M has arrived at those claims after due
experimentation, thus giving them initially a status comparable to that of a scientific
hypothesis,atleast fromtheprovider’sperspective.
We consider the circumstance that the user community of machines of type M
andofsimilarcompetingequipmentthathasbeenprovidedbycompetingprovidersin
combinationwith differentpackages of promisesfeels dissatisfiedwithM inthelight
ofP ’spromises. Nowthemembersoftheusercommunityhavetheoptiontoupdate
their trust in P , rather than to contemplate modifications of the promises that P has
made.
Itshouldbenoticedthat,apartfromforgettingentirelyaboutP ’spromisesregard-
ing M, the only alternative way to accommodate their dissatisfaction that is open for
themembersoftheusercommunity,istothreatthesepromisesasscientifichypotheses
which must now be updated in a systematic fashion on the basis of new information
gained during usage. But following that systematic path of renewed hypothesis for-
mation is impossible without being given full information on how P arrived at these
opinions in the first place. And such information is likely to be unavailable to the
membersofM’s usercommunity.
These remarks serve as an illustrationof the principle mentionedin Paragraph 2.3
above.
4.9 A technical refinement of the example
The setting just sketched may seem artificial, but with the following example we will
demonstrate that it makes practical sense. Let 2n represent the set of bit sequences of
lengthn. SHA-256-512isthesecurehashalgorithmSHA-256appliedto2 512(see[12]
for an authoritative description and [4] for an alternative formalization). We will ab-
breviateSHA-256-512toh. AsadomainD wechooseD = 2 256 ×2 256,andtherange
R is2 256. Thecriterionφ(d) = φ(d 1 ,d 2) works asfollows:
φ(d 1 ,d 2 ,r) ⇔ bs2n(h(d 1 || r)) ≤ bs2n(d 2).
Here||denotesstringconcatenationandbs2nconvertselements(bitsequences)of
2 256 interpretedasnaturalsinbinarynotationwithbigendianrepresentationtonatural
ASIC based machines that compute functions f according to these concrete spec-
ifications, modulo some details, are now on the market as so-called Bitcoin (see [25])
mining tools.6 We claim that viewing claims about these machines put forward by
theirprovidersas promisesisconvincing.
SHA-256-512 is presented by FIPS (see [12]) as a secure hashing function which
is for that reason supposed to be resistant against so-called first pre-image attacks:
given r ∈ 2 256 it is very difficult to find a string d ∈ 2 512 with h(d) = r. Although
expressing the algorithmic difficulty of finding d given r as a property of SHA-256-
512 is a mathematical issue in principle, no indication of a proof of the difficulty of
that problem has been found. Nevertheless, the assertion about h that the mentioned
problemiscomputationallydifficulttosolvecanbequalifiedasascientifichypothesis
maintainedbythecomputersciencecommunityatlargeratherthanasapromisemade
by FIPS.
Nakamoto’s design of Bitcoin turns SHA-256-512 into a parametrized problem
(the Bitcoin mining problem: computing f(d
,d 2), necessarily fast in order to win
5IgnoringanyknowledgeofSHA-256-512andassumingthatitworksrandomlyanestimateofthe
probabilitythatsomersatisfiesthementionedconditionisbs2n(d 1)·2−256. Thisprovidesanexpec-
tationofthenumberofinputsthatmustbetriedbeforeabitsequencer that“solvesthecombinatorial
problem”isfound.
6SuchequipmentisbeingsoldforinstanceunderthetrademarksAvalonandButterfly.
a competition and preferably at low energy costs on cheap but dedicated machines in
ordertomakeaprofitaswell)whichisalsoassumedtobedifficulttosolve,andwhich
isassumedtogrowexponentiallymoredifficultwhenthenumberofleadingzeroes of
d increases. Otherwise Bitcoin mining will eventually be cracked so to say. In the
absence of a thorough scientific analysis of the Bitcoin mining problem the difficulty
of that problem is probably adequately viewed as a promise made by Nakamoto and
reproduced by theopen sourcedevelopercommunityaround Bitcoin.
4.10 About the philosophical literature on promises
Having worked out a view on promisesin thisSection, we are in the positionto make
some further remarks concerning the connection of non-obligationistpromissory the-
ory as advocated aboveand thepluralityof viewson promisethat has been developed
in philosophy. We will use the illuminating entry on promises in the Stanford Ency-
clopedia on Philosophy as a guide (see [19]). We refer to that survey paper only and
don’trepeat references citedthere.
Our non-obligationist promise theory (NOPT) takes accounting for promissory
obligations and measuring their force in comparison to other kinds of obligations for
an issueofsecondary pragmaticimportanceonly.
NOPT may be considered a branch of act-consequentialism, and also as a brach
of the expectational theory of promises. In mechanical terms NOPT is connected to
speech act theoryand promisesmay beconsiderda sublcassofSearle’s commissions,
and of the illocutions of Austin. Expectationalism portrays a view of promises not
unlike that of NOPT, where trust and modifications of trust are the key parameters
against which promises and promise keeping are measured. NOPT seems to differ
from expectationalistviewsin not paying attentionto whetheror not failingto liveup
to a promiseand thus failing to meet an expectation created by and trusted in connec-
tionwithapromiseiswrong. Ratherthanthinkingintermsofwrongdoingsthefuture
impactofnotkeepingapromiseontheinteractionbetween promisingand trustmain-
tenance and its secondary effect on the calculation of expectations from a promisee’s
perspectiveisconsideredcentral in NOPT.
NOPT has been worked out in such a way as to be relevant for automated, or arti-
ficial,agentcommunitiesaswellasforcommunitiesofhumanagents. Forthatreason
NOPT has a bias, at least in principle, towards (i) quantitative aspects of the creation
and maintenance of expectation, (ii) logical aspects (informal logic) of reasoning on
the basis of expectation and trust, (iii) trust maintenance and the interaction between
trust and reputation dynamics, (iv) temporal aspects of a promise life-cycle, (v) inter-
actionbetween different promises.
TheabovefocusofNOPTisatcostofadiminishedfocusonthefollowingaspects:
(i) moral aspects and ethical valuation of actions, (ii) the special status of promissory
obligations (which seem to be rather useless in a world of artificial agents), (iii) the
ramificationofspeechacts(thoughNOPTmustviewapromiseasanactofcommuni-
cation), (iv)promisesin relation to contracts (for which the importanceof obligations
is not denied), and with various forms of contractualism and contractarian theory, (v)
relationswithLaw.
4.10.1 Promisesinthe philosophyofLaw
Thereisalarge bodyofliteratureinthephilosophyofLawabouttheroleofpromises
in general, and in the context of contracts in particular. In [29] the question why
and to what extent keeping a promise ought to be legally enforced is discussed and
seven different views on the matter are distinguished. What matters for us is that the
author takes promising as a given institution and understands the conception of legal
instruments as a variable, rather than the other way around. However, thoughout this
paper promises invariably give rise to expectations, whereas the status of promissory
obligationsismuchlessobvious,thoughsuch obligationsifanyare alwaysconnected
topromissoryexpectations,whichconforms toourownviewpoints.
In[11]thecaseismadethatphilosophicalexplanationsofwhypromisesarebining
are less criticalto thedevelopmentofcontract law than manyauthorsseem to defend.
Insteadanotionofefficiencyisbroughtforwardwhichmighthavegreaterexplanatory
powerreading theroleofpromising.
4.10.2 Promisinginanthropology
in [24] the observation is documented that in some communities promising does not
exist because promises are not considered as creating (binding) promissory obliga-
tions,whichistakentobeanessentialaspectoftheinstitutionofpromising. Wemight
turnthemessageofthepaperaroundanddrawtheconclusionthatthereexistsanthro-
pologic evidence for the feasibility of human communities with a non-obligationist
conceptionoftheinstitutionofpromising.
5 Promise valuation, assessment, reasoning, and logic
In this section we discuss that a promise may have tome value to its promiser as well
as to itspromisee. Further the strengthof a promiseis on displayas well as as variety
of assessment methods and finally an embedding of the tropic in “Informal Logic” is
given.
5.1 Promise value
Promises are valuable to agents, because they help to deal with uncertainty. Because
certainty is key, a promise is worth nothing unless there is trust. Zero trust makes
promises worthless. Trust might be based on a history of keeping promises or, in
our terminology, on a history of positiveassessments about a succession of promises.
So there is a symmetry between trust and promises that must be broken to solve the
dilemma.
If there is trust, apromiseabout futurebehaviourdoes not need to beperceived as
an obligationon the promiserbut as an indicationthat best effort will be respected. If
agivenagentX doesnottrustthepromiserhowever,itmightassumethatthepromise
impliesan obligationon thepromiser. This perception of obligationby X does not of
course imply an obligationperceived by the promiser. There is a fundamental subjec-
tivityintheseperceptions.
The value of a promise to any agent in its scope is an expectation of the eventual
benefit. Suppose,thenthatApromisesB 400dollarsperyear. B promisestowashA’s
windowsatthisprice. Botharesatisfiedwiththevaluetheygetfromthisarrangement
andprefer nottoquestionittoomuchas thiscouldunleashallkindsofconsequences.
Observer C can see that the values are quite mismatched, or that A is getting a poor
deal by its judgement, but C also cannot deny that the relationship is stable because
bothAand B arehappy.
5.2 Promise strength
The above example illustrates that once promises are made and have been noticed by
an audienceconsistingof agents in its scope, theseagents engage in a process of trust
management. The strength, or force, of a promise, viewed from the perspective of an
agent in its scope, quantifies the expectation that it will be kept. The same promise
mayhavedifferentstrengthfordifferentmembersofitsaudience,andtheevolutionof
that strength may differ between agents with different experiences. Promise strength
combines(i)apromisee’spromiseindependenttrustinthepromiser,(ii)thecredibility
of the promise (given the promiser), and (iii) the promise type related trust of the
promiseein thepromiser.
It must be stressed, however, that the promiser, the promisee, and all agents in
scopeareindividuallyresponsiblefortheirmanagementofthestrengththeyattributeto
apromise. Aggregatetrustmanagementmay beused, butis isnecessarily avoluntary
matterfor allagentsinvolved.
5.3 Assessments
The notionof whether promisesare kept or not is central to theirsustained usefulness
in any application domain, thus we need to make mention of how this comes about
in a theory of promises. It would be possible to go overboard and delve into the
complexities of observation and measurement tin an attempt to provide a satisfactory
answerbutthatisnotinthespiritofthispaper. Weseekinsteadasimplernotionwhich
isatthesamelevelofabstractionastheconceptsofpromiseandintentionthatwehave
introducedthusfar. Wecall thistheconcept ofassessment.
Term 17(Assessment) An assessment is a subjective statement made by an agent
aboutwhether theintentionsof itselfor ofanotheragentwere fulfilled.
Ournotionofanassessmentismoregenericandlessquantitativethanaverification. It
isbothsubjectiveand notapriorilinkedtoobservation. In astatictheoryofpromises
and intentionsthe existenceof intentionsas well as the valueof assessmentsis linked
to state parameters like time. Thus, for an intention of agent A, in existenceat time t,
and known to be by way of a promise that A had issued before t, it may be the case
thatagent B’s assessment,madeat timet′ > t ispositive(ornegative).
At this level of description, we need not say any more about it than this. What
is important is how a witness to the promise assesses the fate of the promise. Such
an assessor may or may not feel obliged to assess a resulting state or activity in a
particular way, might promise to conform to certain criteria, and so on. What matters
is only the assessment, which might or might not be rationally obtained. We believe
thatthisis afairmodeloftheworld inwhich welive.
Assessmentinvolvesavarietyofpossibleroutestoinference,i.e. therearedifferent
kinds of assessment. This is a subjective issue, but this should not be viewed as a
weaknessofourtheory,itisanimportantfeatureofthesubjectivenatureofindividual
assessment.
5.4 Promise related reasoning processes
Promise descriptions are symbolic representations of actions, and events and states
of affairs that allow systematic transformation processes. Transforming the physical
representationofasymbolicdescriptionofapromisemightbeconsideredan instance
ofreasoning.
The logical complexity of promises becomes apparent by taking into account the
diversity of reasoning processes related to a single promise that are performed by
promiser,promisee,and agentsin scopeofthat promise.
The following reasoning processes can be distinguished in relation to a single
promise p with promiser A, body X, promisee B and with agent C in its scope (C
may be equal to B). We assume that some representation of P and its components,
or of components in a stage of preparation of P is available to an agent that performs
reasoning about it. No analysis is suggested of the means of representation used, but
this range will include mental representation as it occurs within an animate agent and
also formal representation amenable for some formal reasoning process as it may be
implementedwithinan inanimateintelligentagent.
Promisepreparation: areasoningprocessperformedbyAleadingtothedesign,tim-
ingand issuingofp byA.
Credibility analysis: areasoningprocesswhereagentsC inscopeofpdeterminethe
credibility they assign to A’s promising p in the light of general facts known of
A(butexcludingspecifichistoricalinformationabouttheindividualbehaviorof
Aas amemberofitsagent class.)
Priortrustdetermination: reasoning processes performed by C (provided that C is
inthescopeofp)aimedat(i)determiningthetrustC hadinAbeforebecoming
aware of p (C’s prior trust in A), and (ii) specifying which expectations are
generated by takingnoticeofp.
Counter-promise deliberation: reasoningprocessesperformedbyBconcerningplau-
sible counter-promises that may be issued in by B reply of taking notice of p
(providedB isinscopeofp).
Promiseimpactprediction: (this maybe donewith theunderstandingthat B has is-
suedoneormoreplausiblecounter-promises)(i)reasoningprocessesperformed
byB (wheninscopeofp)andbyC (anyagentinscopeofp)aimedatdetermin-
ingthe(changeof)expectation(asviewedbyB resp. C)thatpcreatesinB (and
that A intended to generate), (ii)and reasoning processes aimed at modification
of plans (held by B or by C) given the change of expectations held by each of
themthatwas broughtaboutby takingnoticeofp.
Promiseassessment: reasoning processes performed by C concerning (i) the way in
which C will assess whether or not A’s promise is kept, (ii) assessing the latter
bymeans ofthepreferred assessmentmethod.
Promisewithdrawal monitoring: A may at some later stage issue another promise,
say q, the keeping of which is not compatible with keeping p. It that case q
qualifies as a withdrawal of p. An agent C applies a reasoning process that
monitors and evaluates subsequent promises issued by A to determine whether
thesemaybeviewedasbreakingptoan extentthatpmaybeconsideredhaving
been withdrawn.
Trust updating: reasoning processes in place for each agent C in scope of p. The
processaimsatupdatingC’spriortrustinAinaccordancewiththeresultofthe
assessmentC makes concerningthedegreeofkeepingp thatis achievedbyA.
Reputation processing: a reasoning processes performed by each agent C in scope
of p aimed at exchanging the effects of trust updates between different agents.
Reputation flow permits an agent C while having no prior trust assessment of
an agent A to acquire an initial trust of A by taking noticeof evidencegathered
aboutAby otheragents.
5.5 Promise related informal logic
Connections between promises and informal logic are of a diverse nature. Such con-
nections admit a general classification. Here are four forms of such connections that
may be imagined, the first three of which may be considered relevant in the case of
promises:
Promisesas a contribution to informallogic: Promisesconsideredanadditionalen-
tryin thecatalogueofentitiesthatare central forinformallogic.
Viewpoints from informallogicsupporting promisetheory: Definitionanddemar-
cationoftheconceptofapromiseprofitingfromexistingdevelopmentsininfor-
mallogic.
Methods ofinformallogicapplied topromise dynamics: Promiserelatedreasoning
mechanismshaveincommonthatastrictformalizationisimplausible. Asignif-
icant variation between promiserelated reasoning patterns for individualagents
isplausible. Thisvariationisafeatureofinformallogicratherthanofformalized
logic.
Promisesas analternativeto (parts of)informallogic: We are not aware of parts
of informal logic that would profit from being rewritten in the language of
promises.
5.5.1 Specific links between promises andinformallogic
Concerning these three forms of connections that matter in the case of promises the
followingmorespecific remarks can bemade:
1. Promises are utterances like remarks, questions, announcements, replies, and
obligations.7 Special of promises is the dynamic interplay with credibility and
trust. Issuingapromisediffersfromproducingastatementindiscourse(dialecti-
cal use), or from making an argument (alethic use), or from rhetorical language
(though rhetoric may involve promises and deceptive promises). We mention
[27] for an application of this distinction. In that paper reason for action are
studiedindetail,andreasonsforissuingapromisecanbeconsideredasubtopic
withinthat themeworthofindependentinvestigation.
2. Credibility assessment may involve reasoning by analogy (similar agents have
kept similar promises in similar circumstances and therefore there promise is
credible), and arguments from authority (another highly regarded agent claims
that the promise is credible). Pattern matching techniques may be used to sup-
port an agent in finding similarities that allow for comparative assessment of
credibility. The form of reasoning is similar to “story similarity” as discussed
in[36].
7Whileanobligationisnotaspeechactandnottheresultofaspeechactapromiseislikelytobethe
resultofaspeechact. Thedynamosofobligationsandpromisesdiffers. Suchdifferencesanbefound
withutterancetypesremark,question,announcement,reply,and(toalesserextent)predictionaswell.
3. Trust assessment may involve arguments from authority and as well as various
forms of probabilistic and plausible reasoning. We mention [33] which deals
with systematic reasoning given the absence of evidence, a very plausible con-
ditionfor agents who need to assess trust in a promisingagent. Many examples
of trust based reasoning are given in [28]. Although that paper focuses on trust
asahumanbehavioralormentalfeaturemostexamplesmakesenseinacontext
of artificial examplesjust as well. In [35] one finds an analysis of detecting and
avoidingcircular reasoningwhen establishingorupdatingtrust.
4. Both trust and credibility are conveyed and created through a combination of
network based reputation development, which is an instance of distributed rea-
soningfrom authority,and distributedplausiblereasoning.
5.5.2 Nonlogicalprocessing ofpromisebodies
Agents aware of promises that have been issued will perform processing on the basis
oftheirownlocalrepresentationsofpromisestatements. Fromasymbolicperspective
this involves symbolic processing on (representations of) promise types and promise
bodies.
Butthereseemstobenoneedforanotionofvalidityfortheprocessingofpromise
statement representations that is performed by agents in scope of a promise. Whether
ornotpromisingworksoutwelltotheextentthatitisofsustaineduseinsomecontext
isalearning outcomebyagents whomay act as promisersandpromisees.
Besidesalethicuse,dialecticaluse,andrhetoricaluse,abehavioraluseisconceiv-
able. Behavioraluseofpromisesdoesawaywithaprincipledapproachtothepromise
types and the meaning of promise bodies as well as with valid reasoning on the basis
of theseingredientsand admits any form ofassociativeprocessing by agents involved
thatsuitstheirobjectives.
6 Promises versus obligations
The importance of the notion of promises may be questioned by those who consider
promises as a concept secondary to obligations. If one views obligations as the pri-
maryconcept,thevalueorimportanceofpromisesunavoidablyshrinks. Weshallnow
survey advantages and disadvantages of obligations as an alternative cornerstone of a
theory of multi-agent systems. The discussion will be somewhat asymmetric because
wewillnotbaseourcomparisonon aproperdefinitionoftheconcept ofanobligation
(which wecannotfathom).
Having explainedintentionsand promises, let us now try to describe thenotion of
obligations in the same manner. The intuitive notion of an obligation seems straight-
forward, but it proves to have difficult properties. We refer to Jackson & Altham [22]
foraconvincingexpositionofthesecomplications.
We might try to think of obligations in a straightforward way, for instance: an
obligationisan intentionthatis perceived to benecessarybyan agent. Thiscertainly
captures some of the characteristics that we understand by the term, but it also leaves
many questions unanswered: is the feeling of the necessity voluntary or forced, a
matterofsurvivalorsimplyan authoritarianconvention?
An obligation, or more precisely the impact of an obligation in general, as felt by
an agent within its scope, falls into the category of possibleintentions. We will speak
ofan induced intention,theintentionbeing achievingcompliancewiththe obligation.
Theinducedintentionmusthavesource,atargetandabody,andthebodymusthavea
qualityandaquantity. Thesourceandtargetarenowsomewhatdifficulttounderstand
however. Unclearisfurthertowhatextentaninducedintentioniscurrent,andifsoifit
isacommitment. Can itbeindifferent,orevenadeceptionorsimplyinvalid? Beyond
this, we shall not attempt to define obligations more carefully in this paper. We shall
merely statesomeassumptionsaboutthem.
An obligation can be imposed by external conditions, e.g. by the expected be-
haviourofexternalagents,bylawsthreateningsanctionsetc, oritcan beself-imposed
bycodesofpersonalbehaviourwhichanagentholdstobenecessary. Butthisimposi-
tion suggests the action of a force which attempts to induce a commitment in another
agent(oritself). Anobligationisapossibleintentionwhichmayormaynotbecurrent
and may or may not have the status of a commitment. In any case the agent is aware
of any compelling reasons to include the intention in the portfolio of commitments,
eitherfromwithinitselforwithoutduetoexternal forces.
It seems natural then to refer to the source and target of the induced intention as
being the agent in which one attempts to induce the intention, and the recipient of
the intention respectively. However, the source of the obligation itself might not be
an agent at all, but merely a set of external conditions, norms, experiences or other
informationacquired by theagent thatlead to aperceivedpriority.
Noteagainthateven‘forced’behaviourcanbeclassifiedundertherealmsof(pos-
sible) intentions since all behaviour can be intended. Again, we emphasize that this
does not imply that a coerced agent holds the intention that is being forced upon it.
Nor does it say anything about whether the agent is able to resist the force or not, or
whetheritmattersifan obligationisself-imposedorexternallyimposed.
Viewed from the perspective of an agent, the notion of an obligation immediately
seemssignificantlymorecomplicatedthananintentionorapromiseanddoesnotseem
tobeclosetothenotionofeitherpromisesorintentions.
Weholdthatobligationsarefarfrombeingareliabletoolforensuringcompliance.
If a law-giver wanted to ensure the compliance of an agent, a better strategy would
be to obtain a promise from the agent, and to convince it to view the intention as
a commitment since the law-giver could never know whether the agent had indeed
committedto thebodyoftheobligation.
6.1 Obligation strength
Obligationscanbeassignedameasureordegreeofstrengthfromtheperspectiveofan
audience just as promises. When assessing the strength of an obligation an agent will
first ofallestimatethedegreetowhich an obligationapplies toitsowncontext,rather
thanthedegreetowhich theobligingentityis entitledtodoso.
The divergence between promise strength and obligation strength appress strik-
inglywhen oneappreciates that,unlikepromisestrength,obligationstrengthhas little
to do with expectations and is nearly independent of future action of any agent in-
volved.
6.2 Potential prominence of promises
Our belief in restricted strong non-obligationism implies that conceptually separat-
ing promises from obligations is a starting point of our work. Viewed as utterances
promises must further be separated from other utterances such as informative utter-
ances, questions,predictions,and commands.
If an agent A expressesa fact, say F, meant tobe informativeforan audience, the
similarity with A promising F is significant. However, when stating F, agent A may
not be able, or have been able in the past, to exercise its influence to bring about that
F holds true. While it is always acceptable that an agent acts in such a way that its
promisesarekept, thesameisnotalways validforinformativestatements.
For instance: an agent telling an employer that “he will not be present tomorrow
because of a flu” need not be absent if the flu fails to hit as expected. Such a message
impliesnosingleactionthatincreasesitsplausibility. Whatmaygetlostwhenviewing
informative utterances as promises is objectivity. This provides a clear separation,
and at the same time it indicates that in systems that do not measure or assess agent
objectivityitisunproblematictotreat each informativeutteranceas apromise.
When agent A asks question q to another agent, say B, in the scope of an audi-
ence, then the corresponding utterance need not be considered a promise. Indeed for
understandingthenotionofaquestiononehasnoneedofpromises. Inotherwordsas
concepts promises are not prior to questions. Nevertheless it is quite plausible to re-
placethequestionbyanutterancewhereApromisesB somerewarduponB providing
an answertoq.
Finally, if agent A issues a command c to agent B in scope S, then like with
questions as just mentioned, in order to understand what is going one has no need of
the concept of a promise. Having said that, however, again it is plausible that A’s
command is replaced by a promise that A will provide some reward if B acts as if it
puts command c into effect. Suggesting this replacement is plausible in particular if
onehasno interestin obligationsthatmightresultfromtheissuingofacommand.
We find that promises stand out as the utterances from which all other communi-
cationscanbederived. Thisgivespromissoryutterancessomeconceptualprominence
ofotherutterances.
6.3 For and against the primacy of obligations
Invariably,howeverpromisesarelinkedwithobligations. Bythesheerweightoftradi-
tion,obligationsdominatediscussionsofbehaviour. Ourobjectistopositionpromises
as a major tool for the specification and the regulation of behavior. For that reason
we make an attempt to compare promises and obligations as conceptual tools for dis-
tributedsystemsdesign.
6.3.1 Infavourofobligations
Webeginwithlistingsomeargumentsinfavorofobligationsasregulatorymechanism
when comparedwithpromises.
1. Some people might think that a promise is an obligation because it seems to
createone,andmightthereforebeconsideredequivalenttothatobligation. (This
isaversionofobligationismto whichweoppose.)
2. Obligationsareawellknownconceptfromdeonticlogic. Thereisanadvantage
to to reducing the less well-known concept of promises to one that has been
studied for more than fifty years. (This is true, but it implies no more than that
promisesareworthstudying.)
3. Obligationshave a formal status in state laws and regulations. There is no such
publicbodyofpromises. (Promisesareadynamicphenomenonconcurrentwith
autonomousaction,listingpromisesgloballyand staticallyisnotplausible.)
4. Many obligations give rise to promises which occur in the process of fulfilling
an obligation. E.g. the cat must get fed while owner is on holiday, the owner
is obliged to get the cat fed (by law forbidding cruelty to animals). A friend
promisesto help in thefulfillmentof theobligation. (This is truebut it does not
implythat obligationsarepriortopromisesin general.)
6.3.2 Againstobligations
When balancing obligations and promises as a regulatory mechanism for distributed
systemssignificantarguments infavorofpromisescan bementioned.
1. Obligationshavetheirowncomplexlogic,thatisonphilosophicalgroundssome
combinations of obligations are less plausible. Seemingly simple deontic logic
still captures (or hides) a wealth of moral dilemmas and ethical mysteries. We
refer toHolbo[21]forastrategiesfordealingwithinconsistentobligations.
2. Much more than obligations promises provide a tool for the self-organization
of a community of autonomous agents. At any stage, and concerning any fu-
ture cooperative activity, agents can start exchanging promises thereby creating
an increasingly complex and functional promise graph which may eventually
provideabasisforusableexpectationassessments.
3. Once issued a promise admits a dynamically maintained equilibrium between
theexpectationofthepromisebeingkept andwithcredibilityofandtrustinthe
promiser. Such balancingtradeoffsare absentwithobligations.
4. It is easy to imagine a significant plurality of promises constituting a promise
graphrelatedtoasingleplannedactivity. Itiscounterproductivetoexplainsuch
promisesintermsofequallymanyobligations.
5. Suppose one has the concepts of promise available, and now reflects upon obli-
gations. An agent P issuingan obligationwithbodyb toall agents Qin
issue:ob ob
a scope S, might be understood as simultaneously promising all members Q of
S that P will act in such a way as if P had received a promise with body
B from Q.
Thisisareasonableexplanationofwhatmayhappenwhenissuinganobligation
and it explains why obligations seem to be complex entities or events from the
perspectiveofpromises.
6. If a future promise (e.g. the promise to feed the cat in the future) is in fact a
deceptionthenthisfalsifiesthenecessityofarelationshipbetweenpromisesand
obligations. In other words, all intentions occurring as apparent intentions in
promises cannot be induced obligations because some promises can be decep-
tionsandthesecannotbe(easily)understoodas inducedobligations.
7. Similarly,notallpromisesareaboutfutureactions,sotherecannotbeanimplied
obligationcapturing its essence for all promises. E.g. I promise that the cat got
fed. Indeed theownermightactually be displeasedthat thecat was fed ifit was
supposedtobedieting.
8. There is a dissimilarity between promises and obligations. They are quite dif-
ferententities. Obligationsmaycausepromisesandpromisesmaycauseobliga-
tions, but promises have a physical reality as events in space and time, whereas
obligationsdo not. Obligationsare at adifferentlevelofabstractionaltogether.
9. Promises are madeon a voluntarybasis. Forobligationhowever,the concept of
voluntarity is almost irrational. In any case it might be voluntary to imply an
obligationonsomeoneelse,butengaginginapromiseyoumayfaceaninvolun-
tary obligation or a voluntary one. Voluntarity is therefore natural for promises
butisquiteproblematicfor obligations.
10. Promiseannouncementconstitutespositiveextensionsofuserbehaviour,whereas
obligationsprimarily constitutea negativeconstraint on the degrees of freedom
oftheobligedparty.
6.3.3 Promisesprecede obligations;localityprecedes globality
Ifonewouldchoosebetween promisesand obligations,it seemsabundantlyclear that
promises are the simplerconcept, or perhaps the more primitiveconcept. It is hard to
imagine a world without promising while one may imagine a world without obliga-
tions.
Inadditiontheconceptofapromiseseemsmorenaturalinthetechnologicalworld:
sincecomputerscannotfeel ethicalresponsibility,thereductiontopromisestoobliga-
tionsseemstobeneitherphilosophicallysatisfactorynortechnicallycorrect.
So far we have argued that promises are different, simpler and can be analyzed
independently of obligations. There is one more point that is of principal practical
importance. Promises are local constructions, whereas obligationsare non-local. The
source of a promise is localized in a single entity that has all of the information and
self-control to be available to resolve conflicts and problems with multiple promises.
The sources of obligationshowever are distributed amongst many individuals and the
obliged party does not have the access to resolve the conflicts without maintaining a
voluntarydialoguewithallofthesemultipleparties.
From a practical viewpoint, obligations are simply less effective at reducing un-
certainty because they tend to increase uncertainty not reduce it. Indeed, obligations
can be inconsistent, but promises cannot. More precisely: consistency of promises is
a matter that can be verified at the level of sources only. Promises made by different
agents cannot be inconsistent if promise bodies are dealing with actions or states of
affairs aboutwhich thepromiserhasan overridingcontrolagainstotheragents. Ifdif-
ferent agents issueconflicting promisesat least oneof thesefails tohavetheexpected
degree of control. In any case once such conflicting promise are noticed the trust in
bothissuersneedsreconsideration,andadecreaseintrustinatleastoneofthepromise
agentsis likelytooccur.
Preferablythenonewouldnotuseobligationasacoordinationprincipleifamech-
anismbased onpromisescan beused instead.
7 Conclusions
Wehaverestrictedourattentiontostaticscenariosinthiswork,asthematterofchange
is a complex one. An account of how promises arrive, persist and are removed again
is forthcoming. Some work has already been done in this area, however, in [2] and in
[8] but scope for embellishment is vast, as is the number applications for the concept
of promises. In the latter reference, the matter of organization is related to promises,
as aform ofcooperationbetween individualsorautonomousagents.
Although we have avoided describing specific and detailed scenarios or using the
notion of agent autonomy in this work, one of us has written extensivelyon the view-
point that promises represent a basis for a sound engineering discipline, somewhat
analogous to an “atomic theory”, where arbitrary systems can be reduced to indepen-
dent agents that issuepromises about their behaviour[6]. This sets about a process of
documentation of independent properties that can be helpful in detailing one’s under-
standingofobservedphenomena. Indeed,incomputinginparticularthereisagenuine
casetobemadeforviewingacomputerasanumberofindependentelectricalcompo-
nentsthat makequitespecific promisesto oneanother.
Given the role promises have in influencing certainty, an exploration of the re-
lationship to causation and fault propagation networks seems fruitful. Similarly the
benefits ineconomicsare obvious.
Outside computing undoing promises from their obligation generating effects can
beahelpfultostrengthentheroleofpromisesasanorganizationalprinciple. Thismay
provideafruitfuldirectionformanagementscienceresearch.
Without attempting to suggest applications in any field, we have argued for the
usefulness of promises as an independent and practical concept, whether in philoso-
phy, economics or technology. We have compared promises to the more usual idea
of obligations and have concluded unequivocally that promises are a simpler theoret-
ical notion and a more practical tool than obligations in the reduction of an agent’s
uncertaintyaboutthebehaviourofotheragents.
We show that intentions, promises, and commitments can be introduced and to a
significant extent explained in the absence of an understanding of obligations. Fur-
thermore,althoughitseemstobeacommonviewthatobligationsareamoreprimitive
concept than promises, our paper suggests the contrary. Promises need not be viewed
merely as proxies for obligations; if promises give rise to obligations, this can in fact
be studied purely in an exposition based on promises, intentions and commitments.
Indeed more often than not promises are made by agents who would not be able to
explain the extent to which theirpromises might lead to obligationsor not, or to what
extent such obligations would be more significant than the promises from which they
arose.