1v5361.2101:viXra
A study on the relation between
linguistics-oriented and domain-specific
Institutionen f¨or datavetenskap,
Link¨opings universitet, Sweden
Abstract. In this paper we dealt with the comparison and linking be-
tweenlexicalresourceswithdomainknowledgeprovidedbyontologies.It
is oneof theissues for thecombination oftheSemanticWebOntologies
and Text Mining. We investigated the relations between the linguistics-
orientedanddomain-specificsemantics,byassociatingtheGObiological
processconceptstotheFrameNetsemanticframes.Theresultshowsthe
gaps between the linguistics-oriented and domain-specific semantics on
the classification of eventsand the grouping of target words. The result
providesvaluableinformation fortheimprovementofdomain ontologies
supportingfortextminingsystems.Andalso,itwillresultinbenefitsto
language understandingtechnology.
1 Introduction
The combination of Ontologies and Text Mining (TM) has been considered im-
portant within the life science research community, to keep track of knowledge
reported in the increasing accumulation of scientific literature available online
(e.g. [5]). Although most of them have not been developed for natural language
analysis [3], ontological resources provide domain knowledge required by text
mining systems. Ontologies can provide a structured and semantically richer
representation for text mining systems. They will provide the capability of nat-
urallanguageprocessing(NLP)systemstorunreasoningovernaturallanguage.
Furthermore,they will providethe frameworkfor a consistentsemantic integra-
tionofthevariousresourcesusedthroughoutatextminingsystem,andalsothe
integration of knowledge extracted from text and from other different resources
like databases. This is consistent with the vision of the Semantic Web.
In this paper we dealt with one of the issues for the combination of the two
technologies, comparing and linking lexical resources with domain knowledge
providedbyontologies.Neitherontologiesnortheirinterplaywiththelexicalre-
sources have received much attention in the development of lexical resources
for the bio-medicine domain, although in very beginning domain ontologies
have been considered important resources. In this paper we explicitly linked
the FrameNet [1] semantic frames with the concepts from the biologicalprocess
ontology of the Gene Ontology (GO) The result shows the gaps between the
linguistics-orientedand domain-specific semantics onthe classificationof events
and the grouping of target words. It provides valuable information for the im-
provement of domain ontologies support for text mining systems. And also, it
will result in benefits to language understanding technology.
The Gene Ontology has been widely used as knowledge base for NLP sys-
tems in the domain. Among the three subontologies of terms, biologicalprocess
ontology provides structured knowledge of biological processes that are recog-
nized seriesofevents ormolecularfunctions. The FrameNetis a lexicalresource
for general English, based on the theory of frame semantics and supported by
corpus evidence. There is a network of frames that are linguistically-oriented
classifications of semantics. A semantic frame describes an event or a situation
and the relevant participants and roles. For example, Progress defines the sit-
uation that “an Entity changes from a Prior state to a Post state in a sequence
leading to improvement”. A set of words (not only verbs) are grouped into a
frame based on their semantic meaning.
The related work include the BioFramenet [2]. It is an extension of the
FrameNet with domain-specific frames. Its semantic frames are based on 5 pro-
tein transport classes from the Hunter Lab protein transport knowledge base.
In [4], the GENIA group made an effort to investigate the gap between its
domain-specific corpus to FrameNet by associating 4 of GENIA event concepts
with the FN semantic frames.
To collect the FN semantic frames (releases 1.3) that are mostly likely to be
valuable for describing and processing text in molecular biology domain, we
utilized biomedical verbspresentby PASBio project(releases1.0). It represents
29verbs(representing34predicates)chosenfortheir usagein the descriptionof
gene expression and related events. The assignment of a FN frame to a verb is
based on the definition of PAS predicates and their arguments, FN frames and
their FEs.A FN frame became a candidate frame for a verb,if the verbis a LU
in the FN frame. We discarded FN frames that either have completely different
meanings to the sense of the verb, or are too specific for biological situations. If
therewerenoentryforthe verb,orallavailableframesarediscarded,synonyms
orwordsinitsdefinitionwereused.WemanuallyexaminedallPASBiopredicates
and their arguments, and FN frame candidates and their FEs, and made the
assignments. 19 FN semantic frames are collected in this stage.
InthebiologicalprocessontologyofGO(releases1.2inOBOformat),events
andmolecularfunctionsarenamedbyusingnounformscorrespondingtoverbs.
A biological process concept becomes a candidate that is semantically relevant
to a FN frame, if the head of the concept name is the noun form of a verb
that is a LU in the FN frame. The second step is to choose GO concepts from
candidates that are the mappings to the FN frames. Here we define the map-
ping as “the GO concept can be seen as a subclass of the FN semantic frame
in biomedicine domain”. More general concept is more likely to be considered
as the concept mapping to a FN frame than more specific concept, since a gen-
eral concept subsumes all specific concepts. If there is part-whole relationship
betweentwo candidates,the partconcept is less likely to be consideredthe con-
cept mapping to a FN frame. The reason is that the whole concept includes
the part concepts. The GO mapping candidates were first collected automati-
cally by evaluating concept names. Then they are returned as the mappings if
a candidate is neither a subclass of other concepts nor a part of other concepts.
The program is written in release 0.11 of perl modules for GO and OBO on-
tologies.Then we manually examinedall mapping candidates andidentified the
finalmappings.Allthe finalmappings betweenthe FN andGO areavailableon
3 Result and Discussion
TheresultingmappingsbetweenGOconceptstotheFNframescanbeexplained
by decomposing it into different cases.
NomappingGOconcept.ForfourFNframes,Activity start,Causation,In-
terrupt process,Forgoing,therearenosemanticallyrelevantGOconcepts.While
their words are used to describe biological events or situations, there are no
defined GO concepts that representthe events or situations expressed by them.
1 mapping GO concept. The GO concept GO:0008283:cell proliferation is
associatedwiththeFNframeProliferation in number.Wenoticedthatinthefour
subclassesofGO:0008283:cellproliferation,cystformationdescribestheformation
ofaclusterofgerm-linecellsderivedfromasinglefoundercell.WhileinFNform
and formation are the LUs of the FN frame Creating, the phrase cyst formation
can be grouped into such a frame in the phenomenon of biology. Secondly, the
GO conceptGO:0006412:translationis associatedwith the FNframeTranslating.
In its subclasses, the head of concepts name is translation.
Multiple mapping GO concepts. Two situations exist in the case: 1)
Multiple verbs. There are two examples in this situation. Two GO concepts
GO:0007571:age-dependentgeneral metabolic decline and GO:0040007:growthare
associated with the FN frame Change position on a scale. The frame profiles
words that indicate the change of an Item’s position on a scale (Attribute) from
a starting point (Initial value) to an end point (Final value)”. The words decline
and growth describe biological process of opposite directions. Three GO con-
cepts,GO:0018409:peptideorproteinamino-terminalblocking,GO:0018410:peptide
or protein carboxyl-terminal blocking and GO:0060468:prevention of polyspermy
are associated with the FN frame Preventing. They describe three very differ-
ent kinds of biological process by using words, prevent and block. The head of
the concept names of the subclasses of GO:0018409 and GO:0018410, including
carbamoylation and carboxylation, are not LUs of the frame Preventing. They
describe specific chemical reactions. Only when these actions happen to N-
terminal protein amino acid, preventing situation happens to the protein or
peptide sequencing. This kind of domain-specific verbs cannot be grouped into
anyframes.2)Multiple specific biological process. For the restofthe FN frames,
thereareasetofveryspecificmappingGOconcepts.TheframesincludeRemov-
ing,Cause change,Cause change of position on a scale,Progress,CreatingandBe-
coming aware. For example, the GO concepts mapping to the frame Removing,
are located in the different branches of the GO, such as GO:0006915:apoptosis,
GO:0043412:macromoleculemodificationandGO:0006259:DNAmetabolicprocess.
No general concept subsumes the specific events or situations.
GOconceptsmappingtomultipleFNframes.Inthiscase,thefirstsit-
uationcanbeexplainedbyusingtheexampleGO:0032502developmentalprocess.
Basedon the definition, this conceptcan be the mapping to the frame Progress.
However, many of its subclasses describe a biological progress not semantically
relevant to Progress. For example, the subclass GO:0010014:meristem initiation,
canbeconsideredasthemappingtotheframeProcess start.Ontheotherhand,
theheadoftheconceptnamesofsomesubclassesarenotLUsofneithertheframe
Progress nor any frames in FrameNet, but the concept describes the situation
semantically relevant to Progress, e.g. the concept GO:0043934:sporulation. The
secondsituationrefersto the conceptGO:0019882:antigenprocessingand presen-
tation.TheverbpresentisintheLUsoftheframeCause to perceive,andprocess
is the word referring to the frame Process. This kind of concepts cover a series
of events and can not be simply mapped to one frame.
The result shows the gap between the classification of events or situation
in GO and FrameNet. From the point of view of biology, GO may describe a
situationthathappens todifferentsubstancesby differentspecific concepts,but
it is defined as a semantic frame in the point of view of linguistics. A general
GO biological process concept may cover different events that are described
by different semantic frames, although they all are considered as a kind of the
general biological process from the point of view of biology. For some events,
althoughtheyappearinthe contextinmolecularbiologydomain,the semantics
are general. Secondly, the result illustrates the gap between the grouping of
words in the domain and in general English. The granularity of groupings can
be different from the point of view of linguistics and biology. It is also difficult
to create semantic frames for some domain-specific words.