A Universal Model of Global Civil Unrest
New England Complex Systems Institute, 238 Main St., Suite 319, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Dartmouth, MA 02747, USA
(Dated: May 2012)
Civil unrest is a powerful form of collective human dynamics, which has led to major
transitions of societies in modern history. The study of collective human dynamics,
including collective aggression, has been the focus of much discussion in the context of
modeling and identification of universal patterns of behavior. In contrast, the possibility
that civil unrest activities, across countries and over long time periods, are governed by
universal mechanisms has not been explored. Here, we analyze records of civil unrest of
170 countries during the period 1919-2008. We demonstrate that the distributions of the
number of unrest events per year are robustly reproduced by a nonlinear, spatially
extended dynamical model, which reflects the spread of civil disorder between geographic
regions connected through social and communication networks. The results also expose the
similarity between global social instability and the dynamics of natural hazards and
epidemics.
Civil unrest contagion occurs when social, economic, and political stress accumulate slowly, and
is released spontaneously in the form of social unrest on short time scales to nearest and long-
range neighboring regions that are susceptible to social, economic, and political stress (1-5).
Unrest events have led to significant societal and cultural changes throughout history. Examples
include the spread of discontent in France in 1848 that proliferated to most of Europe and parts
of Latin America; the wave of urban racial riots in the United States in the 1960s; and the 1989
uprisings against communism in various central and eastern European countries, symbolized by
the fall of the Berlin Wall. More recently, social instability has spread rapidly in the Arab world
‒ from nonviolent protest movements in Tunisia and Egypt that toppled long-established
authoritarian regimes, to a protest movement that evolved to a full-blown civil war in Libya.
These social unrest events span the full spectrum from civil wars, revolutions, and coups d'état
that have killed millions of people to relatively peaceful forms of intra-state conflicts, such as
anti-government demonstrations, riots, and general strikes (5-10).
A pertinent question from large-scale social dynamics and policymaking standpoints is what
causes the extent and outbreaks of civil unrest spreading. Social unrest has been attributed to a
variety of social, political, economic, and environmental causes including racial and ethnic
tensions (11), food scarcity and food price increases (6-10), variations in international
commodity prices (12, 13), economic shocks (14), climate change and rainfall shocks (15, 16)
and demographic changes (17). Despite these conditions, we show that external causes are not
necessary to explain the observed magnitude of almost a century of riots and collective protests
across the world. Instead, we provide a parsimonious explanation of social unrest dynamics
based on a hypothesis that widespread unrest arises from internal processes of positive feedback
and cascading effects in the form of contagion and social diffusion over spatially interdependent
regions connected through social and mass communication networks. We analyze records of
civil unrest events, compiled from newspaper reports, of 170 countries covering the period of
1919 through 2008 (see SI-1). The long-term event dataset analyzed here includes the number of
incidents of three main indicators: anti-government demonstrations, riots, and general strikes.
We group countries by their geographical region (see SI-2), and study the corresponding
distributions of the number of civil unrest events per year. The results reported here (described
later and shown in Fig. 3) also apply at the level of individual countries. Fig. 1 shows the size
distributions of the number of unrest incidents (the sum over the three event indicators) for
various geographical regions of the world (see SI-2). The data indicates that there is a wide
variation in the characteristics of civil unrest with no apparent pattern of unrest dynamics in time
or geographical space. Although the study of collective human dynamics, including collective
aggression, has been the focus of much discussion in the context of modeling and identification
of universal patterns of behavior (18-25), the mechanisms leading to this diverse behavior of
social unrest are unclear, and have never been attempted before. Here, we consider social
instability as a generalized spatial epidemics phenomenon, similar to other spatially extended
dynamical systems in the physical and biological sciences, such as earthquakes, forest fires, and
epidemics (26-28). Our model provides a parsimonious quantitative framework that is able to
explain and reproduce the full range of empirical civil unrest event count distributions for all
regions as shown in Fig. 1.
The model (shown schematically in Fig. 2) divides the country into sites ("urban clusters")
placed on a two-dimensional grid. We assume that unrest activity is transmitted, with
infectiousness probability , along two kinds of links: short-range links between sites that are
directly adjacent to each other in either the horizontal and vertical directions; and long-range
links created with probability between each site and another site selected uniformly at random
from the grid. The connectedness between sites on the grid reflects geographic proximity, social
proximity, and proximity within the mass communication networks along which social instability
is transmitted. Social, economic, and political stress accumulates slowly on the grid with
probability per site (‘unrest susceptibility’ rate), which then become susceptible to unrest
activity. Social unrest is released spontaneously with probability per susceptible site
(‘spontaneous outburst’ rate), and is diffused on short time scales to nearest and distant
susceptible sites. This activity can lead to further instabilities and avalanches of unrest events
throughout the grid. We measure the simulated incidence of civil unrest by the number of sites
that are involved in the spread of unrest activity.
Asia Africa Europe America
itu A B C D
Total number of civil unrest incidents per year
Figure 1| Observed civil unrest event count distributions. We measure the incidence of civil
unrest events per year by summing over the reported country-level number of anti-government
demonstrations, riots, and general strikes (see SI-1), for all countries within a particular
subregion of the world (see SI-2). The figure shows the log-log plot of the complementary
cumulative distribution of civil unrest event count, . (A) Unrest event count
distributions for geographical subregions of Asia: Western Asia (); South-Eastern Asia ();
Eastern Asia (); Southern Central Asia (). (B) Unrest event count distributions for
geographical subregions of Africa: Western Africa (); Southern Africa (); Middle Africa
(); Eastern Africa (). (C) Unrest event count distributions for geographical subregions of
Europe: Western Europe (); Southern Europe (); Northern Europe (); Eastern Europe ().
(D) Unrest event count distributions for geographical subregions of America: Caribbean, Central,
and South America (); North America ().
Figure 2| Social unrest spatial contagion model. The model is defined on a square grid of
sites, which represents the division of a country into urban clusters (see SI-4). Each site of
the grid can be in one of three different states: empty ("white"), susceptible to social unrest
("red"), and involved in social unrest ("crowd"). Sites are one grid step apart if they are directly
adjacent to each other in either the horizontal or vertical direction, or are connected through
weak links (e.g., site E4 is connected to site F2). The weak links are formed by associating with
each site, with probability , a single link to a site selected uniformly at random from the grid.
The grid is updated synchronously according to the following rules: at each time step, empty
sites become susceptible with probability , and susceptible sites become involved in social
unrest with probability . Unrest contagion occurs on a short time scale as follows. If a site is
involved in social unrest (e.g., sites B2 and E4), the unrest activity spreads with probability to
susceptible sites that are one grid step apart (e.g., sites C2, B3, or D5), which in turn can lead
(with probability ) to further instabilities of susceptible sites that are two grid steps apart, three
grid steps apart, and so on. Each of the sites involved in social unrest during a time step
contributes to the size of the unrest contagion.
We have specified a plausible size for the grid based on changes in the average population of
a country over the period analyzed (1919 to 2008), and a characteristic urban cluster as defined
by the U.S. Census Bureau (see SI-4). The outburst ( ) and susceptibility ( ) rates have been set
such that , which reflects the time scale separation that often underlies riots, unrest
and revolutions (5-10). This leaves only two free parameters: the probability of establishing
long-range links between sites, and the infectiousness rate of transmitting social instability on
short time scales to nearest and distant susceptible sites. Given a set of parameters, a computer
simulation was run for a number of time steps (see SI-4), and the simulated distribution of the
total unrest event count was determined. The free parameters associated with specific
geographical regions of the world were chosen by minimizing the statistical distance between the
simulated and empirical distributions (see SI-3). Using these parameters in the computer
simulation model, we find that the model is able to reproduce the observed distributions
remarkably well over the full range of the world's geographic regions (Fig. 3).
Western Asia South-Eastern Asia Eastern Asia Southern Central Asia
Western Africa Southern Africa Middle Africa Eastern Africa
Western Europe Southern Europe Northern Europe Eastern Europe
Caribbean, Central, and South America North America
Total number of civil unrest events
Figure 3| Observed data and best-fit curves for civil unrest event count distributions.
Observed values are denoted by circles. Solid best-fit lines denote average distributions
calculated from 500 realizations of the social unrest contagion model. The goodness of fit of the
model relative to the empirically observed unrest event count distributions was determined by
measuring the distance between the observed and simulated distributions (SI-3). Here, we use the
tail-weighted Kolmogorov–Smirnov (wKS) statistic (SI-4). The fit of the model is very good for
all regions. Goodness-of-fit (wKS) and fitted parameters ( ) for all regions: Western Asia =
0.1269 ( , ), South-Eastern Asia = 0.1581 ( , ), Eastern Asia
= 0.1492 ( , ), Southern Central Asia = 0.1078 ( , ), Western
Africa = 0.1749 ( , ), Southern Africa = 0.2513 ( , ), Middle
Africa = 0.1856 ( , ), Eastern Africa = 0.1191 ( , ), Western
Europe = 0.1436 ( , ), Southern Europe = 0.11220 ( , ),
Northern Europe = 0.16 ( , ), Eastern Europe = 0.1634 ( , ),
Caribbean, Central, and South America = 0.0707 ( , ), North America = 0.2349
( , ). Values of wKS that are less than 0.3 represent good fits (SI-3).
The unrest contagion model is sufficiently flexible to accommodate a wide range of possible
unrest event count distributions. “Broad-scale” distributions that show a power–law regime with
a sharp cutoff in the tail are obtained when the infectiousness rate , and when the outburst
rate is very small relative to the susceptibility rate (i.e., ⁄ ), even in the absence of
long-range connections ( ). ‘‘Single-scale’’ distributions with fast-decaying tails arise
when the infectiousness rate , in which case augmenting the grid with a network of long-
range connections ( ) could lead to broad-scale distributions. In general, different forms of
social or communication networks that connect the regions of the country will generate different
civil unrest event count distributions.
The unrest contagion patterns of each of the world's geographic regions (Fig. 1) are uniquely
characterized by the parameters of the model (Fig. 3). Unlike critical phenomena where
universality arises from the irrelevance of particular details of the system (29), here universality
arises from the fact that social unrest contagion is governed by the same mechanisms despite
idiosyncrasies of individual countries and geographic regions. The mechanisms we uncover
separate the phenomenon of rioting and social instability into three time scales: the unrest
infectiousness rate from disrupted regions to neighboring regions that are susceptible to social
unrest, the rate by which regions become susceptible to unrest activity due to social, economic,
and political stress, and the rate by which social unrest is released spontaneously in susceptible
regions ( The spatial contagion mechanism here arises from interdependence of
closely related regions; people participate in collective protest because of long-standing social,
economic, and political stress, and because others have recently done so. If rioters see others they
might respond similarly even if their external conditions have not changed, and protests spreads
across social networks and from place to place. While our parsimonious model does not prove
that exogenous causes play no role in determining the intensity of civil unrest, it does say that
exogenous causes are not necessary to explain the observed data, and that the pursuit of
independent variables that predict the occurrence of civil unrest events in space and time may be
illusory.
Our results have several practical implications. First, the parameters of the model can be
estimated from unrest data that includes small and medium sized events, and then be used to
quantify the risk of large-sized events. Second, monitoring the parameters of the model and
trends in their values over time through comprehensive ongoing unrest data, may serve as an
early warning signal for increased vulnerability to social instability.
Acknowledgements: I am grateful to Marcus A. M. de Aguiar, Zvi Bar-Yam, and Irving R.
Epstein for helpful comments.
[1] M. Perrot, Workers on strike: France, 1871-1890 (Yale University Press, New Haven,
1970).
[2] B. Moore, Injustice: The social bases of obedience and revolt (White Plains, N.Y., 1978).
[3] F. Polletta, Social Problems 45, 137-159 (1998).
[4] M. Biggs, American Journal of Sociology 110, 1684-1714 (2005).
[5] L. G. Scarman, Scarman Report: The Brixton Disorders (Penguin Book, 1981).
[6] D. Dowe, H.-G.Haupt, D. Langewiesche, and J. Sperber, Eds. Europe in 1848: Revolution
and reform (Berghahn Books, 2001).
[7] G. Rudé, The crowd in history: A study of popular disturbances in France and England,
1730-1848 (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1964).
[8] R. Quinault and J. Stephenson, Popular protest and public order (Allen & Unwin, Crows
Nest, Australia, 1974).
[9] J. Walton and D. Seddon, Free markets & food riots: The politics of global adjustment
(John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 1994).
[10] T. R. Gurr, Why men rebel (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1970).
[11] D. McAdam, American Sociological Review 48, 735-754 (1983).
[12] R. Arezki and M. Bruckner, IMF Working Paper 11/62 (2011).
[13] M. Brückner and A. Ciccone, The Economic Journal 120, 519–534 (2010).
[14] H. Berger and M. Spoerer, The Journal of Economic History 61, 293-326 (2001).
[15] D. D. Zhang et al. PNAS 108, 17296-17301 (2011).
[16] M. B. Burke et al. PNAS 106, 20670-20674 (2009).
[17] J. A. Goldstone, Revolution and rebellion in the early modern world (University of
California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1991).
[18] L. F. Richardson, J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 43, 523-546 (1948).
[19] D. C. Roberts and D. L. Turcotte, Fractals 6, 351-357 (1998).
[20] J. M. Epstein, PNAS 99, 7243-7250 (2002).
[21] L. –E. Cederman, Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 97, 135-150 (2003).
[22] M. Lim, R. Metzler, and Y. Bar-Yam, Science 317, 1540-1544 (2007).
[23] A. Clauset, M. Young, and K. S. Gleditsch, J. Conflict Resolut. 51, 58-87 (2007).
[24] J. C. Bohorquez et al. Nature 462, 911-914 (2009).
[25] N. Johnson, et al. Science 333, 81-84 (2011).
[26] H. J. Jensen, Self-organized criticality: emergent complex behavior in physical and
biological systems (Cambridge University Press, 1998).
[27] B. D. Malamud, G. Morein, and D. L. Turcotte, Science 281, 1840-1842 (1998).
[28] C. J. Rhodes and R. M. Anderson, Nature 381, 600-602 (1996).
[29] H. E. Stanley et al. Physica A 281, (2000).