]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v1352.1001:viXra
Ab initio study of magnetism at the TiO /LaAlO interface
Mariana Weissmann ∗ and V. Ferrari†
Departamento de F´ısica, Comisio´n Nacional de Energ´ıa Atomica,
Avda. del Libertador 8250, 1429 Buenos Aires, Argentina
Andre´s Sau´l
Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de Marseille, CNRS,
Campus de Luminy, Case 913, 13288 Marseille Cedex 9, France‡
(Dated: November1,2018)
In this paper we study the possible relation between the electronic and magnetic structure of the
TiO /LaAlO interface and the unexpected magnetism found in undoped TiO films grown on LaAlO .
Weconcentrate ontheroleplayedbystructural relaxation andinterfacial oxygen vacancies.
LaAlO has a layered structure along the (001) direction with alternating LaO and AlO planes, with
nominal charges of +1 and -1, respectively. As a consequence of that, an oxygen deficient TiO film with
anatase structure will grow preferently on the AlO surface layer. We have therefore performed ab-initio
calculationsforsuperlatticeswithTiO /AlO interfaceswithinterfacialoxygenvacancies. Ourmainresults
are that vacancies lead to a change in the valence state of neighbour Ti atoms but not necessarily to a
magnetic solution andthat theappearance ofmagnetism depends also onstructural details, such assecond
neighbor positions. Theseresultsareobtained usingboththeLSDAandLSDA+Uapproximations.
Keywords:oxides,magnetism,ab-initiocalculation
I. INTRODUCTION
Thin films of transition metal oxides (ZnO, TiO , HfO ) were found to be ferromagnetic a
few years ago, with a high Curie temperature, when doped with magnetic ions1–3. The origin
of this magnetic ordering is still debated, but meanwhile ferro-magnetism was also found doping
with non magnetic ions, such as Cu4, and also in undoped cases5–7. Trying to understand this,
severalexperimentaltestswereperformedindifferentlaboratories: themagneticion,thesubstrate
over which the films were grown, the substrate temperature and the oxygen pressure during film
growth were changed. The results are confusing, as some samples are magnetic while others are
not8. It now seems well established that structural defects, such as oxygen vacancies, and low
dimensionality(thinfilms ornanoparticles)are necessary fortheappearance ofthistypeof ferro-
magnetism9. One can understand why it is difficult to obtain reproducible results from different
experimental samples, as it is hard to asses quantitatively the influence of defects or disorder in
anysystem.
At the same time, several ab-initio calculations have been performed for these oxides in
bulk10–13, with impurities and/or defects, and different models have been proposed to produce
the spin ordering. However, few calculations have discussed if surfaces or interfaces have any
influencein thistypeofmagnetism14.
LaAlO (LAO) single crystal is an excellent substrate for epitaxial growth of many oxides,
such as SrTiO , BaTiO , PbTiO and TiO . While the surface electronic structure and atomic
relaxation of those oxides15 and the SrTiO /LAO interface16,17 have been widely studied, the
TiO /LAO interface has not. In the present paper we focus on undoped films of TiO grown on
topofaLAOsubstrate. Thissystemhasbeenfoundtobeferromagnetic,withaCurietemperature
ofabout800K6,7, growneitherby pulsedlaserdepositionorby spincoating. It isalso wellsuited
forab-initiocalculationsbecauseLAOinitscubicphaseandTiO inanatasestructure,bothalong
the (001) direction, have a very small structural misfit. In fact, thin films of TiO using LAO as a
substratedevelopanatase structure,indicatingepitaxialgrowth.
Theaimofthisworkistostudytheroleplayedbyinterfacialoxygenvacanciesonthemagnetic
propertiesoftheinterface. Forthispurpose,weconsideramodelsystemwithahighconcentration
of vacancies. Under certain conditions we find a localized magnetic moment in the interfacial Ti
atoms, depending not only on the presence of vacancies, but also on subtle structural details. We
do notconsiderhere thepossibleinteractionbetween theselocalized moments.
II. THESYSTEM
To simulate interfaces we use a super-lattice geometry, so that the system under study results
periodicin 3D: ... LAO/TiO /LAO /TiO /...
Figure 1 shows the unit cells of the two component materials: LAO and TiO anatase. LAO is
alayered materialand along the(001)direction. TheplanesLaO andAlO havenominalcharges
of +1 and -1, respectively. TiO anatase is almost layered: the oxygen atoms are slightly out of
the Ti planes, as indicated by the small arrows in Fig. 1. Each plane has zero nominal charge, so
that theinterface withLAO will restructuredue to electrostatics eitherchanging thevalence ofTi
or by missing oxygen atoms. In this respect, our previous preliminary
work14 showed, using total energy calculations, that it is easier to remove an oxygen atom from
theanatasesideoftheinterfacethan fromtheLAOside.
Figure2showsthetwopossibleinterfaces,namelythetwowaysofstackingtoformthesuper-
lattice, that maintain the octahedral environment of the Ti atoms. Without oxygen vacancies, our
previous calculations14 showed that neither one has a magnetic solution. With oxygen vacancies
near the interface it is clear, due to electrostatics, that the AlO /TiO interface will be preferred
with respect to the LaO/TiO one. While there is only one way of stacking in which LaO faces
TiO , there are two ways with AlO facing TiO , that we name A and B. They are shown in
Fig. 3, that presents the super-lattice unit cells used in the present calculations. In order to have
all interfaces in the super-lattice either of type A or type B, 7 anatase planes and 5 LAO planes
are considered. If there are no oxygen vacancies, type A is clearly more stable, with lower total
energy, as Al-O bonds are formed at the interface due to the off plane oxygens in the anatase
structure. With oxygenvacancies,each distributionhas tobestudiedseparately.
The size of the super-cells is obtained by minimizing the total energy in each case, and the
atomic positions inside the cell are allowed to relax but only in the direction of the super-lattice.
The reason for this last restriction is based on our previous results, apart from making the cal-
culation more feasible. In fact, the calculations on pure bulk rutile TiO 11 showed that oxygen
vacancies can give rise to a local magnetic moment due to structural relaxation. However, this is
only true for a fairly large concentration of vacancies and for a fixed cell size, which means there
mustbesomerestrictiontothefullstructuralrelaxation. Wecouldnotfindasimilarresultforbulk
anatase TiO , but our assumption here is that the LAO substrate could impose such a structural
restrictiontotheanatasefilmthusgivingrisetomagneticsolutions. Therefore, thecalculationsin
the present paper are performed fixing the unit cell size in the direction normal to the stacking to
that of cubic LAO (lattice constant = 3.8 A˚) and relaxation is only allowed in the direction of the
super-lattice.
III. METHODOFCALCULATIONANDRESULTS
FortheDensityFunctionalTheory(DFT)18 calculationswehaveusedtheWien2kcode,19 that
is an implementation of the FPLAPW (full potential linear augmented plane waves) method, in
which the space is divided into muffin tin spheres around the atoms and an interstitial region.
Plane waves are used to describe the region outside the spheres. The number of plane waves in
the interstitial region is set by the cut-off parameter RK . In this work we use RK =7 that
correspondstoan energy cutoffof340 eV. Weconsiderboththelocal spindensityapproximation
LSDA20 and theLSDA+U21 one. The calculationis scalar relativisticand the atomicsphere radii
are taken to be small,so that the atomicspheres do not overlap when relaxing the structure. They
are 1.7 a.u. for Ti and Al, 1.4 a.u. for O and 2.5 a.u. for La. The number of k-points in the
Brillouin zone is 50 or 100 for the relaxation procedure and increased to 200 k-points for the
relaxed structure.
Figure 4 shows the densities of states calculated within LSDA for the component systems and
for the super-lattice. There are no magnetic solutions for any of these cases. The gap obtained
for anatase is 2.2 eV, to be compared with the experimental 3.2 eV, the gap for LAO is 4.3 eV to
be compared with the 5.6 eV experimental value. This feature of the LSDA approximation, that
gives small band gaps, can be corrected using the LSDA+U method or hybrid functionals22. The
LSDA+U approach introduces an additional term based on a simple Hubbard model for electron
on-site repulsion. This removes the self-interaction error by energetically penalising partial oc-
cupation of the relevant electronic states, at the price of introducing an empirical parameter in an
ab-initiocalculation.
Beforestudyingtheeffectofoxygenvacanciesattheinterface,westartwithbulkTiO . Figure
5 shows the densities of states of bulk TiO anatase with one oxygen vacancy in the unit cell, for
twodifferentconcentrationsandbothmethodsofcalculation,relaxingallstructuresseparately. No
magnetic solutions are found for any of these cases. A defect state appears inside the band gap,
tooclosetotheconductionbandintheLSDAapproximation,thusmakingthesystemmetallic. In
theLSDA+Uapproximation,usingU=5eV,thebandgapincreasesbyabout1eVandthesystem
becomes a semiconductor, as the defect state is separated from the conduction band. However,
usingonlyoneparameterU(forthed electronsofTi)itisnotpossibletofitboththeexperimental
bandgapandthepositionofthedefectstateinsidethegap(whichisat0.8eVfromtheconduction
band). It has been shown for reduced rutile TiO surfaces that a discontinuity appears for this
propertyas afunctionofUat 4eV and thatalargervalueis requiredto ensurethesemiconductor
characterofthesystemaswellasthecorrectpositionofthegapstate23. Atthispointitisimportant
toremarkthatinthepresentworkweconsideralargeconcentrationofvacanciesintheinterfaces,
with the defect state developing into an impurity band, and therefore the exact position of the
defect stateisnotso relevant.
Turningnowtovacanciesattheinterface,Fig.6showsthedensitiesofstatesforthesuper-cells
A and B of Fig. 3 when all oxygen atoms on the anatase side of the interface have been removed,
calculatedwithLSDAandwithLSDA+U.Thisextremecaseisveryinteresting,asthetotalenergy
ofsystemsAandBareequalwithinthecalculationerror(1mRy)butsystemBismagneticwhile
systemA isnot. Theonlydifference betweenthetwo structureslieson thesecondneighborlayer
of the interface, as shown by a dotted line in Fig. 3. The local distortion is similar in both cases,
producingaripplein theinter-facial AlO layer.
ThemagneticmomentincaseBismostlylocatedattheinter-facialTi,ascanbeseeninFig.7.
However,thetotaloccupationofthed orbitalsinthisTiatomisverysimilarincasesAandB,both
can be considered
, calculated with LSDA and LSDA+U. In both approximations, the defect
level widens to form a band that almost fills the band gap completely, due to the large number of
oxygenvacancies. Thiswidefeature insidetheband gapis alsofoundin XPSexperiments24.
IV. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSIONS
The results shown in the previous section call our attention to the following fact: oxygen va-
cancies lead to a change of valence in a nearby Ti atom turning it into
, but this does not
necessarily imply that the system will have a magnetic solution. Trying to understand this un-
expected result, we resort to the well known Stoner criterion. The main idea behind it is that
hybridizationandbandsplittingarecompetingmechanismstolowertheenergyofthesystem. For
this purpose we performed non-magnetic calculations of super-lattices A and B, in the unrelaxed
structures.
The results are shown in Figures 8, 9 and 10. The stronger hybridization in case A is quite
obvious in Fig. 8: the partial density of states of orbital d of the inter-facial Ti overlaps almost
completelywiththat correspondingto orbital d ofthesubsurface Ti. In case B, the Alatom that
is in the same position as the Ti subsurface atom, destroys this hybridization. It is the geometric
differencein secondneighborpositionswhichdrivesthesystemto amagneticsolution.
Anotherwayoflookingatthisisbyplottingthechargedensity,inanenergyrangeclosetothe
Fermi energy. Thisisshownin Fig. 9, and as expectedit isquitedifferent forbothstructures.
Fig.10showsthatthenon-magnetictotaldensityofstatesat theFermi levelislargerincaseB
thanin caseA, inagreement withthepresenceofmagnetism.
The study of this extreme example, with such a large number of inter-facial defects, shows
that oxygen vacancies and consequently the presence of
, are a necessary but not sufficient
condition to obtain magnetic solutions. This result may be related to the difficulty of producing
reproducibleexperimentalresults.
Acknowledgements
WeacknowledgesupportbyCONICETundergrantPIP112-200801-38,ANPCyTundergrant
PICT-06-157 and aCNRS-CONICET InternationalScientificCooperation Project (PICS).
Electronic address: weissman@cnea.gov.ar
† Electronic address: ferrari@tandar.cnea.gov.ar
‡ Electronic address: saul@ciman.univ-mrs.fr
1 Y.Matsumoto, T.Shono,T.Hasegawa,T.Fukumura,M.Kawasaki,P.Ajmet,T.Chikyow,S.Koshihara
andH.KoinumaScience (2001)291,854
2 M.Venkatesan, C.B.Fitzgerald, J.G.LunneyandJ.M.D.CoeyPhys.Rev.Lett.(2004)93,177206
3 R.Janisch, P.GopalandN.A.SpaldinJ.ofPhysics: Condensed Matter(2005)17,R657
4 S.Duhalde,M.F.Vignolo,F.Golmar,C.Chilotte,C.E.R.Torres,L.Errico,A.F.Cabrera,M.Renteria,
F.SanchezandM.Weissmann.Phys.Rev.B(2005)72,R161313
5 M.Venkatesan, C.B.Fitzgerald andJ.M.D.Coey,Nature(2004)430,630
6 S.D.Yoon,Y.Chen,A.Yang,T.L.Goodrich,X.Zuo,K.Ziemer,C.VittoriaandV.HarrisJ.Mag.Mag.
Materials (2007)309,171
7 A.Hassini, J.Sakai,J.S.LopezandN.H.HongPhysicsLettersA(2008)372,3299
8 S.A.ChambersSurf.Sci.Rep.(2006)61,345
9 C.Sudakar,P.Kharel,R.Suryanarayanan, J.S.Thakur,V.M.Naik,R.NaikandG,Lawes,J.Mag.and
Mag.Materials(2008) 320,L31
10 L.Errico,M.RenteriaandM.WeissmannPhys.Rev.B(2005)72,184425
11 M.WeissmannandL.Errico,PhysicaB(2007)398,179
12 G.Pacchioni, J.Chem.Phys.(2008)128,182505 andreferences therein
13 D.Kim,J.Hong,Y.R.ParkandK.J.Kim,J.Phys: Condens. Matter(2009)21,195405
14 M.WeissmannandV.Ferrari,J.Phys.Conf.Series(2009)167,012060
15 R.I.EglitisandD.Vanderbilt, Phys.Rev.B(2007)76,155439 andPhys.Rev.B(2008)77,195408
16 M.S.Park,S.H.RhimandA.J.FreemanPhys.Rev.B(2006)74,205416
17 R.PentchevaandW.E.Pickett,Phys.Rev.B(2008)78,205106
18 P.Hohenberg andW.Kohn,Phys.Rev.(1964)136.B864
19 P.Blaha,K.Schwarz,G.K.H.Madsen,D.Kvasnicka,andJ.Luitz,WIEN2k,AnAugmentedPlaneWave
+ Local Orbitals Program for Calculating Crystal Properties (Karlheinz Schwarz, Techn. Universitt
Wien,Austria),2001. ISBN3-9501031-1-2.
20 J.P.PerdewandY.Wang,Phys.Rev.B(1992)45,13244
21 V. I. Anisimov, I. V. Solovyev, M. A. Korotin, M. T. Czyzyk and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B (1993)
22 G.Pacchioni, J.Chem.Phys.(2008)128,182505
23 B.J.MorganandG.W.Watson,Surf.Sci.(2007)601,5034
24 A. Rumaiz, B. Ali, B. Ceylan, M. Boggs, T. Beebe and S. Ismat Shah Solid State Comm. (2007) 144,
FIG.1: Unitcellsofthetwocomponentmaterialsinbulk: LAO(left)andTiO anatase(right). Thearrows
ontheoxygen atomsofanataseindicate theoff-planedisplacement withrespecttotheTiplane.
.. .
AlO2 TTii TTii
.
FIG.2: Schematic diagram ofthetwopossible waysofstacking toformasuper-lattice: AlO facing TiO
(left)andLaOfacingTiO (right). Thedottedlinesindicatetheposition oftheinterfaces.
FIG. 3: Unit cells of the two super-lattices considered in this work. Due to the off-plane oxygens in the
anatase structure and also to the differences inthe second neighbor structure (shown by dotted lines) there
aretwotypesofAlO /TiO interfaces, A(left)andB(right).
-4 -2 0 2 4 6
E - E (eV)
FIG. 4: Calculated densities of states of: (a) bulk TiO anatase (b) bulk LAO, (c) Super-lattice with
AlO /TiO interfaces (relaxedstructure).
-4 -2 0 2 4
-4 -2 0 2 4
E - E (eV)
FIG.5: Calculateddensitiesofstatesofbulkanatase,withtwodifferentconcentrationsofoxygenvacancies
intheLSDAandLSDA+Uapproximations (U=5eV).Thestructure isrelaxedseparately ineachcase.
-4 -2 0 2 4
-4 -2 0 2 4
-4 -2 0 2 4
-4 -2 0 2 4
E - E (eV)
FIG.6: Calculateddensitiesofstatesofsuper-lattices A(left)andB(right)inFig.3. withnooxygenatoms
in the Ti side of the interface, using the LSDA (top) and LSDA+U (bottom) approximations (U = 5 eV).
Case A is not magnetic, so that the contributions of both spin types have been added. In case B we show
spin up and spin down contributions separately, the magnetic moment of the unit cell is 2.7 m and inside
themuffintinofeachinter-facial Tiitis0.65 m .
Charge Spin
FIG. 7: Charge and spin density maps for super-lattice B, near the AlO /TiO interface with 2 oxygen
vacancies. The effect of relaxation is too small to be seen in this scale, but the AlO plane is buckled.
Magnetism is mostly localized at the inter-facial Ti atom, spin isolines in the figure start at 0.01 and are
spaced by 0.03. Charge isolines start at 0.1 and are spaced 0.1, The interface is indicated by a dotted
horizontal line.
-2 -1 0 1 2
E - E (eV)
-2 -1 0 1 2
E - E (eV)
sub−surface Ti
sub−surface Ti
.
Ti3+ interface Ti interface Ti Ti3+
interface Ti dx -y
interface Ti dxz
sub-surface Ti dz
FIG. 8: Non-magnetic calculations for super-lattices A (left) and B (right). Top: atomic structures in the
proximity oftheinterfaces. Bottom: localdensities ofstatesforanenergy rangeclosetotheFermienergy.
Dotted line: d of the inter-facial Ti, broken line: d of the inter-facial Ti and full line: d of the
x2−y2 xz z2
subsurface Tiatom. Interface A shows a much stronger hybridization (bonding) between orbitals of inter-
facialandsubsurface Tiatoms.
FIG.9: ChargedensitiesatinterfacesA(left)andB(right)intheenergyrangeE −0.5eV<E<E ,plotted
foryz-planeofFig.8. Theisolines startat0.04andarespacedby0.02.
FIG.10: Calculatednonmagnetictotaldensitiesofstatesforsuper-lattices A(fullline)andB(dottedline).
At the Fermi level their values are 7.2 for case A and 11.5 for case B, indicating that case B has a larger
probability ofbeingmagnetic.