1v3268.0141:viXra
Addressing the non-functional requirements of computer
vision systems: A case study
Shannon Fenna, Alexandre Mendesa, David Buddenb
aSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Faculty of Engineering and Built Environment,
The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia.
{Shannon.Fenn,Alexandre.Mendes}@newcastle.edu.au
bSystems Biology Laboratory,
Melbourne School of Engineering,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
David.Budden@unimelb.com.au
Computervisionplaysamajorroleintheroboticsindustry, wherevisiondata
is frequently used for navigation and high-level decision making. Although
there is significant research in algorithms and functional requirements, there
isa comparative lackofemphasis onhowbest tomapthese abstract concepts
onto an appropriate software architecture.
In this study, we distinguish between the functional and non-functional
requirements ofacomputervisionsystem. UsingaRoboCuphumanoidrobot
system as a case study, we propose and develop a software architecture that
fulfills the latter criteria.
The modifiability of the proposed architecture is demonstrated by de-
tailing a number of feature detection algorithms and emphasizing which as-
pects of the underlying framework were modified to support their integra-
tion. To demonstrate portability, we port our vision system (designed for
an application-specific DARwIn-OP humanoid robot) to a general-purpose,
Raspberry Pi computer. We evaluate performance on both platforms and
compare them to a vision system optimised for functional requirements only.
The architecture and implementation presented in this study provide a
highly generalisable framework for computer vision system design that is
of particular benefit in research and development, competition and other
environments in which rapid system evolution is necessary.
Keywords: Computer vision; software architecture; robotics
Preprint submitted to Journal of Systems and Software October 18, 2018
1. Introduction
There is currently significant research into developing and optimising the
functional requirements (e.g., feature detection and classification) of com-
puter vision systems, both within the multi-billion dollar robotics indus-
try [1, 2, 3, 4] and the more general field of industrial automation [5, 6, 7].
Many of these application domains lend themselves to the initial develop-
ment of a highly-specialised computer vision system, without the need for
modifiability, extensibility or portability as design considerations. However,
other domains (e.g., robot soccer) have particular need to foster innovation
in these additional non-functional requirements, due to the rapid evolution
of both cutting-edge hardware and the physical domain itself [8]. Despite the
clear importanceofthese requirements, thereis currently anotablelack ofre-
search and practical guidelines on how best to map them onto anappropriate
software architecture.
Inthisstudy, weproposeatwo-layeredarchitecturewithinterface,control
and data storage components in the top layer; plus all the components for
feature detection in the bottom layer. The system promotes hardware inde-
pendence by having a specific interface component to communicate with the
camera and other sensors; modifiability by adopting a modular approach for
the implementation of the algorithms; and efficiency, with the introduction
of a controller module to use those algorithms in a more intelligent fashion.
Using the vision system of the NUbots humanoid RoboCup team [9, 10]1 as
a case study, we demonstrate how the proposed architecture both:
• addresses thenon-functionalrequirements ofmodifiability, extensibility
and portability; and
• enables the rapid development and integration of feature detection al-
gorithms to better address the functional requirements of a rapidly-
evolving domain (e.g., robot soccer).
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the two plat-
forms used for evaluating the proposed architecture. Section 3 describes the
designs of both original and new vision systems, both in terms of functional
(algorithms) and non-functional (architecture) requirements. In Section 4
we describe the image data and the algorithms for feature detection used
in our tests. Then, in Section 5 we present the computational results for
performance related to the functional requirements for the system. In Sec-
tion 5.2 we explain the porting of the new system from the DARwIn-OP to
a Raspberry Pi platform; followed by a discussion of our main findings and
their implications in computer vision system design.
2. The DARwIn-OP and the Raspberry Pi platforms
Portability is one of the key non-functional requirements for software sys-
tems designed to be used in hardware dependent environments. Continuous
progress in robotics frequently raises the difficult question of when to change
platforms to better take advantage of such advances [11]. For instance, the
University of Newcastle robotic soccer team has changed platforms twice
since 2002 – first, from the Sony Aibo2 to the Aldebaran NAO3, and then to
the Robotis DARwIn-OP4. Each of those required a major overhaul of the
entire software system; mainly due to changes in sensors, motors, and the
adaptation of higher level procedures such as walking and kicking, which are
platform-specific.
The vision system described in this paper was designed for utilisation on
multiple platforms with as little re-design as possible. In order to demon-
strate portability, it was tested with two platforms: the DARwIn-OP andthe
Raspberry Pi. The DARwIn-OP features a 1.6 GHz Intel Atom Z530 with 4
GB of RAM, Ubuntu operating system, a Logitech C905 camera, plus actu-
ators, sensors, etc. The main requirement on the vision system imposed by
the platform was efficiency, due to the low-power, single-core processor. Two
other main requirements were flexibility and modifiability. The system will
be used in future RoboCup competitions, and game rules typically change
every year to make the matches more realistic. Historically, most of those
changes impact either vision or behavior.
The second platform tested was a Raspberry Pi, which is a credit card-
sized, single-board computer. It has an ARM1176JZF-S 700 MHz processor
with 512 MB of RAM and Ubuntu operating system. It can be connected to
a standard USB webcam, keyboard and monitor, and was developed mainly
for educational purposes5. Porting to a Raspberry Pi platform creates a few
challenges from the software architecture perspective. Due to the lack of
sensors and motors attached to it, the vision system has to be adapted to
obtain that data from so-called mock components that will mimic the be-
haviour of the real hardware. Further, since the system must be be moved
without its partner components (Localisation, Behaviour and Locomotion)
the usual external communication infrastructure is missing. The less modi-
fications required, the easier the porting process.
3. Original and new vision systems architectures
Software architecture is the high level description of a software system.
Its main goal is to describe the system’s components and their interactions;
howfunctionalrequirements mapontothem; andhownon-functionalrequire-
ments are promoted. The design of the software architecture is arguably the
first step in the software design process, preceding the definition of classes
and data structures and, of course, the coding process itself [12, 13]. In this
section we present the architecture diagrams and overviews of the original
and new vision systems. We compare their main features and justify the pros
and cons of the design decisions in each of them.
3.1. Original vision system
The original vision system was first designed in 2002 and implements a
pipeline architecture, due to the highly inter-dependent nature of the various
components. Since then, it has undergone several improvements in terms of
functional requirements, but the architecture remained the same. A diagram
of its main components is shown in Figure 1. The inputs to the system come
from three sources:
• The image stream from the camera, represented by the external com-
ponent ‘Camera’;
• Kinematics data fromtheLocomotionsystem, stored inthe component
‘System Blackboard’;
• The colour classification lookup table, also stored in the System Black-
board.
The sole requirement of the vision system is to take these inputs and
determine the relative locations of predefined field objects; e.g., ball and
goalposts. That information will then be accessed by the Behaviour system
to determine the next action the robot should take. The pipeline design was
useful as it allowed for the maximum efficiency by minimising the overhead
Green Horizon
Segmentation
Classifier
Blackboard
Categorize
Form Lines /
Robot Points
Robot Detection
Line Detection
Goal Detection
Ball Detection Behaviour
Figure 1: Originalvisionsystem architecture design: The architecturalstyle is a pipeline,
due to the highly inter-dependency nature of its components. Even though it promotes
efficiencybyminimisingtheoverheadthatwouldbepresentinamorerobustarchitecture,
itbecomesinflexibleasitforcesthesequentialapplicationofeveryobjectdetector. Notice
alsothe high-dependency onthe externalSystemBlackboardmodule -7outof9modules
rely on its interface.
that would be present in a more robust architecture. It is however fairly
inflexibleanddoesnotreadilyallowforparallelprocessing, whichwillbecome
a reality when platform power demands decrease and multi-core chipsets are
used. Another significant drawback of the original system is that it enforces
the application of every processing stage, for every frame. This translates
into unnecessary processing in situations where, for instance, there are only
one or two features of interest (e.g., ball and goals). In addition, the lack of
a data wrapper created the dependency of 7 out of 9 modules, on the System
Blackboard interface, as can be seen in Figure 1.
3.2. New vision system
The new vision system was designed with a focus on modularity, porta-
bility and modifiability (see Figure 2). Vision has to communicate with
three external components - Behaviour System, Camera and System Black-
board. As the name indicates, the Behaviour system determines how the
robot should behave and which action to take next. Camera represents the
robot’s on-board camera. The System Blackboard module contains infor-
mation about the environment and the robot itself; and can be accessed by
any of the other three systems of the robot’s software, namely Behaviour,
Locomotion and Localisation.
Communication between the vision system and the three external com-
ponents in the new design is achieved by the Control Wrapper and Data
Wrapper modules. The Control Wrapper is an external interface and allows
Behaviour to access and control several elements of the vision system. By
designing this interface through a wrapper we trade a very slight decrease
in efficiency (through a small number of redundant method calls) for a sig-
nificant increase in modifiability. This modifiability comes as the Control
Wrapper is the only module that needs to change for the system to be in-
voked in any different way (that is, provided the change does not require the
vision system’s internal behaviour to be extensively modified).
The Data Wrapper allows the vision system to access the external data it
needs (image frames, kinematic data, etc). The same reasoning for modelling
the control interface as a wrapper is applicable for the data interface - small
reductions in efficiency allow for a more modifiable design. This approach
also allows for data validity to be maintained as simply as possible. The
Data Wrapper is responsible for maintaining a copy of the relevant data
accessed at the same time as the current frame, insulating the system against
poorly maintained external data structures. For instance, if any sensor data
Control Data
Wrapper Wrapper
Controller Blackboard
Transition Obstacle
Filter Detection
Scanline Ball Line Green Horizon
Classifier Detection Detection Detection
Behaviour System
System Camera Blackboard
Figure2: Newvisionsystemarchitecturedesign: Noticethetwo-layersystem,withthetop
layer concentrating all external communication into two wrapper modules. The top layer
alsocontainsaControllermodulethataccessesthebottomlayer’sprocessingstages;anda
Blackboardmodulethatstoreslocallyallinformationrequiredbythoseprocessingstages,
as well as their results. The system is considerably more flexible, easier to maintain and
to modify. It also allows for the Controller module to determine which processing stages
should be applied, resulting in better flexibility.
is updated on the System Blackboard by, say, the locomotion system whilst
the vision system is still analysing a frame, the Data Wrapper still has a
local copy. This decouples the data responsibilities of the various systems
and ensures Vision is as robust as possible to external changes.
Having these interfaces as wrappers has one extra advantage: rapid test-
ing. Either wrapper can be replaced by a stub providing dummy data, invok-
ing the vision system with extra debugging information. This also allowed
for the system to be quickly integrated into the Raspberry Pi platform, inter-
facing with a stand-alone web camera, without kinematic or sensor data, in a
near seamless fashion. Indeed, most of the vision system implementation and
testing was made on a desktop PC, without using the real robotic platform.
However, it is important to emphasize that the computational tests numbers
presented in this paper indeed reflect the performance of the system on the
DARwIn-OP and Raspberry Pi platforms.
The Controller module calls the processing stages in order; and stages
can be optionally ignored; e.g., ball or goalpost detection. This allows for
current stateknowledge toincrease theefficiency of thesystem. Forexample,
consider the situation where the Localisation system has a high certainty of
the robot location, but a low certainty of the ball location. In that case, it
does not need any landmark information to determine where the robot is;
and the vision’s priority becomes simply to identify and locate the ball as
quick as possible. By suppressing goalpost and line detections, the vision
system reduces its processing time, freeing up resources for other parts of
the software.
The Blackboard module was implemented following the singleton pat-
tern[14]. Thiswasfortwo reasons: theblackboardisasingleobject through-
out the vision system and it should not be possible for multiple copies to be
instantiated; and it allows for simple access in the form of a static access
method, improving performance. The Blackboard module is a central repos-
itory of current state information, specifically for the vision system; and each
processing stage can request any input information needed from it and posts
results back. This increases the complexity of the system somewhat by re-
quiring correct process order to be maintained by a controller, but allows for
rapid reordering of independent stages and incorporation of new stages.
In additionto the two wrappers, and Blackboard andController modules,
there are seven processing modules, namely Scanline Classifier, Transition
Filter, Line Detection, Green Horizon Detection, Ball Detection, Goalpost
Detection and Obstacle Detection. Those are called sequentially by the Con-
troller to carry out the tasks necessary to identify elements and features in
the soccer field and allow the robot to play correctly.
4. Experimental design
In this section, we describe the dataset used to compare the two vision
systems and the algorithms for feature detection. The image stream was
a collage of five typical playing scenarios - two of them were recorded in a
laboratory environment (with a full indoor field), and three were recorded at
previous RoboCup competitions. The total time is 5 minutes - equivalent to
9,000 image frames. Each of the five image streams is continuous and was
taken at 30 frames-per-second, exactly the same condition of a real soccer
match. All elements normally observed in a match, such as the ball, field
lines, other robots and goalposts are present. The five scenarios along with
a short description is given next:
• Lab 1: Controlled environment at the lab. Occasional variable light-
ing and image quality. Background noise is present but minimal field
occlusion.
• Lab 2: Controlled environment at the lab, taken after lighting change
to a more stable condition. There is little to no variability in image
quality or lighting, and no occlusion.
• Difficult: Stream with poor lighting, poor image quality and significant
field occlusion, where objects of interest are difficult, or impossible to
classifycorrectly. ThestreamwastakenononeofthefieldsatRoboCup
2012, in Mexico City.
• RC 2012: This stream was also recorded during RoboCup 2012, on a
field with a prominent lighting intensity gradient from one end to the
other. The lighting variability complicates the task of feature classifi-
cation. Varying image quality and background noise.
• RC 2013: Stream recorded during RoboCup 2013, in The Netherlands.
Predominantly high quality images with consistent lighting. Also con-
tains a large number of opponent robots and human obstacles; e.g.,
referees and team captains.
4.1. Green horizon detection
Green horizon detection is a procedure used to improve the system’s per-
formance by determining which parts of the image are relevant or not. All
objects of interest are within the field, which has a green colour; everything
else can be considered noise for soccer playing purposes e.g., walls, crowds,
etc. (see Figure 3).
Figure 3: Camera frame and green horizon detection results: The image is a real frame
captured by the DARwIn-OP onboard camera of the playing field. It shows several im-
portant features - ball, goalposts, another robot and several field lines. Notice that all
those features can still be detected if we consider only the part of the image below the
so-called green horizon; i.e., the point where the field ends. The blue line indicates the
true horizon, obtained from kinematics information about the robot’s head angle. The
vertical lines are scanlines used to determine where the green pixels start (marked by the
magenta markers). Finally, the green horizon is calculated as the top segments of the
convex hull associated to those markers.
The only objects of interest which might extend above the green horizon
are the goalposts, and they are detected using a less computationally inten-
sive method (see Sections 4.2 and 4.3.2). The procedure to determine the
greenhorizonisasfollows. First, itrequests thelocationoftherealhorizonin
screen coordinates, calculated using a forward kinematics chain model and a
camera projection, from the external Blackboard module. The method then
scans the image downwards from this horizon using evenly-spaced, vertical
scan-lines to determine where the first green pixels start - and stores those
points (indicated with magenta markers in Figure 3). The green horizon is
calculated as the upper convex hull formed from those points. The procedure
is very fast (O(n)) and robust to features blocking parts of the horizon (e.g.,
the robot in Figure 3), as well as being capable of handling the changing
geometry of the green border in the camera frame.
4.2. Scanline classifier and colour segmentation
Thisstageisapre-processtoallobjectdetection procedures. Itcomprises
an image scan followed by a segmentation for specific colour sections [15].
Due to time constraints we do not segment the entire image. Instead, we
separate the image into below/above green horizon areas. For the area below
thegreen horizon, vertical andhorizontal scan lines, evenly-spaced by a small
number of pixels, are considered for sequential pixels of the same colour.
Theseformsegmentswhicharethebasisforallfurtherfilteringanddetection,
and are stored in a special data structure in the vision system’s Blackboard
module. Fortheareaoftheimageabovegreenhorizon, weonlyusehorizontal
scanlines, as the only features of interest in that region are the goalposts.
Figure 4 shows the result of the scanline and colour segmentation procedures
applied to a typical image of the playing field.
4.3. Feature detection
Colour transitions form the input to all feature detection algorithms ex-
cept for obstacle (e.g., robot) detection. Each of these processes take the
Figure 4: Scanline classifierand colour segmentationare used as a pre-processingstep for
the detection algorithms. Vertical and horizontal scan lines are considered for sequential
pixels of the same colour, which are indicative of objects of interest. In the image, the
greenhorizonisrepresentedbythemagentaline,andscanlinesareusedtodetecttheball,
goalpostsand fieldlines. In orderto reduce computationaltime, the areabelow the green
horizon uses both vertical and horizontal scanlines for better accuracy. The area above
the green horizon is scanned using horizontal lines only, and only if there was a goalpost
detected below the horizon.
transitions which have been mapped to their corresponding field objects,
and apply a combination of clustering, filtering and model-fitting techniques
to identify valid objects.
4.3.1. Ball
Balldetection usesthegeometricmeanofthepixels’ locationsforalltran-
sitions that might represent a ball; followed by a 4-point occlusion detection
method. Valid transitions representing a ball are “orange→all colours” or
“all colours→orange”. The method is very efficient; accurate in terms of
distance-to-ball estimation; and robust to partial occlusion (up to 50%) of
the ball [16].
4.3.2. Goalposts
Goals are integral to the localisation of the robot. They are large, static
and monochromatic features; and therefore are relatively simple to extract.
Valid transitions representing a goalpost are “yellow→all colours” or “all
colours→yellow”.
The statistical model fitting method RANdom Sample And Consensus
(RANSAC) is used to fit lines (further detail in Section 4.3.4) to the filtered
transitions - thus detecting the vertical edges of the post which are typically
very clear. That step is then followed by a simple heuristic to pair the lines
into post objects [17]. This procedure is able to reliably handle images with
no posts and goal-coloured noise in the background as well as those with one
or two posts in the frame.
4.3.3. Obstacles
Obstacles are found by considering breaks in the green horizon. The first
green pixel markers used for constructing the green horizon that are not
in the convex hull are sent to list of obstacle candidates. For instance, in
Figure 3, those would be markers 2, 3 and 4, counted from left to right. If
there are at least α consecutive scans where the markers do not belong to the
green horizon, then the set of scans forms a potential obstacle. The width is
determined from the outer scanlines, and the base of the obstacle from the
lowest scan.
4.3.4. Field lines
Field lines are an important source of information for the robot to localise
itself in the field. They are visible from most field positions, as opposed to
landmarks that can often be absent due to the small camera field of view.
Any “white→all colours” or “all colours→white” transition might represent
a line border. The vision system uses the RANSAC algorithm mentioned in
Section 4.3.2 [17] due to its resilience to noise and, in particular, extreme
numbers of outliers; which makes it effective for finding multiple models
within a single dataset. For more information about additional computer
vision methods and an overview of related algorithms applied to robotic
soccer, we refer the reader to reference [18].
5. Computational results
This section is divided into two parts. The first one describes a perfor-
mance comparison between original and new versions of the vision system.
The second part explains the process to port the new vision system from the
DARwIn-OP to the Raspberry Pi platform.
5.1. Performance comparison
To conduct a performance comparison between the two versions of the
vision system, we ran a series of tests using the dataset described in Section 4
on the DARwIn-OP platform. The goal was to measure the average time to
process each image frame, thus determining if the increase in flexibility and
portability came at the cost of reduced efficiency. The mean and standard
deviation of the processing times for each image frame are shown in Table 1.
The results show an average reduction of 35.5% in processing time be-
tween original and new vision systems. The original vision system was al-
ready capable of faster than real-time image processing, achieving a mean
framerateof52fps. Thenewsystem increased thatframerateto80fps. The
improvement in the performance resulted from three sources, listed below.
• A better architecture design that reduced communication overhead;
• A focus on intelligent data reduction in earlier processing stages to
reduce the input size to later, more complex algorithms, and;
• The principled application of specialised data structures to store infor-
mation about the several objects needed during the several stages of
image processing and object detection.
Table 1: Performance comparison between the original and the new vision systems. The
figures represent the average total time (standard deviations are in subscript, between
brackets) required to process a single frame on the DARwIn-OP platform. Notice that
the processing time was already well below 30ms, indicating that the original system
did achieve above real-time image processing. However, the new system is 54% faster,
primarily due to better data handling and reduced overhead.
Original vision system New vision system
Image stream Number of frames in ms per frame in ms per frame
Lab 1 5090 18.73 (3.89) 13.37 (3.04)
Lab 2 470 25.95 (4.63) 8.29 (2.35)
Difficult 175 9.68 (1.70) 7.21 (1.15)
RC 2012 2640 20.31 (5.32) 12.56 (2.81)
RC 2013 625 18.97 (3.58) 10.04 (2.09)
9000 19.41 (4.85) 12.52 (3.24)
5.2. Porting to the Raspberry Pi platform
AportfromtheDARwIn-OPtotheRaspberryPiplatformwasconducted
to demonstrate the portability and flexibility of the new vision system. To
emulate the behaviour of the DARwIn-OP platform in the Raspberry Pi, a
modification external to the new vision system had to be made.
Forresultstobecomparable, modificationstothecameraaccesssectionof
the Data Wrapper were made to provide the vision system with pre-recorded
frames captured on the DARwIn-OP platform. This same modification was
made to the version run on the DARwIn-OP and a similar change was made
to the original system - so that the comparison between implementations was
fair.
In addition to that external change, the internal changes were as follows:
• The Data Wrapper class was modified to provide the system with
‘dummy’ kinematics data and other system data, as there was no phys-
ical robot with motors, camera or other sensors attached to the Rasp-
berry Pi. This required less than a fifth of the methods to be modified
or removed.
• The Control Wrapper class was modified so that the system was more
easily used as a stand-alone process instead of as a submodule. As
this is a relatively small interface, all seven methods were modified or
removed in the transition.
The only difference between the DARwIn-OP and the Raspberry Pi test
results was the performance, as expected, due to the different processors in
the platforms. Beyond the reduced CPU capacity, the Raspberry Pi also has
a number of other limiting factors including possessing only a quarter of the
system memory of the DARwIn-OP. The new vision system running in the
RaspberryPiachievedanaverageframerateof23fps(seeTable2), overape-
riodof5minutesofimagecapturingandprocessing(9000frames). Compared
to the 80 fps rate obtained in the DARwIn-OP platform, that represents a
decrease of 70%, in line with the processing power difference between the
processors. The accuracy and reliability of the new vision system remained
the same, as expected, since there were no changes in functionality. Porting
the whole new vision system took less than 6 hours of re-implementation and
testing, and affected only two of its modules: the Data Wrapper and Control
Wrapper modules. The Data Wrapper had 101 lines of code changed (53%
of the code), in 12 of 34 methods; and the Control Wrapper had 17 lines of
code changed (59% of the code), in 5 of 5 methods.
Table 2: Performance comparison between the new vision system implementation on the
DARwIn-OP and Raspberry Pi platforms. Similarly to Table 1, the figures represent the
average total time (standard deviations are in subscript, between brackets) required to
process a single frame.
DARwIn-OP Raspberry Pi
performance in performance in
Image stream Number of frames ms per frame ms per frame
Lab 1 5090 13.37 (3.04) 44.52 (7.65)
Lab 2 470 8.29 (2.35) 47.01 (12.18)
Difficult 175 7.21 (1.15) 12.11 (1.41)
RC 2012 2640 12.56 (2.81) 47.94 (16.89)
RC 2013 625 10.04 (2.09) 28.04 (4.16)
9000 12.52 (3.24) 43.88 (12.97)
Alargefactorinthesechangeswasthereplacementofcodewhichaccessed
the external system blackboard or communicated with the Localisation sys-
tem, with code to generate mock data and communicate with the Raspberry
Pi peripherals. For example, the method that provides the system with an
artificialhorizonbasedonkinematicdata(seeSection4.1), wasreplacedwith
a stub that provided a hard-coded horizon at the top of the image frame (so
that the image was processed fully, regardless of the declination of the cam-
era during capture). After this experiment, it becomes clear that when the
vision system is ported to a new, more advanced platform in the future, it
should be a relatively straightforward task.
6. Discussion
Whilst the system, as presented, is tailored for soccer scenarios, it is a
generic architecture that can support more complex settings; e.g., multiple
feature detectors, either simple and self-contained modules, or complex sub-
systems comprised of several independent stages. Any colour-based design
can also take advantage of the existing segment and transition filter pre-
processing components.
It should be noted that there has been no leveraging of parallelism within
this design. Parallelism, as an oft-noted inherent aspect of vision processing,
couldbewellutilisedwithinthearchitectureforsignificant performancegains
- both fine grained within individual algorithms, as well as course grained
between independent modules. This would form a valuable direction for
enhancing the architecture, allowing the use of more complex detection al-
gorithms as higher performance parallel computing becomes more available
to low power platforms.
In addition to these non-functional improvements, Table 1 shows that the
new system markedly outperforms the previous system in multiple scenarios,
including competition venues, intentionally noisy images and the laboratory
environment. As computational resources on mobile platforms are restricted,
this efficiency increase can pose a significant gain in the functional perfor-
mance of the robot.
This design is not without its drawbacks though. The flexibility of the
internal blackboard patternallows for coding mistakes during modificationof
the controller to break the system flow (as there is no dependency constraint
inthedesign). Futuremodificationstothesystemneedtobecarefultoensure
the data expected by a later-stage module is provided to the blackboard in
the expected form.
A further drawback is the use of singleton classes. These were included in
order to reduce the communication overhead involved in passing references to
the internal Blackboard and Data Wrapper objects, by instead having them
accessible via a static getInstance() method. This choice however means
that utilising multiple cameras with this system will require architectural
redesign or careful data management as simply instantiating two distinct
versions of the system is not possible. This is a potential direction for further
improvement.
The new vision system and the five image streams are available for down-
load as supplementary material6.
7. Conclusion
In this study, we have proposed, implemented and evaluated a software
architecture design for general computer vision systems to address the non-
functional requirements of modifiability, extensibility and portability. In ad-
dition to demonstrating the fulfillment of these criteria, we further demon-
strate that a computer vision system optimised for non-functional require-
ments can yield improved performance (quantified as execution time to pro-
cess image frames).
We selected RoboCup humanoid robot soccer as an example of a do-
main subject to rapidly-evolving, domain-specific requirements, in which
non-functional requirements are particularly critical. The vision system de-
tailed in this study has been successfully applied by two-time world cham-
pionRoboCupteamNUbotsduringthe2013(Netherlands) and2014(Brazil)
competitions7. We propose that the underlying software architecture is read-
ily extensible to a far wider range of computer vision domains, and moreover,
that the complementary development of systems to address both functional
andnon-functionalrequirementsiscriticaltofuturecomputervisionresearch.
8. References