Age-sensitive bibliographic coupling
with an application in the history of science
Sándor Soós
Dept. of Science Policy and Scientometrics, Library of the Hungarian Academy of
soossand@caesar.elte.hu
Abstract. In science mapping, bibliographic coupling (BC) has been a standard tool for
discovering the cognitive structure of research areas, such as constituent subareas,
directions, schools of thought, or paradigms. Modelled as a set of documents, research
areas are often sorted into document clusters via BC representing a thematic unit each.
In this paper we propose an alternative method called age-sensitive bibliographic
coupling: the aim is to enable the standard method to produce historically valid thematic
units, that is, to yield document clusters that represent the historical development of the
thematic structure of the subject as well. As such, the method is expected to be especially
beneficial for investigations on science dynamics and the history of science. We apply
the method within a bibliometric study in the modern history of bioscience, addressing
the development of a complex, interdisciplinary discourse called the Species Problem. As
a result, a quantitative and qualitative comparison of the standard and the proposed
method of bibliographic coupling will be reported, together with a pilot study on the
cognitive–historical structure of the Species Problem, regarding an important fragment
of the discourse.
Keywords: bibliographic coupling, science mapping, history of science, science
dynamics, species problem, citation analysis
Introduction
Bibliographic coupling (BC) is a long-established method in science mapping. Its main
aim is to detect, within a set of publications, groups or clusters that share a common
intellectual background, and, therefore, can be conceived as each representing a
particular research problem, program, approach or school, depending on the
interpretation. To this effect, the method relies on references, usually conceptualized as
conveying the intellectual background of the corresponding papers. The basic principle
is that the relatedness of any two papers is a function of the number of references they
have in common.
Since the introduction of the method within bibliometrics (Kessler 1963), the method of
BC has been effectively applied in many contexts, basically in its original form. In this
paper we propose a refinement of BC that takes into account a further parameter of
common references: beyond their (usually normalized) number it also incorporates the
(respective) age of them. We call this method age-sensitive bibliographic coupling. The
reason for and our expectations on this alteranative method is best communicated with
the help of an analogy from biological systematics.
A striking similarity between reference-based science mapping and evolutionary
biosystematics is that both attempts to detect groups of related actors based on common
ancestors. In the case of science mapping, biological descendancy is to be replaced by
citation links, or „intellectual descendancy”: a reference can be viewed as an ancestor of
the citing document. However, as a disanalogy, biosystematics defines the degree of
relatedness as conditional on the „age” of common ancestors: on the evolutionary
timescale, the more ancient their common ancestor is, the less related two species are,
while the more recently they originated from a common predecessor, the closer they
stand in systematics. As a result, biosystematics is capable of setting up a categorization
where groups also reflect the history of their formation.
We claim that these considerations can be adopted for bibliographic coupling as well to
gain similar advantages. Our modified basic principle of BC, therefore, would formulate
in the following way: the more recent references any two papers have in common, the
higher the degree of their relatedness is. That is, the (intellectual or cognitive)
relatedness of any two papers is a function of the (1) number and the (2) age of
references they have in common.
Addressing the age of references in bibliometrics is, by far, not a new idea,—consider,
for example, the classical Price index (Price 1970), conveying the age distribution of the
intellectual background—nor is the assumption that the subset of references published
more recently is indicative of the particular direction of research a paper belongs to, as
contrasted to „older” references, characterizing the broader thematic context. However,
approaches linking these observations to bibliographic coupling have been rather rare.
One such example is the study of (van Raan 2005), addressing the behavior of BC. For a
sample of documents to be structured by the method, Raan partitioned the set of
aggregated references into two age groups based on two consecutive time windows,
producing a cohort of „old” references and another of „young” references. The
application of BC on sample documents using the old cohort and the young cohort,
respectively, resulted in similarity networks within the sample with different structural
characteristics (degree distribution). Based on these results, Raan argued that the young
cohort, that is, recent references, is better suited to classify documents according to their
intellectual relatedness, which is in accord with the assuption on the role of immediate
cognitive ancestors.
As contrasted to this latter approach, our goal is not to filter the set of references so that
an improved precision of clustering could be achieved via BC, reflecting exclusively the
closest and most timely relations. Instead, we aim at the „whole picture”, inside which all
relations are made visible, but still (historically) distinguishable: relying on the entire,
unfiltered (and aggreageted) list of referred works, we intend to incorporate age as a
factor into the method, and potentially obtain clusters being differentiated in this
respect: some reflecting a closer, some looser internal historical relatedness. The
rationale behind is the same as in the case of biosystematics: by age-sensitive
bibliographic coupling we expect to map a research area not only in terms of „thematic
directions”, but by revealing real, hitorically (causally) connected parts of the discourse.
That is, by finding groups reflecting the history of the problem, we aim contribute to the
toolkit of the history of science.
Materials: a corpus on the Species Problem
In order to test and demonstrate the capacity of the proposed method, we applied it in
an attempt to reconstruct the historical development of a rather complex discourse in
biology, usually referred to as the Species Problem. The Species Problem can be briefly
described as a historical debate on what biological species are, and as the related quest
for the appropriate definition of species, or species concept for biology. With a long
prehistory, dated as back as to Aristotle and Plato, including Darwin’s paradigm-shifting
work on the nature of species in the XIX. century (milestone #1), the debate expanded in
the early XX. century, mainly due to the rediscovery of Darwin’s work, and having it
integrated with the early (Mendelian) genetics of the era. The new paradigm has been
called the Evolutionary Synthesis (milestone #2). Since the Synthesis, a plethora of
theories has emerged on species, resulting in a variety of competing species concepts.
According to a comprehensive review of Mayden (1997), no less than 22 species concept
(definitions) exhibit themselves in the contemporary literature of the subject.
Given its complexities, the Species Problem was an ideal candidate for a bibliometric
analysis with the proposed method of asBC (age-sensitive bibliometric coupling):
(1) The roots of the discourse are centuries-old, while there are several contemporary
directions of the debate (and of research) as well. Therefore, the capacity of asBC to
differentiate between more classical and more recent thematic developments could be
tested well.
(2) During its modern history (in the XX. century), many schools of biosystematics
contributed to, and competed over the problem, involving—from a data-mining
perspective—different topics: theoretical papers as well as empirical ones, the latter
focusing on particular subjects of taxonomy (description of taxa). It was of outstanding
interest whether the asBC was capable of identifying these schools as being pairwise
different but internally coherent lines of research.
(3) A nonstandard feature of the Species Problem is its complexity in terms of the
contributing scholarly fields, or even disciplines. As we shall see, for example, a proper
interaction of evolutionary systematics, on one side, and the philosophy of science (of
biology), on the other side, had a significant effect on the present state of the debate. Due
to this interdisciplinarity, it is not an easy task to obtain the cognitive structure of the
discourse for the historian of science. However, it is a good challenge to the proposed
method of science mapping, that may, ideally, help the historian in achieving her goal.
To cover a representative corpus of the modern history of the discourse, bibliographic
data were harvested from three databases of the Web of Science, namely, the SCI, the
SSCI and the A&HCI (Science Citation Index, Social Science Citation Index and the
Arts&Humanities Citation Index, respectively). Also in a attempt to avoid the potential
exclusion of relevant works from the corpus, data retrieval was based on a topic-related
query, that did not put any constraints on the set of fields, journals, authors etc. entering
the sample. The query was defined to include all records related (topicwise) to any of
the following terms: „species problem”, „species definition”, „species concept”.
The resulting corpus included N=1605 documents for the period 1975–2011. Since (1)
we were primarily interested in the period where the debate became most intense and
accelerated (so that empirical methods are helpful to clarify its structure), and (2) the
selected data was also required to „contain enough references”, potentially reaching
back to all historical layers of the debate, we took a smaller time window for our
analysis. As confirmed by the distribution of the corpus over publication years (Fig 1), a
period starting from the ’90s was meeting the intensity criterion, and was late enough to
reflect existing directions. We took a fraction of the whole corpus accordingly, covering a
decade being a „burst” in the dispute. This fraction contained about 400 records. We
pruned it by eliminating those few that did not share any references with the rest (not
being related to the problem, in this sense). Our final sample, therefore, contained the
fragment of the base corpus published between 1990–2000, with N=386 papers.
Fig. 1. Distribution of the corpus collected on the Species Problem over publication years.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
(1) in the next section we define the age-sensitive method of bibliographic coupling.
The subsequent section will report the results of analysing our sample via the
proposed method in two respects:
(2) first, a quantitative comparison of the results achived by the classical method and
the age-sensitive method will be outlined, then
(3) a qualitative comparison of the thematic structure vs. the intellectual history of
the species problem, obtained by the classical and the new method, respectively,
will be described. It shows, on one hand, how the age-sensitive method changes
the cognitive structure revealed by the classical method, and, on the other hand,
provides a historical mapping of the species problem.
The altered method of bibliographic coupling
Bibliographic coupling of a set of publications, in the classical case, is based on the
number of their common references, in a pairwise manner. This relation can be
conceived as some sort of similarity (or distance) between the two vectors of references
of any publications p1 and p2, respectively. These vectors are usually represented as
dichotom sequences with values {1,0}, denoting the presence/absence of a publication
in the reference set (this method also implies that such vectors are built over the
aggregation of the references of each pub in question to make them comparable —
practically, these are the rows of a publication-reference incidence matrix).
More formally, the method of determining the relatedness of pubs within classical
bibliographic coupling may be presented as follows. Given any two publications P and
P , consider the vectors REF and REF of their respective sets of references. These
vectors are best conceived as of length n, where n is the number of all references
belonging to either P or P . Based on these same tuple of referred publications, REF (i)
denotes whether the i-th reference is present among the references of P , and may take
the corresponding value of 1 or 0 (the same goes for P ). In this setting, the basic
similarity between the two publications is given by
S P ,P := REF i ×REF i .
BC 1 2 1 2
In verbal terms, S (P , P ) is the absolute number of references shared among P and P .
BC 1 2 1 2
This amount is usually subject to a normalization procedure accounting for the size of
the reference sets of P and of P , respectively, for it is often argued that having the same
amount in common out of an extensive background (of which the shared part is a
relatively small fraction) makes pubs less related, than if this same amount is a
substantial part of the references for any member of the pair. In our study, however, we
used this measure in its raw, non-normalized version, mainly for the reasons of
comparison with our age-sensitive indicator (see below).
In order to implement the idea of age-sensitive bibliometric coupling, we altered the
abovedescribed method of BC in two steps. The procedure was based on the
publication–reference incidence matrix constructed from publications in our material.
Step 1: Weighting
At first, an indicator of the age of references has been introduced. To systematically
account for this feature of reference publications, each component of the
presence/absence vectors was weighted according to the publication year of the
corresponding reference. This procedure yielded a weighted reference vector for each
source publication:
REF i :=REF i × f Pubyear i ,
whereby REFW(i) is the weighted value of the i-th reference within the vector of
references REF(i), and this weight is given by a function of the publication year of the i-
th reference, i.e. Pubyear(i).
Practically, this kind of modification of a presence/absence vector replaces the value „1”
of each reference of the source publication with a time-dependent weight, determined
by the weighting scheme. In order to reflect our „phylogenetic” notion of relatedness, we
defined the particular weighting scheme (the function f(Pubyear(i)) in the formula)
according to the following criteria:
(1) The more recent a shared reference is, the closer relatedness of source documents it
should represent.
(2) Classical topic-related literature should reflect distant kinship when referred by
pubs, while shared recent literature reflect close kinship. Furthermore, as we intend to
amplify the effect of having classical vs. recent common ancestors in drawing
relatedness (so that recent kinship and more ancient kinship could be separated), it is
assumed that differences between the age of classical (old) publications contribute less
to relatedness, than age differences in the recent literature.
In the scheme chosen for weighting, criterion (1) is realized by weights being defined as
increasing by publication years. This procedure assures that, when subjected to the
similarity measure introduced below, recent references contribute more to document
similarity than older ones. Criterion (2) is met by rewarding a reference for being timely,
via determining weights as a non-linear function of time (publication years). In
particular, we used an exponential function of the rescaled years of publication, the
parameters of which were experimentally set to enable the scheme conveying the age
effect of the intellectual background, in the case of the topic under study:
( )  scale (Pubyear)
w Pubyear :=scale 30 2 ,
whereby Pubyear is a year of publication (age), w(.) is the associated weight, and
scale (Pubyear) designates a linear rescaling of the series of publication years within the
interval [1,10]. The immediate result was also rescaled within the interval [1,100],
indicated by scale (.), to produce intuitive weighting scores for references. Fig 2 graphs
the weights associated with years of publication. It can be observed that (due to the
distant origins mentioned above) references to the ancient—e.g. medieval or XIX.
century—history of the problem, ranging from the XVI. century to the beginning of the
XX. century are almost equally weighted, their contibution being kept at a low level. The
weighting is becoming rather progressive from the 1960s, and the slope of the curve
increases by roughly twenty years (at the beginning of the ’80s, and that of the second
millenium). This scheme is in accord with our aim to detect the accelerated development
of the topic in the XX. century, and also with descriptive studies characterizing similar
periods of problem development along the timescale.
Fig. 2. Weights associated with publication years according to the weighting scheme used for the age-based
ranking of references
Step 2: Similarity measure
As the second step of the method, the degree of relatedness of source documents was
calculated based on their weighted reference vector. In particular, we applied the basic
similarity measure S of bibliographic coupling explicated above, to each pair of such
vectors obtained for source documents in the sample. This resulted in a measure
S P ,P := REF i ×REF i ,
BC 1 2 1 2
( P1,P2 ) is the weighted (or age-sensitive) similarity of publications P
while REF 1
are the weighted reference vectors belonging to P 1 and P 2
respectively.
In practice, according to this measure, the more recent references are being shared by
any two publications, the more closely related (similar) these pubs will be. Defined in
such a way, this indicator is not normalized (e.g. doesn’t control for the number of
references that the two publications contain, separatelly), but since we are interested in
the effect of age (weighting) of shared references, as disentagled from any other effect ,
we used the measure as such: this choice allowed us to contrast the results directly with
the core of the classical (unnormalized) approach, whereby the same common
references are counted but not age-weighted. More importantly, by this definition we
obtain a fine-grained relation between publications, even analytically. Consider a
publication P1 that has the same number of common references both with P2 and P3,
but with recent publications shared with the former, and with old publications shared
with the latter. On the classical account, P1 is equally similar to P2 and P3 (since only the
amount of shared references matters). However, on the present account, P1 is much
more similar to P2 than to P3, due to the contribution of recent background literature to
the similarity value.
Clustering of source publications
Though not specific to the altered procedure of bibliographic coupling discussed so far, a
still relevant step of the method is the actual „coupling” (or grouping) of publications,
that is, the clustering based on the weighted similarity matrix. For this purpose, a type of
hierarchical clustering was selected, and imposed on the distance matrix obtained from
the original similarity matrix. We applied the average clustering method, as the resulting
hierarchy turned out to be, among those produced by other available methods, best
fitted to document distances. (This latter fit was measured by the so-called cophenetic
correlation, and yielded a value cpc = 0.7)
In order to detect the cluster structure at a fine-grained level, we avoided to cut this
cluster tree at a predefined height, as such a trade-off would have resulted in
overlooking groups with varying „internal cohesion”. Instead, an approach called
dynamic cutting was utilized, as developed and detailed in (Langfelder–Zhang–Horvath
2008). The main advantage of dynamic cutting compared to the traditional cutting-at-a-
specific-level approach is the sesitivity to the shape of the dendogram and to nested
groups. Due to our phylogenetic view on BC whereby closer and looser relatedness is
assumed to be definitive of groups, we expected nested clusters (that is, groups to be
recognized at different levels of cohesion). Therefore, this tool seemed to suit our needs
quite well.
Results and discussion
Having defined age-sensitive bibliographic coupling (asBC) on the basis of the classical
approach (cBC), we subjected our corpus collected on the history of the species problem
to a dual analysis. For the purposes of comparison, we applied both the classical, and the
new method to reveal its cognitive structure. In what follows, the results of the two
clustering exercieses are presented and compared. According to our goals, we contrast
the respective outputs (1) in a quantitative and (2) in a qualitative manner as well. The
qualitative approach, in particular, the thematic characterization of the document
clusters yielded by the asBC provides, as a demonstration of the capacities of asBC,
insight into the „historically informed” structure of the species problem.
Quantitative comparison
To the effect of a first diagnosis to see whether the results of cBC and asBC could be
expected to show a different picture of the corpus, the degree of similarity between the
two groupings were estimated. We used two indicators thereof, (1) the Jaccard index
plus (2) the correlation of cophenetic distances within the respective clusterings. The
Jaccard index, in this case, could be interpreted as the relative extent of overlap between
the two clusterings with a range of values [0,1], and yielded a value of J = 0.3, reporting a
relatively small portion of document pairs that are judged similarly by both methods.
Indicator (2) goes beyond this level of granularity, as it measures the change of relative
positions each document has in the cluster tree based on cBC, when recalculated via
asBC. The correlation obtained was r = 0.66, indicating that the distances of documents
within the cluster tree has moderately changed due to the age-sensitive grouping, that is,
groups of documents are more closely or loosely connected on the new account (within
in the hierarchical cluster tree). This observation is in accord with our expectations
outlined in the previous section. In sum, the two diagnostics suggested that the age-
sensitive version of BC generated a refined cognitive structure with different clusters,
resulting mainly from the redefinition of document similarity increased or decreased as
a function of the age distribution of references.
In mor detail, the classical procedure, cBC resulted in a corpus divided into N=4 clusters,
while the age-sensitive version, asBC yielded N=6 clusters. These numbers, already at
this quite general level, suggest that asBC did result in a refinement of the clusters from
cBC. This assumption is further corroborated by the size of these groups (that can be
read off from Table 1, see below). While in the original case (cBC), 63% of the sample
documents formed a single category, the age-sensitive version produced a more even,
less uniform distribution with the first two groups accountig for 36% and 30% of the
corpus, respectively. The remaining asBC-clusters were also in a par with the remaining
cBC-clusters, that is, no degradation of group size according to the refined method could
be observed (indicating small, less „proper” groups, outliers etc.).
Table 1. Comparison of the clusterings obtained by cBC vs. asBC via a confusion matrix.
cBC / asBC 1 2 3 4 5 6 Sum (×100) %
1 89 107 0 27 22 0 245 0.63
2 0 0 28 0 0 0 28 0.07
3 17 0 0 0 4 0 21 0.05
4 34 9 5 4 1 39 92 0.24
Sum 140 116 33 31 27 39 386 1.00
(×100) % 0.36 0.30 0.09 0.08 0.07 0.10 1.00
To put it another way, the new method seemed to split the largest (and, as unifying most
documents, supposedly somewhat meaningless or hardly interpretable) cluster into
smaller ones, that are expected to be historically more coherent (see the qualitative
section below). Indeed, the so-called confusion matrix of the two groupings has the same
implication (Table 1.). The confusion matrix is a cross-table of the two clusterings,
reporting the joint distribution of sample documents within both sets of clusters (so that
the relation of cBC- and asBC-groups could be examined). The rows of Table 1
correspond to the four clusters drawn via the cBC-method, as the columns to the six new
clusters from the asBC-method.
As is apparent in the matrix, most affected by the re-partitioning of the species problem
literature is the cBC-cluster no. 1, that has been split into mainly two, similar-sized
groups, asBC-clusters no. 1 and no 2. These are also the dominant groups in the matrix,
in terms of size. The classical cluster no. 2 and no. 3 remained mostly unchanged,
indicating a strong historical–thematic cohesion. Much less robust is the classical cluster
4, similar to no. 1, as its content has also been re-allocated between, primarily, the first
and the last age-sensitive cluster (no. 1 and no. 6), but with less constituent elements
than the first cluster, altogether.
Qualitative characterization of new clusters
According to our primary interest in applying the asBC method to the historical corpus
in the focus of this study, we also investigated the content of the resulting document
clusters, in relation to the classical ones. To this effect, we followed a strategy based on
two pillars:
1) Since mapping the intellectual structure of the topic was modelled via
references, for the qualitative characterization of these clusters we also relied on
the contribution of references to the formation of clusters.
2) In order to obtain a mapping in an economic way, that reveals both the profile of
the new clustering and the difference between the „old” and the „new” profile, we
did not aim to describe all groups. Instead, we selected a set of clusters that best
represented this two aspects at once.
Point 1) above has been addressed by the following procedure: for each selected cluster
C the references of documents belonging to C were collected and ranked, according to
their cumulative weight in C (that is, their weight used by the asBC method times the
number of documents they referred by, within C). Note that such a cumulative weight is
proportional to the contribution of the particular reference to the formation of C. In
other words, this ranking shows how important a particular reference in the intellectual
background of C is. Based on this ranking, we obtained the first n most important
reference in C to draw the profile of the cluster. The threshold n was based on a „knee
plot” of ranks: the weight-based ordering of reference sets in each case led to a typical
powerlaw-like curve with a relatively few references—with high cumulative weight—
playing a major role, and many more contributing to a much lower level in itself. We
identified these highly-weighted refs as residing in the first, most rapidly ascending
section of the weight-curve that ends with a change of slope, the so-called „knee” that
can be seen as a transition to the almost flat section of the curve. As the most important
descriptors of C, we called this n refrences (above the knee of the curve) as the core of C.
In what follows, beyond its description, the core is presented for each cluster under
consideration as a set of references, and supported by the knee plot of the cluster. The
knee plots are presented in the Appendix, under Fig 4. Core references are also included
in the Appendix for each cluster, in the form of ranked lists, collected in Table 2.
Point 2) of our strategy was achieved by selecting asBC clusters no. 1–4 to look after
contentwise, together with their two sublcusters. One of these is (1) the fragment of no.
1 that previously belonged to the classical (cBC-) cluster 1, referred to as 1/1, and (2)
another fragment of no. 1 that previously was part of the classical cluster 4, referred to
as 1/4. The explanation of this choice leads back to Table 1. It can be seen that by
examining asBC clusters no. 1 and 2, we can gain insight to the two dominant clusters (in
terms of size) of the new thematic profile. On the other hand, since the vast majority of
the first cBC-cluster has been reallocated between these two and, in addition, no. 4, we
may also observe how the oversized „old” thematic group (no. 1) has been
reconceptualized by the age-sensitive method. The two sublcusters 1/1 and 1/4 further
refine this picture, as while new clusters no. 2 and no. 4 were born almost exclusively
from the classical no. 1, new cluster 1 also inherited from old cluster 4. Finally, new
cluster no. 3 is discussed as left rather intact (being almost identical to old cluster no. 2).
In sum, by this selection, both novel and unchanged parts of the new profile are sampled
(asBC-clusters 1–2–4 and 3, respectively), and also the relation of the two clusterings
may become visible.
Based on these considerations, the historically informed structure of the species
problem can be described with the following profiles:
• Cluster no. 1: the BSC and the debate over the theory framing the species concept
The core of the first cluster contains approx. 50 important references, ranked with their
cumulative weights in Table 21. (the knee plot on Fig. 4 suggested a threshold of
cumulative document weight, CDM > 150). Highly-ranked references are the position
papers on the species concept since the modern synthesis. Most striking, especially from
the full list of core references including books and book chapters as well, is the
dominance of Ernst Mayr, the champion of the „biological species concept” or the BSC
(cf. Mayr, #4) what, basically, launched this debate in the context of the synthesis.
Several position papers, upon debating the BSC, ranked high in this list. These papers are
also classical proposals of infamous alternative species conceptions (not just
definitions), such as the „pluralistic conception” or „species pluralism” (Mishler, #10),
the „evolutionary species concept” (Wiley, #13), the „genetic species concept” (Masters,
#15). With somewhat lower weights, but two further definitions also exhibit themselves,
namely, the „phylogenetic concept” (Nixon, #18), and the „ecological species concept”
(van Valen, #30), though the latter having the lowest rank in the list.
Beside the collection of proposals to challenge the BSC as the concept that initiated the
discourse, a further line of research also observable in Cluster 1, as heavily interacting
with the previous one. Among highly ranked papers we find several approaches
regarding the application, or, rather, the problems of application of the biological
concept (BSC), mainly in microbiology (Wayne, #3; Dykhuizen, #8; Smith, #11 or, as a
case outside microbiology, Knowlton, #20). The association of these topics is well-
explained by the fact that the BSC is known as hardly applicable to biological kinds with
non-sexual reproduction, such as bacteria and other subjects of microbiology, but also
has strange implications to some sexually reproducing kinds as well (e.g. sibling species,
Knowlton, #20). What we see in this reference set, then, is best interpreted as a series of
responses to the BSC on the part of the practice of systematics.
In sum, Cluster no. 1 can be conceived as quite coherently mirroring what is the
bottomline of the XX. centrury history of the problem, the biological conception (BSC)
and the immediate discourse it generated, including both the application and the
alternatives of this concept. In terms of the history and philosophy of biology, this profile
1 In Table 2 only journal publications are demonstrated, therefore, the actual number of references included in
the table is smaller than the size of the whole core.
is the debate over the best theory of species within biology, yielding a theoretically
sound category.
• Cluster no. 2: A more recent response: cladistics and the PSC
The core of the second most extensive cluster counts about 100 references (by the knee
plot, CDM > 150, as above). Thematically, this group of referred papers is rather
coherent. By inspecting the list, striking is the dominance of two concepts, „cladistics”
and the „phylogenetic species concept”: at least one parameter of each document is
related to one of these notions. Many highly ranked references came from the journal
Cladistics, which has been the main platform of a specific school of systematics by the
same name. The reference of the highest rank is Nixon’s seminal paper, published in
Cladistics on the phylogenetic species concept (#1)—this very paper occured in Cluster
no 1 also, but with a relatively low rank, indicating a different emphasis of the two
clusters. Papers from other journals also contain „cladistics” and/or a reference to the
phylogenetic species concept in their metadata, among their keywords or within their
abstracts, with a very few exception. The unity of the profile is also confirmed by the ISI
Subject Categories assigned to the papers included: almost each assignment contains
„Evolutionary Biology”, and, in the majority of the cases, quite exclusively.
Due to this relatively clear profile, Cluster no 2. can be interpreted as the „cladistic
response” to the species problem (or, to the BSC). Cladistics is a more recent
development in systematics, a school with very specific implications on the definition of
the species category, concerning how the phylogenetic tree should be partitioned into
species. It is, therefore, closely related to the so-called „phylogenetic species concept”
(PSC). The representation of this school is also expressed by the high rank and
recurrence of a set of authors, known as the champions of either the phylogenetic or the
cladistic conceptualization, e.g. Donoghue, DeQueiroz, Cracraft, Mishler etc. In sum, the
cluster is a body of literature on this school of systematics entering the species broblem,
and producing a significant part of its history.
• Cluster no. 3: the species problem in ecology—a thematic outlier
The core of the asBC-cluster no. 3 is a relatively small one, enumerating 15 important
references altogether (CDM > 150). Characteristic of its thematic composition are two
features of the document set: (1) the references of the two (or three) highest rank are
far above the others in terms of weight, and are concerned with the „keystone species
concept” (in ecology), and (2) the Subject Category to which these pubs have been
assigned by WoS is mainly Ecology (and rarely is Evolutionary Biology, as opposed to the
previous clusters).
This rather compact thematic group is an interesting example of what can be called a
„thematic outlier”, a strain of research that doesn’t belong to the (history of the) very
problem under study. Being a „self-contained” group is also reflected in the robustness
of the cluster: as noted above, both methods, cBC and asBC classified these refences
nearly the same way, as cluster 3 was originated from classical cluster 2 almost without
any change (cf. Table 1).
The reason for this sub-topic entering our sample can be said mainly terminological:
both discourses are called „species problem” in their own (otherwise, related) contexts.
However, while our interest lies in the discourse on the appropriate species concept for
biology, the more particular discourse indicated here belongs to the field of ecology and
addresses the role of species as actors setting up ecosystems. Therefore, while in the
former case the „species problem” stands for the problem of the species concept, in the
latter it denotes the problem of finding species in ecosystems (e.g. foodwebs) whose
presence are crucial for its functioning (keystone species). Consequently, in this case, the
method (actually, both methods) of bibliographic coupling can be credited for „filtering
out” a direction that doesn’t belong to the scope of the study.
• Cluster no. 4: An ontology of species taxa for the theory of species
The new cluster no. 4 is also based on a relatively small core, containing about 20
references. The threshold level, CDM > 100, drawn from the knee plot is below the level
encountered for the previous clusters, indicating that it is a somewhat less coherent, or
more diverse intellectual basis compared to those of the other three groups. A quite
interesting multi- (or, as we shall see, rather inter-) disciplinarity can also be observed
as to the thematic structure: The pub of the highest rank (ref1) refers to the solution of
cladistics to the species problem, yet is has been published in the journal Biology and
Philosophy, wich fact is also reflected in its Subject Category, History & Philosophy of
Science. This very Subject Category dominates a significant part of the core, together
with Zoology. What this mixture of „cultures” conveys is a very authentic feature of the
species problem, well represented in this separate cluster.
The feature in question is a clear tendency within the XX. century scientific debate on
species to rely on and properly icorporate arguments from the philosophy of science
(namely, of biology). Just as Darwin revolutionalized systematics by altering the way we
look at individual species (species taxa), so did, in the modern history of the problem,
two authors, Micheal Ghiselin (a biologist) and David Hull (a philosopher of science), the
champions of the „individuality thesis” (species as individuals, SAI). Addressing the
ontology of species (taxa), they argued that species are best viewed, instead of being
„classes of organisms”, as individuals (particular, historical, evolvable etc. entities).
Interestingly, in the technical sense, this view supported some definitions of species,
while discrediting others. Among those that could directly rely on SAI was the cladistic
species concept and its relatives. As a result of the interaction between biophilosophy
and systematics, the SAI and other ontological arguments became integral part of the
scientific discourse on species.
This quick historical highligt makes cluster no. 4 a well-interpretable collection. Authors
of this cluster are, indeed Ghiselin, Hull and other theoreticians and biophilosophers
(Kitcher, Kluge), on one hand, and proponents of the cladistic and phylogenetic concept,
on the other (Ridley, DeQuerioz, Mishler, Cracraft etc.). Beyond the synbiontic relation of
these two cultures, the presence of the practice of systematics is also present with a high
rank (#2). This indicates that theorizing on the status of species propagated into the
very circles of practitioners of systematics as well. In sum, cluster 4 can be conceived as
a trace of the debate on the ontology of species taxa, being infiltrated into biological
theorizing about the species concept (category).
• Cluster no. 1/1 and 1/4: Aquiring historical coherence
The remaining two groups we took under closer inspection were both a fragment of no.
1 described above. The main reason for looking into the internal structure of the first
cluster was to sharpen the characterization of how the age-sensitive restructuring of the
corpus affected the original thematic groups.
Cluster 1/1 is the fraction of our new cluster no. 1 (The BSC-related theme), that came
from the original cluster 1. Recall, that the striking change from the re-clustering
procedure was the division of old cluster 1 into new ones, exposed so far as the new
cluster no. 1 (condisering the majority of its content) and 2. However, it is somewhat
more sound to speak of new cluster 1/1 and 2 as the resulting groups. Now, by turning
to the content of 1/1, we encounter an even more concentrated profile, than that of the
whole class: in this fragment, the the position papers proposing and discussing the BSC
and its major alternatives exhibit themselves, that is, theorizing of the main figures of
biosystematics about the species concept (category). Even more telling, with respect to
the capacity of the age-sensitive method, if we compare the age distribution of
references in cluster 1/1 and 2, respectively, that is, between the two descendant of the
same old cluster. According to Fig 3, the asBC procedure sorted the content of the old
cluster into a „more classical”, and a „more recent” discussion. For cluster 1/1,
references are distributed almost equally before and after the ’90s, with a peak in the
late 80’s, while for cluster 2 the majority of references originate from the ’90s, their peak
is in the early ’90s, and show a more „continuous” or coherent discourse. In other
words, the procedure identified the BSC-based dispute (cluster 1/1) as a more classical
context, within which the new cluster no. 2, that is, the cladistic/phylogenetic discourse
emerged as a more recent movement. Note, that these two, historically distinguishable
movements were inseparably linked together by the cBC method, in one, thematically
coherent but giant cluster. In this sense, the asBC method did produce a historically
informed thematic structure, differentiating between „ancient” and „new” features of a
thematic group.
Considering the contribution of 1/4, the fraction of the BSC-theme that came from the
classical cluster no. 4, the picture gets even more interesting. In this small fragment (the
core contains only 12 pubs) papers (references) from the very practice of biosystematics
are added to the theoretical debate in 1/1, belonging, in particular, to the field of
microbiology. This phenomenon recalls our previous observation that new cluster no. 1
covers both (1) the theoretical debate initiated by the biological species concept (BSC)
and (2) its extension from, mainly, microbiology, whereby the application of BSC has
always been problematic. At this point, we can see that not only does this cluster unify
these references, but also „collects” them by „cutting out” the theoretical and the applied
part of the BSC-debate from old clusters 1 and 4.
In sum, results suggest that the proposed method of asBC has been capable of better
identifying strains of research or schools in the modern history of the species problem.
On one hand, the asBC eliminated a more recent school within the theoretical discourse,
namely, the phylogenetic approach and cladistics emerging from the pool of species
concepts. On the other hand, it unified references that show the real or causal, that is,
historical unfolding of ideas, instead of reflecting mere topical similarities. This latter
feature is shown in connecting the theory and application of the BSC, while, in the
original cluster structure these pubs were sorted into the big „theoretical cluster” (old
cluster 1), and the „cluster of applications”, mainly, topics in microbiology (old cluster
4), respectively.
Fig. 3. Age distribution of references within the core of clusters 1/1 and 2, respectively.
Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed a method of bibliographic coupling (BC) designed primarily
for the purposes of the history of science. As an alternative of classical BC, age-sensitive
bibliographic coupling, or asBC, was supposed to work in a similar manner as
evolutionary systematics does in biology. By incorporating the age (in the bibliometrics
case: publication year) of common ancestors (references) into the assessment of
document relatedness, it was supposed to support a classification of source documents
that reflects the history of the subject. Not only were the resulting clusters expected to
distinguish the various research directions emerged within the area under study, but
also to mirror the historical relations between these directions.
Having defined the age-sensitive method, we applied it in a pilot bibliometric study of an
important decade of the Species Problem, a centuries-old but still active discourse in
biology addressing the concept of biological species. Quantitative results showed that
the new method was able to refine the thematic structure of the corpus, collected on the
Species Problem, that was obtained by the classical method of bibliographic coupling.
The comparison of the two clusterings (the classical and the altered one) made clear that
the giant thematic cluster, resulted from classical BC, was split up by the age-sensitive
method.
Truly promising observations were gained on closer inspection of the document clusters
resulted from asBC, that is, from the qualitative assessment and comparison of the new
structure vs. the classical one. Via the age-sensitive method the extensive theoretical
debate on species, classified in the giant cluster mentioned above by the original method
of BC, could be differentiated into clusters representing the initial context of the
discourse, and later developments, like coherent schools of systematics responding to
the initial context. On the other hand, documents differing topicwise, but belonging to
the same research tradition were bound together by the new method, while this relation
was overlooked in the classical case.
In sum, the method of asBC seemed to be a utility that is worth experimentig with. As a
procedure for detecting either research dynamics or patterns in the history of science,
age-sensitive bibliometric coupling could be a useful tool for bibliometric investigations
aiding the historian of complex scientific discourses. Subsequent research is intended to
work on the refinement of this measure, as well as on further clarification, via
bibliometric means, of the historical structure of the Species Problem. Iteratively
contrasting these two would result in an efficient empirical methodology for mapping
complicated historical phenomena in science.
Acknowledgement
This paper was supported by the János Bolyai Research Scholarship of the Hungarian
Academy of Sciences.