1v2202120/sc:viXra
Algorithms for Rapidly Dispersing Robot
Swarms in Unknown Environments
Tien-Ruey Hsiang1, Esther M. Arkin1, Michael A. Bender1,
Sa´ndor P. Fekete2, and Joseph S. B. Mitchell1
Stony Brook University,StonyBrook, NY 11794, USA
2 TU Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
Abstract. Wedevelopandanalyzealgorithmsfordispersingaswarmofprimitive
robots in an unknown environment, R. The primary objective is to minimize the
makespan,thatis,thetimetofill theentireregion.Anenvironmentiscomposedof
pixels thatform aconnectedsubset oftheintegergrid.Thereisat most onerobot
per pixeland robots move horizontally or vertically at unit speed. Robots enterR
by means of k ≥ 1 door pixels Robots are primitive finite automata, only having
local communication, local sensors, and a constant-sized memory.
We first give algorithms for the single-door case (i.e., k = 1), analyzing the
algorithms both theoretically and experimentally We prove that our algorithms
haveoptimal makespan 2A−1, where A is thearea of R.
We next give an algorithm for the multi-door case (k ≥ 1), based on a wall-
following version of the leader-follower strategy. We prove that our strategy is
O(log(k+1))-competitive, and that this bound is tight for our strategy and other
related strategies.
1 Introduction
The objectiveofswarmroboticsis toprogramahuge numberofsimple,tiny
robots to perform complex tasks collectively. A typical application scenario
for a robot swarm may involve two phases: first, the robot swarm fills an
environment as quickly as possible while keeping the swarm “connected”
(a term made more precise later). Once the robots are distributed in the
environment, the robots perform world-embedded computational tasks, such
as computing distances and short paths between points in the environment,
finding chokepoints, mapping the environment, and searching for intruders.
This paper develops efficient algorithms for filling an environment with
a swarm of robots, thus focusing on the first phase described above. Be-
cause targetapplications requirethousands to millions ofrobotsand current
demonstration scenarios have at most hundreds of robots, it is crucial to
develop algorithms that have explicitly stated performance guarantees, thus
ensuring scalability.
There has already been work on dispersion algorithms, but most disper-
sion algorithms rely on greedy strategies such as go-for-free space, where
robots move to fill unoccupied space, or artificial physics strategies, where
neighboringrobotsexert“forces”oneachother:repulsionforcesiftherobots
2 Hsiang et al.
arecloserthanthetargetseparation,andattractionforcesiftheneighboring
robots aretoo far away.Although suchrobotbehaviorsoften leadto reason-
abledispersion,therearecasesinwhichtheswarmentersinfiniteloops,never
fillingthedomain.Eveninartificialphysicsstrategies,whichseemtodisperse
robots most efficiently, there are no guarantees on filling time. Furthermore,
the swarm behavior under artificial-physics rules results in dispersions that
aremorereminiscentofmoleculardynamicssimulations(withlargeamounts
of “bouncing” and “jitter”) than of the ideal coordinated behavior of coop-
erating teams of robots.
The dispersion algorithms in this paper represent a departure from pre-
viously studied dispersion strategies. First of all, we test our algorithms in
arbitrary polygonal environments, rather than restricting ourselves to rect-
angles or the infinite plane. It is important to study the dispersion algo-
rithms in complicated polygonal domains because the target domains may
be bottleneck-filled indoor environments or systems of pipes or ductwork.
Ouralgorithmsarebasedonfollow-the-leaderlocalrules,wheretherobots
formchainsofleadersandfollowersemanatingfromacentralsourceofrobots.
(the “doors”). The emergent behavior of our main algorithm is a left-hand-
on-the-wall strategy, where the entire robot swarm hugs the left wall of the
domainasthefillingproceeds.Weprovidematchinglowerandupperbounds
on the amount of time to fill as a function of the total size of the source.
The difficulty in dispersing efficiently is in sustaining a large flow of robots
coming in through the doors; the “chains” of robots coming in through the
doors have a tendency to “cut each other off”; see Figure 1(left). Thus, we
devise a set of local rules for splitting and splicing the robot chains. Our
experience with our robot simulator shows that unless the local rules are
precisely implemented, the flow of robots out of the source diminishes and
perhaps even grinds to a halt prematurely.
Fig.1.Left:Oneturncancutoffmostoftheflowlinesleadingoutofthedoorpixels
(shaded grey): The left three columns of robots are trapped. Right: A polygonal
domainenclosesadiscretesetofpossiblerobotlocations(pixels);specialdoorpixels
are shown in grey.
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 3
1.1 Our Results
We develop and analyze algorithms for dispersing robot swarms in an un-
known environment R. The primary objective is to minimize the makespan,
that is, the time to fill the entire region. An environment is composed of
squares or pixels that form a connected subset of the integer grid; such an
environment is also called a maze. There is at most one robot per pixel and
robots move horizontally or vertically at unit speed. There is a source of
robots entering the environment through k ≥ 1 doors. Robots are primi-
tive finite automata, only having local communication, local sensors, and a
constant-sized memory. The challenge is in proving that purely local strate-
gies distributed over a swarm of agents can result in a predictable and prov-
able behavior for the collective.
This paper presents the following results:
• We give filling algorithms for the single-doorcase (i.e., k =1), analyzing
the algorithms both theoretically and experimentally in terms of natural
performance metrics, such as makespan and total traveled distance by
all robots. Our algorithms are based on leader-follower strategies that
are adapted from depth-first and breadth-first search to apply to robot
swarms. We prove that our algorithms have optimal makespan 2A−1,
where A is the area (number of pixels) of R.
• We give a filling algorithm for the multi-door case (k ≥ 1), also based
on a leader-follower strategy. The emergent behavior of the swarm is a
filling strategy, called laminar flow, that generalizes the “left-hand-on-
wall” strategy to multiple streams of robots coming in through multiple
doors. An important contribution of the algorithm is the formulation of
splitting and splicing strategies that maintain a large flow of robots out
of the doors. We prove that the laminar flow algorithm is O(log(k+1))-
competitive, that is, the ratio of the makespan of our algorithm to the
optimal makespan is O(log(k+1)).
• We giveamatching lowerboundofΩ(log(k+1))onthe competitiveness
of the natural class of “simple-minded” strategies that use only strictly
local information.
• WereportonexperimentswithaJavasimulatorthatwebuiltforswarms
ingridenvironments.Allofthealgorithmsinthispaperareimplemented
in this simulator.
While our results here are given purely in terms of robots moving syn-
chronously on discrete grids, the results apply also to dispersing swarms of
robots within an arbitrary connected planar domain, in the ideal setting in
which the robots have perfect motion control and synchrony. More impor-
tantly, our results may form the foundation for theoretical work on more
realistic models of swarmrobotics in the continuum, with asynchronousmo-
tion, sensor errors,slippage, and hardware failures.
4 Hsiang et al.
1.2 Prior and Related Work
There has been considerable study recently of distributed control and coor-
dinationofa setofautonomousrobots.Gage[14,15] hasproposedthe devel-
opment of command and control tools for arbitrarily large swarms of micro-
robotsandhasproposedcoverageparadigmsinthecontextofrobotdispersal
in an environment. Payton et al [20,21] propose the notion of “pheromone
robotics” for world-embeddedcomputation. Wagner et al. [9,27,28,29] devel-
opedmulti-robotalgorithms,directlyinspiredbyantbehaviors,forsearching
and covering. Principe et al [13,22] and Suzuki et al [12,25,26] have studied
algorithmic aspects of pattern formationin distributed autonomous robotics
undervariousmodelsofrobotswithminimalcapabilities.Therelatedflocking
problem, which requires that a set of robots follow a leader while maintain-
ing a formation, has been studied in several recent papers; see, e.g., [3,6,16].
Balch [2] has developed “Teambots”, a Java-based general-purpose multi-
robot simulator.
There is a vast literature on algorithms for one or several robots to ex-
plore unknown environments. The environments can be modeled as graphs
(directed or undirected), mazes, or geometric domains, and the robots can
have a range of computing powers; see, e.g., [1,7,8,10,11]. Mitchell [19] in-
cludes a survey of many results on exploring and navigating in geometric
environments.
Dispersion algorithms have been recently studied both in the context of
multi-robotcoverageandsensornetworkdeployment;see[4,5,17,30].Methods
includepotentialfields[17,23],“artificalphysics”[24],attraction-repulsion[18],
andalgorithmsbasedonmoleculardynamics[5].Whilethesestudieshaveex-
aminedempiricallythemeritsofheuristics,theyhavenotaddressedformally
the algorithmic efficiency of the dispersion problem.
2 Preliminaries
For an arbitrary connected region R in the plane, we let R denote the set
of pixels that lie entirely within R. A pixel is an axis-aligned unit square,
{(x,y) : i ≤ x ≤ i+1,j ≤ y ≤ j +1}, whose lower left corner is given by
the integergridpoint(i,j).Twopixelsareneighbors ifthey shareacommon
edge; thus, pixel (i,j) has four neighbors, (i − 1,j), (i + 1,j), (i,j − 1),
and (i,j +1). We refer to R as the environment, and we assume that it is
connected. A subset, D ⊂ R, of the pixels are doors, which serve as sources
of incoming robots. See Figure 1(right).
A robot r is said to occupy a pixel p = (i,j) when it is located in that
pixel. We assume that at most one robot can occupy any one pixel at any
giventimet.Weletp(r,t)denotethepixeloccupiedbyrobotr attimet.We
let prev(r,t)=p(r,t−1) denote the pixel previously occupied by robot r.
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 5
Timeisdiscretizedintostepst=0,1,2,3,....Thepositionsoftherobots
at time t are given by the set S(t), where D ⊆S(t)⊆R. At time 0, there is
one robot in each door: S(0)=D.
Eachpixelisinoneofthreestatesattime t:(1)the pixelis anobstacle if
itdoesnotlie inR;(2)the pixelisoccupied ifitisinRandarobotoccupies
it; or (3) the pixel is unoccupied if it is in R and no robotoccupies it attime
t. An unoccupied pixel at time t is classified as either previously occupied, if
it was occupied by some robot at some time prior to t, or frontier, if it has
never been occupied.
Robotshavesensors thatdetectinformationaboutthelocalenvironment.
In particular, if a robot occupies pixel (i,j) at time t, then we assume that
it can detect the state of each pixel within a distance r of (i,j), where r
is the (fixed) sensor radius. Robots have no global sensor (e.g., a GPS) and
no knowledge of the coordinates of the pixels they occupy.
We assume that each robot has a small finite memory that allows it to
remember the sensor readings of the last T ≥ 1 time steps; i.e., a robot
knowsthesensorreadingsithastakenattime t−T,t−T+1,...,t−1,t.In
particular,eachrobotknowswhichnearbypixelshavebeenoccupiedrecently
byotherrobots.ThealgorithmsinthispaperhaveanO(1)-bitmemory;thus,
the robots have the computational power of finite automata.
Weassumethatrobotshavealimitedabilitytocommunicatewithnearby
robots. In particular, at any given time step a robot is able to exchange a
constant-size message with any robot that lies within a prescribed commu-
nication radius, r , of the robot. The communication graph, G(t), of the
swarm S(t) at time t is defined to be the undirected graph whose nodes are
the robots S(t) and whose edges link pairs of robots that communicate. The
swarmis said to be connected at time t if each connected component of G(t)
contains at least one door pixel.
Robotsmovediscretelyonthe gridofpixels.Ifattime t arobotoccupies
pixel (i,j) of R, and a neighboring pixel (say, (i+1,j)) of R is unoccupied
at time t, then the robot may take a step to the right, so that at time t+1
it occupies pixel (i+1,j). Naturally, no two robots can move into the same
pixel, since no pixel can be occupied by more than one robot. Thus, if two
robots are occupying pixels that neighbor an empty pixel p of R, then the
robots must negotiate which one of them will have the right of way to enter
p. A simple way to handle this negotiation is to establish a priority among
the four directions, e.g., north, south, east, west. The robot occupying the
pixel with the highest priority with respect to p has first rights for moving
to p.
The above rules on occupying and vacating pixels force a constant delay
inthemotion.Supposethatrobotroccupiespixel(i,j)attimetandvacates
(i,j)attimet+1.Nootherrobotr′ canoccupypixel(i,j)duringtime t+1;
the earliestpossibletime thatthe pixelcanbe occupiedist+2.Inprincipal,
wecouldvarytheselocalrules.Forexample,wecouldallowrobotr′ toenter
6 Hsiang et al.
pixel (i,j) at timestep t+1, if it enters in one direction while the current
robot r leaves in the opposite direction. However, these rules would require
a much higher degree of coordination among the robots, and the movement
decisions of robots would have to be less local. Specifically, whether a given
robot can enter one pixel may depend on whether a different robot far away
leaves another pixel. Alternatively, we could build a longer delay into the
movement rules, but the resulting filling algorithms would be essentially the
same. Note that the delay has an immediate impact on the necessary sensor
range: If we require a delay of two time steps, robots need at least a sensor
rangeoftwo,inordertobeabletokeeptrackofpredecessorsandsuccessors.
A similar issue arises in the way new robots enter through the door. For
simplicity,weassumethatadoorpixelisalwaysoccupiedbyarobot;assoon
as the robot occupying a door pixel moves to an adjacent pixel, a new robot
materializes at the door. One can consider there to be an infinite supply of
robots onthe “otherside” ofa door pixel,so that a new robotsteps into the
doorwheneverthe robotthat wasthere previouslymovesto anotherpixelof
R. When a robot first appears at the door, we assume that the robot points
north.
We say that the robots have filled the region R at time t if S(t)= R; in
this case, the robots are well dispersed. A strategy is a set of rules by which
robotsmove,basingtheir movementdecisions solelyonthe constantamount
of information they sense and remember. The makespan of a strategy is the
minimum time, t∗, until the robots have filled the region R.
3 Dispersion Strategies for a Single Door
We begin with the caseof a single door pixel s, which we callthe source. We
describe strategies based on the notion of “leaders” and “followers”.
Arobotrattimetatpositionp(r,t)isclassifiedasmoving (meaningthat
it is “active”) or stopped (meaning that it no longer moves). If r is moving,
it is classified as either a leader or a follower.
In our leader-follower strategies, each robot r at time t has a successor
robot, succ(r,t), that is following r and a predecessor robot, pred(r,t), that
is leading r. If robot r is at the door at time t (p(r,t) = s), then we define
succ(r,t) to be NIL; if r is a leader, then we define pred(r,t) to be NIL.
Attimet=0thereisarobotatthedoors,whichisdesignatedasmoving
and as a leader.
3.1 Depth-First Leader-Follower
The depth-first leader-follower strategy (DFLF) is inspired by depth-first
search in a graph. Specifically, at any given time t ∈ {0,1,2,3,...}, there is
exactly one leader, r, which is on pixel p(r,t) and r is looking for a frontier
pixel (one that has never been occupied by a robot). (Thus, necessarily the
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 7
pixelfromwhichthe robotcame,prev(r,t), isnotfrontierattimet.)Ifthere
are two or more frontier pixels neighboring p(r,t), the leader selects any one
of them as its next destination.
If the leader has no frontier pixel next to it, it stops (its state changes
to “stopped”), and it tells its successor, succ(r), to assume the leadership
(succ(r)’sstatechangesto“leader”)attheconclusionofthistimestep.(The
predecessor completes its move before taking over the leadership.) If the
leader has no predecessor (i.e., it is a robot at the door), then the algorithm
halts. (In this section, successors and (non-Nil) predecessors are invariant
over time, and thus t is removed from the argument.)
Any robot r that is a follower (i.e., not the leader) simply follows its
predecessor: at time t it steps next to prev(pred(r),t), the pixel previously
occupiedbythepredecessorofr.Notethatoncearobotstops,itnevermoves
again. Furthermore, at any point in time there is exactly one leader.
When dealing with finite automata, we have to use particular care when
implementing the leader-follower strategy. As each robot has only a finite
number of states, it cannot keep track of the identities of other robots, nor
carry its own “ID label”. Instead, we use spatial information to pursue the
immediate predecessor. Each robot r has a “heading”, indicating the direc-
tion in which it is moving. The predecessor pred(r) is the nearest robot in
thatdirection.Similarly,eachrobotkeepstrackofits“tailing”,thedirection
from which it came. Thus, the successor is the nearest visible robot in that
direction. Whenever a robot is about to change its heading, it signals this
turn to its immediate successor. Heading and tailing are updated accord-
ing to delay and sensor-range. This is reflected in the following lemma and
corollary,which are proved by introduction on time.
Lemma 1. If r is not the leader at time t, then prev(pred(r),t) is an un-
occupied pixel neighboring p(r,t). Furthermore, the maximum (L ) distance
between r and pred(r) is 2.
Corollary 1. If a pixel is not occupied in two consecutive time steps t and
t+1,then it was never occupied before timet. (i.e., there are no “large gaps”
of time in the occupation of a pixel.)
AfurtherconsequenceoftheabovelemmaandcorollaryisthattheDFLF
strategy can be implemented with a sensor radius of r = 2 and a memory
of T = 1 (i.e., each robot recalls its previous sensor reading). Now it is not
hard to derive the following result:
Theorem 1. The DFLF algorithm halts when all pixels are occupied by
robots.ThemakespanoftheDFLFalgorithmis2A−1,whereAisthenumber
of pixels of the environment R.
Proof. At each time step there is exactly one leader and that leader will
do one of two things: (1) move to a frontier pixel, or (2) change its status
8 Hsiang et al.
to stopped and transfer leadership to its predecessor. (If the leader has no
predecessor, that is, it is at the door, the algorithm halts.) Since each non-
doorpixelcanbechangedfromfrontiertonon-frontieratmostonce,andeach
pixel can have a robot“park” itself on top of it at most once, the number of
steps before the algorithm halts is at most 2A−1. The algorithm does not
stop earlier since there is always a leader and the leader must do one of the
two actions ((1) or (2)) above. (cid:3)
Note that the factor 2 is a result of using a delay of 2. It is easy to see
that this is best possible.
The total distance traveled by all robots in a filling using DFLF is at
most A2, since eachrobot steps at most A. We note that there are examples
in which any dispersion strategy will require Ω(A2) total travel. One trivial
example is a 1×A rectangle,with the door pixel at one end. A trivial lower
bound on the total travel for any given instance is the sum of the distances
from each pixel of R to the door.
DFLF may use substantially more total travel than an optimal (mini-
mum makespan) strategy that minimizes total travel; consider, for example,
a square with side lengths A1/2, for which DFLF requires total travel of A2
while an optimal strategy achieves total travel O(A3/2).
3.2 Breadth-First Leader-Follower
Wenowdescribeanalternativedispersionalgorithm,thebreadth-firstleader-
follower(BFLF)strategy.BFLFoftenhasadvantagesovertheDFLFstrategy
intermsofothermetricsofperformance(totaltraveloftherobots,maximum
travelofanyone robot,totalrelativedistance,etc), while still being optimal
in terms of makespan (2A−1).
The BFLF strategy is substantially more complex than the DFLF, as it
is not trivial to implement breadth-first search with local decision rules on
(finite-automata)robots;indeed,ourstrategydoesnotperformbreadth-first
search, but it “approximates” breadth-first search sufficiently well to have
some similar properties.
As before, a robot can be in a “moving” state or a “stopped” state;
however,wenowintroduceathirdstate,thewaiting state,whichisaninterim
state when a robot pauses temporarily and waits to be able to move. Once
a robot is in a stopped state, it never moves again. In the BFLF strategy
we canhave multiple leaders,while in DFLF we haveonly one.As described
for DFLF, we use a limited amount of spatial information to keep track
of successors and predecessors. Other local rules are more complex and are
described in the following.
Initially, there is one leader robot — the robot at the door, s. When a
robot r materializes at the door,it chooses to follow the previous robot that
left the door.A leader alwaysattempts to go to a neighboringfrontier pixel,
but makes sure it does not stray too far from its follower. If there are no
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 9
neighboring frontier pixels, the leader waits for the immediate follower to
catch up. As soon as the immediate follower catches up, the leader becomes
stopped and passes on the leadership role to the immediate follower. If the
leaderratpixeluhasachoiceamongneighboringfrontierpixels,itpicksany
one of them to be its heading. If other frontier pixels adjacent to u remain
unclaimedbyotherrobotsfollowingdifferentbranchesofdispersion,thenthe
followerr′ ofrwillchooseoneofthesepixelsasitsheadingwhenitarrivesat
u;ifthereremainsafrontierpixeladjacenttou,thenr′’sfollowerr′′ chooses
this pixel as its heading when it arrives at u. Here, r′ and r′′ are relabeled
“leaders” and pixel u is marked as a branching point.
A robot r is only allowed to move at time t, if it satisfies the Movement
Criterion (MC): Arobotcurrentlyoccupiesprev(r,t) (its “parent”position)
orarobotiscurrentlyheading for prev(r,t).IftheMC issatisfied,the robot
r moves to its heading; otherwise, it remains at its current position, p(r,t)
butisstillheading for itstargetpixel.Aswewillseebelow,arobotrisnever
blockedbyitsimmediatepredecessorexcept forthetimestepatwhichr first
appearsatthedoororatimewhenitsimmediatepredecessorisaleaderwith
nowhere to go, meaning that the leadership will be passed to r.
The BFLFstrategytriesto createas manypaths aspossible atalltimes.
The visited pixels form a tree that guides the directions that robots move;
thus, pixels have parents and grandparents. At branches in the tree (pixels
with ≥ 2 children), robots alternate the direction that they travel. Specifi-
cally, when a robot r leaves a pixel at time t, it tells its immediate follower
r′ =succ(r,t) what r′’s immediate destination should be. Branchingenables
robots arriving at the same pixel at different times to go in different direc-
tions, thereby balancing the flow.
Lemma 2. If not all pixels are occupied, then some robot can move.
The following structural lemma shows that the BFLF algorithm is non-
blocking, i.e., a robot r is never “delayed” by its predecessors, only by its
followers; i.e., only the MC holds a robot back, not temporary blockages
downstream. Correctness follows by induction on the height of the tree.
Lemma 3. If a robot is at pixel v and a robot is at pixel u, the non-root
parent of v, then the robot at v is stopped.
Corollary 2. A robot moves from the root every other time step, until all
pixelsareoccupied.I.e.,ifarobotdidnotpopupattherootattimet,thenone
must pop up at time t+1, unless all pixels (including the root) are occupied.
Lemma 4. The robots maintain a communication distance of 3, meaning
that the algorithm works for r ≥3. The maximum L -distance from a robot
toa follower is 3.Furthermore,at least one of thefollowing pixels is occupied
when a robot is at pixel u: (1) the parent of u, (2) the grandparent of u, or
(3) the uncle of u.
10 Hsiang et al.
Putting all the claims together and using similar reasoning as for Theo-
rem 1, we get the same kind of bound on the makespan:
Theorem 2. TheBFLFalgorithmhaltswhenallpixelsareoccupiedbyrobots.
The makespan of the BFLF algorithm is 2A−1, where A is the number of
pixels of the environment R.
3.3 Experimental Comparison
While the DFLF and BFLF strategies both have optimal makespan, they
differ with respect to other performance metrics. We have implemented in
Javaasimulatorfortestingourdispersionstrategies,whilemeasuringvarious
performance measures, including: (1) the depth of the tree of all paths from
the source (i.e., the length of the longest path of a robot); (2) the average
distance traveled by a robot during the dispersion; and (3) the average of
the ratios, ρ =l /d , of the (L ) distance l from the door to robot i’s final
location to the total distance d traveled by robot i during the dispersion.
We have compared the DFLF and BFLF strategies for the case of a sin-
gle door, in a variety of different environments. Our results show that the
average depth of the tree grows substantially more rapidly, as a function of
the number of pixels, for DFLF than it does for BFLF; e.g., for an n-by-n
square grid, BFLF tree depth grows linearly in n while DFLF depth grows
closetoquadraticallyinn.Similarly,theaveragedistancetraveledbyarobot
using DFLF growsmore rapidly than using BFLF. The averageof the ratios
ρ =l /d decreaseswithincreasingproblemsizeforDFLF,whileitincreases
for BFLF. Details of the experimental results are deferred to the full paper.
4 Dispersion with Multiple Doors
We now consider the case in which there are k ≥ 1 door pixels. In order to
achieve rapid filling, the objective is to maintain a flow of robots out of as
manydoorsaspossible.Thedifficultyisthatonerobotchainoutofonedoor
pixelmayunnecessarilyblocktheflowofrobotsoutofotherdoorpixels.(See
the introduction and Figure 1(left) for examples.)
4.1 Laminar Flow Leader-Follower (LFLF) Algorithm
ThissectiondescribestheLaminar Flow Leader-Follower (LFLF) algorithm.
TheLFLFalgorithmmaintainsrapidflowsbycarefuluseofcuttingandsplic-
ing.Theemergentbehaviorofthe swarmisaleft-hand-on-wallstrategy.The
behaviorofthe algorithmiscomplexbecausebottlenecksinthe environment
may force the flow to divide into smaller flows that fill different regions and
may merge and split.
In the LFLF algorithm there are k multiple door pixels, s ,s ,···,s .
Note that LFLF matches DFLF algorithm if k = 1. As in the k = 1 case,
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 11
our dispersion strategies are based on leaders and followers. A robot r at
time t at position p(r,t) is classified as active or inactive (stopped). If r is
active, it is either a leader or a follower. However, unlike for k = 1, robots
revert between leaders and followers. (In contrast, for k =1 a robot changes
roles from follower to leader but only relinquishes the leader role by stop-
ping and becoming inactive.) Furthermore, in DFLF once a robot stops, it
becomes inactive. In contrast, in LFLF a robot may temporarily stop while
still remaining active.
In LFLF (as in DFLF), robots have successors and predecessors, but in
LFLF a robot’s immediate successor or predecessor may change over time.
Thus, each robot r at time t has a predecessorrobot denoted robot-pred(r,t)
anda successorrobotdenotedrobot-succ(r,t). If robotr is ata door pixelat
time t (p(r,t) = s , for i ∈ [1,k]), then robot-succ(r) = NIL; if r is a leader
at time t, then robot-pred(r)=NIL.
Here we further refine the roles of the pixels. A pixel can be: (1) an
obstacle, (2) a frontier pixel (a pixel that has never been occupied), (3) an
inactive pixel,thatis,an(occupied)pixelthathostsaninactiverobot,(4)an
active pixel, (which may be occupied or not). If a pixel is unoccupied but
previously occupied, then it is always active; if a pixel is occupied, then it is
active if and only if the robot it hosts is active.
Notethatdoorpixelsmaybeactiveorinactive,asdescribedlater.Active
pixels play the role of transporting robots throughout the domain whereas
inactivepixels areessentiallyobstacles.Analogoustothe definitionofprede-
cessor and successor robots, each active pixel has predecessor and successor
pixels.Inparticular,pixel u attime stept hassuccessorpixel pixel-succ(u,t)
and predecessor pixel pixel-pred(u,t). For door pixels s at any time t ≥ 0
pixel-succ(u,t)=NIL.
A leader pixel u at time t has pixel-pred(u,t) = NIL. As we will see, if a
leader pixel contains a robot, then the robot is a leader, however the leader
robot may not be on a leader pixel and the leader pixel may not contain
robots. We call a chain of predecessor pixels starting from the door pixel s
and ending at a leader pixel, a flow line.
Wenowdefineformallytheleftside andrightside oftheflow.Todoso,we
first present some intermediate definitions. Consider a pixel v at time t, and
let u = pixel-succ(v,t) and w = pixel-pred(v,t). Let the incoming direction
for v at time t be the vector vu and let the outgoing direction for v at time
t be the vector vw.
Consider the (vertical or horizontal) neighboring pixels, when we start
from the incoming direction vu and rotate clockwise until reaching the out-
going direction vw. Those neighboring pixels at intermediate (vertical or
horizontal) orientations are defined to be on the left-hand side of v time t.
Thus, the left-hand side may contain 0,1, or 2 pixels. Any neighboring pixel
that is not on the left-hand side, is on the right-hand side; this includes the
pixels at the incoming and outgoing directions.
12 Hsiang et al.
Notethatleaderpixelsdonothaveoutgoingedges,invalidatingthisdefini-
tion.Foraleaderpixel,wedefineallneighboringpixels(exceptthe successor
pixel) to be on the left-hand side.
The left side of a flow line is the union of the left sides of the non-leader
pixels in the flow line.
The essentialidea the LFLF algorithmis to treat the left side of the flow
linecompletelydifferentlyfromtherightsideoftheflowline.Specifically,we
splice into the left-hand side but we cannot splice into the right.
4.2 Splicing and the LFLF Algorithm
Suppose that attime t a leader robotr reachesa pixel u=p(r ,t). If u has
an(unoccupied)predecessorpixelpixel-pred(u,t),thenrobotr movestothis
pixel. (Since r is a leader robot, it will never have an occupied predecessor
Otherwise, pixel u = p(r ,t) is a leader pixel. If u = p(r ,t) has no
neighboring frontier pixels, then robot r tries to pass on the leadership.
Robot r first looks for a neighboring active pixel v. If no such v exists,
then r becomes inactive and passes the leadership to its successor robot
robot-succ(r ,t). When r becomes inactive, pixel u also becomes inactive
and its successor pixel becomes the new leader pixel.
If robot r looks for a neighboring active pixel v, and such a v exists,
then r checkswhether u=p(r ,t) is a left-hand neighborof v. If this is not
the case for any possible v, then again r becomes inactive and passes the
leadershiptoitssuccessorrobotrobot-succ(r ,t).Asbefore,whenr becomes
inactive, pixel u also becomes inactive and its successor pixel becomes the
new leader pixel.
If there exists such a v, robot r chooses the first such v sweeping clock-
wise, startingfromthe incomingdirection.We redefine the predecessorpixel
pixel-pred(u,t+1) := v and thus successor pixel pixel-succ(v,t+1) := u.
Thus, the previous successor pixel of v becomes a new leader pixel. (Note
that this new leader pixel may or may not have a robot on it.) Now r iden-
tifies its new leader; it follows predecessor pixels starting at v until it finds
a robot r and sets robot-pred(r ,t+1) = r and robot-succ(r ,t+1) = r .
Robot r then passes the leadership to r =robot-succ(r ,t).
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 13
Fig.2. The LFLF algorithm: There are six door pixels in the lower left corner.
Splicing enables the flow to turna corner.
4.3 Correctness of LFLF
WenowshowthatLFLFalwaysfillsanenvironment.DuringLFLF,weclaim
thatthefollowinginvariantismaintained:The left side of a flowline consists
of visited pixels and obstacles. This follows from the fact that, whenever a
robotenters a pixel, it turns as far left as it can (left-hand-on-the-wall).The
invariantimplies the following lemma,which we use to show that the visited
regions propagate out from obstacle pixels:
Lemma 5. The union of boundary points separates the visited region from
obstacles and the right side of flows. In other words, the unvisited region only
touches a flow from its right.
Another useful property of flow lines is the following:
Lemma 6. Flows do not self-intersect.
Lemma 7. Leadership passing does not change the total number of leader
robots. Thus, the number of leader robots at any time step t is equal to the
number of active doors.
Theorem 3. The robots always fill environment R.
Proof. When a robot becomes inactive, it is a leader and its surrounding
pixels must allnot be frontier,for otherwise r would advance to sucha pixel
and still be active. Therefore, if an active pixel u is next to a frontier pixel
v, any robot advancing into u will not become inactive and some flow lines
can advance into the empty region so it will be filled. (cid:3)
In the next sections we analyze the makespan for this filling strategy.
4.4 Competitive Analysis for Online Strategies
ForanystrategyS, letn (t)be the number ofrobotsthatenter throughthe
doors during timestep t; we define n (0)=k.
Note that the inherent delay of 2 in robot movement means that n (t)
is a highly erratic function, so that in one timestep k robots might enter
the doors, implying that in the next timestep no robots enter the doors.
14 Hsiang et al.
In LFLF additional delays are caused by splicings, and therefore we cannot
even say that a robot enters an active door pixel every other timestep. To
understandwhy,considerFigure2.Whenoneflowlinesplicesintoadifferent
flow line, a robot may get delayed by one additional time step in order to
obtaintherequiredseparationbetweenrobots.Ifmanysplicingarehappening
nexttoeachother,thiscancauseanaccumulateddelayofuptoktimeunits,
which causes a “wave” of packed robots that propagates back towards the
doorpixels.Thus,adoorpixelmighttemporarilyholdoffejecting robotsfor
many units without the door pixel becoming inactive. Whenever an active
door pixel does not eject a robot we say there is a door-pixel delay.
Fortunately, the following lemma bounds the number of splicings (and
also the total number of door-pixel delays).
Lemma 8. A pixel can only be used to initiate O(1) splicings.
Theorem 4. The LFLF strategy is O(log(k+1))-competitive.
Proof. Considerthetimes{t }⌈log(k+1)⌉,wheret isthelatesttimestepduring
whichatleastk/2idoorpixelsareactive.Wecalltimest ,t ,t ,...,t
significant events. Consider the time interval from t to t , when at least
k/2i+1 door pixels are active. Thus, the total number of robots leaving the
doorplusdoor-pixeldelaysduringthis intervalisatleast(k/2i+1)(t −t ).
Now consider an optimal strategy S∗, and consider the cut χ associated
with the significant event t of LFLF. Cut χ is the boundary between the
occupied and frontier pixels and has size at most k/2i. A lower bound on
the makespan of any strategy is the area “behind” χ (i.e., the side of χ not
containing the doors) divided by the length of χ plus the amount of time
required to send the flow from the door to reach χ. Thus, the makespan,
opt, of S∗ satisfies
k/2i i+1 i
Summing over all significant events we obtain that the total filling time of
LFLF is O(opt·log(k+1)). (cid:3)
If we disregard the issue of delays caused by pixels having to be fully
vacatedbeforebeingre-entered,wegetawholeclasscalledsensiblestrategies,
defined by the following two conditions:
(1) n (t) is non-increasing in t; and
(2) If n (t) > n (t + 1), then at time t the number of occupied pixels
bordering on a frontier pixel is n (t+1).
The above proof also implies the following; quite clearly, this result still
holds if we extend the notion of sensible strategies to allow for some delays,
as long as these only add a constant factor to the filling times.
Theorem 5. Any sensible strategy is O(log(k +1))-competitive.
Rapidly Dispersing Robot Swarms 15
2k robots enter
k+1 corridors ("doors")
of width k
k/2 + 1 corridors of width k/2
k/2 k/2 k co /4 rr + i 1 dors,
k2 width k/4 M M
Fig.3. Left: An environment that is hard for both depth-first and breadth-
first filling strategies. This example shows that LFLF and related strategies are
Ω(log(k+1)) competitive. Right:Ascenario in which anysimple-minded strategy
is Ω(log(k+1)) competitive.
4.5 Competitive Analysis of Simple-Minded Strategies
Under certain natural assumptions that limit the power of strategies, it is
possibletogivematchinglowerboundsonthe competitiveness.Togivesome
intuition, consider first the class of examples shown in Figure 3(left), which
shows that the laminar flow algorithm may take as much as Ω(log(k+1))
times opt.
Theorem 6. The LFLF algorithm is Ω(log(k+1))-competitive.
This lower bound can be generalized to a much larger class of strategies.
We say that strategy S is simple-minded if the following condition holds:
There is a constant C, such that we can only tell the number A′ of pixels in
a region R′ ⊆R when a set R′′ ⊆R has been visited that has all pixels in R′
within L distance C.
Considering simple-minded strategies is quite natural in the context of
robot swarms: If we assume we only “know” a regionR′ after each pixel has
been seenby one ofthe robots,then the constantC correspondsprecisely to
the sensor range. The example of Figure 3(left) can be generalized as shown
schematically in Figure 3(right), which forms the basis for the proof of the
following theorem:
Theorem 7. Any simple-minded strategy is Ω(log(k+1))-competitive.
A particular subclass of simple-minded strategies is one that arises quite
naturally in exploration problems: We say that a strategy is conservative
if any pixel that has been “discovered”, i.e., come within sensor range of a
robot,muststaywithinsensorrangeofsomerobot.Foraconstant-sizesensor
16 Hsiang et al.
range,itiseasytoprovethefollowingstatement,whichhasbeenclaimedfor
a long time in a different context:
Proposition 1. All conservative strategies are simple-minded.
As the LFLF strategy is conservative by design, we conclude that the
lower bound of Theorem 7 applies to LFLF.
Acknowledgements We thank N. Jovanovicand M. Sztainberg for contri-
butionstothisresearch.ThisreseearchwaspartiallysupportedbyHRLLabs
(a DARPA subcontract), Honda Fundamental Research Labs, NASA Ames
Research (NAG2-1325), NSF (CCR-0098172, EIA-0112849, CCR-0208670),
U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation, and Sandia National Labs.