Amplitude / Higgs Modes in Condensed Matter Physics
David Pekker1 and C. M. Varma2
1Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15217 and
2Department of Physics and Astronomy,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521
(Dated: February10,2015)
The order parameter and its variations in space and time in many different states in condensed matter
physicsatlowtemperaturesaredescribedbythecomplexfunctionΨ(r,t). Thesestatesincludesuperfluids,
superconductors,andasubclassofantiferromagnetsandcharge-densitywaves. Thecollectivefluctuations
in the ordered state may then be categorized as oscillations of phase and amplitude of Ψ(r,t). The phase
oscillations are the Goldstone modes of the broken continuous symmetry. The amplitude modes, even
at long wavelengths, are well defined and decoupled from the phase oscillations only near particle-hole
symmetry, where the equations of motion have an effective Lorentz symmetry as in particle physics, and
if there are no significant avenues for decay into other excitations. They bear close correspondence with
the so-called Higgs modes in particle physics, whose prediction and discovery is very important for the
standard model of particle physics. In this review, we discuss the theory and the possible observation of
the amplitude or Higgs modes in condensed matter physics – in superconductors, cold-atoms in periodic
lattices, and in uniaxial antiferromagnets. We discuss the necessity for at least approximate particle-hole
symmetry as well as the special conditions required to couple to such modes because, being scalars, they
donotcouplelinearlytotheusualcondensedmatterprobes.
]noc-rpus.tam-dnoc[
2v8692.6041:viXra
I. INTRODUCTION
EversincethephenomenologicaltheoryofGinzburgandLandauin1950[1],ithasbeenknown
that the long-range order of superfluids and superconductors and its slow variations in space and
time must be described by a complex function describing an amplitude and a phase, i.e., a U(1)
matterfield:
This is in accord with the hydrodynamics introduced by Landau [2] for liquid 4He and the mi-
croscopic weak-coupling theory for Bosons by Bogoliubov [3]. The microscopic theory of su-
perconductivity was invented by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer [4] (BCS) in 1957 and almost
immediately the phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau Lagrangian with (1) as the order parameter
fieldwasderivedbyGorkov[5]inthestaticlongwavelengthlimitofthetheory.
We are concerned in this review with a number of different systems with different micro-
scopic physics but with long-range order and its long wavelength fluctuations describable by a
field Ψ(r,t). We therefore first write down the action-density for the field Ψ(r,t) based on general
symmetry principles and in subsequent sections show how the microscopic physics in different
systems leads to it. This allows us to emphasize the generality of the ideas most simply and
economically.
TheGinzburg-Landauaction-densityinthestaticandlongwavelengthlimitis
For a charged matter field Ψ(r,t), as in superconductivity, one must include the action of the
electromagnetic field and its interaction with Ψ(r,t) in a gauge-invariant way by changing ∇ →
(∇−i(e/c)A), where A(r,t) is the vector potential. The effect of such a term is briefly mentioned
inSec.II.
We need consider only the first two terms of Equation (2) in equilibrium. Then for r > 0, the
potentialenergyisrepresentedpictoriallyasinFig. (1). Thestaticequilibriumisat
Theequilibriumenergydoesnotdependonthephaseφandwemaypickittobe0.
(cid:40)(cid:73)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:83)(cid:0)(cid:34)(cid:79)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:0)(cid:73)(cid:78)(cid:0)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:67)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:67)(cid:84)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83) (cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:19)
FIG.1. The“MexicanHatPotential”V(|Ψ|,φ)forthecondensatefieldΨinthelongwave-lengthlimitasa
functionoftheamplitude|Ψ|andthephaseφ. AdaptedfromReference[6]
Tocalculatethetime-dependentfluctuationsaboutthisstateonemustsupplementEquation(2)
with dynamical terms. Throughout this paper, we restrict ourselves to phenomena at low temper-
atures compared with the transition temperature, where loss of energy in the degrees of freedom
in Ψ(r,t) compared with other degrees of freedom such as fermions, phonons, etc., is unimpor-
tant. The dynamical terms must then be time-reversal invariant. The first two time-reversal and
gauge-invarianttermsallowedintheaction-densityare
∂ (cid:16)∂ (cid:17)(cid:16)∂ (cid:17)
dynamic 1 2
The distinction between the two terms is important in the subsequent discussion. On deriving
the equation of motion from S + S (as detailed in the next section), one observes that
static dynamic
retaining the K term alone gives time dependence, as in the Schro¨dinger equation. This is what
occurs,appropriatelyenough,forthedynamicalequationsforsuperfluidheliumgivenbyGross[7]
and Pitaevskii [8], which are not Lorentz invariant. In the present context, it is more important to
emphasize the particle-hole symmetry aspect of Lorentz invariance because it requires that the
equation of motion be symmetric under conjugation. If the K term is absent, e.g., owing to
the presence of particle-hole symmetry, only the K remains and a Lorentz-invariant equation of
motionisobtained.
The equations of motion with both K and K terms included are derived in the next section,
but we can say some useful things by looking at Fig. (1) alone and making some general con-
siderations. The invariance of the energy to the phase implies that there must exist a zero energy
or massless mode of fluctuation of density current in the long wavelength limit, i.e., along the
azimuthaldirectionattheminimumofthepotentialinFig. (1). Thisisthephysicalcontentofthe
Goldstone theorem [9]. These are the sound modes derived for superfluid 4He and for the weakly
interactingBosegas. Duetothelong-rangenatureoftheCoulombinteraction,densityorlongitu-
dinal fluctuations of the charge density in superconductors at long wavelengths occur not at zero
energy but close to the plasmon energy as in the normal metallic state [10]. These results are true
whetherornotthedynamicsisLorentzinvariantorparticle-holesymmetric.
What about the orthogonal degree of freedom exhibited in Fig. (1), i.e., the oscillations of
the amplitude of the order parameter |Ψ(r,t)| around its equilibrium value (3)? This is the Higgs
or amplitude mode of the model. Its existence was first mentioned in a paper by Higgs [11] for
the same model but with Lorentz invariance, i.e., with a second-order derivative in time only,
because he was interested in applications to particle physics. Its occurrence in superconductivity
was missed until 1981 [12], because collective fluctuations of amplitude were studied primarily
only near T , where the dominant time-dependent term describes the relaxation dynamics of the
order parameter associated with coupling to the fermion bath. In this case, there is no distinct
Higgs mode [6]. In superfluid 4He, K (cid:44) 0 and so no Higgs mode can be found either [6]. In
superconductors at low temperatures, as is explained below, K ≈ 0 and K (cid:44) 0; the theory is
Lorentz invariant to a very good approximation. So an amplitude mode or Higgs boson can exist
provided it does not have avenues for rapid decay into quasiparticle-quasihole pairs. Particle-hole
symmetryoccursforinteractingBosonsinaperiodiclattice[13]alongalineintheirphasediagram
and such a system was experimentally realized by cold atom techniques and the observations
interpreted in terms of the Higgs or amplitude modes. Experiments in planar antiferromagnets
have also been interpreted similarly. So have the experiments in the recently achieved exciton
condensates[14].
We start with very briefly discussing the amusing history of the relationship of developments
in superconductivity and in the standard model of electro-weak unification in particle physics. In
the following section, we discuss the phenomenology of the Higgs mode that appears in different
physical systems under appropriate conditions. In subsequent sections, the microscopic theory
andexperimentsinsuperconductors,coldbosonicatoms,andquitebrieflyinantiferromagnetsare
discussed. WeplacesomeemphasisonthefactthatHiggsmodesarequitehardtodiscover. They
are directly discoverable in some cases – as, for example, in superconductors – only because the
existence of a condensate allows some conservation law to be circumvented. We also mention a
newwayofdiscoveringHiggsthroughJosephson-couplingeffects.
A. BriefHistory
The story of the amplitude or Higgs mode, and the phase or Goldstone or Bogolubov mode in
a gauge theory of chargeless matter, which moves to the plasma frequency in a gauge theory of
chargedmatter,isamongimportantmatters,asisthestoryofculturaldifferencesamongcondensed
matter physicists and elementary particle physicists. The prolific and wide variety of experiments
available in condensed matter physics compared with that in particle physics make certain things
obvious that are less so in the experiment starved and therefore necessarily more abstract field
of particle physics. Among condensed matter physicists, there appears to be some confusion
about why the Higgs discovered in particle physics is so important as well as about the meaning
and difference of the terms, Higgs field, Higgs condensate, Higgs bosons, Bogolubov modes,
Anderson-Nambu-Goldstone bosons. We present the development of the idea of the Higgs or
amplitude mode in condensed matter physics and along the way hopefully also clear up some of
theconfusion. Westartbyfirstgivingaglimpseintotheinterestinghistoryofthisfield.
BCS had chosen a gauge to do the calculations in which the transverse response of the super-
conductor to an electromagnetic field and the the Meissner effect are perfectly well calculated.
They did not calculate the longitudinal response, which, in the BCS mean-field theory cannot be
correctly calculated. This should not have been much of an issue but was made into one. In a
systemofchargedfermions,onemustcouplethephasedegreeoffreedom,whosegradientispro-
portional to the charge-current, to the electromagnetic field. The longitudinal charge response of
the superconductor is then essentially the same as that of a normal metal [10, 15], i.e., at long
wavelength the superconductor must also have plasmon excitations. Deriving the longitudinal re-
sponserequiresatheoryrespectingtheequationofcontinuityofcharge. Thesimplestsuchtheory
isnottheBCSmean-fieldtheorybuttherandomphaseapproximation,or,infieldtheoryparlance,
theone-loopapproximation.
Much attention was paid in the years immediately following the BCS to the fluctuations of
the amplitude of the order parameter near T , where they are over-damped and mixed with the
fluctuationsofthephase. Notmuchattentionwaspaidtotheirpropertiesatlowtemperatures. For
thestateofthetheoryofcollectivemodesin1969,seeRef. (16). Thus,forexample,althoughtime-
dependent equations for the order parameter (containing both first- and second-order derivative
terms in time) were derived [17, 18] and the dispersion of the collective modes was calculated,
thederivation,aspointedoutbytheauthors[17]themselves,waswithinlimitswheretheanswers
werenotvalid. Therefore,thecorrectdispersionfortheamplitudemodesatlowtemperatureswas
not obtained. A simple calculation in the collisionless limit [12] at low temperatures yields the
correct result for the amplitude modes. Perhaps more subtle than that, as discussed below, is how
onecouplestoitinexperiments.
Meanwhile, in the early 1960s, locally gauge-invariant gauge theories for matter fields had be-
come popular in particle physics [19] because they gave answers that were well controlled, i.e.,
the theory was renormalizable. However, such theories predicted, as in superfluid He or weakly
interacting Bose gas [3], a massless phase fluctuation mode in the limit of long wavelengths. No
masslessparticleswerefoundinnatureexceptthephotons. Thederivationofsuchmasslessmodes
byGoldstone[9]andcollaboratorshadleftalittleloopholeintheexistenceofsuchamodeinthe
U(1)modelsandintheirgeneralizationtonon-Abelianmodels. In1963,inagenerallyoverlooked
paper, possibly because the discussion was not Lorentz-invariant, Anderson [20] pointed out that
the remedy in particle physics may be the coupling of the matter field to electromagnetism, the
same remedy that converts the Goldstone modes in a neutral system to the plasmons in supercon-
ductors. Meanwhile, Nambu [15], who was the pioneer in connecting what was learned in the
theory of superconductivity to particle physics and introducing the concepts of broken symmetry
to particle physics, together with Jona-Lasinio [21] applied the pairing idea to strong interaction
physics,butnottoweak-interactionphysicsandwithoutcojoiningtoelectromagnetism.
In 1964, three papers appeared [11, 22, 23] on the issue of coupling of the matter field to the
electromagnetic field and the problem of the massless mode. Of these three, the simplest is the
paperbyHiggs,whichstartsbywritingdownjusttheU(1)Lagrangiancoupledtotheelectromag-
neticfield,i.e.,theGinzburg-LandautypeLagrangianaboveEquation(2),andacknowledgingthat
his work is based on the developments by Anderson and others in superconductivity. But being a
particle theorist, he considered a Lorentz invariant or particle-hole symmetric version of it and so
put K = 0. One then has an equation of motion with a second order time-derivative. Along with
the result that the Goldstone mode moves to a finite frequency, he noted the existence of another
mode with the words, “It is worth noting that an essential feature of this type of theory which
has been described in this note is the prediction of an incomplete multiplet of scalar and vector
bosons”. The scalar is massive. The “Higgs mode” was born through this important remark. In
particle physics, these issues took on great importance when Weinberg [24] and Salam [25] used
these ideas in connection with a gauge-invariant theory of weak interactions that had to be of
SU(2) symmetry. This was physics with application to observable particles and several predic-
tions. Infact,thecommontextbookversionofelectro-weaktheoryisallfoundinthebriefelegant
paperbyWeinberg[24]. Thevectorbosons,WandZwerederived;Wbosonsaretheideological
equivalents of the plasmons, and Z bosons are the associated neutral oscillations in SU(2) fields.
They were observed in experiments in the 1970s. The massive scalar particle, the “Higgs boson,”
appears to have been observed recently at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [26, 27], completing
the observations of the principal predictions of standard model and making us believe that the
universeis,amongotherthings,anelectro-weakcondensate.
The phenomenological Standard Model assumes an electro-weak condensate. Ψ(r,t) is often
called the Higgs field. The equivalent of what is the superconducting condensate in electro-weak
theory, is called the “Higgs condensate”. The excitations of this condensate are the Higgs modes
andthevectorbosonsWandZ.TheHiggsmodesaretheamplitudemodesofthiscondensate,and
theWandtheZparticlesaretheSU(2)phasemodes.
The microscopic theory for the condensate, if it exists, is yet to be discovered. To a condensed
matter theorist, the principal difficulty, experimentally and notionally, is that the equivalent in
electro-weak theory of what condensed matter physicists call the “normal state,” whose under-
standing was essential to understanding superconductivity, is estimated to occur at temperatures
of over 250GeV. No controlled experiments or observations are expected at such temperatures.
Intheirabsence,speculativedirectionsoftheoryhaveprospered,whichmaywitherintheabsence
of experimental support [28]. It also appears that the analog of the BCS microscopic theory, i.e.,
condensation of fermions to form the superconducting condensate, the so-called “techni-color”
theories, are not supported in experiments. New ideas for theory and experiments are necessary.
Perhaps detailed experimental results from the LHC in the future will help frame the right ques-
tions.
Thestandardmodel,initspresentform,wouldhavetheHiggsfieldexistingabovethetransition
temperature with zero vacuum expectation value, because r < 0 in the action Equation (2). In
that case, only the leptons with weak and electromagnetic interactions, such as the electrons, are
expectedtobecomemassless. Anamplitudemodeatfiniteenergywouldcontinuetoexist,butthe
absence of the vacuum expectation value for Ψ makes the W and the Z particles massless. All of
thisisquitedifferentfromthetheoryofnormalmetals.
Motivated by some unexpected experimental observations [29], the theory of “what particle-
physicists would call a Higgs mode”, (to quote Higgs himself [30]), in superconductors was dis-
coveredin1981[12]. Inignoranceofdevelopmentsinparticlephysics,itwascalledtheamplitude
mode. It was also pointed out that modes in other U(1) systems, such as some antiferromagnets
and incommensurate charge density waves (CDWs) can be similarly discussed. The realization
that cold bosons in a lattice have a line in the chemical potential-dimensionless interaction plane,
whichis particle-holesymmetric[13]has ledtothe searchforandevidence oftheHiggs modein
such a system. The x-y antiferromagnetic insulators are particle-hole symmetric, and their modes
naturally map to those of the action Equation (2). Specifically, a recent study of antiferromagnets
has identified the modes corresponding to fluctuations of the magnitude of the order parameter as
theHiggsmodes,whereastheusualspinwavesaretheequivalentofthephasemodes[31].
One might well ask when is it appropriate to call an amplitude mode in condensed matter
physics a Higgs mode. Higgs was dealing with a locally gauge-invariant problem. Of the con-
densed matter problems discussed here, only the superconductors are locally gauge invariant, the
cold bosons in a lattice are only globally gauge invariant, while the antiferromagnets are even
locally anisotropic. So it might be appropriate to refer to only the amplitude mode(s) in super-
conductors as Higgs mode(s). This semantic distinction is, however, not being maintained in the
literature,anditmaynotbepossibletostemthetide.
II. PHENOMENOLOGY
Insubsequentsections,wediscussthat,for(neutral)superconductorsorforbosonsonalattice
or for planar antiferromagnets, the microscopic physics leads to the action of Equation (2), in the
appropriate continuum limit. The equations of motion for fluctuations of Ψ(r,t) are given from
Equation (2) by setting ∂S/∂Ψ∗ = 0 and ∂S/∂Ψ = 0. The low-energy modes are obtained by
expanding around the static equilibrium (with equilibrium φ chosen to be 0) and separating into
amplitudeandphasefluctuations,δ andδ ,respectively:
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Momentum--k
k(cid:116)--ycneuqerF
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Momentum--k
k(cid:116)--ycneuqerF
Higgs-like sector Goldstone sector
K1=0.1 K1=0.1
K1=0.2 K1=0.2
FIG.2. (a)ThedispersionoftheHiggs-likeandtheGoldstonemodesatthecriticalpointr = 0forseveral
values of K (as indicated in the legend). (b) The dispersion in the superfluid (ordered) phase r = 0.15,
valuesofK sameasina.
OnFouriertransformingtowave-vectorqandfrequencyvariablesω,
Some important conclusions [6] follow from these simple equations. First consider the particle-
hole asymmetric case, with K = 0. The roots of the secular equation are simply the degenerate
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Bogoliubov modes with dispersion ω2 = 2r (ξq)2 at long wavelengths. The eigenvectors show
that the phase δ and the amplitude δ are coupled so that there are no distinct modes for the
amplitudeandphasefluctuations. Considernowthecompletelyparticle-holesymmetricbyputting
K = 0, K (cid:44) 0. We get two orthogonal modes with eigenvector δ , i.e., the phase or Bogoliubov
mode with dispersion ω2 = (ξq)2/K and a mode with eigenvector δ , i.e., the amplitude mode,
with energy ω2 = 2r/K at q = 0. A few solutions for arbitrary ratios K /K are shown in
Figure 2. The magnitudes of K and K are easily determined microscopically in weak-coupling
calculations, which are the only analytic calculations available so far. They are, however, subject
torenormalizationforstrongerinteractions[32],aninvestigationthatoughttobepursuedfurther.
The important point is that having a Mexican hat potential is not enough to get distinct ampli-
tudeandphasemodes. Inparticlephysics,theimpositionofLorentzinvarianceguaranteesK = 0.
To get orthogonal amplitude and phase modes in condensed matter physics, exact particle-hole
symmetry is required. [A small amount of particle-hole asymmetry results in the mixing of the
amplitude and phase modes. As a result of this mixing, the Higgs-like mode is pushed to higher
frequencies and remains a gapped (ω = 1 2r+K2) even at the transition point.] Normal
metals are not particle-hole symmetric, but as explained below, superconductors are particle-hole
FIG.3. TheRamanspectrainNbSe2intwodifferentsymmetriesA andE . TheFigureontheleftshows
the Raman spectra at 9 K, the superconducting transition temperature is 7.2 K. There is a charge-density
wave transition in the compound at about 40 K. The low energy peaks near 40 cm−1 occur only below 40
Kandareduetotheloweredlatticesymmetry. Thefigureontherightshowsthelow-frequencypartofthe
Ramanspectraat2K,exhibitingthenewmodesnearanenergyof2∆. AdaptedfromReference29.
symmetric at low energies of the order of the superconducting gap. In homogeneous superfluid
4He,onemayagaindispensewithdampingforlowtemperature,butthereisnoparticle-holesym-
metry: The time dependence is nonrelativistic, as in Schro¨dinger equation or the Gross-Pitaevskii
equation. In cold bosons in lattices, as explained below, particle-hole symmetry may be care-
fully organized along certain lines in the chemical potential-interaction phase diagram. In dimer-
antiferromagnets, the particle-hole symmetry corresponds to the equivalence of the two triplets
thatdescribetheeasy-plane.
We now briefly mention the effect of an applied electromagnetic vector potential A(r,t) in
superconductors through change of the gradient terms in Equation (2). Additional off-diagonal
terms ∝ ieqA then appear in Equation (6). For particle-hole symmetry, K = 0, there is then a
nonlinear in A driving of the mode and a modification of its dispersion. For K (cid:44) 0, there is
a linear response of O(qK A), because the amplitude and the phase modes are already linearly
coupledby K .
III. MICROSCOPICTHEORYINSUPERCONDUCTORS
In 1981, Raman scattering experiments were reported in NbSe (see Figure 3), both in its nor-
malstateandinitssuperconductingstate,whichoccursbelowT ≈7.2K[29]. Generally,Raman
experiments are hard to do on metals. The experiment could be done in the superconducting state
only below the temperature of the superfluid temperature of 4He – used as the coolant – about 2
K. The Raman spectra (see Figure 3) show optical phonons, which are also seen above the su-
perconducting transition, and an additional peak at about twice the superconducting gap, 2∆. A
microscopic theory to explain this observation was developed, and it was called the amplitude
mode. It was realized that such a mode in principle exists in all superconductors and in any con-
densed matter problem with U(1) symmetry but that, except under special circumstances, it may
be over-damped. More importantly, the mode is a scalar, to which there is no linear coupling to
the usual condensed matter probes. Therefore, it can be observed only in special circumstances
andwithspecialexperimentaltools.
The key prediction of the theory, that the mode can only be discovered in Raman by stealing
weight from some other excitation that shakes the superconducting condensate, has been verified
onlyrecently[33].
The microscopic theory of the Higgs or amplitude collective mode in superconductors is best
formulatedinthebasisoftheGor’kovspinors:
c ,c† are fermion annihilation and creation operators with momenta k and the z-component of
spin. In this space, the charge-density operators appear as the τ component of the Pauli matrixτ,
andthesuperconductingamplitudeandphaseastheτ andtheτ components,respectively. α (cid:44) β
areupanddownspin-componentsinsomechosenquantizationaxis. Condensedmatterphysicsis
concernedwithonlytheinteractionbetweenchargessothatthebasicHamiltonianispurelyinthe
τ space:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
k,α k 3 k,α k+q,α 3 k+q,α k(cid:48)−q,β 3 k(cid:48),β
k,α k,k(cid:48),q,α,β
For attractive interactions, the normal Fermi-liquid state of such a Hamiltonian is unstable to
Cooperpairingandsuperconductivity,andthegroundstateisgivenbythegroundstateoftheBCS
Hamiltonian. It is useful to rewrite the Hamiltonian as the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian and its
differencefromH:
BCS k,α k 3 k 1 k,α
AspointedoutbyNambu[15],theBCSHamiltonianbearsaone-to-onecorrespondencewiththe
Dirac Hamitonian. It is particle-hole symmetric, and equations of motion derived from it must be
Lorentz invariant. This is strictly true only if the density of states in the vicinity of the chemical
potential has a zero derivative in the normal state. If the density of states in the normal state of a
metal has a finite derivative ρ(cid:48)((cid:15)) near the chemical potential, it is usually of O(ρ((cid:15) )/W), where
W is the bandwidth. Then the particle-hole asymmetry in the quasiparticle density of states in the
superconductoruptoenergiesofseveraltimesthegap∆isofO(∆/W),whichistypically10−3.
A. PhaseModes
InEquation(9),thephaseofΦhasbeenarbitrarilychosenintheτ -direction. Identicalphysical
resultsshouldbeobtainedforanychoiceintheτ −τ plane,i.e.,bytherotation
ThisisalocalgaugetransformationunderwhichtheoriginalHamiltonianEquation(8)isinvariant
providedwealsomakethechange
Thisinvariancereflectsthecontinuityequationforcharge
(cid:32) (cid:33)
∂ (cid:16) (cid:17) P
wherePisthemomentumoperator.
Although the full Hamiltonian satisfies this invariance, H does not – the gauge invariance
troublementionedabove. Theremedyistocalculateinapproximationsconsistentwiththeinvari-
ance, the simplest being the random phase approximation (RPA). This requires fluctuations over
the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian, with use of H and writing down equations of motion for inter-
action vertex in the τ channel. Solving the equations of motion in the RPA approximation, one
finds that the vertex has a pole at ω = (v /3)k for k → 0 if one neglects the Coulomb interaction
partofH . ThiswouldbetheGoldstoneortheBogoliubovmode,whosephysicswehavealready
interpreted in the discussion of Figure 1. But unlike in the case of a neutral superfluid like 4He,
this is a mode of oscillation of charged particles. The Coulomb interaction part of H , which is
singularasq−2,cannotbeneglected. Inclusionofthisprocesspushesthepoleatlongwavelengths
toneartheplasmafrequencyΩ = (4πne2/m)1/2 [34]withnegligiblecorrectionsoforder(∆2/E ).
Here, N is the charge density of the metal and E , its Fermi energy. Ω in a typical metal is on
orderofseveraleV’s,whereas∆istypicallyofO(1meV).So,asfarasthelongitudinalproperties
are concerned, essentially nothing changes on the transition from the metallic state to the super-
conducting state. It would be very surprising if it did. After all, the color of a metal is determined
toalargeextentbytheplasmafrequency;onewouldhardlyexpectittochangeduetothechanges
of the excitations at tiny energy compared with the plasma frequency due to superconductivity.
This coupling of matter field to electromagnetic field, however, has been of great importance [19]
inhighenergyphysics,whereonedoesnothaveagivenmicroscopicHamiltonianandwherethere
arenoexperimentsinthe“normalstate”.
B. AmplitudeMode
To find the amplitude collective modes, one must look for singularities in the vertex in the
τ channel. The bare vertex in the τ channel is just ∆, as may be seen from the BCS Hamilto-
nian (Equation (9)). The simplest next step is again RPA. Just as RPA in the density channel can
be trusted because it is consistent with the invariance of the full Hamiltonian to the transforma-
tion (Equation (11)), there are additional but rather unfamiliar invariances of the full Hamiltonian
(Equation (8)) in the τ and τ channels. These were pointed out by Nambu [15] in Eqsuations
(4.4)-(4.8)inhisclassicpaper,wherethecontinuityequationsintheCooperchannelsτ ,τ were
provided.
The RPA equation of motion for the vertex, which is consistent with the Nambu continuity
equations in the Cooper channel, is represented graphically in Figure 4. Writing Γ = ζ(q)τ , the
collective modes are given by the solutions of the homogeneous part of the equation for Figure 4,
FIG. 4. The vertex equation or the Bethe-Salpeter Equation for the amplitude mode or the Higgs. The
fermion propagators in this diagram are in the representation of the Gor’kov spinors, Equation (7). The
bare-vertexγ aswellastherenormalizedvertexΓareintheτ channel. Projectedtotheordinaryfermion
operators,thisdiagramisintheparticle-particleorCooperchannelwithnetmomentumqandspin-singlet.
i.e.,bysettingthevalueofthebarevertexγ = 0,whichbyinspectionofthisfigureis
1 (2π)4 3 1 3
Her,e k stands for the four-vector for the energy-momentum carried by the propagators. The
solution of Equation (14) is described in detail in Refs. 12. For T = 0, at momentum transfer
q → 0,ithassingularities [12]attheenergyν givenby
(cid:88) (cid:15)2
1+V k = 0. (15)
Visthes-waveattractiveinteractionsbetweennormal-stateparticles,whicharealsoshowninFig-
ure4); E2 = (cid:15)2+∆2 istheBCSquasi-particleenergyassumingthesimplests-wave,k-independent
gap function ∆. As usual, singularities in the vertex signify collective modes. Several important
points about Equation (15) should be noted. At ν = 2∆, this is just the BCS equation for the
superconducting gap. The finite temperature version of this equation has a factor tanh(βE ) in
the numerator in the second term. At ν → 0,∆ → 0, this is then just the BCS condition for the
temperature of the superconducting instability. This means that every (s-wave) superconductor is
requiredtohaveacollectivemodeintheτ oramplitudechannelatleastintheweakcouplinglimit
andforthemomentumq → 0andprovidedparticle-holeasymmetryisnegligible. Comparingthis
with the phenomenology found in Section II and Figure 1, this is the same collective excitation
as the amplitude or Higgs mode of the phenomenological U(1) model. The physical reason for
getting the collective exception in the weak-coupling limit at precisely ν = 2∆ and the relation to
thephenomenologyisprovidedbytakingthecoefficientsr andU inEquation2fromBCStheory
and realizing that the coefficient K is given by the compressibility, which is N(0), the density of
statesattheFermisurface.
To consider the observability of such modes, one must however also consider the damping of
suchresonances. Withthebenefitofamicroscopictheory,wecancalculatethefiniteq-correction
andtheeffectofquasiparticlelifetime. SolutionsofEquation14atsmallq[12]gives
where v is the Fermi-velocity. The damping at finite q is because the frequency of the mode
lies in the particle-hole continuum. We see below that the mode is shifted below 2∆ because of
interactionswithphonons,andthenthereisthennodampinguntillaminimalvalueofq. Thereare
bound to be corrections to this result due both to Fermi-liquid effects and strong-coupling, which
havenotbeenmuchpursued.
An important question is what do Coulomb interactions do to the amplitude mode. The mode
is an eigenvector of τ . It is therefore orthogonal to the charge sector τ . It can therefore not
couple to Coulomb interactions. This is seen in explicit calculations [12] but only for particle-
hole symmetry. This may also be seen from the fact that Φ†τ Φ is invariant to the transformation
Equation(11).
C. CouplingofAmplitudeModestoExperimentalProbes.
If one puts in the Raman scattering q, which is of the order of the inverse wavelength of light
in Equation (16), the damping of the mode is much larger than 2∆. This bears no relation to the
experiments that see very sharp peaks. But even more important is the question how one may
couple with external fields to such a mode and observe it as a linear response. As we have seen,
the Higgs mode has no projection to charge or current density or dipole or magnetization oscilla-
tions and therefore no linear coupling to electromagnetic fields. Indeed, it has no linear-response
coupling to ordinary condensed matter probes. This corresponds to the oft-used characterization
oftheHiggsasascalar.
A reading [12] of the experiments [29] suggested that the new mode appears only through
stealing spectral weight from the optical phonon present already in the Raman spectra above T .
(Approximate conservation of the first moment of the spectral weight in the two modes as a func-
tionofamagneticfieldwasshownintheexperiments,butonefindsanequallygoodconservation
of the integrated spectral weight itself in those measurements. No temperature dependent mea-
surements in the superconducting state were made until very recently [33].) Such a conservation
automatically occurs if the Higgs were linearly coupled to Raman active optical phonons. The
u q# τ 1# τ 1# u q# q# k+q# Drive# Higgs#
1 " Condensate#
FIG. 5. (a) The Raman active phonon’s self-energy due to linear coupling to the Higgs mode due to the
anomalous vertex of Equation 17. A similar process gives the self-energy of the Higgs mode with an
intermediatestateofthephonon. (b)Theanomalousvertexwhichreliesontheexistenceofanumbernon-
conservingcondensate. (c)VertexforproductionofHiggsboson,whichmaybeusedincoldbosonatoms
in a lattice, similar to that of (b). The drive excites long wave-length density or current fluctuations which
arequadraticinbosonoperators. Avacuumexpectationvalueofthebosonoperatorexistsinthecondensed
stateleavingthefluctuationsoftheothertoturnintotheAmplitudeorHiggsmode.
Higgs mode would then appear as a pole in its self-energy of the Raman active phonon, resulting
in a pair of resonances, with the weight of the two resonances the same as that of the only reso-
nance above the superconducting transition temperature to which alone the external optical probe
couples.
It was therefore natural to assume that a coupling of the lattice displacement coordinate u of
theRamanactivemodestotheamplitudemode(Ψ†τ Ψ(cid:1) (q)exists:
Here, λ labels the polarization of the displacement coordinate. Now we can calculate the self-
energy of the displacement propagator, D(λ,q,ω) ≡ (cid:104)u u† (cid:105)(ω) as shown in part (a) of Figure 5,
as well as the self-energy of the amplitude mode due to the coupling. Such couplings have two
effects: The pole of the amplitude mode shifts downwards at q = 0 from its value without the
coupling of 2∆ if lies below the phonon energy ω . So at small q, it no longer overlays the
particle-holecontinuumandisthereforeundamped. Therenormalizedpoleoftheamplitudemode
appears in the self-energy of D(λ,q,ω) to which external photons couple. An approximately
correct estimate of the spectral weight transfer in Figure 3 could be obtained for the breathing
or A mode through an estimate of the coupling g obtained from the relative variation of the
superconductingandchargedensitywavetransitionswithhydrostaticpressure.
Themagnitudeoftheself-energyinFigure5dependson,besidethecouplingmatrixelements,
thedifferenceintheenergyofthephononω andtheamplitudemode,i.e.,2∆. Calculationsshow
that the effect disappears as g2 λ(ω −2∆(cid:1)−2. We have a fortunate situation in NbSe , where due to
theoccurrenceofachargedensitywavetransitionsatT ≈ 30K,thereexistmodeswithω ≈ 4∆.
Other materials where such happy circumstances prevail are some A15 compounds in which the
amplitudemodemayalsobeidentifiedthroughtheconservationoftotalspectralweight[35].
It should be noted that Equation (17) appears to violate the conservation of particle number
(not charge). To understand the conditions in which this is allowed, one has to delve a bit deeper
intothephysicsofg . Thefactisthatalatticedisplacementorvariationin(local)densitycouples
only to the electronic charge density, i.e., to the τ channel. We can however generate a vertex
of the form Equation (17) through the process shown in Figure 5b. As shown, we have a super-
conducting condensate that is a reservoir of a (even) number of particles or a state with a linear
combinationofdifferent(even)numberofparticles. SotheobservationoftheamplitudeorHiggs
mode occurs only through shaking the condensate by the lattice vibration and a particle-number
nonconserving condensate. Similar freedom from electro-weak conservation laws is provided by
the Higgs condensate in some of the processes by which Higgs excitations are discovered at the
LHC.Similarlyforcoldbosonsinalattice,onemayobservetheamplitudemodeusingtheprocess
showninFigure5c,which,aswediscussinSectionIVisyettobeemployeddirectly.
Instead of the phenomenological coupling of Equation 17, there have been microscopic calcu-
lations [36, 37] starting from the full panoply of equations for the superconductor and the charge
densitywaves. Ineffect,thecouplingvertexillustratedinthemiddlepartofFigure5iscalculated.
These authors found that the general results given above are reproduced except for the fact that
insteadofaconstantcouplingg,onehasafrequencydependentcoupling. Theseaffectthedetailed
comparisonwithexperiments.
The evidence that observed excitation is the amplitude mode or Higgs is the evidence for it to
be a scalar. In that case, it can have no direct linear coupling to the usual external probes. In a
Raman experiment, it should appear only through stealing the spectral weight from some other
excitationsothatthespectralweightofthetworesonancesbelowT isthesameasthatoftheone
resonance above T . Measson et al. [33] were able to fdetect thid spectral weight transfer due to
theimprovementoftechniquesofperformingRamanscatteringexperimentsonmetalsforseveral
temperatures from above T to below T . The spectra obtained by them for various temperatures
inNbSe areshowninFigure6,whereintheinsetthedifferenceofthespectraatanytemperature
fromthespectrajustaboveT isalsoshown. Theseexperimentsrevealaconservationofweightto
within the experimental accuracy, which is approximately 5%. In another important experiment,
the same authors examined the Raman spectrum of NbS , a compound isostructural with NbSe
NbSe CDW mode
0 20 40 60 80
0 25 50 75
Raman Shift (cm )
isosbestic point
Raman Shift (cm-1)
FIG.6. TheRamanspectraintheA symmetryatvarioustemperaturesinNbSe2,takenfromReference33.
The inset on the right shows the spectra at different temperatures below T subtracted from the data just
aboveT . Abbreviation: CDW,chargedensitywave.
and thast has a similar T = 6.2K. But this compound has no low-lying phonon because there is
noCDWtransition. Nomodenear2∆appearsinthiscase,consistentwiththediscussionabove.
There is yet another revealing aspect of the earlier and the more recent experiments on NbSe .
Thechargedensitywavetransitionleadstolow-energyphononsbothinthebreathingchannel A
andinachannelinahigherirreduciblerepresentation, E . Amodeofalmostthesameenergy,2∆
isobservedbelowT inbothchannelsandwithpreservationofthespectralweightineachchannel.
This is highly unusual and is more evidence that the vertex for coupling the amplitude mode is
as shown in Figure 5. Whichever channel, irrespective of its symmetry, shakes the condensate
adequately and is at low enough energy to acquire enough amplitude of the singular self-energy
bycouplingtotheamplitudemodehelpstoseetheamplitudemode.
One notices from Figure 6 that the energy of the amplitude mode increases as the temperature
isdecreased. Butthisisnotsimplythetemperaturedependenceof2∆(T)ofBCStheory,asinthe
simple theory that we have presented. There may be two reasons for the discrepancy. The mode
energy is shifted from 2∆(T) due to coupling to the CDW phonon, which, as Figure 5 explains,
depends on the coupling constant, which in turn depends on the magnitude of the condensate,
whichistemperaturedependent. AlsoNbSe isastrong-couplingsuperconductorthatshowsfaster
rise of 2∆(T) just below T and a more uniform approach toward T→ 0 than BCS theory. Both
thesefactorscorrectfromthetemperaturedependenceoftheBCStheorytowardswhatisobserved.
However, there has been no attempt to calculate the temperature using these considerations to see
whether there is a good fit with the recent experiments. In the microscopic calculation [36, 37] of
thecouplingofthechargedensitywavetosuperconductivity,anestimateofthecouplingconstant
g and its dependence on the frequency of the phonon is given. These have not been used to
calculate the detailed temperature dependence because this the temperature dependence was only
recentlyobtained.
The occurrence of a resonance near 2∆ led to some theoretical efforts to understand it in terms
of pair-breaking [38, 39] in the τ or charge channel. The Hartree-Fock approximation using
the BCS Hamiltonian [38] gives such a resonance, but this is the old problem of calculating a
non-gauge-invariant response in the longitudinal channel. Such a resonance occurs at the plasma
frequency in the superconducting state, with energy almost equal to the plasma frequency of the
normal metallic state in a proper theory that considers long-range Coulomb interactions [12]. It
was then argued that because the intensity of the external radiation decreases from the surface
of the sample over its penetration depth [39], there may be additional effects in the τ channel.
However, a correct theory in the longitudinal channel due to effects of a surface can only produce
surfaceplasmonsinthesuperconductor(withsomemodificationsatlowenergies). Therehasalso
been some attempt to explain the observed modes at energy 2∆ with the Bardasis-Schrieffer [40]
modes [41], which are modes of excited pair states in a symmetry channel other than that of the
ground state). These can also be excluded by the observation of the conservation of weight and
theoccurrenceofthemodeofthesameenergyindifferentRamansymmetries.
There is also a more violent way of shaking the condensate to observe the amplitude mode in
recent experiments. This is a pump probe experiment [42] in which an intense THz electromag-
netic pulse is applied to an Nb Ti N film below its superconducting transition temperature. The
transient creation of a large density of particle-hole pairs shakes the condensate. The response of
thecondensateisthenprobedasafunctionoftime,effectivelybyanalogsofRamanscattering. It
isfoundthatatransientoscillationappearswhosefrequencyiscloseto2∆. Thisprocessisclosely
related to other theoretical analysis [43, 44]. It may also be regarded as the manifestation of the
nonlinearcouplingofthemodetoelectromagneticfields,brieflydiscussedinSec. II.
D. DirectcouplingtothecondensateusingtheJosephsonandproximityeffects
One can couple linearly and directly with external probes to the amplitude or Higgs modes
using the Josephson effect. Consider Josephson coupling between a superconductor and another
of the same symmetry but, in general, different amplitude. The coupling energy between the two
weakly coupled superconductors, one with order parameter |Ψ|eiφ in which we are interested in
excitingcollectivemodesandtheotherwiththeorderparameter|Ψ |eiφp,is
The coupling constant C depends on the properties of the weak link. Add this to the action in
Equation 2. If a time-dependent voltage is applied across the two superconductors, the difference
of phase evolved in time because it is canonically conjugate to charge difference. The derivative
with respect to time of the phase difference is the chemical potential difference between the two
superconductorsortheappliedvoltageacrossthem:
If V(t) is periodic with frequency ω, so is δφ(t). Now one gets a periodic driving term on the
right side of both Equations (6). Therefore, both the phase mode and amplitude or Higgs mode
can be excited by this method. This was the technique with which Carlson & Goldman [45]
and Kadin & Goldman [46] observed a new class of phase oscillation modes (Carlson-Goldman
modes) near T as well as slightly below T under conditions in which there is counterflow of
supercurrent and normal current such that charge neutrality is maintained and the phase mode is
not pushed to high energies. One can also apply a magnetic field parallel to the junction between
the two superconductors which acts to introduce a spatially periodic coupling between the two
superconductors along the surface of the junction orthogonal to the external magnetic field. One
can then study the dispersion relations, (ω(k)), of the collective modes. It is straightforward to
show that this process excites not only the Carlson-Goldman modes but the Higgs modes as well.
In the experiments [45], there is a report of finding higher energy resonances, but this matter was
notpursued.
E. Higgsinsuperconductorsofothersymmetries
Superfluid3Hehasamulticomponentorderparameter[47]withangularmomentum1andspin
1. The collective modes of oscillations between the various components of the order parameter
have been studied by Wo¨lfle [48] and others [49, 50]. In cuprate superconductors, which have a
spin-singlet condensate with d(x2 −y2) lattice symmetry, there is a mysterious mode [51] directly
seen in Raman scattering in the A symmetry at an energy of approximately 1.5 ∆, where ∆ is
the maximum gap as a function of angle on the Fermi surface. This appears below a continuum
electronicscattering,whichischaracteristicofboththenormalandthesuperconductingcuprates.
Ithasbeenidentifiedastheamplitudemodeofthesuperconductor[52]whichdrawsweightfrom
the continuum, just as the Higgs draws its weight in Raman scattering from the low-lying optical
phononsinNbSe .
IV. HIGGSMODEINULTRACOLDATOMGASES
In the past thirty years, a new field of experimental physics, that of ultracold atoms, has de-
veloped and made remarkable progress. Some of the technical highlights are the development of
techniques for cooling atoms to low temperatures and subsequently trapping them (e.g., see 53),
evaporative cooling to form Bose-Einstein condensates [54], the development of optical lattices
that can be modulated and atomic imaging with single-site resolution, and the observation of the
superfluid-Mott insulator transitions [55]. This progress has raised hopes of transforming atomic,
molecular, and optical physics from a branch of physics that studied few atom interactions and
thermalgasesintoaplatformforstudyingmany-bodyphysicsinquantumdegeneratestates[56].
This new setting offers some experimental advantages and some challenges compared with
thoseinothercondensedmatterforstudyingcollectivemodesofbosons. Animportantdifference
is that ultracold atom superfluids are charge neutral. So although there should be Higgs modes,
therearealsomasslessBogoliubovmodes. Asdistinctfromsuperfluid4He,ultracoldatomexper-
iments are performed in optical lattices. The periodic lattice gives rise to particle-hole symmetry
requiredforHiggsmodesalongasetoflinesinthephasediagram.
A unique aspect of the new setting is the ability to control Hamiltonian parameters over wide
ranges, during the course of the experiment. This has allowed the observation of the superfluid-
Mottinsulatortransitions[55]whichhasbeenanecessarystepinobtainingevidencefortheHiggs
modeinthesuperfluid. Thepresentevidenceforthismodeisthroughthespectroscopyofabsorp-
tionofenergyoftheatomsinresponsetoperiodicmodulationsofthekineticenergy(KE)andthe
correspondenceoftheobservedlineshapewithanalyticaswellasquantumMonteCarlocalcula-
tions. As we discuss, this is not as direct as the evidence for Higgs mode in superconductors. At
the end of this section, we speculate on more direct observation of Higgs through further manip-
ulations and the possibility of observing the Higgs of neutral fermions in their paired superfluid
state.
A. Ultracoldatomsinopticallattices
Consider a collection of repulsively interacting bosonic atoms in a potential created by the
combination of an atom trap and an optical lattice. The motion of the atoms, in free space, is
governedbytheHamiltonian
(cid:88) p2 (cid:88) (cid:88)
Here, p and r are the momentum and position of the i-th atom, V˜(r) is the combination of the
optical lattice potential and the trap potential for the atoms, and U˜ is the repulsive interatomic
potential. The details of the physics of the trap potential and the periodic lattice potential in one,
two,orthreedimensionscreatedbyastandingwaveoflightmaybefoundinRef.57. Thetypical
range of the interatomic interaction U˜ is significantly smaller than the lattice period, and hence it
can be replaced by an on-site interaction. For some atoms a Feshbach resonance [56] can be used
to tune the strength and sign of this on-site interaction. However for the case of the Higgs boson
experiments, 87Rb atoms were used. Although the hyperfine levels of 87Rb atoms have a number
ofnarrowFeshbachresonances,thereisnoconvenient(i.e.,wide)Feshbachresonancethatcanbe
usedtotunethestrengthofinteractionsandsoU˜ isfixed.
B. TheBose-HubbardmodelandtheHiggsexcitation
Consider the motion of the interacting atoms in a periodic potential. If the lattice potential
is sufficiently deep, the atoms are confined to the lowest Bloch band so that we can describe the
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
Bose%Hubbard,model,,
phase,diagram,
Mo#$$ superfluid$
FIG. 7. The phase diagram of the Bose Hubbard model in 2D. The phase diagram was obtained by
optimizing the trial wave function Equation (22) with up to 10 bosons on each site. Trajectories 1 and 2
refertogenericandparticle-holesymmetrictraversalsofthephasediagram.
low-energysectorofthesystemusingtheBose-Hubbardmodel[58]
(cid:88) 1 (cid:88) (cid:88)
BH i j 2 i i i
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) i i
Here, b† and b are the boson creation and annihilation operators on site i, n is the occupancy of
the i-th site. The hopping matrix element J is related to the overlap of the boson wave functions
on neighboring sites and the interaction strength U to the boson scattering length in free spacea .
Both J and U are sensitive to the optical lattice depth; however in the case of a deep lattice, J
depends exponentially on the lattice depth, whereas U varies weakly. The chemical potential µ is
relatedtothedepthofthetrapanditsfilling,andgenerallyvariesacrossthesystem. However,we
initiallyconsideronlythecaseofuniformµ.
TogetanotionoftheT = 0phasediagramoftheBose-Hubbardmodelconsideragroundstate
wavefunctionoftheproductform
prod i i i
wheretheindexirunsoverallthesitesofthesystem,α,β,γ,... arecomplexcoefficients,andthe
notation|n(cid:105) indicatesastatewithnbosonsonsitei. Onminimizing(cid:104)ψ |H |ψ (cid:105)withrespect
i prod BH prod
toα,β,..twokindsofphasesarefound: Bose-Mottinsulatorsandsuperfluids. Theresultingphase
diagramisplottedinFigure7.
Deep in the Mott insulator phase, where U (cid:29) J, the bosons are localized. In this case, the
optimaltrialwavefunctionhasexactlymbosonspersite|ψ (cid:105) = (cid:81) |m(cid:105),wheremisdetermined
prod,m i i
by the value of the chemical potential µ. Deep in the superfluid phase, J (cid:29) U, the bosons
delocalize and acquire phase coherence. In this case, the coefficients α, β, γ, ... of the trial
wavefunctionareallfinite,andhencethesuperfluidorderparameter(cid:104)ψ |b|ψ (cid:105) = α∗β+
prod,SF i prod,SF
β∗γ+··· hasafiniteexpectationvalue. Althoughthissimplewavefunctiongetsthelayoutofthe
phasediagram,itdoesnotaccuratelypredictthelocationsofthephasetransitions. Thisisbecause
of the absence of spatial correlations in the trial wave function. More accurate phase diagrams
have been obtained using both more sophisticated theoretical treatments [59, 60] and numerical
pathintegralquantumMonteCarlosimulations[61–63].
The simplest method for describing the long wavelength modes of the Hubbard model in the
vicinity of the Mott insulator to superfluid transition is to map the lattice model onto a continuum
fieldtheory(see64). ThisapproachresultsintheactionoftheforminEquation(2). Inthepresent
case the tuning parameter that takes the system across the phase transition r is proportional to
J/U−(J/U) . Negativercorrespondstothesymmetricphase,i.e.,Mottinsulator,andpositive
r tothespontaneouslybrokensymmetryphase,i.e.,thesuperfluidstate.
As already explained, in the continuum description, particle-hole assymmetry depends on the
value of K . Only for K = 0 is the critical theory particle-hole symmetric or relativistic, and we
see emergent Lorentz invariance. In the phase diagram of Figure 7, K = 0 is achieved along a
linethatmeetstheMott-Insulatorphasesatthemaximumof J/U ateachoftheboundaries,where
µ/U ishalf-integral.
To get a physical picture of the long wavelength (k = 0) quasi-particle modes, we can extend
thetrialwavefunctionofEquation(22)bylettingthecoefficientsα,β,γ,... besitedependent[13,
65–67]. The normal modes can then be obtained by extremizing (cid:104)ψ |i∂ − H |ψ (cid:105). First, let
prod t BH prod
us lookat theparticle-hole symmetriccase (Figure7, trajectory 2). On the Mottside, wefind two
degenerate gapped (massive) modes. These are the particle-like and hole-like modes of the Mott
insulator that are found using trial wave functions. The modes become gapless at the transition
point, r=0. On the superfluid side, the antisymmetric combination of the particle and hole modes
becomestheGoldstoneboson,whereasthesymmetriccombinationbecomesthegapped(massive)
Higgsboson.
Second, let us look at the generic case with no particle-hole symmetry (Figure 7, trajectory
1). We again see that there is a particle-like mode and a hole-like mode in the Mott insulator.
However, this time at the transition only one of the modes becomes gapless, whereas the other
mode remains gapped. On the superfluid side, the mode that became gapless at the critical point
turnsintothegaplesssoundmode.
Superfluidtransitionsthatoccurin4Heandincoldgaseswithnolatticecanbedescribedbythe
particle-hole asymmetric version of the φ4 model. As there is no mechanism to enforce particle-
holesymmetry,wedonotexpectLorentzinvarianceoraHiggsmode. However,genericallythere
should be a K term in Equation (2), and thus we should still expect the existence of a gapped
branch. However, there are two issues. First, as K → 0 the gap at the transition becomes larger
and larger ω ∼ K /K . Second, the gapped branch tends to be unstable due to the decay into
soundmodesandhenceweshouldnotexpectanysharpsignature.
C. CreationoftheHiggsexcitation
We now consider the question of how to observe the Higgs mode in the particle-hole symmet-
ric case. This question has two parts: (1) Does the decay of the Higgs mode into the low-lying
GoldstonemodesrendertheHiggsmodeunobservable;and(2)howdoesonecoupletotheHiggs
mode? The observability of the Higgs mode, especially in 2D, was investigated by a number of
authors[65,68–71]. ThequestionwasresolvedinReference72,whicharguedthatpreviousrefer-
encesconsidereddifferentwaysofdrivingtheHiggsmodeandhenceobtaineddifferentanswers.
ConsidertwodifferentrepresentationsoffluctuationsoftheorderparameterΨarounditsequi-
librium broken value Ψ , in Eq. (2). In one representation, variations of the order parameter in
longitudinal direction u and transverse direction u to the chosen directions, i.e., along and per-
pendicular to the vector Ψ shown in Figure 1, are considered to be the normal coordinates for the
collective modes. In the second representation, radial coordinates η and φ are used, which are the
sameastheδ and(Ψ )−1δ inEquation5,
In an expansion of the energy in terms of such variables, one finds that the leading term coupling
η and φ is η|∇φ|2. This is as it should be, as energy can depend only on the gradients of the phase
variations to any order. But in the first manner of parameterization, the leading coupling term
is r u u2. In calculations starting with such a parameterization, one finds that the correlation
χ (ω) = −Im(cid:104)[u (ω),u (−ω)](cid:105) ∼ ω−1 for long-wavelengths in d = 2 and has a logarithmic di-
vergenceind = 3. Ontheotherhand,usingtheradialparameterization,theHiggsreadilyappears
as a peak in the correlation χ (ω) = −Im(cid:104)[η(ω),η(−ω)](cid:105). Unlike χ (ω), at low frequencies
χ (ω) ∼ ωd+1, and hence the Higgs is not hidden by the low-frequency divergence [72]. This
low-frequencybehaviorofχ (ω)maybeobtainedeasilyfromthekinematicconsiderationsofthe
decay, at long wavelengths, of the Higgs mode η into a pair of Bogoliubov modes φ, each with a
dispersionω ∝ qthroughthecouplingη|∇φ|2.
In the experiments done so far, the correlation χ (ω) cannot be accessed directly, and an in-
direct connection with such a correlation through lattice modulation spectroscopy is used. The
strategy for the spectroscopy consists of three steps: (1) Prepare a superfluid in an optical lattice.
(2) Perform modulations of the depth of the optical lattice at a particular frequency. Because the
hoppingmatrixelement J isexponentiallysensitivetothelatticedepth,thiscorrespondsprimarily
to modulations of the KE operator. (3) Measure the total energy absorbed by the system [73] due
to the initial modulation. As the measurement step is destructive, at the end of the three-step se-
quence, the atoms are thrown out of the trap. To obtain the next data point, the steps are repeated
withnewlycooledatomsandadifferentmodulationfrequency. Therefore,whatisbeingmeasured
experimentally is the total energy absorbed by the lattice gas in response to periodic modulations
oftheKE.Inthecaseofweakdrive,thetotalenergyabsorbedisrelatedtotheKE–KEcorrelator
(cid:34)(cid:90) (cid:35)
mod (cid:126)
where ω is the drive frequency, δ is the amplitude of the KE modulations, and n is the total
number of modulations performed [74]. The idea is that for modulation frequency at the natural
resonancesofthesuperfluidstate,theabsorptionpeaks.
AlthoughlatticemodulationspectroscopycouplestotheHiggsmode,itdoesnotdosocleanly,
inthesensethatKEmodulationsalsoexciteparticle-holeexcitations. Therefore,theinterpretation
oftheexperimentreliesonthecomparisontoanalyticalandnumericalcalculationswithHamilto-
nian parameters that are known to a high accuracy. We now summarize the kinds of comparisons
thatcanbemade,beforedescribingtheexperimentalsituationinthenextsubsection.
There are three choices of theoretical calculations that are available for comparisons. These
are (1) mean-field and cluster mean-field calculations of the modulation dynamics in the Bose-
Hubbardmodel[73],(2)calculationsoftheχ responseinthecontinuummodelofEq.2[72,75],
and(3)thecalculationoftheχ intheBose-Hubbardmodel,usingquantumMonteCarlo[76–
78].
Choice (1) faithfully models the drive, the detection scheme and the trap that is present in the
experiment, but it suffers from the fact that it does not calculate the decay of the Higgs mode into
Goldstone modes accurately. It does a good job of capturing features seen in the experiment, but
itisnotapplicablenearthephasetransitionpoint.
Choice(2)hastheadvantageofworkingwiththeuniversalmodelthatcapturesthelongwave-
length physics near the phase transition point. However, it has the disadvantage that the relation-
shipbetweenwhatisbeingobservedandwhatisbeingcomputedisnotstraightforward.
Choice (3) should have all the advantages of choice (1), but should also be able to capture
the decay of the Higgs modes into the low-lying Goldstone modes. It is applicable both outside
and inside the quantum critical regime. Specifically, numerical calculations obtain the imaginary
frequencycorrelator(cid:104)KE(τ), KE(0)(cid:105)−(cid:104)KE(cid:105)2 usingquantumMonteCarloandthenuseaninverse
Laplace transform to obtain the energy absorption line shape. Unfortunately, a direct comparison
ofMonteCarlocalculationswiththeexperimenthasyettobemade,asexperimentaldetails,such
asthepropertiesofthetrap,havenotbeensystematicallytakenintoaccountinthecalculations.
Near the quantum critical point of the Mott-superfluid transition, analytical calculations of
Imχ (ω) [72, 75] and numerical calculations of Imχ (ω) [76–78] show that the Higgs line
shape develops a characteristic broad maximum at Higgs mass frequency. Moreover, as one ap-
proaches the superfluid-Mott insulator quantum critical point from the superfluid side, the ab-
sorption line shape becomes universal. By universal, it is meant that the absorption line shapes
obtained for various deviations from the critical point δ = (U − U )/J should be collapsed onto
eachotherusingaone-parameterscalingfunctionΦ(ω/∆)
where∆isthegapscale∆ ∼ |δ|ν,andν = 0.6723(3)isthecorrelationlengthcriticalexponent[79,
80]. This universality in the line shape, obtained using a quantum Monte Carlo calculation of the
KElinearresponsetoKEmodulations,isplottedinFigure8,andisonlyreasonablygood.
small uniform modulation term to the Hamiltonian
where  J/J 1. The imaginary time correlation func-
tion for kinetic energy,  (⌧) = K(⌧)K(0) K 2, is
related to S(!) through the spectral integral with the 1
finite-temperature kernel, N(⌧,!) = e !⌧ +e !(1/T ⌧):
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
We employ the same protocol of collecting and analyzing
data as in Ref. [14]. More specifically, in the MC simu-
lation we collect statistics for the correlation function at
Matsubara frequencies ! = 2⇡Tn with integer n
n i!
which is related to  (⌧) by a Fourier transform. In the
path integral representation,  (i! ) has a direct unbi-
ased estimator, ei! n ⌧ k 2, where the sum runs over
all hopping transitions in a given configuration, i.e. there
is no need to add term (3) to the Hamiltonian explicitly.
Once  (⌧) is recovered from  (i! ), the analytical con- n
tinuation methods described in Ref. [14] are applied to
extract the spectral function S(!). A discussion on the
reproducibility of the analytically continued results for
this type of problem can also be found in Ref. [14].
We consider system sizes significantly larger than the
correlation length by a factor of at least 4 to ensure that
our results are e↵ectively in the thermodynamic limit.
Furthermore, for the SF and MI phases, we set the tem-
perature T = 1/  to be much smaller than the charac-
teristic Higgs energy, so that no details in the relevant
energy part of the spectral function are missed.
We consider two paths in the SF phase to approach the
QCP: by increasing the interaction U U at unity fill-
!
ing factor n = 1 (trajectory i perpendicular to the phase
boundary in Fig 1), and by increasing µ µ while keep-
!
ing U = U constant (trajectory ii tangential to the phase
boundary in Fig 1). We start with trajectory i by consid- ering three parameter sets for ( g ,L, ): (0.2424,20,10),
(0.0924,40,20), and (0.0462,80,40). The prime data in
imaginary time domain are shown in Fig. 3 using scaled
variables to demonstrate collapse of  (⌧) curves at large
times. Analytically continued results are shown in the in-
set of Fig. 4. After rescaling results according to Eq. (1),
we observe data collapse shown in the main panel of
Fig.4. This defines the universal spectral function in the
superfluid phase   .
When approaching the QCP along trajectory ii,
with ( g ,L, ) = (0.40,25,15), (0.30,30,15), and µ
(0.20,40,20) we observe a similar data collapse and arrive
at the same universal function   ; see Fig. 5. The fi-
nal match is possible only when the characteristic energy
scale  (g ) = C (g(g )) involves a factor of C = 1.2. µ µ
|g|=0.2424
|g|=0.0924
|g|=0.0462
FIG. 3. (Color online) Collapse of correlation functions in
imaginary time domain for di↵erent values of U along trajec-
toryiintheSFphase,labeledbythedetuningg = (U U )/J.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
|g|=0.2424
|g|=0.0924
|g|=0.0462
FIG. 4. (Color online) Collapse of spectral functions for dif-
ferent values of U along trajectory i in the SF phase, labeled
by the detuning g = (U U )/J. Inset: Original data for c
S (!).
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
S3−ν/2]J/)
1.5 |g µ |=0.20 µ
FIG.8. ThespectralfunctionImχ (ω) = S (ω)asafunctionofthefrequencyωshowingtheHiggs KEKE SF
excitationinthe2DBose-Hubbardmodel. ThespectralfunctionwasobtainedusingquantumMonteCarlo
calculations for several values of g = (U −U )/J in the superfluid phase near the particle-hole symmetric c
quantum critical point. The inset shows the un-rescaled spectral functions while the main plot shows the
collapseofthespectralfunctionsupontherescalingoftheaxes. AdaptedfromReference[78].
D. ExperimentalobservationoftheHiggsmodeinultracoldatoms
Thefirstexperimentstostudytheexcitationsofbosonicsuperfluidsonalattice,withanattempt
to observe the Higgs excitation, were reported in Refernces [81, 82]. These experiments intro-
ducedthebasicthree-stepstrategymentionedaboveandappliedittoisotropic3Dlattices[81,82]
and to 1D lattices and anisotropic lattices in the 1D-3D crossover regime [81]. The scheme for
detecting the energy absorbed consisted of (1) ramping down the lattice to an intermediate depth
totransferthegasdeepintothesuperfluidregime,(2)lettingthegasthermalize,(3)turningoffthe
lattice and trap potentials and letting the gas expand, and (4) taking an image of the interference
pattern in the expanding cloud of atoms. The interference patterns observed in these images are
related to the phase coherence across the atom clouds (following thermalization) and hence their
FIG. 5. (Color online) Collapse of spectral functions for dif-
temperatures,whichisameasureoftheenergyabsorbed.
ferent µ along trajectory ii in the SF phase, labeled by the
To analyze thdeetduatnai,ntghegfu=ll w(µidthµat)h/aJlf.mInaxseimt:uomri(gFinWaHl Mda)taofftohreScen(tr!a)l.peak in the inter-
ference images was measured and plotted as a function of the modulation frequency (see Fig. 9a
for the 3D case). At large U/J, in the Mott-insulating phase, the FWHM shows a clear pair of
peaks at ω ∼ U and ω ∼ 2U. The lower peak can be ascribed to a single double occupancy-hole
(particle-hole) excitation, while the higher peak corresponds to a pair of these excitation. As one
approaches the Mott-insulator to superfluid transition, one would expect the lower peak to move
to lower frequencies as the excitation gap of the Mott insulator vanishes. At the transition point,
the peak should move all the way to zero frequency, before emerging again on the superfluid side
as the Higgs excitation. Experimentally, the excitation spectrum indeed shows some changes as
one approaches the Mott insulator - superfluid transition (for the 3D case the transition occurs at
U/J 16 [62]). Unfortunately, the low frequency behavior is poorly resolved making it hard to
see evidence for the closing of the excitations gap and the emergence of the Higgs gap. There is
always structure at higher frequencies associated with ω ∼ U scale. This structure may be related
tothelocalphysicsofdoubleoccupancy-holeexcitations.
Two subsequent experiments have since been done. In one, spatially nonuniform lattice mod-
ulations were used to to impart a momentum of √ π (1,1,0) to the quasi-particle modes that were
beingexcited[83]. Themeasurementprocedurewassimilartothatoftheearlierexperiments: the
optical lattice was ramped down and then the cloud was allowed to expand in order to produce a
time of flight image. In order to interpret their results, sophisticated numerical modeling of the
experimentswasdone. Theresultsofthemodelingwereconsistentwithexperimentaldata. Asthe
experimental probe measured the response only at high momenta, near the Brillouin zone bound-
ary, the results obtained were not directly related to the physics of the long-wavelength Higgs
mode.
The other experiment repeated the Esslinger experiments on 2D lattices using uniform lattice
modulations,butitachievedmuchhighersensitivityinthemeasurementstepbyusinga“quantum
gas microscope” to image the atoms in the optical lattice with single-site resolution [73, 84, 85].
Specifically, to image the atoms, the optical lattice is slowly ramped up to confine the atoms to
individual lattice sites. Once the atoms are confined, they are imaged using florescence imaging
throughamicroscopewithalargenumericalaperture. Theresultingimageshowstheparityofthe
numberofatomsineachlatticesite,i.e.,brightspotsforsiteswithoddnumbersofatomsanddark
spotsforsiteswithevennumbersofatoms(theimagingprocedurewasunabletomeasuretheatom
numberbecauseofaphoto-assistedrecombinationprocessthatkickedoutpairsofatomsfromthe
lattice, and thus emptied the sites with an even number of atoms, during the imaging procedure).
To obtain the energy absorbed by the gas during lattice modulations, the sample temperature was
reconstructedfromtheradialdistributionoftheevenandtheoddsites.
The employment of the quantum gas microscope resulted in a qualitative improvement in the
data. Modulation spectra obtained by this method showed a sharply rising feature at low frequen-
cies indicative of a gap (see Figure 9c). The size of this gap depends on the proximity to the
quantumcriticalpoint. As J/U decreases,thisgapshrinks,reachingitssmallestvalueatthequan-
tumcriticalpoint,beforeexpandingagainontheMottinsulatingside(seeFigure9b). Theoretical
modelingshowsthatboththevalueofthegapanditsdependenceon J/U matchedthemassofthe
Higgs excitation on the superfluid side and the particle-hole gap on the Mott insulating side, thus
identifyingtheoriginofthisgap.
The question arises, why did the experiments observe a threshold feature as opposed to a peak
attheHiggsmassscale? Therearetwopossiblereasons. Oneisthattheexperimentalsoobserves
absorptionbythecontinuumofparticle-holeexcitationsthathaveasimilarthresholdastheHiggs
energy. The other reason is the nonuniform boson density due to the trapping field. In the center
of the trap one finds the density to be one boson per site, i.e., particle-hole symmetry. As one
moves toward the edges of the trap, the density of bosons decreases, and the massive mode gets
moremassiveandisalsodamped. Theabsorptionbythesemassivemodesattheedgesofthetrap
probablystretchestheHiggspeakintoaline-shapewithathreshold. Thislocaldensitydescription
canberefinedbyconstructingthenormalmodesinatrap. TheHiggsexcitationsappearintheform
of trap modes that appear similar to the modes of a drum head (see Figure 10). The lowest trap
mode occurs slightly above the Higgs mass in free space. It is followed by a discreet spectrum of
higher frequency modes. Uniform lattice modulations couple to all trap modes with zero angular
momentum. Thus, during lattice modulation spectroscopy one observes the absorption into a
numberoftrapmodesincontrasttotheabsorptionintothesinglek = 0modeinfreespace. Monte
Carlo analysis [76] and experimental data [73], suggest that the Higgs modes are too short-lived
for observation of individual trap frequencies. The broadened spectrum of trap modes resembles
theobservations.
In summary, with the refinements that were introduced in Ref. [73], ultracold atom experi-
ments present evidence for the existence of the Higgs mode in lattice superfluids. As the lattice
modulation spectroscopy does not cleanly couple to the Higgs mode, the evidence is based on a
combination of experimental measurements and comparison to analytical and numerical calcula-
tions.
E. Outlook
In the future we may expect experiments on ultracold atoms to provide us with a wealth of
new data to help understand many-body phenomena. A possible way to observe the Higgs mode
a""" b" c"
FIG. 9. Experimental data from ultra cold atom groups showing the results of lattice modulation spec-
troscopy. a Modulation spectra obtained in Reference [81], showing the full width at half-maximum
(FWHM) a measure of the energy absorbed by the atom gas, as a function of the lattice modulation fre-
quency and the lattice depth. A pair of peaks can be seen at energy scale ∼ U and ∼ 2U (see text). b &
c Lattice modulation data from Reference [73]. The three plots on the right show the temperature of the
samplefollowinglatticemodulations,asafunctionofmodulationfrequency,atthreedifferentvaluesofthe
latticedepth(asindicated). Ineachspectrumthereappearsastep-likeabsorptionedge,associatedwiththe
Higgsmass(seetext). Thelefthandplotshowsthefrequencyassociatedwiththeabsorption-edgefeatureas
afunctionofthelatticedepth(measuredin j/j where j = J/U and j = (J/U) ). Thepointsrepresent
c c critical
experimentaldata,thesolidlineshowsthemassoftheHiggsobtainedfrommean-fieldcalculationsandthe
dashed line shows the energy of the lowest particle-hole excitation. One can clearly see the softening of
theHiggsmassonapproachtothequantumcriticalpoint,thusallowingtheidentificationoftheabsorption
edgewiththeHiggsmass.
0.
)ytisned)diuflrepuS )ytisned)diuflrepuS
FIG.10. Higgsdrummodesinatrap,takenfromdatainReference[73]. Thefourplotsshowthesuperfluid
density as a function of position in the trap, after lattice modulations at frequencies corresponding to the
lowest four Higgs modes. The plots were obtained by numerically evolving the product wave function of
Equation22.
directly would be to change the driving mechanism. Instead of coupling to the Higgs mode via
the KE, one could couple to it via long wavelength density or current modulations. One may then
generate the Higgs directly through the process depicted in Figure 5c, although this process is
implicatedintheexperimentsthathavealreadybeendone. ThedirectexceptionsofHiggsmaybe
accomplishedbygradientsofthechemicalpotentialacrossthelatticeorbygeneratingasynthetic
gauge field [86] to couple to the current. This type of coupling, in addition to being cleaner,
could be used to extract the dispersion relation of the Higgs mode. These techniques may require
shallowerlatticepotentials,whichcreatefurtherproblemsincontrollingtheexperiment.
Although current state-of-the-art experiments can approach the quantum fluctuation regime in
2D lattice bosons, we expect that ultracold atoms will provide quantitatively reliable data on the
1D, 2D, and 3D Mott insulator superfluid quantum critical points, with improved measurement
precision and lower temperatures. Such experiments may answer the questions about universal
featuresoftheHiggsexcitationnearcriticality.
Another area that could be addressed by ultracold atom experiments is the fate of the Higgs
excitation in fermionic superfluids. In the weakly interacting fermionic superfluids, the Higgs
mass coincides with the edge of the particle-hole excitation spectrum, making the Higgs hard
to observe. However, interactions bring down the Higgs mass in relation to the particle-hole
continuum. This raises the question of whether the Higgs can be observed in experiments with
strong interactions (i.e., near a Feshbach resonance), or dipolar interactions (i.e., in polar atomic
ormoleculargases). Alternatively,strongconfinementcanbeusedtoprotecttheHiggsmodefrom
decay,aspointedoutinReference87.
The development of artificial static and dynamic gauge fields [88] also lies in the future and
holdspromiseforfurtherprobingoftheamplitudeandphasemodes.
V. HIGGSEXCITATIONINMAGNETICMATERIALS
We have so far described the appearance of the Higgs excitation in superfluid and supercon-
ducting systems in which the condensate is made up of particles or pairs of particles. Magnetic
systems offer an alternative, and in some sense richer, setting in which the condensate consists
of the magnetization of the system. At the transition to the ordered phase, the magnetization
spontaneouslybreaksrotationsymmetryasitacquiresaspecificdirectioninspace.
In a model of interacting spins that can be mapped to the xy model, the Goldstone excitations
are the spin-waves that correspond to small fluctuations in the direction of the magnetization.
The Higgs excitations are the spin-waves in which the magnitude of the magnetization fluctuates.
The existence of both kinds of spin-waves has been theoretically known and studied for a long
timebyinelasticpolarizedneutronscatteringandinelasticlightscattering. However,recently,the
identificationofthecollectivemodesasGoldstone-likeandHiggs-likehasbeenmadebystudying
asystemnearitsquantumcriticalpoint: Theideaistoseethatonthemagneticallyorderedsideof
FIELD-ANDPRESSURE-INDUCEDMAGNETIC... PHYSICALREVIEWB69,054423 "2004#
!t &"t†!0&" "! &!! &),
!t &"t†!0&" "! &!! &), "1#
wherethearrowsineachstatedenotethedirectionofthetwo
spins,andallthestatescreatedinEq."1#havetotal"dimer#
S "0. From the action of the spin operators S and S "de-
FIG. 2. Schematic representation of relevant interdimer cou- noting left and right sites of the dimer# on these states one
FIG. 11. The Heisenberg lpilkinegsminoXdCeulCol
f: T"a#lCa-ucCplla3n.eaTnhde"b#vbe-rctipcleanse.represent the mmagaynedteidcucme4o5mtheenctosrroesfpothndeence
Copperatoms, thethicksolidlinesrepresentthepositionofthedimersaswellastheintra-dimercoupling
type between octahedra, where the edge is from basal plane 1
J,thethinsolidlinesrepresetontapthexe.iAngtaeirn-dthime peorscsiobuilpitylinagrisseJs1f,roJm2 ,theetcg.eAomdeatprytetdhaftromReferenceS[ ’ l,9r "4]#. 2 "s†t ’ !t ’ †s#%i( ’)* t ) †t * , "2#
theseweakbondsmaybeFM.Viewingthedimersasladder
rungs,theeffectiveladder-legcouplingisdenotedbyJ , and where ’,),*+x,y,z. The spin commutation relations for
the critical point, one sho t t u h h l e e d s a t o s r y u b m c s t m u e r r e e v tr o i e c f a b t l h o e c t ro l h a s d s m d c e a o r u s l p e s g l l i e s n s g is s b s a y u n c J h d1 ! t m h !F a i t a g s a . s 2 n i " e v a x e # t $ - . n s e F p i i g i n n h a b - ll o w y r , aveb S so l , , s r wo a n r ii e tch r s e tt c ah o tie v s e tim r c e s d a.s i Hs f o t bw h e e eivn s e i rg n , gl t e h t e a b n o d nd trip o l p e e t ra o t p o e r r s ato ar r e s h c a o v n e -
Cu-Cl-Cl-Cu coupling, similar to that proposed in CuGeO , strained by the number of physical states available on each
afunctionofthedistance m to ay th no e tb c e ri e t x i c c l a u l de p d o ,a in nd t. thisisdenotedasJ".Asignifican 3 t dimer,onesingletoroneofthreetriplets,toobeythecondi-
interchaincouplingisexpectedonlywheretheCu-Cl-Cl-Cu
Around2003,itwasfopuanthdwtahyaitsarpatphleyrindigrechty, dwriothstbaotnidcpanreglsessunroettodetvhiaetincgompoundTlCuCl induces
widely from 180°. The dimers are oriented primarily along s†s! , t† t "1, "3#
aquantumphasetransitionthebectawxiese"nFiga.n1o#,nwmheargenbeytiincspsetacttieonanandyaonvearlnaptifisernrootmagneticstate,attih i ec’r"ixt,-y,z i,’i,’
especiallydirectandmayinvolveparallelpaths.Becausethe
ical pressure P
= 0.42mdbimaerrs[8ar9e–a9ls3o]ti.lteSdtsriugcnitfiucraanltllyy,alTonlgCaˆu,Citli3spcoosnsisbilsettshaotf on w e h
.
ted in the subse-
dimers with a separation of one or two unit cells in this
quentsectionsofthesystemunderafinitemagneticfield,we
ofdimers,withweakinter d c ir h ec a t i io n n c a o re u c p o l u i p n le g d s ;l ( e s t e J e 2 F de i n g o u te re ad 1 i 1 m ) e . rc T o h up e li q ng ua al n o t n u g m cˆ ph i a n s tr e od t u r c a e ns h i e t r i e on th i e s a d p r p i r v o e pr n iate bond-operator description.
only, J! a coupling along aˆ!cˆ, and J" a coupling along TheoperatorsinEq."1#arenottheeigenstatesofanexternal
by the competition between th2e intradimer couplings (w2 hich favor the nonmagnetic dimer sin-
2ˆa!cˆ !Fig.2"a#$.Finally,theshortestinterchaindistanceis
magneticfield,andsowetransformthesetotheoperators52
glet ground state) and thethianttebertdwiemenerthceotuwpoliinnegqsuiv(walehnitcchhafiansvoinr tthheeuannitticfeellr,romagnetic ground state).
Applying hydrostatic presf n rs a ou m mr e e ly th , der 2 1 i b f ˆ va ! cets 1 2 t cˆ htha " t F e i t g hp . eh 1 ap #. ast H eh e wt r ra e ay t n h gs e oie d tsi i o re tnh ct r i ob o u n yg a h l t i u ty thne i i s nC e g v l i o d io e fn n st t he relative strength t o x " f t! 1 h2e "t ! !t % #,
pointingmaximallyupordown"relativetotheaaxis#from
inter-andintradimercoupthliendgi.mers, indicating that this coupling J 3 should corre- %1
spond to the interdimer separations %aˆ! 2 1bˆ! 2 1%cˆ, where t y " !2 i"%t ! !t % #,
A detailed study of th%e"s#pi1n.-TwhaevpeosmsiboildityesreomfaiTnslCthuatCthle icnoupthlinegsviocfinthiety of the quantum critical
spinononedimertoeitherofthoseonaneighboringdimer
t "t , "4#
pointwasperformedbyRau¨reegfigniteet,raelq.u[ir3in1g]aufisninalgsuinpeerleaxschtiacngneepuatrraomnetesrcJa!tt!eFrigin. g. Theneutron-scatterinzg 0
2"b#$;inspectionofbondlengthsandangles"Fig.1#suggests whichcreatethetripletstates
data (see Figure 12) showthatthJr!e$eJm.assive spin-wave modes in the nonmagnetic phase. The mass
of all three modes decreases as the quantumB.cMriotdicelal point is approached. At criticality, two of
Having argued that the properties of the system in zero 1
the modes become massless, whereas the third mode remains massive. As one pushest†i!0n&t"o the"! &!! &),
field, including the spin gap, are determined largely by the 0 !2 ↑↓ ↑↓
dominantdimercouplingJ,onemayconstructamodelwith
antiferromagnetic phase,
e.
e massless modes rem
!
&"! &. "5#
representation the S"1/2 spin degrees of freedom on each % ↓↓
massless (the Goldstone spin-wave), and the other massless mode acquires a mass (the Higgs
dimer,orladderrung,areexpressedbythebondoperators In this basis the magnetic-field term for a dimer has the di-
agonalrepresentation
spin-wave). 1
!s&"s†!0&" !2 "! ↑↓ &%! ↓↑ &), %h•"S 1 !S 2 #"ih z "t x †t y %t† y t x #"h"t ! †t ! %t % †t % #, "6#
Inordertomakeaconclusiveidentificationofthevariousspin-wavemodes,Ru¨eggetal. useda
Heisenberg-likemodelofmagnetismthatwasintroducedinReference94. Theoriginalmodelcon-
sists of intradimer couplings J and interdimer couplings J , J , etc., as shown in Figure 11. Here
FIG.12. Themassofthethreespin-wavemodesofTlCuCl obtainedfrominelasticneutronscattering. The
figure shows Neel temperature (green points) and the mass and the three spin-wave modes (the remaining
points) as a function of the hydrostatic pressure (see text). The solid lines represent theoretical fits from
the minimal model of Equation 26. Abbreviations: QCP, quantum critical point; QD, quantum disordered
phase;RC-AFM,renormalizedclassicalantiferromagnetic. AdaptedfromReference[31].
we present a minimal version of this model, which is sufficient to analyze the neutron-scattering
datainRef.[31]:
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
H = J S ·S − J Sx Sx + J S ·S , (26)
l,a r,a xx l,a r,a 2 l,a r,b
a a (cid:104)a,b(cid:105)
where l and r are the left- and right-hand sites of the dimer, a and b are the dimer positions,
(cid:104)a,b(cid:105) indicate the nearest dimers, and S is a spin 1/2 operator. The J interaction couples the
two sites of the same dimer and therefore when it is the dominant interaction each dimer goes
into a singlet ground state and the system becomes nonmagnetic. However, when the intradimer
coupling J becomes comparable to the J coupling, the system develops 3D antiferromagnetic
order. Importantly, the weak J coupling models the anisotropy of the dimer bond. In TlCuCl ,
the J term favors y and z triplets on dimers, and hence introduces an “easy plane” (i.e. a “hard
axis”) anisotropy. The easy plane anisotropy changes the symmetry being broken from SU(2) to
U(1). The3Dcharacterarisesduetotheinter-chaincouplingsthatarenotcapturedbytheminimal
model. Analysisoftheminimalmodelatthemean-fieldlevelis,however,sufficienttocapturethe
mainexperimentalobservations.
Togetapictureofthephasediagram,aswellasthatoftheexcitationssupportedbytheminimal
model,considerthefollowingproductwavefunction
(cid:89)(cid:16)(cid:112) (cid:17)
a a a a a 1 a a 2 a a 3 a
Here, |s(cid:105) = √1 | ↑↓ −| ↓↑(cid:105) represents a singlet on the dimer a, and |t (cid:105) = √1 | ↑↓ + ↓↑(cid:105) ,
|t (cid:105) = √ i | ↑↑ + ↓↓(cid:105) , and |t (cid:105) = √1 | ↓↓ − ↑↑(cid:105) are the three triplets. We choose the triplets so
2 a a 3 a a
that |t (cid:105) and |t (cid:105) have the same energy, and |t (cid:105) lies just above in energy due to the easy-plane
1 a 2 a 3 a
anisotropy. Theparametersα andβ playtheroleoftherealandimaginarypartofthesuperfluid
order parameter φ. Hence the nonmagnetic ground state corresponds to α = β = γ = 0 and the
magneticgroundstatecorrespondsto|α |2 +|β |2 (cid:44) 0.
The spin-wave theory, at the mean-field level, can be obtained by extremizing the matrix el-
ement (cid:104)ψ|i∂ − H|ψ(cid:105) with respect to α , β , and γ , which results in a set of equations that are
analogous to the usual Bogoliubov equations. The resulting zero momentum modes were plotted
assolidlinesinFig.12. Inthenonmagneticstate,therearethreemassivemodes. Twomodeswith
identical energy corresponding to the triplets |t (cid:105) and |t (cid:105); and another mode with slightly higher
energy corresponding to the triplet |t (cid:105). As we approach the quantum critical point, the gap for
thetwodegeneratemodesgoestozero,whereasthethirdmoderemainsgapped. Onthemagnetic
side, the two degenerate modes split into a gapless Goldstone mode and a gapped Higgs mode,
whereas the third mode remains gapped. Hence, using the simple model, the modes observed in
neutron scattering could be conclusively identified. We note in passing, that in the absence of an
anisotropy, on the nonmagnetic side the third mode would become degenerate with the other two
modes,whereasonthemagneticsideitwouldbecomeanotherGoldstonemode.
Disclosure Statement: The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or
financialholdingsthatmightbeperceivedasaffectingtheobjectivityofthisreview.
Acknowledgements: We wish to acknowledge useful discussions with and suggestions from
Daniel Arovas, Assa Auerbach, Andrew Cohen, Manuel Endres, Thierry Giamarchi, Alan Gold-
man,Marie-AudeMe`asson,AndreaMorales,DanielPodolsky,andLodePollet.
[1] V.L.GinzburgandL.D.Landau,Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz.20,1064(1950).
[2] L.D.Landau,Zh.Eksp.Teor.Fiz.11,592(1941).
[3] N.N.Bogoliubov,Izv.Akad.NaukSSSRSer.Fiz.11,77(1947); J.Phys.USSR11,23(1947).
[4] J.Bardeen,L.N.Cooper, andJ.R.Schrieffer,Phys.Rev.108,1175(1957).
[5] L.P.Gor’kov,SovietPhysicsJETP-USSR36,1364(1959).
[6] C.Varma,JournalofLowTemperaturePhysics126,901(2002).
[7] E.Gross,IlNuovoCimentoSeries1020,454(1961).
[8] L.P.Pitaevsk,SovietPhysicsJETP-USSR13(1961).
[9] J.Goldstone,IlNuovoCimento19,154(1961); J.Goldstone,A.Salam, andS.Weinberg,Phys.Rev.
127,965(1962).
[10] P.W.Anderson,Phys.Rev.110,827(1958).
[11] P.W.Higgs,Phys.Rev.Lett.13,508(1964).
[12] P.B.LittlewoodandC.M.Varma,Phys.Rev.Lett.47,811(1981); Phys.Rev.B26,4883(1982).
[13] S.D.Huber,E.Altman,H.P.Bu¨chler, andG.Blatter,Phys.Rev.B75,085106(2007).
[14] J. Keeling, F. M. Marchetti, M. H. Szymanska, and P. B. Littlewood, Semiconductor Science and
Technology22,R1(2007).
[15] Y.Nambu,Phys.Rev.117,648(1960).
[16] P. C. Martrin, in Superconductivity, Vol. 1, edited by R. D. Parks (Marcel Dekker, New York, 1969)
Chap.7.
[17] E.AbrahamsandT.Tsuneto,Phys.Rev.152,416(1966).
[18] C.CaroliandK.Maki,Phys.Rev.159,306(1967).
[19] L. Hoddeson, L. Brown, M. Riordan, and M. Dresden, eds., TheRiseoftheStandardModel (Cam-
bridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,U.K.,1997).
[20] P.W.Anderson,Phys.Rev.130,439(1963).
[21] Y.NambuandG.Jona-Lasinio,Phys.Rev.122,345(1961).
[22] F.EnglertandR.Brout,Phys.Rev.Lett.13,321(1964).
[23] G.S.Guralnik,C.R.Hagen, andT.W.B.Kibble,Phys.Rev.Lett.13,585(1964).
[24] S.Weinberg,Phys.Rev.Lett.19,1264(1967).
[25] A. Salam and J. Ward, Physics Letters 13, 168 (1964); A. Salam, “Elementary particle theory,”
(AlmqvistandWiksells,Stockholm,1969)p.367.
[26] TheCMSCollaboration,Science338,1569(2012).
[27] TheATLASCollaboration,Science338,1576(2012).
[28] M.Shifman,arXiv:1211.0004 (2012).
[29] R.SooryakumarandM.V.Klein,Phys.Rev.Lett.45,660(1980); Phys.Rev.B23,3213(1981).
[30] P.Higgs,“Seepage509ofref.[19],” (1997).
[31] C.Ru¨egg,B.Normand,M.Matsumoto,A.Furrer,D.F.McMorrow,K.W.Kra¨mer,H.U.Gu¨del,S.N.
Gvasaliya,H.Mutka, andM.Boehm,Phys.Rev.Lett.100,205701(2008).
[32] J.A.Sauls,“Privatecommunication,” (2013).
[33] M.-A.Me´asson,Y.Gallais,M.Cazayous,B.Clair,P.Rodie`re,L.Cario, andA.Sacuto,Phys.Rev.B
89,060503(2014).
[34] J.R.Schrieffer,TheoryofSuperconductivity(W.A.Benjamin,Inc.,1964).
[35] R.Hackl,R.Kaiser, andS.Schicktanz,JournalofPhysicsC:SolidStatePhysics16,1729(1983).
[36] D.BrowneandK.Levin,Phys.Rev.B28(1993).
[37] Y.Kurihara,JournalofthePhysicalSocietyofJapan52,542(1983).
[38] C.BalseiroandL.M.Falicov,Phys.Rev.Lett.45,662(1980).
[39] M.V.KleinandS.B.Dierker,Phys.Rev.B29,4976(1984).
[40] A.BardasisandJ.R.Schrieffer,Phys.Rev.121,1050(1961).
[41] I.Tu¨tto¨ andA.Zawadowski,Phys.Rev.B45,4842(1992).
[42] R. Matsunaga, Y. Hamada, K. Makise, Y. Uzawa, H. Terai, Z. Wang, and R. Shimano, Phys. Rev.
Lett.111,057002(2013).
[43] R.A.BarankovandL.S.Levitov,Phys.Rev.Lett.96,230403(2006).
[44] E.A.Yuzbashyan,O.Tsyplyatyev, andB.L.Altshuler,Phys.Rev.Lett.96,097005(2006).
[45] R.CarlsonandA.M.Goldman,Phys.Rev.Letters34,11(1975).
[46] A.M.KadinandA.M.Goldman,Phys.Rev.B25,6701(1982).
[47] A.J.Leggett,Rev.Mod.Phys.4,331(1975).
[48] P.Wo¨lfle,JournalofLowTemperaturePhysicsB90,96(1977).
[49] R. McKenzie and J. A. Sauls, Vol. 26, Chapter 5 of Modern Problems in Condensed Matter Physics,
Ed.byW.P.HalperinandL.P.Pitaevskii,North-Holland1990 (2013).
[50] G.E.VolovikandM.A.Zubkov,JournalofLowTemperaturePhysics175,486(2014).
[51] Y.Gallais,A.Sacuto,T.P.Devereaux, andD.Colson,Phys.Rev.B71,012506(2005).
[52] Y.BarlasandC.Varma,Unpublished (2014).
[53] W.D.Phillips,Rev.Mod.Phys.70,721(1998).
[54] K.B.Davis,M.O.Mewes,M.R.Andrews,N.J.vanDruten,D.S.Durfee,D.M.Kurn, andW.Ket-
terle,Phys.Rev.Lett.75,3969(1995).
[55] M.Greiner,O.Mandel,T.Esslinger,T.W.Hansch, andI.Bloch,Nature415,39(2002).
[56] D.JakschandP.Zoller,AnnalsofPhysics315,52 (2005),specialIssue.
[57] C.PethickandH.Smith,Bose-EinsteinCondensationinDiluteGases,2nded.(CambridgeUniversity
Press,2008).
[58] M.P.A.Fisher,P.B.Weichman,G.Grinstein, andD.S.Fisher,Phys.Rev.B40,546(1989).
[59] J.K.FreericksandH.Monien,Phys.Rev.B53,2691(1996).
[60] A.Dutta,C.Trefzger, andK.Sengupta,Phys.Rev.B86,085140(2012).
[61] W.KrauthandN.Trivedi,EPL(EurophysicsLetters)14,627(1991).
[62] B.Capogrosso-Sansone,N.V.Prokof’ev, andB.V.Svistunov,Phys.Rev.B75,134302(2007).
[63] B.Capogrosso-Sansone,S.So¨yler,N.Prokof’ev, andB.Svistunov,Phys.Rev.A77,015602(2008).
[64] S.Sachdev,QuantumPhaseTransitions,Troisie`meCycledelaPhysique(CambridgeUniversityPress,
2011).
[65] E.AltmanandA.Auerbach,Phys.Rev.Lett.89,250404(2002).
[66] S.D.Huber,B.Theiler,E.Altman, andG.Blatter,Phys.Rev.Lett.100,050404(2008).
[67] D.Pekker,B.Wunsch,T.Kitagawa,E.Manousakis,A.S.Sørensen, andE.Demler,Phys.Rev.B86,
144527(2012).
[68] A.V.Chubukov,S.Sachdev, andJ.Ye,Phys.Rev.B49,11919(1994).
[69] S.Sachdev,Phys.Rev.B59,14054(1999).
[70] W.Zwerger,Phys.Rev.Lett.92,027203(2004).
[71] N.H.LindnerandA.Auerbach,Phys.Rev.B81,054512(2010).
[72] D.Podolsky,A.Auerbach, andD.P.Arovas,Phys.Rev.B84,174522(2011).
[73] M. Endres, T. Fukuhara, D. Pekker, M. Cheneau, P. Schauss, C. Gross, E. Demler, S. Kuhr, and
I.Bloch,Nature487,454(2012).
[74] M. Endres, Probingcorrelatedquantummany-bodysystemsatthesingle-particlelevel, Ph.D. thesis,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universita¨tMu¨nchen(2013).
[75] D.PodolskyandS.Sachdev,Phys.Rev.B86,054508(2012).
[76] L.PolletandN.Prokof’ev,Phys.Rev.Lett.109,010401(2012).
[77] S.Gazit,D.Podolsky, andA.Auerbach,Phys.Rev.Lett.110,140401(2013).
[78] K.Chen,L.Liu,Y.Deng,L.Pollet, andN.Prokof’ev,Phys.Rev.Lett.112,030402(2014).
[79] M.HasenbuschandT.To¨ro¨k,JournalofPhysicsA:MathematicalandGeneral32,6361(1999).
[80] M.Hasenbusch,JournalofPhysicsA:MathematicalandGeneral34,8221(2001).
[81] T.Sto¨ferle,H.Moritz,C.Schori,M.Ko¨hl, andT.Esslinger,Phys.Rev.Lett.92,130403(2004).
[82] C.Schori,T.Sto¨ferle,H.Moritz,M.Ko¨hl, andT.Esslinger,Phys.Rev.Lett.93,240402(2004).
[83] U. Bissbort, S. Go¨tze, Y. Li, J. Heinze, J. S. Krauser, M. Weinberg, C. Becker, K. Sengstock, and
W.Hofstetter,Phys.Rev.Lett.106,205303(2011).
[84] W. S. Bakr, A. Peng, M. E. Tai, R. Ma, J. Simon, J. I. Gillen, S. Fo¨lling, L. Pollet, and M. Greiner,
Science329,547(2010).
[85] J.F.Sherson,C.Weitenberg,M.Endres,M.Cheneau,I.Bloch, andS.Kuhr,Nature467,68(2010).
[86] Y.J.Lin,R.L.Compton,K.Jimenez-Garcia,J.V.Porto, andI.B.Spielman,Nature462,628(2009).
[87] G.M.Bruun,arXiv:1403.6876 (2014).
[88] D.Banerjee,M.Dalmonte,M.Mu¨ller,E.Rico,P.Stebler,U.-J.Wiese, andP.Zoller,Phys.Rev.Lett.
109,175302(2012).
[89] A.Oosawa,M.Fujisawa,T.Osakabe,K.Kakurai, andH.Tanaka,JournalofthePhysicalSocietyof
Japan72,1026(2003).
[90] H.Tanaka, K.Goto, M.Fujisawa, T.Ono, andY.Uwatoko,PhysicaB:CondensedMatter329–333,
Part2,697 (2003),proceedingsofthe23rdInternationalConferenceonLowTemperaturePhysics.
[91] C. Ru¨egg, A. Furrer, D. Sheptyakov, T. Stra¨ssle, K. W. Kra¨mer, H.-U. Gu¨del, and L. Me´le´si, Phys.
Rev.Lett.93,257201(2004).
[92] A.Oosawa,K.Kakurai,T.Osakabe,M.Nakamura,M.Takeda, andH.Tanaka,JournalofthePhysical
SocietyofJapan73,1446(2004).
[93] K.Goto,M.Fujisawa,T.Ono,H.Tanaka, andY.Uwatoko,JournalofthePhysicalSocietyofJapan
73,3254(2004).
[94] M.Matsumoto,B.Normand,T.M.Rice, andM.Sigrist,Phys.Rev.B69,054423(2004).