An analysis of the abstracts presented at the annual meetings
of the Society for Neuroscience from 2001 to 2006
John M Lin1, Jason W Bohland1, Peter Andrews1, Gully Burns2, Cara B Allen1, Partha P Mitra1
1Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA
2 Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Continuing exponential growth in the volume of science as measured by number of scientists
or by publications has made it virtually impossible for individual researchers to keep track of
the totality of knowledge and major progress areas in a research field using the traditional
modes of scholarly research. This is individually frustrating for researchers not satisfied with
exploring increasingly hyper-specialized niches, but also has negative implications for
broader questions relating to the efficiency of the research enterprise and for science policy.
Automated or semi-automated methods using natural language processing, applied to the
scientific literature, provide a potential avenue to address this problem. Indeed, such
bibliometric analysis forms the groundwork for search engines such as Google. However,
most of the scientific literature is behind a Byzantine arrangement of online firewalls which
prevent efficient utilization of automated tools by the average researcher. Meeting abstracts
published by scientific societies are often available freely in electronic form on the web or in
form of media distributed at annual meetings, and forms an attractive starting point for the
construction and mining of knowledge bases about specific scientific domains. In particular,
the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience (SFN) is a large-scale, international event
that is arguably the most influential single meeting within the subject. The abstracts of
presentation at this meeting are not peer-reviewed publications, but nonetheless provide a
unique global survey of the state of the subject of neuroscience each year.
In this paper, we extracted and processed abstract data from the SFN annual meeting abstracts
during the period 2001-2006, using a suitable combination of relatively standard software
ranging from natural language processing and database management to visualization and
analysis tools. An important first step in the process was the application of data cleaning and
disambiguation methods to construct a unified database, since the data were too noisy to be of
full utility in the raw form initially available. The resulting co-author graph in 2006, for
example, had 39,645 nodes (with an estimated 6% error rate in our disambiguation of similar
author names) and 13,979 abstracts, with an average of 1.5 abstracts per author, 4.3 authors
per abstract, and 5.96 collaborators per author (including all authors on shared abstracts).
Most authors (28,084) have a single abstract; 6665, 2464, and 1002 authors have 2, 3, and 4
abstracts, respectively.
Recent work in related areas has focused on reputational indices such as highly cited papers or
scientists and journal impact factors, and to a lesser extent on creating visual maps of the
knowledge space. In contrast, there has been relatively less work on the demographics and
community structure, the dynamics of the field over time to examine major research trends
and the structure of the sources of research funding. In this paper we examined each of these
areas in order to gain an objective overview of contemporary neuroscience including its
demographics and community structure, major research areas and trends, and the distribution
of NIH funding across topic clusters. Some interesting findings include a high geographical
concentration of neuroscience research in north eastern United States, a surprisingly large
transient population (60% of the authors appear in only one out of the six studied years), the
central role played by the study of neurodegenerative disorders in the neuroscience
community structure, and an apparent growth of behavioral/systems neuroscience with a
corresponding shrinkage of cellular/molecular neuroscience over the six year period.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
We extracted and processed data from the annual Society for Neuroscience (SFN) meeting
planners to build databases of SFN abstracts and their authors. Maintaining an accurate count
of the total number of authors was a challenging task complicated by two types of
ambiguities: (1) different authors may share the same name and initials, and (2) the same
author may use different number of initials in different abstracts. In this study, we used a
combination of string matching, entity matching, and co-authorship patterns to disambiguate
unique authors. See Materials and Methods for details of these processes. We created one
database for each year between 2001 and 2006, as well as a consolidated database
encompassing data from all 6 years. The information contained in these databases allowed us
to perform a variety of analyses to elucidate the structure and evolution of the neuroscience
landscape.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we present the geographical distribution
of the SFN authors, followed by basic statistics and demographics of the SFN annual
meetings. We constructed a graph of co-authors on abstracts and applied graph theoretic
algorithms to investigate patterns of connection and communication between neuroscientists.
Finally, we used computational techniques in natural language processing to cluster the
abstracts into neuroscience topics and studied their dynamics and concordance of these
discovered topic clusters with the thematic organization provided by the SFN. We also
studied the distribution of NIH funding across these topics.
1. Geographical Distribution of SFN Abstract Authors
To explore geographical distribution and dynamics of neuroscience research, the city, state
(for US and Canada), and country of each author’s institution was extracted. The number of
authors associated with each unique location was then tabulated for each year between 2001
and 2006. Table 1 shows the top 10 cities with the highest SFN representation during this
time frame. Based on these data, the global “hubs” for neuroscience research seem to be
concentrated in the following geographical regions: northeast region of the United States
(Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore/DC vicinity), Southern California, Tokyo,
Montreal, and London. These representations remained fairly static over the years, indicating
the stable presence of prominent and well-funded neuroscience research centers in these
regions. By plotting the changes in the percentage of representation for some of these
locations (Figure 1), it is evident that New York City consistently ranks as the top producer of
neuroscience research, signifying the number and caliber of academic institutions, research
centers, and hospitals in the New York metropolitan area. In addition, the city of Atlanta
appears to have a steadily increasing presence in the neuroscience landscape, although the
spike occurred between the year 2005 and 2006 may be partly attributed to the fact that the
2006 SFN meeting was held in that city.
It is interesting to compare this list with the top ten cities in terms of scientific publications in
1967 (Table 7.2 in Price, 1986). In descending order, these were Moscow, London, New
York, Paris, Tokyo, Washington, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, St Petersburg (Leningrad).
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
New York New York New York New York New York New York
Boston Baltimore Bethesda Los Angeles Baltimore Baltimore
Baltimore Bethesda Baltimore Boston Bethesda Boston
Los Angeles Boston Boston Bethesda Boston Bethesda
Bethesda Los Angeles Los Angeles La Jolla Los Angeles Los Angeles
La Jolla Tokyo La Jolla Baltimore Philadelphia Chicago
Tokyo Chicago Chicago Philadelphia Chicago Atlanta
London Philadelphia Philadelphia Chicago La Jolla Philadelphia
Montreal La Jolla London Tokyo Atlanta Tokyo
Chicago Montreal Tokyo Pittsburgh Tokyo La Jolla
Table 1. Top 10 cities for SFN representation between 2001 and 2006
Figure 1. Changes in the percentage of representation for several geographical locations between the year
2001 and 2006
The advent of web mapping technologies such as GoogleMap (maps.google.com), YahooMap
(maps.yahoo.com) provides capabilities to generate, visualize, and navigate high quality
geographical maps on the World Wide Web. In order to visualize the geographical
distribution of the home institutions of abstract authors on a map, the latitude and longitude of
each address from the abstracts were fetched using Yahoo’s GeoCode Web Service
these geographical data can then be plotted on different map templates using the application
programming interface (API) provided by the mapping engine. Figure 2 shows different
perspectives of geographical distribution of 2006 SFN data using Google Map API.
Figure 2. Geographical distribution of SFN authors for the year 2006 displayed on a Google Map. The
location with the most representation is in the northeast region of the US, as indicated by the blue circle. Other
regions of high representation include Southern California (Los Angeles and San Diego), London, and Tokyo.
2. Basic Statistics and Demographics
The upper bound for the total number of authors in the six-year database is 197429; this
number was obtained by parsing the data from SFN abstracts without applying any of the
disambiguation or entity matching schemes described in the Materials and Methods section.
After these schemes were applied, the total number of authors was reduced by approximately
35% to 128553. The number of unique author names in the database was 99410, which
represents the lower bound for total author count. The final tally of 128553 falls between the
upper and lower bound and gives a reasonable estimate of the true number of unique authors
in the database.
The top five countries represented in the SFN annual meetings between 2001 and 2006 were:
USA (56.6%), EU-15 (20.2%), Japan (7.3%), Canada (5.2%), and Mexico (1.4%). For
comparison, the share of worldwide science and engineering article production in 2003 was
31.5% (EU-15), 30.3 (USA) and 8.6 (Japan) (National Science Board, 2006). Note also that
the number of life scientists employed in the science and technology workforce in the USA in
2000 was estimated to be 226,000 (National Science Board, 2006). As discussed below, most
(60%) of the SFN abstract authors appear to be transients.
For the 6-year data between 2001 and 2006, the average number of abstracts per author was
2.93, and the average number of authors per abstract was 4.31. Looking at the statistics on a
year by year basis (Table 2), it is apparent that the number of abstracts per author, number of
authors per abstract, and average number of collaborators in any given year stay roughly
constant during the six year span. This suggests that the neuroscience community produces
research results at a relatively constant rate and that most research projects in the field are
conducted by a small to moderate team of scientists. The average number of authors on
Science and Engineering articles worldwide in 2003 was reported to be 4.22 and the
corresponding number for the US was 4.42 (National Science Board, 2006), suggesting that
the team sizes represented in SFN abstracts are consistent with other areas of science.
Year Number of Number of Avg Abstracts Avg Authors Average Number of
Authors Abstracts Per Author Per Abstract Collaborators
2001 42318 15340 1.55 4.28 5.82
2002 37129 13307 1.53 4.21 5.51
2003 41349 15261 1.58 4.29 5.90
2004 43853 15987 1.59 4.37 6.09
2005 39622 13669 1.50 4.35 5.88
2006 39645 13979 1.54 4.33 5.96
2001-2006 128553 87543 2.93 4.31 8.62
Table 2. Basic statistics of SFN data for the 6-year period between 2001 and 2006
To further elucidate the collaboration patterns of neuroscientists, we plotted the histograms of
the number of co-authors for abstracts and the number of abstracts submitted by authors. As
highlighted in Figure 3(a), most SFN meeting abstracts contain two to five authors. Very few
abstracts are associated with only one author or more than 10 authors. This may again imply
that most research projects in neuroscience are carried out by a few scientists instead of large
teams of people.
Figure 3(b) shows the histograms of the number of abstracts associated with each author. The
majority of the authors had only one abstract over the span of six years. We speculated that
this number reflected a large group of “transients” comprising mostly undergraduates,
graduate students, and perhaps post-docs who entered and exited the neuroscience field in a
short period of time. Given the increasingly blurred boundaries between different disciplines
of biomedical sciences, it is possible that many of these scientists simply shifted their focus to
a different aspect of biomedical research, i.e. from cellular neuroscience to genomics, or from
cognitive neuroscience to psychology. The histograms also highlight a few individuals who
are associated with very large numbers of abstracts (some have over 100).
Figure 3. (a) Histograms of the average number of authors per abstract between 2001 and 2006. (b)
Histograms of the average number of abstracts per author between 2001 and 2006.
In Figure 4(a), we plotted the histograms of the number of years in which authors are
represented between 2001 and 2006. As the figure shows, approximately 60% of the authors
made presence in only one SFN meeting within the six-year period. Again, we speculated
that this high turn over rate is the direct manifestation of many transients who entered and
exited the field in a relatively short time frame. The phenomena of a high transient rate,
reflecting a sort of “infant mortality rate” for first time authors was first analyzed by Price
(Price, 1986), who estimated a 22% transient rate for paper authorship from a database
consisting of a statistical sample of papers published between 1964 and 1970. Although we do
not pursue it in detail, it should be straightforward to extend or implement Price’s model of
transients and continuants to the SFN abstracts database, particularly if data from a longer
period of time becomes available.
To correlate these data with the demographics of actual SFN meeting attendance, we
downloaded from the SFN website (www.sfn.org) the annual meeting attendance statistics
from 1971 to 2006. These data are plotted in Figure 4(b) using a base 2 logarithm. The SFN
meeting attendance has shown an overall slowing growth rate in the past 3 decades. As
evident from the graph, the first doubling took approximately 5 years. The next two
doublings occurred at a steady exponential rate between 1975 and 1995, with a doubling
period of about 8 years. The growth slowed after 1995 and the current doubling rate is
projected to be about 15 years.
What are the causes of the exponential growth, and what is causing the rates to slow down?
To put the numbers in perspective, the number of life scientists employed in the Science and
Technology workforce in the US for the years 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000 were 55, 102, 139
and 226 (in thousands). These numbers also show an initial doubling period of 10 years and a
subsequent slowing. The exponential increase in the number of scientists and scientific
publication over the last three centuries has been studied systematically (Price, 1986).
Interestingly, Price’s estimate of the doubling times of 10-15 years is consistent with the
estimated growth of SFN meeting attendees over the last three decades. However, this growth
has also slowed down and may continue to fall further. It is interesting to speculate about
what is slowing the growth in meeting attendance. A number of limitations come to mind: a
reflection of an overall slowdown in growth of the S&T workforce or in general or of
biomedical scientists in particular, perhaps due to saturating funding rates; maturation of the
research field and a shift in scientific talent to other growth areas such as information
technology, or perhaps non-scientific factors such as the number of hotel rooms in the cities
where the meetings are held,
To see if the participation level of the annual SFN meetings might be linked to the amount of
funding available to the scientists, we plotted in Figure 4(c) the budgets for National Institute
of Health (NIH), one of the largest funding agencies for biomedical sciences, from 1976 to
2006 (Source: Historical Table 2: R&D by agency, AAAS website
period, there does not seem to be a detailed correlation between NIH funding and SFN
meeting attendance. In fact, the growth in meeting attendance slowed down precisely when
NIH budget was doubled from 1995 to 2005.
Exponential growths do not continue forever, and the increase in the number of SFN attendees
is no exception. Price has pointed out that a doubling time of 10-15 years is much faster than
the doubling time of the human population (which is currently around 50 years, and slowing),
and has predicted a period of transition to a steady state where the number of scientists per
capita reaches a stable value. In Price’s estimate, we are either at the inflection point of the
corresponding logistic curve, or have passed it already. It is to be noted that the percentage of
GNP devoted to R&D in developed nations has remained steady between 2-3% since the 70’s
(Ziman, 1990), and other subject areas in science such as physics or electrical engineering
also showed sharp growth followed by saturation within recent history. Unfortunately, despite
such historical data and exhortations by Price and others about the necessity to manage the
transition from rapid exponential growth to slower growth or a relatively steady state, there is
little evidence for forward planning by the biomedical community in trying to manage the
coming demographic transition by practicing stricter scientific “birth control” (Martinson,
2007). Absent such planning, the danger is that Malthusian factors will make the transition
significantly more painful than necessary.
Figure 4. (a) Histograms of the number of years in which authors are represented. (b) Growth of attendees at
annual SFN meeting from 1971 to 2006 (in base 2 logarithm). (c) Growth of NIH funding from 1976 to 2006.
3. Analysis of Co-authorship Graphs
A co-author graph, G: = (V, E), was constructed from the preprocessed database by
representing each author as a vertex on a graph, v ∈ V. Two authors were connected by an
undirected edge, e ∈ E, if they have co-authored at least one abstract in the database. Matrix
representations of the graph can be used to analyze the structure of the underlying community.
In addition, by integrating the data with a graph visualization package, such as Graphviz
(www.graphviz.org) or JUNG (jung.sourceforge.net) one can visualize, explore, and navigate
the network interactively.
A fundamental measure used in graph theory is the shortest path between a pair of connected
vertices. In the context of the network under study, this measures the number of steps it takes
to go from one author to another through intermediate collaborators. From the multi-year
SFN database, the lengths of shortest paths between all pairs of authors for whom a
connection exists were calculated exhaustively using breadth-first search algorithm. These
numbers were then averaged to yield the mean distance between authors in the entire network.
Table 3 shows that the authors in the SFN community are separated from one another by an
average distance of 6.09. A similar observation of “six degree of separation” has been
reported previously for abstracts in the MEDLINE database (Newman, 2001), suggesting that
neuroscience and the greater biomedical science community share similar connection patterns.
The diameter of the graph, or the maximum distance between any two authors in the network
for whom a connection exists, is 20, which also closely matches the result from Newman’s
MEDLINE analysis.
We also computed the clustering coefficient, which measures cliquishness (Watts and
Strogatz, 1998). Suppose that a vertex v in a graph has k neighbors; then at most k (k -1)/2
edges can exist between them (this occurs when every neighbor of v is connected to every
other neighbor of v). Let C denote the fraction of possible edges for the neighborhood around
v that actually exist. The clustering coefficient of a graph is the average of C for all v. The
mean clustering coefficient for the SFN network between 2001 and 2006 is 0.7724. In other
words, two authors in the network have a 77.24% or greater probability of being collaborators
if they have both collaborated with a third author.
A large sparse graph such as the one created from the SFN database may not be connected
(i.e. there may not exist a path from each vertex to every other vertex in the graph). Finding
the set of individual connected components in the graph may provide another insight into
community structure. The SFN coauthor graph for 2001-2006 was found to contain 2650
connected components (Table 3). Most authors belong to a single large connected component
which comprises more than 90% of the entire network. The remaining connected components
in the graph are significantly smaller, each accounting for less than 1% of the vertices of the
entire graph. Some of these small connected components represent research groups from
pharmaceutical companies or other commercial entities, while some others belong to
laboratories from countries with a relatively low SFN presence.
Another interesting aspect of the graph is the relative importance of each vertex as measured
by the betweenness centrality of the vertex (Anthonisse, 1971; Freeman, 1977). The
betweenness centrality for a given vertex BC(v) is defined as:
s≠v≠t∈V st
where σ is the number of shortest paths between s ∈ V and t ∈V, and σ (v) is the number
of shortest paths between s and t that pass through v. In other words, betweenness centrality
measures the frequency with which a vertex falls on one of the shortest paths between any
other pair of vertices in the graph.
Vertices with large betweenness have more influence over the information flow in the graph
and can thus be considered to represent authors playing central roles in the SFN co-author
network. Analysis of the multi-year SFN data revealed that only a few individuals in the
network have disproportionately large betweenness centrality measures (Figure 5(a)). In
addition, Figure 5(b) shows that on average the distribution of the betweenness centrality of
an author and the number of abstracts closely follow a power law. However, the authors
possessing the largest betweenness centrality, and thus the most influence over the network,
were not necessarily associated with the most number of abstracts. To better elucidate the
roles of these brokering members of the SFN network, the research profiles of these
individuals were located from the World Wide Web and qualitatively assessed. Most of the
authors with high betweenness centrality conduct research in the field of neurodegenerative
diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD). Research related to
AD, PD, and other neurodegenerative diseases is highly multidisciplinary in nature, and
scientists engaging in this type of research will likely employ techniques and methodologies
spanning multiple different sub-disciplines of neuroscience and other biomedical sciences,
which might explain the high values of betweenness centrality. Another possible reason is the
comparatively high funding rates for neurodegenerative disorders (discussed in a later
section).
Average Distance 6.09
Graph Diameter 20
Mean Clustering Coefficient 0.7724
Number of Connected Components 2650
Size of Largest Connected Component 116716
As a percentage 90.79%
Size of Second Largest Connected Component 56
As a percentage 0.0436%
Table 3. Some graph analysis results for multi-year SFN data
Figure 5. (a) Histograms of the betweenness centrality (bc) normalized by total number of possible edges,
[N*(N-1)]/2, where N is the number of authors, from all authors plotted in log scale. The majority of the authors
have very small normalized bc (less than 0.005), and only a few authors have disproportionately large bc. (b)
The averaged normalized bc over all authors having the same number of abstracts as a function of the number of
abstracts. On average, the betweenness centrality of an author and the number of the abstracts follow a power
law.
4. Topic Modeling
The sheer number and diversity of the annual SFN meeting attendees indicate that the text
corpora from the abstracts provide an illustrative view of the current state and dynamics of the
neuroscience research landscape. One can perform a variety of text mining and natural
language processing (NLP) techniques to exploit topic information from the syntaxes and
semantics of the text corpora. The information gained from topic modeling can be used to
classify abstracts into different categories, chart the rise and fall of research topics over time,
measure the popularity of specific fields, and facilitate document retrieval.
In this work, we explored the utility of Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), (Deerwester et al.,
1990), to find the topic space spanned by the SFN abstract set. Briefly, LSA is a
dimensionality reduction technique that projects terms and documents (abstracts) to a lower
dimensional space. The reduced dimensionality vector space captures most of the important
underlying structure in the association of terms and documents, while at the same time
removing the noise or variability in word usage (Berry et al., 1995). In the reduced vector
space, terms that occur in similar documents are located near one another even if they never
co-occur in the same document, and topically related documents are grouped near one another
based on their semantic relatedness.
Figure 6. Projections of the terms (represented by the blue dots) on the reduced vector space formed by the 2nd
and 3rd singular vectors of the truncated Singular Value Decomposition (See Materials and Methods). Select
terms with high frequencies are labeled in the figure. Note that these terms were stemmed.
Figure 6 shows the projections of the terms in a reduced two-dimensional vector space. The
terms with the highest frequencies of occurrence are labeled. It can be seen from the figure
that some terms representing similar concepts are located near one another in this reduced
vector space. For example, many terms on the left side of the figure are related to sensory and
motor systems (“task”, “stimulus”, “movement”, “visual”), terms at the bottom of the figure
are related to cellular neuroscience (“potential”, “current”, “axon”, “channel”, “synaptic”,
“neuron”), and many terms on the right side of the figure are related to molecular biology
(“protein”, “gene”, “regulatory”, “bind”, “express”, “pathway”).
After LSA was performed using 100 dimensions, we applied the Normalized Cuts (NCuts)
algorithm (Shi and Malik, 1997) to automatically cluster the abstracts into different topic
groups. The number of topic clusters was determined by evaluating concordance between the
topic labels found by clustering to the eight SFN theme labels (Figure 7) which were available
in the database. The concordance evaluation was performed using the Adjusted Rand Index
(Hubert and Arabie, 1985), a measure that quantifies the agreement between two clustering
systems. The number of topic clusters that maximized concordance was found to be 10
(Refer to the Materials and Methods section for detailed descriptions of these algorithms).
Figure 7. Themes used by SFN to categorize abstracts submitted for the 2006 meeting
4.1 Topic Clusters
To understand the content of the resulting topic clusters, we found the 20 most frequent words
used in each cluster. The lists of frequent words, along with the complete collections of the
abstracts, were also distributed to laboratory members working in neuroscience for subjective
labeling. Among the 10 topic clusters, half of them were readily identified for their distinct
and coherent themes. For example, all abstracts in Cluster 3 deal with research in songbirds.
Abstracts in Cluster 6 frequently contain such words as “amyloid beta”, “abeta”, “tau
protein”, or other terms relevant to Alzheimer’s disease. Cluster 7 is distinct from all other
clusters in that it contains mostly education and informatics related work. Cluster 8 groups
together all abstracts related to biological rhythms, which is evident from the abundance of
the following words: “circadian”, “melatonin”, “clock”, “phase”, and “suprachiasmatic
nucleus” or “SCN”. Finally, Cluster 10 contains mostly abstracts dealing with the structures
and mechanisms of sleep. The remaining 5 clusters, which tend to be larger in size, were not
as readily identifiable and required more thorough investigation of the abstracts themselves.
Table 4 shows cluster sizes, lists of frequent words, and the labels qualitatively assigned to
each cluster. For illustrative purpose, only the 7 most distinguishing words taken from each
cluster’s list of 20 most frequent words are shown. Complete lists of the 20 most frequent
words for each cluster are available as supplementary materials.
To visualize the 10 topic clusters on a high level “conceptual map”, the abstracts from all six
years were plotted as points in a 2D space formed by the two leading eigenvectors of the
graph Laplacian defined on the nearest neighbor abstracts graph. Each abstract was color
coded based on the topic cluster to which it belongs. The resulting maps are presented in
Figure 8.
1 (16729) 2 (22647) 3 (492) 4 (7210) 5 (19988)
Substance Cellular Behavior of Song Pain Proteins, Gene
Abuse & Neuroscience Birds & Expression &
Addiction Trauma Molecular Biology
BEHAVIOR SYNAPTIC SONG SPINAL CELL
LEVEL PROTEIN HVC* PAIN NEURON
COCAINE CURRENT BIRD RECEPTOR EXPRESS
DOSE CHANNEL VOCAL MUSCLE ACTIVE
DRUG POTENTIAL AUDITORY INJURIES BRAIN
INJECT DENDRITIC FUNCH DORSAL GENE
TREATMENT SUBUNIT SING MORPHINE RECEPTOR
6 (3609) 7 (736) 8 (794) 9 (14192) 10 (1146)
Alzheimer’s Education & Biological Visual & Motor Sleep
Disease Informatics Rhythms Systems
AD* STUDENT CIRCADIAN RESPONSE SLEEP
AMYLOID DATA SCN* TASK WAKE
TAU LEARN LIGHT VISUAL REM*
ALZHEIMER PROGRAM RHYTHM SUBJECT EEG
PEPTIDE MODEL PHASE CORTEX DEPRIVATION
PLAQUE SCHOOL CLOCK MOVEMENT PERIOD
ABETA INFORMATICS CYCLE STIMULUS WAVE
*Abbreviations: HVC = “High Vocal Center”; AD = “Alzheimer’s Disease”; REM = “Rapid Eye Movement”;
SCN = “Suprachiasmatic Nucleus”
Table 4. The 10 clusters produced by the Ncuts algorithm performed on the nearest-neighbor graph from year
2001-2006 (see Materials and Methods). The size of each cluster is given in parentheses. The second row of the
table shows the subjective assessed topic assigned by domain experts to each cluster. The third row shows the 7
most distinguishing words found in the 20 most frequently used words in each cluster.
Figure 8. (a) Visualization of topic map for all SFN meeting abstracts from 2001 to 2006. Abstracts assigned
to different clusters appear in different colors (see legend). (b) Zooming in at the center of the topic map reveals
more detailed clusters
4.2 Concordance with SFN Themes
While the Adjusted Rand Index provides a global measure of similarity between partitions,
the individual abstract clusters derived from NCuts partitioning can be compared pairwise
with the SFN theme clusters. A concordance matrix, C, between the two classification
systems was constructed in which each element C indicates the number of abstracts from the
2006 that belonged to cluster i and theme j (i=[1..10], j=[A..H]).
Figure 9(a) shows the relative distribution of abstracts in each cluster across the SFN themes,
after dividing each matrix element C by the total number of abstracts in cluster i. Thus these
matrix entries represent the proportion of abstracts from cluster i that are classified as theme j.
Some observations of good concordance can be made:
• Most of the abstracts from Cluster 7 (“Education and Informatics”) are labeled as
Theme G (Techniques in Neuroscience) or Theme H (History and Teaching of
Neuroscience), with more percentage in the latter.
• Cluster 6, which represents Alzheimer’s disease, is almost wholly contained in Theme
F (Disorders of the Nervous System).
• Cluster 3, which corresponds to behavior of song birds, is mostly captured by Theme
E (Cognition and Behavior).
• There is fairly good concordance between Cluster 4, which represents topics related to
pain and trauma, and Theme C (Sensory and Motor Systems).
• Good concordance is also observed between Cluster 8 (“Biological Rhythms”) and
Theme D (Homeostatic and Neuroendocrine Systems).
Similarly, by dividing each matrix element C by the total number of abstracts in theme j, the
resulting matrix (Figure 9(b)) gives the proportion of abstracts from theme j that are classified
as cluster i. There are some interesting observations as well:
• Theme H (History and Teaching of Neuroscience) is almost entirely contained in
Cluster 7.
• Theme G (Techniques in Neuroscience) is spread between Cluster 2 (“Cellular
Neuroscience”) and Cluster 9 (“Visual and Motor Systems”). This illustrates that
while SFN groups together techniques used in kinematics, imaging, and cellular
neuroscience, unsupervised clustering classified these abstracts according to their
target applications.
• There is very good concordance between Theme B (Neural Excitability, Synapses, and
Glia: Cellular Mechanisms) and Cluster 2.
• Many abstracts from Theme D belong to Cluster 1 (“Substance Abuse and
Addiction”), suggesting that mechanisms of addiction to various psychoactive
substances (i.e. alcohol, tobacco, drugs) are important elements of homeostatic and
neuroendocrine research.
Figure 9. (a) Concordance matrix between Ncuts clusters and SFN themes, normalized by cluster size in each
row. The matrix has been diagonalized for clarity. (b) Concordance matrix between Ncuts clusters and SFN
themes, normalized by theme size in each column. The matrix has been diagonalized for clarity.
4.3 Dynamics of Topics
Analyzing the dynamics of scientific topics provides interesting insights into the rise and fall
of different research subjects and methodologies. The amount of scientific interest generated
by different topics has both sociological and economical implications, and tracking their
changes can potentially prove useful for policy making, research planning, and funding
allocation. Since the topic clustering performed in the previous section was applied to a
corpus of abstracts spanning 6 years, it is straightforward to study short-term trends in
neuroscience research by examining how the distribution of abstracts across the topic clusters
changes from year to year. Detailed descriptions of this method are outlined in Materials and
Methods.
Among the 10 topic clusters, Cluster 9, which corresponds to visual and motor systems, is
shown to consistently increase in representation over the six year span (Figure 10(a)). On the
other hand, Cluster 2, which corresponds to cellular neuroscience, exhibits the most
significant decrease in representation over the same period (Figure 10(b)). These results
suggest that there is a shift in general scientific interest from cellular-level work such as ion
channel, synapse, and membrane physiology, towards more system level research
incorporating such topics as vision, kinematics, motor processing, and imaging. We
speculated this trend is reflective of the heavy reliance of neuroscience research on animal
models and invasive techniques. The use of animal model systems continues to be the most
prevalent way of studying the pathophysiologic mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases,
which is an area which is both well funded and well represented in the SFN abstracts
database. This may explain the rise of macro-level study in favor of cell-based and molecular
techniques. In addition, neuroimaging technologies have in recent years become
indispensable tools in various aspects of neuroscience research. It is therefore not surprising
to observe a surge of activities related to this subject matter.
Figure 10. (a) Dynamics of Cluster 9 (“Visual and Motor Systems”), which shows consistent and strong
increase in representation from 2001 to 2006. (b) Dynamics of Cluster 2 (“Cellular Neuroscience”), which shows
steady decrease in representation from 2001 to 2006.
In addition to charting the changes in the distribution of abstracts across topic clusters, we
also performed analysis of word frequency dynamics using principal component analysis (see
Materials and Methods). The results revealed that the first principal component accounted for
over 74% of the variance in F (Figure 11, top left). The first temporal component, which is
roughly linear across time, is shown in Figure 11 (top). The corresponding first singular
vector in word-space was sorted in order to find the specific terms that have the largest
(positive and negative) projections on this temporal series. The words with largest negative
projections (bottom left) are decreasing in frequency, whereas the words with the largest
positive projections (bottom right) are increasing in frequency.
The results of principal component analysis on word-frequency dynamics indicated that a
large fraction of the changes could be accounted for by a nearly linear component in time,
which intuitively corresponds simply to some words becoming more frequent and some
becoming less frequent. The corresponding word-space vector was examined to see which
words contributed to the increase and which to the decrease. Figure 11 (bottom) shows the 25
terms with the largest positive and negative projections on this component. These terms seem
to roughly correspond to the domains of cellular neuroscience (decreasing) and systems
neuroscience (increasing). This finding is consistent with the analysis of topic clustering
dynamics (above), and appears to indicate a significant shift in the topics being addressed at
the Society for Neuroscience conference between the years 2001 and 2006.
1 2 3 4 5 6
Singular values 1st temporal component
’01 ’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06
Most Negative Projections Most Positive Projections
antagonist target
effect trial
apoptosi stimulu
gaba train
protein compar
glutam base
lesion reward
channel learn
immunoreact cognit
subunit test
inject alpha
label anim
cultur mice
suggest network
nmda function
bind perform
releas signal
induc neural
mrna abeta
neuron condition
express time
rat memori
receptor behavior
cell model
−0.50 −0.25 0.25 0.50
Figure 11. Word-frequency dynamics. Top left: distribution of singular values. The first component accounts
for 74.4% of variance. Top right: The first right singular vector (temporal component). Bottom: The most
negative and most positive projections of specific words onto the first component. Most positive words are
increasing in frequency; most negative words are decreasing.
4.4 NIH Funding Analysis
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is the largest funding agency for biomedical research
in the world, currently investing over $28 billion each year for conducting and supporting
medical research in the US and around the world (from NIH website:
which manages research activities related to specific topics. The list of these 27 institutes is
provided in Table 5. Much of the research showcased in SFN meetings is supported
completely or partially by the NIH institutes. The correspondence between research dollars
allocated from individual NIH institute and topic clusters provides another interesting
perspective of the current neuroscience landscape. As a caveat to this section, it should be
noted that the derivation of the funding information from the abstracts is inferential, since no
dollar figures are provided in the abstracts, and we did not make any attempt to find tune our
analysis to individual funding mechanisms but counted each listed grant equally.
Nevertheless, no comparably comprehensive database of neuroscience funding is publicly
available, and we considered it valuable to perform such inferential analysis.
We anticipated a correspondence between certain topic clusters and specific NIH institutes.
For example, Figure 12(a) shows the NIH funding breakdown among the 8 themes created by
SFN for the 2006 meeting abstracts. The majority of the work categorized as Theme A
(“Disorders of the Nervous System) was supported by the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA). If we further
explore the funding distributions among the subthemes of Theme F (Figure 12(b)), it is clear
that neurodegenerative disorders and addiction and drugs of abuse indeed represent the
majority of the work classified as Theme F. Applying the same analysis to the NCuts topic
clusters, one might expect to find many abstracts from Cluster 1 (subjectively labeled
“Substance abuse and addiction”) to be supported by the National Institute of Drug Abuse
(NIDA), and most of the work supported by the National Eye Institute (NEI) to be captured
by Cluster 9 (“Visual and Motor Systems”).
The funding information associated with each abstract between 2001 and 2006 was parsed
from the original XML data file. If the NIH was designated as one of the funding sources, the
specific institute was determined from the two-letter organization code preceding the grant
number. For abstracts supported by more than one grant, an appropriate fraction was assigned
to each institute by dividing the number of grants from each institute by the total number of
grants listed. It should be pointed out that not all abstracts provided support information, and
not all of those that did provided a grant number. However, considering the size of the
database, the result is likely to be representative of the overall funding breakdown among the
institutes. The breakdown of funding across the topics derived from NCuts and the NIH
institutes is illustrated in Figure 12(c).
As an example of an inference that may be drawn from these visualizations, note that a large
fraction of neuroscience research, both at the cellular and system level, is supported by
NINDS. This observation is consistent with the expectation that, regardless of techniques or
methodologies, one of the ultimate goals of many neuroscience investigations is to further the
understanding of the causes, prevention, diagnostics, and treatment of various disorders of the
nervous systems. If more detailed information can be extracted from the specific grants
referenced, one might further break down NINDS funding among different types of
neurological disorders. These types of information can be useful for research planning and
analysis of the societal costs of neurological diseases.
There is good concordance between several NIH institutes and our topic clusters. For
example, most abstracts from Cluster 6, which corresponds to Alzheimer’s disease (AD), are
supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIA). Similarly, a significant portion of the
abstracts funded by the NIA are from Cluster 6, suggesting that AD is indeed the top
neurological health priority for the aging population. As anticipated, another example of good
concordance is the fact that most of the work supported by NEI is associated with Cluster 9,
which encompasses visual and motor systems. Finally, it makes intuitive sense that NIDA
and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) would apportion most
resources to support works related to substance abuse and addiction, which is captured by
Cluster 1.
Acronym Full Name Organizational Code
CLC Clinical Center CL
CSR Center for Scientific Review RG
FIC John E. Fogarty International Center TW
NCCAM Natl. Ctr. for Complementary and Alternative Medicine AT
NCI National Cancer Institute CA
NCMHD National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities MD
NCRR National Center for Research Resources RR
NEI National Eye Institute EY
NHGRI National Human Genome Research Institute HG
NHLBI National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute HL
NIA National Institute on Aging AG
NIAAA National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism AA
NIAID National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases AI
NIAMS Natl. Inst. of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal & Skin Diseases AR
NIBIB Natl. Inst. of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering EB
NICHD National Institute of Child Health and Human Development HD
NIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse DA
NIDCD Natl. Inst. on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders DC
NIDCR National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research DE
NIDDK Natl. Inst. of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases DK
NIEHS National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences ES
NIGMS National Institute of General Medical Sciences GM
NIMH National Institute of Mental Health MH
NINDS National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke NS
NINR National Institute of Nursing Research NR
NLM National Library of Medicine LM
OD Office of the Director OD
Table 5. List of NIH Institutes, acronyms, and organizational codes (extracted from the website
Figure 12. (a) Distribution of NIH funding across institutes and themes for the 2006 meeting abstracts. (b)
Distribution of NIH funding across institutes and Theme F subthemes for the 2006 meeting abstracts. (c)
Distribution of NIH funding across institutes and topic clusters. The color of an individual entry in the “image
grid” indicates the number of abstracts from a particular theme (for (a)), subtheme (for (b)), or topic cluster (for
(c), as determined by graph partitioning) that were funded by a particular NIH institute. Colors are scaled non-
linearly for greater contrast. The “bar plots” on each axis indicate the total number of abstracts funded by a
particular institute (top) or contained in a particular topic group (left). Both rows and columns have been sorted
by total number of abstracts.
4.5 Related Work – Topic Modeling Analysis in Computer Science.
Several fields within computational linguistics (CL) use topic modeling, clustering and large-
scale visualization efforts to analyze text corpora of varying degrees of size. Typically these
text collections are non-scientific (either using sources such as Wikipedia with over 2 million
pages, large-scale crawls of the world-wide-web or newstext). The National Library of
Medicine’s MEDLINE corpus is the standard data of choice for biomedical text mining (Kim
and Tsujii, 2006). MEDLINE contains roughly 16 million documents and requires large-scale
supercomputing methods to analyze using these methods (Newman et al., 2006, Personal
Communication).
A number of techniques provide an alternative methodology to LSA for the analysis of topics
and topic signatures (the associations between words within clusters) within text, these
include the log-likelihood ratio (Lin and Hovy, 2000), a variety of clustering methods (See
Pantel and Lin, 2002 for one example), and Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA, Blei et al.,
2003). One refinement of LDA uses Gibbs sampling as an efficient methodology to discover
topics (Griffiths and Steyvers, 2004; Newman et al., 2006). The complexity of the data may
be explored with advanced graph visualization techniques to assist the analysis (Shiffrin and
Borner, 2004). Recent studies include analyses of the 20 years of abstracts from the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS, Boyack, 2004), or from
publications concerned with Melanoma research (Boyack et al., 2004).
Unlike massive resources such as MEDLINE, the SFN annual meeting abstract data provides
an ideal ‘laboratory’ for the use of these techniques on a small, focused set in the service of a
small specific community. As a well-established method to investigate topics for our specific
domain, we focused on the use of LSA to provide a clear high-level overview of the whole
subject and to investigate detailed trends and issues concerning policy and the informational
needs of neuroscientists. We envisage that the SFN abstracts can provide a valuable resource
and application domain for the CL community since neuroscientists need efficient
computational tools to assist them in their scholarly work
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The annual Society for Neuroscience (SFN) meeting abstracts from the years 2001 through 2006 were
available as XML files on CD-ROMs from the SFN during the annual meetings of the society. These
XML files were parsed to extract tagged attributes associated with each abstract. Each of these
attributes was further processed in order to extract specific types of data. For example, the XML files
provide attributes corresponding to authors’ full names; these attributes were tokenized in order to
separate last name from first and middle initials. Similar processing was applied to institution
affiliations in which department name, institution name, city, state (for US and Canada), and country
are identified. Furthermore, each author was linked to her respective institution based on annotated
superscript numbers supplied during abstract submission. The postprocessed data were added into
persistent storage in a MySQL database. The database contains three entity tables: author, institution,
and paper. Since each author can be affiliated with multiple institutions and can produce one or more
papers, these entities are mapped using many-to-many relationships in the database. For this study, we
created one database for each year between 2001 and 2006, as well as a consolidated database
encompassing data from all 6 years.
Author Disambiguation
As is the case in many bibliographical resources, each author in an SFN abstract is identified by last
name followed by one or more initials. Such an identification system is inherently ambiguous and can
impact the quality of the database as more abstracts are pooled from multiple years. Two types of
name ambiguities are observed during the parsing process. The first type results from the same author
using a different number of initials in different abstracts. For example, Partha Mitra from Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory has been identified as “Mitra, P.” and “Mitra, P. P.” in different abstracts. Because
such inconsistencies could lead to falsely identifying the same author as two unique individuals, only
the last name and first initial were compared by default. Middle initials were used if and only if the
two author names being compared both contained a middle initial. The second type of ambiguity
arises when different authors actually share the same name and initials (e.g. “Brown, S.” from the
University of Tennessee in Memphis and “Brown, S.” from Columbia University). To resolve this
scenario, authors were identified as different individuals if their affiliations were different, regardless
of name identities. This heuristic, of course, assumes that no two authors sharing the same name work
in the same department of an institution, which is reasonable given the nature and size of the SFN
data.
The method employed to distinguish authors by straightforward comparison of institution strings
inevitably results in a large number of duplicates. This is because institution entities usually have
many name variants. Syntactic differences (“Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center” and “Sloan
Kettering Institute for Cancer Research”), the use of abbreviations or acronyms (“New York State
Psychiatric Institute” and “NYS Psychiatric Institute”), and even misspellings (“University of
Pittsburg” instead of “University of Pittsburgh”, and “Wilfred Laurier University” in Ontario, Canada
instead of “Wilfrid Laurier University”) were present due to the lack of a controlled vocabulary in
abstract submission. Given this situation, a strategy that relies on exact string matching might suffer
from low recall (Cohen and Sarawagi, 2004). This problem of determining whether different names
refer to the same entity, or entity matching, has been addressed extensively in the field of information
integration, and numerous solutions have been developed (Shen et al., 2007). Here, the following
procedure was used to resolve semantic ambiguities for institution entities:
1. Break all institution affiliations, which consist of department name, institution name, city,
state (for US and Canada), and country, into “bags of words” (or tokens). Convert all words
to upper case.
2. Remove “stop words” from the token sets. Stop words are words that do not carry any weight
in distinguishing different named entities. The initial stop list was downloaded from the
Cornell SMART project (ftp://ftp.cs.cornell.edu/pub/smart/english.stop), and was
supplemented by institution specific stop words such as “college”, “clinic”, “center”,
“laboratory”, “program”, “campus”, etc.
3. Perform token based name matching using Jaccard similarity, which is defined as:
where S and T are token sets of two arbitrary strings s and t, respectively. Two institutions are
considered identical if their Jaccard similarity is 1. This step resolves institution names with
different word orders such as “Weill Medical College of Cornell University” and “Cornell
University Weill Medical College”.
4. Edit distance is used as a metric to resolve syntactic variations in institution names (e.g. “UC
Berkeley” versus “University California Berkeley”, or “Mount Sinai” versus “Mt. Sinai”).
The edit distance between strings s and t is the cost of the best sequence of edit operations that
convert s to t (Bilenko et al., 2003). If the distance between two names is less than a certain
threshold, the two are considered aliases of the same entity and are thus merged into one
representation.
In addition to institution entities, co-authorship patterns were also used to detect authors who moved
between affiliations, further reducing duplicate author instances. For simplicity, authors who share the
same name and have at least one common co-author were considered to be the same individual. The
workflow for disambiguating and matching author entities is summarized in Figure 13.
Figure 13. Work flow of determining whether two authors are the same individual.
Graph Analysis
The breadth-first search algorithm used to calculate lengths of shortest paths between all pairs of
authors for whom a connection exists was implemented in Perl. Refer to Introduction to Algorithms
(Cormen et al., 2001) for detailed descriptions of the algorithm.
All other graph analysis (connected component, betweenness centrality, and clustering coefficient)
were performed in MATLAB 7.3.0 (R2006b) using the MATLAB Boost Graph Library (MatlabBGL)
Topic Modeling
Latent Semantic Analysis
The first step of latent semantic analysis (LSA) was to construct a term-by-document matrix, A, in
which each row corresponds to a unique term and each column to a unique document (abstract). Entry
A contains the number of times term i appeared in abstract j. The full text from the 87543 SFN
meeting abstracts from years 2001 to 2006 were first parsed into tokens. All punctuations, numbers,
and other special characters were discarded. In addition, common English words that do not carry
semantic value were eliminated based on a “stop word” list from the Cornell SMART project
(ftp://ftp.cs.cornell.edu/pub/smart/english.stop). To further reduce the size of the resulting “bag of
words”, all terms that appeared in only one abstract were eliminated. Word stemming algorithms from
words sharing the same root (e.g. “neuron”, “neurons”, “neuronal”) were collapsed into one
(“neuron”). Previous studies have indicated that the use of stemming can result in some improvement
of the precision and recall of information retrieval (Hull, 1996).
The preprocessing steps resulted in 87543 documents and 35943 terms. The term-by-document matrix
A was constructed by counting the number of occurrences of each term in each document. In LSA, it
is customary to transform this frequency matrix by some weight function to give better interrelations
between term and document. In this work, the matrix A was weighted using the log entropy function
(Berry and Browne, 1999). The log entropy weight of each term i is the product of its local weight l
and global weight g computed as
l = log (1+ A )
⎜ ij 2 ij ⎟
g =1+⎜ j ⎟
where A is the frequency of the ith term in the jth document, p is the probability of the ith term
occurring in the jth document, and n is the total number of documents in the corpus. The weighted
frequency of each element from A is then calculated by multiplying its local component by its global
component. In other words, the weighted m × n term-by-document matrix, F, is defined as
F =( f ), where f = l × g
ij ij ij i
The goal of using a weighting scheme is to assign less weight to terms that appear in many documents
while awarding more weight to less frequent terms because the latter presumably have more
differentiating power.
The weighted m × n term-by-document matrix, F, was factored into the product of 3 matrices using
the singular value decomposition (SVD):
where U is the m × r orthogonal matrix containing the left (term) singular vectors, WT is the r × n
orthogonal matrix containing the right (document) singular vectors, and Σ is the r × r diagonal marix
of singular values of A (Golub and Van Loan, 1996). The number of singular values computed for the
matrix F, denoted by r, was set to 100 in this work.
In the reduced dimensionality vector space created by truncating the SVD, terms that occur in similar
documents are located near one another even if they never co-occur in the same document. Topically
related documents are also grouped near one another in the reduced vector spaces. The similarity
between any pair of documents x and y can be measured by their cosine similarity, which is computed
as:
cos(x,y) =
where x and y are the r-dimensional projections of the two documents in the reduced space.
Topic Clustering
After LSA was completed, topic clustering of the documents proceeded as follows. First, cosine
similarities were computed exhaustively for all pairs of documents. For each document, a sorted list
of nearest neighbors was identified as those having the highest cosine similarity scores. To reduce
computational complexity, we identified only the top 100 nearest neighbors. Next, these data were
represented as an undirected, weighted graph G = (V, E) where each vertex, v ∈ V, denotes a
document and each edge, e(i, j) ∈ E, connects a document i with one of its nearest neighbors j, i ≠ j.
The weight associated with each edge e(i, j) was simply set to cos(i, j). Given the resulting sparse,
connected graph, clustering could be performed using graph partitioning algorithms that segment the
vertices of a graph into n disjoint sets, V , V ,…,V , such that document similarity is high within a set
V and lower across different sets V and V.
In this study, we applied the Normalized Cuts (NCuts) algorithm originally proposed by Shi and Malik
(1994) to partition the full nearest neighbors graph. Unlike other graph partitioning methods, the
NCuts algorithm avoids the bias of separating out small sets of isolated points by considering the
global properties of the graph instead of focusing on local features (Shi and Malik, 1997). The
algorithm attempts to partition G into n set of disjoint clusters by minimizing the normalized cut cost
between any two partitions V, V, V ∪V =V , V ∩V =∅:
i j i j i j
cut(V,V) cut(V,V)
assoc(V,V) assoc(V,V)
where cut(V,V ) = ∑ w(u,v) is the sum of the weights of the edges that are removed between
V and V, assoc(V,V) = ∑ w(u,t) is the sum of the weights of edges connecting vertices in
V to all vertices in the graph, and assoc(V,V)is similarly defined. Therefore, the NCuts algorithm
not only evaluates the value of total edge weight connecting two partitions, but also computes the cut
cost as a fraction of the total edge connections to all vertices in the graph (Shi and Malik, 1997) in
order to produce globally optimal partitions. NCuts was applied recursively to cut the full graph into n
connected components; the number of components or “clusters” is a parameter that we should estimate
objectively.
Estimate Number of Clusters
Since the SFN theme labels and assignments were produced by scientists with domain expertise, we
used this categorization as an evaluation benchmark to estimate the optimal number of clusters, n. The
goal was to find the clustering of abstracts based on the NCuts algorithm that best matched the
clustering based on SFN theme labels for the year 2006; this value n could then be assumed to be an
appropriate number of clusters across the full 6-year data set. By varying the number of clusters, n,
different degree of cluster agreement were obtained. We used the Adjusted Rand Index to quantify the
agreement between NCuts clustering and the SFN theme labels. Adjusted Rand Index is defined as
follows (Handl et al., 2005): Given two partitions X and Y of a common set of data points, the
quantities a, b, c, and d are computed for all possible pairs of data points i and j, and their respective
cluster assignments, C , C , C , C , where
a =|{i, j | c c ^ c c }|
b =|{i, j | c c ^ c c }|
c =|{i, j | c c ^ c c }|
d =|{i, j | c c ^ c c }|
In the present context, X represents SFN theme labels and Y represents the Ncuts clustering. The
quantity a is the number of document pairs from the same SFN theme that are assigned to the same
cluster in Y, d is the number of document pairs from different themes that are assigned to different
clusters, b is the number of document pairs from the same theme that are assigned to different clusters,
and c is the number of document pairs from different themes that are assigned to the same cluster.
The Rand Index (Rand, 1971) is then the fraction of all document pairs for which the clusterings
agree:
Figure 14. Adjusted Rand Index comparing similarity of SFN themes and NCuts-based partitioning versus
number of clusters.
The Rand Index lies between 0 and 1. When the partitions X and Y agree perfectly, the Rand Index is
1. The Adjusted Rand Index was devised by Hubert and Arabie (1985) to correct for the fact that the
expected value of R for random partitions is not constant. The Adjusted Rand Index linearly
transforms the Rand Index such that its expected value is 0, and maximum value is 1. The Adjusted
Rand Index comparing NCuts clusters with SFN themes was calculated for n=[5..20], a range
intentionally chosen to be similar to the number of distinct SFN themes.
The Adjusted Rand Index versus the numbers of Ncuts clusters is shown in Figure 14. The plot
suggests that Ncuts produces the clustering that is most similar to the SFN theme categorization when
the number of clusters is 10, which was used throughout this work.
Dynamics of Topics
A 10 x 6 matrix, D, was constructed, where each element D denotes the number of abstracts from
cluster i and year j. The matrix columns were normalized by the total number of abstracts in each
year. To find topic clusters that demonstrate consistent and noteworthy rise or decline in popularity,
we applied linear regression fit to the normalized frequency of each cluster by year.
An additional analysis of dynamics was performed using a term-frequency by year matrix, F. Entries
of F count the occurrences of each term in abstracts, normalized by the total number of words in all
abstracts for each year. Only those terms that appeared in more than one abstract were included in F.
The row-wise mean, which indicates the average frequency of a given term across years, was
removed. The singular value decomposition of this matrix was performed to reveal the principal
temporal components and associated term-space components of change in the six year data set.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by a grant (#061984) from the W. M. Keck Foundation and the Crick-
Clay Professorship from Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.