AN AUGMENTED VIRTUALITY BASED SOLAR ENERGY POWER CALCULATOR IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
An Augmented Virtuality Based Solar Energy
Power Calculator in Electrical Engineering
C. Onime1, J. Uhomoibhi2 and E. Pietrosemoli1
1 Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy
2 University of Ulster, Belfast, Northern Ireland
Abstract—It is becoming increasingly important to include science subjects (physics, mathematics, chemistry), along
information about power generation from renewable energy with others such as computer programming [4].
sources in the training of electrical engineers. Solar energy The formal training of engineers typically includes core
is arguably the most common renewable energy source in experimental laboratory work and sometimes other active
use today. Providing practical hands-on training on solar
learning activities such as seminars and capstone projects
energy power generation today requires the use of
[5]. Seminars and capstone projects are useful for
photovoltaic panel devices which are used for transforming
facilitating interactions with industry especially when such
solar energy into electrical energy.
interactions are for solving practical challenges and
developing practical know-how (or learning material) [6].
In many developing countries, practical hands-on training
This is demonstrated in the learning material (course) on
on solar power generation is limited due to the cost of
photovoltaic (solar energy) developed by a consortium of
photovoltaic panel devices and so the training consists of
universities and enterprises (academia-industry
theoretical and tutorial classes sometimes supported by
collaboration) under the E-Learning and Practical
remote and virtual laboratories.
Training of Mechatronics and Alternative Technologies in
Industrial Community (E-PRAGMATIC), as a lifelong
This paper presents an augmented virtuality tool where
learning resource for the training of European
real-time information from a mobile device’s sensors is used
professionals in the electro-mechanical Industry [7].
directly within a virtual or computer generated
environment. The tool provides a practical context for Apart from the above mentioned course, additional
hands-on tutorial exercises on solar energy power educational/pedagogically resources on photovoltaic/solar
generation. energy including simulations, theoretical material and
animations are also available from the pveducation.org
Index Terms—Augmented virtuality, computer aid, solar on-line user portal [8]. Notably, there are already some
energy, tutorial exercise. remote and virtual laboratory experiments on photovoltaic
that are relevant for training on solar energy power
I. INTRODUCTION generation; these tend to focus on measuring performance
of devices along with the effects of the immediate
A good understanding of alternative sources of energy
physical environment (such as insolation) on the
including solar energy is becoming important for the
photovoltaic cells [3]. The solar insolation is the total
modern electrical engineer. There is a global drive to use
amount of solar energy received at a particular location
new energy sources even at the level of individual home
during a specified time period such as one day; it is often
units and it is estimated that at least 20% of solar panels
in units of kWh/m2 per day [8]. The Virtual Physical
deployed worldwide are for residential use [1].
Laboratory (VPL), part of the virtual and remote
In many nations, providing electricity power supply to
laboratory package of the University of Ulster, includes
all citizens even in rural locations is of paramount
simulations and experiments for fixed and auto-tracked
importance and energy sources such as solar energy power
performance (comparative) measurements on solar energy
generation are viewed as attractive alternative solutions
generation systems built using either poly-crystalline or
capable of extending the reach of national power grids
mono-crystalline panels.
especially to island and/or other rural locations [2]. As a
For many learners from developing countries, training
result, electrical engineers and professionals in many
on solar energy power generation is mostly about the
countries are increasingly, tasked with proving
solutions/projects that involve a mix of energy from theoretical exercise as the immediate physical
environmental conditions in a remote laboratory maybe
different sources such as solar, wind and micro-hydro.
considerably different from the local physical
A. Educational resources environment. For solar energy solutions, the physical
Educational resources on solar energy power generation environment (geographical coordinates and orientation of
are still quite few and are generally designed for informal the solar panel towards the sun) are important as well as
and/or professional learning [3]. In many countries, the the characteristics of the physical photovoltaic device such
formal training of electrical engineers is carried out in as operational efficiency and physical dimensions. The
institutions of higher education and sometimes includes a expected power output for any solar panel type device
multi-disciplinary curriculum that may contain courses on may be calculated as a mainly theoretical exercise where
the learner is only expected to substitute values into a
suitable modeling equation [9].
AN AUGMENTED VIRTUALITY BASED SOLAR ENERGY POWER CALCULATOR IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
sensors such as orientation sensors and touch-screens are a
cost effective, technologically accepted solution that may
be used as acceptable mixed reality viewers. In the
resulting augmented virtuality application, real-time
Figure 1. Simple representation of a Reality-Virtuality Continuum information taken directly from the device sensors is
blended into a computer generated environment.
B. Emerging technologies
A. Theoretial background
An emerging trend in learning and also in on-line
Photovoltaic cells convert light power into electrical
experimentation is the use of virtual and augmented
power, the resulting output is highly dependent on the
reality computing technologies. In virtual reality
incident solar power reaching the surface of a solar panel.
environments, the goal is to completely replace all
Manufacturers of solar panels provide values for several
physical objects with computer generated equivalents.
parameters (such as open circuit voltage and short circuit
Sometimes the virtual reality user is required to use/wear
current) useful for determining the operational
special equipment such as hand-wands/head-gear/body-
characteristics of the panel under standard irradiance and
suits and/or remain in a specially designed environment or
temperature conditions at sea level [9]. Since the power is
room in order to be completely immersed in the virtual
generated only during the hours in which the sun is
environment. Alternatively, mixed reality environments
actually shining, the amount of energy per square meter of
are composed of both computer generated and physical
solar power captured during one day is the integral of the
objects. Figure 1 shows the relationship between reality,
instantaneous power over 24 hours and is normally
virtuality as two extremes and augmented reality,
expressed in Wh/m2. This number is often called Peak Sun
augmented virtuality as two forms of mixed reality in-
Hours (PSH), since it is the equivalent of a constant
between the two extremes. Augmented reality is a well
insolation of 1000 W/m2 shining during the number of
known example of the mixed reality environment and in
hours that would produce the same amount of energy.
augmented reality, the goal is to blend computer generated
information into a physical environment, while in In a simplified model of a solar energy based power
augmented virtuality, the goal is to “blend” the generation system, four key factors define the resulting
information taken from the physical environment around electrical energy output, namely: the insolation at the
the viewer into a computer generated environment (virtual given geographical position, the angular orientation of the
world). In other words, the fundamental different between solar panel towards the sun, the operational efficiency of
augmented reality and augmented virtuality is that in the particular solar panel device and the physical
augmented reality, virtual objects are added onto a view of dimensions or surface area of the collecting panel. They
the real world environment, while in augmented virtuality, are related by the equation:
real objects (or information) are added into an otherwise
virtual environment. As this implies, augmented virtuality E =G*e*cos(! "!) (1)
has a virtual or computer generated environment, which is
used as a reference for all objects. The virtual environment In (1), E is the energy output of solar panel in Wh/m2,
is augmented through the addition of one or more real G is the solar insolation value in the given place in Wh/m2
objects. and e is the panel efficiency, ! is the optimal angle of
A joint research activity between the University of
inclination (on a first approximation the latitude of the
Ulster, Northern Ireland and the International Centre for
place) and ! is the current angle of inclination. If G is
Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Italy on the use of computer
expressed in watt-hour per square meter (kWh/m2), the
aids in engineering education; named the Computer Aided
total energy in kWh captured during one day is obtained
Engineering Education (CAEE) scheme is concerned with
by multiplying this number with area of the collecting
the use of interactive video along with virtual and mixed
panel in square meters. Also, in (1), it is necessary to use
reality computing technologies for the enhanced,
the absolute value of the angle since the formula is valid
interactive delivery of educational materials in the field of
for both positive and negative latitudes, but the energy is
engineering and science while also maintaining existing
always positive and related to the absolute value of the
pedagogical contents and standards. In the CAEE scheme,
difference between the actual and the optimal inclination
mixed reality applications running on mobile
angle.
devices/platforms are used for delivery of hands-on
laboratory practical work and tutorial exercises. B. Main view
This later sections of this paper presents a CAEE The main view of the augmented virtuality application
augmented virtuality implementation of a solar energy as shown in Figure 2 is a publicly available solar
power output calculator that may be used as a practical irradiance map of the whole world. The augmented
companion to existing educational resources on solar virtuality definition is derived from the fact that the map
energy power generation. has no relationship to the learner’s immediate
surroundings, and serves to both abstract and confine all
II. IMPLEMENTATION
objects within it. The solar irradiance map is color coded
The augmented virtuality solar energy power calculator and the color of a particular location may be translated
is implemented as an example of the Computer Aided into the approximate global horizontal insolation value in
Engineering Education (CAEE) scheme. It is mixed watt-hour per square meter (Wh/m2) [10] according to the
reality tool running on a mobile device (tablets/phones) color gradient table shown in the lower left hand corner of
and is used for the enhanced delivery of practical hands- Figure 2. Generally, warmer color results in higher values,
on experience on solar energy power generation. Mobile that is, blue areas have lower values compared to yellow,
devices especially smart-phones and tablets devices with while red areas have higher values.
iJEP ‒ Volume 5, Issue 1, 2015 5
AN AUGMENTED VIRTUALITY BASED SOLAR ENERGY POWER CALCULATOR IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Figure 4. Output from augmented virtuality solar energy calculator
The fourth interactive input from the learner is the
current inclination or angular orientation data of a solar
panel. For optimal production of energy, solar panels have
to be oriented towards the energy source (sunlight) to
obtain the maximum power. This highlights the difference
between solar panels that are installed at high latitudes (in
Figure 2. Main view of augmented virtuality application either hemisphere), which will require steeper inclination
angles compared with those installed near the Equator. For
C. Interactive inputs and control an optimal power output, the solar panel should be
The CAEE implementation is an active learning tool installed in a location where it will receive maximal
and the learner is required to provide data to the incidence of sunlight avoiding objects that could cause
application in an interactive manner. During active shade in its surface at any time of the day. In the
learning, the learner is engaged in specially designed application, the angular inclination is read in real-time
activities aimed at reinforcing or delivering some intended directly from the mobile device sensors as the learner
learning outcome. changes the inclination of the device simulating that of the
solar panel. This implies that the mobile device used must
The primary input of geographic location requires the
include the appropriate hardware sensors. Users quickly
learner to indicate by touching a desired location on the
learn to appreciate the effect of angular inclination on the
map. This requires the learner to be geographically aware
calculated power output.
of the location of the intended site of the solar panel.
Users quickly learn to appreciate the effect of geographic D. Immediate feedback/output
location on the calculated power output. The application
As a computer based learning aid, the augmented
then obtains the geographical latitude information from
virtuality solar energy power calculator is able to provide
the indicated point. The current location is indicated by a
the augmented output or results as immediate feedback to
cross-hair icon that may be moved from one location to
the learner. The augmented output/immediate feedback is
another by simply touching the new location on the device
based on the various interactive input supplied by the
display.
learner.
A zoom control (shown in the left-hand side of Figure 2
The output from the software application is composed
and magnified in the right hand side of Figure 3), is
of 5 values as shown in Figure 4. The first output value is
implemented as two grey icons/buttons. The button with
the actual real-time angle of inclination of the mobile
the + (plus) sign is for magnification (zoom-in) and the
device as obtained from the hardware sensors. The second
lower button with the – (minus) sign is for reduction
output value is the current panel efficiency which is set by
(zoom-out) of the map. These two buttons play a role in
the slider control shown in Figures 3 and 4. The third
improving the precision of the indicated (selected)
value presents the current latitude as determined from the
location. The zoom control allows users to appreciate the
indicated/touched location on the displayed solar map
effect of precision on the calculated power output.
(device display). The fourth value is the global horizontal
A third control object (the slider control) shown in
irradiance at the indicated location computed from the
right hand side of Figure 3 allows the user to input the
color gradient table and the fifth value shows the
desired panel efficiency. The slider control limits the input
computed energy as the energy harvested during one day.
range to values between 5 and 40. For a physical solar
An example of the augmented virtuality solar panel
panel device, the panel efficiency is typically obtained
calculator in use is shown in Figure 5 for a location in
from the manufacturer specification. Using this control
eastern Nigeria (in the African continent) as indicated by
allows users to quickly learn or better appreciate the effect
the cross-hairs. The location is situated at about 9 degrees
of understanding and interpreting the manufacturer’s
above the Equator, the mean global daily solar irradiance
specifications on the calculated power output.
at this place is determined from the map to be 190 W/m2.
To obtain the total energy captured during one day we
must multiply by 24, the number of hours in one day.
Substituting the values in (1) gives 190 W/m2 * 0.4 *
cos |(9 – 25)| = 72.78 W/m2 ! 73 W/m2 * 24h = 1752
Wh/m2, which is the final output shown by the augmented
virtuality solar energy calculator as shown in Figures 4
Figure 3. Input controls and panel efficiency control and 5.
AN AUGMENTED VIRTUALITY BASED SOLAR ENERGY POWER CALCULATOR IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
and photovoltaic, this tool enhances several learning
outcomes in a practical and hands-on manner that ensures
that learners (engineer and professional) are better
equipped with the skills for meeting the challenges and
demands imposed by the increasing importance of solar
energy as a viable source of generating electrical power.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The augmented virtuality component and android
application is based on the prior work and contributions
from Engineer. M. Santachiara of Santa’s Co, Reggio
Figure 5. Example of augmented virtuality solar energy calculator in
action Emilia, Italy.
E. Discussion REFERENCES
The augmented virtuality solar energy power calculator [1] EPIA, "Global Market Outlook for Photovoltaics 2013-2017,"
European Photovoltaic Industry Association, Brussels, Technical
on start up presents the learner with a solar irradiance
Report 2013..
world map as the environment for all input and output
[2] Faisal Ahammed and Azeem Abdullahil, "An economic analysis
from the application. The included zoom controls are used
of solar PV micro-utility in rural areas of Bangladesh," in 1st
to enhance the precision of the input location and International Conference on Developments in Renewable Energy,
subsequently the calculated power output. The application Dhaka, 2009, pp. 1-4..
is interactive and requires the learner to indicate by [3] P Bauer, A Rojko, and R. Ionel, "Distance Learning Module for
touching the approximate location of interest, and then the Solar Electricity with Programming of MPPT," in 15th European
Conference on Power Electronics and Applications, Lille, 2013,
application will provide the geographical latitude and the
pp. 1-8.
solar irradiance value corresponding to these coordinates.
[4] C Onime and J Uhomoibhi, "Engineering Education in a
The operational panel efficiency (with a range between 5 developing country: Experiences from Africa," in 15th
and 40) is entered from a slider control located in the International Conference on Interactive Collaborative Learning
upper left section of the display and may be used to show (ICL), Klagenfuth, 2012, pp. 1-3.
the difference in output between different models of solar [5] D. A Umphress, d. Hendrix, and J. H Cross, "Software processes
panels and devices from different manufacturers. in the classroom: The capstone project experience," IEEE
Software, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 78-85, Sep.-Oct. 2002.
mobile device is read from the mobile device’s hardware [6] Narayanan Komerath and Marilyn Smith, "Research Seminars as a
!
accelerometer. All four values are then used to calculate Resource in Mentoring Undergraduates," in Innovations 2011:
the mean power output during one day in W/m2, this is World Innovations in Engineering Education and Research, W
Aung et al., Eds. Arlington: iNEER, 2011, pp. 183-193..
subsequently multiplied by 24 to obtain the total energy
captured during one day in Wh/m2 and show on the [7] A Rojko and K Kozlowski, "Lifelong education in robotics and
mechatronics ," in 17th International Conference on Methods and
display as “Energy harvested during one day” along with
Models in Automation and Control, Miedzyzdrojie , 2012, pp.
the values of all other variable used. 343-348.
Additionally, as the results are presented immediately, [8] R. Koseler, S. Shapcott, K.,G Nelson, and J Husman, "Work in
progress: Evaluation of an online education portal from the user's
the learner is able to quickly use the application in
perspective: An empirical investigation of a photovoltaics (PV)
comparing the power outputs at different sites/locations,
engineering learning portal, pveducation.org," in Frontiers in
which is useful when identifying suitable sites for large
Education Conference, Seattle, WA , 2012, pp. 1-6.
scale solar energy power generation farms. [9] E da S Brito et al., "Comparison of Solar Panel models for Grid
Integration Studies," in 10th IEEE/IAS International Conference
III. CONCLUSION on Industry Applications (INDUSCON), 2012, pp. 1-8.
[10] 3TIER. (2014, January) Free Renewable Energy Reosurce Maps:
This paper has presented an augmented virtuality tool
Wind Speed, Solar Irradiance, Hydropower. [Online].
that runs on mobile devices equipped with appropriate
sensor hardware. The solar panel energy output calculator
provides hands-on introduction to some practical aspects AUTHORS
of solar power energy generation and compliments
C. Onime is with the Abdus Salam International Centre
existing education resources. The interactive nature of the
for Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera 11, Trieste,
application ensures an improved learning experience with
34100, Italy (e-mail: clement.onime@ictp.it).
the ability to quickly estimate and compare solar energy
E. Pietrosemoli is with Abdus Salam International
power output for various locations, inclinations and device
Centre for Theoretical Physics, Strada Costiera 11,
models. The tool is cost effective especially if used on
Trieste, 34100, Italy (e-mail: pietrosemoli@ictp.it).
personal mobile devices of learners and may also be used
as a completely off-line aid or companion tool for the J. Uhomoibhi is with the University of Ulster, Antrim
informal training of engineers and professionals. Although Road, Newtownabbey, Belfast, Northern Ireland (e-mail:
the power output value from the tool is an approximation, j.uhomoibhi@ulster.ac.uk).
it is capable of results that highlight subtle differences that
This work was jointly supported by the Telecommunications/ICT for
may occur with different brands/models of solar panels. It Development (T/ICT4D) Laboratory and the Information,
should be noted that the resolution and therefore location Communication and Telecommunications Section (ICTS), both of the
accuracy obtainable from the world solar irradiance map Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP).
Submitted 06 May 2014. Published as resubmitted by the authors 14
is limited. In the field of solar energy power generation
February 2015.
iJEP ‒ Volume 5, Issue 1, 2015 7