An Astronomer’s View of
Galaxy can affect global temperatures, and how shorter-term
changes ( ⪅ 104 yr) in the luminosity or the solar magnetic
Climate Change
field through the modulation of galactic cosmic rays can also
be important. Later sections compare global temperature
by Donald C. Morton
measurements with the predictions of the General Circulation
Herzberg Astronomy and Astrophysics Programs
Models (GCM) from the Reports of the Intergovernmental
National Research Council of Canada
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2007, 2013).
5071 West Saanich Rd, Victoria BC V9E 2E7, Canada
2. The Stability of the Solar Luminosity
The simplest explanation of the ice ages and other climate
This paper describes some of the astronomical effects that changes is variations in the Sun’s luminosity. The relevant
could be important for understanding the ice ages, historic quantity at the Earth is the solar constant or total irradi-
climate changes and the recent global temperature increase. ance—the integrated flux over all wavelengths outside the
These include changes in the Sun’s luminosity, periodic Earth’s atmosphere at the mean distance of one astronomical
changes in the Earth’s orbital parameters, the Sun’s orbit unit. There has been much effort for nearly two centuries to
around our galaxy, the variability of solar activity, and the measure the luminosity, but calibration difficulties have led to
anticorrelation of cosmic-ray flux with that activity. Finally, large uncertainties, and even satellite instruments recording
recent trends in solar activity and global temperatures are the whole spectrum since 1978 have had their inconsisten-
compared with the predictions of climate models. cies. With the NASA Solar Radiation and Climate Experi-
ment (SORCE), Kopp and Lean (2011) found the value to
be 1360.8 ± 0.5 Wm-2 during the 2008 solar minimum and
1. Overview
similar values for the previous two minima, slightly less than
In successive sections, this article will discuss the stability of the 1365.4 ± 1.3 Wm-2 adopted by most climate models.
the Sun’s luminosity, how long-term changes ( ⪆ 104 yr) in the Note that the models actually use 1365.4/4 = 341.35 Wm-2,
Earth’s orbit around the Sun and through the Milky Way which is the flux per unit surface area of a spherical Earth.
February / février 2014 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada 27
The new calibration is not expected to have a significant effect On shorter time scales, there is the added complexity of
on the climate simulations. The mean peak-to-peak change the Sun’s magnetic field and the internal mass motions of
in total irradiance over three solar cycles since 1978 is about a dynamo to generate that field as well as turbulence and a
0.12 percent with occasional extremes up to 0.34 percent that convective outer envelope that carries the energy to the surface.
could be partially compensated by unseen parts of the Sun. Li et al. (2003) included these effects in simple models of
The associated change in global temperature during a cycle is the solar interior and found the luminosity could vary by the
approximately 0.1 °C, so the 0.5 °C warming during the past observed 0.1 percent. Much larger fluctuations seem unlikely,
35 years cannot be due to an increase in the irradiance. but further analysis with more realistic models is needed for a
clearer answer. Meanwhile, it is instructive to examine other
Were larger variations possible in earlier times? The Sun is a contributors to the Earth’s climate.
spherical ball of gas in hydrostatic equilibrium with a central
temperature of 1.6x107 K, hot enough for nuclear energy
3. Long-term Astronomical
generation by converting hydrogen into helium. During an
evolutionary time of 8×109 yr on the main sequence, the Effects ⪆ 104 Years
models of Bahcall et al. (2001) show that the luminosity of the The Serbian scientist Milankovitch (1941, 1969) investigated
Sun will increase gradually by about a factor of two. The lower the slow variations in the parameters of the Earth’s orbit
luminosity in earlier years implies an Earth temperature below around the Sun as the cause of the ice ages. The semi-major
the freezing point of water more than 2×109 yr ago, while axis and the length of the year are very stable, but changes in
geological evidence suggests that liquid water has been present other elements due to perturbations by the Moon and planets
for the past 4×109 yr. Extra water vapour or CO to trap the affect the insolation and its seasonal and geographical distribu-
heat seems insufficient, so Sackmann & Boothroyd (2003) tion. The direction of the Earth’s pole precesses with a period
considered a Sun starting at 1.07 solar masses. Their model of 26 kyr (1000 × year), while the orbital axis precesses over
produces acceptable temperatures but requires a wind with a 112 kyr in the opposite direction for a combined period of
thousand times more flux than now to dissipate the extra mass. about 22 kyr. The obliquity of the ecliptic oscillates over 41
kyr, and the orbital eccentricity has periods of about 100 and
413 kyr. Since the 18O isotope is enhanced in ocean sediments
and shells during colder intervals, it is a useful temperature
proxy. When the first three Milankovitch periods were found
in seabed cores, there was general acceptance that this orbital
forcing could explain the ice ages. However, as seen from
Figure 1, there was an unexpected change in the dominant
period from 100 kyr to 40 kyr about 800 kyr ago and the
22-kyr signal is less significant, even though the precession
term was expected to be the strongest. Furthermore Wunsch
(2004) concluded that the Milankovitch terms could explain
at most 20 percent of the observed temperature changes.
Alternative explanations have considered the Sun’s orbit
around our galaxy and where supernovae would be most
frequent, because the associated cosmic rays could seed clouds
that reflect more sunlight. Shaviv & Veizer (2003) estimated
Figure 1 — Plot from Wunsch (2004) of the 18O temperature proxy for the
past 3.3 Ma from a subpolar North Atlantic seabed core. Increasing 18O
implies colder temperatures. The dominant periods are about 100 kyr during
the past 800 kyr and 40 kyr for earlier times rather than the expected 22 kyr
from the basic Milankovitch theory.
28 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada February / février 2014
the times when the Sun passed through spiral arms, while
Svensmark (2012) looked at close approaches to young
clusters. Both studies found coincidences of the strongest
cosmic-ray fluxes with colder temperatures indicated by 18O
enhancement, but significant differences in the two results
prevent definite conclusions. These interesting ideas deserve
further investigation as our knowledge of galactic structure
improves.
Figure 2 — This plot from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency
4. Short-term Astronomical Effects ⪅ 104 Years: shows sunspot numbers since their first observation with telescopes in 1610.
Radiation and Sunspots Systematic counting began soon after the discovery of the ~11 year cycle in
1843. Later searching of old records provided the earlier numbers.
Again in consideration of orbital effects, there is the
2400-year period of the oscillation of the Sun about the
some winters. Grove (2001) concluded from the radiocarbon
barycentre (centre of mass) of the Solar System due to
dating of trees felled by advancing ice around the world that
planetary perturbations. Since the barycentre usually is within
the Little Ice Age was a global phenomenon and began in the
two solar radii, the fractional variation in insolation is about
13th century in many places.
± 10-4 or only 1/10 the mean variation over the solar cycle.
Further historical investigations have revealed earlier warm
As the Sun rotates with an average period of about 27 days,
intervals now referred to as the Roman (250 BC-AD 400) and
various active regions come into view from the Earth. The total
Medieval (950-1250) Maxima. The latter matches the Norse
irradiance can vary by ± 0.34 percent and the ultraviolet (UV)
settlements in Greenland and the explorations of the east
and X-radiation as well as the solar wind and its perturbations
coast of North America at least as far south as L’Anse-aux-
of the Earth’s magnetosphere can change by larger amounts
Meadows in Newfoundland and a grape-growing region called
in a random way. Thus the rotation can add brief spikes to the
Vinland. The following colder interval must have contributed
measurements of these indices.
to the abandonment of these settlements. All of these dates
with warm and cold designations are rather imprecise and have
The principal short-term effect is the ~11 year sunspot cycle
regional differences.
discovered by the amateur astronomer Heinrich Schwabe in
1843. Actually, it is a ~22 year period because the new spots
In Switzerland, there is a mountain pass at 2756 m called
appearing at the maximum of a cycle reverse their magnetic
Schnidejoch between Lenk on the north and Sion on the
polarity each ~11 years. At the peak of solar activity, the
south side of the Bernese Alps. It was blocked by ice and snow
0.1-percent reduction in solar irradiance by the dark spots is
year round and never considered a route joining these towns
more than compensated by 0.2-percent increase from bright
until an exceptionally warm summer in 2003 opened it to
faculae or other regions of the solar surface.
hikers and then archeologists. The carbon dates on 73 artifacts
In an important paper reviewing the history of sunspot found there ranged from a Neolithic 4800 BC to a Medieval
observations, Eddy (1976) described how Rudolf Wolf began AD 1000 with gaps from 4300 to 3700 BC and 1500 to
a systematic counting soon after Schwabe’s discovery and 200 BC, when ice probably closed the route (Hafner 2012).
estimated the numbers back to 1700 by searching old records. Temperatures warm enough to melt the ice on Schnidejoch
Later, Gustav Spörer and Edward Maunder extended these occurred before modern industry and transportation began
historical investigations, demonstrating a real absence of spots adding CO to our atmosphere. The present recession
and aurorae from about 1645 to 1715. During some decades of glaciers in much of the world confirms we are in another
in this interval, spots were so infrequent that an astronomer warm period.
could write a paper if he saw one. Galileo and others with
It is possible to estimate past temperatures from the growth
early telescopes first reported spots in 1610. Forty years later,
of tree rings, corals, and ocean sediments, or from deuterium
they might have missed them altogether. Figure 2 plots the
or 18O isotopes in these deposits because HD16O and H18O
sunspot numbers since 1610 showing what Eddy called the 2
condense faster than normal H16O. Mann, Bradley, & Hughes
Maunder Minimum and a later one from about 1800 to 1820 2
(1998, 1999) used some of these proxies to derive their “hockey
now known as the Dalton Minimum.
stick” plot of Northern Hemisphere temperatures for the past
The Maunder and Dalton minima are especially interesting, 1000 years. It indicated a gradual decrease with some fluctua-
because they occurred when global temperatures were tions for the first 900 years and then a steep rise beginning in
unusually cold. During the Little Ice Age from about 1430 1900. The absence of the Medieval Maximum and the Little
to 1850, glaciers advanced in the European Alps, while canals Ice Age raised immediate questions. Canadians Stephen
in Holland and the Thames River in London froze during McIntyre of Toronto and Ross McKitrick of the University
February / février 2014 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada 29
of Guelph (McIntyre & McKitrick 2003) demonstrated that 5. Short-term Astronomical Effects ≲ 104 years:
flawed statistics were used to construct the graph. (See also Cosmic Rays
Essex & McKitrick 2007). Recently Ljungqvist et al. (2012)
Protons, electrons, ionized atoms, and the attached magnetic
and Christiansen & Ljungqvist (2012) examined a variety of
field in the solar wind stream out from the Sun at velocities
Northern Hemisphere proxies for the past 2000 years. They
of a few hundred km/s to form the heliosphere. Beyond the
found that the magnitude of 20th-century warming is within
orbits of Neptune and Pluto, this wind establishes a pressure
the range of variability over the past 12 centuries, though the
balance with the interstellar medium in a region called the
present rate of warming has been exceptionally fast. Relative to
heliopause. Any direct effect of the wind on the Earth’s
the interval AD 1880 to 1960, they found a Medieval Warm
climate remains uncertain, but the Sun’s magnetic field, with
Period with a peak of +0.6 °C between AD 950 and 1050 and
its modulation of cosmic rays reaching the Earth, could be an
a Little Ice Age cooler by 1.0 °C between AD 1580 and 1720.
important astronomical variable influencing climate. This field,
which changes polarity every ~11 years and is distorted by the
One objective measure of solar activity is the radio flux that
Earth’s field and the Earth’s motion through the interstellar
is Canada’s contribution to solar monitoring. Beginning in
medium, provides a variable shield against galactic cosmic rays,
1947 in Ottawa, Arthur Covington at the National Research
which can cause mutations in living cells, and and can seed
Council (NRC) began a systematic, calibrated measure-
nuclei for clouds. The incident protons ( 87 percent), alpha
ment of the solar flux at 10.7 cm. This happened to be the
particles ( 12 percent), and heavier nuclei ( 1 percent) (Sherer
band of his war-surplus radar equipment, but it has turned
et al. 2006) collide with atoms in our upper atmosphere to
out to be very suitable for studying the Sun. Ken Tapping
produce a large variety of secondaries including rare isotopes
(2013), at NRC’s Dominion Radio Astrophysical Observa-
such as 2D, 13C, and 18O, which can be proxies for temperature.
tory near Penticton, B.C., has continued this monitoring with
The Sun also emits cosmic rays, but they are weaker and are
support from the Canadian Space Agency and participation
partly shielded by the Earth’s magnetic field.
by Natural Resources Canada. Figure 3 shows the variation in
this radio flux over six 11-year cycles. There is no direct effect
Reaction Half life (yr) Product
on the Earth, but the radio emission is a good measure of the
ultraviolet flux around 120 nm and it correlates well with the n + 14N → p + 14C 5730 12C
sunspot number, giving a consistent measure of solar variability
Spallation of 14N, 16O → 10Be 1.51 106 8Be
since 1947 and providing a definite measure of activity when
Spallation of 40Ar → 36Cl 3.08 105 35Cl
there are no spots. At the 2009 minimum, the monthly average ×
10.7-cm flux was 4 percent lower than the previous minima.
Table 1 — The Cosmogenic Nuclides
Note also the extra breadth of the last minimum and the
weakness of the maximum just past. The sunspot count shows
a similar pattern, possibly implying that the Sun could be Especially useful among secondaries are the radioactive nuclei
heading for another Dalton or even a Maunder Minimum. 10Be and 14C, formed by the processes summarized in Table 1.
The 14C combines with atmospheric 16O to form 14C16O that
circulates for about 5 years before photosynthesis deposits it as
14C in annual tree rings. The 10Be isotope attaches to aerosols
(any liquid or solid particle suspended in air) that precipi-
tate after about a year. In polar regions, the snow becomes
compressed in annual layers of ice. Thus we have two useful
histories of the cosmic-ray flux reaching the Earth and the
associated solar activity. Solanki et al. (2004) found from
11,400 years of 14C data that the Sun has been exceptionally
active over an unusually long duration from 1940 to 2000. The
previous comparable activity was more than 8000 years ago.
Figure 4 from Frölich & Lean (2004) shows how these
records correlate with the sunspot numbers—high flux
during the Dalton Minimum and even higher during the
Figure 3 — Monthly averages of the 10.7-cm solar radio flux measured by Maunder Minimum. The 14C variations are well known as
the National Research Council of Canada and adjusted to the mean Earth-Sun
the de Vries Effect in the dating of organic samples, because
distance. A solar flux unit = 104 Jansky = 10-22 Wm-2 Hz-1. The maximum just
it is an important correction to the assumption that the
past is unusually weak and the preceding minimum exceptionally broad. flux is constant in time. The 14C and 10Be data also show
Graph courtesy of Dr. Ken Tapping of NRC.
earlier fluctuations with peaks on either side of the Medieval
30 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada February / février 2014
Figure 4 — The 10Be and 14C indices (increasing downward) show the
variation in the strength of galactic cosmic rays reaching the Earth and their
anticorrelation with sunspot number. The graph is reproduced from Frölich &
Lean (2004).
Maximum and a broad peak from 1420 to 1570 named after
Spörer. Except for an interval around 1600, the cosmic-ray flux
was particularly strong from 1400 to 1700, coinciding with
Figure 5 — Cores of layered ocean sediments indicate the latitude where ice
much of the Little Ice Age.
floes melted leaving debris from northern glaciers. In this figure from Bond
et al. (2001), the latitude of melting increases towards the top, so tempera-
A remarkable correlation of ocean temperature and cosmic
ture increases downwards. Thus stronger cosmic-ray fluxes measured by the
rays follows from the analysis of cores of layered sediments
14C and 10Be isotopes correlate with cooler North Atlantic temperatures.
in the North Atlantic by Bond et al. (2001). Icebergs carrying
debris from glaciers in Canada and Greenland drifted south
Of course, it is possible that the past cold intervals resulted
until they melted at latitudes dependent on the water tempera-
entirely from a reduced solar irradiance either at visible or
ture, leaving signals in the sediments. Figure 5 shows the
UV wavelengths, so that a stronger flux of cosmic rays is just
correlation of this temperature proxy with the 14C and 10B
an indicator of an inactive Sun with lower total luminosity.
fluxes. Meanwhile, the concentration of atmospheric carbon
However, the amplitudes of the fluctuations required for the
dioxide changed by less than 8 percent.
ice ages seem greater than expected for the Sun, so alterna-
How can cosmic rays affect global temperatures? Many years tive explanations such as the cloud-seeding hypothesis deserve
ago, Ney (1959) suggested that cosmic rays could provide further investigation.
condensation nuclei to help form clouds. This was a direct
Another possibility is a variation in the ultraviolet solar
extension of the principle of the cloud chamber invented by
flux. From minimum to maximum in recent solar cycles, the
C.T.R. Wilson, a meteorologist interested in cloud formation,
radiation near 200 nm that produces ozone (O) from oxygen
to track ionizing particles. Svensmark & Calder (2007) have 3
in the stratosphere increased by as much as 6 percent, and
described the development of this idea and experiments to test
between 240 and 320 nm in the O absorption bands, by up to
it. When the solar magnetic field is weak, more cosmic rays 3
4 percent, while the total flux increased by only 0.12 percent.
reach the Earth. Ionization by secondary galactic cosmic rays
Gray et al. (2010) describe current research into mechanisms
with 10-20 GeV energies assists in the formation of aerosols
for coupling this heating into the lower atmosphere. Thus
of sulphuric acid and water with radii of 2-3 nm. Some of
temperatures could go up and down with solar activity with
these are hypothesized to grow into cloud condensation nuclei
minimal change in the total irradiance.
with radii greater than 50 nm that enhance the formation
of low-altitude clouds. These clouds reflect sunlight, letting
the Earth cool. Laboratory tests at CERN with a pion beam 6. Current Global Temperature Trends and
support the first step of this process (Kirkby et al. 2011), and
the Atmospheric Models
experiments in Copenhagen with gamma-ray and natural
ionizing sources support the second step (Svensmark, Enghoff Since the recent pattern of solar activity suggests a cooler
& Pedersen 2013). Research is continuing to determine Earth, it is interesting to examine what has happened to the
whether these effects are sufficient to influence climate. global temperature. Several institutions have produced graphs
During the present solar maximum the cosmic-ray fluxes of changes in global annual temperatures by calculating
at neutron monitors in Greenland and Finland have been the anomaly, the difference from a long-term mean at each
exceptionally strong. location and averaging over continents, oceans, and seasons.
February / février 2014 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada 31
Canadians Christopher Essex of Western University and Ross
McKitrick, already mentioned, have raised serious questions
about both the physical significance of a mean temperature
for a nonequilibrium Earth and the variability of the results,
depending on the choice of the statistical procedures. Essex
& McKitrick (2007) also discussed the inadequacies of the
modelling process, but this paper will continue to refer to
these temperatures and models, because they are central to
the IPCC reports.
Figure 6 is one such plot of the mean temperature. The recent
rise, beginning about 1977, continued until 1998 with no
significant increase since. Already in 2009, the change in
slope was a concern. At that time, Knight et al. (2009) asked Figure 7 — Measured concentrations of the greenhouse gases CO, CH, NO
the rhetorical question “Do global temperature trends over and the four most abundant chlorofluorocarbons, all from the global air
the last decade falsify climate predictions?” Their response sampling network of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency.
was “Near-zero and even negative trends are common for Increasing uptake of CO during Northern Hemisphere spring and summer
intervals of a decade or less in the simulations, due to the produces the annual oscillations. However, the worldwide slowing of
model’s internal climate variability. The simulations rule out economic activity following the 2008 recession had no discernable effect.
(at the 95% level) zero trends for intervals of 15 yr or more,
suggesting that an observed absence of warming of this
Although other observations such as sea levels indicate
duration is needed to create a discrepancy with the expected
continued warming, it is important to understand the surface-
present-day warming rate.”
temperature hiatus, because environmental advocates and
government policies emphasize it and have proposed a goal
of limiting the rise to 2 °C. The extent of polar sea ice is less
useful: the Arctic is notoriously variable; a previous major
retreat occurred in the 1930s; and most of Antarctica has
continued to cool.
The IPCC climate models are among the most sophisticated
of all computer simulations. Nevertheless, something seems
to be missing. The usual explanation of climate begins with
a solar flux of 340 Wm-2 (on the surface-area scale noted
in Section 2) incident on an Earth with no atmosphere
that produces a mean temperature of -18 °C. Then, with an
atmosphere, the water vapour along with small additional
Figure 6 — Recent history of the global mean temperature anomaly compiled
by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Note the contributions from the so-called greenhouse gases (GHG)—
absence of any rise since 1998. carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH 4 ), nitrous oxide (N 2 O),
ozone (O), and chlorofluorocarbons —absorb about 240
Wm-2, heating the Earth to a mean of about +15 °C and
reradiating thermally in proportion to the fourth power of the
Now we have 16 years with no indication of increasing global
temperature from near unit optical depth into the atmosphere.
temperature, while the atmospheric concentrations of CO
2 The remaining 100 Wm-2 is reflected from clouds and the
and other greenhouse gases shown in Figure 7 continue to rise.
surface. Such backwarming is well known to astronomers,
Figure 8 compares temperature observations with the predic-
who call it line blanketing in their calculations of stellar
tions of an average of 42 models. By the 15-year criterion, the
atmospheres (Mihalas & Morton 1965). This heating by
IPCC models have failed the test of predicting the tempera-
gaseous absorption is well understood, so any explanation of
ture. Some climate scientists now are saying that 15 years is
the present constancy of global temperatures must include
too short a time for a test, but if that is the case, the rise over
compensation for the expected continuing warming from
21 years also could be an aberration. The critical test of any
increasing concentrations of the greenhouse gases.
scientific theory or model is whether it makes correct predic-
tions; simply fitting a model to existing data does not validate Note, however, that absorption is not the cause of heating
it for future trends. Unfortunately, a lot of public policy is inside a glass house. Instead the air becomes hot from contact
based on those unsuccessful predictions. with the heated ground or plants and remains so because it
32 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada February / février 2014
also could be contributing, as proposed by Estrada, Perron, &
Martinez-Lopez (2013). The IPCC report broadens the range
of the predicted temperature increase to 1.5 to 4.5 °C from the
previous 2.0 to 4.5 °C for a doubling of the CO concentra-
tion, thus allowing for a little less warming while retaining the
alarming upper limit. Otherwise, the report ignores the change
in slope of the temperature curve and a possible clue to some
overlooked physics of climate change. If there is a heating
bias in some models, why did the upper limit on temperature
remain the same? Regrettably, there is no recognition of the
significant decrease in solar activity during the last decade.
Also in September, Canadian scientists Fyfe, Gillet, & Zwiers
(2013) at the University of Victoria published an important
Figure 8 — Comparison of the average of 42 models from the Coupled-Model
paper confirming the discrepancy between the models and
Intercomparison Project (CMIP) with the HadCRUT3 mean of global temper-
temperatures. The authors averaged only model tempera-
atures compiled by the Hadley Centre of the UK Met Office. Graph courtesy
tures at locations coincident with observations and found
of Dr. Ed Hawkins (2013), Dept. of Meteorology, University of Reading, U.K. ±
a predicted rise of 0.21 0.03 °C per decade since 1998
compared with an observed 0.05 0.08 °C. As these authors
have noted, there is much work ahead to identify the causes of
does not circulate with external air that has not been heated.
the discrepancy, construct new models, and see how well they
Greenhouse operators often increase the CO concentration,
predict temperatures in coming decades.
because the plants will grow better with extra food!
8. Summary and Viewpoint
Since the Industrial Revolution, global temperatures have been
rising along with increased concentrations of CO and the
2 In summary, at this stage of our understanding, the most
other greenhouse gases. Although coincident behaviour is not
important contributors to climate change in order of
proof of a physical connection, the IPCC models made the
decreasing time scales are:
plausible assumption that CO has been the primary cause of
the warming. Reflections by clouds and other aerosols approxi- a) the gradual evolutionary brightening of the Sun over
mately cancelled the effects of the other gases. However, the almost 5×10^9 yr,
backwarming by CO produced only about half the tempera-
2 b) changes in the total solar irradiance, with limitations
ture rise, so the models needed to include amplification by
to be determined from satellite measurements and
a positive feedback caused by hotter air holding more water
further solar modelling,
vapour, which absorbs more radiation. The computer simula-
tions approximated this feedback and many other effects c) a change in the ultraviolet irradiance,
through adjustable parameters to match the observed tempera-
d) changes in cloud formation due to galactic cosmic rays,
ture rise and produce a range of future scenarios. Essentially
both in the long term, depending on the proximity of
the feedback has been calibrated by the past rise in tempera-
supernovae in the Sun’s galactic orbit, and on shorter
ture; if it is no longer rising, the effect of more CO will be
2 time scales, depending on the strength of the Sun’s
less serious. magnetic shield, and
e) changes in the concentrations of absorbing gases, both
7. The 2013 Report to the IPCC water vapour and the greenhouse gases.
The latest report IPCC (2013), which was released on 2013 This astronomer’s view includes the following thoughts:
September 28 after the completion of this paper, changes little.
1) The present climate models have predicted rising global
The writers recognize the 15-year absence of warming and
temperatures that actually have been constant since 1998.
speculate it is part of natural variability in climate and is biased
by a warm El-Niño event in 1998. (Until this explanation was 2) Like the astrophysical models described above, climate
required, the 1998 peak was just another example of warming models can be helpful to test hypotheses and understand
by CO.) The report also suggests the deviation from the physical processes. However, more development is needed
simulations could be due to heat being absorbed in the oceans before the models are reliable enough for future planning.
or that some models overestimate the effect of greenhouse Without a clear understanding of the temperature plateau,
gases and notes that models can have decade-long intervals it is impossible to decide how much reduction in anthro-
of near-constant temperature. The changes in slope for the pogenic greenhouse gases is needed to limit the tempera-
curves for CH and two of the chlorofluorocarbons in Figure 7 ture rise to 2 °C.
February / février 2014 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada 33
3) As we increase the concentration of CO and other IPCC (2013). Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contri-
anthropogenic gases, temperatures could rise again, or bution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. www.ipcc.ch
they could decrease if the weak solar activity leads to
another Maunder Minimum. Kirkby, J. et al. (2011). Role of sulphuric acid, ammonia and galactic
cosmic rays in atmospheric aerosol nucleation. Nature, 476, 429.
4) We should avoid claiming that climate science is settled
Knight, J. et al. (2009). Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 90 (8), Special Suppl.
or that we know how to control the climate.
pp. S22, S23.
5) We must beware of science by consensus. There once was Kopp, G. & Lean, J.L. (2011). A new lower value of total solar irradi-
ance: evidence and climate significance. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38,
general agreement that the ether was necessary for the
L01706.
propagation of light in a vacuum. Science progresses by
skepticism and the comparison of theory with experiments Li, L.H., Basu, S., Sofia, S., Robinson, F.J., Demarque, P., &
Guenther, D.B. (2003). Global parameter and helioseismic tests
and observations.
of solar variability models. ApJ, 591, 1284.
Acknowledgements Ljungqvist, F.C., Krusic, P.J., Brattström, G., & Sundqvist, H.S.
(2012). Northern Hemisphere temperature patterns in the last
The author thanks Dr. Jan Veizer of the University of Ottawa 12 centuries. Clim. Past, 8, 227.
and Dr. Richard Goody of Harvard University for helpful Mann, M.E., Bradley, R.S., & Hughes, M.K. (1998). Global-scale
comments. temperature patterns and climate forcing over the past six
centuries. Nature, 392, 779, Corrigendum 430, 105.
References _________ (1999). Northern Hemisphere temperatures during
the past millenium: inferences, uncertainties and limitations.
Bahcall, J.N., Pinsonneault, M.H., & Basu, S. (2001). Solar Models.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 759.
ApJ, 555, 990.
McIntyre, S. & McKitrick, R. (2005). Hockey sticks, principal
Bond, G., Kromer, B., Beer, J., Muscheler, R., Evans, M.N., Showers, components, and spurious significance. Geophys. Res. Lett., 36,
W., Hoffmann, S., Lotti-Bond, R., Hajdas, I., & Bonani, G. L15101.
(2001). Persistent solar influence on North Atlantic climate
Mihalas, D. & Morton, D.C. 1965, ApJ, 142, 253.
during the Holocene. Science, 294, 2130.
Milankovitch, M. (1941). Kanon der Erdbestrahlung und seine
Christiansen, B. & Ljungqvist, F.C. (2012). The extra-tropical
Anwendung auf das Eiszeitenproblem, Belgrade: Koniglich
Northern Hemisphere temperature in the last two millenia:
Serbische Akademie.
reconstruction of low frequency variability. Clim. Past, 8, 765.
______________ (1969). Canon of Insolation and the Ice Age Problem.
Eddy, J.A. (1976). The Maunder minimum. Science, 192, 1189.
Israel Program of Scientific Translation for U.S. Dept of
Essex, C. & McKitrick, R. (2007). Taken by storm: the troubled science, Commerce and National Science Foundation.
policy and politics of global warming. Toronto, ON, Canada: Key
Ney, E.P. (1959). Cosmic radiation and the weather. Nature, 183, 451.
Porter Books (Rev. ed.)
Sackmann, I.-J. & Boothroyd, A.I. (2003). ApJ, 583, 1024.
Estrada, F., Perron, P., & Martinez-Lopez, B. (2013). Statistically
Scherer, K. et al. (2007). Interstellar-terrestrial relations: variable
derived contributions of diverse human influences to twentieth-
cosmic environments, the dynamic heliosphere, and their
century temperature changes. Nature Geoscience 6, 1050-1055.
imprints on terrestrial archives and climate Space Sci. Rev.,
Frölich, C. & Lean, J. (2004). Solar radiative output and its variability: 127, 327.
evidence and mechanisms. Astron. Astrophys. Rev., 12, 273.
Shaviv, N.J. & Veizer, J. (2003). Celestial driver of phanerozoic
Fyfe, J.C., Gillett, N.P., & Zwiers, W. 2013. Overestimated global climate. GSA Today, (Geophysical Society of America) July, p. 4.
warming over the past 20 years. Nature Climate Change, 3, 767.
Solanki, S.K., Usoskin, L.G., Kromer, B., Schussler, M., & Beer,
Gray, L.J. et al. (2010). Solar influences on climate. Rev. Geophys. 48, J. (2004). Unusual activity of the Sun during recent decades
RG4001. compared to the previous 11,000 years. Nature, 431, 1084.
Grove, J.M. (2001). The Onset of the Little Ice Age. In P.D. Jones, Svensmark, H. (2012). Evidence of nearby supernovae affecting life
A.E.J. Ogilvie, T.D. Davies, & K.R. Briffa (Eds.), History and on Earth. Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc., 423, 1234.
Climate: Memories of the Future? Dordrecht, the Netherlands:
Svensmark, H. & Calder, N. (2007). The Chilling Stars: A New Theory
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
of Climate Change. Thriplow, Cambridge, UK: Icon Books Ltd.
Hafner, A. (2012). Archeological discoveries on Schnidejoch and at Svensmark, H., Enghoff, M.B., & Pedersen, J.O.P. (2013). Response
other ice sites in the European Alps. Arctic, 65, Suppl. 1, 189. of cloud condensation nuclei (> 50 nm) to changes in
ion-nucleation. Phys. Lett. A, 377, 2343.
Hawkins, E. (2013). www.climate-lab-book.ac.uk/2013/comparing-
observations-and-simulations-again; www.climate4you.com Tapping, K.F. (2013). The 10.7 cm radio flux (F10.7). Space Weather,
Space Weather 11, 394.
IPCC (2007). Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contri-
bution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Wunsch, C. (2004). Quantitative estimate of the Milankovitch-forced
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK and contribution to observed quaternary climate change. Quaternary
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Sci. Rev. 23, 1001.
34 JRASC | Promoting Astronomy in Canada February / février 2014