AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF
INCARCERATION
KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
1 Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory, Virginia Bioinformatics
Institute, Virginia Tech
2 Department of Sociology, Virginia Tech
Abstract. We build an agent-based model of incarceration based on the SIS
modelofinfectiousdiseasepropagation. Ourcentralhypothesisisthattheobserved
racial disparities in incarceration rates between Black and White Americans can
be explained as the result of differential sentencing between the two demographic
groups. We demonstrate that if incarceration can be spread through a social in-
fluence network, then even relatively small differences in sentencing can result in
the large disparities in incarceration rates. Controlling for effects of transmissi-
bility, susceptibility, and influence network structure, our model reproduces the
observed large disparities in incarceration rates given the differences in sentence
lengths for White and Black drug offenders in the United States without extensive
parameter tuning. We further establish the suitability of the SIS model as applied
to incarceration, as the observed structural patterns of recidivism are an emergent
propertyofthemodel. Infact,ourmodelshowsaremarkablyclosecorrespondence
with California incarceration data, without requiring any parameter tuning. This
work advances efforts to combine the theories and methods of epidemiology and
criminology.
keywords: epidemiological criminology, agent-based model, incarceration, SIS model, influ-
ence network, simulation
1. Introduction
The rapid increase in the U.S. incarceration rate over the last few decades has been
described as an epidemic. According to Bureau of Justice Statistics, the per capita
rate of incarceration nearly quadrupled between 1978 and 2011, from 137 to 511
persons per 100,000 [8]. This prison boom has primarily affected Black Americans,
especially Black males. By 2011, Black incarceration rates were over six times higher
than White rates (3,023 per 100,000 for Blacks, and 478 per 100,000 for Whites).
Racial disparities in incarceration rates have been studied extensively[16, 20, 14,
13, 21], and while these disparities are partially due to differences in criminal involve-
ment [12], the increase in imprisonment for Black males since 1980 was not matched
1v0761.2131:viXra
2 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
by a similar increase in Black-male criminality [3, 2, 25]. What then accounts for
the racial disparities in incarceration? Scholars offer several explanations, including
differential exposure to police surveillance [2], prosecutorial discrimination [17], the
use of incarceration to deal with a “racial threat” [7, 23], or sentencing disparities be-
tween Blacks and Whites. Although studies reveal that racial sentencing disparities
are reduced when legal factors [29, 15, 6] or social contexts [11, 28] are considered, a
recent meta-analysis reports that sentencing disparities remain even after controlling
for these factors [14]. While the magnitude of the difference is small and variable,
it is largest in cases involving discretionary powers and for drug offenses. In fact, it
has been shown that Blacks receive longer sentences than Whites for drug offenses
[2, 20].
Careful study of patterns of incarceration reveals that incarceration behaves like a
contagious disease in that the close associates of an incarcerated person have higher-
than-average probabilities of being incarcerated. An individual’s incarceration can
be “transmitted” to others via several mechanisms. It can increase the strains fam-
ily members must endure, expose them to criminal norms, and enmesh them in a
criminal subculture, thereby increasing the probability these people would them-
selves commit crimes [1, 18] and be incarcerated. Alternatively, once a person is
incarcerated, the police and courts pay more attention to the inmate’s family and
friends, thereby increasing the probability they will be caught, prosecuted and im-
prisoned [24, 10, 4]. Regardless of the mechanisms involved, the incarceration of
one family member undoubtedly increases the likelihood of other family members
being incarcerated [27, 22, 26, 19]. This suggests that models of contagion may aptly
characterize incarceration.
It is well known that some models of contagion exhibit nonlinearities. Nonlinear
processes such as infectious disease outbreaks are capable of amplifying small differ-
ences in parameters through feedback in certain circumstances. One such example
is the SIS (Susceptible-Infected-Suspectible) in which individuals transition between
susceptible and infectious states– near a critical value of transmission probability,
positive feedbacks amplify small differences in transmission rate to create large dif-
ferences in prevalence, the number of infected people.
Here we explore the possibility that the dramatic racial disparity in incarceration
rates is a consequence of a disparity in sentencing via analogous nonlinearities to
those described. Our hypothesis is that the differences in sentencing between Blacks
and Whites result in disparate transmission probabilities near a critical point, caus-
ing the incarceration epidemic to reach very different levels of prevalence under the
two sentencing schemes. Using an agent-based SIS model, we simulate the spread
of incarceration through a highly realistic synthetic population. We run our simula-
tions under one scenario in which sentence lengths are consistent with those received
by Black Americans for drug possession and under a second scenario in which the
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 3
sentence lengths are representative of those received by Whites. We demonstrate
here that if incarceration is infectious-like in that one’s incarceration causes his or
her family and friends to themselves become more likely than the general popula-
tion to be incarcerated, then it is plausible that the observed large disparities in
incarceration rates between Black and White Americans are the result of inequity in
sentencing.
2. The susceptible - incarcerated -susceptible (SIS) model
The hypothesized “transmissibility” of incarceration suggests that an SIS model
in which incarceration is modeled as though it were an infectious disease is appropri-
ate. An agent-based simulation of the SIS model requires three main components: a
contact network through which individuals stochastically transmit the disease, trans-
mission probabilities that dictate the rate at which agents transmit to each other,
and a period of infectivity [5]. Network ties represent opportunities for transmission,
and the structure of the network through which the disease spreads affects the dy-
namics of the outbreak. In a disease model, network ties between agents typically
denote physical contact or close proximity; in the case of incarceration, they denote
the existence of a familial relationship or close friendship, i.e. the existence of a
strong influence between the agents.
In the disease modeling paradigm, transmission probabilities may be a function
of characteristics of the individual agents (e.g., elderly individuals have a higher
probability of contracting a disease) or the relationship between the agents (e.g.,
transmission rates are higher between parents and small children). In our model,
incarcerated people are considered “infectious” to those who are most profoundly
affected by their absence. Incarcerated people “transmit” the incarceration “disease”
to their network members with a probability that is a function of the relationship
type (e.g. an individual’s incarceration has greater effect on his or her child than on
a friend) and personal characteristics (e.g. males are more susceptible than females).
We denote the probability that infected agent i transmits to susceptible agent j by
p(i → j).
InmodelingthespreadofdiseaseusingtheSISmodel, theperiodofinfectivity,s, is
the duration of time during which the infected individual is contagious. In our model
s is the length of the individual’s prison sentence, as that is the time during which
the inmate’s family and close friends are acutely affected. Here, we do not explicitly
model increased risk of incarceration due to an inmate’s difficulty re-integrating into
society. In our model, individuals released from prison cease to be “infectious” and
return to a “susceptible” state from which they may become re-infected. The source
of the new infection will be incarcerated friends and relations, introducing positive
feedback into the system. Given the infectious period, the probability that agent
4 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
i transmits the disease to agent j over the whole course of the infectious period is
given by p (i → j) = 1 − (1 − p(i → j))s i.e. the complement of the probability
that agent i does not transmit to agent j in any of the s iterations during which
it is infectious. Thus, for fixed p(i → j), a longer infectious period results in a
higher transmission probability (see Figure 1) and a greater chance that the outbreak
becomes widespread.
0 100 200 300 400 500
Transmission Probability Over Whole Sentence
Sentence Length (months)
noissimsnarT
ytilibaborP
Figure 1. As an example, we assume that at each iteration (month),
an agent transmits with probability p = .1. This shows the probability
that a transmission would have been made throughout the duration of
the sentence as a function of sentence length in months.
3. Simulation overview
We synthesize a realistic multi-generational population of agents for which all fam-
ily and friendship ties are known. All parameters involved in creating this population
are based on recent, high quality data. For example, distributions for the sex, lifes-
pan, and the number of children of each agent are taken from the US Census, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Social Security Administration,
respectively. The total population consists of 8,856 agents, with 61,376 family and
friendship ties. Transmission probabilities are derived directly from the survey of
prison inmates presented in [9]. This survey provides the probability that an in-
mate’s mother, father, sister, brother, or adult child are also incarcerated by inmate
gender. That is, p(i → j) is taken directly from the literature. In our simulation,
we treat close friends as siblings in terms of transmission probabilities. We focus on
the crime of drug possession, and use data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics to
derive sentence lengths by race.
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 5
Using this hypothetical synthetic population, we run “Black” simulations in which
incarcerated agents are assigned sentences that are consistent with those received by
Black Americans for drug possession and “White” simulations using a distribution of
sentence lengths corresponding to those received by White Americans for the same
crime, as described. In order to test whether differential sentencing alone can explain
racial disparities in incarceration rates, we use the same transmission probabilities
and the same network to represent both Black and White populations.
4. Model Components
4.1. Synthetic Population. We begin with a seed population of n = 1500 individ-
uals, {a ,a ,...,a }, from which all members of the population will be descendants.
Toinitializeeachagent, itisassignedseveralattributes. Theithagent, a , isassigned
a gender from the distribution g ∼ Bernoulli(.5), a birth year (b ∼ Uniform(L,U)),
and a spatial location in the unit square (x ,y ∼ Uniform(0,1)). The location may
be thought of geographically, as a physical location in a city, or as a preference space.
Regardless of how one prefers to conceptualize the spatial location, it serves the func-
tion of creating communities in the network, as friends and spouses are selected with
respect to these locations. To simulate a realistic distribution of life durations, the
age at death is sampled according to the 2009 life tables released by the Social Se-
curity Administration. 1 In these tables, the probability of death in the next year at
each age (from 0-119) is given by sex. We treat these as the probabilities of death
at each age throughout the simulation. If individual i is female and born in year
b , we select a life duration, l , at random from the distribution given in the female
life tables (i.e. l ∼ Multinomial(p )). The iteration of death is then given by
d = b +l .
Female agents are assigned an age at first birth attribute. Age at first birth is
based upon a figure released by the Center for Disease Control, which lists the mean
age at first childbirth for women in 2011 as 25.6 years. 2 We specify h , the age at
first birth, to be drawn from the distribution h = 15+r where r ∼ Poisson(10.6),
which has mean 25.6.
Each female agent is also assigned the number of children she will have through-
out her lifetime.The US Census provides the distribution of the number of children
women in the age bracket 40-44 have had and lists the total fertility rate for several
years between 1980 and 2008 , which ranges from about 1.84 to 2.1. Because we do
not want our simulated population to die out, se adjust the raw distribution given in
for 40-44 year old women to be consistent with historical fertility rates. Under this
adjusted distribution, the expected fertility rate is 2.07 children per woman.
6 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
4.2. Network Ties. In addition to personal characteristics, each agent is endowed
with relationships with other agents. These are represented as edges in a network.
In our simulation, all parent-child, sibling, spouse and close friend relationships are
represented. When an agent reaches its 10th “birthday”, the agent forms friendship
ties. In order to select the number of close friends assigned to each agent, we use data
from the 2004 General Social Survey 3, in which respondents indicate the number of
individuals with whom they discuss important matters and their relationship to up
to five of these people. Because many familial relations are already accounted for
in our simulation, we count only those people listed who are not parents, children,
spouses or siblings to calculate the probability of selecting each possible number of
friends, f .
Conditional on f , we select the specific agents that will be designated as friends.
We consider potential friends to be non-siblings between the ages of 9 and 11. This
age range is based on information obtained from the National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health 4 , in which children were asked to list several of their friends. Of
the friends listed, nearly 95% were within one grade of the student (75% shared the
samegrade). Becausefriendswithinoneyearofthestudentsmadeupthemajorityof
close childhood friendships, we also restrict to this range. From this set of potential
friends, we select the f agents that are closest in Euclidean space to the given agent.
In the iteration in which a female actor’s first child is born, she is assigned a
partner. In this hypothetical population, we only model opposite-sex spousal ties.
Thealgorithmfirstfindsallpotentialpartners–unrelatedandnon-friendmaleagents
whosecurrentageisbetweenthefemaleagent’sageandnineyearsolder. Weselected
thisschemebasedupondatafromthe1999USCensusthatshowsthatforabout80%
of marriages, the husband’s age minus the wife’s age falls into the range [−1,9]. We
restrict male agents to be strictly older than female agents, as our partner selection
algorithm tends to force the age of the male partners to fall to the lower end of the
allowable range. From this collection of potential partners, the agent is assigned the
potential partner that is located the closest to it, again using Euclidean distance.
At this point, the children of the couple (or single mother) are initialized. The first
child is assigned to be born in the current iteration. Subsequent children are assigned
birthyearsasthecurrentiterationplusindependentandidenticallydistributeddraws
from a Poisson distribution with mean parameter λ = 4.5. The mean parameter,
λ, is again based on the Centers for Disease Control’s data used to calibrate the
age at first birth. Child locations are set to be half way between the mother and
father’s location plus random noise (Uniform(m −.05,m +.05)), where m and m
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 7
are the midpoints between the mother and father’s location along the x and y axis,
respectively.
We run our algorithm for 200 iterations, resulting in a total population of 13,826
individuals. We discard the first 150 iterations as a burn-in period, reducing depen-
dence on our initial conditions. Those agents that are part of our simulation (i.e.
those that are alive at any point beyond the 150th iteration) are retained, resulting
in a population of size 8,856. The left panel of Figure 2 shows an example family
tree generated by our algorithm. This individual family, of course, does not exist in
isolation of the rest of the population. The population-wide network is shown in the
right panel.
Birth: 75 Birth: 79
Death:163 Death:154
B1 B2 B3 B4
Birth: 101 Birth: 107 Birth: 109 Birth: 113
Death:174 Death:177 Death:187 Death:194
C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8
Birth: 125 Birth: 127 Birth: 135 Birth: 136 Birth: 141 Birth: 144 Birth: 149 Birth: 155
Death:208 Death:205 Death:211 Death:216 Death:228 Death:214 Death:241 Death:246
4 children… 3 children… 2 children…
Figure 2. (left) One family from the synthetic population (right)
The network of agents in our simulation. Different colors indicate com-
munities found in the network. These communities are not explicitly
included in the simulation
5. Generating Sentences
Data released by the Bureau of Justice Statistics5 indicates that the duration of
sentenceservedforthesamecrimevariesbyrace. Inparticular, theBureauofJustice
Statistics states that for drug possession, the mean sentence for Whites is 14 months
with a median of 10 months. For Blacks, the mean sentence served is 17 months with
a median of 12 months. We use a negative binomial distribution to generate sentence
lengths that are consistent with the specified summary statistics. A comparison of
the sentence distributions is shown in Figure 3.
8 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
Figure 3. Comparison of the distribution of sentence lengths for
Whites and Blacks under our simulation parameters. These distri-
butions are fitted to data released by the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
6. Transmission Probabilities
Dallaire [9] presents the results of a survey of incarcerated individuals. In this
survey, each inmate is asked which of their relations are also incarcerated. The
proportion of inmates whose relations are incarcerated are reported in this data by
sex. Weusetheseprobabilitiestoderiveourtransmissionprobabilities, p(i → j). We
have noted that if agent i has probability p(i → j) of infecting agent j each month
it is incarcerated and its sentence is s months, then the probability of transmission
over the course of its incarceration, p (i → j), is given by, p (i → j) =
sentence sentence
1−(1−p(i → j))s. One can easily solve for p(i → j) = 1−(1−p (i → j))1.
sentence s
We set s = 14 to approximately calibrate to a value between the Blacks and Whites.
The derived monthly transmission probabilities used in this simulation are given in
Table 1.
The derived monthly transmission probabilities are most usefully understood in
the context of the probability of transmission averaging over sentence length, i.e. the
marginal transmission probabilities,
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 9
Table 1.
Derived monthly transmission probabilities, p(i → j).
mother 0.001 0.003
father 0.011 0.011
sister 0.008 0.004
brother 0.033 0.030
spouse 0.004 0.001
adult child 0.017 0.006
race sentence race
where p is defined above and π (s) is the distribution of sentence lengths for
sentence race
each race. Marginal probabilities by race, sex of inmate, and relation are given in
Table2, alongwiththeoriginalprobabilitieslistedin[9]. Thesewerecalculatedusing
the Monte Carlo method. We notice that our marginal probabilities for the White
sentences tend to be just slightly lower than those given. For Black sentences, the
marginalprobabilityoftransmissiontendsto beslightlyhigherthanthatgiven. This
is, of course, unsurprising as the sentences tend to be shorter for Whites and they
thus have fewer opportunities for transmission. Recall that the monthly transmission
rates under the two scenarios are precisely the same, so one should not interpret the
differences in marginal probabilities to mean that this model implies that Blacks are
more susceptible than Whites under the same conditions. The only differences that
exist here are due to the discrepancies in sentencing. We find that the probability of
transmission for Blacks under these parameters tends to be about 20% greater than
the probability of transmission for Whites.
We run our simulation 250 times using each sentence length distribution, resulting
in250“Black”epidemicsand250“White”epidemics. Thepopulationsareinitialized
to have approximately 1% of individuals incarcerated at the beginning of the simula-
tion. Although White and Black incarceration rates, in reality, were different in the
mid-80s, we initialize the simulations equivalently under the two scenarios to rule
out the possibility that the resultant disparities are due to initial conditions alone.
Our first analysis looks at the effects of differential sentencing after 50 years. Figure
2a shows the mean epidemic curves and corresponding confidence intervals by race.
Figure 2b shows several example trajectories. While the prison epidemic takes off
10 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
Table 2.
Probabilitiesgivenin[9]andmarginaltransmissionprobabilities
for Whites and Blacks.
Survey White Black
women men women men women men
mother 0.012 0.048 0.012 0.046 0.014 0.056
father 0.147 0.148 0.138 0.138 0.163 0.163
sister 0.107 0.059 0.101 0.058 0.121 0.069
brother 0.377 0.349 0.324 0.303 0.370 0.347
spouse 0.059 0.011 0.057 0.011 0.069 0.013
adult child 0.213 0.085 0.194 0.082 0.227 0.098
under Black sentence lengths, reaching just under 3% incarcerated on average after
50 years, the model using White sentence lengths indicates that the prison popula-
tion first declines and then increases at a much slower rate, reaching about 0.725%
over the same time period. Figure 2c shows the results of removing transmission
from the model, i.e. simulating a situation in which agents spontaneously become
incarcerated independent of any relationship with an incarcerated person. We set
the probability of spontaneous infection such that at the end of the simulation, the
Black population’s prevalence is roughly 3% as in the SIS simulations. Based on
this, we conclude that sentence length disparities in the absence of network effects
do not account for the observed difference in incarceration rate, as this model results
in a difference between the two curves of only about 20%. It is feedback through the
local network coupled with sentencing disparities that causes such large differences
in incarceration rates.
Finally, as a comparison with real data, we initialize the Black and White simu-
lations to be near the real incarceration rates in California in the mid-1980s when
mandatory drug sentencing became law (1% and 0.15% for Blacks and Whites re-
spectively). The results of this are shown in Figure 5. From 1986 to 2010, the
incarceration rate for Blacks in California climbed from about 1% to 2.18%, whereas
the rate for Whites rose much more modestly from 0.15% to 0.277%. In our simu-
lations, the Black and White simulations increase to 2.25% and 0.34%, respectively,
over the same time period. For the black trajectory, our mean trajectory deviates
slightly though the ultimate results after 25 years are remarkably similar to real-
ity; however, we note that the real trajectory in California is well within the range
of values that are typical under our simulation, as it falls well within the cloud of
trajectories shown. The white trajectory in California is quite similar to the mean
trajectory in our simulation.
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 11
Figure 4. (a) The mean incarceration prevalence by race. Log p-
values shown below indicate that at all but the first time point, the
mean prevalence is significantly different between the two populations.
(b)Severalexampleepidemiccurves. (c)Themeanincarcerationpreva-
lence under a non-contagious model.
Figure 5. The incarceration rate in California by year and race. The
number of incarcerated people by race and year was calculated us-
ing the National Prisoner Statistics data set from the Inter-University
Consortium for Political and Social Research. The total number of
people in California by race and year was calculated from the Califor-
nia Department of Finance.
Additionally, in Figure 6 we compare the recidivism rates derived from the simu-
lation model to those released by the state of California. The plots to the right show
the same statistics from a variety of other states. These vary because not all states
12 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
release the same statistics; we chose California as our primary point of comparison
because its report shows recidivism rates by the most factors and at the highest
level of discretization. Remarkably, our model reproduces the structural properties
of recidivism very accurately. For example, in both our model and the data from
California, recidivism rates increase with the number of times an inmate has been
incarcerated, with the largest increase occurring between the first and second in-
carceration. This effect emerges as a structural property of the SIS model without
including an increased probability of incarceration for those who have previously been
incarcerated. An agent’s incarceration affects its local network enough that, upon
release, it has a higher probability of return. In all cases, including our simulation
results, the recidivism rate is lower for those who are released at an advanced age.
In fact, our simulation even reproduces a subtle demographic bulge in rates that is
apparent in the California report. This is again an emergent property of the model –
as an agent ages, it tends to have fewer (and different types of) contacts who gener-
ate positive feedback for incarceration. The rate by months since release (for those
who recidivated within three years) closely matches the structure of the data from all
states. These results suggest that our model is reflecting the underlying regularities
in the system.
6.1. An ordinary differential equations (ODE) approach. Under assumptions
ofrandommixingandhomogeneityoftransmissionrate,theSISmodelcanbewritten
as a set of ordinary differential equations. In this case, the number of people infected
– the prevalence – when an outbreak reaches a steady state, I, is determined by
the expected number of transmissions per infected person, which in turn is given by
the product ps of transmission rate and the duration of infectivity. The presence
of a positive feedback loop makes the relation between prevalence and number of
transmissions highly nonlinear. In particular, ignoring births and deaths, I = 0 if
s < p−1 and 1−1/ps otherwise. Thus, given the transmission rate p, we can define
a critical duration of infectivity s ≡ p−1 such that for s < s the outbreak dies
out, while for s > s it achieves a non-zero steady-state prevalence. Near s , small
differences in sentencing (i.e. duration of infectivity) can cause large differences in
incarceration (i.e. disease) prevalence.
We take an agent-based simulation approach to modeling the incarceration epi-
demic because neither the assumption of uniform mixing nor the assumption of
homogeneity are met. Indeed, the network of family and friends plays a crucial role
in our hypothesis. Furthermore, the data show that transmission rates depend on
the nature of the relationship between the infectious and susceptible people, and any
particular susceptible may simultaneously have several types of relationships with
AN AGENT-BASED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL OF INCARCERATION 13
different infectious people (e.g. mother and sister and daughter). It is easier to cap-
ture this heterogeneity in transmission rates in an agent-based simulation than in a
set of ODEs.
Moreover, using the output of our simulation, we can generate a population-wide
mean transmission rate p to calibrate an ODE model. The result is p ≈ 0.0612
transmissions per infected person per month, or s ≈ 16.3 months. Thus the mean
sentence lengths (17 and 14) are on opposite sides of the critical point. Under
this model, the incarceration epidemic in the White population would eventually
die out, as no spontaneous infections are allowed. However, the Black population’s
incarceration rate would reach a steady state of about 3.9%. As this model does not
account for spontaneous infections, this result is consistent with those of the agent-
based model. This approach, however, does not allow us to assess the validity of the
model or comment on its ability to reproduce structural properties of the epidemic
using other withheld sources of information, such as the recidivism data we have
shown.
7. Discussion
The model presented here demonstrates that the dramatic disparities in incarcer-
ation rates of Black and White Americans can be explained by the “transmission” of
incarcerationfromanincarceratedpersontohisorhercloseassociatescombinedwith
modest differences in sentencing. A relatively small difference in sentencing of, on
average, three months created incarceration discrepancies similar to those observed
today. Further evidence supporting the plausibility of the model was found in its
agreement with observed patterns of recidivism, especially in California. However,
the model reveals that, contrary to the arguments of some advocates, sentencing
differences alone do not account for the disparities. To generate the vast incarcera-
tion disparities observed today in the U.S., the model must include both sentencing
disparities and a mechanism for transmitting incarceration similar to that in the SIS
model of disease propagation.
Our model is silent on the question, “Why is there a disparity in sentencing?”
However, it demonstrates that disparities in incarceration rates between White and
Black Americans may have as much to do with the social construction of crime as
they do the criminal behavior of individuals.
acknowledgments
The authors thank the Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory
team, the SAMSI ABM working group, and Jose Torres for their valuable input.
This work has been partially supported by DTRA Grant HDTRA1-11-1-0016 and
theNationalInstituteofGeneralMedicalSciencesoftheNationalInstitutesofHealth
14 KRISTIAN LUM1, SAMARTH SWARUP1, STEPHEN EUBANK1, JAMES HAWDON2
(NIH) under the Models of Infectious Disease Agent Study (MIDAS) program, award
number 2U01GM070694-09. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors
and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or DTRA.