Published in: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Sponsored Conference on Computational Intelligence, Control and Computer
Vision in Robotics & Automation, Rourkela, India, 2008, pages 145-148.
© 2008 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating
new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in
other works.
An Efficient Circle Detection Scheme in Digital Images Using Ant System
Kaushik Chattopadhyay¹, Joydeep Basu², Amit Konar³
Department of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata-700032, India
E-mails: ¹kaushik_chattt@yahoo.co.in, ²joydeep_etce@yahoo.co.in, ³konaramit@yahoo.co.in
Abstract boundaries as a graph consisting of nodes and branches
Detection of geometric features in digital images is an altogether. All the nodes and branches are found out and
important exercise in image analysis and computer the incidence matrix of the graph is constructed. Using
vision. The Hough Transform techniques for detection of this information the closed loops in the graph are found
circles require a huge memory space for data processing out which are then tested for circles.
hence requiring a lot of time in computing the locations In Section 2 we define various terms. In Section 3 the
of the data space, writing to and searching through the agents that conduct the search, viz. ants are described.
memory space. In this paper we propose a novel and Section 4 describes how to arrange the collected data
efficient scheme for detecting circles in edge-detected using various data structures so that data can be accessed
grayscale digital images. We use Ant-system algorithm very easily. The pseudo code of the scheme is also
for this purpose which has not yet found much provided here. Section 5 describes how to test the
application in this field. The main feature of this scheme detected loops for circles. In Section 6 we show the
is that it can detect both intersecting as well as non- results of application of our method on some original
intersecting circles with a time efficiency that makes it sample images.
useful in real time applications. We build up an ant
system of new type which finds out closed loops in the 2. Branches and Nodes
image and then tests them for circles.
Key Words-circle detection, edge detection, ant system In an edge detected image, a string of edge pixels
algorithm, gray scale image, image processing. stand for the boundary of an object present in the image.
When we are talking about intersecting shapes, it is clear
1. Introduction that such boundaries will cross each other. In a way, a
graph (in not too technical a sense) is formed. A string of
edge pixels, where each pixel is connected to only two
Detection of circles in digital images is a very
adjacent pixels, is called a branch. A pixel where more
important task from the view point of many applications
than two branches meet is called a node. A branch is
in different domains like pattern recognition, machine
completely described by the pixel co-ordinates of that
vision etc. Presence of various shapes in digital images
branch, taken in order. A node is completely specified if
can be detected using Hough transform technique [1-6].
we have its co-ordinates along with the information that,
But a serious drawback of this technique is its huge time
to which other nodes it is connected and by which
and space complexity. The time complexity for finding a
branches. This connectivity information is gathered in a
shape using this technique grows exponentially with the
matrix form which is formally called the incidence
number of parameters used to characterize the shape, e.g.
matrix.
for circles the number of parameters is 3, i.e. the co-
ordinates of the centre and radius and this gives rise to a
3. The ‘Ants’
complexity of O(n³). Several papers have suggested
methods to improve the technique [7]. In spite of that in
many simple real time applications this method often The search is done by one-pixel-agents that we shall call
turns out to be far from practical. ‘ants’. They occupy a single pixel and move one pixel at
In this paper we propose a completely new, time and one step. An ant that moves, we call an active ant. We
memory efficient, multi-agent searching scheme for make them move over all the edge pixels according to
detecting intersecting circles in an edge detected some rules and extract information about the graph
grayscale digital image. We consider the intersecting formed, i.e. they explore the edge image.
Each ant has its own co-ordinates which indicate on connects L to B, oblivious of the fact that there is already
which pixel it is, and those co-ordinates are continuously one coming towards B along L. The new ant will move
updated as the ant moves. Before making a move an ant towards A along L. Thus the two ants move toward each
finds the number of directions available to move, by other and after some time their co-ordinates will become
counting the number of edge pixels around the pixel it is the same. We say that the two ants ‘meet’. Whenever two
resting upon, excluding the pixel it has just come from ants meet, we take advantage of that as follows:
(this pixel is not to be covered again, i.e. the ant can not I: Each of them had partially discovered the same
move back). For a branch, this number is one. For a node, branch. They recorded pixel co-ordinates of the branch
it is at least two, and when an ant finds such a pixel, we from two sides in their path [ ] arrays. By joining the
say that it has discovered a node. p a t h [ ] a r r a y s o f t h e s e t w o a n t s b a c k t o b a c k , w e g e t a n
If an ant moves into a pixel on a branch, then it array which has all the pixel co-ordinates of the branch, in
updates its own co-ordinates and stores the co-ordinates order.
of the previous pixel in an array of its own called the
path[] array. The figure below shows all possible adjacent II: Since each ant remembers from which node it
pixels of (x, y). If an ant moves from pixel (x, y) to the comes from, when they meet, the connection between the
right upper corner pixel, then (x, y) is updated to (x+1, y- nodes is discovered. We use this information to build up
1) and similarly for other adjacent pixels. the incidence matrix.
After meeting each other, both the ants are made
inactive. This prevents one ant from going through the
same pixels that have already been visited by some other
ant, which guarantees that each edge pixel is visited only
once and by only one ant. We thus get another property:
Property 4: An ant ends up either reaching a node or
meeting another ant and becomes inactive.
Figure 1. Co-ordinates of adjacent pixels The scheme begins with a single active ant. Gradually
their number rises as new nodes are discovered. But all
If an ant discovers a node, the co-ordinates of the node the ants end up sometime as indicated by the above
are recorded. The ant also discovers that the node it has property, i.e. the number of active ants will become zero
come from and the new node are connected. This ant now sometime and by that time not a single edge pixel remains
becomes inactive, i.e. it ceases to move. New active ants to be discovered i.e., the graph is completely explored. In
are placed at the starting pixels of the branches that fact, we keep track of the number of active ants to know
originate from this node. They continue further whether the exploration is complete or not.
exploration of the graph.
In fact, the process of searching starts with placing an 4. Implementation
ant (the ‘mother’ ant) at a randomly selected edge pixel.
This ant moves up to a node (this is the first discovered
4.1. Ants: Each ant is represented as a structure with the
node) and generates new ants which travel along branches
following fields:
and create newer ants upon discovering new nodes. In
(x, y) its current co-ordinates
this way a whole system of ants is build up.
So far we have observed three properties of the ants:
(xn, yn) co-ordinates of the node it has come
Property 1: All ants move at the same speed, i.e. one
pixel at one step.
path[ ] in this array it stores the pixel
co-ordinates of the branch it is
Property 2: Ants are generated at nodes.
moving along
The ants are represented as individual blocks of a
Property 3: An ant remembers the node it has come
linked list. New blocks are added to the list with the
from.
generation of new ants. The block corresponding to a
particular ant is deleted when it becomes inactive.
The above listed properties of ants have an interesting
4.2 Branches: Each branch is represented as a structure
consequence. Suppose, between two nodes A and B, there
which has the following fields:
is a shorter path S and a longer path L. The ants are
index if index is n, we call that branch the
generated at A and move towards B. The one along S will
nth branch or branch n
reach B sooner and place a new ant on the pixel that
closed loop. The path[ ] array of this ant stores the co-
branch_arr [ ] this array stores the co-ordinates ordinates of the pixels forming this loop. This array is
of the pixels on the branch tested for circularity.
Each branch is a block of a linked list. When a new But, if the mother ant reaches a node, it places new
branch is discovered, a block is added to the list. When an ants at the starting pixels that originate from this node, the
ant travels from one node to the other, it discovers a node is recorded as the first node discovered and this ant
branch completely. Its path[ ] array becomes the itself becomes inactive. The pseudo code describing the
branch_arr[ ] of the newly discovered branch. When two movement of the ants from this point onwards is given.
ants move toward each other from the terminal nodes of a Let the total number of active ants be N and the
branch and eventually meet, each has a part of the branch number of branches discovered be B, at any time.
stored in their path[ ] arrays. We join these two path[ ] Searching ends when N becomes zero, i.e. no active ants
arrays back to back (to keep the order of the pixels right) are left.
and this becomes the branch_arr[ ] of this newly
discovered branch. There is one variable called B. This is while N>0
initially set to zero and is incremented each time a branch i=1;
is discovered and becomes the index of the newly while i<=N
discovered branch. After the ants finish their exploration, find d, the number of edge pixels available to move
the variable B will be the total number of branches. into around the pixel occupied by the ith ant
4.3. Nodes: Each node is also represented as a structure add a block to the list of nodes and record this
with the following fields: pixel as a node
index if the index is n, we call it the nth B=B+1;
node or node n add a block to the list of branches and make the
path[ ] array of this ant the branch_arr[ ] of the
(x, y) co-ordinates of the node new branch and the index of this branch is B
if the ant was coming from node p and has
incidence [ ] an array reached node q
Several nodes are blocks of a linked list. As a new then node p.incidence[B] = +1;
node is discovered, a new block is added to the list. node q.incidence[B] = -1;
The array incidence[ ] has some special importance. If end
an ant coming from the ith node reaches the jth node or delete the block of this ith ant from the list of ants
meets another ant coming from jth node, through the kth place d new ants at the starting pixels of the d new
branch (i.e. branch with index k), then we do the branches originating from this node by adding d
following operations: new blocks to the list of ants
node i . incidence[k] = 1; else if d=1
if the only pixel available to move into is occupied
node j . incidence[k] = - 1; by some other ant //i.e. two ants meet//
then B=B+1;
Otherwise the entries of these arrays are set to zero. add a new block to the list of branches
After the ants finish their exploration, the variable B will join the path[ ] arrays of the ants back to
be the total number of branches and the index of the back and make this the banch_arr[ ] of the
branch which is discovered last. Since branch indices are new branch , the index of the branch is B
array positions of the incidence[ ] arrays, after delete the block of the two ants from the list
exploration is complete, these arrays will have length that of ants
corresponds to the maximum branch index, i.e. B. Let the N=N-2
total number of nodes be N. Now we stack the incidence[ if one ant was from node p and the other
] arrays of the nodes one below the other, starting with from node q
node 1 at the top, node 2 below that, then node 3 and so then node p.incidence[B]=+1;
on. Then it is clear that the NxB matrix so formed will be node q.incidence[B]=-1;
the incidence matrix of the graph. end
4.4. Pseudo Code: First an ant, i.e. the mother ant is else update the co-ordinates of the ith ant
according to the adjacent pixel it moves into
placed at any randomly selected edge pixel. It moves
record the co-ordinates of this pixel in the
along the edge pixels and if it comes back to the starting
path[ ] array of the ith ant
pixel without encountering any pixel which leads to more
than one direction, i.e. any node, then it has discovered a
5. Finding Circles
Once it is found from the incidence matrix which
Fig. 3.a Original image no.2 Fig. 3.b Detected circle
branches form a closed loop, we can easily find out if it
represents a circular shape. If some branches (taken in
7. Discussion and Conclusion
order, of course) form a closed loop, then the
branch_arr[ ] arrays of the branches (they are also taken
The first step of this scheme is the searching. As told
in the same order as the branches) have the co-ordinates
before, each edge pixel is visited only once and by only
of the edge pixels that make the loop. We can analyze
one ant. Let the number of edge pixels be Ne. This can be
these co-ordinates whether they lie on a circle. We take
taken very much greater than the number of nodes and
three equidistant points on the loop at random and
branches, in most cases. Then the complexity of searching
determine the equation of circle passing through them.
is O(Ne). The next step is to find closed loops from the
Then the distance of each point on the loop is found from
incidence matrix. This may take considerable time if the
the centre of the circle and compared with the radius.
number of nodes and branches are too many. However,
Even if the loop looks perfectly like a circle, all points on
for various practical purposes where nodes and branches
it will not be at a same distance from the centre because
are less in number, this scheme is highly time efficient.
of the error introduced inevitably due to quantization. So
Also notable is the memory efficiency of the scheme. The
we have to make room for some tolerance which will
main memory usage goes into storing co-ordinates of
depend on the radius of the circle. If some point fails to
edge pixels only.
be within the range radius ± tolerance from the centre,
There is no particular inclination towards circles.
then the loop is discarded from being a circle.
Once some closed loop is found, it can be tested for any
shapes, like ellipses. However a limitation is imposed in
6. Simulation Results
this respect by the distortion due to digitization.
The algorithm has been tested extensively on different
8. References
images consisting of circular and non-circular objects.
Figures below show two original images of different
[1] Hough, P. V. C.: “Method and means for recognizing
intricacies, having intersecting shapes and the circles
complex patterns”, U.S. Patent 3 069 654, Dec. 18, 1962.
extracted from them.
[2] R. O. Duda, P. E Hart, “Use of Hough transformation
to detect lines and curves in pictures”, Comm. Assoc.
Comput, 15(1), pp. 11.15., 1972.
[3] Solaiman B., Burdsall B., Roux C., “Hough transform
and uncertainty handling. Application to circular object
detection in ultrasound medical images”, Proceedings,
1998 International Conf. on Image Processing, vol. 3, pp.
828-831, Oct. 1998.
[4] J. lllingworth and I. Kittler, “A survey of the Hough
Fig.2.a Original image no. 1
transform”, Computer Vision, Graphics and Image
Processing, vol. 44, pp. 87-1 16, 1988.
[5] H. K. Yuen, J. Princen, J. Illingworth and J. Kittler,
“Comparative study of Hough transform methods for
circle finding”, Image and Vision Computing, 8(1),
pp.71–77, February 1990.
[6] P. Kierkegaard, “A method for detection of circular
arcs based on the Hough transform”, Machine Vision and
Applications, 5, pp. 249–263, 1992.
Fig. 2.b & 2.c Detected circles [7] E. R. Davies, “A Modified Hough Scheme for
General Circle Location”, Pattern Recognition, letter 7,
pp. 37-43, 1988.