1v0700.2180:viXra
An Integrated Software-based Solution for Modular and
Self-independent Networked Robot
I. Firmansyah, Z. Akbar, B. Hermanto and L.T. Handoko
Group for Theoretical and Computational Physics, Research Center for Physics
Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI)
Kompleks Puspiptek Serpong, Tangerang 15310, Indonesia
firmansyah@teori.fisika.lipi.go.id, zaenal@teori.fisika.lipi.go.id
October 11, 2018
An integrated software-based solution for a modular and self-independent networked robot is
introduced. The wirelessly operatable robot has been developed mainly for autonomous monitor-
ing works with full control over web. The integrated software solution covers three components
: a) the digital signal processing unit for data retrieval and monitoring system; b) the externally
executable codes for control system; and c) the web programming for interfacing the end-users
with the robot. It is argued that this integrated software-based approach is crucial to realize a
flexible, modular and low development cost mobile monitoring apparatus.
Keywords : networked robot, mobile monitoring, digital processing
1 Introduction
During the last decades, automated systems embedded with remote robots are getting common in all
aspects of human life. In some applications, it is motivated in most cases by the concern of safety
as volcano observations and so forth. Furthermore, instead of radio-frequency based remote robots,
in recent years the remote robot is evolutionary advancing to be networked robot. The technology
migration is of course possible due to the advancements in internet technologies. Many groups have
developed the so-called networked robots that is roboticsystems controlled remotely over internet using
TCP/IP protocol. Most of them fall into the category to support human daily life, or to realize more
interactive humanoids. One example is the WAX Project which is the second tele-operated internet
robot at Ryerson Polytechnic Universities, the MAX Project [1]. The MAX Tele-Operated Dog has
shown that a tele-operated robot controlled from over web is quite reliable [2][3]. On the other hand,
the WAX puts together a procedure to change any robot into a tele-operated robot on the web [4].
EitherMAX/WAXorMONEAarethemicrocontroller-basedrobotsequippedwithonboardcomputer,
camera and microphone with a main purpose to simulate telepresence. Originally these robots were
intended and simulated to support the handicapped persons. So the main issue is how to recognize the
captured images or sounds and interpret them to be useful information for potential users.
Another kind of networked robot is the MONEA (Message-Oriented NEtworked-robot Architecture)
which is an efficient development platform architecture for multifunctional robots [5]. The architecture
embeds a Networked-Whiteboard Model for informationsharing framework along with Message passing
framework via P2P Virtual Network using Interest-Oriented Module Groups and Software Patterns to
reduce complexity risks. It has actually been designed to fulfill three features : embodying the Meta-
Architecture forNetworked-Robots, supporting Bazaar-StyleDevelopment Model, andnoneedofheavy
weight middleware. The MONEA-based middleware has been implemented to develop a dialog robot
for exhibition.
On the other hand, there is also another usage of tele-operated mechanism to control and monitor
simultaneously several robots over web [6]. The system provides a comprehensive platform enabling
the users to customize each robot independently.
In our present project of LIPI Networked Robot (LNR) we follow similar approach to develop a
modular and self-independent wireless robot [7]. The difference is on the main objective to perform
more serious tasks requiring telepresence for the reason of safety. For example : direct data retrieval
in nuclear reactors, observation apparatus for volcanoes and so on. These kinds of purpose lead to
completely different requirements. The robot should be able to acquire data in almost real-time basis,
and then to process it at the robot’s local system as well. Therefore no need for the end-users to install
certain softwares in a terminal connecting to the robot. The users just connect their terminals over
wireless network and then pointing the browser to the assigned address of robot to display the analyzed
results, while at same time it is able to control and monitor the robot’s movement, direction etc. Also,
by definition there is no requirement on neither complex physical movement nor human interfaces.
The present paper is focused on describing the whole aspects of software-based solution in LNR.
Because the detailed hardware components in LNR has been presented previously [8][9]. Further, a
real implementation in LNR as the prototype is discussed. Finally we summarize the results and
mention future plans.
2 The concept
Here, let usagainreview briefly theconcept torealizethefeatures mentioned above. Wehavedeveloped
therobottobeasmodularaspossibletomakeitmoreadaptivetousers’ needs. Thisconcept isdepicted
in Fig. 1, consisting of three modules [8],
1. Main unit.
2. Data acquisition module.
3. Data processing module.
The first module mainly involves hardwares of actuators, network and embedded PC. The second
one contains combination of microcontrollers and the related softwares for signal processing, while
the last one is completely a software-based solution. Of course, the main unit is also responsible for
the underlying operating system including mini web server and so forth. In fact, the embedded data
processing system enables the robot to be self-independent.
The last two modules are closely integrated each other in the sense that two modules should always
belong to the same package. So, the system is practically divided into two independent units : the
main unit and the Data Acquisition and Processing Systems (DAPS) unit for data acquisition and its
processing modules. In principle, one might have single main unit with different packages of DAPS, or
Figure 1: Three modules and its contents constructing the modular robot.
vice versa according to the needs. This characteristic would enable users to easily replace, for instance
the set of censors and relevant software-based data processing modules with any available packages
later on using the same main unit. Inversely, replacing the main unit with more appropriate one to a
certain geographical site, but using the same DAPS package.
Now, the whole architecture is available for public as an open source [10]. We expect that this
approach could encourage third parties to develop independently any relevant packages designed for
some certain needs. Inversely, another ones who are interested more in hardware developments, might
build alternative main unit with different type of mechanics for robot, but with same architecture for
the rest to keep its compatibilities with existing DAPS packages. Some considerable packages are, for
example, censors of hazard gas combined with software based chemical compound analyzer, vibration
censor combined with software based seismograph, and so forth. This is the reason we call it as a
generic robot which is adaptable to any DAPS.
In contrary most robots are usually constructed for single particular task. According to this concept,
in order to realize high degree of freedom for both users and developers, and to keep full compatibilities
in the future developments, let us list common features which should be fulfilled :
1. All aspects are fully controllable wirelessly over web through TCP/IP protocol.
2. Acquired data are stored and processed at the robot’s local system independently from external
apparatus.
3. The processed data can be retrieved and analyzed by users also over web such that no need for
additional software installation at the user’s terminal connecting to the robot.
4. The hardware-based components are replaced as much as possible with the software-based sys-
tems, even in the main unit.
According to the last point, in particular signal processing and filtering from the censors are performed
using customized software rather thanhardware as commonly done. This is important againto improve
the flexibility and overall cost reduction. Hence, attaching different type of censors would require only
different set of DAPS accordingly.
list here some advantages in deploying this approach for a mobile monitoring robot :
Easy access for end-users regardless the operating system being used.
No need for installing any additional softwares in terminal accessing the robot.
Overall cost reduction, since most components are replaced with software based system.
High compatibility due to limited proprietary hardwares and also embedded softwares in the
system.
All software based components are developed using freely available open-source softwares. In our
case we use Debian Linux for the operating system, Apache for the web-server and some GNU
Public License development languages like GNU C, Java and Python.
Highly safe at any untouchable areas of human being, since all aspects of robot are remotely
accessible and controllable.
Simple calibration since all signals are processed by softwares. This point is crucial regarding the
main purpose of direct and continuous retrieval of physical observables.
3 Software-based solutions
Now we are ready to introduce the software-based solutions for a modular and self-independent robot.
Following the architecture previously mentioned, the software can also be divided into three parts.
3.1 Main unit software
The software are embedded in the main unit, involving the operating system, web server, networking,
some interpreters like Java and shell.
Beside some standard based system, networking and programming tools, the main unit software also
contains some codes for the control system of actuators. The actuators might be the robot mechanics
or some supplementing tools like camera and so on.
In some cases it could also involve a kind of monitoring system, that is processing the feedback
from actuators and reflecting it back to the control system to enable an intelligent robot. Needless to
say, the software should process the navigation system as well, either using the image processing or
dead-reckoning method.
Finally the main unit software is responsible for interfacing the whole system with the users. We
have deployed a user-friendly and integrated web interface covers :
Front module for for common information.
Administration module to maintain the whole parameters, basic settings, authenticate a new
user or terminal, uploading or upgrading the data acquisition and processing software relevant
for particular hardwares being used, etc.
User module to enable user access to control and monitor the main unit, to display or download
the raw data or analyzed results.
3.2 Data acquisition software
This is mainly the digital signal processing (DSP) system [11]. Because, for the sake of improving the
modularity, all acquired data from the attached censors through microcontrollers are not processed by
the hardware-based filters as commonly done. Instead, the raw signals are sent directly to the main
unit to be processed and filtered using the dedicated software.
This approach would definitely require developments on dedicated DSP’s along with the user needs.
The benefits are clear, i.e. :
It enables unlimited combination on processing the signals by just adjusting the relevant param-
eters in the DSP system.
Periodical adjustment orcalibrationcanbedoneeasily whenever it isneeded. Thiswould improve
the accuracy of data taken by censors etc.
On the other hand, it simplifies the data acquisition hardwares that further improves its flexibil-
ities and modularities. Because, for instance we can in principle attach any censors to the main
unit and modify the data acquisition software accordingly.
3.3 Data processing software
The most unique component is the data processing software. This component plays an important role
to get rid of any software installation at the user’s terminal connecting to the robot. The user just runs
the browser, points it to the assigned address and that’s all.
As its nature, the data processing software should be a dedicated software for a particular purpose
relevant with the acquirable data taken from a set of data acquisition hardwares.
We should remark here that the web interface in the main unit has a capability to install a new or
upgrade newer version of DAPS software over web.
4 A prototype : LIPI Networked Robot
For the sake of completeness, let us discuss the case of LNR that is accessible on the net for public
[7]. Since we put the priorities on the DAPS unit rather than the main unit, LNR adopts a simple
actuators to enable it to move in a limited space.
To be more specific, we have designed a DAPS package to observe hazard gas in a certain area and
to measure the surrounding environment. The whole system then consists of,
Main unit :
Containing main processor (mini PC etc), storage media (mini hard-disk), access point, power
supply, battery and all mechanical components. Of course, it also includes the underlying op-
erating system, integrated web interface, hardware control and monitoring systems and storing
system for all data.
Data acquisition module :
A set of censors (CO gas, temperature, humidity, NO gas, smoke) and small camera. The
softwares in this module are also responsible for filtering the raw signal from censors.
Data processing module :
It covers all add-on softwares to process, store and analyze the acquired data and display the
results accordingly. The system provides a real-time warning system regarding the air quality in
a certain area.
For communication between the main unit and the control and data acquisition hardwares we use the
parallel port for both reading the signals from and sending some commands to microcontroller. As a
result, the microcontroller decodes each command into an associated task such as driving the actuators
(in the case of LNR are two DC motors), and also retrieving the raw signals from attached censors.
In this paper, however we are not going to discuss the microcontrollers in the DAPS unit, nor the
communication hardwares itself. Because those details are out of coverage of the paper, and have
already been discussed in our previous works [8][9]. Instead, we focus on describing briefly our concept
to deal with the wheels as actuators and the associated dead reckoning to track the current position
easily with very limited hardwares and mostly relying on software based systems. Instead we discuss
in more detail the algorithm we use to control and to obtain some feedback from the actuators. Again,
the detail about the actuators in LNR should refer to [9].
The actuators in LNR enables movements in any directions by deploying two independent and one
free wheels [12][13]. This architecture is to avoid unnecessary complexities. The mechanical compo-
nents consists of three wheels, one is freely rotatable while the other two are fixed and driven by two
independent DC motors. Using these motors we are able to control the robot movement in four di-
rections such as turning left and right, moving forward and backward by controlling each DC motors
independently. Turning left (right) is realized by stopping the left (right) motor and starting the right
(left) motor respectively. Moving forward is simply done by starting both motors simultaneously.
The next problem is how to recognize the current position at almost real-time basis. Instead of
using the images captured by camera which would require complicated and resource wasting image
processing, we make use of the compass censor and the wheel rotation counters. Again, we remind
that in LNR the main processor should be prioritized to retrieve, store and analyze the data. Although
a small camera is attached on the robot, it is only intended to get the actual visualization around
the robot. Therefore, the problem is turned into how to track the paths and recognizing the current
position in a sightless condition.
The compass censor provides information of the actual angle against the North-South pole, while
countingeachwheelrotationyieldsthepoint-to-pointdistance. Thismechanismislateronvisualizedon
the web in real-time basis as a virtual compass and the footprints of wheels from one point to another.
This compass module has been specifically designed for a usage in robots as add-on navigation. It
generates a unique number in byte from 0 to 255 to represent the angles within 0 360 . The
internal microcontroller in the compass module then converts the signals from magnetic field censor
into serial I2C data format. Using the compass module, the angles information is retrieved through
I2C communication protocol. This allows us to read one or two bytes for 8-bit or 16-bit registers
respectively.
In order to recognize a real path length, we simply count the wheels rotation whenever the wheels
start moving and stopping. The wheel rotation is measured by using opt coupler. The opt coupler
detects a black and white colors on the wheel and produces digital signals (1 and 0). The data is
acquired by microcontroller and stored in the main unit storage media. In LNR each wheel is divided
into eight areas which means a complete rotation occurs after eight counts, however we can divide
it as much as possible to improve the accuracy. All information of the angles and the path lengths
are recorded path by path. Finally we borrow the dead reckoning method which is very powerful to
calculate the position relying on a previously determined position [14]. To implement such algorithms
on a robot, we have constructed a mathematical prescription to calculate the geometrical distances of
each path obtained from each wheels counter, and its relative angles obtained from the compass censor.
The final formula is embedded into the software belonging to that main unit. The formula provides
an exact calculation for each intermediate path, the total running-distance over the paths and the real
distance between the initial and end points. Nevertheless, due to the limited space the detail algorithm
and formulae will be given elsewhere.
Below is a short and simple example on the algorithm to control the motors in LNRusing C language.
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/io.h>
#define base 0x378
#define status base+1
#define control base+2
main(int argc, char **argv)
int input=0;
if (ioperm(base,1,1))
fprintf(stderr, "Error: port %x\n", base),
if (ioperm(status,1,1))
fprintf(stderr, "Error: port %x\n", status),
if (ioperm(control,1,1))
fprintf(stderr, "Error: port %x\n", control),
outb(0x01, base); //to set the robot move forward
usleep(5000);
The value of data sent to the microcontrollers depends on the initial setting. In this case we use the
value of 0x01. The algorithm written above is enough to send the command to the robot since there is
no need for feedback so that it will move the robot in forward direction. In contrary, for the compass
censor one needs more as below to read the data from the compass censor. Algorithm below shows how
to read the data using control address of parallel port in nibble mode with the help of IC 74LS151.
outb(0x09, base); //command to read compass
usleep(5000);
outb(inb(control)|0x01,control);
input=(inb(status)&0xF0);
usleep(100);
input=input>>4;
outb(inb(control) & 0xFE,control); // strobe = 1
input=input|(inb(status)&0xF0);
usleep(100);
input=(input^0x88);
usleep(100);
printf("compas : %d \n",input);
5 Summary and discussion
We have introduced an integrated software-based solution for modular networked robot which is fully
controllableandaccessible over network. Asatypical implementation oftheconcept, wehavedeveloped
the LNR. We have shown that the software-based solution is crucial to enable the required features.
Also it improves significantly its flexibility to various purposes. We argue that regarding its main
objective as a monitoring apparatus, LNR is quite efficient and has good total cost-performance due
to its modularity and dominant software based solutions.
However, the system has complicated aspects and still requires further developments as, like :
More examples of DAPS packages fit certain purposes.
More complicated robot’s actuators and the relevant algorithms for its software-based control and
monitoring systems.
Further development of main unit and its mechanical components to enable more advanced and
smooth movements. Rather than full hardware-based approach, this will be done by utilizing as
much as possible integrated software-based algorithms.
Automatic and software based calibration systems to keep the accuracy of actuators. For instance
in the current LNR, synchronizing the rotation speed of left and right wheels, reseting the initial
angle of camera and so on.
Lastly, we would like to announce that the architecture and all related softwares of LNR will
be open for public under GNU Public License once we consider the system is ready for further
development by open-source communities around the world [10].
Acknowledgment
The work is financially supported by the Riset Kompetitif LIPI in fiscal year 2008.