1v4892.7011:viXra
An Introductory Review of Information Theory in the Context of
Computational Neuroscience
Mark D. McDonnell
Institute for Telecommunications Research
University of South Australia
Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, Australia
Mark.McDonnell@unisa.edu.au
Shiro Ikeda Jonathan H. Manton
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics The University of Melbourne
Tokyo 190-8562 Japan Victoria 3010 Australia
shiro@ism.ac.jp jmanton@unimelb.edu.au
September 19, 2018
must have the skill to understand one, to criticize
one,andtosuggestone. Thephysiologistneednot
This paper introduces several fundamental con- be able to prove a certain mathematical theorem,
cepts in information theory from the perspective but he must be able to grasp its physiological sig-
oftheiroriginsinengineering. Understandingsuch nificance and to tell the mathematician for what
concepts is important in neuroscience for two rea- he should look.”
sons. Simply applying formulae from information
theorywithoutunderstandingtheassumptionsbe- Indeed, three giants of science, Wiener, von
hind their definitions canlead to erroneousresults Neumann and Shannon, realised in the 1940s
and conclusions. Furthermore, this century will the need for understanding the brain in terms
seeaconvergenceofinformationtheoryandneuro- of the fundamental engineering principles applica-
science;informationtheorywillexpanditsfounda- ble to any computational device: energy, entropy
tions to incorporate more comprehensively biolog- and feedback (Wiener, 1948; von Neumann, 2000;
icalprocesses thereby helping revealhow neuronal Shannon and Weaver,1949). ThisledtotheMacy
networksachievetheirremarkableinformationpro- conferences (1946–1953) which attracted leading
cessing abilities. scientists from across engineering and the physi-
cal and life sciences. The Macy conferences were
one of the earliest organised approaches to trans-
1 Introduction disciplinarity and hailed by some as the most im-
portant event in the history of science after World
NorbertWiener, the founder of cybernetics, wrote War II. They demonstrated the need for, and the
that it is the “boundary regions of science which initial difficulties in, establishing a common lan-
offer the richest opportunities to the qualified in- guage powerful enough to communicate the intri-
vestigator. Theyareatthesametimethemostre- caciesofthe relevantfields acrossthe physicaland
fractoryto the accepted techniques of mass attack life sciences and engineering.
and the division of labor” (Wiener, 1948, p. 2).
Hewentontoexplainthat“aproperexplorationof Whiletheirdreamwasnotrealised,thiswaspri-
theseblankspacesonthemapofsciencecouldonly marily due to insufficient experimental data. As
be made by a team of scientists, each a specialist time marched on, the barrier to bringing together
in his own field but each possessing a thoroughly the ever more specialised disciplines grew larger.
sound and trained acquaintance with the fields of With tremendous experimental advances having
his neighbors;all in the habit of workingtogether, beenmadeinthepast60years,itistimelytostand
ofknowingoneanother’sintellectualcustoms,and on the shoulders of these giants and resume their
of recognizingthe significance of a colleague’snew quest. With this as motivation, the present article
suggestion before it has taken on a full formal ex- endeavourstowhettheappetitesofneuroscientists
pression. The mathematician need not have the andinformationtheoristsalikeforlearningmoreof
skillto conducta physiologicalexperiment, buthe each other’s fields.
1.1 Relevance of Information The- tion theory while feedback was studied in con-
ory (and Feedback) trol theory — recent years have seen some con-
vergence of feedback and information theory. A
The human brain is often described as the
fundamental question is what is the slowest rate
most complex structure in the known uni-
atwhichinformationmustbe fedbackforthe sys-
verse (Fischbach, 1992). Certainly, it is the most
tem to work. Scientists have started to consider
efficient signal processing device known. Drawing
how fast the brain must be processing informa-
only20wattsofpower,thebrainsignificantlyout-
tion if we are able to walk properly and can move
performs engineered devices at signal processing
our hand in a straight line even though random
taskssuchassourceseparation,featureextraction,
external forces are impeding its motion in experi-
and speech and image recognition (Sarpeshkar,
ments (Burdet et al., 2006). This is an example of
1998). Thisisallthemoreremarkablebecausesig-
such convergence of two important theories.
nals within the brain propagate very slowly com-
By virtue of being introductory, the present pa-
pared with those in a computer.
per focuses on discussing information theory in
Thissuggeststhatthebrainusesaparadigmfor
“one-way” (i.e. feed-forward exclusively) biologi-
signalprocessingverydifferentfromanydeveloped
calcontexts. Acomprehensiveaccountofthebrain
in engineering. Why then should engineering in
in engineering terms would necessarily involve the
general and information theory in particular have
marriageofinformationtheoryandcontroltheory.
relevanceto understanding the brain? The answer
Repeating the words of von Neumann, the brain
lies partially in the fact that engineers study fun-
mustbeunderstoodintermsofcontrol(feedback),
damental laws pertinent to any system, including
communication (information theory) and compu-
biological ones (Berger, 2003; Sarpeshkar, 1998).
tation.
Indeed, John von Neumann viewed the brain as
a hybrid computer which performs control, com-
1.2 Information Theory and Com-
munication and computation, and concluded that
informationtheoryisthereforeessentialforunder- munication
standing its functionality (von Neumann, 2000).
Itmustberecognisedthatthemathematicaldisci-
Wienertoorecognisedthatinformationtheorywas
plineof“informationtheory”doesnot(andshould
essential for a deeper understanding of feedback
not)captureallaspectsofhowtheword“informa-
and thus life (Wiener, 1948). Anecdotal evidence
tion”is usedinspokenlanguage. Failing todistin-
suggests Shannon himself, the father of informa-
guish the two can lead to errors caused by flawed
tion theory, may have been partially motivated by
intuition in onedirection, orthe inappropriateap-
how his brain processed “information” when per-
plication of information theory in the other1.
forming a complex task such as juggling balls.
Information theory was invented in response to
A few words on the concept of feedback are in
practical problems faced by the designers of com-
order. Feedback refers to achievinga task, suchas
munication systems such as telephones and data
keepinga cartravellingataconstantspeed, byre-
modems. The basic problem is to find an efficient
peatedly measuring the current state, such as the
way of transmitting informationfrom one place to
car’s speed, and feeding those measurements back
another,whetheritbeaprobesendinginformation
and using them to make the requisite changes at
fromthemoonbacktoearthoramobiletelephone
theinput,suchasapplyingmoreorlesspressureto
sending and receiving voice and internet packets.
theacceleratorofthecar. Feedbackisafundamen-
Indeed, consider the problem of one person trying
tal concept in engineering because it can militate
to send a series of messages to another person on
errors caused by imprecisions and external inter-
theothersideofabrickwall;forsimplicity,assume
ference.
this second person is not allowed to speak or send
The brain too must use feedback to over-
any other form of message to the first person such
come imprecisions (Burdet et al., 2001; Wiener,
as an acknowledgement or request for clarification
1948; Marko, 1967; Todorov and Jordan, 2002;
(or“retransmission”). Howshouldthe firstperson
Burdet et al., 2006; Franklin et al., 2008); with-
send each message?
out feedback, we would fall over whenever we at-
One thing is clear; the louder the first person
tempted to walk. Within the sensory pathways
shouts,thegreaterthechancethatthesecondper-
there are tremendous numbers of feedback paths
son can understand the message over the back-
connecting regions of higher-level brain function
ground noise (perhaps the neighbours are mowing
to regions of lower-level functionality, giving rise
totop-downprocessingtheoriesofthevisualpath- 1Blindly applying the mathematical equations defining
ways and providing a mechanism for selective at- entropyorchannelcapacitydoesnotnecessarilyendowthe
tention. resulting quantities with any meaning or validity; infor-
mation theoretic quantities can be understood only with
Althoughtheystartedoutindifferentdisciplines
respect to the assumptions and limitations of information
— information theory emerged from communica- theory.
their lawns). Perhaps a little harder to appreciate back to normal and in the long run, there is no
but equally true in the digital world, if the first confusing Beethoven for hard rock.
person were to speak more slowly the second per- For the transmission rate to be acceptable the
son would have a greater chance of catching every codebooks would need to contain more than just
word. The third parameter that can be adjusted two messages. (With two messages, each one en-
is the level of redundancy. When we speak with coded by a five-minute song,the transmissionrate
a young child we tend to elaborate and use more would be 1 bit per 5 minutes.) In the same way
words to describe a concept in an attempt to in- thatthetransmissionpowerdoesnotneedtogoto
creasethe chancesofcorrectreceptionofthe over- infinity, the transmission rate need not go to zero.
all message. Precisely,Shannondiscoveredaquantityknownas
In information theory, these parameters are re- the channel capacity. If the transmission rate is
ferred to formally as the transmission power, the less than the channel capacity then communica-
transmission rate and coding (or redundancy). tion with any desired level of accuracy is possible
The simplest form of coding is to repeat the mes- whereas if the transmission rate exceeds the chan-
sage two or more times. This is known as a repe- nel capacity then it becomes impossible to have
tition code. arbitrarily good performance in finite time. As is
to be expected, the channel capacity depends on
Shannon’spioneeringworkshatteredalong-held
the interference. The more destructive the inter-
belief that with finite power it was impossible to
ference the lower the channel capacity.
be able to transmit a message in such a way as
to guarantee its perfect reception even in the pres-
ence of noise and other interference. Indeed, even 1.3 Intra-organism communication
if I shouted at the top of my voice and repeated
Messages are also passed around within an organ-
myself a hundred times, every so often the inter-
ism. Informationgatheredbyanorganism’ssenses
ference (lawn mowers?) will prove too great and
must be communicatedfor it to haveany effect on
my message will be lost.
the organism. Within the brain and nervous sys-
The answer lies in coding; repetition codes are tem, information is manipulated in at least three
notparticularlygoodcodes. Shannonrealisedthat different ways:
thereexistveryclevercodeswhichcanensurethat
any two messages are so different from each other • information acquisition (sensory transduc-
that the receiver can correctly decide which mes- tion);
sagewassentdespitetheinterference. Technically,
• communication between spatially separated
perfectreceptionrequiresthereceivertolistenfor-
regions (information transmission);
ever before deciding which message was sent but
the key point is that given any positive but arbi-
• memory formation and recall (information
trarilysmallprobabilityoferror(suchas one mes-
storage (Varshney et al., 2006)).
sage being incorrectly received in 1012 messages)
thenacodecanbeconstructedwhichachievesthis In brains, each of these are essential for the emer-
level of performance in finite time, and more im- gence of broader functions that might be termed
portantly, the transmission power does not need ‘computation’. Communication is perhaps most
to be increased. Increasing transmission power to fundamental, since information from the senses
achieve a particular error rate is grossly inefficient needs to be communicated in order for it to have
compared with choosing a better code. In the ex- any affect on an organism,while information stor-
ample ofone persontrying to conveya messageto age, whether in computers or brain memories, can
the other person,the secretis to sharea codebook be viewed as communication from the past to the
beforehand,andadifferentsequenceofsounds,one present or future.
for each message that may be sent, is written in Understanding how the brain stores and trans-
it. “It will rain tomorrow” might be encoded as mits information is tantamount to understanding
(a segment of) Beethoven’s 5th symphony while the brain as a whole because if we could “listen
“It will be sunny tomorrow” might be encoded as in” to brain messages it would surely be just a
a hard rock song. These two encoded messages matteroftime beforeweunderstoodthecomputa-
are “sufficiently different from eachother” to have tionalside,too. Thatsaid,the possibility thatthe
very little chance of being confused. More impor- brain does not separate out information transmis-
tantly,anysmallfragmentofthe twomessagesare sion from information processing must be consid-
different. Thisishowinterferenceisovercome. Be- ered. Whereas computer architectures have mech-
cause interference itself has limited power (other- anismsknownasbusesformovinginformationbe-
wisethegamewouldnotbefair!) thenevenifthere tween different processing units, the brain might
aretimeswhentheinterferenceisparticularlybad, take a more efficient distributed approach and si-
there will be other times when the interference is multaneously process and communicate in a non-
separable fashion. It has been stated that “com- In this paper we advocate that information the-
putation in the brain always means that informa- ory 1) can be a useful framework for finding an-
tionismovedfromoneplacetoanother”(Buzs´aki, swers to some of these questions; but 2) must be
2006, p. 116). A comprehensive understanding broadened for its theorems to be directly applica-
of the brain’s mechanisms for internal communi- ble to neuronal networks. Although information
cation will likely form an integral part of more manipulation can happen at very different levels
advanced theories about how ‘computation’ arises of organisation, such as storage of information in
within brain networks. genes, or communication at the level of synaptic
Regardless of how the brain actually processes transmission between cells, or at that of spiking
information, at the end of the day the brain is an patterns of neurons in a network,in this paper we
input-output system (we react to what we sense) will be focusing on examples that involve spiked-
and therefore subject to the same laws as any based communication between neurons.
other input-output system. Information theory is In making these points, it is necessary for us
therefore relevant to understanding how the brain to introduce the most basic and well-known infor-
works, and conversely, it is highly likely that ad- mation theoretic concepts in Section 2, before dis-
vances in the field of information theory will be cussingthechallengesofapplyingthetheorymean-
made in synergy with new discoveries of the com- ingfully to questions in neuroscience in Section 3.
puting paradigmsusedby the brain(Cohen,2004; Then in Section 4 we summarise a specific ex-
Sarpeshkar, 1998; Berger, 2003). Indeed, informa- ample which illustrates that information theoretic
tion theory may have to expand to address new approaches depend critically on different assump-
neurobiologically relevant questions if it is to be tions that could be made about neural systems.
powerful enough to explain all aspects of how the Finally in Section 5 we conclude the paper with
brain manipulates information. someclosingremarksonthematerialwecoverand
To demonstrate the relevance of even simply brieflysummariserecentdevelopmentsoninforma-
thinking in information theoretic terms, Landauer tion theoretic approaches in neuroscience that ex-
estimatedthathumanslearninformationatarate tend well beyond the classical ideas we present,
of about two bits per second (Landauer, 1986)2. thereby with increasing relevance to neurobiologi-
Takingmemorylossintoaccount,apersonwillac- cal systems.
cumulate approximately two billion bits of infor-
mation in a lifetime (or approximately 240MB in
2 The basics and utility of
computingterms). Sinceourbrainhasmanymore
synapsesthantwobillion,Landauerconcludesthat Shannon Information The-
“possiblywe shouldnotbe lookingfor models and
mechanisms that produce storage economies but
ratheronesinwhichmarvelsareproducedbyprof-
This section briefly explains key concepts from
ligate use of capacity.”
Shannon information theory and hints at possible
contributions in neuroscience. By Shannon infor-
1.4 Outline of Paper
mation theory we are referring to a specific sub-
Accordingto Cohen(2004), biologicalscience asks part of the broader field of information theory.
sixkinds ofquestionsaboutdomains rangingfrom The latter, by definition, encompasses any mathe-
molecules and cells, up to the biosphere: matical theorems about information, and therefore
is not confined to well-known concepts introduced
1. How is it built? (Structures)
by Shannon, such as entropy and mutual informa-
tion. As we discuss later, information theory be-
2. How does it work? (Mechanisms)
yond Shannon theory may be very important in
3. What is it for? (Functions) neuroscience.
Shannon’smilestonepaper(Shannon,1948)that
4. What goes wrong? (Pathologies)
founded the field of information theory showed to
5. How is it fixed? (Repairs) theworldthatintroducingtherightkindofredun-
dancywasthekeytomovinginformationfromone
6. How did it begin? (Origins)
place to another in an efficient and reliable man-
Utilising information theory in neuroscience is ul- ner. Sinceinformationsourcessuchasspokenvoice
timately useful only if it can address one or more or PDF (portable document format) documents
of these questions. generally contain the wrong kind of redundant in-
formation, Shannon proposed a two-step process:
2To put this in perspective, a digital camera typically first remove the existing redundancy by compress-
storesasinglephotousingaround10,000,000 bits. Clearly
ingthemessagetobesent,thenintroducetheright
then, we extract only a very small amount of information
fromwhatoursensesreceive. kindofredundancyforcommunicatingthemessage
through the channel at hand. These two impor- messages. How then does a computer compress a
tant concepts are known as “source coding” and file losslessly?
“channelcoding” respectively. They motivate sev-
The secret is that there is often redundancy in
eral fundamental questions including determining the kinds ofinformationthatpeople areinterested
the maximum amount of compression possible of in. Equivalently,itisgenerallythecasethatnotall
aninformationsource. Answersto these questions messages have an equal chance of occurring. For
are given in terms of quantities such as entropy argument’s sake, assume that out of the 256 pos-
and mutual information. It is important to re-
sible messages, there are 15 messages which occur
alisethatthesequantitiesweregivenspecialnames mostofthetime. Toexploitthis,wemaydecideto
because they serve to answer important questions use4bitstorepresenteachofthesemessages. Pre-
for a particular class of problems. It would be a cisely, “0000” would represent the first message,
mistake to assume without additional justification “0001”thesecond,upto“1110”forthe15thmes-
thattheyareapplicableorevenmeaningfulbeyond sage. To represent any other message, we would
theboundsoftheoriginalquestionsforwhichthey first write down “1111” to mean “not one of the
serve as the answers to. See e.g. Johnson (2008) 15” and then we would write down the original
for more discussion.
message using 8 bits. This means that 15 of the
messages can be written down using only 4 bits
but the remaining 256−15 = 241 messages now
2.1 Entropy and Source Coding
require 4+8=12 bits for their storage.
Living in the digital age, readers will be famil- The only way to make this meaningful is to
iar with compressing files. Zipping up a file to consider repeating this compressionexercise many
send to a friend is an example of lossless compres- times. IfwehadtostoreaverylargenumberN of
sion. Generally (but not always) the compressed 8-bit messages using this scheme, how many bits
file will be smaller than the original yet no infor- will be required? Assume that K out of the N
mation has been lost; the friend can recover the messages belong to the set of 15 special messages.
original file by decompressing the compressed file TheseK messagesrequire4bits whilethe remain-
(Fig. 1). For compressing music or photos, signifi- ing N −K messages require 12 bits, or in total,
cantly greater compression can be achieved by us- 4K+12(N −K) bits are required compared with
inglossycompressionalgorithmssuchasMP3and 8N bitshadwenotcompressedthemessages. Pro-
JPEG. As the name suggests, some information is videdK issufficientlylarge,wewillhavesucceeded
lost (Berger and Gibson, 1998). The original can in compressing the data. For example, if K =750
berecoveredsufficientlywellforasatisfactorycom- and N = 1000 then we would require only 6,000
promise to have been reached; a small amount of bits rather than the original 8,000 bits.
quality is sacrificed for a large saving in storage
The conventionalwayto describe the abovesce-
space.
nario is to work with probabilities. We assume
that the messages we are being asked to compress
X Compression C Decompression X˜
arebeinggeneratedatrandomandthereisnocor-
relation between the message we are being asked
Figure 1: Source Coding. to compress now and the messages we have al-
ready compressed. Mathematically, we represent
The remainder of this section discusses lossless the original sequence of messages by a sequence
compression only. Consider the problem of com- of independent andidentically distributed random
pressing a short message of length 8 bits. A bit variables {x ,x ,···}, each having a probability
is simply a “0” or a “1” so an 8-bit message densityp(X). Intheaboveexample,eachx would
is a sequence of eight zeros and ones, such as be an8-bitmessage(orequivalently,a numberbe-
“01011101”or “10101010”3. A calculation (or by tween 0 and 255 inclusive) and p(X) would be the
writing out all the possibilities if need be, starting probability that a particular message X is cho-
with “00000000”,“00000001”and continuing un- sen. For concreteness, assume that each of the
til “11111111”)showsthat there are precisely 256 first fifteen messages have a 5% chance of occur-
different 8-bit messages. Compressing a message rence (meaning there is a 75% chance of a ran-
would mean using fewer than 8 bits to store the domly chosen message being one of these 15 and
message. A simple enumeration shows that this is thereby corresponding with the earlier choice of
impossible as stated; there are only 128 7-bit mes- K = 750 and N = 1000 ). Then p(00000000) =
sages, not enough to represent all possible 8-bit p(00000001) = ··· = p(00001110) = 0.05. We
assume that all other messageseachhavea proba-
3Of course, any other alphabet could have been used. bilityof0.25/(256−15)ofoccurring. Theexpected
An 8-character message consisting of a string of 8 letters
number of bits required to compress a single mes-
of the alphabet might look like “abzpuikq” and the same
reasoningwouldapply. sagecanthenbe calculatedbysumming overithe
probabilitythattheithmessageoccursmultiplied likely zeros and ones cannot be compressed. Note
bythenumberofbitsrequiredtorepresenttheith also that if p=0, 0log 0=0.
message. When most of the probabilities are the Shannon’s source coding theorem states that (in
same the calculation simplifies. With the values the limit as the number of symbols goes to infin-
given above, the expected length is calculated to ity)itispossible tocompresseachsymboltoH(X)
be15×0.05×4+(256−15)× 0.25 ×12=6. Thus, bits on average (and impossible to do better). It
onaverage,6N bitswouldberequiredtocompress does not however say how to design such a source
N messages drawn at random if the above scheme code. Furthermore, the practical construction of
were used. compression and decompression methods is com-
Isthere abetter compressionscheme,one which plicatedby considerationsofalgorithmicefficiency
requiresfewerthan6 bitsper messageonaverage? (which affects battery life in portable equipment
In fact, what is the best possible? As elucidated such as mobile telephones) and latency (how long
presently, Shannon was able to answer these ques- the receiver must wait from the time a symbol is
tions. First though, a technicality needs mention- sent until that symbol can be received and de-
ing. coded). That said, having a target to aim for is
Coding each message separately, as was done extremely useful and entropy provides that target
above, is inefficient. It is better to concatenate a for source compression.
series of messages and compress them all at once; The reader may wish to verify that for the ex-
thisprovidesmoreopportunityforbettercompres- ampleintroducedinthissection,thecorresponding
sion through the simple fact that there are more entropyis5.72bitspersymbol. Thisrepresentsthe
compression schemes to choose from. (It also alle- best any compressionscheme can hope to achieve,
viatesthewastedspacecausedbyotherwisehaving and indeed, it is lower than the 6 bits per symbol
to use an integer number of bits to represent each scheme presented here.
It is therefore quite standard to refer to each
2.2 Mutual Information, Channel
x as a symbol rather than a message and ask
Capacity and Channel Coding
how many bits per symbol on average must be
used to compress the infinitely long sequence of
Thefollowingexampleofabinarysymmetricchan-
independent and identically distributed symbols
nel will be used to add concreteness to the ensu-
{x ,x ,···} if eachsymbolhas a probabilityp(X)
1 2 ing introduction of mutual information and chan-
of occurring4.
nel capacity. Let {s ,s ,···} denote a binary se-
When X is a random variable and its distribu-
quence which is to be transmitted to another per-
tion is p(X), its entropy is defined as
sonordevice. Itiscalledthesourcesequence. The
mediumthroughwhichamessagecanbesentfrom
p(X) one personor device to another is called the chan-
nel. Mathematically, a channel takes a sequence
where E [·] denotes the expectation with re-
p(X) at its input and it generates another sequence at
spect to p(X). The practical operation is a sum-
its output. If the channelwereideal,it wouldsim-
mationwhenX isdiscreteandanintegrationwhen
ply copy its input to its output and communica-
X is continuous. When 2 is the base of logarithm,
tion would be straightforward. Generally though,
i.e. log , the units of entropy are bits and H(X)
2 the channel is not ideal. It introduces random er-
ispreciselythenumberofbitspersymbolrequired
rors. If{x }isthebinaryinputsequence(whichis
onaverageto compress aninfinitely long sequence
shorthand notation for {x ,x ,···}) then the bi-
ofsymbolswheneachsymbolhasprobabilityp(X)
nary output sequence {x˜ } of a binary symmetric
of occurring.
channel with error probability p is given by the
It is for this reason that people endeavour to
rules that 1) for each integer i, the output x˜ at
explain entropy as quantifying the “ambiguity”
time i depends only onthe correspondinginput x
or “uncertainty” about the random variable X.
at the same time i; and 2) the probability that x˜
When X has only one possible state (that must
differs from x is p. If p=0.1 then on averageone
thereforeoccurwithprobability1),thereisnoam-
in every ten symbols will be corrupted, meaning
biguity about X and the entropy is 0. However if
either a 0 was sent and a 1 was received, or a 1
X takes one of two states with probability p and
was sent and a 0 was received.
1−p, respectively, (0 ≤ p ≤ 1), entropy is max-
What sequence {x } should be sent over the
imised when p = 0.5 and H(X) = log 2. This is
2 channelif the ultimate aimis to send {s i } reliably
exactly1bitandimpliesthatasequenceofequally
tothereceiver,assumingofcoursethatthereceiver
can process the output {x˜ } of the channel before
4It is traditional in probability theory to use an upper i
decidingwhatitbelievesthemessage{s }is? This
case letter to represent the random variable while the cor- i
respondinglowercaseletter representsrealisedvalues. is illustrated in Fig. 2 where the operation of gen-
erating{x }from{s }iscalled(channel)encoding tion was that there is a much better way of in-
andtheoperationofgenerating{s˜},thereceiver’s creasing the chance of correct reception than by
best guess at the originalmessage,is called (chan- decreasing the rate towards zero. For a fixed rate
nel) decoding. R, the block size K can be increased (thereby in-
creasing N according to the formula N = KR ).
S Encoding X This allows a more sophisticated form of redun-
dancy to be introduced (but at the price of intro-
NoisyChannel ducing greater latency; the receiver must receive
N symbols before it can work out what the corre-
X˜ Decoding S˜
sponding K message symbols were).
ShannonprovedthatthereexistsarateC,called
Figure 2: Channel Coding.
the channel capacity, such that for any rate R
strictlylessthanC andanydesirederrorrateǫ>0
For simplicity, often the encoding and decod-
(meaningthattheprobabilitythatthereceiverde-
ing processes work on blocks of data. Precisely,
codes a bit incorrectly is less than ǫ, which might
the original source sequence S is divided up into
be chosen to be ǫ = 10−9 or smaller in practice),
subsequences of length K. Each of these is en-
there exists a K (possibly quite large)and a block
coded to a longer binary sequence X with length
encoder and decoder pair such that the receiver
N. For example, a simple K = 2, N = 3 block
can correctly decode each bit of the source mes-
code would be to add a parity bit (i.e. a bit that
sage with error probability less than ǫ. This is
is zero when the sequence has an even number of
customarily summarised by saying that error-free
zeros, and a one when an odd number) after ev-
communicationispossibleatratesbelowthechan-
ery two symbols, so: “00” becomes “000”; “01”
nel capacity5.
becomes“011”; “10”becomes “101”and“11”be-
Shannon was able to give a formula for comput-
comes “110.” Therefore, the sequence “0111” be-
comes“011110”wherethe3rdand6thbitsarethe ing the channel capacity C. When this formula
(described below) is applied to the above exam-
introduced parity bits.
ple of a binary symmetric channel with probabil-
This coded sequence is transmitted through the
ity of error p, the channel capacity is found to be
channel. At the other end, the receiver reverses
C =1+plog p+(1−p)log (1−p), meaning for
the process, converting each block of N symbols 2 2
examplethatifthechannelcantransferonebitper
back into a block of K symbols. In this particular
secondthen the source symbolsmust arriveslower
case, introducing just a single parity bit does not
than C bits per second. If p=0.1 then C =0.531
allow the receiver to have a better guess at what
meaning that for every 1,000 source symbols, just
the original message is, but it does allow the re-
over 1,883 encoded symbols are required for reli-
ceiver to detect if a single bit has been changed.
able communications.
This is called error detection. Error correction,
The formula for channel capacity involves a
when the receiver is not only able to detect an er-
quantity called mutual information. Intuitively,
rorhasoccurredbutcanfixtheerrorandtherefore
themutualinformationoftheinputandtheoutput
recoverthe originalmessage,requires more redun-
ofthechannelmeasureshowmuchinformationthe
dancy to be introduced, that is, choosing N to be
outputprovidesaboutthe input; the morereliable
larger than K +1. (If there are too many errors
the channel the higher the mutual information. It
then error correctionwould fail, but the key point
isthereforereasonabletoexpectthatthelargerthe
isthattheprobabilitythatseveralconsecutivebits
mutualinformationthe greaterthe channelcapac-
arewrongissignificantlysmallerthanifasinglebit
ity.
were wrong, therefore a small increase in redun-
Bearing in mind that “information” is a very
dancy allows a substantial increase in reliability.)
generalwordanditisthereforenotpossibletocap-
The two lengths K and N together define the
ture all its nuances in a single mathematical defi-
“rate” of the code, which perhaps is better un-
nition, it is expedient to return to the idea in the
derstood as measuring the decrease in throughput
previous section of using asymptotic compressibil-
caused by the introduction of redundancy by the
ity as a measure of information. It turns out that
encoder. Precisely, in the above example, the rate
this is the right definition to use when it comes
ofthecodeisR=K/N,meaningthatifthechan-
to determining the capacityofa channel(which in
nel can accept encoded symbols at a rate of 1 bit
itself is an asymptotic measure).
per second then the source symbols must have a
rate of only R bits per second. Suppose there are two random variables, X and
Reducing the rate enables more redundancy to
be introduced which can be used to increase the
5Shannonalsoprovedtheconverse,thatnoscheme(even
non-block-based coding schemes) can achieve arbitrarily
chanceofthe receiverbeing ableto workoutwhat
small error rates if their rate is greater than or equal to
message was sent. Shannon’s remarkable observa- C.
Y, and they are somehow related to each other. takingthevalue1withprobabilityθ andthevalue
For example, X might denote temperature while 0 with probability 1−θ.
Y denotes humidity. Even simpler, X might rep- AlthoughwemusthavethechannelinputX rep-
resent the outcome of rolling a 6-sided die while resent the source message S in some way, there
Y is giventhe value 0 if the die landed on an even is otherwise arbitrary freedom in how to choose
number,or1ifodd. KnowingY givespartialinfor- X. Why not choose X to maximise the mutual
mation about X; how can we measure how much information? The largest value H(q) can take is
information Y tells us about X? 1 (which occurs when q = 1/2 ). Therefore, the
The fact that Y gives partial information about largestnumberofbitswecaneverexpecttotrans-
X isreflectedinthefactthatifY isknownthenX mitreliablythroughthebinarysymmetricchannel
canbecompressedmorethanifY werenotknown. is 1−H(p) bits per usage of channel. If p = 0.1
In the above example, if Y were not known then then 1−H(p) = 0.469. In this case, at most ev-
it is impossible to compressX because eachof the ery 0.469 bits of the source message must be ex-
outcomesisequallylikely;weareforcedtouseone panded to 1 bit (since the channel transmits 1 bit
ofsixpossiblesymbols(orlog 6bits)tostoreeach per usage), or in other words, we must have the
sample of X; the entropy of X is H(X) = log 6. rate of the code (see above) satisfy K/N < 0.469.
IfY is knownthoughthen only one ofthree possi- Remarkably, Shannon proved that this bound is
ble symbols (or log 3 bits) needs to be stored;the achievable;whenevertherateislessthanthemax-
average conditional entropy is H(X|Y) = log 3. imum of the mutual information, (as close as you
The additional amount of compression possible, like to) error-free communication is possible7.
I(X;Y) = H(X)−H(X|Y), is called the mutual It is of interest to note that while here we have
information and measures the amount of informa- considered an example where X is a discrete ran-
tionY providesaboutX. Itturnsoutthatmutual dom variable, the most well knowncase of a chan-
information is symmetric — I(X;Y) = I(Y;X) nelforwhichthecapacityachievinginputdistribu-
—hence thereisno needto specify theorderofX tionisknown,istheadditiveGaussiannoisechan-
and Y. In the above example, if X is known then nel, with a power constraint on the input. In this
Y is known, therefore no additional bits are re- case,thecapacityachievinginputdistributionisin
quired to store Y if X is known: H(Y|X) = 0. fact continuous, i.e. a Gaussian distribution. As
Since H(Y) = log 3 it is indeed the case that we discuss later though, it is far more common for
I(Y;X)=H(Y)−H(Y|X)=log 3=I(X;Y)6. the capacity achieving input to be discrete.
Returning to the channel capacity calculation, We now summarise and precisely define the im-
assume that a sequence generated by X is sent portant information theoretic terms that we have
through the channel. The output sequence is it- introduced and discussed above without stating
self generated by a random variable, call it Y. If their formal definitions. Each of these are defined
the receiver wants to recover X, it needs at least mathematically as follows. We already introduced
anextraH(X|Y)bitsofinformation(forotherwise entropy, in Eqn. (3). The average conditional en-
there would be an even more efficient scheme for tropy requires a double expectation:
compressing X than the best possible, a contra-
diction). Lookingatitfromanotheranglethough, H(Y|X)=−E p(X) E p(Y|x) [logp(y|x)] . (2)
thisimpliesthatI(X;Y)=H(X)−H(X|Y)bitsof (cid:2) (cid:3)
information have somehow been transmitted suc- Asanaidtointuition,considerasingleoutcomeof
the randomvariable X. The entropyof Y givenX
cessfully with each use of the channel (since with
anextra H(X|Y) bits of carefully choseninforma- canbe calculatedfrom Eqn.(2) by calculating the
tion it is theoretically possible to recover X). For expectation with respect to the conditional distri-
bution ofY givenX =x . If this is carriedout for
thecaseofthebinarysymmetricchannelwitherror
allpossible outcomesof X,the resultis a function
probability p, a reasonably straightforward calcu-
of x. This function can then be averaged with re-
lation shows that if the input X takes the value 1
specttothedistributionofx,andbydefinition,the
withprobabilityq andthevalue0withprobability
resultis the averageconditionalentropy, H(Y|X).
1−q then the mutual information of the input X
andthe outputY isI(X;Y)=H(q)−H(p)where Asmentionedabove,themutualinformationcan
ber of bits requiredto compressa binary sequence H(Y)−H(Y|X) . In what follows below we write
mutual information in a different form based on
6Thereasonforthissymmetryisthatifweweretocom- another entity called relative entropy or Kullback-
press X first then compress Y, or if we were to compress
Y first then compress X, we end up either way with hav- 7NotethatShannonproved“itisachievable”inthelimit
ing compressed optimally the joint sequence generated by when N and K goes to infinity, but did not show “how to
X andY. Mathematically, H(X,Y)=H(X)+H(Y|X)= achieveit.” Inordertobeclosetothebound,wegenerally
H(Y)+H(X|Y) from which it follows immediately that need a good error correction code and N and K must be
I(X;Y)=I(Y;X). verylarge.
Leibler divergence. This is defined as primarily flowing in one direction. Considerably
extra care must be taken when feedback loops are
D(p(X)||q(X))=E log , present. This is especially the case because (in ex-
q(x)(cid:21) periments) we have control over the input signal
itself and hence can investigate how a known sig-
where p(X) and q(X) are two distributions of the
nal is communicated from one neuron to another.
same random variable X. Note that the relative
The complicationthoughis that it appearsthe in-
entropy is positive and is equal to 0 if p(X) is
formationis being processedatthe same time itis
identical to q(X). Mutual information is defined
being communicated.
as the relative entropy between the joint distribu-
The brain heavily compressesthe information it
tion of X and Y, and the product of the marginal
receives from its sensory systems. Since the en-
distributions of X and Y:
tropy of a signal determines precisely how much
I(X;Y)=D(P(X,Y)||P(X)P(Y)) (lossless)compressionispossible,itsetsfundamen-
p(x,y) (3) tal limits which must be respected by any system,
=E log .
p(X,Y)(cid:20)
including biologicalsystems. It is no surprise then
that the estimation of entropy of neural signals
It is straightforward using p(x,y) = p(y|x)p(x) = based on experimental data is an active research
p(x|y)p(y)toobtaintheabovestatedrelationships area (Borst and Theunissen, 1999; Panzeri et al.,
betweenmutualinformationandentropy. Thedef- 2007; Vu et al., 2009).
initions as written here hold for both discrete and In the brain, neurons communicate with each
continuous distributions of X and Y. In this sec- other and transfer information. The primary
tionwehaveconsideredonlyasimplediscretecase, means of communication are the spikes of each
where X and Y are both binary. In general they neuron (Rieke et al., 1997), and it is parsimo-
can have any number of states, or be continuous, nious to model their occurrences as depending
asis the case below. In full generality,the channel randomly on the neuron’s input (Poggio, 1964;
capacity is defined as Mainen and Sejnowski,1995). Thus,neuronscom-
municate through a noisy channel, and mutual in-
C = sup I(X;Y).
formation should therefore play an important role
in understanding the nervous system and brain
In order to consider a neuron as a communica-
3 Challenges of Utilising In-
tionchannel,weneedtoconsiderwhatwemeanby
formation Theory in Neuro- “communication”inthespecificcontextofbiologi-
cal neurons. There are severalimportant concepts
toconsiderbeforewecanbegintodiscussaspecific
exampleoftheapplicationofinformationtheoryin
Inthissection,someofthechallengesofintegrating
neuroscience.
information theory into neuroscience are touched
upon. In particular, we must make assumptions
aboutthe wayin which informationis represented 3.1 Communication Channels and
inthebrain,whereasinengineeringthisisspecified Modulation
by the designer. Ultimately it will be necessary to
extendthefrontiersofinformationtheoryifitisto A definition of communication requires the exis-
encompass in its entirety the information process- tenceofaphysicalmediumthatallowspropagation
ing techniques of neuronal networks. Such an ex- of energy from one place (an “energy source”) to
pansion would involve in part the greater integra- another place where that energy has some causal
tionintoinformationtheoryofsystemsandcontrol effect(an“energysink”)8. Wealsoneedtodefinea
theory from engineering and the theory of com- meansbywhichsomepropertyofthesourcecanbe
putation from mathematics. Whereas engineers altered in a way that results in an observable dif-
aimtokeepseparatecommunicationcircuitryfrom ference at the sink after propagation through the
computation circuitry so as to simplify the design channel. In communications engineering theory,
andanalysisofengineeredsystems,thereisnorea- the energy propagation is called “transmission,”
sonwhynatureshouldmaintainsuchaseparation. the source is known as a “transmitter” and the
Evolution tends to find efficient designs and not sink as a “receiver.” These concepts are not suf-
necessarily “simple” designs. ficient for communication. There also needs to be
It would be counter-productive though to as- an“informationsource”thatisinitiallyobservable
sume that information theory in its current form
couldnotbeappliedusefullyincomputationalneu- 8Communication can also take place from the past to
the future, in a fixed location, such as when writing to a
roscience. One place it is immediately applicable
memory device then reading it back again at a later date,
is the earlysensorypathwayswhereinformationis butherewefocusonplace-to-placecommunication.
at the transmitter’s location, but not at the re- spikes. Typicalcorticalneuronstransmit spikesto
ceiver’s. Communication requires the transmitter manyotherneurons,andreceivespikesfrommany
to alter the energy source in a manner that re- neurons.
flects the information source, and that can subse- Whilethereareanumberofdifferent“communi-
quently be observed at the receiver after propaga- cationchannels”inneuronalcircuitry—including
tion. This conversion from information source to segments of the dendritic tree which carry post-
energy source is known as “modulation.” synapticpotentialstowardsthesomaofthecell—
Afamiliarexamplewhereeachoftheseconcepts we choose to focus on action potentials because it
is readily identified is analog AM or FM radio isoneofthemostimportantcommunicationmech-
transmission, in which recorded sound signals are anisms between two neurons.
communicated,andthenreproducedviaaspeaker. Theotherconceptwemustalsoattempttoiden-
In this example, the transmission medium can be tify is the way in which spikes are coded (modu-
a vacuum9 or air, the propagating energy source lated) in order to communicate information. Two
is electromagnetic radiation, and the transmitter possibilities are the height and the width of each
modulates the electromagnetic waves in a manner spike. However, these are observed to be close to
thatreflectsthe recordedsoundsignal. AMis am- identical in most cases, and do not seem to be in-
plitude modulation, and means that a single fre- formation carrying parameters. Instead, it is the
quency sinusoidal wave of E-M (electromagnetic) interval between spikes (ISI: inter-spike interval)
radiationhasitsamplitudechangedovertime. FM that is thoughtto play animportant rolein carry-
is frequency modulation, which means the ampli- ing information through a neuronal channel.
tude remains constant, while the carrierfrequency Given this, how do ISIs represent information?
is changed over time. In neuroscience there are mainly two different
ideas. Oneidea isthatthe ISI itself(see forexam-
ple MacKay and McCulloch (1952)) carries infor-
3.2 Neuronal Spikes and Spike In-
mation. Thisiscalled“temporalcoding”(Fig.3a).
terval Coding
The other is that the number of spikes in a
fixed time interval (see Stein (1967); Lansky et al.
Modulation of the energy source can be thought
(2004)) carries information. This is called “rate
of as a code, since it requires a conversion from
coding” (Fig. 3b).
one kind of informationrepresentationto another.
Indeed, in neuroscience, modulation has a more
generalmeaningthanincommunicationsengineer-
timeinterval(∆msec)
ing,andtheconversionfromaninformationsource
to variations in a parameter of the energy source t(spikeinterval)
time r(numberofspikes) time
is instead known as a “code.” This is largely in (a)Temporalcoding. (b)Ratecoding.
contrast with communications engineering, where
Figure 3: Two forms of spike codes.
“code” instead refers to conversionbetween differ-
entrepresentationsofthe informationsourceprior
So far we have only stated that an input can be
to transmissionat the source, for example “source
communicated to a receiver output. If this is a
coding” and “error correction coding.”
perfectly repeatable process, the rate at which in-
If we wish to consider communication between
formation can be transmitted depends on the rate
neurons, we need to identify the transmission
at which the input is updated, and — in line with
medium, the form of energy propagation, and a
Section2—alsodependsontheprobabilitydistri-
modulation mechanism. From now on we will use
bution of the input, via its entropy. The transmis-
neuroscience terminology, and refer to modulation
sionisusuallynotperfect,andnoiseisintroduced.
as the “code.” Further, we will refer to the infor-
This fact leads us to consider the information the-
mation source as the “input,” and the observable
oretic concepts ofmutual informationand channel
effectatthe receiverthatresultsfromthe inputas
capacity.
the “output.”
Information theory is not concerned with the
Althoughoverlongertimescalestheplasticityof
typeofmodulation. Itrequiresanabstractionthat
neurons can encode/carry information, in shorter
specifies only what the observable output variable
time scales the primary physical medium for com-
shouldbe. Sincewearenotdesigningasystem,we
munication seems to be the axons of neurons, and
mustmakesomeguessesaboutaspectsoftheinput
theenergypropagationisapulse-likewaveofvolt-
andoutputforaneuronalcommunicationchannel,
age that travels along an axon where it may be
and then proceed to calculations of mutual infor-
received by other neurons at synaptic junctions.
mation.
These pulses are known as action potentials, or
Therefore, in Section 4 where we consider the
9Vacuum is thought of a transmissionmedium for elec- channelcapacityofaneuronmodel,wenecessarily
tromagneticwaves. beginbyspecificallydefiningthe inputandoutput
of the channel, and state a model for the channel Due to refractoriness, a neuron cannot fire too
noise. fast; therefore the ISI cannot be 0 but must be
largerthanafew milliseconds. Onthe otherhand,
if the ISI is too large, it means the neuron is not
4 Example: Channel Capac-
working. Thus we assume the input to the neuron
ity of a Neuron istryingtocontrolthe ISIinafixedrangeoftime.
The average ISI, which depends on θ and κ, is
limited between a and b , that is,
Inthissectionwepresentsomeofourresultsonthe 0 0
channel capacity for simple neuron models. One
a ≤ T =κθ ≤b , where 0<a <b <∞.
reason for providing this example, is to illustrate 0 0 0 0
that there is no simple single formula for channel
capacity, and hence assumptions about the under-
b /κ}.
lying model are very important. If these assump-
tions change, the channel capacity also changes.
4.2 Channel Capacity of a Single
As we have seen, channel capacity is the max-
imum amount of information that can be trans- Neuron
ferred through a noisy channel in a unit time. It
For a noisy channel, one important fundamental
may be much larger than the actual information
problem is to compute the capacity C. Another
transmissionrate. Thisbringsustoanaturalques-
problem is to obtain the capacity achieving distri-
tion,thatis,whydoweneedtoknowthecapacity?
bution.
Channel capacity is something similar to the
The family of all the possible distributions π(θ)
maximum speed indicated in the speedometer of
of inputs P is defined as
an automobile. While you will likely never drive
with that speed, the maximum speed is useful be-
cause it tells you the potential of the automobile,
n (cid:12) o
eventhoughyoudrivewithmoderatespeed. Chan- (cid:12)
The mutual informationand the capacity depends
nel capacity provides not only the upper limit of
on the choice of an output variable. This is
thepossibleinformationtransmissionrate,butalso
called“coding”incomputationalneuroscience,but
describes how good the channel is.
“modulation” is an appropriate term in informa-
Although there is much interest in the quantity
tion theory. Traditionally, two types of modula-
in neurophysiology (Borst and Theunissen, 1999),
tionshavebeenconsideredincomputationalneuro-
theoretical work is rare (MacKay and McCulloch,
science. Oneis“temporalcoding”andtheotheris
1952; Stein, 1967; Johnson, 2010;
“rate coding” (see Fig. 3). Note that both tempo-
Suksompong and Berger,2010). Wehaveobtained
ral and rate coding may be used in the brain. For
some interesting results on the capacity from two
example, binaural sound localisation needs phase
different viewpoints. The details will be given be-
information and temporal coding seems natural
low.
whileratecodingisappropriateforamotorneuron
because muscles react according to the rate.
4.1 Inputs and Noise of Channel We providesome resultsonthe capacityoftem-
poral and rate coding in the following.
We consider here a single spiking neuron, and as-
sume that the input to the neuron controls the
Temporal Coding
expectation of the neuron’s output ISIs. Using
theterminologyintroducedabove,theinformation In temporal coding, the received information is T.
source modulates the ISI. We introduce channel For a π ∈ P, we define the marginal distribution
noise to the picture by assuming that the ISI is a as
gamma-distributed random variable, when the in-
put to the neuron remains constant. p(t;π,κ)=E [p(t|θ;κ)].
Biologically,eachcorticalneuronreceivesinputs
from a lot of (pre-synaptic) neurons and each sen- The mutual information between T and Θ is de-
sory neuron receives physical stimuli. The above fined as
assumptionistomodelalltheinputstotheneuron
asasingleparameterθ. Althoughthisassumption I(Θ;T)=E E log .
may seem too simple, θ is a time varying function
and is able to represent a a lot of possible func-
The capacity per spike is defined as
tions. Inthe gamma ISI model, the expectation of
the ISI is given by κθ. Because κ is fixed, θ is the C = supI(Θ;T).
input to the neuron. π∈P
00 10 20 30 40 50
expected time interval [msec]
ytilibaborp
00 10 20 30 40 50
expected time interval [msec]
(a)Temporalcoding(κ=3).
ytilibaborp
This optimisation problem cannot be solved
analytically either, but the capacity C has
been proven to be achievable by a discrete
distribution with a finite number of mass
points(Ikeda and Manton,2009). Figure4bshows
(b)Ratecoding(κ=3). the capacity achieving distribution for κ = 3.
The channel capacity C is 44.95 bits per second
Figure4: Capacityachievingdistributionsfortem-
(See Ikeda and Manton(2009)for further results).
poral and rate coding. For both coding types, the
optimalinput distribution is discrete, with a finite
number of probability mass points. 4.3 Tuning Curves
The definition of channel capacity requires a max-
This optimisation problem cannot be solved an- imisation overallpossible input probability distri-
alytically. However, it has been proven that butions. This definition arose in an engineering
the capacity C T is achieved by a discrete dis- context, where a system designer is assumed to
tribution with a finite number of mass points havecontrolovertheinputstothechannel,butnot
(see Ikeda and Manton (2009) for the details). the channel itself. A different optimisation prob-
Since the optimal distribution is a discrete dis- lemresultsiftheinputtothechannelisassumedto
tribution with a finite number of mass points, the be fixed, but some controloverthe channel is pos-
optimisation problem becomes simple, and we can sible. This idea is particularly relevant for studies
compute the capacity and the capacity achieving ofbiologicalsensorytransduction. In this context,
distribution numerically. Figure 4a shows the ca- an external stimulus that cannot be controlled by
pacityachievingprobabilitydistributionforκ=3. the sensing organism must be transduced and en-
The channel capacity C T is 34.68bps (bit ber sec- coded into action potentials for communication to
ond)(See Ikeda and Manton(2009) for further re- the brain. This stimulus can be thought of as an
sults). input to a communication channel.
Figure 4a shows that the capacity is achieved Given internal noise in the transduction mecha-
when the input is a discrete memoryless distribu- nisms, the encoded stimulus received by the brain
tion10 with 3 states. This does not imply that the is also noisy. Since we introduced mutual infor-
brain is using discrete states. It is more plausi- mation in the context of the channel coding the-
ble that the brain is using continuous states; it is orem and digital data, and here our channel in-
likelythattheactualinformationtransmissionrate put isasensorystimulus,mutualinformationmay
in the brainis less than the numerically computed not seem relevant. However there are other rea-
capacity. sons why it can be useful to ensure mutual in-
formation is as large as possible (Berger, 2003;
Rate Coding Johnson and Goodman,2008)andwethereforeare
interested in how the channel might be altered to
In rate coding, a time window is set and the num-
maximise mutual information.
ber of spikes in this interval is counted. Let us
But what can be optimised when the stimulus
denote the interval and the rate as ∆ and R,
cannotbecontrolled? Theonlyothervariablethat
respectively, and define the distribution of R as
canalterthemutualinformationistheconditional
p(r|θ;κ,∆). The form of the distribution of R is
distribution of the channel output given its input.
showninIkeda and Manton(2009). Forπ ∈P,let
In the biological context this is the distribution of
us define the following marginal distribution
a neuralresponseforagivenstimulus. Optimising
this distribution means seeking to find the com-
munication channel that it best suited to a fixed
The mutual information of R and θ is defined as stimulus distribution. Without some constraints
on the form of the conditional distribution, this
p(r|θ;κ,∆)
I(Θ;R)=E E log . would not be a meaningful task. One such con-
h p(r;π,κ,∆) i(cid:21) straint is to consider a fixed form for the condi-
tional distribution that has some parameters that
Hence,thecapacityperchanneluseorequivalently
can be optimised. Clearly the optimal parameter
per ∆ is defined as
set may change for different input distributions.
One reasonforconsideringsuchanoptimisation
C = supI(Θ;R).
π∈P might be to assess whether neuronal mechanisms
exist for adaptively altering the conditional distri-
10Theinputischosenfromthethreestatesindependently
bution to match non-stationary stimuli. Another
ateachtimeaccordingtotheprobabilitydistributionshown
inFig.4a. equally intriguing reason is the idea that evolu-
tion might have enabled neural systems to change these expectations as
parameters over eons with the end result that
those parametersareinformationtheoretically op- E p(T|x;κ) [t]=κf(x)
timal. In this scenario, the underlying fixed form
of the probability distribution must be what it is and
due to unavoidable constraints, or perhaps gov-
erned by criteria that are not information theo- E [r]= .
p(R|x;κ,∆)
retic, e.g. energy considerations (Laughlin et al.,
1998; Sarpeshkar, 1998; Levy and Baxter, 2002;
Since Θ=f(X), when the capacity achieving dis-
Laughlin and Sejnowski, 2003; Berger and Levy,
tribution for Θ is discrete with say M states, the
2010).
tuning curve will also consist of M unique values.
There are several potentially important sets of Lets call these µ ,..,µ . While this discontinuous
parameters that might be chosen. However, in tuning curve achieves the largest possible mutual
other contexts there has been much interest in informationforthe channel,itisnotunique; other
determining the optimal form of neuronal tuning tuning curves are equally good. Suppose X is a
curves, and this is our sole focus here. Experi- continuous random variable, and that the tuning
mentally produced tuning curves are plots of the curve maps large intervals of X to the same M
mean response of a neural system, as a function values µ , ..., µ . This tuning curve providesthe
ofastimulusparameter(Dayan and Abbott,2001; same M possibilities for the conditional expected
Lansky et al.,2008;McDonnell and Stocks,2008). ISI. In order for it to provide the same mutual in-
Classic examples of a stimulus parameter include formation achieved by the original discrete capac-
the angle of a moving bar of light relative to the ity achieving distribution, it is necessary that the
receptive field of visual cells, or the sound pres- probabilitywithwhicheachµ occursis the same
sure level of a single frequency (pure tone) sound inbothcases. Ithasbeenprovenforaspecialcase
played by a speaker. In these examples the av- of the gamma distribution and rate coding that
erage response as a function of the stimulus de- this can be achieved by appropriate choice for the
fines the tuning curve. The former kind of tun- ranges of X that are mapped to each µ . The
ing curve typically has a bell-shape, meaning that resulting optimal discrete tuning curve is then de-
there is a stimulus that produces a maximal re- pendent only on the probability density function
sponse,while more than one stimulus canproduce of X (Nikitin et al., 2009).
the same lesser response. The latter kind has a
Consequently, the capacity achieving input dis-
sigmoidalshape,meaningthatthemeanfiringrate
tributions derived in Section 4.3 can be converted
monotonicallyincreaseswithstimulus,andherewe
to an optimal tuning curve for any choice of the
focus only on this case.
stimulus distribution. An example of the capacity
We therefore wish to find the sigmoidal tun- achieving tuning curve is shown in Figure 5, for
ing curve that maximises mutual information, for the special case of κ = 1, which means the chan-
a given fixed form of a conditional distribution. nelisequivalenttoaPoissonneuron(Nikitin et al.,
While this is generally a difficult optimisation 2009). Themaximumrateisrestrictedto30spikes
problem, a simple solution exists for channels per input sample.
where the capacity achieving input distribution is Although such a result holds exactly only for
discrete, like those considered in this paper. In discrete input distributions, similar derivations of
fact, the mutual information maximising tuning information theoretically optimal continuous tun-
curvecan be derivedfor anarbitrarystimulus dis- ing curves have been made, which hold only in
tribution, if the capacity achieving input distribu- the low noise limit (McDonnell and Stocks, 2008).
tion has been calculated first. The reason for this See Kostal and Lansky (2010); Kostal (2010) for
is explained in the following. related work in the high noise limit.
We consider the same noisy channel as Sec-
tion 4.2, that is the ISIs are governedby a gamma
4.4 Discussion and Interpretation
distribution. We now make a slight generalisation
to the setup of Sections 4.1 and 4.2 and consider We have shown our results on neuron channel ca-
theexpectationoftheISIstobegovernedbyaran- pacity from two very different viewpoints. Inter-
dom variable X with a known distribution, such estingly, both show that the capacity is achieved
that Θ is an arbitrary function of X. by a discrete distribution. The numerically com-
We therefore write Θ = f(X). For the gamma puted capacities are similar to the range indicated
ISIchannel,the tuningcurveisdefinedasthecon- by some biologically measured results of sensory
ditional expectation of the response variable (ei- neurons (Borst and Theunissen, 1999). The chan-
ther T or R) given a specified outcome of X. For nel capacity depends on various factors, and we
timingcodingorratecodingrespectively,wewrite consider some of them below.
0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Inputstimulus,x
]r[)∆,κ;x|R(pE,esnopsernaeM
sible to implement the optimalharddecoderwith-
←µ3=30.00 out requiring the online computation of the pos-
terior distribution. Indeed, the output space (the
space where X˜ lies) can be divided into L sub-
spaces in advance, such that the k th subspace
contains all the points X˜ such that x has the
← ← µ µ 1 2 = = 7 1 . 0 5 . 6 80 largest posterior probability given X˜. T k herefore,
theoptimalharddecodercanbeimplementedbya
“quantisation” or “thresholding” algorithm which
simplycheckstoseewhichsubspaceX˜ liesin. Such
analgorithmisoftencomputationallysimplerthan
Figure5: Channelcapacityachievingtuning curve
computing first the posterior distribution.
for a Poisson rate-coding neuron (κ = 1), and an
input x ∈ [0,1], with a maximum spike-rate of 30 When we considerinformationprocessingin the
spikes per input sample—see Nikitin et al. (2009) brain, a naive soft decoding seems difficult, at
for further examples. least for a single neuron. The hard decoding
idea seems more natural. However, the informa-
tion transmissionrateof the bestharddecoding is
4.5 Input and Output less than the best soft decoding. We should keep
this point in mind. Further discussion is found
Wefirstdiscusstheinputandoutputoftheneuron
in Ikeda and Manton (2009).
channel in this subsection.
Letus startwith the input. Although eachneu-
ron receives information from many neurons, we 4.6 Discreteness
have only considered a single input θ. This may
seemtoosimple. Weassumedthatthesingleinput Under the assumptions made, we have shown that
θ summarises all the inputs to the neuron. More- the capacity of a neuron is achieved by a dis-
over,θhasbeenassumedtobememorylessandcan crete distribution with a finite number of proba-
have any distribution within the support. Consid- bility mass points. In information theory, there
ering the biological system, this is far from real- are many other known types of channels for which
istic. The net input of a neuron may not change channel capacity is achieved by a discrete distri-
quickly, that is, it has memory. Moreover, a neu- bution (Huang and Meyn, 2005). For example,
ron’s input is a collection of many neurons’ noisy although the capacity of an average power con-
outputs,therefore,itmayfollowaparticularprob- strained additive Gaussian white noise channels is
ability distribution. This implies that we have achieved by continuously valued Gaussian inputs,
computed capacity under less restrictive assump- simply placing a constraint on the maximum am-
tions, and the biologically achievable rate should plitude of the channel means capacity is achieved
be smaller than the capacity obtained in the nu- by a discrete distribution (Smith, 1971).
merical studies. A better understanding of the Our results do not imply that “neuron signals
constraints on the input of a neuron would lead are only using discrete levels.” On the contrary,
toamoreaccuratecalculationofneuronalchannel we believe many neuronsareusing continuous lev-
capacity. els. What is implied by our results is that those
Next, we discuss the output of a neuron from neurons cannot achieve the capacity and the ac-
two viewpoints, decoding and demodulation. tual rate of information transfer is therefore less
In order to achieve channel capacity, the re- than the capacity. Another implication is for the
ceiver must act as an optimal decoder, meaning measurement of information capacity in neuro-
that when X˜ is observed, the receiver must com- science (Borst and Theunissen, 1999). Our result
pute the posterior distribution of the input X as impliesthatonlyasmallnumberofdiscreteranges
p(x|x˜). When x takes discrete values x ,··· ,x , are sufficient for the input distribution to measure
it becomes p(x |x˜). This is a real number for each the information capacity of neural coding.
x i . In engineering, this type of decoding is called Informationtheoryprovidesawayofquantifying
“soft decoding.” It seems unlikely that a neuronal whether discrete or continuously distributed sig-
mechanismsfor carryingthis outcouldexist,since nals are better for any givencommunicationchan-
a computation of the posterior distribution is nec- nel corrupted by random fluctuations. Many neu-
essary. rosciencestudies quantify informationusing Shan-
Another standard decoding technique is “hard non’s famous information capacity formula relat-
decoding,” that is, only a single value of x is cho- ing mutual information to signal-to-noise ratio.
sen by the decoder. The optimal hard decoder This formula is correct only for Gaussian additive
choosestheonewhichmaximisestheposteriordis- noise channels(Cover and Thomas,2006) —it re-
tribution, that is xˆ =argmax p(x |x˜). It is pos- lies on many assumptions, and if any are false it
can significantly under- or over-estimate the true the (difficult) problem of accurately estimating
capacity (Berger and Gibson, 1998). mutual information exist, the bigger difficulty is
with using the result to say something about how
the system works. Indeed, the actual goal of com-
4.7 Further Points
putationalneuroscienceis thatof“systemidentifi-
Guessingthechannelmodelisnotstraightforward. cation,” as engineers would call it.
In particular, feedback is prevalent in many parts If the brain uses spikes to transmit information
of the brain, which makes it much more diffi- (whichonfastertime-scalesappearstobethecase)
cult to relate changes in responses to inputs11. then understanding the neural code — how the
One important example where it is known that brain encodes information before sending it across
the circuitry is solely feedforward is that of reti- the “channel” — is tantamount to understanding
nal cells (Jacobs et al., 2009). This example has how the brain works. Indeed, if we would listen in
been used to demonstrate that it is possible to to the messages as they are sent from one neuron
rule out certain guesses of neural codes. Because to another, it would be relatively straightforward
this is based on optimal Bayesian decoding of a to determine what each neuron is doing.
forcedbinarychoice, it wouldbe interesting to ex- Although system identification is not the forte
tend (Jacobs et al., 2009) beyond the binary limi- of traditional information theory (Johnson, 2008),
tation to that where the signals being coded may this is merely for historical reasons. With compu-
have many possibilities tationalneuroscienceasa mainmotivator,we pre-
What can we say about more complicated sit- dict that the next decade will see the expansionof
uations? For example, information processing of information theory to include more powerful tech-
cortical neurons are not strictly feedforward and niques for system identification, and possibly even
the information is shared by many neurons. If we an integration of control, computation and infor-
assume every neuron is performing the same com- mation theory into a unified framework.
putation, and each neuron encodes and decodes Some recent information theoretic approaches
information in the same way, it seems possible to in neuroscience that go beyond standard Shannon
extend our results. However, when different neu- theory are summarized in the following list.
rons encode information differently, the problem
becomes very different. Understanding how the • While it is traditional in engineering to sepa-
brain works in information theoretic terms is one rately code an information source, and then
of the grand challenges of this century. channel code it for communication across
a channel, it has been shown for some
simple but instructive examples, that non-
5 Conclusions and Future Di-
separation of these two aspects can achieve
rections an optimal communication system with a
vastly reduced complexity compared to sep-
Most information theory research to date has aration (Gastpar et al., 2003). This fact is
been predicated on an engineering viewpoint. potentially important for neurobiological sys-
The main thrust has been to design compres- tems, where separation mechanisms seem im-
sion/decompressionmethodsthatcompresssource plausible.
information to the limits given by its entropy
(source coding), or to design error correction • Many studies have investigated whether the
brain might have
schemes and encoding/decoding methods that al-
low communication close to capacity. mechanisms for implementing Bayesian algo-
rithmsduringdecisionmaking,predictionand
Ontheotherhand,thegoalofneuroscienceisin-
pattern recognition (Rao and Ballard, 1999;
stead to understand information processing in the
S.Lee and Mumford, 2003; Knill and Pouget,
brain.
2004; George and Hawkins, 2009).
Thisdoesnotmeanthatinformationtheoryhas
no place in computational neuroscience. Informa-
• Thepossibilityofanalogcorticalerrorcorrect-
tion theory provides a way to measure informa-
ing codes has been proposed by Fiete et al.
tion and to understand the limits of compression
(2008).
(namely, entropy) and communication (namely,
mutual information and channel capacity).
• One limitation of Shannon theory is that
A common “information theoretic” method in
its measures say nothing about directional-
computational neuroscience is to obtain quantita-
ity or causality. However, directed informa-
tive estimates of the mutual information between
tiontheoryhasalsobeendeveloped(Granger,
observed sets of data. Since various methods for
1969; Marko, 1973; Rissanen and Wax, 1987;
11Channelswithfeedbackcanhavelargercapacity. Massey, 1990; Tatikonda and Mitter, 2009)
and has recently been applied in neuro- H. Marko. Information theory and cybernetics.
science (Hesse et al., 2003; Eichler, 2006; Spectrum, IEEE, 4(11):75–83,nov. 1967.
Waddell et al., 2007; Amblard and Michel,
EmanuelTodorovandMichaelI. Jordan. Optimal
2011; Quinn et al., 2011).
feedback control as a theory of motor coordina-
• The relationship between control, informa- tion. Nat Neurosci, 5(11):1226–1235,11 2002.
tiontheoryandthermodynamicshasbeendis-
E.Burdet,K.Tee,I.Mareels,T.Milner,C.Chew,
cussed by Mitter and Newton (2005); Friston
D. Franklin, R. Osu, and M. Kawato. Stabil-
(2010); Mitter (2010).
ity and motor adaptation in human arm move-
Summarising our own modest contribution, we ments. Biological Cybernetics, 94:20–32,2006.
carefully came up with a simple neuron channel
David W. Franklin, Etienne Burdet, Keng
model based on biological evidence and computed
Peng Tee, Rieko Osu, Chee-Meng Chew,
the channel capacity of this model. Interestingly,
Theodore E. Milner, and Mitsuo Kawato. CNS
itwasprovedthatthechannelcapacityisachieved
Learns Stable, Accurate, and Efficient Move-
by a discrete distribution.
ments Using a Simple Algorithm. J. Neurosci.,
28(44):11165–11173,2008.
Acknowledgements
L. R. Varshney, P. J. Sjo¨str¨om, and D. B.
Chklovskii.Optimalinformationstorageinnoisy
Mark D. McDonnell’s contribution was supported
synapsesunderresourceconstraints.Neuron,52:
by the Australian Research Council (ARC) under
409–423,2006.
ARC grants DP1093425 (including an Australian
ResearchFellowship),RN0459498andDP0770747.
G.Buzs´aki. Rhythms of the Brain. OxfordUniver-
Jonathan H. Manton wishes to acknowledge sev- sity Press, Oxford, UK, 2006.
eral interesting and thought-provoking conversa-
tionswithProfessorIvenMareelswhichfacilitated J. E.Cohen. Mathematics is biology’snext micro-
the writing of parts of this paper. JM’s contri- scope, only better; biology is mathematics’ next
bution was supported in part by the Australian physics,onlybetter. PLoSBiology,2:e439,2004.
Research Council.
Thomas K. Landauer. How much do people re-
member? some estimates of the quantity of
References learned information in long-term memory. Cog-
nitive Science, 10:477–493,1986.
Norbert Wiener. Cybernetics: or Control and
Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of
Communication in theAnimaland theMachine.
communication. The Bell System Technical
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, sec-
Journal, 27:379–423 and 623–656, July and Oc-
ond edition, 1948.
tober 1948.
JohnvonNeumann. The Computer and the Brain.
D. H. Johnson. Information theory and neuro-
Yale University Press, second edition, 2000.
science: Why is the intersection so small? In
Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver. The Proc. Information Theory Workshop, 5-9 May
Mathematical Theory of Communication. Uni- 2008, pages 104–108,2008.
versity of Illinois Press, 1949.
T. Berger and J. D. Gibson. Lossy source coding.
Gerald D. Fischbach. Mind and brain. Scientific IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 44:
American, 267(3):24–33,1992. 2693–2723,1998.
Rahul Sarpeshkar. Analog versus digital: Extrap- A.BorstandF.E.Theunissen. Informationtheory
olating from electronics to neurobiology. Neural and neural coding. Nature Neuroscience, 2:947–
Computation, 10(7):1601–1638,1998. 957, 1999.
T. Berger. Living information theory: The 2002 Stefano Panzeri, Riccardo Senatore, Marcelo A.
Shannonlecture. IEEE Information Theory So- Montemurro, and Rasmus S. Petersen. Correct-
ciety Newsletter, 53:1,6–19,2003. ing for the sampling bias problem in spike train
informationmeasures.J.Neurophysiol,98:1064–
Etienne Burdet, Rieko Osu, David W. Franklin,
1072, 2007.
Theodore E. Milner, and Mitsuo Kawato. The
central nervous system stabilizes unstable dy- VincentQ.Vu,BinYu,andRobertE.Kass. Infor-
namics by learning optimal impedance. Nature, mation in the nonstationary case. Neural Com-
414:446–449,November 2001. putation, 21:688–703,March 2009.
F. Rieke, D. Warland, R. de Ruyter van P. Dayan and L. F. Abbott. Theoretical Neuro-
Steveninck, and W. Bialek. Spikes: Exploring science: Computational and Mathematical Mod-
the Neural Code. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA., eling of Neural Systems. The MIT Press, 2001.
1997.
P.Lansky,O.Pokora,andJ.P.Rospars.Classifica-
G. Poggio. Time series analysis of impulse se- tionofstimulibasedonstimulus-responsecurves
quences of thalamic somatic sensory neurons. and their variability. Brain Research, 1225:57–
Journal of Neurophysiology, 27:517–545,1964. 66, 2008.
M. D. McDonnell and N. G. Stocks. Maximally
ZacharyF.MainenandTerrenceJ.Sejnowski. Re-
informative stimuli and tuning curves for sig-
liability of spike timing in neocortical neurons.
moidal rate-coding neurons and populations.
Science, 268:1503–1506,June 1995.
Physical Review Letters, 101:058103,2008.
Donald M. MacKay and Warren S. McCulloch.
A.P.Nikitin,N.G.Stocks,R.P.Morse,andM.D.
The limiting information capacity of a neuronal
McDonnell. Neural population coding is opti-
link. Bull. Math. Biophys., 14:127–135,1952.
mizedbydiscretetuningcurves.PhysicalReview
R.B.Stein.Theinformationcapacityofnervecells Letters, 103:138101,2009.
using a frequency code. Biophysical Journal, 7:
L. Kostal and P. Lansky. Information transfer for
797–826,1967.
small-amplitude signals. Physical Review E, 81:
050901,2010.
P. Lansky, R. Rodriguez, and L. Sacerdote. Mean
instantaneous firing frequency is always higher L.Kostal. Informationcapacityinthe weak-signal
than the firing rate. Neural Computation, 16: approximation. Physical Review E, 82:026115,
477–489,2004. 2010.
D. H. Johnson. Information theory and neural in- J. Huang and S. P. Meyn. Characterization and
formationprocessing. IEEE Transactions on In- computation of optimal distributions for chan-
formation Theory, 56:653–666,2010. nel coding. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 51:2336–2351,2005.
P. Suksompong and T. Berger. Capacity analy-
sis for integrate-and-fire neurons with descend- J. Smith. The information capacity of amplitude-
ing action potential thresholds. IEEE Transac- and variance-constrained scalar Gaussian chan-
tions on Information Theory, 56:838–851,2010. nels.InformationandControl,18:203–219,1971.
S. Ikeda and J. H. Manton. Capacity of a single T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of In-
spiking neuron channel. Neural Computation, formation Theory. Wiley,NewYork,secondedi-
21:1714–1748,2009. tion, 2006.
A. L. Jacobs, G. Fridman, R. M. Douglas, N. M.
D. H. Johnson and I. N. Goodman. Inferring the
capacity of the vector Poisson channel with a Alam,P.E.Latham,G.T.Prusky,andS.Niren-
Bernoullimodel.Network: ComputationinNeu- berg.Rulingoutandrulinginneuralcodes. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
ral Systems, 19:13–33,2008.
the USA, Early Edition:1–6, 2009.
S. B. Laughlin, R. R. de Ruyter van Steveninck,
M.Gastpar,B.Rimoldi,andM.Vetterli. Tocode,
andJ.C.Anderson.Themetaboliccostofneural
or not to code: Lossy source–channel commu-
information. Nature Neuroscience, 1(1):36–41,
nication revisited. IEEE Transactions on Infor-
1998.
mation Theory, 49:1147–1158,2003.
W. B. Levy and R. A. Baxter. Energy-efficient
R. P.N. RaoandD. H.Ballard. Predictivecoding
neuronal computation via quantal synaptic fail-
in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation
ures. The Journal of Neuroscience, 22:4746–
ofsomeextra-classicalreceptive-fieldeffects.Na-
4755,2002.
ture Neuroscience, 2:79–87,1999.
S. B. Laughlin and T. J. Sejnowski. Communica- T. S.Lee and D. Mumford. Hierarchical Bayesian
tion in neuronal networks. Science, 301:1870– inferenceinthevisualcortex. JOSAA,20:1434–
1874,2003. 1448, 2003.
T.BergerandW.B.Levy. Amathematicaltheory D. C. Knill and A. Pouget. The Bayesian brain:
of energy efficient neural computation and com- theroleofuncertaintyinneuralcodingandcom-
munication. IEEE Transactions on Information putation. Trends in Neurosciences, 27:712–719,
Theory, 56:852–874,2010. 2004.
D.GeorgeandJ.Hawkins. Towardsa mathemati- K. Friston. The free-energy principle: a unified
caltheoryofcorticalmicro-circuits. PLoS Com- braintheory? NatureReviews Neuroscience,11:
putational Biology, 5:e1000532,2009. 127–138,2010.
I. R. Fiete, Y. Burak, and T. Brookings. What S. K. Mitter. Towards a unified view of infer-
grid cells convey about rat location. Journal of ence, communication and control. In 2010 In-
Neuroscience, 28:6858,2008. ternational Conferenceon SignalProcessing and
Communications (SPCOM), pages 1–2. IEEE,
C.W.J.Granger.Investigatingcausalrelationsby
2010.
econometricmodelsandcross-spectralmethods.
Econometrica, 37:424–438,1969.
H. Marko. The bidirectional communication
theory–a generalization of information theory.
IEEE Transactions on Communications, 21:
1345–1351,1973.
J. Rissanen and M. Wax. Measures of mutual
and causal dependence between two time series.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 33:
598–601,1987.
J. Massey. Causality, feedback and directed in-
formation. In Proc. 1990 Intl. Symp. on Info.
Th. and its Applications, pages 27–30. Citeseer,
1990.
S. Tatikonda and S. Mitter. The capacity of chan-
nels with feedback. IEEE Transactions on In-
formation Theory, 55:323–349,2009.
W. Hesse, E. Mo˜ller, M. Arnold, and B. Schack.
The use of time-variant EEG Granger causality
forinspectingdirectedinterdependenciesofneu-
ralassemblies.JournalofNeuroscienceMethods,
124:27–44,2003.
M. Eichler. On the evaluation of information flow
in multivariate systems by the directed trans-
fer function. Biological Cybernetics, 94:469–482,
2006.
J. Waddell, R. Dzakpasu, V. Booth, B. Riley,
J. Reasor, G. Poe, and M. Zochowski. Causal
entropies–A measure for determining changes
in the temporal organization of neural systems.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162:320–332,
2007.
P.-O.AmblardandO.J.J.Michel. Ondirectedin-
formation theory and Granger causality graphs.
Journal of Computational Neuroscience, 30:7–
16, 2011.
C. J. Quinn, T. P. Coleman, N. Kiyavash, and
N. G. Hatsopoulos. Estimating the directed in-
formationtoinfer causalrelationshipsinensem-
ble neural spike train recordings. Journal of
Computational Neuroscience, 30:17–44,2011.
S. K. Mitter and N. J. Newton. Information and
entropyflowintheKalman–Bucyfilter. Journal
of Statistical Physics, 118:145–176,2005.