]hp-tnauq[
1v59630.8051:viXra
An introduction to Fault-tolerant Quantum Computing
Alexandru Paler Simon J. Devitt
UniversityofPassau OchanomizuUniversity
Innstr. 43 2-1-1,Otsuka,Bunkyo-ku
Passau,Germany,94032 Tokyo,112-8610,Japan
alexandru.paler@uni-passau.de devitt1@mac.com
ABSTRACT [4,3]. However,thetheoreticalframework forfault-tolerant
In this paper we provide a basic introduction of the core quantum computing has existed for nearly 20 years and is
ideasandtheoriessurroundingfault-tolerantquantumcom- verywell understoodandquantumcomputingiscompeting
putation. These concepts underly the theoretical frame- with the vast classical computing power currently in exis-
work of large-scale quantum computation and communica- tence. It would be unreasonable to believe (even given the
tionsandarethedrivingforceformanyrecentexperimental apparent computational power quantum information pro-
efforts to construct small to medium sized arrays of con- cessing has over classical computing), that a small, error
trollable quantum bits. We examine the basic principals prone array of qubits could computationally outperform a
of redundant quantum encoding, required to protect quan- classical system comprising of potentially millions of com-
tum bits from errors generated from both imprecise con- putingcores,eachitselfcontainingbillions(oreventrillions)
trol and environmental interactions and then examine the of transistors.
principals of fault-tolerance from largely a classical frame-
work. Asquantumfault-toleranceessentiallyisavoidingthe Fault-tolerant quantum computing refers to the framework
uncontrollable cascade of errors caused by the interaction of ideas that allow qubits to be protected from quantum
of quantum-bits, these concepts can be directly mapped to errors introduced bypoor controlor environmentalinterac-
quantuminformation. tions (Quantum Error Correction, QEC) and the appropri-
atedesignofquantumcircuitstoimplementbothQECand
Categories andSubject Descriptors encoded logic operations in a way toavoid theseerrors cas-
H.4[InformationSystemsApplications]: Miscellaneous; cadingthroughquantumcircuits[8]. Byavoidingacascade
D.2.8 [Software Engineering]: Metrics—complexity mea- of errors, therebecomes a point(when thefundamentalac-
sures, performance measures curacy of individual qubits is high enough), where QEC is
correcting more errors than are being created. Once this
General Terms threshold has been achieved,expandingthe size of thepro-
tective quantum will exponentially decrease the failure of
QuantumInformation, QuantumError Correction
theencodedinformationandallowsustoachievearbitrarily
long quantumalgorithms implemented with noisy devices.
ACM proceedings, LATEX, texttagging In this paper we will provide a basic introduction to some
of the key principals of QEC and then pivot into a discus-
1. INTRODUCTION
sionaboutfault-tolerancethathavebeeninvestigatedinthe
Fault-tolerant, error corrected, digital quantum computing classical computing world. As the goal of fault-tolerance is
underpinsasignificant worldwideeffort toconstructviable, to prevent errors to cascade uncontrollably, a large amount
commercial quantum computing systems [7]. The size of of classical work can be easily transferred to the quantum
such error corrected machines is somewhat daunting for a world.
field that has only managed to experimentally fabricate ar-
rays of up to about ten functional quantum-bits (qubits)
2. QUANTUMCOMPUTING
∗(Does NOT produce the permission block, copyright Inthissectionwepresentthebasicmathematicalframework
information nor page numbering). For use with
for qubits, quantum gate operations and quantum circuits.
ACM PROC ARTICLE-SP.CLS.SupportedbyACM.
Further details can be found in a number of papers [2] and
books [8] both from the physics community and the com-
puterscience community.
Quantum circuits represent and manipulate information in
qubits. Asinglequbithasanassociatedquantumstate ψ =
(α0,α1)T = α0 0 +α1 1 . Here, 0 = (1,0)T and | 1 i =
(0,1)T arequant | u i manal | og i onsofcla | ss i icallogicvalues0 | a i nd
1, respectively. α0 and α1 are complex numbers called am-
plitudes with α0 2+ α1 2 =1.
Quantum measurement is defined with respect to a basis Secondly, any measurement of an arbitrary quantum state
and yields one of the basis vectors with a probability re- will collapse the wavefunction describing the state. Hence
lated to the amplitudes of the quantum state. Common protecting errors in an encoded piece of quantum informa-
measurements are known as Z- and X-measurements. Z- tionbymeasuringacertainsubsetoftheencodedblockwill
measurement is definedwith respect tobasis (0 , 1 ). Ap- irrevocably destroy the information content of that state.
plying a Z-measurement to a qubit in state ψ = α0 0 + Therefore we need a slightly new mechanism to protect en-
α1 1 yields 0 with probability α0 2 and | 1 i with p | r i ob- coded quantuminformation.
abi | lit i y α1 2. | i Moreover, the stat | e ψ | colla | p i ses into the
measured state (i.e. only the components of ψ consistent Thefoundationofquantumerrorcorrectionisstillbasedon
with the measurement result remains). X-measurement is classical coding theory, however we need to design codes in
defined with respect to the basis (+ , ), where = a slightly different manner. This is due both to the restric-
1 (0 1 ). | i |−i |±i tions of what we can theoretically do with quantum infor-
√2 | i±| i
mation, but also due to the possible errors that can affect
A state may be modified by applying single-qubit quantum qubits. Unlikeclassicalbits,whichcanonlyexperienceaflip
gates. Eachquantumgatecorrespondstoacomplexunitary between 0 1 , qubits can also experience phase errors
matrix, and gate function is given by multiplying that ma- (0 + 1 )
(0 1 )/√2. Additionally,errorsdonot
trixwiththequantumstate. TheapplicationofX gatetoa occurinadiscretemanner. Theyaremostoftencontinuous
state results in a bit flip: X(α0,α1)T =(α1,α0)T. The ap- errors, such as a rotation around the X axis by some an-
plication oftheZ gateresultsinaphase flip: Z(α0,α1)T = gle ǫ or some incoherent (non-unitary) error caused by the
(α0, α1)T. A Y = iXZ gate can be thought of as both interaction with theoutsideenvironment.
a bit-flip and a phase-flip together on an individual qubit.
These three gates are important in the context of quantum Due to expedience we will only present the formalism for
errors. coherent errors, those that can be represented by a uni-
tary gate. In this case, an error operator, E, acting on
The exponentiation of the Pauli matrices results in the ro- a qubit, ψ can be decomposed into a linear superposi-
tationalgatesRx,Ry,Rz parameterisedbytheangleofthe tion of X gates, Z gates and both Y = iXZ, E
rotation [8]. Hence the bit flip is a rotation by π around a1 ψ +a2X ψ +a3Z ψ +ia4XZ ψ . Ifwecouldmagically
| i | i | i | i
the X-axis, implying that X =Rx(π),and thephase-flip is measure if an X and/or Z error occurred on a qubits (via
a rotation by π around the Z-axis, such that Z = Rz(π). some type of quantum measurement), the state would col-
c T a h n e b H e a u d s a e m d a t r o d t g a a k t e e a is c H om = put R a z t ( io π n / a 2 l )R st x a ( t π e /2 k )R et z 0 ( , π 1 /2) i a n n t d o l a a b p i s li e ty to of the a s 1 ta 2, te a { 2 |2 ψ , i a , 3 X 2| , ψ a i 4 ,Z 2 | . ψ i T , h X is Z co | ψ nv i} er w ts it a h p a os p s r i o b b le -
superposition states, =(0 1 )/√2, a { state | w i i } th no continuous {| qu | ant | um | er | ro | r in | to | a } discrete X and/or Z gate.
classical analogue {|±i | i±| i While the errors themselves are continuous (for very small
errors, a1 2 1), this determination of what type of error
In thecontext of fault-tolerant quantumcomputation, only hasoccurredconvertssmallerrorsintodiscretebit-orphase-
one interaction gate is needed; the controlled-not (CNOT) errorswithsmallamplitudesconvertedtosmallprobabilities
gate. The CNOT gate is thequantumanalogue of a binary for such results to beobserved. The question is, how dowe
XOR operation and is designed to bit-flip the state of a detect if some typeof discrete error has occurred?
targetqubit,conditionalonthestateofacontrolqubit. This
gate canbeemployedon certain quantumstatestoprepare Thisdetectionoccursthroughtheideaofredundantencod-
entangled states. For example, CNOT(0 + 1 ) 0 /√2 = ing with two classical codes. One is designed to detect X-
(00 + 11 )/√2. This state, known a | s i a B | e i ll | st i ate has errorsandoneisdesignedtodetectZ-errorswithouthaving
th | e i prop | ert i y that measuring one of the qubits produces a to, necessarily, decode the codespace. Detecting an error
randomresult(0 or 1 witha50:50probability),butonce indirectly for bit-flipsiscommonplace in classical computer
the state of one | i qubi | t i is measured, the state of the other science and was usurpedfor thequantumregime. The sim-
qubit is also determined. plest example is the bit-flip code, with basis states given
by | 0 iL = | 0 i ⊗ N and | 1 i = | 1 i ⊗ N, where the ⊗ N notation
It is well known that the ability to perform arbitrary rota- simply meaning N copies of the qubit. The basic idea is
tions around two orthogonal axis (e.g. Rz(θ1) and Rx(θ2) that given a given codified, N, the numberof physical flips
e i g L im ↔ e, | w
.
operation. This gate set is therefore quantumuniversal. sure any subset of qubits in the code block. So we need a
differentmethodtoidentifyerrors. Inthecontextofthebit
flipcode,wenoticeacertainproperty,namelythatforboth
3. ERRORSANDQUANTUMERRORCOR- basisstates,pairwisebit-parityinthecodeblockiseven(i.e.
RECTING CODES calculating the parity of any two bits via modulo addition
for the 0 and 1 state is even). If such a comparison
There are two important differences between classical error | iL | iL
everresultsinanoddvalue,weknowanerrorhasoccurred
correction and quantum error correction. The first is the
withoutactuallyknowingifwestartedwiththe 0 or 1
no-cloning theorem [11], which states that is is impossible | iL | iL
state. This is what we need. Therefore, we need a way
toperfectlycopyanunknownquantumstate. i.e. thereisno
to calculate the parity of any two qubits in the code block
operation that satisfies U ψ 0 = ψ ψ for an unknown
| i| i | i| i without directly measuring the qubits themselves. We can
ψ . Therefore, we are unable to protect arbitrary quan-
| i do this via the circuit in Fig. ??. This circuit introduces
tumstatesagainsterrorsbysimplymakingmultiplecopies.
an ancilla qubit that is initialised, interacted with a pair of bit flip error in any one of the three blocks. In principal,
qubits in the code block and measured. The result of the thiscodecan correct for threebit-fliperrors (providedeach
measurementontheancilla(either 0 or 1 )willdetermine error occurs in a separate block), however in general, as
the parity of the two qubits (odd or even), and also force two or more errors can occur in a single block the code is
thesetwoqubitstobeinanevenoroddparitystateifthey describedasonlyhavingthecapacityforcorrectingasingle
were not beforehand. bitfliperror. Phaseerrorsarecorrectedviathethreeblocks
and comparing the parity of pairwise blocks. Again, the
The principal of a codespace within quantum computation code,inprincipal,cancorrectformorethanonephaseerror
is to construct encoded codewords that are always in cer- (provided errors occur in specific locations), but in general
tain, well defined parity states regardless of the state of onlyasinglearbitraryerrorisdeterministicallycorrectable.
the encoded information. Physical errors will then perturb
encoded information away from these well defined parities 4. FAULT-TOLERANCE
whichcanbedetectedwithoutdetermininganyinformation
The effectiveness of QEC depends on how we implement
regarding theencoding.
quantum circuits to realise the correction code. As with
classical computing, interactions between qubitsduringthe
Returning back to the example of a redundancy code, the
execution of the circuit leads to the copying of errors. If
twoencodedstates 0 and 1 areconstructedtobeeven
| iL | iL this happens in an uncontrolled manner, the QEC code is
parity states of any pairwise Z operators. i.e. applying
overwhelmed and the computation will fail. Therefore, we
the operator ZiZj for any i,j
N returns the same state,
needtobeverycarefulwhendesigningcircuitssuchthatthis
. Bit flip errors result in states which
does not occur. While there is not often a direct compari-
violate this condition. For example, a bit-flip on qubit one
son between classical and quantum information processing,
of the encoded block will result in Z1Zj
the principals of fault-tolerance in a classical framework is
j. Henceifwemeasuretheparityofanyoftheseoperators
∀ easily transferable. Wewill therefore focus on some general
and wefindan oddresult, weknowthat sometypeoferror
principalsoffault-toleranceintheclassical worldwhichcan
has occurred. Determininga location for the error and how
bemapped directly toquantumcomputing.
many unique errors we can identify depends on the size of
the code block, N. The parity of pairwise checks of the
5. SHORT PARALLEL TO DISTRIBUTED
ZiZi+1 operator will allow us to uniquely locate individual
errors and the number of errors we can successfully correct SYSTEMS
scales linearly with thenumberof qubitsin thecode block. The need for fault-tolerance in quantum computing can be
For N qubits, we are able to uniquely correct (N 1)/2 introduced by drawing parallels with distributed systems.
errors. The following insights do not extend classical distributed
systems to quantum ones [10], but propose the problem
Thisexampleillustrateshowwehandlebit-fliperrorswithin of quantum fault-tolerance to be formulated without intro-
quantuminformation,whataboutphaseerrors? Inquantum ducingquantuminformation andquantumcomputing. The
information, phase-fliperrorswork exactlythesamewayas discussion will focus on processes and communication over
bit-flip errors if we take our compuational states as = point-to-pointlinks.
(0 1 )/√2. i.e. a Z-error will take + . H |± e i nce
if | w i e ± u | se i d a redundancy code of the fo | rm i ↔ | 0 iL |− = i | + i ⊗ N The distributed system is modelled as crash-stop [1], such
t a h n e d Z | 1 iZ iL i+ = 1 o | p − e i r ⊗ at N or, an w d e i c n h s e t c e k ad th o e f p ch ar e i c t k ie in s g of th t e he pa X r i it X y i+ o 1 f t is ha a t t t le h a e st pr o o n c e es f s a e u s lt ca d n et c e r c a t s o h r a m n o d d n u e le ve i r n r t e h t e ur s n ys t t o em liv a e n , d th t e h re e
operator for i, (N 1), then everything works exactly communication linksare perfect (messages arenot lost, du-
the same way. ∈ There − fore, a redundancy code either using plicated or inserted by fault). Additionally, the distributed
0,1 or +, stateswillallowustoeitherprotectencoded system includes a fault corrector, which is informed by the
i | nfor i mat | ion − a i gainst X-errors or Z-errors. A full quantum fault detectors about faults requiring correction.
errorcorrectioncodethereforecombinestwoclassicalcodes,
independentlyresponsible for bit-errors and phase-errors. The main target of fault-tolerance, as presented in these
sections,istocontrol the propagation of faults betweenpro-
The Shor code is the simplest example of this [9]. In the cesses. The presentation will focus on describing the dis-
Shor code we essentially have one redundancycode embed- tributed system elements, and the way these interact, but
ded within another. The code encodes a single qubit of without delving into details about the liveness and safety
information into nine physical qubits. The basis states are properties of thepresented protocols.
5.1 The processes
0 = (000 + 111 )(000 + 111 )(000 + 111 ) A process holds an abstract object q and a black-box that
| iL 2√2 | i | i | i | i | i | i consists of a coin, two Boolean values and a real value τ.
1 Theblack-boxisamodelfortheprocessfaults. TheBoolean
1 = (000 111 )(000 111 )(000 111 )
| iL 2√2 | i−| i | i−| i | i−| i valuesband paretheresultsof tossingthecoin twice. The
(1) valuetrue indicates heads, and false stands for tails.
Wehavethreeblocksofthreequbitsthateffectivelyactasa None of the processes is aware of the Boolean values in-
distancethreeredundancycodetocorrectbitflipsintheway side the box. Furthermore, the processes do not control
that we described above. This allows us to correct a single the black-box and the coin toss. The coin toss is randomly
performed (withaprobabilityτ),meaningthatnone,asin- is performed in two rounds: firstly, x sends its b value to y
gle orboth valuesare generated at undeterminedexecution requesting it to update its b value to bx by. Afterwards,
pointsoftheprocess. Therefore, theremaybenoneormul- process y sends its p value to x asking an update of its v
tiplecointossesduringthelifetimeofaprocess. Inorderto valuetovx vy. The functionmodelsthebehaviourofa
simplify themodelling, theprobabilityτ isequalfor all the coin flip: the coin returnsto its initial valueafter two flips.
processes, and process failures are not correlated. During the third communication round the control process
applies the distributed abstract operation e: the update of
The actual state of a process is computed by the function thestateqy (target) is afunction of stateqx (control). The
qa =q+b+p,wherethe+operation is theaddition ofthe e-operationwillnotbedetailedinthecontextoftheanalogy
two possible random faults modelled as Boolean values A with distributedsystems, and its cost is considered zero.
correct process is theonefor which qa =q, while, if qa =q,
theprocessiscalledfaulty. Inthefollowing,qwillreferboth Besides communicating and performing the distributed op-
totheobjectandtoitsstate,dependingonthecontextitis eration e, the process can perform local (intra-process) op-
used in. It should be noted that object q is noncopyable1, erations that transform thestate of thelocal object q.
meaningthatonceconstructed,itcanbeeithertransformed
locally or through distributed computations, but cannot be 5.3 Distributed processing
copied between processes. Aspreviouslyintroduced,inter-processcomunicationisboth
anattempttocorrecttheblack-boxvaluesand,atthesame
Duringprocessinitialisationitpossibletoinitialisetheblack- time, a distributed computation. The simplest distributed
boxvaluesandtosetthestateofq toastatechosenfrom a system executing a single communication step consists of
discrete set sq S. Oncetheblack-boxwas set up,thereis two processes, which we will call the control and the tar-
no guarantee that the values had not been changed by the get. The control initiates the communication, thus is the
coin tosses. requester during the first communication round, and the
target is the requester of the second communication round.
A terminating process returns a state so S. During ter- Additionally, a process can beboth control and target dur-
mination, thecurrent q isclassified against all theS-states, ing separate communication steps.
and the closest so is returned. The classification is proba-
bilistic,meaningthatifthereisnostatesoforwhichso=q, Generally,adistributedalgorithmrepresensaseriesofinter-
then it could happen that the returned state so is actually process communication steps and local operations. There
orthogonal to thestate so′ that was classified as nextto q. are at least two types of algorithms: 1) distributed cor-
rection, where processes communicate only to correct their
Once a process is terminated, it cannot be brought back to Boolean values; 2) distributed computation, in which pro-
liveand,ifonewouldliketoapproximatetheprobabilityof cesses try to solve a computational problem. Algorithms
q being in any of the states of S, the complete distributed compliantwiththefirstoptiongenerallyconsistonlyofcom-
computationhastoberepeated. Moreflexibleinitialisation munication steps and no local operations. A well-defined
and termination procedures could benefit from a larger set correction protocol (see Section 5.5) is the execution of co-
S,butthiswillnegativelyimpactthepracticalityofsystem ordinated communication. Distributed computations (the
implementation. second option) include intra-process operations but neglect
(donotcoordinate)theeffectofthetwocorrectionroundsin
5.2 Communication andoperations each communication step. The result is that uncoordinated
correctioncanleadtopropagationoffaults: theheadsvalues
The Boolean black-box values of a process can be either
arebeingtransferred,withouttheprocesseshavingnoticed,
read and communicated to other processes, or updated by
from a faulty process to a correct one(see Section 5.7).
a second process. A single process is not able to read its
values and correct them. Value correction is performed
5.4 Fault-tolerantprocesses
only through coordinated communication during a proce-
duresimilar to consensus [1]. In general, fault-tolerance is achieved by using an hierar-
chic(layered) approach. Assuming thefailure probability τ
The processes are naive: if one of their Boolean values is of a process, a set of two processes will fail simultaneously
considered heads, then the same happens to the other pro- withprobabilityτ2. Theintroductionofredundanciesisthe
cesses. The processes are also lazy, meaning that the com- key of achieving fault-tolerance, and there are two types of
municationofheads-valueshasanassociatedcost,suchthat possibleredundancies: 1)computationalredundancy,where
cost(heads)=1 and cost(tails)=0. the same computation is repeated sequentially for multiple
times;2)resourceredundancy,wheremultipleprocessesare
Ideally,everyprocessshouldhaveitsBoolean valuesalways abstracted as a single logical process and the component
set to false (tails). For this reason, in general, the pro- processes are executedin parallel.
cess avoids initialising their black-boxes with heads values.
Processes are not byzantine, and each time one communi- Computational redundancy is the equivalent to executing
cates,itwilltry,basedontheprocessvalues,toconvinceits adistributedalgorithm inepochs,andtoguaranteeingthat
partenertoeitherfliporkeeponeofitsvalues. Morespecif- afteracertainnumberofepochsapropertyofthealgorithm
ically,acommunicationstepbetweentwoprocessesxandy isachieved. Resourceredundanciesaregenerallyusedwhen
at least f faulty processes are needed to be tolerated. For
1Similarly,in C++ aprivatecopyconstructorandcopy as- example, the uniform epoch consensus algorithm from [1]
signment operator are required for such classes. requires N processes with N >2f.
Majorities (quorums [1]) are the most common option for are controls and the ancillae targets) or p-values (the other
checking the introduced redundancies. The simple major- way around, the components are targets and the ancillae
ity (N/2+1) of N objects (processes, bits etc.) is used to controls). Oncemore, withoutloss of generality,thefollow-
introduce the fault-tolerant quantum computing in the fol- ing fault detectors will beresponsible only for b-values.
lowing: a fault-tolerant logical process is constructed from
three (or more) component processes (called components), Ancillae are usual processes and can be affected by faults,
andthelogicalprocessisabletotolerateatmostonefaulty which arerequirednottopropagatetothecomponents. At
component. ThecomputationofquorumsisdetailedinSec- the same time, as process failures are probabilistic, a set of
tion 5.8. ancillaeisusedbythedetectorforreaching(withhighprob-
ability)atrustfuldecisionaboutthelogicalprocess(seeSec-
Due to the fact that the q objects of each process are non- tion5.8). Ab-valuedetectorresponsibleforalogicalprocess
copyableincreasesthedifficultyofimplementingfault-tolerance protectedagainst b-valuefaultshastheprocesscomponents
through redundancy. Copying the q state of an existing ascontrolsandtheancilla astargetduringthecommunica-
process to a newly initialised one is not possible. As a re- tionsteps. Iftheancillaholdsap-valuesettoheads,thiswill
sult,separatecomponentsareinitialisedintothesamestate propagatetothecomponents,butitwouldnotinfluencethe
q S at the start of the distributed algorithm and exactly b-valueprotection. Again,iftheancillaholdsab-valuefault,
thesame operations are applied on theirobjects. this will not propagate given thecommunication protocol.
Thiswork presents,withoutloss ofgenerality,howthecon- A logical process could be faulty beyond correction when
structionoflogicalprocessesisperformedusingtriple-modular a majority of the components is faulty. Assuming that all
redundancy(TMR)[6]. Thelogicalstateq ofalogicalpro- thecommunicationbetweenthelogicalprocessesistransver-
cess is a sequence of n (in this work n = 3) component sal (see Section 5.7), and because process faults are uncor-
processstates: q
qi. Transformingq
representsthe related, it would be improbable that such processes exist.
transformation of each qi. Their existence would be a result of a high τ (called in the
quantumcomputingliteraturetheerror threshold), butcan
The repetition code is the TMR counterpart in the field of be mitigated by using more powerful encodings (e.g. sur-
error-checking and -correction methods. As a consequence, face code). Therefore, it is further assumed that the right
the logical state q should be interpreted as the encoding encoding was chosen for thelogical processstates, andthat
of one of the component process states (the states of the faulty componentsform a minority.
components are equivalent). The repetition code can be
replaced with more powerful codes like the Hamming code Computingasimplemajorityofcorrectprocessesfromaset
orsurfacecodes[5],butthisaspectisnotfurtheraddressed ofcomponentsisequivalenttofindingthefaultycomponents
in thiswork. forming a minority. For the distributed system example, a
minority consists of at most one component. Two ancillae
After constructing a logical process from three freshly ini- arerequired,thefirstonecomparestheb-valuesbetweenthe
tialised processes, it is possible to compute the simple ma- firstandthesecondcomponents,andthesecondancillathe
jority of the b-values from every component’s black-box. b-valuesbetween thesecond and thethird components.
Additionaly, after grouping three separate logical processes
(lower-level) into another logical process (higher-level), it The twoancillae are initialised in thesame known stateqa.
is also possible to keep track of p-value majorities. Corre- Let the component b-values be b0,b1,b2; the ancilla output
spondingly, thehighest-level logical process consists of nine statesafterterminationwillbeqa1 =qa+(ba1 b0 b1)+pa1,
components (lowest-level) grouped into three logical pro- qa2 = qa+(ba2 b1 b2)+pa2. Considering that initially
cesses. There will be three b-value majorities and one p- theancillaearenotfaulty,thefaultdetectorwillextracttwo
value majority. This hierarchic construction where logical bitsof information s1 =b0 b1 ands2 =b1 b2,indicating
constructs are embedded intoone another is known as con- howtheb-valuescomparepairwisebetweenthecomponents.
catenation, and hastheadvantageof polynomially lowering The extension to faulty ancillae is presented in Section 5.8.
thefailure probability of theresulting logical processes [8].
Thesyndromebitss1 ands2 encodetheindexofthefaulty
5.5 Faultdetectors component process. For s1 = s2 = 0 no faulty component
exists,andthefaultdetectorsetsitsfaulty flagtofalse. For
Thefaultdetectorsusedinthedescribeddistributedsystem
alltheothersyndromevalues,thedetectorsetsfaulty=true,
are detecting faulty component processes. For each logical
processthereisaseparateassociated faultdetectorthatin-
and the faulty component index is computed by pos=s2
teracts with the components. A fault detector consists of
1.
a set of low-level processes (called ancillae) which are ini-
5.6 Faultcorrector
tialised, used for communicating with the component pro-
cesses and terminated. The output state of the ancillae is The fault corrector communicates with all thefault dectors
used to compute a syndrome: infer which component pro- in the system, and has a global overview of all the faults
cess is faulty. A fault detector contains also two variables: that were detected during the execution of the distributed
theBooleanfaulty indicatesiftheassociatedlogicalprocess computation. The global perspective has the following ad-
is faulty or not, and the integer pos points to the faulty vantage: thecorrector can observe if the modelled τ failure
component. rates are valid or not;is themodelled failure rate to low?
Fault detectors can check either b-values (the components In the presence of faults (signalled by the detectors), the
fault corrector has two options: to either correct thefaults, c1 c2.
or to try and track their effect throught the distributed al-
gorithm. Thedirectcorrectioncouldintroducefailures,and 5.8 Computational redundancy
for this reason fault-tracking is more advantageous. Fault-
Transversality is the key to constructing fault tolerant op-
tracking is performed based on commutativity properties:
erationsonlogicalprocesses,butisnotapplicableformain-
it is known how faults are transformed by both local and
tainingaconsistent setof componentprocesses. Adifferent
globaloperations. Hence,correctionsarerequiredonlyafter
techniquehastobedevised. Inthepresentation ofthepro-
thedistributedcomputationwasterminatedandtheoutput
cessmodelitwasmentionedthatfaultscanoccuranytime:
states were read out from thedistributed system.
the black-box coin is tossed at random time points. The
toss could happen before each local or distributed opera-
5.7 Transversality tion. Faults are also allowed to occur before a process is
The transversal application of a logical operation (local or terminated: after the last operation, but before returning
distributed) is its decomposition into (local or distributed) its finalstate.
operations applied on the component processes. For exam-
ple, the logical local operation G is the n-fold application Thesolutionistocontinouslycheckandcorrect everylogical
of Gon each of then components. process in the system. Checking is performed by the fault
detectorsandcorrections areapplied bythefaultcorrector.
Faults are propagated by inter-process communication. In A detection roundconsists of multipleepochs, buta logical
this section, propagation is illustrated by a distributed sys- process is continously checked(multiplerounds).
temwith twological processes, each constructedfrom three
component processes. Propagation will be mitigated by Section 5.5 introduced the fault detector and its use of an-
transversal communication. cillae, but ancillae were considered correct. In the presence
of faults, the syndrome bits could be incorrect and trig-
Let qc be the logical state of the logical control, and qt the ger an unnecessary correction that would introduce more
stateofthelogicaltarget. Itisfurtherassumedthatinboth faults. The solution is to repeat during a detection round
logicalprocesses(controlandtarget)atmostonecomponent the syndrome extraction procedure multiple times, similar
has its b-value set to heads. Once more, it should be noted to a sequence of epochs (an example of computational re-
thattheprocessesarenotawareoftheirvalues. Thelogical dundancy). Every epoch requires a new pair of ancillae,
statesweretransformedbytransversallogicaloperationsre- andthefaultdetectorwillperformmajorityvotingbetween
sulting in three equivalent component states in each logical thethreepairs of extracted syndromebits.
process: qc =qc =qc and qt =qt =qt.
0 1 2 0 1 2
Afreshlyinitialisedprocessthatwasdetectedasbeingfaulty
As the component states in both control and target are could be either corrected or directly terminated and a new
equivalent, transversal inter-process communication is im- process instance would need to be initialised. During the
plementedbyformingpairsbetweencontrolandtargetcom- execution of a process (between local and distributed oper-
ponents. There are two possibilities: 1) the same control ations), correction is the only option. Process operations
component is paired with each target component (see Fig- could be delayed by the complete detection and correction
ure??);2)eachcontrolcomponentispairedwithadifferent procedures, because the detectors requires multiple execu-
targetcomponent(seeFigure??). Thesecondscenariocor- tions in order to achieve a probabilistically consistent de-
responds totransversal inter-processcommunication. cision. Thus, fault-tolerance introduces significant resource
and computational overheads.
Forthefirstscenario,assumingthatthecomponentprocess
0c (thecomponentindexed0incontrol)isused,pairsofthe 6. CONCLUSIONS
following form (control,target) are built: (0c,0t), (0c,1c) 7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
and(0c,2t). Thethreecommunicationstepsresultintheup-
SJD acknowledges support from the JSPS Grant-in-aid for
datedb-valuesofthetargetcomponents(bit =bit⊕ b0c ). As-
ChallengingExploratoryResearchandJSPSKAKENHIKiban
sumingb0c isheads,thecontrolfaultwaspropagatedtothe
B 25280034
target components. At this point it cannot be guaranteed
that the logical target is protected against a component’s
8. REFERENCES
singleheadsb-value. Furthermore,thetotalcostofcommu-
[1] Christian Cachin, Rachid Guerraoui, and Lu´ıs
nicationbetweenthelogicalprocessisc1 =3 cost(heads).
× Rodrigues. Introduction to reliable and secure
distributed programming. Springer Science& Business
Thesecondscenario,thetransversalinter-processcommuni-
Media, 2011.
cation,couldresultinthefollowingthreepairsbeingformed:
(0c,0t),(1c,1t),(2c,2t). Maintainingtheassumptionofthe [2] S.J. Devitt,W.J. Munro, and K. Nemoto. Quantum
component 0c being faulty in the b-value, after the three error correction for beginners.Rep. Prog. Phys.,
communication rounds only the state of 0t would be nega- 76:076001, 2013.
tivelyaffected(b0t =b0t⊕ b0c ). Asaresult,afterexecuting [3] S.J. Devitt,A.M. Stephens,W.J. Munro, and
this communication scenario, it can be guaranteed that the K.Nemoto. Requirementsfor fault-tolerant factoring
logicaltargetisfurtherprotectedagainstasingleheadsvalue on an atom-optics quantumcomputer. Nature
of b. The total cost of communication between the logical Communications, 4:2524, 2013.
processisc2 1 cost(heads). Transversalityminimisesthe [4] J. Kelly et.al. Statepreservation byrepetitive error
communication cost between the logical processes, because detection in a superconductingquantumcircuit.
Nature (London), 519:66–69, 2015.
[5] Austin GFowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M
Martinis, and AndrewN Cleland. Surface codes:
Towards practical large-scale quantumcomputation.
Physical Review A, 86(3):032324, 2012.
[6] Israel Koren and C Mani Krishna.Fault-tolerant
systems. Morgan Kaufmann,2010.
[7] T. D. Ladd,F. Jelezko, R.Laflamme, Y. Nakamura,
C. Monroe, and J.L. O’Brien. QuantumComputers.
Nature (London), 464:45–53, 2010.
[8] Michael A Nielsen and Isaac L Chuang. Quantum
computation and quantum information.Cambridge
universitypress, 2010.
[9] P.W. Shor.Schemefor reducingdecoherencein
quantumcomputermemory. Phys. Rev. A.,52:R2493,
1995.
[10] RodneyVan Meter. Quantum Networking. John Wiley
& Sons, 2014.
[11] W.K. Wooters and W.H.Zurek.A SingleQuantum
Cannot beCloned. Nature (London), 299:802, 1982.