]NG.oib-q[
1v6402160/oib-q:viXra
An Introduction to Reconstructing Ancestral Genomes
Lior Pachter
Abstract. Recent advances in high-throughput genomics technologies have
resultedinthesequencingoflargenumbersof(near)completegenomes. These
genomesequencesarebeingminedforimportantfunctionalelements,suchas
genes. Theyarealsobeingcomparedandcontrastedinordertoidentifyother
functional sequences, such as those involved in the regulation of genes. In
cases where DNA sequences from different organisms can be determined to
have originated froma common ancestor, itis natural to try to infer the an-
cestralsequences. Thereconstructionofancestralgenomescanleadtoinsights
about genome evolution, andthe originsanddiversityof function. Thereare
anumberofinterestingfoundationalquestionsassociatedwithreconstructing
ancestral genomes: Which statistical models for evolution shouldbe used for
makinginferencesaboutancestralsequences? Howshouldextant genomesbe
compared in order to facilitate ancestral reconstruction? Which portions of
ancestral genomes can be reconstructed reliably, and what are the limits of
ancestral reconstruction? We discuss recent progress on some of these ques-
tions, offer someof our own opinions, and highlight interesting mathematics,
statistics,andcomputerscienceproblems.
1. What is comparative genomics?
These notes summarize a lecture at a special session of the American Math-
ematical Society on mathematical biology, during which we discussed the central
problemofcomparativegenomics,namelyhowtoreconstructtheancestralgenomes
that evolved into the present-day extant genomes. This is fundamentally a statis-
tics problem, because with a few exceptions, it is not possible to sequence the
genomes of ancestral species, and one can only infer ancestral genomes from the
multitude of genomes that can be sampled at the present time. The problem is a
grand scientific challenge that has only begun to be tackled in recent years, now
thatwhole genomesarebeing sequencedfor the firsttime. Our aimis to introduce
the reader to the statistical (and related mathematical) elements of the methods
of comparativegenomics, while providing a glimpse of the exciting results that are
emerging from first generation attempts to reconstruct ancestral genomes. Due to
thecomplexinterdisciplinaryscopeofthesubject,wehavebeenforcedtoomitalot
of detail and many interesting topics, but we hope that the curious mathematical
reader may find some threads worthy of further exploration.
1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary92D15,62P10;Secondary94C15,68W30.
Key words and phrases. Comparativegenomics,statistics,algebra,combinatorics.
Theauthor wassupportedinpartbyNSFGrantCCF-0347992.
2 LIORPACHTER
We begin with a concrete example of one sequence from a single genome: the
16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene from Salmonella typhimurium LT2. This se-
by searching for the accession number “AE008857”. The sequence is
1 aattgaagag tttgatcatg gctcagattg aacgctggcg gcaggcctaa cacatgcaag
61 tcgaacggta acaggaagca gcttgctgct tcgctgacga gtggcggacg ggtgagtaat
121 gtctgggaaa ctgcctgatg gagggggata actactggaa acggtggcta ataccgcata
181 acgtcgcaag accaaagagg gggaccttcg ggcctcttgc catcagatgt gcccagatgg
241 gattagcttg ttggtgaggt aacggctcac caaggcgacg atccctagct ggtctgagag
301 gatgaccagc cacactggaa ctgagacacg gtccagactc ctacgggagg cagcagtggg
361 gaatattgca caatgggcgc aagcctgatg cagccatgcc gcgtgtatga agaaggcctt
421 cgggttgtaa agtactttca gcggggagga aggtgttgtg gttaataacc gcagcaattg
481 acgttacccg cagaagaagc accggctaac tccgtgccag cagccgcggt aatacggagg
541 gtgcaagcgt taatcggaat tactgggcgt aaagcgcacg caggcggtct gtcaagtcgg
601 atgtgaaatc cccgggctca acctgggaac tgcattcgaa actggcaggc ttgagtcttg
661 tagagggggg tagaattcca ggtgtagcgg tgaaatgcgt agagatctgg aggaataccg
721 gtggcgaagg cggccccctg gacaaagact gacgctcagg tgcgaaagcg tggggagcaa
781 acaggattag ataccctggt agtccacgcc gtaaacgatg tctacttgga ggttgtgccc
841 ttgaggcgtg gcttccggag ctaacgcgtt aagtagaccg cctggggagt acggccgcaa
901 ggttaaaact caaatgaatt gacgggggcc cgcacaagcg gtggagcatg tggtttaatt
961 cgatgcaacg cgaagaacct tacctggtct tgacatccac agaactttcc agagatggat
1021 tggtgccttc gggaactgtg agacaggtgc tgcatggctg tcgtcagctc gtgttgtgaa
1081 atgttgggtt aagtcccgca acgagcgcaa cccttatcct ttgttgccag cgattaggtc
1141 gggaactcaa aggagactgc cagtgataaa ctggaggaag gtggggatga cgtcaagtca
1201 tcatggccct tacgaccagg gctacacacg tgctacaatg gcgcatacaa agagaagcga
1261 cctcgcgaga gcaagcggac ctcataaagt gcgtcgtagt ccggattgga gtctgcaact
1321 cgactccatg aagtcggaat cgctagtaat cgtggatcag aatgccacgg tgaatacgtt
1381 cccgggcctt gtacacaccg cccgtcacac catgggagtg ggttgcaaaa gaagtaggta
1441 gcttaacctt cgggagggcg cttaccactt tgtgattcat gactggggtg aagtcgtaac
1501 aaggtaaccg taggggaacc tgcggttgga tcacctcctt acct
This gene is a key component of the protein synthesis machinery in cells. In
fact, it is such a basic ingredient of life, that the same sequence, albeit with minor
modifications,existsinthegenomesofalllivingorganisms. Forexample,thereader
is encouraged to compare it to the 16S rRNA gene in Escherichia coli (K12):
1 aaattgaaga gtttgatcat ggctcagatt gaacgctggc ggcaggccta acacatgcaa
61 gtcgaacggt aacaggaaga agcttgcttc tttgctgacg agtggcggac gggtgagtaa
121 tgtctgggaa actgcctgat ggagggggat aactactgga aacggtagct aataccgcat
181 aacgtcgcaa gaccaaagag ggggaccttc gggcctcttg ccatcggatg tgcccagatg
241 ggattagcta gtaggtgggg taacggctca cctaggcgac gatccctagc tggtctgaga
301 ggatgaccag ccacactgga actgagacac ggtccagact cctacgggag gcagcagtgg
361 ggaatattgc acaatgggcg caagcctgat gcagccatgc cgcgtgtatg aagaaggcct
421 tcgggttgta aagtactttc agcggggagg aagggagtaa agttaatacc tttgctcatt
481 gacgttaccc gcagaagaag caccggctaa ctccgtgcca gcagccgcgg taatacggag
541 ggtgcaagcg ttaatcggaa ttactgggcg taaagcgcac gcaggcggtt tgttaagtca
601 gatgtgaaat ccccgggctc aacctgggaa ctgcatctga tactggcaag cttgagtctc
661 gtagaggggg gtagaattcc aggtgtagcg gtgaaatgcg tagagatctg gaggaatacc
721 ggtggcgaag gcggccccct ggacgaagac tgacgctcag gtgcgaaagc gtggggagca
781 aacaggatta gataccctgg tagtccacgc cgtaaacgat gtcgacttgg aggttgtgcc
841 cttgaggcgt ggcttccgga gctaacgcgt taagtcgacc gcctggggag tacggccgca
901 aggttaaaac tcaaatgaat tgacgggggc ccgcacaagc ggtggagcat gtggtttaat
961 tcgatgcaac gcgaagaacc ttacctggtc ttgacatcca cagaactttc cagagatgga
1021 ttggtgcctt cgggaactgt gagacaggtg ctgcatggct gtcgtcagct cgtgttgtga
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 3
1081 aatgttgggt taagtcccgc aacgagcgca acccttatct tttgttgcca gcggtccggc
1141 cgggaactca aaggagactg ccagtgataa actggaggaa ggtggggatg acgtcaagtc
1201 atcatggccc ttacgaccag ggctacacac gtgctacaat ggcgcataca aagagaagcg
1261 acctcgcgag agcaagcgga cctcataaag tgcgtcgtag tccggattgg agtctgcaac
1321 tcgactccat gaagtcggaa tcgctagtaa tcgtggatca gaatgccacg gtgaatacgt
1381 tcccgggcct tgtacacacc gcccgtcaca ccatgggagt gggttgcaaa agaagtaggt
1441 agcttaacct tcgggagggc gcttaccact ttgtgattca tgactggggt gaagtcgtaa
1501 caaggtaacc gtaggggaac ctgcggttgg atcacctcct ta
There are very few differences between the genes. The Salmonella sequence
has three extra bases at the end, and the E-coli gene one extra in the beginning,
there are 37 differences within the genes, and no insertions or deletions. Such a
comparison is easy to perform in the example above, but if there are many se-
quences and lots of insertions and deletions, it can be non-trivial to identify the
relationships among individual bases. This multiple sequence alignment problem is
a major problem in comparative genomics, and is discussed in Section 3. In fact,
one of our main points is that finding a good multiple alignment is the essence of
the ancestral reconstruction problem.
The degree of conservation of the 16S rRNA gene throughout the tree of life
meansitisagoodstartingpointforreconstructingancestralgenomes. Inparticular,
we can begin modestly by asking only for the ancestral 16S rRNA gene sequences.
Such a reconstruction entails the following:
(1) Identifying the 16S gene in many organisms, and determining the se-
quences.
(2) Obtaining a likely phylogenetic tree that relates the sequences.
(3) Inferring ancestral sequences corresponding to internal nodes in the tree.
This comparative genomics programme was outlined by Woese et al. [58]. It fol-
lowedontheheelsofthefirstcomparativegenomicspapers,writtenbyLinusPaul-
ing and Emile Zuckerkandl [41, 61, 62]. They applied fingerprinting techniques
to compare amino acid sequences of hemoglobins, finding that distant species have
more divergent sequences than related species. The biological problem of identify-
ingthe16Sgeneandrapidlyfindingits sequencewassolvedin[30]. Morerecently,
new approacheshavebeen suggestedforobtaining 16SrRNAsequences,evenfrom
unculturable bacteria, using “community sequencing” approaches [11].
The narrow focus of comparative genomics on 16S rRNA ended with the ar-
rival of fast and cheap sequencing technologies. A recent flood of ideas and re-
searchinspired by vast amounts of genome sequences has led to the reconstruction
of numerous protein sequences and even megabases of boreoeutheriean ancestral
chromosomes. Interestingexamplesofthe formerare[24, 28, 54]andofthe latter
[4, 32]. There have been a number of recent surveys on ancestral reconstruction
[45, 53], and a book on the topic will appear next year [31].
We begin in Section 2 by discussing the “easy” case of ancestral sequence
reconstruction, where the phylogenetic tree is known and the alignment of the
sequences is trivial. Evenin this simplest case, the choice of an effective statistical
modelforevolutionisnon-trivialandextremelyimportant. Weintroducethereader
to these issues by way of the simplest example possible, and provide pointers for
further reading. In Section 3 we discuss complexities that arise when inferences
need to be made about insertions and deletions, and when the alignment of the
sequences is non-trivial. The difficulty of alignment is explored in more detail in
4 LIORPACHTER
Section 4, where we presentevidence, based on our ownrecent work,that suggests
the amount of insertion and deletion in genomes has been vastly underestimated.
This has major implications for ancestral genome reconstruction. In Section 5 we
discuss the problem of tree reconstruction, which needs to be solved in the case
where the phylogenetic history of the genomes being compared is unknown. This
leadsustothefieldofphylogenetics[49],wherewerestrictourselvestomentioninga
numberofrecenttheoreticaladvancespertinenttoancestralgenomereconstruction.
WeconcludeinSection6withalistofopenproblemsandadiscussionoftheroleof
mathematics,statistics,andcomputerscienceinreconstructingancestralgenomes.
2. Reconstructing ancestral sequences: the “easy” case
Intheintroduction,wementionedtheexampleof16SrRNAsequences,andob-
served that these genes are conserved in all organisms. However, within restricted
domains of the tree of life, there are examples of functional elements exhibiting
even more sequence conservation than rRNA genes. The term ultra-conserved ele-
ments was introduced in [3], and is used to described genome sequences that have
remainedunchangedovermillions ofyears. Such sequenceswere first discoveredin
vertebrates, and their degree of conservation is astounding.
Example 2.1. Consider the sequence
(2.1) tttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaag
It is located in the human genome on chromosome 7, coordinates 156,694,482–
156,694,523(versionMarch2006). Theidenticalsequenceappearsinthegenomesof
everyothersequencedvertebratespeciestodate: the chimpanzee,rhesusmacaque,
cat, dog, cow, mouse, rat, rabbit, armadillo, opossum, chicken, frog, zebrafish,
pufferfish and fugufish. An alignment of the sequence (including an extra 6 bases
on each end) is shown below:
Human tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Chimp tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Macaque tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Cow tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Mouse tatctgtttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Rat tatctgtttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagtttgta
Rabbit tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Cat tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Dog tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Armadillo tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Opossum tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Chicken tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Frog tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Pufferfish tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Zebrafish tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
Fugufish tatctatttaattgaaagaagttaattgaatgaaaatgatcaactaagcttgta
We postpone providing a precise definition of alignment until Section 3, but
remark that for our purposes here it suffices to consider an alignment to be an
ordered collection of columns. Each column contains bases from different species
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 5
that are homologous, i.e., that are derived from a shared common ancestral base.
Thesequencein(2.1)iscalledultra-conserved,becausethereappeartohavebeenno
insertions,deletionsormutationssincethecommonancestor(*charactersindicate
columnswithallcharactersidentical)amongeachgroupofhomologousnucleotides.
In fact, in [40] we prove
Theorem 2.2. The probability that the sequence (2.1) was not present in the
genome of the ancestor of all vertebrates is less than 10−50, assuming a Jukes-
Cantor model of evolution for the sequences.
The Jukes-Cantor model is a statistical model for the evolution of characters
ontrees,whichis explainedbelow. While the modelhasmanydrawbacksanddoes
notdescribethefullextentandstructureofmutation,thetinyprobabilityisrobust
tochangesinthemodel, anditisfairlycertainthat(2.1)isthe ancestralsequence.
Thestartingpointforspecifyinganevolutionarymodelforbiologicalsequences
is the data: a collection of k sequences σ1,...,σk of lengths n ,...,n , each with
characters from a finite alphabet Σ. We use the notation σa to denote the ith
element of a sequence and by a set of characters S = {σ1,...,σk} we mean the
set of n + n ··· + n sequence characters that form the sequences σ1,...,σk.
These sequences may be DNA sequences (in which case the alphabet has size 4),
amino acid sequences (in which case the alphabet has size 20), or they may be
sequences derived from organisms. For example, the alphabet may have size 2,
and the sequences may represent the presence or lack of genes, or morphological
features in different species. The elements of the sequences are called characters,
and it is important to note that in problems of interest, k is small but n is usually
fairly large (in the case of DNA sequences, n may be in the billions).
We restrictourdiscussionheretotheevolutionarymodelcalledtheCavender–
Farris model[10]. Thisisthe simplestofaclassofcontinuoustimeMarkovmodels
for trees that are used in biological sequence analysis, and although it is very
simple,itcapturesmanyoftheelementsoftheevolutionarymodelsthatareusedin
practice. TheCavender–Farrismodelisanevolutionarymodelforbinarysequences
(i.e., the alphabet has size 2), and for sequences of the same length (n = ··· =
n =n).
The first ingredient of the Cavender-Farris model is a directed rooted tree on
k leaves. Therootofthe treehasbiologicalsignificance: itis the commonancestor
of all the sequences. The leaves of the tree also have special significance: they
correspond to the k different sequences whose evolution is being modeled. The
internal vertices of the tree correspond to speciation events. Edges of the tree are
directed from the root to the leaves, and the directions of the arrows specify the
direction of time.
The second ingredient of the Cavender-Farris model is a collection of 2× 2
matrices associated with each edge of the tree. These matrices are all of the form
(2.2) θ = i i .
i (cid:18)π i µ i(cid:19)
where i is an edge of the tree, 0 ≤ π ≤ 1, and µ = 1−π . These matrices have
a biological interpretation: they describe the probabilities of characters changing
alongbranchesofthetree. Althoughinprincipletheseprobabilitiesmaybedifferent
for each edge and for each character within each sequence, the Cavender–Farris
model specifies a single probability of change π for each edge i. If the vertices
6 LIORPACHTER
adjacent to the edge i are v and w with i oriented from v to w , then for the jth
character of the sequence at v , π is the probability that the jth character of the
sequence at w is different.
The Cavender-Farris model is an example of a continuous time Markov chain
model on a tree. ToseetheconnectiontoMarkovmodels,considerthe2×2square
The rows and columns of Q are indexed by Σ = {0,1}. Note that the matrix Q
has the following properties:
q ≥0 for i6=j,
q =0 for all i∈Σ,
q <0 for all i∈Σ.
Any square matrix Q (of arbitrary size) with the above properties is called a rate
matrix. The following is a straightforward result about continuous time Markov
chains [39].
Theorem 2.3. Let Q be any rate matrix and θ(t)=eQt = ∞ 1Qiti. Then
i=0 i!
(2) θ(t) is the unique solution to the forward differential equation
θ′(t)=θ(t)·Q, θ(0)=1 for t≥0 (here 1 is the identity matrix),
(3) θ(t) is the unique solution to the backward differential equation
Furthermore, a matrix Q is a rate matrix if and only if the matrix θ(t) =eQt is a
stochastic matrix (non-negative with row sums equal to one) for every t≥0.
Note that for the binary rate matrix (2.3), we have
θ(t) = .
2(cid:18)1−e−2αti 1+e−2αti(cid:19)
The expected number of mutations over time t is the quantity
(cid:0) (cid:1)
This number is called the branch length. It can be computed fromthe substitution
matrix θ(t) and is the expected number of mutations. For this reason it is used
instead of t to label edges in a phylogenetic tree.
The matrices θ in the Cavender-Farrismodel are parameterized by α and t:
One way to specify an evolutionary model is to give a phylogenetic tree T
togetherwithQandaninitialdistributionforthe rootofT (whichwehereassume
tobetheuniformdistributiononΣ). Thebranchlengthsoftheedgesareunknown
parameters,andthe objectiveistoestimatethese branchlengthsfromdata. Thus,
if the tree T has r edges, then such a model has r free parameters.
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 7
Returning to Theorem 2.2, we note that the Jukes-Cantor model is just the
Cavender-Farrismodel with |Σ|=4. That is, the Q matrix is given by
Inthiscasethebranchlengthisgivenby3αt(thisshouldbecomparedwith(2.4)).
The Cavender-Farris/Jukes-Cantor models are too simple to be used in prac-
tice. Point mutations in genome display various asymmetries, and the general
reversible Markov model is preferred. The model in (2.7,2.8) is realistic, and was
estimated from observed synonymous substitutions (those that do not change the
amino acid)in human-mouse-ratalignments [60]. Note that π ,π ,π andπ are
the equilibrium frequencies, and are also parameters in the model.
−1.05 0.19 0.71 0.15
 0.17 −0.96 0.18 0.61 
(2.7) Q = ,
0.60 0.17 −0.95 0.17
 0.15 0.72 0.20 −1.07
The models used can be even more general, including local dependencies between
sites and different functional categories for the ancestral sequences that alter mu-
tation rates. There is an extensive literature on this topic, as well as many papers
discussingthereliabilityofreconstructedcharactersinalignedsequences(e.g. [43]).
The final aspect of Theorem 2.2 that we have not yet discussed is a computa-
tional one, namely how to compute the probability given the sequences, the tree
and the model. The algorithm is known as Felsenstein’s algorithm [20] and in-
volvesdynamic programmingon a tree. In the context of ancestralreconstruction,
[44] show how to modify Felsenstein’s algorithm for fast joint reconstructionof all
ancestral sequences. It is best to view all these algorithms as a special case of the
Junction Tree algorithm for a graphical model where the graph is a tree.
We conclude by noting that there is a direct connection between evolution-
ary models such as the Cavender-Farris model and the emerging field of algebraic
statistics. This is because the families of probability distributions on the leaves
are essentially parameterized algebraic varieties, and for this reason the tools of
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry can be used to study the model and
develop inference methods. We refer the interested reader to the recent book [39]
for an introduction to the subject.
3. Alignment
The models for ancestral reconstruction in Section 2 do not account for in-
sertions and deletions (indels). This is a serious drawback because the homology
between muliple sequences is complicated by insertions, deletions, rearrangements,
segmental duplications, and other evolutionary events. We restrict our discussion
in this section to the issues regarding ancestral reconstruction in the presence of
insertions and deletions only.
8 LIORPACHTER
Definition 3.1. A partial global multiple alignment of sequence characters S =
{σ1,...,σk} is a partially ordered set P = {c ,...,c } together with a surjective
function ϕ:S →P such that ϕ(σa)<ϕ(σa) if i<j.
The elements of P correspond to columns of the multiple alignment, and the
partialorderspecifiestheorderinwhichcolumnsmustappear. Notethatthefunc-
tion ϕ specifies the homology relationships among the sequences: two characters
thataremappedto the sameelementinthe posetarehomologous. Thus,analign-
ment is just a pair (P,ϕ). We call P an alignment poset, and note that unless P
is a total order (chain), there are columns of the partial multiple alignment whose
order is unspecified. A linear extension of a partially ordered set P ={c ,...,c }
Figure 1. A set of four sequences, an alignment poset together
with a linear extension, and a global multiple alignment. The
function from the set of sequence elements to the alignment poset
that specifies the multiple alignment is not shown, but is fully
specified by the diagram on the right. For example, the second
element in the first sequence is σ1 =G, and ϕ(σ1) corresponds to
the fourth column of the multiple alignment.
is a permutation of the elements c ,...,c such that whenever c < c , i < j.
A global multiple alignment is a partial global multiple alignment together with a
linearextensionofthealignmentposetP (seeFigure1). Thealignmentinexample
2.1 is a global multiple alignment where the poset is a chain.
The problem of finding a multiple alignment for a collection of sequences is
to find a “good” poset and function ϕ that are likely to determine the homology
correctly. Thisisanon-trivialproblem,anditssolutionisessentialforaccuratean-
cestralreconstructionof sequences. A complete discussionof multiple alignment is
beyondthescopeofthissection,butwebrieflyreviewpairwisesequencealignment.
In the case of two sequences, an alignment poset is always a disjoint union of
chains. Notethatfortwosequencesoflengthnandm,thereare n+m alignments.
We consider a simple criterion for selecting an alignment. Given(cid:0)thre(cid:1)e parameters
X,S and M, we assign a score to an alignment as follows:
where #S = |{x ∈ P : |ϕ−1(x)| = 1}| (the number of spaces in the alignment),
#M = |{a ∈ σi,b ∈ σj : ϕ(a) = ϕ(b), chara = charb}| (the number of matches),
and #X = |{a ∈ σi,b ∈ σj : ϕ(a) = ϕ(b), chara 6= charb}| (the number of mis-
matches). Theproblemofmaximizing(3.1)canbesolvedefficientlyusingdynamic
programming, using what is known as the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm [36]. As
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 9
with Felsenstein’s algorithm, this is just a special case of the Junction Tree algo-
rithm, in this case for a graphical model known as the pair hidden Markov model.
Despitethename,pairhiddenMarkovmodelsarenon-trivialmodificationsofstan-
dardhiddenMarkovmodelsmodels,inthatthestructureofthemodelsisnotfixed.
Inthe graphicalmodelliterature,these types of models arereferredto as Bayesian
multinets. The connection between alignments and pair HMMs provides a proba-
bilistic interpretation for the score in (3.1). For details see [1] or [39].
Analignmentspecifiesthe homologyrelationshipsamongnucleotidesoramino
acids, but provides no information about ancestral sequences. In order to make
inferencesaboutancestralsequences,itisnecessarytousethealignmenttoestimate
the locations, sizes, and times of insertions and deletions.
Figure 2. Alignment of 17 species from the CFTR region [50].
Example 3.2. Figure 2 shows an alignment of 17 species from the cystic fibrosis
transmembraneconductanceregulatoryregion(CFTR)producedfortheENCODE
consortium[18]. The phylogenetictree onthe left canbe used inconjunction with
thealignmenttoidentifyindelevents. Theboxesshowninthefigureshowthemost
parsimonious explanation (minimum number of events), based on the tree [50].
Given a phylogenetic tree T, together with a pair hidden Markov model asso-
ciated to each edge of T, the tree alignment problem is to find sequences σi where
i ranges over all the internal nodes of T such that P(σi,σj) is maxi-
mized. TheinferenceperformedinExample3.2[50Q]isbasedonarestrictedversion
of tree alignment. In general, there is a ratio-two approximation algorithm for the
problem that runs in quadratic time, together with a polynomial time approxima-
tion scheme [56].
4. The limits of ancestral reconstruction: indel saturation
Studies of the reliability of ancestral reconstruction have mostly focused on
point mutations and the effects of using different types of evolutionary models
[57]. Such studies implicitly assume that multiple alignment, while difficult, is
a tractable problem and that indels can be effectively ignored, or else accounted
for using procedures such as tree alignment. In this section we provide indirect
evidence that evenoverrelatively shorttime-scales,large number of insertions and
deletions make it impossible to align sequences (as there is little or no homology),
10 LIORPACHTER
and therefore it is impossible to reconstruct ancestral sequences. Our arguments
are based on estimating the overall numbers of indels from length differences of
homologous segments.
Weillustrateourideaswithacalculationbasedonthecomparisonofintronsin
fourspeciesoftheDrosophila(fruitfly): melanogaster,pseudoobscura,yakubaand
virils. Introns are sequences within genes that are spliced out after transcription
but before translation, so that they do not contribute to the amino acids in the
protein. Although it has been shown that introns can be important for regulating
theexpressionofgenes,theyconsistofmostlynon-functionalsequence. Thereason
to examine Drosophila is that multiple genomes have been sequenced during the
past year. The reason to look at introns is that it is easy to identify homologous
introns when the genes they reside in are unambiguously homologous.
Our methods provide an overall assessment of the number of inserted and
deletednucleotidesalongeachbranchofthetreerelatingthespecies. Theinference
is basedon a maximum likelihoodmodel for Brownianmotion ona tree, originally
developed by Felsenstein [21] for modeling changes in gene frequencies over time.
Our application of this model to estimating indel rates from length differences of
introns is new, and is the first such analysis with more than a pair of species. Pre-
vious work on the comparison of lengths of pairs of homologous introns [37, 59]
has mainly revealed that there is a correlation between the length differences and
the distance between species.
We explain the Gaussian model we consider completely but briefly, for more
detail and background we refer the reader to [21, 38]. Let T be an unrooted tree
with n leaves, together with labels v = v ,...,v on the edges parameterizing
variances of normal distributions. Let xs be quantitative characters generated
from a Brownian motion model on a tree. We use the term quantitative character
to refer to uncountable state spaces, in this case xs ∈ R. The ijth contrast is
∆xs = xs −xs. Note that ∆xs is drawn from a normal distribution with mean
0 and variance v . Let C ={i j ,...,i j } ⊂ [n] be a spanning tree of the
ij 1 1 n−1 n−1 2
complete graphK
. In the case of four taxa which w(cid:0)e w(cid:1)ill consider (see Figure 3),
the C-covariance matrix for C ={12,13,14}is
15 25 15 15
.
v v +v v +v +v
15 15 56 15 46 56
We let ∆xs = [∆xs ,...,∆xs ] and denote the determinant of Σ by
C i1j1 in−1jn−1 C
|Σ |. The log-likelihood of the data is given by
(n−1)p p 1
([n]) 2 2 C 2 C C C
2 Xs=1(cid:0) (cid:1)
This specifies the model we will use completely. The next Lemma follows from the
“Pulley principle” [21].
Lemma 4.1. The log-likelihood (4.2) does not depend on the choice of C. Further-
more, (4.2) is linear in the n numbers d = p ∆xs 2 .
2 ij s=1 ij
(cid:0) (cid:1) P (cid:0) (cid:1)
Inotherwords,ifweletd={d }n ,thenthemaximumlikelihoodestimator
=argmaxv lnL(d|v).
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 11
Figure 3. Tree with four leaves.
is well-defined and it therefore makes sense to refer to the “log-likelihood function
for the contrast Brownian motion model on a tree”.
Example 4.2 (n=3, from [21]). The likelihood equation becomes
lnL(d ,d ,d |v ,v ,v ) = −pln2π− ln(v v +v v +v v )
12 13, 23 14 24 34 14 24 14 34 24 34
v d +v d +v d
14 23 24 13 34 12
− .
2(v v +v v +v v )
14 24 14 34 24 34
The critical equations are easy to solve and one finds that
14 12 13 23
c24 23 12 13
c34 13 23 12
Notethatinthe casecp=1,ifd isatreemetricthenV
. Thisis truefor
general n, and is a restatement of the fact that the maximum likelihood estimator
is consistent.
Example 4.3 (n=4). There are five critical equations in the n=4 case:
25 36 46 56 36 46 34 25 56 24 35 23 45
15 36 46 56 36 46 34 15 56 13 46 14 36
46 36 46 56 14 24 12 46 56 14 25 24 15
36 36 46 56 14 24 12 36 56 23 15 13 25
15 25 36 46 34 15 25 12 36 46
Thesolutionoftheseequationsisanexerciseinelimination,andcanbedoneusing
Gr¨obner bases methods [39]. Using the pulley principle we can restrict ourselves
to v +v = d and v +v = d , in which case we find one unique critical
15 25 12 36 46 34
point: theglobalmaximum. Thesolutionconsistsof5enormousrationalfunctions
in tche d cwhich we omitchere cdue to lack of space.
The data analyzed was obtained from [59]. We restricted our attention to
introns in the range of 100−500bp, and cleaned up the dataset by removing du-
plicates or cases with ambiguous homology. We then computed, for each pair of
species, the “distance”
12 LIORPACHTER
Figure 4. Differences in lengths between homologous introns in
Drosophila melanogaster and pseudoobscura. Introns with similar
numbers ofinsertionsanddeletions displaylittle lengthdifference,
but that does not mean that introns with small length differences
have not undergone insertion and deletion.
where ∆xs is the difference in length between the sth pair of introns in species i
andj. ThisisjustthequantitythatappearsinLemma4.1. Itisimportanttonote
thattheuseoftheBrownianmotionmodelonthed constitutesanapproximation
to a Poisson process model for indels. We omit the details of this relationship and
again refer to [38].
Returning to the data, we show a histogram of the differences between the
intron lengths for a pair of species in Figure 4. These are the raw data we use
to compute the d distances, and then the maximum likelihood estimates for the
branch lengths, which are the total number of indels. The maximum likelihood
estimates are
v = 49894,
v = 16169,
where vertices 5,6 are the internal vertices in the four taxa tree (as in Figure 3).
In other words, we estimate that the total number of inserted and deleted bases
betweenD.melanogasterandD.Yakubais5725,andbetweenD.melanogasterand
D. pseudoobscura we obtain 3204+16169+9595=28968.
These numbers are much larger than the mean length of the introns we con-
sidered (note that the longest introns had length 500). The conclusion is that the
total number of inserted and deleted bases is far larger than the size of the intron.
This may seem surprising at first, but is a reflection of the fact that insertions and
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 13
deletions cancel each other out, and therefore a small difference in intron length
does not necessarily indicate a lack of indel activity. In fact, the intuition that
homologousintrons of similar length must contain homologous nucleotides is false.
The difference of two Poisson distributions is Skellam distributed, and if the rates
are the same then the peak is at 0, exactly what we see in Figure 4.
The Brownian motion model we have proposed is (too) simple; it is the indel
equivalent of the Jukes-Cantor model for point mutations, but it is sufficiently
realisticto suggestthatitmaybe impossible toreconstructancestralintrondue to
excessiveindel turnover. The large amount of insertion and deletion should not be
surprisinginthelightoftheexistenceoftransposableelements. Thesearerepetitive
elements that make up a large fraction of many genomes. The term transposable
elements groups several subclasses of elements that replicate autonomously in the
genome, either through reverse transcription, or directly from DNA to DNA via
excisionandrepair. Uptohalfofthehumangenomeiscomposedofsuchelements,
and although they are sometimes thought of as “parasitic elements”, somewhat
like viruses, they clearly play an integral role in shaping genome evolution, and in
many cases are believed to influence gene function. Unfortunately, they confound
attemptsatreconstructinggenomes,byvirtueofcreatingenormousturnoverinthe
sequences. At the very least, a complete catalog of such elements will be essential
for reconstructing ancestral genomes.
5. Tree reconstruction
In the previous sections we have been assuming that the phylogenetic tree for
thespeciesunderconsiderationisknown. Thisassumptionis,unfortunately,rarely
justifiable. Molecular based phylogenies may not conclusively determine certain
branchings in a tree, and fossil-based phylogenies tend to have low resolution. We
mention two best-case examples where despite substantial work there is still some
disagreement as to the actual phylogeny. In vertebrates, molecular techniques are
not in agreement with other methods used for the rodents (the so-called “rodent
problem” [2, 52]), and in Drosophila there is disagreementabout the splits among
Drosophila erecta, yakuba and melanogaster [42]. In other branches of the tree
of life, the situation can be that nothing at all is known about the details of the
phylogeny. Thus,phylogenetictreesmustbeinferred,andthetopologyofthetrees
has a direct bearing on the reconstructed ancestral sequences [46].
We begin by describing a likelihood-based strategy that can be followed, but
that is computationally infeasible in practice: for each tree, the probability of
the known sequences may be computed for a specific evolutionary model, and one
can select the tree/evolutionarymodel combination with maximallikelihood. This
is known as the maximum likelihood approach to phylogeny reconstruction. The
reason the algorithm proposed above is computationally intractable for trees with
manyleavesisthatthenumberofbinarytreeswithkleavesis(2k−5)!!. Moreover,
the problem of finding the maximum likelihood branch lengths for a fixed tree is
very difficult [25]. The field of phylogenetics research is very active and it is only
recently that the following result was published, quantifying the difficulty of the
tree reconstruction problem:
Theorem 5.1 ([12]). Given a set of binary strings, all of the same length, and
a negative number L, it is NP-hard to determine whether there is a tree T such
14 LIORPACHTER
that the log likelihood of the sequences for the tree T with optimal branch lengths is
greater than L.
On the positive side, there are theoretically sound approaches to phylogenetic
reconstructionthatare alsopracticalfor largedatasets. Inthe contextofancestral
reconstructionthereareoftenmanytaxatobeconsidered,andthefavoredapproach
is neighbor joining [47] (sometimes other closely related distance-based algorithms
areused[8]). The neighborjoiningalgorithmtakesasinputadissimilarity mapon
a set of taxa X. This is a map δ : X ×X → R that satisfies δ(i,j) = δ(j,i) and
δ(i,i) = 0. The quantities δ(i,j) are maximum likelihood estimates of the branch
length (see 2.4) between every pair of taxa. The algorithm is:
(1) Given a dissimilarity map δ, compute the Q-criterion
Xk6=i Xk6=j
Then select a pair a,b that minimize Q as motivated by the following
theorem:
Theorem 5.2 ([47]). Let δ be the tree metric corresponding to the tree
T. The pair a,b that minimizes Q (i,j) is a cherry in the tree.
(2) If there are more than three taxa, replace the putative cherry a and b
with a leaf j , and construct a new dissimilarity map where δ(i,j ) =
1(δ(i,a)+δ(i,b)). This is called the reduction step.
(3) Repeat (1) and (2) until there are three taxa.
Neighbor-joining is fast: existing implementations run in O(n3) where n is the
number of taxa, and it has been observed (empirically) to produce good results
[29]. However,despite the ubiquitous use of the algorithm, very little about it has
been understood until recently. Exciting new results include:
• The development of fast neighbor-joining which achieves an optimal run
time of O(n2) [17].
• A uniqueness theorem for the algorithm [7].
• Ananswertothequestionof“whatdoesneighbor-joiningoptimize”? [23].
• An answer to the question of “when (and why) does neighbor-joining
work”? [35].
Together, these results provide new insight into the algorithm, and open up the
possibility for significant improvements in accuracy.
Returning to maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction, recent results
also show that it is possible to efficiently reconstruct the topology of trees (with
high probability) using likelihood models of the type described in Section 2 given
only polylogarithmic quantities of data.
Theorem 5.3 ([13]). Under the Cavender-Farris model, there is a constructive
algorithm that reconstructs almost all trees on k leaves with sequences of length
k =O(poly(logk)).
Arecentrelatedresult[34]providesanalternativeanalysisthatquantitatively
couples the reconstruction problem with the ancestral reconstruction problem. In-
deed, itappearsthat ancestralsequence reconstructionandtree reconstructionare
far more related than originally thought.
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 15
6. Open problems and discussion
A recent survey article [45] proposes that “an integrated, multi-disciplinary
approachis neededinordertomakeprogressonancestralgenomereconstruction”.
Weagreewiththispointofview,andinthespiritoftheproposalofferaninvitation
tomathematicians,statisticiansandcomputerscientistsbyhighlightingsomeopen
problems that may form a starting point for research and collaboration. We focus
onproblemsimportantforbiology,butmanyofthequestionsalsoleadtointeresting
mathematics [51].
The Cavender-Farris model introduced in Section 2 is the simplest example of
anevolutionarymodel. Acentralproblemingenomicsistofindappropriatemodels
that effectively capture the mechanisms by which sequences changes, but that are
also useful for inference. An important class of models that have been proposed
are phylogenetic hidden Markov models [33, 48].
Problem 6.1 (Phylogenetichidden Markovmodels). Find efficient algorithms for
inference with phylogenetic hidden Markov models.
See [27] for an introduction to this problem and some first steps exploring the
use of variational methods and other graphical model techniques.
InSection4,weraisetheissueofalignabilityofsequences,andtheimplications
for ancestralgenome reconstruction. There are other approachesto addressingthe
problemofalignability: In[14],weshowthatthechoiceofparametersiscrucialfor
correctly identifying homologous transcription factor binding sites. The methods
used are those of parametric alignment, which is a geometric approachto studying
the dependence of optimal alignments on parameters. We propose the following
problem based on [22].
Problem 6.2 (Parametric ancestral reconstruction). Develop polyhedral algo-
rithms for the ancestral reconstruction problem. In particular, what implications
does the Jukes-Cantor function of [14], have for ancestral reconstruction?
Inasimilarvein,andinspiredbyourobservationinSection4 thatthe number
of indels in introns may preclude ancestral reconstruction, we ask:
Problem 6.3 (Indel saturation). What are the limits on ancestral reconstruction
as determined by indel rates and distances?
In the field of phylogenetics, we offer two problems chosen for their specific
relevance to the ancestral genome reconstruction problem. For readers interested
in algebraic geometry, we mention [19] for further mathematical problems.
Problem 6.4 (Tree reconstruction and alignment). Find efficient algorithms for
reconstructing a tree under the tree alignment model.
The next problem is especially important for ancestral reconstruction of bac-
terial genomes where there is a lot of horizontal transfer:
Problem6.5(Consistencytheoremsfornetworks). Extendtherobustnessanalysis
of[35]togeneralizationsoftheneighborjoiningalgorithmthatprojectdissimilarity
maps onto phylogenetic networks [9, 26] rather than trees.
The reconstruction of ancestral genomes involves more than the inference of
ancestral sequences based on groups of homologous extant nucleotides. The or-
der of sequences is also important, and an important component of whole genome
16 LIORPACHTER
reconstruction is the inference of the ancestral order of genomic segments. The
problem is closely related to the whole genome alignment problem [15]. In this
regard, Definition 3.1 is too restrictive. For example, it does not allow for homol-
ogyrelationshipswhere therehavebeen rearrangements,inversions,andsegmental
duplications. In our opinion, a major problem that needs to be solved, where a
close collaboration between biologists and mathematicians is necessary is:
Problem 6.6 (What is an alignment?). Provide a definition for whole genome
alignment that is based on a comprehensive biological definition of homology.
There are formulations of alignment different from 3.1, but they are also too
restrictive. Nevertheless, we mention one important approach to inference of an-
cestral order:
Definition 6.7. A reversal alignment between two genomes is a signed permuta-
tion.
For example, the signed permutation
(6.1) 17−610−98−211−3−54
is a reversal alignment between the human and mouse X chromosomes (this is an
examplefrom[5]). ThismeansthatthereisadivisionofthehumanXchromosome
into 11 pieces (equivalently 11 breakpoints) such that if they are labeled, in order,
1234567891011, then they appear in the mouse in the order (6.1). Note that
the negative signs specify the direction of the segments, with a negative indicating
reversal and complementation. A reversal operation involves reversing the order
of a segment of a signed permutation, and flipping the signs. For example, by
a reversal of (6.1) can consist of changing the segment 11−3−54 to 4−5−311.
Biologically, reversals correspond to rearrangement events. The reconstruction of
ancestral order is equivalent to
Problem 6.8 (The median problem). Given a phylogenetic tree T, a distance
measurebetweensignedpermutations,andsignedpermutationslabelingthe leaves
of T, find signed permutations πi where i ranges over all the internal nodes of T
such that the sum of the distances between permutations adjacent in the tree is
minimized.
Thecasewherethedistancemeasureisthereversaldistanceisalreadyinterest-
ing and difficult, but in practice more complex distance measures need to be used
(that allow for multiple chromosomes and other events, such as duplications). For
more on the problem see [6, 16, 55].
We conclude by noting that although we have not discussed it in this paper,
ancestral reconstructions of proteins can be sequenced and tested for their physio-
chemicalproperties(e.g.,[28, 54]). Thus,ancestralreconstructionsarenotmerely
theoretical exercises. This exciting aspect of the field continues to be developed,
and will hopefully lead to tests not just of genes, but also of ancestral regulatory
elements and larger genome segments.
AN INTRODUCTION TO RECONSTRUCTING ANCESTRAL GENOMES 17