Chapter 6: An Introduction to RNA Databases
Marc P. Hoeppner 1, Lars E. Barquist 2 and Paul P. Gardner 2,3
1 Department of Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden
2 Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA0,
3 School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
Marc P. Hoeppner: marc.hoeppner@molbio.su.se
Lars E. Barquist: lb14@sanger.ac.uk
Paul P. Gardner: pg5@sanger.ac.uk
We present an introduction to RNA databases. The history and technology behind RNA
databases is briefly discussed. We examine differing methods of data collection and
curation, and discuss their impact on both the scope and accuracy of the resulting
databases. Finally, we demonstrate these principals through detailed examination of four
leading RNA databases: Noncode, miRBase, Rfam, and SILVA.
Keywords: ncRNA, database, alignment database, sequence database, SILVA, Rfam,
Noncode, miRBase
Introduction
The introduction of targeted molecular and bioinformatic approaches (1,2) and the
availability of affordable sequencing technologies have lead to a glut of novel ncRNA
sequences (Figure 6.1). NcRNAs have been shown to be involved in a diverse array of
cellular processes, from long-known roles in the translational process to more recently
discovered functions in the regulation of gene expression and genomic defense (3,4).
Databases provide a central resource for researchers to obtain and deposit this information
in the form of sequences and descriptive metadata.
[Figure 6.1]
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the reader to the state of the art of RNA
databases. The first section of this chapter will provide a brief history of RNA databases
which will put current databases in context. The second section covers approaches to data
collection and curation, and how these differing approaches affect the utility of data served.
Finally, we illustrate these points by exploring a few exemplar databases in depth:
Noncode, miRBase, Rfam, and SILVA.
RNA databases - a historical perspective
The development of modern RNA databases reflects both our growing knowledge of RNA
biology and the development of modern information technologies. The earliest databases
focused on long-known classes of RNA molecules. For instance, the original release of the
Sprinzl tRNA database was distributed as the text of a journal article (5). Other early
databases include the Signal Recognition Particle Database (6) and the Ribosomal RNA
Database project (7), both distributed as “flat” text files over FTP.
The growing number of sequenced RNAs drove a shift in database technology. While the
original Sprinzl tRNA database contained approximately 700 sequences, it’s modern
inheritor contains more than 12,000 tRNA genes (8), and the current release of the Rfam
database contains over 1 million sequences computationally identified as encoding tRNAs.
This amount of data would be impractical to store and search as flat files. The solution to
this problem that has been adopted is the use of relational databases accessible over the
world wide web.
The strength of relational databases lies in the ability to have one data repository from
which multiple outputs can be generated dynamically. Any updates to the database will
affect all output. In contrast, flat files need to be updated individually. More specifically, a
relational database acts as a server which organizes data and provides it in an interactive
fashion to client applications. All output draws from the same source, making data
maintenance considerably easier. In addition, the way data is organized allows for the use
of complex boolean queries to retrieve specific information of interest. An example would be
collecting all human ncRNAs that belong to a specific class, are between 50 and 60
nucleotides long and were published after 2004. This would require query-specific scripting
with flat file data, and would then require constant updating of a multitude of files as new
information becomes available. In a relational database, we would simply select the
relevant entries from our tables, and any changes in the underlying data set could be
captured by re-running our query.
[Figure 6.2]
At the time of writing, there are at least 72 active databases dedicated to RNA (9)
specialist databases as their functional importance has grown clear. Examples include
bacterial small RNAs (10) and eukaryote microRNAs (11), both of which function in the
regulation of gene expression. Other abundant classes are small interfering RNAs (siRNA)
(12) and small nucleolar RNAs (13). The latter have been found in both archaea and
eukaryotes and have spawned several databases over the years, focused on the inventory
of single species or on collecting information from a broad taxonomic range
In contrast to these ‘specialist’ databases and as a consequence of the widening spectrum
of known RNA classes, the need for ‘generalist databases’ has emerged. Examples include
the noncoding sequence database Noncode (14) and the RNA family database Rfam (15).
Focusing on information relevant only to a narrow functional class of RNA, these databases
aim to provide broad information about all RNAs.
The RNA community continues to drive innovation in database design. The Rfam database
has recently shifted its annotation to the open encyclopedia, Wikipedia (16). Through
Wikipedia anyone with an internet connection can contribute or correct annotation, allowing
database developers to focus on adding and improving data sources. Early fears about
vandalism seem to be unfounded (15), and the open community annotation model is being
adopted by other databases and scientific institutions.
Curation and Data
Given the diversity of RNA function, it is not surprising that different classes of ncRNAs can
require different approaches for data production (1). One of the more important challenges
is the detection and classification of RNAs. The various classes of RNA have different
defining features that need to be taken into consideration. An example of this are
microRNAs (miRNAs). Given the relatively short sequence of a mature miRNA (~22 bp),
testing for the presence of their characteristic stem-loop structure is an essential step in the
prediction process to decrease the chance of false annotations. In contrast, small nucleolar
RNAs possess well-conserved sequence motifs in addition to structural features. Similar
requirements exist for many other classes as well. Consequently, detection algorithm
choice depends on the class of RNA under investigation.
Another distinguishing factor across databases is scope. Some databases focus on a
particular type of ncRNA (specialist databases), while others provide access to sequences
from a broad range of ncRNA classes (generalist databases). Similarly, sequences may be
presented individually (sequence databases) or grouped based on common function and
inferred ancestry (alignment databases). Some databases rely on data manually curated by
domain experts in addition to or instead of computational predictions. In the following, we
will discuss the various approaches used in RNA databases, then present some specific
examples that demonstrate their application.
Manual versus automated annotation
One of the main differences between RNA databases is whether the data is the result of
experimental discovery and verification or derived from automatic, computational scans
(discussed in other chapters). The former is often used in specialist databases, whereas the
latter generally finds application in genome-scale annotation processes.
Automated annotation has a clear advantage in that it can be used to quickly identify
potential RNAs in very large data sets. Relevant tools range from sequence similarity
search methods such as BLAST (17,18) to complex probabilistic models (19). Rather then
relying entirely on experimentally confirmed results, automated annotation uses some
criterion of sequence and/or structural similarity to define thresholds for the inclusion of new
sequences (e.g. covariance models as implemented in Infernal (20)). This "thresholding"
allows for greater transparency and makes it possible for researchers to apply the same
method to their own data. Likewise, new insights into the sequence or structure of a given
RNA can be easily incorporated into the annotation process without requiring a time-
consuming manual re-evaluation of all data.
Despite technological advances, computational predictions still come with a number of
caveats. First, they are only as good as the information they are built on - such as a seed
alignment for covariance models. While manual curation of data is potentially subjective
and can result in the occasional false annotation, any error in the automated annotation
process will affect all down-stream predictions and could be more severe. However, these
mistakes can also be more easily rectified by adjusting the relevant parameters and
rerunning the analysis.
Second, the degree of sequence divergence of ncRNAs remains a complicated issues and
can be highly variable across classes and lineages. Some ncRNAs, such as tRNAs, have
relatively well conserved sequences and have been predicted with a low error rate across
all domains of life (21). However, many other ncRNAs, such as small nucleolar RNAs
(snoRNAs), can exhibit a high degree of sequence plasticity (22). SnoRNAs are involved in
the guidance of modifications on other RNAs (mostly rRNA) through the interaction with a
conserved protein complex. As their function is determined by their secondary structure and
a small stretch of complementarity to their target sequence, primary sequence information
may not be sufficient for reliable identification over larger evolutionary distances. In such
cases, finding genuine RNA genes without producing many false positives is challenging
and experimental validation is of crucial importance.
Whether to prefer manual or automatic curation depends on the intended use of the data.
Manual curation will provide high specificity, while automatic curation will produce a higher
false positive rate in exchange for a faster and more systematic detection. It should be
noted that both approaches can be complimentary. Manual curation is usually the first step
in automatic annotation pipelines, while automatic annotation in turn recovers many
candidate sequences later subjected to manual inspection and curation. In any case,
information from databases can not replace a solid understanding of the biology of the
ncRNAs under investigation and scrutiny of the information is always advisable.
Sequence versus alignment databases
A large fraction of RNA databases can be further divided into sequence databases and
alignment databases. Sequence databases, such as GenBank (23), are primarily designed
as repositories. Their primary purpose is to store individual sequences, usually
complemented by cross-references to publications and other databases. This approach
makes it easier for both developers and external contributors to add to the database, as
little specialized analysis beyond sequence discovery is necessary for a new entry.
However, sequence databases generally contain no detailed information on individual
ncRNAs, their relationships to each other or a robust nomenclature. The lack of explicit
homology information or a stringent nomenclature may negatively impact the value of such
resources to certain users. For example, discovering all of the U3 snoRNA sequences in
GenBank presents a considerable challenge. Some of the relevant entries may contain
helpful information in their descriptions, but many others will not. Even more are probably
not annotated at all.
In contrast, to better capture the diversity of a ncRNA, some of the more specialized
projects (e.g. miRBase) bin ncRNAs into families based on their expected common
ancestry using similarity in structure and sequence. These sequences can then be aligned,
producing an estimate of the diversity of each nucleotide. The alignments may
subsequently be employed to e.g. train covariance models and thus greatly improving out
ability to identify homologs across genomes. On the downside, this process is time
consuming as each sequence and alignment need to be manually curated to ensure
optimal sensitivity. As such, expansion of these databases may be limited by the availability
of expert curators able to perform such tasks.
[Figure 6.3]
RNA databases - examples and practical application
In the previous section, we defined RNA databases in terms of their curation style and data
types. These differences have implications for when and how databases should be used. In
the following, we will explore these implications by the example of a few leading databases
covering the breadth of methods and scopes.
General sequence databases - Noncode
Noncode, established in 2005, is among the most exhaustive general databases on the
topic of ncRNAs (14). At the time of writing, it holds information on 112 distinct classes from
over 800 species. Noncode is a general sequence database and as such focuses on
presenting individual sequences with relevant metadata. In contrast to many other
databases, candidate genes are derived primarily from experimental data – over 80% of
sequences. This is an impressive feat when considering that there are over 200000
sequence entries in Noncode (release 2.0, 2007).
Data production in Noncode is a step-wise, semi-automated process. Initially, a set of broad
keywords is used to identify putative ncRNAs in the literature and new queries are
iteratively added to the original list as they are recovered during this search. Based on the
results of this process, the GenBank database is then automatically filtered for candidate
entries. All data is manually vetted by reference to relevant publications to ensure that they
constitute genuine RNAs and to gather additional information relevant to their biological
role. Sequences are checked for redundancy before being added to the final data set
(Figure 6.4).
[Figure 6.4]
A useful innovation in Noncode is the introduction of a 'process function classification'
(PFC). PFC is a vocabulary that describe the cellular functions a ncRNA takes part in,
similar to GO terms (24). This system was introduced in an attempt to systematize RNAs
functional nomenclature and allows quick access to particular functional classes. Other
useful parameters used to describe RNAs include the molecular mechanism of their
function, their sub-cellular location, or their cellular role. Noncode can also report ncRNAs
based on their organismal range.
Noncode features a boolean search engine that allows users to perform complex queries
against the data set, enabling efficient data mining - with certain limitations. Among these, it
relies on existing annotation and so does not contain unannotated homologous sequences,
though a BLAST sequence search is available for specific sequence queries. Additionally,
while all sequences are available as a bulk FASTA-format download, the metadata is not.
This limits the prospects for preforming bespoke analysis of the Noncode dataset.
At the time of writing (March 2011) updates to Noncode have been sparse (2005 and
2007), and so may not reflect the current state of ncRNA research. A contributing factor
here may be the presumably time-consuming manual vetting of data as part of the
production pipeline.
Specialized sequence databases - miRBase
The microRNA (miRNA) database miRBase was first released in 2002 as the 'microRNA
Registry' (25). It is currently the most complete resource for information on miRNAs, a
diverse group of eukaryote RNAs involved in the regulation of gene expression (26). The
primary goal of miRBase is to collect published, experimentally verified miRNA sequences
and provide researchers with a consistent nomenclature. As of March 2011, the database
has seen 16 major releases and contains entries for over 17,000 distinct mature miRNA
and their sequences in over 140 species (Figure 6.5).
[Figure 6.5]
Conceptually, miRBase can be divided into three parts (Figure 6.6). The first is the registry,
in which novel miRNAs are included and given a unique id and stable accession number. In
order to be considered for inclusion into miRBase, sequences must conform to a set of
quality criteria and be either derived from experimental studies or show clear homology to
existing entries (27). De-novo computational predictions are not part of the miRBase data
set. Submitted sequences are manually inspected and integrated into the database, but
only after the work describing the new data has been accepted for publication in a peer-
reviewed journal. This serves to maintain a high standard and clean data set with few false
annotations. Where applicable, entries are also assigned to a higher order family which
group miRNAs across species based on common ancestry. Owing to the increasing amount
of available sequencing data, miRBase has recently integrated new procedures to recover
miRNAs from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (28) using, among other things,
significant sequence similarity to existing entries and characteristic expression profiles as
criteria to identify genuine miRNAs
The second part of miRBase focuses on miRNA sequences. Individual miRNAs are
annotated in depth with information such as genome coordinates and genomic context
(intronic, intergenic, clustered or singleton). Relevant meta data is extracted from the
literature, including details on experimental procedures used to identify and characterize the
respective genes. Finally, miRBase links individual miRNA entries to external databases
that focus on automated prediction of possible mRNA targets, such as ‘microCosm’ which
was originally developed as part of miRBase.
[Figure 6.6]
MiRBase offers a range of options for users to interact with its data. Most importantly, it can
be searched for a set of pre-defined criteria including species, genomic location and
expression patterns. While a free-form search is possible, it does not support complex
boolean queries. In addition, BLASTN and SSEARCH can be used to find known miRNAs
similar to a query sequence. The wealth of metadata makes miRBase particularly useful for
bioinformaticians. Not only is it possible to download all the sequences, but the entire
database is freely available as well. This opens up the possibility of designing custom data
mining pipelines which incorporate all of the information contained in miRBase.
General alignment databases - Rfam
The RNA family database, Rfam, is the largest general alignment database currently
available (15,29). As of release 10, it provides over 3 million annotations for 1446 distinct
ncRNAs across the entire EMBL nucleotide database. Rfam defines all sequences that
align to a covariance mode constructed from a ”seed” alignment within certain sequence
and structural similarity criteria as a family. These “seed” models are constructed from two
or more representative sequences and are manually curated, using published data. The
thresholds of Rfam covariance models are individually adjusted to account for the varying
degree of sequence plasticity specific to each family, reducing the fraction of false
annotations. A possible shortcoming of this approach is that distantly related RNAs may not
be captured by a model. To address this issue, Rfam has introduced clans, which are a
higher-order grouping of families based on expected common descent using information
from the literature and measures of similarity between families (16). Clans and families
provide a robust nomenclature to identify homologous RNAs across genomes.
[Figure 6.7]
The Rfam annotation pipeline consist of a two step process (Figure 6.8). First, verified
RNAs from the literature or external databases are used to create seed alignments.
Sequences from these families are then used as queries for WU-BLAST searches against
the EMBL nucleotide database to identify candidate RNAs. This step is made necessary by
the comparatively high computational requirements of the covariance model search but
may be replaced by accelerated profile hidden Markov models in the near future (30,31). All
candidate sequences are subsequently subjected to more rigorous covariance model
searches (20). These models are calibrated so as to capture the suspected range of an
ncRNA family, while providing a low false positive rate.
[Figure 6.8]
The tools and information provided by Rfam are diverse. Full alignments of all annotations
as well as evolutionary trees are available to provide users with insight into the diversity and
phylogenetic distribution of each family. In addition, users can search sequences against
the Rfam database to identify putative ncRNAs. In addition, the Rfam database as well as
the annotation pipeline are available for download from the website. Rfam has also found
application in, for example, the Ensembl database (32) where it is used to provide
annotations of ncRNAs in a range of different genomes. Rfam annotations are provided
through Wikipedia, allowing researchers to rapidly update and correct annotations as new
information becomes available.
The use of computational predictions means that Rfam provides ncRNA annotations for
many genomes that have not yet been studied in detail. However, there are limitations to
this approach. Despite rigorous examination and thresholding of families, the Rfam pipeline
can produce false positives. Secondly, Rfam is not exhaustive but features only a limited
number of ncRNAs. Newly discovered ncRNAs need to be manually curated before being
included in the database, which requires time. In an effort to speed up this process, Rfam
has introduced a special publication track in collaboration with the journal RNA Biology
where researchers can publish alignments and Wikipedia annotations of the ncRNAs they
work on, which are then included in the database.
Specialized alignment databases - SILVA
Ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) were among the first RNAs to be cataloged in databases, and
several projects have done this over the years. This continued interest is partially due to
the fact that rRNAs are widely used as phylogenetic markers. This has special relevance to
the emerging field of metagenomics, where the taxonomic diversity of a sample can be
difficult to determine.
At the time of writing, the most complete rRNA database is SILVA, which was originally
released in 2007 (33). The release 104 (October 2010) holds information on almost 1.5
million small subunit (SSU) and over 200.000 large subunit (LSU) rRNA entries from all
domains of life. The SILVA release cycle is synchronized with the EMBL nucleotide
database, from which it draws sequence data. As a result, it is updated on a regular basis.
[Figure 6.9]
SILVA’s automated production pipeline is based on a set of keywords that are used to
identify putative rRNAs in the EMBL database, given existing annotations or descriptions.
To account for the increasing number of unannotated rRNAs produced by large-scale
sequencing projects, EMBL sequences are scanned using Hidden Markov Models to
identify additional candidates (34,35). Data retrieved in these ways are subsequently
filtered based on a set of stringent criteria aimed at identifying genuine rRNA genes,
including a minimum size requirement and a maximum number of allowed ambiguous
positions. All rRNAs which pass these filters are then aligned against aforementioned seed
alignments and stored in the database. In addition to this primary, comprehensive data set
(referred to as ‘Parc’), SILVA compiles the ‘Ref’ data set, a subset of ‘Parc’ comprised of
high-quality, full- or nearly full-length sequences.
[Figure 6.10]
SILVA provides users with a range of tools. Most importantly, annotations can be searched
using numerous criteria, including organism names, accession numbers or related
publications. All retrieved hits can be downloaded in either FASTA or the ARB format.
Another helpful feature is the use of ontologies, such as the environmental or the
aforementioned taxonomic affiliation, to further characterize sequences. Finally, user-
submitted queries can be aligned against the respective seed alignments, or subsets
thereof, to create quality alignments from their own data .
Data from SILVA is free for academic use and pre-filtered datasets are available for
download.
[Table 6.1 near here]
Closing remarks
Two major trends have been driving the development of ncRNA databases: an increasing
appreciation of the importance of ncRNA genes, particularly in the face of high-throughput
sequencing technologies, and the development of faster, more accurate computational
tools for identifying ncRNA sequences. We have presented four databases here with very
different approaches to making sense of increasingly large data sets. We believe these
approaches are complimentary, as these diverse molecules demand diverse approaches to
their characterization. It is important that users be aware of the potential for false positives,
particularly in computationally-produced predictions. In these cases, cross-validation from
multiple sources can provide higher certainty in an annotation.
Figure captions
Figure 6.1: The expanding RNA world. The expanding picture of non-coding RNAs as
established by the number of publications dedicated to the subject matter and listed in the
PubMed database (identified by the tag ‘npcRNA’).
Figure 6.2: Number of RNA databases. The growth in available data and general interest
in the various classes of RNAs is mirrored in the increase of the number of RNA databases
Figure 6.3: RNA databases can be broadly organized into alignment, sequence and
structure databases. These are further grouped into class specific databases (dotted line)
and general databases (solid line). An index of RNA databases is maintained at
Figure 6.4: The Noncode annotation pipeline compiles experimentally verified ncRNAs
from the literature and the nucleotide database GenBank using a set of relevant keywords.
In addition, the authors also include unpublished RNAs studied in their lab. The resulting
data is subjected to manual inspection and annotation (such as the Noncode-specific
process function classification) prior to inclusion in the database.
Figure 6.5: The miRBase database was first released in 2002 and as of early 2011 has
seen 16 major releases. During this time it has grown significantly, mirroring closely the
growth of the RNA field and the increasing amount of sequence data.
Figure 6.6: Data in miRBase stems primarily from experimental evidence. After
submission, new miRNAs are given an entry in the registry, annotated and linked to
external sources for target prediction. In an attempt to capitalize on the increasing amount
of sequencing data, miRBase more recently expanded its pipeline to identify expressed
miRNA candidates in the GEO database, based on expected homology to existing entries.
Figure 6.7: Release 10.0 of Rfam contains information on 1446 ncRNA families, yielding
more than 3 million annotations across the EMBL nucleotide database. Each family is
defined as sequences aligning to a co-variance model, based on manually curated seed
alignments from published ncRNA data.
Figure 6.8: The Rfam pipeline. The Rfam pipeline consists of two major steps. First,
experimentally verified sequences are grouped based on their expected common ancestry
to create seed alignments. Sequences from these alignments are then used in a traditional
BLAST search against the EMBL database to identify putative ncRNA genes. To further
increase the confidence in these predictions, all candidate hits are analyzed with manually
curated co-variance models. Sequences that pass both these tests are included in Rfam.
Figure 6.9: Since its initial release in February 2007 (89, based on EMBL 89), data for both
small subunit rRNA (SSU) as well as large subunit rRNA (LSU) has increased markedly
over the course of only 3 years. As of release 104, SILVA contains information on over 1.4
million SSU sequences and more than 200.000 LSU sequences.
Figure 6.10: SILVA data production. The SILVA rRNA database is built in three
automated steps. Starting with a set of keywords, putative ribosomal RNAs are retrieved
from the EMBL nucleotide database. rRNA candidates are identifed by alignment to a
curated profile hidden Markov model. The resulting data then has to meet a number of
criteria, including a minimum length of 300 bases and a maximum of 2% ambiguities, for
inclusion in the database. The comprehensive dataset of SSU and LSU sequences is
referred to as ‘Parc’, from which a subset of full-length, high quality sequences is created
(‘Ref’).
Table 6.1: Summary and comparison of major RNA databases
Noncode Rfam miRBase SILVA
DB type General sequence General Alignment DB Specialist sequence DB Specialist Alignment DB
Manual annotation yes (based on yes (seed alignments yes yes (seed alignments)
published data) and Wikipedia)
Comp. annotation no yes yes (homologs only) yes
Data source GenBank/Literature EMBL User submission EMBL
Nomenclature no yes yes NA
Data download sequence files everything everything sequence files
Release cycle irregular ~1-2/year ~1-2/year synced with EMBL