]hp-tnauq[
2v4622.4080:viXra
Quantum Computing
Eleanor Rieffel
FX Palo Alto Laboratory
1 Introduction 3
2 Early history 4
3 Basic concepts of quantum computation 5
4 Quantum algorithms 6
4.1 Grover’s algorithm and generalizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4.2 Generalizations of Shor’s factoring algorithm . . . . . . . . . 8
4.3 Other classes of algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
4.4 Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
5 Limitations of quantum computing 10
6 Quantum protocols 10
7 Broader implications of quantum information processing 12
8 Impact of quantum computers on security 13
9 Implementation efforts 14
10 Advanced concepts 16
10.1 Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
10.2 Models underlying quantum computation . . . . . . . . . . . 17
10.3 What if quantum mechanics is not quite correct? . . . . . . . 19
11 Conclusions 20
12 Glossary 20
Key words: Quantum computing; quantum cryptography; public key
cryptography; simulation of quantum systems; qubits; entanglement; effi-
cient algorithms
Changingthemodelunderlyinginformationandcomputationfrom
a classical mechanical to a quantum mechanical one yields faster al-
gorithms, novel cryptographic mechanisms, and alternative methods
of communication. Quantum algorithms can perform a select set of
tasksvastlymoreefficientlythananyclassicalalgorithm,butformany
tasks it has been proven that quantum algorithms provide no advan-
tage. The breadth of quantum computing applications is still being
explored. Majorapplicationareasincludesecurityandthemanyfields
that would benefit from efficient quantum simulation. The quantum
information processing viewpoint provides insight into classical algo-
rithmic issues as well as a deeper understanding of entanglement and
other non-classicalaspects of quantum physics.
1 Introduction
Quantumcomputation explores how efficiently natureallows us tocompute.
The standard model of computation is grounded in classical mechanics; the
Turing machine is described in classical mechanical terms. In the last two
decades of the twentieth century, researchers recognized that the standard
modelofcomputation placedunnecessarylimitsoncomputation. Ourworld
is inherently quantum mechanical. By placing computation on a quantum
mechanical foundation faster algorithms, novel cryptographic mechanisms,
and alternative methods of communication have been found. Quantum in-
formation processing, a field that includes quantum computing, quantum
cryptography, quantum communication, and quantum games, examines the
implications of using a quantum mechanical model for information and its
processing. Quantum information processing changes not only the physical
processes used for computation and communication, but the very notions of
information and computation themselves.
Quantum computing is not synonymous with using quantum effects to
perform computation. Quantum mechanics has been an integral part of
modern classical computers and communication devices from their earliest
days, the transistor and the laser being the most obvious examples. The
phrase “quantum computing” is not parallel with the phrases “DNA com-
puting” or “optical computing”: these describethe substrateon which com-
putation is done without changing the notion of computation. The phrase
“quantum computing” is closer in character to “analog computing” because
the computational modelfor analog computingdiffers from thatof standard
computing: acontinuum ofvalues isallowed, ratherthan onlyadiscreteset.
While the phrases are parallel, the two models differ greatly. The funda-
mental unitof quantum computation, the qubit, can take on a continuum of
values, but a discrete version of quantum computation can be constructed
that preserves the features of standard quantum computation.
Quantum computing does not provide efficient solutions to all problems.
Nor does it provide a universal way of circumventing the slowing of Moore’s
law as fundamental limits to miniaturization are reached. Quantum com-
putation enables certain problems to be solved efficiently; some problems
which on a classical computer would take more than the age of the uni-
verse, a quantum computer could solve in a couple of days. But for other
problems it has been proven that quantum computation cannot improve on
classical methods, and for yet another class, that the improvement is small.
Quantumcomputationwillhavesignificantimpactonsecurityandthemany
fields which will benefit from faster and more accurate quantum simulators.
2 Early history
In the early 1980s, Feynman, Manin, and others recognized that certain
quantum phenomena - phenomena associated with entangled particles -
could not be simulated efficiently on standard computers. Turning this ob-
servation around, researchers wondered whether these quantum phenomena
could be used to speed up computation in general. Over the next decade,
a small group of researchers undertook the task of rethinking the mod-
els underlying information and computation and providing formal models.
DeutschdevelopedanotionofaquantummechanicalTuringmachine. Bern-
stein, Vazirani, and Yao showed that quantum computers can do anything
a classical computer can do with at most a small (logarithmic) slow down.
The early 1990s saw the firsttruly quantum algorithms, algorithms with
no classical analog that were provably better than any possible classical al-
gorithm. Thefirstof these was Deutsch’s algorithm, later generalized to the
Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm. These initial quantum algorithms were able to
solve problems efficiently with certainty that classical techniques can solve
efficiently only with highprobability. Sucha resultis of nopractical interest
since any machine has imperfections so can only solve problems with high
probability. Furthermore, the problems solved were highly artificial. Never-
theless, such results were of high theoretical interest since they proved that
quantum computation is theoretically more powerful than classical compu-
tation.
These results inspired Peter Shor’s 1994 polynomial-time quantum algo-
rithmforfactoringintegers. Thisresultprovidedasolutiontoawell-studied
problem of practical interest. A classical polynomial-time solution has long
eluded researchers. Many security protocols base their security entirely on
the computational difficulty of this problem. Shor’s factoring algorithm and
related results mean that once a large enough quantum computer is built,
all standard public key encryption algorithms will be completely insecure.
Shor’s results sparked interest in the field, but doubts as to its practical
significance remained. Quantum systems are notoriously fragile. Key quan-
tumproperties,suchasentanglement, areeasily disturbedbyenvironmental
influences. Properties of quantum mechanics, such as the impossibility of
reliably copying an unknown quantum state, made it look unlikely that er-
rorcorrection techniquesforquantumcomputation couldeverbefound. For
these reasons, it seemed unlikely that reliable quantum computers could be
built. Luckily, in spite of widespread doubts as to whether quantum in-
formation processing could ever be made practical, the theory itself proved
so tantalizing that researchers continued to explore it. In 1996 Shor and
Calderbank, and independently Steane, developed quantum error correc-
tion techniques. Entanglement provides a key resource. Today, quantum
error correction is arguably the most mature area of quantum information
processing.
The notions underlying quantum computation are highly technical and
not easily explained because they rely on unintuitive aspects of quantum
mechanics that have no classical analog. The next section briefly introduces
a few of the most fundamental concepts. The following sections discuss
the applications of quantum computation, its limitations, and the efforts to
build quantum information processing devices.
3 Basic concepts of quantum computation
The state space of a physical system consists of all possible states of the
system. Any quantum mechanical system that can be modeled by a two
dimensional complex vector space can be viewed as a qubit. Such systems
includephotonpolarization,electronspin,andagroundstateandanexcited
state of an atom. A key difference between classical and quantum systems
is the way in which component systems combine. The state of a classical
systemcanbecompletely characterized bythestateofeachofitscomponent
pieces. Asurprisingandunintuitive aspect of quantum systems is that most
statescannotbedescribedintermsofthestatesofthesystem’scomponents.
Such states are called entangled states.
Another key property is quantum measurement. In spite of there being
a continuum of possible states, any measurement of a system of qubits has
only a discrete set of possible outcomes; for n qubits, there are at most 2
possibleoutcomes. After measurement, the system will bein oneof thepos-
sible outcome states. Which outcome is obtained is probabilistic; outcomes
closest to the measured state are most probable. Unless the state is already
in one of the possible outcome states, measurement changes the state; it is
not possible to reliably measure an unknown state without disturbing it.
Just as each measurement has a discrete set of possible outcomes, any
mechanism forcopyingquantumstates canonlycorrectly copyadiscreteset
of quantum states. For an n qubit system, the largest number of quantum
states a copying mechanism can copy correctly is 2 . For any state there is
a mechanism that can correctly copy it, but if the state is unknown, there
is no way to determine which mechanism should be used. For this reason,
it is impossible to copy reliably an unknown state, an aspect of quantum
mechanics called the no cloning principle.
A qubit has two arbitrarily chosen distinguished states, labeled 0 and
1 , which are the possible outcomes of a single measurement. Every single
qubit state can be represented as a linear combination, or superposition, of
these two states. In quantum information processing, classical bit values of
0 and 1 are encoded in the distinguished states 0 and 1 . This encoding
enables a direct comparison between bits and qubits: bits can only take
on two values, 0 and 1, while qubits can take on any superposition of these
values, a 0 +b 1 , whereaandbarecomplex numberssuchthat a2+ b 2 =
1.
Any transformation of an n qubitsystem can beobtained by performing
a sequence of one and two qubit operations. Most transformations cannot
be performed efficiently in this manner. Figuring out an efficient sequence
of quantum transformations that can solve a useful problem is the heart of
quantum algorithm design.
4 Quantum algorithms
Problems generally get harder as the size of the input increases. The effi-
ciency of an algorithm is quantified in terms of an asymptotic quantity that
looks at how theresources used by thealgorithm grow with theinput. Time
andspace, generally measuredintermsofnumberof operations andnumber
of bits or qubits, are the resources most often considered. Constant factors
are usually ignored, since they depend on fine details of an implementation
that often are not known, but can be bounded. An algorithm is polynomial
in the input size n if the amount of resources used is less than a fixed poly-
nomial of n; in such a case the algorithm is said to be O(n ) for some k, the
degree of a bounding polynomial. Algorithms whose resource use cannot be
boundedbyapolynomialaresaidtobesuperpolynomial. Algorithmswhose
resource use is asymptotically greater than some exponential function of n
are said to be exponential. Algorithms of the same polynomial degree are
generally viewed as achieving the same level of efficiency.
It is easy to take a reversible classical computation and turn it into an
equivalently efficient quantum computation. Bennett showed in 1973 that
any classical computation using t time and s space has a reversible counter-
part using only
) time and O(slogt) space. Thus for every classical
computation there is a quantum computation of similar efficiency. Truly
quantum algorithms use other methods to solve problems more efficiently
than is possible classically. Discovering novel approaches remains an active
but difficult area of research. After 1996, there was a hiatus of five years be-
fore a significantly new algorithm was discovered. Then alternative models
of quantum computation and quantum random walks inspired new types of
algorithms.
Most researchers expect that quantum computers cannot solve NP-
complete problems in polynomial time. Informally, a problem is in NP
if there is an efficient way to check that a proposed solution is a solution.
A problem is in P if a solution can be found in polynomial time. A prob-
lem is NP-complete if an efficient solution to that problem would imply an
efficient solution to all problems in NP. There is no proof that quantum
computers cannot solve NP-complete problems in polynomial time (a proof
would imply P = NP, a long standing open problem in computer science).
Ladner’s theorem says that if P = NP, then there exist NP intermediate
problems: problemsthatareinNP,andnotinP,butarenotNP complete.
CandidateNP intermediate problemsincludefactoringandthediscretelog-
arithm problem. Other candidate problems include graph isomorphism, the
gap shortest lattice vector problem, and many hidden subgroup problems.
Whether thereare polynomial quantum algorithms for these other problems
remains a major open question.
4.1 Grover’s algorithm and generalizations
Grover’s search algorithm is the most famous quantum algorithm after
Shor’s algorithm. It searches an unstructured list of N items in O(√N)
time. The best possible classical algorithm uses O(N) time. This speed-up
is small but, unlike for Shor’s algorithm, it has been proven that Grover’s
algorithm outperforms any possible classical approach. Although Grover’s
original algorithm succeeds only with high probability, variations that suc-
ceed with certainty are known; Grover’s algorithm is not inherently proba-
bilistic.
Generalizations of Grover’s algorithm apply to a more restricted class
of problems than is generally realized. It is unfortunate that Grover used
“database” in the title of his 1997 paper. Databases are generally highly
structured and can be searched rapidly classically. Because Grover’s algo-
rithm does not take advantage of structure in the data, it does not provide
a square root speed up for database search. Childs et al. showed that
quantum computation can give at most a constant factor improvement for
searches of ordered data like that of databases. Furthermore, Grover’s algo-
rithm destroys the quantum superposition of the data, so the superposition
mustberecreated for each search. Thisrecreation is often linear inN which
negates the O(√N) benefit of Grover’s algorithm, reducing its applications
still further; the speed-up is obtained only for data that has a sufficiently
fast generating function.
Extensions of Grover’s algorithm provide small speed-ups for a vari-
ety of problems including approximating the mean of a sequence and other
statistics, finding collisions in r-to-1 functions, string matching, and path
integration. Grover’s algorithm has also beengeneralized toarbitrary initial
conditions, non-binary labelings, and nested searches.
4.2 Generalizations of Shor’s factoring algorithm
At the same time Shor discovered his factoring algorithm, he also found a
polynomial time solution for the discrete logarithm problem, a problem re-
lated to factoring that is also heavily used in cryptography. Both factoring
andthediscrete logarithm problemarehidden subgroup problems. Inpartic-
ular, they are both examples of abelian hidden subgroup problems. Shor’s
techniques are easily extended to all abelian hidden subgroup problems and
a variety of hidden subgroup problems over groups that are close to being
abelian.
Two cases of the hidden subgroup problem have received a lot of atten-
tion: the symmetric group Sn, the full permutation group of n elements,
and the dihedral group Dn, the group of symmetries of a regular n-sided
polygon. But efficient algorithms have eluded researchers so far. A solution
to thehiddensubgroupproblem over Sn would yield a solution to graph iso-
morphism, a prominent NP intermediate candidate. In 2002, Regev showed
that an efficient algorithm to the dihedral hidden subgroup problem us-
ing Fourier sampling, a generalization of Shor’s techniques, would yield an
efficient algorithm for the gap shortest vector problem. Public key cryp-
tographic schemes based on shortest vector problems are among the most
promising approaches to finding practical public key cryptographic schemes
that are secure against quantum computers. In 2003, Kuperberg found a
subexponential(butstillsuperpolynomial)algorithmforthedihedralgroup.
Efficient algorithms have been obtained for some related problems. In
2002, Hallgren found an efficient quantum algorithm for solving Pell’s equa-
tion. Pell’s equation, believed to be harder than factoring and the discrete
logarithm problem, was the security basis for Buchmann-Williams key ex-
change and public key cryptosystems. Thus Buchmann-Williams joins the
many public key cryptosystems known to be insecure in a world with quan-
tum computers. In 2003, van Dam, Hallgren, and Ip found an efficient
quantum algorithm for the shifted Legendre symbol problem, which means
thatquantumcomputerscanbreakcertainalgebraically homomorphiccryp-
tosystems and can predict certain pseudo-random number generators.
4.3 Other classes of algorithms
In 2002, a new family of quantum algorithms emerged that uses quantum
random walk techniques to solve a variety of problems related to graphs,
matrix products, and relations in groups. The alternative models of quan-
tum computation that will bediscussed in section 10.2, such as cluster state
and adiabatic quantum computing, led to other novel types of quantum
algorithms.
4.4 Simulation
Simulation of quantum systems is another major application of quantum
computing;itwastherecognitionofthedifficultyofsimulatingcertainquan-
tumsystemsthatstartedthefieldofquantumcomputationinthefirstplace.
Already, in the early 2000s, small scale quantum simulations have provided
usefulresults. Simulationsrunonspecialpurposequantumdeviceswillhave
applications in fields ranging from chemistry, to biology, to material science.
They will also support the design and implementation of yet larger special
purpose quantum devices, a process that ideally leads all the way to the
building of scalable general purpose quantum computers.
Evenonauniversalquantumcomputer,therearelimitstowhatinforma-
tion can begained from a simulation. Some quantities, like the energy spec-
tra of certain systems, are exponential in quantity, so noalgorithm, classical
or quantum, can output them efficiently. For other quantities, algorithmic
advances are needed to determine whether and how that information can be
efficiently extracted from a simulation.
Many quantumsystems can beefficiently simulated classically. After all,
weliveinaquantumworldbuthavelongbeenabletosimulateawidevariety
of natural phenomena. Some entangled quantum systems can be efficiently
simulated classically, while others cannot. The question of exactly which
quantum systems can beefficiently simulated classically remains open. New
approaches to classical simulation of quantum systems continue to be devel-
oped, many benefiting from the quantum information processing viewpoint.
Thequantuminformationprocessingviewpointhasalsoledtoimprovements
in a commonly used classical approach to simulating quantum systems, the
density matrix renomalization (DMRG) approach.
5 Limitations of quantum computing
Beals et al. proved that, for a broad class of problems, quantum compu-
tation cannot provide any speed-up. Their methods were used by others
to provide lower bounds for other types of problems. Ambainis found an-
other powerful method for establishing lower bounds. In 2002, Aaronson
showed that quantum approaches could not be used to efficiently solve col-
lision problems. This result means there is no generic quantum attack on
cryptographic hash functions. Shor’s algorithms break some cryptographic
hash functions, and quantum attacks on others may still be discovered, but
Aaronson’s result says that any attack must use specific properties of the
hash function under consideration.
Grover’s search algorithm is optimal; it is not possible to search an un-
structured list of N elements more rapidly than O(√N). This bound was
known before Grover found his algorithm. Childs et al. showed that for or-
dered data, quantum computation can give no more that a constant factor
improvement over optimal classical algorithms. Grigni etal. showed in2001
that for most non-abelian groups and their subgroups, the standard Fourier
sampling method, used by Shor and successors, yields exponentially little
information about a hidden subgroup.
6 Quantum protocols
Applications of quantum information processing include a number of com-
munication andcryptographic protocols. Thetwo most famous communica-
tion protocols arequantumteleportation anddensecoding. Both useentan-
glement sharedbetween thetwo parties thatarecommunicating. Teleporta-
tion uses two classical bits, together with shared entanglement, to transmit
the state of a single qubit. It is surprising that two classical bits suffice to
communicate any one of an infinite number of possible single qubit states.
Teleportation destroys thestateattheoriginalsiteintheprocess,leadingto
the name teleportation. In this way, teleportation enables the transmission
of an unknown quantum state without violating the no-cloning principle.
Dense coding uses one quantum bit, together with shared entanglement, to
transmit two classical bits. Since the entangled particles can be distributed
ahead of time, only one qubit needs to be physically transmitted to com-
municate two bits of information. This result is surprising since only one
classical bit’s worth of information can be extracted from a qubit. Both
protocols show the power of a small amount of shared entanglement.
Quantum key distribution schemes were the first examples of quantum
protocols. The first scheme, due to Bennett and Brassard in 1984, uses
properties of quantum measurement; no entanglement is needed. Quan-
tum key distribution protocols perform the same function as the classical
Diffie-Hellman key agreement protocol, to establish a secret symmetric key
between both parties, but their security rests on properties of quantum me-
chanics. TheDiffie-Hellmanprotocolreliesonthecomputationalintractabil-
ity of the discrete logarithm problem; it remains secure against all known
classical attacks, but is broken by quantum computers. Other quantum key
distributions schemes exist, including Ekert’s entanglement based scheme.
Many of the schemes have been demonstrated experimentally, over fiber op-
tic cable and in free space. Three companies, id Quantique, MagiQ, and
SmartQuantum, focus on quantum cryptography, while a number of other
companies, including BBN, NTT, NEC, Mitsubishi, and Toshiba, have con-
tributed to the area.
While “quantum cryptography” is often used as a synonym for “quan-
tum key distribution,” quantum approaches to a wide variety of other cryp-
tographic tasks have been developed. Some of these protocols use quantum
means to secure classical information. Others secure quantum information.
Many are “unconditionally” secure in that their security is based entirely on
propertiesofquantummechanics. Othersareonlyquantumcomputationally
secure in that their security depends on a problem being computationally
intractable for a quantum computers. For example, while “unconditionally”
secure bit commitment is known to be impossible to achieve through either
classical or quantum means, quantum computationally secure bit commit-
ments schemes exist as long as there are quantum one-way functions.
Closely related to quantum key distribution schemes are protocols for
unclonable encryption, a symmetric key encryption scheme that guarantees
that an eavesdropper cannot copy an encrypted message without being de-
tected. Unclonableencryption hasstrongties withquantum authentication.
One type of authentication is digital signatures. Quantum digital signature
schemes have been developed, but the keys can be used only a limited num-
beroftimes. InthisrespecttheyresembleclassicalschemessuchasMerkle’s
one-time signature scheme.
Cleve et al. provide quantum protocols for (k,n) threshold quantum se-
crets. Gottesman et al. provide protocols for more general quantum secret
sharing. Quantum multiparty function evaluation schemes exist. Finger-
printing enables the equality of two strings to be determined efficiently with
high probability by comparing their respective fingerprints. Classical finger-
prints for n bit strings need to be at least of length O(√n). Buhrman et
al. show that a quantum fingerprint of classical data can be exponentially
smaller.
In 2005, Watrous showed that many classical zero knowledge interactive
protocols are zero knowledge against a quantum adversary. Generally, sta-
tistical zero knowledge protocols are based on candidate NP-intermediate
problems, another reason why zero knowledge protocols are of interest for
quantum computation. There is a close connection between quantum inter-
active protocols and quantum games. Early work by Eisert et al. includes
a discussion of a quantum version of the prisoner’s dilemma. Meyer has
written lively papers discussing other quantum games.
7 Broader implications of quantum information
processing
Quantum information theory has led to insights into fundamental aspects of
quantum mechanics, particularly entanglement. Efforts to build quantum
information processing devices have resulted in the creation of highly entan-
gled states that have enabled deeper experimental exploration of quantum
mechanics. These entangled states, and the improvements in quantum con-
trol, have been used in quantum microlithography to affect matter at scales
below the wavelength limit and in quantum metrology to achieve extremely
accurate sensors. Applications include clock accuracy beyond that of cur-
rentatomic clocks, whicharelimited by thequantumnoiseof atoms, optical
resolution beyond the wavelength limit, ultra-high resolution spectroscopy,
and ultra-weak absorption spectroscopy.
The quantum information processing viewpoint has also provided a new
way of viewing complexity issues in classical computer science, and has
yielded novel classical algorithmic results and methods. Classical algorith-
mic results stemming from the insights of quantum information processing
include lower bounds for problems involving locally decodable codes, local
search, lattices, reversible circuits, and matrix rigidity. The usefulness of
the complex perspective for evaluating real valued integrals is often used
as an analogy to explain this phenomenon. We examine one example of an
applicationofquantuminformationprocessingtoclassicalcomputerscience.
Cryptographicprotocolsusuallyrelyontheempiricalhardnessofaprob-
lem for their security; it is rare to be able to prove complete, information
theoretic security. When a cryptographic protocol is designed based on a
new problem, the difficulty of the problem must be established before the
security of the protocol can be understood. Empirical testing of a problem
takes a long time. Instead, whenever possible, “reduction” proofs are given
that show thatif thenew problemweresolved it would implyasolution to a
knownhardproblem. Regevdesignedanovel, purelyclassical cryptographic
system based on a certain lattice problem. He was able to reduce a known
hard problem to this problem, but only by using a quantum step as part of
the reduction proof.
8 Impact of quantum computers on security
Electronic commerce relies on secure public key encryption and digital sig-
nature schemes, as does secure electronic communication. Public key en-
cryption is used to authenticate the communicating parties, and to dis-
tribute symmetric session keys, the keys used to encode data for transmis-
sion. Public-private key pairs consist of a public key, knowable by all and
therefore easy to distribute, and a corresponding private key whose secrecy
must be maintained. Symmetric keys consist of a single key (or a pair of
keys easily computable from one another) that are known only to the legiti-
mate parties. Without secure publickey encryption, authentication and the
distribution of symmetric session keys become unwieldy.
Public key encryption is the digital equivalent of a locked mailbox: any-
one can put a message in, but only the person with the key can read the
message. Public key encryption schemes have digital analogs of the locked
box and the key. Publicly known one way functions provide the digital ana-
log of a locked box: they are easy to compute, but the inverse function is
hard to compute, just as it is easy to put a letter in a locked mailbox, but
hard to get it out again without the key. The digital analog of the key is a
trapdoor, additional information that makes the inverse easy to compute.
All practical publickey encryption protocols useone-way trapdoor func-
tions based on either factoring or the discrete logarithm problem. RSA, Ra-
factoring, while Diffie-Hellmen, DSA, El Gamal, and elliptic curve cryptog-
raphy rely on the discrete logarithm problem. Shor’s quantum algorithms
renderalloftheseencryptionschemesinsecurebyprovidingameansofcom-
puting the inverse function almost as easily as the original function. Once
quantum computers have been built, what were one-way trapdoor functions
are no longer one-way. Limited use classical or quantum signature schemes,
such as Merkle’s or Gottesman’s, provide only an inefficient substitute. So
if scalable quantum computers existed today, the world would not have a
secure means for efficient electronic commerce.
EvenbeforeShordiscovered hisalgorithms, cryptographerswereworried
about the dependence of public key encryption on just two closely related
problems. However, developing alternative public key algorithms based on
other mechanisms has proven difficult. McEliece is not practical; for the
recommendedsecurityparametersthepublickeysizeis219 bits,andbecause
of its impracticality, its security has received less scrutiny than had the
protocol been more practical. All knapsack-based public key cryptosystems
have been broken, including the Chor-Rivest scheme which stood for 13
years. Many other types of public key cryptosystems have been developed
and then broken.
Both factoring and the discrete logarithm problem are candidate NP in-
termediate problems. Hope for alternative public key encryption protocols
centers on using other NP intermediate problems. The leading candidates
are certain lattice based problems. Some of these schemes have impracti-
cally large keys, while for others their security remains in question. Also,
Regev showed that lattice based problems are closely related to the dihedral
hidden subgroup problem. The close relationship of the dihedral hidden
subgroup problem with problems solved by Shor’s algorithm makes many
people nervous, though so far the dihedral hidden subgroup problem has
resisted attack.
Given the historic difficulty of creating practical public key encryption
systems based on problems other than factoring or discrete log, it is unclear
which will come first, a large scale quantum computer or a practical public
key encryption system secure against quantum and classical attacks. If the
building of quantum computers wins the race, the security of electronic
commerce and communication around the world will be compromised.
9 Implementation efforts
DiVincenzo developed widely used requirements for a quantum computer.
It is relatively easy to obtain N qubits, butit is hardto get them to interact
with each other and with control devices, but nothing else. DiVincenzo’s
criteria are, roughly:
Scalable physical system with well-characterized qubits
Ability to initialize the qubits in a simple state
Robustness to environmental noise
A set of “universal” gates that approximate all quantum operations
High efficiency, qubit-specific measurements
There are daunting technical difficulties in actually building such a ma-
chine. Research teams around the world are actively studying ways to build
practical quantum computers. The field is changing rapidly. It is impossi-
ble even for experts to predict which of the many approaches are likely to
succeed. As of 2008, no one has made a detailed proposal that meets all of
the DiVincenzo criteria, let alone realize it in a laboratory. Many promising
approaches are being pursued by theorists and experimentalists around the
world. Researchers are actively exploring various architectural needs of and
designs for quantum computers and evaluating different quantum technolo-
gies for achieving these needs. A breakthrough will be needed to go beyond
tens of qubits to a quantum computer meeting DiVincenzo’s criteria with
hundreds of qubits.
The earliest small quantum computers used liquid nuclear magnetic res-
onance (NMR) technology that was already highly advanced due to its use
in medicine. A quantum bit is encoded in the average spin state of a large
number of nuclei of a molecule. Each qubit corresponds to a particular
atom of the molecule; the qubits can be distinguished from each other by
the nucleus of their atom’s characteristic frequency. The spin states can be
manipulated by magnetic fields and the average spin state can be measured
with NMR techniques. Liquid NMR appears unlikely to lead implementa-
tion effortsmuchlonger, letaloneachieve ascalablequantumcomputer, due
to severe scaling problems; the measured signal drops off exponentially with
the number of qubits.
The history of optical approaches to building a quantum computer il-
lustrates how hard it is to make good predictions. Optical methods are the
unrivaled approach for quantum communications applications because pho-
tons do not interact with much. This same trait, however, means that it is
difficult to get photons to interact with each other, which made them ap-
pear unsuitable as the fundamental qubits on which computation would be
done. So in 2000 optical approaches were considered unpromising. While
“nonlinear” optical materials induce some photon-photon interactions, no
known material has a sufficiently strong non-linearity, and scientists doubt
such a material will ever be found. In 2001, Knill, Laflamme and Milburn
(KLM) showed how, by clever use of measurement, non-linear optical ele-
ments could be avoided altogether. However, the overhead was enormous.
In 2004, Nielsen reduced this overhead by combining the KLM approach
with cluster state quantum computing.
In an ion-trap quantum computer individual ions, confined by electric
fields, represent single qubits. Lasers directed at ions perform single qubit
operations and two qubit operations between adjacent ions. All operations
necessary for quantum computation have been demonstrated in the labora-
tory for small numbers of ions. To scale this technology, proposed architec-
tures include quantum memory and processing elements where qubits are
movedbackandfortheitherthroughphysicalmovementoftheionsorbyus-
ing photons to transfer their state. Many other approaches exist, including
cavity QED, neutral atom, Josephson junctions, and and various other solid
state approaches. Hybrid approaches are also being pursued. Of particular
interest are interfaces between optical qubits and other forms.
Onceaquantuminformation processingdeviceis built, itmustbetested
to see if it works as expected and to determine what sorts of errors occur.
Finding efficient methods of testing is a challenge, given the large state
space and the effects of measurement on the system. Quantum state to-
mography provides procedures for experimentally characterizing a quantum
state. Quantum process tomography experimentally characterizes asequence
of operations performed by a device.
10 Advanced concepts
10.1 Robustness
Environmental interactions muddle quantum computations. It is difficult
to isolate a quantum computer sufficiently from environmental interactions,
especially because controlled interactions are needed to perform the com-
putation. In the classical world, error correcting codes are primarily used
in data transmission. But the effects of the environment on any quantum
information processing device are likely to be so pervasive that quantum
states will need protection at all times.
Fault tolerant techniques limit the propagation of errors during com-
putation to keep them manageable enough that quantum error correction
techniquescanhandlethem. Faulttoleranterrorcorrection techniquesmake
sure that even if the error correction process is faulty, it introduces fewer
errors than it cures. Powerful threshold theorems have beenproven; aquan-
tum computer with an error rate below acertain thresholdcan runarbitrar-
ily long computations to whatever accuracy is desired. Threshold results
exist for a variety of codes and error models.
Alternative approachestorobustquantumcomputation exist. Insteadof
encoding so that common errors can be detected and corrected, all compu-
tation can be performed in subspaces unaffected by common errors. These
“decoherence-free subspace” approaches are complementary to error cor-
recting codes. Operator error correction provides a framework that unifies
quantum error correcting codes and decoherence-free subspaces. Quantum
computers built according to the topological model of quantum computa-
tion have innaterobustness. Most likely, actual quantumcomputers willuse
quantum error correcting codes in combination with other approaches.
10.2 Models underlying quantum computation
A circuit model for universal quantum computation consists of a set of one
and two qubit transformations, quantum gates, from which all quantum
transformation can be approximated. Circuit diagrams such as the one
shown in figure 1 are often drawn, but these should not be taken literally;
thesearenotblueprintsforquantumhardware,butratherabstractdiagrams
indicating a sequence of operations to be performed. Each horizontal line
represents aqubit. Timerunsfromlefttoright, andtheboxesrepresentone
and two qubitquantum gates applied to the qubits. Inan ion-trap quantum
computer, these diagrams indicate the sequence of laser pulses to apply.
Because efficiency of a quantum algorithm can be quantified in terms of
the number of qubits and basic transformations used, and because there are
quantum gates corresponding to basic classical logic operations, this model
enables adirectcomparison of quantumand classical algorithms, andmakes
finding quantum analogs of classical computation straightforward.
It is less clear that the circuit model is ideal for inspiring new quantum
algorithms or giving insight into the limitations of quantum computation.
Other models may give more insight into quantum algorithmic design or the
physical realization of quantum computers and their robustness. Two al-
ternative models of quantum computation have proven particularly fruitful:
cluster state quantum computation and adiabatic quantum computation.
Cluster state quantum computation illuminates the entanglement re-
sourcesneededforquantumcomputation. Inclusterstate,orone-way,quan-
tum computing a highly entangled “cluster” state is set up at the beginning
ofthealgorithm. Allcomputationstakeplacebysinglequbitmeasurements,
so the entanglement between the qubits can only decrease in the course of
the algorithm (the reason for the “one-way” name). The initial cluster state
is independent of the algorithm to be performed; it depends only on the
size of the problem to be solved. In this way cluster state quantum com-
putation makes a clean separation between the entanglement creation and
computational stages. Cluster state quantum computing underlies the most
Figure 1: A graphical representation for a 3-qubit quantum circuit. Each
horizontal line represents a qubit. Time runs from left to right. The boxes
represent basic one and two qubit quantum gates applied to the appropriate
qubits.
promising approaches to optical quantum computation.
Adiabatic quantum computation rests on the Hamiltonian framework
for quantum mechanics. A problem is encoded in the Hamiltonian of a
system in such a way that a solution is a ground state. An adiabatic algo-
rithm begins withthe system in theground state of an easily implementable
Hamiltonian. TheHamiltonian isgradually perturbedalong apathbetween
the initial Hamiltonian and the problem Hamiltonian. The adiabatic theo-
rem says that if the path is traversed slowly enough the system will remain
in a ground state, so at the end of computation it will be in a solution
state. How slowly the path must be traversed depends on spectral proper-
ties of the Hamiltonians along the path. Which Hamiltonians can be used
affects the computational power. Some versions of adiabatic computation
are equivalent to quantum computation, butothers are only classical. Small
adiabatic computational devices have been built; in some cases it has not
been possible to determine whether they perform quantum computation or
not. Initial interest centered on the possibility of using adiabatic computa-
tion to solve NP-complete problems, because adiabatic algorithms were not
subject to the lower bound results proven for other approaches. Vazirani
and van Dam, and later Reichardt, were able to rule out a variety of such
adiabatic approaches. Quantum adiabatic solutions to other problems have
been found.
Holonomic, orgeometric, quantumcomputation isahybridbetween adi-
abatic quantum computation and the circuit model in which the quantum
gates are implemented via adiabatic processes. Holonomic quantum compu-
tationmakesuseofnon-Abeliangeometricphasesthatarisefromperturbing
a Hamiltonian adiabatically along aloop in its parameter space. Thephases
depend only on topological properties of the loop so are insensitive to per-
turbations. This property means that holonomic quantum computation has
good robustness with respect to errors in the control driving the Hamilto-
nian’s evolution. Early experimental efforts have been carried out using a
variety of underlying hardware.
In1997, priortothedevelopmentoftheholonomicapproachtoquantum
computing, Kitaev proposed topological quantum computing, a more spec-
ulative approach to quantum computing with great robustness properties.
Topological quantum computing makes use of the Aharonov-Bohm effect
in which a particle that travels around a solenoid acquires a phase that de-
pendsonlyonhowmanytimesithasencircledthesolenoid. Thistopological
property is highly insensitive to disturbances in the particle’s path, which
leads to the intrinsic robustness of topological quantum computing. Univer-
sal topological quantum computation requires non-abelian Aharonov-Bohm
effects, but few have been found in nature, and all of these are unsuitable
for quantum computation. Researchers are working to engineer such effects,
buteventhemostbasicbuildingblocksoftopological quantumcomputation
have yet to be realized experimentally in the laboratory. In the long term,
the robustness properties of topological quantum computing may enable it
to win out over other approaches. In the meantime, it has inspired novel
quantum algorithms.
10.3 What if quantum mechanics is not quite correct?
Physicists do not understand how to reconcile quantum mechanics with
general relativity. A complete physical theory would require modifications
togeneralrelativity,quantummechanics,orboth. Modificationstoquantum
mechanics would have to be subtle; the predictions of quantum mechanics
holdtogreataccuracy. Mostpredictionsofquantummechanicswillcontinue
to hold, at least approximately, once amore complete theory is found. Since
no one knows how to reconcile the two theories, no one knows what, if any,
modificationswouldbenecessary,orwhethertheywouldaffectthefeasibility
or the power of quantum computation.
Once the new physical theory is known, its computational power can
be analyzed. In the meantime, theorists have looked at what computational
powerwouldbepossibleifcertainchangesinquantummechanicsweremade.
So far these changes imply greater computational power rather than less.
Abrams and Lloyd showed that if quantum mechanics were non-linear, even
slightly, all problems in the class #P, a class that contains all NP problems
and more, would be solvable in polynomial time. Aaronson showed that
any change to one of the exponents in the axioms of quantum mechanics
would yield polynomial time solutions to all PP problems, another class
containing NP.With these resultsin mind,Aaronson suggests that limits on
computational power should be considered a fundamental principle guiding
physical theories, much like the laws of thermodynamics.
11 Conclusions
Will scalable quantum computers ever be built? Yes. Will quantum com-
puters eventually replace desktop computers? No. Quantum computers will
always be harder to build and maintain than classical computers, so they
will not be used for the many tasks that classical computers do equally effi-
ciently. Quantumcomputerswillbeusefulforanumberof specialized tasks.
The extent of these tasks is still being explored.
However long it takes to build a scalable quantum computer and what-
ever the breadth of applications turns out to be, quantum information pro-
cessing has changed forever theway in which quantumphysics is taught and
understood. Thequantuminformationprocessingviewofquantummechan-
icsclarifieskeyaspectsofquantummechanicssuchasquantummeasurement
and entangled states. The practical consequences of this increased under-
standingofnaturearehardtopredict,buttheycanhardlyfailtoprofoundly
affect technological and intellectual developments in the coming decades.
12 Glossary
Authenticationprotocols arecryptographicprotocolsusedtoestablish
that some or all of the commmunicating parties are who the other parties
believe them to be.
Entanglement is a property of quantum states that does not exist
classically. Two or more subsystems of a quantum system are said to be
entangled if the state of the entire system cannot be described in terms
of a state for each of the subsystems. For entangled states, the state of
the subsystem is not well-defined. EPR pairs and Bell states are the most
well-known entangled states.
The no cloning principle of quantum mechanics states that it is not
possible to create a device that reliable copies unknown quantum states.
An algorithm is polynomial-time in the input n if the amount of re-
sources it uses is no more than a fixed polynomial of n.
Public key encryption is the digital equivalent of a locked mailbox:
anyone can put a message in, but only the person with the key can read the
message.
Aproposalforquantumcomputersisscalableiftheamountofresources
it requires is no more than a polynomial function of the number of qubits.
Threshold theorems for quantum computation show that if the error
rate can be brought below a certain threshold, arbitrarily long and precise
quantum computations can be performed.
Quantumcircuitsareabstractdiagramsindicatingasequenceofquan-
tum operations to be applied as part of a computation. Quantum circuit
diagrams should not be taken to literally; they are not blueprints for quan-
tum hardware.
Quantum gates are abstract, mathematical representations of basic
operations which can be performed on small numbers of qubits. Sequences
of quantum gates form quantum circuits.
Quantum communication applies quantum information processing
to the task of communicating classical or quantum information. Quantum
teleportation andquantumdensecodingarethemostfamousquantumcom-
munication protocols. The former uses entangled states and classical com-
munication to transfer a quantum state, while the later uses entanglement
and quantum communication to communicate classical information.
Quantumcryptographyappliesquantuminformationprocessingtech-
niques to cryptographic applications such as key distribution, encryption,
secret sharing, and zero knowledge proofs. Properties of quantum infor-
mation, such as the no cloning principle, provide security guarantees not
available classically.
Thefieldofquantum information processing examines thetheory of
quantum information and its applications. Subfields include quantum com-
puting, quantum cryptography, quantum information theory, and quantum
games.
Quantum teleportation uses entangled states and classical communi-
cation to transfer arbitrary quantum states from one location to another.
The reason for “teleportation” in the name is that the transferred quantum
state is necessarily destroyed at the source by the time the protocol is fin-
ishes, as must happen according to the no cloning principle. Unfortunately
quantum teleportation does not enable the sort of teleportation discussed in
science fiction.
Aqubit, orquantum bit,isthefundamentalunitofquantuminforma-
tion, playing the role in quantum computation that the bit plays in classical
computation. While a bithas only two possiblevalues, a qubithas a contin-
uum of possiblevalues; any unitlength vector in a two dimensional complex
vector space is a possible qubit value. Common realizations of a qubit in-
clude photon polarization, electron spin, and a ground state and an excited
state of an atom.