1v1114060/sc:viXra
Analysis of Dynamic Task Allocation in
Multi-Robot Systems
Kristina Lerman1, Chris Jones2, Aram Galstyan1 and Maja J
1. Information Sciences Institute
2. Computer Science Department
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0781,USA
{lerman|galstyan}@isi.edu,{cvjones|maja}@robotics.usc.edu
Dynamic task allocation is an essential requirement for multi-robot
systemsoperatinginunknowndynamicenvironments. Itallowsrobotsto
change their behavior in response to environmental changes or actions of
other robots in order to improve overall system performance. Emergent
coordinationalgorithmsfortaskallocationthatuseonlylocalsensingand
no direct communication between robots are attractive because they are
robustandscalable. However,alackofformalanalysistoolsmakesemer-
gent coordination algorithms difficult todesign. In thispaper we present
a mathematical model of a general dynamic task allocation mechanism.
Robots using this mechanism have to choose between two types of task,
and the goal is to achieve a desired task division in the absence of ex-
plicit communication andglobalknowledge. Robotsestimatethestateof
the environment from repeated local observations and decide which task
to choose based on these observations. We model the robots and obser-
vations as stochastic processes and study the dynamics of the collective
behavior. Specifically, we analyze the effect that the number of obser-
vations and the choice of the decision function have on the performance
of the system. The mathematical models are validated in a multi-robot
multi-foraging scenario. The model’s predictions agree very closely with
experimental results from sensor-based simulations.
1 Introduction
In the 1980’s it was considered ground-breaking for a mobile robot to move
around an unstructured environment at reasonable speeds. In the years since,
advancements in both hardware mechanisms and software architectures and
algorithms have resulted in quite capable mobile robot systems. Provided with
thisbaselinecompetencyofindividualrobots,increasingattentionhasbeenpaid
tothe study ofMulti-RobotSystems(MRS), andinparticulardistributed MRS
withwhichtheremainderofthispaperisconcerned. InadistributedMRSthere
isnocentralizedcontrolmechanism–instead,eachrobotoperatesindependently
under local sensing and control, with coordinated system-level behavior arising
from local interactions among the robots and between the robots and the task
environment. The effective design of coordinated MRS is restricted by the lack
of formal design tools and methodologies. The design of single robot systems
(SRS) has greatly benefited from the formalisms provided by control theory –
the design of MRS is in need of analogous formalisms.
For a group of robots to effectively perform a given system-level task, the
designer must address the question of which robot should do which task and
when [4]. The process of assigning individual robots to sub-tasks of a given
system-level task is called task allocation, and it is a key functionality required
of any MRS. Dynamic task allocation is a class of task allocation in which
the assignment of robots to sub-tasks is a dynamic process and may need to
be continuously adjusted in response to changes in the task environment or
group performance. The problem of task allocation in a distributed MRS is
further compounded by the fact that task allocation must occur as a result
of a distributed process as there is no central coordinator available to make
task assignments. This increases the problem’s complexity because, due to the
local sensing of each robot, no robot has a complete view of the world state.
Giventhis incomplete andoften noisy information,eachrobot must make local
control decisions about which actions to perform and when, without complete
knowledge of what other robots have done in the past, are doing now, or will
do in the future.
Thereareanumberoftaskallocationmodelsandphilosophies. Historically,
the most popular approaches rely on intentional coordination to achieve task
allocation[21]. Inthose,therobotscoordinatetheirrespectiveactionsexplicitly
throughdeliberatecommunicationsandnegotiations. Duetoscalingissues,such
approaches are primarily used in MRS consisting of a relatively small number
ofrobots(i.e.,fewer than10). Taskallocationthroughintentionalcoordination
remainsthe preferredapproachbecauseitisbetter understood,easierto design
and implement, and more amenable to formal analysis [4].
AsthesizeoftheMRSgrows,thecomplexityofthedesignofintentionalap-
proachesincreases due to increaseddemands in communicationbandwidth and
computational abilities of individual robots. Furthermore, complexity intro-
duced by increased robot interactions makes such systems much more difficult
toanalyzeanddesign. Thisleadstothealternativeto intentionalcoordination,
namely, task allocation through utilizing emergent coordination. In systems
using emergent coordination, individual robots coordinate their actions based
solely on local sensing information and local interactions. Typically, there is
very little or no direct communication or explicit negotiations between robots.
They are, therefore, more scalable to larger numbers of robots and are more
ableto takeadvantageofthe robustnessandparallelismprovidedbythe aggre-
gationoflargenumbersofcoordinatedrobots. The drawbackoftaskallocation
as achieved through emergent coordination mechanisms is that such systems
can be difficult to design, solutions are commonly sub-optimal, and since co-
ordination is achieved through many simultaneous local interactions between
varioussubsetsof robots,predictive analysisofexpectedsystemperformanceis
difficult.
As MRS composed of ever-larger numbers of robots become available, the
needfortaskallocationthroughemergentcoordinationwillincrease. Toaddress
the lack of formalisms in the design of such MRS, in this article we present
and experimentally verify a predictive mathematical model of dynamic task
allocation for MRS using emergent coordination. Such a formal model of task
allocation is a positive step in the direction of placing the design of MRS on a
formal footing.
The rest of the paper is organizedas follows. Section 2 providesa summary
of related work. In Section 3 we describe a general mechanism for task alloca-
tion in dynamic environments. This is a distributed mechanism based on local
sensing. In Section 4 we present a mathematical model of the collective behav-
ior of an MRS using this mechanismand study its performance under a variety
of conditions. We validate the model in a multi-foraging domain. In Section 5
wedefine the experimentaltaskdomainofmulti-foraging,robotcontrollersand
the simulation environment. In Section 6 we compare the predictions of math-
ematical models with the results from sensor-based simulations. We conclude
the paper in Section 7, with a discussion of the approach and the results.
2 Related Work
Mathematical modeling and analysis of the collective behavior of MRS is a
relatively new field with approaches and methodologies borrowed from other
fields, including mathematics, physics, and biology. Recently, a number of re-
searchers attempted to mathematically analyze multi-robot systems by using
phenomenological models of the type present here. Sugawara et al. [23, 24]
developed a simple model of cooperative foraging in groups of communicating
and non-communicating robots. Kazadi et al. [11] studied the general prop-
erties of multi-robot aggregation using phenomenological macroscopic models.
Agassounon and Martinoli [1] presented a model of aggregation in which the
number of robots taking part in the clustering task is based on the division of
labormechanisminants. Thesemodelsaread-hoc anddomainspecific,andthe
authorsgivenoexplanationastohowtoapplysuchmodelstootherdomain. In
earlier works we have developed a general framework for creating phenomeno-
logicalmodelsofcollectivebehavioringroupsofrobots[16,18]. Weappliedthis
frameworkto study collaborativestick-pullingin agroupofreactiverobots[17]
and foraging in robots [13].
Most of the approaches listed above are implicitly or explicitly based on
stochastic processes theory. Another example of the stochastic approach is the
probabilisticmicroscopicmodeldevelopedbyMartinoliandcoworkers[19,20,8]
to study collective behavior of a group of robots. Rather than compute the
exact trajectoriesand sensory information of individual robots, Martinoli et al.
model each robot’s interactions with other robots and the environment as a
series of stochastic events, with probabilities determined by simple geometric
considerations. Running several series of stochastic events in parallel, one for
eachrobot,allowedthemtostudythegroupbehaviorofthemulti-robotsystem.
Sofarverylittleworkhasbeendoneonmathematicalanalysisofmulti-robot
systems in dynamic environments. We have recently extended [14] the stochas-
tic processes framework developed in earlier work to robots that change their
behavior based on history of local observations of the (possibly changing) envi-
ronment [15]. In the current paper we develop these ideas further, and present
the exact stochastic model of the system, in addition to the phenomenological
model.
Closest to ours is the work of Huberman and Hogg [7], who mathematically
studiedcollective behaviorofa systemofadaptiveagentsusing game dynamics
asa mechanismfor adaptation. Ingame dynamicalsystems,winning strategies
arerewarded,andagentsusethebestperformingstrategiestodecidetheirnext
move. Although their adaptation mechanism is different from our dynamic
task allocation mechanism, their analytic approach is similar to ours, in that
it is based on the theory of stochastic processes. Others have mathematically
studied collectivebehaviorofsystems composedoflargenumbers ofconcurrent
learners [25, 22]. These are microscopic models, which only allow one to study
collectivebehaviorofrelativelysmallsystemsofafewrobots. Weareinterested
in macroscopic approaches that enable us to directly study collective behavior
in large systems. Our work differs from earlier ones in another important way:
wesystematicallycomparetheoreticalpredictionsofmathematicalmodels with
results of experiments carried out in a sensor-based simulator.
3 Dynamic Task Allocation Mechanism
Thedynamictaskallocationscenariowestudyconsidersaworldpopulatedwith
tasksofT differenttypesandrobotsthatareequallycapableofperformingeach
task but can only be assigned to one type at any given time. For example, the
tasks could be targets of different priority that have to be tracked, different
typesofexplosivesthatneedtobelocated,etc. Additionally,arobotcannotbe
idle — eachrobot is always performing a task at any given time. We introduce
the notion of a robot state as a shorthand for the type of task the robot is
assignedto service. A robotmayswitch its state accordingto its controlpolicy
when it determines it is appropriate to do so. However, needlessly switching
tasksis tobe avoided,sinceinphysicalrobotsystems,this caninvolvecomplex
physical movement that requires time to perform.
The purpose of task allocation is to assign robots to tasks in a way that
will enhance the performance of the system, which typically means reducing
the overall execution time. Thus, if all tasks take an equal amount of time to
complete, in the best allocation, the fraction of robots in state i will be equal
to the fraction of tasks of type i. In general, however, the desired allocation
couldtakeotherforms—forexample,itcouldbe relatedtotherelativereward
or cost of completing each task type — without change to our approach. In
the dynamic task allocation scenario, the number of tasks and the number of
available robots are allowed to change over time, for example, by adding new
tasks, deploying new robots, or removing malfunctioning robots.
Thechallengefacedbythedesigneristodeviseamechanismthatwillleadto
adesiredtaskallocationinadistributedMRSevenastheenvironmentchanges.
The challenge is made even more difficult by the fact that robots have limited
sensing capabilities, do not directly communicate with other robots, and there-
fore, cannot acquire global information about the state of the world, the initial
or current number of tasks (total or by type), or the initial or current number
of robots (total or by assigned type). Instead, robots can sample the world
(assumed to be finite) — for example, by moving around and making local ob-
servationsofthe environment. We assumethatrobotsareable to observetasks
anddiscriminatetheirtypes. Theymayalsobeabletoobserveanddiscriminate
the task states of other robots.
One way to give the robot an ability to respond to environmental changes
(includingactionsofotherrobots)istogivearobotaninternalstatewhereitcan
store its knowledge of the environment as captured by its observations [9, 14].
Theobservationsarestoredinarollinghistorywindowoffinitelength,withnew
observations replacing the oldest ones. The robot consults these observations
periodically and updates its task state according to some transition function
specified by the designer. In an earlier work we showed [9, 15] that this simple
dynamic task allocation mechanism leads to the desired task allocation in a
multi-foraging scenario.
In the following sections we present a mathematical model of dynamic task
allocationand study the role that transition function and the number of obser-
vations (history length) play in the performance of a multi-foraging MRS. In
Section 4.1, we present a model of a simple scenario in which robots base their
decisionstochangestatesolelyonobservationsoftasksintheenvironment. We
study the simplest form of the transition function, in which the probability to
change state to some type is proportional to the fraction of existing tasks of
thattype. InSection6.1wecomparetheoreticalpredictionswith noadjustable
parameters to experimental data and find excellent agreement. In Section 4.2
we examine the more complex scenario where the robots base their decisions
to change task state on the observations of both existing task types and task
states of other robots. In Section 6.2 we study the consequences of the choice
of the transition function and history length on the system behavior and find
good agreement with the experimental data.
4 Analysis of Dynamic Task Allocation
Asproposedintheprevioussection,arobotmaybeabletoadapttoachanging
environment in the absence of complete global knowledge if it is able to make
and remember local observations of the environment. In the treatment below
we assume that there are two types of tasks — arbitrarily referred to as Red
and Green. This simplification is for pedagogical reason only; the model can
be extended to a greater number of task types.
During a sufficiently short time interval, each robot can be considered to
belongto the Green orRedtask state. This is averyhighlevel,coarse-grained
description. In reality, each state is composed of several robot actions and
behaviors, for example, searching for new tasks, detecting and executing them,
avoiding obstacles, etc. However, since we want the model to capture how the
fraction of robots in each task state evolves in time, it is a sufficient level of
abstraction to consider only these two states. If we find that additional levels
of detail are required to explain system behavior, we can elaborate the model
by breaking each of the high level states into its underlying components.
4.1 Observations of Tasks Only
In this section we study dynamic task allocation mechanism in which robots
make decisions to switch task states based solely on observations of available
tasks. Let m and m be the numbers of the observed Red and Green tasks,
respectively, in a robot’s memory or history window. The robot chooses to
change its state, or the type of task it is assigned to execute, with probabilities
given by transition functions f g→r (m r ,m g ) (probability of switching to Red
from Green) and f r→g (m r ,m g ) (probability of switching to Green from Red).
We would like to define transition rules so that the fraction of time the robot
spends in the Red(Green) state be equalto the fractionofRed(Green) tasks.
This will assure that on average the number of Red and Green robots reflect
thedesiredtaskdistribution. Clearly,iftherobotshaveglobalknowledgeabout
thenumbersofRedandGreentasksM andM ,theneachrobotcouldchoose
each state with probability equal to the fraction of the tasks of corresponding
type. Such global knowledge is not available; hence, we want to investigate
how incomplete knowledge of the environment (through local observations), as
well as the dynamically changing environment (e.g., changing ratio of Red and
Green tasks), affects task allocation.
4.1.1 Modelling Robot Observations
As explained above, the transition rate between task execution states depends
on robot’s observations stored in its history. In our model we assume that a
robot makes an observation of a task with a time period τ. For simplicity, by
anobservationwemeanheredetectingatask,suchasatargettobemonitored,
minetobeclearedoranobjecttobegathered. Therefore,observationhistoryof
lengthhcomprisesofthe numberofRedandGreen tasksarobothas observed
during a time interval hτ. We assume that τ has unit length and drop it.
The process of observing a task is given by a Poisson distribution with rate
λ = αM0, where α is a constant characterizing the physical parameters of the
robotsuch as its speed, view angles, etc., and M0 is the number of tasks in the
environment. This simplification is based on the idea that robot’s interactions
with other robots and the environment are independent of the robot’s actual
trajectory and are governed by probabilities determined by simple geometric
considerations. Thissimplificationhasbeenshowntoproduceremarkablygood
agreements with experiments [20, 8].
Let M (t) and M (t) be the number of Red and Green tasks respectively
(canbe time dependent), and letM(t)=M (t)+M (t)be the totalnumber of
tasks. The probabilitythat in the time interval[t−h,t]the robothas observed
exactly m and m tasks is the product of two Poissondistributions:
m !m !
where λ , i = r,g, are the means of the respective distributions. If the task
distribution does not change in time, λ = αM h. For time dependent task
distributions, λ =α dtM (t).
4.1.2 Individual Dynamics: The Stochastic Master Equation
Let us consider a single robot that has to decide between executing Red and
Green tasks in a closed arena and makes a transition to Red and Green states
accordingto its observations. Letp (t) be the probabilitythat a robotis in the
Red state at time t. The equation governing its evolution is
where ε is the rate at which the robot makes decisions to switch its state,
and f g→r and f r→g are the correspondingtransitions probabilities between the
states. Asexplainedabove,theseprobabilitiesdependontherobot’shistory—
thenumberoftasksofeithertypeithasobservedduringthetimeintervalhpre-
ceding the transition. If the robots have global knowledge about the numbers
of Red and Green tasks M and M , one could choose the transition proba-
bilities as the fraction of tasks of corresponding type, f g→r ∝ M r /(M r +M g )
and f r→g ∝ M g /(M r +M g ). In the case when the global information is not
available, it is natural to use similar transition probabilities using robots’ local
estimates:
f g→r (m r ,m g )= ≡γ r (m r ,m g ) (3)
f r→g (m r ,m g )= ≡γ g (m r ,m g ) (4)
Note that γ (m ,m )+γ (m ,m )=1 whenever m +m >0, e.g., whenever
r r g g r g r g
there is at least one observation in the history window. In the case when there
arenoobservationsinhistory,m =m =0,robotswillchooseeitherstatewith
probability 1/2 as it follows from taking the appropriate limits in Equations 3
and4. Hence,wesupplementEquation3withf g→r (0,0)=f r→g (0,0)=0(and
similarly for Equation 4) to assure that robots do not change their state when
the history window does not contain any observations.
Equation2,togetherwiththetransitionratesshowninEquations3–4,deter-
minestheevolutionoftheprobabilitydensityofarobot’sstate. Itisastochastic
equationsincethecoefficients(transitionrates)dependonrandomvariablesm
andm . Moreover,sincetherobot’shistorychangesgradually,thevaluesofthe
coefficients at different times are correlated, hence making the exact treatment
very difficult. We propose, instead, to study the problem within the annealed
approximation: we neglect time–correlation between robot’s histories at differ-
ent times, assuming instead that at any time the real history {m ,m } can
be replaced by a random one drawn from the Poisson distribution Equation 1.
Next, we average Equation 2 over all histories to obtain
dt r r g r
Here γ and γ are given by
r r+g g r+g
where P(m ,m ) is the Poisson distribution Equation 1 and the summation
excludes the term r = g = 0. Note that if the distribution of tasks changes in
time, then γ are time-dependent, γ =γ (t).
To proceedfurther, we need to evaluate the summations in Equation6. Let
us define an auxiliary function
e −λre −λg
m !m ! m +m
m Xr=0m Xg=0
It is easy to check that γ are given by
Differentiating Equation 7 with respect to x yields
dx m !m !
m Xr=1m Xg=0
Notethatthesummationoverm startsfromm =1. Clearly,thesumsoverm
andm arede–coupledthankstothecancellationofthedenominator(m +m ):
dF = e −λr xmr −1 λm r r m e −λg (xλ g )mg (10)
dx m ! m !
(cid:18) m Xr=1 r (cid:19)(cid:18) m Xg=0 g (cid:19)
Theresultingsumsareevaluatedeasily(asthe Taylorexpansionofcorrespond-
ing exponential functions), and the results is
where λ = λ +λ . After elementary integration of Equation 11 (subject to
the condition F(0)=1/2), we obtain using Equation 9 and the expressions for
λ , λ :
r,g h Zt−h r,g
Hereµ (t)=M (t)/M arethefractionofRedandGreentasksrespectively.
Let us first consider the case when the task distribution does not change
with time, i.e., µ (t)=µ . Then we have
γ (t)=(1−e
The solution of Equation 5 subject to the initial condition p (t = 0) = p is
readily obtained:
(cid:18) r g(cid:19)
One can see that the probability distribution approaches the desired steady
statevalue ps =µ0 exponentially. Also,the coefficientofthe exponentdepends
on the density of tasks and the length of the history window. Indeed, it is
easy to check that γ +γ = 1−e
−αhM0.
Hence, for large enough M and
h, αhM ≫ 1, the convergence rate is determined solely by ε. For a small
task density or short history length, on the other hand, the convergence rate is
proportionalto the number oftasks,ε(1−e
. Note thatthis is
a directconsequence of the rule that robots do not changetheir state whenever
there are no observation in the history window.
Now let us consider the case where the task distribution changes suddenly
at time t , µ (t) = µ0 + ∆µθ(t − t ), where θ(t − t ) is the step function.
For simplicity, let us assume that αhM ≫ 1 so that the exponential term in
Equation 12 can be neglected,
r,g h Zt−h r,g r g
ReplacingEquation15intoEquation5,andsolvingtheresultingdifferential
equation yields
Equation 16 describes how the robot distribution converges to the new steady
statevalue after the changeintaskdistribution. Clearly,the convergenceprop-
erties of the solutions depend on h and ε. It is easy to see that in the limiting
caseεh≫1thenew steadystateisattainedaftertime h,|p (h)−(µ +∆µ)|∼
∆µ/(εh) ≪ 1, so the convergence time is t ∼ h. In the other limiting case
εh ≪ 1, on the other hand, the situation is different. A simple analysis of
Equation 16 for t > h yields |p (t)−(µ +∆µ)| ∼ ∆µe
so the convergence
is exponential with characteristic time t ∼1/ε.
4.1.3 Collective Behavior
In order to make predictions about the behavior of an MRS using a dynamic
task allocation mechanism, we need to develop a mathematical model of the
collectivebehaviorofthe system. In the previoussectionwe deriveda modelof
how an individual robot’s behavior changes in time. In this section we extend
ittomodelthe behaviorofaMRS.Inparticular,westudythecollectivebehav-
ior of a homogenous system consisting of N robots with identical controllers.
Mathematically, the MRS is described by a probability density function that
includes the states of all N robots. However, in most cases we are interested
in studying the evolution of global, or average, quantities, such as the average
number of robots in the Red state, rather than the exact probability density
function. This applies when comparing theoretical predictions with results of
experiments, which are usually quoted as an average over many experiments.
Since the robots in either state are independent of each other, p (t), is now
the fraction of robots in the Red state, and consequently Np (t) is the average
number of robots in that state. The results of the previous section, namely
solutions for p (t) for constant task distribution (Equation 14) and for chang-
ing task distribution (Equation16), canbe used to study the averagecollective
behavior. Section 6.1 presents results of analysis of the mathematical model.
4.1.4 Stochastic Effects
In some cases it is useful to know the probability distribution of robot task
states over the entire MRS. This probability function describes the exact col-
lective behavior from which one could derive the average behavior as well as
the fluctuations around the average. Knowing the strength of fluctuations is
necessaryfor assessinghow the probabilistic nature of robot’s observationsand
actionsaffects the globalproperties ofthe system. Belowwe considerthe prob-
lem of finding the probability distribution of the collective state of the system.
LetP (t)betheprobabilitythatthereareexactlynrobotsintheRedstate
at time t. For a sufficiently short time interval ∆t we can write [15]
where W (t;∆t) is the transitionprobability between the states i and j during
the time interval (t,t+∆t). In our MRS, this transitions correspond to robots
changing their state from Red to Green or vice versa. Since the probability
that more than one robot will have a transition during a time interval ∆t is
O(∆t), then, in the limit ∆t → 0 only transitions between neighboring states
are allowed in Equation 17, n→n±1. Hence, we obtain
Here r is the probability density of having one of the k Red robots change its
state to Green, and g is the probability density of having one of the N −k
Green robots change its state to Red. Let us assume again that αhM ≫1 so
that γ =1−γ . Then one has
= g−1 = 0, r
is history-averaged transition rate to
Red states.
The steady state solution of Equation 18 is given by [10]
Ps = g n−1 g n−2 ...g 1 g 0 Ps (20)
n r n r n−1 ...r 2 r 1 0
where Ps is determined by the normalization:
Ps = 1+ g n−1 g n−2 ...g 1 g 0 (21)
0 " r n r n−1 ...r 2 r 1 #
Using the expression for γ, after some algebra we obtain
N!
n (N −n)!n! r r
e.g., the steady state is a binomial distribution with parameter γ. Note again
that this is a direct consequence of the independence of the robots’ dynamics.
Indeed, since the robots act independently, in the steady state each robot has
the same probability of being in either state. Moreover,using this argument it
becomes clear that the time-dependent probability distribution P (t) is given
by Equation 22 with γ replaced by p (t), Equation 14.
4.2 Observations of Tasks and Robots
In this section we study the more complex dynamic task allocation mechanism
in which robots make decisions to change their state based on the observations
of not only available tasks but also on the observed task states of other robots.
Specifically, each robot now records the numbers and types of task as well as
the numbers and task types of robots it has encountered. Again, we let m
and m be the number of tasks of Red and Green type, and n and n be the
number of robots in Red and Green task state in a robot’s history window.
The probabilities for changing a robot’s state are again given by transition
functions that now depend on the fractions of observed tasks and robots of
each type: mˆ = m /(m +m ), mˆ = m /(m +m ), nˆ = n /(n +n ),
r r r g g g r g r r r g
and nˆ = n /(n +n ). In our previous work [15] we showed that in order to
achieve the desired long term behavior for task allocation (i.e., in the steady
state the average fraction of Red and Green robots is equal to the fraction of
RedandGreen tasksrespectively),the transitionratesmusthavethefollowing
functional form:
f g→r (mˆ r ,nˆ r ) = mˆ r g(mˆ r −nˆ r ), (23)
Here g(z) is a continuous, monotonically increasing function of its argument
defined on an interval [−1,1]. In this paper we consider the following forms for
g(z):
• Power: g(z)=100z/100
• Stepwise linear: g(z)=zΘ(z).1
To analyze this task allocation model, let us again consider a single robot
that searches for tasks to perform and makes a transition to Red and Green
states according to transition functions defined above. Let p (t) be the proba-
bility that the robot is in the Red state at time t, with Equation 2 governing
its time evolution. Note that p (t) is also the average fraction of Red robots,
As in the previous case, the next step of the analysis is averaging over the
the robot’s histories, i.e., mˆ and nˆ . Note that a robot’s observations of avail-
able tasks can still be modeled by a Poissondistribution similar to Equation1.
However, since the number of robots of each task state changes stochastically
in time, the statistics of n and n should be modeled as a doubly stochas-
tic Poisson process (also called Cox process) with stochastic rates. This would
complicate the calculation of the average over nˆ = n /(n +n ) and require
mathematical details that go well beyond the scope of this paper. Fortunately,
as we demonstrated in the previous section, if a robot’s observation window
contains many readings, then the estimated fraction of task types is exponen-
tially close to the average of the Poisson distribution. This suggests that for
sufficiently high densities of tasks and robots we can neglect the stochastic ef-
fects of modeling observations for the purpose of our analysis, and replace the
robot’s observation by their average (expected) values. In other words, we use
the following approximation:
The Equations 2, 25, and 26 are a system of integro–differential equations
that uniquely determine the dynamics of p (t). In the most general case it is
notpossible to obtainsolutions by analyticalmeans,hence one has to solve the
system numerically. However, if the task density does not change in time, we
canstillperformsteadystateanalysis. Steadystateanalysislooksforlong-term
solutions that do not change in time, i.e., dp /dt = 0. Let µ0 be the density
of Red tasks, and p = p (t →∞) be the steady state value, so that mˆ = µ0,
nˆ =p0. Then, by setting left hand side of Equation 2 to zero, we get
0 r r 0 0 r r 0
Note that p = µ0 is a solution to Equation 27 so that in the steady state
the fraction of Red robots equals the fraction of red tasks as desired. To show
thatthisistheonlysolution,wenotethatforafixedµ0 theright-andleft-hand
1ThestepfunctionΘisdefined asΘ(z)=1ifz≥0;otherwise,itis0. Thestepfunction
guarantees thatnotransitionstoRedstateoccurwhen mr <nr.
sides of the equation are monotonically increasing and decreasing functions of
p respectively, due to the monotonicity of g(z). Consequently, the two curves
can meet only once and that proves the uniqueness of the solution.
4.2.1 Phenomenological Model
Exact stochastic models of task allocation can quickly become analytically in-
tractable, as we saw above. Instead of exact models, it is often more conve-
nient to work with the so-called Rate Equations model. These equations can
be derived from the exact stochastic model by appropriately averaging it [15];
however,theyareoften(see,forexample,populationdynamics[6])phenomeno-
logical,or ad hoc, in nature — constructed by taking into account the system’s
salient processes. This approach makes a number of simplifying assumptions:
namely, that the system is uniform and dilute (not too dense), that actions of
individual entities are independent of one another, that parameters canbe rep-
resentedbytheir meanvaluesandthatsystembehaviorcanbedescribedby its
average value. Despite these simplifications, resulting models have been shown
to correctly describe dynamics of collective behavior of robotic systems [18].
Phenomenological models are useful for answering many important questions
aboutthe performanceofaMRS,suchas,doesthe steadystateexist,howlong
doesittaketo reachit, andsoon. Belowwe presentaphenomenologicalmodel
of dynamic task allocation.
Individualrobotsaremakingtheirdecisionstochangetaskstateprobabilis-
ticallyandindependently ofoneanother. ArobotwillchangestatefromGreen
to Red with probability f g→r and with probability 1−f g→r it will remain in
the Green state. We can succinctly write ∆N g→r and ∆N r→g , the number of
robotsthatswitchfromGreentoRedandvice versa duringasufficientlysmall
time interval ∆t, as
X (cid:0) (cid:1)
X (cid:0) (cid:1)
Here we introduced a state variable x , such that x =1 when a robot is in the
Green state, and x = 0 when a robot is in the Red state. δ(x) is Kronecker
delta, defined as δ(x) = 1 when x = 0 and δ(x) = 0 otherwise. Therefore,
∆N g→r is a random variable from a binomial distribution specified by a mean
µ = f g→r N g and variance σ2 = f g→r (1−f g→r )N g . Similarly, the distribution
of the random variable ∆N r→g is specified by mean µ = f r→g N r and variance
σ2 =f r→g (1−f r→g )N r .
Duringatimeinterval∆tthetotalnumberofrobotsinRedandGreentask
states will change as individual robots make decisions to change states. The
followingfinite difference equation specifies how the number of Redwill change
on average:
Rearrangingthe equationandtaking the continuoustime limit (∆t→0)yields
adifferentialRateEquationthatdescribestimeevolutionofthenumberofRed
robots. By taking the means of ∆N’s as their values, we recover Equation 2.
Keeping ∆N’s as random variables allows us to study the effect the prob-
abilistic nature of the robots’ decisions have on the collective behavior.2 We
solve Equation 28 by iterating it in time and drawing ∆N’s at random from
their respective distributions. The solutions are subject to the initial condition
N (t≤0)=N and specify the dynamics of task allocation in robots.
Functions f g→r and f r→g are calculated using estimates of the densities of
Red tasks (m ) and robots in Red state (n ) from the observed counts stored
in the robot’s history window.
Transitionratesf g→r andf r→g inthemodelaremeanvalues,averagedover
all histories and all robots. In order to compute them, we need to aggregate
observations of all robots. Suppose each robot has a history window of length
h. For a particular robot i, the values in the most recent observational slot are
N0 , N0 , M0 and M0 , the observed numbers of Red and Green robots and
i,r i,g i,r i,g
tasks respectively at time t. In the next latest slot, the values are N1 , N1 ,
M1 and M1 , the observed numbers at time t−∆, and so on. Each robot
estimates the densities of Red robots and tasks using the following calculation:
n = i,r = nj (29)
i,r h Nj +Nj h i,r
j=0 i,r i,g j=0
m = i,r = mj . (30)
i,r h Mj +Mj h i,r
j=0 i,r i,g j=0
When observations of all robots are taken into account, the mean of the
observeddensities of Red robots at time t — 1 N n0 — will fluctuate due
to observation noise, but on average it will be proportional to N (t)/N, which
is the actual density of Red robots at time t. The proportionality factor is
related to physical robot parameters, such as speed and observation area (see
Section 6.1). Likewise, the average of the observed densities at time t−j∆ is
1 N nj ∝ N (t−j∆)/N, the density of robots at time t−j∆. Thus, the
N i=1 i,r r
aggregate estimates of the fractions of Red robots and tasks are:
2Notethatwedonotmodelheretheeffectofobservationnoiseduetouncertaintyinsensor
readingsandfluctuations inthedistributionoftasks.
Robots are making their decisions asynchronously, i.e., at slightly different
times. Therefore, the last terms in the above equations are best expressed in
continuousform: e.g., 1/Nh N (t−τ)dτ (see Equation25andEquation26).
Estimates Equation 31 and 32 can be plugged into Equation 23 and Equa-
tion 24 to compute the values of transition probabilities for any choice of the
transition function (power or linear). Once we know f r→g and f g→r , we can
solveEquation28tostudythe dynamicsoftaskallocationinrobots. Note that
Equation 28 is now a time-delay finite difference equation, and solutions will
show typical oscillations.
We solve the models presented in this section and validate their predictions
in context of the multi-foraging task described next.
5 Multi-Robot Multi-Foraging Task
In this section we describe the multi-foraging task domain in which we exper-
imentally tested our dynamic task allocation mechanism, including the simu-
lation environment used and robot sensing and control characteristics. In Sec-
tion 6.1 we use this application to validate the models presented above, solve
them and compare their solutions to the results of embodied simulations.
5.1 Task Description
The traditional foraging task is defined by having an individual robot or group
of robots collect a set of objects from an environment and either consume on
the spot or return them to a common location [5]. Multi-foraging, a variation
on traditional foraging, is defined in [2] and consists of an arena populated by
multiple types of objects to be concurrently collected.
In our multi-foraging domain, there are two types of objects (e.g., pucks)
randomly dispersed throughout the arena: Puck and Puck pucks that
are distinguishable by their color. Each robot is equally capable of foraging
both puck types, but can only be allocated to foraging for one type at any
giventime. Additionally,allrobotsareengagedinforagingatalltimes;arobot
cannot be idle. A robot may switch the puck type for which it is foraging
according to its control policy, when it determines it is appropriate to do so.
This is an instantiation of the generaltask allocation problem described earlier
in this paper, with puck colors representing different task types.
Inthemulti-foragingtask,therobotsmoveinanenclosedarenaandpickup
encountered pucks. When a robot picks up a puck, the puck is consumed (i.e.,
it is immediately removed from the environment, not transported to another
region) and the robot carries on foraging for other pucks. Immediately after
a puck is consumed, another puck of the same type is placed in the arena at
a random location. This is done so as to maintain a constant puck density
in the arena throughout the course of an experiment. In some situations, the
densityofpuckscanimpacttheaccuracyorspeedofconvergencetothe desired
task allocation. This is an important consideration in dynamic task allocation
mechanisms for many domains; however, in this work we want to limit the
number of experimental variables impacting system performance. Therefore,
we reserve the investigation on the impact of varying puck densities for future
work.
The role of dynamic task allocation in this domain requires the robots to
split their numbers by having some forage for Puck pucks and others for
Puck pucks. For the purpose of our experiments, we desire an allocation
of robots to converge to a situation in which the proportion of robots foraging
for Puck pucks is equal to the proportion of Puck pucks present in the
foraging arena (e.g., if Puck pucks make up 30% of the pucks present in the
foraging arena, then 30% of the robots should be foraging for Puck pucks).
In general,the desired allocation could take other forms. For example, it could
be related to the relative reward or cost of foraging each puck type without
change to our approach.
We note that the limited sensing capabilities and lack of direct communica-
tionoftheindividualrobotsintheimplementationofourtaskdomainprohibits
them from acquiring global information such as the size and shape of the for-
aging arena, the initial or current number of pucks to be foraged (total or by
type), or the initial or current number of foraging robots (total or by foraging
type).
5.2 Simulation Environment
In order to experimentally demonstrate the dynamic task allocation mecha-
nism we made use of a physically-realistic simulation environment. Our simu-
lationtrials were performedusing Playerand Gazebo simulationenvironments.
Player [3] is a server that connects robots, sensors, and control programs over
a network. Gazebo [12] simulates a set of Player devices in a 3-D physically-
realistic world with full dynamics. Together, the two represent a high-fidelity
simulation tool for individual robots and teams that has been validated on a
collection of real-robotrobot experiments using Player controlprograms trans-
ferred directly to physical mobile robots. Figure 1 provides snapshots of the
simulation environment used. All experiments involved 20 robots foraging in a
400m2 arena.
The robots used in the experimental simulations are realistic models of the
ActivMedia Pioneer 2DX mobile robot. Each robot, approximately 30 cm in
diameter,is equippedwithadifferentialdrive,anodometrysystemusingwheel
rotation encoders, and 180 degree forward-facing laser rangefinder used for ob-
stacle avoidance and as a fiducial detector/reader. Each puck is marked with
a fiducial that marks the puck type and each robot is equipped with a fiducial
thatmarksthe activeforagingstateoftherobot. Notethatthefiducialsdonot
contain unique identities of the pucks or robots but only mark the type of the
puck or the puck type a given robot is engaged in foraging. Each robot is also
equipped with a 2-DOF gripper on the front, capable of picking up a single 8
cm diameter puck at a time. There is no capability available for explicit, di-
rectcommunicationbetweenrobotsnorcanpucksandotherrobotsbeuniquely
Figure 1: Snapshots from the simulation environment used. (left) An overhead
view of foraging arena and robots. (right) A closeup of robots and pucks.
identified.
5.3 Behavior-Based Robot Controller
All robots have identical behavior-based controllers consisting of the following
mutually exclusive behaviors: Avoiding, Wandering, Puck Servoing, Grasping,
and Observing. Descriptions of robot behaviors are provided below.
- The Avoiding behaviorcauses the robotto turn to avoidobstacles in its
path.
- The Wandering behavior causes the robot to move forward and, after a
randomlength ofelapsedtime, to turn leftor rightthrougharandomarc
for a random period of time.
- ThePuck Servoingbehaviorcausestherobottomovetowardadetected
puckofthedesiredtype. Iftherobot’scurrentforagingstateisRobot ,
the desired puck type is Puck , and if the robots currentforaging state
is Robot , the desired puck type is Puck .
Green Green
- TheGraspingbehaviorcausestherobottouseitsgrippertopickupand
consume a puck within the gripper’s grasp.
- The Observing behavior causes the robot to take the current fiducial
information returned by the laser rangefinder and record the detected
pucks and robots to their respective histories. The robot then updates
its foraging state based on those histories. A description of the histories
is given in Section 5.3.1 and a description of the foraging state update
procedure is given in Section 5.3.2.
Each behavior listed above has a set of activation conditions based on rel-
evant sensor inputs and state values. When met, the conditions cause the be-
havior to be become active. A description of when each activation condition is
Obstacle Puck Gripper Break- Observation Active
Detected Detected Beam On Signal Behavior
X X X 1 Observing
1 X X X Avoiding
0 1 0 0 Puck Servoing
0 X 1 0 Grasping
0 X X X Wandering
Table 1: Behavior Activation Conditions. Behaviors are listed in order of de-
creasing rank. Higher ranking behaviors preempt lower ranking behaviors in
the event multiple are active. X denotes the activation condition is irrelevant
for the behavior.
active is given below. The activation conditions of all behaviors are shown in
Table 1.
- The Obstacle Detected activation condition is true when an obstacle
is detected by the laser rangefinder within a distance of 1 meter. Other
robots, pucks, and the arena walls are considered obstacles.
- ThePuck Detectedactivationconditionistrueiftherobot’scurrent
foraging state is Robot and a puck of type Puck (where Det is Red
orGreen)isdetectedwithinadistanceof5metersandwithin±30degrees
of the robot’s direction of travel.
- TheGripper Break-Beam Onactivationconditionistrueifthebreak-
beam sensor between the gripper jaws detects an object.
- TheObservationSignalactivationconditionistrueifthedistancetrav-
eledbytherobotaccordingtoodometrysincethelasttimetheObserving
behavior was activated is greater than 2 meters.
5.3.1 Robot State Information
All robots maintain three types of state information: foraging state, observed
puck history, and observedrobot history. The foraging state identifies the type
of puck the robot is currently involved in foraging. A robot with a foraging
state of Robot refers to a robot engaged in foraging Puck pucks and a
foraging state of Robot refers to a robot engaged in foraging Puck
Green Green
pucks. Forsimplicity,wewillrefertobothrobotforagingstatesandpucktypes
as Red and Green. The exact meaning will be clear in context.
Eachrobotisoutfittedwithacoloredbeaconpassivelyobservablebynearby
robots which indicates the robot’s currentforaging state. The color of the bea-
con changes to reflect the current state – a red beacon for a foraging state of
Red and a green beacon for foraging state Green. Thus, the colored beacon
acts as a form of local, passive communication conveying the robot’s current
foragingstate. All robots maintaina limited, constant-sizedhistory storing the
most recently observed puck types and another constant-sized history storing
the foraging state of the most recently observed robots. Neither of these his-
tories contains a unique identity or location of detected pucks or robots, nor
does it store a time stamp of when any given observation was made. The his-
tory of observedpucks is limited to the last MAX-PUCK-HISTORYpucks observed
and the history of the foraging states of observed robots is limited to the last
MAX-ROBOT-HISTORYrobots observed.
While moving about the arena, each robot keeps track of the approximate
distance it has traveled by using odometry measurements. At every interval of
2 meters traveled, the robot makes an observation performed by the Observing
behavior. Thisprocedureisnearlyinstantaneous;therefore,therobot’sbehavior
isnotoutwardlyaffected. Theareainwhichpucksandotherrobotsarevisibleis
within5metersand±30degreesintherobot’sdirectionoftravel. Observations
are only made after traveling 2 meters because updating too frequently leads
to over-convergence of the estimated puck and robot type proportions due to
repeatedobservationsofthe samepucksand/orrobots. Onaverage,duringour
experiments, a robot detected 2 pucks and robots per observation.
5.3.2 Foraging State Transition Function
Afterarobotmakesanobservation,itre-evaluatesandprobabilisticallychanges
itscurrentforagingstategiventhenewlyupdatedpuckandrobothistories. The
probabilitybywhichthe robotchangesits foragingstate isdefinedby the tran-
sition function. We experimentally studied transition functions given by Equa-
tion3,Equation23andEquation24with both power andlinear forms. Below
we presentresults of analysis and simulations and discuss the consequences the
choice of the transition function has on system level behavior.
6 Analysis and Simulations Results
The mathematical models developedin Section 4 canbe directly appliedto the
multi-foraging task if we map Red and Green tasks to Red and Green pucks
and task states of robots to their foraging states. Model parameters, such as
ε, α, etc, depend on physical realizations of the implementation and can be
computed from details of the multi-foraging task as described below.
6.1 Observations of Pucks Only
First, we study the model of dynamic task allocation, presented in Section 4.1,
where robots observeonly pucks and make decisionto switchforagingstate ac-
cording to the transition functions givenby Equation 3. We comparedtheoret-
ical predictions of the robots’ collective behavior with results from simulations.
We used Equation 14 and 16 to compute how the average number of robots in
the Red state changes in time when the puck distribution is suddenly changed.
The parametervalues were obtained from experiments. p =1.0 was the initial
density of Red robots (of 20 total robots), µ = 0.3 was the initial Red puck
density (of 50 total pucks), which remained constant until it was changed by
theexperimenter. Thefirstchangeinpuckdensitywas∆µ=0.5,meaningthat
80%ofthe pucks inthe arenaarenowRed. The secondchangeinpuck density
was ∆µ=−0.3, to 50% Red pucks.
ǫistherateatwhichrobotsmakedecisionstoswitchstates. Robottraveled
2 m between observations at an average speed of 0.2 m/s; therefore, there are
10 s between observations, and ε = 0.1. h, the history length, is the number
of pucks in the robot’s memory. αM0 is the rate at which robots encounter
pucks. A robot makes an observationof its local environment at discrete time
intervals. The area visible to the robot is A = (5 m)2π/6 = 13.09, with 1/6
coming from the 60o angle of view. The arena area is A = 315 m2; therefore,
αM0 = A M0/A = 2.1. We studied the dynamics of the system for different
history lengths h.
0 500 1000 1500
History length 10
Red Robots (expt)
Red Robots (theory)
0 500 1000 1500
History length 50
0 500 1000 1500
History length 100
0 500 1000 1500
Simulation Time (seconds)
Figure 2: Evolution of the fraction of Red robots for different history lengths.
Robots’ decision to change state is based on observations of pucks only.
Figure 2 shows evolution of the numbers of Red robots for different history
lengths. Initially, the distribution of Redpucks is set to 30%and all the robots
are in the Red foraging state. At t = 500 s, the puck distribution changes
abruptly to 80%, and at t = 1000 s to 50%. The solid line shows results of
simulations — the fraction of Red robots, averaged over 10 runs. The dashed
line gives theoretical predictions for the parameters quoted above. Since we
are in the εh ≫ 1 limit (for h = 50,100), the time it takes to converge to the
steady state is linear in history length, t ∼h, as predicted by Equation 16.
The agreement between theoretical and experimental results is excellent. We
stress that there are no free parameters in the theoretical predictions — only
experimental values of the parameters were used in producing these plots.
In addition to being able to predict the average collective behavior of the
multi-robot system, we can also quantitatively characterize the amount of fluc-
tuationsinthe system. Fluctuations aredeviationsfromthe steadystate (after
the system has converged to the steady state) that arise from the stochastic
nature of robot’s observations and decisions. These deviations result in fluctu-
ations from the desired global distribution of Red and Green robots seen in an
individualexperiment. Onecansuppressthesefluctuationsbyaveragingresults
of many identical experiments.
Figure 3: Histogram of the fraction of Red robots in the steady state for three
differentpuckdistributions(dataforh=10). µ specifiesfractionofRedpucks.
Lines are theoretical predictions of the distribution of Red robots.
Tomeasurethestrengthofthefluctuations,wetakedatafromanindividual
experimental run and extract the fraction of Red robots, after the system has
converged to the steady state, for each of the three Red puck distributions:
µ = 30%, 50%, 80%. Because the runs were relatively short, we only have
300sworthofdata(30datapoints)inthe convergedstate;however,sinceeach
experimentwasrepeatedten times, wemake the data sets longerby appending
datafromallexperiments. Inthe end, wehave300measurementsofthe steady
state Red robot density for three different puck distributions. Figure 6.1 shows
the histogram of robot distributions for three different puck distributions. The
solidlinesarecomputedusingEquation22,whereforγweusedtheactualmeans
ofthe steady state distributions (γ =0.28,0.47and 0.7for µ =30%,50%and
80%respectively). We cansee fromthe plots that the theory correctlypredicts
the strength of fluctuations about the steady state. As is true of binomial
distributions, the fluctuations (measured by the variance)are greatestfor cases
where the numbers of Red and Green pucks are comparable (µ = 50%) and
smaller when their numbers are very different (µ =80%).
6.2 Observations of Pucks and Robots
In this section we study the dynamic task allocation model developed in Sec-
tion 4.2, in which robots use observations of pucks and other robots’ foraging
states to make decision to change their own foraging state.
Figure 4 shows results of embodied simulations (solid lines) as well as so-
lutions to the model Equation 28 (dashed lines) for different values of robot
history length and forms of transition function (given by Equation 23 and 24,
withg(z)linearorpowerfunction). Initially,theRedpuckfraction(dottedline)
is30%. Itischangedabruptlyatt=500sto80%andthenagainatt=2000s
to 50%. Each solid line showing Red robot density has been averaged over 10
runs. We rescale the dimensionless time of the model by parameter 10, corre-
spondingε=0.1. Thehistorylengthwastheonlyadjustableparameterusedin
solvingthe equations. The valuesofhusedtocompute the observedfractionof
Redrobotsn inEquation31wereh=2, 8, 16,correspondingtoexperimental
history lengths 10, 50, 100 respectively. For m , the observed fraction of Red
pucks, we used their actual densities.
In order to explain the difference in history lengths between theory and ex-
periment,we notethatinthe simulationexperiments,the historylengthmeans
the numbers of observed robots and pucks, while in the model, it means the
number of observations, with multiple objects sighted within a single observa-
tion. According to calculations in Section 6.1, a robot observes about 2 pucks
in a single observation. Moreover, the robot travels 2 m between observations,
yet it sees 5 m out during each observation, meaning that individual observa-
tions will be correlated. Observations will be further correlated because of the
pattern of a robot’s motion — as the robot moves in a straight line towards
a goal, it is likely to observe overlapping regions of the arena. These consid-
erations could explain the factor of five difference between the history lengths
used in the experiments and the corresponding values used in the model. More
detailed experiments, for example, ones in which robots travel farther between
observations, are necessary to explain these differences.
Solutions exhibit oscillations,although eventually oscillations decay and so-
lutions relax to their steady state values. In all cases, the steady state value is
the same as the fraction of red pucks in the arena. History-induced oscillations
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 10
Red Robots (expt)
Red Robots (theory)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 50
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 100
Simulation Time (seconds)
(a) Linear transition function
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 10
Red Robots (expt)
Red Robots (theory)
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 50
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
History length 100
Simulation Time (seconds)
(b) Power transition function
Figure 4: Evolution of the fraction of Red robots for different history lengths
and transition functions, compared to predictions of the model
arefarmorepronouncedforthelineartransitionfunction(Figure4(a))thanfor
the power transition function (Figure 4(b)). For the power transition function,
theseoscillationsarepresentbutbecomeevidentonlyforlongerhistorylengths.
This behavior is probably caused by the differences between the values of tran-
sition functions near the steady state: while the value of the power transition
function remains small near the steady state, the value of the linear transition
function grows linearly with the distance from the steady state, thereby ampli-
fying any deviations from the steady state solution. The amplitude and period
of oscillations and the convergence rate of solutions to the steady state all de-
pend on history length, and it generally takes longer to reach the steady state
for longer histories. Another conclusion is that the linear transition function
convergesto thedesireddistributionfasterthanthe powerfunction,atleastfor
moderate history lengths.
7 Discussion
Wehaveconstructedandanalyzedmathematicalmodelsofdynamictaskalloca-
tioninamulti-robotsystem. Themodelsaregeneralandcanbeeasilyextended
to other systems in whichrobots use a history of localobservationsof the envi-
ronmentasabasisformakingdecisionsaboutfuture actions. Thesemodelsare
based on theory of stochastic processes. In order to study a robot’s behavior,
we do not need to know its exact trajectory or the trajectories of other robots;
instead, we derive a probabilistic model that governs how a robot’s behavior
changes in time. In some simple cases these models can be solved analytically.
However, stochastic models are usually too complex for exact analytic treat-
ment. Thus, in the scenariodescribed inSection 4.1 in whichonly observations
oftasksaremade,thoughtheindividualmodelistractable,thestochasticmodel
of the collective behavior is not. Instead, we use averaging and approximation
techniquestoquantitativelystudythedynamicsofthecollectivebehavior. Such
models, therefore, do not describe the robots’ behavior in a single experiment,
butratherthebehaviorthathasbeenaveragedovermanyexperimentalorsim-
ulations runs. Fortunately, results of experiments and simulations are usually
presentedasanaverageovermanyruns;therefore,mathematicalmodelsofaver-
agecollectivebehaviorcanbeusedtodescribeexperimentalresults. Infact,the
stochastic model produces excellent agreementwith experimental results under
all experimental conditions and without using any adjustable parameters.
Phenomenological models are more straightforward to construct and ana-
lyze than exact stochastic models — in fact, they can be easily constructed
from details of the individual robot controller [18]. The ease of use comes at a
price, namely, the number of simplifying assumptions that were made in order
to producea mathematicallytractablemodel. First, weassumethat the robots
arefunctioning inadilute limit, wherethey aresufficientlyseparatedthattheir
actionsarelargelyindependentofoneanother. Second,weassumethatthetran-
sitionratescanberepresentedbyaggregatequantitiesthatarespatiallyuniform
and independent of the details of the individual robot’s actions or history. We
alsoassumethesystemishomogeneous,withmodeledrobotscharacterizedbya
set of parameters,eachof them representing the mean value of some real robot
feature: mean speed, mean duration for performing a certainmaneuver, and so
on. Real robot systems are heterogeneous: even if the robots are executing the
same controller, there will always be variations due to inherent differences in
hardware. We do not consider parameter distributions in our models as would
benecessarytodescribesuchheterogeneoussystems. Finally,phenomenological
models more reliably describe systems where fluctuations (deviations from the
mean behavior) can be neglected, as happens in large systems or when many
experimental runs are aggregated. However, even if phenomenological models
don’t agree with experiments exactly, as we saw in Section 6.2, they can still
reliably predict most behaviors of interest even in not-so-large systems. They
are, therefore, a useful tool for modeling and analyzing multi-robot systems.
8 Conclusion
Mathematical analysis can be a useful tool for the study and design of MRS
and a viable alternative to experiments and simulations. It can be applied to
large systems that are too costly to build or take too long to run in simula-
tion. Mathematical analysis can be used to study the behavior of an MRS,
select parameters that optimize its performance, prevent instabilities, etc. In
conjunction with the design process, mathematical analysis can help under-
stand the effect individual robot characteristics have on the collective behavior
before a system is implemented in hardware or in simulation. Unlike experi-
ments and simulations, where exhaustive search of the design parameter space
is often required to reach any conclusion, analysis can often produce exact an-
alytic results, or scaling relationships, for the quantities of interest. If these
are not possible, exhaustive search of the parameter space is much more prac-
tical and efficient. Finally, results of analysis can be used as feedback to guide
performance-enhancing modifications of the robot controller.
In this paper we have described an dynamic task allocation mechanism
where robots use local observations of the environment to decide their task
assignments. We have presented a mathematical model of this task allocation
mechanism and studied it in the context of a multi-foraging task scenario. We
compared predictions of the model with results of embodied simulations and
foundexcellentquantitativeagreement. Inthisapplication,mathematicalanal-
ysis could help the designer choose robot properties, such as the form of the
transition probability used by robots to switch their task state, or decide how
many observations the robot ought to consider.
Mathematical analysis of MRS is a new field, but its success in explaining
experimentalresults shows it to be a promisingtool for the design andanalysis
of robotic systems. The field is open to new research directions, from apply-
ing analysis to new robotic systems to developing increasingly sophisticated
mathematical models that, for example, account for heterogeneities in robot
population that are due to differences in their sensors and actuators.
Acknowledgment
The research reported here was supported in part by the Defense Advanced
ResearchProjectsAgency(DARPA) under contractnumber F30602-00-2-0573.