Acta Pharmacologica Sinica (2015) 36: 3–23 npg
© 2015 CPS and SIMM All rights reserved 1671-4083/15 $32.00
www.nature.com/aps
Androgen receptor: structure, role in prostate cancer
and drug discovery
MH Eileen TAN1, 2, *, Jun LI1, H Eric XU2, 3, Karsten MELCHER2, Eu-leong YONG1, *
1Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, National University Hospital, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore; 2Laboratory of Structural Sciences, Center for Structural Biology and Drug Discovery, Van Andel Research
Institute, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA; 3VARI/SIMM Center, CAS-Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China
Androgens and androgen receptors (AR) play a pivotal role in expression of the male phenotype. Several diseases, such as androgen
insensitivity syndrome (AIS) and prostate cancer, are associated with alterations in AR functions. Indeed, androgen blockade by drugs
that prevent the production of androgens and/or block the action of the AR inhibits prostate cancer growth. However, resistance to
these drugs often occurs after 2–3 years as the patients develop castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In CRPC, a functional AR
remains a key regulator. Early studies focused on the functional domains of the AR and its crucial role in the pathology. The elucidation
of the structures of the AR DNA binding domain (DBD) and ligand binding domain (LBD) provides a new framework for understanding
the functions of this receptor and leads to the development of rational drug design for the treatment of prostate cancer. An overview of
androgen receptor structure and activity, its actions in prostate cancer, and how structural information and high-throughput screening
have been or can be used for drug discovery are provided herein.
Keywords: androgen; androgen receptor; prostate cancer; nuclear receptor; drug discovery; rational drug design; structural biology;
castration resistance; antiandrogen
Introduction and albumin[4, 5]. Only the free form enters prostate cells.
The androgen receptor (AR) (NR3C4, nuclear receptor sub- Intracellularly, testosterone is converted into a more potent
family 3, group C, gene 4) belongs to the steroid hormone 5α-reduced metabolite of testosterone, 5α-dihydrotestosterone
group of nuclear receptors with the estrogen receptor (ER), (DHT), which promotes the growth and survival of prostate
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), progesterone receptor (PR) cells. DHT binds to the AR with high affinity, displaces heat-
and mineralocorticoid receptor (MR)[1–3]. The AR is a ligand- shock proteins from the AR, drives the interaction between
dependent transcription factor that controls the expression the N and C termini of the AR, and binds importin-α to
of specific genes. The binding of the AR to its native ligands translocate the AR into the nucleus[6]. In the nucleus, recep-
5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and testosterone initiates male tor dimers bind to androgen response elements (AREs)
sexual development and differentiation. The current model in the promoter regions of target genes, such as prostate-
of action of androgens and the AR is depicted in Figure 1A. specific antigen (PSA) and transmembrane protease serine 2
Androgens such as testosterone are synthesized primarily by (TMPRSS2), etc, to which they recruit various coregulatory
the Leydig cells in the testes, under the regulation of lutein- proteins to facilitate transcription, leading to responses such
izing hormone (LH) produced by the anterior pituitary gland. as growth and survival[7–12]. Male sexual differentiation fails
LH secretion is in turn regulated by gonadotropin-releasing to occur in the absence of androgens or without a function-
hormone (GnRH). Once produced, testosterone mostly circu- ing AR. A complete loss of AR function in males results in
lates bound to serum sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) complete androgen insensitivity syndrome[13, 14]. The role of
the AR in the development and progression of prostate cancer
has led to increasing interest in this nuclear receptor. Prostate
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
cancer is predicted to be the leading cause of cancer-related
E-mail Eileen.tan@vai.org (MH Eileen TAN);
obgyel@nus.edu.sg (Eu-leong YONG) death in men over the next decade in the United States[15]. The
Received 2014-01-10 Accepted 2014-03-05 development and progression of prostate cancer depends on
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
Figure 1. Androgen and AR action. Genome organization of the human androgen receptor gene and the functional domain structure of the androgen
receptor protein. (A) Androgen and AR signaling in prostate cells. After testicular synthesis, testosterone is transported to target tissues such as the
prostate and becomes converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by 5-α-reductase. DHT binds to the ligand-binding pocket and promotes the dissociation
of heat-shock proteins (HSPs) from the AR. The AR then translocates into the nucleus, dimerizes and binds to the androgen response element (ARE)
in the promoter region of target genes such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and TMPRSS2. At the promoter, the AR is able to recruit members of
the basal transcription machinery [such as TATA-box-binding protein (TBP) and transcription factor IIF (TFIIF)] in addition to other coregulators such as
members of the p160 family of coactivators and cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP). SHBG: serum sex hormone-
binding globulin. (B) The androgen receptor gene has been mapped to the long arm of the X-chromosome (locus: Xq11-q12). It contains eight exons
interrupted by introns of varying lengths (0.7–2.6 kb) and codes for a protein of 919 amino acids consisting of several functional domains (N-terminal
domain (NTD), DNA binding domain (DBD) and ligand binding domain (LBD); amino acid residue numbers are indicated above the AR protein domain
map). Exon 1 codes for the NTD, exons 2 and 3 encode the DBD, and exons 4 to 8 encode both the hinge and LBD.
androgenic stimulation[11]. As such, prostate cancer is treated tural information and biochemical experiments have been
by depriving tumors of androgens such as DHT and testoster- used to aid rational drug design to improve existing drugs and
one or blocking their actions. However, the effect of this type develop new treatments for the disease. This review summa-
of treatment is transient, as patients relapse after developing rizes AR structure-function relationships, describes the role of
a castration-resistant form of the disease that is usually due the AR in prostate cancer, and integrates a discussion on how
to increased levels of AR expression or mutations that cause structural information has been used to help guide rational
the AR to be resistant to antiandrogens. Many studies have drug design for treatment of prostate cancer.
focused on providing new insights into the mechanisms of
AR action in prostate cancer. The determination of the three- AR structure and activity
dimensional crystal structures of the AR DNA binding domain The AR gene is located on the X chromosome at the locus
(DBD) and ligand binding domain (LBD) has helped expand Xq11-Xq12 (Figure 1B)[16–18]. The protein coding region has
our understanding of this receptor by revealing fine molecular 2757 nucleotides and spans eight exons, with introns that
details. The importance of the AR has also led to the develop- vary in size from 0.7 to 2.6 kb. The AR gene encodes a 110-
ment of many predictive models of compound binding. Struc- kDa protein consisting of 919 amino acids (Figure 1B)[19]. Like
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
other members of the nuclear receptor family, the AR consists Deletion mutagenesis showed that, within the NTD region, a
of three major functional domains: (i) the N-terminal domain domain is required for full transcriptional activity[38]. Deletion
(NTD) (residues 1–555), followed by (ii) the DNA binding studies have also helped to further demarcate the AF1 region
domain (DBD) (residues 555–623), and (iii) the C-terminal as the primary effector region of the NTD. The AF1 contains
ligand binding domain (LBD) (residues 665–919), which is two separable transcription activation units [Tau-1 (amino
connected to the DBD by a flexible hinge region (residues acids 100–370] and Tau-5 (amino acids 360–485)) that are
623–665) (Figure 1B)[1]. All three domains are important for indispensable for full activity of the AR (Figure 1B)[39]. Tau-1
receptor function. The highly conserved DBD tethers the AR contains a nuclear receptor box, FQNLF (amino acids 23–27),
to promoter and enhancer regions of AR-regulated genes by and Tau-5 contains the WHTLF motif (amino acids 433–437),
direct DNA binding to allow the activation functions of the both of which mediate direct ligand-dependent, interdomain
NTD and LBD to stimulate transcription of these genes. The interactions between the NTD and the LBD (termed an N/C
activation function 1 (AF1, residues 142–485) in the NTD is interaction), which are important in regulating some, but not
constitutively active[20], whereas the activation function 2 all, androgen-dependent genes[40–42]. The N/C interaction also
(AF2), a hydrophobic surface composed of helices 3, 4, and 12 helps to stabilize the AR dimer complex and to slow the rate
located in the LBD, is ligand dependent[21]. Currently, there of ligand dissociation[43, 44].
is no structural information for the full length AR receptor.
However, the structures of both the DBD and LBD have been DBD and hinge
solved separately, revealing critical details of the mechanism The DBD (residues 556–623) is a cysteine-rich region that is
of action of this receptor. highly conserved among steroid hormone receptors (Figure
2A). According to the crystal structure of the AR DBD, each
NTD DBD monomer has a core composed of two zinc fingers (Fig-
The NTD accounts for more than half of the size of the AR ure 2B) (PDB: 1R4I), each of which consists of four cysteine res-
(residues 1–555), and its entirety is encoded by exon 1. The idues that coordinate a zinc ion. The AR functions as a dimer
sequence and lengths of the polyglutamine (CAG) and poly- that, like other steroid receptors, binds to promoter DNA
glycine (GGC) repeats of the AR NTD are highly variable in response elements consisting of two equal, common hexameric
the human population[22–24]. The length of the poly-Q repeat half-sites (5’-AGAACA-3’) separated by a 3 base-pair spacer
region has been shown to affect the folding and structure (IR3)[45]. The α-helix of the N-terminal zinc finger (the “rec-
of the AR-NTD[25]. Through biochemical and biophysical ognition helix”) interacts directly with nucleotides in the hor-
approaches, it was demonstrated that the removal of poly-Q mone response element in the DNA major groove (Figure 2B).
repeats from the AR leads to a reduction in α-helical struc- Three amino acid residues at the N terminus of this α-helix,
ture, whereas increasing the length of poly-Q repeats led to named the P(roximal) box [glycine-serine-valine] (amino acids
a modest increase in α-helical structure. The conformational 577–581; GSCKV), are identical in the PR, GR and MR (Figure
changes in the NTD were proposed to have a concomitant 2A and 2B) and are responsible for the specific recognition of
impact on protein-protein interactions that is likely to explain the DNA response element[12]. A question that persisted was
the dependency of AR transcriptional activity on the repeat how steroid receptors achieve target specificity if the AR, PR,
length[26]. As has been observed for many other poly-Q repeat- GR, and MR bind a common DNA response element. Studies
containing proteins, shorter repeats generally impose a higher have identified selective androgen response elements (AREs)
AR transactivation activity, whereas longer repeats cause (eg, 5’-GGTTCT-3’) that allow specific AR activation[46–48].
reduced activity[27]. The deletion of the poly-Q tract causes a AREs have hexameric half-sites in a direct repeat orientation.
four-fold increase in AR activation function compared with Structural studies have confirmed that selectivity is achieved
the wild-type protein[28]. Thus far, the structure of the NTD by receptor dimerization in a “head-to-head” fashion through
has not been defined through X-ray crystallography: this is the D(istal) box region (amino acid 596–600; ASRND), which
likely due to its highly disordered structure as described by allows the AR to bind to direct repeat half-sites in its promoter
circular dichroism spectroscopy studies and structure predic- (Figure 2A and 2B)[45]. Because the DBD domains are highly
tion algorithms[25, 29–32]. It has been proposed that intrinsically conserved among the different steroid receptors, the reason
disordered proteins may undergo folding induced by the why other steroid receptors do not recognize selective AREs
formation of specific protein-protein interactions[29, 30]. Taken is still a matter of debate. Based on crystallographic data, it
together, the structural plasticity of a partially folded state was speculated that the AR contains an additional interface
is hypothesized to be an intrinsic property of the NTD that that stabilizes the AR dimer/ARE complex. In contrast, the
allows interactions with many structurally diverse binding dimerization strength of other steroid receptors would not be
partners[32, 35], such as coactivators of the P160 family[36], the sufficient to retain stable binding to selective AREs[45, 49].
basal transcription factors TATA-box binding protein and The nuclear localization signal (NLS) (residues 617–633)
transcription factor IIF[37], and intramolecular interactions with is localized at the junction between the DBD and the hinge
the LBD. Cooperative interactions with multiple binding part- region (residues 624–665) and is responsible for nuclear import
ners enable high specificity by low-affinity interactions, which of the receptor[50, 51]. Passive transport across the nuclear pore
appear to be crucial for AR activity[32, 35]. complex has been suggested ranging from 20–40 kDa[52]. In
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
Figure 2. Structures of AR functional domains. (A) Sequence alignment of the DNA binding domain of the androgen receptor (AR), progesterone
receptor (PR), mineralocorticoid receptor (MR), and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) performed using ClustalW. *indicates the conserved cysteines involved
in coordinating the zinc atom. (B) Top, crystal structure of the AR DBD (pink) (PDB: 1R4I) complexed with its hormone response element (red/purple).
The DBD contains two zinc fingers (grey). Each zinc ion is coordinated by four cysteines (yellow). One zinc finger is involved in direct DNA binding
mediated by the P-box (orange), which recognizes the specific hormone response element half-site 5′-AGAACA-3′. The other zinc finger is involved in a
“head-to-head” receptor dimerization through the D-box (green). Bottom, cartoon representation of the AR DBD. (C) Crystal structure of an AR nuclear
localization signal (NLS) peptide (amino acid 621-635) (orange) complexed with importin-α (yellow) (PDB: 3BTR). Residues from the major NLS site
629-RKLKKL-634 contribute to importin-α binding. (D) Crystal structure of the AR ligand binding domain (purple) (LBD) (PDB: 1E3G). The LBD consists
of 11 α-helices and two small, two-stranded β-sheets arranged in a typical three-layer antiparallel helical sandwich fold. The long flexible linker between
helices 1 and 3 is colored blue.
contrast, the AR, which is 110 kDa in size, requires help to has suggested that androgen binding induces a switch that
be actively transported upon ligand binding. A recent study exposes the NLS and thereby allows the NLS to promote
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
nuclear import through binding of importin-α[53]. Details of tors from the Netherlands characterized and named the active
this interaction have been identified in the crystal structure of ingredient in the extract testosterone[63]. Another hallmark in
importin-α bound to the AR NLS (Figure 2C) (PDB: 3BTR)[54]. the history of androgen biochemistry was the discovery that
The NLS is composed of two clusters of basic amino acids sep- a fraction of testosterone is metabolized to the more potent
arated by ten residues (617-RKCYEAGMTLGARKLKK-634), androgen DHT in a reaction catalyzed by 5α-reductase[64, 65].
a motif that is highly conserved with that of the GR, MR and DHT differs from testosterone by the absence of a single dou-
PR steroid hormone receptors. In the complex, importin-α ble bond on ring A (Figure 3A)[13], which increases its affinity
adopts a banana-shaped conformation in which its inner for the AR two-fold and decreases the rate of dissociation five-
concave surface makes charge interactions with the second fold relative to testosterone[66], differences that account for
basic amino acid cluster of the NLS (Figure 2C). Apart from essential, DHT-specific functions.
nuclear localization, the hinge region, and in particular its The first structure of the AR LBD was solved with the
629-RKLKKL-634 motif, was also found to play a complex role AR in complex with the potent synthetic androgen R1881
in DNA binding, coactivator recruitment, and N/C interac- (metribolone) (Figure 3A) and shows the AR in an agonist
tion[55, 56] and is a target site for acetylation, ubiquitylation and conformation with the ligand inside of the LBP formed by
methylation[56]. H3, H5, and H11 (PDB: 1E3G) (Figure 2D and 3B)[57]. Later,
structures of the AR LBD complexed with its physiological
LBD agonists DHT (PDB: 1I37 or 2AMA) and testosterone (PDB:
In contrast to the NTD, the AR LBD (residues 666–919) has 2AM9) were solved (Figure 3B)[67, 68]. These three AR LBD
been structurally well characterized by crystallography. The agonist structures have very similar overall conformations,
crystal structure of the AR LBD was first solved in the year revealed key ligand and receptor interaction sites, and helped
2000[57], and subsequently, many other complex structures to define the general structural requirements for the binding
were deposited into the protein databank (PDB). The three- of ligands in the LBP. R1881, DHT, and testosterone have 18,
dimensional structure is arranged in a three-layer, antiparallel 16, and 15 contact points, respectively, with the LBD at a van
α-helical sandwich (PDB: 1E3G) fold that is characteristic of der Waals distance cutoff of 4 Å (Figure 3C). These residues
NR LBDs. The AR LBD consists of eleven α-helices and four are hydrophobic and interact mainly with the steroid scaf-
short β strands forming two anti-parallel β-sheets (Figure 2D). fold. The remaining amino acids are polar and form hydrogen
The H1 and H3 helices form the first layer of the α-helical bonds with the polar atoms of the ligand. Notably, there are
sandwich. Unlike other nuclear receptors, the AR does not four hydrogen bonds formed between the LBD and DHT/
have H2, which is instead replaced by a long flexible linker Testosterone/R1881. As shown in Figure 3C, the keto group
(Figure 2D). The middle layer is formed by H4, H5, the first β of ring A interacts with the side chains of amino acids Q711
sheet, H8, and H9. The third layer is completed by H10 and and R752, whereas the hydroxyl group at the 17β-position
H11. There is a ligand binding pocket (LBP) surrounded by hydrogen-bonds with the side chains of N705 and T877. The
the N termini of H3, H5, and H11. H12, which forms the core position of the side chains is perfectly conserved in all three
of the activation function 2 domain (AF2), acts as a lid to close ligands studied, suggesting that this interaction is particularly
the LBP upon agonist binding (Figure 2D). important for the binding of androgens. This may explain
why the AR binds androgens with a strong affinity in the low
AR Ligands nanomolar range. A gross comparison of the AR complexed
A large variety of small molecules has been discovered or with DHT and testosterone showed no major differences in the
engineered to interact with the AR[58-60]. The chemistry of these protein structure able to account for the differences in DHT
ligands has been extensively reviewed[60, 61]. In general, AR and testosterone physiological activity. A close analysis of the
ligands were identified through in vitro binding or reporter structure of DHT and testosterone showed that the presence
gene assays. They are largely classified as agonists or antago- of an unsaturated bond between C4–C5 in testosterone results
nists based on their ability to activate or inhibit transcription in a change in the geometry of the A-ring, which changes the
of AR target genes. All of these ligands modulate AR func- orientation of the ketone group at C3. This altered geometry
tion by binding to the LBP in the LBD. The receptor is able changes the distance and angle of the hydrogen bond with
to accommodate many different ligands by modifying the residue R752 to favor the AR LBD interaction with DHT over
volume of its LBP by changing the position or orientation of that with testosterone[68].
amino acid side chains[62]. In an unbound state, the AR complexes with heat-shock,
chaperone and co-chaperone proteins (such as HSP90, HSP70,
AR agonists and p23), which helps to maintain the apo state of the AR in
The two most important endogenous androgens are testoster- a state competent to bind ligand (Figure 1A)[73]. However, in
one and DHT (Figure 3A). The functions of androgens were an agonist-bound state such as was seen in the crystal struc-
first described in 1889, when French physiologist and Professor ture of DHT-bound AR (PDB: 1I37 or 2AMA), H12 was held
of Medicine Charles Edward Brown-Sequard first identified near H3 and H4 (Figure 3D). This conformational change in
androgen action through self-injections of testicular extracts. the LBD has also been seen in other nuclear receptors, such as
Subsequently, in 1935, Prof Ernst LAQUEUR and collabora- the retinoic acid receptor (RARγ) bound to all-trans retinoic
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
Figure 3. Structural basis of AR agonism. (A) Chemical structures of testosterone, dihydrotestosterone and R1881. (B) Structural overlay of the AR
LBD complexed with testosterone (PDB: 2AM9, orange), dihydrotestosterone (PDB: 1I37, green), and R1881 (PDB: 1E3G, purple). (C) Comparison of
the binding of R1881, testosterone, and dihydrotestosterone in the AR ligand-binding pocket. AR LBD residues within a distance of 4 Å are shown.
Key residues (N705, Q711, R752, and T877) that form hydrogen bonds with ligands are labeled and shown in stick presentation. Hydrogen bonds are
indicated by dotted lines. (D) Structure of the AR LBD (purple) in complex with an FxxLF motif-containing peptide (yellow) (Left panel). The middle panel
shows the interface between the AR LBD and the FxxLF motif. Hydrogen bonds are indicated by dotted lines with key residues labeled. A surface view
of the motif-binding hydrophobic pocket is shown. A sequence alignment of helices H3 and H12 of the androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was performed using ClustalW. (E) Structure of the AR
LBD complexed with 3,3′,5-triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC) (PDB: 2PIT). Left: cartoon representation; right: surface view of the binding function (BF3)
surface pocket (green).
acid (PDB: 2LBD)[74], thyroid hormone receptor (TRα) bound proliferator-activated receptor-α (PPARα) bound to the ago-
to 3,5,3’-triiodothyronine (PDB: 3GWS)[75, 76] and peroxisome nist ligand GW409544 (PDB: 1K7L)[77]. Hormone binding cre-
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
ates an ‘active’ conformation of the receptor that primes the androgens by competing for AR binding sites. Antiandrogens
receptor for coactivator binding to an AF2 region comprised of can be both steroidal and non-steroidal. Steroidal antiandro-
H3, H4, and H12. Many nuclear receptors retain full ligand- gens include cyproterone acetate, oxendolone, and spironolac-
dependent transcriptional activity by binding to coactivators tone (Figure 4A). Steroidal antiandrogens have limited clinical
containing short leucine-rich LxxLL motifs (where “x” can applications due to their undesired side effects; this then led
be any amino acid) known as nuclear receptor (NR) boxes[78]. to the development of nonsteroidal antiandrogens. Toluidide
Binding to coactivators and association with histone acetyl derivatives such as flutamide, bicalutamide and nilutamide
transferase coactivator complexes such as p300/CBP results (Figure 4B) are pure antiandrogens without androgenic prop-
in potent histone acetyl transferase activity[7, 79]. We and oth- erties; this lack of androgenic properties makes them suitable
ers have shown that the AR can bind with high affinity to for use in the treatment of prostate cancer[60].
some LxxLL motifs in p160 coactivators[80, 81]. However, phage Thus far, only the binding mechanism of agonists to the AR
display demonstrates that the AR has a strong preference for has been described (see section AR agonists), and the struc-
the phenylalanine-rich motif FxxLF, or motifs with phenylala- tural mechanism for antagonism of the AR remains unclear. In
nine or tryptophan at positions +1, +5, or both[82]. Mutational contrast to the AR, the structural basis of antagonism has been
changes of the +4 and +5 residues abolished the interaction elucidated for other nuclear receptors, eg, from the structures
of the motifs with the AR, which further confirms the impor- of 4-hydroxyltamoxifen (4-OHT) bound to the ER[91], RU-486
tance of intact +1, +4, and +5 hydrophobic amino acids in the bound to the GR[91, 92] and the antagonist GW6471 bound to
motif[83]. Structural studies have revealed that this strong pref- PPAR-α[93]. From these structures, we have learned that H12
erence is due to geometrical and conformational constraints becomes displaced over the coactivator binding pocket, which
that occur between a cofactor and a cofactor binding site on in turn prevents coactivator binding (Figure 4C). In the case of
the LBD (PDB: 1T7R)[82, 84]. The side chains of coactivator aro- the ER, the size and structure of 4-OHT prevent the molecule
matic residues F+1, L+4, and F+5 insert into the hydrophobic from being completely confined in the cavity, leaving its bulky
cofactor binding groove on the LBD surface formed by helices side chain protruding against H12 and preventing H12 from
3, 4, and 12 (Figure 3D, left and middle panel). Amino acid adopting a position essential for coactivator interaction. The
side chains in the coregulator recognition site of the LBD can schematic diagram in Figure 4C shows the different positions
rearrange upon motif binding, a phenomenon known as the of NR AF2 in both the agonist-bound and antagonist-based
induced fit mechanism[84]. The charged amino acids lysine in states[71]. In the structure of PPAR-α bound to the antago-
H3 (K720 in AR) and glutamate in H12 (E897 in AR) are highly nist GW6471, H12 rotates clockwise toward H3 and blocks
conserved among different nuclear receptors (Figure 3D, right the coactivator binding site (Figure 4C and 4D). In addition
panel). These residues are located at the end of the groove to blocking coactivator binding, H12 repositioning allows
and electrostatically interact with the coactivator backbone, the recruitment of corepressors such as nuclear receptor co-
thus forming a “charge clamp” between the amide nitrogen of repressor 1 (NCoR) and silencing mediator of retinoic acid
F+1 and E897 and the carbonyl group of F+5 and K720 (Figure and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) (PDB: 1KKQ) (Figure
3D, middle panel). This type of electrostatic interaction adds 4D)[93].
specificity to the recognition of different coregulators[80]. The It is unclear whether the mode of antagonism observed in
AF2 domain is important not only for forming the coregulator other nuclear receptors is relevant to the AR as the structure
binding site; it also mediates the preferred N/C interaction of the antagonist form of the AR LBD has not been solved.
mentioned earlier[42, 85]. In recent years, an additional surface However, functional studies do suggest that the H12 displace-
cleft called BF3 (binding function 3) was found to allosteri- ment model is likely applicable to the AR[94, 95]. It is believed
cally regulate AF2 coactivator binding (Figure 3E)[86–88]. This that bicalutamide binding blocks AF2 function. Computer
was a surprising finding to the group, as they initially set out modeling suggests that the displacement of H12 by bicalu-
to identify compounds that bound the AF2 pocket through tamide would not be as dramatic as those seen for the ER. The
a high-throughput screen. Interestingly, this site, localized model depicts a shift of the N terminus of helix 12 upwards
by x-ray crystallography, reveals that compounds such as and away from H3 and H4, which is believed to be sufficient
3,3’,5-triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC) (PDB: 2PIT) and fluf- for the distortion of AF2-coactivator binding (Figure 4E)[95].
enamic acid (PDB: 2PIX) bind to a hydrophobic cleft at the Antagonist-induced conformational changes were analyzed
junction of H1, the H3–H4 loop, and H9 (Figure 3E). The LBD using limited trypsinization, demonstrating that the binding
has another important feature: the regulation of AR nuclear of agonists and antagonists result in different conformational
export. The AR is exported to the cytoplasm upon ligand changes[96]. This modulation of protein surface topology was
withdrawal[89]. The presence of a nuclear export signal (NES) proposed to enable the recruitment of a different repertoire of
(residues 742–817) (Figure 1B) in the surrounding vicinity of regulators. It was shown that antagonists induce recruitment
the bound ligand can sense ligand withdrawal and thus helps of the corepressors NCoR and SMRT[7, 94, 97–99]. In the absence
to complete AR nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling[90]. of conflicting evidence, the AF2 displacement model holds
as the mechanism for AR antagonism. However, the precise
Antiandrogens mechanism remains unclear, and a crystal structure of the AR
Antiandrogens are AR ligands that antagonize the actions of LBD in the antagonist-bound conformation would be required
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
Figure 4. Structural model of AR antagonism. (A) Chemical structure of the steroidal antiandrogens cyproterone acetate, oxendolone and
spironolactone. (B) Chemical structure of the non-steroidal antiandrogens flutamide, bicalutamide and nilutamide. (C) Nuclear receptor H12 helices
can adopt different conformations. In an agonist state, the H12 of DHT-bound AR (PDB: 1I37 or 2AMA) is held near H3, H4, and H11, which form
a groove for coactivator binding. In an antagonist state, H12 rotates clockwise toward H3 and blocks the coactivator binding site. (D) Structure of
the PPARα LBD complexed with SRC-1 coactivator peptide (H12 in agonist conformation) and with the SMRT corepressor peptide (H12 in antagonist
conformation). (E) Computer model of antagonist-bound AR shows the predicted displacement of H12.
to provide a better basis for the structure-based design of AR complete inability of cells to respond to androgens[13, 101, 102].
antagonists for the treatment of AR disorders. Defects in the AR gene can be caused by four types of muta-
tions: (i) Single point mutations resulting in substitutions or
AR and physiological disorders premature stop codons, (ii) nucleotide insertions and deletions
Although the AR is involved in diverse activities, its primary resulting in frameshifts, (iii) complete or partial deletion of
functions are related to male physiology, such as sex differ- the gene, or (iv) intronic mutations that affect AR RNA splic-
entiation and sex-specific pathology[100]. Defects in the AR ing[103]. Currently, 1029 distinct mutations have been identified
gene can prevent the normal development of both internal in the human AR gene and are distributed predominantly over
and external male structures in 46, XY individuals and result the AR DBD- and LBD-coding regions. These mutations are
in androgen insensitivity syndrome, which is the partial or well documented in the Androgen Receptor Gene Mutations
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
Database World Wide Web Server at the Lady Davis Institute ment of three DNA-directed enzymes, activation-induced
ca[104]. Several investigations have associated the polymorphic endonuclease, and topoisomerase II beta (TOP2B), that trigger
polyglutamine repeats in the NTD with Kennedy’s Disease, chromosomal translocation[125, 126]. Other signaling pathways
also known as spinobulbar muscular atrophy, a progressive shown to be involved in prostate cancer initiation and progres-
neurodegenerative condition[105–107]. There are an increasing sion include the PI3K and RAS/RAF pathways; dysregulation
number of studies relating the action of the AR to breast[108], of these pathways in both early and late stage prostate cancer
larynx[109], liver[110], and testicular cancers[111]. was implicated through genomic profiling[127]. In this study,
analysis of the AR signaling pathway revealed a greater altera-
AR and prostate cancer tion compared with the other pathways, indicating that the
AR activity is intimately linked to prostate cancer, which is by AR is still the “master regulator” of prostate cancer.
far the most commonly diagnosed cancer among American AR pathway perturbation is the mechanistic rationale for the
men and the second leading cause of cancer deaths[112, 113]. In use of androgen suppression methods to treat prostate cancer.
2010, direct medical costs for prostate cancer were projected Initial treatment includes androgen suppression via castration
to reach $12 billion and are expected to further increase by through surgical (orchiectomy) or chemical (gonadotropin-
2020[114]. Of the 1029 mutations found in gene that encodes releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues such as leuprolide and
the AR, 159 mutations predispose males to prostate can- goserelin) means[128]. GnRH agonists desensitize the GnRH
cer[104]. In addition, previous work has suggested that the receptor by interrupting its physiological intermittent stimula-
length of the repeats in the NTD influences prostate cancer tion, whereas the GnRH antagonist degarelix blocks GnRH
risk in men[23, 115, 116]. A meta-analysis of 19 studies including stimulation directly[129]. Patients are then placed on androgen
Caucasian, African-American and Asian subjects predicted deprivation therapy, which is usually combined with leupro-
an increased risk of prostate cancer in men with shorter (≤21) lide for total androgen blockade[130, 131]. Deprivation is typically
CAG repeats. However, a Swedish study suggests that men achieved by oral treatment with nonsteroidal antiandrogens,
with shorter AR CAG lengths (eg, ≤22 repeats) are at a greater such as flutamide (Figure 3A), which was approved for the
risk of developing prostate cancer. Other studies found no treatment of prostate cancer in 1989, and the newer, structur-
association between the AR CAG repeat length and prostate ally related compounds bicalutamide and nilutamide (Figure
cancer risk[117]. Although evidence that mutations in the AR 3A).
predispose men to prostate cancer is undisputed, AR NTD
CAG repeat length association with prostate cancer risk thus AR and castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
remains controversial. Patients on androgen deprivation therapy remain in long-
Prostate cancer cells, similar to normal prostate cells, require term remission of the disease. However, the development of
androgens to grow and survive. Growth of prostate cancer a castration-resistant disease is inevitable[132, 133]. This form of
depends on the ratio of the rate of cell proliferation to the rate prostate cancer is lethal, and patients no longer respond to
of cell death[118]. In prostate cancer, the rate of proliferation is first-line androgen deprivation therapy. CRPC patients are
higher than that of death, resulting in continuous net growth. usually treated with chemotherapy including the anti-mitotic
Androgens and the AR are the main regulators of this ratio. compound docetaxel, which has been demonstrated to confer
More than 70 years ago, Charles HUGGINS demonstrated that a survival advantage[134, 135]. The mechanisms of castration
androgen deprivation by orchiectomy (removal of the testes) resistance remain unclear but are thought to be diverse. For a
caused regression of prostate cancer[119, 120]. Increased serum comprehensive review of the mechanisms of CRPC develop-
levels of the important biomarker PSA suggest that AR activ- ment, the reader is referred to other excellent reviews[133, 136–139].
ity is elevated in prostate cancer patients. According to the Briefly, there are four possible mechanisms of CRPC develop-
American Cancer Society, a PSA level above 4 ng/mL has been ment: 1) Increased sensitivity of the AR to its agonists, 2) AR
recognized to be abnormal, and these patients are advised to mutations that render the receptor responsive to alternate,
undergo a biopsy[113, 121]. non-androgen ligands, 3) ligand-independent AR activation,
The initiation of prostate cancer can in many cases be attrib- and 4) AR-independent mechanisms (Figure 5).
uted to the activation of distinct growth-promoting pathways. Patients on androgen deprivation therapy have lower levels
One prominent example is the androgen-dependent upregu- of circulating androgens, which initially curb prostate cancer
lation of members of the E-twenty-six (ETS) family of tran- cell proliferation; however, the opposite happens in CRPC
scription factors by gene fusions between the AR-regulated patients, who have increased tumor cell proliferation. One
TMPRSS2 gene promoter and the coding region of the ETS of the underlying mechanisms of CRPC is an increase in the
family members erythroblast transformation-specific (ERG) expression of AR in the cell. Koivisto et al showed that 28%
and ETS variant 1 (ETV1), which have been estimated to occur of androgen-independent tumors that developed after andro-
in ~50% of prostate tumors[122–124]. These fusions confer andro- gen deprivation therapy had increased AR expression due to
gen responsiveness to ETS transcription factors, which leads AR gene amplification[140]. These results indicate that CRPC
to cell-cycle progression. Interestingly, the induction of this cells may not be strictly androgen independent, but rather,
fusion is itself dependent on the DHT/AR-stimulated recruit- they become more sensitive due to a lowered threshold for
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
through ligand-independent mechanisms[146]. Studies have
shown that tyrosine kinase receptor-activating ligands, such
as insulin-like growth-factor-1 (IGF-1), keratinocyte growth
factor (KGF), and epidermal growth factor (EGF), can activate
the AR as a consequence of activating the downstream PI3K/
AKT/mTOR pathway, thus creating an ‘outlaw receptor’.
IGF-1 was able to cause AR activation, inducing a five-fold
increase in PSA levels in LNCaP cells cultured in serum-free
medium[147]. Activation of the AR complex can also occur via
crosstalk with other signaling pathways, such as those medi-
ated by the non-receptor tyrosine kinases Src and Ack1[139, 148–
151]. Recently, various groups have described AR activation by
binding of long non-coding RNAs (eg, PCGEM1 and PRNCR1)
to the AR that can result in castration-resistant prostate can-
cer[152]. In addition, several AR variants that lack the LBD and
act as negative regulators of the NTD have been described in
CRPC. The AR NTD is constitutively active in the absence of
Figure 5. Androgen and AR action in castration-resistant prostate cancer. the LBD and thus can promote androgen depletion-resistant
Mechanism of castration-resistant prostate cancer. Several mechanisms
growth[138, 153].
promote the progression of castration-resistant prostate cancer: (1) The last pathway leading to CRPC bypasses AR signaling
AR overexpression coupled with continued tumor steroidogenesis. (2) completely. It has been shown that castration therapy in mice
Promiscuous binding and activation of mutant AR by alternative ligands, triggers an inflammatory response released by the dying cells.
such as estrogen (E2), progesterone (P), glucocorticoids (C) and flutamide Proinflammatory factors produced by dying prostate cancer
(F). (3) Ligand-independent mechanisms of AR activation via crosstalk
cells cause the infiltration of B and T cells. Infiltrating B cells
with Akt, HER2, and Ack1 kinases that phosphorylate the AR and via
produce lymphotoxin and factors that increase Stat3 signaling,
long non-coding RNAs (eg, PCGEM1) that bind to the AR to stimulate
which is vital for promoting hormone-free survival of prostate
transcription of AR target genes. (4) AR-independent pathways, in which
cancer cells[154]. Similarly, upregulation of the anti-apoptotic
cancer cell survival and growth are directed by Stat3 signaling or by
protein Bcl-2 protects cancer cells from castration-induced
upregulation of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2. Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was
found to activate a similar set of AR target genes necessary for survival of apoptosis[155]. Very recently, CRPC tumors were found to
cancer cells. upregulate the expression of GR, another member of the
nuclear receptor family. GR was shown to drive the expres-
sion of a subset of AR target genes necessary for cancer cell
androgens. Even under androgen deprivation therapy, andro- survival[156]. The various pathways mentioned may operate
gen levels are sufficiently high to activate overexpressed AR, simultaneously to enhance AR activity[157]. Most evidence sug-
which is due to intratumoral in-situ synthesis[141] and residual gests that ADT failure may not result from a loss of androgen
synthesis in the adrenal gland[142], along with decreased levels signaling but rather from the acquisition of genetic changes
of the androgen inactivating enzymes CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and that lead to aberrant activation of the AR and its signaling
CYP3A7 in patient tissue samples[143]. axis[104, 137, 158]. Thus, the AR remains a potential therapeutic
Another mechanism for the development of CRPC is ligand target for prostate cancer therapy[39].
promiscuity, which results from AR gene mutations that cause In 2012, the second-generation AR antagonist enzalutamide
amino acid substitutions in the LBD that decrease specific- (Figure 6) (MDV3100) was approved by the FDA for use in
ity and selectivity for ligands (eg, T877A, L701H, W741L, and prostate cancer[159–161]. Enzalutamide is a more potent antago-
F876L). These mutant AR proteins bind to other steroid hor- nist than bicalutamide because it binds to the AR ligand-
mones, such as estrogen, progesterone and glucocorticoids, binding pocket with higher affinity than first generation
which induce the activation of AR transcriptional activity antagonists, such as bicalutamide, and also prevents the trans-
resulting in prostate cancer growth[144]. In certain situations, location of the receptor into the nucleus[162]. Recent studies
AR mutations cause antagonists to induce an agonist con- have shown that abiraterone acetate (Zytiga), an inhibitor of
formation, resulting in AR activation rather than inhibition. the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP17, impedes androgen syn-
Early examples have been found in patients on flutamide treat-
ment in combination with androgen blockade. Five of these
16 patients had the AR mutation T877A. Through luciferase
assays, it was shown that the antagonist flutamide behaves
like an agonist for these AR mutant proteins[145], and it was
suggested that flutamide exerts a strong selective pressure for
AR mutations.
The third mechanism of CRPC development is AR activation Figure 6. Chemical structure of enzalutamide.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
thesis and thus lowers the level of circulating ligand, improv- come current clinical problems.
ing overall survival in well-powered, randomized phase III
studies[163, 164]. In addition, a series of new agents are in clinical Structural basis of mutation-induced AR promiscuity
development, including the AR antagonists ARN-509[44] and DHT-bound AR LBD T877A
EPI-001 that directly target the AR, as well as orteronel (TAK- The single point mutation T877A has been found in LNCaP
700)[45, 46] and galeterone (TOK-001)[47] that indirectly target cells and prostate cancer patients to confer abnormal binding
the AR. Collectively, the development of enzalutamide, abi- characteristics to the AR. This mutation has been shown to
raterone acetate, and other new agents validate the importance cause a significant increase in the affinity of the AR for bind-
of the AR as an important therapeutic target. ing to estrogens and progesterone. In addition, this mutation
also allows the AR to be activated by antiandrogens such as
Structural understanding of disease/drug resistance- flutamide[145, 165]. To understand the structural basis of this
related androgen receptor mutations through X-ray abnormal binding characteristic, Sack et al solved the crystal
crystallography and structural modeling structure of the wild-type (WT) (PDB: 1I37) and T877A (PDB:
Because the AR remains the driving force in the progression of 1I38) AR LBDs complexed with DHT[67]. A comparison of both
more aggressive castration-resistant prostate cancers[139], it is structures revealed similar overall conformations. Interactions
important to understand how each genetic aberration affects between DHT and both forms of the AR occur at almost iden-
the pharmacology of the AR and its ligands. Through the use tical points of contact, except at the mutated residue (Figure
of X-ray crystallography and computer modeling, biochemical 7A). Interestingly, the introduction of the T877A mutation cre-
observations can be understood at the atomic level, which is ated additional space around the D-ring of DHT. This increase
expected to greatly aid the design of improved drugs to over- in volume allows bulkier ligands to enter the pocket, and this
Figure 7. Structural understanding of disease/drug resistance-related androgen receptor mutations. (A) Structural comparison of wild-type (PDB:
1I37) and mutant T877A (PDB: 1I38) AR LBDs in complex with dihydrotestosterone. Key residues involved in hydrogen bonding have been highlighted,
with hydrogen bonds indicated by black dotted lines. (B) Structure of the AR LBD double mutant L701H/T877A complexed with 9α-fluorocortisol (PDB:
1GS4). (C) Structural overlay of androgen receptor complexed with FxxLF (PDB: 1XOW) and LxxLL (PDB: 1T7F) motif-containing peptides. Residues
V730, M734, and I737 are involved in forming hydrophobic contacts with coactivator peptides. Residue V730 was mutated to M730 to demonstrate
an enhanced binding of LxxLL peptides. (D) Structure of AR LBD W741L complexed with bicalutamide (PDB: 1Z95). Residues L704, N705, Q711, and
R752 form hydrogen bonds with bicalutamide (indicated by dotted lines). Also shown is the wild-type W741 residue (white) to illustrate a possible steric
clash between tryptophan and the B-ring of bicalutamide.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
may induce AR promiscuity for other hormones and analogs, the hydrophobic groove, allows the formation of a smoother
such as estrogens and progesterone. Conversely, the presence and flatter surface that permits greater complementarity to
of T877 limits the pocket size and is thought to be important FxxLF compared with the LxxLL motif (Figure 7C). A muta-
for ligand specificity. The concept that an increase in the LBP tion of V730 to methionine would alter the interaction surface
may increase ligand promiscuity was further supported by to become more favorable to binding to LxxLL motifs and
biochemical studies in which threonine was replaced by the thereby to the recruitment of LxxLL motif-containing coactiva-
larger amino acid aspartic acid, which prevented androgen tors, such as the SRC coactivators, which are commonly asso-
binding, presumably by steric hindrance, making the mutant ciated with the AR in recurrent prostate cancer[7, 170, 171].
receptor unresponsive to androgen activation[166].
Mutations alter drug antagonist properties
9α-fluorocortisol-bound AR LBD L701H/T877A Bicalutamide-bound AR LBD W741L
Two mutations, L701H and T877A, were identified in the The administration of antiandrogens is the standard approach
androgen-independent prostate tumor cell lines MDA 2a and to treat prostate cancer. Examples of first generation anti-
2b. The double mutation allows the AR to be activated in the androgens include bicalutamide, flutamide, and nilutamide,
absence of androgens. Both mutations are located in the LBD which inhibit androgen action by binding to the androgen
and strongly increase AR sensitivity to cortisol and cortisone, receptor in a competitive fashion, ie, as an antagonist. Unfor-
which in turn leads to the promotion of prostate cancer cell tunately, these first-generation drugs demonstrated agonist
growth[167]. Not surprisingly, the double mutant also renders properties in LNCaP cells, which overexpress the AR, a state
the receptor responsive to progesterone and estrogen due to that mimics castration-resistant prostate cancer. Hara et al
the presence of the T877A mutation, most likely for the reason reported two LBD mutations, W741L and W741C, in LNCaP
mentioned in the above section. However, the T877A muta- cells that appeared during bicalutamide treatment and caused
tion alone is insufficient to promote receptor binding and the receptor to be activated by bicalutamide[172]. The struc-
activation by cortisol. Matias et al provided a structural basis ture of the AR LBD W741L bound to bicalutamide shed light
for the glucocorticoid responsiveness of the AR LBD double- on how the mutation imparts agonistic properties leading
mutant L701H/T877A (Figure 7B)[168]. The overall fold of to bicalutamide resistance[173]. In the structure, bicalutamide
the L701H/T877A double-mutant AR LBD complexed with adopts a bent conformation within the ligand-binding pocket
9α-fluorocortisol (PDB: 1GS4) is similar to previous agonist (Figure 7D). Although hydrophobic interactions account for
structures. The main structural difference is the formation of the majority of the contact points between bicalutamide and
a favorable hydrogen bonding network between the D- and the AR LBD, hydrogen bonds form in two different regions.
C-rings of 9α-fluorocortisol and A877, H701, and S778 of the Similar to the previous structures of the AR bound to R1881
mutant receptor. Specifically, hydrogen bonding between and DHT, the cyano group of the bicalutamide A ring forms
S778 and H701 correctly positioned the imidazole ring of hydrogen bonds with Q711 and R752. Additional hydrogen
H701 to form a hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl group on bonding was observed between the amide nitrogen and the
the D-ring to form a hydrogen bond with H701, whereas A877 chiral hydroxyl group of bicalutamide and amino acids L704
was able to form a close Van der Waals contact with the D-ring and N705. Unlike in the structures of R1881- and DHT-bound
of 9α-fluorocortisol. In contrast, a threonine residue at posi- AR, T877 is not involved in hydrogen bonding (Figure 7D),
tion 877 would be extremely unfavorable for 9α-fluorocortisol which may explain the lower binding affinity of bicalutamide
binding, and the hydrophobic leucine at position 701 in the compared with R1881 or DHT. In the presence of the W741L
wild-type receptor would be unable to engage in the forma- mutation, the bulkier side chain of tryptophan is replaced by
tion of this stabilizing hydrogen bond network. the smaller side chain of leucine. This provides more space
to accommodate the B-ring of bicalutamide, allowing the AR
The V730M mutation alters coactivator selectivity to maintain a similar fold as that seen in other agonist-bound
V730M is a somatic mutation that was detected in an structures and thus favoring the formation of an active state of
advanced-stage prostate carcinoma that resulted in an increase AF2. In other words, this increase in space in the LBP would
in AR activation by androgens[169]. The crystal structure of the allow bicalutamide to bind without displacing H12, which is
wild-type AR illustrated the reason why the LxxLL motifs of the basis for its antagonist activity.
typical NR coactivators fail to hydrogen bond with Glu897 of
H12 and make fewer and less optimized hydrophobic con- MDV3100 and AR LBD F876L
tacts with the AF2 pocket compared with FxxLF-containing The recent FDA approval of enzalutamide (Figure 6) and the
peptides, explaining the lower affinity of AF2 for the LXXLL- development of ARN-509 reiterate the importance of target-
containing p160-type coactivators[82]. In contrast, cell-based ing AR signaling for CRPC treatment[160, 162]. Despite the
reporter gene assays and in vitro binding assays showed that success of enzalutamide at causing a significant drop in the
V730M increases LxxLL binding without affecting FxxLF bind- serum PSA levels of patients, responses to enzalutamide are
ing, resulting in increased overall AR transcriptional activ- often short-lived. Some causes of resistance to enzalutamide
ity[84]. In three-dimensional space, V730 is located near the have been identified[174, 175]. Through a reporter-based muta-
coactivator binding site[84] and, along with M734 and I737 in genesis screen, Balbas et al identified the AR mutation F876L.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
In contrast to wild-type AR, enzalutamide functions as an and LBD, can be targeted by small molecules. Targeting the
agonist for AR F876L and causes the mutant receptor to bind intrinsically unstructured NTD remains a challenge. Never-
enzalutamide six times more effectively than wild-type recep- theless, it is an attractive target for developing novel thera-
tor[176]. To understand the effect of the F876L mutation, the peutics, especially in light of increasing reports indicating that
group also mutated F876 to a bulkier residue, tyrosine, or to constitutively active AR splice variants that lack the LBD are
another aliphatic amino acid, isoleucine. Only the F876I muta- found in prostate cancer patients. A number of NTD inhibi-
tion caused enzalutamide to behave as an agonist, similar to tors have been reported in the literature, with decoy proteins
F876L, indicating that resistance is due to a clear structural providing the first proof-of-concept evidence that target-
change in the drug-receptor complex. As the structure of ing the NTD is a viable method to pre-clinically control the
enzalutamide-bound AR has not been reported, the Sawyer growth of CRPC[177]. NTD peptide (amino acids 1–558) was
group modeled the AR-enzalutamide complex through ligand overexpressed to competitively block binding of interacting
docking and molecular dynamics simulations. Docking sug- proteins or the N/C interaction. In another study, Anderson
gested that enzalutamide interacts with the wild-type AR et al reported the identification and characterization of the
differently than with bicalutamide. As shown in Figure 5D, small molecule EPI-001, which was isolated from the marine
the B-ring of bicalutamide makes contact with H12. How- sponge Geodia lindgreni and targets the NTD-AF1 domain.
ever, enzalutamide does not interact with helix 12; instead, its This compound also reduces the interaction between the NTD
C-ring interacts with the C terminus of helix 11 and the loop and the known AF1-interacting coactivator CBP. EPI-001 was
region between helix 11 and helix 12. It was proposed that effective in mice bearing LNCaP xenografts, with no apparent
this accommodation allows enzalutamide to directly contact toxicity detected. Thus far, this is the best characterized com-
F876, resulting in a conformational rearrangement in helix 11 pound shown to effectively target the AR NTD for treatment
that prevents helix 12 from adopting the agonist conformation of CRPC[178]. Recently, this group has continued to design
required for coactivator binding. In contrast, in the presence new EPI-001 analogs that target the NTD and are currently
of the F876L mutation, leucine lacks the favorable contact with under clinical development for human study[179]. More high-
enzalutamide that is predicted to be necessary for helix 12 dis- throughput screens have been used to identify new classes of
placement. Hence, helix 12 is thought to assume an agonist- compounds, such as the glycerol ethers niphatenones isolated
like conformation that allows coactivator recruitment. from the sponge Niphates digitalis, which are proposed to
covalently bind the AF1 and may serve as lead compounds for
Rational drug discovery in progress further drug development[180].
A growing amount of evidence suggests that mutations in the
AR-encoding gene occur spontaneously in prostate cancer and Targeting the DBD
eventually result in the relapse of patients. As a consequence, Fewer strategies targeting the DBD have been explored to date.
the effects of drugs change, and patients are no longer respon- In early work, a hairpin pyrrole-imidazole polyamide was
sive to treatment. These gain-of-function mutations present a designed to target the ARE to disrupt AR DBD binding and
scientific challenge to pharmacologically overcome the mecha- was effective at inhibiting androgen-induced PSA expression
nisms of drug resistance and further highlight the importance in LNCaP cells[181]. Building on this work, affinity and specific-
of identifying advanced compounds to inhibit AR activity. ity were further improved by creating a cyclic polyamide with
Rational drug design, which is the application of a structure- a greater effect on decreasing PSA mRNA levels[182]. Although
function relationship, is now widely used in modern medici- this was an ingenious approach, allosterically affecting the
nal chemistry for developing exquisitely selective ligands. conformation of double-stranded DNA to prevent the AR DBD
Can the available structural information on AR-ligand from binding has limited clinical applicability. This is because
interactions based on x-ray crystallography and modeling be each polyamide can only target a subset of AR-dependent
exploited for the rational design of next-generation antian- genes, instead of simultaneously targeting all AR-dependent
drogens to overcome problems with antiandrogen resistance? genes important for disease progression. To overcome this
Available structures of the wild-type and mutant AR in com- shortcoming, a recent report described a high-throughput
plex with ligands reveal a clear explanation for how changes screen to target the AR protein rather than the DNA to reduce
in a single residue can result in dramatic changes in ligand- AR binding to the promoter and enhancer regions of PSA
binding properties and pinpoint the key determinants of and TMPRSS2. Of ~160 000 molecules, the authors identified
receptor-ligand specificity and affinity. This information will 1-[3-(2-chlorophenoxy)propyl]-1H-indole-3carbonitrile (CPIC)
greatly facilitate the development of new antagonists for the as a compound that was able to reduce AR-specific DNA
treatment of prostate cancer. Hence, this section will provide binding, although it remains unclear whether this compound
an overview of the development of new antiandrogens. works directly by binding to the DBD[183]. Given that the struc-
ture of the AR DBD has been solved, one might have expected
Targeting the NTD the development of further DBD-targeted drugs. However,
Hypothetically, there are numerous regulatory sites that can this has not been the case. One factor that may be limiting
be therapeutically exploited. As discussed earlier in this progress in this area of research lies in limited specificity,
review, various functional domains, such as the NTD, DBD given that the DBD has high sequence homology among all
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
members of the nuclear receptor family. This issue needs to be different site on the AR, AF2, and BF3 inhibitors can be con-
addressed before DBD-targeted drugs will enter the market. currently taken with antiandrogens to prolong time to cancer
remission.
Targeting the LBD
Targeting AF2 and BF3 Targeting the LBP
It is generally accepted that AR activation requires the for- Finally, drugs can be designed to bind to the ligand-binding
mation of a functional AF2 region for interactions with both pocket. Over the past decade, most research efforts have been
cofactors and N/C. This makes the AR AF-2 surface an devoted to the design of small molecules that target the LBP,
attractive target to modulate AR activity. Compounds that which is well ordered in crystal structures. Current research
bind the AF2 would hypothetically prevent intramolecular is focused on designing AR inhibitors with high affinity and
association between the AR LBD and NTD and interactions of specificity. Antiandrogens that have a high enough binding
the LBD with coregulators. Selective peptide inhibitors have affinity to sufficiently displace DHT from the ligand-binding
been developed for ligand-bound ER and TR[184]. A similar pocket need to be designed. Based on the agonist-AR LBD
approach could be adopted for the AR. Hydrophobicity, size, complex structure, it is believed that favorable H bonding
and complementarity all substantially contribute to differen- between the ligand and AR T877, N705, Q711, and R752 and a
tial binding affinity and to the selective high-affinity binding hydrophobicity within a proper range are critical for ligands to
of the AR AF2 to phenylalanines at the +1 and +5 positions bind to the AR with high affinity. Computer modeling of the
in coactivator recognition helices. Hence, inhibitors that are binding of AR antagonists such as flutamide, nilutamide and
designed to bind to the hydrophobic groove at the +1 or +5 bicalutamide also suggested that both polar and hydrophobic
sites to disrupt coactivator interaction may provide promising interactions are essential for proper binding to anchor those
leads[80]. The feasibility of targeting AR in its coactivator bind- compounds into the pocket[192]. A structural comparison of the
ing pocket was demonstrated using peptide antagonists[185]. wild-type AR bound to DHT and the agonist-converted AR-
Phenylalanine-rich peptide antagonists were able to inhibit AR bicalutamide complex demonstrated that the sites that bind
gene reporter activation without affecting PR-mediated acti- the A and B rings of DHT are similar to the sites bound by
vation, demonstrating some level of specificity for the andro- bicalutamide. Only the C6, C7, and C8 atoms of the B ring and
gen receptor. However, as different nuclear receptors have the C15 and C16 atoms in the D ring of DHT bind to locations
evolved to bind hydrophobic LxxLL consensus motifs through not bound by bicalutamide[173]. Additional van der Waals
similar binding mechanisms, it remains important that mimet- interactions by these atoms are likely responsible for the much
ics are designed in a way that conveys greater selectivity to higher binding affinity of DHT. Hence, designing antiandro-
the AR. Improving mimetics by including specific flanking gens with increased bulk in this region may enhance binding
sequences is expected to improve selectivity, as studies have affinity. Enzalutamide was developed by ligand-based drug
shown that the sequences immediately flanking the consensus design, which relied on the pharmacophores of known drugs,
motif confer specificity in vivo[83, 186–189]. Further characteriza- to bind and inhibit the AR with a much improved binding
tion of the unique requirements for androgen receptor-specific affinity (IC =21 nmol/L, compared with 160 nmol/L for
coactivator binding may be useful for the design of peptide bicalutamide)[162]. Specifically, enzalutamide was developed
antagonists. The effects of AR peptide antagonists have been by starting with the AR agonist RU59063 and systematically
evaluated in mammalian cell-based assays; however, none has modifying its chemical groups while maintaining the steroid
been further evaluated in animal models, and thus, it remains fold[162].
unclear whether they will be effective in vivo. The use of pep- Specificity is another key factor to consider in the design
tide antagonists may be difficult as drug delivery of small pep- of antiandrogens. Although enzalutamide generally seems
tides can be a rather challenging task to overcome. In place to be well tolerated in humans, there was a low incidence of
of peptide antagonists, Axerio-Cilies et al employed methods adverse events where patients developed seizures[193]. This
of computer-aided drug discovery to discover small molecule effect was postulated to be a result of inhibition of GABA-
inhibitors of the AF2 using the ZINC database, which cur- gated chloride channels, as shown in animal models[194]. Such
rently consists of ten million purchasable compounds in the off-target effects can be minimized or eliminated by ensuring
market. Six lead compounds were found to inhibit AR tran- tissue selectivity. Entry of selective steroid receptor antago-
scriptional activity. These authors confirmed by X-ray crystal- nists into different target tissues would be a new avenue to
lography that compound 5 binds specifically to the AF2 site explore to avoid neurological side effects. However, to date,
(PDB: 2YHD)[190]. structural features that are essential for achieving uptake
The same group adopted this method to identify inhibitors selectivity have not been determined. Building on the success
that target the BF3[191]. Several X-ray structures (PDB: 2YLP, of enzalutamide, the Sawyer group developed the compound
2YLO, 4HLW) confirmed the presence of the BF3 site and its ARN-509 by maintaining the strong affinity of enzalutamide
importance in regulating the AF2. Both AF2 and BF3 inhibi- while reducing its off-target effects. ARN-509 has greater effi-
tors provide new therapeutic avenues that could potentially cacy compared with enzalutamide in laboratory animals and
help overcome the gain-of-function mutations that are selected is currently undergoing phase I clinical trials[195, 196]. Notably,
for in the presence of current antiandrogens. By targeting a the levels of ARN-509 in the brain are lower than those of
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
enzalutamide at therapeutic doses, and phase I clinical trials DR105 and DR106 were able to overcome the effect of the
have demonstrated an excellent safety profile and efficacy at F876L mutation and retain antagonistic properties. Molecular
decreasing PSA levels for ARN-509. Although the mechanism docking simulations suggested that DR103 would be capable
of tissue specificity remains unclear, there is clearly a need for of displacing the N-terminal residues of H12, thus imposing
further research in this area. an antagonist-like conformation. Efforts from all groups not
The search for new AR antagonists is ongoing. In the only led to the design of a new pan-antagonist but also helped
absence of a structure showing the AR in antagonist confor- to confirm the proposed model for AR antagonism as a result
mation, the use of computer modeling has provided an entry of the displacement of H12.
point for structure-based drug design[197]. Recent drug discov-
ery strategies are based on two criteria: first, compound struc- Conclusion and perspective
tures that are distinct from bicalutamide and enzalutamide The success of the Sawyer group and others in predicting drug
to avoid cross-resistance and, second, compounds that retain actions through molecular dynamics simulations is promis-
antagonist properties even for known AR mutant proteins ing and raises hopes for the development of improved anti-
that adopt agonist conformations when bound to current AR androgens. However, it is important to note that flaws in the
antagonists (also known as pan-antagonists). Small-molecule docking method do persist, as it employs rigid protein struc-
in silico screens have identified molecules that fulfill both cri- tures, which limit accurate predictions. It would therefore be
teria. For example, the compound DIMN [(6-13,4-dihydro- reassuring to verify these computational models by crystal-
1H-isoquinolin-2-yl)-N-(6-methylpyrindin-2yl)nicotinamide] lographic studies. Clearly, crystallography of the AR LBD
has shown promising in vitro antagonistic activity[198]. Simi- antagonist conformation has been challenging[86, 173], as the AR
larly, Shen et al identified another series of structurally defined LBD remains unstable in the absence of an agonist during pro-
AR antagonists, chemotype A–F compounds, that function in tein expression and purification. In addition, the antagonist-
the micromolar range and remain antagonistic for AR T877A bound AR LBD remains complexed with the heat-shock pro-
and AR W741C. Interestingly, these compounds also impair teins groEL, likely due to improper receptor folding. Methods
nuclear localization and enhance AR degradation, thus pro- to stabilize the AR in an antagonist conformation should be
viding a multi-pronged approach that might overcome all explored for crystallizing the protein.
new somatic mutations that arise during the course of the dis- Although the AR LBP remains the primary target of small
ease[199]. Other candidates, such as compound 3 from the NCI- molecules, the focus of screens is beginning to shift to other
3D database[200], DIMN analogs termed 7AU and 7BB[201], and functionally significant domains of the protein, such as the
MEL-3[202], all showed encouraging in vitro activities and need NTD, DBD, AF2, and BF3. Recently, using an in silico method,
to be tested in animal models. Helsen et al provided insights into the existence and impor-
In silico models of drug-AR LBD complexes have provided tance of physical connectivity between the AR DBD and
a path for rational drug design to overcome the effects of ago- LBD[205]. This information will give researchers another plau-
nist-converting mutations and restore the clinical efficacy of sible interface for drug intervention. More detailed informa-
currently used drugs. In the structure of AR LBD W741L com- tion on the structure of the full length AR would provide a
plexed with bicalutamide, the 4-fluorophenyl sulfone group of complete picture necessary to understand interdomain interac-
bicalutamide is located between residues of H12 and the side tions. Crystallization of full length nuclear receptors remains
chain of L741. A tryptophan at position 741 would result in a formidable challenge, and currently, only two structures of
a steric clash that would block H12 from adopting its agonist nuclear receptors that include all functional domains have
conformation (Figure 5C). McGinkey and Koh predicted that been solved by the Rastinejad group (HNF-4α homodimers
creating derivatives of bicalutamide with an expanded aryl (PDB: 4IQR)[34] and PPAR/RXR heterodimers[33] complexed
sulfone core would extend farther toward H12 and would thus with their DNA elements and coactivator peptides). These
interfere with H12 adopting an agonist conformation even in structures have greatly expanded our understanding of the
the presence of the L741 mutation[203]. They validated their physical connectivity between the LBD and DBD, which can
model with the compound PLM1, which exhibited no agonist be utilized for the design of small molecule inhibitors.
properties in both wild-type and mutant conditions. Likewise, With rapid advances in protein engineering and data col-
the flutamide derivative SC333 was shown to retain antago- lection/diffraction methods, including X-ray free-electron
nistic properties toward AR T877A[204]. Recently, the Sawyer lasers[206], we expect that the full length structure of the AR in
group has shown that it is possible to use structural and mod- antagonist conformation will eventually be solved. We believe
eling data to chemically design and guide modifications of the that by capitalizing on various critical contributions to the
enzalutamide structure to restore antagonism in the presence understanding of the AR structure and function and advance-
of the F876L mutation[176]. In their model, position 4 of the ments in crystallography techniques, the future of rational
enzalutamide B-ring comes into closer contact with H12 in AR drug design for better antiandrogens for the treatment of pros-
F876L. They predicted that contact with H12 may help repo- tate cancer remains bright.
sition the AF2 into an antagonist conformation. To test this
hypothesis, they synthesized a series of analogs with bulkier Acknowledgements
and more complex B rings. Of those compounds, DR103, This work was supported by the Singapore National Medi-
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
cal Research Council (R-174-000-137-275), the Jay and Betty Endocr Relat Cancer 2004; 11: 281–93.
Van Andel Foundation (H Eric XU and Karsten MELCHER), 21 He B, Kemppainen JA, Voegel JJ, Gronemeyer H, Wilson EM. Activa-
Amway (China) Limited (H Eric XU), and the National Insti- tion function 2 in the human androgen receptor ligand binding
domain mediates interdomain communication with the NH-terminal
tutes of Health 5R01DK071662-08 (H Eric XU) and GM102545 2
domain. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 37219–25.
and GM104212 (Karsten MELCHER). MH Eileen TAN is sup-
22 Sasaki M, Kaneuchi M, Sakuragi N, Fujimoto S, Carroll PR, Dahiya R.
ported by a PhD scholarship from the NUS Graduate School
The polyglycine and polyglutamine repeats in the androgen receptor
for Integrative Sciences & Engineering.
gene in Japanese and Caucasian populations. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2003; 312: 1244–7.
References 23 Hsing AW, Gao YT, Wu G, Wang X, Deng J, Chen YL, et al. Polymorphic
1 Mangelsdorf DJ, Thummel C, Beato M, Herrlich P, Schutz G, Umesono CAG and GGN repeat lengths in the androgen receptor gene and
K, et al. The nuclear receptor superfamily: the second decade. Cell prostate cancer risk: a population-based case-control study in China.
1995; 83: 835–9. Cancer Res 2000; 60: 5111–6.
2 Tsai MJ, O'Malley BW. Molecular mechanisms of action of steroid/ 24 Chang CS, Kokontis J, Liao ST. Structural analysis of complementary
thyroid receptor superfamily members. Annu Rev Biochem 1994; DNA and amino acid sequences of human and rat androgen
63: 451–86. receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988; 85: 7211–5.
3 Nuclear Receptors Nomenclature Committee. A unified nomenclature 25 Davies P, Watt K, Kelly SM, Clark C, Price NC, McEwan IJ. Con-
system for the nuclear receptor superfamily. Cell 1999; 97: 161–3. sequences of poly-glutamine repeat length for the conformation
4 Rosner W, Hryb DJ, Khan MS, Nakhla AM, Romas NA. Sex hormone- and folding of the androgen receptor amino-terminal domain. J Mol
binding globulin: anatomy and physiology of a new regulatory system. Endocrinol 2008; 41: 301–14.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1991; 40: 813–20. 26 Werner R, Holterhus PM, Binder G, Schwarz HP, Morlot M, Struve
5 Baker ME. Albumin, steroid hormones and the origin of vertebrates. D, et al. The A645D mutation in the hinge region of the human
J Endocrinol 2002; 175: 121–7. androgen receptor (AR) gene modulates AR activity, depending on
6 Srinivas-Shankar U, Wu FC. Drug insight: testosterone preparations. the context of the polymorphic glutamine and glycine repeats. J Clin
Nat Clin Pract Urol 2006; 3: 653–65. Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91: 3515–20.
7 Shang Y, Myers M, Brown M. Formation of the androgen receptor 27 Choong CS, Kemppainen JA, Zhou ZX, Wilson EM. Reduced androgen
transcription complex. Mol Cell 2002; 9: 601–10. receptor gene expression with first exon CAG repeat expansion. Mol
8 Dehm SM, Tindall DJ. Molecular regulation of androgen action in Endocrinol 1996; 10: 1527–35.
prostate cancer. J Cell Biochem 2006; 99: 333–44. 28 Callewaert L, Christiaens V, Haelens A, Verrijdt G, Verhoeven G,
9 Wang Q, Carroll JS, Brown M. Spatial and temporal recruitment of Claessens F. Implications of a polyglutamine tract in the function
androgen receptor and its coactivators involves chromosomal looping of the human androgen receptor. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
and polymerase tracking. Mol Cell 2005; 19: 631–42. 2003; 306: 46–52.
10 van Royen ME, van Cappellen WA, de Vos C, Houtsmuller AB, 29 Lavery DN, McEwan IJ. Structural characterization of the native NH-
Trapman J. Stepwise androgen receptor dimerization. J Cell Sci terminal transactivation domain of the human androgen receptor: a
2012; 125: 1970–9. collapsed disordered conformation underlies structural plasticity and
11 Heinlein CA, Chang C. Androgen receptor in prostate cancer. Endocr protein-induced folding. Biochemistry 2008; 47: 3360–9.
Rev 2004; 25: 276–308. 30 Reid J, Kelly SM, Watt K, Price NC, McEwan IJ. Conformational
12 Beato M, Herrlich P, Schutz G. Steroid hormone receptors: many analysis of the androgen receptor amino-terminal domain involved in
actors in search of a plot. Cell 1995; 83: 851–7. transactivation. Influence of structure-stabilizing solutes and protein-
13 Brinkmann AO. Molecular basis of androgen insensitivity. Mol Cell protein interactions. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 20079–86.
Endocrinol 2001; 179: 105–9. 31 Lavery DN, McEwan IJ. The human androgen receptor AF1 trans-
14 McPhaul MJ, Marcelli M, Tilley WD, Griffin JE, Wilson JD. Androgen activation domain: interactions with transcription factor IIF and
resistance caused by mutations in the androgen receptor gene. molten-globule-like structural characteristics. Biochem Soc Trans
FASEB J 1991; 5: 2910–5. 2006; 34: 1054–7.
15 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013. CA 32 Lavery DN, McEwan IJ. Structure and function of steroid receptor
Cancer J Clin 2013; 63: 11–30. AF1 trans activation domains: induction of active conformations.
16 Lubahn DB, Joseph DR, Sullivan PM, Willard HF, French FS, Wilson Biochem J 2005; 391: 449–64.
EM. Cloning of human androgen receptor complementary DNA and 33 Chandra V, Huang P, Hamuro Y, Raghuram S, Wang Y, Burris TP, et al.
localization to the X chromosome. Science 1988; 240: 327–30. Structure of the intact PPAR-gamma-RXR- nuclear receptor complex
17 Brown CJ, Goss SJ, Lubahn DB, Joseph DR, Wilson EM, French FS, et on DNA. Nature 2008; 456: 350–6.
al. Androgen receptor locus on the human X chromosome: regional 34 Chandra V, Huang P, Potluri N, Wu D, Kim Y, Rastinejad F. Multido-
localization to Xq11–12 and description of a DNA polymorphism. Am main integration in the structure of the HNF-4alpha nuclear receptor
J Hum Genet 1989; 44: 264–9. complex. Nature 2013; 495: 394–8.
18 Migeon BR, Brown TR, Axelman J, Migeon CJ. Studies of the locus 35 Uversky VN. Multitude of binding modes attainable by intrinsically
for androgen receptor: localization on the human X chromosome and disordered proteins: a portrait gallery of disorder-based complexes.
evidence for homology with the Tfm locus in the mouse. Proc Natl Chem Soc Rev 2011; 40: 1623–34.
Acad Sci U S A 1981; 78: 6339–43. 36 Bevan CL, Hoare S, Claessens F, Heery DM, Parker MG. The AF1 and
19 Gelmann EP. Molecular biology of the androgen receptor. J Clin AF2 domains of the androgen receptor interact with distinct regions
Oncol 2002; 20: 3001–15. of SRC1. Mol Cell Biol 1999; 19: 8383–92.
20 McEwan IJ. Molecular mechanisms of androgen receptor-mediated 37 McEwan IJ, Gustafsson J. Interaction of the human androgen
gene regulation: structure-function analysis of the AF-1 domain. receptor transactivation function with the general transcription factor
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
TFIIF. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997; 94: 8485–90. 56 Clinckemalie L, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Claessens F. The
38 Simental JA, Sar M, Lane MV, French FS, Wilson EM. Transcriptional hinge region in androgen receptor control. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012;
activation and nuclear targeting signals of the human androgen 358: 1–8.
receptor. J Biol Chem 1991; 266: 510–8. 57 Matias PM, Donner P, Coelho R, Thomaz M, Peixoto C, Macedo S, et
39 Callewaert L, Van Tilborgh N, Claessens F. Interplay between two al. Structural evidence for ligand specificity in the binding domain
hormone-independent activation domains in the androgen receptor. of the human androgen receptor. Implications for pathogenic gene
Cancer Res 2006; 66: 543–53. mutations. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 26164–71.
40 Doesburg P, Kuil CW, Berrevoets CA, Steketee K, Faber PW, Mulder 58 Fang H, Tong W, Branham WS, Moland CL, Dial SL, Hong H, et al.
E, et al. Functional in vivo interaction between the amino-terminal, Study of 202 natural, synthetic, and environmental chemicals for
transactivation domain and the ligand binding domain of the binding to the androgen receptor. Chem Res Toxicol 2003; 16:
androgen receptor. Biochemistry 1997; 36: 1052–64. 1338–58.
41 He B, Kemppainen JA, Wilson EM. FXXLF and WXXLF sequences 59 Sathya G, Chang CY, Kazmin D, Cook CE, McDonnell DP. Pharma-
mediate the NH-terminal interaction with the ligand binding domain cological uncoupling of androgen receptor-mediated prostate cancer
of the androgen receptor. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 22986–94. cell proliferation and prostate-specific antigen secretion. Cancer Res
42 Wilson EM. Analysis of interdomain interactions of the androgen 2003; 63: 8029–36.
receptor. Methods Mol Biol 2011; 776: 113–29. 60 Singh SM, Gauthier S, Labrie F. Androgen receptor antagonists
43 Zhou ZX, Lane MV, Kemppainen JA, French FS, Wilson EM. Specificity (antiandrogens): structure-activity relationships. Curr Med Chem
of ligand-dependent androgen receptor stabilization: receptor domain 2000; 7: 211–47.
interactions influence ligand dissociation and receptor stability. Mol 61 Gao W, Bohl CE, Dalton JT. Chemistry and structural biology of
Endocrinol 1995; 9: 208–18. androgen receptor. Chem Rev 2005; 105: 3352–70.
44 Langley E, Kemppainen JA, Wilson EM. Intermolecular NH-/carboxyl- 62 Cantin L, Faucher F, Couture JF, de Jesus-Tran KP, Legrand P, Ciobanu
terminal interactions in androgen receptor dimerization revealed by LC, et al. Structural characterization of the human androgen
mutations that cause androgen insensitivity. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: receptor ligand-binding domain complexed with EM5744, a rationally
92–101. designed steroidal ligand bearing a bulky chain directed toward helix
45 Shaffer PL, Jivan A, Dollins DE, Claessens F, Gewirth DT. Structural 12. J Biol Chem 2007; 282: 30910–9.
basis of androgen receptor binding to selective androgen response 63 VC M. The history of clinical endocrinology: a comprehensive account
elements. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004; 101: 4758–63. of endocrinology from earliest times to the present day. Carnforth:
46 Claessens F, Alen P, Devos A, Peeters B, Verhoeven G, Rombauts Parthenon Press; 1993.
W. The androgen-specific probasin response element 2 interacts 64 Baulieu EE, Lasnizki I, Robel P. Metabolism of testosterone and
differentially with androgen and glucocorticoid receptors. J Biol action of metabolites on prostate glands grown in organ culture.
Chem 1996; 271: 19013–6. Nature 1968; 219: 1155–6.
47 Verrijdt G, Schoenmakers E, Haelens A, Peeters B, Verhoeven G, 65 Bruchovsky N, Wilson JD. The conversion of testosterone to 5-alpha-
Rombauts W, et al. Change of specificity mutations in androgen- androstan-17-beta-ol-3-one by rat prostate in vivo and in vitro. J Biol
selective enhancers. Evidence for a role of differential DNA binding Chem 1968; 243: 2012–21.
by the androgen receptor. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 12298–305. 66 Grino PB, Griffin JE, Wilson JD. Testosterone at high concentrations
48 Schoenmakers E, Verrijdt G, Peeters B, Verhoeven G, Rombauts interacts with the human androgen receptor similarly to dihydro-
W, Claessens F. Differences in DNA binding characteristics of the testosterone. Endocrinology 1990; 126: 1165–72.
androgen and glucocorticoid receptors can determine hormone- 67 Sack JS, Kish KF, Wang C, Attar RM, Kiefer SE, An Y, et al. Crystallo-
specific responses. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 12290–7. graphic structures of the ligand-binding domains of the androgen
49 Claessens F, Denayer S, Van Tilborgh N, Kerkhofs S, Helsen C, receptor and its T877A mutant complexed with the natural agonist
Haelens A. Diverse roles of androgen receptor (AR) domains in AR- dihydrotestosterone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001; 98: 4904–9.
mediated signaling. Nucl Recept Signal 2008; 6: e008. 68 Pereira de Jesus-Tran K, Cote PL, Cantin L, Blanchet J, Labrie F,
50 Jenster G, Trapman J, Brinkmann AO. Nuclear import of the human Breton R. Comparison of crystal structures of human androgen
androgen receptor. Biochem J 1993; 293: 761–8. receptor ligand-binding domain complexed with various agonists
51 Zhou ZX, Sar M, Simental JA, Lane MV, Wilson EM. A ligand- reveals molecular determinants responsible for binding affinity.
dependent bipartite nuclear targeting signal in the human androgen Protein Sci 2006; 15: 987–99.
receptor. Requirement for the DNA-binding domain and modulation 69 Schwabe JW. Transcriptional control: how nuclear receptors get
by NH2-terminal and carboxyl-terminal sequences. J Biol Chem turned on. Curr Biol 1996; 6: 372–4.
1994; 269: 13115–23. 70 Li Y, Lambert MH, Xu HE. Activation of nuclear receptors: a per spec-
52 Marte B. Passage through the nuclear pore. Nat Cell Biol 2001; 3: tive from structural genomics. Structure 2003; 11: 741–6.
E135. 71 Bourguet W, Germain P, Gronemeyer H. Nuclear receptor ligand-
53 Ni L, Llewellyn R, Kesler CT, Kelley JB, Spencer A, Snow CJ, et al. binding domains: three-dimensional structures, molecular inter-
Androgen induces a switch in the androgen receptor from cyto- actions and pharmacological implications. Trends Pharmacol Sci
plasmic retention to nuclear import. Mol Cell Biol 2013; 33: 4766– 2000; 21: 381–8.
78. 72 Wang Z, Benoit G, Liu J, Prasad S, Aarnisalo P, Liu X, et al. Structure
54 Cutress ML, Whitaker HC, Mills IG, Stewart M, Neal DE. Structural and function of Nurr1 identifies a class of ligand-independent nuclear
basis for the nuclear import of the human androgen receptor. J Cell receptors. Nature 2003; 423: 555–60.
Sci 2008; 121: 957–68. 73 Cano LQ, Lavery DN, Bevan CL. Mini-review: Foldosome regulation
55 Haelens A, Tanner T, Denayer S, Callewaert L, Claessens F. The of androgen receptor action in prostate cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol
hinge region regulates DNA binding, nuclear translocation, and trans- 2013; 369: 52–62.
activation of the androgen receptor. Cancer Res 2007; 67: 4514–23. 74 Renaud JP, Rochel N, Ruff M, Vivat V, Chambon P, Gronemeyer H, et
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
al. Crystal structure of the RAR-gamma ligand-binding domain bound and the antagonism of this interaction by tamoxifen. Cell 1998; 95:
to all-trans retinoic acid. Nature 1995; 378: 681–9. 927–37.
75 Wagner RL, Apriletti JW, McGrath ME, West BL, Baxter JD, Fletterick 92 Kauppi B, Jakob C, Farnegardh M, Yang J, Ahola H, Alarcon M, et
RJ. A structural role for hormone in the thyroid hormone receptor. al. The three-dimensional structures of antagonistic and agonistic
Nature 1995; 378: 690–7. forms of the glucocorticoid receptor ligand-binding domain: RU-486
76 Nascimento AS, Dias SM, Nunes FM, Aparicio R, Ambrosio AL, induces a transconformation that leads to active antagonism. J Biol
Bleicher L, et al. Structural rearrangements in the thyroid hormone Chem 2003; 278: 22748–54.
receptor hinge domain and their putative role in the receptor 93 Xu HE, Stanley TB, Montana VG, Lambert MH, Shearer BG, Cobb JE,
function. J Mol Biol 2006; 360: 586–98. et al. Structural basis for antagonist-mediated recruitment of nuclear
77 Xu HE, Lambert MH, Montana VG, Plunket KD, Moore LB, Collins JL, co-repressors by PPARalpha. Nature 2002; 415: 813–7.
et al. Structural determinants of ligand binding selectivity between 94 Hodgson MC, Shen HC, Hollenberg AN, Balk SP. Structural basis for
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U nuclear receptor corepressor recruitment by antagonist-liganded
S A 2001; 98: 13919–24. androgen receptor. Mol Cancer Ther 2008; 7: 3187–94.
78 Heery DM, Kalkhoven E, Hoare S, Parker MG. A signature motif in 95 Osguthorpe DJ, Hagler AT. Mechanism of androgen receptor
trans criptional co-activators mediates binding to nuclear receptors. antagonism by bicalutamide in the treatment of prostate cancer.
Nature 1997; 387: 733–6. Biochemistry 2011; 50: 4105–13.
79 Ogryzko VV, Schiltz RL, Russanova V, Howard BH, Nakatani Y. The 96 Kuil CW, Mulder E. Mechanism of antiandrogen action: conforma-
trans criptional coactivators p300 and CBP are histone acetyl trans- tional changes of the receptor. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1994; 102:
ferases. Cell 1996; 87: 953–9. R1–5.
80 Estebanez-Perpina E, Moore JM, Mar E, Delgado-Rodrigues E, 97 Zhu P, Baek SH, Bourk EM, Ohgi KA, Garcia-Bassets I, Sanjo H, et al.
Nguyen P, Baxter JD, et al. The molecular mechanisms of coactivator Macrophage/cancer cell interactions mediate hormone resistance by
utilization in ligand-dependent transactivation by the androgen a nuclear receptor derepression pathway. Cell 2006; 124: 615–29.
receptor. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 8060–8. 98 Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, Baek SH, Chen R, Vessella R, et al.
81 Zhou XE, Suino-Powell KM, Li J, He Y, Mackeigan JP, Melcher K, et al. Molecular determinants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nat
Identification of SRC3/AIB1 as a preferred coactivator for hormone- Med 2004; 10: 33–9.
activated androgen receptor. J Biol Chem 2010; 285: 9161–71. 99 Dotzlaw H, Moehren U, Mink S, Cato AC, Iniguez Lluhi JA, Baniahmad A.
82 Hur E, Pfaff SJ, Payne ES, Gron H, Buehrer BM, Fletterick RJ. The amino terminus of the human AR is target for corepressor action
Recogni tion and accommodation at the androgen receptor and antihormone agonism. Mol Endocrinol 2002; 16: 661–73.
coactivator binding interface. PLoS Biology 2004; 2: E274. 100 Quigley CA, De Bellis A, Marschke KB, el-Awady MK, Wilson EM,
83 He B, Minges JT, Lee LW, Wilson EM. The FXXLF motif mediates French FS. Androgen receptor defects: historical, clinical, and
androgen receptor-specific interactions with coregulators. J Biol molecular perspectives. Endocr Rev 1995; 16: 271–321.
Chem 2002; 277: 10226–35. 101 Hughes IA, Davies JD, Bunch TI, Pasterski V, Mastroyannopoulou K,
84 He B, Gampe RT Jr, Kole AJ, Hnat AT, Stanley TB, An G, et al. MacDougall J. Androgen insensitivity syndrome. Lancet 2012; 380:
Structural basis for androgen receptor interdomain and coactivator 1419–28.
interactions suggests a transition in nuclear receptor activation 102 Hiort O. Clinical and molecular aspects of androgen insensitivity.
function dominance. Mol Cell 2004; 16: 425–38. Endocr Dev 2013; 24: 33–40.
85 Slagsvold T, Kraus I, Bentzen T, Palvimo J, Saatcioglu F. Mutational 103 McPhaul MJ. Androgen receptor mutations and androgen insensi-
analysis of the androgen receptor AF-2 (activation function 2) core tivity. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2002; 198: 61–7.
domain reveals functional and mechanistic differences of conserved 104 Gottlieb B, Beitel LK, Nadarajah A, Paliouras M, Trifiro M. The
residues compared with other nuclear receptors. Mol Endocrinol androgen receptor gene mutations database: 2012 update. Hum
2000; 14: 1603–17. Mutat 2012; 33: 887–94.
86 Estebanez-Perpina E, Arnold LA, Nguyen P, Rodrigues ED, Mar 105 La Spada AR, Wilson EM, Lubahn DB, Harding AE, Fischbeck KH.
E, Bateman R, et al. A surface on the androgen receptor that Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar
allosterically regulates coactivator binding. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A muscular atrophy. Nature 1991; 352: 77–9.
2007; 104: 16074–9. 106 Zajac JD, Fui MN. Kennedy's disease: clinical significance of tandem
87 Grosdidier S, Carbo LR, Buzon V, Brooke G, Nguyen P, Baxter JD, et repeats in the androgen receptor. Adv Exp Med Biol 2012; 769:
al. Allosteric conversation in the androgen receptor ligand-binding 153–68.
domain surfaces. Mol Endocrinol 2012; 26: 1078–90. 107 Finsterer J. Bulbar and spinal muscular atrophy (Kennedy’s disease):
88 Buzon V, Carbo LR, Estruch SB, Fletterick RJ, Estebanez-Perpina E. A a review. Eur J Neurol 2009; 16: 556–61.
conserved surface on the ligand binding domain of nuclear receptors 108 Lobaccaro JM, Lumbroso S, Belon C, Galtier-Dereure F, Bringer J,
for allosteric control. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012; 348: 394–402. Lesimple T, et al. Androgen receptor gene mutation in male breast
89 Tyagi RK, Lavrovsky Y, Ahn SC, Song CS, Chatterjee B, Roy AK. cancer. Hum Mol Genet 1993; 2: 1799–802.
Dynamics of intracellular movement and nucleocytoplasmic recycling 109 Goulioumis AK, Varakis J, Goumas P, Papadaki H. Androgen receptor
of the ligand-activated androgen receptor in living cells. Mol in laryngeal carcinoma: could there be an androgen-refractory
Endocrinol 2000; 14: 1162–74. tumor? ISRN Oncol 2011; 2011: 180518.
90 Saporita AJ, Zhang Q, Navai N, Dincer Z, Hahn J, Cai X, et al. 110 Chen PJ, Yeh SH, Liu WH, Lin CC, Huang HC, Chen CL, et al. Androgen
Identification and characterization of a ligand-regulated nuclear path way stimulates microRNA-216a transcription to suppress the
export signal in androgen receptor. J Biol Chem 2003; 278: 41998– tumor suppressor in lung cancer-1 gene in early hepato carcino-
2005. genesis. Hepatology 2012; 56: 632–43.
91 Shiau AK, Barstad D, Loria PM, Cheng L, Kushner PJ, Agard DA, et 111 Garolla A, Ferlin A, Vinanzi C, Roverato A, Sotti G, Artibani W, et
al. The structural basis of estrogen receptor/coactivator recognition al. Molecular analysis of the androgen receptor gene in testicular
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 2005; 12: 645–55. 132 Macfarlane RJ, Chi KN. Research in castration-resistant prostate
112 Siegel R, DeSantis C, Virgo K, Stein K, Mariotto A, Smith T, et al. cancer: what does the future hold? Curr Oncol 2010; 17: S80–6.
Cancer treatment and survivorship statistics, 2012. CA Cancer J Clin 133 Harris WP, Mostaghel EA, Nelson PS, Montgomery B. Androgen
2012; 62: 220–41. deprivation therapy: progress in understanding mechanisms of
113 Hoffman RM. Clinical practice. Screening for prostate cancer. N resistance and optimizing androgen depletion. Nat Clin Pract Urol
Engl J Med 2011; 365: 2013–9. 2009; 6: 76–85.
114 Mariotto AB, Yabroff KR, Shao Y, Feuer EJ, Brown ML. Projections 134 Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, Lara PN Jr, Jones JA, Taplin
of the cost of cancer care in the United States: 2010–2020. J Natl ME, et al. Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone
Cancer Inst 2011; 103: 117–28. and prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer. N Engl J
115 Silva Neto B, Koff WJ, Biolchi V, Brenner C, Biolo KD, Spritzer PM, Med 2004; 351: 1513–20.
et al. Polymorphic CAG and GGC repeat lengths in the androgen 135 Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, Horti J, Pluzanska A, Chi KN, et
receptor gene and prostate cancer risk: analysis of a Brazilian al. Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for
population. Cancer Invest 2008; 26: 74–80. advanced prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 1502–12.
116 Schleutker J. Polymorphisms in androgen signaling pathway 136 Feldman BJ, Feldman D. The development of androgen-independent
predisposing to prostate cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012; 360: prostate cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2001; 1: 34–45.
25–37. 137 Nyquist MD, Dehm SM. Interplay between genomic alterations and
117 Price DK, Chau CH, Till C, Goodman PJ, Baum CE, Ockers SB, et al. androgen receptor signaling during prostate cancer development and
Androgen receptor CAG repeat length and association with prostate progression. Horm Cancer 2013; 4: 61–9.
cancer risk: results from the prostate cancer prevention trial. J Urol 138 Sharifi N. Mechanisms of androgen receptor activation in castration-
2010; 184: 2297–302. resistant prostate cancer. Endocrinology 2013; 154: 4010–7.
118 Denmeade SR, Lin XS, Isaacs JT. Role of programmed (apoptotic) 139 Green SM, Mostaghel EA, Nelson PS. Androgen action and meta-
cell death during the progression and therapy for prostate cancer. bolism in prostate cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012; 360: 3–13.
Prostate 1996; 28: 251–65. 140 Koivisto P, Kononen J, Palmberg C, Tammela T, Hyytinen E, Isola J,
119 Huggins C. Endocrine-induced regression of cancers. Cancer Res et al. Androgen receptor gene amplification: a possible molecular
1967; 27: 1925–30. mechanism for androgen deprivation therapy failure in prostate
120 Huggins C, Hodges CV. Studies on prostatic cancer: I. The effect cancer. Cancer Res 1997; 57: 314–9.
of castration, of estrogen and of androgen injection on serum 141 Montgomery RB, Mostaghel EA, Vessella R, Hess DL, Kalhorn
phosphatases in metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. 1941. J Urol TF, Higano CS, et al. Maintenance of intratumoral androgens in
2002; 168: 9–12. metastatic prostate cancer: a mechanism for castration-resistant
121 Zeliadt SB, Buist DS, Reid RJ, Grossman DC, Ma J, Etzioni R. Biopsy tumor growth. Cancer Res 2008; 68: 4447–54.
follow-up of prostate-specific antigen tests. Am J Prev Med 2012; 42: 142 Zhu H, Garcia JA. Targeting the adrenal gland in castration-resistant
37–43. prostate cancer: a case for orteronel, a selective CYP-17 17,20-lyase
122 Rubin MA, Maher CA, Chinnaiyan AM. Common gene rearrangements inhibitor. Curr Oncol Rep 2013; 15: 105–12.
in prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 3659–68. 143 Mitsiades N, Sung CC, Schultz N, Danila DC, He B, Eedunuri VK, et
123 Marx J. Medicine. Fused genes may help explain the origins of al. Distinct patterns of dysregulated expression of enzymes involved
prostate cancer. Science 2005; 310: 603. in androgen synthesis and metabolism in metastatic prostate cancer
124 Tomlins SA, Rhodes DR, Perner S, Dhanasekaran SM, Mehra R, Sun tumors. Cancer Res 2012; 72: 6142–52.
XW, et al. Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription factor 144 Buchanan G, Greenberg NM, Scher HI, Harris JM, Marshall VR, Tilley
genes in prostate cancer. Science 2005; 310: 644–8. WD. Collocation of androgen receptor gene mutations in prostate
125 Lin C, Yang L, Tanasa B, Hutt K, Ju BG, Ohgi K, et al. Nuclear cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2001; 7: 1273–81.
receptor-induced chromosomal proximity and DNA breaks underlie 145 Taplin ME, Bubley GJ, Ko YJ, Small EJ, Upton M, Rajeshkumar B, et
specific translocations in cancer. Cell 2009; 139: 1069–83. al. Selection for androgen receptor mutations in prostate cancers
126 Haffner MC, Aryee MJ, Toubaji A, Esopi DM, Albadine R, Gurel B, et treated with androgen antagonist. Cancer Res 1999; 59: 2511–5.
al. Androgen-induced TOP2B-mediated double-strand breaks and 146 Jenster G. Ligand-independent activation of the androgen receptor
prostate cancer gene rearrangements. Nat Genet 2010; 42: 668– in prostate cancer by growth factors and cytokines. J Pathol 2000;
75. 191: 227–8.
127 Taylor BS, Schultz N, Hieronymus H, Gopalan A, Xiao Y, Carver BS, et 147 Culig Z, Hobisch A, Cronauer MV, Radmayr C, Trapman J, Hittmair A,
al. Integrative genomic profiling of human prostate cancer. Cancer et al. Androgen receptor activation in prostatic tumor cell lines by
Cell 2010; 18: 11–22. insulin-like growth factor-I, keratinocyte growth factor, and epidermal
128 Palmbos PL, Hussain M. Non-castrate metastatic prostate cancer: growth factor. Cancer Res 1994; 54: 5474–8.
have the treatment options changed? Semin Oncol 2013; 40: 337– 148 Mellinghoff IK, Vivanco I, Kwon A, Tran C, Wongvipat J, Sawyers CL.
46. HER2/neu kinase-dependent modulation of androgen receptor func-
129 Van Poppel H, Klotz L. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone: an update tion through effects on DNA binding and stability. Cancer Cell 2004; 6:
review of the antagonists versus agonists. Int J Urol 2012; 19: 594– 517–27.
601. 149 Mahajan NP, Liu Y, Majumder S, Warren MR, Parker CE, Mohler JL,
130 Crawford ED, Eisenberger MA, Mcleod DG, Spaulding JT, Benson et al. Activated Cdc42-associated kinase Ack1 promotes prostate
R, Dorr FA, et al. A controlled trial of leuprolide with and without cancer progression via androgen receptor tyrosine phosphorylation.
flutamide in prostatic-carcinoma. New Engl J Med 1989; 321: 419– Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007; 104: 8438–43.
24. 150 Liu Y, Karaca M, Zhang Z, Gioeli D, Earp HS, Whang YE. Dasatinib
131 Hellerstedt BA, Pienta KJ. The current state of hormonal therapy for inhibits site-specific tyrosine phosphorylation of androgen receptor by
prostate cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 2002; 52: 154–79. Ack1 and Src kinases. Oncogene 2010; 29: 3208–16.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
npg www.nature.com/aps
Tan ME et al
151 Kraus S, Gioeli D, Vomastek T, Gordon V, Weber MJ. Receptor 169 Culig Z, Hobisch A, Cronauer MV, Cato ACB, Hittmair A, Radmayr
for activated C kinase 1 (RACK1) and Src regulate the tyrosine C, et al. Mutant androgen receptor detected in an advanced-
phosphorylation and function of the androgen receptor. Cancer Res stage prostatic-carcinoma Is activated by adrenal androgens and
2006; 66: 11047–54. progesterone. Mol Endocrinol 1993; 7: 1541–50.
152 Yang L, Lin C, Jin C, Yang JC, Tanasa B, Li W, et al. lncRNA-dependent 170 Culig Z, Klocker H, Bartsch G, Hobisch A. Androgen receptors in
mechanisms of androgen-receptor-regulated gene activation prostate cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 2002; 9: 155–70.
programs. Nature 2013; 500: 598–602. 171 Xu J, Wu RC, O'Malley BW. Normal and cancer-related functions of
153 Guo Z, Yang X, Sun F, Jiang R, Linn DE, Chen H, et al. A novel the p160 steroid receptor co-activator (SRC) family. Nat Rev Cancer
androgen receptor splice variant is up-regulated during prostate 2009; 9: 615–30.
cancer progression and promotes androgen depletion-resistant 172 Hara T, Miyazaki J, Araki H, Yamaoka M, Kanzaki N, Kusaka M, et
growth. Cancer Res 2009; 69: 2305–13. al. Novel mutations of androgen receptor: a possible mechanism of
154 Ammirante M, Luo JL, Grivennikov S, Nedospasov S, Karin M. B-cell- bicalutamide withdrawal syndrome. Cancer Res 2003; 63: 149–53.
derived lymphotoxin promotes castration-resistant prostate cancer. 173 Bohl CE, Gao W, Miller DD, Bell CE, Dalton JT. Structural basis for
Nature 2010; 464: 302–5. antagonism and resistance of bicalutamide in prostate cancer. Proc
155 Setlur SR, Rubin MA. Current thoughts on the role of the androgen Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005; 102: 6201–6.
receptor and prostate cancer progression. Adv Anat Pathol 2005; 174 Golshayan AR, Antonarakis ES. Enzalutamide: an evidence-based
12: 265–70. review of its use in the treatment of prostate cancer. Core Evid
156 Arora VK, Schenkein E, Murali R, Subudhi SK, Wongvipat J, 2013; 8: 27–35.
Balbas MD, et al. Gluco corticoid receptor confers resistance to 175 Joseph JD, Lu N, Qian J, Sensintaffar J, Shao G, Brigham D, et al. A
antiandrogens by bypass ing androgen receptor blockade. Cell 2013; clinically relevant androgen receptor mutation confers resistance
155: 1309–22. to second-generation antiandrogens enzalutamide and ARN-509.
157 Mitsiades N. A road map to comprehensive androgen receptor axis Cancer Discov 2013; 3: 1020–9.
targeting for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer Res 2013; 176 Balbas MD, Evans MJ, Hosfield DJ, Wongvipat J, Arora VK, Watson PA,
73: 4599–605. et al. Overcoming mutation-based resistance to antiandrogens with
158 Steinkamp MP, O’Mahony OA, Brogley M, Rehman H, Lapensee EW, rational drug design. Elife 2013; 2: e00499.
Dhanasekaran S, et al. Treatment-dependent androgen receptor 177 Quayle SN, Mawji NR, Wang J, Sadar MD. Androgen receptor decoy
mutations in prostate cancer exploit multiple mechanisms to evade molecules block the growth of prostate cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
therapy. Cancer Res 2009; 69: 4434–42. S A 2007; 104: 1331–6.
159 Bishr M, Saad F. Overview of the latest treatments for castration- 178 Andersen RJ, Mawji NR, Wang J, Wang G, Haile S, Myung JK, et al.
resistant prostate cancer. Nat Rev Urol 2013; 10: 522–8. Regression of castrate-recurrent prostate cancer by a small-molecule
160 Scher HI, Fizazi K, Saad F, Taplin ME, Sternberg CN, Miller K, et inhibitor of the amino-terminus domain of the androgen receptor.
al. Increased survival with enzalutamide in prostate cancer after Cancer Cell 2010; 17: 535–46.
chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 1187–97. 179 Myung JK, Banuelos CA, Fernandez JG, Mawji NR, Wang J, Tien AH, et
161 Antonarakis ES, Eisenberger MA. Expanding treatment options for al. An androgen receptor N-terminal domain antagonist for treating
metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 2055–8. prostate cancer. J Clin Invest 2013; 123: 2948–60.
162 Tran C, Ouk S, Clegg NJ, Chen Y, Watson PA, Arora V, et al. Develop- 180 Meimetis LG, Williams DE, Mawji NR, Banuelos CA, Lal AA, Park JJ, et
ment of a second-generation antiandrogen for treatment of advanced al. Niphatenones, glycerol ethers from the sponge niphates digitalis
prostate cancer. Science 2009; 324: 787–90. block androgen receptor transcriptional activity in prostate cancer
163 Ryan CJ, Smith MR, de Bono JS, Molina A, Logothetis CJ, de Souza cells: structure elucidation, synthesis, and biological activity. J Med
P, et al. Abiraterone in metastatic prostate cancer without previous Chem 2012; 55: 503–14.
chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 138–48. 181 Nickols NG, Dervan PB. Suppression of androgen receptor-mediated
164 de Bono JS, Logothetis CJ, Molina A, Fizazi K, North S, Chu L, et al. gene expression by a sequence-specific DNA-binding polyamide.
Abiraterone and increased survival in metastatic prostate cancer. N Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007; 104: 10418–23.
Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1995–2005. 182 Chenoweth DM, Harki DA, Phillips JW, Dose C, Dervan PB. Cyclic
165 Veldscholte J, Ris-Stalpers C, Kuiper GG, Jenster G, Berrevoets C, pyrrole-imidazole polyamides targeted to the androgen response
Claassen E, et al. A mutation in the ligand binding domain of the element. J Am Chem Soc 2009; 131: 7182–8.
androgen receptor of human LNCaP cells affects steroid binding 183 Cherian MT, Wilson EM, Shapiro DJ. A competitive inhibitor that
characteristics and response to anti-androgens. Biochem Biophys reduces recruitment of androgen receptor to androgen-responsive
Res Commun 1990; 173: 534–40. genes. J Biol Chem 2012; 287: 23368–80.
166 Risstalpers C, Verleunmooijman MCT, Trapman J, Brinkmann AO. 184 Geistlinger TR, McReynolds AC, Guy RK. Ligand-selective inhibition of
Threonine on amino-acid position-868 in the human androgen the interaction of steroid receptor coactivators and estrogen receptor
receptor is essential for androgen-binding specificity and functional- isoforms. Chem Biol 2004; 11: 273–81.
activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993; 196: 173–80. 185 Chang CY, Abdo J, Hartney T, McDonnell DP. Development of peptide
167 Zhao XY, Malloy PJ, Krishnan AV, Swami S, Navone NM, Peehl DM, et antagonists for the androgen receptor using combinatorial peptide
al. Glucocorticoids can promote androgen-independent growth of phage display. Mol Endocrinol 2005; 19: 2478–90.
prostate cancer cells through a mutated androgen receptor. Nat Med 186 Needham M, Raines S, McPheat J, Stacey C, Ellston J, Hoare S, et
2000; 6: 703. al. Differential interaction of steroid hormone receptors with LXXLL
168 Matias PM, Carrondo MA, Coelho R, Thomaz M, Zhao XY, Wegg A, motifs in SRC-1a depends on residues flanking the motif. J Steroid
et al. Structural basis for the glucocorticoid response in a mutant Biochem Mol Biol 2000; 72: 35–46.
human androgen receptor (AR(ccr)) derived from an androgen- 187 Ko L, Cardona GR, Iwasaki T, Bramlett KS, Burris TP, Chin WW.
independent prostate cancer. J Med Chem 2002; 45: 1439–46. Ser-884 adjacent to the LXXLL motif of coactivator TRBP defines
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica
www.chinaphar.com npg
Tan ME et al
selectivity for ERs and TRs. Mol Endocrinol 2002; 16: 128–40. 199 Shen HC, Shanmugasundaram K, Simon NI, Cai C, Wang H, Chen
188 Heery DM, Hoare S, Hussain S, Parker MG, Sheppard H. Core LXXLL S, et al. In silico discovery of androgen receptor antagonists with
motif sequences in CREB-binding protein, SRC1, and RIP140 define activity in castration resistant prostate cancer. Mol Endocrinol 2012;
affinity and selectivity for steroid and retinoid receptors. J Biol Chem 26: 1836–46.
2001; 276: 6695–702. 200 Liu B, Geng G, Lin R, Ren C, Wu JH. Learning from estrogen receptor
189 Ren Y, Behre E, Ren Z, Zhang J, Wang Q, Fondell JD. Specific antagonism: structure-based identification of novel antiandrogens
structural motifs determine TRAP220 interactions with nuclear effective against multiple clinically relevant androgen receptor
hormone receptors. Mol Cell Biol 2000; 20: 5433–46. mutants. Chem Biol Drug Des 2012; 79: 300–12.
190 Axerio-cilies P, Lack NA, Nayana MRS, Chan KH, Yeung A, Leblanc E, 201 Yang SH, Song CH, Van HT, Park E, Khadka DB, Gong EY, et al. SAR
et al. Inhibitors of androgen receptor activation function-2 (AF2) site based design of nicotinamides as a novel class of androgen receptor
identified through virtual screening. J Med Chem 2011; 54: 6197– antagonists for prostate cancer. J Med Chem 2013; 56: 3414–8.
205. 202 Voet A, Helsen C, Zhang KY, Claessens F. The discovery of novel
191 Lack NA, Axerio-Cilies P, Tavassoli P, Han FQ, Chan KH, Feau C, et al. human androgen receptor antagonist chemotypes using a combined
Targeting the binding function 3 (BF3) site of the human androgen pharmacophore screening procedure. ChemMedChem 2013; 8:
receptor through virtual screening. J Med Chem 2011; 54: 8563– 644–51.
73. 203 McGinley PL, Koh JT. Circumventing anti-androgen resistance by
192 Bisson WH, Cheltsov AV, Bruey-Sedano N, Lin B, Chen J, Goldberger N, molecular design. J Am Chem Soc 2007; 129: 3822–3.
et al. Discovery of antiandrogen activity of nonsteroidal scaffolds of 204 Zhou J, Liu B, Geng G, Wu JH. Study of the impact of the T877A
marketed drugs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007; 104: 11927–32. mutation on ligand-induced helix-12 positioning of the androgen
193 Berruti A, Generali D, Tampellini M. Enzalutamide in prostate cancer receptor resulted in design and synthesis of novel antiandrogens.
after chemotherapy. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 2448. Proteins 2010; 78: 623–37.
194 Foster WR, Car BD, Shi H, Levesque PC, Obermeier MT, Gan J, et 205 Helsen C, Dubois V, Verfaillie A, Young J, Trekels M, Vancraenenbroeck
al. Drug safety is a barrier to the discovery and development of new R, et al. Evidence for DNA-binding domain — ligand-binding domain
androgen receptor antagonists. Prostate 2011; 71: 480–8. communications in the androgen receptor. Mol Cell Biol 2012; 32:
195 Clegg NJ, Wongvipat J, Joseph JD, Tran C, Ouk S, Dilhas A, et al. ARN- 3033–43.
509: a novel antiandrogen for prostate cancer treatment. Cancer 206 Boutet S, Lomb L, Williams GJ, Barends TRM, Aquila A, Doak RB,
Res 2012; 72: 1494–503. et al. High-resolution protein structure determination by serial
196 Rathkopf DE, Morris MJ, Fox JJ, Danila DC, Slovin SF, Hager JH, et al. femtosecond crystallography. Science 2012; 337: 362–64.
Phase I study of ARN-509, a novel antiandrogen, in the treatment of
castration-resistant prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 3525–
30.
197 Villoutreix BO, Eudes R, Miteva MA. Structure-based virtual ligand
screening: recent success stories. Comb Chem High Throughput
This work is licensed under the Creative
Screen 2009; 12: 1000–16. Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-No
198 Song CH, Yang SH, Park E, Cho SH, Gong EY, Khadka DB, et al. Derivative Works 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy
androgen receptor antagonist. J Biol Chem 2012; 287: 30769–80. by-nc-nd/3.0/
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica