Pawel Ptak. Application of Dasylab in Teaching Electrical Engineering
APPLICATION OF DASYLAB IN TEACHING ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
Pawel Ptak
Czestochowa University of Technology, Poland
Abstract. The teaching of subjects connected with electricity, such as electrotechnics or
electronics is an important part of school and technical university curricula. Due to the
recent development of computer technology, laboratory exercises can be performed through
simulation. Such simulations can be performed in a virtual environment measurement. The
paper presents an example simulation process of a measuring system in the software
environment DasyLab.
Keywords: DasyLab environment, electricity subjects, simulation, teaching.
Introduction
The recent years have witnessed a fast technological progress in the field of
computer science. Due to the development of information technology and
electronics a concept has appeared of a device not existing in reality but
performing a certain function for the user, and employing both material and non-
material means. All the functions of a traditional measuring device are
performed by its hardware, in the case of a virtual device or system it is not so.
In a computer measuring system with a graphic interface, what is performed by
the hardware is the acquisition and processing of data and what is performed by
the software is the functions of the graphic user interface. According to some
definitions, such a device can be treated as a virtual device. This term has been
created also to refer to new software devices for the computer-supported
designing of measuring-information systems (Winiecki, 2001; Rak, 1999). Such
devices enable the use of an instrument or a system by means of the graphic
interface. The development of measuring techniques and virtual measuring
devices has been stimulated by:
- fast technological progress, especially in the production of computers,
- availability of supporting software suited to the user’s needs,
- wide possibilities of processing, analysis, and visualisation of
measurement results,
- economical factors: virtual devices are cheaper than traditional
devices of a similar class.
The choice of content to be represented and the way of representing it on
the particular panels of the virtual device are up to the user. The record of
measurements can be created automatically and stored on the disk or printed.
The software is a crucial component of the measuring system and determines the
way and extent to which the device is utilized. It enables convenient monitoring
of the measuring process, archivization of and access to data, their analysis and
processing and presenting results in a required form (Winiecki, 2003; Ptak &
Prauzner, 2010; Petrilli, 2001; Hull & John, 1988). In the next part of the paper
presents a practical application of modeling software package DasyLab. Shows
an example of a project implemented at the laboratory classes with students.
Development of measuring devices
The evolution of measuring devices has taken place due to the fast
development of science and technology. Changes could be observed in the
methods of processing measuring signals, the principles of designing devices,
the ways of utilizing measuring equipment and levels of interaction among the
particular devices in a system. The first generation of measuring devices
included analogue devices operated manually from the front panel. The result of
the measurement was read from the position of an indicator on the scale
displaying numbers and measuring units (Laughton & Warne, 2003). When a/c
converters were invented, the second generation of measuring devices was
introduced, which became digital, with discrete measuring signals. The
metrological parameters were significantly improved in these devices by
eliminating reading errors but the device was still operated manually (Wilson,
2005; Sellars, 1995). The next generation was that of the so called systemic
devices (Winiecki, 2001; Rak, 1999; Swisulski, 2004), which could be either
used as an independent measuring device or it could be remotely controlled by
providing channels of external digital communications, i.e. digital interfaces.
The current generation of measuring devices includes virtual devices, consisting
of a general-use computer with software and systemic devices or measuring
devices of a new generation, such as measuring cards (Prauzner & Ptak, 2014;
Smetana & Stracapova, 2013; Beamish, 2000).
Functional modulesin the DasyLab package
Specialized programs enable not only analysis of signals from measuring
sensors but also simulation of such signals in the programming environment.
The programs have to be fairly easy to install and to adapt to the user’s
preferences. These requirements are met by integrated measuring environments
based on object programming, such as DasyLab produced by National
Instruments (Ptak & Prauzner, 2010).
The fact that it is easy to construct a measuring schema with the types of
analyses required and that it is possible to represent them in real time is also of
great value. It only takes minutes to create one’s own application for data
acquisition and analysis by means of DasyLab. The analysis of complex
acquisition and control problems is fact and does not require additional
programming. The symbols of particular modules, representing input and output
SOCIETY. INTEGRATION. EDUCATION. Volume IV
blocks, displays, and operations are simply to be placed in a Worksheet window
and connected (Swisulski, 2004; Kurkowski & Ptak, 2001).
Functional modules and functions are grouped by themes in DasyLab. The
basic groups are input-output modules. Here are found elements responsible for
acquiring the signal from the measuring card connected directly to the inductive
sensor (Figure 1). The signal, typically a voltage one, is in the analogue form.
Figure 1. Functional modules – input-output
The signal has to be subsequently modified by signal processing modules
so that it is suitable for analysis. It has to be amplified and filtered in order to
eliminate interference and noise from the grid. The amplified and purified signal
is the basis for establishing characteristic parameters of the measuring signal,
such as amplitude, frequency, and phase of the fundamental harmonic, as well as
for applying the functions of the FFT (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Functional modules – amplification and filtering
By means of the statistical modules, it is possible to obtain average,
minimal, and maximal values (Figure 3). It is also possible to draw a histogram
of the input signal and determine the minimal and maximal values for a specific
stream of data by prescribing the number of periods of the signal to be analysed.
Figure 3. Functional modules – statistical analysis
The process of analysing measuring signals from inductive sensors can be
controlled by means of controlling modules, which enable the starting and
stopping of the analysis by additional controlling signals, or by the operator.
They also control the particular parameters during the analysis by means of
various kinds of controllers acquiring data from external devices or by means of
variables input to the system (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Functional modules – control and regulation
The data processed and developed on the basis of signals from inductive
sensors can be represented in a graphical and numerical form as time
characteristics, or as two-variable functions (Figure 5). The parameters which
are relevant for the measurement can be input as analogue or digital indicators
directly at any point of the analysis.
Figure 5. Functional modules – display and recording
The output data can be subjected to mathematical analysis to establish
accuracy and eliminate measuring errors (Figure 6).
Figure 6. Functional modules – mathematical analysis
There is yet another group of modules, the generating modules, for
simulating the measuring signal. This is useful at the stage of constructing the
system for measuring signal analysis, before the analysis proper begins (Zloto et
al., 2012).
SOCIETY. INTEGRATION. EDUCATION. Volume IV
Application of DasyLab package in teaching technical subjects
The traditional classroom or lab for teaching electrotechnics and electronics
consists of a number of terminals for conducting previously prepared
experiments. The experiments are about connecting a number of measuring
devices and performing measurements in the so obtained system. Students’ task
is to select the devices properly and to connect them in accordance with the
instructions provided. After performing the measurements, students write down
the results in a protocol, on the basis of which they prepare a report. The report
additionally includes calculations, tables and graphs representing the results, as
well as conclusions from the experiment.
Due to the fast development of computer technology it is possible to
employ in the teaching various computer programmes, whose two main tasks
are:
 simulating the operation of electrical or electronic systems in the
computer independently of the hardware or connecting it to the
traditional measuring device,
 controlling traditional measuring devices by means of a computer
programme, which displays a virtual control panel for the user.
Results can be recorded directly in the programme. On the basis of the
results it is possible to perform any operations involving their
processing or graphical representation.
The DasyLab system enables the user to tackle all problems connected with
data acquisition and processing. What is innovative is the great simplicity of
using the programme by constructing a scenario for the analysis by means of
icons. Connecting icons represents the path of data flow and its analysis,
constituting the data flow worksheet shown schematically by Kurkowski & Ptak
(2001).
The ease of creating the measuring schema required for the analyses we
need and the possibility of representing them graphically in real time are an
important advantage of the software. DasyLab makes it possible to create one’s
own application for data acquisition and analysis within a few minutes. It also
makes it possible to solve even complicated acquisition-control problems
without any additional programming. The symbols of modules required are
simply placed in the worksheet window and connected. The modules represent
input blocks, output blocks, displays, and each of numerous operations which
can be performed by the programme. The DasyLab software package constitutes
a unit as a measuring system with a measuring card and a PC computer. It
includes a module responsible for data acquisition and adaptation to the format
suitable to be input to the computer. Measuring data processed in this way is
analysed by special software operating in the Windows environment. The
computer performs a central role by controlling the processes of data
acquisition, its processing and analysis, and then the presentation of results in a
form chosen by the user. Results can be also archivised so that access to them is
possible at any time they are required for further examination.
The DasyLab environment can be used for modelling various measuring
and simulation systems created within the measuring system on the basis of the
programming modules available.
For example, for the measurements of the coating thickness with the
inductive converter, a measuring system was modelled as presented in Fig. 7.
Inductive sensors are widely used as magnetic field sensors for threat
detection and alarm systems (Ptak & Prauzner, 2013; Prauzner, 2014). During
teaching for electrical engineering laboratory practical exercises are conducted
with the measurement of the parameter inductive sensors (Prauzner, 2012). The
operation of these sensors can also be simulated in specialized programs and the
results compared with actual measurements.
Figure 7. Measuring system modelled in the DasyLab programme
Below will be presented the particular stages of modelling the system for
measuring the coating thickness. Such a system can be built during the
simulation class with computers with the DasyLab package. This system can be
subsequently examined in the virtual environment before it is used in laboratory
classes or employed for measuring real industrial objects.
In order to adjust DasyLab to the requirements of the measurements of the
coating thickness, a measuring system was especially designed. At first a system
for generating a signal feeding the sensor was built together with the measuring
part, representing results on the display as temporal waveforms or as values in
the case of using the digital display module (Figure 8).
SOCIETY. INTEGRATION. EDUCATION. Volume IV
Figure 8. Diagram of the programme system simulating the measuring signal
and its acquisition in the DasyLab environment
The signal simulation block consists of a sinusoidal generator of constant
amplitude and signal frequency. The signal is generated and then amplified so
that it fits the other parts of the system. The signal is transferred directly onto the
oscilloscope output as time characteristics. Since the information on the coating
thickness is encoded in the amplitude of the sinusoid signal, the amplified signal
is brought to the module determining the maximal and minimal values of the
waveform examined. The maximal value obtained in this way is then averaged
to stabilise it and presented on the digital display.
The existing measuring system was subsequently extended to include a part
enabling adjustment of the sinusoid signal frequency and amplitude. The other
parts of the system were not modified (Figure 9).
Figure 9. Diagram of the programming system with adjustable generator frequency and
Since the measuring signal is subject to external interference of about a few
tens of hertz coming from the grid and of radio frequency from the ambient
environment, the system includes signal filtering modules. In this way an
optimal operating spectrum is selected for the measuring system (Figure 10).
Figure 10. Diagram of the programming system with filtering the measuring signal
This system additionally includes a module adjusting the signal from both
filters and transforming the two measuring trajectories into one common signal.
The version of system presented in Figure 11 had the acquisition path of
the measuring signal amplitude modified.
Figure 11. Diagram of the system averaging the amplitude
for a prescribed number of samples
Instead of the module analyzing the maximal and minimal value of the
signal and the module for averaging the two, there is a module averaging the
amplitude by analyzing a sufficient number of signal samples.
With the signal averaging module it is possible to adjust the parameters
during the system operation. In the previous version it was necessary to interrupt
measurements, introduce corrections and only then resume operation. In the new
version the so called coefficients have been introduced the value of which is
input into the system through built-in regulators: knobs, or two different kinds of
slides.
So far, the system for measuring the coating thickness is capable of
representing a simulated signal whose amplitude corresponds to the sought value
of thickness. The amplitude is presented on the display, but the coating thickness
has to be derived from it outside the DasyLab environment. Naturally, then, the
next step is the implementation of this operation into the measuring system. To
obtain this, more coefficients were introduced and the sought value is computed
in the mathematical module.
SOCIETY. INTEGRATION. EDUCATION. Volume IV
Again, the value of the coating thickness so obtained in presented in the
digital form on the display. The fully extended version of the system is
presented in Figure 12.
Figure 12. Diagram of the system yielding the coating thickness as output
The system presented above is almost a complete version of a device for
measuring coating thickness. What can still be added to it is modules recording
results obtained.
By using computer-aided learning results achieved not available for
learning using conventional teaching methods. Many of the systems that you can
build and analyze them in a computer program is not can be realized in the
classical laboratory because of financial constraints or too little extensive
equipment base. The most interesting element, however, remains an immediate
opportunity to experiment and test his ideas in a virtual software environment.
This allows to achieve very good results both in terms of objectives of teaching
and skills acquired during the educational process (Ptak & Prauzner, 2010; Zloto
et al., 2012).
Conclusions
On the basis of the considerations presented above it is possible to draw the
following conclusions:
 the DasyLab programming environment uses a graphical
programming language therefore enabling developing a measuring
system in the form of a diagram,
 by means of the programming environment DasyLab it is possible to
configure the existing measuring system, to develop an algorithm for
signal processing on the basis of existing procedures and to build
one’s own graphic interface for representing the results of
measurements and results of measuring data processing,
 applying the special-purpose software package offers significant
advantages over the traditional teaching methods,
 using the DasyLab software teaches independent thinking, seeking
solutions to problems and drawing conclusions on the basis of
experiments conducted and results obtained,
 a number of systems can be built for the sake of analyzing their
operation in a simulated software environment, which reduces cost of
conducting such experiments as compared to the traditional
electronics laboratory,
 the system developed is an open and flexible solution, whose
configuration can be extended and altered very quickly, to suit the
current requirements of the user,
 the measuring systems offers an opportunity of experimenting in the
virtual software environment.