Architecture of Network and Client-Server model
University of Science and Technology of China
Abstract –With the development of Internet technology, the Web is becoming more and more important in our lives so
that it has even become an essential element. The application of the Web has never been limited to computers; it has
been opened to all kinds of intelligent digital devices like mobile ones. In this paper, we discuss the main and
substantial difference between UDP and TCP, and how to implement Client-Server model. We also discuss the
efficiency of multi-thread server and its relationship with internet.
Keywords –Client-Server model; TCP; UDP
1. Introduction sentence structure, so that we can make a complete
sentence and paragraph, for terminal communication, this
language is called protocol. The first part that I want to
With the development of Internet technology, the
introduce concerns different transfer protocols used
Web is becoming more and more important in our lives
between client and server for different purposes.
so that it has even become an essential element. At the
Secondly, as long as a terminal knows the language used
same time, the application of the Web has never been
by communication, when it has something to transfer, it
limited to computers; it has been opened to all kinds of
can create a packet based on its language and protocol. Of
intelligent digital devices like mobile ones. In addition,
course, in the concrete implementation of communication,
the architecture of the Web is the Client-Sever (CS)
especially, when we want to achieve it by programming,
model that is shown as Figure 1. As a result, the
packet is not enough for transmission, we need another
communication between server and client is the first thing
structure to finish packing our message that is called a
we should be concerned about. Only based on successful
socket. The socket is the basic operating unit that sustains
and smooth communication, can Web technology move
network communication.
forward and Web applications be applied to all kinds of
devices so that they can help people.
In this semester, one of the courses I am taking is
Computer network which introduces the transfer protocol
between different terminals. Just as I mentioned above
briefly, a protocol can be defined as the rules,
conventions, and standards governing the syntax,
semantics, and synchronization of communication. In
other words, protocols are sets of rules, (or a sequence of
events) that control or enable preferably reliable and
recognizable transfer of information among
communication end points. There are so many transfer
protocols used in communication because of different
purposes. That is to say, devices may be connected but
not communicate without protocol. Here, I will introduce
the two most common protocols that are “User Datagram
Figure 1 The structure of the Client-Server model.
Protocol (UDP) and Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP)”. UDP does not have prior communication to set
2. The comparison between TCP and UDP
up a special transmission channel so that it is a simple
transmission model with a minimum of protocol
To implement communication, firstly, we should define mechanism. In addition, this is the main and substantial
how to transfer messages between server and client, that difference between UDP and TCP. For TCP, before two
is, the protocol that is one kind of language that can be terminals establish a connection, they will execute a
understood by terminals, which connect to Internet. Just process called handshaking that is a process of
as we learned one new language including its syntax and negotiation. After handshaking, the two terminals will
reach a agreement including, but not limited to, also the difference between oriented-object language and
information transfer rate, coding alphabet, parity, structure programming language.
interrupt procedure, and other protocol or hardware
features. As a result of handshaking, TCP will establish a
specific connection between two terminals for this
communication, so that TCP will cost more time depends
on network traffic condition than UDP to finish it,
however, TCP is simultaneously much more reliable than
UDP. So whether our transmission uses TCP or UDP is a
trade off, we have to consider network overload and the
degree of security.
Figure 3 TCP Socket Connections
Figure 2 The comparison between TCP and UDP
4. Discussion
3. How to use Client-Server model into real
world In addition, if I have finished the communication
between one server and several clients, the other factor
we need to consider is efficiency. Because I need to deal
After the above introduction of transfer protocol, we
with several clients, if we handle requests one by one, the
have to begin to be concerned with how to put these
total cost time will be N times by one execution time.
protocols into real use, that is to say, how to implement
However, if we can do it parallel, the total time can be
network communication by programming. The most
almost equal to one execution time. Another course I am
common method is by socket, which is network interface,
taking this semester is Operating System, which
an endpoint of an inter-process communication flow
introduces how to deal with some different questions or
across a computer network. Actually, there are many
different parts in one question by multi-thread. As a result,
kinds of sockets, but nowadays, most communications
when I designed a pattern of one server that has to
between computers are based on the Internet protocol that
decrease the overload due to too many clients, I decided
this paper introduces so that most network sockets are
to achieve it by multi-thread on server side. To be
called Internet sockets. A socket contains socket address
specific, when one client wants to connect to the server,
and data. Socket address includes local IP address and
the server will open a new thread for it, this thread just
remote IP address that are the addresses of our computer
belongs to the client and it will handle every request.
and target computer in the network and port number that
Meanwhile, in my project, there is a function like MSN
is used for sending and receiving data. About data, it is
so that it needs to communicate between two different
not only something the computer wants to transfer, but
threads. To do it, the server will store its specific ID and
also some elements used for synchronization that is a part
its thread for every client so that the server can find the
of the protocol. However, we can not operate sockets
target thread by its ID and then send message to it from
directly because it is just abstract concept, therefore, we
the original client. In addition, what I want to say is
have to through application programming interface (API)
multi-thread can be used for solving different parts in one
to operate sockets including sending, receiving data and
question. The most basic one is to calculate the product
functions. It is worth noting that the API is not identical
of two matrixes. Of course, if the dimension of matrix is
among different platforms and programming languages. I
small, we do not need to worry about it, we just process it
am working on one computer communication project by
row-by-row and column-by-column. However, if they are
programming C and the other android project that also
too large, this method will cost much time, therefore, we
includes communication between one server and many
can assign one thread to one row and one column, and
clients using Java. Even though all of Internet protocols I
then we can improve efficiency by calculating every row
used are TCP, the achievement is different with each
and column simultaneously.
other, programming C needs more complicated
statements because it is more basic than Java, Java API
encapsulates more operations, but I have to implement
many functions by myself in programming C, which is
[9] Hangwei Qian, Chenghua Cao, Li Liu, Hualong Zu,
Qixin Wang, Menghui Li, Tao Lin, Exploring the
Network Scale-out in virtualized Servers, Proceeding of
International Conference on Soft Computing and
Software Engineering (SCSE 2013)
[10]Yunfeng Ling, etc.,Design of Omnidirectional Vision
Reflector based on VC and Matlab, Computer Applicati
ons and Software, China, 2008.
[11] Hangwei Qian, Hualong Zu, Chenghua Cao, Qixin
Wang (2013), CSS: Facilitate the Cloud Service Selection
in IaaS Platforms Proceeding of IEEE International
Figure 4 Multi-thread processes different clients Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems
In a word, if we want to design and finish a network
project practically, the first thing is to understand Internet [12]Yiming Han and Anthony T. Chronopoulos,
protocol and secondly, we pack it by socket and send it. Distributed Loop Scheduling Schemes for Cloud Systems,
Finally, we should consider the efficiency of the server so 2013 IEEE 27th International Parallel and Distributed
that multi-thread would be imported into project. Processing Symposium Workshops & PhD Forum
(IPDPSW), Boston, MA, May 2013.