Are there laws of genome evolution?
Eugene V. Koonin
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD, USA
Research in quantitative evolutionary genomics and systems biology led to the discovery
of several universal regularities connecting genomic and molecular phenomic variables.
These universals include the log-normal distribution of the evolutionary rates of
orthologous genes; the power law-like distributions of paralogous family size and node
degree in various biological networks; the negative correlation between a gene‟s
sequence evolution rate and expression level; and differential scaling of functional
classes of genes with genome size. The universals of genome evolution can be accounted
for by simple mathematical models similar to those used in statistical physics, such as the
birth-death-innovation model. These models do not explicitly incorporate selection,
therefore the observed universal regularities do not appear to be shaped by selection but
rather are emergent properties of gene ensembles. Although a complete physical theory
of evolutionary biology is inconceivable, the universals of genome evolution might
qualify as „laws of evolutionary genomics‟ in the same sense „law‟ is understood in
modern physics.
Author Summary
Research in comparative genomics and systems biology uncovered several universal,
quantitative regularities of genome evolution, such as the distribution of the evolutionary
rates of orthologous genes that is virtually indistinguishable from bacteria to mammmals,
and anti-correlation between a gene‟s sequence evolution rate and expression level. What
are these universals of genome evolution? Should they be considered „laws of genome
evolution‟ or biologically irrelevant statistical effects? Here I discuss simple
mathematical models similar to those used in statistical physics that can account for the
universals of genome evolution and argue that, although a complete physical theory of
evolutionary biology is inconceivable, these universals might qualify for the status as
physical laws.
Introduction
Darwin‟s concept of evolution, all its generality and plausibility notwithstanding, was
purely qualitative. In the 1920s and 1930s, seminal work of Fisher, Wright and Haldane
laid the foundation for quantitative analysis of elementary processes in evolving
population, and in the 1950s, this population genetic theory was incorporated in the
framework of the Modern Synthesis of evolutionary biology. However, the formalism of
population applies only to microevolution in idealized populations and falls far short of a
general quantitative theory of evolution. Rapid progress of genomics and systems biology
at the end of the 20th century and in the beginning of the 21st century brought about
enormous amounts of new data amenable to quantitative analysis. The new data types
include numerous complete genome sequences, transcriptomes (genome-wide gene
expression information), proteomes (organism-wide protein abundance information),
interactomes (organism-wide data on physical and genetic interactions between proteins
or gene), regulomes (comprehensive data on gene expression regulation) and more. This
deluge of new information spawned a research direction that occupies itself with
quantification of the relationships between various genomic and molecular phenomic
variables and may be called quantitative evolutionary genomics [1,2].
Universals of genome and molecular phenome evolution
Quantitative comparative genomic analysis revealed several universals of genome
evolution that come in the form of distinct distributions of certain quantities or specific
dependencies between them. The most conspicuous universals include (Figures 1 and 2):
-log-normal distribution of the evolutionary rates between orthologous genes[3,4,5];
-power law-like distributions of membership in paralogous gene families and node degree
in biological „scalefree‟ networks[6,7,8,9];
-negative correlation between a gene‟s sequence evolution rate and expression level (or
protein abundance)[10,11,12,13];
-distinct scaling of functional classes of genes with genome size[14,15].
The universality of these dependencies appears genuinely surprising. For example, the
distributions of sequence evolution rate of orthologous genes are virtually
indistinguishable in all evolutionary lineages, for which genomic data are available,
including diverse groups of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes[3,4,5]. The shape of the
distribution did not perceptibly change through about 3.5 billion years of the evolution of
life even though the number of genes in the compared organisms differs by more than an
order of magnitude, and the repertoires of gene functions are dramatically different as
well[5]. The same conundrum pertains to the other universals: despite major biological
differences between organisms, these quantitative regularities hold, often to a high
precision. What is the nature of the genomic universals? Do they reflect fundamental
„laws‟ of genome evolution or are they „just‟ pervasive statistical patterns that do not
really help us understand biology? A related major question is: are these universals
affected or maintained by selection?
Mathematical models to account for the evolutionary universals
Clearly, should there be laws of genome evolution, in the sense this term is used in
physics, identification of recurrent patterns and universal regularities is only the first step
in deciphering these laws. The obvious next steps involve developing physical
(mathematical) models of the evolutionary processes that generate the universals and test
the compatibility of the predictions of these models with the observations of comparative
genomics and systems biology. Indeed, such models have been proposed to account for
each of the universals listed above (Figure 2). Notably, these models can be extremely
simple, based on a small number of biologically plausible elementary processes, but they
are also highly constrained. A case in point is the birth-death-and-innovation model that
explains the power law-like distribution of gene family sizes in all genomes[7,8,9]. This
model includes only three elementary processes, the biological relevance of which is
indisputable: i) gene birth (duplication), ii) gene death (elimination), iii) innovation (that
is, acquisition of a new family, e.g., via horizontal gene transfer). A model with precise
balance between the rates of these elementary processes and a particular dependency of
birth and death rates on paralogous family size yields family membership distributions
that are statistically indistinguishable from the empirically observed distributions[7].
Straightforward models of evolution have been developed that apparently account for
more than one universal (Figure 2). A case in point is a recent amended birth-death-
innovation model of evolution that connects two genomic universals that are not
obviously related, namely, the distribution of gene family size and differential scaling of
functional classes of genes with the genome size[16]. In this model, gain and loss rates of
genes in different functional classes (e.g., metabolic enzymes and expression regulators)
are linked in a biologically motivated proportion. The model jointly reproduces the
power-law distribution of gene family sizes and the non-linear scaling of the number of
genes in functional classes with genome size. Moreover, the model predicted that
functional classes of genes that grow faster-than-linearly with genome size would show
flatter-than-average family size distributions. The existence of such a link between these
a priori unrelated exponents is indeed confirmed by analysis of prokaryotic genomes.
The ubiquitous negative correlation between sequence evolution rate and expression level
triggered the hypothesis of misfolding-driven protein evolution that explains the universal
dependency between evolution and expression under the assumption that protein
misfolding is the principal source of cost incurred by mutations and errors of
translation[4,17]. This assumption was used to incorporate evolutionary dynamics into an
off-lattice model of protein folding[18]. The resulting model of protein evolution
reproduced, with considerable accuracy, the universal distribution of protein evolutionary
rates, as well as the dependency between evolutionary rate and expression. These
findings suggest that both universals of evolutionary genomics could be direct
consequences of the fundamental physics of protein folding.
Universals of evolution are emergent properties of gene ensembles not selectable
The models of evolution that generate the observed universal patterns of genome
evolution do not explicitly incorporate selection. The question of selective vs neutral
emergence of global quantitative regularities has been explored in some detail for the
case of network architectures. Networks have become ubiquitous images and tools of
systems biology[6]. Indeed, any class of interacting objects can be naturally represented
by nodes, and the interactions between these objects, regardless of their specific nature,
can be represented by edges. Commonly explored biological networks represent gene
coexpression; genetic interactions between genes; physical interactions between proteins;
regulatory interactions between genes; metabolic pathways where metabolites are nodes
and enzymes are associated with edges; and more, considering that the network
formalism is general and flexible enough to capture all kinds of relationships. In a sharp
contrast to random networks that are characterized by a Poisson distribution of the node
degree, biological networks typically show a power-law-like node degree distribution,
P(k) ~ k, where k is the node degree, i.e., the number of nodes to which the given node
is connected and  is a positive coefficient. These networks are said to be scale-free
because the shape of their node degree distribution remains the same regardless of the
chosen scale, that is any subnetwork is topologically similar to the complete network (in
other words, scale-free networks display fractal properties). The negative power law node
degree distribution is characteristic not only of biological networks but also of certain
purely “artificial” networks such as the Internet. Barabasi and colleagues came up with
the provocative idea that this is an intrinsic feature of evolved networks and proposed a
simple and plausible mechanism of network evolution known as preferential
attachment[19]. In addition to the scale-free architecture, most of the biological networks
possess additional interesting features such as small world properties, modularity and
hierarchical structure that are also widespread but tend to differ among networks
representing different classes of biological phenomena[6].
Scale-free networks are “robust to error but vulnerable to attack”: elimination of a
randomly chosen node most of the time has little effect on the overall topology and
stability of the network whereas elimination of highly connected nodes (hubs) disrupts
the network. This property might be conceived as implying that the architecture of such
networks represents “design” that evolved under selection for increased robustness.
However, this idea is no more justified than the view that the Internet was deliberately
designed with the same purpose in mind. The preferential attachment mechanism in itself
is a non-adaptive route of network evolution. Simulation of the growth of a network by
random duplication of its nodes with all their connections followed by
subfunctionalization, i.e., differential loss of edges by the daughter nodes not only yields
the typical power law distribution of the node degree but also reproduces the modular
structure of biological (specifically, protein-protein interaction) networks[20].
Duplication followed by subfunctionalization is the most common route of gene
evolution that does not intrinsically involve selection. Rather, subfunctionalization is
naturally interpreted as a type of “constructive neutral evolution” whereby complexity,
and complex networks in particular, evolve not as adaptations but through irreversible
emergence of dependencies between parts of the evolving system[21,22].
Compelling evidence of the non-adaptive origin of global architectural features of
networks was obtained through the analysis of gene coexpression networks in mutation
accumulation (MA) lines of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans[23]. The MA lines are
virtually free of selective constraints, so comparison between these lines and natural
isolates provides for evaluation of the contribution of selection to the evolution of various
characters, in particular network architecture. The global architectures of evolutionary
coexpression networks (i.e., networks in which edges connected genes with similar
patterns of expression across multiple lines) were indistinguishable between MA lines
and natural isolates, demonstrating that these features are not subject to selection.
Furthermore, there was no significant correlation between the properties of any given
node, such as the degree and the clustering coefficient, in the networks from mutation
accumulation lines and natural isolates. These results strongly suggest that not only
general architectural properties of networks but even the position of individual nodes in
networks are not subject to substantial selection.
Collectively, the ability of simple models to generate the universals of genome evolution
and additional results indicating that the global architecture of biological networks is not
a selected feature suggest that all evolutionary universals are not results of adaptive
evolution. Such a conclusion does not imply that these universals are biologically
irrelevant: beneficial properties such as network robustness may emerge “for free” from
the most general principles of evolution.
The universal dependencies and distributions seem to be emergent properties of
biological systems that appear because these systems consist of numerous (sufficiently
numerous for the manifestation of robust statistical regularities) elements (genes or
proteins, depending on the context) that weakly interact with each other, compared to the
strong interactions that maintain the integrity of each element. Clearly, this
representation of biological systems as ensembles of weakly interacting “particles”
resembles rough but enormously useful approximations, such as ideal gas, that are
routinely used in statistical physics. This approach is obviously over-simplified because
higher level interactions such as epistasis are common and critically important in
biology[24,25]. Nevertheless, the ability of simple models akin to those used in statistical
physics to quantitatively reproduce universals of genome and molecular phenome
evolution attest to the fruitfulness of the “statistical ensemble” approximation.
‘Laws’ of evolutionary genomics
The analogies between the evolutionary process and statistical physics are not limited
to the existence of universal dependencies and distributions, some of which can be
derived from simple models. It is actually possible to draw a detailed correspondence
between the key variables in the two areas [26,27]. The state variables (degrees of
freedom) in statistical physics such as positions and velocities of particles in a gas are
analogous either to the states of sites in a nucleotide or protein sequence, or to the gene
states in a genome, depending on the level of evolutionary modeling. The characteristic
evolutionary rate of a site or a gene naturally corresponds to a particle velocity.
Furthermore, effective population size plays a role in evolution that is clearly analogous
to the role of temperature in statistical physics, and fitness is a natural counterpart to free
energy.
The process and course of evolution critically depend on historical contingency and
involve extensive adaptive “tinkering”[28,29]. Therefore a complete physical theory of
evolution (or any other process with a substantial historical component) is inconceivable.
Nevertheless, the universality of several simple patterns of genome and molecular
phenome evolution, and the ability of simple mathematical models to explain these
universals suggest that “laws of evolutionary biology” comparable in status to laws of
physics might be attainable.
Figure legends
Figure 1. Universals of genome and molecular phenome evolution
The figure shows idealized versions of universal dependencies and distributions. The
scattered points show the range of characteristic variance.
(A) Log-normal distribution of evolutionary rates of orthologous genes
(B) Anticorrelation between gene expression level (protein abundance) and sequence
evolution rate
(C) Power law-like distribution of paralogous family size
(D) Differential scaling of functional classes of genes with the total number of genes
in a genome. Three fundamental exponents are thought to exist: 0 – no
dependence, typical of translation system component; 1 – linear dependence,
characteristic of metabolic enzymes; 2 – quadratic dependence, characteristic of
regulatory and signal transduction system components.
Figure 2. Universals of genome and molecular phenome evolution and
underlying physical/mathematical models.
Arrows connect each model with the universals it accounts for.