1v5950.1101:viXra
StatisticalScience
2010,Vol.25,No.1,22–40
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2010
Assumptions of IV Methods for
Observational Epidemiology
Vanessa Didelez, Sha Meng and Nuala A. Sheehan
Abstract. Instrumental variable (IV) methods are becoming increas-
ingly popularas they seem to offer the only viable way to overcome the
problem of unobserved confounding in observational studies. However,
some attention has to be paid to the details, as not all such methods
target the same causal parameters and some rely on more restrictive
parametric assumptions than others. We therefore discussand contrast
the most common IV approaches with relevance to typical applications
in observational epidemiology. Further, we illustrate and compare the
asymptotic bias of these IV estimators when underlying assumptions
are violated in a numerical study. One of our conclusions is that all IV
methods encounter problems in the presence of effect modification by
unobserved confounders. Since this can never be ruled out for sure, we
recommend that practical applications of IV estimators be accompa-
nied routinely by a sensitivity analysis.
Keywords andphrases: Causalinference,instrumentalvariables,Mendel-
ian randomization, relative bias, structural mean models.
1. INTRODUCTION ple,itwouldbeunethicalorimpracticaltorandomly
allocate individuals to exposures such as smoking,
Inferringcausationinobservationalstudiesisprob-
alcoholconsumption,andcomplexnutritionalorex-
lematic, as observed associations can often be due
ercise regimes. Furthermore, the cohort of a trial
to other than causal explanations, confounding be-
mightnotberepresentative of thetargetpopulation
ing of special concern. Randomized controlled trials
for which health interventions are required [16, 39].
(RCTs), rendering all other explanations unlikely
The standard approach to causal inference from ob-
by design, are the accepted standard approach to
servational data is to assume that there is no un-
causal inference. However, we are here interested in
observed confounding, that is, that a sufficient set
epidemiological applications where it is not always
of covariates has been measured. This is often im-
possiblenor desirableto carry out RCTs.For exam-
plausibleandhasproducedmisleadingresultsinthe
past, for example, regarding the effects of hormone
Vanessa Didelez is Senior Lecturer, Department of
replacement therapy [38, 72].
Mathematics, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK e-mail:
Methodsexploitinginstrumentalvariablesprovide
vanessa.didelez@bristol.ac.uk. Sha Meng is Research
analternative solution.Supposeweareinterested in
Fellow, Department of Health Science, University of
Leicester, Leicester, UK e-mail: sm456@leicester.ac.uk. the causal effect of some exposure (e.g., cholesterol)
Nuala Sheehan is Reader, Department of Health on disease (e.g., coronary heart disease), and be-
Science, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK e-mail: lieve that important confounding factors are likely
nas11@ leicester.ac.uk. butunobservable,perhapsbecausetheyarenotfully
understood.Loosely speaking,an instrumentalvari-
This is an electronic reprint of the original article
able (IV) is athird (observable) variable that is pre-
published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in
Statistical Science, 2010, Vol. 25, No. 1, 22–40. This dictive of exposure, but has no direct effect on the
reprint differs from the original in pagination and disease and is independent of the unobserved con-
typographic detail. founders. In general, it is difficult to find a variable
2 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
that can be justified as a suitable IV for any par- effect is motivated by RCTs with partial compli-
ticular problem. For randomized trials with partial ance and contrasts the effect of treatment versus
compliance, wherethe effect of theactual treatment nontreatment for those individuals who follow their
taken isof interest, thenaturalIVis therandomiza- assignment whatever it is. In our view, the interpre-
tion to treatment [29]; but, of course, this is not an tation of this causal parameter is very much bound
option when considering exposures that cannot be to the randomization scenario and we will therefore
randomized as mentioned earlier. Examples in epi- not consider it any further.Theeffect of “treatment
demiological contexts are the physician’s prescrip- on the treated” can be translated as the “effect of
tionpreferenceasanIVtoassessdrugeffects [8,55], exposureontheexposed”inanepidemiological con-
cigarette price to assess the effects of smoking [41] textanddescribestheeffectofpreventingthosewho
or genetic variants that are associated with expo- would normally beexposed frombecomingexposed.
sures of interest [16, 34, 39]. The latter has become Thisparticular subgroupeffect isexplicitly modeled
known as Mendelian randomization and, due to the by structural mean models (SMMs) [32].
fact that it is currently generating a lot of interest In this paper we compare the above approaches
in the epidemiological literature, will serve as illus- with regard to their use in observational epidemiol-
tration throughout (see Section 2). ogyandfocusonissuesthathaverecently arisen,for
Relying only on their defining properties, IVs can example, in Mendelian randomization applications,
be used to test for or bound the causal effect [2, to make the discussion concrete. We formally con-
4, 23, 29, 32, 58]. However, identification and hence sider the targeted causal parameters and the under-
point estimates of the causal effect are only obtain- lying modeling assumptions of IV methods. We ar-
able under additional parametric and distributional gue that their assumptions should be made explicit
assumptions.Linearstructuralequationmodels,pop- so that those most plausible for a given problem
ular in the econometrics literature [71, 74], are a can be chosen. As models are never expected to be
well-studied model class that allows identification. exactly trueinpractice,wecomplementthetheoret-
Generalizations to nonlinear structural equations ical comparison byanumericalstudyof thepossible
based on log-linear or probit modeling, for example
bias under violations of the assumptions. The out-
[47, 70], are also available (see overview [13]). In-
line of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we begin
spiredby the simplicity of the linear case, wherethe
by presenting the basic idea of IVs with the exam-
IV estimator is given as the ratio of the coefficients
ple of Mendelian randomization as recently applied
from the regressions of outcome on IV and expo-
toinvestigate theeffects ofalcoholconsumption.We
sure on IV, alternative methods have been put for-
thenintroducethemainconceptsofcausalinference
ward replacing these two linear regressions by non-
in Section 3, a central issue being the different no-
linear ones. One such example which is popular in
tions of causal effect parameters. Section 3.2 gives
Mendelian randomization studies with binary out-
the core conditions characterizing an instrumental
comes is what we will call the “Wald-type” estima-
variable. InSection 4 we present the IVmodels that
tor. This combines odds ratios or risk ratios for the
we will consider, and provide general indications
genotype-outcome relationship with the mean dif-
of how they interrelate. Section 5 investigates the
ference in exposure given the genotype [10, 11, 16,
performance in terms of relative asymptotic bias of
35, 40, 66].
these methods in a numerical study where we focus
An important consideration when using IV meth-
on the particular case where all variables are binary
ods is the target of inference, that is, the precise
in order to facilitate exact evaluation of the relevant
definition of the causal parameter of interest. In our
quantities. We conclude with a discussion of the im-
experience, epidemiologists are mostly interested in
plications,bothforepidemiological applications and
the population causal effect, that is, a comparative
more generally.
measure of subjecting everyone in a given popula-
tiontoexposureasopposedtonoexposure,aswould
2. USING A GENETIC VARIANT AS AN IV
ideallybeobtainedinanRCT.However,somepromi-
nent IV methods target causal effects within spe- WewillrelatetoMendelianrandomizationthrough-
cific subgroups. These are the effect of treatment out the paper as a concrete application of an IV
on the compliers [2, 33], or the effect of treatment approach in observational epidemiology and outline
on the treated [32, 57, 59, 67]. The complier causal the basic idea here using an example taken from
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 3
Chen et al. [12]. Further details, including history exposure by establishing that the disease and the
and nomenclature, are provided in a recent review IV are associated: the risks of high blood pressure
[15]. and hypertension are significantly different between
Alcohol consumption has been found in observa- the different genotypes. As ALDH2 is assumed to
tional studies to have a positive effect on coronary have no direct effect on blood pressure or hyperten-
heart disease (CHD) and negative effects on liver sion other than through alcohol consumption, the
cirrhosis,some cancers and mental health problems. observed associations must be due to an effect of
These findings, however, are strongly suspected to alcohol consumption on blood pressure and hyper-
be confounded by factors like diet, lifestyle and so- tension. Since the above assumptions define an IV,
cioeconomic factors. Thus, in order to inform pub- this reasoning only holds if we can be fairly con-
lic health recommendations on alcohol intake, for fident that ALDH2 is a valid IV. Hence, only well-
example, it is important to verify which, if any, of understoodgenotypes can beusedasIVs.Note, this
these observed associations is in fact causal for the does not yet provide a point estimate of the causal
relevant health outcome. effect of alcohol consumption on hypertension: it is
The connection between the ALDH2 gene and al- merely evidence that there is such an effect.
cohol consumption is well established and under- ThenumberofapplicationsofMendelianrandom-
stood [6, 26, 42, 73]. The ALDH2*2 variant is as- ization is growing rapidly [10, 17, 18, 36, 42, 43, 46,
sociated with an accumulation of acetaldehyde and 66]; a brief overview of some recent studies is given
hence with unpleasant symptoms after drinking al- in Sheehan et al. [64]. Note that even when a ge-
cohol. Carriers of this variant tend to limit their al- netic variant can be found that is associated with
cohol consumption regardless of their other lifestyle the exposure of interest, it does not automatically
behaviors.Sincegenesarerandomlyassignedduring qualify as an IV. Problems could occur when there
meiosis,ALDH2*2 carriersshouldnotdiffersystem- are differentsubpopulationswith different allele fre-
atically from carriers of the ALDH2*1 allele in any quencies and different prevalences of disease, for in-
other respect. In particular, there should be no as- stance, [9]. Finding a suitable genetic instrument is
sociation between the variant and the unobserved thus a challenge as discussed in detail in several pa-
confounders of the various relationships between al- pers [16, 23, 24, 39, 48, 65].
cohol consumption and above health outcomes. The
3. CAUSAL INFERENCE
plausibility of this assumption is strengthened by
thefactthatthereisnoevidenceofALDH2 associa- Epidemiologistsareconcernedwithidentifyingthe
tionwithtypicalknownepidemiologicalconfounders causal effect of an exposure X on a disease Y, typi-
suchasage,smoking,BMI,cholesterol,etc.[19].The cally with the view to informingpublic health inter-
possibilitythatALDH2affectstheparticulardisease ventions. We therefore regard causal inference to be
of interest by any route other than through alcohol about the effect of intervening in, or manipulating,
consumption can also be excluded from the known a given system as is implicit in many approaches to
functionality of the gene. Thus, for any specific dis- causal inference [21, 24, 31, 37, 49, 57, 62, 63].
ease,weshouldobservethattherearemore*1*1and It is useful to introduce notation to represent in-
*1*2 than *2*2 genotypes among the affected indi- tervention. Pearl [51] uses the do operator to dis-
viduals if alcohol consumption is really causal for tinguish between conditioning on an intervention in
that disease. The meta-analysis by Chen et al. [12], X, P(Y|do(X =x)), and the usual conditioning on
based mainly on studies in Japanese populations, observing X, P(Y|X =x). The former reflects how
shows that blood pressure and risk of hypertension thedistributionofY shouldbemodifiedwhenX has
is higher for *1*1 than for *2*2 homozygotes, and beenforcedtothevaluexbysomeexternalinterven-
is also higher for heterozygotes (*1*2) than for the tion,whereas thelatter reflects how thedistribution
*2*2 homozygotes. As the heterozygotes tend to be of Y should be modified when X =x is simply ob-
moderate drinkers due to less pronounced adverse served. The different conditions, observation versus
symptoms, the study concludes that even moderate intervention, reflectthecommonwisdomcorrelation
alcohol consumption is “harmful” for blood pres- is not causation. Note that we often write do(x) for
sure. do(X =x).
The example shows how ALDH2 can be used as Another formal approach is based on counterfac-
an IV to provide evidence for a causal effect of the tual (potential outcome) variables [31, 62, 63]. Here
4 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
Y(x ) denotes the value that the outcome Y would effect of male alcohol consumption on oesophageal
have if the variable X were set to the value x , cancer risk. The above causal parameters can easily
whereas Y(x ) is the outcome if the same variable be adapted by conditioning on covariates provided
X were set to the value x . The variables Y(x ) thesearepriortoexposure.Wewillnotconsiderthis
andY(x )arecounterfactualbecausetheycannever further in the present paper.
both be observed together, so when one is fact, the However, oneparticular causal subgroupeffect, or
other one is, of necessity, contrary to fact. The no- local causal effect, is very relevant in the epidemi-
tionofintervention alsounderliesthecounterfactual ological literature. This is the effect of exposure on
approach [31, 60, 62, 63]. Both approaches define the exposed group [29, 57, 58], or the effect of treat-
a formal language for causality and provide spe- mentreceivedasitisknowninthecontextofclinical
cific mathematical notation for representing inter- trials (cf. [25],e.g.). For example, wemightbeinter-
ventions thatwemight beinterested in.Hence, they ested in the effect of reducing alcohol consumption
force us to be clear and explicit about any assump- for those individuals who would normally tend to
tions underlyinga given method of causal inference. have high alcohol consumption,but not in the ques-
tionofincreasingalcoholconsumptionforthosewho
3.1 Causal Parameters
normallydonotdrinkmuch.Thisdoesnotquitecor-
Causaleffect parametersaretypically functionsof
respond to conditioning on observed covariates, as
the distribution of Y under different interventions
what the subjects “would normally” be exposed to
in X. The most popular is the average causal effect
in the future is not usually observable. However, it
(ACE)definedastheexpecteddifferenceinY under
can be assumed that if no intervention takes place,
two different settings of X:
alcohol consumption will remain high for those in-
ACE(x ,x ):=E(Y|do(x ))−E(Y|do(x )), dividuals with existing high consumption. In coun-
terfactual notation the corresponding local causal
where x is typically some baseline value. The ACE
1 relative risk, LCRR, for instance, is given by
is a natural choice of causal parameter when the ef-
fect of X is suspected to be linear on Y. When Y is E(Y(x)|X =x)
(2) LCRR:= ,
nonnegative or binary, in contrast, it is more com- E(Y(0)|X =x)
mon to use a multiplicative measure like the causal
whereY(x)isthevalueoftheoutcomeifanindivid-
relative risk (CRR) defined as
ual’s alcohol consumption is set to be x and Y(0) is
E(Y|do(x )) thecounterfactualoutcomeifitissettobeatabase-
(1) CRR(x ,x ):= ,
1 2 E(Y|do(x )) line level, while conditioning on X =x means that
the “natural” alcohol consumption is x. Note that
or, for binary Y, the causal odds ratio (COR) given
given X =x, we actually observe Y =Y(x), so that
the numerator of (2) is equal to E(Y|X =x). This
P(Y =1|do(x 2 ))P(Y =0|do(x 1 )) type of causal parameter can also beexpressed with
COR(x ,x ):= .
P(Y =0|do(x ))P(Y =1|do(x )) the do-notation, butwe need to distinguish between
the “natural” value of exposure X and the one that
Note that the odds ratio is mainly used in case-
it is set to by intervention X˜. When no intervention
control studies to approximate the relative risk in
takes place, these two are identical, that is, X ≡X˜.
the case of a rare disease.
However, when an intervention takes place, it is as-
Allthesecausalparametersarepopulation param-
sumed that X˜ “overrules” X so that Y causally de-
eters, that is, they compare setting X = x with
1 pends on X˜ while being still associated with X due
setting X = x for the whole population of inter-
to the fact that X is informative for the unobserved
est. They are what is measured in a comparison of
confounding that also predicts Y. The above can
the active and control groups in a controlled ran-
then be translated to
domized experiment when all subjects comply with
their treatment assignment. In some situations, we E(Y|X =x,do(X˜ =x))
may be more interested in the causal effect within (3) LCRR:= .
a subset of the population, that is, conditional on a
specific value of some observed covariates. For ex- See Robins, VanderWeele and Richardson [61] and
ample, we might want to know the average causal Geneletti and Dawid [28] for more details on how
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 5
to interpret this local causal effect without coun- we let G be the instrument (e.g., genotype in a
terfactual notation. Local versions of the ACE and Mendelian randomization study) and U an unob-
COR can easily be defined analogously to the above served variable (or, more realistically, a set of unob-
LCRR. Note that the term “local” causal effect in servedvariables)thatwillrepresenttheconfounding
the IV literature is most commonly used for the between X and Y. The properties that define an IV
effect of treatment on the “compliers” in an RCT are expressed in terms of conditional independence
[2, 29, 33], which we are not dealing with here and statements where A⊥⊥B|C means A is independent
which is different from (3). ofB givenC.Thecoreconditionsarethefollowing:
One further causal parameter that is sometimes
1. G⊥⊥U, that is, G must be (marginally) inde-
consideredistheindividual causaleffectwhichisex-
pendent of the confounding between X and Y;
pressedwithpotential outcomes as Yi(x )−Yi(x ).
2 1 2. G6⊥⊥X, that is, G must not be (marginally)
It is the difference between the potential outcomes
independent of X;
for a specific individual i. Assumptions underwhich
3. G⊥⊥Y|(X,U), that is, conditionally on X and
the individual causal effect can be identified are in-
the confounder U, the instrument and the response
herently untestable [20], but may be justified given
are independent.
specific subject matter background knowledge.
Finally, we want to emphasize that a population Thesepropertiescan,toalimitedextent,betested
parameter like CRR in (1) will be different from fromtheobservabledata(i.e.,withoutmeasurements
a conditional or local parameter LCRR in (2) or on U) when G,X,Y are all categorical. This is be-
from an individual causal effect when the effect of cause they impose certain inequality constraints on
exposure is different in different subgroups or indi- the joint distribution p(y,x,g) (see [50, 51] for de-
viduals, that is, under heterogeneity or effect mod- tails). Analogous constraints can also be obtained
ification. For instance, those who naturally have a for situations where joint observation of (G,X,Y)
highalcoholconsumptionarelikelytobedifferentin is not possible, but separate observations on (G,X)
many other relevant butunobservablerespects than and (G,Y) are available from different studies [52],
those who have a naturally low alcohol consump- for instance, as is often the case for Mendelian ran-
tion and, therefore, the effect of changing that level domizationapplications.Furthermore,Ramsahai[53]
should be different in these two groups. In partic- develops a statistical test for violation of these in-
ular, there may be no overall effect in the popula- equality constraints that properly accounts for the
tion (i.e., CRR=1) if negative and positive effects sampling variability in the estimated probabilities.
in subgroups (or individuals) cancel each other out. When the data are categorical, these inequalities
In such a situation, an estimator that targets the should always be verified in order to detect “gross”
CRR will be biased for the LCRR and vice versa. violations of the above core conditions. However, it
We reiterate that the accepted gold standard RCT shouldbekeptinmindthatdistributionsp(y,x,g,u)
randomizing individuals to either x or x always will exist which violate the core conditions but may
targets a population causal effect. have marginals p(y,x,g) that still satisfy these in-
equalities. We are not aware of analogous inequality
3.2 Instrumental Variables
constraints that could be checked when X is con-
Thestandard approach to estimating a causal pa- tinuous (but see [5] for the case where instrument
rameter from observational data is to assume that or outcome are continuous). Categorizing continu-
a sufficient set of observed confounders is available ous variables is not advisable, as it is possible that
for which we then adjust [21, 30, 37, 51, 62]. When the continuous variables satisfy the above core con-
thereisreasontosuspectadditionalunobservedcon- ditions, while their discrete versions do not. Hence,
founding, the causal effect cannot typically be ob- since a test of the inequalities can only falsify the
tained in this way. In this situation, IV methods core assumptions butnever confirm them, and since
permit a different way of performing causal infer- it cannot be carried out when the exposure is con-
ence by exploiting the additional information pro- tinuous,itis crucialtoalways justifythecorecondi-
vided by the instrumental variable. tionsonthebasisofsubjectmatterorotherrelevant
Recall thatwedenote theexposureof interest (in- background knowledge.
termediate phenotype or modifiable risk factor) by A shorthand way of encoding conditional inde-
X and the outcome (disease) by Y. Furthermore, pendence restrictions is via graphical models [14].
6 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
The directed acyclic graph (DAG) in Figure 1 is the intervention, X˜ overrules the “natural” X with re-
unique representation of the above core conditions. spect to the conditional distribution of Y and we
Furthermore, this graph is equivalent to a factor- obtain the joint distribution under intervention
ization of the joint density on (Y,X,U,G) in the
following way: 0
which can again be represented graphically with a
While this describes how the variables behave “nat-
DAG as in Figure 3 [28, 61]. As before, we have the
urally,” we have to specify our assumptions about exclusion restriction Y ⊥⊥G|do(X˜), but we can also
how an intervention in X operates on the system.
derive, for instance, that Y is not independent of G
This takes the form of an additional structural as- given X and do(X˜).
sumption which states that intervening in X does
not affect the distributions of any other factors in
4. SOME COMMON IV MODELS
(4) besides the conditional distribution of X. Under
intervention on X, the joint distribution of (4) thus Withtheabovecoreconditions1–3andstructural
becomes assumption of (5), the IV can beused to test for the
presence of a causal effect, or to derive lower and
p(y,u,g,x|do(x ))
0 upper bounds on causal effects for the case when
all variables are categorical [4, 22, 44, 57]. How-
ever, for general distributions of (X,Y,G,U), the
whereI(·)istheindicatorfunction.Thecorrespond- core conditions alone donot necessarily allow point-
ing DAG in Figure 2 graphically shows the condi- identification of causal effects, except for some ex-
tional independence relationships among Y,G and tremely unusual situations [29].
U for the core conditions and an intervention on X. Below we present some common model restric-
One immediate implication is that G⊥⊥Y|do(X), tions, that is, additional parametric assumptions,
whichisalso knownastheexclusion restriction con- that enable point-identification of causal parame-
dition in the IV literature, where it is typically ex- ters. When the causal parameter is identified, it can
pressed with potential outcomes as G ⊥⊥ Y(x) [2, be estimated consistently; in practice, small sample
33]. sizes can still induce problems, but we will ignore
Taking this astep further,we can also express the this issue here.
IV assumptions when the effect of exposure on the Our terminology is as follows. Let θ∗ be the true
exposedindividualsisofinterest.Usingthenotation causal parameter of interest, for example, the CRR
introduced in Section 3.1, let X denote the “natu- θ∗ =E P∗(Y|do(x
)), where expec-
ral” exposure level, while X˜ denotes the exposure tations are taken with respect to the true distribu-
that is set by an intervention. When there is no in- tion P∗. Restrictions are imposed in the form of a
tervention, they are identical and(4)is valid. Under statistical model M, which is simply a set of distri-
butions with some common characteristics for the
randomvariables of interest,forexample,thecondi-
tionalmeanof Y beinglinearin X.ThemodelMis
correctly specified if P∗∈M. Themodel M further
allows point-identification of the true causal effect
parameterwhenθ∗isequaltoafunctionθ (P∗ )
Fig. 1. The DAG representing the core conditions required M X,Y,G
for G to be an instrument. that only depends on the observational (i.e., not
Fig.2. TheDAGrepresenting thecoreconditionsunderin- Fig.3. TheDAGrepresenting thecoreconditionsunderin-
tervention in X. tervention in X˜ and “natural” exposure X.
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 7
interventional) distribution of the observable vari- on G and then by regressing Y on Xˆ. It is there-
ables.Theexactformofthefunctionθ dependson fore known as two-stage least squares [1, 71]. In the
the model assumptions, that is, on M. If the model special case of binary instrument G, we have
M is misspecified, then it does not contain the true
distribution P∗ and θ (P∗ ) will not necessar- (7) LIVAE= .
ily be equal to θ∗, as the former relies on wrong
model assumptions. We call the causal parameters This is analogous to the Wald method, which was
of interest, θ∗, the target of inference, and we call originallyproposedtodealwiththecaseofmeasure-
θ M (P X ∗ ,Y,G ) the estimand regardless of whether the ment errors in both variables X and Y [7, 69]. As
model is correctly specified or not. Hence, the esti- weshallnowdiscuss,theLIVAEidentifieseitherthe
mand is equal to the target under a correct model population, individual or local average causal effect
andotherwisepotentiallydifferent.Notethatthein- (ACE, ICE or LACE), depending on the particular
terventiondistributionP∗(Y =y|do(x))itselfmight model assumptions.
be of interest as a target, and, if identified, any In addition to the three IV conditions and struc-
causal parameter can be obtained from it. tural assumption (5), assume that the conditional
As we will see below, θ M can typically be ex- expectation of Y is linear without interactions and
pressed in terms of conditional probabilities or ex- that all dependencies only affect the mean. Then
pectations with respect to the observational distri-
bution of X,Y and G. For practical data analysis,
these have to be replaced, for instance, by the cor-
responding empirical relative frequencies, averages
or regression coefficients, assuming that we have an where h(u) is some function of u only. With α=
independentidentically distributed(i.i.d.)sampleof E(h(U)), we have
(X,Y,G); this then yields an estimator θˆ . We will
not go into the details of the actual construction
of estimators θˆ M as functions of the sample but so that the ACE for a unit difference in X is equal
will focus on how different models M allow point- to the model parameter β, while the causal relative
identificationandwhatthecorrespondingestimands risk CRR(x ,x ) under this model is equal to (α+
θ M (P X ∗ ,Y,G ) are. βx 2 )/(α+βx 1 ). It can easily beseen (cf. Appendix)
Notethatwhenparametricassumptionsaremade, that, under the above assumptions, β=Cov(Y,G)/
the core conditions can sometimes be weakened, for Cov(X,G).Hence,theLIVAEidentifiestheACE.In
example, by requiring only that G and U are un- the Appendix we show that the CRR is also identi-
correlated, but we do not discuss this further here. fied in this linear model and we will call the corre-
Also, some, but not all, of the following approaches sponding estimand LIVRR.
are only defined when Y and/or G are binary. This When Y is binary, for example, assumption (8)
will be indicated when relevant. cannot hold exactly, as it allows E(Y|X,U) to take
values outside [0,1]. It might still be used as a sen-
4.1 Linear IV Models
sible approximation in practice, especially when the
TheclassicalIVmethodwasdevelopedinthecon- range of X is restricted and its effect is small. As
textoflinear models Mwhichwedefineinmorede- mentioned above, causal relative risks and odds ra-
tail below, and results in an estimator θˆ M , given as tios that might be of more interest for binary Y can
the ratio of the least squares slope estimators from also be identified based on the linear model as de-
linear regressions of Y on G and of X on G. We will tailed in the Appendix.
call this the linear IV average effect estimator, and Under stronger model assumptions, such as those
its estimand θ M is commonintheeconometrics literature,forinstance,
the LIVAE identifies the individual causal effect,
(6) LIVAE:= . ICE.A structuralequation modeldescribes how the
individual responses Yi depend structurally (i.e.,
The LIVAE can equivalently be estimated by ob- undermanipulation)onothervariables[51,71].This
taining predicted values Xˆ from the regression of X can also be expressed using counterfactuals [8]. A
8 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
structural equation counterpart for (9) that param- that the average effect is the same for different val-
eterizes the ICE is given by ues of U, or (iii) the local effect on the exposed, if
we believe that this is the same for different values
I of G.
for individual i, where ξi can be regarded as a com-
4.2 Nonlinear Wald Type Methods
bination of Ui and other (nonconfounding) factors
that determine the outcome. The problem of con- As mentioned earlier, the LIVAE is the same as
Wald’s estimator which was originally devised to
founding by U leads to ξ and X not being indepen-
dealwithmeasurementerrors[69].Inthissectionwe
dent, so that β cannot be estimated consistently
consider two further methods leading to ratio based
from a regression of Y on X, and the LIVAE is
IV estimators and which we will therefore call Wald
used instead. For the interpretation it is important
type estimators (cf. also [39, 46, 66]).
to note that model (10) explicitly assumes that the
Several applications of Mendelian randomization,
causal effect is the same for each individual i, while
typically considering a binary outcome Y, a contin-
(8) assumes that manipulating X has the same av-
uous exposure X and a dichotomous genotype G,
erage effectregardlessofthevalueofU onthelinear
have used the following reasoning to obtain an IV
scale. In fact, model (10) implies (8), but the con-
estimator for a causal effect [10, 11, 16, 35, 40]. The
verse is not true (see the Appendix for details).
na¨ıve odds ratio of Y given X, which we denote
Each of models (8) and (10), together with the
NOR, is suspected to be confounded. The odds ra-
IV assumptions, allows us to identify the effect of
tio of Y given the instrument G, which we denote
exposure on the exposed, that is, the local aver-
by OR(Y|G), is not confounded due to core condi-
age causal effect LACE, via the LIVAE from (6).
tion 3, and should be roughly equal to the causal
However, the LACE can be identified under weaker
odds ratio, COR, between X and Y scaled by the
model assumptions, namely, those of an additive
mean difference in exposure for the two genotypes,
structural mean model (cf. the Appendix or Hernan
and Robins [32]). Using the notation introduced in
CORδ.Therefore,intheseapplications,thequantity
Section 3.1, let X denote the “natural” exposure
NORδ is compared with OR(Y|G) and, if similar,
level, while X˜ denotes the exposure that is set by
the conclusion is drawn that there is no confound-
an intervention (overruling the “natural” X). An
ingand,hence,thatNOR≈COR.Wethusconsider
additive SMM assumes that
the following as the Wald type odds ratio estimand:
−E(Y|X =x,G=g,do(X˜ =0))=β x, (On the log-scale this is the ratio of log-odds differ-
enceandthemeandifferenceδ,hence“Wald type.”)
whereX =0again denotesasuitablebaselinevalue.
At first sight, this reasoning seems heuristic, and
Here, β x is the effect of reducing the exposure to
L there is no model assumption from which it can
this baseline value for those who under “natural”
be theoretically derived. However, by regarding the
circumstances are exposed to X =x and have G=
odds ratio as an approximation to the relative risk
g. Note that this additive SMM makes no explicit
for rarediseases, we can motivate theabove formula
assumptions about individual causal effects or the
theoretically. The following is a slight generaliza-
role of U; in fact, U is allowed to modify the effect
tion of the structural equation approach presented
of X onY.Implicitly,however, themannerinwhich
by Mullahy [47] and suitable not only for binary
Y dependsonU isrestrictedbytheassumptionthat
butalso for general nonnegative response Y (X and
theabovedifferenceinconditionalexpectations (11)
G can be continuous or discrete). Assuming a log-
does not depend on G. The different interpretation
linear model [and structural assumption (5)],
of the LIVAE in the context of linear models and
logE(Y|X =x,U =u)
presence of effect modification is also discussed by
Brookhart and Schneeweiss [8]. (12) =logE(Y|do(X =x),U =u)
Insummary,wecanusetheLIVAEtoestimate(i)
theindividualcausaleffect,ifwebelievethatthein-
dividualeffect is the same for everyone on the linear where h(u) is some function of u only. It can then
scale, or (ii) the average causal effect, if we believe easily be seen that the causal relative risk for one
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 9
unitdifferenceinX issimplyCRR=expγ.Further, 4.3 Multiplicative Structural Mean Models
we suppose that X has conditional mean
We already mentioned that the LIVAE can be
justified in an additive SMM identifying the causal
meandifferencewithintheexposedindividuals(LACE).
where k(u) is some function of u only, and, in ad- Alternatively,wenowconsideramultiplicative struc-
dition, we require that the distribution of X is such tural mean model (MSMM) [32]. Again using the
that notation introduced in Section 3.1, let X denote the
“natural” exposure level, while X˜ denotes the ex-
(14) [X−(δG+k(U))]⊥⊥G|U. posure that is set by an intervention (overruling the
“natural” X). An MSMM parameterizes the LCRR
Note that this requirementcannot besatisfied when
(2) and is given by
X is binary, for instance, but is automatically true
whenithasaconditionalnormaldistribution.Itcan E(Y|X =x,G,do(X˜ =x))
(15) log =γ x,
now be shown (cf. the Appendix or Mullahy [47]) (cid:26)E(Y|X =x,G,do(X˜ =0))(cid:27) L
that the CRR is identified because γ is equal to the
where X˜ =0 stands for a suitable baseline value as
ratioofthelog-coefficient fromaloglinearregression
before. Hence, γ x is the log-relative risk of chang-
ofY onGandthecoefficientfromalinearregression L
ingtheexposuretothisbaselineforthosewhowould
ofX onG.Inthespecialcaseofabinaryinstrument
normally be exposed to X =x, where it is assumed
G, this simplifies to
that the effect is the same within different levels of
logE(Y|G=1)−logE(Y|G=0) the instrument G. This does not follow from the
γ= .
core IV conditions nor from the structural assump-
tion (5). It means, for example, that reducing the
The method of estimating this via two regressions alcohol intake for those individuals who are heavy
as mentioned above is also called two-stage quasi drinkers has the same effect on the relative risk for
maximum likelihood [47]. We will refer to the esti- hypertension regardless of their ALDH2 genotype.
mand based on the right-hand side of the above as This may be unrealistic if those who drink much
the Wald relative risk (WaldRR), given by despite carrying the ALDH2*2 variant are different
in relevant aspects from those who drink much and
do not carry this allele. An analogous assumption
is made by the additive SMM (11) but for the risk
where RR(Y|G) is shorthand for the relative risk of
difference; note that except for trivial cases both,
Y given G. When G is binary, δ is the mean differ-
the assumption that G does not modify the effect
ence in X, otherwise it is Cov(X,G)/Var(G).
on the multiplicative and on the additive scale, can-
The WaldRR identifies the CRR under the above
not be true at the same time [32]. This assumption
combination of log-linear model for Y given X and
of no heterogeneity with respect to levels of G is
U, and the stated assumptions on the conditional
required so that the model has only one unknown
distribution of X given G and U. Note that when
parameter, since we can only identify one parame-
Y is nonnegative and continuous, it is, in principle,
ter. When baseline covariates have been measured,
possible(butnotcommon)toelaboratetheassump- it is possible to identify more complex SMMs and
tionsfurthersothattheindividualrelativecausalef- this assumption could be relaxed [3, 27, 32], but we
fect Yi(x 2 )/Yi(x 1 ) is identifiable; model (12) would do not consider this any further here.
then need to be reformulated as a structural equa- In general, a SMM estimator for a causal parame-
tion model analogously to the linear case earlier. ter is obtained by solving estimating equations that
When Y is binary and P(Y =1) is small (“rare are based on the exclusion restriction mentioned in
diseaseassumption”),WaldRR andWaldOR willbe Section 3.2. The solution typically does not have a
approximately the same, so that in this case we can closed form expression. However, for the case where
arguethattheWaldORapproximately identifiesthe X and G are binary, an explicit solution exists [32,
COR under the same model assumptions. A differ- 57] (cf. also the Appendix), yielding that exp(−γ L )
ent justification of WaldOR has been proposed by equals
[3]basedonalogisticSMMandsomeveryroughap- E(Y|G=1)−E(Y|G=0)
(16) 1− .
proximations, under which it identifies the LCOR. E(YX|G=1)−E(YX|G=0)
10 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
The parameter γ can easily be estimated using the joint distribution of (X,G) and of (Y,G), only.
correspondingempiricalfrequenciesoraverages.Un- This means that an IV analysis can be performed
der the multiplicative SMM, we hence obtain that by exploiting results, for example, from different
the estimand is the inverse of (16), which we will existinggeneticstudiesormeta-analysesasispar-
callMSMMRR.ItidentifiestheLCRRundertheIV ticularlyrelevantforMendelianrandomizationap-
core conditions and the assumptions of an MSMM. plications[46,66].Inaddition,theWaldORisuse-
In order for it to also identify the population effect ful for case-control studies where, under the rare
CRR,itis sufficienttoassumethat X and U cannot disease assumption, δ can be approximated by a
interact on Y on the multiplicative scale [32]. This control group estimate [35].
is analogous to the “no interaction” assumption in
linear model (8). In this special case we can also 5. NUMERICAL ILLUSTRATION OF
obtain closed formulae for the odds ratio and risk ASYMPTOTIC BIAS
difference [32, 57] (cf. also the Appendix).
In the previous section we have given some exam-
Logistic structural mean models have been pro-
plesofstandardmodelsthatallowpoint-identification
posed [67], but these require more restrictive as-
of a causal parameter exploiting an IV. In practice,
sumptions, and conditions enabling consistent es-
suchmodelassumptionsareunlikelyevertoholdex-
timation are relatively complicated. We therefore
actly, and we should be concerned with the robust-
omit them here. Robins and Rotnitzky [59] provide
nessofIVmethodsunderviolations ofsuchassump-
a detailed discussion of the fundamental difficulty
tions.Therefore,inthissectionweillustratethepos-
with identifiability in SMMs, other than for the ad-
sible bias of the above approaches for a set of con-
ditive or multiplicative cases.
crete scenarios that would be realistic, for instance,
4.4 Comparison of Assumptions in a Mendelian randomization study. We place im-
portance on the following issues:
The estimands, their target causal effects and the
• A sensible IV model should allow consistent esti-
conditions for identification are summarized in Ta-
mation at the null-hypothesis of no causal effect.
ble 1. (WaldOR as an approximation to WaldRR is
• A sensible IV model should also allow consistent,
omitted.) The following points are noteworthy:
or at least not seriously biased, estimation when
• One could say that the strongest assumptions are thereisinfactnoconfounding,andhencea“na¨ıve”
those underlying the WaldRR and WaldOR, as analysis, based on a regression of response Y on
they rely on a specific outcome model for the dis- exposure X without using an IV, would be valid.
tribution of Y given (X,U), as well as a specific • A sensible IV model should also not induce more
exposure model for the distribution of X given bias than such a na¨ıve approach.
(G,U). Neither the linear models nor the SMMs
WewanttoinvestigatewhichofthevariousIVmeth-
require the latter.
ods satisfy these desiderata, or what situations lead
• AllIVapproachesunderlyingpoint-estimationrely
to the most serious violations.
on some “no-interaction” (or homogeneity/no ef-
Using the notation introduced at the beginning of
fect modification assumption). No interaction be-
Section 4, we base our comparison on the difference
tween X and U on the linear (or log-linear) scale
between the targeted causal parameter θ∗ and the
in the sense of model (8) [or model (12)] is suf-
estimand θ under a given model M, evaluated at
ficient to ensure the assumption of no interac- M
the true distribution P∗. More precisely, we use the
tion between X and G in the additive (or mul-
relative measure
tiplicative) SMMs, models (11) and (15) (see the
Appendix).However,the“no-interaction”assump- M
tionmayeitherbetrueonthelinearoronthelog- θ
linear scale, but not both, except in trivial cases which is the asymptotic relative bias of any consis-
like Y ⊥⊥X|U or Y ⊥⊥U|X [32]. tent estimator θˆ for θ . If the model is correctly
• In contrast to the MSMM, the linear and Wald- specified, that is, P∗∈M, and identifies the causal
type models do not require joint information on parameter, then the above is zero. The asymptotic
(X,Y,G); they allow identification of the causal relative bias can becalculated exactly, usingnumer-
parameter based on separate information on the icalintegration whererequired,underagiven choice
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 11
Summary of IV model assumptions under which the various estimands identify the targeted causal effects
(in addition to general IV assumptions)
Estimand Target Modelassumptions
LIVAE ICE Constant additiveindividual effect [Y (x) linear in x].
LIVAE ACE E(Y|X =x,U =u) linear in x, no (X,U)-interaction on additive
scale.
LIVAE LACE E(Y|X =x,G=g)−E(Y|X =x,G=g,do(X˜ =0)) linear in x, no
(X,G)-interaction on additive scale.
LIVRR CRR Sameas LIVAEfor ACE.
WaldRR CRR (i) E(X|G=g,U =u) linear in g, no (G,U)-interaction on addi-
tivescale,additiveindependentresidual.(ii)E(Y|X=x,U=u)log-
linear in x,no (X,U)-interaction on multiplicative scale.
MSMMRR LCRR log{E(Y|X=x,G=g)/E(Y|X =x,G=g,do(X˜ =0))} linear in x,
no(X,G)-interaction on multiplicative scale.
MSMMRR CRR Asfor LCRR,and no (X,U)-interaction on multiplicative scale.
of a “true” joint distribution P∗ of (X,Y,G,U) (see model is invariant with respect to intervention on
below). In special cases it is even possibleto express X, by which we mean
the bias explicitly as in [8] for the linear case. Note
logitE(Y|X =x,U =u)
that we are not considering any sampling properties
of specific estimators θˆ and hence are not simu- (17) =logitE(Y|do(X =x),U =u)
lating any data.
Werestrictournumericalcomparisontothecausal 1 2 3 4
relative risk, θ∗=CRR, as target. We compare the The conditional distribution of X given G and U is
linear model, with estimand LIVRR, the log-linear also determined by a logistic dependence:
Wald type approach, with estimand WaldRR (Wal-
logitE(X|G=g,U =u)
dOR is always slightly more biased for CRR than
WaldRR and is therefore omitted), and the multi-
plicative SMM,withestimandMSMMRR,whichall
identifytheCRRundertheirrespectiveassumptions Finally, the marginal distribution of G is deter-
as detailed in Section 4. minedbyp =P(G=1),whichwesetto50%through-
out (all estimands are unaffected by p ), while p(u)
5.1 Full Model g
is continuous and set to have a uniform distribution
The true joint distributions P∗ for (X,Y,G,U) on [0,1].
that we use for the comparison are specified as fol- The true CRR can easily be calculated from the
lows. To facilitate interpretation and to keep the above using (5) and integrating out as
numberofparametricanddistributionalchoiceslim-
ited, we consider dichotomous observable variables 1 2 3 4
(19) .
Y, X and G with the following interpretations: R {1+exp(−α 1 −α 3 u)}−1p(u)du
1, diseased, Note that the CRR does not depend on (18), but
(cid:26)0, healthy, θ M does for the IV models considered here.
For the above true distributions P∗, all models
1, exposed,
X = fromSection4areessentiallymisspecified,sincenone
(cid:26)0, not exposed,
ofthemmodelalogistic dependenceof Y on (X,U).
and we label G=1 to denote the value of the in- Exceptions are α = α =0, or for the linear and
strument that predisposes to X =1. MSMM when α =α =0. Also, note that if α =0,
The dependence of Y on X and U is given by a then there is no effect modification by U on the lo-
logistic regression. In addition, we assume that this gistic scale. This does not strictly imply no effect
12 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
modificationontheadditiveormultiplicative scales, a stronger instrument is used, that is, by increasing
though departure from these assumptions will be the G–X association. However, the relative risk of
more extreme when α 6=0. 2.4 used here is about as strong as we would expect
Our choice of P∗ is motivated by the fact that to see in a Mendelian randomization study.
a logistic model like (17) would be the standard
5.2 Numerical Results
model assumption for a binary outcome if the con-
founder(s)U couldbe observed.Itisnoteworthythat We now compare the asymptotic biases of the
this default model assumption for the case of ob- LIVRR, WaldRR and MSMMRR. In addition, we
servedconfoundingisnotnecessarilycompatiblewith consider the na¨ıve relative risk, NRR, obtained as
standard IV methods for unobserved confounding. P∗(Y =1|X =1)/P∗(Y =1|X =0), which gives an
indication of the bias of a standard analysis when
5.1.1 Settings of the parameters There are eight
not using an IV. In our settings, the NRR is unbi-
parameters in (17) and (18). By varying these, we
ased when there is no confounding, but not neces-
consider the following set of scenarios which we re-
sarily otherwise.
gardasrealistic forepidemiological studiesbasedon
Mendelian randomization, for example. 5.2.1 Nocausaleffect Webeginwiththecasewhere
We choose three strengths for the causal effect: CRR=1,whichusuallyconstitutesthenullhypoth-
none (CRR = 1.0), small (CRR = 1.33) and large esis. When α =α =0, no table is shown as none
(CRR=3.03); this is obtained by adjusting α 2 ac- of the IV models from Section 4 are misspecified,
cordingly. Confounding is varied by setting α ∈{0,
3 only the NRR is biased by as much as 39%. How-
0.1,1,2},whilekeepingβ =2fixed.Interactionsare
3 ever, CRR=1 can also arise when α and α are
investigated by varying β ,α ∈{−1,0,1}, but note
4 4 nonzero and of opposite signs. The relative biases
that we only consider combinations where |α | ≤
4 for the corresponding settings are shown in Table 2.
|α |, as large interactions with small main effects
3 The problem we mentioned earlier, and that be-
are commonly perceived as unrealistic. The remain-
comes evidenthere,isthattherecanbetwo typesof
ing parameters are chosen so as to satisfy the fol-
scenarios where CRR=1: either there is no causal
lowing criteria. The strength of the association be-
effect of exposure in any subgroup (α =α =0), or
tween G and X is kept constant at a relative risk of
there are different causal effects in subgroups which
2.4 throughout by adjusting β accordingly. We fix
2 canceloutoverall.Thelatteroccurswhenα andα
themarginals P(X =1)=0.13 andP(Y =1)=0.03
are nonzero in such a way that the ratio of integrals
by setting β and α accordingly. These latter val-
1 1 in (19) happens to be one.
ues, respectively, are again typical for the exposure
frequencies and rare disease situations, as are often
encountered in Mendelian randomization studies.
Asymptotic relative biases when estimating CRR for all
5.1.2 Bounds To further characterize the chosen settings with CRR=1 and α 4 6=0
scenarios, we calculated the nonparametric bounds
Relativebias
for the CRR (and the ACE for comparison) [4, 22,
44, 57] for all our settings and found that they were α3 α4 β4 NRR LIVRR WaldRR MSMM
always extremely wide and always included the null
1 1 0 0.277 0.105 0.110 0.095
hypothesis of no effect. For those settings where 2 0.414 0.092 0.095 0.075
CRR=3.03, for instance, the bounds were of the 1 −1 0.020 −0.113 −0.108 −0.101
order [0.2,30] (and about [−0.08,0.8] for the ACE 2 0.174 −0.106 −0.102 −0.087
where the true ACE was around 0.06). These are
1 1 1 0.361 0.198 0.213 0.163
the “tightest assumption-free bounds” [4], meaning 2 0.545 0.177 0.189 0.125
that the observable frequencies p(y,x,g) alone, de-
1 −1 0.025 −0.202 −0.187 −0.169
rived from the above distributions by marginalizing 2 0.226 −0.195 −0.181 −0.140
over U, do not allow us to narrow down the causal
1 1 −1 0.184 0.006 0.006 0.006
effects any further. This re-emphasizes the fact that
2 0.272 0.002 0.002 0.002
point-identification via an IV model relies heavily
1 −1 0.013 −0.009 −0.009 −0.009
on the additional parametric assumptions that have
2 0.115 −0.006 −0.006 −0.005
tobemade.Narrower boundscan beobtained when
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 13
All IV methods exhibit some bias in these sce- Table 3
Asymptotic relative biases when estimating CRR for all
narios, with around 20% relative bias in the worst
settings with CRR=1.33
case. We can see the following patterns in Table 2.
When β 4 =−1, all IV estimators are only slightly Relative bias
biased, while the NRR can be biased by up to 27%.
α3 α4 β4 NRR LIVRR WaldRR MSMM
There are only two settings where all IV methods
are more biased than the na¨ıve one, and these are 0.1 0 0 0.015 0.003 0.036 −0.000
when α = −1 and α = 1, and β = 0 or 1. For 1.0 0.150 0.027 0.066 −0.001
2.0 0.299 0.051 0.097 −0.002
all considered settings, the MSMMRR is the least
biased, and the WaldRR is the most biased, but 1.0 1 0 0.275 0.130 0.206 0.093
the order of magnitude is generally comparable and 2.0 0.411 0.141 0.222 0.072
we would not suggest an overall ranking of the ap- 1.0 −1 0 0.020 −0.085 −0.071 −0.101
2.0 0.172 −0.052 −0.033 −0.088
proaches based on these results alone.
Recall that the MSMMRR does not actually tar-
0.1 0 1 0.019 0.005 0.038 −0.000
gettheCRR,buttargetsaparticularsubgroupeffect—1.0 0.195 0.048 0.095 −0.002
the local causal relative risk of exposure within the 2.0 0.392 0.096 0.160 −0.004
exposed—instead.Thelatteristypicallynotonewhen
1.0 1 1 0.358 0.247 0.380 0.159
α 2 6=0. 2.0 0.541 0.273 0.422 0.120
1.0 −1 1 0.025 −0.153 −0.148 −0.169
5.2.2 Causaleffectbutnoconfounding Letusnow
2.0 0.225 −0.100 −0.089 −0.142
consider thosescenarios wherethereis noconfound-
ing (so either α 3 =α 4 =0 or β 3 =β 4 =0). No plots 0.1 0 −1 0.010 0.000 0.032 0.000
or tables are shown here as only the WaldRR has 1.0 0.100 0.001 0.034 0.000
nonzero bias. This is because all assumptions of the 2.0 0.197 0.002 0.034 0.000
na¨ıve,linearandmultiplicativestructuralmeanmod- 1.0 1 −1 0.182 0.004 0.039 0.005
els are satisfied when there is no confounding and 2.0 0.270 0.002 0.032 0.002
when X and Y are binary. In contrast, as noted in 1.0 −1 −1 0.013 −0.004 0.027 −0.009
Section 4.2 and again in the Appendix, the assump- 2.0 0.114 −0.000 0.034 −0.006
tion (14) underlying the WaldRR cannot be satis-
fied when X is binary. We observed biases for the
turn,issimilarforsmallandlargeCRRwithamax-
WaldRR and WaldOR of up to 3.2% and 4.5%, re-
imum of 17%.
spectively, for a moderate effect size of CRR=1.33,
As one might expect, the LIVRR and MSMMRR
and biases as large as 65% and 76%, respectively,
are only slightly biased, and much less so than the
when CRR=3.03.
NRR,wheneverthereisnoX–U interaction,α =0.
5.2.3 Causal effect and confounding We now con- More surprising is that this is also the case when
sider those scenarios where there is a causal effect β =−1 regardless of the other parameter values.
as well as confounding. Tables 3 and 4 show the re- This is not due to less confounding, as we can see
sults for a small causal effect (CRR=1.33) and a that the na¨ıve relative risk is still noticeably biased
large causal effect (CRR=3.03), respectively. in those settings.
First, let us compare the results for small versus All methods struggle the most when α 4 6=0 and
large CRR. The na¨ıve relative risk (NRR) behaves β 4 =1—the MSMMRR bias then reaches 17% and
similarly in both cases. The LIVRR is more biased the extent of the LIVRR bias can range from 24%
whenthetruecausaleffectis large—this isplausible for small CRR to 45% for large CRR.
Even though there is no uniformly best method,
as the nonlinearity of themodelis morepronounced
both tables show that the MSMMRR is much less
for larger causal effects. The WaldRR is unaccept-
biased in most settings. The only cases where it is
able when CRR=3.03: with relative biases between
outperformed by the LIVRR arise when α =−1.
40% and 250%, it seriously overestimates the true 4
TheonlycaseswhereitisoutperformedbytheNRR
effect. As its bias is either comparable to, or much
are when additionally α =1.
larger than, the bias for the other two IV methods 3
whenCRR=1.33, wewillnotconsider theWaldRR 5.2.4 Sign of bias Duetoourchoices of thecoeffi-
any further. The relative bias of the MSMMRR, in cientsofU,theNRRisalwayspositivelybiased.The
14 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
Table 4 bias with 50% exposure frequency, with the Wal-
Asymptotic relative biases when estimating CRR for all
dRR performing much more sensibly, in particular.
settings with CRR=3.03
The MSMM is still clearly the least biased and is
Relative bias not sensitive to interaction effects when the expo-
sure frequency is 50%. This might be due to the
α3 α4 β4 NRR LIVRR WaldRR MSMM
exposure distribution being more balanced, so that
0.1 0 0 0.014 0.006 0.671 −0.001 conditioning on X is not so informative for U and,
1.0 0.145 0.066 0.870 −0.006
hence, the local causal effect is not much different
2.0 0.289 0.128 1.090 −0.010
from the population causal effect even when there
1.0 1 0 0.265 0.161 1.220 0.084 are strong interactions.
2.0 0.397 0.210 1.410 0.061
5.3 Practical Implications
1.0 −1 0 0.020 −0.036 0.539 −0.102
2.0 0.167 0.033 0.757 −0.093
In Section 4.4 we compared the assumptions un-
0.1 0 1 0.018 0.013 0.695 −0.001 derlying the IV models of Section 4 on theoretical
1.0 0.188 0.132 1.110 −0.010 grounds. The above numerical study adds the fol-
2.0 0.379 0.263 1.630 −0.017 lowing insights:
1.0 1 1 0.344 0.334 1.950 0.144
• The linear IV approach is often not considered
2.0 0.523 0.447 2.510 0.102
appropriate when the outcome variable is binary
1.0 −1 1 0.025 −0.070 0.440 −0.170
or nonnegative. However, we found that it per-
2.0 0.217 0.062 0.858 −0.150
formed better than expected for binary Y with
0.1 0 −1 0.009 −0.001 0.647 −0.000 relative asymptotic bias below 20% in all but six
1.0 0.096 −0.006 0.637 −0.000
oftheconsideredscenariosandwithlessbiasthan
2.0 0.191 −0.014 0.605 −0.000
thatofthena¨ıveapproachinallbutfivescenarios.
1.0 1 −1 0.176 −0.019 0.590 0.005 This may be deemed acceptable, especially given
2.0 0.261 −0.028 0.570 0.003
thesimplicityofthelinearIVestimator.However,
1.0 −1 −1 0.013 0.004 0.663 −0.009 forthelinearity assumptionto beatleast approx-
2.0 0.110 −0.002 0.648 −0.006
imately appropriate with binary outcomes, the
range of exposure X should be restricted and the
true causal effect small. The latter is not uncom-
IVestimatorscan,however,benegativelybiased,es-
mon for epidemiological—especially Mendelian
pecially when α or β are negative. Also, their bias
4 4 randomization—applications.
does not always have the same sign. Therefore, we
• AlthoughitisclearbytheoryalonethattheWald
cannot say that IV methods generally over- or un-
type methods from Section 4.2 make very strong
derestimate the true causal effect.
assumptions, we have seen here that they are not
5.2.5 Other comparisons We also considered the just slightly but can be extremely biased when
other causal parameters, ACE and COR, as targets these assumptions are violated. It is especially
in our chosen scenarios using the corresponding es- worrisome that this occurs for realistic scenarios,
timands under the three IV models. We got broadly thatthebiascanbeworsethanwiththena¨ıveap-
similar results with the SMM approach generally proach andincreases withthestrength ofthetrue
producing less biased results, except in the pres- causal effect, and that they can be biased even
ence of interactions, and the Wald approach behav- when there is no confounding since the model for
ing very poorly throughout even when there is little the exposure X is violated. We would therefore
or no confounding. notrecommendthisapproachunlessthereisgood
Allresultspresentedsofarwereforscenarios with reason to be confident in the model assumptions.
3% disease frequency and 13% exposure frequency. A small true causal effect and a balanced or ap-
Wealsoconsideredscenarioswith20%diseaseand/or proximately normal distribution of the exposure
50% or 85% exposurefrequencies, butdo not report X, possibly after suitable transformation, would
them in detail as the results followed similar pat- support this confidence.
terns in terms of relative performances of the var- • Asmentionedbefore,allIVapproaches,excluding
ious approaches. All IV methods show much less thebounds,makeanassumptionofno-interaction
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 15
or no effect modification by the unobserved con- requireamodelfortheexposureX given theinstru-
founder U either on the additive or multiplicative mentG,anditonlyassumes(log-)linearity oftheef-
scale. The results show that violation of this as- fect within the exposed individuals. Under stronger
sumption indeed seriously increases the bias of all assumptions, essentially if U and X do not interact
IV methods and can lead to bias even at the null on Y on the relevant scale, the local causal effect
hypothesis of no causal effect. In practice, this is equal to the population causal effect. However,
assumption is difficult to asses or justify, as it in- the multiplicative SMM requires joint data on the
volves the unobserved confounders which might observable variables which may not always be avail-
include factors that are poorly understood. able from existing studies. For the linear model it
• Asfarastherelativebiasisconcerned,theMSMM has also been noted by [8] that the traditional ratio
approach seems the most recommendable for sit- estimator LIVAE has to be given a different inter-
uations similar to those of Section 5.1, especially pretation in the presence of effect modification. The
for binary outcomes. However, other properties Wald type estimator for the relative risk, together
arerelevantforpractical application,mostimpor- with the odds ratio as an approximation to the lat-
tant being the efficiency of the estimators. As our ter,issimpleandusefulformeta-analysesbutmakes
numerical study only considers a specific set of very specific assumptions about all conditional dis-
scenarios, it is also not possible to say whether tributions, especially that of the exposure, and also
the MSMM performs equally well in very differ- requires the absence of interactions on the multi-
ent situations. We therefore recommend that fur- plicative scale.
ther comparison and sensitivity analyses are car- Our bias calculations are of course only valid for
ried out for any specific application. the particular model and scenarios we chose to con-
sider, but we believe they still raise serious issues.
Not surprisingly, all estimators encounter difficul-
6. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
ties in estimating the population effect in scenar-
Our theoretical comparison of different IV meth- ios where the exposure has different effects within
ods was motivated by the need for such methods levels of the unobserved confounder. Maybe more
in observational epidemiology, with Mendelian ran- surprisingare the particularly poor performances of
domization applications providing an example that the Wald relative risk and odds ratio—especially in
has generated a lot of recent interest. The core con- the absence of confounding. This is supported by
ditions 1–3 plus the structural assumption (5) are a recent study on odds ratio estimators which also
sufficient for testing for a causal effect of exposure found that the WaldOR was often outperformed by
on disease, but, as emphasized here, the identifica- other approaches [3]. However, we did not find that
tionofacausaleffecthastorelyonadditional model it did “especially well” at the causal null hypothe-
assumptionswhich,ifinappropriate,caninducebias sis, as reported there, when there were interactions
as illustrated in our numerical study.The need for a in the model for the outcome Y. An obvious im-
comparison of IV methods is also highlighted by the plication for practical applications of IV methods
results of a recent study which concluded that there is that the plausibility of such interactions, on the
wereveryfewdifferencesbetweenIVapproachesbe- chosen effect scale, should be explicitly addressed.
cause they yielded similar results on particular data If such interactions are judged to be likely on the
sets [54, 56]. Our results do not support this point multiplicative scale, then the MSMM estimator is
of view and show that any model assumptions have closer to the local effect and the Wald relative risk
to be justified carefully. is likely to beseriously biased. Also, one has to keep
The main points to be made from our comparison in mind that such interactions can induce bias of all
are that the different IV approaches target different IV methods even at the null hypothesis of no causal
parameters, where we are not referring to the dif- effect, though one might hope that such exact can-
ference between a risk difference and risk ratio, for cellations of subgroup effects are rare. It might be
instance, but the difference between an individual, argued that, in practice, important effect modifiers
population or local causal effect. In the case of the willbeknownandobservedasadditionalcovariates,
latter, the SMM approach (additive or multiplica- so that once these are taken into account, only neg-
tive) makes the weakest assumptions, as it does not ligibleinteractions withtheunobservedconfounders
16 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
remain,butby definitionthiscannotbeverified em- expected to be biased, as core condition 3 is likely
pirically. Note that any justification for the absence to be violated when X is the measured, and not the
of effect modification has to take the chosen mea- true, exposure. In that case, we have to make even
surement scale into account. Due to the increased more modelingassumptions, namely, about the spe-
bias we have seen in our numerical study, we would cific measurement error process, in order to obtain
therefore recommend that practical applications of valid point estimates [68].
IV methods be complemented by some sensitivity
analyses, especially with regard to such interactions APPENDIX
inthemodelfortheoutcomeY.Moreover,wewould
Justification of LIVAE
advise that these considerations are also valid for
continuous outcomes which are often analyzed un- We have established that the ACE is equal to
questioned with linear no-interaction models. the model parameter β in model (8). Define G˜ =
The particularly restrictive assumptions underly- G−E(G),thenE(YG˜)=Cov(Y,G).Withcorecon-
ing the WaldRR (and WaldOR) raise serious con- dition 1 and model (8),
cern about how to handle situations where we do
not have joint information on all the relevant vari- G
ables, such as in most meta-analyses, rendering the =E (βE(XG˜|G)+G˜E(h(U)))
multiplicative SMMestimator inapplicable.Thelin-
=βE(XG˜).
ear IV estimator could, in principle, be applied, as
ittoo doesnotrequirejoint dataandis notas badly Hence, β = Cov(Y,G)/Cov(X,G), which is the
biased, but for binary disease outcomes, risk differ- LIVAE estimand.
ences are rarely reported. In most applications the Riskratiosoroddsratiosrequireestimationofthe
exposure is continuous and robustness of the non- intercept of (9) obtained as follows:
linear Wald estimators to violations in those cases
remains to be investigated. It certainly does not
seem advisable to dichotomize a continuous expo- whereβˆ= LIVAEfromabove.Hence,theCRRand
sure. COR are identified by
We have only considered the asymptotic bias of
the various estimators. In practice, their efficiency
will also be of major concern. It is well known that αˆ
IV estimators have larger variance than the na¨ıve (αˆ+βˆ)(1−αˆ)
estimators when there is no unobserved confound- LIVOR:= .
ing. The variance, unlike the bias, very much de-
pends on the strength of the instrument, but when Further, under the additive SMM (11) we have
thereisstrongconfounding,itisimpossibletofinda by simple rearranging that E(Y|X,G,do(X˜ =0))=
strong instrument [7, 45]. The SMM estimators, de- E(Y − β X|X,G), where we use that E(Y|X =
rived from estimating equations, can be made semi- x,G,do(X˜ = x)) = E(Y|X = x,G). The exclusion
parametrically efficient by choosing appropriate restriction implies that Y ⊥⊥G|do(X˜ =0) (cf. Fig-
weights in these equations [58]. Some methods for ure 2), which induces an estimating equation to ob-
improving the efficiency of the Wald type relative tain β based on the moment condition E((Y −
risk have been proposed [47]. Further comparisons β X)G˜)=0, where G˜ =G−E(G), as before. The
of properties and sampling behavior of IV estima- solution is again β =Cov(Y,G)/Cov(X,G).
tors for the special case of a binary outcome can be
Justification of WaldRR
found in [3, 13].
Another important issue that we have not ad- In addition to the model assumptions expressed
dressed here is that of measurement error. Theo- in (12) and (13), we need (14), that is, the random
retically, it is not a problem if the IV is affected by variableξ:=X−E(X|G,U)hastosatisfyξ⊥⊥G|U.
measurementerror,aslongasthisisnotdifferential. Thisisautomatically satisfied whenX hasanormal
Iftheexposureis affected by measurementerror,we distribution with constant variance given (G,U), or
can still use the IV approach to test for a causal ef- a variance that only depends on U. More generally,
fect. However, all the above IV estimators are then this is satisfied when the model for X given (G,U)
ASSUMPTIONSOF IV METHODS 17
is a location-scale family, where only the location Underadditionalassumptions,theACEandCOR
parameterdependsonG,U,forexample,theclassof are also identified in an MSMM. First, we note that
(noncentral) t-distributions; any class that restricts by integrating out first G and then X from (20), we
the support of the distributions it contains, like the obtain an expression for E(Y|do(X˜ =0)) as
Bernoulli, will not typically satisfy this condition,
Hence,bydefinition,wecanwriteX =δG+k(U)+
ξ. Consider now a regression of Y on G alone and If we assume that the Y-X relative risk is the same
substitute this expression for X: withinsubgroupsofU asinmodel(12),thenexp(γ L )
is also the (population) CRR (cf. also next section).
Thus, by substituting, we now obtain an expression
From these it is straightforward to obtain the esti-
ξ|G=g,U mands that identify the ACE or COR by replacing
=exp{γδg}E [exp{h(U)+γk(U)} γ by the negative log of (16).
·E exp{γξ}] Relations Between Assumptions
( = ∗) const ·exp{γδg}, Under the IV conditions the linear model (8) im-
plies the additive SMM (11). As E(Y|X =x,U =
where (∗) uses ξ ⊥⊥G|U, so that E exp{γξ}
is constant in G.Hence, thecoefficient of G in alog- inition of X˜ from Section 3.1,
linearregressionofY onGisγδ.Furthermore,δ can
be recovered from a linear regression of X on G, as E(Y|X =x,G=g,do(X˜ =x˜))
the latter is independent of U. Thus, as stated in
Section 4.2, the CRR is identified by the WaldRR. =βx˜+E(h(U)|G=g,X =x)
Justification of MSMMRR and, hence,
AnalogouslytotheargumentfortheadditiveSMM,
we have by simple rearranging that
which is an additive SMM.
It can be shown analogously that the log-linear
The exclusion restriction Y ⊥⊥G|do(X˜ =0) now in-
model (12) implies the MSMM (15). In each case
duces an estimating equation to obtain γ based
L the reverse is not true, as discussed by Hernan and
on the moment condition E(Y exp(−γ X)G˜) = 0,
L Robins [32] for the special case where all variables
where still G˜ =G−E(G). Due to the nonlinearity
are binary.
oftheexponentialfunction,thisdoesnothaveasim-
Further, the structural equation model (10) im-
ple closed form solution as in the linear case, except
plies model (8) and hence (11). The former states
for binary variables as shown next.
that the potential responses of a generic individual
WhenGisbinary,theexclusionrestrictionimplies
that E(Y|G=1,do(X˜ =0))=E(Y|G=0,do(X˜ = are given as Yi(x)=β I x+ξi, where ξi is fixed for
the individual but not between individuals. Hence,
0)). By averaging over X,
L L u).InterpretingE(Y(x)|U =u)asE(Y|do(X =x),U =
When X and Y are binary as well, we obtain that u) and using (5), we obtain E(Y|X =x,U =u)=
E(Y exp(−γ L X)|G)isequaltoE(YXexp(−γ L )|G)− β I x+h(u), which is equivalent to (8). The reverse
E(YX|G)+E(Y|G). Hence, we can rearrange the is clearly not true as counterexamples are easy to
above equality to give (16). construct.
18 V. DIDELEZ,S. MENG ANDN. A.SHEEHAN
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Stephens, J. W., Hurel, S. J., Livingstpne,
S., Colhoun, H. M., Miller, G. J., Bautista,
We acknowledge research support from the Medi-
L., Meade, T., Sattar, N., Humphries, S. E.
calResearchCouncilforacollaborativeprojectgrant and Hingorani, A. (2006). Insight into the na-
addressing causal inferences using Mendelian ran- ture of the CRP-coronary event association using
domization (G0601625) for all authors and which Mendelian randomisation. International Journal of
fully supports Sha Meng. We are grateful to Roger Epidemiology 35 922–931.
[12] Chen,L.,DaveySmith,G.,Harbord,R.andLewis,
Harbord, Frank Windmeijer and Jamie Robins for
S. (2008). Genotype influencing alcohol consump-
helpful discussions.
tionispositivelyassociatedwithbloodpressureand
the risk of hypertension: A systematic review im-
plementing a Mendelian randomization approach.