Asteroid Surface Geophysics
NaomiMurdoch
InstitutSupe´rieurdel’Ae´ronautiqueetdel’Espace(ISAE-SUPAERO)
PaulSa´nchez
UniversityofColoradoBoulder
StephenR.Schwartz
UniversityofNice-SophiaAntipolis,ObservatoiredelaCoˆted’Azur
HideakiMiyamoto
UniversityofTokyo
The regolith-covered surfaces of asteroids preserve records of geophysical processes that have oc-
curredbothattheirsurfacesandsometimesalsointheirinteriors. Asaresultoftheuniquemicro-gravity
environment that these bodies posses, a complex and varied geophysics has given birth to fascinating
featuresthatwearejustnowbeginningtounderstand. Theprocessesthatformedsuchfeatureswerefirst
hypothesised through detailed spacecraft observations and have been further studied using theoretical,
numerical and experimental methods that often combine several scientific disciplines. These multiple
approachesarenowmergingtowardsafurtherunderstandingofthegeophysicalstatesofthesurfacesof
asteroids. In this chapter we provide a concise summary of what the scientific community has learned
so farabout thesurfaces ofthese smallplanetary bodiesand theprocesses that have shaped them. We
also discuss the state of the art in terms of experimental techniques and numerical simulations that are
currently being used to investigate regolith processes occurring on small-body surfaces and that are
contributingtotheinterpretationofobservationsandthedesignoffuturespacemissions.
1. INTRODUCTION widerangeofgeologicalfeatureshavebeenobservedonthe
surfacesofasteroidsandothersmallbodiessuchasthenu-
Before the first spacecraft encounters with asteroids,
cleusofcomet103P/Hartley2(Thomasetal.2013). How-
many scientists assumed that the smallest asteroids were
ever, we do not have direct access to the properties of the
all monolithic rocks with a bare surface, although, there
granularmaterialthatledtothesefeatures. Althoughcon-
hadbeenafewarticlessuggestingpossiblealternativesur-
stitutive equations exist for granular interactions on Earth,
face properties and internal structures (e.g., Dollfus et al.
the inferred scaling to the gravitational and environmental
1977;Housenetal.1979;Micheletal.2001;Harris2006).
conditions on other planetary bodies such as asteroids is
Given the low gravitational acceleration on the surface of
currently untested. Understanding the dynamics of gran-
an asteroid, it was thought that regolith formation would
ular materials in the small-body gravitational environment
not be possible; even if small fragments of rock were cre-
isvitalfortheinterpretationoftheirsurfacegeologyandis
atedduringtheimpactprocessnothingwouldberetainedon
also critical for the design and/or operation of any device
the surface (e.g., Chapman 1976). However, the NASA
plannedtointeractwiththeirregolith-coveredsurfaces.
Galileo, NEAR-Shoemaker (hereafter simply NEAR) and
Regolithwasoriginallydefinedas“alayeroffragmented
the JAXA Hayabusa space missions revealed a substantial
debrisofrelativelylowcohesionwhichoverliesamoreco-
regolithcovering(951)Gaspra,(243)Ida,(433)Eros(Sulli-
herentsubstratum”(Shoemakeretal.1968),although,this
vanetal.2002;Robinsonetal.2002)and(25143)Itokawa
definitionrunsintodifficultieswhenthereisnoclearinter-
(Fujiwaraetal.2006). Inadditiontofindingeachofthese
faceseparatingthefragmenteddebrisandthecoherentsub-
bodiestoberegolith-covered,thereisstrongevidencethat
strate (Robinson et al. 2002). Here we will use the term
thisregolithhasverycomplexandactivedynamics. Infact,
regolith to describe, in general terms, the “loose uncon-
itwasduetotheNEARobservationsofErosthatthelocal
solidatedmaterialthatcomprisestheupperportionsofthe
gravitywasfirstunderstoodtobeofimportancetoasteroid
asteroid” (as defined in Robinson et al. 2002). However,
surface processes (Robinson et al. 2002). The importance
wenotethatself-gravitatingaggregateslikeItokawa,often
ofgravityforregolithdynamicswasemphasisedevenfur-
referred to as “rubble piles” (Richardson et al. 2002), are
therwhenthefirstimageswerereceivedfromtheHayabusa
composed of rubble - boulders of the order of tens of me-
probe.
tresandless-heldtogetherbygravityandcohesiveforces
Over the course of these space missions and others a
insteadofbeingamonolithicbody(Fujiwaraetal.2006).
]PE.hp-ortsa[
1v13910.3051:viXra
As such they are essentially made of regolith throughout.
Therefore, although not discussed in this chapter, under-
standinghowgranularmaterialsbehaveintheseextremely
low-gravityenvironmentscanalsoimproveourunderstand-
ingoftheinteriorsofthesebodies.
Thischapterwillstartbypresentingourcurrentknowl-
edge of the surfaces of asteroids (433) Eros, (25143)
Itokawa, (21) Lutetia and (4) Vesta. After a short intro-
duction to granular materials, we will then introduce the
uniqueasteroidenvironmentandsuggesthowthismayin-
fluence the regolith dynamics. Next, we discuss in detail
theunderlyingphysicalmechanismsbehindthegeological
processesobservedtooccuronthesurfacesofasteroids.Fi-
nally, a discussion of the experimental techniques that can
beusedtosimulatetheasteroidenvironmentandtherecent
advancesinmodellingregolithdynamicsisprovided.
Figure1: Globalimagesofasteroids(433)Eros(topleft),
2. IN-SITU OBSERVATIONS OF ASTEROID SUR-
(25143) Itokawa (top right), (21) Lutetia (bottom left) and
(4) Vesta (bottom right). Image credits: NEAR/NASA,
In this section we will briefly discuss the in-situ obser- Hayabusa/JAXA,Rosetta/ESA,Dawn/NASA,respectively.
vationsoffourasteroids: (433)Eros,(25143)Itokawa,(21)
Lutetiaand(4)Vesta.Formoredetailedreviewsaboutthese
bodiesthereadersarereferredto(Yoshikawaetal.;Barucci
servations,andmorphologicaldata,indicatethatthebright
et al.; Russell et al. (all this volume) and Cheng 2002).
streaksaretheresultsofpreferentialdownslopemovement
Additionally,detailedreviewsofthegeologyofotheraster-
or a landslide of mature regolith, revealing immature ma-
oidssuchas(951)Gaspra,(243)Idaand(253)Mathildeare
terial beneath (e.g., Robinson et al. 2002; Thomas et al.
available elsewhere (e.g., Carr et al. 1994; Sullivan et al.
2002;Rineretal.2008;Murchieetal.2002).
1996;Thomasetal.1999).
Indeed, on closer inspection, accumulations of gran-
2.1. Asteroid(433)Eros ular material that have been gravitationally transported
away from topographic highs can be seen on Eros (Fig.
(433) Eros (hereafter simply Eros; Fig. 1,Table 1), the
2; Thomasetal.2002;Veverkaetal.2001;Robinsonetal.
secondlargestnear-Earthasteroid(NEA),showsasubdued,
2002). These granular deposits appear to result from low
gently undulating and complex regolith-covered surface,
momentum downslope movements and some observations
characterised by abundant, but not uniformly distributed,
suggeststhatmobilisedregolithmayevenbehaltedbyfric-
ejectablocksandconspicuouslydegradedcraters(Veverka
tionalorothereffectsbeforereachingthefootoftheslope
et al. 2000; Veverka et al. 2001; Cheng et al. 1997). The
(Mantzetal.2004;Thomasetal.2002).Downslopemotion
effectivetopographyonEroshasarangeofabout2kmand
hasalsobeenobservedonslopesthatarewellbelowtheex-
the slopes, calculated relative to the local gravity vector,
pectedangleofreposeforgranularmaterials. Whetherthis
varyoverthesurfaceoftheasteroid(foranexplanationof
indicatesthenecessityforatriggeringmechanismornotis
how elevation is defined on irregular bodies see Section 5
a subject currently under debate (Cheng 2002; Holsapple
ofChengetal.2002a)withanaverageslopeof∼8◦to10◦
2013).
(Zuberetal.2000;Thomasetal.2002).
Craters and crater morphology on Eros - Further ev-
EvidenceofregolithmotiononEros- Ingeneral,Eros
idence for regolith motion is that, despite the large num-
isveryblandintermsofcolourandalbedovariations.How-
ber of craters on the surface of Eros, there is a deficiency
ever,visiblevariations,suchasseveralbrightfeaturestyp-
of small (<2 km diameter) craters (Veverka et al. 2000;
ically with sharp boundaries, can be seen in regions that
Veverka et al. 2001). As there are sufficient projectiles
havesteepslopes(seeFig.2;Veverkaetal.2000;Robinson
in near-Earth space to produce small craters there must,
etal.2001;Cheng2002;Mantzetal.2004;Murchieetal.
therefore, be a process that either covers or erodes small
2002). AsalltheNEARdataindicateglobalcompositional
cratersonEros(Veverkaetal.2001). Ithasbeensuggested
homogeneity, the brighter surfaces imply freshly exposed
thatimpact-inducedseismicshaking(seeSection5),which
material that has not yet been subjected to space weath-
causestheregolithtomove,mayerasesmallcraterfeatures
ering (Brunetto et al. (this volume) and Chapman 2004).
and thus explain their paucity compared to predictions of
In contrast, dark soils are typically located at the bases of
dynamicalmodelsofprojectilepopulations(e.g., Richard-
bright streaks and display both diffuse and sharp bound-
son et al. 2004; Michel et al. 2009). However, alternative
aries (Thomas et al. 2002; Riner et al. 2008). These ob-
degradation mechanisms have also been suggested includ- relativeagesofthelineationsindicatethattheywereformed
ing micro-cratering and thermal creep (Cheng 2002). See during many different and unrelated events (see Section 5
Marchietal. (thisvolume)foradetaileddiscussionofcra- andMarchietal. (thisvolume);Veverkaetal.2000;Prock-
teringonasteroids. teretal.2002;Thomasetal.2002;Robinsonetal.2002).
Additional evidence of resurfacing and modification is For a full map and analyses of the linear features on Eros
visible in the interiors and the subdued rims of several seeBuczkowskietal.(2008).
craters(Robinsonetal.2002;Zuberetal.2000).Thedepth-
to-diameter ratio of craters on Eros is, on average, ∼0.13, Depth and character of Eros’ regolith - Eros has a
butthefreshestandyoungestcratersapproachlunarvalues widespread unconsolidated regolith of depths that are typ-
of ∼0.2 (Robinson et al. 2002). Many of the topographic ically several tens of meters in thickness, but not uniform
lowsarefilledwithdepositsoffinegranularmaterial(Fig. over the surface (Cheng 2002; Barnouin-Jha et al. 2001;
2 and e.g., Veverka et al. 2001). These features, referred Veverkaetal.2001;Robinsonetal.2002). Theheterogene-
to as “ponds”, are characterised by smooth, level surfaces ityoftheregolithdepthdistributionisprobablycausedpar-
that are sharply delineated (Robinson et al. 2001; Cheng tiallybytheasymmetricnatureofcraterejectablankets(a
etal.2002b). Theyarefoundpreferentiallyatlowlatitudes consequence of the asteroid’s rotation, see Section 5 and
and in the bottom of small (<1 km) craters or other topo- Geissleretal.1996)andisfurtheraccentuatedbytheirreg-
graphic lows (Robinson et al. 2001; Cheng et al. 2002b), ular spacing of craters and the subsequent downslope mo-
however, this may be due to observational biases (Roberts tionandregolithtransportthat,asdiscussedabove,appears
etal.2014b). Thebottomsofthepondsareoftenoffsetina tooccurcommonlyonthesurfaceofEros(Robinsonetal.
directiontowardsthedownslopeofthecrater(Veverkaetal. 2002).
2001)andrecentresultshavefoundthatthepondfloorsare The surface of Eros is extremely rough and the surface
notasflatasoriginallybelieved(Robertsetal.2014a). roughnessisapproximatelyself-affinefromscalesofafew
meters to hundred of meters (Cheng 2002). The regolith
particlesrangeinsizefromthefine((cid:28)cm-sized)dustpar-
ticlesfoundinthepondstothenumerous(>104)large(>10
m)ejectablocksofbouldersattheextremelargeendofthe
particle size distribution (Thomas et al. 2002). The mor-
phologyoftheseblocksrangesfromangulartofracturedto
disaggregated (Robinson et al. 2002) and their size distri-
butionisdescribedadequatelybyapowerlawwithaslope
of about -3 on a cumulative plot (Fig. 3). For more infor-
mationaboutthenatureofthesebouldersseeMarchietal.
(thisvolume).
2.2. Asteroid(25143)Itokawa
Compared to Eros, the NEA (25143) Itokawa (here-
aftersimplyItokawa;Fig.1,Table1)wasfound,astonish-
Figure 2: Evidence of regolith transport on Eros - LEFT:
ingly,tohaveentirelydifferentstructuralandsurfaceprop-
Bright, freshly exposed material on a large crater wall, as
ertiesdespitetheirsimilartaxonomicclass. Thereasonfor
thedarkermaterialmovesdownslope(PIA03134);RIGHT:
thesedifferentpropertiesisnotclearlyunderstood,butper-
An example of a dust pond (2001 028 5 eros.png from
haps this shouldn’t have been surprising; because of their
size (mass) difference, if gravity is the discriminator, then
Itokawa is expected to be as different from Eros, geologi-
cally,asErosisfromtheMoon(Asphaug2009).
One of the most remarkable features of Itokawa is the
LinearfeaturesonEros- OnthesurfaceofErosseveral
globalshape, whichseemstoconsistoftwoparts: asmall
lineationscanbeobservedincludingchainsofcraters,sinu-
“head”andalarge“body”separatedbyaconstricted“neck”
ousandlinearelongateddepressionsandtopographicridges
region (Fig. 1 and Fujiwara et al. 2006; Demura et al.
(Veverka et al. 2000). Such lineations are similar to those
2006). It is highly likely that Itokawa is a rubble pile as-
observed on the Martian satellite, Phobos (Thomas et al.
teroidratherthanamonolithicbody(Fujiwaraetal.2006).
1979). Prockter et al. (2002) explain that, on Eros, these
ThelowbulkdensityofItokawa(Table1)providesfurther
linear features, or grooves, exist on a global scale (promi-
evidencefortherubblepileinteriorstructurewithestimates
nentwidetroughsandridgesseveralkilometresinlength),a
suggestingthatItokawa’smacroporositymaybeashighas
regionalscale(chainsofcratersandstraight-edgedgrooves
∼41%(Fujiwaraetal.2006). However,thesedensitymea-
several hundreds of meters long) and also on very local
surementsdonotruleoutthepresenceofacoreontheorder
scales(closelyspacedridgeandtroughterrainstensofme-
of100minsize.
terinscale). Thelargevariationsindirections,patternsand
Table1:Characteristicsoftheasteroidsdiscussedindetailinthischapter.(1)Chengetal.(1997);(2)Yeomansetal.(2000);
(3)Miller et al. (2002); (4)Veverka et al. (2000);(5)Fujiwara et al. (2006); (6)Abe et al. (2006); (7)Scheeres et al. (2006);
(8)Schulz et al. (2012); (9)Sierks et al. (2011); (10)Lamy et al. (2010); (11)Thomas et al. (2012); (12)Russell & Raymond
(2011);(13)Russelletal.(2012)
Asteroid SpaceMission Meandiameter Bulkdensity Rotationperiod Surfaceacceleration Escapespeed
(433)Eros NASANEAR(1) ∼17(2) 2.7(2) 5.3(3) 0.23-0.56(3) ∼1(4)
(25143)Itokawa JAXAHayabusa(5) ∼0.32(5) 1.9(6) 12.1(7) 2.4e-3-8.6e-3(7) 0.1-0.2(5)
(21)Lutetia ESARosetta(8) ∼99(9) 3.4(9) 8.2(10) ∼5(11) ∼70(11)
(4)Vesta NASADawn(12) ∼526(13) 3.5(13) 5.3(13) ∼25 ∼363
Depth,characterandmigrationofItokawa’sregolith- to the preferential displacement of some block sizes rela-
Twodifferenttypesofterrain-roughandsmooth-areob- tive to others, and the settling locations of differing sized
served on Itokowa (Saito et al. 2006). The rough deposits blocks. The abundance of meter-sized boulders (particu-
consist of numerous boulders (Fujiwara et al. 2006) and larly on the western side; Fujiwara et al. 2006), and the
typicallyexhibitvariationsinelevationthatrangefrom2-4 fact that decameter-sized boulders exist (the length of the
m over small lateral distances (Barnouin-Jha et al. 2008). largest boulder is approximately one tenth of the length
Theveryhighestandroughestpartsoftheasteroidarecov- ofItokawaitself;Saitoetal.2006),indicatethattheymay
ered in large gravel and boulders and are completely de- havebeenproducedduringacatastrophicdisruptionevent,
void of all particles smaller than 1 cm in size (Barnouin- consistent with the rubble pile structure (Fujiwara et al.
Jha et al. 2008). The smooth terrains - Muses Sea and 2006;Micheletal.2001).
Sagamihara-coincidewiththelow-gravitationalpotentials
and are generally homogeneous, featureless and relatively Further evidence for an active regolith on Itokawa -
flat (slopes <8◦). This is consistent with a loose granular AttheboundaryoftheMusesSearegionwiththeroughter-
layerthathasbeenallowedtoseekoutitsminimumenergy rain,bouldersaretypicallypiledontopofeachotherwith-
configurationaftertheformationoftheasteroid(Miyamoto outbeingburiedbyfines.Thelargersizedgravelstendtolie
et al. 2007; Fujiwara et al. 2006; Yano et al. 2006; Riner overthesmallerparticlesandarealignedwithdirectionsco-
et al. 2008). This idea is further reinforced by the close- incidentwiththelocalgravityslope(Miyamotoetal.2007).
upimagesandmeasurementstakenduringthetouchdown Thistypeoforganisationofgravelsisreferredtoasimbri-
of the Hayabusa spacecraft; these indicate that small re- cations,inthiscasewiththelongestaxesofthegravelbe-
golith particles are being transported into the Muses Sea ingpreferentiallyorientatedtransversetothegranularflow.
region and are gradually covering up the boulder-rich sur- The positions and orientations of all of the particles indi-
face(Miyamotoetal.2007;Barnouin-Jhaetal.2008). The cate that they are stable against local gravity and that the
regolith depth in the smooth regions on Itokawa is esti- migrationsweregravity-induced(Miyamotoetal.2007).
matedtobeapproximately2.5m(Barnouin-Jhaetal.2008; Evidence of landslide-like deposits can be seen in Fig.
Chengetal.2007). 4. Therearelargebouldersthathaveblockedthemigration
In general Itokawa’s regolith appears to be dominated of smaller particles, resulting in piles of smaller particles
by grains >1 mm in size (Miyamoto et al. 2007). That ontheuphillsidesoftheboulders(Miyamotoetal.2007).
said, the regolith particles that were returned to Earth are Unlike the surface of Eros, Itokawa is very heterogenous
fine-grained(sizerangebetween3-180µm,butmost <10 incolourandalbedo,withbrightersurfacesbeingfoundin
µm; Nakamura et al. 2011). The apparent absence, or at three main areas: areas with steeper slopes, areas of local
least the small quantity, of fines on the surface of Itokawa high terrain and apparently eroded areas, e.g., crater rims
may be explained by processes such as electrostatic levi- (Saitoetal.2006). Saitoetal.(2006)suggestthatthisdi-
tation combined with solar radiation pressure (Lee 1996; chotomyisduetodarksurfacesbeingremoved,leavingthe
Scheeres 2005), segregation of the fines towards the inte- freshregolithnewlyexposedatthesurface,asobservedon
rior of the body (Asphaug 2007; Miyamoto et al. 2007) or Eros.
simplehigherejectionvelocitiesfollowingimpactsmaking All of these observations give a strong indication that
reaccumulation difficult (Nakamura et al. 1994). Some of regolithonthesurfaceofItokawahasbeenrelocatedsince
theseprocesseswillbediscussedlaterinSections4–5. theinitialaccumulationordeposition.
ThesizedistributionofbouldersonItokawa’ssurfaceis
estimated to be a power law with a slope of -2.8 to -3.0
CratersandcratermorphologyonItokawa- Itokawa
on a cumulative plot (Fig. 3). It is possible, however,
hasveryfewcratersingeneral(thetotalnumberofcraters
that the observed distributions on Itokawa may be related
onItokawais<100overtheentiresurfaceincludingindef-
10−1 100 101 102
evitalumuC
ever,onthebodyofItokawasubtlelocallinearfeaturescan
be observed. These features, caused by the alignment of
boulders(Chengetal.2007),arenotastallasotherstruc-
tures such as large boulders. Nonetheless, they are an im-
.
).
aduetotheir
Particle width (m)
Figure3: Measuredcumulativesizedistributionasafunc-
tionofparticlesizeonthesurfacesofasteroidsandPhobos. Figure4:EvidenceofregolithtransportonItokawa-LEFT:
Data combined from several papers. Itokawa: Miyamoto HighresolutionimageoftheboundaryareabetweenMuses
et al. (2007), Saito et al. (2006), Michikami et al. (2008), Sea and the rough terrains. Piles of gravel can be seen on
Mazrouei et al. (2012); Eros: Thomas et al. (2001); Lute- the uphill sides of boulders. Such a characteristic is simi-
tia: Ku¨ppersetal.(2012);Phobos(aMartiansatellitewith lartoterrestriallandslide;TOPRIGHT:ImageoftheNeck
a mean diameter of ∼22 km): Thomas et al. (2002). For areaofItokawa(13cm/pixel)showingpilesofangularboul-
thepapersinwhichthecumulativenumberofparticleswas dersatthelowerpartoftheimage. Crater-likedepressions
given, this has been approximately converted to cumula- areshownbythecirclesandthearrowsindicatethedebris,
tivenumberpersquarekilometreusingtheinformationpro- which appears to have drained from the rim of the upper
videdintherespectivepapers. Ashallowerslope mayin- cratertowardsthesmoothterrain;BOTTOMRIGHT:Acir-
dicate that boulders have experienced less processing, in- culardepressionthatappearstobefilledwithfinerparticles.
cluding breaking, sorting and transporting (Thomas et al.
2002).
2.3. Asteroid(21)Lutetia
The main-belt asteroid (21) Lutetia (hereafter simply
initecandidates)andabsolutelynodistinctcraters<1min
Lutetia;Fig.1,Table1)hasahighlycomplexsurfacegeol-
diameter (Saito et al. 2006; Fujiwara et al. 2006). Those
ogywithsignificantinteractionsbetweenancientandmore
craters that do exist on the rough and transitional terrains,
recentstructures(Sierksetal.2011;Thomasetal.2012).
and that retain their regolith, are filled with finer particles,
similartothe“ponds”seenonEros. Thebestexampleofa
crateronthesurfaceofEros-Komaba-islocatednearthe Craters and crater morphology on Lutetia - The
edgeofthehighlands.Ithasasmalldepth-to-diameterratio highergravityandescapevelocityonLutetiahaveprovided
(0.09)consistentwithcraterformationinacoarsegranular anenvironmentforcontinuousejectapatternswithobvious
target,aflatfloorandissurroundedbybrighterrims(Saito relationstotheimpactfromwhichtheyformed(Massironi
etal.2006;Barnouin-Jhaetal.2008).Inaddition,thereap- etal.2012). Thetypicaldepth-to-diameterratioofcraters
pears,unusually,tobenoapparentcorrelationbetweenthe on Lutetia is 0.12 but values have been observed ranging
locations of boulders and craters (Michikami et al. 2008). from 0.05 to 0.3 (Vincent et al. 2012). The distribution of
Theseobservationsarefurtherevidenceofregolithmotion depth-to-diameter ratios varies depending on the region of
and suggest that a mechanism is filling in and erasing the Lutetia’s surface indicating that, not only are there varia-
craters on the surface of Itokawa. Such a mechanism may tionsofphysicalpropertiesacrossthesurface,butthereare
wellbeseismicshaking, asproposedtoexplainpaucityof alsodifferencesinthesurfaceevolutionaryprocesses(Vin-
small craters on Eros (see Section 5). Alternatively, it is centetal.2012).
alsopossiblethatItokawacouldhavebeengeneratedrela- Thomas et al. (2012) divide the craters on Lutetia into
tively recently in the main belt before being moved to it’s four different categories: standard craters, buried or par-
currentorbit(Saitoetal.2006). tially filled craters, distorted or cut craters that have been
disturbed by lineament formation, and morphologically
non-standard impact structures. By the latter they refer
LinearfeaturesonItokawa- UnlikeEros,thereareno
to craters that are not typically bowl-shaped and/or do not
globallineamentsonItokawa(Fujiwaraetal.2006). How-
have a round rim and the strange form is not obviously ofmultiplelandslides(e.g.,Fig. 5of Thomasetal.2012).
linked to linear features. Such unusually shaped craters Rocky outcrops are also visible at what appears to be the
(for examples see Thomas et al. 2012) could be the result sourceofthelandslides(Thomasetal.2012).
ofobliqueimpacts(Thomasetal.2012;Herrick&Hessen
2006; Krohn et al. 2014) but other mechanisms have also Linear features on Lutetia - Lutetia displays a huge
beenproposed(Vincentetal.2012). number of lineaments (e.g., Fig. 5) that can be found over
Similarly to the surface of Eros, Lutetia’s surface ex- theentireimagedsurface,withtheexceptionoftwoyoung
hibits a paucity of small (<1 km) craters. This could per- regions(Thomasetal.2012). Theorientationoftheselin-
hapsbeexplainedbyseismicshaking;however,thereisalso ear features, which are similar in appearance to those on
adepletionincratersofsizesupto8km,whichismoredif- ErosdiscussedinSection2.1,hasbeenlinkedtothreeim-
ficulttoattributetoseismicshaking. Thecratersthathave pactcraters(Besseetal.2014). Thelinearstructureshave
been deformed by linear features are additional evidence been classified into several types by Thomas et al. (2012):
that the surface has been modified since the crater forma- irregular troughs, large faults and tectonic troughs, organ-
tion(Sierksetal.2011). isedlinearreflectancevariationsandnarrowfaults,rowsof
coalesced pits (known as pit-chains), intra-crater trenches,
Depth and character of Lutetia’s regolith - The sur- intra-craterlayersandejectalayersand,finally,scarpsand
face of Lutetia is covered by an extensive regolith, similar ridges. ThemoststrikinglinearfeatureonLutetia’ssurface
to that of the Moon (Coradini et al. 2011). Nonetheless, is the very long (∼10 km) and wide (∼1.2 km maximum
Lutetia’ssurfaceisveryheterogeneous. Imagestakendur- width)grooveintheNoricumregion(Thomasetal.2012).
ingthecloseapproachofESA’sRosettaspacecraftallowed This groove is situated on a local topographic high and is
Lutetia’ssurfacetobeseparatedintoseveraldistinctregions approximately 100 m in depth (Sierks et al. 2011). For a
(for a detailed map of the Lutetia regions see Sierks et al. very complete discussion of the lineaments on Lutetia, in-
2011; Massironi et al. 2012). Some regions are very old cludingmultipleexamples,seeThomasetal.(2012).
andheavilycrateredwithsignificantdeformationbylinear
features, while others exhibit sharp morphological bound-
55kkmm(cid:1)(cid:1)
aries. TheBaetica(NorthPole)regioncontainsaclusterof
craters, createdfromaseriesofsuperposedimpacts(Mas-
sironietal.2012)thisisoneofthemostprominentfeatures
imagedonLutetia’ssurface. Theextremelylowcraterden- aa(cid:1)(cid:1)
sityandlackoflinearfeaturesinthisregioncanperhapsbe
attributedtothecoveringofsmoothregolithmaterial,prob-
ablytheejectablanketfromthecratercluster(Sierksetal.
2011;Vincentetal.2012).
Lutetia’s regolith is estimated to be up to ∼600 m in
depth (Vincent et al. 2012). This estimate is based on the
thickness of the ejecta blanket of the largest crater assum-
ingauniformgravityfieldandmay,therefore,beimproved 55kkmm(cid:1)(cid:1)
with a more detailed study of regional ejecta geophysics
takingintoaccountthecomplexgravitationalfieldofLFFiugigtuuerre-e'4'4::'C'ClFolosi seg euu upp r'i' emimaa 5gge: ess'o'ofC f'L'Lul u ottes e4e 4au a'–' p –'L'LEE iFF mTT::'aC'C guure rvv siliilnin oeeaf arr'f' L feeau attut u erret esi s a.'.S'Soo -mmeL e'l'il EnineF eaa Trr'f' : feeaa Cttuu urrer esv s'c' i cu- utt'c'crraatteerr'r'rimimss'('(aa))''
tia. Surface slopes can exceed 30◦ in some places buitmimapprlyleyiningg't'thhleeisnseee'f'faeearattuurrfeeess'ap'ptoousstrtdedasat.tee't'thhee'c'crraSatteoermrss'('(eIDID'2'22l24i4n559e98a8,r',E'ESSAAf'2e'20a01t10u0'rM'MePsPSS'f'foocrr'uO'OtSSIRIRIcSISr'T'aTeetaeamrm'M'MPPSS//UUPPDD//LLAAMM//
generally less than this (Sierks et al. 2011; Thomas e IAI t AAA a //R l R . SSSSDD//I r NINi T mTAA/ s/UUPP( MMa / )/DDAAi S mSPP/ p/IDIDl A yA) i), n ',R'Rg IGIGHHt T hT::' e T'Ts hhe ee'c'ceef n entta rra tal u 'lc'cr rre aat steerr'c'pclulous ssttt eed rr' a i'nint ' e B'Baaeet 4 h4cce aa's'shhc oor wwa i t nine ggr 'l's alannddsslildideess'('(aarrrroowwss))''
aanndd'n'nuummeerroouuss'b'boouuldldeerrss'('(IDID'2'21166882200,',E'ESSAA'2'2001100'M'MPPSS'f'foorr'O'OSSIRIRISIS'T'Teeaamm'M'MPPSS//UUPPDD//LLAAMM//IAIAAA//RRSSSSDD//ININTTAA//
2012). The size distribution of blocks on Lutetia isUUPPrMMe/-/DDAASSPP ( // I IDI D DAA))(cid:1)(cid:1)224598, ESA 2010 MPS for OSIRIS Team
ported to be a steep power-law of -5 (Fig. 3 and Ku¨ppers MPS/UPD/LAM/IAA/RSSD/INTA/UPM/DASP/IDA);
etal.2012). Itisnoted,however,thatthemethodusedby RIGHT: The central crater cluster in Baetica show-
Ku¨ppers et al. (2012) for binning the boulders is different ing landslides (arrows) and numerous boulders
tothemethodusedbyotherresearchgroups. (ID 216820, ESA 2010 MPS for OSIRIS Team
MPS/UPD/LAM/IAA/RSSD/INTA/UPM/DASP/IDA)
Evidence for an active regolith on Lutetia - Diverse
evidenceforregolithmotionwasobservedinsidethelarge
crater cluster in the North pole (Baetica) region. The ob- 2.4. Asteroid(4)Vesta
servationsincludealbedovariationswithbrightregionson
(4)Vesta(hereaftersimpleVesta; Fig.1,Table1)isthe
thesteepslopesindicativeofrelativelyrecentlandslides(as
second most massive main-belt asteroid and is one of the
observedinsidecratersonErosandonItokawa),depositsof
fastest rotators of the large asteroids. Vesta’s surface has
smoothandfineparticleswithboulders,andapparentland-
a complex topography at all spatial scales (Jaumann et al.
slidedeposits(Sierksetal.2011). Inaddition,observations
2012). One of the most dramatic discoveries on the sur-
showcratersthathavepoorlydefinedrimsasaconsequence
face of Vesta is an 18 km high mountain in the centre of
a huge (460 km-wide) crater named the Rheasilvia basin. aprocessbywhichexternalmaterialistransportedintothe
This peak is the second highest in the Solar System after crater.
OlympusMonsonMars.
DepthandcharacterofVesta’sregolith- Thethickness
ofVesta’sregolithisestimatedtobeapproximately800m
(Jaumann et al. 2012). The surface slopes on Vesta can
exceed 40◦ and there are a considerable number of steep
slopes that may be indicative of intact bedrock beneath or
the presence of cohesive forces in the regolith. Dark ma-
terials, of likely exogenic origin (carbon-rich low-speed
impactors), are distributed unevenly across Vesta’s surface
20km(cid:1) 10km(cid:1)
(Fig.6(a);Jaumannetal.2014).
Craters and crater morphology on Vesta - Craters on
Vestadisplayawiderangeofdegradationstatesfromfresh
craters with unmodified rims to impact crater ruins show-
ing almost no visible rims (Jaumann et al. 2012). Depth-
to-diameterratiosaresimilartoLutetia,varyingfrom0.05
to 0.4 with a mean of 0.17 (Jaumann et al. 2012; Vincent
etal.2012;Vincentetal.2013).Thenorthernhemisphereis 5km(cid:1)
observedtobeheavilycrateredwhereasthesouthernhemi-
sphere shows comparatively fewer craters, most probably (e)(cid:1)
duetotherelativelyrecentbasinformingimpactsnearthe
southpole(Vincentetal.2013).Shallowercratersarefound
in the oldest regions on the surface of Vesta, as would be
expected due to progressive crater degradation. The deep,
looseregolithintheyoungersouthernhemispheremayalso
aidtheformationofdeepercraters(Vincentetal.2013).
Topographyplaysamuchmoreimportantroleincrater
formation and evolution on small bodies and moons than
on terrestrial planets. For example, Vesta’s ratio of ob-
served relief to size (15%; Williams et al. 2013) is signif-
Figure 6: Surface processes on Vesta; (a) Dark hill
icantly greater than for terrestrial planets (1%; Jaumann
(PIA14689, modified), (b) Fresh crater (center) with
et al. 2012). Strongly asymmetriccraters have beenseen
bright and dark rays (PIA15045, modified), (c) Crater
on the many steep surfaces of Vesta (Fig. 6(c)). During
on a slope with a sharp crest uphill and slumping ma-
impactsonsteepslopesejectaispreventedfrombeingde-
terial covering the lower rim PIA15495, (d) Dark and
positedintheuphilldirectionandslumpingmaterialsuper-
bright material at the rim of Marcia crater (NASA/JPL-
imposes the deposit of ejecta on the downhill side (Krohn
Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA/LPI/ASU), (e) Pitted ter-
etal.2014). Thisleadstocraterswithasmootheddowns-
rainsonMars(left)andVesta(right)(PIA16185,modified).
loperimthatisoftencoveredbytheasymmetricejecta(Jau-
mannetal.2012).Resurfacingduetoimpacts,gravitational
modificationsandseismicshakingareimportantgeophysi-
calprocessesthatnotonlyaddtothecomplexityofVesta’s
Evidence for an active regolith on Vesta - As on the
surface evolution, but also substantially alter Vesta’s mor-
surfaces of the other asteroids discussed so far, extensive
phology (Jaumann et al. 2012). Young bright and dark-
evidence of regolith mobility has been observed on Vesta;
rayed craters and their ejecta field are superposed across
slumps of material, scarps beginning at the top of a slope,
thesurfaceofVesta(Fig.6(b);Williamsetal.2014;Yingst
dark and bright material emanating from the rims or walls
etal.2014). Pond-likedepositsarealsoseenonthesurface
ofimpactcraters,orrunningdownslopeintothecraterbowl
ofVesta. SimilarlytoonEros, theytendtohaveadowns-
(Fig.6(d);Jaumannetal.2012;Williamsetal.2013;Yingst
lope asymmetry within craters on slopes, and show no ev-
et al. 2014). Lobate, flow-like features are generally ob-
idence for regolith flows into the craters and depressions
servedincloseproximitytoimpactcratersorinsteepslopes
(Jaumannetal.2012;Chengetal.2002b). However,given
(Williams et al. 2013). These features are interpreted as
themoreimportantgravityonVesta(comparedtoEros)and
gravity-drivenmassflowdeposits,impactejectadepositsor,
the larger size of such pond-like features, their formation
for a small number of features, impact melt deposits (Jau-
maysimplybeduetostandardcraterslumping,ratherthan
mannetal.2012;Williamsetal.2013).
OnVesta,theseismicshakingcreatedbythegiantbasin cerealsandsandsintheconstructionindustry. Theoretical
forming impacts probably contributed to smoothing and models of granular dynamics are also widely employed to
erasureofsmallfeatureswellbeyondtheextentoftheejecta understandtrafficflowandevencrowddynamics.
blankets(Vincentetal.2013). Mixingofregolithmaterials
(e.g.,thedarkexogenicmaterialswithimpactejecta)isev- What is a granular material? The term granular mate-
identonVesta’ssurface(Jaumannetal.2014;Pietersetal. rial is most often used to describe a material containing
2012).Thereisaalsodearthoflarge-scalevolcanicfeatures a large number of particles that interact with each other
on the surface of Vesta, compared to what was expected through dissipative contact forces (Richard et al. 2005;
(e.g., Wilson&Keil1996;McSweenetal.2011). Jaumann Jaeger et al. 1996). In these aggregates, though each in-
et al. (2012) suggest that the lack of such features may be dividual grain can be adequately described by Newtonian
duetoextensivecratering,regolithformationandresurfac- physics, a collection of grains offers complex behaviour
ingthathasremovedtheevidenceoflarge-scalevolcanism which is often extremely sensitive to their external condi-
that ceased early in Vesta’s history (Williams et al. 2013; tions (such as external forcing). A granular material is a
Jaumannetal.2012).ThiswillbediscussedfurtherinSec- material for which the relevant energy scale is the poten-
tion5. tialenergyratherthanthethermalenergyi.e.,particlesina
granularmaterialaremassiveenoughfortheirpotentialen-
Linear features on Vesta - Large equatorial and north- ergytobeordersofmagnitudelargerthantheirthermalen-
ern troughs appear on Vesta’s surface (Fig. 1). The equa- ergy(Schroteretal.2005). Forexample,atypicalgrainof
torial troughs are wide, flat-floored and bounded by steep sandofmassm,raisedbyitsowndiameterd,intheEarth’s
scarps along ∼ 240◦ of longitude, while in the remaining gravityg,willhavepotentialenergymgdwhichisatleast
longitude muted troughs, grooves and pit crater chains are 1012timesthethermalenergyk T atroomtemperatureon
evident (Jaumann et al. 2012). The northern troughs dis- Earth(Jaegeretal.1996).
play gentler slopes, rounded edges and considerable infill- The size of the constituent particles is closely linked to
ing. This,combinedwiththeheavycratering,suggeststhat thetypeofinteractionsbetweentheparticlesthatwilldom-
they are much older than the equatorial troughs (Jaumann inatethebehaviouroftheaggregate. OnEarththeapproxi-
etal.2012). Thecentrepositionsofthesecirculartroughs matesizeatwhichdissipativecontactinteractionsdominate
correspondtothecentreofVesta’stwosouthernbasinsin- is 100 µm; at grain sizes <100 µm, humidity and van der
dicatingthattheformationofthetroughsandthebasinsare Waalsforceswillinfluencetheparticleinteractions. Addi-
verylikelyrelated(seeFig. 2of Jaumannetal.2012). tionally, if present, the interstitial fluid will also influence
thedynamicsofthegrainsdependingonthedensityofthe
3. ANINTRODUCTIONTOGRANULARMEDIA fluid and the grain size (Burtally et al. 2002; Biswas et al.
2003). We will discuss in Section 4 how the importance
Granularmaterialsareunlikesolids,inthattheycancon-
ofsomeoftheseforceschangesinthelow-gravityenviron-
formtotheshapeofthevesselcontainingthem,therebyex-
mentofanasteroid.
hibiting fluid-like characteristics. On the other hand, they
cannotbeconsideredafluid,astheycanbeheaped(Gudhe
et al. 1994). The study of granular dynamics is incredibly Basic characteristics of granular materials - Granu-
complex and constitutes an entire field of research by it- larmaterialsexhibitseveralcharacteristicsthatmakethem
self. Infact,P.G.DeGennes,aFrenchphysicistandNobel interesting but equally very difficult to model and under-
Prizelaureate,saidthat,“Forphysicists,granularmatteris stand. Fromthedefinitionspresentedabove, somecharac-
anewtypeofcondensedmatter; asfundamentalasliquid, teristicscanbeextracted,whilstotherscomefromobserva-
orsolid;andshowinginfacttwostates:oneliquid-like,one tion: (1)thegrainsthatformagranularmaterialaresolid;
solid-like. But,thereisyetnoconsensusonthedescription (2) grain-grain interactions are highly dissipative; (3) po-
ofthesetwostates. Granularmatter,in1998,isatthelevel tential energy, more than temperature, of the system is the
ofsolidstatephysicsin1930.”(deGennes1999). Thisis relevant parameter; (4) granular materials are thixotropic;
nottosaythatgranularmatterhasnotbeenstudied;ancient thismeansthattheyexhibitsolid-, liquid-andgas-likebe-
Egyptiansdidindeedknowhowtoworkwithit,atleastat haviour: (5)friction,globallyunderstoodtobeacombina-
anempiricallevel(Falletal.2014),ErnstChladni(Chladni tionofsurface-surfacefrictionandgeometricalinterlocking
1787)andMichaelFaraday(Faraday1831)studiedthein- thatpreventsmotion,makesaggregatesabletosustainshear
teraction of grains and fluids, and Geosciences have also stressandcontributetothedissipativenatureofgrain-grain
longdealtwithitscomplexitiesonthesurfaceoftheEarth. interactions.
OnEarthwecanobservegranularmaterialsinvolvedin From these basic characteristics, some phenomena re-
dramatic avalanches and rockslides, as well as active sand sult. For example, Fig. 7 (upper right) shows the solid,
dunes moving across deserts. Industries also handle sev- liquid, and gas flow regimes obtained in an avalanche-like
eral different types of granular materials. Some examples situation. In a solid-like state, such as a heap or pile, the
aretabletsorpowdersinthepharmaceuticaltradesaswell materialissaidtobe“quasi-static”astheindividualparti-
asagriculturalproductssuchaswheat,oats,riceandother clesareinastablemechanicalequilibriumwiththeirlocal
neighbours. In the liquid-like and gas-like states the ma-
terial is said to “flow”. Dense flows (liquid-like state) are
dominatedbymany-bodyinteractionsandoccurwhenpar-
ticles have long-lived contacts with many neighbours. In
rapid or dilute flows (the gas-like state) there are no en-
duringcontactsandthecollisiontimeismuchsmallerthan
thetimebetweencollisions(Andreottietal.2013providea
thoroughexpositionofthesetopics).
Flowing granular materials can segregate according to
particleproperties(size, density, shape, andmore)making
granular media highly heterogeneous (Fig. 7 [upper left]).
The phenomenon of segregation is a continued source of
frustration for industries (McCarthy 2009), however, seg-
regationmayhelpustoexplainseveralgeologicalfeatures
observed on the surface of asteroids and discussed at the
beginningofthischapter.
The final, but very important, property of granular ma-
terialsisthenon-lineartransmissionofforcebetweenpar-
Figure 7: Top Left: Segregation of particles in a tumbler
ticles via force chains. A force acting on a granular mate-
- The large sugar crystals (white) and small iron particles
rialisdistributedthroughacomplexforcedistributionnet-
(black) segregate in the tumbler as described in Gray &
work that depends on the positioning and packing of the
Chugunov (2006). Credit: N. Gray, University of Manch-
individualparticles. Thisgrainnetworkresistsreorganisa-
ester; Top Right: Solid, liquid or gas? - An illustration
tionwhenstressedandimposesagranulardragforcewhen
of the solid (bottom), liquid (middle), and gas (top) flow
a solid object is pushed through the material (Costantino
regimes obtained by pouringsteel beads on a pile. Credit:
etal.2008). Figure7(lower)showstheforcechainsinside
O. Pouliquen and Y. Forterre; Bottom: Force chains in a
a granular material. The presence of force chains can in-
granularmaterial-Photoelasticimageofasystemthathas
ducecomplexstressesatthesidesofgrainsilos(Schwartz
been jammed by applying simple shear strain from an ini-
etal.2012),preventingexplosionsatthebottomandinstead
tiallyforce-freestate.Theapparatususedhereappliesshear
leadingtorupturesatthesides(Janssen1895;Jaegeretal.
fromtheboundariesandalsofromthebase,whichconsists
1996). Thiscanbelinkedtothenon-localeffectsgranular
ofindividualslatswhichdeformaffinelywiththeboundary.
materials exhibit (Nichol et al. 2010) and may even cause
Credit: J.RenandR.P.Behringer,DukeUniversity.
asteroids to feel long range consequences of small events
suchasmeteoroidimpacts(Murdochetal.2013b).
TheoreticalFrameworks- Asshownintheparagraphs derivedfromtheprincipalstressesofthestresstensor)de-
above,granularmattercanpresentsolid-,liquid-,andgas- finethestressstateofthemediaandareaveragequantities
likebehaviours,allatthesametime. Althoughacomplete thatinrealityresultfromthecontactsbetweenparticlesand
theorytodescribeeachbehavioursimultaneouslyhasyetto theinteractionsbetweentheirsurfaces.
be put forward (e.g., (Jop et al. 2006; GDR-MiDi 2004)), Fluid mechanics equations are used for dense flows, or
different regimes (or states) can be modelled within cer- forwhengrainsbegintoflowlikealiquid(e.g.,Haff 1983;
tainframeworks. Dependingonwhichofthesetheoretical Forterre & Pouliquen 2008). Within this framework, the
frameworks is best-suited to the regime at hand, the prop- dynamics of the medium is described through a continu-
ertiesofthegrainswillbedescribedbydifferentsetsofpa- ityequation,derivedfromtheconservationofmassprinci-
rameters, e.g., friction, elastic moduli, viscosity, and resti- ple; a momentum equation, derived from the conservation
tutioncoefficientsamongothers. ofmomentumprinciple(inthecaseofgranularmaterials,a
The elasticity-perfect plasticity models can be used for descriptionofviscositymustbeincluded);anenergyequa-
the static case (e.g., Holsapple 2004; Holsapple & Michel tion,derivedfromtheconservationofenergyprinciple;and
2006). ThesemodelsbelongtothefieldofContinuumMe- an equation of state relating the three conservation equa-
chanicsand, asthenamewouldsuggest, theytreatagran- tions.
ular media as continuous. This can be done under one as- KineticTheory(e.g.,Jenkins&Zhang2002;Brilliantov
sumption,thesizeofthegrainsthatformthemedia(orsoil) & Po¨schel 2010), used for dilute, highly dynamical (gas-
areverysmallcomparedwiththetypicallengthscaleorthe like) systems makes the following assumption: the parti-
sizeofthesample. Thedynamicsofthemediaismodelled cles only have binary collisions. Of course, in a real sys-
through yield criteria such as Mohr-Coulomb or Drucker- temthisisnotthecaseasmulti-particlecollisionsmayalso
Prager in which the main parameters are angle of friction occur; however, they are determined to be too rare to be
andcohesivestrength. Thepressureandshearstress(both taken into account. The validity of the assumption is re-
lated to the density of the granular system (must be safely the available samples, it has been found that asteroids are
below jamming density) and the duration of the collisions formed mainly by pyroxine, olivine, plagioclase and iron
(must be short in order to avoid the occurrence of three or compounds. These materials have crystalline structures,
moreparticlesinsimultaneouscontact). Thus,theparticles and their detailed study belongs to the field of solid state
of this system are idealised as hard spheres (instantaneous physicsorcondensedmatterphysics.
collisions). In this particular regime, the concept of gran-
ulartemperaturecanbedefined. A“granulartemperature” Observed regolith characteristics - Section 2 in this
can be defined in multiple ways, but essentially it is some chapterhasalreadysummarisedthemainobservationsand
measureoftheaverageofenergyfluctuationsexhibitedby interpretationsmadeabouttheslopesandgrainsizedistri-
a collection of grains. An example of one such definition, butionsonasteroidsurfaces.
foracollectionofN grainsofaveragevelocityv¯andaver-
agespinω¯,witheachgrainhavingamassm ,velocityv ,
i i Surfacegravity- Uptothispoint,inthedescriptionand
momentofinertiaI ,andspinω ,thegranulartemperature
i i characterisation of the surface regolith of asteroids, there
maybedefinedas
are no big differences with what can be found on Earth.
However, it is here where the similarities end as one of
T = 1 (cid:88) N (cid:16) m |v −v¯|2+I |ω −ω¯|2 (cid:17) . (1) the most important factors affecting the dynamics of the
regolith on asteroids is the ambient gravity; i.e., the sum
ofthelocalgravitationalfieldandcentrifugalforcesdueto
This quantity does not include, but is analogous to, the
therotationoftheasteroid. Thecalculatedsurfacegravity
thermodynamic temperature(Walton &Braun 1986). One
of asteroids such as Itokawa and 1999 KW4 can be found
importantdifferencebetweenagranulargasandamolecu-
in Yoshikawa et al. (this volume), Scheeres et al. (this
largasistheinelasticnatureofthecollisionsoftheformer, volume), Scheeres et al. (2010) and Hartzell & Scheeres
which leads to clumping and effectively serves to distin-
(2013).
guishthebehaviourofgranularmaterial.
These surface gravity calculations show some impor-
tant features that are not common in our terrestrial expe-
4. THEASTEROIDSURFACEENVIRONMENT
rience: (1) gravity is 103-106 times smaller than Earth’s
By now it should be clear that asteroid surfaces are gravitational field, g; (2) the gravitational field is not al-
formed by regolith of various shapes, sizes, materials and, ways perpendicular to the terrain; and (3) relatively small
therefore,materialproperties.Inagranularaggregate,these displacements on the surface of a small body could mean
material properties are intrinsically related to the size and bigchangesinthegravitationalfield. Amongthemainim-
shape of the grains, their atomic and electronic structure, plications: escape speeds are in the order of cm/s; micro-
and the gravitational field to which they are subjected, to meteoriteimpactscouldtransferenoughenergytogenerate
mention the most important factors. These properties will surfaceorevenglobalchanges;steppingorlandingonone
alsoplayaroleinhowasteroids’surfaces,andasteroidsasa oftheseaggregatescouldgenerateanejectafieldthatcould
whole,reacttoexternalagentssuchasgravitationalfieldsof damage the instruments of a spacecraft or generate a local
otherplanetarybodies,solarradiationpressure(Yarkovsky avalanche.
andYORPeffects, particletransportandlevitation)orim-
pacts. Inwhatfollows,wewillexploretheseaspectsofthe Friction- Intuitively,theideaoffrictionisthatofaforce
surfacesofasteroids. NotethatSIunitsshouldbeassumed thatresiststherelativemotionoftwobodiesthatareincon-
inallexpressionsinthissection. tact. Thisresistancemayappearinvariousways;thework
carried out by Bowden & Leben (1939), Bowden & Tabor
4.1. Surfacecharacterisation
(1939) and Bowden et al. (1943) and later summarised by
Materials - Different mineral compounds form the re- Raoetal.(2008)suggestedthatasperitiesorprojectionson
goliththatispresentinasteroidsurfaces;theyprovidetheir thesurfacesofthebodiesadheretoformjunctions. There-
spectral,thermalandsomemechanicalcharacteristics. The fore, work must be done to deform and break these junc-
firsttwoareobviousastheyhavetodowiththeabsorption, tions,andthisisaccompaniedbywearorerosionofmate-
transmissionandreemissionofenergy(Mazziero2009);the rialintheinterfacialregion. Additionalworkisassociated
third comes from how regolith is formed as that would be withthedeformationofthematerialinalargerregionnear
a reflection of the hardness of the material, the crystalline theinterface(plowing).
structureandforcesbetweenthesurfacesofgrainsincon- Thefirstattempttoformulateamacroscopicfrictionco-
tact(adhesion,cohesionandfriction). efficientisattributedtoCoulomb(1776),whoequateditto
At the moment what is known about the materials that thetangentoftheangleofrepose,bydefiningittobethera-
make up asteroids comes from the meteorites that have tioofshearandnormalstressesonaninclinedpileofsand.
crashedonEarth,fromspectralobservationsand,morere- The seminal work of Bagnold (1954) and Bagnold (1966)
cently,fromthesamplesbroughtfromasteroidItokawaby found that the frictional force varied as the square of the
theHayabusamission. Throughtheresearchcarriedouton shearrateforgrain-inertialflowintheregimeofrapidshear.
Ontheotherhand,GDR-MiDi(2004)madeitclearthatthe arealsothesame. Thestaticangleofreposemayberelated
rheologicalpropertiesofgranularflows(friction,viscosity) to cohesive forces including van der Waals forces, elec-
dependontheshearratei.e.,onthedynamics,thusputting trostaticforcesandcapillaryforcesincaseofmicroscopic
theworkofBagnoldandcollaboratorsintocontext. fluidpocketsbetweentheparticles. Usingaparabolicflight
Mehta (2007) recognises that the proper microscopic experiment Kleinhans et al. (2011) concluded that for de-
formulation of inter-grain friction remains an outstanding creasing gravity, the static angle of repose increases while
theoretical problem. In a granular material, it is not only thedynamicangleofreposedecreasedforalltestedmate-
the grain-grain surface friction that will determine the re- rials.
sistance of a grain to movement, or the resistance of the
aggregate to be sheared and deform, but also the grains’ Electrostatic forces and cohesion - As mentioned be-
shapes,geometricalinterlocking,packingandsizedistribu- fore, any kind of cohesive force between the grains of an
tion; all these factors are usually pulled together in a sin- aggregate is going to increase the value of its angle of re-
gleterm: theangleof(internal)frictionthatappearsinthe pose. This includes van der Waals, capillary, electrostatic
Mohr-Coulomb(MC)orDrucker-Praguer(DP)yieldcrite- and magnetic forces. The effects of these cohesive forces
ria. canbeclearlyseeninpowdersonEarth(flour,toner,pollen,
Within the Mohr-Coulomb yield criterion, the angle of chalkarecommonexamples). Howtheyappearandwhen
internal friction is defined as the arctangent of the ratio of they are apparent in the behaviour of granular aggregates
sheartonormalcompressivestressatthestabilitylimit(see willbediscussedinthenextsections.
Fig.8).TheMCcriterionprescribesthatshearingalongany
plane in a granular material cannot occur unless the shear 4.2. Cohesiveandadhesiveforces
stress(σ )onthatplanereachesavalueproportionaltothe
s Definition- Cohesiveandadhesiveforceshavethesame
normal(compressive)stressonthatplane: σ = µσ . The
s n origin, the only difference being that the term cohesive
proportionalityconstantµ,thefrictioncoefficient,iswritten
applies to the attractive force between molecules of the
as the tangent of the friction angle ϕ: µ = tan(ϕ). Thus,
same material and the term adhesive applies to molecules
the friction angle is a material property. The DP criterion
ofdifferentmaterials. Forexample,liquidwatermolecules
isbasedonsimilarphysicalideas,butusesalineardepen-
attract one another and form water droplets with sur-
dence of an average shear stress, as measured by the J
2 face tension (this is cohesion); water molecules and sil-
stress invariant, on the pressure (Holsapple 2013; Chen &
icamoleculesalsoattractoneanotherandwatercanmake
Han1988). Theoretically,ifamaterialiscohesionless,the
a glass wet (this is adhesion). These attractive forces are
angleofreposecorrespondstotheangleofinternalfriction.
electromagnetic in nature and are appreciable when the
On the other hand, for a cohesive aggregate, the angle of
electroniccloudsoftheatomsthatformthesurfacesoftwo
reposehastobesuchthatisrelatedtothecohesivestrength
bodiesarewithinafewangstroms. ThetermvanderWaals
ofthematerial(seeNedderman(2005)foranin-depthex-
forces is used here very loosely and refers to the totality
planation).
of nonspecific attractive or repulsive intermolecular forces
Cohesive forces (electrostatic and van der Waals are
other than those responsible for ionic and covalent molec-
among the best known interactions) are kept in a different
ular bonds (McNaught & Wilkinson. 1997). These inter-
term and, within either criteria, do not affect the angle of
actions are often modelled by the Lennard-Jones potential
friction, butonlytheangleofrepose. Fig.8showsthere-
lationbetweenthenormalstress(σ ),shearstress(σ ),co-
hesive strength (c), tensile strength (σ
) and friction angle
(ϕ). If cohesive strength is defined as the shear stress at
s.
thentensilestrengthisthenormalstress
On Earth, a well-know experimental fact is that angles
of internal friction of cohesionless granular materials vary c
from25◦forsmoothsphericalparticlesto45◦forroughan-
gularparticles(Carrigy1970;Pohlmanetal.2006;Klein-
hans et al. 2011). Calculations made on asteroids Eros   a   n
and Ida, and Martian satellites Phobos and Deimos show
that only Ida has more than 2% (by area) of gravitational
slopesabovetypicalreposeangles(35◦). Atthispointitis Figure 8: Mohr-Coulomb yield criterion: normal stress
worthexplainingthatthestaticangleofreposeisthemaxi- (σ ), shear stress (σ ), cohesive strength (c), tensile
mumslopethatcanbesupportedbeforetheformationofan strength(σ )andfrictionangle(ϕ).
avalanche and a dynamic angle of repose is the slope that
resultsafterthisavalanchehastakenplace. Themaximum
angle of stability, critical angle and static angle of repose
arethesame;angleofreposeanddynamicangleofrepose
(Jones1924): mechanism (Yano et al. 2006). It has been proposed that
the electrostatic interaction between charged particles and
(cid:20)(cid:16)γ(cid:17)12 (cid:16)γ(cid:17)6 (cid:21)
apossiblychargedsamplerhornhelpedcollectthesample
r r (Tsuchiyama et al. 2011). Whether or not dust levitation
occurs on asteroids is still an open question, although it is
where (cid:15) is the depth of the potential well, γ is the finite
undoubtablethatsurfacegrainsonthesebodiesaresubject
distance at which the inter-particle potential is zero and r
toelectrostaticforces. Unfortunately, asofyet, thisisstill
is the distance between the two particles (neutral atoms or
notfullyunderstood.
molecules). Thoughother, moreaccurateformsofthepo-
The electrostatic force felt by a particle on the surface
tential exist, this one is usually used in computer simula-
of an asteroid is related to its location on the surface. The
tionsduetoitssimplicity.Ther−12termdescribesthePauli
charge density at any point on the surface is the result of
exclusionprincipleduetooverlappingelectronorbitalsand
thedifferencebetweenthenumberofelectronsthatarede-
the r−6 term describes the long-range attraction (van der
positedonitbythesolarwindandthosethatleavethesur-
Waalsforce,ordispersionforce).
face due to photoemission. These two vary with the loca-
Johnson et al. (1971), Heim et al. (1999) and Hughes
tionofthesurfaceandwithtimeastheasteroidrotatesand
et al. (2008) theoretically and experimentally studied the
solarwindinfluencesdifferentareasofthesurface. Photoe-
characteristicsofthevanderWaalsforceingranularmate-
missionandsolarwindinteractiondependonthesolarinci-
rials. The cohesion between two spherical particles (radii
denceangleandavarietyofplasma-relatedphenomenathat
r andr )canbeapproximatelydescribedby(Castellanos
1 2 varywithsolarlongitude,respectively.Theresultingcharge
2005;Perkoetal.2001;Rognonetal.2008):
on the surface of the asteroid then influences the charging
A r r of the particle in question and influences the plasma envi-
F c = 48(t+d)2r 1 + 2 r (3) ronment(photoelectronandplasmasheaths)thatwillbeex-
periencedbytheparticleifitisloftedabovetheasteroid’s
whereAistheHamakerconstantforthegrains(4.3×10−20 surface(Scheeresetal.2010).
Joules for lunar soil), t is the minimum distance between If grains are idealised as spherical, and we make the
theparticlesurfacesduetoadsorbedmoleculesanddisthe sameassumptionsasColwelletal.(2005)abouttheplasma
widthofanyadditionalseparationbetweentheparticlesbe- sheet, it is then possible to demonstrate that for a particle
yondthatcausedbythepresenceoftheadsorbedmolecules.
ofradiusr(surfacearea,Λ=4πr2),theelectrostaticforce
Intheextremeenvironmentofspacetheminimumdistance thatwouldprovideloftingis:
betweenthematerialscanbemuchcloserthanpossibleon
F =(cid:15) E2Λ≈4π(cid:15) E2r2 ⇒F ≈9×10−9r2 (5)
Earthwhereatmosphericgases,watervapor,andrelatively es 0 0 es
lowtemperaturesallowforsignificantcontaminationofsur- where(cid:15) isthepermittivityofvacuumandE istheelectric
faces (d = 0). These much cleaner surfaces and closer field.
contacts allow for increased cohesion (Perko et al. 2001; Recenttheoreticalanalysisandexperimentshaveshown
Scheeresetal.2010). that cohesion will play a role in dust levitation Hartzell &
Perkoetal.(2001)defineacleanlinessfactorS asΩ/t, Scheeres (2011); Hartzell et al. (2013) and also that cohe-
where Ω is the diameter of an oxygen ion (O2−) and t is sion will dictate the electric field required for lofting for
definedasabove.Thisbeingso,thecohesiveforcebetween particles smaller than 1 mm on Itokawa (100 µm on Eros
agrain(radius,r)andaflatsurface(oramuchlargergrain) and10µmontheMoon). Furthermore,theseexperiments
is: have also shown that a balance between cohesive, gravita-
tionalandelectrostaticforcesisneededtoensurelevitation.
4.4. Thelinkbetweenthesurfaceenvironmentandthe
4.3. Electrostaticforces
geophysicalfeatures
Electrostatic forces have been hypothesised to play an
In the previous sections we have tried to account for
important role on the surfaces of asteroids, and have been
anddescribetheoriginofthemainforcesthatcouldaffect
specifically invoked as one means by which small dust
grainsonthesurfaceofanairlessplanetarybody.However,
grains can be transported across a body’s surface. The
an even more interesting aspect is the interplay of these
first evidence of electrostatic lofting was the Lunar hori-
forces as this determines the dynamics of the grains and
zon glow observed by the surveyor spacecraft (Rennilson
thelandscapeofthesurfaceasawhole. Withthisinmind,
& Criswell 1974) at the terminator region. A second dis-
and following the notation used by Scheeres et al. (2010),
coverycontributingtothishypothesiswastheexistenceof
wedefinesomethingcalledabondnumberas:
pondsonErosandotherasteroidseventhoughithasbeen
foundthattheirapparentdistributioncouldhaveanobserva- B = F c (6)
tionalbias. Finally,thereisalsothefactthattheHayabusa W
missionwasabletobringbacksamplesofgrainsfromas- whereF isthecohesiveforceactingonagrainandW isits
teroid Itokawa despite the malfunctioning of the sampling weight. Foranambientgravitationalaccelerationofg the
ambientweightofagrainisdefinedasW = mg , where alsotoagreewiththemodels,showingthatvaluesofcohe-
mistheparticle’smass. sivestrengthunder100Paandanglesoffrictionsimilarto
Onsmallplanetarybodies,self-gravitybetweenindivid- thosefoundongranularaggregatesonEarth(35◦-45◦)are
ualgrainsismuchmoreimportantthanonEarthandshould enoughtoexplaintheelevatedspinratesoftheseasteroids.
be taken into account in calculations. For two equal-size
particles of radius r and density ρ = 3500 kg/m3 (larger 5. GEOPHYSICAL PROCESSES ACTING ON AS-
thantheasteroid’sbulkdensity)thebondnumberis: TEROIDS
4πρ r As we have already discussed, asteroids observed by
B =G g r ≈1×10−6 . (7)
self 3g g spacecraft preserve records of geophysical processes that
haveoperatedattheirsurfacesandsometimesintheirinte-
Fortheelectrostaticforceduetophotoelectricemission riors. Here,theseprocessesareclassifiedintothefollowing
alone,usingeq.5: three categories: (1) exogenic phenomena, that are outer
geophysicalprocessesincludingimpactcrateringandslope
B =6×10−13 . (8) failures/collapses,(2)endogenicphenomena,thatareinner
A geophysicalprocessesincludingridges,faulting,andpossi-
Wenotethattriboelectricchargingandother(notyetunder- blevolatileandvolcanicactivities,and(3)otheroriginsin-
stood)mechanismsintheterminatorregionscouldincrease cludingtidalandYORPeffects. Notethatsomeprocesses
the electrostatic force to F ≈ 0.1r2. This would, there- dominantlyactingononeasteroidmightnotnecessarilyact
fore,increasetheelectrostaticbondnumberto: onotherasteroidsbecausethephysical,especiallymechan-
ical, environments of asteroids vary significantly (for ex-
B ≈7×10−6 (9) ample,Vestaisconsideredtohavebeenvolcanicallyactive
A becauseitsmassissignificantlylarge;10ordersofmagni-
Forcohesiveforcesandformaterialparametersoflunar tude larger than that of Itokawa, which is simply a pile of
regolith: rubble).
B =2.5×10−6 (10) 5.1. Exogenicphenomena
Becauseofthelackofanatmosphere,anasteroidisdi-
whereS isthecleanlinessfactordefinedearlier.
rectlyexposedtosolarwind,cosmicandsolarraysandin-
On small planetary bodies, for sufficiently small grain
fluxesofmeteoroidsofvaryingsizes.Animpactcanlargely
sizes, these bond numbers can easily attain values greater
modify the shape of an asteroid and even its arrangement
than 1, meaning that the grain’s own weight can be over-
(suchasimpact-inducedbreak-upofanasteroid). Thiswill
come. Strong cohesive forces give rise to highly porous
notbediscussedhere,rather,wefocusonsurfaceprocesses
structuresfirstcalled“fairycastles”byHapke&vanHoen
resultingfromimpacts.
(1963). Back then they attributed the existence of such
On small bodies regolith is traditionally believed to re-
structures to adhesive and long-range electrostatic forces
sultfromrepetitiveimpactswhichexcavatethesurfaceand
that act between grains during deposition and influence
distribute ejecta materials, However, speeds of ejecta are
their trajectories. After that, the work of Matson & Nash
typically greater than several tens of centimetres per sec-
(1983), Kreslavsky & Shkuratov (2003) and Cassidy &
ond(Housenetal.1979;Housen&Holsapple2011),which
Johnson(2005)shedmorelightonhowthesestructuresaf-
correspondstothegravitationalescapespeedofkilometre-
fectphotometricanomaliesoftheMoon. Anomaloushalos
sized asteroids. Impact debris reaccumulation, therefore,
aroundsmallbrightimpactcratershavebeenassociatedto
may not be solely responsible for the ubiquitous presence
changes in porosity probably related to some geologically
ofregolithonsmallasteroids.Otherregolithformationpro-
recentdamageoftheequilibriumregolithstructure.
cesseshavebeenproposedincludingduringcontact-binary
Additionally, the scaling of cohesive forces with ambi-
forming collisions of asteroids, by tidal forces, as well as
ent gravity means that cm-sized grains in a microgravity
theretentionofregolithfromaparentbody(Barnouin-Jha
environmentmaybehaveasµmsizegrainsinEarth’sgrav-
et al. 2008; Scheeres et al. 2007). Using laboratory ex-
ity. Keeping this in mind, Me´riaux & Triantafillou (2008)
periments and numerical simulations, Delbo et al. (2014)
and Durda et al. (2013) have started research to under-
have shown that thermal fragmentation induced by diur-
stand the dynamics of cohesive powders under vacuum as
nal temperature variations breaks up rocks larger than a
a proxy to regolith-covered granular surfaces on asteroids.
fewcentimetresmorequicklythancommunitionbymicro-
SimulationscarriedoutbySa´nchez&Scheeres(2014)and
meteoroidimpacts. Thelatterwasdemonstratedbyadapt-
Hirabayashi (2014) have shown that modest values of co-
ing the lunar impact induced comminution rates of Hoerz
hesivestrength(25-150Pa)andaheterogeneousstructure
et al. (1975) to asteroids. Because thermal fragmentation
candrasticallymodifythemaximumspinrates, disruption
is independent of asteroid size, this process can also con-
patternsandtheexistenceornotofsurfaceflow.Theresults
tribute to regolith production on larger asteroids. Produc-
obtainedbyRozitisetal.(2014),Hirabayashietal.(2014)
tion of fresh regolith originating in thermal fatigue frag-
and Scheeres (2014) about 1950 DA and P/2013 R3 seem
mentation may, therefore, be an important process for the ejecta curtain is expected to be larger than the fragments
rejuvenationofthesurfacesofNEAs(Delboetal.2014). higherinthecurtain.
Once formed, resultant deposits of loose debris will be One may wonder if ejecta may selectively escape from
affectedbythegravityinalongertimescale,whererepeated thesurfaceofanasteroidnevertoreturntomantleitsorig-
disturbancescauseoverallslowmotioninthedownhilldi- inalsurface. Thisideahasbeentestedagainsttheobserva-
rection. Thedisturbancesmaybecausedbyprocessessuch tions of Itokawa, for which 530 boulders larger than 5 m
assmallimpactsandseverethermalcycling,whilemanyof insizehavebeenidentifiedonitssurface(Michikamietal.
the surface processes are in some aspects similar to those 2008). Assuming the slope value on the cumulative plot
terrestrial phenomena resulting from expansion and con- (Fig. 3) from Saito et al. (2006), the cumulative number
tractionprocesses,heatingandcooling,wettinganddrying, (N)ofbouldersmaybeapproximatedas:
andfreezingandthawing. Wenotethatheretherearemany
importanttemperature-relatedprocessesoccurringonaster- N(>d)=4.8×104d−2.8, (12)
oid surfaces and these are discussed in Delbo et al. (this
wheredisthediameterofaboulder. Ifweassumethatthe
volume).
above size distribution is continuous down to the size of a
pebble,thevolumeofpebbles(4mmto6.4cminsize)can
Impact ejecta mantling - An impact will excavate the
beestimatedas1.9×105 m3. Note,however,thatsmaller
surface and create impact ejecta, which usually result in a
particles that exist on the asteroid surface are difficult to
deposit of debris surrounding the impact crater except for
observe, because they are overlapped by larger boulders;
the cases in whichthe target has too little gravity to retain
the size distribution may, therefore, be different from that
ejecta or too much porosity to produce it. The ejecta de-
observedforlargerbouldersby0.2-0.3intheslopeoflog-
positsnormallyaffectatleasttheareawithin5craterradii
logplot. Thisestimateisnonethelessofthesameorderas
by blanketing the original surface (Melosh 1989). In the
thatestimatedfromtheareasanddepthsofsmoothterrains
caseofgravity-dominatedcratering,thethicknessofthede-
(2.3×105 m3; Miyamotoetal.2007). Itmight,therefore,
posit,H ,isgivenby
b be appropriate to assume that no particular pebble-sized
H =0.14R0.74[ r c ]−3, (11) blockshaveselectivelyescapedoraccumulated(Miyamoto
b c R 2014).
wherer isthedistancefromthecratercenterandR isthe
craterradius (McGetchinetal.1973). Assuggestedinthis Seismic shaking - Crater excavation resulting from an
equation,theejectadepositisthickestatthecraterrimand impactontoanasteroidisassociatedwithashockwavethat
thinswithincreasingdistanceawayfromthecrater.Impact- severelyshakestheterrain. Suchshakingmayinducelocal
ejectamantlingmayaccountfortheabsenceofdiscernible movementsthatcauseanetdownslopemovementofloose
surfacefeaturesnearcratersonbodiessuchasLutetia. surfacematerial(Richardsonetal.2005)andthiseffectcan
Whentheejectadepositiscontinuousandclearlyrecog- be more important for a smaller asteroid because the seis-
nised to be the result of the cratering event, it is called an micenergyisunabletoattenuateoveralargevolume.
ejectablanket.However,suchablanketisnotrecognisedon Indeed, the first evidence for such seismic shaking on
the surface of a small asteroid. Considering the low grav- an asteroid was presented by Thomas & Robinson (2005).
ity,aswellastheoftenirregularshapes,theaboveequation Theyshowedthattheformationofarelativelyyoungcrater
mightnotbedirectlyapplicableforsmallasteroids. Infact, (7.6 km in diameter) on asteroid Eros resulted in the re-
otherthanthelocalgravity,spinparameters,especiallythe moval of other craters as large as 0.5 km over nearly 40%
rotational period, can significantly affect the situation and oftheasteroid’ssurface. Asburialbyejectacannotexplain
causeveryasymmetricejectablanketsasobservedonEros. the observed pattern of crater removal, and the areas with
Forexample,athree-dimensionalSPH(Smoothed-Particle lowsmall-craterdensitiescorrelatewellwithradialdistance
Hydrodynamics)simulationofahemispheric-scale impact fromtheShoemakercrater,theyconcludethatseismicshak-
ontoVesta,whichspinsevery5.3hours,showthatvariably ingisthemostprobablemechanism.
shaped,multiplyfoldeddepositscanbeformed(Jutzi&As- Assumingthattheseismicenergyiscompletelysupplied
phaug2011)ratherthanasimpleejectamantling. bythekineticenergyofanimpactor,theratioofthemaxi-
The presence of boulders adjacent to an impact site on mumaccelerationtothesurfacegravity,a/g,canbewritten
Lutetia suggests that boulder generation is a common fea- as:
ture of large impacts on this asteroid (Sierks et al. 2011). a 3fv ρ D3
= i η i i , (13)
In fact, the fragments of ejecta deposits can be size-sorted g G ρ3 D5
through an impact event. Even though some interaction
wheref istheseismicfrequencyinHertz, v istheveloc-
mayoccurbetweenejectafragmentsinthedenserpartsof i
ityoftheimpactor,Gisthegravitationalconstant,η isthe
theejectacurtain,generalmotionofthefragmentsislikely
seismicefficiencyfactor(thefractionoftheoriginalkinetic
dominatedbyballisticsandthusfollowsanearlyparabolic
energyconvertedtoseismicenergy), ρ isthebulkdensity
trajectoryabovetheasteroidbeforefallingbacktothesur- i
of the impactor, ρ is the bulk density of the asteroid, D
face. The size of the ejecta fragments near the base of the a i
istheradiusoftheimpactor,andD isthediameterofthe recognised through differences in colour, as described in
asteroid. For the case of a rubble pile, the seismic energy Section2.
mayattenuatesignificantly. Inthiscase,adiffusivescatter- Whenablockofrockslipsonaslope,sometimesthebal-
ingtheoryasadoptedbyRichardsonetal.(2005)mightbe anceofshearstressandsustainableshearstressesinsidethe
arealisticapproach. Inthistheory,a/gonadiffusivebody blockchanges. Thiscausesaflow-likephenomenon,some-
may be written as in Eq. (13) but multiplied by the scale timesreferredtoasadebrisfloworgranularflow (Legros
factorexp(−fD a 2 ),whereK istheseismicdiffusivityand 2002).Someoftheabove-mentionedmassmovementsmay
Q is the seismic quality factor. Note that the exact values bebetterexplainedbythisprocess.
of some of the parameters for the above equations, such When we consider a case in which a block of rock is
as f, K, Q, and η are difficult to properly obtain. How- resting on a slope at angle α, σ s = (m A g)sinα, where m
ever, most importantly, both models show that the size of is the mass of the block and A is its basal area. Similarly,
an asteroid is an important factor to determine the surface σ n = (m A g)cosα. Assumingthecaseinwhichthesliding
acceleration against the gravity; smaller asteroids vibrate rock is actually loose debris (a case in which cohesion is
easierthanlargerasteroids. Althoughitisdifficulttocon- negligibleinaterrestrialenvironment,andthusflowoccurs
strainreasonablerangesofvaluesformanyparameters,the rather than simply sliding), the largest shear stress in the
aboveequationsgenerallysuggestthatverysmallimpactors block is achieved at the base of the rock. In this situation,
may produce global shaking. Thus, repetitive impacts on σ s = σ n tanϕ, which gives the condition of α = ϕ. In
asteroidsmaycausesignificantshakings,believedtobere- other words, in this case, the angle of repose is the same
sponsibleforthedepletionofcratersonItokawaandsmall as the angle of internal friction and is independent of the
cratersonEros. gravitationalacceleration.
Theoverallmigrationsofsuchflowsaresometimescon-
sideredasgravityflows,whosespeedU maybedescribed
Mass movements - Once an asteroid is seismically
asU ∼ D(ρgh)1/2,whereDisacoefficientofdragforce,
shaken, reverberation continues until internal friction and
ρisthedensityoftheflow,andhisthethicknessoftheflow.
collisions finally convert it entirely into heat. Similarly,
Thespeedoftheflow,therefore,dependsonthesquareroot
some other disturbances such as heating and cooling may
ofgravity (Jopetal.2006),indicatingthattheflowcanbe
occur. When the formation of faults, rapid landslides, or
muchslowerthantypicalonesonEarth.
otherprocessesoccurreleasinghorizontalstress, suchdis-
Anothertypeofmassmovementiselectrostaticdustlev-
turbances generally make the ground surface expand per-
itation(seealsoSection4),whichisproposedtoberespon-
pendicularly to the slope. When the disturbance ceases,
sible for particle migrations on airless bodies exposed to
the ground surface contracts along the direction of grav-
bothdirectsunlightandthesolarwind(Lee1996). Smaller
ity, which is not necessarily parallel to that of the above
levitated particles on an asteroid may escape into space
surfaceexpansion(especiallyonasurfaceinclinedagainst
throughthesolarwind,butlargerparticlesmaysettleback
the local gravity). When such expansion and contraction
onto the surface. This may explain the smooth ponds on
occur cyclically, the materials covering the surface show
the surface of Eros (Robinson et al. 2001), the formation
overall migrations, which are essentially downslope dis-
ofwhichclearlyinvolvesthesettlingoffines((cid:28)cm-sized
placements. This kind of downslope mass movements of
particles)ingravitationallowsbyasecondaryprocess,after
dry, unconsolidated material is a common geological pro-
crater formation (Section 2 Cheng et al. 2002b; Robinson
cessonterrestrialplanets (Meunieretal.2013). However,
etal.2002).
geophysically, thoseonterrestrialplanetsaregenerallyin-
Cheng et al. (2002b) suggest, however, that the pond
terpreted in terms of the competition between gravity or
material derives from the flanks of the bounding depres-
inertia and inter-granular friction. Naturally for the case
sionseismicallyshakendowntothebottomofthedepres-
of a relatively smaller asteroid, the situation may be more
sion. Anotherideafortheformationofpondsiserodingof
complicatedsinceotherforcessuchascohesiveforcescan
boulders;repeatedday/nightcyclingcausesmaterialfatigue
playasignificantrole,asdiscussedinSection4.
leading to erosion of the boulders (Dombard et al. 2010).
A slow and cyclic creep process is not the only type of
However, recent morphological analyses indicate that the
mass movement on an asteroid. More rapid examples in-
depositedmaterialmostlikelyoriginatesfromasourceex-
clude landslides, which take place when the acceleration
ternal to the ponds themselves (Roberts et al. 2014a). In
dueto theambientgravityexceedstheabilityofarockon
addition,themorphology,geography,colourandalbedoof
aslopetoresist. Roughlyspeaking,theconditionsforthis
theponds maybeconsistentwithformationbyelectrostatic
phenomenontooccurcanbedescribedbyCoulomb’sequa-
levitation rather than seismic shaking (Riner et al. 2008;
tion,σ =c+σ tanϕ(seeFig.8). Iftheshearofablock
s n Richardsonetal.2005).
ofrockexceedsthemaximumsustainableshearstress, the
blockslipsandmayberecognisedasalandslide. Thiskind
ofmassmovementcanbefoundassmall-scale,streak-like Regolithsegregation- Inadditiontothesizesegregation
featuressuchasobservedoncraterwallsofVesta(Section thatoccursduringimpactejectamantling,ingranularflows
2). Indeed, mass movements can expose an interior, often where particles have different physical properties, particle
segregationalsooccurs(asdiscussedinSection3).Oneex- the interior of the planet, including tectonics, magmatism,
ampleofsuchsegregationisinagranularavalanche. The metamorphism,andseismicactivities.However,inthecase
dominantmechanismforsegregationingranularavalanches of asteroids, the ultimate cause of tectonics or seismic ac-
is kinetic sieving (Bridgwater 1976) rather than effects of tivitiesmaybedifficulttoclearlyseparate.
diffusive remixing, particle-density differences, or grain- Internal magmatism and volcanic processes are not of-
inertia (Thomas et al. 2000). As the grains avalanche ten expected to occur on asteroids. However, differenti-
downslope,therearefluctuationsinthevoidspaceandthe atedearly-formingasteroidsshouldhaveexperiencedvari-
smallerparticlesaremorelikelytofall,undergravity,into ouskindsofvolcanicactivity,especiallyasaresultofincor-
gaps that open up beneath them because they are more porating the heat-generating isotope 26Al. The howardite-
likely to fit into the available space than the coarse grains. eucrite-diogenite (HED) class of meteorites, whose parent
The fine particles, therefore, percolate towards the bottom body is believed to be the asteroid Vesta, have been stud-
oftheflow,andforceimbalancessqueezethelargeparticles ied in detail, and the magmatic origins of these rocks and
towardsthesurface(Gray&Chugunov2006). their compositions as surface lavas or intrusions are well
A further example of regolith segregation, that may be understood(e.g., Taylor1993). Nevertheless,observations
responsibleforthepresenceoflargebouldersonthesurface ofVestashownoconclusiveevidenceofvolcanicfeatures.
ofasteroidssuchasItokawaandEros(Asphaugetal.2001; ThesurfaceofVesta,particularlythenorthernhemisphere,
Miyamoto et al. 2007), is the “Brazil-nut effect” (Rosato appears to be saturated with craters >10 km in diameter
et al. 1987). The idea is that seismic shaking may cause (Marchietal.2012).Thisindicatesthatthesurfaceregolith
the larger regolith particles to move up to the surface. If todepthsofmorethan1kmissignificantlyoverturned. On
thisisthecase,theinteriorsofrubble-pileasteroidshaving theotherhand,Wilson(2013)predictedtypicallavaflowdi-
experiencedthiskindofevolutionarelikelytobecomposed mensionsare∼10mthick,muchshallowerthanthethick-
ofsmallerparticlesthanthoseobservedatthesurface. This ness of overturned regolith, which might be the reason for
may also lead to some variations of macro-porosity with the lack of clear evidence of lava flows or pyroclastics on
depthinsidetheasteroid. thesurfaceofVesta.
ThemechanismdrivingtheBrazil-nutsegregationisstill Even though volcanism is not a common process on an
underdebate(Kudrolli2004).Ithasbeensuggestedthatthe asteroid, somefeaturesindicatephase-changingofmateri-
segregation mayresultfromthepercolationofsmallparti- alsandtheirtransportationtothesurface. Possiblemelting
cles in a similar fashion to the kinetic sieving mechanism, flows identified on Vesta might be good examples. Also,
but here the local rearrangements are caused only by the more than 10 active (mass-shedding) asteroids have been
vibrations(e.g., Rosatoetal.1987;Williams1976). How- reported(Jewitt2012)andthepossiblemechanismsforpro-
ever, other experimental results from Knight et al. (1993) ducing mass loss include dehydration stresses and thermal
have shown that vibration-induced size segregation may fracture. Althoughcometsarenotthefocusofthischapter,
arise from convective processes within the granular mate- wenotethat, infact, strangefeaturesexistinthenucleiof
rialandnotalwaysfromlocalrearrangements. bothTempel1andWild2. Thesefeaturesareinterpretedas
Granular convection is, in fact, a process often in- pitsandscarpretreatsresultingfromventingofsubsurface
voked by the community of small-body scientists to in- volatiles(Veverkaetal.2013).
terpret the surface geology of asteroids (Miyamoto et al. Some pitted terrains of Vesta (Fig. 6(e)) are also be-
2007; Asphaug 2007). However, as discussed in Mur- lieved to be related to subsurface volatiles; morphologic
dochetal.(2013b),kineticsievingandgranularconvection similaritiesofpittedterrainsbetweenMarsandVestasug-
are strongly dependent on the gravitational acceleration gest volatile release as an origin. However, because me-
(Thornton 2005; Murdoch et al. 2013c). A weak gravita- teorites thought to originate from Vesta indicate low en-
tionalacceleration may,therefore,reducetheefficiencyof dogenic volatile content, it has been suggested that the
particle size segregation. Indeed, recent numerical simu- volatileshavebeendeliveredtoVesta’ssurfaceandarenot
lations and parabolic flight experiments of the Brazil-nut endogenic. The source may be carbonaceous chondrites,
effecthaveshownthatthespeedatwhichalargeintruderin which have been observed as clasts in howardites (mete-
a granular material rises is reduced as the external gravity oritesmostlikelyoriginatingfromthesurfaceofVesta),or
decreases (Tancredi et al. 2012; Gu¨ttler et al. 2013; Mat- perhaps comets. Later impacts into this water-bearing re-
sumuraetal.2014). Therefore,allconvectiveandparticle golithwouldresultindevolatilisationduetoimpactheating
segregationprocessesinagranularmaterialonornearthe andmelting(Denevietal.2012).
surfaceofasmallbodymayrequiremuchlongertimescales Tectonicfeaturesaresurfacefeaturescreatedbyinternal
thanthesameprocesseswouldrequireinthepresenceofa stresses that fracture or deform the surface layer. Numer-
stronggravitationalfield oustectonicfeaturesaredocumentedonasteroids. Forex-
ample, Vesta displays examples similar to those found on
5.2. Endogenicphenomena
smallSaturniansatellitessuchasIapetus. Also,RaheDor-
For terrestrial planets, “endogenic processes” are geo- sumonErosisaridgethatextendsforabout18kmaround
logical processes associated with energy originating from theasteroid, whichresemblesthrustfaultstructuresonthe
terrestrialplanets(Prockteretal.2002). Tectonicdeforma-
tioncannotoccurwithoutforcestodriveit. However,many 5.3. Tidalandrotationaleffects
sourcesoftectonicstressexistofbothinternalandexternal
Theremightbesomemorphologicalorevenlargermod-
origin,andaclearseparationandexclusiveclassificationis
ificationsofasteroidsduetotidalforces.Modestinfluences
difficult.
are expected to include exposing layers of surface materi-
For example, on Eros, the large “spiral” pattern south-
als;toexplainthefactthatthelaboratoryspectraofordinary
west of Psyche, is suggestive of extensional tectonics
chondritemeteoritesareagoodmatchtoQ-typeasteroids,
whereasthespatialdistributionsofotherridgesystems, as
Binzeletal.(2010)andNesvorny´ etal.(2010)pointedout
wellasitsestimatedshearstrength,indicatethattheridges
thepossibilitythatQ-typeNEAsunderwentrecentencoun-
are in fact thrust faults, which were formed by impact-
ters with the terrestrial planets and the tidal force exposed
induced compression (Watters et al. 2011; Cheng et al.
freshordinarychondritematerialonthesurface. Morecon-
2002b;Veverkaetal.2000). However,theridgesystemon
siderableoutcomesmayincludesplittingtheasteroidintoa
asteroid (2867) Steins (hereafter simply Steins), which is
binary(Walsh&Richardson2008)orevencatastrophically
the most prominent feature recognised on its surface, may
disruptingitinamannersimilartocometShoemaker-Levy-
be formed through the change in rotation rate due to the
9 at Jupiter. Such tidal effects by a terrestrial planet are
effect of solar radiation known as the YORP effect. The
consideredasoneofthemostlikelycreationscenariosfor
effectspinsSteins,makingthesurfaceseekfortheobject’s
asteroid families (Fu et al. 2005). Also, strange shapes of
potential-energy minimum, which may cause tectonic ar-
someNEAsasrevealedbyradarimagesmayhaveresulted
rangementsorlandslide-likesurfacemodificationstowards
fromthetidaldisruptionprocessesandre-accumulationsof
theequator(Harrisetal.2009). Eitherprocesscanexplain
disruptedfragments(e.g., Bottkeetal.1999).
theformationoftheridgeattheequator. Asimilaroriginis
YORP can modify both the rotation rate and the spin-
proposedforanequatorialridgeof1999KW4(Walshetal.
axis orientation of small asteroids and has been identified
2008).
asanimportantprocessdrivingtheirphysicalanddynami-
Grabensorlineardepressionsarefoundonmanyaster-
calevolution(Vokrouhlicky´ etal.2003). Asteroidsof5km
oids(seeSection2),whichmayseemstrangegiventhefact
andsmallerinradiusinnear-Earthorbitsandafewtensof
thatasteroidsarecoveredbyloosefragmentaldebris. Itis
km in the inner main belt are subject to the YORP effect.
possiblethatthesefracturesareevidenceofcompetentrock
The spin-up of asteroids can have dramatic consequences
below the regolith. It has been suggested that they result
(Scheeres et al. 2007; Walsh et al. 2008). For example,
from stresses from large impact events, which have refo-
thedeficiencyinsmallcratersonSteinsisattributedtosur-
cussed and caused fracture far from the crater (Fujiwara
face reshaping (through landslides) due to spin-up by the
& Asada 1983; Asphaug et al. 1996), or that they are due
YORP effect (Keller et al. 2010). The shape of the north-
to thermal stresses (Dombard & Freed 2002) and/or body
ernhemisphereofSteinsisreminiscentofthatoftheNEA
stressesinducedbychangesinspin. However,faultingcan
1999 KW4, which has been attributed to spin-up by the
occureveninagranularmatrixwhenitiscohesiverelative
YORPeffect. AplausiblescenarioisthatSteinswasspun-
totheappliedstress.
upbyYORP,leadingtomaterialslidingtowardtheequator
Grooves have been reported on Gaspra, Eros, Steins,
to form the typical top-shape (Keller et al. 2010). Mass
Lutetia, and many other asteroids observed at high resolu-
shed from the equator of a critically spinning asteroid can
tion. Asubsetofthegroovesappeartobechainsofpits(or
accreteintoasatellite(Walshetal.2008). Alternatively,an
crater-like indentations) in an almost linear arrangement.
asteroid may spin-up by the YORP effect until it reaches
TheglobalextentofaseriesofpittedchainsfoundonSteins
its fission spin limit and the components enter orbit about
indicatesthesearenotimpactcraters, becausethechances
each other (Scheeres et al. 2007). Asteroid pairs may be
offormationofmanychainsofthesecratersofsimilarsize
formed by the rotational fission of a parent asteroid into a
ishighlyimprobable. Instead,partialdrainageofloosesur-
proto-binarysystem,whichsubsequentlydisruptsunderits
face material into a fracture within stronger, deeper mate-
owninternalsystemdynamics(Pravecetal.2010). These
rialisconsideredasalikelyorigin(Richardsonetal.2002;
binaryasteroidformationmechanismsmayexplainthefact
Kelleretal.2010). Thisexplanationofhowpittedgrooves
thatasteroidpairsubiquitouslyexist. Formoreinformation
formwassuggestedtoexplainthefeaturesseenonPhobos
onasteroidbinariesseeWalshetal. (thisvolume).
(Thomasetal.1979). Experimentshavedemonstratedthat,
insuchamodel,thespacingofthepitsalongthegrooveis 6. INVESTIGATINGREGOLITHDYNAMICS
equaltothethicknessoftheregolithinwhichtheyformand
is independent of regolith bulk density, grain size, shape, Regolith processes on asteroid surfaces may not have
angularityandangleofrepose(Melosh1989;Prockteretal. readyterrestrialanalogs. Inordertostudyregolithdynam-
2002). Short and well-defined grooves can also be caused icsintheuniqueasteroidenvironmentdescribedinSection
by a boulder that has bounced and rolled a short distance, 4, both experimental methods and numerical simulations
but very few (<5) such tracks have been positively identi- canbeused.
fiedonthesurfaceofEros(Prockteretal.2002;Robinson
etal.2001).
6.1. Experimentalmethods in the best possible conditions, at times they fall short of
the real environments that are the object of study. These
Creating reduced-gravity conditions - One of the ma-
constraints are what make computer simulations, their de-
jorchallengesforinvestigatingthebehaviourofregolithat
velopment and understanding, attractive from a scientific
the surface of an asteroid is to recreate the proper grav-
pointofview. Computersimulationsofcoursealsohavea
itational conditions. Microgravity, the condition of rela-
costastherearemanysimplificationsandassumptionsthat
tive near weightlessness, can only be achieved on Earth
have to be made (see Section 6.2). This means that there
by putting an object in a state of free-fall. Here we intro-
must be a trade off between their complexity and their re-
duce some of the techniques used to perform experiments
alism. A trade off that calls for a very careful look at the
inreduced-gravityconditions.
results and their interpretations as computational artefacts
Drop towers have been extensively used for micro-
must be distinguished from fact. If research is carefully
gravity experiments related to dust and regolith dynamics
conducted, simulations can be used to guide better experi-
(e.g., Hofmeister et al. 2009 studying granular flow un-
ments and predictions of simulations can be tested so that
der reduced-gravity, and Schra¨pler et al. 2012 and Beitz
natureisunderstood.
et al. 2011 investigating low-velocity collisions between
dust agglomerates). Parabolic flights can also provide a
6.2. Numericalmethods
microgravity environment for regolith experiments (e.g.,
Murdochetal.2013a,cperformingexperimentsofgranular With advances in computer hardware and software, nu-
shear and granular convection, Gu¨ttler et al. 2013 inves- mericalmodellinghasbecomeincreasinglyimportanttothe
tigating granular convection and the Brazil-nut effect, and study of granular systems in general, and to granular sys-
Dove & Colwell 2013 investigating particle charging and tems in exotic environments such as the surfaces of small
thedynamicsofchargedparticlesonthesurfacesofairless bodies, where conditions are difficult to replicate experi-
bodies). Suchflightsarenormallyoperatedusingmodified mentally. Thedifferenttypesofnumericalapproachescan
commercialaeroplanes,however,smalleraircrafthavealso bedividedintothebroadcategoriesofcontinuumanddis-
been used (e.g., Kleinhans et al. 2011). Other ways of crete. Intherealmofnumericalsimulation,continuumap-
achieving microgravity are using a sounding rocket (e.g., proachesanddiscreteapproacheshavetheirrelativeadvan-
Krause & Blum 2004 studying the formation of dust ag- tages and disadvantages that depend on the specific inves-
glomerates) or flying an experiment on the International tigationathand. Ingeneral,discreteapproachesattemptto
Space Station (e.g., Colwell 2003 investigating low-speed treatmaterialasindividualparticles, sometimeswithlarge
impacts into dust). Further methods of simulating micro- particles as proxies for groupings of smaller ones. Con-
gravityexistsuchasmagneticlevitationandneutralbuoy- tinuumapproachesaveragethephysicsofnearbyparticles,
ancy. However, to perform an experiment with particles and use smooth transitions to account for variance. Con-
using these techniques, every particle in the experiment tinuum approaches are particularly well suited for high-
would have to be neutrally buoyant or magnetically lev- speed collisions, where material phase changes and the fi-
itated. If, for example, only the experiment container is nite propagation speed of sound waves are important. In
levitated or buoyant, the individual grains would still feel low-speed granular regimes, however, discrete approaches
thegravitationalfield. have the advantage of being able to capture the inherently
discrete nature of granular systems and of being able to
describe in great detail the properties of individual grains.
Creating the electrostatic environment - The electro-
Thesepropertiesarethenusedtosolveforthefrictionaland
static part of the asteroid environment is provided by the
cohesive forces that arise when grains come into contact
solar wind, which is essentially a stream of plasma (elec-
witheachother. Discretecodesarealsomuchbettersuited
trons and protons) that originates in the upper atmosphere
towards capturing the physics of slowly evolving granular
of the Sun. The energy of this plasma ranges between 1.5
systems such as those that take place on the surfaces of
and10keV.Thoughtherearemanywaystoobtainplasma,
smallbodies.
the one technique that is chiefly employed to study lunar
andasteroidenvironmentsusesanemissivefilamentwithin
6.2.1. Numericalmodellingofgranularsystemsinplan-
acylindricalstainlesssteelvacuumchamber.Argonplasma
etaryscience
is created by the impact ionisation using electrons emitted
For many years, numerical continuum approaches have
fromanegativelybiasedandheatedfilamentinthebottom
beenusedtoaddressissuesrelatedtogranulardynamicsin
of the chamber (Wang et al. 2012; Hartzell et al. 2013).
thefieldofplanetaryscience(e.g., Holsapple1993, inves-
However,theexperimentshaveahigherdensityandlower
tigating scaling laws for impact-induced catastrophic dis-
temperaturethanthesolarwind.
ruption,andBenzetal.1994,investigatingdifferentclasses
Efforts are being made to improve these experimental
oftwo-bodycollisions). Continuumapproacheshavesince
techniquessothattheobtainedresultsarenotonlyqualita-
grown significantly in sophistication (some in current use
tively, but also quantitatively correct, and so that they can
for the modelling of asteroid shapes and the scaling laws
be directly translated to the asteroid environment. In spite
fordisruptionare,e.g.,Holsapple&Michel2008;Holsap-
ofthis,theycarrysize,timeandcostconstraints,andeven
ple 2009 and Sharma et al. 2009). Discrete numerical ap- Lagrangian descriptions, together with complex physical
proaches, describedbelow, havebeeninuseinthefieldof laws and computational parameters, have been developed
planetarysciencesince,e.g.,Brahic(1975);Brahic(1977), (seeMonaghan1988foranearlyperspective). Inaddition,
who simulated Saturn’s rings, Asphaug & Benz (1994), there have been significant advances in continuum coding
whosimulatedthebreakupofcometShoemaker-Levy-9us- approaches that mitigate some of the problems of numeri-
ing a soft-sphere discrete element method (SSDEM), and calviscosity, includingsophisticateddifferencingschemes
Richardsonetal.(1998),whoconductedamoregeneralised (see,e.g.,Mart´ı&Mulet2014).
numericalinvestigationintotidalbreakupsofsmallbodies In the modelling of granular media, the continuum ap-
usingahard-spherediscreteelementmethod(HSDEM).In proach often treats the material as a deformable solid and
lightofadvancesincomputerprocessorspeeds,onlyquite models it with some chosen finite-element (e.g., Crosta
recently have robust versions of SSDEM begun to be ap- et al. 2009, who make use of the definition of bulk plas-
plied to the realm of planetary science, and specifically tic and elastic modulii) or mesh-free (Lagrangian) method
to the study of regolith dynamics in microgravity environ- suitedfortheparticularsituationathand(e.g.,Elaskaretal.
ments. SSDEMgranularphysicscodesarenowdeveloped 2000). Stability problems (e.g., the stability of granu-
oradaptedspecificallyforplanetaryapplicationsbyvarious lar piles or cliffs) require an elasto-plastic framework that
groups (e.g., Wada et al. 2006; Sa´nchez & Scheeres 2011; defines, at minimum, some type of yield criterion (con-
Schwartz et al. 2012; Tancredi et al. 2012) using various sider the simple 1-D coulomb yield criterion: conditions
integrationschemesandstrategiestoaccountforthetypes are static until the tangential force exceeds the product of
of friction between grains. Other codes, using continuum thecoefficientofstaticfrictionandthenormalforce).
approaches,havealsobeendevelopedtoinvestigate,forin- Depending on the system, a continuum approach could
stance,collisionsbetweenporousaggregates(Sirono2004; incorporate viscosity in some useful form (e.g., Lagre´e
Jutzietal.2013). However,owingtothegranularnatureof etal.2011)andtreatthematerialasafluidandusecompu-
therelevantdynamicalprocessesinvolved,theregolithsur- tationalfluiddynamics(usefulindescribingoutflowsfrom,
faces of small bodies are more commonly modelled using e.g., crater walls). However, since successful simulations
discrete element methodologies, specifically (although not ofasteroidsurfacedynamicsentailthecapturingofthedis-
exclusively)SSDEM. crete nature of individual particles, the effects of such ho-
mogenisation must be examined thoroughly. Haff (1983),
6.2.2. Thecontinuumapproachtoregolithmodelling
in his article describing his efforts to treat granular media
Continuum numerical modelling of granular material asafluidanalytically,considersmanyofthepotentialhaz-
usuallybeginsbydefiningasystematicapproachtoaverag- ardsandpayoffsofusingfluiddynamicsfromhisanalytical
ingthephysicsacrossmanyparticles(andtherebytreating approach. Thesesameconsiderationsthatariseanalytically
the granular material as a continuum). The approach typi- (i.e., the sharp boundary conditions on grain surfaces, in-
callywillinvolvedividingaparameterspaceordimensional cluding the complex frictional forces at play on these sur-
spaceintoregions,andthenintegratingthesystemforward faces),alsoarisenumerically.
intime.
6.2.3. Thediscreteapproachtoregolithmodelling
Indescribingfluidmechanicsequationsfordenseflows,
relevantconservationlawsarefollowed,ofteninaNavier- The discrete-element method (DEM) is a general term
Stokes framework (e.g., Haff 1983). At minimum, these appliedtotheclassofdiscreteapproachestothenumerical
conservation laws should include mass conservation, mo- simulationofparticlemotion,whereparticlesusuallyrepre-
mentum conservation, and the conservation of energy to- sentactualgrains(orcollectionsofgrains),unlikethecon-
gether with the first law of thermodynamics. These re- tinuumapproachthatusesaveragestohomogenisethema-
gions may be described in Eulerian terms, where a vol- terial. However, as continuum approaches use homogeni-
umeinspaceisheldconstant,withmaterialpassinginand sation schemes to simplify the complex and rapidly vary-
out of this volume, or in Lagrangian terms, where a re- ing physical quantities within a material, in discrete ap-
gion is described by the material itself as it moves around proaches, the physics within individual particles are aver-
in space (e.g., see Springel & Hernquist 2002 for a fully aged,andthustheparticlesaredefinedonlybytheireffec-
conservativederivationofaLagrangiantreatmentinaSPH tivebehaviour, describedbyquantitativeparameters. Nev-
code). The numerical viscosity problems that stem from ertheless, these parameters are typically borrowed directly
continuumcodes(aknownproblemsincevonNeumann& from continuum mechanics, either by explicitly defining
Richtmyer(1950),aresultofthehomogenisingofmaterial quantitiessuchasthePoisson’sratioandtheYoung’s,bulk,
properties)aresomewhateasiertomitigateinEulerianap- andshearmoduli, orbyusingderivedquantitiesincluding
proaches(Springel2010),whereastheprincipleadvantage springconstantsandfrictioncoefficients.
totheLagrangianapproachisthattheresolutionofthesys- DEMcollisionalroutinesaretypicallybuiltoffofanN-
tem adjusts automatically to the movement of the material Body routine. In an N-Body framework, at the beginning
(see,e.g., theBenzetal.1994handlingoftwo-bodycolli- ofeachtimestep,forcesoneachoftheN numberofparti-
sions).SophisticatedcodesthatusehybridsofEulerianand cles(bodies)inagivensimulationaresolvedforandusedto
advance the simulation ahead through time in small quan- linearforcedependenceoraHertziandependenceonpen-
tizedsteps. Theseforcescaninclude,forexample,external etration depth (F ∝ x or F ∝ x3/2, where x is the pen-
gravity or electromagnetic fields, and can incorporate the etration in units of length). Once a contact is established,
effectsthattheparticlesthemselveshaveonthefield(e.g., particlesaresubjecttofrictionalforcesoftenmakinguseof
interparticlegravity). Thecollisionalroutinesarethenbuilt material parameters based on continuum mechanical the-
ontopofthisframework,anddefineanewsetofforcesto ory; these forces will vary depending on the specific SS-
accountforthephysicalinteractionsthatparticleshavewith DEM code (see Radja¨ı & Dubois 2011 for a comprehen-
each other (of course these interactions are also electric at siveoverviewonthedifferentclassesofSSDEMcodesand
themolecularlevel). commonvariations).
In the standard implementation, particles are approxi-
6.2.4. Benefitsanddrawbacksbetweenthesenumerical
matedashavingperfectsphericalgeometry(morecomplex
approaches
geometries are also possible). Since DEMs tend to com-
putethemotionsoflargenumbersofindividualparticles,it In contrast to HSDEM, where collisions are solved for
isrelativelycomputationallyintensive,whichtendstolimit analytically,basedonthepositionsandmomentumstatesof
eitherthelengthofasimulationorthenumberofparticles the particles along with some basic material parameters to
inthesimulation. describethebehaviour,SSDEMmustresolveeachcollision
numerically. Assuch,collisionstypicallyrequiredozensof
The hard-sphere discrete-element method (HSDEM) - timestepstoresolve. InHSDEM,however,sincecollisions
Thenumericalapproachtosolvingtheequationsofmo- arepredictedinadvanceandthentreatedasinstantaneous,it
tioninHSDEMistodiscretisethesimulationintime,with istheexternaldynamics(e.g.,gravity)thatdrivesthechoice
variablesprogressinginsmallsteps(timesteps)byforward instepsizeratherthanthecollisionhandling;althoughthe
advancingalongderivatives. Collisionsarepredictedinad- timestep may also be limited by concerns over missing a
vance by analysing particle motion and checking for po- collision, timesteps in SSDEM can often be smaller than
tentialcontactsthatmayoccurwithinthecurrenttimestep. those used in identical HSDEM simulations by factors of
Particles are not allowed to penetrate each other (overlaps 102.Indenseregimes,however,thespeedoftheintegration
are not allowed). HSDEM codes carry out collisions be- in HSDEM is typically limited by collisional bottlenecks
tweenspheresbytreatingcollisionsasinstantaneouslyoc- owingtothefactthatcollisionsmusttypicallybecomputed
curringatasinglepointofcontactthatliesontheparticles’ one-at-a-timeinsequence,limitingtheefficiencyofparallel
surfaces; thesoundspeedthroughaparticleisalsoinstan- processing.
taneous. Thusthismethodologytreatsmotionsandmutual Duringthefiniteamountoftimethatittakesfortworeal
interactions of non-deformable, indestructible (hard) par- particles to collide, the particles are in contact, exchang-
ticles. The assumption of hard particles allows collisions ingenergyandmomentum. Insufficientlydenseregimes,a
tobecarriedoutanalytically,withpost-collisionvelocities thirdparticlemayintrudeonthiscollisionbymakingcon-
androtationsgivenby,e.g.,Richardson(1994,1995). tact with either particle or with both particles, changing
theoutcome. ThisexposesanotherdrawbackofHSDEM’s
treatment of collisions between particles: multiple contact
The soft-sphere discrete element method (SSDEM) -
effectsarenottakenintoaccountinHSDEM,wherecolli-
SSDEM is commonly used in the study of granular ma-
sionsareseparateandinstantaneous.Multi-contactsystems
terials, and has often been applied to industrial problems
ofrigid,indestructibleparticlescan,however,besolvedus-
(e.g., Tsuji et al. 1992; Cleary & Sawley 2002; Kosinski
ing an algorithm known as contact dynamics (CD), which
&Hoffmann2009). Themethodologyhasbeenappliedin
treatstheserigidparticlesassubjecttoCoulombstaticfric-
otherdisciplinesofphysics, suchaschemicalphysics, un-
tional forces (Moreau 1994). HSDEM also must account
derthenameofMolecularDynamics(MD),whereitisused
fortheproblemofinelasticcollapse,whichoccurswhena
to compute motions of atoms and molecules and interac-
group of particles collides infinitely often in a finite time,
tionsbetweenthem(infact,thisapplicationandnomencla-
causing the simulation to grind to a halt (see, e.g., Petit &
ture predates SSDEM’s use in granular physical contexts;
Henon1987;Bernu&Mazighi1990forearlynumericalen-
Alder&Wainwright1959). Inthecomplexcaseofsimulat-
countersofthiseffect,and,e.g.,McNamara&Young1992;
ing regolith dynamics, one must treat each of the relevant
McNamara 2000 for more complete quantitative descrip-
frictional forces by generalising and applying the rules of
tions). Although sophisticated collision-handling schemes
interaction between grains. The basic methodology hav-
have been tailored to help mitigate this problem (Petit &
ing been developed by Cundall & Strack (1979), SSDEM
Henon1987;Luding&McNamara1998),thesimplestway
treats macroscopic particles as deformable spheres, allow-
to avoid the finite-time singularity in HSDEM is straight-
ing overlaps between particles to act as proxies for actual
forward: itrequiressettingsomeminimumimpactspeedor
deformation. Particlesaretakentobeincontactifandonly
energyunderwhichthecoefficientofrestitutionisunity(no
iftheirsurfacesaretouchingormutuallypenetrating. The
dissipation). Thisresultsinparticles,eventhosein“stable”
greater the extent of this penetration, the more repulsive
configurations, to always maintain some minimum energy
force is generated. The majority of codes either assume a
state (temperature), which may not appropriately capture will there be a collision at any moment during the follow-
certainlow-energygranularregimes. Problemsofinelastic ing timestep? In contrast, SSDEM needs only to ask if
collapsedonotariseinSSDEMorCDmethodologies. thereareanyoverlapspresentlyoccurring. Effectively,this
SSDEMisneverthelesstheappropriatechoiceoverCD meansthatcontactsearchesarea4-dimensionalproblemin
inverydenseregimesoflargenumbersofparticlesbecause HSDEM (3 spatial dimensions and 1 temporal dimension)
CD must solve, through iteration between each timestep, anda3-dimensionalprobleminSSDEM(3spatialdimen-
thecontactforcesbetweeneachparticleinacontactchain. sions). More complex wall boundary geometries are more
Still, HSDEM and CD can be a more appropriate colli- easilyincludedinSSDEM(theSSDEMcodeimplemented
sional routine in more dilute regimes, where collisions do in pkdgrav, for example, allows for a wider set of wall
not involve networks consisting of large numbers of parti- boundaries;theseincludethetriangle,whichcanallowfor
cles (e.g., higher energy, “granular gas” regimes; see Sec- sophisticated 3-dimensional polyhedral shapes, along with
tion3ofthischapter),andwheresoundpropagationspeed thosediscussedinSchwartzetal.2012).
is unimportant (the sound speed can be controlled in soft- As a direct comparison of the two DEM collisional
spheremethodologiesviaastiffnessparameter). However, methodologies, HSDEMandSSDEM,simulationsoflow-
evenin2-bodycollisions,HSDEMcanmakeerrors. Parti- speedrubblepilecollisionswereperformedusingbothSS-
cles can rotate significantly during realistic, finite, oblique DEM and HSDEM in the same numerical code (Richard-
collisions, altering the outcome of the collision—an effect sonetal.2012b). Inthetests, self-gravitatingrubblepiles
thatdoesnotoccurbetweenperfectlyrigidparticles(Mu¨ller (withoutfrictionorcohesiveforces)werecollidedtogether
& Po¨schel 2012). In addition to CD, attempts have been atlowspeed. Theresultsfromthetwocollisionalroutines
made to use HSDEM with added analytical corrections to weregenerallysimilar; SSDEMoften,butnotinallcases,
accountforrotationsofthemulti-bodysystemwhileparti- showed a somewhat higher final ellipticity of the largest
clesarecolliding(Mu¨ller&Po¨schel2013),andtoaccount collisionalremnant,suggestingahighershearstrengththat
for finite collision times (by “pausing” collisions). These mayarisefromitsmorecarefultreatmentofcontactforces
aremosteffectiveinregimeswhen(third-)particleintrud- andfinitecollisionaltimes.
erscanbesafelyignored.Also,whentworeal(deformable)
6.2.5. Theuseofnumericalsimulationinthefieldofre-
grainsjust“graze”eachother,dependingontherigidityof
golithdynamics
the grains, they may interact very weakly; however, these
typesofcontactsaregiventoomuchsignificancewhenus- Several DEM numerical codes have been written with
inghardspheres(theassumptionofgrainincompressibility the specific aim of investigating and solving for regolith
inHSDEMandCDleadstotheexchangeoftoomuchen- dynamics. Walsh et al. (2008, 2012) used the HSDEM
ergyandmomentumduringobliqueimpacts). collisional routine in pkdgrav (Stadel 2001; Richardson
Despite these drawbacks, HSDEM and/or CD can be etal.2000)tostudygraindisplacementsandloftingdueto
theappropriatechoiceincertaindilute/ballisticregimes(cf. YORPspinup. Soft-spherecollisionalmethodologieshave
Richardson et al. 2011; Murdoch et al. 2012), where they been used to study regolith dynamics in low-gravity envi-
are advantageous over continuum models for their speed ronments,whichincludesubsonicimpactcrateringintore-
andaccuracy,andoftenoverSSDEMfortheirspeedgiven golith(Wadaetal.2006;Schwartzetal.2014),theBrazil-
the ability to handle large timesteps. These are regimes nut effect (Tancredi et al. 2012; Matsumura et al. 2014),
wherecollisionaltimescalesmaybelongcomparedtoother and regolith motion due to tidal forces (Yu et al. 2014).
dynamical timescales (the “granular gas” regime; see Sec- Alsointherealmofasteroidsurfacescience,severalnumer-
tion3ofthischapter),wherecontactsbetweengrainsdonot icalinvestigationstostudyavalancherun-outsandanglesof
persistandthuscomplexfrictionalforcesarelessrelevant, repose of regolith have been performed using both contin-
and where the propagation of disturbance waves (material uumcodes(e.g.,Holsapple2013,usingafinite-differencing
soundspeeds)areunimportant. method)andusingDEM(e.g.,Richardsonetal.2012a,us-
For the simulation of dense environments, however, in- ingsoft-sphere).
cludingmanygranularregimesinwhichgraindeformation, The inclusion of cohesion in numerical coding can be
finitesoundspeed,multicontactphysics,andthecomplex- adaptedtomanydifferentgranulardynamicsapplicationsin
ity of higher-order frictional forces during contact cannot planetaryscience,includingthestudyofregolithdynamics
be neglected, SSDEM is the better choice. Although the (e.g.,inSSDEM:Schwartzetal.2013;Sa´nchez&Scheeres
use of small timesteps can limit its speed, it is well suited 2014). Attractive interparticle forces may be used to treat
for true parallelisation (without the HSDEM drawback of ionic or covalent molecular bonds, weaker intermolecular
having to compute collisions in serial order). Presently it dipole-dipole bonds such as hydrogen bonds and London
is possible to follow the evolution of millions of grains in dispersionforces,orelectrostaticforces.
close contact and over a fairly large range of simulation
conditions,somethingnotpossiblewithHSDEM. 7. CONCLUSIONS
The search for contacts in SSDEM is a simpler task
Inthischapterwehavepresentedabriefoverviewofthe
than the search for contacts (collisions) in HSDEM. Be-
observations of granular surfaces of asteroids, our current
foreintegratingoverthenexttimestep, HSDEMmustask:
understanding of the geophysical processes that may have Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol. 32 of d,
occurred, and the state of the art experimental and com- p.1786.
putationalmethodsusedtostudythemandmakenewpre- Beitz, E., Gu¨ttler, C., Blum, J., et al. (2011) Low-velocity
dictions. The field of regolith dynamics in varying grav- CollisionsofCentimeter-sizedDustAggregates.TheAs-
itational environments, including the study of near-Earth trophysicalJournal,736,34.
asteroids as self-gravitating aggregates, is a new field of Benz, W., Asphaug, E., & Ryan, E. V. (1994) Numerical
planetary science that will continue to evolve with the de- simulations of catastrophic disruption: Recent results.
velopment of better computational tools and experimental Planet.SpaceSci.,42,1053–1066.
techniques, refinements in the theoretical models and new Bernu, B. & Mazighi, R. (1990) One-dimensional bounce
in-situobservationsfromup-comingspacemissionssuchas of inelastically colliding marbles on a wall. Journal of
OSIRIS-REx(NASA)andHayabusa2(JAXA). PhysicsA:MathematicalandGeneral,23,24,5745.
Besse,S.,Kppers,M.,Barnouin,O.,etal.(2014)Lutetia?s
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS lineaments. PlanetaryandSpaceScience,101,0,186–
195.
We would like to thank D. C. Richardson and D. J.
Binzel, R. P., Morbidelli, A., Merouane, S., et al. (2010)
Scheeres for their comments on our chapter and L. Staron
Earthencountersastheoriginoffreshsurfacesonnear-
andO.Barnouinfortheirveryhelpfulreviews.
Earthasteroids. Nature,463,331–334.
REFERENCES Biswas, P., Sa´nchez, P., Swift, M.R., &King, P.J.(2003)
Numericalsimulationsofair-drivengranularseparation.
Abe, S., Mukai, T., Hirata, N., et al. (2006) Mass and Lo-
Phys.Rev.E,68,050301.
calTopographyMeasurementsofItokawabyHayabusa.
Bottke, W. F., Jr., Richardson, D. C., Michel, P., & Love,
Science,312,5778,1344–1347.
S.G.(1999)1620Geographosand433Eros: Shapedby
Alder, B.J.&Wainwright, T.E.(1959)StudiesinMolec-
PlanetaryTides? Astron.J.,117,1921–1928.
ularDynamics.I.GeneralMethod. J.Chem.Phys., 31,
Bowden, F. & Leben, L. (1939) The nature of sliding and
459–466.
the analysis of friction. Proceedings of the Royal So-
Andreotti, B., Forterre, Y., & Pouliquen, O. (2013) Gran-
ciety of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical
ularMedia: BetweenFluidandSolid. CambridgeUni-
Sciences,pp.371–391.
versityPress. CambridgeBooksOnline.
Bowden,F.&Tabor,D.(1939)Theareaofcontactbetween
Asphaug, E. (2007) The Shifting Sands of Asteroids. Sci-
stationaryandbetweenmovingsurfaces. Proceedingsof
ence,316,5827,993–994.
theRoyalSocietyofLondon.SeriesA,Mathematicaland
Asphaug, E. (2009) Growth and Evolution of Asteroids.
PhysicalSciences,pp.391–413.
Ann.Rev.EarthPlanet.Sci.,37,1,413–448.
Bowden, F. P., Moore, A. J. W., & Tabor, D. (1943) The
Asphaug, E. & Benz, W. (1994) Density of comet
ploughing and adhesion of sliding metals. Journal of
Shoemaker-Levy9deducedbymodellingbreakupofthe
AppliedPhysics,14,2,80–91.
parent’rubblepile’. Nature,370,120–124.
Brahic,A.(1975)Anumericalstudyofagravitatingsystem
Asphaug, E., King, P., Swift, M., & Merrifield, M. (2001)
of colliding particles: Applications to the dynamics of
Brazil nuts on Eros: Size-sorting of Asteroid Regolith.
saturn’s rings and to the formation of the solar system.
InLunarandPlanetaryScienceConference,32,p.1708.
Icarus,25,3,452–458.
Asphaug,E.,Moore,J.M.,Morrison,D.,etal.(1996)Me-
Brahic, A. (1977) Systems of colliding bodies in a grav-
chanical andGeological Effectsof ImpactCratering on
itational field. I-Numerical simulation of the standard
Ida. Icarus,120,1,158–184.
model. AstronomyandAstrophysics,54,895–907.
Bagnold,R.(1966)Theshearinganddilatationofdrysand
Bridgwater,J.(1976)Fundamentalpowdermixingmecha-
and the’singing’mechanism. Proceedings of the Royal
nisms. PowderTechnology,15,2,215–236.
SocietyofLondon.SeriesA.MathematicalandPhysical
Brilliantov, N. V. & Po¨schel, T. (2010) Kinetic theory of
Sciences,295,1442,219–232.
granulargases. OxfordUniversityPress.
Bagnold, R. A. (1954) Experiments on a gravity-free dis-
Buczkowski,D.L.,Barnouin-Jha,O.S.,&Prockter,L.M.
persionoflargesolidspheresinanewtonianfluidunder
(2008)433Eroslineaments:Globalmappingandanaly-
shear. ProceedingsoftheRoyalSocietyofLondon.Se-
sis. Icarus,193,39–52.
riesA.MathematicalandPhysicalSciences,225,1160,
Burtally,N.,King,P.J.,&Swift,M.R.(2002)Spontaneous
49–63.
air-driven separation in vertically vibrated fine granular
Barnouin-Jha, O. S., Cheng, A. F., Mukai, T., et al.
mixtures. Science,295,5561,1877–1879.
(2008) Small-scale topography of 25143 Itokawa from
Carr, M. H., Kirk, R. L., McEwen, A., et al. (1994) The
theHayabusalaseraltimeter. Icarus,198,108–124.
geologyofGaspra. Icarus,107,61.
Barnouin-Jha, O. S., Garvin, J. B., Cheng, A. F., et al.
Carrigy,M.A.(1970)Experimentsontheanglesofrepose
(2001) Preliminary Impact Crater Dimensions on 433
of granular materials1. Sedimentology, 14, 3-4, 147–
ErosfromtheNEARLaserRangefinderandImager. In
158.
Cassidy, T. & Johnson, R. (2005) Monte carlo model of Cundall,P.A.&Strack,O.D.L.(1979)Adiscretenumer-
sputteringandotherejectionprocesseswithinaregolith. ical model for granular assemblies. Ge´otechnique, 29,
Icarus,176,2,499–507. 47–65.
Castellanos, A. (2005) The relationship between attractive deGennes, P.G.(1999)Granularmatter: atentativeview.
interparticle forces and bulk behaviour in dry and un- Rev.Mod.Phys.,71,S374–S382.
chargedfinepowders. AdvancesinPhysics,54,4,263– Delbo, M., Libourel, G., Wilkerson, J., et al. (2014) Ther-
376. mal fatigue as the origin of regolith on small asteroids.
Chapman, C. R. (1976) Asteroids as meteorite parent- Nature,508,233–236.
bodies - The astronomical perspective. Geochimica et Demura, H., Kobayashi, S., Nemoto, E., etal.(2006)Pole
CosmochimicaActa,40,701–719. andglobalshapeof25143Itokawa. Science,312,5778,
Chapman, C. R. (2004) Space weathering of asteroid sur- 1347–1349.
faces. AnnualReviewofEarthandPlanetarySciences, Denevi, B. W., Blewett, D. T., Buczkowski, D. L., et al.
32,1,539–567. (2012) Pitted Terrain on Vesta and Implications for the
Chen, W. & Han, D. (1988) Plasticity for structural engi- PresenceofVolatiles. Science,338,246–.
neers. Springer,NewYork. Dollfus, A., Geake, J. E., Mandeville, J. C., & Zellner, B.
Cheng,A.F.(2002)NearEarthAsteroidRendezvous:Mis- (1977)Thenatureofasteroidsurfaces,fromopticalpo-
sionSummary. AsteroidsIII,pp.351–366. larimetry. In A. H. Delsemme, ed., IAU Colloq. 39:
Cheng, A. F., Barnouin-Jha, O., Hirata, N., et al. (2007) Comets,Asteroids,Meteorites: Interrelations,Evolution
Fundamentally distinct outcomes of asteroid collisional andOrigins,pp.243–251.
evolution: Itokawa and Eros. Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, Dombard, A. J., Barnouin, O. S., Prockter, L. M., &
L09201. Thomas,P.C.(2010)BouldersandpondsontheAster-
Cheng,A.F.,Barnouin-Jha,O.,Prockter,L.,etal.(2002a) oid433Eros. Icarus,210,2,713–721.
Small-ScaleTopographyof433ErosfromLaserAltime- Dombard,A.J.&Freed,A.M.(2002)Thermallyinduced
tryandImaging. Icarus,155,51–74. lineationsontheasteroidEros: Evidenceoforbittrans-
Cheng,A.F.,Izenberg,N.,Chapman,C.R.,&Zuber,M.T. fer. Geophys.Res.Lett.,29,16.
(2002b)Pondeddepositsonasteroid433Eros.Meteorit- Dove,A.&Colwell,J.E.(2013)Investigationsofcharged
icsandPlanetaryScience,37,1095–1105. particlemotiononthesurfacesofdusty,airlesssolarsys-
Cheng,A.F.,Santo,A.G.,Heeres,K.J.,etal.(1997)Near- tembodies(Invited).AGUFallMeetingAbstracts,p.F1.
EarthAsteroidRendezvous: missionoverview. J.Geo- Durda, D., Devaud, G., Scheeres, D., et al. (2013) Labo-
phys.Res.,102,23695–23708. ratory investigation of asteroid regolith properties. In
Chladni, E. (1787) Entdeckungen u¨ber die theorie des EPSC2013Proceedings.
klanges. BeyWeidmannserbenundReich. Elaskar, S. A., Godoy, L. A., Gray, D. D., & Stiles, J. M.
Cleary, P. W. & Sawley, M. L. (2002) DEM modelling of (2000) A viscoplastic approach to model the flow of
industrialgranularflows: 3Dcasestudiesandtheeffect granularsolids. Int.J.SolidsStruct.,37,2185–2214.
ofparticleshapeonhopperdischarge.Appl.Math.Mod- Fall,A.,Weber,B.,Pakpour,M.,etal.(2014)Slidingfric-
ell.,26,89–111. tiononwetanddrysand. Phys.Rev.Lett.,112,175502.
Colwell,J.E.(2003)Lowvelocityimpactsintodust:results Faraday,M.(1831)Onapeculiarclassofacousticalfigures;
fromtheCOLLIDE-2microgravityexperiment. Icarus, and on certain forms assumed by groups of particles
164,188–196. uponvibratingelasticsurfaces. PhilosophicalTransac-
Colwell, J. E., Gulbis, A. A., Hora´nyi, M., & Robertson, tionsoftheRoyalSocietyofLondon,121,pp.299–340.
S.(2005)Dusttransportinphotoelectronlayersandthe Forterre,Y.&Pouliquen,O.(2008)FlowsofDenseGran-
formationofdustpondsonEros. Icarus, 175, 1, 159– ular Media. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 40, 1,
169. 1–24.
Coradini, A., Capaccioni, F., Erard, S., et al. (2011) The Fu, H., Jedicke, R., Durda, D.D., etal.(2005)Identifying
Surface Composition and Temperature of Asteroid 21 near-Earthobjectfamilies. Icarus,178,434–449.
LutetiaAsObservedbyRosetta/VIRTIS. Science, 334, Fujiwara, A. & Asada, N. (1983) Impact fracture patterns
492–. onphobosellipsoids. Icarus,56,3,590–602.
Costantino,D.J.,Scheidemantel,T.J.,Stone,M.B.,etal. Fujiwara, A., Kawaguchi, J., Yeomans, D. K., et al.
(2008) Starting to Move through a Granular Medium. (2006) The Rubble-Pile Asteroid Itokawa as Observed
Phys.Rev.Lett.,101,108001. byHayabusa. Science,312,5778,1330–1334.
Coulomb,C.A.(1776)Essaisuruneapplicationdesre`gles GDR-MiDi(2004)Ondensegranularflows. TheEuropean
demaximis&minimisa`quelquesproble`mesdestatique, PhysicalJournalE,14,4,341–365.
relatifsa`l’architecture. Del’ImprimerieRoyale,Paris. Geissler, P., Petit, J. M., & Greenberg, R. (1996) Ejecta
Crosta,G.B.,Imposimato,S.,&Roddeman,D.(2009)Nu- Reaccretion on Rapidly Rotating Asteroids: Implica-
mericalmodelingof2-dgranularstepcollapseonerodi- tionsfor243Idaand433Eros.InT.Rettig&J.M.Hahn,
bleandnonerodiblesurface. JournalofGeophysicalRe- eds.,CompletingtheInventoryoftheSolarSystem,vol.
search: EarthSurface,114,F3.
107 of Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Holsapple, K. A. (2004) Equilibrium figures of spinning
Series,pp.57–67. bodieswithself-gravity. Icarus,172,272–303.
Gray, J. M. N. T. & Chugunov, V. A. (2006) Particle-size Holsapple,K.A.(2009)Onthe“strength”ofthesmallbod-
segregation and diffusive remixing in shallow granular iesofthesolarsystem:Areviewofstrengththeoriesand
avalanches. JournalofFluidMechanics,569,365–398. theirimplementationforanalysesofimpactdisruptions.
Gudhe,R.,Yalamanchili,R.,&Massoudi,M.(1994)Flow Planet.SpaceSci.,57,127–141.
ofgranularmaterialsdownaverticalpipe. International Holsapple,K.A.(2013)Modelinggranularmaterialflows:
JournalofNon-LinearMechanics,29,1,1–12. The angle of repose, fluidization and the cliff collapse
Gu¨ttler,C.,vonBorstel,I.,Schra¨pler,R.,&Blum,J.(2013) problem. Planet.SpaceSci.,82–83,0,11–26.
Granularconvectionandthebrazilnuteffectinreduced Holsapple,K.A.&Michel,P.(2006)Tidaldisruptions: A
gravity. Phys.Rev.E,87,044201. continuum theory for solid bodies. Icarus, 183, 331–
Haff, P. (1983) Grain flow as a fluid-mechanical phe- 348.
nomenon.JournalofFluidMechanics,134,1,401–430. Holsapple,K.A.&Michel,P.(2008)Tidaldisruptions.II.
Hapke, B. & van Hoen, H. (1963) Photometric studies of Acontinuumtheoryforsolidbodieswithstrength,with
complexsurfaces, withapplicationstothemoon. Jour- applicationstotheSolarSystem. Icarus,193,283–301.
nalofGeophysicalResearch,68,15,4545–4570. Housen, K.R.&Holsapple, K.A.(2011)Ejectafromim-
Harris,A.W.(2006)Thesurfacepropertiesofsmallaster- pactcraters. Icarus,211,856–875.
oidsfromthermal-infraredobservations. InL.Daniela, Housen,K.R.,Wilkening,L.L.,Chapman,C.R.,&Green-
M.SylvioFerraz,&F.J.Angel,eds.,Asteroids,Comets, berg, R. (1979) Asteroidal regoliths. Icarus, 39, 317–
Meteors,vol.229ofIAUSymposium,pp.449–463. 351.
Harris, A. W., Fahnestock, E. G., & Pravec, P. (2009) On Hughes, A. L., Colwell, J. E., & DeWolfe, A. W. (2008)
the shapes and spins of “rubble pile” asteroids. Icarus, ElectrostaticdusttransportonEros: 3-Dsimulationsof
199,310–318. pondformation. Icarus,195,2,630–648.
Hartzell,C.,Wang,X.,Scheeres,D.,&Hora´nyi,M.(2013) Jaeger,H.M.,Nagel,S.R.,&Behringer,R.P.(1996)Gran-
Experimental demonstration of the role of cohesion in ular solids, liquids, and gases. Rev. Mod. Phys., 68,
electrostatic dust lofting. Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 6, 1259–1273.
1038–1042. Janssen, H. A. (1895) Versuche u¨ber Getreidedruck in
Hartzell,C.M.&Scheeres,D.J.(2011)Theroleofcohe- Silozellen. Zeitschr. d. Vereines deutscher Ingenieure,
siveforcesinparticlelaunchingonthemoonandaster- 39,35,1045–1049.
oids. PlanetaryandSpaceScience,59,14,1758–1768. Jaumann,R.,Nass,A.,Otto,K.,etal.(2014)Thegeologi-
LunarDust,AtmosphereandPlasma: TheNextSteps. calnatureofdarkmaterialonvestaandimplicatonsfor
Hartzell,C.M.&Scheeres,D.J.(2013)Dynamicsoflevi- thesubsurfacestructure. Icarus,,0,–.
tatingdustparticlesnearasteroidsandtheMoon. Jour- Jaumann, R., Williams, D. A., Buczkowski, D. L., et al.
nalofGeophysicalResearch: Planets,118,1,116–125. (2012) Vesta’s Shape and Morphology. Science, 336,
Heim,L.-O.,Blum,J.,Preuss,M.,&Butt,H.-J.(1999)Ad- 687–.
hesionandfrictionforcesbetweensphericalmicrometer- Jenkins,J.T.&Zhang,C.(2002)Kinetictheoryforidenti-
sizedparticles. Phys.Rev.Lett.,83,3328–3331. cal, frictional, nearly elastic spheres. Physics of Fluids
Herrick, R. R. & Hessen, K. K. (2006) The planforms of (1994-present),14,3,1228–1235.
low-angle impact craters in the northern hemisphere of Jewitt, D.(2012)TheActiveAsteroids. TheAstronomical
Mars. Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 41, 1483– Journal,143,66.
1495. Johnson, K.L., Kendall, K., &Roberts, A.D.(1971)Sur-
Hirabayashi, M. (2014) Structural failure of two-density- face energy and the contact of elastic solids. Proceed-
layercohesionlessbiaxialellipsoids. Icarus,236,0,178 ings of the Royal Society of London. A. Mathematical
–180. andPhysicalSciences,324,1558,301–313.
Hirabayashi,M.,Scheeres,D.J.,Sa´nchez,D.P.,&Gabriel, Jones,J.E.(1924)Onthedeterminationofmolecularfields.
T.(2014)Constraintsonthephysicalpropertiesofmain i. from the variation of the viscosity of a gas with tem-
beltcometp/2013r3fromitsbreakupevent. TheAstro- perature. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
physicalJournalLetters,789,1,L12. SeriesA,106,738,441–462.
Hoerz, F., Schneider, E., Gault, D. E., et al. (1975) Catas- Jop,P.,Forterre,Y.,&Pouliquen,O.(2006)Aconstitutive
trophic rupture of lunar rocks - A Monte Carlo simula- lawfordensegranularflows. Nature,441,727–730.
tion. Moon,13,235–258. Jutzi, M. & Asphaug, E. (2011) Mega-ejecta on asteroid
Hofmeister,P.G.,Blum,J.,&Heißelmann,D.(2009)The Vesta. Geophys.Res.Lett.,38,L01102.
flow of granular matter under reduced-gravity condi- Jutzi,M.,Asphaug,E.,Gillet,P.,etal.(2013)Thestructure
tions. AIPConferenceProceedings,1145,1,71–74. of the asteroid 4Vesta as revealed by models of planet-
Holsapple,K.A.(1993)Thescalingofimpactprocessesin scalecollisions. Nature,494,207–210.
planetarysciences. AnnualReviewofEarthandPlane-
tarySciences,21,333–373.
Keller, H. U., Barbieri, C., Koschny, D., et al. (2010) E- Matson,D.L.&Nash,D.B.(1983)Io’satmosphere: Pres-
Type Asteroid (2867) Steins as Imaged by OSIRIS on sure control by regolith cold trapping and surface vent-
BoardRosetta. Science,327,190–. ing. Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics,
Kleinhans, M. G., Markies, H., de Vet, S. J., et al. (2011) 88,A6,4771–4783.
Static and dynamic angles of repose in loose granular Matsumura,S.,Richardson,D.C.,Michel,P.,etal.(2014)
materialsunderreducedgravity. JournalofGeophysical The Brazil nut effect and its application to asteroids.
Research: Planets,116,E11,n/a–n/a. Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.,443,3368–3380.
Knight, J. B., Jaeger, H. M., & Nagel, S. R. (1993) Mazrouei, S., Daly, M., Barnouin, O., etal.(2012)Distri-
Vibration-induced size separation in granular media: butionofBouldersonAsteroid25143Itokawa.InLunar
The convection connection. Phys. Rev. Lett., 70, 24, andPlanetaryScienceConference,vol.43,p.2404.
3728–3731. McCarthy, J. J. (2009) Turning the corner in segregation.
Kosinski, P. & Hoffmann, A. C. (2009) Extension of the PowderTechnology,192,2,137–142.
hard-sphereparticle-wallcollisionmodeltoaccountfor McGetchin,T.,Settle,M.,&Head,J.(1973)Radialthick-
particledeposition. Phys.Rev.E,79,6,061302. ness variation in impact crater ejecta: implications for
Krause,M.&Blum,J.(2004)GrowthandFormofPlane- lunar basin deposits. Earth and Planetary Science Let-
tarySeedlings: ResultsfromaSoundingRocketMicro- ters,20,2,226–236.
gravity Aggregation Experiment. Physical Review Let- McNamara, S. (2000) Inelastic collapse. In J. Karkheck,
ters,93,2,021103. ed., Dynamics: Models and Kinetic Methods for Non-
Kreslavsky, M. A. & Shkuratov, Y. G. (2003) Photometric equilibrium Many Body Systems, pp. 267–277. Kluwer,
anomaliesofthelunarsurface: Resultsfromclementine Dordrecht.
data. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 108, McNamara, S. & Young, W. R. (1992) Inelastic collapse
E3,n/a–n/a. and clumping in a one-dimensional granular medium.
Krohn, K., Jaumann, R., Elbeshausen, D., et al. (2014) PhysicsofFluidsA,4,496–504.
Asymmetric craters on vesta: Impact on sloping sur- McNaught, A. D. & Wilkinson., A. (1997) IUPAC. Com-
faces. Planet.SpaceSci.,,0,–. pendiumofchemicalterminology,vol.1669. Blackwell
Kudrolli, A. (2004) Size separation in vibrated granular ScienceOxford. XMLon-linecorrectedversion.
matter. ReportsonProgressinPhysics,67,3,209. McSween, H. Y., Mittlefehldt, D. W., Beck, A. W., et al.
Ku¨ppers,M.,Moissl,R.,Vincent,J.-B.,etal.(2012)Boul- (2011) HED Meteorites and Their Relationship to the
dersonLutetia. Planet.SpaceSci.,66,71–78. GeologyofVestaandtheDawnMission. SpaceScience
Lagre´e, P.-Y., Staron, L., & Popinet, S. (2011) The granu- Reviews,163,141–174.
lar column collapse as a continuum: validity of a two- Mehta,A.(2007)Granularphysics. CambridgeUniversity
dimensionalnavier–stokesmodelwithaµ(i)-rheology. Press.
JournalofFluidMechanics,686,378–408. Melosh,H.J.(1989)Impactcratering: Ageologicprocess.
Lamy,P.L.,Faury,G.,Jorda,L.,etal.(2010)Multi-color, OxfordMonographsonGeologyandGeophysics.
rotationally resolved photometry of asteroid 21 Lutetia Me´riaux,C.&Triantafillou,T.(2008)Scalingthefinalde-
from OSIRIS/Rosetta observations. Astron. Astrophys., posits of dry cohesive granular columns after collapse
521,A19. and quasi-static fall. Physics of Fluids (1994-present),
Lee, P. (1996) Dust Levitation on Asteroids. Icarus, 124, 20,3,033301.
181–194. Meunier,P.,Uchida,T.,&Hovius,N.(2013)Landslidepat-
Legros, F. (2002) The mobility of long-runout landslides. ternsrevealthesourcesoflargeearthquakes. Earthand
EngineeringGeology,63,34,301–331. PlanetaryScienceLetters,363,0,27–33.
Luding, S.&McNamara, S.(1998)Howtohandlethein- Michel,P.,Benz,W.,Tanga,P.,&Richardson,D.C.(2001)
elasticcollapseofadissipativehard-spheregaswiththe Collisions and Gravitational Reaccumulation: Forming
tcmodel. GranularMatter,1,3,113–128. Asteroid Families and Satellites. Science, 294, 1696–
Mantz, A., Sullivan, R., & Veverka, J. (2004) Regolith 1700.
transportincratersonEros. Icarus,167,197–203. Michel, P., O’Brien, D. P., Abe, S., & Hirata, N. (2009)
Marchi, S., McSween, H. Y., O’Brien, D. P., et al. (2012) Itokawa’scrateringrecordasobservedbyHayabusa:Im-
TheViolentCollisionalHistoryofAsteroid4Vesta.Sci- plicationsforitsageandcollisionalhistory. Icarus,200,
ence,336,690–. 503–513.
Mart´ı,M.&Mulet,P.(2014)Sometechniquesforimprov- Michikami, T., Nakamura, A. M., Hirata, N., et al. (2008)
ing the resolution of finite difference component-wise Size-frequencystatisticsofbouldersonglobalsurfaceof
weno schemes for polydisperse sedimentation models. asteroid25143Itokawa. Earth,Planets,andSpace,60,
AppliedNumericalMathematics,78,1–13. 13–20.
Massironi, M., Marchi, S., Pajola, M., et al. (2012) Ge- Miller,J.K.,Konopliv,A.S.,Antreasian,P.G.,etal.(2002)
ological map and stratigraphy of asteroid 21 Lutetia. DeterminationofShape,Gravity,andRotationalStateof
Planet.SpaceSci.,66,125–136. Asteroid433Eros. Icarus,155,3–17.
Miyamoto, H. (2014) Unconsolidated boulders on the sur- Pohlman, N. A., Severson, B. L., Ottino, J. M., & Luep-
faceofItokawa. Planet.SpaceSci.,95,94–102. tow,R.M.(2006)Surfaceroughnesseffectsingranular
Miyamoto, H., Yano, H., Scheeres, D.J., etal.(2007)Re- matter: Influenceonangleofreposeandtheabsenceof
golithMigrationandSortingonAsteroidItokawa. Sci- segregation. Phys.Rev.E,73,031304.
ence,316,5827,1011–1014. Pravec, P., Vokrouhlicky´, D., Polishook, D., et al. (2010)
Monaghan,J.J.(1988)AnintroductiontoSPH. Computer Formationofasteroidpairsbyrotationalfission. Nature,
physicscommunications,48,1,89–96. 466,1085–1088.
Moreau,J.J.(1994)Somenumericalmethodsinmultibody Prockter, L., Thomas, P., Robinson, M., et al. (2002) Sur-
dynamics: application to granular materials. European faceExpressionsofStructuralFeaturesonEros. Icarus,
journalofmechanics.A.Solids,13,93–114. 155,1,75–93.
Mu¨ller,P.&Po¨schel,T.(2012)Obliqueimpactoffriction- Radja¨ı, F. & Dubois, F. (2011) Discrete-element modeling
lessspheres:onthelimitationsofhardspheremodelsfor ofgranularmaterials. Berlin: Wiley-ISTE.
granulardynamics. GranularMatter,14,2,115–120. Rao, K.K., Nott, P.R., &Sundaresan, S.(2008)Anintro-
Mu¨ller, P. & Po¨schel, T. (2013) Event-driven molecular duction to granular flow. Cambridge University Press
dynamics of soft particles. Physical Review E, 87, 3, NewYork.
033301. Rennilson,J.&Criswell,D.(1974)Surveyorobservations
Murchie, S., Robinson, M., Clark, B., et al. (2002) Color oflunarhorizon-glow. TheMoon,10,2,121–142.
Variations on Eros from NEAR Multispectral Imaging. Richard,P.,Nicodemi,M.,Delannay,R.,etal.(2005)Slow
Icarus,155,145–168. relaxation and compaction of granular systems. Nature
Murdoch, N., Michel, P., Richardson, D. C., et al. (2012) Materials,4,121–128.
NumericalsimulationsofgranulardynamicsII.Particle Richardson,D.C.(1994)TreeCodeSimulationsofPlane-
dynamicsinashakengranularmaterial. Icarus,219,1, taryRings. Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.,269,493.
231–335. Richardson, D. C. (1995) A Self-Consistent Numerical
Murdoch,N.,Rozitis,B.,Green,S.,etal.(2013a)Granular TreatmentofFractalAggregateDynamics. Icarus,115,
shearflowinvaryinggravitationalenvironments. Gran- 320–335.
ularMatter,15,2,129–137. Richardson, D. C., Blum, J., Weinhart, T., et al. (2012a)
Murdoch, N., Rozitis, B., Green, S.F., etal.(2013b)Sim- NumericalSimulationsofLandslidesCalibratedAgainst
ulating regoliths in microgravity. Mon. Not. R. Astron. LaboratoryExperimentsforApplicationtoAsteroidSur-
Soc.. faceProcesses. InAAS/DivisionforPlanetarySciences
Murdoch, N., Rozitis, B., Nordstrom, K., et al. (2013c) MeetingAbstracts#44,vol.44ofAAS/DivisionforPlan-
Granular Convection in Microgravity. Phys. Rev. Lett., etarySciencesMeetingAbstracts#44,p.#105.06.
110,018307. Richardson,D.C.,Bottke,W.F.,&Love,S.G.(1998)Tidal
Nakamura, A. M., Fujiwara, A., & Kadono, T. (1994) Ve- Distortion and Disruption of Earth-Crossing Asteroids.
locityoffinerfragmentsfromimpact.Planet.SpaceSci., Icarus,134,47–76.
42,1043–1052. Richardson, D. C., Leinhardt, Z. M., Melosh, H. J., et al.
Nakamura, T., Noguchi, T., Tanaka, M., et al. (2011) (2002) Gravitational Aggregates: Evidence and Evolu-
ItokawaDustParticles: ADirectLinkBetweenS-Type tion. AsteroidsIII,pp.501–515.
AsteroidsandOrdinaryChondrites. Science,333,1113. Richardson, D. C., Munyan, S. K., Schwartz, S. R., &
Nedderman,R.M.(2005)Staticsandkinematicsofgranu- Michel, P. (2012b) Comparison of Discrete Element
larmaterials. CambridgeUniversityPress. Methods for Simulating Low-Speed Rubble Pile Colli-
Nesvorny´,D.,Bottke,W.F.,Vokrouhlicky´,D.,etal.(2010) sions: First Results. In Lunar and Planetary Science
DoplanetaryencountersresetsurfacesofnearEarthas- Conference, vol. 43 of Lunar and Planetary Inst. Tech-
teroids? Icarus,209,510–519. nicalReport,p.2195.
Nichol, K., Zanin, A., Bastien, R., et al. (2010) Flow- Richardson,D.C.,Quinn,T.,Stadel,J.,&Lake,G.(2000)
InducedAgitationsCreateaGranularFluid. Phys.Rev. DirectLarge-ScaleN-BodySimulationsofPlanetesimal
Lett.,104,078302. Dynamics. Icarus,143,45–59.
Perko, H., Nelson, J., & Sadeh, W. (2001) Surface clean- Richardson,D.C.,Walsh,K.J.,Murdoch,N.,&Michel,P.
liness effect on lunar soil shear strength. Journal of (2011) Numerical simulations of granular dynamics: I.
Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 127, Hard-spherediscreteelementmethodandtests. Icarus,
4,371–383. 212,427–437.
Petit, J.-M. & Henon, M. (1987) A numerical simulation Richardson,J.E.,Jr.,Melosh,H.J.,etal.(2005)Theglobal
ofplanetaryrings.I-Binaryencounters. Astron.Astro- effects of impact-induced seismic activity on fractured
phys.,173,389–404. asteroidsurfacemorphology. Icarus,179,2,325–349.
Pieters,C.M.,Ammannito,E.,Blewett,D.T.,etal.(2012) Richardson, J. E., Melosh, H. J., & Greenberg, R. (2004)
DistinctivespaceweatheringonVestafromregolithmix- Impact-InducedSeismicActivityonAsteroid433Eros:
ingprocesses. Nature,491,79–82. A Surface Modification Process. Science, 306, 5701,
1526–1529.
Riner,M.A.,Robinson,M.S.,Eckart,J.M.,&Desch,S.J. Schra¨pler, R., Blum, J., Seizinger, A., & Kley, W. (2012)
(2008) Global survey of color variations on 433 Eros: The Physics of Protoplanetesimal Dust Agglomerates.
Implicationsforregolithprocessesandasteroidenviron- VII.TheLow-velocityCollisionBehaviorofLargeDust
ments. Icarus,198,67–76. Agglomerates. TheAstrophysicalJournal,758,35.
Roberts, J., Kahn, E., Barnouin, O., et al. (2014a) Not all Schroter,M.,Goldman,D.I.,&Swinney,H.L.(2005)Sta-
pondsareflat: Astereophotoclinometricanalysisofto- tionarystatevolumefluctuationsinagranularmedium.
pographyon433eros. Meteorit.Planet.Sci.,InPress. Phys.Rev.E,71,3,030301.
Roberts, J. H., Barnouin, O. S., Kahn, E. G., & Prockter, Schulz, R., Sierks, H., Ku¨ppers, M., & Accomazzo, A.
L. M. (2014b) Observational bias and the apparent dis- (2012) Rosetta fly-by at asteroid (21) Lutetia: An
tributionofpondsoneros. Icarus,241,0,160–164. overview. Planet.SpaceSci.,66,2–8.
Robinson, M. S., Thomas, P. C., Veverka, J., et al. (2001) Schwartz, S. R., Michel, P., & Richardson, D. C. (2013)
The nature of ponded deposits on Eros. Nature, 413, Numerically simulating impact disruptions of cohesive
6854,396–400. glass bead agglomerates using the soft-sphere discrete
Robinson, M. S., Thomas, P. C., Veverka, J., et al. (2002) elementmethod. Icarus,226,67–76.
Thegeologyof433Eros.MeteoriticsandPlanetarySci- Schwartz, S. R., Michel, P., Richardson, D. C., & Yano,
ence,37,1651–1684. H.(2014)Low-speedimpactsimulationsintoregolithin
Rognon, P. G., Roux, J.-N., NaaIM, M., & Chevoir, F. supportofasteroidsamplingmechanismdesigni.:Com-
(2008)Denseflowsofcohesivegranularmaterials.Jour- parisonwith1-gexperiments. Planet.SpaceSci..
nalofFluidMechanics,596,21–47. Schwartz, S. R., Richardson, D. C., & Michel, P. (2012)
Rosato,A.,Strandburg,K.J.,Prinz,F.,&Swendsen,R.H. An implementation of the soft-sphere discrete element
(1987)WhytheBrazilnutsareontop: Sizesegregation methodinahigh-performanceparallelgravitytree-code.
ofparticulatematterbyshaking.Phys.Rev.Lett.,58,10, GranularMatter,14,363–380.
1038–1040. Sharma,I.,Jenkins,J.T.,&Burns,J.A.(2009)Dynamical
Rozitis, B., MacLennan, E., & Emery, J. P. (2014) Cohe- passagetoapproximateequilibriumshapesforspinning,
siveforcespreventtherotationalbreakupofrubble-pile gravitatingrubbleasteroids. Icarus,200,304–322.
asteroid(29075)1950da. Nature,512,7513,174–176. Shoemaker, E. M., Batson, R. M., Holt, H. E., et al.
Russell,C.T.&Raymond,C.A.(2011)TheDawnMission (1968)TelevisionObservationsfromSurveyor3.J.Geo-
toVestaandCeres. SpaceScienceReviews,163,3–23. phys.Res.,73,3989.
Russell,C.T.,Raymond,C.A.,Coradini,A.,etal.(2012) Sierks, H., Lamy, P., Barbieri, C., et al. (2011) Images of
Dawn at Vesta: Testing the Protoplanetary Paradigm. Asteroid 21 Lutetia: A Remnant Planetesimal from the
Science,336,684–. EarlySolarSystem. Science,334,487–.
Saito, J., Miyamoto, H., Nakamura, R., et al. (2006) Sirono, S.-I. (2004) Conditions for collisional growth of a
Detailed Images of Asteroid 25143 Itokawa from grainaggregate. Icarus,167,431–452.
Hayabusa. Science,312,5778,1341–1344. Springel, V. (2010) Smoothed particle hydrodynamics in
Sa´nchez, P. & Scheeres, D. J. (2011) Simulating Asteroid astrophysics. Annual Review of Astronomy and Astro-
Rubble Piles with A Self-gravitating Soft-sphere Dis- physics,48,1,391–430.
tinctElementMethodModel. Astrophys.J.,727,120. Springel, V. & Hernquist, L. (2002) Cosmological
Sa´nchez, P. & Scheeres, D. J. (2014) The strength of re- smoothed particle hydrodynamics simulations: the en-
golithandrubblepileasteroids. MeteoriticsandPlane- tropyequation. Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.,333,3,649–
taryScience,49,788–811. 664.
Scheeres, D., Gaskell, R., Abe, S., et al. (2006) The Stadel,J.G.(2001)CosmologicalN-bodysimulationsand
Actual Dynamical Environment About Itokawa. In theiranalysis. Ph.D.thesis,UniversityofWashington.
AIAA/AASAstrodynamicsSpecialistConferenceandEx- Sullivan, R., Greeley, R., Pappalardo, R., etal.(1996)Ge-
hibit. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronau- ologyof243Ida. Icarus,120,119–139.
tics. Sullivan,R.J.,Thomas,P.C.,Murchie,S.L.,&Robinson,
Scheeres,D.,Hartzell,C.,Sa´nchez,P.,&Swift,M.(2010) M.S.(2002)AsteroidGeologyfromGalileoandNEAR
Scalingforcestoasteroidsurfaces:Theroleofcohesion. ShoemakerData. AsteroidsIII,pp.331–350.
Icarus,210,2,968–984. Tancredi, G., Maciel, A., Heredia, L., et al. (2012) Gran-
Scheeres, D. J. (2005) Solar Radiation Pressure and Tran- ular physics in low-gravity environments using discrete
sient Flows on Asteroid Surfaces. In S. Mackwell & elementmethod. Mon.Not.R.Astron.Soc.,420,3368–
E.Stansbery,eds.,LunarandPlanetaryScienceConfer- 3380.
ence,vol.36,p.1919. Taylor,G.J.(1993)RapidMagmaMigrationinAsteroids.
Scheeres, D.J.(2014)Solarsystem: Sandcastlesinspace. Meteoritics,28,447–448.
Nature,512,7513,139–140. Thomas,N.,Barbieri,C.,Keller,H.U.,etal.(2012)Thege-
Scheeres,D.J.,Abe,M.,Yoshikawa,M.,etal.(2007)The omorphologyof(21)Lutetia: ResultsfromtheOSIRIS
effectofYORPonItokawa. Icarus,188,425–429. imagingsystemonboardESA’sRosettaspacecraft. lan-
etaryandSpaceScience,66,96–124.
Thomas, P., Veverka, J., Bloom, A., &Duxbury, T.(1979) von Neumann, J. & Richtmyer, R. D. (1950) A method
Grooves on Phobos: Their Distribution, Morphology for the numerical calculation of hydrodynamic shocks.
and Possible Origin. J. Geophys. Res., 84, B14, 8457– JournalofAppliedPhysics,21,3,232–237.
8477. Wada,K.,Senshu,H.,&Matsui,T.(2006)Numericalsim-
Thomas, P. C., A’Hearn, M. F., Veverka, J., et al. (2013) ulationofimpactcrateringongranularmaterial. Icarus,
Shape, density, and geology of the nucleus of Comet 180,528–545.
103P/Hartley2. Icarus,222,550–558. Walsh, K. J. & Richardson, D. C. (2008) A steady-state
Thomas, P. C., Joseph, J., Carcich, B., et al. (2002) Eros: model of NEA binaries formed by tidal disruption of
Shape, Topography, and Slope Processes. Icarus, 155, gravitationalaggregates. Icarus,193,553–566.
18–37. Walsh, K. J., Richardson, D. C., & Michel, P. (2008) Ro-
Thomas,P.C.&Robinson,M.S.(2005)Seismicresurfac- tational breakup as the origin of small binary asteroids.
ingbyasingleimpactontheasteroid433Eros. Nature, Nature,454,188–191.
436,366–369. Walsh,K.J.,Richardson,D.C.,&Michel,P.(2012)Spin-
Thomas,P.C.,Veverka,J.,Bell,J.F.,etal.(1999)Mathilde: up of rubble-pile asteroids: Disruption, satellite forma-
Size,Shape,andGeology. Icarus,140,17–27. tion,andequilibriumshapes. Icarus,220,514–529.
Thomas, P. C., Veverka, J., Robinson, M. S., & Murchie, Walton, O. R. & Braun, R. L. (1986) Viscosity, granular-
S.(2001)Shoemakercraterasthesourceofmostejecta temperature,andstresscalculationsforshearingassem-
blocksontheasteroid433Eros. Nature,413,394–396. bliesofinelastic, frictionaldisks. JournalofRheology,
Thomas, P.C., Veverka, J., Sullivan, R., etal.(2000)Pho- 30,949.
bos: Regolith and ejecta blocks investigated with Mars Wang, X., Hora´nyi, M., & Robertson, S. (2012) Charac-
Orbiter Camera images. Journal of Geophysical Re- teristics of a plasma sheath in a magnetic dipole field:
search,105,15091–15106. Implicationstothesolarwindinteractionwiththelunar
Thornton, A. (2005) A study of segregation in granular magneticanomalies. JournalofGeophysicalResearch:
gravitydrivenfreesurfaceflows. Ph.D.thesis,TheUni- SpacePhysics,117,A6,n/a–n/a.
versityofManchester. Watters, T. R., Thomas, P. C., & Robinson, M. S. (2011)
Tsuchiyama, A., Uesugi, M., Matsushima, T., et al. Thrust faults and the near-surface strength of asteroid
(2011)Three-DimensionalStructureofHayabusaSam- 433Eros. Geophys.Res.Lett.,38,L02202.
ples:OriginandEvolutionofItokawaRegolith.Science, Williams, D. A., O’Brien, D. P., Schenk, P. M., et al.
333,6046,1125–1128. (2013) Lobate and flow-like features on asteroid vesta.
Tsuji, Y., Tanaka, T., & T., I. (1992) Lagrangian numeri- Planet.SpaceSci.,,0,–.
calsimulationofplugflowofcohesionlessparticlesina Williams, D. A., Yingst, R. A., & Garry, W. B. (2014) In-
horizontalpipe. PowderTechnol.,71,239–250. troduction: Thegeologicmappingofvesta. Icarus, ,0,
Veverka, J., Farquhar, B., Robinson, M., et al. (2001) The –.
landingoftheNEAR-Shoemakerspacecraftonasteroid Williams,J.(1976)Thesegregationofparticulatematerials.
433Eros. Nature,413,390–393. Areview. PowderTechnology,15,2,245–251.
Veverka, J., Farquhar, B., Robinson, M., et al. (2001) The Wilson,L.(2013)Volcanismondifferentiatedasteroids(In-
landingoftheNEAR-Shoemakerspacecraftonasteroid vited). AGUFallMeetingAbstracts,p.A6.
433Eros. Wilson,L.&Keil,K.(1996)Volcaniceruptionsandintru-
Veverka, J., Klaasen, K., AHearn, M., etal.(2013)Return sions on the asteroid 4 Vesta. Journal of Geophysical
to comet tempel 1: Overview of stardust-next results. Research,101,18927–18940.
Icarus,222,2,424–435. Stardust/EPOXI. Yano, H., Kubota, T., Miyamoto, H., et al. (2006) Touch-
Veverka,J.,Robinson,M.,Thomas,P.,etal.(2000)NEAR down of the Hayabusa spacecraft at the Muses Sea on
at Eros: Imaging and Spectral Results. Science, 289, Itokawa. Science,312,5778,1350–3.
5487,2088–2097. Yeomans, D. K., Antreasian, P. G., Barriot, J.-P., et al.
Veverka, J., Thomas, P. C., Robinson, M., et al. (2001) (2000) Radio Science Results During the NEAR-
Imaging of Small-Scale Features on 433 Eros from ShoemakerSpacecraftRendezvouswithEros. Science,
NEAR:EvidenceforaComplexRegolith. Science,292, 289,5487,2085–2088.
484–488. Yingst, R., Mest, S., Berman, D., et al. (2014) Geologic
Vincent, J.-B., Besse, S., Marchi, S., et al. (2012) Phys- mappingofvesta. Planet.SpaceSci.,,0,–.
ical properties of craters on asteroid (21) Lutetia. Yu,Y.,Richardson,D.C.,Michel,P.,etal.(2014)Numer-
Planet.SpaceSci.,66,79–86. icalpredictionsofsurfaceeffectsduringthe2029close
Vincent,J.-B.,Schenk,P.,Nathues,A.,etal.(2013)Crater approachofasteroid99942apophis. Icarus.
depth-to-diameter distribution and surface properties of Zuber,M.T.,Smith,D.E.,Cheng,A.F.,etal.(2000)The
(4)vesta. Planet.SpaceSci.,,0,–. Shape of 433 Eros from the NEAR-Shoemaker Laser
Vokrouhlicky´, D., Nesvorny´, D., & Bottke, W. F. (2003) Rangefinder. Science,289,5487,2097–2101.
The vector alignments of asteroid spins by thermal
torques. Nature,425,147–151.
This2-columnpreprintwaspreparedwiththeAASLATEXmacrosv5.2.