Athena:
Modular CAM/CAD Software for Synthetic Biology
Authors:
Deepak Chandran1
Frank T. Bergmann1,2
Herbert M. Sauro1
1Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Box 355061,
William H. Foege Building, Room N210E,
Seattle, WA, USA 98195-5061
2 Keck Graduate Institute,
535 Watson Drive, Claremont, CA, USA, 91711
email: deepakc@u.washington.edu
keywords: synthetic biology, modularity
]MQ.oib-q[
1v8952.2090:viXra
Synthetic biology is the engineering of cellular networks. It combines principles of en-
gineering and the knowledge of biological networks to program the behavior of cells.
Computational modeling techniques in conjunction with molecular biology techniques
have been successful in constructing biological devices such as switches, oscillators, and
gates. The ambition of synthetic biology is to construct complex systems from such fun-
damental devices, much in the same way electronic circuits are built from basic parts. As
this ambition becomes a reality, engineering concepts such as interchangeable parts and
encapsulation will find their way into biology. We realize that there is a need for compu-
tational tools that would support such engineering concepts in biology. As a solution, we
have developed the software Athena that allows biological models to be constructed as
modules. Modules can be connected to one another without altering the modules them-
selves. In addition, Athena houses various tools useful for designing synthetic networks
including tools to perform simulations, automatically derive transcription rate expres-
sions, and view and edit synthetic DNA sequences. New tools can be incorporated into
Athena without modifying existing program via a plugin interface, IronPython scripts,
Systems Biology Workbench interfacing and the R statistical language. The program is
currently for Windows operating systems, and the source code for Athena is made freely
available through CodePlex, www.codeplex.com/athena.
1 Introduction
Over the past few decades, biological protocols for inserting genes and manipulating a
cell’s innate behaviour have become common practice [35]. At the same time, systems
biology has provided the ability to mathematically represent and analyze biological sys-
tems. The ability to computationally analyze a biological system and the procedures
for constructing that system together have given birth to the emerging field of synthetic
biology [1]. Synthetic biology brings the vision of constructing organisms with designed
geneticandmetabolicnetworksthatperformfunctionsthatareofinteresttothedesigner.
To date, such synthetic networks can mimic functions such as logic gates, switches, and
oscillators [2, 8, 10, 13, 14, 26, 27, 39]. These synthetic networks have been modelled
and simulated to reproduce the behaviour seen in a cell, demonstrating the fact that
it is possible to design, model, and build biological circuits in much the same way as
electronic circuits.
Synthetic biology aims to build networks that are composable, so that one designed net-
work can be reused in different settings, allowing large networks to be built from simpler
ones [1]. This aim has been pioneered by the BioBricks Foundation [9, 34], which has
introduced various new concepts and terms to fuel synthetic biology as an engineering
discipline. The BioBricks Foundation defined the notion of a BioBrick “part”, the ba-
sic unit used for construction of a synthetic network. Current BioBrick parts include
promoters, protein coding regions, ribosome binding sites, transcriptional terminators,
and other functional components which can be ligated together to construct regulatory
networks. The MIT Registry of Parts [21] hosts a database of such parts. Just as electric
engineers are able to purchase parts to build a circuit, the vision is to do the same for
biological systems.
While the term “part” refers to a physical entity, the term “device” [1, 19] is used to
identify a functional entity. A synthetic biology device is a composition of various parts
that performs a well defined function. Devices can be as simple as a regulatory region
followed by a gene, or it can be an entire regulatory pathway, as long as it has a well
defined function. The inspiration behind the concept of a device is that well behaved
devices can be connected together in different ways to create complex systems easily and
reliably. Various ongoing efforts hope to resolve issues such as proper definitions for parts
and devices, because well defined behaviours and descriptions are needed for synthetic
biology to move forward. One proposed interface for connecting two devices is through
“PoPS” inputs and outputs [18]. Polymerase Per Second, or PoPS, refers the rate at
which RNA polymerase is moving through a given region of DNA, much like current
through a wire. This notion is important for synthetic biology because it allows a part
such as a protein coding region to define its transcription rate independent of which
promoter lies upstream of it: the promoter provides the PoPS current as a function of
transcription factor concentrations, and the gene receives that current and produces a
proportional amount of mRNA transcripts. The PoPS current travels through the gene
and to the next part. A transcriptional terminator stops the current. Since much of the
presentsyntheticbiologyreliesonrewiringregulatorynetworksbyalteringpromoter-gene
combinations, the PoPS terminology is a useful way of defining parts without referring
to specific proteins.
Available software tools The software presented in this work, called Athena, allows mod-
ular construction of models as well as supports various features, such as sequence infor-
mation, that is needed for synthetic biology. In order to select other features that Athena
should support, we began by analyzing popular existing software packages. For this we
selected CellDesigner [32], JDesigner [3], and BioTapestry [16] as representative modeling
environments of the systems biology community and BioJADE as representative visual
modeling environments for synthetic biology.
CellDesigner [32, 33], developed by the Systems Biology Institute, Tokyo, is a visual
modeling environment, focusing on representing biochemical networks employing the
process-diagram notation. This allows for a complex visual representation of all parts
of biochemical modeling. CellDesigner also allows for time-course simulations and works
with the Systems Biology Workbench, allowing a modeler, to quickly analyze the current
model with other software tools. CellDesigner 4.0 also features a plug-in API allowing
3rd parties to extend its capabilities.
JDesigner [3] operates in a similar way to CellDesigner, with a stronger focus on analysis
and simulation of the created model than the visual representation. JDesigner automat-
ically assigns kinetic laws to created reactions, speeding up the kinetic modeling aspect.
JDesigner also assists modelers by providing a list of inbuilt kinetic laws that is filtered
to match the reaction topology the modeler created. By tight integration with the Sys-
tems Biology Workbench, JDesigner integrates time course simulation, steady state and
metabolic control analysis as well as structural analysis of the network. JDesigner can
also be extended through the Systems Biology Workbench.
Both CellDesigner and JDesigner use the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML)
[24] as their native format, making it straight forward to use models created with over
120 other software tools (as seen on the sbml.org homepage). Both groups have also
joined the Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) initiative [11], thus enabling
their software to exchange the visual description of the computational model.
BioTapestry [16] is exclusively designed to build and visualize (large) gene-regulatory
networks. Models can be created either by “drawing” genes, similar to the CellDesigner
and JDesigner approach, or by importing them from gene expression data. BioTapestry
also features the concept of sub-models, where certain parts of a current model can be
active or inactive at any given time. This feature is used extensively in developmental
network models [31].
BioJADE [23] was probably the first visual software modeling tool for Synthetic Biol-
ogy. It was developed closely with the BioBricks repositories and allows the design and
simulation of synthetic biological systems. The BioBricks repositories take a central role
in BioJADE. Existing parts can be accessed and new parts created in the repository.
BioJADE employs techniques very similar to those used in electronic circuit designs,
where new parts can be assembled from existing parts in a schematic view. BioJADE
provides simulation capabilities relying on established stochastic simulation procedures.
While BioJADE is open source, the connectivity to the central BioBricks repositories is
currently not publicly available. As the only tool in this brief survey, BioJADE lacks
SBML export and relies on direct database access or a proprietary XML format for model
exchange.
While currently existing tools such as JDesigner [3, 37] and CellDesigner [32] allow anal-
ysis of a single network, there are few such as BioJADE [23] and BioTapestry [16] that
allow users to create a new network by connecting existing networks. However, synthetic
biology requires models to be composable. To reach this goal, the hurdle is that the con-
cept of “module” is unclear for biological networks, particularly an engineerable module.
We have developed the application Athena in order to demonstrate a working concept
of a biological module and how this concept of a biological module can be used to con-
struct synthetic modular networks. In addition, Athena contains various features and
tools oriented toward synthetic biology such as access to a regulatory elements database,
sequence editing, automatic transcription rate derivation, and interface with packages
such as the Systems Biology Workbench (SBW) [25, 3] and R [22].
2 Approach
The core components of Athena are designed for modular design of biological networks
as well as to support various data that are needed for synthetic genetic networks, such
as PoPS rates and sequence information. Additional functionalities are added to Athena
through the plug-in interface, which is explained in section 3.3. Studying other software
features allowed us to integrate the various positive attributes of each software into
Athena, in addition to the modular design methodology. The following list summarizes
the key attributes that we incorporated into Athena.
• Composable models: Larger models can be constructed using smaller models with-
out altering the smaller models.
• Support synthetic biology terminology: A common terminology used in current
synthetic biology is the PoPS rate, which is incorporated into the genetic parts in
Athena.
• Databasesupport: Accesstoapartsdatabasethatwillallowuserstobuildconcrete
designs.
• Standard formats: Supporting a standard format like SBML will allow Athena to
export models in order to analyze them with a growing variety of available software
solutions.
• Familiar visual representations: Choosing visual representations that are familiar
to the synthetic biology community will allow users to become quickly acquainted
with the software.
• Extensibility: Athena will allow 3rd parties to extend it using dedicated plug-ins,
SBW Modules and custom scripts.
Athena is implemented in the C# language using the .NET 2.0 framework.
3.1 Network Construction
Athena supports the construction of genetic, metabolic, or signalling networks. While
signallingnetworksandmetabolicnetworksaremodelledidenticallytoothervisualappli-
cations such as JDesigner and CellDesigner, the genetic networks incorporate the notion
of PoPS in order to support the current methodology in synthetic biology. Each genetic
part, such as a promoter, gene, spacer DNA, or terminator, has a PoPS rate associated
with it. The PoPS rate of a promoter is a function of transcription factor concentrations.
The PoPS rate for other genetic parts are determined by the promoter(s) that lie up-
stream of those parts. When the user does not specify a function, Athena automatically
assigns the PoPS rates when parts are connected to one another by looking at the PoPS
of upstream parts. See Figure 1
3.2 Modularity in Athena
A module is a composable model. A larger model can be constructed by connecting
existing modules together. There are two fundamental ways by which modules can be
connected in Athena.
The first manner of connecting two modules is by declaring shared molecular species
between two or more modules. For example, suppose one person designs a module repre-
senting Glycolysis, and another designs a module for the Citric Acid Cycle. The manner
in which these two modules will be joined in Athena is by declaring (visually) that the
species called “Pyruvate” in the Glycolysis module is the same as the “Pyruvate” in
the Citric Acid Cycle module. Athena does not modify the original modules when con-
structing the new combined network. A screenshot of this form of connecting is shown
in Figure 2. Athena allows for multiple connections like these to be made between two
modules or between multiple modules.
Connecting two modules by declaring shared species can have various uses. One note-
worthy use is that it allows for a user to merge existing SBML models that may share
similar species, just as the modules in Figure 2 share the Pyruvate species. Two SBML
files can be loaded into Athena and converted to modules; the species that are shared
between the two models can be merged as shown in Figure 2. This model containing the
two connected modules can be exported as a single SBML file. The new SBML model
would represent a merged form of the two other SBML files. Hence, Athena can be used
to merge SBML files that contain the same species in them.
The second manner in which two modules can be connected is through PoPS. This form
of connection only applies to modules with a genetic network, i.e. which contain a strand
of DNA. Two such modules are connected by ligating their DNA strands together. The
PoPS rate at the end of the first module will be carried over to the start of the second
module, which allows information to pass from the first module to the second via PoPS
rates. A classical example of such a module is the PoPS inverter, which is defined as a
device that produces a low PoPS output for a high PoPS input (and vice versa).
This device is composed of the coding region for a repressor protein (ribosome binding
site is not drawn) and a promoter containing the operating site of that repressor. The
production of the repressor is controlled by parts lying upstream of the inverter. If the
incoming PoPS is high, then the repressor concentration will be high, which will prevent
RNA polymerase from binding the promoter (labeled as p1 in Figure 3, lowering its
PoPS. Conversely, if the incoming PoPS is low, then the promoter will be active, and the
PoPS will be high. This device can be placed upstream of another module, as shown in
Figure 3, allowing the PoPS output from the inverter to serve as the PoPS input to the
next module.
3.2.1 Crosstalk Warnings
Sincebiologicalmodulesgenerallycontainproteinsorothermoleculesthatdiffusethrough-
out the cell, if two identical modules are placed in the same cell, they will interfere with
one another – the proteins from one module will bind to the binding sites on the other
module(andviceversa). Thisproblemiscalled“crosstalk”betweenmodules. Athenade-
tects crosstalk when two modules use the same species within the same compartment and
signals a warning message that informs the users of the two species that are interfering
with one another.
3.3 User Interface
The graphical interface in Athena is intended to maximize the information displayed on
the screen without sacrificing the visual appeal. This is achieved by having a tabular
window (on the right in Figure 4 that shows all the information that is not shown in
the graphical window. While the central canvas shows the connections and the basic
architecture of a network, the tables on the side show information such as the rate of
each reaction, the parameter values, the PoPS values, and concentrations of molecular
species. The table can also be used to modify any of the values that are displayed in
it, thus providing a table based interface for modifying a model. This table changes its
contentdependingontheselecteditem. Forinstance,whendifferentmodulesareselected,
the table would show the kinetics pertaining to the selected module, independent of what
is outside the module. When items other than modules, such as reactions, genetic parts,
or species, are selected, then the table will show properties specific to those items. For
genetic parts that can generate PoPS, such as promoters, the table provides the user
with transcription rate expressions that mimic logic gates such as NOT, OR, AND,
NOR, NAND, and XOR as well as simple activation and repression (all of these rates are
derived using the automatic transcription rate derivation tool explained in Section 3.4.2.
Since Athena is designed for the modular design of networks, it allows a user to load more
than one module onto the screen and analyze each separately as well the entire network
with all the modules. Not only will the tabular view adjust its display depending on
which module is selected, but the simulation tools will also simulate the selected module
as an independent network. This allows a user to analyze and make modifications to
individual modules without reloading each one.
It is anticipated that users would at times prefer to encapsulate a module (i.e. hide
the inner components of a module) when building larger networks. To facilitate this
perspective visually, Athena modules can be viewed in an encapsulated mode, where
only the interfacing parts or species are visible.
3.4 Built-in Plugins
Various tools are available for providing additional support. The database tool allows a
user to search through all transcriptional regulations listed in the RegulonDB database
[36]andautomaticallyfindtranscriptionfactorsthatbindtoaparticularpromoterregion.
The sequence viewing tool allows a user to view the sequence of a selected strand of DNA
and make changes to the sequence. The transcription rate tool provides the convenience
for a user to derive the transcriptional rate formula for any combination of transcription
factors. The script console tool allows users to interface with Athena via Python scripts.
Each of these tools are described in more detail below.
3.4.1 Database Tool
The incentive behind database support is to allow an easy process by which a hypothet-
ical network can be converted to a real network. For example, a user might construct
a conceptual model of a bi-stable switch. After simulation and other forms of anal-
ysis, the design might be ready for construction. Athena allows the user to replace
each promoter, gene, and protein in the network with items listed in RegulonDB, which
houses sequences of 4579 genes, 1560 transcription factor binding sites, 1492 promoters,
179 ribosome binding sites, and 182 transcriptional terminators from E. coli, which also
includes the sequence information for each. More importantly, RegulonDB contains net-
work information, a list of 2237 pairs of transcription factors and their target operator
site. Athena utilizes the network information to find the matching transcription factor
for any given operator site (or vice versa) in the hypothetical network. We chose to use
RegulonDB because it contains a large amount of network information, such as which
protein regulates which operator site, which is not present in other databases that house
information about genes. Figure 5 illustrates the interface to the database plug-in.
3.4.2 Sequence Viewing Tool
The sequence tool allows users to view the entire DNA sequence composed of multiple
parts as well as edit the sequences, as shown in Figure 6. Including a sequence tool allows
a user to construct a network, simulate or analyze it, and generate the final sequence for
that network.
3.4.3 Transcription Rate Expression Tool
Building realistic genetic networks require realistic rate expressions for gene regulation.
Such rate expressions can often be complex, and they may not be readily known. A
user who is not familiar with gene regulation rate expressions may enter incorrect rate
expressions resulting in an inaccurate network model. To avoid such errors as well as
reduce the burden on the user, Athena provides a visual tool, the Transcription Rate
Tool (shown in Figure 7, that automatically formulates the transcription rate equation
when the user provides the binding affinities of the transcription factors. The derived
rate expression assumes that the binding and unbinding of transcription factors are at
equilibrium.
Since diffusion and binding of transcription factors are generally much faster than tran-
scription and translation, it can often be assumed that diffusion and binding processes
have reached equilibrium when modelling transcriptional processes. Under this assump-
tion, a single transcriptional rate expression can be derived if the dissociation coefficients,
k , for the transcription factors are provided. The Transcription Rate Tool provides the
ability for a user to specify different k for different states of the promoter region. For
example, if two transcription factors bind co-operatively, the k might be lower for one
when the other is bound. The transcription rate tool allows deriving rate expressions for
such situations by allowing a user to provide different k values for different combinations
of bound transcription factors, as shown in Figure 7.
3.4.4 Scripting Console
In order to allow experienced users of Athena to put together workflows to improve
their productivity we integrated the IronPython [20] runtime in Athena. This enables
advanced users to use the popular Python scripting language to program against the
Athena object model. All aspects of the current model can be modified, and all plug-ins
are available for invocation and modification. For example, in order to bring the current
model to steady state and print all steady state concentrations, a user can write a short
script that invokes the steady state function in the Systems Biology Workbench plug-in
(mentioned in the next section).
This scripting interface can easily be retargeted to take advantage of another Dynamic
Language Runtime (DLR) [17] scripting language, such as IronRuby.
3.5 Plug-ins for Model Analysis
Since models constructed using Athena can be converted to the SBML format, all models
constructed in Athena can be analyzed using any of the tools in the Systems Biology
Workbench. An interface to the R statistical language is also incorporated in Athena,
allowing any module in Athena to be simulated and analyzed using R.
3.5.1 Systems Biology Workbench
The Systems Biology Workbench (SBW) [25, 3], is both a platform and programming
language resource sharing framework, as well as a suite of software tools for the analysis,
creation, simulation and visualization of biochemical networks. Athena accesses the Sys-
tems Biology Workbench for a variety of tasks: When models without layout information
are loaded, a dedicated SBW module generates a layout for it. When a SBML model
is imported into Athena, a SBW module will translate the model, and read the layout
information. Also simulations and parameter sweeps will be done by employing a SBW
enabled simulator. This happens behind the scenes, and a user of Athena will not notice
that SBW is working. A user of Athena can directly interact with SBW by employing
the scripting console or by selecting one of the available SBW Analyzers from the SBW
menu. The SBW menu allows taking a snapshot of the currently active model and send
it to a variety of software modules, be it for (deterministic or stochastic) simulation,
bifurcation analysis, visualization or to export the model to a variety of other languages.
3.5.2 R Integration
The open source statistical language, R [22], is commonly used by biologists and bioin-
formaticians. Athena converts all modules that are loaded on the main screen into R
differential equation functions. The R window is integrated into Athena (not shown),
allowing users to perform any analysis and plots that R can perform inside Athena.
Additional R functions, such as Gillespie simulation [12] and a steady state solver, are
included with Athena. With the R plug-in, it is possible to perform analysis such as
time series analysis, calculate covariance matrices, matrix operations, optimization, and
various other capabilities.
3.6 Extensibility
In order to be able to support Athena in the future, we built Athena on top of an
extensible plug-in architecture. That is, apart from the rendering canvas (which displays
all graphical elements of the models) and a basic selecting and moving tool, all further
functionality was implemented using plug-ins. There are four plug-in interfaces:
• IGlyph: A graphical object that can be part of a model: such as promoters, genes
or metabolites,
• INonVisualTool: If a tool implements this interface, it can react on certain key
strokes, or mouse actions on model elements it registered to. Most of Athenas
basic actions are implemented this way: (i.e.: alignment tool: which is used to
align the current selection of model elements, insert tool: for adding new elements
to the model or connecting model elements). Any tool that does not give visual
feedback and does not require additional user input would be implemented using
this interface.
• IVisualTool: This interface possesses all features of the INonVisualTool interface,
but additionally can draw annotations onto the drawing canvas before and after
all model elements are drawn. An example for a tool of this category includes the
Grid tool, which helps to align elements precisely onto a user specified grid.
• IGUITool: This interface gives a plug-in the most flexibility. It possesses the ca-
pabilities of a non-visual tool, but additionally can provide its own graphical user
interface. All of Athena’s advanced features are implemented this way, such as the
simulation panel, the R integration (see below) or the database integration to name
but a few. During program startup Athena will load all plug-ins from the plug-in
directory. Additional plug-ins can be loaded by dragging and dropping them onto
the application, or by using the scripting console.
3.7 Exchange Formats
Exchange formats play a vital role for modeling software tools. With the increasing
popularity of Systems Biology [28] a large number of software tools has become avail-
able to aid modelers in their task. Most of these software tools support one of the de
facto model exchange standards SBML [24] or CellML [30]. In order to provide users
with easy exchange of models, Athena can import and export SBML models. Via SBW
modules, Athena will also import standardized SBML annotations such as the SBML
Layout Extension and its successor the SBML Render Extension. Thus models gener-
ated by CellDesigner or JDesigner will be displayed correctly. Athena also supports the
Jarnac script format [38]. Falling back to the SBW SBML Translators any Athena model
can also be exported into a variety of other programming languages, such as C/C++,
FORTRAN, Java, Matlab, Mathematica or XPP.
4 Discussion
Athena captures the essential features that are required from a synthetic biology tool.
Models can be constructed, simulated, and saved as modules. The database of parts
allows construction of networks from real parts. Sequence information allows the network
to be converted to a DNA sequence that can be synthesized. The plug-in interface allows
other features to be added to Athena.
Theabilitytoconstructmodularnetworksandbuildnewnetworksbyconnectingexisting
ones permits various questions that are relevant to synthetic biology to be answered
readily. For example, the preservation of a devices function is always questionable when
it is used in different contexts. Athena can answer this question readily by connecting the
device(whichwouldberepresentedasamoduleinAthena)ofinteresttodifferentmodules
and observing whether the behaviour matches the expected behaviour. Similarly, one can
test different devices to see which is most suitable inside a particular model. Such tests
can be performed without reconstructing any of the models or making major revisions
to the network being designed.
Itisnotpracticaltobuildatoolthatharboursallpossibleanalysisthatanengineermight
need. In order to circumvent this problem, we have made Athena extensible so that new
tools can be added without editing existing code. The transcription rate derivation tool,
the Gillespie [12] simulator, and sequence viewing tool are examples of such plug-ins.
The Systems Biology Workbench integration and R integration are examples of plug-ins
that enhance the analysis capabilities of Athena. Users can write plug-ins such as these
to add more functionality to the software.
As the field of synthetic biology progresses, new terminologies, concepts, and databases
will emerge including novel approaches to simulation [29]. It is intended that Athena will
move hand-in-hand with the field. There are various plans to cope with current aspects
of synthetic biology. For example, synthetic biology parts are organized into categories,
and the categories grow and change over time. It is planned that Athena will provide a
graphical interface for viewing this category structure and placing items of a particular
category into the model. In order to provide greater analytical capabilities, Athena will
incorporate all the features that can be encoded in an SBML file, such as events, which
would allow various other tools to interface with Athena.
5 Conclusion
Ideally, withsuchasoftwaresuchasAthena, asyntheticbiologistshouldbeabletodesign
a conceptual model and analyze the model using various tools. Once the kinetics of the
model are determined, the user should be able to request the software to find the parts in
thedatabasethatwouldmatchthemodel. Oncethepartsareobtained, theuserwouldbe
able to make small changes to the sequence if needed and then obtain the DNA sequence
for the synthetic network. Athena can perform all of these tasks where information is
available. A network can be analysed using the Systems Biology Workbench, R, and
any other software that supports SBML. If needed, additional analytical plug-ins can
be written without modifying existing code. Once the model is satisfactory, parts that
matchthetopologyofthenetworkcanbeautomaticallyfoundusingthebuilt-indatabase
plug-in. Due to the shortage of known kinetic parameters (such as binding coefficients
and transcription rates) for parts, it is not possible for Athena to find parts that would
fit a model’s kinetic requirements. However, once the parts are found, the DNA sequence
can be obtained and modified. Ideally, when the DNA is inserted into a cell, the cell
would behave as predicted from the model. There may be several reasons why this may
not always be the case. Some of the key parameters may be different, hence altering
the behavior of the cell. Further, when parts such as promoters or ribosome binding
sites are connected to genes, Athena assumes that the part behaves independently of
the location at which they are placed. If there are complications in the kinetic due to
secondary structures or other spacial restrictions, then connections made in Athena may
not capture the biological reality. Connecting modules can have similar concerns – if
there are details that are not captured in the kinetics, the model will be inaccurate.
Such problems may be alleviated when sufficient knowledge is obtianed about how each
part behaves and how they interact with one another. It is our plan to make Athena even
more extensible so that it will be able to adjust to any new information that is obtained
about parts, and a user will be able to design models with as much detail as he pleases,
thus minimizing the gap between computational and experimental results.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by Microsoft’s Computational Challenges in Synthetic Biology
2006 Award