4v76750.2051:viXra
Automatic Differentiation
in Machine Learning: a Survey
Atılım Gu¨ne¸s Baydin gunes@robots.ox.ac.uk
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 3PJ, United Kingdom
Barak A. Pearlmutter barak@pearlmutter.net
Department of Computer Science
National University of Ireland Maynooth
Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland
Alexey Andreyevich Radul axch@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
Jeffrey Mark Siskind qobi@purdue.edu
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States
Derivatives,mostly in the formof gradientsandHessians,areubiquitous inmachine learn-
ing. Automaticdifferentiation(AD),alsocalledalgorithmicdifferentiationorsimply“auto-
diff”, is a family of techniques similar to but more general than backpropagation for effi-
ciently and accurately evaluating derivatives of numeric functions expressed as computer
programs. AD is a small but established field with applications in areas including compu-
tational fluid dynamics, atmospheric sciences, and engineering design optimization. Until
very recently, the fields of machine learning and AD have largely been unaware of each
other and, in some cases, have independently discovered each other’s results. Despite its
relevance,general-purposeAD hasbeen missing fromthe machine learningtoolbox,a situ-
ationslowlychangingwith its ongoingadoptionunderthe names “dynamiccomputational
graphs”and“differentiableprogramming”. We surveythe intersectionofAD andmachine
learning, cover applications where AD has direct relevance, and address the main imple-
mentation techniques. By precisely defining the main differentiation techniques and their
interrelationships,weaimtobringclaritytothe usageofthe terms “autodiff”,“automatic
differentiation”,and “symbolic differentiation” as these are encounteredmore and more in
machine learning settings.
Keywords: Backpropagation,Differentiable Programming
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
1. Introduction
Methodsforthecomputation ofderivatives incomputerprogramscan beclassified intofour
categories: (1) manually working out derivatives and coding them; (2) numerical differen-
tiation using finite difference approximations; (3) symbolic differentiation using expression
manipulation in computer algebra systems such as Mathematica, Maxima, and Maple; and
(4) automatic differentiation, also called algorithmic differentiation, which is the subject
matter of this paper.
Conventionally, many methods in machine learning have required the evaluation of
derivatives and most of the traditional learning algorithms have relied on the computa-
tion of gradients andHessians of an objective function (Sra et al., 2011). When introducing
new models, machine learning researchers have spent considerable effort on the manual
derivation of analytical derivatives to subsequently plug these into standard optimization
proceduressuchas L-BFGS (Zhu et al.,1997) orstochastic gradient descent(Bottou,1998).
Manual differentiation is time consuming and prone to error. Of the other alternatives, nu-
merical differentiation is simple to implement butcan behighly inaccurate due to round-off
and truncation errors (Jerrell, 1997); more importantly, it scales poorly for gradients, ren-
dering it inappropriate for machine learning where gradients with respect to millions of
parameters are commonly needed. Symbolic differentiation addresses the weaknesses of
both the manual and numerical methods, but often results in complex and cryptic expres-
sions plagued with the problem of “expression swell” (Corliss, 1988). Furthermore, manual
and symbolic methods require models to be defined as closed-form expressions, ruling out
or severely limiting algorithmic control flow and expressivity.
We are concerned with the powerful fourth technique, automatic differentiation (AD).
AD performs a non-standard interpretation of a given computer program by replacing the
domain of the variables to incorporate derivative values and redefining the semantics of
the operators to propagate derivatives per the chain rule of differential calculus. Despite its
widespreaduseinotherfields,general-purposeADhasbeenunderusedbythemachinelearn-
ingcommunity untilvery recently.1 Following theemergenceof deeplearning(LeCun et al.,
2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016) as the state-of-the-art in many machine learning tasks and
the modern workflow based on rapid prototyping and code reuse in frameworks such as
Theano (Bastien et al., 2012), Torch (Collobert et al., 2011), and TensorFlow (Abadi et al.,
2016), the situation is slowly changing where projects such as autograd2 (Maclaurin, 2016),
Chainer3 (Tokui et al., 2015), and PyTorch4 (Paszke et al., 2017) are leading the way in
bringing general-purpose AD to the mainstream.
The term “automatic” in AD can be a source of confusion, causing machine learning
practitioners to putthelabel“automatic differentiation”, orjust“autodiff”, on anymethod
or tool that does not involve manual differentiation, without giving due attention to the
underlying mechanism. We would like to stress that AD as a technical term refers to
a specific family of techniques that compute derivatives through accumulation of values
during code execution to generate numerical derivative evaluations rather than derivative
expressions. This allows accurate evaluation of derivatives at machine precision with only
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
a small constant factor of overhead and ideal asymptotic efficiency. In contrast with the
effort involved in arranging code as closed-form expressions under the syntactic and seman-
tic constraints of symbolic differentiation, AD can be applied to regular code with minimal
change, allowing branching, loops, and recursion. Because of this generality, AD has been
applied to computer simulations in industry and academia and found applications in fields
including engineering design optimization (Forth and Evans, 2002; Casanova et al., 2002),
computationalfluiddynamics(Mu¨ller and Cusdin,2005;Thomas et al.,2006;Bischof et al.,
2006), physical modeling (Ekstro¨m et al., 2010), optimal control (Walther, 2007), struc-
tural mechanics (Haase et al., 2002), atmospheric sciences (Carmichael and Sandu, 1997;
Charpentier and Ghemires,2000),andcomputationalfinance(Bischof et al.,2002;Capriotti,
2011).
Inmachinelearning,aspecializedcounterpartofADknownasthebackpropagationalgo-
rithm has been the mainstay for training neural networks, with a colorful history of having
beenreinvented atvarioustimes byindependentresearchers(Griewank,2012;Schmidhuber,
2015). It has been one of the most studied and used training algorithms since the day it
became popular mainly through the work of Rumelhart et al. (1986). In simplest terms,
backpropagation models learning as gradient descent in neural network weight space, look-
ing for the minima of an objective function. The required gradient is obtained by the
backward propagation of the sensitivity of the objective value at the output (Figure 1),
utilizing the chain rule to compute partial derivatives of the objective with respect to each
weight. The resulting algorithm is essentially equivalent to transforming the network evalu-
ation function composed with the objective function under reverse mode AD, which, as we
shall see, actually generalizes the backpropagation idea. Thus, a modest understanding of
the mathematics underlying backpropagation provides one with sufficient background for
grasping AD techniques.
In this paper we review AD from a machine learning perspective, covering its origins,
applications in machine learning, and methods of implementation. Along the way, we also
aimtodispelsomemisconceptions thatwebelievehaveimpededwiderrecognition ofADby
the machine learning community. In Section 2 we start by explicating how AD differs from
numericalandsymbolicdifferentiation. Section 3gives anintroductiontotheADtechnique
and its forward and reverse accumulation modes. Section 4 discusses the role of derivatives
in machine learning and examines cases where AD has relevance. Section 5 covers various
implementation approaches and general-purpose AD tools, followed by Section 6 where we
discuss future directions.
2. What AD Is Not
Without proper introduction, one might assume that AD is either a type of numerical or
symbolic differentiation. Confusion can arise because AD does in fact provide numerical
values of derivatives (as opposed to derivative expressions) and it does so by using symbolic
rules of differentiation (but keeping track of derivative values as opposed to the resulting
expressions), giving it a two-sided nature that is partly symbolic and partly numerical
(Griewank,2003). We startby emphasizinghowAD isdifferent from,andin several aspects
superior to, these two commonly encountered techniques of computing derivatives.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
(cid:1)a)Forwardpass
x(cid:1) y(cid:1) w5
y3 E(cid:1)y3(cid:4)t)
(cid:1)b)Backwardpass
Figure 1: Overview of backpropagation. (a) Training inputs x are fed forward, generating
corresponding activations y . An error E between the actual output y and the
target output t is computed. (b) The error adjoint is propagated backward,
giving the gradient with respect to the weights E = ∂E ,..., ∂E , which is
∂w1 ∂w6(cid:17)
subsequently used in a gradient-descent procedure. The gradient with respect to
inputs E can be also computed in the same backward pass.
2.1 AD Is Not Numerical Differentiation
Numerical differentiation is thefinite differenceapproximation of derivatives usingvalues of
the original function evaluated at some sample points (Burden and Faires, 2001) (Figure 2,
lower right). In its simplest form, it is based on the limit definition of a derivative. For
example, for a multivariate function f : Rn R, one can approximate the gradient f =
,..., using
where e is the i-th unit vector and h > 0 is a small step size. This has the advantage of
being uncomplicated to implement, but the disadvantages of performing O(n) evaluations
of f for a gradient in n dimensions and requiring careful consideration in selecting the step
size h.
Numerical approximations of derivatives are inherently ill-conditioned and unstable,5
with the exception of complex variable methods that are applicable to a limited set of
holomorphic functions (Fornberg, 1981). This is due to the introduction of truncation6 and
5. Usingthelimitdefinitionofthederivativeforfinitedifferenceapproximationcommitsbothcardinalsins
of numerical analysis: “thou shalt not add small numbers to big numbers”, and “thou shalt not subtract
numbers which are approximately equal”.
6. Truncation error is the error of approximation, or inaccuracy, one gets from h not actually being zero.
It is proportional to a power of h.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
− Manual 64x(1 2x)2(1 − 8x+8 − x2)2 25 − 6x(1 x)(1 −
f(x)=l4=64x(1 x)(1 2x)2(1 8x+8x2)2 Differentiation 2x)(1 − 8x+8x −2)2 − − −
Coding Coding
Differentiation +8*x*x)^2
f(x): oftheClosed-form
Automatic Numerical
Differentiation Differentiation
f’(x):
fori=1to3 h=0.000001
return(v,dv)
Figure 2: The range of approaches for differentiating mathematical expressions and com-
puter code, looking at the example of a truncated logistic map (upper left). Sym-
bolic differentiation (center right) gives exact results but requires closed-form in-
put and suffers from expression swell; numerical differentiation (lower right) has
problems of accuracy due to round-off and truncation errors; automatic differen-
tiation (lower left) is as accurate as symbolic differentiation with only a constant
factor of overhead and support for control flow.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
10-17 10-15 10-13 10-11 10-9 10-7 10-5 10-3
Round-off error Truncation error
dominant dominant
Forward difference
Center difference
Figure 3: Error in the forward (Eq. 1) and center difference (Eq. 2) approxi-
mations as a function of step size h, for the derivative of the trun-
cated logistic map f(x)= 64x(1 x)(1 2x)2(1 8x+8x2)2. Plotted er-
rors are computed using E forward (h,x 0 )= (cid:12) f(x0+h h ) − f(x0) − d d x f(x) x0(cid:12) and
E center (h,x 0 ) = (cid:12) f(x0+h) 2 − h f(x0 − h) − d d x f(x) x0(cid:12) at (cid:12) (cid:12)x 0 = 0.2 . (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
round-off7 errors inflicted by the limited precision of computations and the chosen value
of the step size h. Truncation error tends to zero as h 0. However, as h is decreased,
round-off error increases and becomes dominant (Figure 3).
Various techniques have been developed to mitigate approximation errors in numerical
differentiation, such as using a center difference approximation
where the first-order errors cancel and one effectively moves the truncation error from first-
ordertosecond-order inh.8 For theone-dimensional case, itisjustas costly tocomputethe
forwarddifference(Eq.1)andthecenterdifference(Eq.2),requiringonlytwoevaluationsof
f. However, with increasing dimensionality, a trade-off between accuracy and performance
is faced, where computing a Jacobian matrix of a function f : Rn Rm requires 2mn
evaluations.
7. Round-off error is the inaccuracy one gets from valuable low-order bits of the final answer having to
competeformachine-wordspacewithhigh-orderbitsoff(x+he i)andf(x)(Eq.1),whichthecomputer
hastostorejustuntiltheycancelinthesubtractionattheend. Round-offerrorisinverselyproportional
toa power of h.
8. This does not avoid either of thecardinal sins, and is still highly inaccurate dueto truncation.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
Other techniques for improving numerical differentiation, including higher-order finite
differences, Richardson extrapolation to the limit (Brezinski and Zaglia, 1991), and differ-
ential quadrature methods using weighted sums (Bert and Malik, 1996), have increased
computational complexity, do not completely eliminate approximation errors, and remain
highly susceptible to floating point truncation.
The O(n) complexity of numerical differentiation for a gradient in n dimensions is the
main obstacle to its usefulness in machine learning, where n can be as large as millions or
billions in state-of-the-art deep learning models (Shazeer et al., 2017). In contrast, approx-
imation errors would be tolerated in a deep learning setting thanks to the well-documented
error resiliency of neural network architectures (Gupta et al., 2015).
2.2 AD Is Not Symbolic Differentiation
Symbolic differentiation is the automatic manipulation of expressions for obtaining deriva-
tive expressions (Grabmeier and Kaltofen, 2003) (Figure 2, center right), carried out by
applying transformations representing rules of differentiation such as
dx (cid:18)dx (cid:19) (cid:18)dx (cid:19)
Whenformulaearerepresentedasdatastructures,symbolicallydifferentiatinganexpres-
sion tree is a perfectly mechanistic process, considered subject to mechanical automation
even at the very inception of calculus (Leibniz, 1685). This is realized in modern com-
puter algebra systems such as Mathematica, Maxima, and Maple and machine learning
frameworks such as Theano.
In optimization, symbolic derivatives can give valuable insight into the structure of the
problem domain and, in some cases, produce analytical solutions of extrema (e.g., solving
for d f(x) = 0) that can eliminate the need for derivative calculation altogether. On the
other hand, symbolic derivatives do not lend themselves to efficient runtime calculation of
derivative values, as they can get exponentially larger than the expression whose derivative
they represent.
Consider a function h(x) = f(x)g(x) and the multiplication rule in Eq. 3. Since h is
a product, h(x) and d h(x) have some common components, namely f(x) and g(x). Note
also that on the right hand side, f(x) and d f(x) appear separately. If we just proceeded
to symbolically differentiate f(x) and plugged its derivative into the appropriate place, we
would have nested duplications of any computation that appears in common between f(x)
and d f(x). Hence, careless symbolic differentiation can easily produce exponentially large
symbolic expressions which take correspondingly long to evaluate. This problem is known
as expression swell (Table 1).
When we are concerned with the accurate numerical evaluation of derivatives and not
so much with their actual symbolic form, it is in principle possible to significantly simplify
computations by storing only the values of intermediate sub-expressions in memory. More-
over, for further efficiency, we can interleave as much as possible the differentiation and
simplification steps. This interleaving idea forms the basis of AD and provides an account
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
Table 1: Iterations of the logistic map l = 4l (1 l ), l = x and the corresponding
derivatives of l with respect to x, illustrating expression swell.
ln (Simplified form)
2 4x(1 x) 4(1 x) 4x 4 8x
3 16x(1 x)(1 2x)2 16(1 x)(1 2x)2 16x(1 2x)2 16(1 10x+24x2 16x3)
64x(1 x)(1 2x)
4 64x(1 x)(1 2x)2 128x(1 x)( 8+16x)(1 2x)2(1 64(1 42x + 504x2 2640x3 +
(1 8x − +8x −2)2 8x+8x2− )+64 − (1 x)(1 2x − )2(1 8x − + 7040x −4 9984x5+7168x −6 2048x7)
− 8x2)2 64x(1 2 − x)2(1 − 8x+8x −2)2 − −
of its simplest form: apply symbolic differentiation at the elementary operation level and
keep intermediate numerical results, in lockstep with the evaluation of the main function.
This is AD in the forward accumulation mode, which we shall introduce in the following
section.
3. AD and Its Main Modes
AD can be thought of as performing a non-standard interpretation of a computer pro-
gram where this interpretation involves augmenting the standard computation with the
calculation of various derivatives. All numerical computations are ultimately composi-
tions of a finite set of elementary operations for which derivatives are known (Verma, 2000;
Griewank and Walther, 2008), and combining the derivatives of the constituent operations
through the chain rule gives the derivative of the overall composition. Usually these ele-
mentary operations include the binary arithmetic operations, the unary sign switch, and
transcendental functions such as the exponential, the logarithm, and the trigonometric
functions.
On the left hand side of Table 2 we see the representation of the computation y =
f(x ,x ) = ln(x ) + x x sin(x ) as an evaluation trace of elementary operations—
1 2 1 1 2 2
also called a Wengert list (Wengert, 1964). We adopt the three-part notation used by
Griewank and Walther (2008), where a function f :Rn Rm is constructed using interme-
diate variables v such that
variables v = x , i = 1,...,n are the input variables,
variables v i= 1,...,l are the working (intermediate) variables, and
variables y = v , i = m 1,...,0 are the output variables.
Figure 4 shows the given trace of elementary operations represented as a computational
graph (Bauer, 1974), useful in visualizing dependency relations between intermediate vari-
ables.
Evaluation traces form the basis of the AD techniques. An importantpoint to note here
is that AD can differentiate not only closed-form expressions in the classical sense, but also
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
v 2 v 5 f(x 1 ,x 2 )
Figure 4: Computational graph of the example f(x ,x ) = ln(x ) + x x sin(x ). See
1 2 1 1 2 2
the primal trace in Tables 2 or 3 for the definitions of the intermediate variables
v ...v .
algorithms making use of control flow such as branching, loops, recursion, and procedure
calls, giving it an important advantage over symbolic differentiation which severely limits
such expressivity. This is thanks to the fact that any numeric code will eventually result
in a numeric evaluation trace with particular values of the input, intermediate, and output
variables, which are the only things one needs to know for computing derivatives using
chain rule composition, regardless of the specific control flow path that was taken during
execution. Another way of expressingthis is that AD is blind with respectto any operation,
including control flow statements, which do not directly alter numeric values.
3.1 Forward Mode
AD in forward accumulation mode9 is the conceptually most simple type. Consider the
evaluation trace of the function f(x ,x ) = ln(x )+x x sin(x ) given on the left-hand
1 2 1 1 2 2
side in Table 2 and in graph form in Figure 4. For computing the derivative of f with
respect to x , we start by associating with each intermediate variable v a derivative
v˙ = .
Applying the chain rule to each elementary operation in the forward primal trace, we
generate the corresponding tangent (derivative) trace, given on the right-hand side in Ta-
ble 2. Evaluating the primals v in lockstep with their corresponding tangents v˙ gives us
the required derivative in the final variable v˙ = .
This generalizes naturally to computing th 5 e Ja ∂ c x o 1 bian of a function f : Rn Rm with n
independent (input) variables x and m dependent (output) variables y . In this case, each
forward pass of AD is initialized by setting only one of the variables x˙ = 1 and setting the
rest to zero (in other words, setting x˙ = e , where e is the i-th unit vector). A run of the
code with specific input values x= a then computes
y˙ = , j = 1,...,m ,
∂x (cid:12)
i(cid:12)x=a
9. Also called tangent linear mode. (cid:12)
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
Table 2: Forward modeADexample, withy = f(x ,x ) =ln(x )+x x sin(x )evaluated
1 2 1 1 2 2
at (x ,x ) = (2,5) and setting x˙ = 1 to compute . The original forward
evaluation of the primals on the left is augmented by the tangent operations on
the right, where each line complements the original directly to its left.
Forward Primal Trace Forward Tangent (Derivative) Trace
=lnv−1 =ln2 v˙
v =sinv =sin5 v˙ =v˙ ×cosv =0×cos5
4 1 2 4 1 2
v =v −v =10.693+0.959 v˙ =v˙ −v˙ =5.5−0
5 4 3 5 4 3
y =v 5 =11.652 y˙ = v˙ 5 = 5.5
giving us one column of the Jacobian matrix
J f =  . . . ... . . . (cid:12) (cid:12)
evaluated at point a. Thus, the full Jacobian can be co(cid:12)mputed in n evaluations.
Furthermore, forward mode AD provides a very efficient and matrix-free way of com-
puting Jacobian–vector products
J f r =  . . . .. . . . .  . . .  , (4)
simply by initializing with x˙ = r. Thus, we can compute the Jacobian–vector product in
just one forward pass. As a special case, when f : Rn R, we can obtain the directional
derivative along a given vector r as a linear combination of the partial derivatives
by starting the AD computation with the values x˙ = r.
Forward mode AD is efficient and straightforward for functions f : R Rm, as all
the derivatives
can be computed with just one forward pass. Conversely
, in the other
extreme of f : Rn R, forward mode AD requires n evaluations to compute the gradient
f = ,..., ,
∇ (cid:18)∂x ∂x (cid:19)
which also corresponds to a 1 n Jacobian matrix that is built one column at a time with
the forward mode in n evaluations.
In general, for cases f : Rn Rm where n m, a different technique is often preferred.
We will describe AD in reverse accumulation mode in Section 3.2.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
3.1.1 Dual Numbers
Mathematically, forwardmodeAD(representedby theleft- andright-handsides inTable2)
can be viewed as evaluating a function using dual numbers,10 which can be defined as
truncated Taylor series of the form
where v,v˙ R and ǫ is a nilpotent number such that ǫ2 = 0 and ǫ = 0. Observe, for
example, that
in which the coefficients of ǫ conveniently mirror symbolic differentiation rules (e.g., Eq. 3).
We can utilize this by setting up a regime where
and using dual numbers as data structures for carrying the tangent value together with
the primal.11 The chain rule works as expected on this representation: two applications of
Eq. 5 give
The coefficient of ǫ on the right-hand side is exactly the derivative of the composition of f
and g. This means that since we implement elementary operations to respect the invariant
Eq. 5, all compositions of them will also do so. This, in turn, means that we can extract
the derivative of a function by interpreting any non-dual number v as v+0ǫ and evaluating
the function in this non-standard way on an initial input with a coefficient 1 for ǫ:
= epsilon-coefficient(dual-version(f)(v+1ǫ)) .
dx (cid:12)
(cid:12)x=v
This also extends t(cid:12)o arbitrary program constructs, since dual numbers, as data types,
canbecontainedinanydatastructure. Aslongasadualnumberremainsinadatastructure
with no arithmetic operations beingperformed on it, it will just remain a dual number; and
if it is taken out of the data structure and operated on again, then the differentiation will
continue.
In practice, a function f coded in a programming language of choice would be fed into
an AD tool, which would then augment it with correspondingextra code to handlethe dual
operations so that the function and its derivative are simultaneously computed. This can
beimplemented throughcalls toaspecificlibrary, intheformof sourcecodetransformation
where a given source code will be automatically modified, or through operator overloading,
making the process transparent to the user. We discuss these implementation techniques
in Section 5.
10. First introduced by Clifford (1873),with important uses in linear algebra and physics.
11. Just as the complex number written x+yi is represented in the computer as a pair in memory (x,y)
whose two slots are reals, the dual number written x+x˙ǫ is represented as the pair (x,x˙). Such pairs
are sometimes called Argand pairs (Hamilton,1837, p107 Eqs. (157) and (158)).
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
3.2 Reverse Mode
AD in the reverse accumulation mode12 corresponds to a generalized backpropagation al-
gorithm, in that it propagates derivatives backward from a given output. This is done by
complementing each intermediate variable v with an adjoint
which represents the sensitivity of a considered output y with respect to changes in v . In
the case of backpropagation, y would be a scalar corresponding to the error E (Figure 1).
In reverse mode AD, derivatives are computed in the second phase of a two-phase pro-
cess. In the first phase, the original function code is run forward, populating intermediate
variables v and recording the dependencies in the computational graph through a book-
keeping procedure. In the second phase, derivatives are calculated by propagating adjoints
v¯ in reverse, from the outputs to the inputs.
Returning to the example y = f(x ,x ) = ln(x )+x x sin(x ), in Table 3 we see
1 2 1 1 2 2
the adjoint statements on the right-hand side, corresponding to each original elementary
operation on the left-hand side. In simple terms, we are interested in computing the contri-
bution v¯ = of the change in each variable v to the change in the output y. Taking the
variable v as an example, we see in Figure 4 that the only way it can affect y is through
affecting v and v , so its contribution to the change in y is given by
0 2 0 3 0 0 0
In Table 3, this contribution is computed in two incremental steps
lined up with the lines in the forward trace from which these expressions originate.
After the forward pass on the left-hand side, we run the reverse pass of the adjoints
on the right-hand side, starting with v¯ = y¯ = = 1. In the end we get the derivatives
= x¯ and = x¯ in just one reverse pass.
∂x1 1 ∂x2 2
Compared with the straightforwardness of forward accumulation mode, reverse mode
ADcan,atfirst,appearsomewhat“mysterious”(Dennis and Schnabel,1996). Griewank and Walther
(2008) argue that this is in part because of the common acquaintance with the chain rule
as a mechanistic procedure propagating derivatives forward.
An important advantage of the reverse mode is that it is significantly less costly to
evaluate (in terms of operation count) than the forward mode for functions with a large
number of inputs. In the extreme case of f : Rn R, only one application of the reverse
mode is sufficient to compute the full gradient f = ,..., , compared with the
n passes of the forward mode needed for populating the same. Because machine learning
practice principally involves the gradient of a scalar-valued objective with respect to a large
number of parameters, this establishes the reverse mode, as opposed to the forward mode,
as the mainstay technique in the form of the backpropagation algorithm.
12. Also called adjoint or cotangent linear mode.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
Table 3: Reverse modeAD example, with y = f(x ,x ) = ln(x )+x x sin(x ) evaluated
1 2 1 1 2 2
at (x ,x ) = (2,5). After the forward evaluation of the primals on the left, the
adjoint operations on the right are evaluated in reverse (cf. Figure 1). Note that
both and are computed in the same reverse pass, starting from the adjoint
Forward Primal Trace ReverseAdjoint (Derivative) Trace
v−1 =x 1 =2 x¯ 1 =v¯ −1 =5.5
v 0 =x 2 =5 x¯ 2 =v¯ 0 =1.716
v 2 =v−1 ×v 0 =2×5 v¯ 0 =v¯ 0 +v¯ 2 ∂ ∂ v v 2 0 =v¯ 0 +v¯ 2 ×v−1 =1.716
v 3 =sinv 0 =sin5 v¯ 0 =v¯ 3 ∂ ∂ v v 3 0 =v¯ 3 ×cosv 0 =−0.284
v 4 =v 1 +v 2 =0.693+10 v¯ 2 =v¯ 4 ∂ ∂ v v 4 2 =v¯ 4 ×1 =1
v 5 =v 4 −v 3 =10.693+0.959 v¯ 3 =v¯ 5 ∂ ∂ v v 5 3 =v¯ 5 ×(−1) =−1
y =v 5 =11.652 v¯ 5 =y¯ =1
In general, for a function f : Rn Rm, if we denote the operation count to evaluate
the original function by ops(f), the time it takes to calculate the m n Jacobian by the
forward mode is n c ops(f), whereas the same computation can be done via reverse mode
in m c ops(f), where c is a constant guaranteed to be c < 6 and typically c [2,3]
(Griewank and Walther, 2008). That is to say, reverse mode AD performs better when
m n.
Similar to the matrix-free computation of Jacobian–vector products with forward mode
(Eq. 4), reverse mode can be used for computing the transposed Jacobian–vector product
J⊺ f r =  . . . ... . . .  . . .  ,
by initializing the reverse phase with y¯ = r.
The advantages of reverse mode AD, however, come with the cost of increased storage
requirements growing (in the worst case) in proportion to the number of operations in the
evaluated function. It is an active area of research to improve storage requirements in
implementations by usingadvanced methods such as checkpointing strategies and data-flow
analysis (Dauvergne and Hasco¨et, 2006; Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2017).
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
3.3 Origins of AD and Backpropagation
Ideas underlying AD date back to the 1950s (Nolan, 1953; Beda et al., 1959). Forward
mode AD as a general method for evaluating partial derivatives was essentially discovered
by Wengert (1964). It was followed by a period of relatively low activity, until interest
in the field was revived in the 1980s mostly through the work of Griewank (1989), also
supported by improvements in modern programming languages and the feasibility of an
efficient reverse mode AD.
Reverse mode AD and backpropagation have an intertwined history. The essence of the
reverse mode, cast in a continuous-time formalism, is the Pontryagin maximum principle
(Rozonoer, 1959; Boltyanskii et al., 1960). This method was understood in the control
theory community (Bryson and Denham, 1962; Bryson and Ho, 1969) and cast in more
formal terms with discrete-time variables topologically sorted in terms of dependency by
Werbos (1974). Prior to Werbos, the work by Linnainmaa (1970, 1976) is often cited
as the first published description of the reverse mode. Speelpenning (1980) subsequently
introducedreversemodeADasweknowit,inthesensethathegavethefirstimplementation
that was actually automatic, accepting a specification of a computational process written in
a general-purpose programming language and automatically performing the reverse mode
transformation.
Incidentally, Hecht-Nielsen (1989) cites the work of Bryson and Ho (1969) and Werbos
(1974)asthetwo earliestknowninstances ofbackpropagation. Within themachinelearning
community, the method has been reinvented several times, such as by Parker (1985), until
it was eventually brought to fame by Rumelhart et al. (1986) and the Parallel Distributed
Processing (PDP) group. The PDP group became aware of Parker’s work only after their
own discovery; similarly, Werbos’ work was not appreciated until it was found by Parker
(Hecht-Nielsen,1989). Thistellsusaninterestingstoryoftwohighlyinterconnectedresearch
communities that have somehow also managed to stay detached during this foundational
period.
ForathoroughreviewofthedevelopmentofAD,weadvisereaderstorefertoRall(2006).
Interested readers are highly recommended to read Griewank (2012) for an investigation of
the origins of the reverse mode and Schmidhuber (2015) for the same for backpropagation.
4. AD and Machine Learning
In the following, we examine the main uses of derivatives in machine learning and report
on a selection of works where general-purpose AD, as opposed to just backpropagation, has
been successfully applied in a machine learning context. Areas where AD has seen use
include optimization, neural networks, computer vision, natural language processing, and
probabilistic inference.
4.1 Gradient-Based Optimization
Gradient-based optimization is one of the pillars of machine learning (Bottou et al., 2016).
Given an objective function f : Rn R, classical gradient descent has the goal of finding
(local) minima w
= argminwf(w) via updates of the form ∆w = η f, where η > 0
is a step size. Gradient-based methods make use of the fact that f decreases steepest if
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
Table 4: Evaluation times of the Helmholtz free energy function and its gradient (Figure 5).
Times are given relative to that of the original function with both (1) n = 1 and
(2) n corresponding to each column. (For instance, reverse mode AD with n= 43
takes approximately twice the time to evaluate relative to the original function
with n = 43.) Times are measured by averaging a thousand runs on a machine
with Intel Core i7-4785T 2.20 GHz CPU and 16 GB RAM, using DiffSharp 0.5.7.
The evaluation time for the original function with n = 1 is 0.0023 ms.
n, number of variables
1 8 15 22 29 36 43 50
f, original
Relative n=1 1 5.12 14.51 29.11 52.58 84.00 127.33 174.44
f, numerical diff.
Relative n=1 1.08 35.55 176.79 499.43 1045.29 1986.70 3269.36 4995.96
Relative n in column 1.08 6.93 12.17 17.15 19.87 23.64 25.67 28.63
f, forwardAD
Relative n=1 1.34 13.69 51.54 132.33 251.32 469.84 815.55 1342.07
Relative n in column 1.34 2.66 3.55 4.54 4.77 5.59 6.40 7.69
f, reverse AD
Relative n=1 1.52 11.12 31.37 67.27 113.99 174.62 254.15 342.33
Relative n in column 1.52 2.16 2.16 2.31 2.16 2.07 1.99 1.96
one goes in the direction of the negative gradient. The convergence rate of gradient-based
methods is usually improved by adaptive step-size techniques that adjust the step size η on
every iteration (Duchi et al., 2011; Schaul et al., 2013; Kingma and Ba, 2015).
As we have seen, for large n, reverse mode AD provides a highly efficient method for
computing gradients.13 Figure 5 and Table 4 demonstrate how gradient computation scales
differently for forward and reverse mode AD and numerical differentiation, looking at the
Helmholtz free energy function that has been used in AD literature for benchmarking gra-
dient calculations (Griewank, 1989; Griewank and Walther, 2008; Griewank et al., 2012).
Second-order methods based on Newton’s method make use of both the gradient f
and the Hessian H , working via updates of the form ∆w = ηH 1 f and providing
significantly faster convergence (Press et al., 2007). AD provides a way of automatically
computing the exact Hessian, enabling succinct and convenient general-purpose implemen-
tations.14 Newton’s method converges in fewer iterations, but this comes at the cost of
having to compute H in each iteration. In large-scale problems, the Hessian is usually
replaced by a numerical approximation using first-order updates from gradient evaluations,
general-purpose AD-based gradient descent routine using DiffSharp.
Newton’s method with the full Hessian.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
f, original function
f, numerical diff.
∇ f, forward AD
f, reverse AD
0 10 20 30 40 50
Figure 5: Evaluation time of the Helmholtz free energy function of a mixed fluid,
based on the Peng-Robinson equation of state (Peng and Robinson, 1976),
f(x)= RT n log xi xTAx log 1+(1+√2)bTx , where R is the universal
i=0 1 bTx − √8bTx 1+(1 √2)bTx
gas constanPt, T is t − he absolute temperat−ure, b Rn is a vector of con-
stants, A Rn n is a symmetric matrix of constants, and x Rn is the
vector of independent variables describing the system. The plots show the
evaluation time of f and the gradient f with numerical differentiation (cen-
tral difference), forward mode AD, and reverse mode AD, as a function of
the number of variables n. Reported times are relative to the evaluation
time of f with n = 1. The lower plot uses logarithmic scale for illustrat-
ing the behavior for small n. Numerical results are given in Table 4. (Code:
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
giving rise to quasi-Newton methods. A highly popular such method is the BFGS15 algo-
rithm, together with its limited-memory variant L-BFGS (Dennis and Schnabel, 1996). On
the other hand, Hessians arising in large-scale applications are typically sparse. This spar-
sity along with symmetry can bereadily exploited by AD techniques such as computational
graph elimination (Dixon, 1991), partial separability (Gay, 1996), and matrix coloring and
compression (Gebremedhin et al., 2009).
In many cases one does not need the full Hessian but only a Hessian–vector product
Hv, which can be computed efficiently using a reverse-on-forward configuration of AD by
applying the reverse mode to take the gradient of code produced by the forward mode.16
Giventhefunctionf :Rn R,theevaluationpointx,andthevectorv,onecanaccomplish
this by first computing the directional derivative f v through the forward mode via
setting x˙ = v and then applying the reverse mode on this result to get 2f v = H v
(Pearlmutter, 1994). This computes Hv with O(n) complexity, even though H is a n n
matrix. Availability ofrobustADtoolsmay makemoresophisticatedoptimization methods
applicable to large-scale machine-learning problems. For instance, when fast stochastic
Hessian–vector products are available, these can beused as the basis of stochastic Newton’s
methods (Agarwal et al., 2016), which have the potential to endow stochastic optimization
with quadratic convergence.
Another approach for improving the rate of convergence of gradient-based methods
is to use gain adaptation methods such as stochastic meta-descent (SMD) (Schraudolph,
1999), where stochastic sampling is introduced to avoid local minima and reduce the com-
putational expense. An example using SMD with AD Hessian–vector products is given by
Vishwanathan et al.(2006)onconditionalrandomfields(CRF).Similarly,Schraudolph and Graepel
(2003) use Hessian–vector products in their model combining conjugate gradient techniques
with stochastic gradient descent.
4.2 Neural Networks, Deep Learning, Differentiable Programming
Training of a neural network is an optimization problem with respect to its set of weights,
which can in principle be addressed by using any method ranging from evolutionary algo-
rithms (Such et al., 2017) to gradient-based methods such as BFGS (Apostolopoulou et al.,
2009) or the mainstay stochastic gradient descent (Bottou, 2010) and its many variants
(Kingma and Ba, 2015; Tieleman and Hinton, 2012; Duchi et al., 2011). As we have seen,
the backpropagation algorithm is only a special case of AD: by applying reverse mode AD
to an objective function evaluating a network’s error as a function of its weights, we can
readily compute the partial derivatives needed for performing weight updates.17
TheLUSHsystem(Bottou and LeCun,2002),anditspredecessorSN(Bottou and LeCun,
1988), were the first production systems that targeted efficient neural network simulation
while incorporating both a general-purpose programming language and AD. Modern deep
learning frameworks provide differentiation capability in one way or another, but the un-
15. AfterBroyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno, who independentlydiscovered themethod in the 1970s.
16. Christianson(2012)demonstratesthatthesecondderivativecanbecomputedwiththesamearithmetic
operation sequence using forward-on-reverse, reverse-on-forward, and reverse-on-reverse. The taping
overheadsof thesemethods may differin implementation-dependentways.
of backpropagation with reverse mode AD.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
derlying mechanism is not always made clear and confusion abounds regarding the use
of the terms “autodiff”, “automatic differentiation”, and “symbolic differentiation”, which
are sometimes even used interchangeably. In mainstream frameworks including Theano18
(Bastien et al., 2012), TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016), Caffe (Jia et al., 2014), and CNTK
(Seide and Agarwal, 2016) the user first constructs a model as a computational graph using
a domain-specific mini language, which then gets interpreted by the framework during ex-
ecution. This approach has the advantage of enabling optimizations of the computational
graphstructure(e.g., asinTheano),butthedisadvantagesofhavinglimitedandunintuitive
control flow and being difficult to debug. In contrast, the lineage of recent frameworks led
by autograd (Maclaurin, 2016), Chainer (Tokui et al., 2015), and PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2017) provide truly general-purpose reverse mode AD of the type we outline in Section 3,
wheretheuserdirectly usesthehostprogramminglanguage todefinethemodelas aregular
program of the forward computation. This eliminates the need for an interpreter, allows
arbitrary control flow statements, and makes debugging simple and intuitive.
Simultaneously with the ongoing adoption of general-purpose AD in machine learning,
we are witnessing a modeling-centric terminology emerge within the deep learning com-
munity. The terms define-and-run and static computational graph refer to Theano-like
systems where a model is constructed, before execution, as a computational graph struc-
ture, which later gets executed with different inputs while remaining fixed. In contrast,
the terms define-by-run and dynamic computational graph refer to the general-purpose AD
capability available in newer PyTorch-like systems where a model is a regular program in
the host programming language, whose execution dynamically constructs a computational
graph on-the-fly that can freely change in each iteration.19
Differentiable programming20 is another emerging term referring to the realization that
deep learning practice essentially amounts to writing program templates of potential solu-
tions to a problem, which are constructed as differentiable directed graphs assembled from
functional blocks whose parameters are learned from examples using gradient-based opti-
mization. Expressed in this paradigm, neural networks are just a class of parameterized
differentiable programs composed of building blocks such as feed-forward, convolutional,
and recurrent elements. We are increasingly seeing these traditional building blocks freely
composed in arbitrary algorithmic structures using control flow, as well as the introduc-
tion of novel differentiable architectures such as the neural Turing machine (Graves et al.,
2014),arangeofcontroller–interface abstractions(Graves et al.,2016;Zaremba et al.,2016;
Joulin and Mikolov,2015;Sukhbaatar et al.,2015),anddifferentiableversionsofdatastruc-
tures such as stacks, queues, deques (Grefenstette et al., 2015). Availability of general-
18. Theano is a computational graph optimizer and compiler with GPU support and it currently handles
derivatives in a highly optimized form of symbolic differentiation. The result can be interpreted as a
hybrid of symbolic differentiation and reverse mode AD, but Theano does not use the general-purpose
reverseaccumulation as we describe in this paper. (Personal communication with the authors.)
19. Notethattheterms“static”and“dynamic”hereareusedinthesenseofhavingafixedversusnon-fixed
computational graph topology and not in thesense of data flow architectures.
of view. Note the difference from differential dynamic programming (Mayne and Jacobson, 1970) in
optimal control.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
purpose AD greatly simplifies the implementation of such architectures by enabling their
expression as regular programs that rely on the differentiation infrastructure. Although the
differentiable programming perspective on deep learning is new, we note that programming
withdifferentiablefunctionsandhavingdifferentiationasalanguageinfrastructurehasbeen
the main research subject of the AD community for many decades and realized in a wide
range of systems and languages as we shall see in Section 5.
There are instances in neural network literature—albeit few—where explicit reference
hasbeenmadetoADforcomputingerrorgradients,suchasEriksson et al.(1998)usingAD
forlarge-scale feed-forwardnetworks, andtheworkbyYang et al.(2008),wheretheauthors
use AD to train a neural-network-based proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller.
Similarly, Rollins (2009) uses reverse mode AD in conjunction with neural networks for
the problem of optimal feedback control. Another example is given for continuous time
recurrent neural networks (CTRNN) by Al Seyab and Cao (2008), where the authors apply
AD for the training of CTRNNs predicting dynamic behavior of nonlinear processes in real
time and report significantly reduced training time compared with other methods.
4.3 Computer Vision
Since the influential work by Krizhevsky et al. (2012), computer vision has been dominated
by deep learning, specifically, variations of convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al.,
1998). These models are trained end-to-end, meaning that a mapping from raw input data
to corresponding outputs is learned, automatically discovering the representations needed
for feature detection in a process called representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013).
Besides deep learning, an interesting area where AD can be applied to computer vision
problems is inverse graphics (Horn, 1977; Hinton and Ghahramani, 1997)—or analysis-by-
synthesis (Yildirim et al., 2015)—where vision is seen as the inference of parameters for a
generative model of a scene. Using gradient-based optimization in inverse graphics requires
propagating derivatives through whole image synthesis pipelines including the renderer.
Eslami et al. (2016) use numerical differentiation for this purpose. Loper and Black (2014)
implement the Open Differentiable Renderer (OpenDR), which is a scene renderer that also
supplies derivatives of the image pixels with respect to scene parameters, and demonstrate
it in the task of fitting an articulated and deformable 3D model of the human body to
image and range data from a Kinect device. Similarly, Kulkarni et al. (2015) implement
a differentiable approximate renderer for the task of inference in probabilistic programs
describing scenes.
Srajer et al. (2016) investigate the use of AD for three tasks in computer vision and
machine learning, namely bundleadjustment (Triggs et al., 1999), Gaussian mixture model
fitting, and hand tracking (Taylor et al., 2014), and provide a comprehensive benchmark of
various AD tools for the computation of derivatives in these tasks.
Pock et al. (2007) make use of AD in addressing the problems of denoising, segmenta-
tion, and recovery of information from stereoscopic image pairs, and note the usefulness
of AD in identifying sparsity patterns in large Jacobian and Hessian matrices. In another
study, Grabner et al. (2008) use reverse mode AD for GPU-accelerated medical 2D/3D reg-
istration, a task involving the alignment of data from different sources such as X-ray images
or computed tomography. The authors report a six-fold increase in speed compared with
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
numerical differentiation using center difference (cf. our benchmark with the Helmholtz
function, Figure 5 and Table 4).
Barrett and Siskind (2013) present a use of general-purpose AD for the task of video
event detection using hidden Markov models (HMMs) and Dalal and Triggs (2005) object
detectors, performing training on a corpus of pre-tracked video using an adaptive step size
gradientdescentwithreversemodeAD.InitiallyimplementedwiththeR6RS-ADpackage21
which provides forward and reverse mode AD in Scheme, the resulting gradient code was
later ported to C and highly optimized.22
4.4 Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing (NLP) constitutes one of the areas where rapid progress is be-
ing made by applying deep learning techniques (Goldberg, 2016), with applications in tasks
including machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), language modeling (Mikolov et al.,
2010),dependencyparsing(Chen and Manning,2014),andquestionanswering(Kumar et al.,
2016). Besides deep learning approaches, statistical models in NLP are commonly trained
using general purpose or specialized gradient-based methods and mostly remain expensive
to train. Improvements in training time can be realized by using online or distributed
training algorithms (Gimpel et al., 2010). An example using stochastic gradient descent for
NLP is given by Finkel et al. (2008)optimizing conditional random fieldparsers throughan
objective function. Related with the work on video event detection in the previous section,
Yu and Siskind (2013) report their work on sentence tracking, representing an instance of
grounded language learning paired with computer vision, where the system learns word
meanings from shortvideo clips paired with descriptive sentences. Themethod uses HMMs
to represent changes in video frames and meanings of different parts of speech. This work
is implemented in C and computes the required gradients using AD through the ADOL-C
4.5 Probabilistic Modeling and Inference
Inference in probabilistic models can bestatic, such as compiling a given model to Bayesian
networks and using algorithms such as belief propagation for inference; or they can be
dynamic, executing a model forward many times and computing statistics on observed
values to infer posterior distributions. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) (Neal, 1993)
methods are often used for dynamic inference, such as the Metropolis–Hastings algorithm
based on random sampling (Chib and Greenberg, 1995). Meyer et al. (2003) give an exam-
ple of how AD can be used to speed up Bayesian posterior inference in MCMC, with an
application in stochastic volatility. Amortized inference (Gershman and Goodman, 2014;
Stuhlmu¨ller et al., 2013) techniques based on deep learning (Le et al., 2017; Ritchie et al.,
2016) work by training neural networks for performing approximate inference in generative
models defined as probabilistic programs (Gordon et al., 2014).
22. Personal communication.
23. Animplementationofthesentencetrackerappliedtovideosearchusingsentence-basedqueriescanbeac-
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
When model parameters are continuous, the Hamiltonian—or, hybrid—Monte Carlo
(HMC) algorithm provides improved convergence characteristics avoiding the slow explo-
ration of random sampling, by simulating Hamiltonian dynamics through auxiliary “mo-
mentum variables” (Duane et al., 1987). The advantages of HMC come at the cost of
requiring gradient evaluations of complicated probability models. AD is highly suitable
here for complementing probabilistic modeling, because it relieves the user from the man-
ual derivation of gradients for each model.24 For instance, the probabilistic programming
language Stan (Carpenter et al., 2016) implements automatic Bayesian inference based on
HMC and the No-U-Turn sampler (NUTS) (Hoffman and Gelman, 2014) and uses reverse
modeAD forthecalculation of gradients for bothHMC andNUTS(Carpenter et al.,2015).
Similarly,Wingate et al.(2011)demonstratetheuseofADasanon-standardinterpretation
of probabilistic programs enabling efficient inference algorithms. Kucukelbir et al. (2017)
present an AD-based method for deriving variational inference (VI) algorithms.
PyMC3 (Salvatier et al., 2016) allows fitting of Bayesian models using MCMC and VI,
for which it uses gradients supplied by Theano. Edward (Tran et al., 2016) is a library for
deep probabilistic modeling, inference, and criticism (Tran et al., 2017) that supports VI
usingTensorFlow. Availability of general-purposeADin this area hasenabled new libraries
such as Pyro25 and ProbTorch (Siddharth et al., 2017) for deep universal probabilistic pro-
gramming with support for recursion and control flow, relying, in both instances, on VI
using gradients supplied by PyTorch’s reverse mode AD infrastructure.
When working with probabilistic models, one often needs to backpropagate derivatives
through sampling operations of random variables in order to achieve stochastic optimiza-
tion of model parameters. The score-function estimator, or REINFORCE (Williams, 1992),
method provides a generally applicable unbiased gradient estimate, albeit with high vari-
ance. When working with continuous random variables, one can substitute a random vari-
able by a deterministic and differentiable transformation of a simpler random variable,
a method known as the “reparameterization trick” (Williams, 1992; Kingma and Welling,
2014;Rezende et al.,2014). Fordiscretevariables,theREBAR(Tucker et al.,2017)method
provides a lower-variance unbiased gradient estimator by using continuous relaxation. A
generalization of REBAR called RELAX (Grathwohl et al., 2017) works by learning a free-
form control variate parameterized by a neural network and is applicable in both discrete
and continuous settings.
5. Implementations
It is usefulto have an understandingof the different ways in which AD can beimplemented.
Here we cover major implementation strategies and provide a survey of existing tools.
A principal consideration in any AD implementation is the performance overhead intro-
duced by the AD arithmetic and bookkeeping. In terms of computational complexity, AD
guarantees that the amount of arithmetic goes up by no more than a small constant factor
(Griewank and Walther, 2008). On the other hand, managing this arithmetic can introduce
a significant overhead if done carelessly. For instance, na¨ıvely allocating data structures for
mentation of HMC with reverse mode AD.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
holding dual numbers will involve memory access and allocation for every arithmetic opera-
tion, which are usually more expensive than arithmetic operations on modern computers.26
Likewise,usingoperatoroverloadingmayintroducemethoddispatcheswithattendantcosts,
which, compared to raw numerical computation of the original function, can easily amount
to a slowdown of an order of magnitude.27
Another major issue is the risk of hitting a class of bugs called “perturbation confusion”
(Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2005; Manzyuk et al., 2012). This essentially means that if two
ongoing differentiations affect the same piece of code, the two formal epsilons they intro-
duce (Section 3.1.1) need to be kept distinct. It is very easy to have bugs—particularly
in performance-oriented AD implementations—that confuse these in various ways. Such
situations can also arise when AD is nested, that is, derivatives are computed for functions
that internally compute derivatives.
Translation of mathematics into computer code often requires attention to numeric
issues. Forinstance,themathematicalexpressionslog(1+x)or x2+y2+z2 ortan 1(y/x)
shouldnotbena¨ıvely translated, butratherexpressedas log1pp(x),hypot(x,hypot(y,z)),
and atan2(y,x). In machine learning, the most prominent example of this is probably the
so-called log-sum-exp trick toimprovethenumericsofcalculations oftheformlog expx .
AD is not immune to such numeric considerations. For example, code calculatPing E =
E , processed by AD, will calculate E = E . If the system is seeking a local
i i ∇ w i∇ w i
Pminimum of E then
0, aPnd na¨ıvely adding a set of large numbers
whose sum is near zero is numePrically fraught. This is to say that AD is not immune to the
perils of floating point arithmetic, and can sometimes introduce numeric issues which were
not present in the primal calculation. Issues of numeric analysis are outside our present
scope, but there is a robust literature on the numerics of AD (e.g., Griewank et al. (2012))
involving using subgradients to allow optimization to proceed despite non-differentiability
of the objective, appropriate subgradients and approximations for functions like and
and √ near zero, and a spate of related issues.
OneshouldalsobecautiousaboutapproximatedfunctionsandAD(Sirkes and Tziperman,
1997). Inthis case, if onehas a procedureapproximating an ideal function, AD always gives
the derivative of the procedure that was actually programmed, which may not be a good
approximation of the derivative of the ideal function that the procedurewas approximating.
For instance, consider ex computed by a piecewise-rational approximation routine. Using
AD on this routine would produce an approximated derivative in which each piece of the
piecewise formula will get differentiated. Even if this would remain an approximation of the
derivative of ex, we know that dex = ex and the original approximation itself was already a
betterapproximationforthederivativeofex.28 UsersofADimplementations mustbethere-
forecautious toapproximate the derivative, not differentiate the approximation. Thiswould
26. The implementation of forward mode in Julia (Revelset al., 2016b) attempts to avoid this, and some
current compilers can avoid this expense by unboxing dual numbers (Leroy, 1997; Jones et al., 1993b;
Jones and Launchbury, 1991; Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2016). This method is also used to reduce the
memory-accessoverheadintheimplementationsofforwardmodeinStalingradandtheHaskellad library.
27. Flowanalysis(Shivers,1991)and/orpartialevaluation(Jones et al.,1993a),togetherwithtagstripping
(Appel,1989;Peterson,1989),canremovethismethoddispatch. These,togetherwithunboxing,canof-
tenmakeitpossibletocompletelyeliminatethememoryaccess,memoryallocation,memoryreclamation,
and method dispatch overhead of dualnumbers(Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2016).
28. In modern systems this is not an issue, because ex is a primitiveimplemented in hardware.
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
requireexplicitlyapproximatingaknownderivative, incaseswhereamathematicalfunction
can only be computed approximately but has a well-defined mathematical derivative.
We note that there are similarities as well as differences between machine learning
workloads and those studied in the traditional AD literature (Baydin et al., 2016b). Deep
learning systems are generally compute-bound and spend a considerable amount of com-
putation time in highly-optimized numerical kernels for matrix operations (Hadjis et al.,
2015; Chetlur et al., 2014). This is a situation which is arguably amenable to operator-
overloading-based AD implementations on high-level operations, as is commonly found in
current machine learning frameworks. In contrast, numerical simulation workloads in tradi-
tional AD applications can be bandwidth-bound, making source code transformation and
compiler optimization approaches more relevant. Another difference worth noting is that
whereas high numerical precision is desirable in traditional application domains of AD such
as computational fluid dynamics (Cohen and Molemaker, 2009), in deep learning lower-
precision is sufficient and even desirable in improving computational efficiency, thanks to
the error resiliency of neural networks (Gupta et al., 2015; Courbariaux et al., 2015).
There are instances in recent literature where implementation-related experience from
the AD field has been put to use in machine learning settings. Oneparticular area of recent
interest is implicit and iterative AD techniques (Griewank and Walther, 2008), which has
founduseinworkincorporatingconstrainedoptimizationwithindeeplearning(Amos and Kolter,
2017) and probabilistic graphical models and neural networks (Johnson et al., 2016). An-
otherexampleischeckpointingstrategies(Dauvergne and Hasco¨et,2006;Siskind and Pearlmutter,
2017), which allow balancing of application-specific trade-offs between time and space com-
plexitiesofreversemodeADbynotstoringthefulltapeofintermediatevariablesinmemory
and reconstructing these as needed by re-runningparts of the forward computation from in-
termediatecheckpoints. ThisishighlyrelevantindeeplearningworkloadsrunningonGPUs
with limited memory budgets. A recent example in this area is the work by Gruslys et al.
(2016), wheretheauthors construct acheckpointing variety of the backpropagation through
time (BPTT) algorithm for recurrent neural networks and demonstrate it saving up to 95%
memory usage at the cost of a 33% increase in computation time in one instance.
In Table 5 we present a review of notable general-purpose AD implementations.29 A
thorough taxonomy of implementation techniques was introduced by Juedes (1991), which
was later revisited by Bischof et al. (2008) and simplified into elemental, operator overload-
ing, compiler-based, and hybrid methods. We adopt a similar classification for the following
part of this section.
5.1 Elemental Libraries
These implementations form the most basic category and work by replacing mathematical
operations with calls to an AD-enabled library. Methods exposed by the library are then
usedinfunctiondefinitions,meaningthatthedecompositionofanyfunctionintoelementary
operations is done manually when writing the code.
The approach has been utilized since the early days of AD, with prototypical examples
beingthe WCOMP andUCOMP packages of Lawson (1971), the APLpackage of Neidinger
,rettumlraeP
Table 5: Survey of AD implementations. Tools developed primarily for machine learning are highlighted in bold.
Language Tool Type Mode Institution/Project Reference URL
Mxyzptlk OO F FermiNationalAcceleratorLaboratory OstiguyandMichelotti(2007)
F:Forward,R:Reverse;COM:Compiler,INT:Interpreter,LIB:Library,OO:Operatoroverloading,ST:Sourcetransformation
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
(1989), and the work by Hinkins (1994). Likewise, Rich and Hill (1992) formulate their
implementation of AD in MATLAB using elemental methods.
Elemental libraries still constitute the simplest strategy to implement AD for languages
without operator overloading.
5.2 Compilers and Source Code Transformation
These implementations provide extensions to programming languages that automate the
decomposition of algorithms into AD-enabled elementary operations. They are typically
executedaspreprocessors30totransformtheinputintheextendedlanguageintotheoriginal
language.
Classical instances of source code transformation include the Fortran preprocessors
GRESS (Horwedel et al., 1988) and PADRE2 (Kubo and Iri, 1990), which transform AD-
enabled variants of Fortran into standard Fortran 77 before compiling. Similarly, the
ADIFOR tool (Bischof et al., 1996), given a Fortran source code, generates an augmented
codein whichall specifiedpartial derivatives arecomputed in addition totheoriginal result.
For procedures coded in ANSI C, the ADIC tool (Bischof et al., 1997) implements AD as a
source code transformation after the specification of dependent and independent variables.
A recent and popular tool also utilizing this approach is Tapenade (Pascual and Hasco¨et,
2008; Hasco¨et and Pascual, 2013), implementing forward and reverse mode AD for Fortran
and C programs. Tapenade itself is implemented in Java and can be run locally or as an
online service.31
In addition to language extensions through source code transformation, there are im-
plementations introducing new languages with tightly integrated AD capabilities through
special-purpose compilers or interpreters. Some of the earliest AD tools such as SLANG
(Adamson and Winant, 1969) and PROSE (Pfeiffer, 1987) belong to this category. The
NAGWare Fortran 95 compiler (Naumann and Riehme, 2005) is a more recent example,
where the use of AD-related extensions triggers automatic generation of derivative code at
compile time.
As an example of interpreter-based implementation, the algebraic modeling language
AMPL (Fourer et al., 2002) enables objectives and constraints to be expressed in mathe-
matical notation, from which the system deduces active variables and arranges the nec-
essary AD computations. Other examples in this category include the FM/FAD package
(Mazourik,1991), basedon theAlgol-like DIFALGlanguage, andtheobject-oriented COSY
language (Berz et al., 1996) similar to Pascal.
TheStalingradcompiler(Pearlmutter and Siskind,2008;Siskind and Pearlmutter,2008a),
workingontheScheme-basedAD-aware VLADlanguage, alsofallsunderthiscategory. The
newer DVL compiler32 is based on Stalingrad and uses a reimplementation of portions of
the VLAD language.
Motivatedbymachinelearningapplications,theTangentlibrary(van Merri¨enboer et al.,
2017) implements AD using source code transformation, and accepts numeric functions
written in a syntactic subset of Python and Numpy.
30. Preprocessors transform program source code before it is given as an input to a compiler.
Baydin, Pearlmutter, Radul, and Siskind
5.3 Operator Overloading
In modern programming languages with polymorphic features, operator overloading pro-
vides the most straightforward way of implementing AD, exploiting the capability of re-
defining elementary operation semantics.
ApopulartoolimplementedwithoperatoroverloadinginC++isADOL-C(Walther and Griewank,
2012). ADOL-C requires the use of AD-enabled types for variables, and records arithmetic
operations on variables in tape data structures, which can subsequently be “played back”
duringreversemodeADcomputations. TheMxyzptlkpackage(Michelotti,1990)isanother
exampleforC++capableof computingarbitrary-orderpartialderivatives viaforwardprop-
agation. TheFADBAD++ library(Bendtsen and Stauning,1996)implements ADfor C++
usingtemplates andoperatoroverloading. For Python,thead package33 usesoperatorover-
loading to compute first- and second-order derivatives, while the newer autograd package34
provides forward and reverse mode AD with support for higher-order derivatives.
For functional languages, examples include R6RS-AD35 and the AD routines within the
Scmutils library36 for Scheme, the ad library37 for Haskell, and DiffSharp38 for F# and C#.
6. Conclusions
Backpropagation and gradient-based optimization are behind virtually all recent successes
in machine learning, yielding state-of-the-art results in computer vision, speech recogni-
tion and synthesis, and machine translation. We expect these techniques to remain at
the core of machine learning for the foreseeable future. Research in the field involves a
rapid prototyping and development cycle for testing new models and ideas, using a col-
lection of increasingly higher-quality machine learning frameworks. These frameworks are
in the process of transition from coarse-grained (module level) backpropagation towards
fine-grained, general-purpose AD, allowing models to be implemented as regular programs
in general-purpose programming languages with differentiation as an integral part of the
infrastructure. We strongly believe that general-purpose AD is the futureof gradient-based
machine learning and we expect it to become an indispensable tool in the machine learning
toolbox.
It is an exciting time for working at the intersection of AD and machine learning, and
there are many opportunities for bringing advanced techniques and expertise from AD lit-
erature to bear on machine learning problems. Techniques that have been developed by the
AD community such as tape reduction and elimination (Naumann, 2004), fixed-point itera-
tions (Christianson, 1994), utilizing sparsity by matrix coloring (Gebremedhin et al., 2009,
2013), and reverse AD checkpointing (Dauvergne and Hasco¨et, 2006) are just a few exam-
ples that can find potential use in machine learning for increasing performance, improving
convergence of optimization, using hardware more efficiently, and even enabling new types
of machine learning models to be implemented. Similarly, exciting new AD modes like
Automatic Differentiation in Machine Learning: a Survey
direct propagation of the inverse Jacobian (Srinivasan and Todorov, 2015) have emerged
from the machine learning community, but have yet to be examined and formalized by the
AD community.
An important direction for future work is to make use of nested AD techniques in ma-
chine learning, allowing differentiation to be nested arbitrarily deep with referential trans-
parency (Siskind and Pearlmutter, 2008b; Pearlmutter and Siskind, 2008). Nested AD is
highlyrelevant inhyperparameteroptimization asitcan effortlessly provideexact hypergra-
dients, that is, derivatives of a training objective with respect to the hyperparameters of an
optimization routine(Maclaurin et al.,2015;Baydin et al.,2018). Potential applications in-
clude Bayesian model selection (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) and gradient-based tuning
of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo step sizes and mass matrices (Salimans et al., 2015). Besides
hyperparameters, models internally using higher-order derivatives constitute a straightfor-
wardusagecasefornestedAD.TheRiemannianmanifoldLangevinandHamiltonianMonte
Carlo methods (Girolami and Calderhead, 2011) use higher-order derivative information to
more closely track the information geometry of the sampled distribution for faster conver-
gence and exploration. In neural networks, it is very natural to use nested derivatives
in defining objective functions that take input transformations into account, such as the
Tangent Prop method (Simard et al., 1998) for imposing invariance under a set of chosen
transformations.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers whose comments helped improve this manuscript. This
work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation Ireland grant 09/IN.1/I2637, by the
Army Research Laboratory, accomplished underCooperative Agreement Number W911NF-
10-2-0060, by the National Science Foundation under Grants 1522954-IIS and 1734938-IIS,
and by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via Department of
Interior/Interior Business Center (DOI/IBC) contract number D17PC00341. Any opinions,
findings, views, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
theauthors and donotnecessarily reflect theviews, official policies, or endorsements, either
expressed or implied, of the sponsors. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce
and distribute reprints for Government purposes, notwithstanding any copyright notation
herein.