1v83850.2051:viXra
Automated Reasoning for Robot Ethics
Ulrich Furbach , Claudia Schon and Frieder Stolzenburg
1 Universit¨at Koblenz-Landau,{uli,schon}@uni-koblenz.de
2 HarzUniversity of Applied Sciences, fstolzenburg@hs-harz.de
Abstract. Deonticlogicisaverywellresearchedbranchofmathemati-
callogicandphilosophy.Variouskindsofdeonticlogicsareconsideredfor
differentapplicationdomainslikeargumentationtheory,legalreasoning,
and acts in multi-agent systems. In this paper, we show how standard
deonticlogiccanbeusedtomodelethicalcodesformulti-agentsystems.
Furthermore we show how Hyper, a high performance theorem prover,
can be used to proveproperties of these ethical codes.
1 Introduction
Deontic logic is a very well researched branch of mathematical logic and phi-
losophy. Various kinds of deontic logics are considered for different application
domainslike argumentationtheory,legalreasoning,andacts inmulti-agentsys-
tems [8].
Thispaperappliesautomatedreasoninginstandarddeonticlogic(SDL)toa
problem in multi-agent systems. For this, we follow the example from [5] where
reasoning with ethical codes is presented. Instead of implementing a reasoning
system for deontic logic directly, we rely on the first order reasoning system
Hyper[14],whichusesthehypertableaucalculusfrom[3].Thishastheadvantage
that reasoning in deontic logic can be embedded easily into other applications
for whichHyper is alreadyaninference system(e.g.the LogAnswersystem[6]).
SDL corresponds to the modal logic K with a seriality axiom. Due to the
factthat modallogicK is (more orless)anotationalvariantofdescriptionlogic
ALC, deontic logic can be translated into it [7]. Since Hyper offers a decision
procedureforvariousdescriptionlogics,itcanbeemployedforreasoninginSDL.
In Section 2 we shortly depict the reasoning framework,and in Section 3 we
show how to model our small example. This hopefully documents the applica-
bility of reasoning with SDL in multi-agent systems.
2 Automated Reasoning for Standard Deontic Logic
Standard deontic logic (SDL) is obtained from the well-known modal logic K
by adding the seriality axiom D: (cid:3)P → ♦P. In this logic, the (cid:3)-operator is
This is a short version of [7]. It is supported by the DFG grants FU 263/15-1 and
STO 421/5-1 ’Ratiolog’.
interpreted as ‘it is obligatory that’ and the ♦ as ‘it is permitted that’. The
♦-operator can be defined by ♦P ≡ ¬(cid:3)¬P. The seriality axiom in SDL states
that, if a formula has to hold in all reachable worlds, then there exists such a
world. With the deontic reading of (cid:3) and ♦ this means: Whenever the formula
P ought to be, then there exists a world where it holds. In consequence, there
is always a world, which is ideal in the sense that all the norms formulated by
‘the ought to be’-operator hold.
Deontic logic is the logic of choice when formalizing knowledge about norms
like the representation of legal knowledge or ethical codes for agents. However,
there are only few automated theorem provers specially dedicated for deontic
logicandusedbydeonticlogicians(see[1,2]).Nonetheless,numerousapproaches
totranslatemodallogicsinto(decidablefragmentsof)first-orderpredicatelogics
are stated in the literature. A nice overview including many relevant references
is given in [12].
Inthispaper,weusethefirstorderpredicatelogictheoremproverHyper[14]
to handle SDL knowledge bases. By using the well-known translation of modal
logic into description logic [11] (called ϕ in the sequel) and the fact that Hyper
offers a decision procedure for the description logic SHIQ [4], we are able to
processSDL efficiently.In the following,SDL is translatedinto ALC,which is a
subset of SHIQ.
Transformation from SDL into ALC
For a normative system consisting of the set of deontic logic formulae N =
{F1,...,Fn}, the translation ϕ is defined as the conjunctive combination of the
translation of all deontic logic formulae in N:
Note that ϕ(N) does not yet contain the translation of the seriality axiom.
As shown in [9], the seriality axiom can be translated into the TBox
with r the atomic role introduced by the mapping ϕ.
Forourapplication,theresultofthetranslationofanormativesystemN and
theserialityaxiomisanALC knowledgebaseΦ(N)=(T,A),wheretheTBoxT
consistsofthetranslationoftheserialityaxiomandtheABoxA={(ϕ(N))(a)}
for a new individual a. In description logics, performing a satisfiability test of a
concept C w.r.t. a TBox is usually done by adding a new individual a together
withtheABoxassertionC(a).Forthesakeofsimplicity,wedothisconstruction
already during the transformation of Φ by adding (ϕ(N))(a) to the ABox.
AnadvantageofthetranslationofdeonticlogicformulaeintoanALC knowl-
edgebaseistheexistenceofaTBoxinALC.Thismakesitpossibletoaddfurther
axioms to the TBox.For example we can add certainnorms that we want to be
satisfied in all reachable worlds into the TBox.
Reasoning Tasks
With the help of Hyper, we can solve the following interesting reasoning tasks:
Consistency checking of normative systems: In practice, normative systems can
be very large. Therefore it is not easy to see, if a given normative system is
consistent. The Hyper theorem prover can be used to check consistency of a
normative system N.
Evaluation of normative systems: Given severalnormative systems, we use Hy-
per to find out for which normative system a desired outcome is guaranteed.
3 An Example from Multi-agent Systems
In multi-agent systems, there is a challenging area of research, namely the for-
malization of ‘robot ethics’. It aims at defining formal rules for the behavior of
agents and to prove certain properties. As an example consider Asimov’s laws,
which aim at regulating the relation between robots and humans. In [5], the
authorsdepictasmallexampleoftwosurgeryrobotsobeyingethicalcodes con-
cerning their work. These codes are expressed by means of MADL, which is an
extensionofstandarddeonticlogicwithtwooperators.In[10],anaxiomatization
of MADL is given. Further it is asserted,that MADL is not essentially different
from standard deontic logic. This is why we use SDL to model the example.
Formalization in SDL
In our example, there are two robots ag1 and ag2 in a hospital. For the sake
of simplicity, each robot can perform one specific action: ag1 can terminate a
person’s life support and ag2 can delay the delivery of pain medication. In [5],
four different ethical codes J, J⋆ , O and O⋆ are considered:
– “If ethicalcode J holds,then robotag1 oughtto take care that life support
is terminated.” This is formalized as:
J →(cid:3)act(ag1,term)
– “If ethical code J⋆ holds, then code J holds, and robot ag2 ought to take
care that the delivery of pain medication is delayed.” This is formalized as:
J ⋆ →J ∧J ⋆ →(cid:3)act(ag2,delay)
– “If ethical code O holds, then robot ag2 ought to take care that delivery of
pain medication is not delayed.” This is formalized as:
O →(cid:3)¬act(ag2,delay)
– “If ethical code O⋆ holds, then code O holds, and robot ag1 ought to take
care that life support is not terminated.” This is formalized as:
O ⋆ →O ∧O ⋆ →(cid:3)¬act(ag1,term)
Furtherwegiveaslightlymodifiedversionoftheevaluationoftheactsofthe
robots,asstated in[5], where (+!!)denotes the most and(−!!) the leastdesired
outcome.Notethattermslike(+!!)arejustpropositionalatomicformulaehere.
act(ag1,term)∧ act(ag2,delay) →(−!!) (1)
These formulae evaluate the outcome of the robots’ actions. It makes sense
to assume, that this evaluation is effective in all reachable worlds. This is why
we add formulae stating that formulae (1)–(4) hold in all reachable worlds. For
example, for (1) we add:
Since our example does not include nestedmodal operators,the formulaeof the
form(5) are sufficientto spreadthe evaluationformulae to allreachableworlds.
The normative system N formalizing this example consists of the formalization
ofthefourethicalcodesandtheformulaefortheevaluationoftherobotsactions.
Reduction to a Satisfiability Test
A possible query would be to ask if the most desirable outcome (+!!) will come
to pass if ethical code
is operative. This query can be translated into a
satisfiability test. If N ∧ O⋆ ∧ ♦¬(+!!) is unsatisfiable, then ethical code O⋆
ensures outcome (+!!).
Hyper can be used for this satisfiability test. We obtain the desired result
namely that (only) ethical code
leads to the most desirable behavior (+!!).
Experiment
We formalized this example and tested it with the Hyper theorem prover as
described above. Since all formalizations are available in ALC, we used the de-
scription logic reasoner Pellet [13] to compare the performance with Hyper. It
took Pellet 2.548 seconds and Hyper 2.596 seconds to show the unsatisfiability.
Additionalexperiments canbe foundin [7]. Forthe exampleswe considered,
the runtimes of Pellet and Hyper are comparable. Further investigation and
comparisonwithothermodaland/ordescriptionlogicreasoningtoolsisrequired
and subject of future work.
4 Conclusion
In this paper, we illustrated with the help of an example how to use standard
deontic logic to model ethical codes for multi-agentsystems.For normative sys-
tems described with deontic logic, there is a translation into description logic
concepts. These concepts can be checked automatically by automated theorem
provers. We used the Hyper theorem prover to prove that a specified desired
outcome is guaranteed, if a certain ethical code is operative.