AUTONOMOUS REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION PROCESSING USING
NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Professor S.G. MacDonell Dr Kyongho Min Dr A.M. Connor
Software Engineering Research Lab School of Computer & Info Sciences Software Engineering Research Lab
Auckland University of Technology Auckland University of Technology Auckland University of Technology
Auckland, New Zealand Auckland, New Zealand Auckland, New Zealand
stephen.macdonell@aut.ac.nz kyongho.min@aut.ac.nz andrew.connor@aut.ac.nz
Abstract 3. Section 4 closes the paper with a brief discussion and
our conclusions to date.
We describe our ongoing research that centres on the
application of natural language processing (NLP) to 2 BACKGROUND
software engineering and systems development activities.
In particular, this paper addresses the use of NLP in the Many of the problems encountered in software
requirements analysis and systems design processes. We systems can be traced back to shortcomings in the
have developed a prototype toolset that can assist the processes and practices used to gather, specify and
systems analyst or software engineer to select and verify manage the end product requirements. Typically, these
terms relevant to a project. In this paper we describe the shortcomings are due to the use of informal information
processes employed by the system to extract and classify gathering, unstated or implicit functionality, unfounded or
objects of interest from requirements documents. These uncommunicated assumptions, inadequately documented
processes are illustrated using a small example. requirements or a casual requirements change process [1].
It has been suggested that between 40 and 60% of
software defects are related to errors made during the
1 INTRODUCTION requirements stage [2]. The cost of correcting defects is
often significantly greater than the cost that would have
This paper describes the architecture of an been incurred to ensure that the requirements correctly
autonomous requirements specification processing system represented the users’ need.
that utilises a limited version of a natural language
processing (NLP) system and an interactive user interface Whilst the generation of a complete and non-
system. When analyzing requirements artefacts e.g. ambiguous set of requirements reduces the risk in any
specification documents, interview transcripts and so on, given project, there is still a risk that the requirement set
an analyst generally uses their own software engineering is not transformed into an appropriate design. This risk is
knowledge, training and experience in combination with inherent as a result of mis-interpretation of the
one or more software design tools. In particular, however, requirements, particularly due to a lack of shared
the verification of requirements specification analysis understanding [3] or due to poor structuring of the project
depends primarily on the software engineer’s knowledge. by not conducting architectural design in parallel with
As a result, important information such as relationships requirements capture [4].
between entities in a requirements specification document
could possibly be missed. The use of formal languages or a structured system
design approach can greatly increase the chance that the
It is rather stating the obvious, but the requirements software as constructed will in fact conform to the
analysis and determination activities are among the most interpretation of the requirements. Formal languages help
important in information systems development. remove some elements of ambiguity from the process as
Inaccuracies that are introduced or omissions that occur in they use explicit syntax and semantics that define a set of
these stages of development, if unchecked, generally relations and object interactions more consistently than
result in costly rework in later lifecycle phases. The work the English language. However, the extraction of entity
described in this paper is therefore focused on the relationships from a natural language requirements
verification of requirements specification analysis as document is normally conducted manually by a designer
performed by a software engineer or systems analyst with using their software engineering knowledge in
a view to producing a design model – a use case diagram, conjunction with a design tool. This introduces the risk of
an entity-relationship model or similar. This paper first inconsistency in approach and also the possibility that
describes prior autonomous application research in some entities, relationships or attributes will be missed
requirements analysis in section 2. This is followed by a entirely.
description of the proposed system architecture in section
A great deal of research has focused on the consistency checking to ensure that all requirements are
automation of aspects of the software engineering captured in terms of the relationships between entities.
process, namely requirements elicitation, translation and
analysis, and subsequent software generation, 3 SYSTEM DESIGN
demonstration and test, resulting in a final system artefact.
To date there have been few attempts to automate the In this section, the architecture of an NL (natural
translation from a requirements document written in a language)-based SE tool is described. The system focuses
natural language to one expressed in a formal on the automatic extraction of objects of interest from a
specification language. One of the major reasons for this requirements specification document that is being
is the ambiguity of natural language requirements. processed by a systems analyst (Figure 1).
Nazlia et al [5] propose new heuristics that assist the
semi-automated generation of entity relationship diagrams
for database modelling from a natural language
description, with reasonable success. However, the
limitation to database systems does imply that the natural
language documents being processed have particular
structure and language and their approach may not be
extendable to generic software requirement documents.
Bras and Toussiant [6] specify a framework for the
analysis and mapping of requirements documents, with a
particular focus on satellite ground support systems. Such
systems tend to be large, take a long time to develop, and
have extensive documentation that is all predominantly in
Figure 1: Assisted Requirements Analysis Process
natural language. They facilitate requirements traceability
(as implemented in this research project)
by building tools to analyze, linguistically map and retain
as a knowledge base the contents of the requirements
3.1 System Architecture
documents.
The system is composed of three modules with a
Lee and Bryant [7] developed a system for mapping
user interface implemented by Common lisp IDE (Figure
natural language requirements documents into an object-
2). The first of the three modules – a tokeniser – reads
oriented formal specification language that utilises
sentences from a document, the second module parses
Contextual Natural Language Processing (CNLP) to
each sentence and extracts all unique noun terms (an NLP
overcome the ambiguity in natural language. The
tool), and the third module – a term management system –
mapping process requires that the requirements
performs 1) the filtering of unimportant terms, 2) the
specification is converted to an XML format which is then
classification of the remaining terms into one of three
parsed, with the results added to a knowledge base. The
categories (function, entity, or attribute), and 3) the
content of the knowledge based is converted into a Two
insertion of objects of interest into a project knowledge
Level Grammar format which is a formal requirements
base.
specification language [8]. Finally, a VDM++ model is
produced that describes the software design.
Requirements NLP Tool Term
Ambriola and Gervasi [9] describe a system for Specification (Syntactic Management
supporting natural language requirements gathering, Document Parsing) System (UI)
elicitation, selection and validation. Central to the work is
the idea that requirements are supplemented by a glossary
Figure 2: System Architecture
describing and classifying all the domain and system specific
terms used in the requirements. Therefore, the NLP engine
3.2 A Parsing System
has a-priori knowledge relevant to the content of the
requirements documents.
After the sentences in a requirements specification
The approach detailed in this paper has no a-priori document are extracted by the tokeniser, each sentence is
knowledge with regards the content of the documents, parsed by a syntactic parser based on a chart parsing
which also require no pre-processing. It is applicable to technique [10] with a context-free grammar (CFG) that is
all software requirements documents as it is primarily augmented with constraints. The current prototype system
used interactively and as such provides a high level of uses a dictionary with about 32000 entries and 79 rules. A
context free rule is composed of LHS (Left-Hand Side),
RHS (Right-Hand Side) with well-formedness constraints (S (NP (DET “A”) (NOUN “system”))
for the phrasal constituent. For example, there is a rule S (VP (VERB “requires”)
(i.e. LHS) (cid:198) NP VP (i.e. RHS) with its well-formedness (NP (NP (NOUN “entry”))
constraint being (number-agreement NP VP). Thus the (PP (OF “of”) (NP (POSSADJ “patient’s”)
sentence “He see a car in the park” would be filtered out (NOUN “information”)))))).
as ill-formed because of the number disagreement
between “he” and “see”. From the parse tree, terms based on the syntactic
structure (noun phrase (NP)) would be extracted. In the
At present, the syntactic parsing system does not example above this would include (NP (DET “A”)
recognise compound noun terms, such as “information (NOUN “system”)), (NP (NOUN “entry”), and (NP
system” and “staff members”, by a systematical (POSSADJ “patient’s”) (NOUN “information”)).
compound noun recognition system. The system However, the NP (“entry of patient’s information”) would
recognises compound noun terms by using a list of not be extracted because the structure includes embedded
compound noun terms and a pattern matching technique. NPs (“entry” “patient’s information”).
The syntactic parser can produce ambiguous parse Another real, complex sentence extracted from a
trees of each sentence. At present, the parser has no requirements specification document, “Dunedin Podiatry
disambiguation module – this will be implemented in a requires an information system that allows entry and
later version of the system. Currently the first parse tree retrieval of patient's details and their medical histories.”
is selected as the basis for the extraction of terms for the results in two parse trees. From the first parse tree, the
term management system, terms that will ultimately term extraction stage retrieves NOUN terms including
appear in specification and design artefacts such as use “Dunedin Podiatry”, “information system”, “entry”,
case diagrams or data models. For example, the sentence “retrieval”, “(patient’s) details”, and “(their medical)
“A system requires entry of patient’s information” has the histories” (Figure 3).
following parse tree:
Term Class Requirement specification document
Figure 3: Term Extraction by a Syntactic Parser
Finally, the term extraction process identifies nouns Further documents relevant to the project can then
in the extracted NPs, in this case nouns such as “system”, be analysed and the knowledge base updated. Class
“entry”, and “information”, and these terms can then be conflicts can be identified by the system and flagged to
classified into one of the categories relevant to the design the user as requiring resolution. The knowledge base can
artefact being produced (e.g. entity, function, attribute) by then be used as the basis for the automatic generation of
a term management system. relevant design artefacts – object models, data models and
the like.
3.3 Term Management System
4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
After extracting NP terms, the nouns are shown in
the term list pane (i.e. left pane) in Figures 3 and 4. The At present the prototype parsing system is unable to
filtering function (enacted by the ‘Filter Entity’ toggle perform the following:
button, shown in Figure 4) enables the analyst or software
engineer to remove unimportant terms. The term 1. disambiguation of syntactic parse trees
extraction process cannot necessarily determine every
useful term automatically. Thus in this stage the user can 2. compound noun analysis and proper noun processing
manually remove further unimportant terms.
3. anaphoric resolution and semantic interpretation of
terms.
The next version of the system will be extended to
implement the above mentioned functionality in order to
enhance the process of term extraction and enable term
relationship identification. The semantic interpretation of
each sentence will help in the extraction of useful
relationships between the classes. For example, the
parsing of “patient’s medical histories” will produce in a
data model a one-to-many relationship between “patient”
and “medical histories”.
The fully implemented system will utilise NLP to
assist systems analysts in selecting and verifying objects
and relationships of relevance to any given project, then
enabling these objects and relationships to be depicted in
design artefacts (in either this tool or additional software
Figure 4: Filtering and categorisation of terms. engineering tools). Thus the burden of analysis –
requiring that the systems analyst ‘parse’, select and relate
The user can then select terms to create classes of the objects of interest from specification documents – can
objects of interest (in this example, one of entity, be shifted at least in part to a toolset that is able to
attribute, or function) and can manage the term’s addition perform these tasks intelligently and automatically.
to and deletion from the defined class (via the class list
pane, shown as the middle pane in Figure 3 and the right- 5 REFERENCES
hand pane in Figure 4). The user can view the currently
classified terms in each of the three classes by using a list [1] Wiegers, K.E. Software Requirements, Microsoft
pane of classes (i.e. a combo box under the ‘chart-parser’ Press, 1999
button in Figure 4).
[2] Leffingwell, D. “Calculating the Return on
By selecting terms and their class, individual objects Investment from more Effective Requirements
are created and stored in a project knowledge base using Management”, American Programmer, vol. 10, no.
the following data structures: 4, pp. 13-16, 1997
(OBJECT (:TYPE FUNCTION) (:VALUE “entry”)); [3] Larson, S. & Morrison, B. “Managing software
(OBJECT (:TYPE ENTITY) (:VALUE “patient”)); and requirements in the context of the scientific
(OBJECT (:TYPE ATTRIBUTE) (:VALUE “age”)). enterprise”, IEEE Aerospace Conference
Proceedings, vol. 4, pp 509-522, 2000
[4] Kazmana, R., In, H.P. & Chem, H-M. “From
requirements negotiation to software architecture
decisions”, Information and Software Technology,
vol. 47, issue 8, pp. 511-520, 2005
[5] Nazlia, O., Hanna, P. & McKevitt, P. “Heuristics-
based entity-relationship modelling through natural
language processing”, Proc. of the Fifteenth Irish
Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive
Science, pp. 302-313, 2004
[6] Bras, M. & Toussaint, Y. “Artificial intelligence
tools for software engineering: Processing natural
language requirements”, Proc. of the Eighth Intl.
Conf. on Applications of Artificial Intelligence in
Engineering, pp. 275-290, 1993
[7] Lee, B.-S. & Bryant, B.R. “Automated conversion
from requirements documentation to an object-
oriented formal specification language”, Proc. of the
2002 ACM symposium on Applied, pp. 932-936,
[8] Bryant, B. & Lee, B.-S., “Two-Level Grammar as an
Object-Oriented Requirements Specification
Language”, Proc. of the 35th Annual Hawaii Intl.
Conf. on System Sciences, vol. 9, pp. 280-290, 2002
[9] Ambriola, V. and Gervasi, V. “Processing natural
language requirements”, Proc. 12th IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Automated Software Engineering, pp. 36-45,
[10] Earley, J. “An Efficient Context-Free Parsing
Algorithm”, CACM, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 94-102, 1970