Bayesian inference of sampled ancestor trees for epidemiology
and fossil calibration
Alexandra Gavryushkina1,2,∗, David Welch1,2, Tanja Stadler3, Alexei Drummond1,2,∗
1 Department of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
2 Allan Wilson Centre for Molecular Ecology and Evolution, New Zealand
3 ETH Zu¨rich, Switzerland
∗ E-mail: Corresponding sasha.gavryushkina@auckland.ac.nz, alexei@cs.auckland.ac.nz
Phylogenetic analyses which include fossils or molecular sequences that are sampled through time re-
quire models that allow one sample to be a direct ancestor of another sample. As previously available
phylogenetic inference tools assume that all samples are tips, they do not allow for this possibility.
We have developed and implemented a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm
to infer what we call sampled ancestor trees, that is, trees in which sampled individuals can be direct
ancestors of other sampled individuals.
We use a family of birth-death models where individuals may remain in the tree process after the
sampling, in particular we extend the birth-death skyline model [Stadler et al, 2013] to sampled ancestor
trees. Thismethodallowsthedetectionofsampledancestorsaswellasestimationoftheprobabilitythat
anindividualwillberemovedfromtheprocesswhenitissampled. Weshowthatsampledancestorbirth-
deathmodelswhereallsamplescomefromdifferenttimepointsarenon-identifiableandthusrequireone
parameter to be known in order to infer other parameters.
We apply this method to epidemiological data, where the possibility of sampled ancestors enables
us to identify individuals that infected other individuals after being sampled and to infer fundamental
epidemiological parameters.
Wealsoapplythemethodtoinferdivergencetimesanddiversificationrateswhenfossilsareincluded
among the species samples, so that fossilisation events are modelled as a part of the tree branching
process. Such modelling has many advantages as argued in literature.
The sampler is available as an open-source BEAST2 package
Author Summary
Acentralgoalofphylogeneticanalysisistoestimateevolutionaryrelationshipsandpopulationparameters
such as speciation and extinction rates or the rate of infectious disease spread from molecular data. The
statisticalmethodsusedintheseanalysesrequirethattheunderlyingtreebranchingprocessbespecified.
Standard models for the branching process which were originally designed to describe the evolutionary
past of present day species do not allow for direct ancestors within the sampled taxa, that is, they do
not allow one sampled taxon to be the ancestor of another. However the probability of sampling a direct
ancestorisnotnegligibleformanytypesofdata. Forexample,whenfossilandlivingspeciesareanalysed
together to infer species divergence times, fossil species may or may not be direct ancestors of living
species. In epidemiology, a sampled individual (a host from which a pathogen sequence was obtained)
caninfectotherindividualsaftersampling,whichthengoontobesampledthemselves. Recently,models
that allow for direct ancestors have been introduced. Such models produce phylogenetic trees with a
differentstructurefromtheclassicphylogenetictreesandsousingthesemodelsininferencerequiresnew
computational methods. Here we developed and implemented a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo
framework for phylogenetic analysis allowing for the possibility of direct ancestors.
]EP.oib-q[
3v3754.6041:viXra
Introduction
Phylogeneticanalysisusesmolecularsequencedatatoinferevolutionaryrelationshipsbetweenorganisms
andtoinferevolutionaryparameters. SincetheintroductionofBayesianinferenceinphylogenetics[1–3],
it has become the standard approach for fully probabilistic inference of evolutionary history with many
popular implementations [4–7] of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [8,9] sampling over the space of
phylogenetic trees. Initial descriptions of Bayesian phylogenetic analysis were restricted to considering
bifurcating trees [1,2], but have been extended to include explicit polytomies [10]. Here we tackle
phylogenetic inference with trees that may contain sampled ancestors [11].
Standard phylogenetic models developed for inferring the evolutionary past of present day species
assume that all samples are terminal (leaf) nodes in the estimated phylogenetic tree. However, serially
sampled data generated by different evolutionary processes can be analysed using phylogenetic methods
[12] and, in some cases, the assumption that all sampled taxa are leaf nodes is not appropriate.
One case in point is when inferring epidemiological parameters from viral sequence data obtained
frominfectedhosts[13–17]. Viralsequencesareobtainedfromdistincthostsandtreatedassamplesfrom
the transmission process. Using standard models to describe the infectious disease transmission process
entails the assumption that a host becomes uninfectious at sampling (where sampling is obtaining a
sequenceorsequencesfromthepathogenpopulationresidinginasingleinfectedhost). Howeverinmany
cases, hosts remain infectious after sampling and, when sampling is sufficiently dense, the probability of
samplinganindividualthatlaterinfectsanotherindividualwhichisalsosampledisnotnegligible[18–20].
A recent analysis of a well-characterised HIV transmission chain [20] employed a hierarchical model
of a gene tree inside a transmission tree to infer the differences in evolutionary rates (substitution rates)
withinandamonghosts. Hierarchicalmodellingofgenetreesinsidetransmissiontreeshasalsobeenused
to infer transmission events for small epidemic outbreaks where epidemiological data is available in the
formofknowninfectionandrecoverytimesforeachhost[16]. Inbothcasestheinferenceoftransmission
trees assumes complete sampling of the hosts involved, and the host sampling process is not explicitly
modelled.
Incomplete sampling is explicitly modelled by birth-death-sampling models [15,21–23], for which the
probabilitydensityfunctionsofthetreesareavailableinclosedform,thusmakingthesemodelstractable
for use in Bayesian inference. The birth-death-sampling models do not assume that individuals are
removed from the tree process after the sampling. However, applications of models allowing for infection
after sampling has not been possible due to a lack of software, meaning that many applications simply
ignore sampled ancestors [15,23].
Another problem that may require sampled ancestor models is inferring species divergence times
using fossil data. Without the means to calibrate the times of divergences, the length of branches in the
estimatedmolecularphylogenyofcontemporaneoussequencesaretypicallydescribedinunitsofexpected
substitutions per site. Geologically dated fossil data can be employed to calibrate a phylogenetic tree,
thus providing absolute branch lengths. The most common approach here is to specify age limits or
a probability density function on specific divergence times in the phylogeny, where the constraints are
defined using the fossil data [24–28]. There are several drawbacks connected to this approach [29,30].
First, there is potential for inconsistency when applying two priors on the phylogeny [31]: a calibration
priorononeormoredivergencetimesandatreeprocesspriorontheentiretree. Second,itisnotobvious
how to specify a calibration density so that it reflects prior knowledge about divergence times [29,30].
Finally, such densities usually only use the oldest fossil within a particular clade, thus discarding much
of the information available in the fossil record [30].
An approach that addresses these issues requires modelling fossilisation events as a part of the tree
processprior. Thisallowsforthejointanalysisoffossilandrecenttaxatogetherinaunifiedframework[29,
30,32–34]. Models that jointly describe the processes of macroevolution and fossilisation should account
for possible ancestor-descendant relationships between fossil and living species [35], and thus include
sampled ancestors.
Abirth-deathmodelwithsampledancestorshavebeenusedtoestimatespeciationandextinctionrates
from phylogenies in [22]. Heath et al. [30] have used the birth-death model with sampled ancestors (they
call this the fossilized birth-death process) to explicitly model fossilisation events and estimate divergence
timesinaBayesianframework. Intheirapproach, thetreetopologyrelatingtheextantspecieshastobe
known for the inference [30]. So a method that simultaneously estimates the divergence times and tree
topology while modelling incorporation of sampled fossil taxa is an obvious next step.
Full Bayesian MCMC inference using models with sampled ancestors is complicated by the fact that
such models produce trees, which we call sampled ancestor trees [11], that are not strictly binary. They
may have sampled nodes that lie on branches, forming an internal node with one direct ancestor and one
direct descendent. Thus, modelling sampled ancestors induces a tree space where the tree has a variable
number of dimensions (a function of the number of sampled ancestors), which necessitates extensions to
the standard MCMC tree algorithms.
Here we describe a reversible-jump MCMC proposal kernel [36] to effectively traverse the space of
sampled ancestor trees and implement it within the BEAST2 software platform [6]. We study the lim-
itations of birth-death models with sampled ancestors and extend the birth-death skyline model [23] to
sampled ancestor trees. We apply the new posterior sampler to two types of data: a serially sampled
viral data set (from HIV), and molecular phylogeny of bear sequences with fossil samples.
Tree models with sampled ancestors
In this section, we consider birth-death sampling models [15,21–23] under the assumption that sampled
individualsarenotnecessarilyremovedfromtheprocessatsampling. Thisresultsinatypeofphylogenetic
tree that may contain degree two nodes called sampled ancestors.
An important characteristic of the models we consider here is incomplete sampling, i.e., we only
observe a part of the tree produced by a process. Consider a birth-death process that starts at some
point in time (the time of origin) with one lineage and then each existing lineage may bifurcate or go
extinct. Further, the lineages are randomly sampled through time. An example of a full tree produced
by such process is shown in Figure 1 on the left. We have information only about the portion of the
process that produces the samples, shown as labeled nodes, and do not observe the full tree. Thus we
only consider this subtree relating to the sample, which is called the reconstructed tree (or the sampled
tree) and is shown on the right of Figure 1.
The sampled ancestor birth-death model
Here we describe a serially-sampled birth-death model with sampled ancestors [15,21].
The process begins at the time of origin t > 0 measured in time units before the present. Moving
towardsthepresent,eachexistinglineagebifurcatesorgoesextinctaccordingtotwoindependentPoisson
processes with constant rates λ and µ, respectively. Concurrently, each lineage is sampled with Poisson
rateψ andisremovedfromtheprocessatsamplingwithprobabilityr. Theprocessisstoppedattime0.
This process can be used to model the transmission of infectious disease and we call it the transmission
birth-death process.
Thetransmissionprocessproducestreesthathavedegreetwonodescorrespondingtosamplingevents
when a lineage was sampled but was not removed. We call these trees sampled ancestor trees (whether
or not any sampled ancestors are present). The reconstructed tree has degree-two nodes when a lineage
is sampled but not removed and then it, or a descendent lineage, is sampled again. The reconstructed
tree in Figure 1 (on the right) is an example of a sampled ancestor tree. Note that the root of a sampled
ancestortreeisthemostrecentcommonancestorofthesamplednodesandthereforeitmaybeasampled
node. There is no origin node in the tree because the time of origin is a model parameter and not an
outcome of the process.
A tree (or genealogy) g consists of the discrete component T, which is called a tree topology, and the
continuous component τ¯, which is called a time vector. The tree topology of a sampled ancestor tree is a
sampled ancestor phylogenetic tree, which is a ranked labeled phylogenetic tree with labeled degree-two
vertices (a rigorous definition of a sampled ancestor phylogenetic tree can be found in [11], where it is
called an FRS tree). The time vector is a real-valued vector of the same dimension as the number of
ranks (nodes) in the tree topology and with coordinates going in the descending order so that each node
in the tree topology can be unambiguously assigned a time from the time vector.
Further, we have three types of nodes: bifurcation nodes, sampled tip nodes, sampled internal nodes.
Let m be the number of leaves, then m−1 is the number of bifurcation events. Let x¯ =(x ,...,x )
be a vector of bifurcation times, where x < ... < x . Let y¯= (y ,...,y ) be a vector of tip times,
where y < ... < y . Further let z¯ = (z ,...,z ) be a vector of times of sampled two degree nodes,
where z <...<z and k is the number of such nodes. Then τ¯ can be obtained by combining elements
ofx¯,y¯,andz¯andorderingtheminthedescendingorder(seealsoFigure1). Agenealogymaybewritten
Stadler et al. [15] derive the density of a genealogy g =(T,x¯,y¯,z¯) given the transmission birth-death
processparametersλ,µ,ψ,r andtimeoforigint . In[21],itwasindicatedthatweshouldalsocondition
on the event, S, of sampling at least one individual because only non-empty samples are observed. The
density is
where the function p (x) is the probability that an individual has no sampled descendants for a time
span of length x so that
q(x)= .
Throughout this paper, we consider non-oriented labeled trees. So equation (1) differs from the equation
on page 350 in [15], written for oriented trees, by a factor accounting for the switch from oriented to
labeled trees and also by the term for conditioning on S. Note also that the definition of the function q
here is different from the definition in [15].
WeshowintheSupportingInformationthatfunction(1)dependsonlyonthreeparameters: λ−µ−ψ,
λψ, and ψ(1−r), and does not depend on parameters λ, µ, ψ and r independently. This means that the
tree model is unidentifiable but, as we show in simulation studies, if we specify one of the parameters we
can estimate the others.
When applying this model to data, we typically shift time such that the most recent tip occurs at
present, y = 0, as we often do not have information about the length of time between the last sample
and the end of the sampling effort. This is done to reduce our set of unknown quantities by one (namely
setting y =0).
We extend the model to allow the possibility of sampling individuals at present, where each lineage
attime0issampledwithprobabilityρ. Thisprocess, withr settozero, canbeusedtomodelspeciation
processes with fossilisation events, hence it is called the fossilized birth-death process [30]. Let S denote
the event of sampling at least one individual at present then according to [21] and accounting for labeled
trees:
where n is the number of ρ-sampled tips and
In contrast to the transmission birth-death process, where only three out of the four parameters λ, µ, ψ,
and r can be inferred, under the fossilized birth-death process, all four parameters λ, µ, ψ, and ρ can be
identified from the phylogeny.
It is possible to re-write density (2) conditioning on the time of the most recent common ancestor
of sampled individuals rather than conditioning on the time of origin. In this case, we discard trees in
which the root is a sampled node. In other words, we assume that the process starts with a bifurcation
event and we only consider trees with sampled nodes on both sides of the initial bifurcation event. Then
the time of the most recent common ancestor of the sample is the time of the root, x . Accounting for
labeled trees, the probability density function can thus be written [21] as:
The sampled ancestor skyline model
Here we extend the sampled ancestor birth-death model so that parameters may change through time in
a piecewise manner. This model combines two models from [15] and [23].
Let there be l time intervals [t ,t ) for i∈{1,...,l} defined by vector t¯=(t ,...,t ) and t =0
i i−1 0 l−1 l
with t <t <...<t <t (where t plays the role of the origin time, i.e., t =t ). We use notation
l l−1 1 0 0 or 0
t for time zero only for convenience and do not include it as a model parameter. Within each interval
[t ,t ), i ∈ {1,...,l} the constant birth-death parameters λ , µ , ψ , and r apply. At the end of each
i i−1 i i i i
intervalattimest ,i∈{1,...,l},eachindividualmaybesampledwithprobabilityρ (seealsoFigure1).
Thus, the model has 6l parameters: λ¯, µ¯, ψ¯, r¯, ρ¯, and t¯. We prove in the Supporting Information that
the probability density of a reconstructed sampled ancestor tree g =(T|x¯,y¯,z¯) produced by this process
is (not conditioned on survival),
(cid:89) k
m+ (cid:89) M−1
(cid:89) m ψ iyi (r iyi +(1−r iyi )p iyi (y i ))
i i+1 i i i+1 i+1 i i+1 i+1 i+1 i
where m is the number of ψ-sampled tips; k is the number of ψ-sampled nodes that have sampled
descendants; M is the number of tips sampled at time t ; K is the number of nodes sampled at time
t and having sampled descendants; N = K +M is the total number of nodes sampled at time t ; n
i i i i i i
is the number of lineages present in the tree at time t but not sampled at this time for i ∈ {1,...,l};
(cid:80) (cid:80)
M = M ; K = K ; i is an index such that t ≤ x < t ; and functions p and q are defined
i i x ix ix−1 i i
presently.
The probability p (t) that an individual alive at time t has no sampled descendants when the process
is stopped (i.e., in the time interval [t ,t]), with t ≤t<t (i=1,...,l) is
λ +µ +ψ −A
i i i i i i
B = i i+1 i i i i
for i=1,...,l and p (t )=1. Further,
4eAi(t−ti)
for i = 1,...,l. Note that q (t ) does not appear in the equation because n (which is the number
of lineages present in the tree at time t but not sampled at that time) and K (which is the number
of two degree nodes at time t ) are always zero. Also, r cancels out because K is always zero and
p (t )=1.
We obtain two special cases of this general model that correspond to the skyline variants of the
transmission and fossilized birth-death processes by setting some of the parameters to zero.
To obtain the skyline transmission process, we set ρ¯ = 0. This implies K = 0, M = 0, and
N = 0 for all i. As before, we condition on the event, S, of sampling at least one individual, where
q 1 (t 0 ) (cid:89) k (1−r )ψ m (cid:89) −1 2λ q (x ) (cid:89) m ψ iyi (r iyi +(1−r iyi )p iyi (y i ))(cid:89) l (q (t ))ni
We show in the Supporting Information that (5) can be re-parameterised with
d =λ −µ −ψ for i=1,...,l
f =λ ψ for i=1,...,l
g =(1−r )ψ for i=1,...,l, and (6)
k = i for i=1,...,l−1.
Thus, of the original 4l parameters, only 4l−1 may be estimated.
For the skyline fossilized birth-death model, we set ρ ,...,ρ = 0 and r¯= 0 and condition on S ,
the event of sampling at least one extant individual (i.e., at time t ). The tree density becomes
ρNl q 1 (t 0 ) (cid:89) k ψ m+ (cid:89) Nl−1 2λ q (x ) (cid:89) m ψ iyi p iyi (y i )(cid:89) l (q (t ))ni
This probability density can be re-parameterised as in (6) with one additional equation h = λ ρ (see
Supporting Information). Now there are 3l +1 initial parameters: λ¯, µ¯, ψ¯, and ρ and 4l equations
defining the re-parameterisation. Since r =0, g defines ψ , then f yields λ , then d yields µ , h yields
i i i i i i i
ρ andthel−1equationsfork arenotneededatall, thus3l+1equationsdefinethereparameterization
of the 3l+1 parameters, thus this re-parameterisation does not reduce the number of parameters.
Markov chain Monte Carlo Operators
We introduce a number of operators to explore the space of sampled ancestor trees with a fixed number
of sampled nodes. Throughout this section, we denote the height (or the age) of a node a by τ .
Extension of Wilson Balding operator
We extend the Wilson Balding operator (a type of subtree prune and regraft) [37] to sampled ancestor
treessothatitisidenticaltotheoriginaloperatorwhenitisrestrictedtotreeswithnosampledancestors.
Theoperatormayproposeasignificantchangetoatreeandmaychangeitsdimension,thatis,thenumber
of nodes in the tree. We use the reversible jump formalism of [36].
First, we describe a reduced version of the operator that does not change the root. Let g =(T,τ¯) be
a genealogy. There are three steps in proposing a new tree.
1. Choose edge e =(cid:104)p ,c (cid:105) uniformly at random such that p is not the root (p is the parent of c ).
1 1 1 1 1 1
Recall that we do not consider the origin as a node belonging to the tree.
2. Choose either edge e =(cid:104)p ,c (cid:105) or leaf l. The method of selection depends on the type of e :
(a) if node c has a sibling then, uniformly at random from all possibilities, either choose edge e
which is not adjacent to e and at least one end of which is above c (i.e., p is older than c )
or leaf l which is older than c ;
(b) if node c does not have a sibling (so p is a sampled node) then choose edge e such that at
least one of its ends is older than c or a leaf which is older than c uniformly at random.
If there is no such edge nor leaf, do nothing and propose no new tree.
3. If an item was chosen in step 2, then prune the subtree rooted at node p and reattach it to edge
e or leaf l. When attaching to an edge, we draw a new height for the parent of node c uniformly
at random from the interval [max(τ ,τ ),τ ].
Figure2illustratespruningfromabranch(case2a)andfromanode(case2b)andattachingtoabranch
and to a leaf. Let the resulting new genealogy be g∗ =(T∗,τ¯∗).
Now we extend this move to add the possibility of changing the root. We modify the described
procedure in two ways. First, we allow to choose e for which p is the root at the first step. Second, we
can also choose the root edge at the second step, i.e., the edge which connects the root with the origin.
Although we do not usually consider this edge as a part of the tree, for convenience we assume we can
choose it. In this case, the parent of node c becomes a new root with the height obtained by drawing
a difference between the new root height and the old root height from the exponential distribution with
rate λ .
To calculate the Hastings ratio, q(g∗|g), for this move we derive the proposal density, q(g∗|g). q(g∗|g)
is a product of the probability of choosing edge e at the first step, the probability of choosing edge e
(or leaf l) at the second step, and the probability density of choosing a new age at the third stage (or
one if we attach to a leaf).
Let D denote the number of edges in tree T. Then the contribution of the first step to the proposal
densityis 1. Theprobabilityatthesecondstepdependsonthenumberofchoicesthere. However, since
we choose the same subtree to prune in the forward and backward moves and then, at step two, choose
from the items remaining in the tree after pruning the subtree, the second terms in the product will
cancel in the ratio and we do not calculate them.
The contribution of the third step depends on the type of a move. When attaching to a leaf it is
equaltoone. Whenattachingtoabranchitisequaltotheprobabilitydensityofarandomvariableτnew
which defines a new age for the parent of c . So it is either
|I | 1 p2 c1 c2
e−λeh1, if h
0, otherwise.
whereτ denotestheheightofnodea. TheHastingsratioforthedifferentcasesissummarisedinTable1.
Leaf to sampled ancestor jump
This is a dimension changing move that jumps between two trees where a particular sampled node is a
sampled ancestor in one tree and a leaf in the other. It randomly chooses a sampled node i. If i is a
sampledancestor,weproposeanewtreewhereiisaleafasfollows. Letpbetheparentofiandcbethe
child of i. Create a new node j with height chosen uniformly at random from the interval [τ ,τ ]. Make
p the parent of j and make i (now a leaf) and c the children of j.
If i is a leaf then it becomes a sampled ancestor replacing its parent if possible. It is not be possible
if i has no sibling or the sibling of i is older than i. When this is possible, let node b be the parent of i in
the proposed tree. The Hastings ratio for this move is 1 when i is a sampled ancestor and (τ −τ )
when i is a leaf.
Note that these same trees can be proposed under the extended Wilson Balding operator. We intro-
duce this more specific, or local, operator to improve mixing.
Other operators
We extend the narrow and wide exchange operators used in BEAST2 to sampled ancestor trees. The
narrow exchange operator swaps a randomly chosen node with its aunt if possible. It chooses a non-root
node c such that its parent p is not the root either. If the parent b of node p is not a sampled node and,
therefore, has another child u and the height of u is less than the height of c then we remove edges (cid:104)p,c(cid:105)
and (cid:104)b,u(cid:105) and add edges (cid:104)p,u(cid:105) and (cid:104)b,c(cid:105). Otherwise no tree is proposed. The wide exchange operator
swaps two randomly chosen nodes along with the subtrees descendant from these nodes if none of them
is a parent to another one and the ages of the parents allow to swap the children. The Hastings ratio is
1 for both operators.
To propose height changes we use a scale operator and a uniform operator. The scale operator scales
non-sampled internal nodes by a scale factor drawn from the uniform distribution on the interval (1,β),
where β >1. If the scaling makes some parent node younger than its children then no tree is proposed.
The Hastings ratio for this operator is αk−2, where α is the scale factor and k is the number of internal
non-sampled nodes (the number of scaled dimensions). The uniform operator proposes a new height for
internal nodes chosen uniformly at random from the interval bounded by the heights of the parent and
the oldest child of the chosen node. The Hastings ratio for this operator is 1.
Simulations and empirical data analysis
Simulating the fossilized birth-death process
We simulated 100 trees under the sampled ancestor birth-death model with ρ-sampling and r = 0. We
fix the tree model parameters in this simulation:
λ=1.5 t =3.5
Since the time of the origin is one of the model parameters, we simulate each tree on the time interval of
3.5. Wediscardtreeswithlessthanfivesamplednodes, whichconstitute8%ofthetrees. Theremaining
trees have 55 sampled nodes on average. Then we simulated sequences along each tree under the GTR
model with a strict molecular clock model and ran the MCMC with the sequences and sampled node
dates as the input data. For these runs, we use the re-parameterisation:
net diversification rate d=λ−µ=1.0
turnover rate ν = µ =0.33 (8)
sampling proportion s= ψ = 0.44
along with the time of origin, t and ρ. The sampling proportion is the proportion of individuals which
are sampled before they are removed, meaning it is the proportion of sampled individuals out of all
individuals in the full tree. Since this set of parameters has only two parameters (d and t ) which are
on the unbounded interval (0,∞) with the others defined on [0,1], this is a convenient parametrisation
for defining uninformative priors. For the tree prior distribution we use the distribution with probability
density function (2) multiplied by priors for hyper parameters: ν, s, and ρ ∼ Uniform(0,1) for and
Uniform(0,1000) for d and t .
Weestimateatree,treemodelparameters,GTRrates,andtheclockrate. Theparametersofinterest
include tree model parameters (d, ν, s and ρ) and features of the tree including the time of the origin
(t ), tree height and number of sampled ancestors.
Simulating the transmission birth-death process
In this process, there is no ρ-sampling but r >0. Here we again use d, ν, and s parametrisation defined
by Equations (8). We fix the time of the origin, t = 3, and draw the tree model parameters from the
distributions
d ∼ Uniform(1,2)
ν ∼ Uniform(0,1)
s ∼ Uniform(0.5,1)
r ∼ Uniform(0,1)
and simulate a tree under the transmission birth-death process with drawn parameters on the fixed time
interval. We choose these prior distributions because they cover a wide range of parameter combinations
of interest and produce trees of reasonable size. We discard trees with less than 5 or greater than 250
sampled nodes, which constitute 21% of the sample. In total, we report the results on 100 trees with the
mean number of sampled nodes being 53. We simulate sequences along each tree under the GTR model
with a strict molecular clock.
IntheMCMCruns,wefixthefossilisationproportion,s,toitstruevalue,asonlythreeoutofthefour
birth-deathparameterscanbeinferred. Thetreepriordistributionis(1)withuniformpriordistributions
forhyperparametersd,ν,s,andr,onthesameintervalsasaboveandUniform(0,1000)priordistribution
for the time of the origin. We estimate the tree, tree model parameters, GTR rates and clock rate and
assess the estimates of the tree model parameters and properties of the tree.
Simulating under the sampled ancestor skyline model
Wesimulatedtheskylinetransmissionprocessunderthreedifferentsetsofparametersandthenestimated
theparametersinMCMCwithfixedtreesandwithsomeparametersfixed. Wehavetriedscenarioswith
two and three intervals, fixing either r or ψ. In one scenario, only ψ changes through time from zero to
none-zero value and the other parameters stay constant. In the second scenario, all parameters except
r change through time. In the final scenario, all parameters change through time and the whole vector
r¯is fixed in the inference. For a full description of the parameter and prior settings see the Supporting
Information.
Bear dataset analysis
We re-analyzed the bear dataset from [30]. The fossilized birth-death model we use is the same model
as in the original analysis by Heath et al. [30] but we use a strict clock instead of a relaxed clock
model. Weperformtwoanalyses,bothwithastrictclock,usingourimplementationinBEAST2andthe
implementation in DPPDiv by Heath et al.
The tree prior density is (3) with transformed parameters d, ν, and s for which we chose uniform
priors and ρ = 1 is fixed. We use the strict molecular clock model with and exponential prior for the
clock rate and the GTR model with gamma categories with uniform priors for GTR rates and gamma
shape.
The prior distributions in both analysis (in BEAST2 and DPPDiv) are all the same except the priors
for GTR rates and gamma shape. In DPPDiv,
(η ,η ,η ,η ,η , η )∼Dirichlet(1,1,1,1,1,1)
AC AG AT CG CT GT
In BEAST2, we fix η to one and use Uniform(0, 100) priors for other rates. We place a uniform prior
for gamma shape parameter in BEAST2 and exponential in DPPDiv.
HIV 1 dataset analysis
We re-analyzed UK HIV-1 subtype B data from [38]. We use the skyline model without ρ-sampling and
withone rateshift time(in1999) becausenosamples were takenbeforethis time. Thetree prior density
is (5). We use the following parameterisation and prior distributions:
effective reproductive number R = λ ∼ LogNormal(0.5,1)
total removal rate δ =µ+ψr ∼ LogNormal(-1,1)
leaf sampling proportion s = ψr ∼ Uniform(0,1)
removal probability r ∼ Beta(5,2)
time of origin t ∼ LogNormal(3.28,0.5)
The leaf sampling proportion is the proportion of individuals who are removed by sampling out of all
removed individuals, thus it is the proportion of sampled tips out of all tips in the full tree. The
parameterisation and prior distributions are different from the distributions used in simulation studies.
We chose the prior distributions for R , δ, and s following [23] and the prior distribution for r assuming
that diagnosed patients are likely to change their behaviour. Recall that this model is unidentifiable and
we need to have a good prior knowledge about at least one of the parameters.
We suppose that only leaf sampling proportion changes through time and it changes from zero to
a non-zero value. Other parameters stay constant through time. We use a GTR model with gamma
categories and a molecular clock model with the substitution rate fixed to 2.48×10−3 as was estimated
in [23].
We developed a Bayesian MCMC framework for phylogenetic inference with models that allow sampled
ancestors. We implemented a sampled ancestor MCMC algorithm as an add-on to software package
BEAST2 [6] thereby making several sampled ancestor birth-death prior models available to users. We
test the accuracy and limitations of these models in simulation studies and apply the sampler to infer
divergence times for a biological dataset comprised of extant species and fossil samples and to an HIV
dataset. In case of the fossil-bear dataset, we compare the results obtained from our implementation to
the result obtained from an alternative implementation [30].
Simulation of sampled ancestor models
We simulated the sampled ancestor birth-death process and sampled ancestor skyline process under
different scenarios. In all cases, the simulations show that we can recover the tree and model parameters
from sequence data and sampling times.
For some variants of the model, one of the tree model parameters has to be fixed for the inference
to its true value as was discussed in the Methods section. Simulation studies show that fixing one of
the parameters allows to recover the remaining parameters. In particular, we showed that function (1)
depends exactly on three parameters because fixing ψ allows recovery of λ, µ and r while function (2)
depends on all four parameters: λ, µ, ψ and ρ. We also simulated scenarios where we fixed different
parameters, for example, r or ψ. All scenarios give accurate estimates of the remaining parameters.
We present here detailed results of two sets of simulations: one for the fossilized birth-death process
and another one for the transmission birth-death process. Further simulation results can be found in the
Supporting Information.
In these two scenarios, we first simulated trees and then sequences along the trees. Then we ran the
samplertorecovertreemodelparametersandgenealogiesfromsimulateddatacomprisedofsequencesand
sampling times. We assess the results by calculating summary statistics including: the median estimate
ofaparameter, theerrorandrelativebiasofthemedianestimate, andtherelative95%highestposterior
density (HPD) interval width. We assess whether the true value belongs to the 95% HPD interval. To
summarisetheresultsfromacollectionofrunswecalculatethemediansofthesummarystatistics(i.e,the
median of the estimated medians, the median of the relative errors and so forth) and count the number
of times when the true value belongs to the 95% HPD interval. To assess the power of the method with
regardtoestimationofsampledancestorsweperformedthereceiveroperatingcharacteristicanalysis[39]
which estimates false positive and false negative error rates under different decision rules.
For the fossilized birth-death process (the process with ρ-sampling and zero removal probability), we
simulated a set of trees under a fixed set of the tree model parameters. Each parameter was estimated
and, in the worst case, the median of the relative errors for all runs was 0.22. The median of the relative
errors for tree properties, such as the time of origin, tree height and number of sampled ancestors, was
at most 0.09. The true parameters and tree properties were within the estimated 95% HPD intervals
at least 95% of the time in all cases. The estimates of the number of sampled ancestors and the tree
height are shown in Figure 3. Figure 4 shows how the amount of uncertainty in turnover rate estimates
decreases with the size of the tree (i.e., with the number of sampled nodes).
To simulate from the transmission birth-death process, i.e., the sampled ancestor birth-death process
withoutρ-samplingandwithnon-zeroremovalprobability, wedrawtreemodelparametersfromuniform
distributions for each simulation. The tree model parameters were estimated with the maximum median
of relative errors of 0.28 and, for the tree properties, of 0.06. In the worst case a parameter or a tree
property was inside the 95% HPD interval 92% of the time. The estimates of the parameters are shown
in Figure 5.
We used the data simulated from the transmission process to perform the receiver operating char-
acteristic (ROC) analysis of the sampled ancestor predictor, which makes a prediction relying on the
posterior distribution of genealogies. A node is predicted to be a sampled ancestor with a probability
calculated as a fraction of trees in the posterior sample in which the node is a sampled ancestor. The
total number of non-final sampled nodes (we exclude the most recent node in each case as it can not
be a sampled ancestor) in all simulated trees was 5225 and 1814 of these nodes were sampled ancestors.
The ROC curve constructed from this data and predictions obtained from the MCMC runs is shown in
Figure 6.
Application of the fossilized birth-death model to a bear dataset
In [30], Heath et al. analysed a bear dataset comprised of sequence data of 10 extant species and
occurrence dates of 24 fossil samples to estimate divergence times in a Bayesian MCMC framework.
They assumed that the tree topology on the extant species is known and each fossil sample is assigned
to a clade in the tree. Here, we replicate this analysis using the MCMC implementation of the fossilized
birth-death model in BEAST2.
We run two analysis with BEAST2 and with the DPPDiv implementation by Heath et al. under the
same model. The tree topology relating all living bear species and two outgroup species is fixed in the
analyses and we estimate the divergence times and tree model parameters. The estimates are the same
in both analyses as expected. The estimated divergence times are shown in Figure 7.
Application of sampled ancestor Skyline model to HIV dataset
WeanalysedanHIV-1subtypeBdatasetfromtheUnitedKingdom,consistingof62sequencesthatwere
originally analysed in [38] and later analysed using the skyline model without sampled ancestors in [23].
The posterior probability of being a sampled ancestors for three sampled nodes was 61%, 59%, and 49%.
Forothersamplednodesthe probabilitywasless than4%. Thereispositiveevidence thatthreesampled
nodes with high posterior probabilities are sampled ancestors. The Bayes factors are 5.9, 8.7, and 4.2,
respectively.
We chose a random tree among the trees in the posterior sample that have exactly these three nodes
as sampled ancestors. The tree is shown in Figure 8. It is noticeable that all three sampled ancestors are
clustered on a clade of 16 (out of 62) samples. The median of the posterior distribution of the number
of sampled ancestors was 2 with 95% HPD interval [1,3]. The removal probability was estimated to be
0.74 with 95% HPD interval [0.46,0.97].
Discussion
TheMCMCsamplerdevelopedhereenablesanalysesundermodelsinwhichtheprobabilityofonesample
being the direct ancestor of another sample is not negligible. These models are useful for describing
infectious transmission processes, including identifying transmission chains. They are also useful for
estimating divergence times for macroevolutionary data in the presence of fossil samples.
In the analysis of a phylogeny of bears we show that the sampler can be applied to data comprised
of both fossil and recent taxa to infer divergence times. This dataset was previously analysed using
the fossilized birth-death model by Heath et al. [30]. While the underlying model is the same and thus
producing the same results, there is a conceptual difference between the two MCMC frameworks. In the
analysis by Heath et al, MCMC was used to integrate over fossil attachment times while the topological
attachment of the fossils was integrated out analytically. To achieve this, the topology of the phylogeny
relating the extant taxa had to be assumed to be known. In our implementation, we integrate over the
treesrelatingfossilandextanttaxa,i.e.,overboththefossilattachmenttimesandtopologicalattachment
points,usingMCMC.Inordertofacilitateadirectcomparisonweconstrainedthetopologyoftheextant
species, however the sampler does not require this. For datasets where the tree topology is well resolved,
analytical calculation results in faster mixing but when there is uncertainty in the extant phylogeny,
which is the more common case, our sampler can account for it. Since the two implementations of the
method were made completely independently of one another, this result also provides strong evidence
that our implementation is sampling from the correct posterior distribution.
A natural extension to the analysis of the bear phylogeny would be to include morphological data to
inform the inference regarding the precise placement of fossils on the tree [32,33], however this requires
models of morphological character evolution [29,40]. Another direction for application of the sampler
is using the skyline version of the fossilized birth-death model to analyse datasets where fossil samples
come from different stratigraphic layers, so that rates of fossilisation and discovery may change through
time. Fossils are better preserved in some layers than in other layers and therefore the sampling rate
varies from layer to layer and this can be modelled as a skyline plot.
Simulation studies show that the MCMC sampler for sampled ancestor trees allows for the detection
of direct ancestors within the sample. In epidemiological studies, sampled ancestors can be interpreted
as sampled individuals that have later infected other individuals. In the analysis of the HIV dataset,
we equated the transmission tree directly with the viral gene tree. This approximation is good enough
to demonstrate the method. But for chronic infectious diseases such as Hepatitis C and HIV where
the genetic diversity of the pathogen population within a single host can be substantial (e.g. [20,41]) the
inferentialpowerwouldbeimprovedbyahierarchicalmodelthatexplicitlymodelsthedifferencebetween
the sampled ancestor) transmission tree and the (binary) viral gene tree. Regardless of the modelling
details,suchanalysesallowfortheestimationoftheremovalatsamplingparameterr,whichcontrolsthe
prevalence of sampled ancestors. In most situations this parameter reflects the probability with which
patients remain able to cause further infections after they were diagnosed.
Analytic calculations (presented in the Supporting Information) and simulation studies show that
there is a degree of non-identifiably of parameters in the transmission birth-death models that include
the r parameter. In other words, these models require one of the parameters to be fixed or strongly
constrained by prior information to achieve unambiguous inference. In epidemiological studies with a
known sampling scheme, a candidate parameter to fix is the sampling proportion. For epidemics with
a period of infection, such as influenza, the total removal rate, δ, could be fixed. Under the fossilized
birth-death model, it is possible to infer all the parameters of the tree process prior when time-stamped
comparative data is available. This is an interesting insight: if no fossils are available, we can only infer
two out of the three parameters λ,µ,ρ (as the likelihood only depends on λ−µ,λρ) while in presence of
fossils we can estimate all four parameters λ,µ,ρ,ψ (as the likelihood depends on λ−µ,λρ,λψ,ψ). As
sequence data of fossil organisms is rarely available and thus information about fossil locations on the
tree obtained by phylogenetic modelling of morphological data [29,40] may become important to enable
effective inference.
ToourknowledgethisisthefirstfullimplementationofanMCMCsamplerofsampledancestortrees
and we anticipate that such samplers will form the computational basis for further developments in both
fossil-calibrated divergence time dating and phylodynamics.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Tracy Heath for assistance with her implementation. We also acknowledge the
New Zealand eScience Infrastructure (NeSI) for use of their high-performance computing facilities. AJD
was funded by a Rutherford Discovery Fellowship from the Royal Society of New Zealand. This research
was also partially supported by Marsden grant #UOA1324 from the Royal Society of New Zealand