Bayesian design of synthetic biological systems
Chris Barnes, Daniel Silk, Xia Sheng and Michael P.H. Stumpf
Theoretical Systems Biology Group, Division of Molecular Biosciences,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK
Email: christopher.barnes@imperial.ac.uk, m.stumpf@imperial.ac.uk
Hereweintroduceanewdesignframeworkforsyntheticbiologythatexploitstheadvantagesof
Bayesianmodelselection. Wewillarguethatthedifferencebetweeninferenceanddesignisthatin
the former we try to reconstruct the system that has given rise to the data that we observe, while
inthelatter,weseektoconstructthesystemthatproducesthedatathatwewouldliketoobserve,
i.e. the desired behavior. Our approach allows us to exploit methods from Bayesian statistics,
including efficient exploration of models spaces and high-dimensional parameter spaces, and the
ability to rank models with respect to their ability to generate certain types of data. Bayesian
model selection furthermore automatically strikes a balance between complexity and (predictive
or explanatory) performance of mathematical models. In order to deal with the complexities of
molecular systems we employ an approximate Bayesian computation scheme which only requires
us to simulate from different competing models in order to arrive at rational criteria for choosing
between them. We illustrate the advantages resulting from combining the design and modeling
(or in-silico prototyping) stages currently seen as separate in synthetic biology by reference to
deterministicandstochasticmodelsystemsexhibitingadaptiveandswitch-likebehavior,aswellas
bacterial two-component signaling systems.
1 Introduction
As we are beginning to understand the mechanisms governing biological systems we are starting to
identify potential ways of guiding or controlling the behavior of cellular and molecular systems. Ra-
tionally reengineering organisms for biomedical or biotechnological purposes has become the central
aim of the fledgling discipline of synthetic biology. By redirecting regulatory and physical interactions
or by altering molecular binding affinities we may, for example, control metabolic processes [1, 2]
or alter intra and inter cellular communication and decision making processes [3, 4]. The range of
potential applications of such engineered systems is vast: designing microbes for biofuel production
[5, 6] and bioremediation [7]; developing control strategies which drive stem cells through the various
decisions to become terminally differentiated (or back) [8, 9], with the aim of developing novel thera-
peutics [10, 11]; construction of new drug-delivery systems with homing microbes delivering molecular
medicines directly to the site where they are needed [12]; use of bacteria or bacterial populations
(employing swarming and quorum sensing) as biosensors [13]; and gaining better understanding of all
manner of biological systems by systematically probing their underlying molecular machinery.
Arangeoftoolsandbuildingblocksforsuchengineeredbiologicalsystemsarenowavailablewhich
allow us to, at least in principle, build such systems from simple and reusable biological components
[14]. Inelectronicsystems, suchmodularityhasbeencrucialandhasallowedthecost-effectiveproduc-
tion of reliable components that can be combined to produce desired outputs. Biology, however, poses
]NM.oib-q[
1v6401.3011:viXra
different and novel challenges that are intimately linked to the biophysical and biochemical properties
of biomolecules and the media in which they are suspended. Especially in crowded environments such
as found inside living cells the lack of insulation between different components, i.e. the very real
possibility of undesired cross talk, can create problems; with increasing miniaturization similar, albeit
quantum effects, are now also surfacing in electronic circuits [15].
1A Designobjectives 1B Modeldefinitions
inputI outputO
1C Systemevolution 1D Posteriordistribution
1 2 3 4 5 p(M | D)
population
Figure 1: Bayesian approach to system design. A) The design objectives are encoded by the speci-
fication of input and output characteristics. B) One or more competing designs for the system are
specified together with priors on the parameters. A distance function, ∆(x,O), relates model output
to the desired output characteristic. C) The system is evolved using sequential Monte Carlo. Each
population more accurately approximates the desired behavior. D) The model posterior probability
encodes the ability of each design to achieve the desired behavior. The parameter posterior shows
parameters that are sensitive or insensitive to the input-output specification.
Assyntheticbiologygearsuptobringengineeringmethodsandtoolstobearonbiologicalproblems
the way in which we manipulate biological systems and processes is likely to change. Historically, each
new branch of engineering has gone through a phase of what can be described as tinkering before
rationally planned and executed designs became common place. Arguably, this is the current state
of synthetic biology and it has indeed been suggested that the complexity of synthetic biological
systems over the past decade has reached a plateau [16]. From the earliest days, explicit quantitative
modeling of systems has been integral to the vision and practice of synthetic biology and it will
become increasingly important in the future. The ability to model how a natural or synthetic system
will perform under controlled conditions must in fact be seen as one of the hallmarks of success of the
integrative approaches taken by systems and synthetic biology.
Here we present a statistical approach to the design of synthetic biological systems that utilizes
methods from Bayesian statistics to train models according to specified input-output characteristics.
It incorporates modeling and automated design and is general in the sense that it can be applied
to any system that can be described by a mathematical model which can be simulated. Because of
the statistical nature of this approach, previously challenging problems such as handling stochastic
models, accounting for kinetic parameter uncertainty and incorporating environmental stochasticity
can all be handled in a straightforward and consistent manner.
2 Bayesian approach to system design
The question of how to design a system to perform a specified task can be viewed as an analogue to
reverse engineering. In design we want to elucidate the most appropriate system to achieve our design
objectives; in reverse engineering we aim to infer the most probable system structure and dynamics
that can give rise to some observational data. In this respect, the design question can be viewed as
statistical inference on data we wish to observe.
In the Bayesian approach to statistical inference the posterior distribution is the quantity of in-
terest and this is given by the normalized product of the likelihood and the prior. In most practical
applications the posterior distribution cannot be derived analytically but if the likelihood (and prior)
can be expressed mathematically we can use Monte Carlo methods to sample from the posterior. In
many cases where the model structure is complex the likelihood cannot be written in closed form
and traditional Monte Carlo techniques cannot be applied. These include inference for the types of
stochastic processes encountered in systems and synthetic biology. In these cases a family of tech-
niques known collectively as approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) can be applied: these use
model simulations to approximate the posterior distribution directly. Here we use a sequential Monte
Carlo ABC algorithm known as ABC SMC to move from the prior to the approximate posterior via a
series of intermediate distributions [17]. This framework can also be used to perform Bayesian model
selection [18] and has been implemented in the software package ABC-SysBio [19].
Figure 1 depicts the approach presented here. The design objectives are first specified through
input-outputcharacteristics. Herethesehavebeendepictedasasingletimeseries, thoughthemethod
can be applied in a much broader sense with multiple inputs and outputs. A set of competing designs
isthenspecifiedthroughdeterministicorstochasticmodelseachcontainingasetofkineticparameters
andassociatedpriordistributions. Thedistancefunctionmeasuresthediscrepancybetweenthemodel
outputandtheobjective. Inprincipalitispossibletospecifyadistributionovertheobjectiveandeach
model could also contain experimental error. The ABC SMC algorithm then automatically evolves
the set of models towards the desired design objectives. The results are a set of posterior probabilities
representing the probability for each design to achieve the specified design objectives in addition to
the posterior probability distribution of the associated kinetic parameters. This approach is similar in
spirit to some existing methods for the automated design of genetic networks such as those adopting
evolutionary algorithms [20, 21], Monte Carlo methods [22, 23] or optimization [24, 25, 26] but the
advantagesofourmethodovertraditionalonesarethatwecanutilizepowerfulconceptsfromBayesian
statistics in the design of complex biological systems, including
the rational comparison of models under parameter uncertainty using Bayesian model selection
which automatically accounts for model complexity (number of parameters) and robustness to
parameter uncertainty
aposteriordistributionoverpossibledesignparametervaluesthatcanbeanalyzedforparameter
sensitivity and robustness and provide credible limits on design parameters
the treatment of stochastic systems at the design stage including the design of systems with
required probability distributions on system components.
methods for the efficient exploration of high dimensional parameter space
In the following we demonstrate the power of this approach by examining, from this new perspec-
tive, systems that have been of interest in the recent literature. First we consider systems that are
1 A 2 A 3 A 4 A
B C B C B C B C
5 A 6 A 7 A 8 A
B C B C B C B C
9 A 10 A 11 A
B C B C B C
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
−1.0 0.5 K_AB
−3 0 2 k_AC
−1.0 0.5 K_AC
−3 0 2 k_BC
−1.0 0.5 K_BC
2B −3 0 2 k_FA
−1.0 0.5 K_FA
−3 0 2 k_FB
−1.0 0.5 K_FB
−3 0 2 k_IA
−1.0 0.5 K_IA
Figure 2: Biochemical adaptation. A) 11 networks capable of biochemical adaptation. A,B,C rep-
resent enzymes that catalyze reactions in their active state. For example A B indicates that A
converts B from its inactive to active state and A B indicates that A converts B from its active
to inactive state. The input is applied to species A and the output is taken to be the concentration
of the active form of C. The concentrations of active and inactive forms sum to 1. Reactions with
no origin node refer to background activating/deactivations enzymes. B) Posterior probability for
achieving biochemical adaptation when there is no cooperativity. C) Posterior probability for achiev-
ing biochemical adaptation when cooperativity is included. The error bars in panels B and C indicate
the variability in the marginal model posteriors over three separate runs. D) Parameter posterior
distribution, represented by univariate and bivariate marginal distributions, for model 11 in the case
of no cooperativity.
capable of biochemical adaptation [27]. We then look at the ability of two bacterial two component
system (TCS) topologies to achieve particular input-output behaviors; and finally we finish with an
analysis of designs for a stochastic toggle switch with no cooperative binding at the promoter.
3 Biochemical adaptation
Biochemicaladaptationreferstotheabilityofasystemtorespondtoaninputsignalandreturntothe
pre-stimulus steady state (Figure 1A). Ma et al [27] identified two three-node network topologies that
are necessary for biochemical adaptation: a negative feedback loop with a buffering node (NFBLB)
and an incoherent feedforward loop with a proportioner node (IFFLP). Within these categories they
identifiedelevensimplenetworksthatwerecapableofadaptation(Figure2A).WeappliedtheBayesian
design approach to these eleven networks using Michaelis-Menten kinetic models with and without
cooperativity(seeappendixBfortheordinarydifferentialequations(ODEs)describingthesemodels).
The desired output characteristics were defined through the adaptation efficiency, E, and sensitivity,
S, given by
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)(O O )/O (cid:12) (cid:12)(O O )/O (cid:12)
E = (cid:12) 2 − 1 1(cid:12) S = (cid:12) peak − 1 1(cid:12),
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) 2 1 1 (cid:12) (cid:12) 2 1 1 (cid:12)
where I ,I are the input values (here fixed at 0.5 and 0.6 respectively), O ,O are the output steady
state levels before and after the input change and O is the maximal transient output level. We
defined the two component distance to be (cid:15) = E,S 1 such that as (cid:15) decreases the behavior ap-
proaches the desired behavior. The final population was defined to obey the toletances (cid:15) = 0.1,1.0 ,
which defines close to perfect adaptation (when O O O /50) and a fractional response equal to
the fractional change in input.
The results of the model selection are shown in Figure 2 (B and C). When cooperativity is not
included the most robust designs for producing the desired input-output characteristics are the inco-
herent feedforward loops, but when cooperativity is added the posterior shifts significantly towards
the negative feedback topology. If a system with these requirements were to be implemented then
not only would designs 11 and 4 be clear candidates for further study, but many of the designs can
be effectively ruled out and the ranking of the models provides a clear strategy for an experimental
programme. These results also illustrate how small changes in context or incomplete understanding
of a system can produce a large change in the most robust design. The Bayesian framework allows
us to incorporate such uncertainty — or safeguard against our ignorance — naturally into the design
process.
The posterior distribution provides information on which parameters are correlated and which are
themostsensitivetothedesiredbehavior. Theposteriorformodel11undernocooperativityisshown
in Figure 2D, where the ODE model is given by
dA (1 A) A
= Ik − F k
dB (1 B) B
= Ak − F k
dC (1 C) C
= Ak − Bk ,
dt (1 C)+K − C +K
where X = A,B,C corresponds to the concentrations of the active forms of proteins (1 X cor-
responds to the concentrations of the inactive form). I represents the input signal and the k and
K represent the reaction rate parameters (of which there are 12 in total). F and F represent
background deactivating enzymes with concentration fixed to 0.5.
Theposteriorshowsinparticularthattheparametersforthebackgrounddeactivatingenzyme(k
and K ) on node B are correlated, and that K should be large; this is exactly the requirement for
the linear regime necessary for the IFFLP system to achieve adaptation [27]. A principal component
analysis of the posterior (Figure S1) shows other correlated parameters on the first few principal
components. The last principal component describes the direction of least variance and therefore the
most sensitive parameters. From this we can deduce for example that the reaction between nodes A
and C is relatively unimportant. A similar analysis for model 4 in the case of cooperativity (Figures
S2 and S3) shows for example that the behavior is insensitive to the values of the Hill coefficients and
the details of the reaction between nodes A and C.
4 Robust oscillator design
Biochemical oscillations are increasingly being implemented in various synthetic systems [28, 29, 30,
31]. ArecentstudybyTsaiet al[32]comparedtheabilityoffivesmallnetworkstoachieveoscillations.
ThefivedesignsareshowninFigure3Awhereeachnoderepresentstheactiveformofaprotein, edges
represent enzymatic reactions and thicker edges represent increased feedback strength. We applied
our Bayesian design methodology to the original problem and further investigated the ability of these
designs, provided in detail in appendix C, to achieve particular amplitude-frequency values.
1 A 2 A 3 A
C B C B C B
Figure 3: Robust oscillator models. A) 5 oscillator models. Model 1 is a loop of repressive enzymatic
reactions. Models 2 and 3 have an additional positive feedback loop on node A with the feedback
strength stronger in model 3 (represented by the thicker loop). Models 4 and 5 have an additional
negative feedback loop on node A with the feedback strength stronger in model 5. B) Posterior
probability for achieving Hopf bifurcation type limit cycle oscillations. C) Posterior probabilities for
speciesAachievingoscillationswithamplitudeof0.1andafrequencyof1Hz. D)Posteriorprobabilities
for species C achieving oscillations with amplitude of 0.1 and a frequency of 1Hz. The error bars in
panels B, C and D indicate the variability in the marginal model posteriors over three separate runs.
Figure 3B shows the posterior probability for each model to achieve limit cycle behavior induced
by a Hopf bifurcation. The addition of the negative feedback loop in models 4 and 5 does not improve
the ability to achieve oscillations. We find that the addition of a positive feedback loop on species A
in models 2 and 3 increases the ability of the system to achieve limit cycle behavior, but no significant
increase in the posterior probability is provided by increasing the feedback strength. This is in conflict
with the original study that found that model 3 outperformed model 2 [32]. Our approach does
sample parameter space predominantly in regions where the desired behavior is more likely, rather
than entirely at random as was done in the previous study; on balance this suggests that the posterior
probability for delivering robust oscillations is approximately the same for models 2 and 3.
Moreinsightcanbegainedintothisdiscrepancybyspecifyingaparticularfrequencyandamplitude
oftheoscillatorasthedesiredoutputbehavior. Figures3CandDshowthemodelposteriorprobability
after requiring an amplitude of 0.1 and a frequency of 1.0 Hz on species A and C respectively. The
first thing to note is that the model posterior is significantly different in the two cases. When the
constraintsareappliedtospeciesA,model3isfavoredwiththeincreaseinfeedbackstrengthdecreasing
theabilitytoreachthespecifiedbehavior. WhentheconditionsareappliedtospeciesC(andspeciesB
bysymmetry)wegetaposteriorthatmoreresemblestheoriginalfindings;thattheincreaseinfeedback
strength does indeed increase the ability to reach the specified oscillations. Thus the posterior for the
Hopf bifurcation behavior represents a sum over all possible oscillator characteristics; in a manner
that is reminiscent of Bayesian model averaging.
If we examine the posterior distribution and the principal component analysis for model 2 to
achieve Hopf bifurcations (Figures S4 and S5), we can see that the parameters k and k , which
are the strengths of the deactivating reactions on nodes A and B, are constrained to be similar in
magnitude to k . We also see that within this model the feedback strength, k , does not affect the
dynamics significantly. Here, and elsewhere, we can use the posterior distributions in order to gain
insights into the sensitivity and robustness of the system to variations in parameters, irrespective of
whether the system’s dynamics are deterministic or stochastic: our ABC SMC framework allows us
to extract such information on the fly as part of the sequential design process.
5 Bacterial two component systems
Two component systems (TCS) allow bacteria to sense external environmental stimuli and relay in-
formation into the cell, e.g. to the gene expression apparatus. They consist of a histidine kinase
(HK) that autophosphorylates upon interaction with a specific stimulus. The phosphate group is then
passed on to a cognate response regulator protein (RR) which, once phosphorylated, can regulate
transcription [33].
Naturally occurring TCS differ in the number of phosphate binding domains. In the most common
formtherearetwophosphatebindingdomains(Figure4A)butanalternativeformexiststhatconsists
ofaphosphorelaymechanismwithfourphosphatebindingdomains(Figure4B).Theseshallbereferred
to as the orthodox and unorthodox TCSs, respectively [34]. The reason for the existence of two forms
of TCS remains largely unknown but it has been demonstrated that the phosphorelay is robust to
noise and can provide an ultrasensitive response to stimuli [34, 35], whereas the orthodox system
can provide behavior that is independent of the concentrations of its components [36]. Here we have
applied the Bayesian approach to directly compare the ability of orthodox and unorthodox designs to
achieve various input-output behaviors, using ODE models similar to ones described previously [34]
(see appendix D).
Figures 4C-F show four types of behaviors that may be desired in synthetic TCS systems (e.g. for
bioremediation or biopharmaceutical applications), and the corresponding posterior probabilities of
the orthodox and unorthodox models to achieve them. In Figure 4C the specified behavior is that of
a fast response to a square pulse input signal. That is the output should show a maximum within 0.1
secondsafterthepulsestartsandaminimum0.1secondsafterthepulseends. Ascanbeseenfromthe
posterior probabilities, both models achieve this behavior easily, as one would expect from a signaling
system, with the orthodox system slightly outperforming the unorthodox system. In Figure 4D the
ability of the two systems to achieve a steady output state for t > 2 seconds under a constant input
signal is examined, and again both systems perform comparably with the orthodox system appearing
slightly more favorable.
In Figure 4E the input signal is a high frequency sinusoid with a mean of 0.6, and the desired
output is a constant signal with the same mean and root mean square < 0.3; this would mimic a
system that is robust to high-frequency noise. The output trajectories at some intermediate and final
populations are shown in Figure S6. In this example the unorthodox system clearly outperforms
the orthodox system, which indicates the increased robust to noisy signals that comes with the relay
architecture [34]. But the direct comparison of the two models’ ability to cope with noise, which is
becoming possible in this approach, also reveals some unexpected characteristics: inspection of the
posterior distribution (Figure S7) shows that all the dephosphorylation reaction rates, k ,k ,k , are
0 2 4 6 8 10
noitartnecnoc
output, RRp
orth unorth
3A 3C 3D 3E 3F
input, S input, S
output, RRp output, RRp
output, RRp
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
time time time
orth unorth orth unorth orth unorth
model model model
Figure 4: Bacterial two component systems. A) Orthodox system where HK denotes the histidine
kinase and RR the response regulator, both of which have phosphorylated forms, HKp and RRp.
Arrows represent reactions involving phosphate groups and the k represent the rate parameters. S
is the input stimulus signal that causes autophosphorylation of the histidine kinase. B) Phosphorelay
system with three phosphate-binding domains, where H, D refer to histidine and aspartate domains
respectively. C-F) Specified input-output behavior (above) and posterior probabilities for the two
designs to achieve it (below). The input signal corresponds to the stimulus, S, and the output signal
isrepresentedbytheconcentrationofphosphorylatedresponseregulator,RRp. Theerrorbarsindicate
the variability in the marginal model posteriors over three separate runs.
minimized while the rate of the signal induced autophosphorylation (k ) is large. Thus the noise
reduction mechanism in the unorthodox system works by saturating the system.
In Figure 4F the input is again a step function but the output is more specific; it much reach to
> 0.8anddropto< 0.2within0.5secondsofthepulsestartandend, respectively, thusapproximately
reproducing the input. Figure S8 shows the evolution of the system in this case. Here the orthodox
model clearly outperforms the unorthodox model. Inspection of the posterior distribution (Figure S9)
shows that both the rate of the signal induced autophosphorylation and the rate of phosphorylation of
the response regulator by the histidine kinase, k ,k , are large while the rate of dephosphorylation of
the response regulator, k , is small. This ensures that the shape of the signal is transferred faithfully
through the system.
6 Stochastic genetic toggle switch without cooperativity
The genetic toggle switch is a synthetic realization of a bistable switch that forms the basis of cellular
memory [37]. It is formed by two genes A and B, whose respective proteins repress the production
of the other protein; protein A represses the production of protein B and vice versa (Figure 5). The
presence of an interaction with inducer molecules allows the system to switch between steady states
with the probability of spontaneous switching low enough such that, in the absence of an interaction,
the system will effectively remain in its appropriate steady state indefinitely.
Here we consider four versions of the stochastic genetic toggle switch that are all bistable without
the requirement for cooperative binding of the proteins to the gene promoter [38]. Note that the
deterministic models are not necessarily bistable; these are shown in Figure 5A and consist of the
basic toggle switch, an exclusive version containing only one promoter, a version that includes bound
repressor degradation (BRD), and a version containing a protein-protein interaction between A and
B with the resulting complex nonfunctional. The additional reactions are are always to reduce the
probability of the ’deadlock’ state where both A and B are bound to the promotors of B and A
respectively [38]. We modeled the switches using a continuous time Markov jump process which
obeys the chemical master equation. Only protein level reactions were modeled which makes the
modelssimpler(andfastertosimulate)whileretainingtheimportantbehavior. Thestochasticmodels
for all four switches are given in appendix E. For such complicated stochastic dynamical systems
the advantages of a Bayesian perspective over conventional model design strategies (based e.g. on
optimization) come to the fore: without an appreciation of the whole distribution choice of the best
model would be subject to considerable uncertainty.
S R k9 S R k10
gA gB gA gB
S R S R AB
gA gB gA gB
0 20 40 60 80 100
S R output, B
0 20 40 k2
0 20 40 k4
0 20 40 k6
0 20 40 k7
Figure 5: Stochastic toggle switch. A) Four different designs for a toggle switch without cooperative
binding. Going clockwise from top left we have the basic switch, the exclusive switch where there is
onlyonerepressorsite,thebasicswitchwithboundrepressordegradation(BRD),andthebasicswitch
with a protein-protein interaction. Genes gA,gB express proteins A,B and S,R represent inducer
molecules. The species AB represents complex formation. The rate constants for the reactions are
shown for the exclusive switch (protein degradation and transcription factor dissociation from the
promoter are not shown). B) The specified input-output behavior. C) The posterior probabilities for
each model to achieve the toggle switch behavior. D) Parameter posterior distribution, represented
by univariate and bivariate marginal distributions, for model 2 (exclusive switch).
Figure 5B shows the desired toggle switch behavior. The inducer S is added between t = 10 and
t = 30, after which the level of protein B should reach a steady state with a mean number of 40.
Between t = 60 and t = 80 the inducer R is added after which the level of protein B should drop
to zero. The inducer numbers are both assumed to be 40 molecules which is fixed in the specified
range. The desired output behavior was specified via the two component distance metric, defined to
be (cid:15) = d ,d ,
(cid:80) t ∈ α (x t − y)2 d 2 =
(cid:115)(cid:80)
t ∈ β (x t − 0)2 ,
where x is the number of protein B at time t, y is the target (here fixed at 40), α = t : 30 < t 60 ,
β = t : 0 < t 10 and 80 < t 100 , n = #α and n = #β. The final population was defined to
be (cid:15) = 7.0,0.05 . Here d represents the distance in the ”on” region and d represents the distance
in the “off” region.
Figure S10 shows the evolution of the stochastic simulations towards the desired behavior. Figure
5Cshowstheposteriorprobabilitiesforeachsystemtoachievethespecifiedbehavior,andinparticular
demonstrates that the exclusive toggle switch outperforms all the others. This chimes with intuition,
since the exclusive switch removes the possibility of the deadlock state without the addition of any
extra reactions. The fact that the BRD switch performs worse than the original toggle shows that the
addition of the two extra degradation reactions does not offer a great enough performance increase for
the extra parameters, a manifestation of the parsimony principle or Occam’s razor which is inherent
to the Bayesian model selection framework used here.
The reactions that comprise the exclusive switch are given by
A gB B+gA+P
A+gB+P B gA
−→ − −−→ −
where gA,gB represent the gene promotors for protein A,B respectively and are fixed at one copy,
A gB,B gA represent the bound transcription factors and S,R represent the inducer molecules.
The P species, fixed to be one copy, ensures only A or B can be bound at any one time. Examination
of the posterior distribution for this model, Figure 5D, clearly shows a large correlation between k
and k , which are the production and decay rates of protein B, respectively. This is clearly seen in
the principal components (Figure S11) through the combination k +k dominating the first PC and
the combination k k dominating the last PC. Thus the system is sensitive to only the difference
in these rates which is typical in birth-death processes.
7 Discussion
Inthispaperwehavepresentedanewmethodforthedesignofsyntheticbiologicalsystemsemploying
ideas from Bayesian statistics. We have demonstrated its utility and generality on three different
systems spanning biochemical, signaling and genetic networks, as well as oscillatory systems. This
methodhasadvantagesovertraditionaldesignapproachesinthatthemodelingisincorporateddirectly
into the design stage. The statistical nature of the method has many attractive features including the
handling of stochastic systems, the ability to perform model selection and the handling of parameter
uncertainty in a well defined manner. We used the ABC-SysBio software [19] which takes as input a
set of SBML files and as such can be used by bioengineers and experimentalists to rationally compare
their competing designs for a system. By using this method we hope that the implementation time of
synthetic systems can be reduced by defining a program of experimental work based on the posterior
probabilities of each design.
Monte Carlo sampling of parameter spaces has been used to assess the robustness of engineered
and biological systems in the past. But like in the statistical case, simple Monte Carlo sampling
tends to waste too much effort and time on those regions which are of no real interest for reverse-
engineeringordesignpurposes. Ourstatisticallybasedsequentialapproachhomesinontothoseregions
where the probability of observing the desired behavior is appreciable. This allows us a more nuanced
comparativeassessmentofdifferentdesignproposals,especiallywhendynamicsareexpected(orindeed
desired)toexhibitelementsofstochasticity. AndtheBayesianmodelselectionapproachautomatically
strikes a balance between the systems’ abilities to generate the desired behavior effectively but also
robustly.
Further developments will include the incorporation of methods for model abstraction to reduce
computation time [39] and to handle a database of standard parts as in other existing design software
systems [40, 41]. Moreover, it is also possible to include the generation of novel structures (by e.g.
using stochastic-context free grammars [42] to propose alterations to a reaction/interaction network)
as part of the design process. Just like in the case where ideas from control engineering and statistics
can gainfully be combined in order to reverse-engineer the structure of naturally evolved biological
systems, we feel that in the design of synthetic systems such a union will also be fruitful.
A Approximate Bayesian Computation : ABC SMC
Here we outline the background behind approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) and describe the
ABC SMC algorithm [17], which is implemented in the software package ABC-SysBio [19]. ABC
methods have been developed to infer posterior distributions in cases where likelihood functions are
computationally intractable or too costly to evaluate. They replace the calculation of the likelihood
with a comparison between observed and simulated data.
A.1 Background
Let θ Θ be a parameter vector with prior π(θ) and f(y θ) be the likelihood of the data y . In
Bayesian inference we are interested in the posterior density
f(y θ)π(θ)
Now imagine the case where we cannot write down the likelihood in closed form but we can simulate
from the data generating model. We can proceed by first sampling a parameter vector from the prior,
θ π(θ), and then sampling a data vector, x , from the model conditional on θ , ie x f(x θ ).
This alone gives the joint density π(θ,x). To obtain samples from the posterior distribution we must
condition on the data y and this is done via an indicator function, i.e.
π(θ,x y) = (cid:82) | A y ,
where I (z) denotes the indicator function and is equal to 1 for z . Here = x : x = y , so
B ∈ B A { ∈ D }
the indicator is equal to one when the simulated data and the observed data are identical. This forms
a rejection algorithm, and in this instance the accepted θ are from the true posterior density π(θ y).
For most models it is impossible to achieve simulations with outputs in the subset and so an
approximation must be made. This is the basis for ABC. In the first instance we can replace by
= x : ρ(x,y) (cid:15) where ρ : R+ is a distance function comparing the simulated
y,(cid:15)
data to the observed data. We then have
π (cid:15) (θ,x y) = (cid:82) | A y,(cid:15) ,
y,(cid:15) Θ |
where π is an approximation to the true posterior distribution. The rationale behind ABC is that if (cid:15)
is small then the resulting approximate posterior, π , is close to the true posterior. Often, for complex
models or stochastic systems, the subset is still too restrictive. In these cases we can resort to
y,(cid:15)
comparisons of summary statistics. We now specify the subset = x : ρ (x,y) (cid:15) where
y,η,(cid:15) S
η : is a summary statistic and the distance function now takes the form ρ : R+. We
D → S S×S →
often write the marginal posterior distribution as π(θ ρ(x ,y) (cid:15)).
A.2 ABC SMC
The simplest ABC algorithm is known as the ABC rejection algorithm [43] and proceeds as follows
R1 Sample θ from π(θ).
R2 Simulate a dataset x from f(x θ ).
R3 If ρ(x ,y) (cid:15) accept θ , otherwise reject.
R4 Return to R1.
This gives draws from π but can be very inefficient in high dimensional models or when the overlap
between the prior and posterior distributions is small. One way to improve the efficiency of the rejec-
tion algorithm is to perform sequential importance sampling (SIS) [44]. In SIS, instead of sampling
directly from the posterior distribution, sampling proceeds via a series of intermediate distributions.
The importance distribution at each stage is constructed from a perturbed version of the previous
population. This approach can be used in ABC and the resultant algorithm is known as ABC SMC
[17]. Described here is a slightly modified version that automatically calculates the (cid:15) schedule and as
such, only the final value, (cid:15) , needs be specified. To obtain N samples θ1,θ2,θ3....,θN (known as
particles) from the posterior, defined as, π(θ ρ(x ,y) (cid:15) ), proceed as follows
S1 Initialize (cid:15) =
Set the population indicator t = 0
S2.0 Set the particle indicator i = 1
S2.1 If t = 0, sample θ independently from π(θ)
If t > 0, sample θ from the previous population θi with weights w .
Perturb the partic ∗ le, θ K (θ θ ) where K is t { he t −p 1 e } rturbation kerne t l − . 1
If π(θ ) = 0, return to S2.1
Simulate a candidate dataset x f(x θ ).
If ρ(x ,y) > (cid:15) return to S2.1
S2.2 Set θi = θ and di = ρ(x ,y), calculate the weight as
1 if t = 0
w t i = π(θ t i) if t > 0
If i < N, set i = i+1, go to S2.1
S3 Normalize the weights.
Determine (cid:15) such that Pr(d (cid:15)) = 0.9.
If (cid:15) > (cid:15) , set t = t+1, go to S2.0.
Here K (θ θ ) is the component-wise random walk perturbation kernel that, in this study, takes the
form K (θ θ) = θ +U( δ,δ) where δ = 1range θ . The denominator in the weight calculation
can be seen as the probability of observing the current particle given the previous population.
A.3 Model selection
In Bayesian inference comparison of a discrete set of models can be be performed using the marginal
posterior. Consider the joint space defined by (M,θ) Θ ; Bayes theorem can then be written
| (cid:48) (cid:48) (cid:48) | (cid:48) (cid:48)
where f(y M), the marginal likelihood, can be written
Therefore the posterior probability of a model is given by the normalized marginal likelihood which
may or may not be weighted depending on whether the prior over models is informative or uniform
respectively. It has recently been noted that model selection using summary statistics can be prob-
lematic because the summary statistic must be sufficient for the joint space, M,θ , rather than just
θ [45]. This is not a concern here since in all our examples we use the full data set with no summary
or we define our posterior distributions through the summary statistics.
Model selection can be incorporated into the ABC framework by introducing the model indicator
M and proceeding with inference on the joint space. For example, the ABC rejection algorithm with
model selection [46] proceeds as follows
MR1 Sample M from π(M).
MR2 Sample θ from π(θ M ).
MR3 Simulate a dataset x from f(x θ ,M ).
MR4 If ρ(x ,y) (cid:15) accept (M ,θ ), otherwise reject.
MR5 Return to R1.
Once N samples have been accepted an approximation to the marginal posterior, π(M = m y), is
#accepted m
Model selection can also be incorporated into the ABC SMC algorithm [18]. To obtain N samples
(M,θ)1,(M,θ)2,(M,θ)3....,(M,θ)N from the posterior, defined as, π(M,θ ρ(x ,y) (cid:15) ), proceed
as follows
MS1 Initialize (cid:15) =
Set the population indicator t = 0
MS2.0 Set the particle indicator i = 1
MS2.1 If t = 0, sample (M ,θ ) from the prior π(M,θ) = π(M)π(θ M).
If t > 0, sample M with probability P (M ) and perturb M KM (M M ).
Sample θ from the previous population θ(M ) with weights w .
∗ ∗∗ t 1 t 1
Perturb the particle, θ
is the perturbation kernel.
If π(M ,θ ) = 0, return to MS2.1
Simulate a candidate dataset x f(x M ,θ ).
If ρ(x ,y) > (cid:15) return to MS2.1
MS2.2 Set (M,θ)i = (M ,θ ) and di = ρ(x ,y), calculate the weight as
1 if t = 0
t t t π(M t i,θ t i) if t > 0
S = (cid:80) P (M j )KM (Mi M j )
S = (cid:80) w t k −1 K t,Mi(θ t i | θ t k −1 )
2 k ∈ M t i=Mt−1 Pt−1(M t i=Mt−1)
If i < N, set i = i+1, go to MS2.1
S3 Normalize the weights.
Obtain the marginal model probabilities given by
P (M = m) = (cid:80) wi(Mi,θi)
i=Mt−1 t t t
Determine (cid:15) such that Pr(d (cid:15)) = 0.9.
If (cid:15) > (cid:15) , set t = t+1, go to MS2.0.
There are two obvious additions to the algorithm when compared to parameter inference. The model
kernel, KM , perturbs the resampled models using a multinomial distribution, and the additional
term in the weight denominator accounts for the probability of observing the current model given the
previous population.
A.4 Prior distribution
The prior distribution encodes our knowledge of the system and should be set according to known
biochemical properties. However, often the kinetic parameters are not well known and can be very
difficult or even impossible to measure in vivo. In these cases we make the prior distribution non
informative by specifying a large range over possible, biophysically and biochemically plausible values.
As more information becomes available, through experimental studies or otherwise, the prior can be
updated to reflect our increased knowledge of the system. Interestingly, for some systems, our design
method could help to constrain kinematic parameters where experimental data are unavailable.
A.5 The distance function and output tolerance
In system design we would rarely insist on achieving the true posterior distribution corresponding to
(cid:15) = 0, butwouldliketoreachtheobjectivewithinsometolerance. AtheoremduetoWilkinson(2008)
[47] states that if we assume that the data can be considered as
where η(θˆ) is a draw from the model at the ’best’ input and e is an additive, independent error, then
the approximate posterior distribution, π(θ ρ(x ,y) (cid:15)) can be interpreted as the ’true’ posterior
π(θˆy). While the independence assumption | is not a ≤ lways true, this theorem provides some insight
intotherelationshipbetweenthefinal(cid:15)valueandthetoleranceonourspecifiedbehavior. Forexample
when using uniform kernels, as in this study, if our desired output behavior is a constant of 0.5 and we
finish the inference at (cid:15) = 0.05 our final trajectories will be distributed U(0.45,0.55) giving a tolerance
of 10% on the output behavior. This can be used when considering our desired output objectives.
Toachieveother errordistributions, such asGaussianerrors, we can always explicitly specifythe error
model in the design objectives.
A.6 Deterministic models
Inference for deterministic models such as ordinary differential equations can be problematic since
there is a one to one relationship between the parameter vector θ and the data set x. Therefore,
in the absence of observational error, the posterior distribution resembles a delta function, δ(θ θˆ)
where xˆ = f(θˆ) is data ’closest’ to y. An additional problem for ABC methods is that the minim − um
distance, ρ(xˆ,y), is greater than zero [49]. However, in practice, observational data have associated
experimental errors and when this is included explicitly in the model, the problem is resolved. In the
case of systems design, we omit the explicit error model for clarity, but note that it could be included
with assumptions on the form of the distribution.
B Biochemical adaptation
B.1 Models
We used the same models as those used in [27], which are enzymatic reactions assuming Michaelis-
Mentenkinetics. Belowwegivethefullmodelsincludingcooperativitybutthemorespecificcaseofno
cooperativity is when the exponents, n , are set to one. Here A,B,C denote the concentrations of the
active form of the species and (1 A),(1 B),(1 C) the concentrations of the inactive form. Species
E and F refer to background activating and deactivating enzymes respectively and are assumed to
have a constant concentration of 0.5. The models were simulated in the range 0 t 200.
dA (1 A)nIA AnFA
= Ik − F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
dB (1 B)nCB BnFB
= Ck − F k
dt CB (1 B)nCB +KnCB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nAC CnBC
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − BC CnBC +KnBC
dA (1 A)nIA AnFA
= Ik − F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
dB (1 B)nEB BnCB
= E k − Ck
dt B EB (1 B)nEB +KnEB − CB BnCB +KnCB
dC (1 C)nAC CnBC CnFC
= Ak − Bk F k
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − BC CnBC +KnBC − C FC CnFC +KnFC
− AC BC FC
dA (1 A)nIA AnFA
= Ik − F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
dB (1 B)nEB BnCB
= E k − Ck
dt B EB (1 B)nEB +KnEB − CB BnCB +KnCB
dC (1 C)nBC CnAC
dt BC (1 C)nBC +KnBC − AC CnAC +KnAC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA
dB (1 B)nAB BnFB
= Ak − F k
dt AB (1 B)nAB +KnAB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nAC CnFC
= Ak − F k
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − C FC CnFC +KnFC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA
dB (1 B)nAB BnFB
= Ak − F k
dt AB (1 B)nAB +KnAB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nEC CnAC
= E k − Ak
dt C EC (1 C)nEC +KnEC − AC CnAC +KnAC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA
dB (1 B)nCB BnFB
= Ck − F k
dt CB (1 B)nCB +KnCB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nAC CnFC
= Ak − F k
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − C FC CnFC +KnFC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA AnFA
= Ik − Bk F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
− IA BA FA
dB (1 B)nEB BnCB
= E k − Ck
dt B EB (1 B)nEB +KnEB − CB BnCB +KnCB
dC (1 C)nAC CnFC
= Ak − F k
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − C FC CnFC +KnFC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA AnFA
= Ik − Bk F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
− IA BA FA
dB (1 B)nCB BnFB
= Ck − F k
dt CB (1 B)nCB +KnCB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nEC CnAC
= E k − Ak
dt C EC (1 C)nEC +KnEC − AC CnAC +KnAC
dA (1 A)nIA AnBA
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − BA AnBA +KnBA
dB (1 B)nEB BnCB
= E k − Ck
dt B EB (1 B)nEB +KnEB − CB BnCB +KnCB
dC (1 C)nEC CnAC
= E k − Ak
dt C EC (1 C)nEC +KnEC − AC CnAC +KnAC
dA (1 A)nIA AnFA
= Ik − F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
dB (1 B)nAB BnFB
= Ak − F k
dt AB (1 B)nAB +KnAB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nBC CnAC
dt BC (1 C)nBC +KnBC − AC CnAC +KnAC
dA (1 A)nIA AnFA
= Ik − F k
dt IA (1 A)nIA +KnIA − A FA AnFA +KnFA
dB (1 B)nAB BnFB
= Ak − F k
dt AB (1 B)nAB +KnAB − B FB BnFB +KnFB
dC (1 C)nAC CnBC
dt AC (1 C)nAC +KnAC − BC CnBC +KnBC
B.2 Distance
Thetwocomponentdistancemetricwasdefinedtobe(cid:15) = E,S 1 ,whereE andS aretheadaptation
efficiency and sensitivity defined by
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)(O O )/O (cid:12)
E = (cid:12) 2 − 1 1(cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) 2 1 1 (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)(O O )/O (cid:12)
S = (cid:12) peak − 1 1(cid:12),
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) 2 1 1 (cid:12)
where I ,I are the input values (here fixed at 0.5 and 0.6 respectively), O ,O are the output steady
state levels before and after the input change and and O is the maximal transient output level.
The final population was defined to be (cid:15) = 0.1,1.0 .
B.3 Priors
The priors on the Michaelis-Menten rates were chosen to correspond to the parameter ranges used in
the original study; logk U( 1,1) and logK U( 3,2) [27].
C Robust oscillator design
C.1 Models
Weusedthesamemodelsasthoseusedin[32],simulatedintherange0 t 10. AgainA,B,C denote
the concentrations of the active form of the species and (1 A),(1 B),(1 C) the concentrations
of the inactive form. The feedback is modeled using Michaelis-Menten kinetics but the conversion of
inactive form into active form is assumed to have a constant rate.
= k (1 A) A
dt 1 − − Kn1 +Cn1
= k (1 B) B
dt 3 − − Kn2 +An2
= k (1 C) C
dt 5 − − Kn3 +Bn3
Designs 2 and 3
dt 1 − − Kn1 +Cn1 7 − Kn4 +An4
= k (1 B) B
dt 3 − − Kn2 +An2
= k (1 C) C
dt 5 − − Kn3 +Bn3
Designs 4 and 5
= k (1 A) A k A
dt 1 − − Kn1 +Cn1 − 7 Kn4 +An4
= k (1 B) B
dt 3 − − Kn2 +An2
= k (1 C) C
dt 5 − − Kn3 +Bn3
C.2 Distance
For the direct Hopf bifurcation detection the distance metric was defined to be
(cid:15) = i i
i − −| i |
where λ is the ith complex eigenvalue of the linearized system in the steady state. Here (cid:15) = 0
represents the location in parameter space where a limit cycle emerges through a Hopf bifurcation
[48]. The final population was at (cid:15) = 0.001.
Toinvestigatetheabilitytoachieveparticularamplitude-frequencyvalues,thedistancewasdefined
as (cid:15) = d ,d ,d , where
d = maxx minx A ,
andnisaninteger,f isthetargetfrequency,f isthefrequencydeterminedfromthelargestcomponent
of the Fourier spectrum, A is the target amplitude and t is a cut to remove initial transients (= 2s).
The final population was defined to be (cid:15) = 0.05,0.05,0.05 .
C.3 Priors
The priors were chosen to correspond to parameter ranges used in the original study; k U(0,10),
k U(0,1000), k U(0,10), k U(0,1000), k U(0,1000), k U(0,100), k
2 ∼ 3 ∼ 4 ∼ 6 ∼ 7 ∼ 7 ∼
U(500,600), n U(1,4) and K U(0,4) [32].
D Bacterial two component systems
D.1 Models
The models we used were based on the ones found in [34]. All simulations were performed in the range
0 t 10.
Orthodox system
We modeled the following reactions
RR.
AdditionallyweassumedthatthetotalconcentrationofHK = HK+HKpandRR = RR+RRp
were equal to one. This resulted in the following ordinary differential equations
Orthodox system
We labelled the occupied states of the phosphorelay as
where H1, D1 and H2 are the binding domains on the Histidine Kinase and x, o represent an empty,
occupied domain respectively. We modeled the following reactions
Again we assumed that the total concentration of HK = HK and RR = RR + RRp were
equal to one. This resulted in the following ordinary differential equations
4 4 6 3 7 1 8 2 1
4 6 6 5 7 2 8 2 1 1 2 2
3 3 4 7 5 4 6 3 7 3 8 5 1 3 2 2
dt − − − −
3 3 4 4 5 4 6 7 7 1 8 6 1 4
3 3 4 8 5 6 6 5 7 5 8 5 1 3
dt − − − −
3 5 2 6 4 6 5 6 6 8 7 2 8 6 1 4
dt − − − −
2 6 4 7 6 7 7 3 8 8 1 7
4 4 6 7 8 7 1 2 3 5 9
D.2 Distance
The distance functions for input-output behaviors (cid:15) were defined to be
(cid:110) (cid:111)
(cid:15) = H(0)(argmax x 2.0),H(0)(argmin x 4.0)
1 t t − t t −
(cid:15) = (x 1.0)2
(cid:15) = (x 0.5)2
(cid:110) (cid:111)
(cid:15) = (cid:15) ,H(0)(1 maxx 0.2),H(0)(minx 0.2)
where H(0) is the Heaviside function ensuring the distance is positive.
D.3 Priors
The priors on all variables were distributed as U(0,1000).
E Stochastic genetic toggle switch
E.1 Models
WemodeledeachtoggleswitchusingacontinuoustimeMarkovjumpprocesswhichobeysthechemical
master equation. We neglected processes at the RNA level and just modeled at the protein level.
This makes the models simpler while retaining all the relevant behavior. In all the following gA,gB
represent the gene promotor for protein A,B respectively and are fixed at one copy. A gB,B gA
represent the bound transcription factors and S,R represent the switch and reset signals. Because the
concentrationofthesearefixedtheyhavetheeffectofremovingAandB fromthesystemrespectively.
The models were simulated in the range 0 t 200
Here, in addition to the species in design 1, we have introduced the P species, fixed to be one copy,
which ensures only A or B can be bound at any one time
R B.
Here we have the same reactions in design 1 butinclude two extra reactions forthe decay of the bound
gA.
Herewehavethesamereactionsindesign1butincludetwoextrareactionsforthebinding/unbinding
of the proteins A and B
A+B.
E.2 Distance
The two component distance metric was defined to be (cid:15) = d ,d ,
d = t α t −
(cid:115)(cid:80)
d 2 = t ∈ β t − ,
where x is the number of protein B at time t, y is the target (here fixed at 40), α = t : 30 < t 60 ,
β = t : 0 < t 10 and 80 < t 100 , n = #α and n = #β. The final population was defined to
be (cid:15) = 7.0,0.05 .
E.3 Priors
The priors for production, binding and interaction rates were distributed as U(0,50) and the priors
for the degradation rates were given U(0,5) distributions.