Bayesian ensemble learning for image denoising
Hyuntaek Oha,∗
aUniversity of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045
Natural images are often affected by random noise and image denoising has
long been a central topic in Computer Vision. Many algorithms have been
introduced to remove the noise from the natural images, such as Gaussian,
Wiener filtering and wavelet thresholding. However, many of these algo-
rithms remove the fine edges and make them blur. Recently, many promising
denoisingalgorithmshavebeenintroducedsuchasNon-localMeans,Fieldsof
Experts, and BM3D. In this paper, we explore Bayesian method of ensemble
learning for image denoising. Ensemble methods seek to combine multiple
differentalgorithmstoretainthestrengthsofallmethodsandtheweaknesses
of none. Bayesian ensemble models are Non-local Means and Fields of Ex-
perts, the very successful recent algorithms. The Non-local Means presumes
that the image contains an extensive amount of self-similarity. The approach
of the Fields of Experts model extends traditional Markov Random Field
model by learning potential functions over extended pixel neighborhoods.
The two models are implemented and image denoising is performed on nat-
ural images. The experimental results obtained are used to compare with
the single algorithm and discuss the ensemble learning and their approaches.
ComparingtotheresultsofNon-localMeansandFieldsofExperts,Ensemble
learning showed improvement nearly 1dB.
Keywords:
Bayesian ensemble learning, Non-local means, Fields of Experts, Image
∗Corresponding author
Email address: hyuntaekoh@ku.edu (Hyuntaek Oh)
Preprint submitted to Computer Vision and Image Understanding August 7, 2013
1v4731.8031:viXra
1. Introduction
Some natural images contain some degree of natural and artificial noise.
These noises usually affect the visual quality of the original images, so the
goal of image denoising is to reconstruct a reasonable estimate of the original
image from the noisy image. Ideally, the resulting denoising image will not
contain any noise or added artifacts.
In the past few decades, many novel approaches have been proposed for
image denoising [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. One striking aspect of image denoising
research is that a wide array of denoising strategies have remained popular,
and in spite of vastly different approaches, many of these algorithms pro-
duce reasonably similar performance in terms of peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR). For example, Fields of Experts (FoE) pursues an entirely paramet-
ric approach, by training Markov random fields with large 5 x 5 cliques to
capture the statistics of small image patches. Over a set of six canonical
images, FoE attained a PSNR of 30.24dB for Gaussian noise with σ = 20. A
Gaussian scale mixtures also uses a parametric approach, and captures the
joint statistics of neighboring Gabor filter coefficients. Over the same set of
six images, mean PSNR was 30.78dB for σ = 20. Sparse dictionaries is a
method that seeks to identify an optimal set of image patches to form the
basis of a sparse L1 norm. Over the same set of images, sparse dictionaries
achieved a mean PSNR of 30.57dB when the dictionary was trained from
natural images, and 31.01dB when trained on the noisy input image. An-
other method that exploits patterns found within the noisy input image is
NL-means. However, NL-means uses a wholly non-parametric approach, by
identifying similar patches within the noisy input image and averaging these
together, weighed according to similarity and proximity. NL-means achieves
a PSNR of 30.37dB for σ = 20 on the same set of images. BM3D is an
algorithm with a similar strategy, but uses more sophisticated methods to
combine similar image patches.
This brief list of algorithms includes some that are parametric and others
non-parametric, some that focus on matching natural scene statistics and
others that focus on utilizing patterns from within the noisy input image,
and some that use generatively trained probabilistic models, some discrimi-
nativelytrainedprobabilisticmodels, andothersthatdonotuseprobabilistic
modelsatall. Numerousadditionaldifferencesareevidentbetweentheimple-
mentation details of each approach. In spite of these significant differences in
strategy, performance is reasonably similar between these varied algorithms.
Continual improvements to denoising algorithms regularly change the domi-
nant approach, and no category of denoising strategies has produced a clear
enough victor to discourage further research in any other category.
On the surface, this observation may suggest that image denoising al-
gorithms are converging to some upper-bound on denoising performance.
However, it is worth noting that each method is regarded as having dif-
ferent advantages and disadvantages. Strategies that perform best for low
noise levels may not perform as well for high noise levels. Input images that
contain many regular textures or patterns often benefit from non-local meth-
ods, while images with less internal regularities may benefit from algorithms
trained from large suites of natural images. Additionally, one important
quality of denoising methods is the ability to preserve sharp edges while re-
moving noise. Methods that fail in this regard produce output that appear
over-blurred. Non-local methods often perform well at maintaining sharp
edges, as demonstrated by their residual images (the denoised image minus
the true image). These residual images show that methods like NL-means
perform similarly near edges as they do near smooth regions. Other methods
such as FoE show higher residual error near edges. Since FoE achieves a
similar overall PSNR, it suggests that performance within smooth regions is
higher for FoE.
When multiple regression algorithms produce similar performance using
significantlydifferentapproaches,andwithdistinctadvantagesanddisadvan-
tages, those algorithms are highly suitable for combination using ensemble
learning methods. Ensemble learning is a method of combining multiple
(possibly weak) predictors to produce one unified predictor of greater ac-
curacy. While ensemble learning is a common and successful technique in
machine learning, it has not been applied to image denoising. Ensemble
learning methods benefit when the constituent algorithms are significantly
different from one another. In this paper, we apply Bayesian ensemble learn-
ing methods to combine two of the most distinct denoising methods: Fields
of Experts and NL-means. We use 40 natural images from the Berkeley Seg-
mentation Benchmark for training [7]. Another set of 80 natural images from
theBerkeleydatabaseareusedfortesting,alongwith6canonicalimagessuch
as Barbara and Lena. For each level of input noise, the ensemble method
achieved statistically significant improvement over both FoE and NL-means.
2. Background
2.1. Image Denoising
The goal of image denoising is to reconstruct the original image from the
noisy image,
where y(i) is the observed image, x(i) is the original image; and n(i) is the
noise value at pixel i. Gaussian white noise is widely used in natural images
for image denoising. The noise value, n(i), is the Gaussian white noise values
withknownvarianceσ2 andzeromean. TheGaussianwhitenoisemodelsare
made by adding random values to the original images. The ideal denoising
algorithm is to remove the noise, n(i), and recover the original image, x(i).
Previous methods such as Gaussian or Wiener filtering attempt to sep-
arate the image into the two parts, the smooth and oscillatory part, by
removing the high frequency from the low frequency [2, 8]. This would re-
sult in a loss of fine edges in the denoised image. Low frequency noise will
remain in the image even after denoising. Therefore, new algorithms have
been introduced recently such as Non-local means [4] and Fields of Experts
[5].
2.2. Fields of Experts
Fields of Experts (FoE) was proposed by Stefan Roth and Michael J.
Black [9]. The goal of the FoE is to develop a framework for learning rich,
generic prior models of natural images. To learn potential functions through
extended neighboring pixels, a Markov Random Field model was used in the
FoE. The key in the FoE is to extend Markov Random Field by modeling the
local field potentials with learned filters [9]. To do this, Products of Experts
were used [5]. In comparison with prior Markov Random Field approaches,
all parameters in the FoE model are learned from a set of training data [9].
One of the parameters is the clique size and 5x5 was used. Those models
prior probability of images can be calculated with the following formula:
(cid:89)(cid:89)
K (cid:18)
1 (cid:16) (cid:17)2
(cid:126) (cid:126) (cid:126)
whereI is5x5imagepatch, andfilterJ representsespeciallyunlikelyimage
patches obtained by training the FoE model on an general image database.
20,000imagepatcheswereselectedrandomlyfromtheBerkeleySegmentation
database, and the image patches are used for the training data [7]. Figure
1 shows the unlikely 5x5 image patches which were used as the filter, J , in
the formula 2.
Figure 1: Selection of the 5x5 filters learned from the training data
Inference: For the denoising problem, the goal is to infer the most likely
correction for the image given the prior and the noisy image. Given a noisy
image N, we can find the denoised image D that maximizes the prior proba-
bility:
We can write the P(N|D) as:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:89) 1
where σ is known standard deviation, and D and N are the denoised and
noisy image at pixel j, respectively. In this study, we use the FoE algorithm
MATLAB code provided by Roth and Black, and use the similar parameters
to get the same results of the paper.
2.3. Non-local Means
Non-local Means (NLM) image denoising algorithm was suggested by An-
toni Buades, Bartomeu Coll, and Jean-Michael Morel. NLM presumes that
the amount of pixel weighting is based on the similarity of their neighbor-
hoods with the neighborhood of each pixel [4]. Efros and Leung originally
suggested the concept of the self-similarity for texture synthesis [10].
Figure 2: Scheme of NLM strategy [4]
Figure 2 shows the scheme of NLM strategy. The figure shows four dif-
ferent pixels: p, q1, q2, and q3. Similar neighborhoods to ps neighborhood
could be found in most pixels in the same column of p such as q1 and q2.
Similar pixel neighborhoods give a large weight, w(p, q1) and w(p, q2), while
much different neighborhoods give a small weight w(p, q3).
To compute each pixel i of the NLM denoising image, the following for-
mula was used [4]
where v is the noisy image and v = {v(i)|i ∈ I}, and weights w(i,j), which
rely on the similarity between pixel i and j, meet the following conditions
0 ≤ w(i,j) ≤ 1 and w(i,j) = 1. A neighborhood should be defined to
compute the similarity. The weighted Euclidean distance is used to measure
the similarity, and the following formula is implemented to calculate the
Euclidean distance of noisy neighborhoods:
i j 2,a i j 2,a
where v(N ) and v(N ) are the gray scale vectors, N and N are the square
neighborhood of fixed size and centered around a pixel i and j, respectively;
and a is the Gaussian kernels standard deviation. The weights w(i,j) can be
calculated with the following formula:
w(i,j) = 1 e− (cid:107)v(Ni)− h v 2 (Nj)(cid:107)2 2,a (7)
where Z(i) is the normalizing constant
Z(i) = (cid:88) e− (cid:107)v(Ni)− h v 2 (Nj)(cid:107)2 2,a (8)
and the parameter h satisfies as a filtering degree.
3. Application of Ensemble learning
As discussed in the introduction, in spite of relatively comparable per-
formance, image denoising techniques like FoE and NLM use very different
methodologies and underlying philosophies for image denoising. This would
seem to make these two algorithms strong candidates for ensemble learning
methods which may be able to produce a single denoising algorithm that
retains the advantages of both FoE and NLM. However, this problem dif-
fers from traditional ensemble learning problems in several important ways,
which result in both advantages and disadvantages in comparison with stan-
dard ensemble learning scenarios.
One significant difference is that ensemble learning is typically used to
combine multiple models of the data or the predicted output, where each
constituent algorithm was trained on labeled data to optimize the param-
eters of the algorithm. In contrast, many image denoising methods utilize
no training at all. Methods like NLM are derived primarily from a theoret-
ical analysis of the image denoising problem, rather than machine learning
techniques. NLM does have some parameters, such as the size of the search
window, but these parameters are not expected to affect the behavior of the
algorithm significantly, and so training is not emphasized.
The lack of training in the constituent algorithms makes image denoising
ineligible for some of the most powerful aspects of ensemble learning. Many
ensemble learning methods, such as boosting [11] or bootstrap aggregation
[12], achieve higher performance by training each constituent algorithm on
different subsets of available training data. In that way, one algorithm be-
comes an expert on one type of input, while another algorithm specializes in
another type of input. Because NLM does not rely on training or make use
of labeled data, such techniques are not possible here.
Another important difference is that the bulk of ensemble learning meth-
ods are designed for classification problems, where the predicted output is
either binary, or at least discrete. For classification problems, the outputs
of each constituent algorithm are typically combined using a voting scheme:
whichever class receives the most votes (possibly weighted by the perfor-
mance of the constituent algorithm) is the output of the ensemble learning
algorithm. Ensemblelearningforcontinuous-valuedoutput(knownasregres-
sion)isnotentirelyuncommon[13]. Inthesecases, outputsoftheconstituent
algorithms are usually combined by averaging. For image denoising, averag-
ing can improve error metrics based on sum squared error. Unfortunately,
though, averaging multiple denoised images may lead to blurry edges and
other undesirable artifacts that reduce perceived denoising quality. Each de-
noising algorithm must hypothesize the most probable image structure that
was obscured by noise in the input image. When these hypotheses disagree,
averaging them together can result in two faint but duplicate differing im-
age structures, rather than a single consistent denoised image. For example,
consider the case where noise has obscured the precise location of an edge
between two regions. If NLM hypothesizes an edge in one location, and
FoE hypothesizes an edge in a different location, an averaging procedure will
produce two faint edges, which is generally an unlikely result. We would
prefer an ensemble technique that could select the single edge location that
appears most likely. Ideally, an ensemble method should be capable of se-
lectingasinglecoherentdenoisinghypothesisratherthancombiningmultiple
outputs naively. This advantage of traditional ensemble methods may pro-
vide one explanation as to why ensemble methods have not been applied to
image denoising in the past.
If a large number of constituent algorithms are available, more sophis-
ticated schemes for combining algorithm output might be possible, where
outlier responses were given less weight. Such techniques might avoid the
pitfalls of averaging methods listed above. Unfortunately, only a handful of
competitive image denoising algorithms exist.
Finally, a third major difference is that some constituent denoising al-
gorithms (in particular, FoE) provide not only a single hypothesis denoised
image,butalsoprovideaprobabilitydistributionoverthespaceofallpossible
denoised images. Recall that FoE outputs not only a denoised image D ,
butalsoprovidesaprobabilitydistributionoverdenoisedimagesP (D|N),
where N is the input noisy image. This distribution allows us to quantify the
uncertainty in the FoE solution, or potentially, to measure the likelihood of
the outputs of other denoising algorithms within the FoE model. As we de-
scribe below, the availability of a probabilistic model of the output space is a
great advantage for applying ensemble method to the image denoising prob-
lem, because it provides a possible solution to the disadvantages of averaging
described above.
If all constituent algorithms provide a distribution over the space of hy-
pothesis, then Bayesian ensemble learning methods can be used to combine
each distribution into a single distribution. In particular, the choice of which
model is superior for a particular input can be treated as a latent variable.
Specifically, suppose we wish to predict output y given input x, and we have
a database of labeled training examples Z. Also, suppose we have M differ-
ent probabilistic predictors which each provide a distribution P (y|x) over
possible outputs. Then we can write the probability of possible outputs y as:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Thus, the Bayesian ensemble distribution is simply the weighted sum
of each constituent distribution, weighted by performance over the training
data Z. The downside of Bayesian ensemble methods is that the ensemble
distribution
P(y|x,Z)P(m|Z) is often computationally demanding to
optimize. However, the advantage is that outputs y that score highly in
the ensemble distribution must be considered probable according to all of
the constituent algorithms, especially those that were most successful on
the training data. If Bayesian ensemble methods were applied to the image
denoising problem, this would be eliminate the pitfall of averaging two de-
noising outputs together. The mean of two plausible solutions may not itself
be plausible, but the optimum of a Bayesian ensemble distribution largely
satisfied both models simultaneously.
Unfortunately, Bayesian ensemble learning methods cannot be applied
in the denoising problem, because many constituent denoising algorithms
do not provide a probability distribution over denoised images. For exam-
ple, NLM, we must combine a mixture of probabilistic and non-probabilistic
models. To our knowledge, this circumstance has not been studied explicitly
in past ensemble learning methods. Our goal is to retain the advantage of
purely Bayesian ensemble approaches: the ensemble method should produce
an output that internally consistent, considered highly plausible by the FoE
probability distribution, while simultaneously resembles the NLM output.
Additionally, we need to find a method that is efficient. Bayesian ensem-
bles are often computationally intensive to optimize, in part because, being
summations, they do not factorize.
Our approach is to treat the NLM output as a known, given quantity.
Thus, we want to model P(I|N,D ), where I is the hypothetical original
image, N is the noisy image, and D is the output of NLM. By applying
Bayes rule, we can write
NL NL NL NL
where terms that do not depend on I can be ignored as constants. The
term P(N|I) is simply the noise model, which is a Gaussian of mean I and
variance given by the strength of the image noise. The prior over noiseless
images, P(I), can be taken from the FoE model, given by equation 2.
To complete the ensemble model, we must choose a model for P(D |I).
OneknownstrengthoftheNLMmethodisthattheimageresidual,definedas
I−D , shows little image structure [4]. In other words, edges and features
that are visible in the noisy image are faint or not visible in the residual.
In comparison, other leading denoising images often produce residuals that
retain structure from the noisy image. This advantage of NLM is believed to
stem from the methodology used by NLM. Trained methods like FoE base
their models for image structure such as edges entirely from databases of
natural images. In contrast, NLM acquires statistics of image structure from
the noisy input image itself. For example, FoE may misjudge the spatial
scale, or sharpness, of edges if evidence of the edge is weak within the image,
and other false spatial of edges solely by comparing against similar edges
within the noisy image, and the edges with less common scales are less likely
to be biased. For these reasons, strong structure visible in the noisy input
image is less likely to be visible in the residuals of NLM outputs.
One consequence of this observation is that the residual of NLM can be
approximated as white noise. In particular, the residual of NLM is known
to closely resemble the statistical structure of the additive noise. This allows
us to define P(D |I) accordingly. In the case of input images with additive
Gaussian noise, P(D |I) is Gaussian centered at I, with some σ < σ:
(cid:32) (cid:80) (I(x,y)−D (x,y))2 (cid:33)
Thiscompletesthedefinitionofourensemblemodel. Notethatthismodel
completes our objective: images that optimize the ensemble distribution are
simultaneously
1. plausible according to the Fields of Experts model
2. similar to the Non-local Means output
3. close to the noisy input image
We also must ensure that our model can be optimized efficiently. Here,
we observe that our model can be simplified into a form that is very similar
to the FoE probabilistic model [5]. We can start with the formula 12.
(cid:32) (cid:33)
NL 2σ2 2σ2 2σ2
N NL pseudo
In formula 13, the left side shows a component of the ensemble learning
model, and the right side shows the same model re-arranged to have the same
structure as FoE [5]. This new form introduces new variables such as N
and σ . We can get these parameters N and σ by comparing
pseudo pseudo pseudo
the left and right side. In the left side, the parameters such as N, and D
are all functions.
(N2 −2NI +I2) (D2 −2D I +I2) (N2 −2N I +I2)
+ NL NL ∝ pseudo pseudo
2σ2 2σ2 2σ2
N NL pseudo
Therefore, the parameter σ and N are
pseudo pseudo
pseudo N NL pseudo NL
N N NL NL N NL
Becausetheensemblelearningisusuallycomputationallyintensive,choos-
ing the method of combining two algorithms, such an NLM and FoE in this
case, allows us to do with extra computational effort and extra coding to
build the ensemble learning.
In theory, σ could be estimated empirically by finding the standard
deviation of the residuals of NLM outputs on natural images for each noise
level . In practice, we found that superior performance was attained by learn-
ing σ from a set of training images.
Figure 3 shows the pseudo code for training σ . First, a noisy image
could be made with the original image by using the Gaussian distribution.
The same noisy images were used for NLM and FoE in this model. The
parametersσ andN werecalculatedwiththedenoisedimage, D ,
pseudo pseudo NL
which was done by the NLM, σ , the original input Gaussian sigma value
and σ , another sigma value from the NLM denoised image. The ensemble
learning algorithm was adapted to the NLM denoised image, D , with the
learned parameters, σ and N . The PSNR could be computed by
pseudo pseudo
using the original images and denoised images after performing the ensemble
learning. Same process was executed with different number of the input
Gaussian noise values, σ .
Fornaturalimagedenoising,40imagesfromBerkeleySegmentationBench-
mark were used for training σ . The selection of σ is very important
pseudo pseudo
in our proposed ensemble learning. Based on the best selection of σ , we
used 80 natural images from Berkeley database and 6 canonical images for
testing.
Given the original training images, I , and for a given noise level:
1) For each training image, I
a) Run NLM to compute D
b) For each σ
1) Compute σ and N
pseudo pseudo
2) Run FoE with σ and N
pseudo pseudo
3) Calculate the error between denoised images by using ensemble
learning and original images
2) Choose the value of σ that produced the highest average perfor-
Figure 3: Pseudo code for training σ
4. Experimentation and Results
4.1. Training dataset
First, we set aside 40 natural images randomly selected from the Berkeley
Segmentation Benchmark to use as training images [7]. From these images,
we learned the best value of σ to use for each input noise level σ. These
40 images contain a diverse array of subject matter including architecture,
landscape, people, flowers, etc.
The noisy image was obtained from the original image by adding Gaus-
sian noise with different noise amplitude: σ = 10,15,20,30,40,50,75 and
100. The NLM algorithm was used to get D , and several values of σ for
theNLMdenoisedimageweretested. Specifically, foreachtrainingimageen-
semble learning was repeated with σ = 1,2,3,5,10,20,30,40,50,100,250,
and 500. We used all these sigma values, NLM denoised images and FoE
algorithm to get the ensemble learning denoised images. The 5x5 filter of
Fields of Experts was used to obtain the denoised images. We used 5,000
iterations to implement FoE [5].
PSNR was calculated with for each denoised image, and the average
PSNR value was computed for each combination of σ and σ . The av-
erage PSNR of ensemble learning with a small σ value, such as 1, showed
a similar result with the NLM algorithm because of N from the formula
16. When the σ is close to a very small number, β component in the
N is much bigger than the α component, so the N is most likely
pseudo pseudo
close to the D , which is the denoised image from the NLM algorithm.
Likewise, when the σ has a large value such as 500, the N is very
similar to the N, which is the original noisy image, and the denoised result
of this N is almost the same as the FoE algorithm.
The ensemble learning achieves peak performance when the σ = 30,40,
50,100,100,3,5,10,40 for σ = 10,15,20,25,30,40,50,75,100, respectively. σ
and N can be calculated with the selected σ and σ by using the
formula 16. For example, when the σ is 25, σ ,α, and β have 24.25, 0.94
and 0.06, respectively. N can be obtained with the calculated α and β.
4.2. Results
The performance of the ensemble denoising algorithm was evaluated over
two image datasets, each separate from the training set. Performance was
measured by the Peak Signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and the structural simi-
larity index (SSIM) [14]. PSNR is measured as
PSNR = 20log √ (18)
where MSE denotes the mean squared error between the denoised image N
and the original image I. We also measure denoising quality using structural
similarity index (SSIM). SSIM is a measure of image similarity intended to
resolve certain known limitations of PSNR that may cause PSNR to disagree
withhumanperceptionofimagequality. Inparticular, acorruptedimagecan
be perceived to be highly similar to the original if the corruptions primarily
affect local contrast or brightness in certain regions. The PSNR of such a
corrupted image may be very low; far lower than PSNR values produced by
imagecorruptionsthatmaybeperceivedasmoresevere. SSIMaddressesthis
by normalizing for contrast and brightness both globally across the image, as
well as locally, within 8 x 8 image windows. SSIM has been shown to adhere
significantly closer to subjective image quality grades assigned by pools of
human subjects.
The first result was done with the 6 canonical images (Barbara, boat,
etc). Table 1 shows the PSNR values for 6 natural images denoised by using
the ensemble learning under different levels of input noise. For most images
and noise levels, the ensemble learning showed an improvement in image
denoising comparing to the NLM and FoE. The ensemble learning showed an
especiallystrongimprovementwhentheinputnoisevalueincreased. Figure4
shows some results of denoising images by using the NLM, FoE and ensemble
learning. Comparing to these results, the ensemble learning outperformed
both NLM and FoE quantitatively. With selected σ , the PSNR result of
the ensemble learning was 27.62dB. The PSNR results of NLM and FoE were
27.14dB and 26.92dB, respectively.
Table 1: The PSNR (dB) values for natural images denoised with the Ensem-
blelearning(Fromtheleft: Non-localMeans, FieldsofExpertsandEnsemble
Lena Barbara Boat
σ NLM FoE Ensem. NLM FoE Ensem. NLM FoE Ensem.
10 35.17 35.11 35.16 33.72 32.93 33.19 32.78 33.27 33.27
15 33.36 33.32 33.41 31.80 30.25 30.6 30.97 31.40 31.42
20 31.97 32.03 32.11 30.19 28.41 28.77 29.54 30.05 30.04
30 29.84 29.88 29.95 27.72 25.88 26.03 27.56 27.96 27.95
40 28.26 28.13 28.58 25.96 24.17 26.04 26.11 26.18 26.27
50 27.14 26.92 27.62 24.70 23.13 24.78 25.04 24.93 25.28
75 25.03 24.94 25.88 22.91 22.00 22.92 23.27 23.13 23.37
100 23.46 21.05 24.8 21.70 18.97 21.86 22.04 20.44 22.76
House Peppers Fingerprint
σ NLM FoE Ensem. NLM FoE Ensem. NLM FoE Ensem.
10 35.47 35.22 35.27 33.38 34.16 34.21 31.03 32.11 32.17
15 33.92 33.62 33.74 31.74 32.05 32.20 29.08 29.64 29.78
20 32.61 32.34 32.50 30.49 30.57 30.76 27.44 28.03 28.16
30 30.05 30.34 30.40 28.11 28.10 28.20 25.09 25.77 25.79
40 28.23 28.74 28.57 26.64 26.47 26.83 23.22 23.58 23.28
50 26.71 27.28 27.17 25.16 24.95 25.43 21.80 21.47 21.88
75 24.34 24.68 25.15 22.91 22.55 23.35 19.49 18.23 19.54
100 22.85 19.75 24.03 21.5 18.84 22.04 18.20 17.63 17.57
The denoising results of NLM often perform well at recovering sharp
edges. In contrast, FoE often produces blurry edges by comparison, espe-
cially when the input noisy sigma value is high. However, mottling can
sometimes be found on the denoising results of NLM. Ensemble learning is
able to preserve the benefits of both techniques, retaining sharp edges with
minimal mottling. Therefore, some disadvantages from NLM and FoE could
be mitigated by the ensemble learning.
Figure 5 shows the close-up denoising results. Figure 5 demonstrate the
advantages and disadvantages of NLM and FoE. Sharp edges can be found in
Figure 4: Denoising Results. (a) Image with Gaussian noise, σ = 50 (PSNR
= 14.18dB), (b) Denoised image using the NLM (PSNR =27.14dB), (c) De-
noised image using the FoE (PSNR = 26.92dB), (d) Denoised image using
the ensemble learning (PSNR = 27.62dB) with σ = 5
Figure5: Close-updenoisingresults. Fromtheleft, NLM,FoE,andensemble
the result of NLM, but not in the result of FoE. Mottling could be detected in
theresultofNLM.Theensemblelearningmodelretainssharpgoodedgesbut
also has less mottling. In other words, the ensemble learning could overcome
some disadvantages from NLM and FoE.
The second result was done with a subset of 80 images from Berkeley
database [7]. These test images were disjoint from the set of training images.
Figure 6 shows noisy images and results of ensemble learning with σ = 30.
The result of average PSNR values at different input noise level is displayed
in Figure 7a. The standard error is shown as the error bar. The ensemble
learning outperformed the NLM and FoE in most cases. The ensemble learn-
ing showed a better improvement, especially at the high levels of the input
noise. When the input noise is 100, the average PSNR results of ensemble
learning, NLM, and FoE are 22.75dB, 21.83dB, and 19.47dB, respectively.
Figure 6: Other ensemble learning results with σ = 30 (Left: Noisy image,
Right: Denoised image)
Figure 7b shows the result of average SSIM of 80 testing images. When the
input noise is 100, the average SSIM results of ensemble learning, NLM, and
FoE are 0.5701, 0.3885, and 0.5062, respectively. Figure 7c and 7d show
an improvement of the ensemble learning versus the best value of FoE and
NLM. Ensemble learning shows a consistent improvement in PSNR over the
two constituent denoising methods, and improvement increases as the input
sigma increases.
5. Conclusion
UsinganovelBayesianensemblelearningmethod, wewereabletoachieve
image denoising that outperformed either of the constituent denoising tech-
nique. The results showed that the ensemble learning quantitatively had
outperformed the NLM and FoE. The majority of PSNR results for ensem-
ble learning showed an improved output, and its denoising performance aug-
mented the quality of the denoised images when the input noise increased.
Although, the PSNR of FoE dropped rapidly as the input noise level in-
creased, ensemble learning was still able to capitalize on the FoE results to
Figure 7: Denoising results (a) PSNR in dB. (b) Denoising SSIM results.
From left to right, Non-local means, Fields of Experts, and Ensemble learn-
ing. (c), (d) Improvement of the ensemble learning in PSNR and SSIM.
The blue line plots the improvement in performance versus the best perfor-
mance of either NLM or FoE, whichever method performed better, Values
are averaged over all 80 testing images.
produce an improvement over NLM, and the performance of the ensemble
method decreased only slowly with sigma, as NLM does. For example, when
the input sigma dropped from 75 to 100, the PSNRs of FoE were 23.19dB
and 19.47dB, respectively. However, the PSNRs of ensemble learning were
23.62dB and 22.75dB, respectively. Moreover, the ensemble learning method
wasabletoretainspecificadvantagesofeachconstituentmethodwithoutlos-
ing the benefits of each. The denoising results of FoE sometimes could lead
to blur at some edges when the input sigma is high. Mottling sometimes is
shown on the denoising images of NLM. However, the ensemble learning is
available to remove the mottling from NLM and get better sharpened images
at the edges. Therefore, the ensemble learning may have advantages over
NLM and FoE.
Thereremainsomefeaturesthatcouldbeimprovedtotheensemblelearn-
ing for our future work. The calculation to get σ and N is based on
pseudo pseudo
the proportional value. In other words, we may need to consider the detailed
calculation procedure to get the exact value of the σ and N . Our
pseudo pseudo
model for p(D |I) is simple, so this could be improved by learning it from
natural images.
In this paper, we focus on testing the probabilistic ensemble learning
model on FoE and NLM. These methods were selected in part because they
are very different from one another, in both their philosophy of approach
as well as their strengths and weaknesses. The ensemble learning method
developed here is flexible and can be extended to include a wide variety of
denoising methods (such as Gaussian Mixture or Sparse coding [3], [8]). If
we add more denoising methods, the formula 11 could be written as follow:
P(I|D ,D )
P(I|N,D ,D ) = P(N|I,D ,D ) (19)
gau NL gau NL
P(N|D ,D )
P(N|I),P(D |I),P(D |I) are all Gaussian distribution and P(I) is
the Fields of Experts model. Therefore, we would be available to calculate
σ and N by using formula 14 15 16 17. Future work will include
pseudo pseudo
further improvements by enhancing these features of the ensemble learning.