1v10260.6051:viXra
Bayesian linear mixed models using Stan: A
tutorial for psychologists, linguists, and cognitive
scientists
Tanner Sorensen1 and Shravan Vasishth1,2
1: Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam, Germany
2: School of Mathematics and Statistics, Sheffield University, UK
Correspondence to: {tanner.sorensen,vasishth}@uni-potsdam.de
June 23, 2015
With thearrival of theRpackages nlme and lme4, linear mixed mod-
els (LMMs) have come to be widely used in experimentally-driven areas
likepsychology,linguistics,andcognitivescience. Thistutorialprovidesa
practicalintroductiontofittingLMMsinaBayesianframeworkusingthe
probabilistic programming language Stan. We choose Stan (rather than
WinBUGS or JAGS) because it provides an elegant and scalable frame-
workforfittingmodelsinmostofthestandardapplicationsofLMMs. We
easethereaderintofittingincreasinglycomplexLMMs,firstusingatwo-
conditionrepeatedmeasuresself-pacedreadingstudy,followed byamore
complex 2×2repeated measures factorial design thatcan begeneralized
to much more complex designs.
1 Introduction
Linearmixedmodels,orhierarchical/multilevellinearmodels,havebecome the
main workhorse of experimental research in psychology, linguistics, and cogni-
tive science, where repeated measures designs are the norm. Within the pro-
gramming environment R [24], the nlme package [22] and its successor, lme4
[3] have revolutionized the use of linear mixed models (LMMs) due to their
simplicity and speed: one can fit fairly complicated models relatively quickly,
often with a single line of code. A great advantage of LMMs over traditional
approaches such as repeated measures ANOVA and paired t-tests is that there
is no needto aggregateoversubjects anditems to compute two sets ofF-scores
(or several t-scores) separately; a single model can take all sources of variance
intoaccountsimultaneously. Furthermore,comparisonsbetweenconditionscan
easily be implemented in a single model through appropriate contrast coding.
Other important developments related to LMMs have been unfolding in
computational statistics. Specifically, probabilistic programming languageslike
WinBUGS[18],JAGS[23]andStan[27],amongothers,havemadeitpossibleto
fit Bayesian LMMs quite easily. However, one prerequisite for using these pro-
gramming languages is that some background statistical knowledge is needed
before one can define the model. This difficulty is well-known; for example,
Spiegelhalter and colleagues [26, 4] write: “Bayesian statistics has a (largely
deserved) reputation for being mathematically challenging and difficult to put
into practice...”.
The purpose of this paper is to facilitate a first encounter with model spec-
ification in one of these programming languages, Stan. The tutorial is aimed
primarily at psychologists, linguists, and cognitive scientists who have used
lme4 to fit models to their data, but may have only a basic knowledge of the
underlying LMM machinery. A diagnostic test is that they may not be able to
answersomeor allofthese questions: what is a designmatrix; whatis contrast
coding; what is a random effects variance-covariance matrix in a linear mixed
model? Our tutorial is not intended for statisticians or psychology researchers
whocould,forexample,writetheirownMarkovChainMonteCarlosamplersin
R or C++ or the like; for them, the Stan manual is the optimal starting point.
The presenttutorialattempts toeasethe beginner intotheir firststeps towards
fitting Bayesian linear mixed models. More detailed presentations about linear
mixed models are available in several textbooks; references are provided at the
end of this tutorial.
We have chosen Stan as the programming language of choice (over JAGS
and WinBUGS) because it is possible to fit arbitrarily complex models with
Stan. For example, it is possible (if time consuming) to fit a model with 14
fixed effects predictors and two crossed random effects by subject and item,
each involving a 14×14 variance-covariancematrix [2]; as far as we are aware,
such models cannot, as far as we know, be fit in JAGS or WinBUGS.1
Inthistutorial,wetakeitasagiventhatthereaderisinterestedinlearning
how to fit Bayesian linear mixed models. We do not try to explain the advan-
tages this approach affords beyond the classical frequentist approach; for such
justification,thereaderisdirectedtotherichliteraturerelatingtoacomparison
between Bayesian versus frequentist statistics (such as the provocatively titled
paperby Lavine[15]; andthe highlyaccessibletextbook by Kruschke[14]). We
also assume that the reader is aware of Bayes’ Theorem, which for our pur-
poses amounts to the statement that the posterior distribution is proportional
to the prior times the likelihood. For the purposes of this paper, the goal of a
Bayesiananalysis is simply to derive the posterior distribution of each parame-
ter of interest, given some data and prior beliefs about the distributions of the
parameters.
The tutorial is structured as follows. We begin by successively building up
increasingly complex LMMs using the data-set reported by Gibson and Wu[8],
1Whetheritmakessenseingeneraltofitsuchacomplexmodelisadifferentissue;see[5],
and[2]forrecentdiscussion.
whichhasasimpletwo-conditiondesign. Ateachstep,weexplainthestructure
ofthe model. The nextsectiontakesup inference forthis two-conditiondesign.
Thenwe demonstratehow one canfit a somewhatmore complex 2×2 factorial
design.
This paper was written using a literate programming tool, knitr [29]; this
integratesdocumentationfortheaccompanyingcodewiththepaper. Theknitr
file that generated this paper, as well as all the code and data used in this
tutorial, can be downloaded from our website:
Westartwiththetwo-conditionrepeatedmeasuresdata-set[8]asaconcrete
running example. This simple example serves as a starter kit for fitting com-
monly used LMMs in the Bayesiansetting. We assume that the reader has the
relevant software installed; specifically, rstan in R. For detailed instructions,
2 Example 1: A two-condition repeated mea-
sures design
This sectionmotivates the LMMwiththe self-pacedreadingdata-setofGibson
and Wu [8]. We introduce the data-set, state our modeling goals here, and
proceed to build up increasingly complex LMMs.
Thescientificquestion Subjectandobjectrelativeclauseshavebeenwidely
usedinreadingstudiestoinvestigatesentencecomprehensionprocesses. Asub-
ject relative is a sentence like The senator who interrogated the journalist re-
signed whereanoun(senator)ismodifiedbyarelativeclause(who interrogated
the journalist), and the modified noun is the grammatical subject of the rela-
tiveclause. Inanobjectrelative,thenounmodifiedbytherelativeclauseisthe
grammatical object of the relative clause (e.g., The senator who the journalist
interrogated resigned). In both cases, the noun that is modified (senator) is
called the head noun.
A typical finding for English is that subject relatives are easier to process
than object relatives [12]. Natural languages generally have relative clauses,
andthe subjectrelativeadvantagehasuntilrecentlybeenconsideredtobe true
cross-linguistically. However, Chinese relative clauses apparently represent an
interesting counter-example to this generalization; recent work by Hsiao and
Gibson [10] has suggestedthat in Chinese, object relatives are easier to process
than subject relatives at a particular point in the sentence (the head noun of
the relative clause). We now present an analysis of a subsequently published
data-set [8] that evaluates this claim.
Thedata ThedependentvariableoftheexperimentofGibsonandWu[8]was
the reading time rt of the head noun of the relative clause. This was recorded
in two conditions (subject relative and object relative), with 37 subjects and
15 items, presented in a standard Latin square design. There were originally
16 items, but one item was removed, resulting in 37×15 = 555 data points.
However, eight data points from one subject (id 27) were missing. As a conse-
quence, we have a total of 555−8 = 547 data points. The first few lines from
the data frame are shown in Table 1; “o” refers to object relative and “s” to
subject relative.
row subj item so rt
1 1 13 o 1561
2 1 6 s 959
3 1 5 o 582
4 1 9 o 294
5 1 14 s 438
6 1 4 s 286
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
547 9 11 o 350
Table 1: First six rows, and the last row, of the data-set of Gibson and Wu
(2013), as they appear in the data frame.
We build up the Bayesian LMM from a fixed effects model to a varying
intercepts model and finally to a varying intercepts, varying slopes model (the
“maximalmodel” of Barrand colleagues[1]). The result is a probability model
that expresses how the dependent variable, the reading time labeled rt, was
generated in the experiment of Gibson and Wu [8].
Asmentionedabove,thegoalofBayesianmodelingistoderivetheposterior
probability distribution of the model parameters from a prior probability distri-
bution and a likelihood function. Stan makes it easy to compute this posterior
distribution of each parameter of interest. The posterior distribution reflects
what we should believe, given the data, regarding the value of that parameter.
2.1 Fixed Effects Model (Simple Linear Model)
We begin by making the working assumption that the dependent variable of
readingtimertontheheadnounisapproximatelylog-normallydistributed[25].
This assumes that the logarithm of rt is approximately normally distributed.
The logarithm of the reading times, logrt, has some unknown grand mean
β . The mean of the log-normal distribution of rt is the sum of β and an
adjustment β ×so whose magnitude depends on the categorical predictor so,
which has the value −1 when rt is from the subject relative condition, and +1
when rt is from the object relative condition. One way to write the model in
terms of the logarithm of the reading times is as follows:
The index i represents the i-th row in the data-frame (in this case, i =
1,...,547);the term ε representsthe errorin the i-throw. With the above±1
contrast coding, β represents the grand mean of logrt, regardless of relative
clause type. It can be estimated by simply taking the grand mean of logrt.
The parameterβ is anadjustment to β so that the mean of logrt is β +1β
when logrt is from the object relative condition, and β −1β when logrt is
from the subject relative condition. Notice that 2×β will be the difference in
the means between the object and subject relative clause conditions. Together,
β and β make up the part of the model which characterizes the effect of the
experimentalmanipulation,relativeclausetype(so),onthedependentvariable
rt. We call this a fixed effects model because we estimate the β parameters,
which are unvarying from subject to subject and from item to item. In R, this
would correspond to fitting a simple linear model using the lm function, with
so as predictor and logrt as dependent variable.
The error ε is positive when logrt is greater than the expected value
µ = β +β so and negative when logrt is less than the expected value µ .
i 0 1 i i i
Thus,the erroris the amountbywhichthe expectedvalue differs fromactually
observed value. It is standardly assumed that the ε are independently and
identically distributed as a normal distribution with mean zero and unknown
standarddeviationσ . Stanparameterizesthenormaldistributionbythemean
andstandarddeviation,andwe follow that conventionhere,by writing the dis-
tributionofεasN(0,σ )(thestandardnotationinstatisticsisintermsofmean
and variance). A consequence of the assumption that the errors are identically
distributedis thatthe distributionofεshould,atleastapproximately,havethe
same shape as the normaldistribution. Independence implies that there should
be no correlationbetween the errors—this is not the case in the data, since we
have multiple measurements from each subject, and from each item.
Setting up the data We now fit the fixed effects Model 1. For the following
discussion, please refer to the code in Listings 1 and 2 in the appendix. First,
we read the Gibson and Wu [8] data into a data frame rDat in R, and then
subset the critical region (Listing 1, lines 2 and 4). Next, we create a data list
stanDatfor Stan, which contains the data (Listing 1,line 7). Stan requires the
data to be of type list; this is different from the lm and lmer functions, which
assume that the data are in of type data-frame.
Defining the model The next step is to write the Stan model in a text file
with extension .stan. A Stan model consists of several blocks. A block is a
set of statements surrounded by brackets and preceded by the block name. We
open up a file fixEf.stan in a text editor and write down the first block, the
data block, which contains the declaration of the variables in the data object
stanDat (Listing 2, lines 1-5). The strings real and int specify the data type
for each variable. A real variable is a real number, and an int variable is an
integer. For instance, N is the integer number of data points. The variables so
and rt are arrays of length N whose entries are real. We constrain a variable
to take only a subset of the values allowed by its type (e.g. int or real) by
specifying in brackets lower and upper bounds (e.g. <lower=-1,upper=1>).
Next, we turn to the parameters block, where the parameters are defined
(Listing 2, lines 6-9). The fixed effects Model 1 has three parameters: the fixed
interceptβ ,the fixedslopeβ ,andthestandarddeviationσ oftheerror. The
fixed effects β and β are in the vector beta of length two; note that although
we called our parameters β and β in Model 1, in Stan, these are contained in
avectorwithindices1and2,soβ is inbeta[1]andβ inbeta[2]. The third
parameter,thestandarddeviationσ oftheerror(sigma e),isalsodefinedhere,
and is constrained to have lower bound 0 (Listing 2, line 8). Finally, the model
block specifies the prior distribution and the likelihood (Listing 2, lines 10-15).
To understand the Stan syntax, compare the Stan code above to the spec-
ification of Model 1. The Stan code literally writes out this model. The block
begins with a local variable declaration for mu, which is the mean of rt con-
ditional on whether so is −1 for the subject relative condition or +1 for the
object relative condition.
Thepriordistributionsontheparametersbetaandsigma ewouldordinarily
bedeclaredinthemodelblock. Ifwedon’tdeclareanyprior,itisassumedthat
theyhaveauniformpriordistribution. Notethatthe distributionof sigma eis
truncated at zero because sigma e is constrained to be positive (see the decla-
rationreal<lower=0> sigma e; in the parametersblock). So, this means that
the error has a uniform prior with lower bound 0.
In the model block, the for-loop assigns to mu the mean for the log-normal
distributionof rt[i],conditionalonthevalueofthepredictorso[i]forrelative
clause type. The statement rt[i] ∼ lognormal(mu,sigma e) means that the
logarithm of rt is normally distributed with mean mu and standard deviation
sigma e. One could have equally well log-transformed the reading time and
assumed a normal distribution instead of the lognormal.
Runningthemodel WesavethefilefixEf.stanwhichwejustwroteandfit
the modelin R with the function stanfromthe packagerstan(Listing 1, lines
9 and 10). This call to the function stan will compile a C++ program which
produces samplesfrom the joint posteriordistribution ofthe fixedintercept β ,
thefixedslopeβ ,andthestandarddeviationσ oftheerror. Here,thefunction
generates four chains of samples, each of which contains 2000 samples of each
parameter. Samples 1 to 1000 are part of the warmup, where the chains settle
into the posterior distribution. We analyze samples 1001 to 2000. The result is
saved to an object fixEfFitof class StanFit.
Evaluating model convergence and summarizing results Thefirststep
after running the above function should be to look at the trace plot of each
chain after warmup, using the command shown in Listing 1, lines 13 and 14.
A trace plot has the chains plotted against the sample ID. In Figure 1, we see
fourdifferentchainsplottedagainstsamplenumbergoingfrom1001to 2000. If
the traceplot looks like a “fat, hairycaterpillar”[17] whichdoes notbend, this
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Trace of beta[1]
Iterations (without warmup)
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Trace of beta[2]
Iterations (without warmup)
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Trace of sigma_e
Iterations (without warmup)
Figure 1: Trace plots of the fixed intercept β , the fixed slope β , and the
standard deviation σ of the error for the fixed effects Model 1.
suggests that the chains have convergedto the posterior distribution.
The second diagnostic which we use to assess whether the chains have con-
vergedtotheposteriordistributionisthestatisticRhat. Eachparameterhasthe
Rhatstatisticassociatedwithit[7];thisisessentiallytheratioofbetween-chain
variance to within-chain variance (analogous to ANOVA). The Rhat statistic
should be approximately 1±0.1 if the chain has converged. This is shown in
the rightmost column of the model summary, see Table 2.
Havingsatisfiedourselvesthatthechainshaveconverged,weturntoexamine
this posterior distribution. (If there is an indication that convergence has not
happened, then, assuming that the model has no errors in it, increasing the
number of samples usually resolves the issue.)
parameter mean 2.5% 97.5% Rˆ
βˆ 6.06 0.03 6.11 1
βˆ -0.04 -0.09 0.01 1
σˆ 0.60 0.56 0.64 1
Table 2: Examining the credible intervals and the R-hat statistic in the Gibson
and Wu data.
TheresultoffittingthefixedeffectsModel1isthejoint posterior probability
distribution of the parameters β , β , and σ . The distribution is joint because
eachofthe (4 chains ×1000 post-warmup iterations =)4000posteriorsamples
which the call to stan generates is a vector θ = (β ,β ,σ )⊺ of three model
parameters. Thus,theobjectfixEfFitcontains4000parametervectorsθwhich
6.00 6.05 6.10 6.15
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05
0.54 0.58 0.62 0.66
0.54 0.58 0.62 0.66
0.54 0.58 0.62 0.66
Figure 2: Bivariate joint posterior probability distribution of each element of
θ with each other element (lower diagonal) and marginal posterior probability
distribution of each element of θ separately (diagonal). All parameters are on
thelogscale,butnotethedifferenceinlengthscalebetweenβ ontheonehand
and β and σ on the other.
occupy a three dimensional space. Already in three dimensions, the posterior
distribution becomes difficult to view in one graph. Figure 2 displays the joint
posteriorprobabilitydistributionoftheelementsofθbyprojectingitdownonto
planes. In each of the three planes (lower triangular scattergrams) we see how
one parameter varies with respect to the other. In the diagonal histograms,
we visualize the marginal probability distribution of each parameter separately
from the other parameters.
Of immediate interest is the marginal distribution of the slope β . Figure 2
suggests that the posterior probability density of β is mainly spread over the
interval (−∞,0). One quantitative way to assess the posterior probability dis-
tribution is to examine its quantiles; see Table 2. Here, it is useful to define
the concept of the credible interval. The (1−α)% credible interval contains
(1−α)% of the posterior probability density. Unlike the (1−α)% confidence
interval from the frequentist setting, the (1−α)% credible interval represents
the range within which we are (1−α)% certain that the true value of the pa-
rameterlies, giventhe priorand the data (see [21] for further discussiononCIs
vs credible intervals). A commonconventionis to use the intervalrangingfrom
the2.5to97.5percentiles. Wefollowthisconventionand95%credibleintervals
in Table 2.
The samples of β suggests that approximately 94% of the posterior proba-
bility density is below zero, suggesting that there is some evidence that object
relatives are easier to process than subject relatives in Chinese, given the Gib-
son and Wu data. However, since the 95% credible interval includes 0, we may
be reluctant to conclude that object relatives are easier to process. We will say
more about the evaluation of researchhypotheses further on.
2.2 Varying Intercepts Mixed Effects Model
ThefixedeffectsModel1isinappropriatefortheGibsonandWudatabecauseit
doesnottakeintoaccountthefactthatwehavemultiplemeasurementsforeach
subject and item. As mentioned above, these multiple measurements lead to a
violation of the independence of errors assumption. Moreover, the fixed effects
coefficients β and β representmeans over all subjects and items, ignoring the
fact that some subjects will be faster and some slower than average; similarly,
some items will be read faster than average,and some slower.
In linear mixed models, we take this by-subject and by-item variability into
accountby addingadjustmentterms u andw , whichadjustβ forsubjectj
and item k. This partially decomposes ε into a sum of the terms u and w ,
whichareadjustmentstotheinterceptβ forthesubjectj anditemkassociated
withrt . Ifsubjectj is slowerthanthe averageofallthe subjects, u wouldbe
somepositivenumber,andifitemkisreadfasterthantheaveragereadingtime
of all the items, then w would be some negative number. Each subject j has
their own adjustment u , and each item its own w . These adjustments u
and w are called random intercepts by Pinheiro and Bates [22] and varying
intercepts by Gelman and Hill [6], and by adjusting β by these we account for
the variability between speakers, and between items.
It is standardly assumed that these adjustments are normally distributed
aroundzerowithunknownstandarddeviation: u ∼N(0,σ )andw ∼N(0,σ );
thesubjectanditemadjustmentsarealsoassumedtobemutuallyindependent.
We now have three sources of variance in this model: the standard deviationof
the errors σ , the standard deviation of the by-subject random intercepts σ ,
and the standard deviation of the by-item varying intercepts σ . We will refer
to these as variance components.
We now express the logarithmof reading time, which was producedby sub-
jects j =1,...,37readingitems k =1,...,15,inconditionsi=1,2(1refersto
subjectrelatives,2toobjectrelatives),asthefollowingsum. Noticethatweare
now using a slightly different way to describe the model, compared to the fixed
effects model. We are using indices for subject, item, and condition to identify
uniquerows. Also,insteadofwritingβ so,weindexβ bytheconditioni. This
follows the notation used in the textbook on linear mixed models, written by
the authors of nlme [22], the precursor to lme4.
ijk 0 1i 0j 0k ijk
Model 2 is an LMM, and more specifically a varying intercepts model. The
coefficient β is the one of primary interest; it will have some mean value −β
forsubjectrelativesand+β forobjectrelativesduetothecontrastcoding. So,
ifour posteriormeanforβ is negative,this wouldsuggestthat objectrelatives
are read faster than subject relatives.
We fit the varying intercepts Model 2 in Stan in much the same way as the
fixed effects Model 1. For the following discussion, please consult Listing 3 for
the R code used to run the model, and Listing 4 for the Stan code.
Setting up the data The data which we prepare for passing on to the func-
tionstannow includes subjectanditem information(Listing 3, lines 2-8). The
data block in the Stan code accordingly includes the number J, K of subjects
and items, respectively; and the variable N records the number of rows in the
data frame.
Defining the model Model2,showninListing4,stillhasthefixedintercept
β ,thefixedslopeβ ,andthestandarddeviationσ oftheerror,andwespecify
these in the same way as we did for the fixed effects Model 1. In addition, the
varyinginterceptsModel2hasby-subjectvaryinginterceptsu forj =1,...,J
and by-item varying intercepts w for k = 1,...,K. The standard deviation
of u is σ and the standard deviation of w is σ . We again constrain the
standard deviations to be positive.
The model block places normal distribution priors on the varying inter-
cepts u and w . We implicitly place uniform priors on sigma u, sigma w, and
sigma e by omitting them from the model block. As pointed out earlier for
sigma e, these prior distributions have lower bound zero because of the con-
straint <lower=0>in the variable declarations.
The statement about how each row in the data is generated is shown in
Listing 4, lines 26-29;here, both the fixed effects and the varying intercepts for
subjects and items determine the expected value mu. The vector u has vary-
ing intercepts for subjects. Likewise, the vector w has varying intercepts for
items. The for-loop in lines 26-29 now adds u[subj[i]] + w[item[i]] to the
meanbeta[1]ofthedistributionof rt[i]. Thesearesubject-anditem-specific
adjustmentsto the fixed-effectsinterceptbeta[1]. Thetermu[subj[i]]iden-
tifies the id of the subject for row i in the data-frame; thus, if i = 1, then
subj[1]=1,and item[1]=13(see Table 1).
Running the model We pass the list stanDat of data to stan, which com-
piles a C++ program to sample from the posterior distribution of Model 2.
Stan samples from the posterior distribution of the model parameters, includ-
ing the varying intercepts u and w for each subject j = 1,...,J and item
k =1,...,K.
It may be helpful to rewrite the model in mathematical form following the
Stansyntax([6]useasimilarnotation);theStanstatementsareslightlydifferent
from the way that we expressed Model 2. Defining i as the row id in the data,
i.e., i=1,...,547, we can write:
Likelihood:
i 0 [subj[i]] [item[i]] 1 i
rt ∼LogNormal(µ ,σ )
Priors: (3)
u∼Normal(0,σ ) w ∼Normal(0,σ )
Here, notice that the i-th row in the statement for µ identifies the subject
id ranging from j =1,...,37, and the item id ranging from k =1,...,15.
Summarizing the results The posteriordistributions ofeachofthe param-
etersissummarizedinTable3. TheRˆ valuessuggestthatmodelhasconverged.
Note also that compared to Model 1, the estimate of σ is smaller; this is be-
causetheothertwovariancecomponentsarenowbeingestimatedaswell. Note
thatthe95%credibleintervalfortheestimateβˆ includes0;thus,thereissome
evidence that object relatives are easier than subject relatives, but we cannot
exclude the possibility that there is no difference in the reading times between
the two relative clause types.
parameter mean 2.5% 97.5% Rˆ
βˆ 6.06 5.92 6.20 1
βˆ -0.04 -0.08 0.01 1
σˆ 0.52 0.49 0.55 1
σˆ 0.25 0.19 0.34 1
σˆ 0.20 0.12 0.32 1
Table 3: The quantiles and the Rˆ statistic in the Gibson and Wu data, the
varying intercepts model.
2.3 Varying Intercepts, Varying Slopes Mixed EffectsModel
Consider now that subjects who are faster than average(i.e., who have a nega-
tive varying intercept) may exhibit greater slowdowns when they read subject
relatives compared to object relatives. Similarly, it is in principle possible that
items which are read faster (i.e., which have a large negative varying intercept)
may show a greater slowdown in subject relatives than object relatives. The
opposite situation could also hold: faster subjects may show smaller SR-OR
effects, or items read faster may show smaller SR-OR effects. Although such
individual-level variability was not of interest in the original paper by Gibson
andWu,itcouldbeoftheoreticalinterest(see,forexample,[13]). Furthermore,
asBarrandcolleagues[1]pointout,itisinprincipledesirabletoincludeafixed
effect factor in the randomeffects as a varying slope if the experiment designis
such that subjects see both levels of the factor (cf. [2]).
In order to express this structure in the LMM, we must make two changes
in the varying intercepts Model 2.
Adding varying slopes The first change is to let the size of the effect for
the predictor so vary by subject and by item. The goal here is to express that
some subjects exhibit greater slowdowns in the object relative condition than
others. We leteffectsizevarybysubjectandbyitembyincludinginthe model
by-subject and by-item varying slopes which adjust the fixed slope β in the
same way that the by-subject and by-item varying intercepts adjust the fixed
intercept β . This adjustment of the slope by subject and by item is expressed
byadjustingβ byaddingtwotermsu andw . Thesearerandom orvarying
slopes, andbyaddingthemwe accountfor howthe effectofrelativeclausetype
varies by subject j and by item k. We now express the logarithm of reading
time, which was produced by subject j reading item k, as the following sum.
The subscript i indexes the conditions.
ijk 0 0j 0k 1 1ij 1ik ijk
varyingintercepts varyingslopes
Defining a variance-covariance matrix for the random effects The
second change which we make to Model 2 is to define a covariance relationship
between by-subject varying intercepts and slopes, and between by-items inter-
cepts and slopes. This amounts to adding an assumption that the by-subject
slopesu couldinprinciplehavesomecorrelationwiththeby-subjectintercepts
u ; and by-item slopes w with by-item intercept w . We explain this in detail
below.
Let us assume that the adjustments u and u are normally distributed
with mean zero and some variances σ2 and σ2 , respectively; also assume
that u and u have correlation ρ . It is standard to express this situation
by defining a variance-covariance matrix Σ (sometime this is simply called a
variancematrix). This matrixhasthe variancesofu andu respectivelyalong
thediagonals,andthecovariancesontheoff-diagonals. (Thecovariancebetween
two variables X, Y, Cov(X,Y) is defined as the product of their correlation ρ
and their standard deviations σ and σ : Cov(X,Y)=ρσ σ .)
Σ = u0 u u0 u1 (5)
u ρ σ σ σ2
(cid:18) u u0 u1 u1 (cid:19)
Similarly,wecandefineavariance-covariancematrixΣ foritems,usingthe
standard deviations σ , σ , and the correlationρ .
Σ = w0 w w0 w1 (6)
w ρ σ σ σ2
(cid:18) w w0 w1 w1 (cid:19)
Thestandardwaytoexpressthisrelationshipbetweenthesubjectintercepts
u and slopes u , and the item intercepts w and slopes w , is to define a
bivariate normal distribution as follows:
u 0 u w 0 w
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
Animportantpointto noticehereis thatanyn×n variance-covariancema-
trix has associatedwith it ann×n correlationmatrix. Inthe subject variance-
covariance matrix Σ , the correlation matrix is
(cid:18) (cid:19)
In a correlation matrix, the diagonal elements will always be 1, because a
variable always has a correlation of 1 with itself. The off-diagonals will have
the correlations between the variables. Note also that, given the variances σ2
and σ2 , we can always recover the variance-covariance matrix, if we know
the correlation matrix. This is because of the above-mentioned definition of
covariance.
A correlation matrix can be decomposed into a square root of the matrix,
using the Cholesky decomposition. Thus, given a correlation matrix C, we can
obtainits squarerootL; anobviousconsequence is thatwe cansquareLto get
the correlationmatrixC back. This is easy to illustrate witha simple example.
Suppose we have a correlation matrix:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
We can use the Cholesky decomposition function in R, chol, to derive the
lower triangular square root L of this matrix. This gives us:
−0.5 0.8660254
(cid:18) (cid:19)
We can confirm that this is a square root by multiplying L with itself to
get the correlation matrix back (squaring a matrix is done by multiplying the
matrix by its transpose):
1 0 1 −0.5 1 −0.5
−0.5 0.8660254 0 0.8660254 −0.5 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
The reason that we bring up the Cholesky decomposition here is that we
will use it to generate the by-subject and by-item adjustments to the intercept
and slope fixed-effects parameters.
−10 −5 0 5 10
−10 −5 0 5 10
Figure 3: Uncorrelated random variables z = (z ,z )⊺ (left) and correlated
random variables x=(x ,x )⊺ (right).
GeneratingcorrelatedrandomvariablesusingtheCholeskydecompo-
sition Theby-subjectandby-itemadjustmentsaregeneratedusingthefollow-
ingstandardprocedureforgeneratingcorrelatedrandomvariablesx=(x ,x ):
1. Given a vector of standard deviances (e.g., σ ,σ ), create a diagonal
matrix:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
2. Premultiply the diagonalized matrix τ with the Cholesky decomposition
L of the correlation matrix C to get a matrix Λ.
3. Generate values from a random variable z = (z ,z )⊺, where z and z
each have independent N(0,1) distributions (left panel of Figure 3).
4. Multiply Λwithz; thisgeneratesthecorrelatedrandomvariablesx(right
panel of Figure 3).
ThisdigressionintoCholeskydecompositionandthegenerationofcorrelated
random variables is important to understand for building the Stan model. We
will define a vague prior distribution on L, and a vague prior on the standard
deviances. This allows us to generate the by-subject and by-item adjustments
to the fixed effects intercepts and slopes.
Defining the model With this background, implementing the varying in-
tercepts, varying slope Model 4 is straightforward; see Listing 6 for the code.
The data block is the same as before. The parameters block contains several
new parameters. This time, we have vectors sigma u and sigma w which are
(σ ,σ )⊺and(σ ,σ )⊺,insteadofscalarvaluesasinModel2. Thevariables
u0 u1 w0 w1
L u, L w, z u, and z w, which have been declared in the parameters block, play
a role in the transformed parameters block, a block which we did not use in the
earliermodels. Thetransformedparametersblockgeneratestheby-subjectand
by-item varying intercepts and slopes using the parameters sigma u, sigma w,
L u, L w, z u, and z w. The J pairs of by-subject varying intercepts and slopes
are in the rows of the J × 2 matrix u, and the K pairs of by-item varying
intercepts and slopes are in the rows of the K×2 matrix w.
These varying intercepts and slopes are obtained through the statements
diag pre multiply(sigma u, L u) * z u and diag pre multiply(sigma w,
L w) * z w. This statement generates varying intercepts and slopes from the
joint probability distribution of equation 7. The parameters L u, L w are the
Cholesky decompositions of the subject and item correlation matrices, respec-
tively, and z u, and z w are N(0,1) random variables.
It is helpful to walk through steps 1 to 4 involved in generating the varying
intercepts and slopes using the procedure described above for generating cor-
related random variables. The statement diag pre multiply(sigma u,L u) *
z ucomputesthe transposematrixproduct(steps 1and2). Therightmultipli-
cationofthisproductbyz u,amatrixofnormallydistributedrandomvariables
(step 3), yields the varying intercepts and slopes (step 4).
 . . 02 1 . . 2 = diag(σ u0 ,σ u1 )L u z u ⊺
. .
σ 0 ℓ 0 z z ... z
= u0 11 11 12 1J
0 σ ℓ ℓ z z ... z
(cid:18) 01 (cid:19)(cid:18) 21 22 (cid:19)(cid:18) 21 22 2J (cid:19)!
Turningtothemodelblock,here,weplacepriorsontheparametersdeclared
inthe parametersblock,anddefinehowthese parametersgeneratelogrt(List-
ing6,lines 30-42). The definitionofthepriorL u ∼ lkj corr cholesky(2.0)
implicitly places a so-called lkj prior with shape parameter η = 2.0 on the
correlationmatrices
u and w (14)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
where ρ is the correlation between the by-subject varying intercept σ and
slope σ (cf. the covariance matrix of Equation 5) and ρ is the correlation
between the by-item varying intercept σ and slope σ . The lkj distribution
with shape parameter η = 1.0 is a uniform prior over all 2 × 2 correlation
matrices; it scales up to larger correlation matrices. The parameter η has an
effect on the shape of the lkj distribution. Our choice of η = 2.0 implies that
thecorrelationsintheoff-diagonalsarenearzero,reflectingthepriorbeliefthat
there is no correlationbetween intercepts and slopes.
The statement to vector(z u) ∼ normal(0,1) places a normal distribu-
tionwithmeanzeroandstandarddeviationone onz u. Thesamegoesforz w.
The for-loop assigns to mu the mean of the log-normal distribution from which
we draw rt[i], conditional on the value of the predictor so[i] for relative
clause type and the subject and item identity.
We can now fit the varying intercepts, varying slopes Model 4; see Listing 7
for the code. We see in the model summary in Table 4 that the model has
converged, and that the credible intervals of the parameter of interest, β , still
include 0. In fact, the posterior probability of the parameter being less than 0
is now 90%(this informationcanbe extractedas shownin Listing 5, lines 6-8).
parameter mean 2.5% 97.5% Rˆ
βˆ 6.06 5.92 6.21 1
βˆ -0.04 -0.09 0.02 1
σˆ 0.51 0.48 0.55 1
σˆ 0.25 0.19 0.34 1
σˆ 0.07 0.01 0.14 1
σˆ 0.20 0.13 0.32 1
σˆ 0.04 0.0 0.10 1
Table 4: The quantiles and the Rˆ statistic in the Gibson and Wu data, the
varying intercepts, varying slopes model.
Figure 4 plots the varying slope’s posterior distribution against the varying
intercept’s posterior distribution for each subject. The correlation between u
and u is negative, as captured by the marginal posterior distributions of the
correlation ρ between u and u . Thus, Figure 4 suggests that the slower a
subject’s reading time is on average, the slower they read object relatives. In
contrast,Figure4showsnoclearpatternfortheby-itemvaryinginterceptsand
slopes. We briefly discuss inference next.
3 Inference
Havingfitavaryingintercepts,varyingslopesModel4,wenowexplainoneway
to carry out statistical inference, using credible intervals. We have used this
approach to draw inferences from data in previously published work (e.g., [4],
[9]). There are of course other approaches possible for carrying out inference.
Bayes Factors are an example; see Lee and Wagenmakers [16]. Another is
to define a Region of Practical Equivalence [14]. The reader can choose the
approachthey find the most appealing.
3.1 Inference using credible intervals
The result of fitting the varying intercepts, varying slopes Model 4 is the pos-
terior distribution of the model parameters. As mentioned above in connection
with Models 1-3, direct inference from the posterior distributions is possible.
For instance, we can find the posterior probability with which the fixed inter-
cept β or the correlation ρ between by-subject varying intercepts and slopes
takeonanygivenvaluebyconsultingthemarginalposteriordistributionswhose
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
−0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Figure 4: The top row shows the relationship between the varying slopes (y-
axis)andintercepts(x-axis)foreachsubject(leftpanel)anditem(rightpanel).
Thebottomrowshowstheposteriordistributionoftheparameterofcorrelation
betweenthe varyingslopesandinterceptsforeachsubject(left panel)anditem
(right panel).
−0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Figure 5: Upper and lowerbounds on the credible intervals (dashedlines) plot-
ted over the marginal posterior distribution of the fixed slope β (left) and of
the correlationρ betweenthe by-subjectvaryingintercepts andvaryingslopes
(right).
histograms are shown in Figure 5. The information conveyed by such graphs
can be sharpened by using the 95% credible interval, mentioned earlier. Ap-
proximately 95% of the posterior density of β lies between the 2.5 percentile
−0.092 and the 97.5 percentile 0.023. This leads us to conclude that the slope
β for relative clause type so is less than zero with probability 90% (see line 8
in Listing 5). Since 0 is included in the credible interval, it is difficult to draw
the inference that object relative clauses are read faster than subject relative
clauses. However, one could perhaps still make a weak claim to that effect, es-
peciallyifalotofevidencehasaccumulatedinotherexperimentsthatsupports
such a conclusion (see [28] for a more detailed discussion).
What about the correlations between varying intercepts and varying slopes
for subject and for item? What can we infer from the analysis about these
relationships? The 95% credible interval for ρ is (−1,0.1). Our belief that ρ
is less than zero is rather uncertain, although we can conclude that ρ is less
thanzerowith probability90%. There is only weakevidence thatsubjects who
read faster than average exhibit greater slowdowns at the head noun of object
relative clauses than subjects who read slower than average. For the by-item
varyinginterceptsandslopes,itisprettyclearthatwedonothaveenoughdata
(15 items) to draw any conclusions. For these data, it probably makes sense to
fit a simpler model [2], with only varying intercepts and slopes for subject, and
only varying intercepts for items; although there is no harm done here if we fit
a model with a full variance-covariancematrix for both subjects and items.
In sum, regarding our main research question, our conclusion here is that
wecannotsaythatobjectrelativesareharderto processthansubjectrelatives,
because the credible interval for β includes 0. However, one could argue that
there is some weak evidence in favor of the hypothesis, since the posterior
probability of the parameter being negative is approximately 90%.
4 Example 2: Generalizing the linear mixed model
to factorial designs
The Gibson and Wu [8] data-set has a two-condition design. This section
presents a varying intercepts, varying slopes model for a 2 × 2 factorial de-
sign. Because of the more general matrix formulation we use here, the Stan
code can be deployed with minimal changes for much more complex designs,
including correlational studies.
Our example is the 2×2 repeated measures factorial design of Husain et
al [11] (Experiment 1), also a self-paced reading study on relative clauses. The
dependent variable was the reading time rt of the relative clause verb. The
factorswererelativeclausetype, whichwecodewiththe predictorso(so=+1
forobjectrelativesandso=−1forsubjectrelatives)anddistancebetweenthe
head noun and the relative clause verb, which we code with the predictor dist
(dist = +1 for far and dist = −1 for near). Their interaction is the product
of the dist and so contrast vectors, and labeled as the predictor int. The 60
subjects were speakers of Hindi, an Indo-Aryan language spoken primarily in
India. The 24 items were presented in a standard, fully balanced Latin square
design. This resulted in a total of 1440 data points (60×24=1440). The first
few lines from the data frame are shown below.
row subj item so dist rt
1 1 14 s n 1561
2 1 16 o n 959
3 1 15 o f 582
4 1 18 s n 294
5 1 4 o n 438
6 1 17 s f 286
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
1440 9 13 s f 516
Table 5: The first six rows, and the last row, of the data-set of Husain et al.
(2014, Experiment 1), as they appear in the data frame.
The theoretical interest is in determining whether relative clause type and
distance influence reading time, and whether there is an interaction between
these two factors. We use Stan to determine the posterior probability distribu-
tionofthefixedeffectβ forrelativeclausetype,thefixedeffectβ fordistance,
and their interaction β .
We fitavaryingintercepts,varyingslopesmodeltothis data-set. Thisisan
extension of Model 4. The grand mean β of logrt is adjusted by subject and
by item through the varying intercepts u and w , which are unique values for
each subject and item respectively. Likewise, the three fixed effects β , β , and
β which areassociatedwith the predictorsso, dist, andint, respectively,are
adjusted by the by-subject varying slopes u , u , and u and by-item varying
slopes w , w , and w .
It is more convenient to represent this model in matrix form. We build up
the model specification by first noting that, for each subject, the by-subject
varyingintercept u andslopes u , u , and u havea multivariate normalprior
distributionwithmeanzeroandcovariancematrixΣ . Similarly,foreachitem,
the by-itemvaryinginterceptw andslopesw , w ,andw havea multivariate
normal prior distribution with mean zero and covariance matrix Σ . We can
write this as follows:
The error ε is assumed to have a normal distribution with mean zero and
standarddeviationσ . Thus,the varyingintercepts,varyingslopes herewill be
the same as Model 4, just with two additional predictors dist, int along with
their associated fixed-effect slopes β , β and random-effect slopes u , u , w ,
and w .
We proceed to implement the model in Stan. First we read in the data-set
(seeListing7). Insteadofpassingthe predictorsso, dist,andtheirinteraction
int to stan as vectors, as we did with so earlier, we make so, dist, and int
into a design matrix X using the function model.matrix available in R.2 The
firstcolumnofthedesignmatrixXconsistsofallones. Thesecondcolumnisthe
predictor so which codes the factor for relative clause type. The third column
the predictor dist which codes the factor for distance. The fourth column is
the predictor int which codes the interaction between relative clause type and
distance. The model matrix thus consists of a fully factorial 2×2 design, with
blocks of this design repeated for each subject. For the full data-set, we could
write it very compactly in matrix form as follows:
Here,XistheN×P modelmatrix(withN =1440,sincewehave1440data
points; and P = 4 since we have the intercept plus three other fixed effects),
β is a P × 1 vector of fixed effects parameters, Z and Z are the subject
and item model matrices (N ×P), and u and w are the by-subject and by-
itemadjustments tothe fixedeffects estimates; these areidenticaltothe design
matrix X in the model with varying intercepts and varying slopes included.
For more examples of similar model specifications in Stan, see the R package
Having defined the model, we proceed to assemble the list stanDatof data,
relying on the above matrix formulation; please refer to Listing 7. The number
Nofobservations,thenumberJofsubjectsandKofitems,thereadingtimesrt,
and the subject and item indicator variables subj and item are familiar from
thepreviousmodelspresented. TheintegerPisthenumberoffixedeffects(four
including the intercept). Model 16 includes a varying intercept u and varying
slopes u , u , u for eachsubject, and so the number n u of by-subject random
effectsequalsP.Likewise,Model16includesavaryinginterceptw andvarying
slopesw ,w ,w foreachitem,andsothenumbern wofby-itemrandomeffects
also equals P. The data block contains the corresponding variables. We declare
thefixedeffects designmatrixXasanarrayof Nrowvectorswhosecomponents
are the predictors associatedwith the N reading times. Likewise for the subject
and item random effects design matrices Z u and Z w, which correspond to Z
and Z respectively in Model 16. The vector beta contains the fixed effects
β , β , β , and β . The matrices L u, L w and the arrays z u, z w of vectors
(not to be confused with the design matrices Z u and Z w) will generate the
varying intercepts and slopes u , ..., u and w , ..., w , using the procedure
described for Model 4. The vector sigma u contains the standard deviations of
theby-subjectvaryinginterceptsandslopesu ,..., u ,andthe vectorsigma w
contains the standard deviations of the by-item varying intercepts and slopes
2Here, we would like to acknowledge the contribution of Douglas Bates in specifying the
modelinthisgeneral matrixform.
grand mean
6.50 6.60 6.70 6.80
relative clause type
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
interaction
−0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
Figure 6: Marginalposterior distributionand HPD intervals ofthe fixed effects
grand mean β , slope β for relative clause type, slope β for distance, and
interaction β . All fixed effects are on the log-scale.
w , ..., w . The variable sigma e is the standard deviation σ of the error
ε. The transformed parameters block generates the by-subject intercepts and
slopes u , ..., u and the by-item intercepts and slopes w , ..., w .
We place lkj priors on the random effects correlation matrices through the
lkj corr cholesky(2.0) priors on their Cholesky factors L u and L w. We
implicitly place uniform priors on the fixed effects β , ..., β , the random
effects standard deviations σ , ..., σ , and σ , ..., σ and the error stan-
u0 u3 w0 w3
dard deviation σ by omitting any prior specifications for them in the model
block. We specify the likelihood with the probability statement that rt[i] is
distributed log-normally with mean X[i] * beta + Z u[i] * u[subj[i]] +
Z w[i] * w[item[i]]andstandarddeviationsigma e. The next steptowards
model-fittingistopasstheliststanDattostan,whichcompilesaC++program
to sample from the posterior distribution of the model parameters.
Figure 6 plots histogramsof the marginalposterior distribution of the fixed
effects. TheHPDintervalofthefixedeffectβˆ forrelativeclausetypeisentirely
below zero. This is evidence that object relatives are read faster than subject
relatives. The HPD interval of the fixed effect βˆ for distance is also entirely
below zero. This is evidence of a slowdown when the verb (where reading time
wasmeasured)isclosertotheheadnounoftherelativeclause. TheHPDofthe
interaction βˆ between relative clause type and distance is greater than zero,
whichis evidencefor a greaterslowdownonsubjectrelativeswhenthe distance
between the verb and head noun is short.
A major advantage of the above matrix formulation is that we do not need
to write a new Stan model for a future repeated measures factorial design. All
we have to do now is define the design matrix X appropriately, and include it
(alongwithappropriatelydefinedZ andZ forthesubjectsanditemsrandom
effects) as part of the data specification that is passed to Stan.
5 Concluding remarks, and further reading
We hope thatthis tutorialhasgiventhe readera flavorofwhatitwouldbe like
to fit Bayesian linear mixed models. There is of course much more to say on
the topic, and we hope that the interested reader will take a look at some of
the excellent books that have recently come out. We suggest below a sequence
of reading that we found helpful. A good first general textbook is by Gelman
and Hill [6]; it begins with the frequentist approach and only later transitions
to Bayesian models. The forthcoming book by Mcelreath [20] is also excellent.
Forthoselookingfora psychology-specificintroduction,the booksbyKruschke
[14] and Lee and Wagenmakers [16] are to be recommended, although for the
latter the going might be easier if the reader has already looked at Gelman
and Hill [6]. As a second book, [17] is recommended; it provides many inter-
esting and useful examples using the BUGS language, which are discussed in
exceptionally clear language. Many of these books use the BUGS syntax [18],
which the probabilistic programming language JAGS [23] also adopts; how-
ever, Stan code for these books is slowly becoming available on the Stan home
troductorycalculus,aslightlymoretechnicalintroductiontoBayesianmethods
by Lynch [19] is an excellent choice. Finally, the textbook by Gelman and
colleagues [5] is the definitive modern guide, and provides a more advanced
treatment.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the developers of Stan (in particular, Andrew Gelman, Bob
Carpenter) and members of the Stan mailing list for their advice regarding
model specification. Douglas Bates and Reinhold Kliegl have helped consider-
ablyoverthe yearsinimprovingourunderstandingofLMMsfromafrequentist
perspective. We also thank Edward Gibson for releasing his published data.
Titus von der Malsburg and Bruno Nicenboim provided useful comments on a
draft.