]NG.oib-q[
1v7440.2121:viXra
Biological Database of Images and Genomes:
tools for community annotations linking image and
genomic information
Andrew T. Oberlin1, Dominika A. Jurkovic2, Mitchell F. Balish2 and Iddo
Friedberg1,2,∗
1Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA
2Department of Microbiology, Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA
Email: Iddo Friedberg - i.friedberg@miamioh.edu;
∗Corresponding author
Genomic data and biomedical imaging data are undergoing exponential growth. However, our
understanding of the phenotype-genotype connection linking the two types of data is lagging
behind. While there are many types of software that enable the manipulation and analysis of
image data and genomic data as separate entities, there is no framework established for linking
the two. We present a generic set of software tools, BioDIG, that allows linking of image data
to genomic data. BioDIG tools can be applied to a wide range of research problems that require
linking images to genomes. BioDIG features the following: rapid construction of web-based
workbenches, community-based annotation, user management, and web-services. By using
BioDIG to create websites, researchers and curators can rapidly annotate large number of
images with genomic information. Here we present the BioDIG software tools that include an
image module, a genome module and a user management module. We also introduce a
BioDIG-based website, MyDIG, which is being used to annotate images of Mycoplasma.
This article has been submitted for publication in Database (cid:13)c: 2012-2013Iddo Friedberg Published by
Oxford University Press on behalf of all authors. All rights reserved.
Introduction
The large amount of genomic data has led to a concurrent deluge for new and creative
ways of genomic data processing and visualization. These are manifest in many types of
genome browsers [1–12] and in the large number genome annotation tools both manual and
computational (See reviews: [13,14]).
However, genomic data are not the only biological data that require high throughput
analysis and annotation. Since long before the genomic revolution, biological image data
have been produced steadily from sources as diverse as drawings, medical radiology (MRI,
X-ray), microscopy and regular photography. Like genomic data, biological images also
require analysis and annotation that include feature detection, segmentation, and
association with biological function. Computer-aided and computational image analysis
has been performed since computers emerged in the 1940s, with major advances made as
the acquisition, storage, analysis and manipulation of images have become cheaper and
more accessible.
With the deluge of both genomic and biological image data, there is a need for
infrastructure capable of handling both types of data and at the same time associating
them in a meaningful fashion. There are many projects that catalog biological images in
fields as diverse as zoology, microbiology, neurobiology, developmental biology and cancer
research, to name a few. However, to date there has been no freely available software to
enable the association of image features with genomic features. With the large number of
both image and genomic data, and with the understanding that phenotypic data manifest
in images is ultimately a result of genomic events (features), there is a need to easily
associate image data and genomic data. While databases providing such information do
exist [15,16], there are no general-purpose software tools that can be used to construct
such an association.
Here we present the Biological Database of Images and Genomes or BioDIG. BioDIG is a
set of tools to construct databases with genomic and image data and place them in
semantic association. BioDIG provides the following features: a genome uploader and
browser, an image uploader, browser, and tagging workbench, association of image features
with genomic features, user management that features circles of trust for image feature
tagging, and web services. We demonstrate an example web-site, MyDIG, which we have
constructed using BioDIG. BioDIG is released under an open source license, and is freely
available. We call upon the community of bioinformatics programmers to join in its
development.
BioDIG is a web-based workbench that enables users to upload images, annotate parts of
them with semantic data and associate these tags with genomic features. BioDIG includes
user management with increasing circles of privileges. BioDIG is implemented using three
modules: the Genome Module, the Image Module and the Users Module. The Genome
Module is used to upload, store and visualize genomes. The Image Module is used to
upload, store, annotate and visualize images. The User Module is used to manage the users
and their privileges in the system.
Genome Module
The Genome Module implements the storage of genomic information that should be readily
accessible for both queries and visualization. As a foundation, we use the Generic Model
Organism Database, GMOD, database schema, Chado, which is implemented in
PostgreSQL. This database was designed to represent genomic information found on NCBI
in the form of GFF files. BioDIG is implemented as an extension of Chado adding links
from the genes in the feature table of Chado to the images in the image database extension.
The features table of Chado is used to store data about genes, gene components, mRNA
and other available data in the GFF format. BioDIG is implemented using PostgreSQL,
however it uses a Django framework (djangoproject.com) for web service and web client
access to support community annotation. For visualization of the genomic data, GMOD
also offers a genome visualization tool, GBrowse [10], which is a Perl-based system that can
link to a multitude of genomic databases including Chado. However, when connecting to
Chado, GBrowse runs much more slowly than when connecting to other databases. Thus,
we have chosen to duplicate the data in SQLite3, which will be used for the rendering of
GBrowse. These files break up the data into separate databases so that each genome can
be separated, increasing search time. The SQLite3 database that is used in conjunction
with GBrowse visualization is Bio::DB::SeqFeature::Store, which stores the features as flat
Perl objects, which eliminate all of the table joins that Chado must go through in order to
prepare the information for visualization. Normally, one would be concerned with the
maintainability of a system that duplicates information. However, the genomic information
in these databases is expected to change only very rarely, leaving little risk that these
sources will become unsynchronized. We expect that in this database schema, one would
perform these information updates. For instance, when a gene’s function becomes known
for an organism that is already in the database a batch procedure will be performed,
making minimal changes to the database without breaking any foreign keys. Using this
Genome Module, we are able to visualize and store information about genes so that queries
are optimized and the visualization workload is not burdening the search system.
Image Module
The Image Module’s goal is to handle the creation and storage of images and image
metadata. Here image metadata is taken to mean identifiable components of biological
interest within the images. Organelles, cells, tissues, organisms, and other biological
objects in the images are all considered identifiable components. The image module
supports the classification of these components. We have implemented a web user interface
that allows the tagging of images by drawing on the image and describing the substructure
using free text and/or an ontology. Finally, once components have been identified, they can
be linked to the associated genes via gene links mapping the phenotypic data in the images
to the genomic data (Figure 1).
The Image Module’s most important task deals with storing the image files in a fashion
that makes them highly accessible. First the picture table stores the path to the image on
the file system. The two options often used for image storage are to store the image in the
database as a BLOB and to store a path to the image in a media directory or the URL on
a media server. However, storing a file as a BLOB in a database has certain advantages
over storing it as a file such as lower read throughput for objects less than 1 MB in size for
short intervals and atomicity for overwriting [17]. However, storing an image as a path to a
file within a file system provides other advantages such as high throughput for files greater
than 1 MB and low fragmentation in the long term.
Because we use the Django framework, Python objects are linked to tables in the database.
When one retrieves one of these objects, the entirety of the data is made available to the
user. Thus, storing the path can decrease search times that may only use the picture table
as a foreign key to link information. In order to increase throughput even more, the images
are kept in consistent format, meaning that all pictures are encoded in PNG format to
remain web compliant. The names of these images are also changed to a unique key, which
can be used for hashing. Once the database grows in size, these hashed names will be used
to limit the number of images per directory by taking two letter prefixes as the names of
the directory in which the image resides, a method suggested by [17] for increasing server
performance.
The rest of the schema for the images represents other image metadata such as its
description, upload date, the user who owns the photo and the image tags. The tags
themselves are represented by a combination of three tables, tag points, tags, and tag
groups. The tag points are an ordered list of points that when drawn in an API form a
polygon. These points are held together by the tags, which hold the metadata such as the
structure related to the tag in the image. We also store information about tag groups for
users to make there own tag groups. These groups will exist unique a user until that user
wishes to merge with another user’s tag group on the same image. When these tags are
linked to the genes in the feature table of Chado via gene links, data querying is enabled
(Figure 2).
User Management Module
BioDIG enables collaborative editing of image meta-data, with the aim of improving image
annotations through rapid collaborative work by a large number of users. At the same
time, there is a need to maintain high annotation quality, and prevent vandalism. To
achieve these goals, BioDIG features a User Module that provides three user permission
levels, with each level including the permissions of the preceding levels.
Level 1 users have the most basic set of permissions, being able to search published
information on the website and download the results of their search, including genomic,
image, image-tag and gene-link information, for further analysis. The majority of users are
intended to have level 1, read-only access to a BioDIG-based site. Level 2 users, or
annotators, have site-wide read privileges, and in addition can employ tagging user
interfaces and pipelines for publishing. Level 2 users are a much smaller number, and
assigning a user to Level 2 is supposed to be based on a circle of trust. Level 3 users, or
administrators, have permissions to access the databases and edit information directly.
These users will also be in charge of monitoring requests for publication and merge requests
for tag groups as the result of the pipeline. Figure 3 illustrates the user permissions scheme.
In this community-annotation effort, crediting users with the publication of images can
connect labs performing similar research and allow the user to edit these photos in their
own workbench. Many websites attempt to have private and public layers; however, this
implementation of the process is aimed to allow for approved and unapproved information
to maximize community engagement. Once a tag is sent through the pipeline, it is
available for all users in the public domain to see. However, if the administrators of
BioDIG approve the tag, it is said to be of a trustworthy source having no obvious errors.
This idea is implemented to increase the amount of quality information in the database,
while not limiting the capabilities of the system. Inclusion of the user who owns the image
also allows the person to be involved in the tagging of the picture by other people; the
approval process of the tags and associated gene-links is done by trusted users only, helping
maintain quality. With the administrators monitoring this submission process we will be
able to avoid deadlocks and make the data more accessible.
Web services and data analysis
Web services provide an opportunity for researchers to mine data from BioDIG-enabled
websites. Most of the search features of the web site itself are, or soon will be, available via
web services. This will allow for a command line interface (CLI) to be implemented along
with an Application Programming Interface (API) in common programming languages for
interacting with these services programmatically. For instance, if someone wishes to
retrieve a phenotype caused by the expression of several orthologs in different species, a
client API could be used to query for tags related to a set of genes across a list of species,
and retrieve the relevant images and image tags. The client could then access the
information for each of these tags through a predetermined object-oriented interface,
allowing for more dynamic searches than one would naturally make by visiting the website.
The user could then run metrics to analyze the image and the tag data in a program rather
than just by hand to increase the speed at which this data can be analyzed.
For example to return information about image 52, a caller program can use the URL:
Which will return a Python dictionary as a valid JSON object:
"description": "Mycoplasma pneumoniae",
"organisms": [{"common_name": "Mycoplasma pneumoniae M129", "organism_id": 7}],
"url": "/dome/media/pictures/85c4bc19fa0d481460bcb522349fba27.png",
"errorMessage": "Success",
"uploadDate": "2012-11-24 19:14:08",
"error": false,
"uploadedBy": "oberliat"
Example Site: the MyDIG website
We describe MyDIG, a BioDIG-derived website implemented to show mycoplasma images
and genomes. Mycoplasmas are a clade of bacteria whose main characteristics are
parasitism, the lack of a cell wall, and a small, rapidly evolving genome [18]. The cellular
morphology of mycoplasmas is especially interesting, as the limited complexity of
mycoplasmal cellular structure, with small, wall-less, single membrane-bound cells, enables
researchers to focus on universal principles of cellular organization [19], providing a
platform for understanding more derived types of cells.
For these reasons, we created the Mycoplasma Database of Image and Genomes or MyDIG
using the BioDIG infrastructure. Phylogenetically-associated cellular morphology is
cardinal in the description of mycoplasmas. Morphological features in mycoplasmas are
often associated with known genomic features. We present a series of screenshots showing a
typical use-case scenario for the image-genomic association for MyDIG. Mycoplasma
pneumoniae is a significant human pathogen whose cell shape is distinctly polarized [20].
From the cell body, which contains most of the cell volume, emanate both the attachment
organelle and the trailing filament [19]. They are both prosthecal structures, continuous
with the cytoplasm of the cell body. Although the trailing filament is not well-understood,
the attachment organelle of M. pneumoniae and its close relatives is essential for adherence
to host cells [21], which is necessary for all growth in a non-laboratory environment, and
also contains a poorly-characterized motor that contributes to cell motility and cell
division [22–24]. The composition and assembly of M. pneumoniae’s attachment organelle
are well-studied, having been established through analysis of non-adherent mutants [25].
Essential to the formation of the attachment organelle is a cytoskeletal structure called the
electron-dense core [26], which has been imaged extensively and carefully [27,28]; despite
this, the specific locations of its protein components are only vaguely defined. In Figure 4,
the general locations of these proteins as well as the transmembrane proteins involved in
adherence are indicated [29–31] on a scanning electron micrograph of an M. pneumoniae
cell grown attached to a glass cover slip, as previously described in [32] and imaged at high
magnification.
The need for an image-genomic database is illustrated by the case of Mycoplasma microti,
a mycoplasma associated with prairie voles. The original publication describing this species
includes a transmission electron micrograph of sections through several M. microti cells
which reveal the variety of polarization idiosyncratic to the Mycoplasma muris
phylogenetic cluster, of which M. microti is a member. At the time of its publication
(1995), images showing very similar structures of other members of this cluster had been
published [33,34]. However, the authors of the M. microti study, perhaps unaware of these
images, described the morphology in terms that emphasize pleomorphy and imply the
absence of polarization [35,36]. This flawed description led to M. microti being described
subsequently as non-motile, since absence of polarity is associated with absence of
motility [37]. However, we recently determined that like other species of the M. muris
cluster that exhibit polarization, M. microti exhibits robust gliding motility [38], (S.L.
Distelhorst and M.F. Balish, unpublished data). Had a database of mycoplasma
morphological features been available to the authors, this error could have been prevented.
Conclusions
We have described a new software package for constructing websites linking biological
image and genomic data. When designing BioDIG, we did so with generic implementation
in mind, so that anyone who associates genomic data with image data may benefit from its
adoption. BioDIG is suitable for uses as diverse as cancer pathology, zoology, plant biology,
cell biology and microbiology, to name a few. The web services feature is especially useful
for linking to other web resources that can capitalize on BioDIG-enabled sites.
Being a collection of modules, rather than a single application, BioDIG can be applied to a
wide range of uses. Those can range from microbiologists researching certain taxa (as the
mollicute-oriented MyDIG is intended, see example above) to zoologists or plant scientists
interested in whole-organism morphologic features and their genomic associations. The
biomedical research community, both applied and basic, can also benefit from BioDIG.
Image databases of cellular and tissue morphology, radiological images and pathology can
all benefit from incorporating BioDIG if links to genomic information are useful.
BioDIG-based websites can also be used as a teaching resource, in application ranging from
primary secondary to post-secondary and higher education. We call upon the community
of biology software developers to join us in the development of BioDIG, which is
distributed under an open source license. We encourage life science researchers to contact
us regarding applications of BioDIG suitable for their needs.
Image feature tagging currently uses freeform drawing, and can be tagged using free text.
However, for certain types of applications it may be better to provide the annotator with a
controlled vocabulary or an ontology to make annotations standard and computationally
tractable. In the future we intend to provide a mechanism for doing so. Other features that
require implementation are searches by taxon, image tags, gene names, gene annotations,
and boolean combinations of all of the above.
Authors contributions
ATO, MFB and IF conceived the study. ATO and IF designed BioDIG. ATO designed the
code and database schema, and wrote the code for BioDIG and MyDIG. DAJ provided the
microscopy images. IF supervised the project. The manuscript was written by ATO, MFB
and IF and was approved by all authors.
This study was partially funded by National Institutes of Health [grant number R15
AI077394] awarded to MFB, and by National Science Foundation Advances in
Bioinformatics [grant number ABI 1146960] awarded to IF.
Acknowledgements
Will be added post-review.