]NM.oib-q[
1v3270.1011:viXra
Bistability of an In Vitro Synthetic Autoregulatory Switch
Pakpoom Subsoontorn1, Jongmin Kim1,4, Erik Winfree2,3,4*
Departments of 1 Biology, 2 Computation and Neural Systems, 3 Computer Science
and 4 Bioengineering
California Institute of Technology
{pakpoom,jongmin,winfree}@dna.caltech.edu
September 25, 2018
Abstract: Theconstructionofsyntheticbiochemicalcircuitsisanessentialstepfordevelopingquantitativeunderstanding
of information processing in natural organisms. Here, we report construction and analysis of an in vitro circuit with
positive autoregulation that consists of just four synthetic DNA strands and three enzymes, bacteriophage T7 RNA
polymerase, Escherichia coliribonuclease (RNase) H,andRNaseR.ThemodularityoftheDNAswitch templateallowed
a rational design of a synthetic DNA switch regulated by its RNA output acting as a transcription activator. We verified
that the thermodynamic and kinetic constraints dictated by the sequence design criteria were enough to experimentally
achieve the intended dynamics: a transcription activator configured to regulate its own production. Although only
RNaseHisnecessarytoachievebistabilityofswitchstates,RNaseRisnecessarytomaintainstableRNAsignallevelsand
to control incomplete degradation products. A simple mathematical model was used to fit ensemble parameters for the
trainingsetofexperimentalresultsandwasthendirectlyappliedtopredicttime-coursesofswitchdynamicsandsensitivity
toparametervariations with reasonable agreement. The positive autoregulation switches can beused to provide constant
input signals and store outputs of biochemical networks and are potentially useful for chemical control applications.
Introduction
independent design of an RNA product and an RNA
regulator within a switch. Hence, one can “wire” sev-
Within a living cell lies an information processing eralswitchestogethertocomposeacomplexregulatory
system: the genetic circuits, the community of genes network, in principle, by simply designing the RNA
that regulate one another, and thus allow the cell to output of one switch to be the RNA regulator of the
express the right genes at the right times. Synthetic other switch. Moreover, individual switch characteris-
biology provides a new approach to understand design tics suchasswitching thresholdsandmaximum output
principles underlying intricate and dynamic behaviors levels are set by the concentrations of switch compo-
of natural genetic circuits, by building and analyzing nents rather than by molecular characteristics of bind-
synthetic circuits which exhibit analogous behaviors; ing domains. The state of each switch (transcription
this also lays the foundation for future engineering of rate)andthelevelsofsignals(RNAconcentrations)re-
complex chemical and biological systems. With such layedamongswitchesdefine the behaviorofthe overall
circuits, it is possible to test hypotheses by construc- circuit. As the circuit dynamics relies only on RNA
tion, and often synthetic simplicity facilitates quanti- transcription and degradation, our in vitro circuit op-
tative analysis as well as systematic engineering de- eratesinarelativelysimpleenvironmentwithNTPfuel
sign [8, 1, 5, 12]. andonlyafewenzymes,RNApolymeraseandRNases.
For designing and constructing synthetic biochem- Here, we expand the repertoire of circuit motifs for
ical networks, several decision steps are necessary to transcriptional circuits by implementing a repeater. A
choosetheregulatorymoleculesandthebiochemicalin- repeateris a transcriptionalswitch whose RNA output
frastructurethat supports networkoperation. Protein- level is a sigmoidal activation function of its RNA reg-
basedsynthetic circuitscantakeadvantageofthe huge ulator,thusprovidingaconcisemechanismforrelaying
diversity of protein structures and functions that al- activation signal. An activator offers greater flexibil-
lows a wide range of possible regulatory features [5, ity and simplicity for a synthetic circuit design and al-
1, 7, 2, 32]. Still, from an engineering perspective, it lows for faster timing. Although, computationally, two
remains a challenge to rationally design a new regula- inverters connected in a series can substitute for a re-
tory protein with desirable function. RNA-based reg- peater, such design can lead to delay and unintended
ulation is an alternative approach for controlling gene amplificationofnoise[13]. Inaddition,arepeaterwired
expressions [15, 3, 14, 34]. RNA structures and inter- toitselfcanimplementapositiveautoregulatoryswitch
actions with other nucleic acid species can be reliably that simplifies our previous bistable circuit design [20]
predicted based on Watson–Crick base-pairing, much as demonstrated in synthetic in vivo circuits [4, 16]
more so than typical protein-protein or protein-DNA (Figure 1A, bottom). In this report, we describe the
interactions of protein regulators. As for the choice of design for a repeater switch and characterize each ele-
biochemicalinfrastructure,the unintendedinteractions mentaryreactionrequiredforafunctionalrepeater. We
between the circuit and its environmentcan be greatly then construct and analyze a self-activating switch, a
reduced by reconstructing the circuit in vitro. In vitro single repeater wired to itself, that can be tuned to ex-
implementation of efficient transcription and transla- hibit bistability. Furthermore, we characterize its sen-
tionmachinery[30,17]forsyntheticnetworkshavebeen sitivity to parameters such as DNA and enzyme con-
successfully implemented [26]. Yet, a supporting envi- centrations; we show that the experimental results are
ronment for an in vitro RNA-based regulatory circuit consistent with a simple mathematical model, whose
can be even simpler as there is no need for translation, parametersareset by Bayesianinference froma subset
protein maturation, and protein-DNA interactions. of experimental data.
Previouswork[19,20]introducedin vitrotranscrip-
Inverter versus Repeater
tionalcircuitsassimplifiedsyntheticgeneticregulatory
circuits. Individual switches functioning as inverters Therepeaterthatweimplementinthispapershares
and a bistable feedback circuit composed of two in- several components and functional mechanisms with
verters have been demonstrated (Figure 1A, top). Our the previously implemented inverter. Therefore, we
“DNAswitch”,asimplifiedgene,hasapromoterforT7 first describe the components and functional mecha-
RNA polymerase (RNAP) flanked by two separate do- nisms of a transcriptional inverter. An inverter con-
mains,aninputdomainandanoutputdomain. Down- sists of two components, a DNA template (“T”) and
stream of a promoter lies an output domain that en- a DNA activator (“A”). The DNA template T consists
codes “an RNA product”; on the opposite side of the of single-stranded regulatory domain, partially single-
promoter,aninput domainregulatedby “anRNA reg- stranded T7 RNAP promoter, and a double-stranded
ulator”viasimpleWatson-Crickbase-pairingruleislo- regionencoding an RNA output (“rO”).This partially
cated. The modularity of a DNA switch allows for an single-stranded promoter is transcribed poorly by T7
RNA polymerase [23, 20], and thus, is designated as tary to A. Because A·rI complex is thermodynamically
an OFF state. The single-stranded DNA activator A more stable than T·A complex and the single-stranded
is complementary to the missing promoter regionof T. domainofAbeyondthehelicaldomainofT·Acomplex
UponhybridizationofTandA,theresultingT·Acom- isavailableforinitiatinghybridizationreactionwithrI,
plexhasacompletepromoterexceptforanickandwas rIcanstripoffAfromT·Acomplexthroughatoehold-
foundtobetranscribedwell,approximatelyhalfaseffi- mediatedbranchmigrationreaction[25,28]. Typically,
cientlyasafully double-strandedpromoter. Therefore, A is in excess of T such that the input rI will first re-
T·A is designated as an ON state. The inverter is reg- act with free A, then strip off A from ON-state switch,
ulated by an RNA inhibitor (“rI”) that is complemen- and the remaining rI will be free-floating in solution.
Figure 1: Transcriptional switches and circuits. (A) Schematic diagrams of an inverter, a repeater, and circuits.
Blunt ends indicate inhibition, while arrowheads indicate signal production or activation. (B) An inverter switch. T
is the DNA template with an incomplete promoter region, A is the DNA activator, rI is the RNA inhibitor, and rO
is the RNA output. Sequence domains are color-coded such that the same colors represent either complementary or
identical sequences. Hybridization reactions are marked by black arrows. Transcription by RNAP and degradation by
RNase H and RNase R are marked by black dashed arrows and dotted arrows, respectively. The production curve of
rO as a function of rI,the degradationcurve of rO as a function ofrO, and the steady-statecurve ofrO as a function
of rI constructed from the compositionofthe productionand degradationcurves are shown. Green dashed lines mark
[rItot] = [Atot] - [Ttot], where all free A species are consumed by rI, yet the switch is still fully ON; orange dashed
linesmark [rItot] =[Atot], whereall A speciesare consumedsuch that theswitch is fullyOFF. Thepurple dashed line
marks [rOtot] = [dXtot] where dX is the regulatory target of rO: below this level rO is mostly bound to dX such that
degradation curve is dominated by RNase H, while above this level RNase R degrades free rO. A dashed red line in
degradationplotillustrates the case whenonlyRNaseH is presentin the reaction mixture. Note that the annihilation
reaction between A and rI is not shown(see Figure 3). Also, dX strand or RNase reactions on rO are not shown. (C)
A repeater switch. T and A are the same as described for an inverter switch, however, a repeater switch also uses a
DNA inhibitor dI to set the switching threshold. Green dashed lines mark [rAtot] = [dItot] - [Atot], where all free dI
species are consumed by rA, yet the switch is fully OFF; orange dashed lines mark [rAtot] = [dItot] - [Atot] + [Ttot],
where enough A species are freed from dI and available to hybridize with T, such that the switch is fully ON. The
purple dashed line marks [rOtot] = [dXtot], where dX is the regulatory target of rO as above. Note that annihilation,
interfering, recovering, recapturing reactions, dX strand, and RNase reactions on rO are not shown (see Figure 3).
Overall, the production rate, as well as the fraction of ure1B,middle). Whenthemaximumratesandswitch-
ON-state switch, is a sigmoidal inhibitory function of ing thresholds for production and degradation curves
rI (Figure 1B, left). are approximately matched, the resulting steady-state
The degradationspeedofRNAsignalsplaysanim- RNAoutputlevelshowsasigmoidalinhibitoryresponse
portant role in circuit dynamics by setting the time- withrespecttoRNAinputs,althoughthetransitionre-
constants of signalrelays. At the same time, the shape gion contains a kink (Figure 1B, right).
of the degradation curve in combination with the pro- Arepeaterutilizessomeofthesamemodulardesign
duction curve would determine the steady-state RNA motifs as an inverter. Because RNA polymerase tran-
levels. The degradation function is determined by the scribespoorlyfromaDNA/RNAhybridpromoter[24],
concentrations of substrates and the enzyme constants we chose to implement a repeater through an indirect
of RNases, Escherichia coli ribonuclease H (RNase H) activation by an RNA activator. The transcriptional
andRNaseR.RNaseHdegradesRNAthatishybridized repeater also contains a DNA template T and a DNA
toDNA: rIinA·rIcomplexandrOthatis boundtoits activator A. However, the repeater has an extra com-
downstream regulatory target, “dX”, to form a dX·rO ponent, a DNA inhibitor (“dI”). Much like the RNA
complex. At low rO concentrations,mostof rO species inhibitor rI of an inverter, the DNA inhibitor dI can
exist within dX·rO complex such that the degradation bind to and removeA from the ON state T·A complex
rateislargelydictatedbyRNaseH.Ontheotherhand, and form a A·dI complex. The input of the repeater,
RNase R degrades single-stranded RNA, both free rI anRNAactivator,“rA”,isasingle-strandedRNAthat
and free rO, such that the degradation rate of free candisplace dI within the inhibiting complex A·dI and
rO — the amount of rO in excess of total dX con- release A through a toehold-mediated branch migra-
centrations — will be largely determined by RNase R. tion. Then,thereleasedAcanbindbacktoTandturn
Because RNase H has a low Michaelis constant, the the switch on. Unlike the inverter, the concentrations
degradationrateofrObyRNaseHquicklysaturatesas of T and A are about the same and the concentration
the concentration of dX·rO increases. Also, the degra- of dI is in excess of A to provide activation thresh-
dation rate of rO by RNase R saturates as free rO old for rA. (The DNA activator strand concentration
concentration increases. Each degradation curve by should be roughly comparable with the template con-
RNaseH andRNase Rconstitutes atypicalMichaelis– centration;it should be at least as high, so that all the
Menten saturation curve with different origins: [rOtot] template can be turned ON, but it needn’t be higher,
= 0 for RNase H and [rOtot] = [dXtot] for RNase R. since excess activator merely disables a stoichiometric
Thus, the composition of degradation curves by these amountofinhibitor.) TheinputrAwillfirstreactwith
two enzymes results in the degradation function with freedI,thenstripoffdIfromtheA·dIcomplex,andthe
a kink located at the total concentration of dX (Fig- remaining rA will be free-floating in solution. Overall,
the productionrate,aswellasthe fractionofON-state tion reactions for a repeater as discussed below.
switch, is a sigmoidal activation function of rA (Fig- There are four types of simple hybridization reac-
ure 1C, left). The degradation function of a repeater tions which we call activation, annihilation, subduing,
is identical to that of an inverter (Figure 1C, middle). and interfering (Figure 3A, red boxes): A binds to T,
Therefore,the resultingsteady-state RNA output level forming T·A (activation); dI binds to A, forming A·dI
shows a sigmoidal activation response with respect to (annihilation); rAbinds to dI,formingrA·dI (annihila-
RNA input with a kink within the transition region tion);rAbindstoT,formingT·rA(interfering). Simple
(Figure 1C, right). hybridization reactions are thermodynamically favor-
able because the resulting complex gains several base
pairs, and hence the reactions proceed in a unidirec-
tional way. As mentioned above, ‘interfering’ reaction
System Design and Mechanisms is not desirable and we provide kinetic pathways (re-
covering and recapturing) to quickly resolve the inter-
Thechallengeofdesigningsequencesforafunctional feringcomplexasshownbelow. Therearefourtypesof
repeater lies in accommodating desirable hybridization stranddisplacementreactions,whichwecallinhibition,
reactionsoutlinedaboveandsuppressingsidereactions release,recovering,andrecapturing(Figure3A,orange
and crosstalks. Here, we present the sequence design boxes): dI strips off A from T·A complex to form A·dI
for a repeaterandprovideevidence forits properfunc- (inhibition); rAdisplacesAfromA·dI complextoform
tionality. rA·dI (release); A displaces rA from T·rA complex to
Sequencesoftherepeatercomponentsarechosento formT·A (recovering);dI strips off rA fromT·rA com-
minimize alternative folding [9] and spurious interac- plex to form rA·dI (recapturing). All displacement re-
tions [29]. Utilizing the modularity of synthetic switch actions are designed to be initiated at the ‘toehold,’ a
designs,severaldomainlengthshavebeenadaptedfrom single-strandedoverhangthat extends beyondthe heli-
previous work [20]; for example, the binding domains caldomainoftheinitialcomplex. Theincomingstrand
of an OFF switch template to an activator (27 bases) can bind to this toehold, providing a fast kinetic path-
and the toehold of an activator (9 bases). The 3’ end way through a toehold-mediated strand displacement
hairpin structure (16 bases) of RNA output increases reaction [25, 28]. The predicted thermodynamic ener-
copynumber andalsodecreasesself-codedextensionof giesofstartingcomplexandresultingcomplexindicate
RNAtranscriptsbyRNAP[33]. ThesequencesofT,A, that all displacement reactions are thermodynamically
dI,rA,andtheircomplexesareshown(Figure2). Note favorable and hence approximately unidirectional.
that, in this design, the sequence of RNA output, rO, Thehybridizationreactionsandstranddisplacement
is identical to RNA input, rA, because we constructed reactions for switch components are characterized by
and characterized a self-activating switch. Because we running different combinations of T, A, dI, and rA
implementedanindirectactivationbyRNAinputs,the in a non-denaturing gel (Figure 3A). The two single-
RNAactivatorrAandDNAactivatorAsharescommon stranded species comprising T was annealed prior to
sequence domains. Thus, a T·rA complex is expected mixing with other single-stranded species. The indi-
to form when both T and rA are available. However, cated components were simultaneously mixed in a test
it is not desirable if an excess of rA interferes with the tube at room temperature and were allowed to sit for
hybridization reaction between T and A. Thus, we im- fiveminutesbeforebeingsubjectedtoanon-denaturing
plemented a staggereddesign, where the A·dI complex gelrunat4 C. When T and Awere mixed together,A
leaves5basesofAassingle-stranded(coloredlightblue couldbindtoT,resultinginawell-definedbandofT·A
in Figure 2) and the rA·dI complex leaves 4 bases of complex (lanes 1 vs. 2: activation). When T, A, and
dI as single-stranded (colored dark blue in Figure 2), an excess of dI were mixed together, only T and A·dI
resulting in a total of 9 base-pair differences between complexwereobserved,implyingthatdIcanbindtoA
theproperONstate,T·A,andtheinterferingcomplex, and also strip off A from T·A (lanes 2 vs. 3: annihila-
T·rA. We chose the sequences and lengths of the bind- tionandinhibition). Ofnote,thesingle-strandedAand
ing domains for T, A, dI, and rA such that the pre- dI migratedfaster thanthe 30-bpmarkerandwerenot
dicted ∆G◦ of complexes are in the following order: visualizedinthegel. Also,whenrAandTaremixedto-
rA·dI<A·dI<T·A<T·rA.Intermsofthenumberof gether,rAcanbindtoTandformainterferingcomplex
base pairs, there are 18, 27, 31, and 34 complementary T·rA, which migrated slower than T·A complex (lane
base-pairs for T·rA, T·A, A·dI, and rA·dI complexes, 4: interfering). However, when all four components
respectively. Therefore, the RNA activator rA has the weremixedtogetherwiththe sumofAandrAconcen-
strongestinfluence onthestateofarepeaterbydesign. trations in excess of dI, T·rA complex was no longer
Thisdesignmeets therequirementofproperhybridiza- visible, while T·A and rA·dI complexes were observed,
Figure 2: Sequences of DNA and RNA species of a self-activating switch. The sequence domains are color-coded to
indicate identical or complementary sequences. Although we simply colored the output domain of switch coding for
regulatory output (’rO’ in Figure 1) red, this sequence is identical to the RNA input ’rA’ because we constructed a
self-activating switch.
implying that A and dI canstrip off rA from T·rA and acterizedasfollows(Figure3B).RNAPcouldefficiently
dI can bind to rA (lanes 4 vs. 5: recovering, recaptur- transcribe rA from an ON-state template, T·A. How-
ing,andannihilation). Moreover,itisalsoimpliedthat ever, the transcription was much slower from an OFF-
rAcanbindtodIandstripoffdIfromtheA·dIcomplex statetemplate,T(Figure3B,top). Thus,transcription
and release A, which in turn binds to T, resulting in a reactionismuchmoreefficientfromanON-stateswitch
T·A complex (lanes 3 vs. 5: annihilation, release, and thanfromanOFF-stateswitchasdesired. Inthiscase,
activation). WedidnotobserveanoticeableA·dI band sincedI wasnotprovidedinthe transcriptionreaction,
in lane 5, indicating that the concentration of rA may we do not expect to observe auto-regulation. RNase H
have been underestimated for lane 5. Recent reported could degrade rA when both rA and dI were present,
measurementsofDNA hybridizationratesrangedfrom butnodegradationofrAwasobservedwithoutdI(Fig-
105 to106/M/s[10]. Thus,startingfromequalconcen- ure 3B, middle). Thus, RNase H degrades RNA that
trations of switch components at hundreds of nM, the are hybridized with DNA, but not free-floating RNA.
hybridization reactions would be completed with half- RNaseRcoulddegradeabout4µMrAwithin210min-
lives on the order of 10 to 100 seconds. No smearing utes. On the other hand, when 4 µM of rA was mixed
orreactionintermediatesweredetectedbetweenthegel with 1 µM of dI, about 1 µM of rA was left over af-
bands when several switch components were mixed to- ter 210 minutes (figure 3B, bottom). Thus, RNase R
gether, indicating that the hybridization reactions and degrades single-stranded RNA, but not RNA within
strand displacement reactions were mostly completed RNA-DNA hybrid complexes.
within a few minutes. Taken together, our sequence design led to proper
Threetypesofenzymereactionsareseparatelychar- hybridizationandstranddisplacementreactionsamong
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011
rA 4 µM +dI 1 µM
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011
Predicted Free Energy (kcal/mol)
T•rA > T•A > A•dI > rA•dI
-21.5 -35.1 -40.8 -45.4
18 bps 27 bps 31 bps 34 bps
“Activation” T
A T(OFF) rA•dI
“Annihilation” “Inhibition”
toehold of A
“Annihilation” “Release”
toehold of dI
“Interfering” “Recovering” “Recapturing”
toehold of T toehold of rA
“Transcription” Tim e T 60 nM T•A 60 nM
rA 4 µM +dI 1 µM
“Degradation by RNase H”
rA rA•dI dI
“Degradation by RNase R”
control, rA
control, rA
G° = -35.1 kcal/mol 100 bp
G° = -40.8 kcal/mol G° = -5.7 kcal/mol
A dI T•A(ON)
A•dI T(OFF)
G° = -45.4 kcal/mol G° = -4.6 kcal/mol
rA•dI rA•dI A
G° = -21.5 kcal/mol G° = -13.6 kcal/mol G° = -23.9 kcal/mol
T(OFF) rA A T•rA(OFF) dI
T•A(ON) rA T(OFF) rA•dI
Time (min)
(0-210 min)
control, rA Time (min)
(0-210 min)
70 nt rA+dI
Time (min)
switch components with fast kinetics. The enzyme re- bridizationkineticswouldbeapproximatelyvalid,even
actions could provide production and degradation of in the presence of constant enzyme-mediated produc-
RNAregulatorysignalswithspecificrecognitionofsub- tion and degradationof signals.
strates. Also, note that the time-scales of enzyme re-
Self-activating switch
actions are much slower than typical hybridization or
stranddisplacementreactions. Therefore,thepresumed To demonstrate the functionality of the repeater
sharp thresholds achieved by fast and irreversible hy- mechanism, we chose to implement — with a single
Figure3: Schematicrepresentationofreactionsforarepeaterswitch. (A)DNAandRNAhybridizationreactions. The
red and orange boxed reactions show simple hybridization reactions and strand displacement reactions, respectively.
Note that, all reactions are thermodynamically driven and that toehold-mediated branch migrations provide fast
kinetic pathways for the strand displacement reactions. A non-denaturing gel was used to analyze the results of such
hybridization and strand displacement reactions in the absence of enzymes (top right). The DNA and RNA species
weremixedand incubatedfor5minatroomtemperature priortoloadingontothe non-denaturinggel. Foreachlane,
the red label indicates the constituents loaded in that lane: T is 50 nM of [Ttot]; A is 500 nM of [Atot]; dI is 700
nM of [dItot]; and rA is 500 nM of [rAtot]. The leftmost lane contains a 10 base-pair ladder. The blue labels on the
right sideofgelindicatecorrespondingsingle-strandedspeciesand complexes. Single-strandedAand dIbandsdo not
appear because they have been run off of the gel. (B) Enzyme reactions. The reaction diagrams are shown in blue
boxes with the corresponding denaturing gel analysis of experimental results on their right sides. For the denaturing
gels,theleftmostlanescontain10baseladdersandthetemplatesorsubstratesforenzymesareindicatedbyredlabels
on top ofgels. Samples in lanes 1 through 4 (and also forlanes 5 through 8)were taken from the same reaction tube
at different time points (0, 10, 40, and 210 min). Sample in lane 9 of the gel analyzing RNAP reaction contained a
half volume of that loaded in lane 8 to avoid SYBR gold signal saturation. Control lanes (lanes 10 and 11 for the gel
analyzing RNAP reaction and lanes 9 through 11 for gels analyzing RNase H and RNase R reactions) have purified
rA at the indicated concentrations. Enzyme concentrations used are as follows: [RNAP] = 33.4 nM, [RNaseH] =
0.168 nM, and [RNaseR] = 0.336 nM.
self-regulatingrepeaterswitch—abistablelatchwhose fore, the production and degradation curves shown in
function is similar to that of the two-node network de- Figure1Ccannowbeinterpretedastheproductionand
veloped in [20]. The construction of a self-activating degradationcurvesofRNAactivatorrAasfunctionsof
switch is straightforward as it only requires the RNA its own concentrations. Thus, given the same switch
output rO to be identical to the RNA input rA, as template and DNA activator concentrations ([Ttot] =
shown in Figure 2. Although we have shown that the [Atot]), the concentration of rA that consumes all dI
elementary reaction steps are plausible, the repeater and turn the switch ON in the production curve coin-
functionembeddedinatranscriptionalcircuitmayshow cideswiththethresholdinthedegradationcurvebelow
dynamic features deviating from our expectation. For whichdegradationbyRNaseHisdominant(i.e.[rAtot]
instance, previous works demonstrated that the switch = [dItot]). The intersections of production and degra-
behavior was measurably different when driven by an dation curves thus indicate the steady-states where to-
RNAspeciessubjecttoconstantproductionanddegra- tal rA concentrations remain constant, and where and
dationascomparedtobeingdrivenbyaDNAspecies[20].how they cross will dictate whether the self-activating
Therefore,the motivationistoassesshowwellthe self- switchshow monostableorbistable behavior. Ifanun-
activating switch behaves with respect to its expected stable fixed point exists where a slight increase in rA
behavior and to gainquantitative understanding of ac- drives further rA production and a slight decrease in
tivation switch motif within a system. Further, this rA drives further rA reduction (Figure 4A, right), the
simple circuit highlights the simplicity providedby the system will show bistable behavior with the threshold
activationswitchmotifvis-a-viscreatingthesamefunc- setatthisunstablefixedpoint. Inthatcase,theswitch
tionality from a larger network of inhibitory switches. states approach either of the two stable steady-states,
In the following sections, we first ‘qualitatively’ ex- completely ON or OFF, depending on the initial con-
plain the dynamics of self-activating switch based on centrationof rA. On the other hand, a monostable ON
the production and degradation functions of RNA sig- state will be achieved irrespective of initial RNA acti-
nals. Then, we assess how well the kinetic model using vator concentration if the production rate exceeds the
ensemble parameters matches the experimental results degradationrateattheswitchingthreshold(Figure4A,
quantitatively. left);amonostableOFFstatewillbeachievedirrespec-
tiveofinitialRNAactivatorconcentrationifthedegra-
Self-activating switch: qualitative and quantita-
dationrateexceedstheproductionrateoftheRNAac-
tive prediction of bistability
tivatorwhentheswitchisfullyON(Figure4A,center).
For a self-activating switch, the RNA input rA and The bistable and monostable switch behaviors depend
RNA output rO are identical, and therefore, we call not so much on the physical nature of molecular com-
RNAoutputas‘rA’henceforth. ThetargetDNAofthe ponentsbutonthefeaturessetbycontinuouslytunable
RNAoutput,dX,isnowtheDNAinhibitor,dI.There- concentrations—suchastheoutputamplitudeandthe
activation threshold.
degradation of rA
production of rA
stable fixed point
unstable fixed point
initial [rA] 0 - 1 PM rA
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910111213
monostable bistable
rates rates rates
[rA t o t ] [rA t o t ] [rA t o t ]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0... 3.0
initial [rA ] (PM)
Figure 4: Bistability of a self-activating switch. (A) Production and degradation functions, and dynamics of a self-
activating switch. Three plots illustrate possible configurations of production and degradation functions of rA as a
function of rA. Depending on the locations and stabilities of fixed points, two types of monostable behaviors or a
bistable switch behavior are expected. (B) A denaturing gel analysis to test bistability of a self-activating switch.
Lanes 1 through 12 show the results from 12 separate reactions. The reaction conditions are as follows: [Ttot] = 50
nM, [Atot] = 90 nM, [dItot] = 1000 nM, [RNAP] = 66 nM, [RNaseH] = 0.7 nM, and [RNaseR] = 0.23 nM, with
variableinitialrAconcentrations([rAtot]=0,0.1,0.2,...,1,and3µM).After120min,allreactionswerestoppedand
subject to denaturing gel analysis. Control lanes, lanes 13 and 14, have purified rA at the indicated concentrations.
Brackets marked ‘w’ indicate incomplete transcription products and degradation products. (C) The measured final
concentrations of rA from the denaturing gel in (B). Note that the apparent threshold of switching between the low
and high steady-states is between 0.6 and 0.7 µM of initial rA concentrations. Black dashed line marks the points
where the initial and final rA concentrations coincide.
Wethenexperimentallytestedwhethertheself-acti- could add a few copy-numbers of RNA transcripts rA
vating switch canshow bistable output responses (Fig- and effectively lowered the apparent switching thresh-
ure 4B). When the self-activating switch was subject old for initial rA concentrations. Second, the ON state
to transcriptionand degradationreactions with a wide output levels were not constant in contrast to almost
range of initial RNA activator concentrations, the fi- identical OFF state output levels. High final RNA
nal RNA activator concentrations reached two distinct outputs were measured for high initial RNA concen-
states after two hours: almost 0 nM or higher than trations, which could be explained by a slow degrada-
600 nM. The self-activating switch showedbistable be- tionkinetics nearthe steady-state. Onthe other hand,
havior as expected. However, the experimental results the measured RNA output levels were as low as 600
deviatedfromanidealizedcircuitbehaviorintwoways: nM when more than 960 nM of rA would be required
a low switching threshold and non-constant ON state to maintain a fully ON state in the idealized model.
outputs. First,theswitchingthresholdliedbetween600 We used RNase R to clean up the incomplete single-
and700nMofrAintheexperimentwhiletheexpected stranded degradationproducts by RNase H. Neverthe-
threshold from idealized production and degradation less,incompletedegradationproductsaccumulatedover
curves lied between 910 and 960 nM of rA for the case time (Figure 4B,bracketsmarked‘w’). Thus,it is pos-
showninFigure4B.Thisdiscrepancymaybeexplained sible that some portions of these incomplete degrada-
by the “burst phase” in enzyme kinetics [18], which tionproductsstillfunctionmuchlikeafull-lengthRNA
activator — e.g. rA without the hairpin region at the have to be to achieve bistability? Third, are the esti-
3’ end. mates and bounds for rates obtained from the char-
Due to experimental difficulties including RNase R acterization of elementary reactions compatible with
not being commercially available at the time of experi- the system behavior? To address these questions, we
mentandhavingapparentlyshortlife-time, wefocused constructed a simple mathematical model for the self-
our study on a simpler system without RNase R. Fur- activating switch that uses four ordinary differential
ther, excluding RNase R eliminates the kink within equations. ThedynamicsofeachDNAandRNAspecies
degradation function and possibly allow for a simpler were derived from the hybridization and strand dis-
quantitative interpretation. However, since the degra- placement reactions described in Figure 3, assuming
dation curve by RNase H is insensitive to the change Michaelis–Mentenenzymekinetics(seeAppendix). Note
of rA concentrations when the concentration of rA is thattheconcentrationof‘interferingcomplex’T·rAwas
abovethetotalconcentrationofdI,theproductionand assumedtobenegligibleinthesimplemodel,andthus,
degradation curves may not cross at the high steady- ‘interfering’, ‘recovering’, and ‘recapturing’ reactions
state. In that scenario, the high state of rA concen- were not included. Initial simulation results showed
tration can grow without bound — which make the that a bistable switch response can be achieved with
systembehaviormorelatch-like. Evenso,the behavior plausiblerateparameterssimilartoapreviouswork[20]
of switch state is bistable. (data not shown).
Totestbistability ofswitchresponseinthe absence Totestwhetherourmathematicalmodelcanbeeas-
of RNase R, we monitored the kinetics of switch re- ilygeneralizedusingarelativelysmallnumberofexper-
sponsethroughreal-timefluorescencemeasurement. The iments to determine system behavior for a wider range
3’ end of A is labeled with a Cy5 dye and the 5’ end of parameter choices, we need a separate training and
of dI is labeled with an IowaBlack-RQ quencher such test data sets. Yet, a rich enough training data set
that the fluorescence is low when the A·dI complex is would be required to constrain parameters effectively.
formedduetofluorescencequenching[22]whiletheflu- Thus, the training data set was obtained by measur-
orescenceishighwhenAisfreeorwithintheT·Acom- ing final rA concentrations for self-activating switches
plex (Figure 5A). Of note, fluorophore-quencher inter- initialized with a wide range of rA concentrations and
action can stabilize the resulting complex, A·dI [22]. threedifferentdIconcentrationsasswitchingthresholds
(In preliminary work, we observed mild to severe dif- (Figure6A,red,blue,andgreen). Forthisdataset,flu-
ferences between fluorophore-labeled strands and their orescence data for available A concentrations were not
unlabeled twins, depending on the fluorophore used.) measured. Belowtheapparentswitchingthreshold,the
We initiated the reaction with four different rA con- finalconcentrationsofrAapproached∼0.5µMregard-
centrations and measured how the system approached less of the initial rA concentrations. On other other
different steady-states (Figure 5B). The fluorescence hand, for initial rA concentrations higher than the ap-
traceseither reacheda maximumsignal,whichimplied parentswitchingthresholds,thefinalrAconcentrations
acompletelyONstate,oraminimumsignal,whichim- weredistinctivelyhigher. Asexpectedfromtheanalysis
plied a completely OFF state. The fluorescence moni- of idealized production and degradation curves shown
toring indicated that the self-activating switch quickly in Figure 5A, adjusting dI concentrations shifted the
approached steady-states and that both fully ON and threshold of switching accordingly.
OFFcaseswerestablesteady-states. Atthesametime, To find suitable values for the set of 11 parameters
the dynamics of RNA signal was determined by taking inourmodel,weusedaMonteCarloBayesianinference
samples at different time points and measuring the to- approachthat results in an ensemble of parameter sets
tal rA concentrations in gel (Figure 5CD). The high that are compatible with the given data within noise
fluorescence traces (magenta and blue) corresponded bounds [6]. (See Appendix for details.) After fitting
to more than 2 µM final RNA levels, but the low fluo- tothe experimentalresultsshowninFigure6A,the re-
rescence traces (green and red) corresponded to about sultingensembleofparametersetscanbeusedtomake
0.5 µM final RNA levels. Thus, we achieved bistable ensemblepredictionsfornovelexperimentalconditions;
behavior in both switch and RNA signals, albeit the forexample,wecanestimatethe possiblerangeofcon-
fact that the high RNA output level is not bounded. centrations of any chemical species at any time point
Whilethebistablesystembehaviorwasdemonstrated given initial conditions.
experimentally, a mathematical framework for the in Using the ensemble parameters fitted to the train-
vitro self-activation system would be required to inves- ing set (Figure 6A), the simulation results for Figure 5
tigate several further questions. First, do the elemen- were generated and compared with the experimental
taryreactionsprescribedinFigure3explainthesystem results (Figure 6B). The kinetic model predicted that
behavior? Second, how fine-tuned the rate constants the switch would either approach the low steady-state
initial rA 550 nM Control
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 111213
initial rA 1750 nM
Production
Degradation
completely partially completely
B C D OFF switch ON switch ON switch
time (min)
time (min)
ecnecseroulf
dezilamron
Figure 5: Time courses of a self-activating switch. (A) The schematic reaction diagram of a self-activating switch
(cf. Figure 1C). The activator A is labeled with Cy5 fluorophore (red circle) and the inhibitor dI is labeled with
IowaBlack-RQquencher(blackcircle)forreal-timemonitoringofswitchstatesbyfluorescence. Apossiblearrangement
ofproductionanddegradationcurvesforself-activatingswitchwithoutRNaseRinthereactionmixtureisshownasan
inset (cf. Figure 4A). (B) For fluorescence measurements, all the switch components, DNA template T, fluorophore-
labeled A, and quencher-labeled dI, were added to each cuvette. Then, purified rA was added prior to enzyme
additions such that the initial conditions are different for each cuvette. Finally, the enzymes were added at time
0 and thoroughly mixed (black dashed line). Normalized fluorescence signal measures the fraction of A that is not
bound to dI, i.e. ([A]+[T·A])/[Atot], because the fluorescence from A is quenched when A is in a A·dI complex. All
four cuvettes contained 48 nM of [Ttot], 145 nM of [Atot], 1500 nM of [dItot], 16.7 nM of [RNAP], and 1.68 nM of
[RNaseH] with the initial rA concentrations at 0, 550, 1350, and 1750 nM (colored red, green, blue, and magenta,
respectively). (C) Time courses of [rAtot] with samples taken from four different cuvettes. The colors correspond to
thoseoffluorescencetracesin(B).(D)Oneofthedenaturinggelsfor[rAtot]measurementsasshownin(C).Samples
in lanes 1 through 5 (as well as lanes 6 through 10) were taken from the same cuvette at different time points. The
final rA concentrations were measured with respect to the known concentrations of purified rA in the control lanes,
lanes 11 through 13.
in which all A were bound to dI and the rA concen- Tofurthertestthe sensitivityofsystembehaviorto
trations converged to 0.5 µM or the high steady-state parameter variation, we systematically varied the tem-
in which all A were free from dI and the rA concen- plate ([Ttot]), activator ([Atot]), inhibitor ([dItot]), and
trations kept increasing. The experimentally measured enzyme concentrations ([RNAP] and [RNaseH]) (Fig-
fluorescence signal from A and sampled rA concentra- ure 6C). For each parameter choices, we initiated the
tions were close to the prediction (Figure 6B), despite transcription and degradation reaction with either a
the fact that the training data set contained informa- low amount of rA (0 nM) or a high amount of rA
tion on rA concentrations at a single time point only. (730 nM). If the final difference of RNA activators is
However, in the experiment, the rA concentrations for greater than the initial difference of 730 nM, it would
the ON state did not increaseindefinitely as the model imply that these two initial conditions lead to differ-
predicted,butseemedtoreachahighsteady-state. We ent switch states. However, since the switch states
shall address this discrepancy between the model and were not monitored by fluorescence, these results were
experiment later. not a direct readout of bistable switch response. On
2.5 (cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:89) 3
0 0.5 1 1.5 0 100 0 100 200
initial [rA ] (µM)
0 200 400 1000 2000 10 15 20 25 0 5
ecnecseroulf
dezilamron
time (min) time (min)
Figure 6: Quantitative measurements and model prediction ofthe self-activatingswitch dynamics. The circles within
each figure and the lines with darker colors in (B, left) are from experimental measurements. Lines with lighter
shades are generated from 95% confidence interval of model parameters fitted to the experimental results shown in
(A). Experimental results in (B) and (C) are used as test cases of model prediction. (A) The training data set used
for parameter fitting. The circles are gel measurements of final [rAtot] at 210 min. All reactions contained 48 nM
of [Ttot], 145 nM of [Atot], 16.7 nM of [RNAP], and 1.68 nM of [RNaseH]. The concentration of dI was varied as
follows: [dItot] = 1.13µM (red), 1.45µM (blue), or1.87µM (green). Note that the thresholds ofswitchingbetween
low and high states were apparently shifted as the total concentration of dI was increased. (B) Experimental and
predictedtime courses ofswitchstates (monitoredas fluorescencechanges)and rA concentrations. Theexperimental
data is identical to Figure 5. The experimental conditions were similar to those colored blue in (A): only dI was
50 nM higher for (B). (C) Experimental and predicted parameter dependence of self-activation switch behavior. The
default set of experimental conditions were identical to those colored red in (A): [Ttot] = 48 nM, [Atot] = 145 nM,
[dItot] = 1.13 µM, [RNAP] = 16.7 nM, and [RNaseH] = 1.68 nM (marked as black dashed lines in each subplot).
For each experimental measurement, one parameter was varied at a time and the final concentration of rA after 210
min was recorded with initial rA concentration of 0 nM (red) or 730 nM (blue), respectively.
the other hand, if both initial conditions lead to low rameterrangeasbistable,ifthefinalswitchstateswere
steady-states, the switch could be in the monostable different for the 95% of ensemble parameter values.
regime, but it also could be in a bistable regime that From the simulation results, the self-activating switch
requires higher initial rA inputs to reach high steady- reached the OFF state under conditions with low T,
state. Yetanotherpossibilityiswhenbothinitialcondi- low A, low RNAP, high dI, or high RNase H, irrespec-
tionsleadtohighsteady-statessuchthatthedifferences tiveofinitialconditions. Conversely,theself-activating
of final rA concentrations would be close to 730 nM. switchreachedtheONstateunderconditionswithhigh
Thus, for experimental results, we marked out the pa- T, high A, high RNAP, low dI, or low RNase H, irre-
rameter ranges where the differences of final rA con- spective of initial conditions. The experimental results
centrations were greater than 800 nM as indications of were in good agreement with the model prediction on
bistable switch responses. The model predicted that the range of bistability for each parameter. Not sur-
the self-activating switch showed a bistable response prisingly, the model predictions showed increased un-
for a limited range of parameter variations near the certainty in the transition regions for both high and
default values. For simulation results, we map the pa- low initial rA concentrations.
Conclusions
Discrepancies in modeling
Given its simplicity, our model predicted the dy- In this work we have designed and synthesized an
namics of the switch surprisingly well. We only in- activating cascade for in vitro transcriptional circuits
cluded the main hybridization and enzyme reactions and demonstrated its use as a single-switch bistable
that constituted our design intentions, excluding the system. In comparison to the previously constructed
unintentional ‘interfering,’ ‘recovering,’ and ‘recaptur- bistable circuit comprised of two mutually inhibiting
ing’ reactions as well as any other undesired crosstalk switches [20], our single-switch system is simpler (four
between DNA or RNA species. Notably, the training strands vs six) but more delicate to design. DNA hy-
data used for fitting (Figure 6A) only gives informa- bridizationreactions canno longer be made arbitrarily
tion about how the final [rAtot] depends on the initial strongly favored and irreversible; the ‘inhibition’ and
[rAtot] and [dItot], and thus provides very weak kinetic ‘release’reactionsmust thereforebe designed carefully.
constraintsonthe model. Unsurprisingly,a wide range Further, the multistep activating cascade makes use of
of parameter sets could fit the data within reasonable both ‘sense’ and ‘antisense’ sequences, making it dif-
noise bounds, as is common when fitting biochemical ficult to eliminate spurious reactions such as ‘interfer-
system models to limited data [11]. Nonetheless, qual- ing’, ‘recovering’, and ‘recapturing’. Fortunately, the
itative (and sometimes quantitative) predictions were working solution demonstrated here ought to be easily
madeaccuratelyforavarietyofnovelexperimentalcon- generalized to other sequences, enabling the modular
ditions(thetestdata,Figure6B,C),includingthetime constructionofin vitrotranscriptionalcircuitscontain-
evolution of the RNA signal and switch state. This ing both activating and inhibiting switches.
suggests that the intended reaction pathways, used to Fulfilling the promise of predictable system design,
construct the model, are dominant ones in the system when configured to self-activate by using the same se-
dynamics. quence elements for both input and output domains,
However,somepredictionswerequalitativelywrong the expected bistable behavior was observed. Some-
forallparametersetsintheaposterioriensemble. These what more surprisingly, when a simple network model
prediction errors may point to omissions in the model. wastrainedonlimiteddata,systemsensitivitiestoDNA
Asanexample,forthetimeevolutionoftheRNAsignal andenzymeconcentrationswerequalitativelyandsome-
(Figure 6B, right), the model predicted that the upper times quantitatively predicted. These studies also sug-
tworeactionswouldreachastateinwhich[rAtot]keeps gestthattheadditionofasingle-strandedRNAexonu-
increasing,whileintheexperiment,thesetworeactions clease, such as RNase R, would help clean up incom-
seemedtoconvergetoasteady-state. Apossibleexpla- pletedegradationfragments,improveperformance,and
nation is that incomplete degradation by RNase H, as yield a more predictable system.
observed in previous work [20], yields short fragments While in principle arbitrary behaviors can be ob-
ofrAthataccumulateduringthereaction: athighcon- tained using networks of inhibiting switches (for ex-
centrations of these short products, product rebinding ample, activation can be obtained by two inhibiting
to the transcription initiation complex of RNAP may switches in series), the direct implementation of acti-
decrease transcription rates [21]. vation using a single switch provides some advantages.
As another example, the model predicts a stronger As discussed before, it yields simpler circuits in terms
sensitivitytoRNaseHconcentrationthanwasobserved of the number of DNA strands required. Furthermore,
(Figure 6C, rightmost panel). Incomplete degradation the hybridization reactions are faster and more energy
fragmentsmayalsoprovideanexplanationforthis dis- efficient than the transcription reactions they replace.
crepancy. Theseshorteroligonucleotidescouldalsobind This observation raises a question for the future con-
todIandthuscompeteforthedegradationbyRNaseH, struction of larger in vitro circuits: how much of the
decreasing its effectiveness. Other notable discrepan- desiredlogic should be implemented by transcriptional
cies are that the model predicts that wider ranges of circuitry[19,20]andhowmuchshouldbeimplemented
[Ttot]and[Atot]willsustainbistabilitythanwasexper- as strand displacement circuitry [27, 35, 31]?
imentally observed. Another oversimplification of the
model is that the inhibition and release reactions are
Materials and Methods
expected to be reversible,despite being thermodynam-
icallyfavoredintheforwarddirectionasdescribed;they
DNA oligonucleotides and enzymes
are instances of so-called toehold exchange, as there
is also a (weaker) toehold in the reverse direction as The sequence of all DNA molecules and expected
well [36]. RNAtranscriptsequenceswerechosentominimize the
occurrenceofalternativesecondarystructures,checked
by the Vienna group’s DNA and RNA folding pro- emissionforCy5-labeledAwereat648nmand665nm.
gram [9]. All DNA oligonucleotides were purchased The fluorescence was recorded every minute using a
from IntegratedDNA Technologies (USA). In addition SPEX Fluorolog-3 (Jobin Yvon, Edison, New Jersey,
tounlabeledAanddI,AlabeledwithCy5atthe3’end United States) and normalized against maximum flu-
and dI labeled with IowaBlack-RQ at the 5’ end were orescence (measured in the presence of Cy5-labeled A
purchased. The T7 RNA polymerase (enzyme mix), prior to the addition of quencher-labeled dI) and min-
transcription buffer, and NTP were purchased as part imum fluorescence (measured after the addition of ex-
ofthe T7Megashortscriptkit(Ambion, Austin, Texas, cessquencher-labeleddI)accountingforvolumeincrease
USA; #1354). RNase H (Ambion; #2293) was pur- due to the addition of rA and enzymes. Denaturing
chased. RNaseRwasagiftfromDr.MurrayP.Deutscherpolyacrylamide gels (8% 19:1 acrylamide:bis and 7 M
at University of Miami, school of Medicine. Note that urea in TBE buffer) were allowed to run for 50 min
according to the manufacturer’s patent (# 5,256,555), with 10 V/cm at 65 C in TBE buffer (100 mM Tris,
the enzymemix ofT7Megashortscriptkitcontainspy- 90 mM Boric Acid, 1 mM EDTA). The 10-base DNA
rophosphatase to extend the lifetime of the transcrip- ladder(Invitrogen,Carlsbad,California,UnitedStates;
tion reaction; since pyrophosphataseis involvedin reg- #10821-015) was used in the control lane. The non-
ulatingthepowersupplyforourtranscriptionalcircuits denaturinggels(10%19:1acrylamide:bisinTAEbuffer)
andisnotdirectlyinvolvedinthedynamics,weneglect were allowed to run for 100 min with 13V/cm at 35 C
this enzyme inourmodels anddo notcallitan“essen- inTAE buffer containing12.5mMMg2+ (40mM Tris-
tial enzyme” for the circuit dynamics. Acetate, 1 mM EDTA, 12.5 mM Mg-Acetate, pH 8.3).
ThegelswerestainedwithSYBRgold(MolecularProbes,
Transcription
Eugene,Oregon,United States; #S-11494)and the gel
DNA templates (T-nt and T-t strands) were an- data was quantitated using the Molecular imager FX
nealed with 10% (v/v) 10x transcription buffer from (Biorad, Hercules, California, United States). The to-
90 ◦ C to 20 ◦ C over 1 hour at 10 times the final concen- talconcentrationsofRNAproductrAinthedenaturing
tration used. To the annealed templates, DNA activa- gel were measured with respect to 0.5, 1, and 1.5 µM
tor andinhibitor,A anddI,wereaddedfromhighcon- purified rA in control lanes.
centration stocks (50 µM), 7.5 mM each NTP, and 8%
Model simulation
(v/v)10xtranscriptionbufferwereadded. Afteradding
all ssDNA strands and RNA signals, enzymes (RNAP, Thekineticsimulationsandparameterfittingswere
RNase H, and RNase R) were addedand mixed. Tran- implemented in MATLAB. Differential equations were
scription reactions for spectrofluorometer experiments solved using the ode23s routine. The parameter sets
werepreparedasatotalvolumeof60µL.Transcription usedinFigure6werederivedfromtheMetropolis’min-
reactionsforgelstudieswerepreparedasatotalvolume imizationofsumsquareddifferencesbetweentheexper-
of10µLandwerestoppedbydenaturingdye(80%for- imentalresults in Figure 6A and the simulation results
mamide, 10 mM EDTA, 0.01 g XCFF). For the purifi- of kinetic model described in Appendix. We identify
cationofRNAsignalrAfortheexperimentsandforgel model parameters, ~θ, as a vector of logs of rate con-
controls,the full lengthtemplate side strand(the com- stants;the kinetic model has 11 parameters(k , k ,
plement of T-nt rather than T-t) was used to prepare k , k , k , k , k , k , k ,
rAI TAI AIrA M,ON M,OFF cat,ON cat,OFF
a fully duplex DNA template for rA.The transcription k , and k ). Each parameter has pre-specified
reaction was prepared as a total volume of 60 µL with minimum and maximum values (see Appendix). The
0.2µMfullyduplexDNAtemplates. Thetranscription cost function is defined as
conditionwasthesameasaboveexceptthatnoAordI
.
al,n−[rA]f
reaction mixture was treated with 2.5 µL DNase I for
30 min to remove DNA template, and stopped by the wheretheconcentrationofrAismeasuredat210minin
addition of denaturing dye. The reaction mixture was µM scale both for the experiment and simulation. The
runon8%denaturinggel,RNAbandswereexcisedand training set (Figure 6A) contained fifty experimentally
eluted from gelby the crush-and-soakmethod, ethanol measured [rA] values (N = 50). Starting from random
precipitated, and resuspended in water. initial values, for each iteration, a random 11x1 vector
of-1,0, or +1(with equalprobabilities)wasgenerated
Data acquisition
to decide whether to decrease,remain, orincreaseeach
For spectrofluorometer experiments, excitation and parameter in the next step. The step size for each pa-
rameterwas1/100thoftherangeforthatparameterin
log scale. We accepted or rejected the next step based [11] R.N.Gutenkunst,J.J.Waterfall,F.P.Casey,K.S.Brown,C.R.
on Metropolis criteria — i.e., the acceptance probabil- Myers,andJ.P.Sethna.Universallysloppyparametersensitivi-
ity was p = 1 if ∆E < 0 and p = e−∆E/T if ∆E > 0 1 ti 8 e 7 s 8 i , n 2 s 0 y 0 s 7 t . emsbiologymodels.PLoSComputBiol,3(10):1871–
with T = 2σ2 = 0.125 µM2. We used three sampling
[12] J.Hasty,D.McMillen,andJ.J.Collins. Engineeringgenecir-
trajectories with 620,000 iteration steps starting from cuits. Nature,420:224–230,2001.
random parameter values, discarding the first 20% of
[13] SaraHooshangi,StephanThiberge,andRonWeiss. Ultrasensi-
iterations and sampling one parameter set per 30,000 tivityandnoisepropagationinasynthetictranscriptionalcas-
iterations. This collection of parameter sets (M = 51) cade. Proc.Natl. Acad.Sci. USA,102(10):3581–3586,2005.
was used for simulation results in Figure 6; they show [14] Farren J Isaacs, Daniel J Dwyer, and James J Collins. RNA
the95%confidenceintervalfortheparametervalues— syntheticbiology. NatureBiotech.,24:545–554,2006.
i.e., the four (out of 51 parameter sets) with largest E [15] Farren J Isaacs, Daniel J Dwyer, Chunming Ding, Dmitri D
are omitted. See Appendix for details. Pervouchine, Charles R Cantor, and James J Collins. Engi-
neeredriboregulatorsenablepost-transcriptionalcontrolofgene
expression. NatureBiotech.,22(7):841–847,2004.
DNA sequences
[16] Farren J Isaacs, Jeff Hasty, Charles R Cantor, and James J
T-nt (106 mer), Collins. Predictionand measurementof an autoregulatory ge-
5’CATTAGTGTCGTTCGTTCACAGTAATACGACT-
neticmodule.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA,100:7714–7719,2003.
CACTATAGGGAGAAACAAAGAACGAACGACACTAATGAACTACTACTACA-
[17] M.C. Jewett, K.A. Calhoun, A. Voloshin, J.J. Wuu, and J.R.
CACTAATACTGACAAAGTCAGAAA-3’.
Swartz. An integrated cell-freemetabolic platform for protein
T-t(79mer),
5’TTTCTGACTTTGTCAGTATTAGTGTGTAGTAGTAGT- productionandsyntheticbiology. MolecularSystems Biology,
4(1):220,2008.
TCATTAGTGTCGTTCGTTCTTTGTTTCTCCCTATAGTGAGTCG-3’.
5’TATTACTGTGAACGAACGACACTAATGAACTACTAC-3’. [18] YipingJiaandSmitaS.Patel. Kineticmechanismoftranscrip-
dI (38mer), tioninitiaionbybacteriophageT7RNApolymerase. Biochem-
5’-GTGTGTAGTAGTAGTTCATTAGTGTCGTTCGTTCAC-
istry,36:4223–4232,1997.
AG-3’.
rA (67 mer), [19] JongminKim,JohnJ.Hopfield,andErikWinfree. Neuralnet-
5’GGGAGAAACAAAGAACGAACGACACUAAUGAACUA-
work computation by in vitro transcriptional circuits. In Ad-
CUACUACACACUAAUACUGACAAAGUCAGAAA3’. vancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NIPS),vol-
ume17,pages681–688,2004.
Note that the RNA activator rA sequence is iden-
tical to I1 in [20], and therefore, T-t sequence is also [20] Jongmin Kim, Kristin S White, and Erik Winfree. Construc-
tionofaninvitrobistablecircuitfromsynthetictranscriptional
identical to T12-t in [20]. switch. Mol.Syst. Biol.,2:68,2006.
[21] IaroslavKuzmineandCraigTMartin.Pre-steady-statekinetics
References of initiation of transcription by T7 RNA polymerase: A new
kineticmodel. J.Mol.Biol.,305:559–566,2001.
[1] E.Andrianantoandro,S.Basu,D.K.Karig,andRWeiss. Syn-
theticbiology: newengineeringrulesforanemergingdiscipline. [22] Salvatore A. E. Marras, Fred Russell Kramer, and Sanjay
Mol.Syst. Biol.,2:2006.0028,2006. Tyagi.Efficienciesoffluorescenceresonanceenergytransferand
contact-mediatedquenchinginoligonucleotideprobes. Nucleic
[2] M.R.Atkinson,M.A.Savageau,J.T.Myers,andA.J.Ninfa. AcidsRes.,30(21):e122,2002.
Developmentofgeneticcircuitryexhibitingtoggleswitchoros-
cillatorybehaviorinEscherichiacoli. Cell,113:597–607,2003. [23] Craig T. Martin and Joseph E. Coleman. Kinetic analysis of
T7RNApolymerase-promoterinteractionswithsmallsynthetic
[3] TravisSBayerandChristinaDSmolke. Programmableligand- promoters. Biochemistry,26:2690–2696,1987.
controlledriboregulatorsofeukaryoticgeneexpression. Nature
Biotech.,23(3):337–343,2005. [24] Kathleen E McGinness and Gerald F Joyce. Substitution of
ribonucleotidesintheT7RNApolymerasepromoterelement.J
[4] A.Becskei,BSeraphin,andLSerrano. Positivefeedbackineu- Biol Chem,277:2987–2991,2002.
karyoticgenenetworks: celldifferentiationbygradedtobinary
responseconversion. EMBOJ,20:2528–2535,2001. [25] A.P.MillsJr.,BernardYurke,andPhilipMPlatzman. Article
foranalogvectoralgebracomputation.Biosystems,52:175–180,
[5] Steven A. Benner and A. Michael Sismour. Synthetic biology. 1999.
Nature Rev.Genet.,6:533–543,2005.
[26] VincentNoireaux,Roy Bar-Ziv, andAlbertLibchaber. Princi-
[6] KevinSBrownandJamesPSethna. Statisticalmechanicalap- plesofcell-freegeneticcircuitassembly. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.
proachestomodelswithmanypoorlyknownparameters.Phys. USA,100(22):12,672–12,677,2003.
Rev.E,68:021904,2003.
[27] G.Seelig,D.Soloveichik,D.Y.Zhang,andE.Winfree.Enzyme-
[7] Michael B. Elowitz and Stanislas Leibler. A synthetic oscilla-
free nucleic acid logic circuits. Science, 314(5805):1585–1588,
torynetworkoftranscriptionalregulators.Nature,403:335–338,
2006.
2000.
[8] Drew Endy. Foundations for engineering biology. Nature, [28] G.Seelig,B.Yurke,andE.Winfree.DNAhybridizationcatalyst
438:449–453,2005. andcatalystcircuit. DNA comp,3384:329–343,2005.
[9] C. Flamm, W. Fontana, I. Hofacker, and P. Schuster. RNA [29] Nadrian C. Seeman. Nucleic-acid junctions and lattices. J.
foldingatelementarystepresolution. RNA,6:325–338,2000. Theor.Biol.,99:237–247,1982.
[10] Yang Gao, Lauren K. Wolf, and Rosina M. Georgiadis. Sec- [30] Yoshiru Shimizu, Akio Inoue, Yukihide Tomari, Tsutomu
ondary structure effects on DNA hybridization kinetics: a so- Suzuki, Takashi Yokogawa, Kazuya Nishikawa, and Takuya
lutionversussurfacecomparison. Nucleic Acids Res,34:3370– Ueda. Cell-free translation reconstitutedwith purifiedcompo-
3377,2006. nents. NatureBiotech.,19:751–755,2001.
[31] David Soloveichik, Georg Seelig, and Erik Winfree. DNA as a
universalsubstrateforchemicalkinetics.Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.
USA,107(12):5393–5398,2010.
[32] JesseStricker,ScottCookson,MatthewR.Bennett,WilliamH.
Mather, Lev S. Tsimring, and Jeff Hasty. A fast, robust and
tunablesyntheticgeneoscillator. Nature,456:516–519,2008.
[33] Francisco J. Triana-Alonso, Marylena Dabrowski, Jorg
Wadzack,andKnudH.Nierhaus.Self-coded3’-extensionofrun-
offtranscriptsproducesabberantproductsduringinvitrotran-
scriptionwithT7RNApolymerase. J. Biol.Chem.,270:6298–
6307,1995.
[34] Maung Nyan Win and Christina D Smolke. A modular and
extensibleRNA-basedgene-regulatoryplatformforengineering
cellularfunction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104(36):14283–
14288,2007.
[35] D.Y.Zhang,A.J.Turberfield,B.Yurke,andE.Winfree. En-
gineering entropy-driven reactions and networks catalyzed by
DNA. Science,318(5853):1121–1125,2007.
[36] D. Y. Zhang and E. Winfree. Control of DNA strand dis-
placement kinetics using toehold exchange. J Am Chem Soc,
131(47):17303–17314,2009.
A simple kinetic model for Self-activating switch
To mathematically explore the behavior of the self-activating switch, we developed a model based on the
DNAandRNAhybridizationreactions,andenzymereactions. Notethatfortheself-activatingswitch,theinput
RNA signal is identical to the output RNA signal, thus both are labeled rA. We constructed a mathematical
model without RNase R, because RNase R was not used for the results presented in Figures 5 and 6 where the
modelisused. Tosimplify the model,we alsoassumedthat,althoughan‘interfering’reactionexiststhatresults
in the T·rA complex, the ‘recovering’ and ‘recapturing’ reactions involving A and dI are fast enough such that
the concentration of the T·rA complex is negligible (see Figure 3). The hybridization and strand displacement
reactions and enzyme reactions are summarized below.
DNA or RNA hybridizations
T+A k →TA T·A (Activation)
A+dI k →AI A·dI (Annihilation)
rA+dI k →rAI rA·dI (Annihilation)
T+A·dI (Inhibition)
rA·dI+A (Release)
Michaelis–Menten Enzyme reactions
T·A+rA (transcription,fast)
T+rA (transcription,slow)
dI (degradation)
We do notconsider side-reactionsorincomplete productionand degradationproducts. We further simplified
enzymatic equations from the full Michaelis-Menten equations to an approximation using the pseudo-steady-
state assumption of enzyme-substrate complex, which is reasonably accurate when enzyme concentrations are
low compared to substrate concentrations.
RNAP+T·A+rA
RNaseH+rA·dI
RNaseH·rA·dI
We express the available enzyme concentrations using the pseudo-steady-state assumption as follows:
[RNAPtot] [RNaseHtot]
[RNAP]= , [RNaseH]= ,
PKM,ON PKM,OFF KM,H
where the Michaelis constants are calculated as K = k−+kcat to determine the affinity of substrates to the
enzymes. The effective rate constants for enzymes are as follows:
Prod = cat,ON [RNAP], Prod = cat,OFF [RNAP], Deg = cat,H [RNaseH].
ON K OFF K H K
M,ON M,OFF M,H
Notethatthisapproximationprocedurewasalsousedin[20]. Takentogether,asetoffourordinarydifferential
equations describes the dynamics of the self-activating switch as follows.
dt AI TA AIrA
dt AI rAI TAI H
dt rAI AIrA ON OFF
The remaining variables,[T·A], [A·dI], and [rA·dI] are calculatedfrom the conservationrelationas [Ttot], [Atot],
and [dItot] remain constants throughout the reaction.
Sampling parameter space with Metropolis criteria
Using the mathematical model described above, we chose to explore the parameter space in the vicinity of
the best fit to data based on the Metropolis sampling method, as outlined in [6]. The experimental data shown
in Figure 6A is used as the training set. Other experimental data are reservedas the test set. The cost function
is calculated as
al,n−[rA]f
where the concentrationof rA is measuredat 210min in µM scale both for the experimentand simulation. The
training set contained fifty experimentally measured [rA] values (N = 50). To estimate errors in experimental
measurements, most experimental conditions were measured in duplicate. For certain experimental conditions
— e.g. in the transition region of blue curve in Figure 6A — the duplicate measurements differed as much as
0.65 µM. We chose σ = 0.25 µM as a reasonable estimate of the standard deviation of repeated experimental
measurements.
The kinetic model has a total of 11 parameters: k , k , k , k , k , k , k , k ,
TA AI rAI TAI AIrA M,ON M,OFF cat,ON
k , k , and k . We set the lower and upper bounds for these parameters as (in log scale) [4.5,
cat,OFF M,H cat,H 10
4.5, 4.5, 4.5, 4.5, -8, -7, -2, -3, -7, -2] and [6.0, 6.0, 6.0, 6.0, 6.0, -6, -5, -1, -1, -5, 0], respectively. In order to
minimize the effect of these widely separated scales and avoid numerical issues, we deal with the logarithms of
the parameters for all our calculations. Henceforth, we identify model parameters, ~θ, as a vector of logs of rate
constants. Weinitiatedtheparameterset~θ asarandom11x1vectorwithinthesebounds. Foreachiteration,we
generateda random11x1vectorof-1, 0,or +1(with equalprobabilities)to decide whether to decrease,remain,
or increase each parameter in the next step. The step size for each parameter was set as 1/100th of the range
for that parameter in a log scale. If the simultaneous updates of 11 parameters resulted in lower cost function
(i.e. ∆E <0), the updates are accepted. On the other hand, if the simultaneous updates of parametersresulted
in higher cost function (i.e. ∆E > 0), the updates are accepted with a probability of p = e−∆E/T following
Metropolis criteria. We accepted or rejected the parameter updates based on the Metropolis criteria with T =
0.125 (= 2σ2).
Following these sampling procedures, 620,000 iterations were performed for trajectories 1 through 3 and
470,000 iterations were performed for trajectory 4 starting from random initial conditions. To assess whether
there are multiple attractor basins for parameter values, we plotted parameter values for the whole trajectories
as histograms (Figure S1) with the initial values marked by red circles. The parameter distributions for all 11
parameters achieved similar ranges and shapes irrespective of their initial values. Therefore, we conclude that
the Monte Carlo sampling with Metropolis criteria has convergedfor these trajectories.
K K k K K k
x 105 M,ON x 104 M,OFF x 105 cat,ON x 105 M,ON x 104 M,OFF x 105 cat,ON
2 5 2 2 5 2
0 0 0 0 0 0
1e−008 1e−007 1e−006 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.0316228 0.1 1e−008 1e−007 1e−006 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.0316228 0.1
k K k k K k
x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H
10 10 10 10 10 10
0 0 0 0 0 0
0.001 0.01 0.1 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.1 1 0.001 0.01 0.1 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.1 1
k k k k k k
x 104 TA x 105 AI x 104 rAI x 104 TA x 105 AI x 104 rAI
10 1 2 10 5 10 1 2 10
0 0 0 0 0 0
31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006
x 105 TAI x 104 rAAI x 105 TAI x 104 rAAI
31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006
K K k K K k
x 105 M,ON x 104 M,OFF x 105 cat,ON x 105 M,ON x 104 M,OFF x 105 cat,ON
2 5 2 2 5 1
0 0 0 0 0 0
1e−008 1e−007 1e−006 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.0316228 0.1 1e−008 1e−007 1e−006 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.0316228 0.1
k K k k K k
x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H
5 10 10 5 5 5
0 0 0 0 0 0
0.001 0.01 0.1 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.1 1 0.001 0.01 0.1 1e−007 1e−006 1e−005 0.01 0.1 1
k k k k k k
x 104 TA x 105 AI x 104 rAI x 104 TA x 104 AI x 104 rAI
10 1 2 10 5 10 10 5 10 5
0 0 0 0 0 0
31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006
x 105 TAI x 104 rAAI x 105 TAI x 104 rAAI
31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006 31622.8 177828 1e+006
Figure S1: Histograms for parameter-sampling trajectories. (A–D) The log-scale parameter values (~θ) for the whole
samplingtrajectoriesareplottedashistograms. Thex-axesareinlogscalewiththerespectiveminimumandmaximum
valuescorrespondingtotherangeofeachparameterasstatedearlier. FollowingMetropoliscriteria,620,000iterations
were performed for trajectories 1 through 3 (A–C) and 470,000 iterations for trajectory 4 (D). The initial values for
parameters are marked by red circles.
Our next goal is choosing M parameter sets, {~θ }M , in such a way that they are independent of each
other. These parameter sets cannot be randomly chosen from the above sampling trajectories because the
different samples may be highly correlated. To estimate decorrelation time of parameter values so as to obtain
independent samples, we analyzed the autocorrelation function of parameter values between the 100,000th and
200,000thiteration steps (Figure S2). For most parameters, the autocorrelationfunction quickly decays to zero
— e.g., K , k , and k . On the other hand, for some parameters such as K and k ,
M,ON cat,ON TAI M,OFF cat,OFF
the parameter values did not converge and slowly drifted over time, possibly because they do not impact the
cost function in a significant way. For these two parameters, which were poorly constrained in the histogram
analysis, the autocorrelation function did not completely decay even after 50,000 steps. Nevertheless, the signs
of autocorrelation function at time lags beyond 30,000 steps were roughly random — it could be positive or
negative depending on the sampling ranges. Thus, we used 30,000 iterations as the decorrelation time.
For sampling trajectories 1, 2, and 3 (with 620,000 iterations each), we discarded the first 20% of iterations
andselectedoneparametersetper30,000iterations,resultingin17parametersetspertrajectory. Thiscollection
ofparametersets—51intotal(M =51)—wasusedforsimulationandcomparedwiththeexperimentalresults
inFigure6. ThelineplotsinFigure6showthe central95%ofpredictions—thetwoparametersetswithlowest
K K k K K k
M,ON x 104 M,OFF cat,ON M,ON x 104 M,OFF cat,ON
5000 5 2000 5000 5 2000
0 0 0 0 0 0
−5000 −5 −2000 −5000 −5 −2000
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
k K k k K k
x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H
5 2 2 5 5 2
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
k k k k k k
TA AI x 104 rAI x 104 TA x 104 AI x 104 rAI
5000 5000 2 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 0 0
−5000 −5000 −2 −1 −1 −1
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
TAI x 104 rAAI TAI x 104 rAAI
2000 5 2000 2
−2000 −5 −2000 −2
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
K K k K K k
M,ON x 104 M,OFF cat,ON M,ON x 104 M,OFF cat,ON
2000 5 1000 5000 5 1000
0 0 0 0 0 0
−2000 −5 −1000 −5000 −5 −1000
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
k K k k K k
x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H x 104 cat,OFF x 104 M,H x 104 cat,H
5 2 2 2 5 2
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
k k k k k k
x 104 TA x 104 AI x 104 rAI x 104 TA AI x 104 rAI
1 2 5 1 5000 2
0 0 0 0 0 0
−1 −2 −5 −1 −5000 −2
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
TAI x 104 rAAI TAI x 104 rAAI
1000 2 2000 1
−1000 −2 −2000 −1
0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
x 105 x 105 x 105 x 105
Figure S2: Autocorrelation functions for parameter-sampling trajectories. (A–D) The log-scale parameter values
(~θ) between the 100,000th and 200,000th iteration steps for the sampling trajectories are plotted as autocorrelation
functions. Autocorrelation functions are for the sampling trajectory 1 (A), 2 (B), 3 (C), and 4 (D). Decorrelation
time for each parameter can be estimated by measuring lag times beyond which the autocorrelation function is close
to zero.
rA output predictions and the two parameter sets with highest rA output predictions were omitted — i.e., the
four parameter sets with largest errors. For the final 51 parameter sets, the sum squared errors ranged from
2.03 to 2.43 µM2 for the whole training set (N = 50 measurements). One can construct an empiricalcovariance
matrix θ from the ensemble of parameters {~θ }M ,
where the angle bracketsdenote ensemble average. An eigenvalue decompositionof this matrix (called principal
component analysis (PCA)) can then be inverted and information about soft and stiff modes are obtained
analogoustothatusingtheHessianbecausePCAHessianP
=θ−1.
Modespectrumandeigenvectorprojections
are shown with eigenvalue-eigenvectorcorrespondence indicated by the numbers 1–11 (Figure S3).
These results show that the eigenvalue spacing is almost uniform in logspace; there is no clear cutoff be-
tween “stiff” and “soft” eigenvalues. However, the wide spacing between eigenvalues indicate that the stiffest
few parameter combinations can be used to explain and fit most of the variations in the experimental data.
These “sloppy model” features have been observed in many other high-dimensional multiparameter nonlinear
−2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
)eulavnegie(gol
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
Figure S3: Mode spectrum and eigenvectorprojectionsfrom PCA of inverse of covariance matrix θ. (A) Eigenvalues
plottedinlogscale. Thefirstfeweigenvaluesaremuchlargerthantherest—i.e.,thefewcombinationsofparameters
associatedwithlargeeigenvaluescanbeusedtoexplainandfitmostofthevariationintheexperimentalandsimulation
data. (B) Eigenvector projections. Eigenvector-eigenvalue correspondence is indicated by the numbers 1–11: small
numberscorrespondtolargeeigenvalues(stiffmodes)andlargenumberscorrespondtosmalleigenvalues(softmodes).
models [6]. These characteristics are typically encountered in models for biochemical regulatory networks in
biological organisms [11].
Letusproceedtointerpretstiffmodesfoundintheeigenvectorprojections. Thevarianceinthestiffestmode
(mode 1) was largely explained by contributions from K and k as well as K and k . The
M,ON cat,ON M,H cat,H
angle on K -k plane indicates that these two values must change in opposite directions, which would
M,ON cat,ON
change the ON-state switch transcription rate significantly. At the same time, the angle on K -k plane
indicates that these two values also must change in opposite directions, which in this case would change the
degradation rate significantly. Together, the signs for these four parameters in eigenvector indicates that the
stiffestmode is capturedbyanincreasedON-statetranscriptionratewithadecreaseddegradationrateandvice
versa—i.e.,“production/degradationbalance”. Thesecondstiffmode(mode2)wasdominatedbycontributions
from K and k , indicating that the changes in opposite directions for these two parameters would
M,OFF cat,OFF
result in significant changes in the OFF-state switch transcription rate — i.e., “leakiness”. The inhibition rate
k contributed significantly in modes 3 and 4. However, since the parameters that change in the same or the
opposite directions in relation to k were not clearly identified, the eigenvalue projections involving k are
not shown in this figure.
Now we examine some of the soft modes revealed in the eigenvector projections. The variance in the
softest mode (mode 11) is mostly captured by parameters K and k . The angle on K -
M,OFF cat,OFF M,OFF
k plane indicates that these two values must change together to preserve the OFF-state transcription
rate, k /K . Similarly, the next soft mode (mode 10) is captured by parameters K and k ,
cat,OFF M,OFF M,H cat,H
preserving the degradation rate, k /K . The projections onto k -k plane revealed that the softer
cat,H M,H TA AI
mode (mode 7) corresponds to concerted changes in the activation rate (k ) and the annihilation rate (k ),
which would change the time-scale of switching but preserve the average switch states. The k -k plane
analogously associated the softer mode (mode 9) with the concerted changes of these two parameters.