Page 1 of 6 Original Research
Black Theology of liberation: A theology of life in the
context of Empire
Author: The cry for life by the peoples of the global South and all the victims of the vicious
Vuyani S. Vellem1 antics of Empire is our hope. Living against the logic of Empire is rebellion against the
life killing order of Empire. This cry for life, the article argues, is our method for re-
Affiliation:
1Department of Dogmatics asserting the goals of Black Theology of liberation as life – life as a precondition to all
and Christian Ethics, ethical claims. Racism cannot be treated as a marginal aspect of modernity and, ipso facto,
University of Pretoria, South
economics. Capitalism exists in a symbiotic relationship between racism, hiding in the
husk of Empire that feeds on the paradigms of life Empire destroys and kills. Using as an
Correspondence to: illustration the dynamics of the mind, unmasking the universe of Empire is the task of a
Vuyani Vellem Black Theology of liberation as a theology of life.
Email:
vuyani.vellem@up.ac.za Introduction
Postal address:
This article builds on the argument that Black Theology of liberation is a discourse of life
Private Bag X20, Hatfield
0028, South Africa (see Vellem 2015a). The cry for life by theologians in the global South some 23 years ago, in a
Statement with the title, A Cry for Life: The Spirituality of the Third World, is even louder than
Dates:
it was ostensibly loud to those who have obstinately refused to close their ears and turn their
Received: 11 May 2015
Accepted: 17 Aug. 2015 sight away from the voices of the black interlocutor in South Africa post-1994. Accordingly,
Published: 30 Nov. 2015 ‘the insistence of Black Theology of liberation on debunking the metaphysics of capitalism’
(Vellem 2015a:177), calls upon us to return to the content of the cry of the marginalised and
How to cite this article:
the continued onslaught on their spirituality and consciousness by Empire today.
Vellem, V.S., 2015, ‘Black
Theology of liberation:
A theology of life in the Assuming that there is a deep relationship between race and economic exploitation, the article
context of Empire’, Verbum
begins to engage the Statement, A Cry for Life: The Spirituality of the Third World, as the basis
et Ecclesia 36(3), Art. #1470,
for locating itself within the experiences of suffering and the struggle history of the racially
org/10.4102/ve.v36i3.1470 subjugated, as a theology of life. The article then moves on to clarify the mindset of Empire by
employing the theory of mind dynamics so as to illustrate how the workings of a life killing
Note:
Empire could be unmasked. To conclude the conversation, the article argues that a cry for life
This article represents a
theological reflection on as rebellion against Empire is a theology of life. Unconcluding remarks are made at the end to
the Faculty Research Theme suggest areas that could be pursued further to engage Empire.
(FRT) of the Faculty of
Theology, University
The cry for life
of Pretoria, entitled
‘Ecodomy – Life in its
fullness’. The theme About 23 years ago, in Kenya, the Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians
is portrayed from the (EATWOT) produced a statement with the title, A Cry for Life: The Spirituality of the Third World
perspective of various (hereafter the Statement), which was published in the Journal of Black Theology in South Africa.
theological disciplines. A
This statement arose when there were changes that were taking place in the world, notably
conference on this theme
was held on 27–28 October the demise of apartheid, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union. There
2014. were signs of hope on the horizon but challenges too as the Statement suggests. Twenty one
years later, after democracy in South Africa, this cry for life articulated 23 years ago, should
Copyright:
be one of the most important texts to use to benchmark any progress that our democratic
© 2015. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS dispensation has made especially with regard to the conditions of the nonpersons or the black
OpenJournals. This work is interlocutors of a Black Theology of liberation. These sentiments from the Statement (1993) are
licensed under the Creative
important:
Commons Attribution
License. The cry of the Third World is not a passive cry of resignation to the realities of death. It is a strident
witness to the persistence of life. The cry for life is not a cry of despair, sorrow, hopelessness or grief. It is
a cry that denies victory to torture, detainment, starvation and military might. It is a cry for bread, rice,
water, land, housing, jobs health care. (p. 47)
Read online:
Scan this QR True to the teachings of the liberation paradigm, the cry is a loud voice: ‘raised from the
code with your
midst of misery and from within situations in which the forces of death are rampant’
smart phone or
mobile device (Statement 1993:47); surely ‘a cry for life, life in all its fullness’ (Statement 1993:47), later
to read online.
echoed in the Accra Confession in 2004. The issues that define this cry, or rather, the
Page 2 of 6 Original Research
contents of this cry before the adoption of the Accra Racism and the capitalist neoliberal
Confession, are almost the same as those stated in the economics
Accra Confession.1 According to the Statement (1993:49),
structures of oppression ‘are global and local’, and the Black Theology of liberation is a reflection of faith praxis
problem of economics – the market economy – is pointed from within the underside of modernity and thus a response
out as one whose ‘catastrophic aspects on the poor and to modernity, namely the theories of modernity and its
the marginalized’ (Statement 1993:47), would continue assumptions. This school argues that there is a link between
to worsen rather than become better. racism and neoliberal economics. Broadly speaking, Black
Theology of liberation holds that modernity totally and
Importantly, the Statement (1993:50) then says that there are violently excludes the black African perspective in the
currents that inspire a ‘vision for a new way of living’. These creation of knowledge, that is, the black African cultural
currents include, amongst others, the struggles of women, dispensation, or world-creating value system and further
the movements of black peoples, the indigenous movements dehumanises living labour and the lived experience of the
and religions, as well as Hispanic and ecological movements. oppressed black African people. For this reason, Black
Alluding to our context in South Africa, the Statement (1993) Theology agrees with the view that the anthropology of
said: modernity is heretical (Saayman 2007:135).
In South Africa, the anti-apartheid struggle gave birth to the
Black Consciousness movement. Blacks in South Africa have set This argument resonates with Dussel’s view that ethically,
foot on the path of being autonomous subjects of their history. ‘the critical problem of our time – the one that affects far
The current movement of liberal democracy in Africa is not seen more people far more adversely – is global neo-colonialism’
as life-saving. The poor will be even more powerless. They will (Alcoff & Mendieta 2000:7). In this regard, the underside
be alienated from their land and get deeper and deeper into the of modernity is an adverse catastrophic experience of total
culture of violence. (p. 52)
and violent exclusion of black Africans that mirrors the root
connection between economics, racism and the current neo-
The resistance of the young people and their anger, women
colonial models of economic management.
and their struggles against patriarchy, including all these
currents that inspire a new vision of living, express hope
Assuming that politics and ethics are two sides of the same
that denies death and affirms life. The development of
coin, at the core of our argument therefore is the view that
distinctive theologies by women in addition to class and
colonialism and imperialism are not marginal concepts of
race constructs that deny black peoples their dignity and
modernity, but central topics within the history of political
life, is an expression of the power of the oppressed to say
and social thought in the West, ipso facto, colonialism and
‘no’ to death.
imperialism must be central to Western, or European
theological and ethical thought.
Empire is life denying. According to the Statement, these
currents above shape the theology of the Third World
Moving from this assumption, the problem is that much as
and, in our case, a Black Theology of liberation as a
there is a tendency to overlook colonialism and imperialism
theology of life. The spirituality of these global currents
as integral to the designs and ponderings of Western political
and movements that resist death is our methodological
theories, Western theological discourse similarly appears to
thrust for a theology that affirms life as the Statement
treat colonialism and imperialism largely as peripheral matters
(1993:57) itself asserts: ‘We have been insisting that our
to its ponderings.3 According to Sugirtharajah (2004:22), ‘more
method is our spirituality’. The spirituality for life in a
books have been written by Western theologians about being
Black Theology of liberation is, amongst others, the energy
nice to animals and the environment than about colonialism
to holding on to life in conditions of death. All of life is
or race’. It is not this apparent obviation of the centrality of
regarded as spiritual without any dichotomies; hence, a cry
colonialism, imperialism and race that matters more for me
for life and that power to resist death, providing strength
than the justification of colonialism and imperialism even by
to live, puts our understanding of God as embedded in the
such eminent icons of theological thought in the West such
struggles of the marginalised. Jesus becomes the rootage
as Reinhold Niebuhr. Sugirtharajah (2004:23–27) offers an
of this spirituality, Jesus who faces the same struggles in
analysis of the theological justification of Empire by Max
life that the nonpersons face. The biblical hermeneutics
Warren and Reinhold Niebuhr, and says this about them:
of a Black Theology of liberation moves from within the
The writings of Niebuhr and Warren emphasize lofty intensions
context of the cry for life by the poor. The proposal for a
of uplifting depraved but appreciative natives. There is a
search of alternatives by the Statement suggests a move
passionate belief in empire, but how the enterprise is essential
beyond capitalism to socialism and building alliances with
to the well-being of the Western powers hardly comes into
people and learning from them.2
the equation. While pointing out the benefits bestowed on the
1.See the introduction of A Cry for Life: The Spirituality of the Third World (1993:26– colonies, no reference is made to colonies as sources of raw
47) and the section on ‘Reading the Signs of the Times’ of the Accra Confession
(1993:170–171). Our reading of these two documents sees similarities of content 3.This is a persistent problem in South Africa perhaps best expressed in the argument
barring their different tones. that South Africans should move beyond race analysis. One work that deals with
this question might help expand on this debate even though the same work simply
2.The section that reflects theologically on this context of death by the Statement dismisses the futility of the view dubbed as postracialism in South Africa and in the
(1993:57–71) is not repeated but summarised for our purpose. U.S.A. (see eds. Ackah, Reddie & Tshaka 2015).
Page 3 of 6 Original Research
material, cheap labour, secure markets, and potential sites of into a force of global capitalist modernity. The brutality of this
investment. (Sugirtharajah 2004:26) modern economic process is nowhere evident as in the institution
of transatlantic slavery. The antiquities in all societies –
Whilst there seems to be very little interest in analysing from the Athenian through the Ashanti to the Roman – seem
colonialism and imperialism as central pivots of modernity, to have known slavery in some form: indentured servitude,
religious caste systems, or other forms of extreme class division
there is more it seems in that omission – the omission of
within a society that renders a particular section of population
racism as part of modernity. It is eloquently an ostensible
exploitable, with or without rights of citizenship. But scholars of
justification of Empire as beneficial to those who live on its
slavery agree that there was something unique and unrepeatable
underside. But one has to remember that:
about modern, transatlantic, and racial African slavery. For the
Not so long ago Western societies claimed the name ‘modernity’ first time in human history the enslaver did not call the enslaved
for their time, their contemporaneity, assuming this to be at the ‘dog’ or ‘beast’ merely metaphorically. On account of skin color,
forefront of the historical continuum. Modernity was a self- it was presumed that Africans were as ‘race unlike any other’ –
description that served as a self-affirmation, differentiating the West a race whose enslavement, regardless of class or caste, was
from the rest. Today, modernity has given way to globalization, or considered ‘scientifically’ valid. (p. 224)
the global age, as a way to describe societies, though not merely
or necessarily those of the industrialized West. Already there is In the Statement, theologians of the global South (EATWOT)
a highly developed bibliography of materials seeking to explain 23 years ago specifically present the beginning of the so-
how globalization came to pass and what its implications are for
called New World Order (1492) as a specific challenge to
different types of society. (Alcoff & Mendieta 2000:1)
which we must respond. The Statement (1993:64) says that
the global South was now ‘destined to become absorbed
The contemporaneity of racism (with capitalism, colonialism,
into this new European world order’; since then, a different
imperialism and Empire) constitutes a continuum giving way
model of anthropology began to exist, bifurcated between
to globalisation, but more deeply so, a continuum between
White Christian Europe and all other peoples of the global
modernist theories of politics, theology and ethics right into
South with whiteness as a norm. The Statement (1993) says:
the ponderings of the current world order. According to Levy
and Young (eds. 2001:xi), ‘Modernity – the centuries since Through the process of modernization, Europe and later North
America were so convinced of their own superiority that
1500 – has been at once the era of the European state and the
they would develop historical, philosophical and theological
era of the European empires’. Levy and Young (eds. 2001:xi)
teachings about the fundamental inequality of the races. This
continue to say, ‘European colonialism and imperialism
would further the moral legitimation to colonialism with all its
ultimately reached a global scale that dwarfed what had come
mechanisms of exploitation of the colonies and their peoples.
before’. One cannot describe those who fail to recognise racism
for what it is, especially apartheid in the historical failures of
modernity in the 20th century. The interpretation of South The tendency to treat racism as a marginal concept to
African public life post-1994 that delinks apartheid from capitalism in the same way as colonialism has been treated
colonialism and colonialism from modernity is exemplified as a marginal concept to modernity is the thrust of our
by some views that point to the beneficial aspects of apartheid conversation in this article. The absence of the word racism in
and colonialism without engaging the fundamental pillars of theology or the treatment of racism as marginal to theological
apartheid and its link to modernity. Before we move on to discourse is equally as cynical. In South Africa’s case, many
the next point of our conversation, these words by Enrique white South Africans, for example, will easily acknowledge
Dussel (2011) require our attention: that apartheid was wrong. Saayman (2007:135) observed that
What the liberation of diverse types of oppressed and/or ‘DRC members do not have a clear understanding at all of
excluded populations presupposes is the overcoming of cynical- the essential racist essence of apartheid and what apartheid
managerial reason (planetary administrative) of capitalism (as actually did to all South Africans’. Often, and here we follow
an economic system), of liberalism (as a political system), of Saayman’s explanation, the acknowledgement of the wrongs
Eurocentrism (as an ideology), of machismo (in erotics) of the of apartheid is confined to the external symptoms of apartheid
reign of the white race (in racism), of the destruction of nature
such as its laws and physical atrocities many blacks suffered,
(in ecology), and so on. (p. 111)
and not the root cause itself which in our view is apartheid’s
symbiosis with modernity and consequently its distorted
Black Theology of liberation situates race analysis in modernity
anthropology. At the heart of Cone’s (1980) theological
and envisions knowledge forms that seek to overcome the
response to this deficient understanding of racism is the
‘reason’ of capitalism, liberalism, macho power, Eurocentrism,
following:
racism and ecocide, politically and theologically, to mention
but a few. In this light, we situate the ponderings of racism The uniqueness of black oppression is not to be understood
theologically as if blacks are elected by God but only scientifically.
and neoliberal economics within Western modernity, ipso
It is a fact that most people who suffer in the world are people
facto, the ponderings of apartheid and its residues in post-1994
of color and not European. And it is a fact that the people
South Africa. Stated otherwise, the anatomy of whiteness is
responsible for that oppression are white Europeans. Marxists
racism. Eze (2011) clarifies this matter as follows:
have to be open to hear the meaning of that fact by asking
Colonialism as a mode of imperial expansion was part of a larger whether fascism is inherent in the very nature and structure of
historical process – it contributed to Europe’s self-fashioning western civilization. (p. 28)
Page 4 of 6 Original Research
It is the scientific fascism of modernity that underlies the all the time that are not convincing. The husk of Empire is
propensity to confine the damage of racism within the hidden in spirituality today, we argue.
external dimension of the damage it caused to black people
rather than the essential core of racism as an integral part of To explain this point, Mike Muendane’s (2006) thesis on
modernity in the same way as capitalism is. Pigmentocracy mindset could help us. Muendane (2006:19) argues that in
is the creation of modernity; it is a science of modernity, its order to eliminate the colonial mentality, mind dynamics
philosophy, its history, economics and theology to say the could be a helpful approach. He says that examining mindsets
least. How does this logic continue to find expression in the and their relationship with behaviour and outcomes is
21st century? This is the question we briefly turn to now. invaluable to overcome the colonial mindset. One does not
Allan Boesak’s (2015:2–3) explanation of the fundamentals need to repeat Muendane’s thesis here, but the insightful
of oppression and the system of apartheid in South Africa exposition on how meaning is constructed. According to
provides a good list of aspects that matter for Black Muendane (2006):
Theology’s response to modernity.
When a single or combination of references are linked to the
object (situation at hand), the result is what the situation means
Unmasking the husk of Empire
for the individual. The mind needs to construct that meaning
before it can act on the situation; it has to attach value to it. (p. 17)
One of the problems of Empire is its opacity (Vellem
2015a:181–184). Modernity as an adverse catastrophic
More importantly is that in the operation of the mind, levels
experience lived by black people up to this day calls upon
of certainty range from low to high. This means that these
a repudiation of the treatment of colonialism as marginal
concepts: notion, idea, perception, opinion, assumption,
particularly in discourses that suggest a ‘post’ to colonialism
belief, model, pattern of thought, conviction and faith,
without mitigating the tragic relationship between
occupying different levels in the operation of the mind,
modernity and colonialism.4 Most of the debates in South
ultimately determine meaning or paradigm as he actually
Africa post-1994 are faulted along these lines; they continue
explains (Muendane 2006:17).
with philosophical, economic, political and theological
insights based on the scientific fascism of modernity. Despite
Empire evokes the manipulation of paradigm or meaning
the warning contained in the Statement by EATWOT
in life. Empire occupies these levels of certainty of meaning.
theologians more than two decades ago, the conspicuous
Empire colonises these levels of certainty of meaning to create
inability in our public mindset to relate liberal democracy to
notions, ideas, perceptions, opinions, assumptions, beliefs
the philosophies of modernity and consequently its inability
to become ‘a democracy that also provides bread’ for those and ultimately faith, for its own sake. This is what we have
historically excluded in the knowledge forms and systems of called the fetish of Empire (Vellem 2015a:182). This is what the
modernity, remains a vexing question for us. Jesse Mugambi spirituality of Empire does; its husk is hidden in the notions,
(2003) asks this important question about democracy: ideas and ultimately the dominant faith paradigms we see
in our country today and the world. Often, the notions of
Why did the powers now calling for ‘democratization’ in Africa
life, the perceptions of life, the opinions and models of life,
discourage ‘temporary’ (or acquiesce at its erosion) during the
are propagated as life-affirming, whilst the core paradigm
past thirty years? Why has ‘democratization’ become important
after the collapse of the Soviet Union? The lack of convincing of Empire is itself a threat to the whole constellation of life.
answers to these questions makes many people to wonder Stated otherwise, the notions of the people, their common
about the real motives of affluent nations for sponsoring spontaneous knowledge, their perceptions, their opinions, their
‘democratization in Africa. (p. 100) models, are now strictly speaking engrafted on the hidden core
of Empire, the core metaphysical paradigm of capitalism which
For us this lack of convincing answers suggests that Empire has no interest in the lives of the poor. Meaning as a whole is
is hidden in liberal democracy or more generally and broadly absorbed by Empire and thus the requisite task to unmask its
speaking in the fascist creation of knowledge associated with antics. Once consumed in the mindset of Empire, the lives of
modernity. Whilst it is clear to everyone that political liberation the poor literally become miserable. The Statement (1993) says:
could never have been sufficient for the comprehensive
The cry of the Third World is from the midst of the politics of the
liberation of those living on the underside of modernity, the
powerful who rule by torture, assassination and the contriving
horrifying spectre of the fetishes of neoliberalism continues to
of the disappearance of women and men, and who commit
consume and destroy in all spheres of life. Still, in the context
aggression through proxy wars. The cry raised from the midst
of such horrifying conditions post-1994 in South Africa, blind of structures designed for our subjugation, marginalization and
obedience to modernity continues to shape our policies in extinction, through distorted priorities, skewed agricultural
economics for example. Perhaps a glance on the relationship policies, unjust trade arrangements and inhumane economic
between the fetishes of modernity and spirituality could lead manipulations and pressure tactics—all practised and imposed
to an understanding of this problem, namely, blind loyalty in brutal and subtle ways by neo-colonialism and international
to modernist forms of knowledge, the spectre of horrifying imperialism of money built up through the atrocities, cruelties
and robberies during the era of military colonialism. (p. 47)
episodes of blind loyalty to political leader with answers
Of course the sentiments were made two decades ago, but
4.For a longer discussion of postcolonial discourse and its relationship with the
liberation paradigm, see Vellem (2015b). it is not difficult to agree with the thrust that runs through
Page 5 of 6 Original Research
these lines. In South Africa we have now become familiar antics of Empire. The Statement (1993:57) further says
with violence in politics, we have seen proxy wars in post- that celebration of life is a spiritual response to the cry for
1994 South Africa and the Marikana massacre is but one life and thus, ‘the spiritual traditions of the indigenous
of the worst examples of this violence. The structures that peoples – Native Americans, Aborigines, Maori’s, Dalits,
are designed to subjugate and annihilate are everywhere Tribal peoples of India and Black Africans in Africa – are a
in the open and the recent ‘Rhodes must Fall’ campaign powerful reminder of this fact’ including the struggles for
at the University of Cape Town is one example of the life by women. The Statement (1993) goes on to say:
struggle against these structures. All these distortions are
There is a life force that urges them to seek the glory of God and
paradigmatic cruelties and robberies of modernity and its of creation by seeking the glory of the whole of humanity, for so
colonising, conquering and christianising mindset. The fall to do is to seek a humanity fully alive. (p. 58)
of the Berlin Wall and the demise of apartheid cannot and
will not necessarily imply the change of mindset. These walls One may say this is a bit too theoretical. By no means! In
and their values and goals are in the mindset. To perpetuate unmasking the universe of Empire and its mindset, there is
these goals and values, Empire colonises the mindset. no theory but the praxis of the peoples of the South and all
those totally excluded and oppressed, living on the underside
Unmasking the husk of Empire is decolonising the mindset. of modernity with its effects of racism and capitalism. The
It is about liberating the notions, ideas, perceptions, opinions, cry for life as rebellion and thus insurrection against life
assumptions, beliefs, models, patterns of thought, convictions killing systems is ‘the capacity of the oppressed to change
and faith from the husk of Empire. Unmasking the husk the conditions of their being and in the process change
of Empire means transformation into a new universe5 of themselves’ (Wa Thiongo n.d.:27 of 27).
meaning, a new universe of meaning that is life-affirming.
A return to some of the aspects that Karl Marx raised as in As a theology of life, the cry for life by those living in
the title of the book by Terry Eagleton, Why Marx Was Right conditions that are life killing, as we have already said –
(2011), is equally helpful to unmask the notions that are not a passive cry – provides the active artefacts of critical
related to capitalism in the quest for a life-affirming theology. consciousness and transformation as the nonperson becomes
an agent of his or her life. Ngungi Wa Thiongo (n.d.:10)
The cry for life is a theology of life
makes this point poignantly: ‘one is transformed by that act
of trying to transform’.
Generally speaking, the view that Black Theology is a
theology of life derives from a particular understanding of
Unconcluding thoughts
the word or concept ‘life’. Life is understood as the starting
point of ethics, a precondition of all ethical claims or systems
Black Theology of liberation has to contend with the
(cf. Petrella 2008:13ff.). God is thus understood as God of life
argument that European modernity is racist at its core. In
and this understanding of life is not an abstract but material,
post-1994 South Africa and certainly in global discourses
bodily life; for example, Gustavo Gutiérrez (2007:11) says
on the challenges associated with Empire, to treat racism
‘resurrection is the victory of life over death, while poverty
as a marginal aspect to capitalism might imply turning a
means simply death’. We need to turn this around. There is
blind eye to the fascist nature of knowledge associated with
a sense in which resurrection is rebellion and in the struggles
modernity. Perhaps those who have the liberty and the
for life, the nonperson rebels against the life killing sprit of
space to do so could continue, but the cry for life is simply
Empire. Rebellion against death is to live in the context of
unbearable to those who can hear it. The more we break the
Empire without the ideals and notions of Empire. Rebellion
seals of Empire, the more we peel the husk of Empire, the
against death is to deny victory to torture and starvation in the
louder the cry. In these adverse catastrophic experiences of
context of the militarisation of life by Empire. Rebellion against
black Africans, women and creation, the energy to hold on to
death is bodily resurrection. The symbiosis between neoliberal
life is our method of spirituality for life. Unmasking the husk
capitalism and racism is at its core life killing, but both the
of Empire is a spiritual matter for decolonisation.
philosophy of liberation (Dussel 2008) and its theology posit
life itself as a ‘sovereign’ starting point and a precondition of
Acknowledgements
any claims and systems in the world. The Accra Confession
sees Empire as death dealing and life killing exactly because of Competing interests
this ethical analysis on life that has developed in years within
The author declares that he has no financial or personal
the paradigm of liberation. The cry for life by nonpersons on
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced
which Black Theology of liberation has constantly reflected is
him in writing this article.
therefore a cry for God to be the God of life.