BLACK THEOLOGY OF LIBERATION AND
RADICAL DEMOCRACY: A DIALOGUE
Vuyani Vellem
Director of the Centre for Public Theology
University of Pretoria
Radical Democracy proposes that capitalism should be theorised deeply and
furthermore, that the liberal tradition must not be denounced and rejected by the
Left. It is possible that what seems to be a ‘confusion,’ or ‘confoundedness,’
‘diffusion’ and ‘vicious’ co-optation of liberation symbols since the demise of
Apartheid, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union could be
unravelled with this theory of Radical Democracy. More importantly, Black
Theology of Liberation and its symbiosis with Black Consciousness – having
assumed that socialism rather than capitalism was an appropriate historical project
of obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ – must urgently engage Radical
Democracy in order to deal with the rhetoric of liberation that is becoming
increasingly sterile. This article argues that Black Theology of Liberation must
move beyond reasserting, or rearticulating its core values by recommitting itself to
social analysis – mokgwa wa yona (its very nature) – and relate to social theories of
the reality of our current context. Radical Democracy is thus chosen as a conversant
to examine our social reality post-1994 and to identify lessons that could be drawn
from this theory.
Key Words: Black Theology; Liberal Discourse; Pragmatism; Radical Democracy;
Social Theory
Introduction
The main purpose of this article is to engage the school of Radical Democracy in dialogue
with Black Theology of Liberation. The qualification or descriptor ‘radical’ in relation to
democracy could easily suggest a broad field that might be difficult to demarcate; therefore
this article focuses on Radical Democracy1 as defined by Ernesto Laclau and Chantal
Mouffe. The conversation with Radical Democracy is important because Black Theology of
Liberation itself has often been understood and described as a ‘radical’ school of theology.2
At core is Radical Democracy’s proposition that the liberal democratic ideology should
not be denounced by the Left. Clearly, the articulation of the struggle within the liberal
tradition poses a number of questions – for Black Theology of Liberation in particular. At
1 To distinguish the school, I use capital letters so as to distinguish my use of both terms each time they are not
rendered in capital letters.
2 For example see this article with this clear descriptor by Heltzel, PG 2009: “Radical Evangelical Democracy:
The Dreams and Nightmares of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Antonio Negri,” in Political Theology 10 (2):
287-303. In this article, Martin Luther King’s theology is presented as radical theology. Exponents of Black
Theology will know how James Cone also uses Martin Luther King Jr, Malcom X and the Blues to develop
his model of Black Theology. The point is simply that Black Theology of Liberation could be qualified with
this same descriptor: ‘radical.’
foundation level Black Theology of liberation has been critical of the liberal tradition surely
because of the former's intrinsic link with Black Consciousness.3 In this article, some of the
implications of Radical Democracy are discussed tentatively in order to examine whether
there could be cleavages between the ‘radicality’ of democracy as perceived by Laclau and
Mouffe, and Black Theology of Liberation which “may be called a theology of revolution”
(Cone 1969:32). One of our aims, emanating from the comparison between Radical
Democracy and Black Theology of Liberation, is to argue, if not demonstrate that social
theory is an important tool without which Black Theology of Liberation cannot succeed in
post-1994 South Africa.
Indeed, in the context of what seems to be a ‘confusing’ state about the so-called Left
and Right in our South African politics, since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the demise
of the socialist project in the main and Apartheid as well, social analysis remains
indispensable to unlock the theme of deepening the liberal discourse rather than denouncing
it, as proposed by the Radical Democracy school. It is important also to help us answer
some of the shifts we have seen so far, where those who have been identified as
ideologically critical and opposed to liberalism, seem to have found a way to operate in
spaces that are vividly liberal in orientation and ideology. Our use of the word ‘confusing,’
to describe the post-1994 context whose economic policy framework has been undeniably
neo-liberal, seemingly supported by Leftist exponents, emanates from this context in which
ideological demarcations are no longer easy to make.
Social Theory and Social Analysis in Black Theology of Liberation
Since the development of the liberation paradigm in theology, associated with the Latin
American Liberation Theology, Black Theology of Liberation in North America and South
Africa, African Theology, Minjung Theology in Korea, Dalit Theology in India, Feminist
and Womanist Theologies – captured in the past as Third World Theologies – there
emerged a methodological difference between Western Traditional and Liberation
theologies.
This methodological difference designated by some (Tefsai 1996) as the debate between
Liberation and Orthodoxy, distinguishes the vision, starting points, contours and goals of
doing theology between the two schools. For example, while Orthodox theology sees the
non-believer as its interlocutor, the Liberation paradigm has continued to argue that the
non-person is its interlocutor. Gustavo Gutierrez says, “…we referred to the poor as
nonpersons” (2007:4) and earlier on Boesak (1977:26) employed the same category of non-
person to elucidate the concept of ‘blackness,’i.e., the interlocutor of the liberation
paradigm of doing theology. There is a huge distinction between the goal of a theology that
sees its interlocutor as the non-believer and another whose interlocutor is the non-person. In
the liberation paradigm, the situation of the non-person and thus situation analysis is one of
the key tenets of doing this model of theology.
James Cone, after more than forty years since the publication of one of the foundational
texts in the school: Black Theology of Liberation (1969), has continued to argue even more
aggressively in his most recent work: The Cross and the Lynching Tree (2012), that the
incompatibility between Orthodox and Liberation theologies arises from differences in
3 Those who are familiar with the school of Black Theology of Liberation in South Africa will remember that
one of the doyens of the school, Itumeleng Mosala, was also the President of the Azanian People’s
Organization (Azapo) which was and continues to be a socialist oriented political movement.
Black Theology of Liberation and Radical Democracy: A Dialogue 3
priority questions and silences by the former on issues that are existentially significant to
the latter. For this reason, Cone (1969:117-118), having asserted the need for the analysis
of the situation of a black person as an important task for practising theology, continues to
hold that the questions Black Theology of liberation prioritises are different from those
prioritised by White theology, and by implication, Orthodox theology. The conversation in
this article is based on this understanding of practising theology, aptly described by Cornel
West when he says, “The possibility of liberation is found only within the depths of the
actuality of oppression. Without an adequate social theory, this possibility is precluded”
(1979:557). Black Theology of liberation therefore is a model of theology that is embedded
in the depths and actualities of oppression. For this reason, it is a model of theology that
requires adequate social theory in its analysis of the depths and actualities of oppression.
In South Africa, the importance of social analysis later found expression in the various
phases of development in the school of Black Theology of Liberation. One of the most
telling and pertinent of its phases was the debate between the Racial and Marxist strands in
Black Theology of Liberation.4
Julian Kunnie (1994) argued for a radical social analysis too by proposing folk tales as a
prism for this purpose – the analysis of the experience of oppression. It is also stated clearly
in the Kairos Document that social analysis is a requirement for Prophetic Theology. We
conclude therefore, that without social theory, which is indispensable for social analysis,
we cannot effectively theorise and reflect on the power changes and shifts that have
occurred since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the demise of the USSR and Apartheid and the
end of the Cold War – the 21st century, in short. The motivation to engage the theory of
Radical Democracy stems inter alia from this background. Radical Democracy does not
reject capitalism, and Black Theology of Liberation has not accepted capitalism; nor has it
theorised its relationship with capitalism adequately. The critique of Black Theology of
Liberation by Ivan Petrella, to which I now turn, sheds more light on this aspect of the
discourse.
Beyond the Reassertion, or Rearticulation of Black Theology of Liberation
One point of criticism levelled against Liberation Theology by Ivan Petrella in his book:
The Future of Liberation Theology is that reasserting and rearticulating the core themes of
this paradigm, albeit important, is no longer adequate in the 21st century. In his specific
discussion of ‘Liberation and Capitalism’ he explicitly alludes to the problem of under-
theorising or better, the failure to ground arguments against capitalism on social theory
(2004:69). Petrella continues to argue that the conceptualisation of capitalism by liberation
theology continues to be a hindrance to the liberation paradigm itself to develop new
historical projects (2004:69). Most pertinently for this article is the appeal Petrella makes to
Fernando Cardoso, that “Capitalism must be, and can be through the right combination of
policy and struggle, reworked into socialism,” (2004:73). This is exactly what Laclau and
Mouffe argue, and Petrella seems to suggest that we should theorise capitalism in another
way, more so if our task is grounded on social theory.
We take our cue from the sentiments above to argue that one of the reasons we have
stifled the feasibility of Black Theology of Liberation perhaps in the post-1994 South
4 Gideon Khabela offers an enlightening account of this debate in his PhD thesis, 1992. A Seamless Garment:
Tutu’s Understanding of the Role of the Church in South Africa. Doctoral dissertation. New York: Union
Theological Seminary, pp. 282-287.
Africa is the constant reaction we offer to the external challenges against this school, some
of which are caused deliberately. After decades of the existence of the paradigm of
liberation in South Africa and the world – and in order for us to avoid being recycled as the
contest against this school is unlikely to abate – there is a need to move beyond
rearticulating its core values. For this reason I concur with Petrella. We should further take
our cue from James Cone, in his discussion of the relationship between faith and praxis,
when he says:
While there are different emphases among liberation theologians regarding the major
historical contradiction in society, they all agree with the need to relate theology to a
social theory of reality, because they share the conviction that truth is found in the active
transformation of unjust social structures (1986:46).
To relate our theology to the challenges of the 21st century requires searching for social
theories to which our theological endeavours must be related. The last sentence in the
quotation above is even more telling. It is about the importance of history – active
participation in the transformation of unjust social structures. It is more important, we note,
than differences of emphasis regarding historical contradictions in society. Nonetheless,
this is clearly unattainable without any kind of social analysis and a particular view of
history. We make this point to justify our purpose, namely, the need to dialogue with
Radical Democracy and more broadly, the need for Black Theology of Liberation to heed
social theory and thus social analysis in the development of the school. Let us remember
that Cone, as much as he turned Karl Barth’s theology ‘inside-out’, also reinterpreted the
appropriation of the notion of praxis by equally reversing Dietrich Bonhoeffer’s inter-
pretation of faith and obedience.
Accordingly, he sees obedience as a practical starting point, because: “One meets God
in the process of historical liberation” (Cone 1986:47). It is when faith is gifted from the
struggle for liberation that it might be connected to the “prevenient grace of God,” he
argues (Cone 1986:49). First, there is an agreement at least among all liberation theologians
to relate their theology to social theories of reality. Second, truth erupts in the active
transformation of unjust social structures.5 With these tenets of Black Theology of
Liberation in mind, the need to go beyond re-articulation or reassertion to identifying social
theories that might assist us interpret our current reality could not be overstated. The task to
identify relevant and critical theories has therefore become too serious to overlook. The
perpetual co-optation of the tenets of Black Theology of Liberation even by its worst
adversaries makes this task much more imperative.
Ivan Petrella makes this very point when he challenges Latin Liberation Theology to
move beyond asserting and revising its core values to participating in the construction of a
historical project. Obedience, à la Cone, is in praxis, and God and God’s grace, according
to Black Theology of Liberation is met in the struggles of historical liberation.
Indeed, the crucial relationship between theology and social science must be a well-
known fact. Cone asserted many years ago that Black Theology of Liberation is “a
5 The participation of the church in the struggle was motivated mostly by this understanding for a faithful
participation in the structures of injustice in South Africa. This is what distinguished Black Theology
paradigmatically from Political Theology and the use of Marxist tools by numerous exponents of Black
Theology of Liberation and is adequate testimony in support of this point. We can only recall the debates
between the Race and Materialist strands of Black Theology of Liberation to illuminate the point. We have
alluded to Khabela, but cf. also, Ntintili, V. 1996. “Notions of Liberation in Black Theology: Which is more
Liberative?” in Journal of Black Theology, Vol.10, No.1:1-18.
Black Theology of Liberation and Radical Democracy: A Dialogue 5
conscious investigation of the socio-religious experience of the black people” (1977:16).
“Social context is important” (1977:43) he explained, and we add, fundamental to liberation
theology, meaning that what people think and say about God, Jesus and the church is
difficult to separate from their social and political locations.
That “consciousness is a social construction” (1977:46) is core to the paradigm of Black
Theology of Liberation and other models of liberation theology. For this reason, the need to
participate in the construction of historical projects is not foreign to the heritage of
liberation even though it appears to have disappeared in the post-1994 political context of
South Africa. That these core tenets of the liberation paradigm continue to be co-opted –
even by the champions of neo-liberal institutions in vain, as most of them are not even
committed to the ideals of radical transformation and equality – should be enough reason
for us to worry. This point, we should remember, was made eloquently by Tinyiko
Maluleke and Sarojini Nadar (2004) when they argued poignantly that there is a ‘fraudulent’
discourse of the co-optation of liberation tenets in South Africa. While the versatility of
liberation knowledge could be viewed as a strength, it is not only by rearticulating, or
reasserting liberation knowledge that the tradition of Black Theology of Liberation can
thrive, when this game of ‘fraudulence’ in the 21st century has shifted to a pseudo-religious
crusade, shamelessly poised to conquer the whole of social life and to suspend history
through its convergence of power, money and military violence.6
To defend the heritage of Black Theology of Liberation from any fraudulent co-optation
of its symbols and grammar – we insist – requires a tenacious commitment to social
analysis and thus, social theory.
To illustrate the points argued thus far, the contradictions on liberation knowledge are
clarified by current analyses of the socio-political context post-1994. Kwandiwe Kondlo
(2011) offers a sharp criticism against the South African Communist Party (SACP) in post-
1994 politics. Apart from what he designates a “tired rhetoric of the Left,” the eclecticism
of the Party and the sterility of the vanguardist notion of liberation in his critical analysis of
the SACP, he pleads for serious attention to these weaknesses. He makes this overall
contention:
I would have no problems if the SACP restates its agenda to say it does not seek to
renounce liberal democracy but instead seeks to deepen and expand it ‘in the direction of
radical and plural democracy’ (Laclau & Mouffe 2001).
This offering to the SACP to follow the direction of ‘radical plural democracy’ is our
fascination in this article. The sentiments above ostensibly arise from what seems to be
painfully true in our South African public life, namely that the difference between a
capitalist and a communist is so diffuse today. For example, those who have opposed Julius
Malema’s project of ‘economic liberation in our life-time’ have often pointed to the
contradictions of his lifestyle. They argue that it is necessary for those committed to the
poor to identify with them and their cause by choosing a particular lifestyle. Strangely, the
same critics are not necessarily outside of the ‘Gucci’ and obscene lifestyles of wealth
display for which they criticise Malema. Yet the issues that are raised by Malema appeal to
the masses of the poor and the millions of the youth that are unemployed. After having
6 There is already much literature on Empire and the Accra Confession is one of those symbolic Reformed
contributions against Empire across the globe. Cf. VS Vellem “Convergence and Eschatology: A Black
Theological View of Globalisation and the Rise of ‘Revival Churches,’ a paper delivered in the Democratic
Republic of Congo in 2011 and upcoming, particularly the notion of the convergence of public spheres and its
impact on public life.”
been expelled by the African National Congress (ANC), Malema has now established a
party, the Economic Freedom Fighters, (EFF) and contested elections in 2014 with the
same arguments he advanced while he was President of the Youth League of the same
organisation.
This example is made to point to the contradictions in the ANC, which has – perhaps for
wrong reasons – been identified as a Leftist organisation in opposition to liberal politics.
Does the ANC renounce liberal democracy? This is the question and our argument is that
we could probably respond to this question, or even debate this question meticulously
through social analysis and thus the theoretical assumptions that undergird the choices the
ANC has made in post-1994 democratic South Africa.
Another example is that of the General Secretary of the SACP, Dr Blade Nzimande,
who is the current Minister of Higher Education in South Africa. Ever since his appoint-
ment as a cabinet Minister, he has had to find reason to justify the dual role he plays in
public life as a leader of the Left and a Minister with a Ministerial Handbook that ‘defines’
his lifestyle.
Arguments for him to choose between the two positions have not ceased and time and
again he has had to find ways to explain this matter in his public speeches. It is not the
merits of the positions we have highlighted above that is the bone of our contention for now,
but the contradiction inherent in these examples in so far as the traditional ideological
demarcations that sought to distinguish those who are committed to the poor from the rest
have been understood hitherto. The looming wreckage in the Congress of South African
Trade Unions (Cosatu) and the internal debates on the National Development Plan (NDP)
and the Youth Wage subsidy among others, serve as good examples of what we have
designated as a ‘confusing’ state in our public life, arising from signals that seem to
contradict the positions traditionally held by some individuals or even organisations in the
struggle for liberation.
Kondlo’s point becomes more pertinent when he points to the structural shifts that took
place since 1989 in the world. He argues that these shifts have contributed to the
‘heteronomous’ and ‘autochthonous’ discourses of politics. By these two terms,
‘heteronomous’ and ‘autochthonous’ he means respectively, that since the fall of the Berlin
Wall, politics has become too pragmatic with the sovereignty of the state simultaneously
diminishing – becoming autochthonous. Because of the saturation of pragmatic discourse of
politics in a heteronomous state, theoretical and intellectual discourses are eclipsed if not
muzzled, he argues. The power of the state is also diminishing increasingly, i.e. many states
are gradually losing their sovereign power since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
In this context of saturated pragmatic politics, a context in which ideological contests
and demarcations are so diffuse, confounding and unclear, democracy becomes a tool of the
elitist, too detached from the aspirations of the poor masses.
This is implied by Xolela Mangcu in his critical view of the ‘elite fear of democracy’
and the trade unions in South Africa that can no longer speak for the underdog
(2009:29-31).
The politics of pragmatism muzzles the intellectual discourses once committed to the
plight of the poor, while the elitist groups continue to dominate the political discourse of
the country.
There may be similar charges against Black Theology of Liberation. Since the demise
of Apartheid in South Africa, many negative things have been said or implied about this
intellectual tradition. One should not be worried about the onslaught against Black
Black Theology of Liberation and Radical Democracy: A Dialogue 7
Theology of Liberation, whether subtle, or overt! We should rather be worried about a
Black Theology of Liberation that might be ‘saturated with pragmatism’ and contradiction,
destined to compromise its ‘sovereignty,’ thus becoming a tired rhetoric of liberation in
public life. We should be far more worried about the possibility of a charge against this
school that it ‘speaks left when it walks right.’ It is not a secret that at foundational level,
Black Theology of Liberation, due to its affinity with Black Consciousness, could arguably
be located within the Leftist project of socialism by some of its exponents. For example,
Nkosinathi Biko writes:
The political space of which Steve Biko was a part has seen a number of ‘isms’ turned on
their heads. In the past, the predominant discourse was that of socialism versus
capitalism. In what would have been the year of his retirement (Steve Biko), central
banks around the world are arguing that they need to apply a little socialism in order to
rescue capitalism (2012:1).
Indeed, in the past Black Theology of Liberation, generally speaking, identified with the
Left, socialism perhaps being preferred to capitalism, the point we have already made. Biko
argues that today banks apply a little socialism in order to rescue capitalism. Indeed, the
language of liberation is employed even at that level. Now, can a little capitalism rescue
socialism? This is the question to reiterate for our conversation.
We should be careful with this generalisation in the light of what Itumeleng Mosala
postulated some years ago: “that a plurality of black theologies of liberation is a reality of
the contemporary South African situation as influenced and shaped by black history and
culture in addition to bourgeois society” (1989:190-191). It is therefore important for us to
grasp at this very point that there have been many brands of Black Theology of Liberation.
Tinyiko Maluleke made a similar point:
The decision to encourage diversity in ideological frameworks in the doing of Black
Theology was taken more than a decade ago (1983, 1984 Black Theology conferences).
This diversity is evident in some of the writings of Black theologians in the past decade.
What theologians such as Mosala (1985:109) have, however, insisted upon is that “the
question of ideological framework is of vital importance in any attempt to participate in a
theology of liberation”. This must not be confused to mean that one ideological
framework is better than all others (Maluleke 1995:22).
In this regard one should be soberly conscious of the diverse ideological positions that
might be associated with the school. At the same time, the vital importance of ideology,
clearly linked to a particular social theory, is indispensable to those who do Black Theology
of Liberation. Our focus for this dialogue, nonetheless, is on that brand which, as seen by
Mosala, “consciously adopts a black working-class perspective” (1989:191). Perceived as
the most liberative and comprehensive of the brands of Black Theology of Liberation, this
one which adopts the working-class perspective obviously places the proletariat as the
agent of change, a significant point of dialogue with Radical Democracy. At least,
secondary to the thrust of this article, must be a clear need for social analysis in order to
engage whatever diverse ideological frameworks there are in the school itself or in the
liberation movement.
Following this point above, Nkosinathi Biko suggests that the powerful of this world
can, when it suits them, co-opt socialism, i.e., the tools of the working class perspective of
Black Theology of Liberation. The collapse of the Berlin Wall and the historical fiasco of
the socialist project and the evident co-optation of the socialist tools by the central banks
must remain a challenge to Black Theology of Liberation to the core!
For this reason, it may ultimately be inexcusable for Black Theology to refrain from
dialoguing with new insights that reflect on the tension between capitalism and socialism,
or better, liberty and equality discourses in the 21st century. The theoretical and intellectual
discourse of the school may become sterile in a context of structural pragmatism and
contradictions in public life. The co-optation of the tools of socialism by the liberal project
adds its own dimension to the sterility of the liberation project. How does Black Theology
of Liberation move beyond rearticulating or renouncing its positions for meaningful
engagement with liberal democracy and the contradictions that are prevalent since the
demise of Apartheid? Let us turn to Radical Democracy with this question in mind.
Radical Democracy: Alternative for a New Left
This subtitle above is the exact title of an article written by two leading scholars in the field
of Radical Democracy, Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe in 1985. We should state
upfront that their writings, which I am constantly quoting, are rather intellectually
challenging – a situation which finds its parallel in a remark once made by Maluleke,
namely that the Marxist tools are “…excellent theories … [but] the protestations of its
adherents are often difficult, if not impossible, to translate for mass benefit and
consumption” (1996:34).
This does not mean that he denies the liberative potential of these theories; long ago
Takatso Mofokeng expressed similar sentiments about Marxism vis-à-vis the importance
and centrality of the Bible among the poor, which in our South African context may
arguably be the only weapon in their hands for their liberation struggle.7 Notwithstanding
these cautionary views, our attempt is to delve into the foundational level and propose that
such intellectual tools espousing a socialist, Leftist option (to which Black Theology of
Liberation has been known to be committed, no matter how difficult) deserve attention.
Radical Democracy is one such a social theory with which we need to dialogue more
because its proponents have also been known to be Marxists.
Laclau and Mouffe argue that as an alternative for the Left, they locate themselves fully
in the field of democratic revolution. They explicitly state that:
The task of the Left therefore cannot be to renounce liberal democratic ideology, but on
the contrary to deepen and expand it in the direction of a radical and plural democracy
(Laclau and Mouffe 2010:492).
This is what is at the core of Radical Democracy, the deepening and expansion of liberal
democracy rather than its denunciation. Known to be Marxists themselves, they criticise the
deterministic nature of Marxism and point to the failure of the Left to contend with the
shifts, or displacements of what they call nodal points that structure social formation which
are important to locate for liberation struggles. Due to a dogmatic view of class analysis,
these shifts or nodal points elude the Left. They argue that classism, “the idea that the
working class represents the privileged agent in which the fundamental impulse of social
change resides” is an obstacle. Against this dogmatism, which in their view leads to what
they designate as ‘essential fixity,’ they posit that a deeper understanding of the notion of
revolution might be helpful to disentangle the Left from its weaknesses.
7 Gerald West has used this argument in his paper entitled: ‘Mbeki’s Bible’. He suggests that Mbeki’s use of
the Bible derives from the conscious knowledge that the masses of the people of this country rely more on the
Bible than on Marxist tools in their quest for liberation.
Black Theology of Liberation and Radical Democracy: A Dialogue 9
For example, they argue, revolution is foundational, it instantiates a new concentration
of power around which society could be newly reorganised. Revolution is a process which
has both internal and external moments. In the process of revolution therefore, the
multiplication of political spaces that prevent the concentration of power in one point then
become conditions for democratic transformation. Let me allow them to speak:
The classic conception of socialism supposed that the disappearance of private
ownership of the means of production would set up a chain of effects which, over a
whole historical epoch, would lead to the extinction of all forms of subordination. Today
we know that this is not so (in Lemert 2010:493).
These sentiments are too important to ignore. Private ownership has not disappeared even
though there have been successful struggles against subordination. If rather than the
disappearance of private ownership, socialism itself disappears, what then will replace it for
the eradication of private ownership? Can we deny that there have been chains of effect that
combined, leading to the extinction of sexism and gender oppression while capitalism
remained intact? they ask. In other words, have no struggles been waged and won over
subordination while at the same time leaving capitalism untainted? These are the questions
directed mainly against the classical view of socialism, the deterministic, essentialist view
of socialism and classism.
Radical Democracy, does not reject socialism; rather, their exponents perceive
socialism as one of the components of Radical Democracy, not the other way around. The
anti-democratic features of socialism are repudiated, while liberal democracy is not rejected,
but targeted wherever the possibilities of Radical Democracy exist. According to Anna
Marie Smith, the rights discourse dubbed “generative principles of democracy” should be
embraced , as progressive instances of the liberal democratic moments” (1998:5). Smith
argues that human rights can incite the emancipatory struggle even though that discourse is
originally bourgeoise. She says:
Marxist discourse privileges class as the primary form of social agency and capitalist
exploitation as the primary form of domination. It is, in this sense, an essentialist
discourse that cannot grasp the irreducible multiplicity of oppressive power relations;
only an anti-essentialist discourse can perform this task (1998:41).
Radical Democracy simply rejects anti-democratic elements in socialism, while it retains
the Marxist critique of liberal politics without rejecting the emancipatory and generative
principles of democratic revolution in liberal politics. What can one make of this argument
in explicit terms? The argument probably suggests that Black Theology of liberation should
not denounce liberal democratic ideology because according to the school of Radical
Democracy, liberal discourse on individual rights is not fixed. It might be an error to fix
individual rights to the liberal discourse in the same way as it was for the Marxist tradition
to fix its praxis on class. So, liberal democracy should be denounced on the pivot of
individual rights as many critiques sought to treat it.
There is a sense also in which one might understand Radical Democracy as placing
liberal discourse and socialism as its components; in other words, Radical Democracy is not
a component of socialism, but above it and in this sense, above liberalism. Democracy
cannot be abandoned in favour of socialism. This presents our attempt to interpret the
meaning of Radical Democracy. So in the end, could Radical Democracy offer a possibility
of liberation within the depths of the oppression of millions of South Africans since the
dawn of democracy in this country? Let us see whether there are lessons that can be drawn
from what we have understood so far as Radical Democracy.
Tentative Lessons of the Dialogue
There are mutual lessons both schools can learn from each other – Black Theology of
Liberation and Radical Democracy.
That there are strong affinities between the two schools enriches the language and
symbols of liberation in the post-1994 political dispensation and the global stage of power
contestations in the 21st century. The fact that there are anti-democratic fault lines in both
the socialist and the liberal discourses is not only refreshing, but pivotal for the critical role
that Black Theology of Liberation can play in post-Apartheid South Africa. Importantly,
Radical Democracy takes language seriously in the formulation of anti-totalitarian
discourses. It argues that the liberal discourse creates new definitions and changes terms to
erode the gains of the liberation struggle. This point captures what Black Theology of
Liberation has decried as the co-optation of the liberation symbols.
At another point Laclau and Mouffe distance themselves from Habermas, whom they
perceive to conjure a rationality of ‘pre-established universality’ (Buttler et al. 2000:3).
This must reinforce the position Black Theology of Liberation has taken against
universalism. Itumeleng Mosala (1989) offers a good example in his analysis of the
tensions between universality and particularity for black hermeneutics. Terry Eagleton’s
views on universality are also relevant: he argues that for some universality has meant that
the West is the sole bearer of universal values and places capitalism in our globalising
world as one value that has ousted every space and everyone today. According to him the
values of equality find expression in the myths of equality promised by the market in the
globalised world (2009:72-73). These twisted values of universality demonstrate the
dilemmas that the pre-established universality of Western discourse often imposed on
Black Theology of Liberation.
So in the critique of universality there is convergence between Black Theology of
Liberation and Radical Democracy and indeed there is a mutual and reciprocal borrowing
of concepts and language in this regard. Importantly, there is a caution here for Black
Theology of Liberation itself to be sensitive to conjuring up disguised universalities
obviously implied in the fixed dogmas and essentialism that might have hampered its
development.
On the question of interlocution, Ernesto Laclau's review of the notion of populism in
his book On Populist Reason traces the disintegration of the psychological currents of
theories of crowd psychology (2007:39). Laclau delves into the Freudian categories of
social theory to demonstrate how the notion of crowd and its psychology has been
developed and viewed to be distinct from ‘public,’ with the notion of public being
construed as a body “whose cohesion is mental” (2007:44). ‘Populism’ he argues, has been
connected to a ‘dangerous excess,’ in the past (2007:X). The language provided by Laclau
in this regard, particular the statement about populism as being “a way of constituting the
political” (2007:X), reinforces the long-held view in Black Theology of Liberation of the
experience of the non-person as the necessary starting point for theology. This is a rich
point of dialogue particularly because of the resources he employs to argue his point.
Laclau himself affirms the Fanonian ‘wretched of the earth’ which resounds tout court with
Steve Biko’s tradition of Black Consciousness, integral to Black Theology of Liberation.
As a digression of the three Greek words that are used to refer to people in the New
Testament, ochlos seems to be the category with which Jesus identified rather than laos and
ethnos. The ochlos are these crowds in the Bible, the riff-raff of society, the underdogs, the
lumpenproletariat as Marx defined them, who are the ‘excesses’ of society destined to be
Black Theology of Liberation and Radical Democracy: A Dialogue 11
‘far away from civilisation.’ This is the category that defines the ‘disdainful’ notion of
‘blackness,’ the non-person to whom Black Theology of liberation seeks to deliver the
liberating message of the Gospel of Christ. To recapitulate the main point we are making in
this section, we are still considering Laclau’s development of his theory of populism and its
resonance with Black Theology of Liberation. In other words, Radical Democracy is an
agonistic theory of democracy in conflict with some tenets of the liberal discourse, while
reformulating it together with the socialist project. Dare we say that Radical Democracy
seeks to ‘colonise’ the liberal tradition into the Left? Well, further dialogue with Radical
Democracy is necessary, but for our purpose, we have attempted to identify gaps between
the schools in the light of our major argument in this article, namely, the need to pursue the
gains of the liberation paradigm through social analysis and social theory. Radical
Democracy sheds some light on what we have designated a ‘confusing’ state in our context
of democracy in South Africa, but there are divergences.
Some Differences between Radical Democracy and Black Theology
of Liberation
There should obviously be some careful distinction between the two schools. Deepening
the liberal discourse rather than denouncing or renouncing it must still contend with the fact
that the French Revolution to which the liberal discourse is ultimately traced, may not stand
as an alternative vision of liberation than the Haitian Revolution for Black Theology of
Liberation. The Haitian Revolution may not necessarily be chosen for the sake of making
choices, but simply because it is not mainstreamed; yet the two erupted almost at the same
time. Moreover that the translation of the gains of the liberal discourse from the West to
Africa did the opposite, remains one of the striking quagmires one has to contend with
continuously. The black African experience, up to this day, continues to be a festering
wound inflicted by those who benefited from the virtues of the liberal discourse upon
arriving on the continent in our land South Africa. It is difficult to place the liberation
vision on the traditions and values that were enjoyed by those who used them as bitterest
sources of oppression and subordination in the non-Western worlds.
Mahmood Mamdani (1996) has already made a point we cannot overlook about the
language of human rights. He cautions that this language often takes the discourse of justice
two steps backward. Indeed if the liberty discourse is seen as a replacement of equality and
justice, and thus the abandonment of socialism, then deepening the liberal tradition can be
dangerous. Often, this ensues when an attempt is made at deepening both of these traditions
simply because one has become powerful and cunning by co-opting the symbols of the
other in a parasitic manner. Mahmood Mamdani’s insights remain invaluable for the
deepening of liberal politics to include equality, while the socialist paradigm is equally
denuded of its anti-democratic weaknesses.
There is an important point that probably defeats the undeniable pivotal point of Radical
Democracy, viz. that nodal points often change as a result of variable political spaces that
emerge due to revolutions. For this reason, the argument goes, agents of change should not
be determined a priori, as the Left sought to argue. Stated otherwise, one could say that
Radical Democracy suggests that true democratic transformation occurs when there are
multiple political spaces that inevitably prevent the concentration of power in one point.
However, Black Theology of Liberation follows what Jesus Christ himself taught, and the
choices he made to side with the poor. This is the nodal point for any struggle even when
there are multiple spaces of radicalism: the mystery of the preferential option for the poor.
Ultimately, for Black Theology of Liberation the question is whether there could be any
compatibility between capitalism and the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Conclusion
The relationship between Black Theology of Liberation and social science, ka mokgwa wa
yona (its manner of doing theology), is no longer a luxury, but an essential to traverse the
vicious and tempestuous terrains of socio-political and economic theories in the 21st
century challenges. The co-optation of liberation tools and the saturation of pragmatic
politics not only diffuse and confuse the boundaries of ideological contestations in South
African public life and the globe, but also challenge Black Theology of Liberation to move
beyond rearticulating its core values as a strategy. If there is a social theory that justifies
embracing the liberal tradition in the same manner as the Radical Democracy school then
Black Theology of Liberation cannot lament, but engage this theory and probably even
have a better grasp of the seismic power shifts that have occurred in the 21st first century.
There are many lessons that can be harnessed from the Radical School of Democracy,
one of which is the deepening of the liberal discourse through the generative principles that
are located in both liberty and equality projects. Clearly, the socialist project of equality
cannot be abandoned; rather the anti-democratic antics of both the liberal and social
discourses must be repudiated. Indeed, after 20 years of democracy, are there no signs of
anti-democratic practices within the former liberation movements and organisations that
were regarded as exponents of the liberation struggle? This task of unveiling anti-
democratic practices, particularly in relation to our Leftist discourse, is urgent today. If the
‘crowds,’ the lumpenproletariat, the millions of the poor who are unemployed, including
those on state grants and the masses who are on service delivery strikes are sheer ‘excesses’
of the political settlement after Apartheid, then it is not their exclusion, but their
participation in democracy that will provide radical tools with new nodal points of
revolution to reclaim democracy itself to the people.
There are, however, important convergences and divergences between the schools. The
French and the Haitian Revolutions point to the ‘yes’ and ‘no’ relationship that Black
Theology of Liberation will continue to have with Western traditions. Whether Rightist or
Leftist, Black Liberation Theology remains a discourse shaped by the festering wounds of
those living in the trenches and dungeons of impoverishment by the West. This is not a
fixed position of Black Theology of Liberation, but a revelation from the Cross of Jesus in
whose obedience the preferential option for the poor remains the locus of the manifestation
of God’s grace.