Bulk Synthesis of Iron-based Superconductors
Athena S. Sefat ♣
Materials Science & Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA
e-mail: sefata@ornl.gov
Phone: (865)574-5495
Fax: (865) 576-5023
Exploratory synthesis efforts for iron-based superconductors (FeSC) have been driven by
hopes of improving superconducting critical temperatures (T s), providing high-quality samples
for in-depth studies of intrinsic properties, and exploring potential superconductivity in similar
families of materials. This manuscript summarizes the synthesis routes that are used for
producing FeSC and their undoped parents, in single crystal and polycrystalline forms. A few of
the materials challenges are summarized.
1. Introduction
High-temperature superconductivity (HTS) is among the most mysterious and elusive
properties in condensed matter physics. The design of new and improved superconducting
materials is of crucial importance both for understanding the fundamental nature of the
superconducting state and for fulfilling the promise of superconductive materials for widespread
use in energy-related needs such as generators and transmission lines. The reasonably high T s,
high upper critical fields (H ), relatively small anisotropy, and long coherence length make the
FeSC encouraging for high-field applications. However, better properties are still needed in order
to make superconductors widespread. The accidental discovery of Fe-based superconductors in
an oxyarsenide in 2008 [1], which followed that of Ni- and Fe-based oxyphosphides with the
same crystal structure [2 - 4], instigated extensive research efforts for understanding the causes
of HTS, finding new FeSC, and for hunting for HTS in similar structure-types without iron.
The FeSC have similarities to the other well-known cuprate family of high temperature
superconductors in that they have layered quasi two-dimensional tetragonal structures, feature
square planar iron sheets analogous to the copper sheets in the cuprates, and are near
antiferromagnetism (AF). However, unlike the cuprate, in which the Cu-Cu distances are long (~
3.85 Å) with AF resulting from local-moment superexchange interactions, the Fe-Fe distances
are short (2.67 to 2.85 Å) in FeSC; Fe 3d states dominate the density of states at the Fermi level,
and AF is a result of itinerant electrons nesting at the Fermi surface [5]. As a result, unlike the
cuprates, in which the parents are Mott-Hubbard insulators, the parents of FeSC are spin-density-
wave [6], with a Fermi surface that is very sensitive to small changes in chemical substitutions or
pressure [5, 7]. Moreover, superconductivity can be caused by electron doping in Fe planes [8,
9], as opposed to the cuprates, in which the Cu layers need to stay intact. This may suggest that
the role of Fe in FeSC may be less critical.
With the discovery of FeSC, and the extraordinarily rich crystal chemistry of this system,
the synthesis of superconducting materials has expanded to more diversified techniques. The
synthesis of FeSC is more difficult compared to that of the cuprates, due to the high toxicity of
arsenic and selenium elements, the high vapor pressure of arsenic (at ~600 °C, 1 atm), the high
moisture/oxygen reactivity and the low melting points of alkali metals and alkaline-earth metals,
and the oxygen sensitivity of rare-earth metals. As a result, the preparation of FeSC is carried out
in an inert-gas-filled glovebox, with ppm pressure levels of O and H O. In addition, the
materials are also air sensitive during reaction temperatures, so unlike the cuprates, the synthesis
is complicated by the need to seal the reactions in vacuum or inert atmospheres. For single-
crystal synthesis, although float-zone technique is primarily used for cuprates, flux-growth and
Bridgman techniques are used for FeSC, as will be described below. For film deposition,
physical vapor deposition and solution methods have been commonly employed for cuprates,
such as pulsed injection metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and metal organic
deposition (MOD) of precursors followed by decomposition and reaction anneals; however,
deposition techniques involving high vacuum such as pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) have been used for FeSC [10, 11].
All of the FeSC (> 50 compounds) have been discovered using chemical intuition and
synthesis attempts. Such explosive growth of materials, along with experimental knowledge, has
yet to be matched by theory. These materials are all based on tetragonal crystal structures that are
made of FeAs or FeSe layers, with nominally divalent iron in tetrahedral coordination. FeSC can
be categorized by chemical formula and structure type into the following five family types:
‘1111’ ZrCuSiAs-type of RFeAsO (R = rare earth) [1], ‘122’ ThCr Si -type of BFe As (B =
alkaline earth) [12] or B Fe Se (B = alkali or alkaline-earth metal) [13], ‘111’ Cu Sb-type of
LiFeAs [14], ‘11’ PbO-type of FeSe [15], and ‘42622’ Sr FeO CuS-type of Sr Sc O Fe P [16].
2 3 4 2 6 2 2
At room temperature, all of the families are in the P4/nmm space group, with the exception of
122 in the I4/mmm. All of the families have similar room temperature a-lattice parameters of ≈
3.9 Å, comparable to cuprates. The c-lattice parameters vary from ≈ 5.1 Å for 11, to 15.8 Å for
42622.
In FeSC, although the maximum T to date is only 55 K, the materials are fairly
isotropic, tolerate disorder well, show great chemical flexibility, and are amenable to first-
principles approaches that should add fundamental knowledge to the causes of unconventional
superconductivity. The maximum T is found in the 1111 family by electron doping within the
RO planes in Gd Th FeAsO [17], SmFeAsO F [18], SmFeAsO [19], SmFeAsO H
0.8 0.2 0.9 0.1 0.85 0.8 0.2
[20], and Sr Sm FeAsF [21]. In 122, T as high as 47 K are found in arsenides by electron
doping within B sheets in Ca La Fe As [22] and Ca Pr Fe As [23], and in selenides by
0.8 0.2 2 2 0.85 0.15 2 2
having off-stoichiometry in Na Fe Se [24]. In 11, isovalent substitution gives highest T = 15
0.7 1.8 2 C
K in FeSe Te [25]. Slightly off-stoichiometric 111 and 42622 give T = 18 K in Li FeAs [14,
0.5 0.5 C x
26] and T = 37 K in ‘Sr V O Fe As ’ [27, 28].
C 4 2 6 2 2
Below is a brief survey of the literature’s synthesis-strategic routes for making the five
families of FeSC; for the complete list of all FeSC, several of which will not be discussed below,
the reader is to refer to literature. The survey highlights the role of chemistry in the creation of
all of the FeSC, illustrating the power of chemical intuition and exploratory synthesis efforts.
2. Overview of Synthesis Routes
In order to achieve a precise, correct, and deep insight into the causes of high-temperature
superconductivity, good crystalline quality and non-amorphous materials are highly desirable. In
a non-amorphous sample, the constituent atoms are arranged in an orderly pattern persisting over
distances much larger than the size of the unit cell. A polycrystalline material can be defined as
possessing ordered regions (grains) of ~ 1 - 10 μm (< 105 Å) in size, and single crystals may be
defined as having ~ 0.1 mm to cm (> 106 Å) size crystallites. Whether the material is obtained as
a single crystal or in polycrystalline form depends on the synthesis conditions used. Although the
preparation of quality single crystals is crucial for finding the anisotropic and intrinsic properties,
in some materials crystal preparation is very difficult. Although a crystal can be synthesized in a
pristine form, small departures from regularity may exist in the forms of small imperfections and
impurity inclusions. These defects can result in variations in composition and structure, leading
to deviation from the intrinsic bulk transport and magnetic properties of the crystal.
The T seems to be mainly determined by chemical composition and structure, whereas
H and current density (J ) are also influenced by microstructures that can be optimized by
varying processing conditions. In order to understand the causes of superconductivity at a certain
T , it is essential to study homogenous and high-purity single crystals with minimal strain and no
grain boundaries. Only once the materials problems are overcome can the universal structural
and property features among the different superconducting classes in cuprates and FeSC be
determined.
For the FeSC and their parents, chemical reactions are not performed under ambient
conditions due to the air sensitivity of the reactants (rare-earths, alkali metals, alkaline-earth
metals), reactant toxicity and volatility at reaction temperatures (arsenic, selenium), and the
desire to form products without oxygen (e.g., in 122, 111, 11) and to have the metal in low
nominal oxidation state (Fe2+). Thus in the preparation of FeSC, the reactions are often loaded
into silica ampoules, evacuated (and sometimes backfilled with inert gas), and then sealed by
melting the silica using a blow torch. In sealed tubes, however, significant pressures can build
up, and care should be taken to avoid minor explosions.
Below, the five synthetic methodologies that are used for making the five families of
FeSC are highlighted. A description of each synthesis method is given, along with the list of
families that are prepared. It should be noted that the following is not an exhaustive review of
synthesis conditions presented in the literature; further details can be found within the reference
lists and additional search of literature.
2.1 Solid-state method
This is the most commonly used method for the preparation of a material with multi-
elements, especially if no prior knowledge of synthesis conditions exists. This method involves
elevated and prolonged heating of the correct molar proportions of the appropriate solid reactants
(elements or binaries) in powder forms. Non-pure, hygroscopic, non-stoichiometric, and volatile
reactants should be avoided, as impurities are impossible to remove at the end of the reaction.
This method enables the synthesis of mainly thermodynamically stable phases, since the reaction
occurs in the solid state (no melting) and requires the diffusion of ions across the grains’ points
of contacts. New structures (the desired material) can form at the phase boundary between the
grains. In order to speed up the reactions in the solid-state method, the temperature can be
increased to improve diffusion; the mixture can be ground to improve homogeneity and reduce
particle size, and the powder mixture can be pelletized to improve grain contacts and to lessen
voids.
The solid-state method has been used for the preparation of all of the five families of
FeSC, with multiple steps, high sintering temperatures, and sealed reactions. Resistive-heating
box furnaces and high melting-point silica (T ~1250 ºC) vessels have been used to contain the
reactions, possibly in conjunction with alumina or precious metal (Au, Pt) containers. Because of
the air-sensitivity or toxicity of many of the reactants, the air exposure is minimal or avoided.
For producing 1111 FeSC, fluorine can be chemically substituted for oxygen in
LaFeAsO F (max T ≈ 26 K). The stoichiometric molar reactant mixtures are pelletized and
sealed in silica tubes, and then heated at 1250 °C for ~ 40 hours. The discovery report on
LaFeAsO F uses the set of reactants listed in equation a; the x-ray diffraction pattern for x =
0.05 gives evidence of minority FeAs and LaOF crystalline impurities [1]. Because the grain
surface of lanthanum powders is usually oxidized and lanthanum chunks cannot be ground and
homogenized with other reactants, a proceeding report offers a different set of reactants that are
listed in equation b, with LaAs prepared as a binary first [29]. In this report, ~5% impurity phase
of La (SiO ) O phase is detected in x-ray diffraction of x= 0.11 (T = 27 K), due to surface
4.67 4 3 C
reaction of the pellet with the silica vessel containing the pellet because of the high anneal
temperatures (1250 °C) and durations (40 hrs) [29]. A third report prepares this material (T = 20
K) by using Fe O as the source of oxygen (see equation c); the reactants are reacted longer and
at a lower temperature of 1150 ºC in a tantalum crucible that are sealed in silica [30]. Other
fluorine-doped 1111 polycrystalline superconductors, with T values as high as 55 K, are found
by replacement of La with other rare-earths in similar reactions, initially in SmFeAsO F and
NdFeAsO F [18, 31, 32].
(a) (1-x)/3 La O + x/3 LaF + (1+x)/3 La + FeAs  LaFeAsO F
2 3 3 1-x x
(b) (1+x)/3 LaAs + ½ Fe As + (1-x)/3 La O + x/3 LaF + (1-2x)/6 As  LaFeAsO F
2 2 3 3 1-x x
(c) (1-x/3) LaAs + x/3 LaF + (1-x)/3 Fe O + (1 + 2x)/3 Fe + x/3 As  LaFeAsO F
3 2 3 1-x x
(d) LaAs + x/3 Co O + (3-4x)/9 Fe O + (3-x)/9 Fe  LaFe Co AsO
3 4 2 3 1-x x
For producing 1111 FeSC, cobalt can also be chemically substituted for iron in LaFe Co AsO
(max T ≈ 15 K). For making this transition-metal doped 1111 superconductor, reactants in
equation d are used, with several regrinding and annealing procedures at 1220 ºC for 12 hrs;
minor impurity phases of FeAs, La O and La(OH) are however reported [9].
For producing 122 FeSC, potassium can be chemically substituted for barium in Ba
K Fe As (max T ≈ 38 K). The stoichiometric molar amounts of the elements, listed in
equation e, are placed inside an alumina crucible, sealed in a silica tube in partial pressure of
argon, and then heated at 600 °C for 15 hours [12]. After the reaction is cooled, the products are
ground and pressed into a pellet; annealing and regrinding procedures are then followed at 650
°C and 750 °C; minor impurity phase of FeAs (~ 6%) is reported [12]. For producing other types
of 122 FeSC, phosphorus can isovalently substitute for arsenic in BaFe (As P ) (max T ≈ 32
2 1-x x 2 C
K); the list of reactants in equation f is used, and annealing and regrinding steps at 300 °C, 900
°C, and 1000 °C; minor secondary phase of Fe P is detected [33].
(e) (1-x)Ba + x K + Fe + As  Ba K Fe As
(f) Ba + 2Fe +2(1-x)As + 2xP  BaFe (As P )
For producing 11 FeSC of FeSe (max T = 8 K), stoichiometric amounts of selenium
and iron powders are mixed according to equation g, ground, pelletized, and then annealed
several times in evacuated silica tubes up to 700 °C [15]. Minor impurity phases of hexagonal
Fe Se , Fe, FeSi, and Fe O can be detected. Higher T = 15 K is produced by isovalent
substitution of selenium for tellurium in FeTe Se [25]. Using equation h, and annealing steps
at 600 °C and 650 °C produces mainly pure products, with minor hexagonal Fe Se impurity.
(g) Fe + x Se  FeSe
(h) Fe + (1-x)Se + xTe  FeTe Se
For producing 111 FeSC (max T = 18 K), highly air sensitive Li FeAs is synthesized
from elements according to equation i, or by using Li and FeAs binary [14, 26, 34]. The
stoichiometric amounts of reactants are reacted up to 800 °C for ~ 1 day, in niobium [26] or
tantalum tubes [34] that are backfilled with ~ 1 atm of argon, sealed in silica; FeAs impurity is
noted in the products. 111 can also be synthesized in gold crucibles under high pressures of 1.8
GPa, at a reduced reaction time (~1 hr) and Li evaporation [26].
Superconductivity is also produced by chemical substitution of iron with cobalt (or
nickel) in NaFe Co As (max T = 20 K) [35]; the elemental reagents (equation j) are sealed
under 1 atm of argon in a niobium tube, and followed by annealing steps at 200 °C and 750 °C
[35].
(i) xLi + Fe + As  Li FeAs
(j) Na + (1-x)Fe + xCo + As  NaFe Co As
For producing 42622 FeSC (max T = 37 K), stoichiometric amounts of SrAs, V O , SrO,
Fe and Sr can be ground and pressed into a pellet, followed by heating in sealed silica tube at
1150 ºC [27]. Another publication uses a different set of reactants namely V O , SrO , Sr, and
FeAs, with heating at 750 ºC and then at 1150 ºC [36]. A more viable set of reactants is listed in
equation k, since SrAs is hard to purity and chunks of Sr cannot be homogenized with other
powders; highest T is produced by heating at 850 ºC, then at 1150 ºC (24 hrs); products
contained FeAs and Sr VO impurities [28].
(k) 4SrO + 2VAs + 2/3 Fe + 2/3Fe O  Sr V O Fe As
2 3 4 2 6 2 2
2.2 Bridgman method
In this synthesis method, congruently melting mixtures of elements or binaries are heated
to slightly above their melting point in a sealed inert crucible, and crystals are grown by slow
cooling from the melt. There exists a temperature gradient across the reaction such that crystals
nucleate in the colder part of the crucible, growing slowly out of the melt. This method cannot be
used to grow materials that have high melting points as containers and tubes for containing the
reaction may be hard to find; also there may be difficulties in attaining and controlling the high
temperatures required for the melt. Among the FeSC, 42622, 1111, and 111 families either have
very high melting temperatures or decompose before melting.
The 11 family of FeTe Se is readily grown via directional crystallization from the melt
using this method, however, there are compositional gradients (x variations) and regions of phase
segregation within a ‘single crystal’ boule [37]. In order to grow 11, molar reactant amounts of
the reactants (equation h) are loaded into a tip-shaped silica ampoule, evacuated and sealed.
Melting is ensured at 1070 ºC or lower, and the reaction is homogenized by dwelling for many
hours (≥ 36 hrs), and then cooled in a temperature gradient furnace at ~4 ºC/hr [37]. Due to the
thermal shock that the Bridgman silica vessel may experience, it is sealed into a second silica
ampoule in order to hold vacuum during crystal growth. The Bridgman grown crystal boules can
be more than a cm on a side; crystals can be easily cleaved perpendicular to the c axis (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Bridgman-grown 11 iron-based superconductor, with
average composition of Fe Te Se (T ≈ 15 K).
δ 0.75 0.25 C
There is a report of 122 BaFe (As P ) crystal (less than 1 mm size) grown using the
2 0.68 0.32 2
Bridgman method [38]. For this, first a polycrystalline material is prepared similar to described
above and equation f. The material is then placed into an alumina crucible and sealed inside a
niobium container. An inductive furnace is used to reach temperatures well above 1250 ºC, then
cooled (60 ºC/hr).
There are several reports for the synthesis of 122 selenides using Bridgman method,
starting with K Fe Se (T ≈ 30 K) giving mm size crystals [13]. However, alkali metal and
iron contents along with the roles of chemical disorder and phase segregations, which seem to be
important for obtaining superconductivity, remain to be matters of debate in these crystals.
2.3 Flux method
This method is used for growing crystals by slow-cooling a supersaturated solution.
Materials that melt incongruently or at very high-temperatures, or that decompose before
melting, can be grown out of a flux. The use of a flux allows for short crystal-growth time scales
and significantly-lowered reaction temperatures. A flux is a low melting-temperature solvent that
is used to dissolve reactants; the flux can be composed of metal elements (e.g., Zn, Ga, In, Sn),
eutectic salts (e.g. NaCl/KCl), or binaries (e.g., FeAs). A good flux offers reasonable solubility
and diffusivity for the reactants, and can be easily separated from the products; it does not enter
the crystal as inclusions or chemical substitutions, nor does it form competing stable compounds
with reactants. The flux method is commonly used for the crystal preparations of 122, and rarely
for 11 and 1111, families of FeSC.
Solution growth from salts generally produces very small crystals, but the removal of salt
is easy by rinsing in deionized water. The crystals of 1111 and 11 have been grown out of salt.
LaFeAsO F and LaFe Co AsO, as large as a few mm on a side, are grown out of NaAs (T
1-x x 1-x x melt
= 600 ºC) [39]. For this, a solution with molar ratio of polycrystalline 1111:NaAs = 1:20 are
sealed in a tantalum tube under partial argon atmosphere, and then sealed in an evacuated silica
tube; the reaction is heated to 1150 ºC (dwell 24 hrs) and cooled to 600 ºC (3 ºC/hr). In order to
ensure sufficient fluorine doping in LaFeAsO F , a small amount of NaF was added to NaAs,
however, only partial maximum T = 12 K is achieved; it is also reported that ~ 0.2 atomic % of
Ta from the crucible material is incorporated inside these crystals [39]. FeSe crystals, < 1 mm
on a side, are grown out of excess KCl (T = 770 ºC) [40] or NaCl/KCl eutectic (T = 650
ºC) [41], in an evacuated sealed silica tube by heating up to 850 ºC, and slowly cooling to the
solidification temperature of the salts.
Flux method from elemental metals of tin (T = 232 ºC) and indium (T = 157 ºC) are
reported to produce mm size 122 crystals [40, 41]; however, metals get incorporated inside the
crystals (up to 1 atomic %), and can dramatically change the intrinsic properties [42]. For
producing Ba K Fe As crystals, the molar ratio of the elements and excess Sn are placed in an
MgO crucible; the reaction is heated to 850 ºC, then slow cooled to 500 ºC. Flux is removed by
the use of a centrifuge and a ‘catch crucible’ (an inverted crucible, containing silica wool, which
is sealed on top of the reaction crucible). In addition to the metal flux incorporating in the
crystal, it is reported that K concentration can vary along the length of a crystal due to its high
volatility [42].
Flux method from FeAs binary material that already makes up part of the FeSC (‘self-
flux’), is reported to produce the largest and highest quality 122 crystals [8]. Crystals are
reported to grow as well-formed plates, with the c-crystallographic direction perpendicular to the
planes, with flat faces that are easily cleavable (Figure 2). Although FeAs is not a typical flux, in
that it melts at a relatively high 1042 ºC, it has become the solution for producing single phase
and large 122 FeSCs, as evident from several hundred reports on understanding their properties.
In order to produce the flux of FeAs, care should be taken as arsenic sublimes before melting; the
recipe is to place molar ratios of Fe and As inside a sealed thick-walled silica ampoule, slowly
heat (30 ºC/hr) to 700 ºC (dwell 6 hrs), then (60 ºC/hr) to 1065 ºC (dwell 10 hrs), followed by
cooling. Anisotropic properties of the first clean BaFe As parent along with BaFe Co As
2 2 2-x x 2
superconductor (ΔT = 0.6 K; full shielding; T = 22 K) was reported by using FeAs flux [8].
In order to grow single crystals out of transition-metal arsenides (TAs), equations l and m
can be followed by using molar ratio of 1:4 or 1:5 of alkaline-earth metal (A) to TAs. The
reactions are typically placed in alumina crucibles, and then sealed under partial argon
atmosphere inside a silica tube; they are heated to 1180 ºC (dwell > 5 hrs), cooled slowly (~ 3
ºC/hr), followed by decanting of flux by the use of a centrifuge, above the melting temperature of
flux (~1090 ºC for FeAs) [8, 44].
(l) A + 5 TAs  AT As + 3 TAs (A = Ca, Sr, Ba; T = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Mo, etc.)
(m) A + (5-x) FeAs + x TAs  AFe T As + 3 TAs
Using this recipe and small variations of it, many 122 AT As [45-47] and transition-metal doped
AFe T As 122 crystals have been produced [48-51].
Figure 2: Typical size of the flux-grown 122 iron-based
superconductor crystal; e.g., BaFe Co As (T ≈ 22 K).
2.4 High-pressure method
This method offers the synthesis of metastable structures, extends the solubility limit of
constituent elements, and produces materials with low oxidation states. The use of pressure also
allows for considerably shortened reaction times and reduced evaporation of volatile elements.
The main disadvantages of this method are that it is difficult to operate, small sample space
results in small product yields, and small reaction times often result in unreacted reactants or side
products.
This method is used for the preparations of 111 (T = 18 K) [26] (described in 2.1), and
of 1111 (up to T = 56 K) that are oxygen-deficient, fluorine- or hydrogen-substituted. RFeAsO
(R = Nd, Sm, Gd, Tb, and Dy) are produced from pelletized stoichiometric mixtures of
reactants that are loaded in a BN crucible, and then heated at ~ 1100 ºC under pressures of 2 to
5.5 GPa, for 2 hr [19, 52]. PrFeAsO F is also produced from a stoichiometric mixture of well
ground reactants, by sintering at 6 GPa and 1250 ºC for 2 hrs [53]. SmFeAsO H [54] and
CeFeAsO H [55] are produced by reactions at 2 GPa and 1200 ºC.
2.5 Ammonothermal method
This synthesis method enables kinetic trapping of metastable products, which may be
inaccessible or unstable at high synthesis-temperatures, by the use of the ammonia as solvent and
catalyst, through redox chemistry. The synthesis of A Fe Se FeSC (A = Li, Na, Ba, Sr, Ca, Yb,
and Eu) is possible by this method and the use of Schlenk apparatus, producing superconducting
shielding fractions up to 60% and T values up to 46 K [56]. The synthesis process involves the
transfer of an assembly containing FeSe and A to a gas-vacuum manifold, chilling to liquid
nitrogen temperatures, opening to pure gaseous NH atmosphere, which is then condensed in the
chilled tube as solid NH .This solvent is then allowed to warm to the reaction, and finally
removed by warming to room temperature and collect the gas for reuse in a chilled vessel. It is
however reported that some ammonia always gets intercalated in the crystal structure [57, 58];
this may actually contribute to the stability of superconductivity and such high T values in 122
selenides.
3. Conclusions
Ongoing synthesis efforts are important, as is evident from the serendipitous discovery of
HTS in both cuprates and iron-based superconductors, then the preparations of their many
families. Although the cause of HTS remains elusive, much effort continues to be applied to
exploratory synthesis of new superconducting materials by seeking certain crystal structures,
chemical substitutions, and promising properties; aside from the creation of potentially useful
superconducting energy applications, such materials are essential for understanding HTS.
The design of a new superconductor involves predicting a suitable chemical composition
to yield the desired structure and property, and the use of an appropriate synthesis method that
would result in the needed bulk material. Both of these steps, however, are non-trivial, as not
only are we unable to definitely predict the structure, stability, and properties of a
superconductor from first principles, but the best method of synthesizing the material in pure
single-crystal form is often difficult, especially when it involves many elements.
There is no doubt that if the exploration of further chemistry through classical synthesis
and other sophisticated methods such as high-pressure synthesis and solvothermal method
continues, new superconductivity discoveries will be made. The availability and knowledge of
such a wide variety of synthetic strategies, combined with a better understanding of crystal
chemistry, electronic structure, and thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of synthesis, will
eventually enable the rational design of superconductors.
Because T is mainly determined by chemical composition and crystal structure, it may
even be that superconductivity in iron-based superconductors will eventually exceed that of the
cuprates.
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials
Sciences and Engineering Division.