Calculating Biological Behaviors of Epigenetic States
in Phage λ Life Cycle
X.-M. Zhu1), L. Yin2), L. Hood3), and P. Ao4),*
1) GENMATH, Corp. 5525 27th Ave.N.E., Seattle, WA 98105, USA
2) School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China
3) Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34 St., Seattle, WA 98103, USA
4) Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
The biology and behavior of bacteriophage λ regulation was the focus of classical investigations
of molecular control of gene expression. Both qualitative and quantitative aspects of this behavior
have been systematically characterized experimentally. Complete understanding of the robustness
and stability of the genetic circuitry for the lysis-lysogeny switch remains an unsolved puzzle. It
is an excellent test case for our understanding of biological behavior of an integrated network
based on its physical, chemical, DNA, protein, and functional properties. We have used a new
approach to non-linear dynamics to formulate a new mathematical model, performed a theoretical
study on the phage λ life cycle, and solved the crucial part of this puzzle. We find a good
quantitative agreement between the theoretical calculation and published experimental
observations in the protein number levels, the lysis frequency in the lysogen culture, and the
lysogenization frequency for the recently published mutants of O . We also predict the desired
robustness for the λ genetic switch. We believe that this is the first successful example in the
quantitative calculation of robustness and stability of phage λ regulatory network, one of the
simplest and most well-studied regulatory systems.
Keywords: phage lambda, gene regulatory network, robustness and stability,
mathematical modeling
* Corresponding author: Dr. Ping Ao, Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA; Phone: (206) 543-3901; E-mail: ao@dirac.phys.washington.edu
1. Introduction
In order to understand the regulatory control of the phage λ life cycle (Ptashne, 1992;
Ptashne and Gann, 2002; Little et al., 1999) quantitative models (Ackers, et al., 1982;
Shea and Ackers, 1985; Reinitz and Vaisnys, 1990; Arkin et al., 1998; Aurell and
Sneppen, 2002) based on physical and chemical characteristics have been developed for
λ O regulatory networks. The objective has been to provide a single coherent model
from which major experimental observations may be described: the development
pathways leading to the two kinds of life cycles of λ, the maintenance of the lysogenic
state, and the robustness of the epigenetic states. Modeling results so far, however, are
unable to provide a quantitative agreement with experimental observations (Reinitz and
Vaisnys, 1990; Aurell and Sneppen, 2002). With a new mathematical modeling approach,
which integrates data from molecular levels of DNA-protein and protein-protein
interactions, to the protein expressions and biological functions, we report here a
successful quantitative connection from the individual molecular elements and the
experimentally determined parameters to the characteristics of the epigenetic states: the
protein numbers in each state, the fluctuations of protein numbers in each state, the
intrinsic stability of the these states, and the changes of these qualities with mutations and
experimental conditions. Our calculated results agree quantitatively with all the available
experimental observations including the observed robustness of the phage λ epigenetic
states. In addition to this agreement we are able to demonstrate how the “landscape” of
epigenesis, e.g. the pathways and valleys (Reik and Dean, 2002), can be constructed
mathematically from the physical and chemical model at the molecular level, which
provides a visualization of the full potential of the network dynamics.
We first summarize the salient experimental and mathematical results on lambda phage.
Upon infection of the host E. coli cell, the bacteriophage λ enters either of the two
different life cycles. It can direct the cell to produce new λ phage particles, resulting in
the lysis of the cell. Or, it can establish dormant residency in the lysogenic state,
integrating its genome into the DNA of its host and replicate as a part of the
chromosome. In these two different life cycles, different sets of genes are expressed. The
genetic switch controlling the function of phage λ consists of two regulatory genes, cI
and cro, and the regulatory regions, O and O on the λ DNA. Established lysogeny is
maintained by the protein CI which blocks operators O and O , and thereby prevents
transcription of all lytic genes including cro (Ptashne, 1992; Ptashne and Gann, 2002). In
lysogeny the CI number functions as an indicator of the state of the bacterium: If DNA is
damaged such as by the UV light the protease activity of RecA is activated, leading to
degradation of CI. A low CI number allows for transcription of the lytic genes, starting
with cro, the product of which is the protein Cro.
According to the biological picture elegantly presented by Ptashne (Ptashne, 1992;
Ptashne and Gann, 2002) and concisely summarized by Aurell et al. (Aurell et al., 2002),
the λ lysogeny maintenance switch is centered around operator O , and consists of three
binding sites O , O and O , each of which can be occupied by either a Cro dimer or a
CI dimer. These three binding sites control the activity of two promoters P and P for
respectively cI and cro transcriptions, illustrated in Fig.1. The transcription of cro starts
at P , which partly overlaps O and O . The transcription of cI starts at P , which
R R1 R2 RM
overlaps O . The occupation of those sites hence prohibits the corresponding
transcription of proteins. The affinity of RNA polymerase for the two promoters, and
subsequent production of the two proteins, depends on the pattern of Cro and CI bound to
the three operator sites and thereby establishes lysogeny with about 100--600 CI
molecules per bacterium. If, however, CI number becomes sufficiently small, the
increased production of Cro flips the switch to lysis.
cI transcript crotranscript
Figure 1. The phage λ regulatory region including promoters for the cI and cro genes and their overlapping
operator sites. cI is transcribed when O is unoccupied and O is occupied by CI. cro is transcribed when
both O and O are unoccupied.
The intrinsic stability of lysogenic state is measured by the amount of free phage in
cultures of the lysogen. The recent three experiments by Aurell et al. (Aurell et al.,
2002), Rozanov et al. (Rozanov et al., 1998), and Little et al. (Little et al., 1999) on the
frequency of spontaneous induction in strains deleted for the recA gene designed to avoid
complications from the SOS system have generated the similar results, as reviewed by
Aurell et al.. Among these consistent experimental data, the measurement by Little et al.
appears to be well controlled and more systematic. We will take their results as our
primary data for comparison. We do, however, take the note that there is an indication
that the wild type may be more stable than suggested by those published data (Little,
private communication), which posts an additional challenge to both experimentalists and
modelers.
2. New Stochastic Nonlinear Dynamics Modeling
The minimal mathematical model which embodies Fig.1 is two coupled equations for the
time rate of change of numbers of CI (N ) and Cro (N ) in a cell (Shea and Ackers,
1985; Reinitz and Vaisnys, 1990), as systematically reviewed in Aurell et al. (Aurell et
al., 2002),
dN /dt = f (N ,N ) - N /τ + ζ (N ,N , t)
CI CI CI Cro CI CI CI CI Cro
dN /dt = f (N ,N ) - N /τ + ζ (N ,N , t) (1)
Cro Cro CI Cro Cro Cro Cro CI Cro
Here f and f are the production rate for CI and Cro proteins in a host cell. τ and τ
CI Cro CI Cro
are their effective decay constants. f and f are functions of CI and Cro dimerization
constants and the Gibbs free energies for their bindings to the three operator sites O ,
O and O (see Appendix for details), the rate of initiation of transcription from P
when stimulated by CI bound to O , T , and when not stimulated T u, and the
efficiency of translation of the mRNA transcripts into protein molecules, the number of
CI (Cro) molecules produced per transcript, E (E ).
The decay constant τ is proportional to the bacterial life-time, since CI molecules are
not actively degraded in lysogeny, while τ is about 30% smaller (Pakula et al., 1986).
We note that there is considerably more experimental uncertainty in the binding of Cro,
both to other Cro molecules and to DNA, than the binding of CI, see e.g. Darling et al.
(Darling et al., 2000). In this minimal model of the switch, we take τ and τ from data,
and deduce f and f at non-zero numbers of both CI and Cro with a standard set of
assumed values of all binding constants, as done in Aurell et al. (Aurell et al., 2002).
Nevertheless, exactly numerical values of those parameters are not essential here. There
is another important adjustment made below of the DNA-protein binding energies to take
the in vivo and in vitro differences into account.
Random forces are represented by ζ (N ,N , t) and ζ (N ,N , t) in Eq.(1). Their
CI CI Cro Cro CI Cro
effects were not quantitatively studied in earlier mathematical modelings (Ackers, et al.,
1982; Shea and Ackers, 1985; Reinitz and Vaisnys, 1990). The numbers of CI and Cro
are only in the range of hundreds, suggesting the importance of stochastic effects. The
actual protein production process is also influenced by many chance events, such as the
time it takes for a CI or a Cro in solution to find a free operator site, or the time it takes a
RNA polymerase molecule to find and attach itself to an available promoter. As a
minimal model of the switch with finite-N noise, we therefore consider two independent
standard Gaussian and white noise sources to describe all possible chance effects (Little,
private communication). For more mathematically oriented readers the noise should be
understood as due to the Wiener process.
We comment that the protein binding free energies as reviewed in Aurell et al. (Aurell et
al., 2002) are taken from in vitro studies. The in vivo protein-DNA affinities could
depend on the ions present in the buffer solutions as well as other factors. This difference
must be taken into consideration in the theoretical calculation. The data quoted in Darling
et al. (Darling et al., 2000) was obtained at KCl concentration of 200mM, which
resembles in vivo conditions. Therefore, though we expect a difference between the in
vivo and in vitro data, it should not be too large (Ptashne, 1992).
Instead of a direct stochastic simulation using Eq.(1), such as performed by Arkin et al.
(Arkin et al.,1998) to calculate the lysogenization frequency, or of the abstract analytic
method of Aurell and Sneppen (Aurell and Sneppen, 2002) to calculate the switching rate
from lysogenic state to lytic state, we take a different mathematical approach which
offers an intuitive and direct grasp of the stability problem. It has been demonstrated (Ao,
2002; Kwon et al., 2003) that there exists a unique decomposition such that Eq.(1) can be
transformed into the following form:
Σ [S (N , N ) + A (N , N ) ] dN/dt
j = CI, Cro i,j CI Cro i,j CI Cro j
i CI Cro i CI Cro
here i = CI , Cro ∇ = ∂/∂N , ∇ = ∂/∂N with the semi-positive definite symmetric
, CI CI Cro Cro
2×2 matrix S, the anti-symmetric 2×2 matrix A, the single-valued scalar function U. The
connection between the random force ξ and the matrix S is similar to that of ζ and D of
Eq.(1): Therefore S is a diagonal matrix in the present situation. (see the Appendix.)
Eq.(2) suggests the analogy to the dynamics of a massless charge particle in the presence
of a magnetic field, with the particle velocity dN/dt moving in the two dimensional space
defined by the numbers of proteins, N , N , a situation familiar in physics and
chemistry. Here Nτ= (N , N ) is the transpose of vector N. We may interpret the
semi-positive definite symmetric S matrix as the friction matrix, and the anti-symmetric
matrix A as the result of a `magnetic' field. The friction matrix S describes the ability of
the system approaching to equilibrium, similar to the degradation of the proteins. Hence
it may be called the degradation matrix. Finally, in the present analogy the scalar function
U takes the role of a potential energy function. The usefulness of such potential function
has been discussed in dynamics of gene regulatory networks (Sagai and Wolynes, 2003).
The potential U may be interpreted as the dynamical landscape of the gene regulatory
network (Fig. 2), a concept proposed long ago in developmental biology (Reik and Dean,
2002). Under appropriate conditions a phage λ will see two minima and one saddle point
in the potential energy landscape. Those two minima correspond to the lytic and
lysogenic states. The positions of the potential minima give the most probable protein
numbers for lytic and lysogenic states. The results are presented in Table I. The relative
levels of CI level in the lysogen state are calculated using the wild type as the standard
(100%). The relative Cro levels in lysis state are also calculated similarly. By varying the
parameters in the model, we may also obtain information on how the protein numbers
change when the experimental condition varies. For example, we find that when
temperature is raised, both CI number for lysogenic state and Cro number for lytic state
increase.
Figure 2. The potential U (plotted on log scale), the landscape of the phage λ regulatory network. The
phage behaves essentially like a billiard ball in this landscape (more precisely, as a charged particle with
negligible mass in a ‘magnetic’ field, see text). A straightforward interpretation of U is a measure of its
implied confinement and paths. The protein numbers N and N in a living cell are confined to the places
where U is relatively low. If N and N of a phage deviate from the minima of U, the phage will evolve
towards one of the minima. There are two minima of U, corresponding to the lytic and lysogenic growth
states, defining two attractive basins. While the phage λ+ is at the lysogenic state, fluctuations in protein
numbers N and N may occasionally result in the phage moving to the lytic state. The shape of the
potential determines that most likely, such a move will happen from the lysogenic minimum along the
valley of the potential, into the lytic minimum. The highest point of the potential along the valley is the
saddle point (position shown in Fig.3(a)). The potential difference between the saddle point and the
lysogenic minimum is used to calculate the likelihood of such an event. Another major function of the
potential U is to determine the evolution path for each phage. At the very early stage of infection (Ptashne,
1992), both CI and Cro are produced before turning on the phage’s decision mechanisms. This phage will
evolve to lytic or lysogenic state according to its position in the potential landscape.
The fluctuation of the protein number is determined by both the potential shape and the
strength of degradation matrix S. The shape of the potential around its minima gives the
CI and Cro distributions in lysogenic and lytic states. Such distributions have not yet
been measured experimentally for phage λ so we do not include the prediction here.
Occasionally, when the phage is at one of the minima, e.g. lysogenic state, a large
fluctuation may bring it over to another minimum, lytic state. The probability is measured
by its ability to go over the saddle point. The quantitative description is given by the
Kramers rate formula (Kramers, 1940)
with the barrier height U = (U - U ), the difference in potential between
b saddle initial minimum
the saddle point and the initial minimum, and the time scale associated with the attempt
frequency ω , determined by the degradation S and the curvatures around the saddle and
the initial minimum. The dominant controlling factor is the barrier height U showing an
exponential sensitivity. The calculated fraction of lysogens that have switched to lytic
state is presented in Table I.
3. Results
To calculate the lysogenization frequency requires additional information. Eq.(2) is a
stochastic differential equation. Besides the equation itself, initial condition is needed to
determine completely the behavior of the phage at the later stage. At the early stage of
phage λ infection before the decision mechanism is fully turned on (Ptashne, 1992), each
phage acquires certain number of CI and Cro proteins. The CI and Cro protein numbers
for different phage may be different. Therefore there is a distribution of CI and Cro
numbers for an ensemble of phage. If this initial distribution is known, the lysogenization
frequency is determined. However, we do not have such information. What we have is
the outcome, the lysogenization frequency. Therefore we perform a ‘reverse engineering’
to determine the initial protein number from the outcome. This differs from Arkin et al.
(Arkin et al., 1998) who demonstrated the lysogenization may be calculated based on
master equations for wild type under certain condition. For simplicity, we assume the
initial protein distribution is uniform. We find that with the same initial protein
distribution for all the different mutants growing under the same condition, measured in
the relative CI level (with respect to CI in lysogen) and the relative Cro level (with
respect to Cro in lysis), we can reasonably reproduce experimental results numerically
with same qualitative trend.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700N 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 N
Figure 3. Lines d<N >/dt = 0 and d<N >/dt = 0 for (a): wild type phage λ+(λO 321); (b): mutant
λO 123. Here the average < > is performed over the noise. By definition, the position of the potential
minima and saddle point coincide with the intersections of nullclines d<N >/dt = 0 and d<N >/dt = 0. In
the first three cases, there are three points where these two lines intersect. These three fixed points
correspond to two potential (U) minima and one saddle point. The two minima represent lytic and
lysogenic growth. Mutant λO 121 and mutant λO 323 have the similar three intersecting points. Therefore
these strains have a switch structure. Comparison of the positions for the potential minima gives the
relative CI level in lysogen and the relative Cro level in lysis listed in Table I. The last mutant (λO 123)
does not have such a switch structure. There is only one fixed point, corresponding to the lytic growth, as
observed by Little et al. ( Little et al., 1999).
The mutant λO 3'23' measured by Little et al. (Little et al., 1999) was first characterized
by Hochschild et al. (Hochschild et al., 1986). There is no quantitative measurement on
its binding free energies yet. In order to produce the desired protein level, we find that the
binding energy between O 3' and Cro protein is 1.8 kcal/mol smaller than that of the O 3
and Cro protein, consistent with the qualitative observation of Hochschild et al. We find
slightly increased, 1 kcal/mol, of CI binding energy from O 3 to O 3', also consistent
with their observation.
Phage Lysogenizatio Relative CI level Relative Switching rate of
n frequency in lysogen Cro level in lysogen to lytic
lysis state
Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical
(experimental) (experimental) (experimental)
Table I. The comparison between the theoretical and experimental results. The experimental results of
Little et al. (Little et al., 1999) are in the parentheses. The wild type data are used to fix parameters in our
minimal model. Others are then calculated accordingly. The bi-stability may be realized by suppressing the
lyses, the so-called anti-immune phenotype (Calef et al., 1971; Eisen et al., 1970). The relative Cro level
predictions can be tested in this way. Relative protein levels are calculated against their wild type values
respectively: 644 for CI and 464 for Cro. The unit of the switching rate to lytic is per minute.
Another natural consequence of this mathematical model is the robustness of the λ
switch. Living organisms survive various sources of impact and are highly robust to
certain fluctuations. Simultaneously, these organisms have certain tolerance to genetic
polymorphism. Both of these properties are presumably the consequences of evolution.
Robustness is understood as the ability of keeping the systems behavior intact while the
details may change significantly. The genetic stability of the λ switch is inferred from
Table I. Little et al. (Little et al., 1999) have given an elaborated discussion from
experimental point of view and concluded that qualitative pattern of λ gene regulation
persists for the mutations in their experiments. The theoretical results by Aurell et al.
(Aurell et al., 2002) were unable to establish the stabilities for the some of the mutants
listed in Table I. Our calculation reproduces Little et al.’s experimental results and
therefore explains their observations from physical and chemical first principles.
The insensitivity of the stability to smooth parameter changes from our analysis agrees
with the following theoretical observations in Aurell et al. (Aurell et al., 2002). The
switch is in general stable though smaller Cro initialization rate T makes the switch
more stable. Aurell et al. varied Cro degradation rate τ -1, T , and finally T and E by
Cro R R cro
keeping the product T µ E fixed. Thus, with given binding affinities the mean rate of
switching increases with any of E , T and τ , but by varying two of these parameters
in opposite directions, they reproduced the measured stability. CI influences the stability
of a lysogen by binding to O 1 and O 2, which determines the fraction of time P is
open. CI also indirectly influences the stability of a lysogen through the binding to O 3,
which determines the fraction of time P is open. Any CI affinity increase could be
compensated by a corresponding increase in T .
Viewing the existence of two minima and one saddle point as the hallmark for the
stability of the switch, we further test of the stability of the wild type based by varying
parameters. We find that for the CI dimer number varying from 2×10-2 to 1×102 relative
to the original value and for Cro dimer number from 5×10-4 to 1×104 relative to the
original value, the switch is stable. We also let the CI degradation time τ vary from 0.1
to 15 relative to its original value and τ vary from 1×10-2 to 5×102 relative to its
original value, again the switch is stable. Note that one of parameters is varied over 8
orders of magnitude. With all the above tests on the stability, we conclude that this phage
λ switch is extremely stable, insensitive to changes in parameters.
4. Discussion
One may wonder why previous mathematical modeling failed to explain the robustness
of the lysogenic state of phage λ. In the light of present quantitative modeling, two
reasons may be offered. First, the difference between the in vivo and in vitro molecular
parameters, though small, does play a dominant role. Both the effect of chemical
environment on binding free energies and the effect of cooperativity among proteins in
the living organism are included in this difference. This small difference has been
difficult to measure. Second, previous methods, such as that of Aurell and Sneppen
(Aurell and Sneppen, 2002), are rigid. No additional stochastic processes rather than
those dictated by the assumed chemical reaction rates have been considered in those
methods.
Our analysis demonstrates that both qualitative and quantitative agreements between
theoretical calculations and the experimental data can be established in an integrative
modeling. Our model offers an intuitively simple quantification of the robustness and
stability of the phage λ genetic switch: the potential landscape for the network dynamics,
which may be useful in tackling more complex gene regulatory networks.
Acknowledgements
We thank G.K. Ackers, D. Galas, and J.W. Little for valuable comments and critical
discussions. This work was support in part by the Institute for Systems Biology (P.A. and
L.H.) by USA NIH grant under HG002894-01 (P.A.) and by USA NSF grant under DMR
0201948 (L.Y.).
I. Details for Eq.(1):
dN /dt = f (N ,N ) - N /τ + ζ (N ,N ,t)
CI CI CI Cro CI CI CI CI Cro
Cro Cro CI Cro Cro Cro Cro CI Cro
Following Ackers et al. (Ackers et al.,1982) and Aurell et al. (Aurell et al., 2002), we
encode a state s of CI and/or Cro bound to O by three numbers (i,j,k) referring to O ,
O and O respectively. The coding is 0 if the corresponding site is free, 1 if the site is
occupied by a CI dimer, 2 if the site is occupied by a Cro dimer, and 3 if the site is
occupied by an RNAp. The probability of a state s with i CI dimers and j Cro dimers
bound to O is in the grand canonical approach of Shea and Ackers (Shea and Ackers,
For example, if CI occupies O , Cro O and O , we have i = 1, j = 2, k = 0, and P (s)
R1 R2 R3 s s s R
= P (221). There are total 40 states represented by s. The normalization constant Z is
determined by summing over s: Z =Σ [CI]is[Cro]js[RNAp]ks exp(-G(s)/T) .
The converting factor between protein number and concentration inside the bacterium is
estimated to be 1.5×10-11.
RNAp occupies either O and O , or O and O , not other configurations. We further
R1 R2 R2 R3
simplify the expression of P (s) by noticing that the controlling of O is operated by CI
and Cro proteins, not RNAp (Ptashne, 1992). If O and O is unoccupied by either CI
or Cro, RNAp binds to them with a probability determined by RNAp binding energy. The
case that RNAp first binds to O and O then blocking the CI and Cro binding is
excluded based on the assumption that only CI and Cro controls the regulatory behavior.
In addition to experimental observation, this assumption is justifiable if the time scale
associated with CI and Cro binding is shorter than the RNAp binding. Except for an
overall constant, which we include into the rate of transcription, the RNAp binding is no
longer relevant. We therefore take it out of the expression P (s) and drop the R subscript.
The total number of states is reduced to 27. This simplification was first used by Aurell
and Sneppen (Aurell and Sneppen, 2002).
The dimer and monomer numbers are determined by the formation and de-association of
dimers, which gives the relation of dimer concentration to the total concentration of
proteins as
Here ∆G = - 11.1 kcal/mol is the dimer association free energy for CI.
Similar expression for [Cro] is
Cro Cro Cro
Here ∆G = - 7 kcal/mol is the dimer association free energy for Cro.
CI and Cro are produced from mRNA transcripts of cI and cro, which are initiated from
promoter sites P and P . The rate of initiation of transcription from P when
stimulated by CI bound to O is denoted T , and when not stimulated T u. The
number of CI molecules produced per transcript is E . The overall expected rate of CI
production is
f (N , N ) = T E [ P(010)+ P(011)+ P(012) ] + T u E [ P(000)
CI CI Cro RM cI RM cI
Similarly, the overall expected rate of Cro production is
f (N , N ) = T E [P(000 )+ P(100)+ P(200) ]. (I.5)
Cro CI Cro R cro
Putting together the production and decay of proteins, we obtain coupled equations for
the time rate of change of numbers of CI and Cro in a cell (Reinitz and Vaisnys, 1990)
dN /dt = f (N ,N ) - N /τ
CI CI CI Cro CI CI
dN /dt = f (N ,N ) - N /τ . (I.6)
Cro Cro CI Cro Cro Cro
The need to include fluctuations has been emphatically discussed in recent publications
(Arkin et al., 1998; Aurell et al., 2002).
II. Parameters:
We use basically the same set of parameters as listed in Table I as that of Aurell and
Sneppen (Aurell and Sneppen, 2002). Those values were taken from various sources
(Koblan and Ackers, 1991 and 1992; Takeda et al., 1989 and 1992; Kim et al.,1987; Jana
et al., 1997; Darling et al., 2000).
RT = 0.617 kcal/mol,
Effective bacterial volume = 0.7×10-15 l,
T = 0.115 /s,
T u= 0.01045 /s,
T = 0.30/s,
τ = 2943 s,
τ = 5194 s,
in vitro free energy differences:
∆G (001) = -12.5 kcal/mol,
∆G (010) = -10.5 kcal/mol,
∆G (100) = -9.5 kcal/mol,
∆G (011) = -25.7 kcal/mol,
∆G (110) = -22.0 kcal/mol,
∆G (111) = -35.4 kcal/mol,
∆G (002) = -14.4 kcal/mol,
∆G (020) = -13.1 kcal/mol,
∆G (200) = -15.5 kcal/mol,
in vitro free energy differences for Hochschild mutant:
∆G (100) = -10.5 kcal/mol,
∆G (200) = -13.7 kcal/mol,
in vivo free energy differences = in vitro free energy differences + ∆G . This ∆G is –2.5
kcal/mol for CI, -4.0 kcal/mol for Cro as found in our numerical calculations. Those two
variations between in vivo and in vitro free energy difference is less than 30%. The ∆G
for cooperation energy is –3.7 kcal/mol, comparing with the in virtue value of –2.7
kcal/mol. This relatively large difference may be due to the looping effect (Dodd et al.,
2001) implicitly considered in our present modeling.
III. Decomposition leading from Eq.(1) to Eq.(2).
Because the mathematical method we use to analyze the stochastic equation Eq.(1) is
new, we will first describe briefly its essence. The method provides a visualization of the
network dynamics. Its equivalence has been widely used in physics and chemistry. We
start by rewriting Eq.(1) so that its notation is more familiar. Defining a vector r = (x,y),
x=N y=N , Eq.(1) becomes
x CI CI y Cro Cro x CI y Cro
supplemented by the relations
which define a diagonal diffusion matrix D. Eq.(III.1) corresponds to the dynamics of a
particle moving in two dimensional space with both deterministic and random forces. It is
easy to check that ∇•F(r) ≠ 0 and ∇×F(r) ≠ 0 in general. Therefore F(r) cannot be
represented by the gradient of a scalar potential. Recall that the simplest case in two
dimensional motion when ∇•F(r) ≠ 0 and ∇×F(r) ≠ 0 is a charged particle moving in a
magnetic field, Eq.(III.1) may be equivalent to
with B(r) the magnetic field, η the degradation matrix in the present paper
(corresponding to friction matrix), and the random or stochastic force ξ(r,t) which is
related to the diagonal degradation matrix η ,
Eq.(III.3) is the same as Eq.(2) in the main text when S = η , A = B ε , here ε = - ε ,
i,j i,j i,j i,j i,j j,i
i,j =x,y.
It is easy to see that Eq.(III.1) can be derived from Eq.(III.3). However, deriving
Eq.(III.3) from Eq.(III.1) is highly non-trivial. The procedure is described in Ao (2002)
and Kwon et al.(2003). We briefly summarize their conclusions here.
i) Under general conditions, Eq.(III.3) can be derived from Eq.(III.1);
ii) The connection between Eq.(III.3) and Eq.(III.1) is unique.
IV. Intermediate results and parameters.
In Table I, we have presented the final results. There are some intermediate results
together with the parameters of interest.
The degradation constants: η =0.056×τ /N (lysogen), η =0.056×τ /N (lysis), here
11 CI CI 22 Cro Cro
N (lysogen) is the N value at the lysogen point and N (lysis) the N value at the
CI CI Cro Cro
lysis point :
λ η = 0.254 η = 0.634
= 0.634/100%
= 0.634/70%
λ R3’23’ η
= 0. 634/130%
here 20% for λ R121 and so on are the relative CI(Cro) level in lysogen(lysis).
We assume degradation matrix is a diagonal constant matrix. Similar to Aurell and
Sneppen (Aurell and Sneppen, 2002), we assume the fluctuations in Eq.(1) scale with the
square root of protein number divided by relaxation time. This leads to the relation that
degradation scales inversely with the protein number and proportional to relaxation time,
according to the Einstein relation (Ao, 2002). The overall constant 0.056 is a fit to the
experiment.
Barrier height from the lysogen minima to the saddle points:
λ U = 7.49
λ R3’23’ U
Attempt frequency:
ω = 4.0×10-4 / minute
The lysogenization frequency is estimated assuming that at the early state of phage λ
infection, before the decision mechanism is fully turned on, each phage acquires certain
number of CI and Cro proteins. The CI and Cro protein numbers for different phage
maybe different. The distribution of CI and Cro numbers for an ensemble of phage is
assumed to be uniform. The distribution for the wild type is the inside area of a circle
centered at N =50, N =0,
(N )2 + (N ) 2 = 1502 N >0, N > 0. (IV.1)
CI Cro CI Cro
For different mutants growing under the same condition, we assume that the perimeter of
such a distribution scale with the CI level in lysogen and the Cro level in lysis. For
example, for λ R121, the ellipse of the distribution is given by
CI Cro CI Cro
here 20% and 100% are the relative CI level in lysogen and relative Cro level in lysis
compared with the wild type.