To appear in Eos – AGU Transactions in November 2005
Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
Anthony B. Davis
Los Alamos National Laboratory
LANL/ISR-2, Mail Stop B-244, Los Alamos, NM 87505
Voice: 1-505-665-6577 / Fax: 1-505-665-4414 / E-mail: adavis@lanl.gov
Didier Sornette
Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics
and Department of Earth and Space Science
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095
Laboratoire de Physique de la Matière Condensée, CNRS UMR6622 and Université
des Sciences B.P. 70, Parc Valrose, 06108 Nice Cedex 2, France
As 2005 —International Year of Physics— draws to an end, two physicists working primarily in
geophysical research reflect on how geophysics is not an applied physics. Although geophysics
has certainly benefited from progress in physics and sometimes emulates the reductionist pro-
gram of mainstream physics, it has also enlightened the physics community concerning some of
the generic behaviors of strongly nonlinear systems. Examples are the insights we have gained
into the “emergent” phenomena of chaos, cascading instabilities, turbulence, self-organization,
fractal structures, power-law distributions, anomalous scaling, threshold dynamics, creep, frac-
ture, and so on. In all of the above, relatively simple models have captured the recurring features
of apparently very complex signals and fields. The future of the intricate relation between phys-
ics and geophysics will be as exciting and productive as its past has been one of mutual fascina-
tion.
A. B. Davis and D. Sornette, Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
UNESCO declared 2005 “International Year of Physics” in celebration of the centennial of Ein-
stein’s annus mirabilis when, junior clerk at the Swiss Patent Office in Berne, he published three
papers that changed physics forever by 1) introducing Special Relativity and demonstrating the
equivalence of mass and energy (E =mc2), 2) explaining the photoelectric effect with Planck’s
then-still-new-and-controversial concept of light quanta (E =h"), and 3) investigating the mac-
roscopic phenomenon of Brownian motion using Boltzmann’s molecular dynamics (E =kT),
!
still far from fully accepted at the time. Like surprisingly many others in AGU, we are trained as
!
physicists but work primarily in geophysics. We enjoy thoroughly our research activity in at-
!
mospheric and solid-earth science respectively. In the following, we take a broad view to exam-
ine the past and future of the intricate and evolving relation between geoscience and physics.
Prefacing his Principles of Philosophy, the 17th-century French philosopher, mathemati-
cian and physicist Descartes described Philosophy as a tree rooted in Metaphysics, whose trunk
is Physics with branches representing other scientific disciplines such as Mechanics or Medicine.
This “Tree of Philosophy” is an extreme version of the general perception that Physics is the
Queen of Sciences and that all others are essentially different flavors of Applied Physics. Phil
Anderson, condensed-matter physicist and Nobel laureate, contended in his 1972 essay More Is
Different [1], that particle physics and indeed reductionism have only limited ability to explain
the world. He argued that reality is structured hierarchically, each level being independent, to
some extent, of levels above and below: “At each stage, entirely new laws, concepts and gener-
alizations are necessary, requiring inspiration and creativity to just as great a degree as in the
previous one.” Anderson noted “Psychology is not applied biology, nor is biology applied chem-
istry.” We examine here how geophysics, far from being just another field of applied physics,
has driven physics itself to innovate in deep and lasting ways.
Geophysical research is generally perceived as using basic scientific principles to explain
observations while hypothesizing theories on the cause of still-unresolved structures and dynam-
ics. In 1752, Franklin performed his famous kite-flying experiment, establishing that lightning is
a naturally-occurring electric spark. In the 19th century, Tyndall’s investigation of the radiative
properties of gases contributed greatly to our understanding of how gases affect the heating and
cooling of the atmosphere. Arrhenius, Nobel prize in Chemistry, presented groundbreaking
work to the Stockholm Physical Society in 1895 “On the Influence of Carbonic Acid in the Air
upon the Temperature of the Ground,” a question still haunting Earth scientists and the broader
A. B. Davis and D. Sornette, Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
community. Early in the 20th century, Serbian astrophysicist Milankovitch developed a mathe-
matical theory of climate based on seasonal and latitudinal variations of solar radiation from
varying Earth-Sun geometry (orbital eccentricity‚ obliquity‚ and precession). This theory still
stimulates research in mathematics and physics, both applied and fundamental. Pioneering an
interdisciplinary approach, Wegener wrote in 1915 one of the most influential and controversial
books in the history of science, The Origin of Continents and Oceans, therein offering his theory
of drifting continents and widening oceans to explain the evolution of Earth’s geography. The
theory waited almost 50 years to be rejuvenated as the theory of Plate Tectonics, established on
the solid basis of modern geophysical data (rock magnetism, mantle convection and seismology).
Recently, John Martin studied the basic chemical processes governing ocean life and proposed
his “iron hypothesis:” sprinkling a small amount of iron into critical oceanic regions could gen-
erate extensive algae blooms that would remove so much carbon from the atmosphere that green-
house heating could be reversed. These are just a few examples of how geophysicists have, like
physicists, reduced complex phenomena to elementary processes —and even capitalized on their
successes to propose bold geo-engineering projects— thus reinforcing the notion that geophysics
is an applied field dependent on more general science.
However, there are also many instances where geophysics has directed scientists towards
discoveries considered “fundamental,” even by criteria satisfying the purest of physicists. In the
early 20th century, Vilhelm Bjerknes, a founder of modern meteorology and weather forecasting,
discovered circulation theorems that led him to a synthesis of hydrodynamics and thermodynam-
ics applicable to large-scale atmospheric and oceanic motions. This opened the road to computa-
tion of the future state of the atmosphere by integrating primitive equations forward in time,
starting from the observed initial state of the atmosphere. Bjerknes, his son Jacob and others es-
tablished the mechanisms controlling the behavior of mid-latitude cyclones, whence the theory
of air-masses and fronts. Motivated in part by the high pressures and shear stresses sustained by
rocks inside the Earth, Bridgman in 1935 and later Enikolopyan did groundbreaking work on the
effect of combined hydrostatic pressure and shear applied to a wide variety of materials. This
research continues today at the interface between the quests for new properties of minerals under
high pressures (up to megabars) and high temperatures (up to thousands of degrees) and for the
physico-chemical properties of composite geological materials. These studies will potentially
impact the location and quantification of oil or geothermal energy sources and structural investi-
A. B. Davis and D. Sornette, Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
gations of silicate melts and glasses at the molecular level. Solid friction, formalized by Cou-
lomb in 1773, has received a recent boost with the discovery of state- and velocity-dependent
(Ruina-Dieterich) friction coefficients, motivated by its application to earthquakes. A vigorous
research effort now attempts to unravel its microscopic physical origin in a variety of materials
and to decipher its broad consequences on the dynamics of sliding and rupture in materials from
atomic scales to faults hundreds of kilometers long. Wavelet analysis is the prevailing method to
overcome the signal-cutting problem in Fourier analysis by using fully-scalable modulated win-
dows. In its present form, the wavelet transform was proposed by Morlet in 1975 under the
name “cycle-octave transform” while working for an oil company, with the goal of enhancing
the resolution of seismic signals. This novel mathematical tool proved useful in data compres-
sion and denoising (leading to significant savings in storage and transmission costs), integration
of partial differential equations, communication, image analysis, spatial statistics, and so on.
The concept of fractals, developed by physicist/mathematician Benoît Mandelbrot in the 1960s,
owes much of its inspiration to geoscience which, in turn, offers the richest and most diverse ap-
plications (topography, fault networks and earthquake ruptures, rocks, lightning, river networks,
coastlines, patterns of climate change, clouds, etc.). The discovery in 1963 of deterministic chaos
by Lorenz, an MIT meteorologist, essentially completed Poincaré’s theory of dynamical systems.
This breakthrough triggered over two decades of intense exploration in mathematics and physics
to understand the mechanisms of chaos. Fractals and chaos are sweeping concepts widely used in
non-equilibrium physics at large. These are just a few examples of how geoscience as influenced
mainstream physics and enabled progress in its own endeavors (e.g., chaotic behavior in lasers,
quantum chaos, multifractality in turbulence and statistical physics).
Chaos and fractals are now standard tools used in the broad field loosely called “com-
plexity theory.” They have played similar paradigmatic roles for the theory of complex systems
as relativity theory and quantum mechanics did for physics in the first half of the 20th century,
and DNA’s double helix did for life sciences in its second half.
The still-evolving theory of complexity is the blueprint for a new way of doing science in
which geosciences are both users and builders of fundamental principles. Indeed, the notion of
complex systems and the importance of systemic approaches is pervasive in geoscience, argua-
bly the best “laboratory” for exploring the following concepts: systems with a large number of
interacting parts, often open to their environment, self-organizing their internal structures, and
A. B. Davis and D. Sornette, Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
dynamics with novel and sometimes surprising (“emergent”) macroscopic properties. Complex-
system approaches see the whole as well as the parts and how they interact. Complexity mani-
fests in linkages between space and time, often producing patterns on many scales and hierar-
chies of interactions, cascades —both direct (from large to small scales) and inverse (micro to
macro)— and generation of fractal structures. Complex systems are typically sensitive to initial
conditions. They may be robust with respect to certain types of perturbation, fragile with respect
to others, and exhibit transitions from different classes of order to chaos, turbulence, or even
complete randomness. Concrete examples of fundamental concepts in statistical physics inspired
by the geosciences include block-spring models and self-organizing sandpile models for earth-
quakes and rupture under threshold dynamics [2].
Feeding the quest for new concepts and understanding, geoscience is witnessing an un-
precedented accumulation of data with improved accuracy, frequency, and resolution. The main
drivers are pressing societal problems associated with biospheric sustainability. For instance,
NASA’s EOS program is gathering new climatological data from space while DOE’s ARM pro-
gram has taken world-leadership in establishing ground-based climate observatories around the
globe. Particularly challenging is the long-term monitoring needed to understand ramifications
of temporal and spectral variability of solar irradiance, aerosols, humidity, clouds, and precipita-
tion for global warming, especially in the sensitive cryosphere. The intricate processes of air
pollution, ozone depletion, El Niño, and so on, are thus coming into sharper focus with NASA
and ESA missions such as Terra, Aqua, Aura, and EnviSat. NSF, USGS and other agencies are
launching EarthScope, a project for monitoring the lithosphere at spatio-temporal scales un-
dreamed off until recently. EarthScope will stimulate the scientific community in quest for
seismic and volcanic hazard control, earthquake risk management, mineral formation, and so on.
The Earth’s surface and interior will thus be probed by novel arrays of instruments and new dis-
coveries are anticipated in the fundamental physics of earthquakes, volcanoes, mantle convection
and tectonics. It is remarkable that Plate Tectonics, which unifies much of geoscience, was not
fully accepted until the late 1960s, decades after physicists understood most of the atomic and
sub-atomic world as well as the finer details of nuclear energy production in the Sun. This is not
because geoscientists are any less clever than physicists, but lies in the fact that gathering and
making sense of data up to planetary scales requires time, commitment, resources and ingenuity
beyond those usually required for most well-controlled experiments carried out in a laboratory.
A. B. Davis and D. Sornette, Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics
The new wave of intensive data acquisition is expected to deeply invigorate geoscience, and
therefore physical science too.
Because it deals with such complex systems, geophysics is rather messy, with little or no
experimental control. It shares this last attribute with astrophysics, and more specifically cos-
mology, since there is only one Universe and only one Earth. Unlike cosmology however, the
first inkling of physics-based prediction will be immediately confronted with hard data. So geo-
physics is a world of paradox and struggle because models of complex natural systems cannot be
validated in the usual sense. Indeed, model validation by comparison of some output with real-
world data does not confirm the underlying scientific conceptualization. There are cases of mod-
els that made accurate, quantitative predictions, but later proved to be conceptually flawed [3].
Far from being an applied physics, geophysics has mutated the role of scientists who, in addition
to remaining abreast in their traditional discipline, are now required to develop novel and still
mostly undiscovered ways of validating their models and theories.
The challenge is to understand humanity’s global environment, formed of interacting sys-
tems (atmosphere, ocean, land surface, biosphere) whose combined complexity exceeds that of
any system previously considered by the physical, life or social sciences. We applaud AGU and
EGU for paving the way with their respective Focus-Group and Section in “Nonlinear Geophys-
ics” cutting across traditional geophysical disciplines, and for nurturing their connections with
societies representing mainstream physics. Departments of Geography, Geophysics, Meteorol-
ogy, Environmental, Atmospheric and/or Oceanic Sciences are already networking in support of
Earth System Science —to become the ultimate interdisciplinary program when linked with so-
cial sciences. Maybe time has come to reach out to other Departments: Physics, Computer Sci-
ence, Economics, Sociology, Anthropology … ?
[1] Anderson, P.W., More is different, Science, 177, 393-396 (1972).
[2] Bak, P., How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. Springer (1996).
[3] Oreskes, N., K. Shraderfrechette, and K. Belitz, Verification, validation and confirmation of
numerical models in the Earth sciences, Science, 263, 641-646 (1994).