In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Robotics and Autonomous Systems
(CIRAS), Singapore, December 2003.
Challenges and Opportunities of Evolutionary Robotics
D. A. Sofge, M. A. Potter, M. D. Bugajska, A. C. Schultz
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington, D.C. 20375, USA
{sofge, mpotter, magda, schultz}@aic.nrl.navy.mil
Abstract The need for ER arises from the fact that as robotic sys-
tems and the environments into which they are placed
Robotic hardware designs are becoming more complex as increase in complexity, the difficulty of programming
the variety and number of on-board sensors increase and their control systems to respond appropriately increases to
as greater computational power is provided in ever- the point where it becomes impracticable to foresee every
smaller packages on-board robots. These advances in possible state of the robot in its environment. Evolution-
hardware, however, do not automatically translate into ary algorithms are used to generate control algorithms
better software for controlling complex robots. Evolu- using the Darwinian principle of survival-of-the-fittest. A
tionary techniques hold the potential to solve many diffi- population of controllers is maintained and evolved by
cult problems in robotics which defy simple conventional evaluating individual control systems based on a measure
approaches, but present many challenges as well. Nu- of how well they achieve desired characteristics such as
merous disciplines including artificial life, cognitive sci- executing appropriate behaviors at appropriate times.
ence and neural networks, rule-based systems, behavior- Only the fitter members of the population survive and
based control, genetic algorithms and other forms of evo- pass the characteristics that made them successful on to
lutionary computation have contributed to shaping the future generations. The ultimate goal is to produce the
current state of evolutionary robotics. This paper pro- best possible controller given some design criteria. As
vides an overview of developments in the emerging field of discussed in the following sections, this approach has
evolutionary robotics, and discusses some of the opportu- proven very successful in a wide variety of challenging
nities and challenges which currently face practitioners in robotics domains.
the field.
The remainder of this paper will provide a sampling of
recent development efforts in evolutionary robotics re-
1. Introduction
search with the goal of showing both the opportunities
presented by the use of evolutionary techniques for solv-
The field of evolutionary robotics has emerged in recent
ing difficult problems in robotics, but also in showing
years as the application of artificial evolution to the de-
some of the challenges of applying these techniques.
velopment of robotic systems. While most of the work in
evolutionary robotics has focused on the development of
2. Evolved Controllers for Autonomous
control systems for autonomous mobile robots, some re-
searchers have used the techniques to evolve robotic Mobile Robots
hardware configurations and even robot body parts along
with the controllers. A key objective in evolutionary robotics is to evolve be-
havior-based controllers for autonomous mobile robots
Evolutionary robotics (ER) has its origins in several dis- [8,9]. Autonomous mobile robots often incorporate both
ciplines including artificial life [1], cognitive science and reactive and longer-term planning components in order to
neural networks [2,3,4], behavior-based control [5], ge- accommodate goal-driven behaviors. The reactive por-
netic programming [6] and genetic algorithms [7]. Cur- tion of the controller may be encoded in a variety of
rent practitioners of ER incorporate techniques from a forms. Common choices include stimulus-response rules,
variety of disciplines to achieve the desired result, often a neural networks, and state-machines. The planning stage
robotic control system for an autonomous mobile robot may be represented as a series of goal states. Behavior-
(or other autonomous system) which exhibits a set of de- based controllers are thus driven by a combination of cur-
sired behaviors, and for which those behaviors were ac- rent state, as determined by current sensor readings and
quired “automatically” (i.e. without custom programming possibly short-term memory, and goal(s). The controller
of each individual behavior). attempts to match its current state readings and goal,
which together comprise the stimulus part, and then to
produce the appropriate output, or response.
2.1. Evolved Rule-Based Control techniques [14]. Evolutionary algorithms have proven
quite successful in training recurrent neural network-
Work by Grefenstette and Schultz [10] resulted in the based controllers for autonomous mobile robots [9].
application of the SAMUEL learning system to evolve
stimulus-response rules to produce a reactive control sys- Potter et al. [15] demonstrated the evolution of neural
tem for autonomous mobile robots. Behaviors achieved network controllers for multiple robots engaged in shep-
using this system include tracking, navigation, and obsta- herding a sheep robot. The goal of this work was to ex-
cle avoidance. SAMUEL maintains a population of can- amine the effects of evolving a single homogeneous con-
didate behaviors which are evaluated in a simulated ro- troller for a group of autonomous mobile robots perform-
botic environment. The population is scored, mutation ing a collective herding task, versus coevolving separate
and crossover operators applied, and the population is heterogeneous controllers, and to determine if the com-
adjusted to remove the lesser scoring rule sets. The proc- plexity of the task favored homogeneous or heterogene-
ess is run for a number of generations until a stopping ous control. The heterogeneous controllers were produced
criteria is met, at which point the best evolved controller using a cooperative coevolutionary architecture [16] in
is uploaded to the robot hardware for validation and test- which the controller for each robot is evolved in a sepa-
ing. This technique proved successful for evolving reac- rate genetically-isolated species. It was found that het-
tive controllers for autonomous mobile robots. Schultz et erogeneous controllers are indeed advantageous when the
al. [12] demonstrated the evolution of rule-based control- task can be decomposed into subtasks that can be solved
lers for learning complex robotic behaviors by evolving by robots specializing in substantially different skill sets.
the behavior for a shepherd robot to coerce a sheep robot Otherwise homogeneous controllers have an advantage
into a corral. This technique and was extended to evolv- due to their generality.
ing controllers for simulated autonomous aircraft and
autonomous underwater vehicles [7,11]. Quinn et al. [17] described another experiment in which
neural network controllers were evolved for a team of real
Challenges with evolving rule-based controllers include robots. The objective was to study the capability of the
determining how to map continuous inputs and outputs to robots to learn formation forming behaviors starting from
discrete state variables, establishing appropriate interme- random positions and using a minimal sensor set consist-
diate and goal states, determining how many production ing of 4 IR sensors on each robot.
rules are required, and performing conflict resolution.
3. Hyper-Redundant Robot Control
2.2. Evolved Neural Network Based Control
One of the greatest challenges in robotics is the design of
An alternative representation used by many researchers in control systems for robots with high degrees of freedom,
evolutionary robotics is artificial neural networks, which particularly if many of the degrees of freedom are cou-
have a number of characteristics that are desirable from pled. A key example of this is a highly segmented ser-
an evolutionary robotics perspective. Neural networks are pentine or snake-like robotic arm (Fig. 1). This is an ex-
relatively insensitive to noise in the environment since the ample of a hyper-redundant robot, where there are many
output of each node is typically a function of the input possible kinematic solutions to achieve the same end-
from a variety of sources. This characteristic also pro- effector position or trajectory.
duces a smooth search space with a well-behaved map-
ping between changes to the network and changes in the
resultant network behavior. Neural networks also natu-
rally handle continuous input and can produce either con-
tinuous or discrete output as desired [9].
A key advantage of using evolutionary algorithms for
producing robotic neural network based controllers is that
Figure 1. Hyper-redundant robotic manipulator
the evolutionary techniques may be used equally well
with feed-forward or recurrent networks [13]. Recurrent
Sofge [18] used evolutionary algorithms to generate the
networks offer many advantages for dynamic control sys-
inverse kinematics for the hyper-redundant robotic ma-
tems because they allow recent state information to be
nipulator. The continuous work space of the robot was
combined with current state information in the decision-
discretized into a grid of regularly spaced points. A popu-
making process. In effect, the recurrent connections pro-
lation of genomes was created such that each genome
vide a kind of short-term memory capability for the neural
represented the joint-space configuration of the robot as a
network so that decisions may include not only the input
real-valued vector. The system then used an evolutionary
state information but also the prior state(s) of the network
strategy to coevolve solutions for each grid position
itself. Recurrent networks, however, are notoriously dif-
within the workspace such that the distance in joint space
ficult to train using standard gradient-descent learning
between any two neighboring points was minimized. The better understand the benefits of the use of the coopera-
fitness function which was minimized included the joint tive coevolution approach over standard evolutionary
space distance between neighboring configurations, as algorithms, and to determine if the rule-based or neural
well as penalty functions for nearing joint angle limits, network-based representation is better for the controller.
exceeding the boundaries of the work space, or putting the
manipulator into otherwise undesirable positions. Karl Sims [23] demonstrated the evolution of fantastical
simulated creatures in an artificial reality environment by
The resulting coevolved kinematics achieved a position coevolving the creatures’ minds and bodies. The crea-
error of less than one inch over a simulated 50 ft. manipu- tures’ bodies consisted of 3D rectangular blocks, while
lator while maintaining smooth end-point trajectory con- their minds were evolved neural network controllers. The
trol from any point to any other point within the work fitness functions were crafted such that the members of
space. the population that could successfully move across the
landscape or track a moving target were more likely to
4. Evolvable Hardware survive and reproduce. After coevolution the creatures
exhibited a variety of interesting behaviors resembling
Evolvable Hardware (EHW) is an emerging field that walking, hopping, slithering and swimming.
applies evolution to automate the design of physically
reconfigurable structures such as electronic systems, mi- Hornby and Pollack [24,25] studied the coevolution of
cro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), and robots. bodies and brains in simulated robots using L-systems as
Since EHW techniques enable self-reconfigurability and a generative encoding mechanism. The fitness objective
adaptability of the systems with embedded programmable was, as with the Sims work, to evolve for locomotion
devices, they have potential to significantly increase the across a simulated landscape. The result of this effort was
functionality, robustness, and reliability of deployable to demonstrate that the evolved L-system individuals
hardware systems. The benefits of self-reconfiguration moved faster than those using standard representations,
and adaptation are evident for space exploration, defense, expressed more modularity of design and exhibited a far
and other applications that need systems to perform with greater complexity than their simpler brethren.
optimal functionality for extended periods of time in un-
known, hostile, and/or changing environments. In In the GOLEM project (Genetically Organized Lifelike
autonomous robotics this is especially true. Electro Mechanics) Lipson and Pollack [26] coevolved
simple neural network controllers and robot body parts as
Evolutionary algorithms have been applied to the design a first step towards creating artificial life-forms. The goal
and post-fabrication adaptation of reconfigurable hard- of evolution was to learn locomotion behavior. The crea-
ware in order to improve the design or performance. The tures were evolved in simulation, and the body parts were
new generation of reconfigurable hardware will also en- automatically constructed using thermoplastic fabrication
able the continuous and embedded evolution of robot con- equipment. The evolved neural network controller was
trollers [19] and vehicle or sensor morphology. then uploaded to the artificial neural network hardware.
Motors, controller, and body parts were hand-assembled
5. Coevolution of Robot Bodies and Brains by a human assistant. When the creatures were connected
to a power source they demonstrated a crude ability to
move across a flat surface such as a table or stage.
In nature, both the morphology and the behavior of an
organism are evolved in lockstep. In an effort to explore
this more natural form of evolution in ER, a number of 6. Embodied Evolution
researchers have begun work coevolving robot hardware
designs with software for controlling the robot. Bugajska Embodied Evolution (EE) is based upon the notion that a
and Schultz [20,21] demonstrate the coevolution of both group of autonomous robots or agents is situated within
rule-based and neural network-based controllers and sen- an environment trying to perform a task. These robots are
sor configurations for autonomous micro-air vehicles allowed to interact with one another, mate, and reproduce
(MAVs). The task presented for the simulated MAV is to control programs which then are transferred to other
fly through a forested area to reach a target without hitting members of the population [27,28]. The key aspects of
any obstacles such as trees. Range sensors with adjust- this paradigm are that the interactions such as mating,
able beam width and maximum range settings are placed cooperation, and so on are based upon contact between
at various locations on the. The SAMUEL system was the actual robots in the environment, and the entire popu-
used for evolving the rule-based controllers and sensor lation is evaluated in parallel. This inherent parallelism in
configurations on the same chromosome, while the coop- EE is a major advantage over the more traditional evolu-
erative coevolution architecture [16,22] was used for tionary approach because as the population size increases,
evolving the neural network controllers and sensor con- the computational requirements for each robot do not.
figurations in two separate species. Successes were dem- Thus the evolutionary computation scales well, which is
onstrated for each method, but more research is needed to
particularly important if it is to be performed on real ro- simulation that differentiates between environmental fea-
bots in real time. tures that are critical to the task at hand and those that are
irrelevant, the noise can be tailored as appropriate, thus
Watson et al. [28] describe an early experiment with EE creating control solutions that ignore the irrelevant fea-
to produce a phototaxis (light-seeking) behavior. Each tures and are robust with respect to the critical ones [31].
mobile robot was equipped with two light sensors, two
motor control outputs, and infrared diodes to provide Another approach explored by Grefenstette and Ramsey
omni-directional communications capabilities. The con- [32] is to combine simulation and reality. In their archi-
trol architecture was a simple neural network model, with tecture for anytime learning (also called continuous and
inputs from each sensor and outputs to the motors. The embedded learning [33]) control systems are evolved on a
evolutionary algorithm used was an adaptation of a simulator that runs continuously on a real robot. Over
steady-state EA model referred to as the probabilistic time, the parameters of the embedded simulation are ad-
gene transfer algorithm. justed to more closely match reality. As new control rules
are evolved that have a high likelihood of improving the
Some of the challenges of getting this system to work robot’s performance, the active robot control system is
were in providing a sufficient number of mobile robots to updated. This process enables the robot to adapt to mis-
overcome the stochastic effects of a small population, matches between simulation and reality due to modeling
providing a consistent source of power to the mobile ro- errors, a dynamically changing environment, and changes
bots, and providing an on-board fitness measure for each in the performance characteristics of the robot’s sensors
robot so that the evolution can be truly distributed. The and effectors.
experiment resulted in a number of solutions comparable
to hand-designed behaviors, and a novel looping behavior 8. Conclusions
for reaching the light.
The field of evolutionary robotics is growing rapidly.
7. Simulation vs. Reality Robots themselves are quickly becoming more complex
as the variety and number of on-board sensors increases,
The most natural and direct application of evolutionary and as Moore’s Law results in greater on-board computa-
computation to robotics is to perform control-system tional power available in ever-smaller packages. Ad-
evaluations on real robot hardware in the actual task envi- vances in hardware, however, do not automatically trans-
ronment. However, if evolution is done in this way a late into better software for controlling complex robots.
number of issues become problematic. Evolution is a rela- With an increased emphasis on more capable and more
tively long time-scale process that may require many con- autonomous robots, evolutionary techniques hold the po-
trol-system evaluations to achieve satisfactory results, tential to solve many difficult problems in robotics which
leading to unacceptable runtimes. This problem is exacer- defy simple conventional approaches.
bated by unreliable hardware and poor battery perform-
ance. The robot may also enter into dangerous states in Behaviorism has become the predominant paradigm for
which its hardware could be damaged or bystanders in- control of autonomous robots. Artificial evolution pro-
jured, especially in the early stages of evolution. These vides a means to achieve desired behaviors. Evolutionary
issues have led most researchers to evolve control systems techniques also hold the promise of having the robots
in simulation where fitness can be evaluated at faster than learn new behaviors automatically in order to adjust to
real-time speed in a safe off-line environment. changes in their environments, changes in themselves due
to sensor drift or malfunction for example, and to acquire
Evolution in simulation is not without its own problems. skills for performing new tasks or improving on old tasks.
A control system that works well in simulation may not
perform satisfactorily on a real robot with noisy sensor As we develop ever more capable robots which assist
readings and imprecise motor control while operating a humans in performing tasks, it is becoming clear that we
complex environment that is computationally impractical must also improve the interfaces and means of interacting
to model with a high degree of fidelity. Grefenstette et al. with these robots. One approach we are pursuing at the
[29], in an early attempt to overcome the limitations of Naval Research Laboratory is known as embodied cogni-
evolving control systems in simulation, experimented tion [34]. In embodied cognition we develop cognitive
with adding noise to the sensor models. It was found that models of human performance to augment a robot’s rea-
given the inevitable mismatch between simulation and soning capabilities. Embodied cognition is based on the
reality, it was better to have too much rather than too little premise that use of cognitive models on the robot facili-
noise in the simulation because this encourages more gen- tates human-robot interaction by making it easier for hu-
eral solutions to emerge. However, a later study by Jakobi mans to predict and understand the robot’s behavior and
et al. [30] showed that unreasonably high levels of noise to interact with the robot. This embodied cognition will sit
can also be harmful because solutions may evolve that on top of evolved reactive behaviors and will allow future
rely on the excessive noise. By carefully designing a systems to have higher-level cognitive abilities.
Navigation and Control Conference (AIAA), 739-
For ER to achieve the vision of supplanting the hand- 749, 1992.
coding and hand-design of complex robotic systems, as
pointed out by Mataric [35] it must be shown to reduce [8] A. C. Schultz and J. J. Grefenstette, "Evolving Robot
the overall effort of its programmers and designers. The Behaviors," In Fourth International Workshop on
evolved controllers produced by current ER systems are the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems
often very simple and could be easily bettered by duly (Artificial Life IV), 1994.
considered hand-coded solutions. Representations for
robot morphologies and controllers do not often exploit [9] S. Nolfi and D. Floreano, Evolutionary Robotics,
notions of modularity which we expect in more complex Cambridge, MA, The MIT Press, 2000.
creatures. Better representations and better evolutionary
algorithms may be necessary to achieve the vision of ER, [10] J. J. Grefenstette, “Credit assignment in rule dis-
and better techniques for transferring these solutions into covery systems based on genetic algorithms,” Ma-
robot hardware, or evolving them in situ, are needed. chine Learning, 3(2-3), 225-245, 1988.
Acknowledgments [11] A. C. Schultz, "Using a Genetic Algorithm to Learn
Strategies for Collision Avoidance and Local Navi-
gation," In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research
tional Symposium on Unmanned Untethered
under work order requests N0001402WX20374,
Submersible Technology, 213-225, 1991.
N0001403WR20212 and N0001403WR20057
[12] A. C. Schultz, J. J. Grefenstette, and W. Adams,