CHALLENGES OF RELATIVISTIC ASTROPHYSICS
Reuven Opher
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
E-mail: opher@astro.iag.usp.br
(Plenary Talk and in the Proceedings of the 26th Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics,
December 15-20, 2012)
I discuss some of the most outstanding challenges in relativistic astrophysics in the subjects of:
COMPACT OBJECTS (Black Holes and Neutron Stars); DARK SECTOR (Dark Matter and Dark Energy);
PLASMA ASTROPHYSICS (Origin of Jets, Cosmic Rays and Magnetic Fields) and the PRIMORDIAL
UNIVERSE (Physics at the beginning of the Universe). In these four subjects, I discuss twelve of the most
important challenges. These challenges give us insight into new physics that can only be studied in the
large scale Universe. The near future possibilities, in observations and theory, for addressing these
challenges, are also discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
There are many challenges in relativistic astrophysics. New satellites are being launched and new ground
based telescopes are being inaugurated. Many theories are being investigated to explain the many
phenomena. In the following sections I discuss what I feel are the most outstanding theoretical and
observational challenges in relativistic astrophysics.
II. COMPACT OBJECTS (Black Holes and Neutron Stars)
CHALLENGE (1): Are there free quarks at the centers of neutron stars?
The equation-of-state at the center of neutron stars is a major challenge of relativistic astrophysics.
Most models of dense matter predict that at densities greater than two times nuclear density at
the centers of neutron stars, the formation of exotic matter takes place, such as free quarks (34).
The gravitational wave signal from a binary containing a neutron star contains information on
the equation-of-state of the neutron star, due to tidal polarizability of the neutron star (18, 19, 20, 21).
Gravitational waves from newborn neutron stars, due to their oscillations, depend on the equation-of-
state in the center. If the oscillation frequency of the emitted gravitational waves is ~ 2.6-3 kHz, a quark
core is implied. The mass-radius relation of the neutron star also gives information on the equation-of-
state of the neutron star. If there is a sufficiently high central pressure, implying a sufficiently high
central density with a high kHz frequency, a quark core is indicated.
CHALLENGE (2): What are the characteristics of the gravitational waves emitted from merging
black holes and neutron stars (number of polarization states; mass of graviton; speed of
gravitational waves)?
The primary source of gravitational waves, for existing and near-future gravitational wave detectors,
is merging binaries. Besides the emission of gravitational waves, the time evolution of merging
binaries is affected by drag forces such as those due to magnetic fields. Due to a drag force, for
example, relativity predicts an increase of the eccentricity of the orbits of a binary, opposite to the effect
of gravitational wave emission (17). The number of polarization states of the gravitational waves
may not be two, as predicted by General Relativity. Different theories predict a different number of
polarization states. Other metric theories allow up to six states. Another interesting possibility of
gravitational waves is that the graviton may have mass, which would make the speed of gravitational
waves less than the speed of light.
CHALLENGE (3): Can the vacuum energy density become greater than other energy densities in
the formation of relativistic stars?
In the absence of a full quantum gravity theory, the influence of gravity on quantum fields can be
properly analyzed only in the semi-classical approximation, in which fields are quantized on a classical
background space-time known as quantum field theory in curved space-time (QFTCS). Hawking
radiation, the radiation of a black hole, is an example of this. It was shown that the vacuum energy
density of a free quantum scalar field can become dominant over any classical energy-density. It was
also shown that the natural time scale for this to happen is a tiny fraction of a second in the collapse of a
relativistic star (40, 41). The formation and existence of neutron stars put limits on the possible
contribution of the vacuum energy of the free quantum scalar field.
III. DARK SECTOR (Dark Matter and Dark Energy)
CHALLENGE (4): Where are the unseen thousands of predicted small dark matter halos, with
central density cusps, in the Milky Way?
The standard LambdaCDM model of cosmology predicts thousands of small dark matter halos in the
Milky Way, with central density cusps (density increasing as an inverse power of the radius, as the
radius decreases). They could exist, without stars, with decreased baryon content, due to a
primordial magnetic field preventing the entrance of baryons into the halos (13). A single supernova in
the primordial universe could have expelled the baryons, which besides explaining their lack of
stars, could have transformed the predicted central dark matter density cusp into a core (14).
Gravitational lensing could detect these small dark matter halos and also determine if the central region
is a cusp or core, but have not yet been able to do so.
CHALLENGE (5): What is the dark energy equation of state versus redshift?
One of the major astronomical observational efforts in the coming years is the determination of the dark
energy equation of state versus redshift. The four most well established methods to determine the
nature of dark energy are to observe: Type Ia supernovae; baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO); weak
gravitational lensing; and the abundance of clusters of galaxies (12). Other approaches are observing:
redshift-space distortions; the Alcock-Paczyinski effect; and direct measurements of the Hubble
constant (12). If the equation of state is found observationally not to be constant, the deviation from a
constant can give information on what is responsible for dark energy, such as an unknown field or
modified gravity.
CHALLENGE (6): Can modified gravity explain dark energy?
Modified gravity could possibly explain dark energy. Experimental tests on Gpc scales rely on the growth
and inter-relationship of perturbations in the metric potentials, and in the density and velocity fields,
which can be measured using gravitational lensing, galaxy cluster abundances, galaxy clustering and the
Sachs-Wolfe effect (33). Observations of modified gravity are interpreted in terms of the ratio of the two
metric potentials where the ratio is unity in general relativity and non-zero in modified gravity. A strong
indication against modified gravity would be if the ratio of the two metric potentials was found to be
exactly unity.
IV. PLASMA ASTROPHYSICS (Origin of Jets, Cosmic Rays and Magnetic Fields)
CHALLENGE (7): What is the origin of relativistic jets?
Due to a magnetic field at the horizon of a spinning black hole, a relativistic jet can be produced (1, 2).
The magnetic field at the horizon is a result of accretion or merging. In the merger of two black holes,
there is an amplification of the magnetic field by two orders of magnitude (3). The high electrical
conductivity of the outer layers of an accretion disk prevents the outward diffusion of a magnetic field,
advecting the magnetic field into the horizon (4). It has been suggested that the interstellar magnetic
field could be dragged inward and compressed by the accretion disk (28). Turbulence, however, in the
disk could allow rapid diffusion of the field outward (28). The high electrical conductivity of the outer
layers of the disk prevents the outward diffusion of the magnetic field implying a stationary state with
zero radial velocity at the surface of the disk (30). General relativistic magnetohydrodynamic numerical
calculations of the jet-accretion disk-compact object connection are now being done (31, 32). Detailed
physics, however, of the accretion disk, in particular, its instabilities and nonlinear interactions and its
connection with the jet and compact object, needs to be made. Relativistic jets could be
hydrodynamically collimated (26) or magnetohydrodynamically collimated (27). Little work has been
done on magnetohydrodynamic collimation since our 1990 study (27).
CHALLENGE (8): What is the origin of the ubiquitous microgauss magnetic fields in high and low redshift
galaxies?
Almost all previous suggested origins are based on ad hoc assumptions that are difficult to prove or
disprove. One of the most interesting suggestions for the origin of cosmic magnetic fields, which does
not rely on any ad hoc assumption, is the natural fluctuations of the dense hot primordial plasma, as
predicted by the Fluctuation Dissipation Theorem. It was shown that fluctuations produced in the high
redshift plasma, after the primordial quark-hadron transition, could produce the present observed
cosmic magnetic fields (7, 8). Many other scenarios have previously been suggested. We alone have
suggested three other possible scenarios: (A) Non-minimal electromagnetic-gravitational coupling (i.e.,
rotation of a neutral body produces a magnetic field) (44, 45, 46); (B) Collimating magnetic fields of
extragalactic jets spread out into the intergalactic medium (a magnetic field in the intergalactic medium
will remain there undiminished for the age of the universe) (47); and (C) Density gradients not parallel to
temperature gradients in primordial supernovae explosions (48).
CHALLENGE (9): What is the origin of the highest energy cosmic rays?
For the highest energy cosmic rays, we need an accelerator that is ten million times more powerful than
the most powerful accelerator on Earth. The highest energy cosmic rays need to come from a distance
less than 75 Mpc due to the GZK effect. The popular model for the source of high energy cosmic rays is
First Order Fermi Acceleration. However, the strong shocks, associated with the few active galactic
nuclei < 75 Mpc, such as Cen A, are not strongly correlated with these particles (22). Another possible
source is the shocks in young supernovae remnants, where the ambient magnetic field has been
amplified (23). Iron nuclei can be accelerated to a tenth of the highest energy cosmic rays in the
observed amplified magnetic fields (24). The accelerated particles can slow down the incoming matter
into the shock, eliminating entirely the observed shock (25). The accelerator also might be a spinning
black hole in a strong magnetic field (2). No definite galactic source is known that can accelerate
particles to ~3-5 X 10^(20) eV, the energy of the highest energy cosmic rays.
V. PRIMORDIAL UNIVERSE (Physics at the beginning of the Universe)
CHALLENGE (10): Did the Universe start to expand due to the very large initial vacuum Casimir energy?
The Casimir energy of the Universe is the vacuum energy due to its finite volume. Initially the Universe
was very small and thus its Casimir energy was very large. We calculated the spatial distribution of the
Casimir energy in the primordial Universe (42, 43). Cornish, Spergel and Starkman (49) suggested yhat a
multiply connected “small” universe could allow for classical chaotic mixing as a preinflationary
homogenization process. The smaller the volume, the more important the process. Also, a smaller
universe has a greater probability of being spontaneously created from a quantum fluctuation. Dewitt,
Hart and Isham (50) calculated the Casimir energy for static multiply connected flat space-times. A
generalization of this calculation was made by us in (42, 43), showing that there is a spontaneous
vacuum excitation of low multipolar components.
CHALLENGE (11): Is new physics needed to make a self-consistent theory of a primordial inflation era?
The assumption of having a primordial inflation period has had various successes. There are
various problems, however. The energy scale of inflation is predicted to be on the order of a trillion
times higher than the highest energy particle accelerators. In the past, each time when a higher energy
particle accelerator was constructed, new physics was discovered. We may expect, therefore, that in the
trillion energy interval there is new physics. In the popular chaotic inflation model of primordial inflation
with a massive scalar field, the mass is unnaturally small. Another problem in the standard model
of inflation is that the amplitude of the fluctuations created in the inflation era is dependent on
the derivative of the potential with respect to the field, but the theory does not give its value.
Still another problem is that the present popular model requires a very flat potential. However, no
known particle has such a flat potential. A self-consistent theory of primordial inflation is thus still
lacking. Inflation occurs at extremely high energies where quantum effects may occur, such as the non-
commutation of space and time and a possible breakdown of Lorentz invariance. The non-commutation
of space and time and violation of Lorentz invariance could possibly produce inflation (35, 36).
CHALLENGE (12): What is the precise value of the ratio, r, of primordial tensor-to-scalar fluctuations?
Different theories of the primordial Universe are sensitive to the ratio of primordial tensor-to-
scalar fluctuations. Cosmic microwave background (CMB) astronomy is the primary means for
obtaining information on the primordial universe. A measurement of the damping tail of the CMB with
the South Pole Telescope plus the WMAP seven year release gives for the primordial tensor-to-
scalar ratio r < 0.21 (9). There are no known technical limitations to achieving a sensitivity to detect r
down to 0.001 (10). Backgrounds, however, will degrade this sensitivity, but a detection of r down to a
level of 0.01 is achievable with a satellite mission (11). Due to the very long wavelengths of the tensor
(gravitational wave) perturbations, their influence on structure formation is expected to be negligible.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
As discussed above, there are many exciting challenges in relativistic astrophysics. Better observational
data and theoretical analysis in the coming years will help address these challenges.