]rehto.tam-dnoc[
1v5010.0121:viXra
November27,2024
Classical Yang-Mills theory in condensed matter physics
Bertrand Berche1,2 and Ernesto Medina2,1
1Statistical Physics Group, P2M, Institut Jean Lamour, UMR CNRS 7198,
Nancy Université, BP70239, F-54506 Vandœuvre les Nancy, France
2Laboratorio de Física Estadística de Medios Desordenados, Centro de Física,
InstitutoVenezolano de InvestigacionesCientíficas, Apartado21874, Caracas1020-A, Venezuela
Recently, gauge field theory approaches were extensively used in order to discuss the physical conse-
quences of spin-orbit interactions in condensed matter physics. An SU(2)×U(1) gauge theory is very
naturally borne out and provides an illustrative example of a classical Yang-Mills field theory at work.
This approach may serve as an exemplification of non-Abelian field theories for students in general
physicscurriculum. ItallowstointroducediscussionsonfundamentalideaslikeNoethercurrents,gauge
symmetry principle, gauge symmetry breaking and non linear Yang Mills equations in very concrete
physicalsituationsthatmakesitaccessibletoabroadaudience.
Résumé. Les théories de jauge ont récemment été utilisées de manière systématique pour discuter
lesconséquencesphysiquesdel’interactionspin-orbiteenphysiquedelamatièrecondensée. Unethéorie
SU(2)×U(1)apparaîtnaturellement etfournitunexempled’illustrationdufonctionnementdesthéories
classiques de Yang et Mills. Cette approche peut servir d’example de théorie de jauge non abélienne
pourdesétudiantsdansuncoursdephysiquegénérale. Celapermetd’introduireetdediscuterlesidées
fondamentalescommelescourantsconservésdeNoether,leprincipedesymétriedejauge,labrisuredela
symétriedejaugeetleséquationsnonlinéairesdeYangetMillsdansdessituationsphysiquesconcrètes,
lesrendantainsiaccessibleàunevastecommunauté.
ϕ(~r,t) wavefunctionorcomplexscalarfield
ψ(~r,t) Pauli2−componentspinororPaulispinorfield
Ψ(~r,t) Dirac4−componentspinor
L Lagrangiandensity
H SchrödingerHamiltonian
H PauliHamiltonian
Dt , D~ U(1)covariantderivatives
φ, A~ U(1)scalarandvectorgaugefields
E~, ~B electricandmagneticfields
ρ(~r,t) chargedensity
~j(~r,t)orJ~(~r,t) chargecurrentdensity
e, g electricandisospincharge
τa SU(2)generators
α SU(2)contractionτaαa
DDDt ,DDD~ SU(2)covariantderivatives
sa a−componentofthespin 1 operator
σa a−componentPaulimatrix
χχχ= 1σaχa, WWW~ = 1σaW~a SU(2)scalarandvectorgaugefields
EEE~= 1σaE~a,BBB~ = 1σaB~a SU(2)fieldstrengths
sa (~r,t), ρa (~r,t), J~a(~r,t) a−componentofthematterspinorisospindensityandcurrentdensity
mat. mat.
sa (~r,t), ρa (~r,t), J~a(~r,t) a−componentoftheradiationspinorisospindensityandcurrentdensity
rad. rad.
~s(~r,t) vectorspindensity
I. INTRODUCTION
Yang-Millstheoriesareusuallyintroducedtostudentsinthecontextofquantumfieldtheory,butareneverencountered
intheirclassicalformattheundergraduatelevel[1]. Regardingthefundamentalroleofgaugesymmetryintheconstruc-
tionofphysicaltheories, thisisdesirable inordertomaketheunderlying conceptsaccessibletophysicsstudentsearly in
thecurriculum. IntheabstractofapaperbyR.Mills[2],thecontentofgaugetheoriesissummarizedasfollows: “...the
gradualemergenceofsymmetryasadrivingforceintheshapingofphysicaltheory;theelevationofNoether’stheorem,relating
symmetriestoconservationlaws,toafundamentalprincipleofnature;andtheforceidea(“thegaugeprinciple”)thatthesym-
metriesofnature, liketheinteractionsthemselves, should be local in character.” Thisobviously brings theconceptof gauge
invariance tothelevel ofakeystoneprinciple amongphysicaltheories,ratherthanaspecificpropertyofelectromagnetic
theory.
ThenonrelativisticlimitofDiracequation,namelythePauliequationanditscorrectionstoSchrödingertheory,i.e. the
spin-orbit (SO)interactionandtheZeeman interaction, offersanatural frameforanSU(2)gaugefieldtheory. Thisdoes
notonlygiveanelegantformulationforthecouplingofspindegreesoffreedomwithexternalelectromagneticfields,but
also theYang-Mills approach provides natural answers to fundamental issues such as conservation laws which may offer
illuminatinginsightsinthecondensedmatterphysicscontext[3]. Hereweshowthatitmaybeausefulandveryconcrete
waytointroduceYang-Millstheory,inthecondensedmatterphysicscurriculum.
Areformulation ofthespin-orbit coupling Hamiltonian interms ofnon-Abelian gaugefields [4–6]was explicitlygiven
inref.[7–13]wheretheSOinteractionispresentedasaSU(2)×U(1)gaugetheory. Akeypropertyforthatpurposeisto
dealwithanSOinteractionwhichislinearinthemomentum,H ∼~p·(σ~×~E)insuchawaythatitcanbeabsorbedinthe
kineticenergythroughaminimalcouplingprocedure,~p−→~p−σ~ ×~E,uptounessentialnumericalfactors. Thisproperty
isfulfilledbythePauliHamiltonian, butalso bytheRashbaSOinteraction[14]andbythetwo-dimensional reductionof
theDresselhausSOinteraction[15]. Apotentialrealizationofsuchsituationinthegeneralcaseisthusthe2−dimensional
electrongas(2DEG)asencounteredinsemiconductorhetero-junctions[16]and2DEGquantumrings[17].
Such gauge point of view, in more general terms, has been known for some time[18–20]. This formulation is very
revealing, sincetheconsistent gaugestructureofthetheorybecomes obvious and thephysics ofspin currents, persistent
currentsandcolordiamagnetism[21]canbeunderstoodinamanneranalogoustothewellknownU(1)gaugetheories.
Theplanofthepaperisasfollows: westartinsectionIIwith thecaseofelectromagnetic theorywhichwill thenserve
as a basis to the non-Abelian Yang-Mills theory presented in section III. Section IV discusses, in this context, the case of
spin-orbit and Zeeman interactions and application to Einstein-de Haas effectis discussed in section V. We have decided
to avoid most of the time the use of tensor analysis and instead embrace vector algebra, in order to obtain equations of
motion in a form very similar to Maxwell equations in matter, as they are known in standard textbooks [22]. We feel
thatthiswillhelpthepartofthecommunitywhoislessfamiliarwithfieldtheory,appealingtothebroaderintuitionfrom
electromagnetism.
II. AWELL-KNOWNGAUGEFIELDTHEORY:THEEXAMPLEOFELECTROMAGNETISM
In this section, we collect the standard results of classical gauge field theory applied to electromagnetism in order to
laterfollowaparallelapproachinthecaseofnonAbelianandSOinteraction.
A. Conservedcurrents
A fundamental question in physics poses the problem of the electric charge. Why is charge conserved? Historically we
have made the empirical observation that in all fundamental processes, e.g. collisions between elementary particles, the
electricchargeisconserved. Thesumofthechargesoftheoutgoingparticlesisalways equaltothesumofthechargesof
theincomingparticles. Thispropertythentranslatesintoahydrodynamicconservationequation∂ ρ(~r,t)+∇~ ·~j(~r,t)=0,
where ρ(~r,t)is theelectric chargedensity calculatedonacoarsedgrained scalewhenacontinuous densitymake sense.
Integrationoveramesoscopic(ormacroscopic)scale,thenleadsto dQ(t) = d3r∂ ρ(~r,t)=− ~j(~r,t)·d~S=0provided
that the volume of integration is large enough and the current densities vanish at the boundaries. So conservation of
charge follows from an experimental observation, but its origin is not something obvious. An answer to the question of
the origin of such a conservation law (formulated here in a provocative manner) is that Hilbert spaces and the complex
fields living in these spaces don’t associate physical relevance to global phases of such fields. Here we refer to the fact
thatinQuantumMechanics(QM)theresultsofmeasurements aregivenbythematrixelements〈ϕ|Obs.|ϕ〉ofHermitian
operatorsObs.associatedtophysicalobservables,andsuchmatrixelementsareindependentofthechoiceofreferencefor
thephaseofthecomplexvectorϕ.
The principle of conservation of the electric charge, experimentally legitimate, is derived using the second approach
from a more fundamental and more abstract principle of invariance of the theory with respect to global phase changes.
The main advantage of the second answer is that it enables us to connect to other similar theories. More importantly, it
leads toaconsistentconstructionoftheelectromagnetic theorywithnoaprioriknowledgeotherthanthatimpliedbythe
Lagrangianformalismwhichisthelanguageadaptedforsuchapproaches. Thisiswhatwenowshow.
TheSchrödingerequationfollowsfromaleastactionprinciple[23]
δ ∂L ∂L ∂L
L d3rdt= 0 −∂ 0 −∂ 0 =0 (1)
where the free matter Lagrangian density L is an ordinary function F of the wave function ϕ(~r,t) (a complex scalar
fielddescribingmatter),itsspaceandtimederivatives,andthecorrespondingcomplexconjugatestreatedasindependent
variables. L =F(ϕ,ϕ∗,∇~ϕ,∇~ϕ∗,∂ ϕ,∂ ϕ∗)istheJordan-WignerLagrangiandensity[23,24],
andequation(1)appliedtothisLagrangian recovers theSchrödingerequation. Asdiscussedabove, QuantumMechanics
isinvariant underaglobalchangeofphaseofthewavefunction
since all physical quantities, expressed in terms of matrix elements, are independent of the global phase choice α. The
coefficiente/ħhinthephaseispresentforlaterconvenience. Itsimplyfixesthedimensionsoftheeαtothoseofanaction.
Thephasetransformationaboveisacontinuoussymmetry(αcantakeanyrealvalue)whichleavestheLagrangiandensity
unchanged. ApplyingNoethertheoremtoaninfinitesimalgaugetransformationϕ→ϕ′≃(1+ieα/ħh)ϕ=ϕ+δϕ[23,25],
it follows that we can define a conserved current obeying a continuity equation. Indeed, demanding the global gauge
transformationtobeasymmetry,i.e. topreservethelagrangiandensityL unchangedleadsto
where use has been made of the equations of motion (1) in the second line. This leads to the definition of a charge
very interesting connectionbetween“phaseinvariance” inQMandchargeconservationwas firstmadebyF.London. For
interested readers, historical aspects of gauge invariance are discussed at length in the bookof O’Raifeartaigh [26] or in
thereviews[27,28].
B. Thegaugeinvarianceprincipleillustrated
Let us now quote Salam and Ward [29], (see also Novaes [30]), who speculated on whether a local generalization of
thegaugeinvariance wouldgeneratestrong,weakandelectromagnetic interactionsandtheassociatednewfundamental
conservationlaws: “Ourbasicpostulateisthatitshouldbepossibletogeneratestrong,weak,andelectromagneticinteraction
terms ... by making local gauge transformations on the kinetic-energy terms in the free Lagrangian for all particles.” The
message behind this sentence is that theories which have a larger symmetry class (local gauge symmetry) have richer
dynamical structure (new interactions present), and thepower of gaugefield theoryappears when one assumes thatthe
phaseinvarianceinvokedabovealsoholdsinthecaseoflocalphasechangesα(~r,t),
whereG≡G(~r,t). ThisisobviouslynotasymmetryoftheoriginalLagrangiandensityL ,since∇~ϕ(~r,t)and∂ ϕ(~r,t)do
nottransformlikethewavefunctionitself,andasaconsequence,termslikeiħhϕ∗∂ ϕor− ħh2 ∇~ϕ∗∇~ϕarenotgaugeinvari-
ant(thefirstofthesetermsforexampletransformsintoiħhϕ∗∂ ϕ−e(∂ α)ϕ∗ϕ). Inordertorepairthislackofsymmetryof
theoriginalLagrangian,andtobeabletobuildanewonewiththeexpectedinvarianceproperty,onemaydefineso-called
covariantderivativesD~ =∇~ −ieA~(~r,t)andD =∂ +ieφ(~r,t)insuchawaythatactingonϕ(~r,t),theytransformlikethe
fields A~(~r,t) and φ(~r,t) are introduced for the transformations above to be satisfied. Again, the factors e/ħh are present
for convenience and the imaginary i is a choice which enables φ and A~ to be real fields (we require i∂ and −i∇~ to be
Hermitianoperators). Thegaugetransformationconditionsimplythatthesefieldsobeythelaws
whereonerecognizesthegaugetranformationsofthevectorandscalarpotentialsofelectromagnetism.
Summarizing the discussion to this point, we made a local phasechange to thewave function, but this does not leave
the Lagrangian density invariant unless we compensate this change i.e. the terms brought about by derivating α can be
cancelled by corresponding changes in the gauge fields. The terminology of covariant derivative refers to the fact that
D ϕ and D~ϕ are not invariant under a gauge transformation, but do transform in thesame manner as thefield ϕ itself.
The derivative operators D and D~ themselve transform like vectors under a gauge transformation, D → GD G−1 and
D~ →GD~G−1. Inthepresenceof an external gaugefield, oneway to make theLagrangian density gaugeinvariant is the
minimalcouplingprescription,i.e. replacetheordinaryderivativesbythecovariantonesinthefreematterfieldLagrangian
density(2),
0 int.
wherenowthereappears asupplementary interactionterm,depending onboththe“matterfield”ϕ andthegaugefields
φ,A~. Thistermappearsbecauseanytermallowedbythegaugesymmetryshouldappear. Inprinciplehigherorderterms
canalso appear butonetakestheminimal lowest orders. Thepricetopay toextendtheso-calledU(1) gaugeinvariance
to local phase transformations is that it automatically generates the interactions of the charged matter field with the
electromagnetic field, which is a strong self consistent check for the theory! Yang summarized the gauge invariance
approachtothestudyoffundamentalinteractionsbytheexpression“Symmetrydictatesinteraction”[31]
In terms of the gauge fields, the physical electric and magnetic fields ~E and B~ are defined as the commutators of
covariant derivatives, E = ħh[D ,D ] and B = −1 ħhε [D,D ] (ε is the totally antisymmetric tensor which takes
k ie t k k 2ie ijk i j ijk
value +1 when ijk is 123 up to circular permutations, it is −1 when ijk is 213 up to circular permutations, and it is 0
whentwoorthreeindicesareidentical). In4−dimensional notation,oneintroducestheFaradaytensor F =
(with D =∂ + ieA and the usual metric signature, A =(φ/c,−A~)) which transforms under gauge transformation as
µ µ ħh µ µ
a vector, i.e. F → GF G−1. The Faraday tensor (hence the electric and magnetic fields) is thus gauge invariant in
the Abelian U(1) gauge theory. The contribution of the free gauge fields to the Lagrangian density then follows simply
from the following requirements: we demand a i) Lorentz invariant, ii) quadratic in the gauge fields derivatives (i.e. a
kinetic energy of a standard form) and iii) gauge invariant quantity. Prescription i) is fulfilled if all space-time indices
are contractedwhile ii) is nicely obtained from thesquare of theFaraday tensor. Thequantity F Fµν, which transforms
under gaugetransformation as F Fµν →GF FµνG−1 satisfies all threeconditions, since G and G−1 simplify each other
inthepresent Abelian theoryforwhich all quantities commute. ThisfreegaugefieldLagrangian densityis known asthe
SchwarzschildLagrangiandensity[32–34]),
The formulation of the principle of gauge invariance was stated in Yang and Mills work [4], where they generalize
“phase invariance” of ordinary Quantum Mechanics of charged fields. They always refer to the case of electromagnetic
theory in order to illustrate their arguments: We define isotopic gauge as an arbitrary way of choosing the orientation of
the isotopic spin axes at all space-time points, in analogy with the electromagnetic gauge which represents an arbitrary way
of choosing the complex phase factor of a charged field at all space-time points. We then propose that all physical processes
(not involving theelectromagneticfield)be invariantundertheisotopicgauge transformationψ→ψ′, ψ′ =S−1ψ, whereS
representsaspace-timedependentisotopicspinrotation.
Topreserveinvarianceonenoticesthatinelectrodynamicsitisnecessarytocounteractthevariationofα[theαofYangand
Mills isthesameasour−eαinEq.(5)]with x, y,z and t byintroducingtheelectromagneticfieldA whichchangesunder
agaugetransformationas
In an entirely similar manner one introduces a B field in the case of the isotopic gauge transformation to counteract the
dependenceofSon x, y,zand t. (...) ThefieldequationssatisfiedbythetwelveindependentcomponentsoftheBfield,which
we shall call the b field, and their interaction with any field having an isotopic spin are essentially fixed, in much the same
waythatthefreeelectromagneticfieldanditsinteractionswithchargedfieldsareessentiallydeterminedbytherequirementof
gaugeinvariance.
ItwasalsoclearlystatedbyUtiyama[5]: Theformoftheinteractionsbetweensomewellknownfieldscanbedeterminedby
postulatinginvariance under acertaingroupoftransformations. Forexample, letusconsider theelectromagneticinteraction
of a charged field Q(x), Q∗(x). The electromagnetic interaction appears in the Lagrangian through the expressions ∂ Q−
ieA Q, ∂µQ∗+ieAµQ∗ (1).The gauge invariance of this system is easily verifiedin virtue ofthe combinations ofQ,Q∗, and
A in (1), if this system is invariant under the phase transformation Q → eiαQ, Q∗ → Q∗e−iα α = const (2) [because the
combination ∂ Q−ieA Q also transforms as Q]. Reversing the argument, the combination (1) can be uniquely introduced
by the following line of reasoning. In the first place, let us suppose that the Lagrangian L(Q,Q ) is invariant under the
constant phase transformation (2). Let us replace this phase transformation with the wider one (gauge transformation)
having the phase factor α(x) instead of the constant α. In order to make the Lagrangian still invariant under this wider
transformation it is necessary to introduce the electromagnetic field through the combination (1). This combination and the
transformationcharacterofA underthegaugetransformationcanbeuniquelydeterminedfromthegaugeinvariancepostulate
oftheLagrangian L(Q,Q ,A ).
C. Conservedcurrentsandequationsofmotioninthepresenceofgaugefields
Inthepresent contextofanAbelian gaugetheory, thefreegaugefieldcontributionL doesnotplay anyroleinthe
expressionoftheconservedcurrents. Thisisduetothefactthatthebosons(photonshere),whichareresponsibleforthe
(electromagnetic)interaction,donotcarrythecorresponding(electric)charge. Weshallseelaterthatthisisnolongertrue
inthenonAbeliancase. Nevertheless,theconservedcurrentgetsanadditionaltermduetothepresenceoftheinteraction
of thematterfield ϕ with thegauge potentials [35]. Indeed, sinceany local phasetransformation is now a symmetry of
theLagrangianL =L +L ,thisisalsotrueforglobalphasetransformationsandequation(4)nowbecomes
mat. 0 int.
wherethechargedensityρ(~r,t)isunchanged,butthecurrentdensityacquiresanadditionaltermoftencalleddiamagnetic
of this conserved current density, the interaction term is often written to lowest powers in the gauge fields as L =
int.
J~·A~−ρφ+O(A~2),whereallfieldsdependinthegeneralcaseonthevariables (~r,t).
ThetotalLangrangiandensitybecomes
tot. mat. U(1)
t ħh 2m ħh ħh
Theequations of motion follow fromEuler-Lagrange equations (1). For thematterfield equation of motion, weperform
thevariationw.r.t. ϕ∗(~r,t),
δ ∂L ∂L ∂L
0 = L d3rdt= mat. −∂ mat. −∂ mat. , (12)
ThoseforthegaugefieldsalsoobeyEuler-Lagrangeequations,butfollowfromvariations w.r.t. thegaugefields,
δ ∂L ∂L ∂L
0 = L d3rdt= mat. −∂ U(1) −∂ U(1) , (14)
k Z k j k t k
0 = L d3rdt= mat. −∂ U(1) , (15)
andtheverydefinitionofthechargeandcurrentdensitiesρ=− ∂Lmat.,J~= ∂Lmat.. TheMaxwellequationsfollow
thetwoequationswithoutsourcesbeingautomaticallysatisfiedwiththedefinitionofthephysicalfields E~ and B~ interms
ofthegaugefields. Inthepresenceofothertypesofinteractionsofthematterfield,therecanoccurnewcontributionsto
thechargeandcurrentdensitiesinMaxwellequationsaswewillseelater.
Thegaugefieldtheoryapproachthusappearsasaverypowerfultoolinordertodefineproperlythenotionofconserved
currents,theinteractionofamatterfieldwithanexternal (gauge)field,theequations ofmotionofthesegaugefields,as
well as some other subtle notions such as topological invariants [36]. This last notion is very useful for example in the
description of the Aharonov-Bohm effect in which a charged particle moves in a pure gauge field (i.e. a region of space
wherethephysicalfieldB~ vanishesbutthepotentialvectordoesnot). Insuchacase,thegaugeinvariantphaseofthewave
function ie A~d~r is responsible for the shift, proportional to the magnetic flux enclosed by the path, of the interference
patternproducedbyanykindoftwo-slitexperiment[37].
III. YANG-MILLSTHEORY
Ourprogramisnowtofollowthesamelines ofderivationas previously outlined,butinthecaseofaSU(2)symmetry.
This is done in many excellent textbooks [38–43], so we will just motivate the theory and fix the notations that we will
need in theapplication we have in mind tocondensed matter physics. TheU(1) gauge transformation introduced in the
previous section was motivated by the fact that non relativistic (spinless) quantum mechanics deals with wave functions
whicharecomplexscalarfieldsandthatphysicsisindependentofthechoiceofglobalphaseofthisfield. Acomplexscalar
fieldcanalso beseenas tworeal scalar fields (thereal andimaginary parts),and thegaugetransformation thusappears
as a rotation inthecomplexplane [44]. We canimagine that amore elaborate theorywould require theintroduction of
more sophisticated mathematical objects, e.g. spinors [45] (or a set of complex scalar fields). In the simplest case, we
will assume that the state of the particle is no longer described by a simple complex scalar field, but by a Pauli spinor
consistingintwocomplexscalarfieldsusuallywrittenintheformofa“vector”ψ= 1 andwewillcallSU(2)(special
unitarygroupof2×2matriceswithdeterminant 1)thecorresponding gaugetheor(cid:16)y. Thi(cid:17)snamecomesfromthefactthat
the objects acting on a two component spinor are two by two matrices which can all be written in terms of four basic
ones, the unit matrix and the Pauli matrices. Now, we obviously have a set of 4 real scalar fields, but only 3 are in fact
independent because the wave function must be normalized as d3rψ†ψ < +∞ where the adjoint spinor is the “row
vector” ψ† = (ϕ∗ ϕ∗). In the “internal” space called isospin space (name given by Eugene Wigner) where these three
components live, a gauge transformation may be seen now as a rotation in a 3−dimensional space. Since the action of
SU(2)operationsrotateinthreedimensionalspaceandsuchrotationsdonotcommute(orderofrotationschangesresults)
asintwodimensions,onesaysthatthetheoryisnonAbelian. ThiscontrastswiththeAbelianU(1)theorywherecomplex
scalarscommuteundermultiplication. Suchatransformation,actingonthespinor,maybewrittenas
The constant g plays the role of a new charge and all operators acting on the spinors are defined as 2×2 matrices (as
expected), denoted here with bold font to emphasize their matrix nature, e.g. α stands for the contraction over the
repeatedindexaτaαa=τ1α1+τ2α2+τ3α3 wheretheτa arethegeneratorsofSU(2)(i.e. halfthePaulimatrices),
1 0 1 1 0 −i 1 1 0
2 1 0 2 i 0 2 0 −1
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
The αa’s are the parameters of the transformation, they define the components of the rotation vector in the three-
dimensionalisospinspace.
The transformation (18) is a symmetry when the parameters αa’s are just constants, hence a conservation equation
followsfromNoethertheorem,since,asquotedbyR.Mills,“Thesubstanceofthetheorem,forourpurposes,isthatforevery
symmetryofnaturethereisacorrespondingconservationlawandforeveryconservationlawthereisasymmetry”[2]. andits
extensiontolocalgaugesymmetryisthestrategyoriginallyproposedbyYangandMills[46]: “Theconservationofisotopic
spin points tothe existence of a fundamental invariance law similar to the conservation of electric charge. In the lattercase,
the electric charge serves as a source of electromagnetic field. An important concept in this case is gauge invariance which is
closely connected with (1) the equationof motionof the electromagneticfield, (2) the existence of a current density, and (3)
thepossibleinteractionsbetweenachargedfieldandtheelectromagneticfield. Wehavetriedtogeneralizethisconceptofgauge
invariancetoapplytoisotopicspinconservation”. Isotopicspinor(strong)isospinhadbeenintroducedearlierbyHeisenberg
in1933asanewconservedphysicalquantityinordertoexplaintheclosesimilarityofbehaviourofprotonsandneutrons
during stronginteractions,e.g. thesamecrosssection(apart fromelectromagneticcorrections)forinteractions involving
bothtypesofparticles,like p+π−→n+π0 orn+π+→p+π0. Thenucleonwasthenconsideredasanisospindoublet.
Theextensionofthetransformation (18)tolocalparameters αa(~r,t),facestheproblemthatexactlylikeinthecaseof
U(1) symmetry, thespaceand timederivatives of thespinor do notobey thesametransformation law (18)as thespinor
itself does. As we mentioned before the simple gradient applied to the spinor is not gauge invariant, and thus is not a
valid building block for the Lagrangian. The alternative is to come up with a recipe for a new derivative, the covariant
derivative,whichafterhavingactedonaspinor,behavesalsolikeaspinor(asoneshouldexpect,thederivativeofaspinor
isanotherspinor).
Aspacecovariantderivativehastobedefinedas
DDD~ =∇~111 − igWWW~ , (20)
orincomponentformDDD =∂ 111 − igτaWa,andacovarianttimederivativeissimilarlyintroducedby,
t t ħh t ħh
111isthe2×2identitymatrix. Thenon-Abelian gaugepotentialsWa andχa carryanisospinindex,andtheyobeyspecific
transformationlawsthroughlocalgaugetransformations.
U(1) Globalgaugetransformations SU(2)
iħh∂ ϕ=− ħh2 ∇~2ϕ freeparticleequationofmotion iħh∂ 111ψ=− ħh2 ∇~2111ψ
Table1: ComparisonbetweenU(1)andSU(2)globalgaugeinvariance.
Oncethenon-Abeliangaugepotentialshavebeendefined,wecanformafieldtensorandagaugecovariantLagrangian
density in order to allow for a simple derivation of the conserved current density following from Noether theorem, and
essentiallyfollowsimilarlinesofderivationthanintheprevioussection. Inordernottorepeatallcalculations,wepresent
the analogies between U(1) and SU(2) theories in two tables. The properties associated to global gauge invariance are
listedinthefirsttable,whiletheconsequencesoflocalgaugeinvariancefollowinthenexttable.
Letusbrieflycommentupontheresultslistedinthesetables. InTable1thereisaveryclearonetoonecorrespondence
between thequantities defined in the two gauge theories. When one invokes global gauge invariance in the SU(2) case,
isospin is inert fixed in a certain direction and everything operates as if charge is the only physical quantity. This is
consistent with the interpretation of the Schrödinger equation not as an equation of motion for spinless particles, but
for “two-component Pauli particles” in a spin eigenstate [47]. There are nevertheless important differences between the
Abelian and the non-Abelian theories. First, the fact that the gauge potentials carry internal indices (this is the origin of
thenon-Abeliancharacter),impliesthatthesameindicesarecarriedbytheconservedcharges,aswellasbyallotherfields
such as E~a and B~a, the non-Abelian analogues to the electric and magnetic fields defined in Table 2. Another essential
differenceisduetothefactthatthegaugefieldsalsocarrythe“charge”oftheinteraction. Thishastwomainconsequences
(seeTable2): theconservedchargedensityandcurrentdensityhave,togetherwiththematterpart,apurelyradiative(i.e.
involvingonlythegaugefields)contributionandtheequationsofmotionforthegaugefieldsarenon-linear.
Localgauge
U(1) SU(2)
transformations
ħh cov.derivatives ħh
B E k k = =− i ħh e [ 2 ħh D ie ε t , i D jk k [ ] Di ,Dj ]) fieldstrengths   E B E B E B k k = =− i ħh g 2 [ ħh i DDD g ε t , i DDD jk [ k DDD ] i ,DDDj ]
D~ϕ) LagrangianLtot. iħh
ρ=eϕ∗ϕ cov.chargedensity ρ
at.
ad.
=gψ†τaψ− g
cov.conserved
J~a+J~a= −
−e m 2 A~ϕ∗ϕ current − 4 g m 2W~aψ†ψ− g c ε abc (χbE~c+1 2 c2W~ b×B~c)
gaugefields
∇~ ·E~= ǫ ρ 0 ) equationsofmotion   ∇~ ·E~a= g c(ρ m a at. +ρ r a ad. )
Table2:ComparisonbetweenU(1)andSU(2)localgaugeinvariance.
AnothersubtledifferencebetweentheAbelianandthenonAbeliancaseresidesinwhichquantitiesaregaugeinvariant,
which are gauge covariant, and which are simply gauge dependent. One is used to the case of the electromagnetic
interaction for which the charge density and the total current density are gauge invariant (even though in the latter
case the paramagnetic and diamagnetic contributions are separetaly not gauge invariant, their sum is). The electric and
magneticfields(ortheFaradaytensor)aresimilarlygaugeinvariant andfinallyonlythewavefunctionisgaugecovariant
ϕ′ = Gϕ. The covariant derivative operator D introduced to satisfy the same covariance law (D ϕ)′ ≡ D′ϕ′ = GD ϕ
thentranforms asavectorD′ =GD G−1 andthisimplies thatthegaugepotential,although a4−vector,has aparticular
non-covariant gauge transformation A′ = GA G−1− ħh(∂ G)G−1. In the non Abelian situation, the same consideration
appliesforthespinorψ′=GGGψandthecovariantderivativeoperator,DDD′ =GGG
GGG−1,andthisrequiresthegaugepotential
to obey a similar non-covariant gauge transformation WWW′ = GGGWWW GGG−1− ħh(∂ GGG)GGG−1. But now the so-called curvature
tensor FFF transforms like a vector, FFF′ = GGGFFF GGG−1, i.e. is subject to a rotation in the isospin space, hence the SU(2)
magneticandelectricfieldsarenotgaugeinvariantandarethenunphysicalinagaugesymmetrictheory(foradiscussion
onthemeaningof“physicalmeaning”,seee.g. Ref.[48]). ThenonAbelianchargedensityandcurrentdensitythemselves
are not gauge invariant, and under a gauge transformation, their matter and radiation content changes. Only the total
nonAbelianchargeQa = d3rρa(~r,t)isgaugeinvariant (andconstantintime)providedthatthevolumeofintegration
extendsoverlargeenoughdistancesforthecurrenttovanish.
IV. YANG-MILLSTHEORYFORSPIN-ORBITINTERACTION
A. Preamble-theZeemaninteraction
Electronsareparticleswhichcarrynotonlyanelectriccharge,butalsoaspin 1. Innon-relativisticQuantumMechanics,
they obey the Pauli equation which is a generalization of the Schrödinger equation with an essential innovation: the
existenceofthespin,i.e. anewdegreeoffreedom,coupledtospace-timedegreesoffreedomintheHamiltonianthrough
interactions such as the spin-orbit interaction and the Zeeman interaction. In the presence of such interactions, spin is
knownnottobeconserved,butspincarriesangular momentumandthetotalangularmomentumisconserved. Thisisat
theorigine.g. oftheEinstein-deHaasexperimentthatwillbediscussedlater.
Althoughthesestatementsarewellunderstoodphysically,aclearformulationisappealingfollowingthelinesofderiva-
tionproposedinthequotationofYangandMills[46]insectionIII.Herethestartingpointisgivenbytheknowninteraction
termspresentinthePauliequation,fromwhichaconsistentgaugetheoryisbuilt. Suchaformulationleads,asbefore,toa
conservationlaw. Then,oncethegaugetransformationsareextendedtolocalchanges,itleadstotheequationsofmotion
forthegaugefields.
Inthisintroductorysection,wewillfocusattentionontheconsequencesoftheZeemaninteractionbetweenthemagnetic
momentassociatedtothespinoftheelectron e~s(with Landéfactor g =2and~s= 1ħhσ~)andanexternalmagneticfield
B~. ThestateoftheparticleisdescribedbyaPauli spinorψ= ϕ ↑ ,andtheHamiltonian reads asH= 1 (~p−eA~)2111+
V111 − e~s·B~. Followingstandardtextbooks[49,50]onecanbu (cid:16) ilda (cid:17) continuityequationwherethechargedensityandthe
chargecurrentdensityaredefinedaccordingto
As we had already anticipated, when a new interaction (here the Zeeman interaction) appears in the problem, the con-
served current gets modified. This is a property that we have already seen at play when the minimal coupling to the
externalelectromagneticfieldwasaddedtothefreeparticle,whereitledtotheappearanceofadiamagneticcontribution
totheNoetherconservedcurrentdensity. Here,therotorofthemagnetizationassociatedtotheelectrondensityproduces
an additional charge current density. Note that this last term may be forgotten during the standard derivation using the
waveequationanditscomplexconjugate,sincethedivergenceofarotorvanishes,andsomecaremustbetakentoestab-
lishthefullcurrentdensity[51–53]. Nevertheless,thisaddititonalterm,sometimescalled“spinterm”[52],iscompulsory
inordertoobtainaconservationequation. Itisthusalsoinstructivetocontemplatethespindensity(e.g. inthedirection
oftheexternal field ~B=B~e ),whichmaybenaturally definedbysz(~r,t)=ψ†szψ. Thez−componentsz commuteswith
theHamiltonian. Thisisaconservedquantity,andthecorrespondingcontinuityequationtakestheform∂ sz+∇~ ·J~z =0
with J~z = −iħh(ψ†sz∇~ψ−(∇~ψ†)szψ) the spin current density. This is a tensorial quantity, since it has a vector character
(thecurrent propagates inspace)anddepends also onthespinorientation. Theconservation equation also follows from
theuseofEhrenfesttheorem, dsz =(iħh)−1ψ†[sz,H]ψ+ψ†∂ szψ=0. Theothercomponentsofthespinhowever donot
commute with the Hamiltonian and in this case the continuity equation gets additional terms. Altogether, one can write
∂ sa+∇~ ·(sa~v)= e(~s×B~) ,wheretheRHSrepresentsthetorqueexertedonthespin.
The spin is just a contribution to the total angular momentum and this latter quantity is of course conserved. Our
discussionthussuggeststhatthereshouldbeawaytowriteaconservationequationwherespincomponentswouldappear
explicitly, together with other sources of angular momentum. The “spin density” components sa(~r,t)= ψ†saψ are, in a
sense equivalent to the charge density, except that they carry the spin index a. Deriving such a conservation equation is
thepurposeofthenextsections.
B. Pauliequationandspin-orbitinteraction
Wearenowinapositiontodiscusscompletelytheroleofthespin-dependentrelativisticcorrectionstotheSchrödinger
equation. ThePauliequationfollowsfromthenonrelativisticlimitoftheDiracequation[54],
(cid:2) (cid:3)
whereα~ andβ arethe4×4DiracmatricesandΨisa4−componentDiracspinor. WeletΨ= ψ e−imc2t/ħhtoremovethe
restenergyoftheelectron. ψandξbothhavetwocomponents. Inthenonrelativistic limit,(cid:16)ξis(cid:17)averysmallcomponent
Here,σ~ isthevectorofPaulimatrices σ~ =σ1~e +σ2~e +σ3~e =σa~e . Forgettingabouttherelativistic correctiontothe
kineticenergy,thePauliHamiltonianisgivenby
NonRelativisticKE
eħh eħh ieħh2 eħh2
2m 4m2c2 8m2c2 8m2c2
Zeemanterm SOinteraction Darwinterm
In the following, we will|ne{gzlec}t the|Darwin interaction{zwhich, like the relat}ivis|tic co{zrrect}ion to the kinetic energy, is
spin-independent. The“substrate”potential V willbedenotedas eφ,definingthescalargaugepotential. Letusnotethat
the SO interaction is written in its more general form here, including the term proportional to the rotor of the electric
field[54].
C. Gaugetheoryofthespin-orbitinteraction
Thefactthat theSOinteraction is linear in~p enables one togather it togetherwith theNonRelativistic KE in asingle
squaredterm, 1 [(~p−eA~)111 −gWWW~ ]2uptoacorrectionquadraticinthespinoperator. Since 1σa isthegeneratorofSU(2)
symmetry (denoted as τa in tables 1 and 2), we setWWW~ = 1σaW~ a, with W~ a three ordinary vectors. Expanding the cross
productsintermsofantisymmetrictensors,theSOinteractioninEq.(26)maynowbewrittenas
andidentifiedtotherelevantcontributionofthecrosstermintheNonRelativisticKE,
providedthatthenew“SO”charge,heredenotedas g,isidentifiedto g=ħh. Itisthusnaturaltodefineanewgaugevector
potential,dependingonbothspace-timevariables andspindegreesoffreedom, gWWW~ = eħh σ~ ×E~ [55]orincomponents
2 2 k k 4mc2 ajk j k
The same identification is obtained if we include the electromagnetic vector potential. We see that the gauge vector
componentsWa carrytwoindices. Theindexk herereferstoapurelyspaceindexwhiletheindexaisaspinindexwhich
also has a spatial meaning due to the fact that spin and space variables are linked in Quantum Mechanics (the index a
wouldbeapurely internal isospinvariable inthecontextofYang-Mills theories offundamental interactions). Inorderto
avoid any confusion between the two indices, we will always denote as upperscript the spin indices (the position of the
indicesmakesnodifference,sinceweuseaEuclideanmetricforthisnonrelativistictheory). Repeatedindicesaresummed
up,independentlyoftheirupordownposition. TheSOinteractionisnowessentiallyincludedintheKEthrough
NonRelativisticKE + SOInteraction=
1 eħh e2ħh2
2m 4mc2 32m3c4
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Letuspointouttheimportantfactthatthegaugevectorpotentialhasaninherentmatrixstructure,hencetheunderlying
gauge theory is a non-Abelian one, called SU(2) due to the presence of the Pauli matrices, exactly like what was briefly
presentedinsectionIII.Theaddititionalterminequation(30)hasthestructureofagaugesymmetrybreaking term[57]
i.e. itchangeswhenweperformagaugetransformation. This,wenowknowhowtodoforthistheory,anditseffectwill
appearinalaterdiscussion.
In the case of the SO+Zeeman interactions of equation (26), one has to build a full U(1)×SU(2) theory. This means
that we contemplate the space of complex scalar and their products and the space of 2×2 matrices and their product.
Boththesespacesbeingindependent. Totakeintoaccountsimultaneouslythefactthattheelectricandmagneticfieldsare
minimallycoupledtothechargeandtothespindegreesoffreedom,wedefinethecovariantderivatives
DDD~ =∇~111 − ieA~111 −iWWW~ ,
whereA~istheelectromagneticvectorpotentialandWa= e ε E ,whileφistheusualelectromagneticscalarpotential,
k 2mc2 ajk j
and χa =−eBa. Note that we have used the simplification which occurs due to the fact that the non-Abelian charge is
UnderaninfinitesimallocalgaugetransformationGGG=exp(i1σaαa)≃ 111+i1σaαa,thenonAbeliangaugefieldsshould
transformaccordingto
i t 2 abc t
The alert student should note that in this theory of the spin-orbit interaction there is no gauge freedom associated to
SU(2) transformations (actually a small subset survives[10]) since the non-Abelian gauge fields are defined in terms of
the physical Maxwell fields [55]. We will come back later to this point. Another peculiarity is due to the appearance
in equation (30) of the so-called gauge symmetry breaking term (GSB) (the last term in the equation) that interferes
with gauge symmetry. The full Lagrangian hence becomes L = L +L +L +L +L , where L ≡
tot. 0 int. GSB U(1) SU(2) mat.
L +L +L (L contains all terms involving thematterfield ψ). Wealso have toaddthefreefieldcontribution
0 int. GSB mat.
L (called Yang-Mills Lagrangian density), which only depends on the non-Abelian fields. This term is required by
gaugesymmetryandLorentzinvariance(forthetheorytobeautomaticallyextendedtoarelativisticcontext).
tot. t 2m k k 2m k k
L0 +Lint. LGSB
2 k k k k 2c k k k k
following from the definitions EEE = 1[∂ 111+iχχχ,∂ 111 −iWWW ] and BBB = −1ε [∂111 −iWWW ,∂ 111 −iWWW ] given in Table 2.
k i t k k k 2i ijk i i j j
The dimensions of the fields are consistent with the coefficients appearing in the covariant derivatives, [χa] = T−1,
[Wa]=L−1,[Ea]=L−1T−1 and[Ba]=L−2,whereTandLaretimeandspacedimensions. Thefactthatthepurenon-
AbelianfieldcontributionL isgaugeinvariantisnotaprioriobviousduetothegaugeco-varianceofthephysicalfields
inthenon-Abelian situationEEE → GGGEEE GGG−1=EEE +i1αa[σa,EEE ]andthesimilar transformationlaw forBBB . Nevertheless,
k k k 2 k k
beingproportionaltoTrFFF FFFµν →TrGGGFFF FFFµνGGG−1,itisobviouslygaugeinvariantthankstotheinvarianceproperties
of thetraceunder cyclic reordering of thematrices. Thereremains thequestion ofthephysical origin ofthis term inthe
present situation. Asargued byTokatly [21],it has thecorrectformtoaccount forthefirstSOcorrections totheenergy.
Inanycaseitisdemandedbysymmetrysoitshouldbeoutthere!
D. Conservedcurrents
Let us stress on the fact that, contrary to the results presented in Table 2 in the case of a SU(2) gauge symmetric
theory(LagrangianinvariantunderSU(2)gaugetransformations),thesocalleddia-colorcontribution− ħh2W~ aψ†ψtothe
current density is exactly compensated in the present situation by the GSB contribution. The term dia-color was coined
in this context by Tokatly and refers to the analogue of the diamagnetic current density, but for the non Abelian SO
interaction[21]. Themattercurrent Ja≡ ∂Lmat. finallysimplifiesfromtheexpressioninTable2to
k 2m 2 k k 2
whiletheradiationcurrentJa≡ ∂LSU(2) isthesam (cid:0) easindicatedinthetable, (cid:1)
k c abc k 2 ijk i j
TheGSBtermhasnoeffectonthematterandradiationspindensitieswhichremainthoseofthetable,
mat. ∂χa 2
rad. ∂χa c abc k k
Thespin-dependent part in theinteraction term L is thus exactly JaWa−sa χa (with no quadratic contribution this
int. k k mat.
time). A very simple, but important consequence is that there is no spin current contribution proportional to the non
Abelian gauge vector, i.e. no current transverse to the ordinary electric field, and the spin Hall conductivity vanishes
automaticallyintheGSBscenario[10].
E. Equationsofmotion
Inordertoobtaintheequationsofmotionforthegaugefields,wealsohavetotakeintoaccountthelastpeculiaritywe
will consider of the present problem, i.e. the fact that the U(1) and the SU(2) gauge fields are not independent. There
aretwoapproacheswecanfollowtocontemplatethisdependencewithinthevariationalformulation: oneeitherincludes
constraintsusingtheLagrangemultipliers[55]method,whichallowstreatingthedifferentgaugefieldsasindependent,
constr. k k k k
m i i 2mc2 aji j
S[ψ,φ,A ,χa,Wa] = dtd3rL (ψ,φ,A ,χa,Wa), (41)
k k tot. k k
oronehastoincludeintheequationsofmotionanaccountofthesecondorderderivatives intheU(1)gaugefields,e.g.
= tot. −∂ tot. −∂ tot.
+∂2 tot. +2∂ ∂ tot. +∂∂ tot. =0. (42)
Letusillustrate thesetwoapproachesinthevery simplecaseofelectrostaticswhere theLagrangian densityreduces to
L = 1ǫ |E~|2−ρφ. Using the first route, the condition E~ = −∇~φ is implemented in the action through the constraint
S = d3r[L −~λ·(E~+∇~φ)]. Varying the action w.r.t. φ (E~ being considered as independent of φ) leads to ∂L +∇~ ·
∂(∇~ ∂ φ R ) λ~ ·(E~+∇~φ)=−ρ+∇~ ·λ~ =0,whilevariation w.r.t. E~ producestheequationǫ 0 ~E−λ=~0. Thecombinationofthe
twoequationsrecoverstheusualMaxwellequation. Thesecondapproachismorestraightforwardinthissimplecaseand
leadsto ∂L −∇~ · ∂L =−ρ−ǫ ∇~2φ=0,i.e. thePoissonequation.
The first route is by far simpler in the SO case. For the usual electric and magnetic fields, we obtain the following
equationsofmotion(Maxwellequations):
constr. = mat. + U(1) − dtd3rλa[Wa− ε E ],
mat. 0 k k 2mc2 k aki i
δS δS δS δ e e
constr. = mat. + U(1) − dtd3r µa(χa+ Ba)+λa(Wa− ε E ) ,
δA δA δA δA m k k 2mc2 ajk j
i i i i Z • ˜
i k i t i k i t i
i 0 ijk j k 0 t i m ika k 2mc2 t ika k
Inthefirstoftheseexpressions,wecandefineapolarizationintermsoftheLagrangemultipliers,
k 2mc2 aki i
Note that the origin of the dielectric polarization has to be found in the fact that a moving magnetic moment µ~ creates
a dipolar moment ∼ ~v×µ~ [56]. This dielectric polarization is associated to bound charges and there appears then a
contribution−∂ P tothetotalchargedensity. Thispolarizationalsocontributesthesecondequationofmotionthrougha
termaddedtotheordinarycurrentdensity,∂ P,aswellasanadditionaltermε ∂ ma,with
describing“Amperian”currents(regularchargecurrents).
The electric charge and current densities are modified by the SO+Zeeman terms and the usual Maxwell equations
become:
Thevariationwithrespecttothenon-Abeliangaugefieldsleadsto
constr. = mat. + SU(2) − dtd3rµb(χb+ Bb),
mat. 2c abc k k c k k
constr. = mat. + SU(2) − dtd3rλb(Wb− ε E ),
δWa δWa δWa δWa k k 2mc2 bjk j
i i k i t i
i 2c abc i ijk j k ijk j k c t i i
We recover the radiation spin density sa = − ħhε WbEc and the radiation spin current density Ja = − ħhε [χbEc +
rad. c abc k k i c abc i
1c2ε WbBc]intermsofwhichthecorrespondingYang-Mills-Maxwell equationsbecome
ħh mat. rad.
ThenonAbelianequationswithoutsourcestaketheform(obtaineddirectlyfromthedefinitions(35)and(36))
From the Yang-Mills-Maxwell equations, one can form a continuity equation describing the conservation of the total
angularmomentumdensity. TakingthedivergenceofEq.(52),andusingEq.(51),onegets
t mat. rad. t
TheLagrangemultipliersformallyappearinthecontinuityequation,butphysically,thel.h.s. containsallsourcesofangular
momentum incorporated in the problem [55], i.e. from free electrons in the conduction band encoded in the spinor ψ
(thematterspindensity),andfromangular momentumtransferedtothelatticeviaSOinteraction(theradiationangular
momentumdensity). Sotheconservationofangularmomentuminthesystemreadsasexpected
t mat. rad.
We note that in the case of a static and homogeneous problem, the Lagrange multipliers just take the simple form µa =
mat. rad.
V. EINSTEIN-DEHAASEXPERIMENTREVISITED
The Einstein-de Haas experiment is one of the famous experiments of the beginning of the XXth century based on
gyromagnetic phenomena [58–60]. In this experiment, a cylinder made of a non magnetized ferromagnetic material is
suspended to a torsion wire and an external magnetic field is applied along the cylinder’s axis. The cylinder acquires a
magnetization,becausespinsorienttothefieldloweringtheenergyofthesystemandatthesametime,thecylinderstarts
arotatingmotion. Thiseffectbecameanefficientexperimentalmethodforthemeasurement ofthegyromagneticratioof
variousmaterialsand,forexample,provedthatmagnetismofironisessentiallyduetothespindegreesoffreedom.
Thisexperimentiswellknown,andwellunderstoodfromveryfundamentalprinciples,sinceitreliesontheconservation
of angular momentum. When the material gets magnetized, the individual magnetic moments of the electrons point in
a common direction, hence a total angular momentum appears which has to be compensated by an opposite angular
momentumcarriedbythewholesampleinordertoconservetheinitiallyvanishing valueofthetotalangularmomentum
of thesample. Although this mechanism is very clear and unquestionable, there is no simple microscopic explanation of
howthisconservationofangularmomentumisatplayattheatomiclevel. Seehowever[61]forabeautifuldescriptionof
thedynamics of theeffectin terms of elastic twist on thelattice induced by therotation of localized spins (spin-rotation
coupling) and the coupling to the anisotropy field. The latter anisotropy is in fact a consequence of the existence, at a
deeper level, of spin-orbit interactions. The purpose of this section is to provide such a microscopic description. Our
approachisbasedonthegaugefielddescriptionofspin-orbitinteractions. Theinterestofthegaugefieldtheoryhereisto
provideanaturalwayfortheintroductionofconservedcurrentscarryingangularmomentum.
An external magnetic field B~ = B~e is applied to the cylinder of ferromagnetic material initially non magnetized, sus-
pendedalongitsz−axistoatorsionwire(hencetheappearenceofanon-Abelianscalarfieldχ3intheMaxwell-Yang-Mills
approach). The material gets magnetized. The spins acquire a common orientation and the corresponding magnetiza-
tion is called the matter spin polarization. The sample is subject to a torsion around the vertical axis, and the radiation
counterpartistheangularmomentumacquiredbythelattice. Wecanunderstandthephysicalsituationastheappearence
of a matter spin polarization s3 since the individual localized spins get polarized along the direction of the external
mat.
magneticfield. Asaconsequence,∇~ ·~E36=0andtheYang-Mills electricfieldaquires anonvanishingcomponentE~3. The
localizedspinsinteractwiththelatticeionsthroughanSOinteraction(responsibleforexampleforcrystallineanisotropy),
hencesomecomponentsofW~ a donotvanish,creating,togetherwithχ3 aradiationcontributiontothespinpolarization
Letusanalysetheequationsinordertoseewhetheranequationofrotationofthelatticefollows. Here,thelatticeenters
theproblemviatheSOinteraction,i.e. viatheelectricfield(the“true”internalelectricfield)whichis“rigidly”associated
tothelatticeions. Sinces3 =−(ħh/c)ǫ WbEc,andEc =−∂ Wc+ε χdWe (weassumeherethatχd =χ3,determined
rad. 3bc k k k t k cde k
bytheappliedmagneticfield,isuniform)weobtain
rad. 4m2c5 t m 3 3
As we had noticed, the appearence of the radiation contribution to the polarization is connected to the SO interaction
(hence the electric field). This equation self-consistently shows that the true electric field produced by the ions located
at the lattice sites is subject to a motion of rotation around the axis ~e along which the external magnetic field was
applied. Thisrotationoftheelectricfieldcanonlybecausedbyanequivalentrotationofthewholelattice,thusexplaining
the observed Einstein-de Haas effect. If we now take into account the magnetization acquired by the cylinder and the
exchange interaction between the conducting electrons and the localized moments (J coupling constant), B~ has to be
changedinto ~B =~B+J µ M~.
VI. CONCLUSION
Inthispaper,wehaveshownthatspin-orbit interactionisasuitablearenatointroducenon-Abelian gaugefieldtheory
(namely here SU(2) gauge theory) and that many consequences, relevant in a condensed matter physics context can be
drawn fromtheclassicalformofthetheory. Morespecifically, wehavediscussedtheconservedcurrentassociatedtothis
theory,theequationsofmotionofthegaugefield,andtheroleofthecontinuityequationinthediscussionoftheEinstein
- de Haas experiment. The approach follows from a very general Yang-Mills-Maxwell theory which we believe is likely
suitable for micromagnetic simulations of spin current and spin configurations in various materials such as conducting
ferromagnetsor2DEGs.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by CNRS-Fonacit grant PI-2008000272, and by the support of Nancy-Université through an
InvitedProfessorposition(EM).EMalsoacknowledgessupportfromthePOLARFoundation.