]hp-neg.scisyhp[
1v3355.8031:viXra
CLIMATE CHANGE AND OPEN SCIENCE
IANPERCIVAL
1. Climate change
2. Origin of science
3. The paper era
4. The silicon era: internet science
5. Conclusion
.
1. Climate change
The world economy is now big enough to make significant and rapid changes in our
environment and of life on this planet [1]. So whether we like it or not, we humans
have become custodians of the planet: to look after it well, we need to take appropriate
action, which depends on finding reliable answers to the following questions:
Q1 Given the current trajectory of atmospheric carbon-loading, and the resultant climate
change, how can we sustainably protect the biosphere?
Q2 Given this climate change, how can we make sure that our descendants will have
better lives than ours?
The answers need to be based on sufficiently reliable physical, biological and social
science, leading to remedial action within the next few decades [2], with negligible prob-
abilityoffailure,soweneedtoaccelerateprogressintherelevantsciencesbymanyorders
of magnitude. At first sight this appears to be a hopeless task, but closer investigation
gives hope.
.
2. Origin of Science.
Charles Darwin and Louis Liebenberg have a lot in common. Their early research was
supported financially by their parents, and both studied origins: Darwin’s book on the
originofspecieswasfirstpublishedin1859; Liebenberg’sbook[3]ontheoriginofscience
was published in 1990 and is now freely available on the internet. Both risked their lives
for their work.
Date: 2013aug23.
2 IANPERCIVAL
Discoveries were made in prehistory before they were recorded. Useful discoveries were
retained and developed in small communities. Their application contributed to the fit-
ness of those communities and helped them to survive, so it was subject to natural
selection: the theory of natural selection applies to the prehistory of discovery. For ex-
ample, the discoveries of the animal trackers of the Kalahari desert in South Africa were
describedbyLiebenberginhisbookfromfirst-handexperience. Accordingtohim,track-
ing involved creative problem-solving in which hypotheses were tested against evidence,
rejecting those which do not stand up and replacing them with better ones, a signifi-
cant but originally unrecorded contribution to scientific method. Unlike Liebenberg in
his book, I think that the transition from localized discoveries in small communities to
what we now call science took place only after records were invented. The invention
of records was an advance in technology, whose impact was not restricted to science.
With scientific records, artificial selection of scientific discoveries supplements natural
selection, accelerating scientific progress. The records are transmitted widely between
communities in both space and time, allowing thorough testing by observation and ex-
periment. Once scientific records were invented, the interaction between technology and
science became a permanent feature of both. Today the application of science makes
an important contribution to the fitness and survival of human communities and to the
future of humanity as a whole.
.
3. The paper era
Darwin’s scientific records were written by hand on paper and published in print on
paper. In his time, rapid communication was by post or private courier, lasting records
were kept in published books and journal articles: this was during the paper era of
science, during which the tradition began of referring to past publications, producing a
time-dependent network of references, each branch of the network linking two scientific
documents or ‘papers’, the later citing the earlier. The network was very sparse near
the beginningof the era, becausethere were few earlier paper documents which could be
referenced. By contrast, near the end of the paper era in the 20th century, the network
grewsomuchthatfieldsof sciencebecameincreasingly tribal. Each fieldandsub-fieldof
science developed its own exclusive language, slowing down the transmission of scientific
records between them and consequently slowing scientific progress too.
.
4. The silicon era: internet science
Paper is now being replaced: most new scientific records are silicon-based. The internet
has already broken down many of the barriers between the sciences; the process is not
complete, but is likely to continue until all the barriers are down, making science a
seamless whole. Individual scientists and small local communities of scientists are still
the basic units of scientific progress, but these days finding answers to some of the most
important questions, like Q1 and Q2 above, needs communication and collaboration
across distant parts of the globe and between traditionally distant fields of science. For
thiscommunication thebarriersmust comedown. Inordertosatisfy thetimeconstraint
CLIMATE CHANGE AND OPEN SCIENCE 3
of Q1and Q2, remedialaction within a few decades, progress in relevant internet science
needs to grow exponentially, with an exponent as large as possible, by analogy with, and
dependent on, the exponential growth of electronics according to Moore’s Law [4]. This
can be optimized only by bringing in as many internet scientists as possible. For most
scientists, access to the internet is not enough to participate in world science, because
at present doing science on the internet needs money. This problem can be overcome by
making the relevant science open-access (OA). Open access is defined by Peter Suber in
anarticle inthebook“UnderstandingKnowledgeas aCommons”[5]as “notonlyfreeof
charge to everyone with an internet connection, but free of most copyright and licensing
restrictions” [6]. In the same book, an article by Charles Schweik [7] describes how OA
“has the potential to lead to more rapid progress in research than is possible within
the existing structure of scientific research and publication”. Suber has also written an
excellent book on OA, which is itself open access [8].
.
5 Conclusion
If we are to answer the questions Q1 and Q2 of the first section in time, and overcome
the problems of climate change, we need a new kind of science. The keys to this science
are open access and cooperation, which gives an added urgency to the open access
program.
.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Tim Palmer, Michelle Pavitt, Dave Pick, David Wax-
man, David Weir, Paul Williams.
I am at the Physics and Astronomy Departments of the University of Sussex and Queen
Mary, University of London.