limate hange and ts auses
A Discussion About Some Key Issues
NicolaScafetta1,2
1ActiveCavityRadiometerIrradianceMonitor(ACRIM)Lab,Coronado,CA92118,USA
2DepartmentofPhysics,DukeUniversity,Durham,NC27708,USA.
This article discusses the limits of the Anthropogenic Global Warming Theory advocated by the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change. A phenomenological theory of climate change based on the physical
properties of the data themselves is proposed. At least 60% of the warming of the Earth observed since 1970
appears to be induced by natural cycles which are present in the solar system. A climatic stabilization or
coolinguntil2030-2040isforecastbythephenomenologicalmodel.
Thisworkismadeof
• AntranslationintoEnglishofthepaper:
Scafetta N., “Climate Change and Its causes: A
Discussion about Some Key Issues,” La Chimica
el’Industria1,p. 70-75(2010);
• Severaladditionalsupportingnotesareaddedtothe
• Anextendedappendixsectionpartisaddedtocover
several thematic issues to support particular topics
addressedinthemainpaper. (notinthispreprint)
ThisworkcoversmosttopicspresentedbyScafettaataseminarattheU.S.EnvironmentalProtectionAgency,DC
USA,February26,2009. Avideooftheseminarishere:
Citeas:
ScafettaN.,“ClimateChangeandItscauses: ADiscussionaboutSomeKeyIssues,”LaChimicael’Industria
1,p. 70-75(2010).
ThefullEnglishversionwiththeappendixescanbedownloadedfrom
TheItalianversionoftheoriginalpapercanbedownloaded(withpossiblejournalrestrictions)from
PreprintsubmittedtoScience&PublicPolicy(SPPI) October22,2018
]hp-oeg.scisyhp[
1v4551.3001:viXra
Figure 1: Global surface temperature (land and sea) HadCRUT3 (red) and its quadratic fit (black). [Climatic Research Unit,
1. Introduction
Since 1900 the global surface temperature of the Earth has risen by about 0.8 oC (Fig-
ure 1), and since the 70s by about 0.5 oC. This temperature increase occurred during a
significant atmospheric concentration increase of some greenhouse gases, especially CO
and CH , which is known to be mainly due to human emissions. According to the Anthro-
pogenic Global Warming Theory (AGWT) humans have caused more than 90% of global
warming since 1900 and virtually 100% of the global warming since 1970 (Appendix A).
The AGWT is currently advocated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) [1], which is the leading body for the assessment of climate change established by
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological Orga-
nization (WMO). Many scientists believe that further emissions of greenhouse gases could
endanger humanity [2].
However, not everyone shares the IPCC’s views [3].1 More than 30,000 scientists in
America (including 9,029 PhDs) have recently signed a petition stating that those claims
are extreme, that the climate system is more complex than what is now known, several
1TheAGWTadvocatesclaimthatthereexistsascientificconsensusthatsupportstheAGWT.However,ascientificconsensus
doesnothaveanyscientificvaluewhenitiscontradictedbydata. Itisperfectlylegitimatetodiscussthetopicofmanmadeglobal
warming and closely scrutinize the IPCC’s claims. Given the extreme complexity of the climate system and the overwhelming
evidencethatclimatehasalwayschanged,theAGWTadvocates’claimthatthescienceissettledisprematureintheextreme.
Figure 2: List of radiative forcings held responsible for the global warming since 1750 and used in the models adopted by the
IPCC. The figure is adapted from the IPCC Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. These forcings are used as inputs of the
climatemodelsusedbytheIPCCtosupporttheAGWT.Thetablesuggeststhatthetotalnetanthropogenicforcingsince1750has
been13.3timeslargerthanthenaturalforcing. However,labelingontheleftofthetable,anthropogenicandnatural,ismisleading
becauseitwouldimplythatonlyhumanactivitycanchangethechemistryoftheatmosphere,whichisnonphysical.
mechanisms are not yet included in the climate models considered by the IPCC and that
this issue should be treated with some caution because incorrect environmental policies
could also cause extensive damage [3]. This article briefly summarizes some of the rea-
sons, mostly derived from my own research, why the science behind the IPCC’s claim is
questionable.2
2On November 19, 2009 a climategate story erupted on the web. This story is seriously undermining the credibility of the
AGWT and of its advocates. Thousands of e-mails and other documents were disseminated via the internet through the hacking
of a server used by the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) of the University of East Anglia in Norwich, England. These e-mails
have been interpreted by some as suggesting serious scientific misconduct and even conspiracy by leading climate scientists and
IPCC authors who have strongly advocated AGWT. These emails apparently suggest: 1) manipulation of temperature data; 2)
prevention of a proper scientific disclosure of data and methodologies; 3) attempts to discredit scientists critical of the AGWT
shallow and suspiciously inaccurate); 4) attempts to bias Wikipedia articles in favor of the AGWT; 5) and much more seriously,
attempts to control which papers appear in the peer reviewed literature and in the climate assessments in such a way to bias the
scientific community in favor of the AGWT. Others, however, believe that the contents of those emails have been maliciously
misinterpretedbytheso-calledskeptics. Adetailedanalysisoftheseemailscanbefoundin: 1)J.P.Costella(2010),Climategate
(2010),Climategate: TheCrutapeLetters,CreateSpacepublisher;3)SeealsoUnitedStatesSenateReport‘Consensus’Exposed:
12b7df1a0b63
2. TheIPCC’spro-anthropogenicwarmingbias
First, it should be noted that the IPCC mission states:
“The IPCC reviews and assesses the most recent scientific, technical and socio-
economicinformationproducedworldwiderelevanttotheunderstandingofhuman-
induced climate change.”
The above statement implies that the IPCC may provide a colored reading of the scientific
literaturebystressingthosestudiesthatwouldbetterjustifyitsownpoliticalmission, which
evidently focuses on human-induced climate change.3
Indeed, the existence of an anthropogenic bias appears evident in Figure 2 that shows the
complete list of the radiative forcings, which, as the IPCC claims, have caused the global
climate warming observed since 1750. This figure divides the climatic forcings into two
groups: one group includes only the total solar irradiance and is labeled natural, the other
group comprises the rest and is labeled anthropogenic. Thus, the IPCC claims that 100%
of the increase of the CO and CH atmospheric concentrations observed since 1750 and
the change of all other climate components, except for the total solar irradiance, are anthro-
pogenic. These labels do suggest that without humans the chemical concentrations of the
atmosphere and a number of other climatic parameters would remain rigorously unchanged
despite a change of the solar energetic input!
This claim is non physical because as the solar activity increases, climate warms, and
this causes a net increase of atmospheric CO and CH concentration. During warming the
abilityoftheoceantoabsorbthesegasesfromtheatmospheredecreasesbecauseofHenry’s
law and other mechanisms. A warming would also increase the natural production of at-
mospheric CO and CH on the land due to the acceleration of the fermentation of organic
material, outgassing of (permafrost) soils and other mechanisms [3,4]. The existence of
CO and CH feedback mechanisms are evident in the large CO and CH cycles observed
during the ice ages (which were caused by the astronomical cycles of Milankovich) when
3Further evidence of the IPCC’s anthropogenic and political bias was discovered in January 2010: the IPCC’s claim that Hi-
malayan glaciers will disappear by 2035 was based on magazine interviews, not on peer-reviewed scientific research which is
contrary to the IPCC’s own policy. Dr. Lal admitted that this physically impossible event was highlighted in the IPCC report
climate-page-suckered-by-ipcc-deletes-a-moved-up-glacier-melting-date-reference/). Other significant errors and non peer-
reviewed material in the IPCC have been uncovered such as: Endanger 40 percent of Amazon rainforests; Melt mountain ice
intheAlps,Andes,andAfrica;Depletewaterresourcesfor4.5billionpeopleby2085,neglectingtomentionthatglobalwarming
couldalsoincreasewaterresourcesforasmanyas6billionpeople;Slashcropproductionby50percentinNorthAfricaby2020.
Figure3: CyclesofCO andCH thattime-lag(withadelayofabout800years)thetemperaturecyclesobservedduringtheIce
Ages.TheseglacialcycleswerelikelyinducedbythemodulationofthesolarinputintotheEarth’ssystemthroughtheMilankovich
cycles,whichareorbitalperturbationsoftheEarthsuchastheprecession,obliquityandeccentricity. Forexample,noticethegood
correspondence between the 100.000 year temperature cycles with the eccentricity, as highlighted in the figure. The figure is
adaptedfromWikipedia’articles: [A]Milankovitchcycles;[B]VostokStation.
no human industrial activity existed, see Figure 3.
For example, even assuming that the IPCC’s forcing estimates in Figure 2 are correct, if
only 10% of the total increase in greenhouse gases since 1750 has been due to the observed
increase of solar activity during the same period, the IPCC, with its labels, has inflated the
anthropogenic contribution by 20% and underestimated the solar contribution by 300%.4
This can be easily extrapolated from the numbers depicted in Figure 2. It is evident that
if the climatic forcings are labeled as anthropogenic, the presumed consequences, namely
climate changes, would also be anthropogenic. This, however, is circular logic.
3. TheclimatesensitivityuncertaintytoCO increase
A second fundamental issue concerns how much global warming can be induced by an
increase of CO (or CH ) atmospheric concentration. Indeed, this estimate is extremely
uncertain. Also the radiative forcing associated with aerosols is extremely uncertain, as
Figure 2 shows.
TheIPCCacknowledgesthatiftheatmosphericconcentrationofCO doublestheglobal
average temperature could rise between 1.5 and 4.5 oC at equilibrium. The variability of
climate sensitivity toCO is shown in Figure 4, which demonstrates an even wider sensitiv-
ity temperature range [5]. If greenhouse gases such as CO are the major causes of global
warming, a climate sensitivity toCO increase with a minimum error of 50% (together with
the extreme aerosol forcing uncertainty) can only raise strong doubts about the scientific ro-
bustness of the IPCC’s climate change interpretation. This error is so large because it is not
well known how to model the major climate feedback mechanisms, i.e., water vapor and
clouds.
Indeed, the AGWT advocates acknowledge that the current models on which the claims
of the IPCC are based are significantly incomplete. Rockstrom and 28 other scientists [2],
who strongly promote the AGWT, have confirmed this fact by recently stating:
4Arecentstudy(usingCO icecorereconstructions)foundaCO feedbackrateof1.7-21.4ppmvCO increaseperoC,while
othertheoreticalandempiricalstudiesfoundalargervalue(FrankD.C.etal. (2010),Ensemblereconstructionconstraintsonthe
globalcarboncyclesensitivitytoclimate, Nature463, 527-530). However, acomparisonbetweenglobaltemperaturefrom1860
and atmospheric CO measurements by direct chemical analysis (not by ice core sample reconstruction) shows an atmospheric
CO concentration curve, with a maximum in 1942, which correlates relatively well with the temperature record; both curves
present a maximum in 1940-1945 (Appendix B). This result would indicate the existence of strong CO feedback mechanisms,
which would imply that the observedCO concentration increase during the last decades is highly related to some carbon cycle
feedbackmechanisminresponsetotheincreasedsolarinputduringthissameperiod. Itappearsthatitisclimatechangethatalters
the atmosphericCO concentration, rather than vice versa. [E.-G. Beck (2007), 180 Years of atmosphericCO Gas Analysis by
Figure4: ClimatesensitivitytoCO doublinginfunctionofthefeedbacks(fromKnuttiandHegerl[5]).Notethelargeuncertainty:
aCO doublingmaycauseaglobalwarmingfrom1oC to10oC atequilibrium. Thefigureontheleftexplainswhythereexists
suchalargeerror.TheGHGwarmingtheoryisbasedontwoindependentchainedtheories.Thefirsttheoryfocusesonthewarming
effectofagivenGHGsuchasCO asitcanbeexperimentallytested. ThisfirsttheorypredictsthataCO doublingcausesaglobal
warmingofabout1oC. Thesecondtheory,theclimatepositivefeedbacktheory,attemptstocalculatetheoverallclimaticeffectof
aCO increasebyassuminganenhancedwarmingeffectduetosecondarytriggeringofotherclimaticcomponents. Forexample,
it is supposed that an increase ofCO causes an increase in water vapor concentration. Because H O too is a GHG, the overall
warminginducedbyanincreaseofCO wouldbeduetothedirectCO warmingplustheindirectwarminginducedbythewater
vaporfeedbackrespondingtotheCO increase. Theproblemwiththeclimatepositivefeedbacktheoryisthatitcannotbedirectly
testedinalabexperiment. ClimatemodelersevaluatetheclimatesensitivitytoCO increaseintheirclimatemodels,notinnature.
Thus, the numerical value of this fundamental climatic component is not experimentally measured but it is theoretical evaluated
with computer climate models that create virtual climate systems. It is evident that different climate models predict a different
climatesensitivitytoCO ,whichgivesrisetothehugeuncertaintyseeninthefigure. Moreover,iftheclimatemodelsaremissing
important mechanisms, it is evident that their predicted climate sensitivity to CO changes may be extremely different from the
truevalues. Theleftfigureispartiallyadaptedfrom“CatastropheDenied: ACritiqueofCatastrophicMan-MadeGlobalWarming
“Most models suggest that a doubling in atmospheric CO concentration will
lead to a global temperature rise of about 3 oC (with a probable uncertainty
range of 2-4.5 oC) once the climate has regained equilibrium. But these models
do not include long-term reinforcing feedback processes that further warm the
climate,... If these slow feedbacks are included, doubling CO levels gives an
eventual temperature increase of 6 oC (with a probable uncertainty range of 4-8
Rockstrom et al. [2] gave a quite alarmist interpretation to their acknowledgment that
currentclimatemodelsaremissingimportantfeedbackmechanisms. However,suchalarmism
is baseless.5 In fact, if missing feedback mechanisms were added to the current climate
models, the corrected models would predict a much greater warming than the 0.8 oC ob-
served during the last century. Thus, these models would severely fail to reproduce the
warming of 0.8 oC observed in the temperature data. If the current IPCC climate models
do not contain many feedback mechanisms that amplify the e ect of a climate radiative
forcing, the logical conclusion would be that the climate sensitivity to atmospheric CO
concentration is currently significantly overestimated by those models, while the e ect of
the solar input is severely underestimated.
4. TheclimaticmeaningofMann’sHockeySticktemperaturegraph
Let us clarify the issue from a historical perspective. In 1998 and 1999 Mann et al. [6]
published the first reconstruction of global temperature over the last 1000 years. This pale-
oclimatic temperature reconstruction is known as the Hockey Stick (Figure 5). This graph
suggests that before 1900 the temperature of the planet was almost constant and since 1900
an abnormal warming has occurred. From the Medieval Warm Period (1000-1300) and the
Little Ice Age (1500-1750) this reconstruction predicts a cooling of less than 0.2 oC. This
graph surprised many, including historians and geologists who have consistently argued
that the early centuries of the millennium were quite warm (the Medieval Warm Period)
while the period from 1500 to 1800 was quite cold (the Little Ice Age).6
5 Rockstrom et al. [2] have implicitly acknowledged that the IPCC climate models are essentially flawed. This objectively
underminestheIPCC’sclaimsbecauseitsclaimsarebasedonthesameclimatemodelsthattheAGWTadvocatesacknowledgeto
beseverelyincomplete. Evidently,Rockstrometal.’sclaimthatfutureclimatemodelswillnecessarilyconfirmandgreatlystress
theAGWTcannotbeconsideredasafact. Indeed,itcannotberuledoutthat,onthecontrary,futureclimatemodelswilldiscredit
theAGWTbymodelingnewclimatemechanismsthatcurrentmodelslack.
6ThislargerclimatevariabilitywasclearlyacknowledgedbytheIPCCin1990. Itwasalsoconsistentwiththeworldclimate
historyafterAD1,000accordingtogroundboreholeevidenceinapaperpublishedin1997(HuangS.H.N.PollackandP.Y.Shen
(1997), Late Quaternary Temperature Changes Seen in Worldwide Continental Heat Flow Measurements, Geophysical Research
Letters24,1947-1950.)
Figure5: (Red)Mann’sHockeyStick [6]. (Blue)OutputresponseofCrowley’slinearupwelling/diffusionenergybalancemodel
usingallforcingterms(solar,volcano,CO andaerosol)[7]. Instrumentaltemperaturedata(black). Notetheverygoodagreement
between the model and temperature reconstruction that is claimed by Crowley in his article. Note that from the Medieval Warm
Period (1000-1300) to the Little Ice Age (1500-1750) both the model response and Mann’s temperature reconstruction show a
coolingofabout0.2oC.
The Hockey Stick temperature graph was considered the only global temperature re-
construction available at the time and it required a scientific interpretation. Several scien-
tific groups, for example Crowley [7], used energy balance models and concluded that the
Hockey Stick implied that the climate is almost insensitive to solar changes and the anoma-
lous warming observed since 1900 has been almost entirely anthropogenic. In fact, only the
(CO and CH ) GHG forcing function (as deduced from ice core reconstructions) presents
a shape that resembles that of a hockey stick. Crowley concluded his article, which shows
a good correlation between his climate model and the Hockey Stick, with this statement:
“The very good agreement between models and data in the pre-anthropogenic
interval also enhances confidence in the overall ability of climate models to sim-
ulate temperature variability on the largest scales.” (See Figure 5)
Crowley’s statement reveals the subtle link that exists between the Hockey Stick and the
confidence in the su ffi cient accuracy of the climate models used to claim that the global
warming observed since 1900 was almost entirely anthropogenically induced. This inter-
pretation was strongly endorsed by the IPCC in 2001, was popularized by Al Gore in his
documentary The Inconvenient Truth, where the Hockey Stick plays a predominant role,
and was almost completely implicitly proposed again by the IPCC in 2007. It is important
Figure 6: Top: Moberg’s temperature (red) [8]. Crowley’s model (blue) [7] which is also shown in Figure 5. Bottom: In blue
Crowley’smodelonceadaptedtoreproducethetemperatureofMobergetal. (2005)thatshowsa0.6oC coolingfromMWPand
LIA.Notethatthesolarcontributionmustbeamplifiedbyafactorof3whiletheGHG+aerosolcontribution,whichiscommonly
labeledasanthropogenic,mustbereducedtoafactorof0.4.
to note that the IPCC’s AGWT is based on the interpretation of climate models, such as
Hansen’s GISS models [20], developed before 2004 5 which appear to be compatible with
the Hockey Stick temperature graph (see also Appendix H).7
5. Theclimaticmeaningofrecentpaleoclimatictemperaturereconstructions
The dates are important because since 2004 / 2005 the Hockey Stick has been mathemati-
cally and physically questioned.8 An additional open issue is whether the tree rings used by
7For example, the GISS GCM are compared and found relatively compatible with Mann’s Hockey Stick temperature graph
in Shindell D.T., G.A. Schmidt, R.L. Miller, and M.E. Mann, (2003), Volcanic and solar forcing of climate change during the
preindustrial era. J. Climate 16, 4094-4107. A compatibility with the Hockey Stick temperature graph is also easily visible in
the energy balance model (EBM) simulations in Foukal P., C. Fro¨hlich, H. Spruit, T. M. L. Wigley (2006), Variations in solar
luminosityandtheireffectontheEarth’sclimate, Nature443, 161-166. InthispaperitisclearthattheEBMmodelsimulations
predictacoolingbetweentheMedievalWarmPeriod(1000-1300)andtheLittleIceAge(1500-1800)oflessthan0.2oCasshown
byMann’sHockeyStick.
8The problems with Mann’s original Hockey Stick temperature graph were first exposed by McIntyre and McKitrick (2005),
TheM&MCritiqueoftheMBH98NorthernHemisphereClimateIndex: UpdateandImplications,EnergyandEnvironment16(1),
69-100. ItwasshownthanMann’salgorithmcouldproducehockeystickshapesevenwithasetofrednoisesequences. Notethat
recently Mann has updated his reconstruction and acknowledged that the preindustrial temperature varied more than previously
claimed in his works (Mann M. E., et al. (2008), Proxy-based reconstructions of hemispheric and global surface temperature
variationsoverthepasttwomillennia,ProcNatlAcadSciUSA105,13252-13257).However,McIntyreandMcKitrickhaveclaimed
thatalsothislatestMann’supdatepresentssignificantmathematicalerrorsincludingsomerecordsthatwouldbeimproperlyused
Mann are able to accurately reconstruct the temperature changes, especially over long time
scales. Indeed, tree growth does not depend on temperature alone but on other factors too,
such as rain patterns and biological adaptation. These multiple factors may introduce non-
linear relationships and a certain degree of randomness in the data. This may reduce the
amplitude of multidecadal and secular oscillations found in the proxy models, in particular
when these proxy records are statistically calibrated against the instrumental temperature
records, which are only available for the period after 1850, and combined for obtaining a
world average.
Alternative paleoclimatic reconstructions, which do not use tree rings, have been pro-
posed [8-10]. These proxy temperature reconstructions suggest a significant pre-industrial
climate variability. From the Medieval Warm Period (1000-1300) and the Little Ice Age
(1500-1750) these reconstructions show a cooling of at least 0.6 oC, three times larger
than the Hockey Stick. Figure 6 shows that if Crowley’s energy balance model is com-
pared against Moberg’s paleoclimatic temperature reconstruction [8], Crowley’s very good
agreement between the model and the data vanishes. If Crowley’s model is recalibrated to
reconstruct Moberg’s temperature, it is easy to calculate that the solar e ect must be ampli-
fied by a factor of 3 and the anthropogenic e ect (GHG Aerosol) should be multiplied by
0.4. Thus, if Moberg’s temperature is accurate, in 2000 the anthropogenic contribution to
global warming was overestimated by 250% because of the Hockey Stick.
Indeed, the Hockey Stick temperature graph does not have any historical credibility be-
causebetween1000and1400,theVikingshadfarmsandvillagesonthecoastofGreenland,
which would suggest an even milder climate than today, while the following period, from
1400 to 1800, is known as the Little Ice Age. The medieval warm and the following cold
period were not only Western and European phenomena but are also evident in Chinese
historical documents [11]. Numerous interdisciplinary studies reporting data from several
regions of the world (see the Medieval Warm Period Project9) clearly indicate a signifi-
cant change in pre-industrial climate which seems to be better reproduced by more recent
paleoclimatic global temperature reconstructions [8-10] which do not show a hockey stick
shape.10 See Appendixes C-H for further details about climate data at multiple time scales.
with the axes upside down by Mann’s algorithm because these records are severely compromised by agricultural impact during
the last century, e.g., Korttajarvi sediments from Tiljander data. Therefore, these data could not be used for reconstructing the
past temperature because they could not be properly calibrated against the instrumental temperature record. (McIntyre S. and R.
R. McKitrick (2009) Proxy Inconsistency and Other Problems in Millennial Paleoclimate Reconstructions. Proc Natl Acad Sci
the-signal-for-the-trees/
10AnicesummaryaboutthefindingsofnumerousstudiespublishedbeforeandafterMann’soriginalworkin1998and1999that
Figure7: Reconstructionofglobalsurfacetemperaturesoverthelast400years(redandgreen).Inblackthereisthesolarsignature
onclimateasestimatedbytheempiricalmodel[12]. Ifsince1980theTSIsatellitecompositeAinfigure8(PSS#1)isusedmost
ofthewarmingobservedduringthelastdecadesissolarinduced. IftheTSIsatellitecompositeCinfigure8(PSS#2)isusedthe
goodcorrelationbetweentemperatureandsolarsignatureabruptlystopsin1980. (AppendixI)
6. Thephenomenologicalsolarsignaturesince1600
It is possible to use a phenomenological model to interpret climate change [12]. This
model can simulate a typical energy balance model to interpret the global surface tem-
perature. However, here the climate sensitivity to solar variations and the thermodynamic
characteristic relaxation times are empirically determined in the temperature patterns dur-
ing the last decades. A secular total solar irradiance reconstruction is used as input of the
model as a proxy for the total solar activity. The model can be used to reconstruct the so-
lar signature on climate for the past centuries and it is possible to compare this signature
against the paleoclimatic temperature reconstructions. Figure 7 shows this result: the tem-
perature signature induced by solar changes as predicted by the phenomenological model
well reproduces 400 years of climate change as reconstructed by Moberg et al. [8].
The advantage of the phenomenological approach over that implemented in the tradi-
tional climate models, which can be described as analytic engineering, is that the phe-
nomenologicalapproachattemptstomeasuretheclimatesensitivitytosolarchangesthrough
stronglyquestionthevalidityoftheHockeySticktemperaturegraphcanbefoundinHeavenandEarth,GlobalWarmingtheMissing
Science,chapter2‘History,’byIanPlimer,TaylorTrade(2009).Apparently,theIPCC’schoicein2001tostronglyhighlightMann’s
HockeySticktemperaturegraph,despiteextensivepublishedliteraturepointingtowardalargepreindustrialclimatevariability,can
beinterpretedasafurtherevidenceoftheIPCC’spro-anthropogenicwarmingbias,asdiscussedinSection2.
the empirical determination of a kind of response function. This methodology would take
into account all mechanisms involved in the process, although the individual microscopic
mechanisms are not explicitly modeled. It is essentially analogous to the method used by
an electric engineer to study the electric response properties of an unknown circuit closed
inside a box by carefully comparing the patterns of the input and the output signals. The
phenomenological approach is essentially a holistic approach 11 that emphasizes the im-
portance of studying a complex macroscopic system by directly analyzing the properties of
the whole because of the complex interdependence of its parts rather than analyzing it by
separating it into parts.
On the contrary, the traditional analytic climate model approach attempts to simulate
climate by dividing the climate system into its smallest possible or discernible elements
and uses their elemental physical properties alone to interpret the macroscopic system. The
limitation of the latter approach is that only those mechanisms and the physical couplings
among them that are currently well known can be modeled. All unknown mechanisms and
physical couplings remain excluded in an analytic model. Therefore, the analytic modu-
larization may fail to properly model and interpret climate change because it just creates
a virtual climate system that may have nothing to do with reality. The risk is scientific
reductionism, that is, compensating the current ignorance about the true climatic mecha-
nisms by mistakenly stressing a few of them, such as the anthropogenic GHG and aerosol
forcings, in such a way to reproduce some warming trend during a restricted period of
time. However, for not mistaking the physics of a complex phenomenon a model should
be able to reproduce the data oscillations at multiple time scales. In science, the holistic
approach complements the traditional analytical approach. When the two methodologies
are appropriately used together, they are considered the most e cient way for studying
complex systems. Essentially, the phenomenological approach acknowledges that under-
standing climate is an inverse-problem that risks to be ill-posed in the analytic approach.
Forexample, theIPCC[1, p. 674]reportsthatthe11-yearsolarcycleproducesatemper-
ature cycle on the global surface temperature of about 0.1 oC that is easy to observe [12].
However, current climate models predict an average solar signature cycle which is three
times smaller, approximately 0.035 oC [12] (for example, Crowley’s model [7] predicts a
cycle of about 0.02 oC). It is obvious that the current climate models are oversimplified.
They are poorly modeling the solar-climate link mechanisms and, therefore, mistaking the
real magnitude of the solar e ects on climate (Appendix J).
11Thetermholisticscienceisusedasacategoryencompassinganumberofscientificresearchfields.Thesearemultidisciplinary,
areconcernedwiththebehaviorofcomplexsystems,andrecognizefeedbackwithinsystemsasacrucialelementforunderstanding
In fact, the IPCC models assume that the sun can influence climate only through total
solar irradiance variation, that is used only as a radiative forcing. However, there are addi-
tionalchemicalmechanismsthatarestimulatedbyspecificfrequenciesofthesolarradiation
(forexample, UValtersozone, whichisagreenhousegas, andlightstimulatesphotosynthe-
sis which influences the biosphere) and there is an additional modulation of clouds, which
alters the albedo, that is due to the solar modulation of cosmic ray flux [13,14].12 All these
alternative solar-climate link mechanisms are absent in the current climate models because
the climate modelers do not know how to model them and the computers are not su ciently
fast to simulate them. The phenomenological model would automatically include all these
mechanisms because the climate sensitivity to solar changes is directly, that is phenomeno-
logically, estimated by the magnitude of the temperature patterns that can be recognized as
correlated to and, therefore, likely induced by solar changes.
7. TheACRIMvs. PMODsatellitetotalsolarirradiancecontroversy
Some discrepancy between the temperature reconstruction and the solar signature on
climate as seen in Figures 6 and 7 may also be due to errors in the temperature as well
as in the solar proxy records. Figure 7 shows two possible empirical solar signatures on
climate after 1980. This uncertainty is due to an uncertainty about the behavior of the total
solar irradiance. The climate models adopted by the IPCC have used total solar irradiance
(TSI) proxy models that claim that total solar irradiance has remained constant since 1980.
However, the satellite experimental groups (ACRIM and Nimbus7), which have measured
the total solar irradiance since 1978, claim that TSI increased from 1980 to 2000 like the
temperature [15].13
12Asolarinducedlowcloudcovermodulationcangreatlyaffectclimatebygreatlyenhancingtheclimaticsolarimpactbecause
ofthepotentialmagnitudeoftheresultingradiativeforcing. Thisisevidentfromthefactthatcloudydaysaresignificantlycooler
than sunny days. In fact, if clouds were absent the solar radiative forcing warming the Earth’s surface would increase by about
30 W/m2. This value is far larger than the sum of all IPCC anthropogenic forcings in 250 years shown in Figure 2. Thus, even
a small solar modulation of cloud cover can have a significant impact on climate change. Clouds can also respond quite fast to
cosmicrayfluxvariationsand,therefore,theymaylinksometemperaturefluctuationstothesolarintermittency. Finally,acosmic-
ray cloud climate link has been suggested to explain the warm and ice periods of the Phanerozoic during the last 600 million
years. In fact, the climate oscillations correlate with the cosmic ray flux variations much better than with the CO atmospheric
concentration records. In the latter case, most of the cosmic ray flux variation is claimed to be due to the changing galactic
environment of the solar system, as it crosses the spiral arms of the Milky Way (Shaviv, N. J. (2003), The spiral structure of
the Milky Way, cosmic rays, and ice age epochs on Earth, New Astronomy 8, 3977; Svensmark H. (2007), Cosmoclimatology:
a new theory emerges, Astronomy & Geophysics 48 1, 18-24; Kirkby J. (2009), Cosmic rays and climate, CERN Colloquium,
13Although it is not possible to verify the accuracy of all satellite measurements, to claim that the TSI proxy models must
necessarily be correct is scientifically unsound. TSI proxy models, by definition, are based on the unproven assumptions that a
givensetofsolarrelatedmeasurements(suchassunspotnumberrecords,afewgroundbasedspectrallinewidthrecords,14C and
10Be cosmogenic isotope production and others) can reconstruct TSI. However, TSI proxy models significantly differ from each
otherand,evidently,thisunderminestheclaimthattheyareaccurate. Thus,althoughTSIproxymodelsareuseful,theycannotbe
usedtoquestiontheaccuracyofactualTSIsatellitemeasurementswithoutvalidphysicalreasons. SomeofthemorepopularTSI
proxymodelswereproducedbyLeanetal.,Solankietal. andHoytandSchatten.
Figure 8: Possible reconstructions of the total solar irradiance using satellite data [12]. The reconstruction ‘A’ uses the Nim-
bus7/ERBdatasettofilltheACRIM-gapfrom1989.5to1991.75;thereconstruction‘C’usestheERBE/ERBsdatasettoadjustthe
annualtrendoftheNimbus7/ERBdatasetandusesthisalteredrecordtofilltheACRIM-gapfrom1989.5to1991.75; therecon-
struction ‘C’ is jus the average between the two. The level difference between the minimum in 1986 and 1996 is approximately
0.3±0.4W/m2. ACRIMisbetween‘A’and‘B’;PMODissimilarto‘C’.Theredcurvesindicatethetrendbetweenthe1986and
1996solarminima.
However, another group, the PMOD in Switzerland, claimed that the TSI satellite data
obtained and published by the above two experimental groups had to be corrected.14 By
doing so, Fro¨hlich obtained a TSI satellite composite that does not show any upward trend
from 1980 to 2000 [16]. It is important to notice that the experimental groups have always
rejected the corrections of their own TSI data proposed by PMOD as arbitrary [15].15
14During the ACRIM-gap (1989.5-1992.5) Fro¨hlich [16] altered the Nimbus7/ERB results to make them compatible with the
ERBE/ERBSresults. TheNimbus7recordwasshifteddownwardby0.86W/m2. Thisshiftconsistedof: (1)astepfunctionchange
ofabout0.47W/m2 whichisusedtocorrectahypotheticalsuddenchangeofthesensitivityoftheNimbus7’ssensorsfollowinga
shutdownclaimedtohaveoccurredon09/29/1989; (2)alineardriftof0.142Wm−2/yr fromOctober1989throughmiddle1992
whichissupposedtocorrectanhypotheticalgradualsensitivityincreaseofthesamesatellitesensors.However,duringtheACRIM-
gapERBE/ERBSsensorswereexpectedtodegradeduetoadecreaseintheircavitypaintabsorbencywhichoccursduringthefirst
exposureofthesekindofsensorstohighsolarmaximumUVradiation. So,theexperimentalteamsclaimthatFro¨hlich’salteration
ofthepublishedNimbus7/ERBdata,toforcethemtoagreewiththelowerqualityERBE/ERBSresults,isunjustified.
15OnSeptember16,2008,DouglasHoyt(PIoftheNimbus7/ERBexperimentwhichisfundamentalforresolvingtheACRIM-
gapproblem, andwhosedatahavebeenalteredtoconstructthePMODTSIsatellitecomposite)sentmethefollowingstatement
that was published in Ref. [15]: “Concerning the supposed increase in Nimbus7 sensitivity at the end of September 1989 and
othermattersasproposedbyFro¨hlich’sPMODTSIcomposite: 1. Thereisnoknownphysicalchangeintheelectricallycalibrated
Nimbus7 radiometer or its electronics that could have caused it to become more sensitive. At least neither Lee Kyle nor I could
never imagine how such a thing could happen and no one else has ever come up with a physical theory for the instrument that
couldcauseittobecomemoresensitive. 2. TheNimbus7radiometerwascalibratedelectricallyevery12days. Thecalibrations
beforeandaftertheSeptembershutdowngavenoindicationofanychangeinthesensitivityoftheradiometer. Thus,whenBobLee
oftheERBSteamoriginallyclaimedtherewasachangeinNimbus7sensitivity,weexaminedtheissueandconcludedtherewas
Figure9: Left: Globalsurface temperaturerecordsof theoceanand theland. Note thesignificantdifferenceobserved between
thetworecordssince1970. Thelandapparentlywarmedatadoubleratethantheocean. Right: Globalsurfacetemperaturerecord
relative to the United States of America. Note that this record highlights the existence of a large 60-70 year cycle and shows a
By preferring the PMOD total solar irradiance satellite composite to the ACRIM one the
IPCC message was that the global warming observed since 1980 could not be naturally in-
terpreted and, therefore, it had to be 100% anthropogenic. Figure 8 shows three alternative
reconstructions of the total solar irradiance using satellite measurements since 1978. The
IPCC has adopted a reconstruction similar to C, which is compatible with PMOD’s claim.
However, the figure clearly indicates that the latter composite shows the lowest 1986-1996
decadal trend but, as the figure suggests, total solar irradiance could very likely have in-
creased from 1980 to 2000 (See also Appendixes K-N).
8. Problemswiththeglobalsurfacetemperaturerecord
Once again it is the uncertainty in the data that makes it di cult to correctly interpret
climate change. Even the global warming of about 0.8 oC since 1900 may be uncertain. In
fact, duringthisperiodthelandwarmedbyabout1.1oC, whiletheoceanswarmedbyabout
0.6 oC (Figure 9). This di ff erence appears to be too significant to be explained only by the
nointernalevidenceintheNimbus7recordstowarrantthecorrectionthathewasproposing. Sincetheresultwasanullone, no
publicationwasthoughtnecessary. 3. Thus,Fro¨hlich’sPMODTSIcompositeisnotconsistentwiththeinternaldataorphysicsof
theNimbus7cavityradiometer. 4. ThecorrectionoftheNimbus7TSIvaluesfor1979-1980proposedbyFro¨hlichisalsopuzzling.
The raw data was run through the same algorithm for these early years and the subsequent years and there is no justification for
Fro¨hlich’sadjustmentinmyopinion.”
di erent thermal inertia between the ocean and the land regions. It could be partially due
to an underestimation of the urban heat island e ect by at least 10-20% [17], to land use
changes or perhaps to the fact that several meteorological stations located in cold regions
were closed after 1960.16 The US temperature record present a smaller warming trend since
1880 than the global temperature records. Given the better quality of this record, this find-
ing may suggest that part of the reported global warming may be spurious. If the warming
trend has been overestimated (or if it was partially due to land use changes), the e ect of
CO and CH on climate change has to be reduced for this reason as well (Appendix O-P).
9. Alarge60yearcycleinthetemperaturerecord
A reasonable alternative is to extract any relevant physical information from the tem-
perature fluctuations. It has been observed that several multi-secular climatic and oceanic
records present large cycles with periods of about 50-70 years with an average of 60 years
[18].17 Figure 10 shows the global temperature record detrended of its quadratic upward
trend [19] depicted in Figure 1. This sequence has been filtered of its fast fluctuations (by
applying a six year moving average smooth algorithm) and it has been plotted against itself
with a time-lag of about 60 years. The figure clearly suggests the existence of an almost
perfect cyclical correspondence between the periods 1880-1940 and 1940-2000. The peak
in 1880 repeats in 1940 and again in 2000. The smaller peak in 1900 repeats in 1960. This
60-odd year oscillation cannot be associated with any known anthropogenic phenomenon
[19]. (See also Appendixes Q and R).
On the contrary, Figure 11 shows the global temperature as reproduced by a typical cli-
mate model such as the GISS ModelE [20], one of the major climate models adopted by
the IPCC 2007. The failure of the model to reproduce the 60 year cycle is evident from the
16Thesurfacetemperaturedatapresentseveralproblemsthatmayhaveskewedthedatasoastooverstatetheobservedwarm-
ing trend both regionally and globally. For example, it has been observed that there is a significant divergence between ground
temperature measurements and satellite global temperature measurements (Klotzbach P. J. et al. (2009), An alternative explana-
tion for differential temperature trends at the surface and in the lower troposphere, J. Geophys. Res. 114, D21102.) Possible
causes may be: 1) More than three-quarters of the 6,000 stations that apparently existed in the 60s were discontinued during the
last decades; 2) Higher-altitude, higher-latitude, and rural locations, all of which had a tendency to be cooler, have been tenden-
tiouslyremoved; 3)Contaminationbyurbanization, changesinlanduse, impropersiting, andinadequately-calibratedinstrument
upgrades further overstates warming; 4) Cherry-picking of observing sites combined with interpolation to vacant data grids may
have further stressed heat-island bias; 5) Satellite temperature monitoring findings are increasingly diverging from the station-
based constructions in a manner consistent with evidence of a warm bias in the surface temperature record. For an overview on
this issue see J. D’Aleo J. and A. Watts (2010), Surface Temperature Records: Policy Driven Deception?, SPPI original paper
17Climaticrecordsthatpresentadominantcycleatabout60yearperiodincludeicecoresample,pinetreesamples,sardineand
anchovysedimentcoresamples,globalsurfacetemperaturerecords,atmosphericcirculationindex,lengthofthedayindex,etc.
Figure10: The60yearcyclemodulationofthetemperature[19].(Red)globaltemperaturedetrendedofitsquadraticupwardtrend
which is shown in Figure 1. (Blue) the same record time-lag shifted of about 60 years. Note the perfect symmetry between the
periods1880-1940and1940-2000thatexcludesthefactthatthesecyclescouldhavehadananthropogenicorigin. Evenasmaller
peakin1900repeatsin1960. Thisoverwhelmingclearfinding,byalone,contradictstheAGWTandtheIPCC’sclaimthat100%
ofthewarmingobservedfrom1970to2000isanthropogenic.
figure. Indeed, all IPCC climate models have the same failing.18
The existence of a natural 60 year cycle with a total (min-to-max) amplitude of at least
0.3 oC, as Figure 10 shows, implies that at least 60% of the 0.5 oC warming observed since
1970 is due to this cycle. Considering that longer natural cycle can be present and that solar
activity was stronger during the second half of the 20th century than during the its first half
[12], the natural contribution to the warming since 1970 may have been even larger than
60%. Human emissions can have contributed at most the remaining 40%, or less, of the
warming observed since 1970 (if no overestimation of the global warming is assumed as
Section 8 would suggest), not the 100% as claimed by the IPCC. This 60 year cycle has just
entered into its cooling phase and this will likely cause a climate cooling, not a warming,
18The other IPCC model scenario runs also fail to reproduce this 60-year cycle. These climate model
simulations can be downloaded from the IPCC Data Archive at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
modelsadoptedbytheIPCC.Thesemodelshavepredictedanincreaseinthewarmingtrendwithaltitudeinthetropictroposphere
due to anthropogenic GHG emissions, but balloon and satellite temperature observations have shown a significant disagreement
with the model predictions. (Douglass D. H., J. R. Christy, B. D. Pearson and S. F. Singer (2007), A comparison of tropical
withactualobservationsandtheincompatibilitybetweenthetwowaspreparedbyDouglasHoyt: GreenhouseWarmingScorecard
Figure 11: Global temperature (red) against the temperature prediction of the GISS ModelE [20] adopted by the IPCC. The
temperature shows a clear cycle of about 60 years which herein is emphasized by black segments. This 60 year cycle has been
explicitlyshowninFigure10. Thiscycleisclearlynotreproducedbytheclimatemodelsimulation[19]. Theclimatesimulation
clearlycrossesfrom1880to1970theblacksegmentsinsteadofreproducingthe60yearmodulationofthetemperature.
until 2030-40, as Figure 10 would suggest.19
The latter result is quantitatively consistent with the results depicted in Figures 6-8 that
suggest a significant change in pre-industrial climate, in contrast to the Hockey Stick, and
that solar activity has increased from 1980 to 2000 as Willson of the ACRIM team claims
in contrast to PMOD Fro¨hlich’s claim. In fact, they are consistent with a reduction of the
anthropogenic contribution by 250% as calculated above in Figures 6 and 7. The indepen-
dent results depicted in Figures 6, 7 and 10 are consistent with each other and would imply
that if the CO atmosphere concentration doubles, the temperature could rise between 1.0
and 1.5 oC, which is significantly less than the IPCC’s estimate of 1.5-4.5 oC.
This result clearly indicates that the possible impacts that anthropogenic GHGs can have
on global climate change should be greatly diminished. Consequently, the IPCC’s claims
about imminent and catastrophic consequences that human emissions are causing and will
cause, are unsubstantiated: these claims should be greatly moderated. The existence of a
large 60-year natural cycle in the global temperature essentially points toward the conclu-
sion that nature, not human activity, rules the climate.
19There is strong observational evidence that the ocean has been cooling since 2003 (Loehl C. (2009), Cooling of the global
Figure12: Spectralanalysisoftheglobaltemperaturefrom1850to2009(above), andofthespeedofthecenterofmassofthe
solarsystemSCMSS(below)[19]. Cycles5and8arealsoclosetothe11±1and22±2yearsolarcycles. TheMcycleinthe
spectrumofthetemperatureatabout9yearisabsentintheSCMSSrecord. However, itcorrespondstoalunarcycle(Appendix
Q-W).
10. Astronomicaloriginoftheclimateoscillations
If the temperature is characterized by natural periodic cycles the only reasonable ex-
planation is that the climate system is modulated by astronomical cycles. Natural cycles
known with certainty are the 11 (Schwabe) and 22 (Hale) year solar cycles, the cycles of
the planets and luni-solar nodal cycles [19]. Jupiter has an orbital period of 11.87 years
while Saturn has an orbital period of 29.4 years. These periods predict three other major
cycles which are associated with Jupiter and Saturn: about 10 years, the opposition of two
planets; about 20 years, their synodic cycle; and about 60 years, the repetition of the com-
bined orbits of the two planets. The major lunar cycles are about 18.6 and 8.85 years.
Figure 12 shows a spectral analysis of the global surface temperature and of a record that
depends on the orbits of planets (the speed of the sun relative to the center of mass of the
solar system [19]). The two records have almost the same cycles. The temperature record
contains the cycles of the planets combined with the two solar cycles of 11 and 22 years
and a lunar cycle at about 9.1 years.20 (See also Appendixes Q-V).
oceansince2003,Energy&Environment20,No. 1&2,101-104).
20The temperature cycle ‘M’ shown in Figure 12 appears to be exactly at 9.1 ± 0.1 years. This period is exactly between the
periodoftherecessionofthelineoflunarapsides, about8.85years, andhalfoftheperiodofprecessionofthesolar-luninodes,
about9.3years.
Figure 13: Global temperatures (red) and the reconstruction of temperature using only the 20 and 60 year planetary cycles (in
black). Thedashedcurveindicatessimplythequadratictrendofthetemperature[19].
These cycles can be used to reconstruct the fluctuations of the temperature [19]. For
example, it is possible to adopt a model using only the major 20 and 60 year cycles plus a
quadratic trend of the temperature and the reconstruction of Figure 13 is obtained. Other
natural cycles associated with the Sun are evident in Figures 6 and 7. The model recon-
structs with great accuracy the temperature oscillations since 1850. It suggests that until
2030-2040 the temperature may remain stable if the upward trend in temperature observed
from 1850 to 2009 continues in the near future21 or the global temperature cools if the trend
of the secular solar activity decreases, as other independent considerations would suggest.
For example, an imminent relatively long period of low solar activity may be predicted
on the basis that the latest solar cycle (cycle #23) lasted from 1996 to 2009, and its length
was about 13 years instead of the traditional 11 years. The only known solar cycle of com-
parable length (after the Maunder Minimum) occurred just at the beginning of the Dalton
solarminimum(cycle#4,1784-1797)thatlastedfromabout1790to1830. ThesolarDalton
minimum induced a little ice age that lasted 30-40 years as shown in Figure 7. Therefore, it
is possible that the Sun is entering into a multi-decade period of low activity, which could
21Notethataquadratictrendfunctionsupposesawarmingacceleration. EveninthissituationFigure13wouldsuggestthatby
2100thetemperaturewillincreasenomorethan1oC abovetheactualvalues. ThisestimateissignificantlylowerthantheIPCC
estimates(theirfigureSPM.5)thathaveprojectedawarmingfrom1to6oCaccordingtodifferentGHGemissionscenarios.
Figure 14: Monthly value of the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) index. Note the evident 60-year cycle. The figure is
adaptedfromWikipediaatthevoices: AtlanticMultidecadalOscillation.
produce cooling of the climate. (Appendix W).
The physical mechanisms involved in the process are likely numerous. The gravitational
forces of the planets can partially modulate the solar activity. For example, it was noted
that the alignment of Venus, Earth and Jupiter presents cycles of approximately 11 years
that are in phase with the 11-year solar cycles [21] and multi secular reconstructions of so-
lar activity reveal 60-year cycles associated with the combined orbit of Jupiter and Saturn
and other longer cycles [22]. Solar changes could modulate climate change through various
physical and chemical processes as explained in Section 6, which are currently not included
in the models, as explained in Section 6.
There is also the possibility that the Earth’s orbital parameters are directly modulated
by the gravitational forces of Jupiter, Saturn and the Moon, and the Sun’s magnetic force
in such a way that the length of day is modulated and or other planetary parameters are al-
tered. For example, the rotation of the Earth on its axis shows 60-year cycles that anticipate
those of the temperature by a few years [18, 23]. Variations in the Earth’s rotation and tides
caused by the lunar cycles can drive ocean oscillations, which in turn may alter the climate
[19]. For example, the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation (PDO) present clear 60-year cycles and other faster cycles, see Figures 14 and
15. None of these mechanisms are included in the models adopted by the IPCC.
11. Conclusion
The analysis of several records suggests that the IPCC’s claim that humanity is running
an imminent danger because of anthropogenicCO emissions22 is based on climate models
that are too simplistic. In fact, these models fail to reproduce the temperature patterns and
the temperature oscillations at multiple time scales. (See also Appendixes H, J, X-Z). These
models exclude several mechanisms that are likely to a ect climate change related to nat-
ural temperature oscillations that have nothing to do with man. Indeed, these oscillations,
such as a large 60 year cycle, appear to be synchronized with the oscillations of the solar
system.
By ignoring these natural mechanisms, the IPCC, also through a questionable choice
of data and labels as explained in Section 2, has greatly overestimated the e ect of an
anthropogenic forcing by a factor between 2 and 3 just to fit the observed global warming in
particular from 1970 to 2000, as the climate model depicted in Figure 11 shows. However,
a detailed climatic reconstruction suggests that the phenomenological model depicted in
Figures 13 and 15 is more satisfactory and is likely to be more accurate in forecasting
22TheAGWTadvocatesclaim,byusingclimatemodelprojections,thatanincreaseinanthropogenicCO concentrationinthe
atmosphere will lead to ecological disasters, including wild swings in weather patterns, extended desertification, spread of hot-
climate infectious diseases, greater risks of severe damaging weather phenomena such as Katrina-like hurricanes, melting of the
glaciersinafewdecadesthat,inturn,willleavehundredsofmillionsofpeoplewithoutfreshwater,causetheextinctionofpolar
bearsandraisesomuchtheoceanlevelthatallcoastsandtheircitieswillbeseverelyfloodbeginning,ofcourse,withNewYork[Al
Gore(2006),AnInconvenientTruth,documentarymovie].Afterthat,anincreaseinanthropogenicCO willreachthetippingpoint
andactivatearunawaygreenhouseeffectthatwilllettheoceansboilawayand, ultimately, transformtheEarthintoaVenus-like
state(asJamesHansenclaimedduringhisAGU2008scientifictalk(2008-12-17)“ClimateThreattothePlanet”). AllthisAGWT
apocalypticism is extensively rebutted in Climate Change Reconsidered [3] by using scientific research based on actual data. Al
Gore’s movie has been elegantly rebutted by Christopher Monckton of Brenchley in “35 Inconvenient Truths: The errors in Al
Regarding the hypothetical tipping point and the runaway greenhouse effect that the Earth would be risking, it should be noted
thattheatmosphericCO concentrationwasmanytimeshigherthantodayinalmostallearliergeologicperiodswhennorunaway
greenhouse effect occurred (Hayden H. C. (2007), A Primer onCO and Climate, Vales Lake Publishing, LLC.). For example,
duringtheJurassicperiod(150-200millionyearsago)theCO concentrationwasatleast5timeshigherthantoday(about2000
ppmv),andduringtheCambrianperiod(500-550millionyearsago)itwasatleast10-15timeshigherthantoday(4000-6000ppmv).
Interestingly,duringthelateOrdovicianperiod(490-440millionyearsago)theEarthexperiencedanextremelycoldglacialperiod
despite the fact that the CO concentration was at least 10 times higher than today. In fact, most of the greenhouse effect that
keepstheEarthwarmisregulatedbywatervapor,notbyCO . Thewatervaporconcentration,togetherwiththelowcloudcover
percentage, arenotwell understoodyetbuttheyare likelystronglyinfluencedbythe solarchangesandcosmicrays. Duringthe
last few years there has been a tendency among the AGWT advocates to declareCO to be a pollutant. This is a further serious
mystificationofthereality. ForhumanhealthCO iscompletelyinnocuousevenataconcentration10timeslargerthatthe0.039%
(390ppmv)actualatmosphericvalue. Moreover,CO isasessentialtolifeasoxygenandwater. Carbondioxideisthemajorfood
forplants,whichinturnarefoodforanimals,andofcourseforhumanstoo. Indeed,anincreaseinatmosphericCO concentration
wouldleadtoacceleratedplantgrowthand,therefore,toincreasedfoodproduction[3]. Infact,inman-madegreenhousesCO is
enrichedat2,3or4timesthenaturalconcentration(about1000ppmv)becausethiscausesplantstogrowfasterandimprovesplant
quality. Thus,anincreaseofatmosphericCO concentrationmayalsobenefithumanity.
Figure 15: GISTEMP global surface ocean temperature record (shown also in Figure 9) plotted against itself with a 60 year lag
shift and a vertical translation. The figure clearly indicates an almost perfect matching between the 1880-1940 and 1940-2000
periods. Thisfurtherprovestheexistenceofa60-yearnaturalcycledrivingclimatechange. Inparticular,notethealmostperfect
correspondence between the warming trends during the 1910-1940 and 1970-2000 periods. The upward trend during the former
period(1910-1940)appearsevenslightlyhigherthantheupwardtrendduringthelatterperiod(1970-2000)suggestingawarming
deceleration. This finding strongly contradicts the IPCC’s claim that 100% of the warming observed since 1970 can only be
explained with anthropogenic emissions. The figure also suggests a slight ocean cooling until 2030-2040, as does the climate-
planetarymodelofFigure13,whichstartedin2002-2003. Theupwardtrendbetweenthefirstandsecondhalfofthelastcentury
correlateswellwiththeincreasedsolaractivityoccurringbetweenthefirstandsecondhalfofthe20th century,asindicatedbyall
solarmodels(seeRef. [12]andFigure7). Iftheupwardwarmingtrendobservedsince1880continuestheoceanwillnotlikely
warmmorethan0.5oCby2100.
The insert A shows the latest update (Jan/2010) of the Ocean Heat Content (OHC) data from the National Oceanographic Data
since 2003. This record significantly differs from an earlier version, which showed a slight increase, published in Levitus et al.
(2009), Global ocean heat content 1955-2008 in light of recently revealed instrumentation problems, Geophys. Res. Lett. 36,
L07608.
TheinsertBdepictsoceanheatcontentasmeasuredbyArgo. Argoisanetworkofover3000floatsscatteredacrosstheglobethat
measuretemperatureandsalinityoftheupperocean. Acoolingtrendfrom2003to2008isfound. LoehlC.(2009),Coolingofthe
globaloceansince2003,Energy&Environment20,No. 1&2,101-104.
Bothinsertsarecompatiblewithaforecastsuggestingthatoceantemperaturewilldecreaseuntil2030-2040.
climatechangeduringthenextfewdecades, overwhichtimetheglobalsurfacetemperature
will likely remain steady or actually cool.23
12. Bibliography