Cloud Computing framework for Computer Vision Research:
An Introduction
Beijing Jiaotong University
Yu.Zhou2020@gmail.com
1. Abstract
Cloud computing offers the potential to help scientists to process massive number of computing
resources often required in machine learning application such as computer vision problems. This
proposal would like to show that which benefits can be obtained from cloud in order to help medical
image analysis users (including scientists, clinicians, and research institutes). As security and privacy
of algorithms are important for most of algorithms’ inventors, these algorithms can be hidden in a
cloud to allow the users to use the algorithms as a package without any access to see/change their
inside. In another word, in the user part, users send their images to the cloud and configure the
algorithm via an interface. In the cloud part, the algorithms are applied to this image and the results are
returned back to the user.
My proposal has two parts: (1) investigate the potential of cloud computing for computer vision
problems and (2) study the components of a proposed cloud-based framework for medical image
analysis application and develop them (depending on the length of the internship). The investigation
part will involve a study on several aspects of the problem including security, usability (for medical
end users of the service), appropriate programming abstractions for vision problems, scalability and
resource requirements. In the second part of this proposal I am going to thoroughly study of the
proposed framework components and their relations and develop them. The proposed cloud-based
framework includes an integrated environment to enable scientists and clinicians to access to the
previous and current medical image analysis algorithms using a handful user interface without any
access to the algorithm codes and procedures.
2. Motivation to unify the Medical Image Analysis resources
In medical image analysis, a cloud can be defined as a framework between users/customers and
resource providers. Unifying these resources (including existing algorithms, hardware, images and so
on) in a cloud is important due to several reasons. Four major reasons are:
(cid:1) When a researcher addresses a new challenge for the analysis of medical images he/she must
consider existing solutions to determine if they are suitable or not. Generally, the re-
implementation, when the software is not available for that solution, or the re-use of a solution
might be limited by various instances. For instance, implementation details are not enough or
the researchers are not familiar with programming languages or even solutions are not
compatible with their own development environments. Medical image analysis (MIA)
researchers spend around 30% of their research time for implementing and evaluating existing
solutions, which represents a significant amount of time. Moreover, the evaluation and
validation of the new software solutions is limited by the way that these applications are
deployed.
(cid:1) User interfaces is a big challenge for MIA researchers as they need to spend additional time to
define a suitable interface for visual input data and present the results when advance
visualization is needed. MIA researchers are often concerned about proving concepts and
learning new programming languages, and image and visualization techniques sometimes is
not an option.
(cid:1) The generation of ground truth outlined shapes is relevant for the validation of image
segmentation algorithms. Ground truth, in the image processing scenario, consists in examples
of target shapes that image segmentation should ideally provide as results. These shapes are
generated by either radiologists or MIA researchers by means of manual segmentation, which
is often, performed using the mouse. This could be both tedious and time consuming.
(cid:1) For some researchers sharing information is quite a challenge as they believe their research is
threatened when their data and algorithms are used by someone. Even though the creation of
data repositories along research centres and universities has been accepted as a way to
preserve and disseminate research data, sharing algorithms and software solutions is still a
challenge.
By unifying all image analysis resources in one environment, cloud computing helps the medical
image analysis researchers to test their new algorithms, visualize the results and compare with other
algorithms by applying on standard ground truth images without spending time and energy. Also, as
users have independent access to remote computing services in a cloud computing framework, then
sharing resources becomes safe and secure.
3. Proposed Framework
Due to the massive number of programming languages and image processing toolkits, simple sharing
of resources as plug and play functionality is difficult. While the proposed cloud computing
framework in Figure.1 allows a platform to have an independent access to remote computing services,
its web services allow end-users to fully interact with data, information requests as well as applications
with a low level of user interaction. In this proposal, I am going to study different components of this
framework and develop them using existing software solutions, imaging toolkits and Microsoft
technologies. For instance, Visual Studio can be utilized as the development environment, SQL server
as the database manager, and Microsoft Workflow foundation as the workflow engine.
A number of work packages have to be studied/developed for this framework:
(cid:1) Evaluate existing software environment solutions.
(cid:1) Design standard datasets, metadata and web services.
(cid:1) Design workflow orchestration and enactment, for example by Windows Workflow
Foundation.
(cid:1) Incorporate existing imaging and visualisation toolkits.
(cid:1) Design mechanisms and tools to enhance software usability for clinicians.
A number of challenges have to be addressed. The adaptation of existing software will require an
analysis and may require significant time. Also, merging toolkits with different languages (such as
Matlab, Java and C++) and their communication will need a deep study. The design and development
of suitable user interfaces for clinicians is another challenge. The idea is to use multi-touch technology
to improve the interaction with image analysis applications as well as the learning experience. Finally,
contributions not only should meet the quality but also facilitate the way researchers do it. The design
of mechanisms to provide such facility must be analysed and evaluated.
Figure.1 The proposed framework for medical image analysis application on cloud