Page 1 of 9 Original Research
Coding and data analysis during qualitative empirical
research in Practical Theology
Author: I dedicate this article to Prof. George Lotter, who has been instrumental in the formation of more
Petria M. Theron1 than 90 postgraduate students in practical theological studies at the North-West University
(NWU). Under his guidance, a significant amount of empirical research has been conducted.
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, School This is in line with a movement among scholars, both national and international, towards a
of Biblical Counselling and more empirical approach in Practical Theology. It is therefore indispensable that both lecturers
Church Ministry, North-West
and students in Practical Theology should further develop their empirical research capacities.
University, Potchefstroom
In this article, it is argued for a more systematic approach during the coding and data analysis
Campus, South Africa
phase of qualitative research and the article concludes with a proposed model for coding and
Correspondence to: data analysis in practical theological studies.
Petria Theron
Email:
petria.theron@nwu.ac.za Kodering en data-analise tydens kwalitatiewe empiriese navorsing in Praktiese
Teologie. Hierdie artikel word aan prof. George Lotter opgedra. Deur die jare was hy
Postal address:
instrumenteel in die vorming van meer as 90 nagraadse studente in Praktiese Teologie
Bali Hoff 07, Pezcod Street,
by die Noord-Wes Universiteit (NWU). Baie empiriese navorsing het onder sy leiding
Potchefstroom 2531,
South Africa plaasgevind. Dit is in ooreenstemming met die nasionale en internasionale tendens van
’n meer empiriese benadering in Praktiese Teologie. Dit is dus van die uiterste belang
Dates:
dat Praktiese Teologie-dosente en -studente se vaardighede in empiriese navorsing
Received: 10 Sept. 2014
verder ontwikkel moet word. In hierdie artikel word aangetoon dat ’n meer sistematiese
Accepted: 07 Sept. 2015
Published: 13 Nov. 2015 benadering gevolg moet word tydens die kodering en die data-analisefase van kwalitatiewe
navorsing. ’n Model vir die kodering en data-analise vir navorsing in Praktiese Teologie
How to cite this article:
word ook voorgestel.
Theron, P.M., 2015, ‘Coding
and data analysis during
qualitative empirical research
Introduction
in Practical Theology’, In die
Skriflig 49(3), Art. #1880,
org/10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880 Lotter is ‘Pastoral Theology in SA: Semper reformanda’. The Latin phrase semper reformanda means
‘always reforming’ and it has become a widely known motto of the reformed tradition (Troxel
Copyright:
2006). It first appeared in 1674 in a devotional by Van Lodenstein, an important figure in a
© 2015. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS movement known as the Dutch Second Reformation (Horton 2014). The phrase is often used
OpenJournals. This work is and even misused as a motivation or justification for change, for example that churches should
licensed under the Creative
be more open to move beyond the faith and practice they confess in their doctrinal standards
Commons Attribution
and allow innovation. However, Troxel (2006) and Horton (2014) make a strong appeal that one
License.
should use the phrase according to its true meaning of ‘always being reformed or changed’1 in
accordance with Scripture and the Lordship of Jesus Christ.2 The doctrine of the church was
reformed during the Reformation, but in the 21st century the lives and practices of God’s people
need further reformation. Wolters (1992:1) stresses the point that incessant reformation should
conform to the Word of God (Rm 12:2) and not, as Horton (2014) warns, to the spirit of the age.
I have come to know George Lotter not only as a person who is willing to change according
to the Word of God, but also as somebody who is open to change, new ideas and new ways of
doing things in practising his subject, pastoral studies. However, he does not approach change
in an uncritical manner, but evaluates it against the truths of God’s Word. To me, he personifies
somebody who is faithful to the reformational principal of semper reformanda. The choice of the title
of his article on how secular psychology has taken over the field of traditional biblical counselling
during the 19th and 20th centuries, and how Jay Adams has done pioneer work to regain the
ground, is significant, namely The ‘reformation’ of counselling. Lotter (2001:328) demonstrates
how the motto semper reformanda can be put into practice in academic endeavours, especially
Read online:
in pastoral theology and biblical counselling. Although Lotter worked and still works in the
Scan this QR
code with your
smart phone or
mobile device 1.The Oxford’s translation of the Latin phrase semper reformanda is given as ‘always to be reformed’ (Bowker 1999:874).
to read online.
2.Sola Scriptura and Solus Christus are two of the five well-known reformational principles (Vorster 2010:432).
Page 2 of 9 Original Research
field of Pastoral Theology, justifying the choice of the theme namely that Pastoral Theology is one of the sub-disciplines
of this edition of In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi in his honour, I of Practical Theology.
choose to write this article in the broader domain of Practical
Theology as will also become evident in the research results The title of this article indicates that the focus will be
later. I therefore deem it necessary to briefly situate Pastoral on empirical research within the discipline of Practical
Theology within the broader domain of Practical Theology. Theology. Dingemans (1996:87) refers to the shift that has
taken place in the last decades of the previous century,
In the time of modernity, Practical Theology was restricted namely investigating Christian practice instead of merely
to the application of doctrine in pastoral situations, but applying biblical data and statements of faith. Five years
from 1950 onwards, scholars in theology and religion have earlier, Pieterse (1991:6) also wrote about this movement
challenged this point of view (Miller-McLemore 2012:1). to emphasise empirical research in Practical Theology. He
One can speak of a revival of Practical Theology during the referred to Bastian who strongly argued in 1968 that Practical
early 1980s when the need for practical knowledge became Theology should take theory and praxis into consideration
evident. Researchers like Browning, Poling, Miller, Forrester and that the actions and activities of the church should be
and Dykstra in the United States, Ballard and Pritchard in analysed empirically. In 1974, states Pieterse (1991:7), Zerfass
England and Van der Ven from the Netherlands, among focused on the actions of the church and his cyclic model
others, responded by viewing the role of Practical Theology for the theory-praxis-reflection has become well known.
anew (Miller-McLemore 2012:2–3). In the process, it became Practical theologians at the North-West University (NWU)
clear that it is not easy to define Practical Theology. It is a have followed this model for many years. Until the 1980s,
multivalent discipline found in a wide range of spaces practical theologians worldwide made use of empirical
and places. Miller-McLemore (2012) gives the following insights from the social sciences (Dingemans 1996:87; Dreyer
definition in terms of four distinct enterprises, different 2012:512). However, at the beginning of the 1990s, Van
audiences and different objectives: der Ven sets forth a proposal for an empirical approach to
Practical Theology so that practical theologians can generate
Practical Theology is an activity of believers seeking to sustain
a life of reflective faith in the everyday, a method or way of their own data by investigating the ecclesiological praxis.
understanding or analysing theology in practice used by He refers to empirical theology (Burger 1991:15; Dreyer
religious leaders and by teachers and students across the 2012:513; Van der Ven 1993:vii). If one looks at the list of
theological curriculum, a curricular area in theological education publications by practical theologians like Pieterse and Dreyer
focused on ministerial practice and sub-specialities, and an from UNISA (University of South Africa), this movement
academic discipline pursued by a smaller subset of scholars to towards a more empirical approach to Practical Theology is
support and sustain these first three enterprises. (p. 5)
also visible in South Africa (Dreyer 2015; Pieterse 2010, 2011,
2012, 2013, 2015). However, I wholeheartedly agree with
Dreyer (2012:511), writing from a South African perspective,
Dreyer (2012:513) that lecturers and students should develop
agrees with Miller-McLemore that Practical Theology can
their empirical research capacities further.
no longer be seen as only studying pastoral actions, actions
related to church life or the training of pastors. An ‘outward’ My central theoretical argument in this article is that
movement is also visible in South Africa as practical postgraduate practical theological studies and research
theologians are increasingly involved in societal, political articles may greatly benefit from the use of a more systematic
and economic issues. The themes of the past three annual approach during the coding and data analysis phase of
meetings of the Society of Practical Theology in South Africa, qualitative empirical research. In this article, I first offer
namely Practical Theology and service delivery (2013), Practical an overview of recent empirical research done by practical
Theology in Africa and human waste (2014), and The power of theologians and postgraduate students at the NWU. Then
religion and religions of power within African contexts (2015) I focus on coding as an important part of data analysis
demonstrate it. during qualitative empirical research. I also present different
approaches to data analysis in qualitative research. In
Coming back to the relationship between Pastoral Theology conclusion, I propose a model for coding and data analysis
and Practical Theology, Miller-McLemore (2012:6) sees the during qualitative empirical research in practical theological
former as both person- and pathos-centred with the focus on studies.
care. In his inaugural address, Lotter (2007:2) also emphasises
the aspect of care by referring to the biblical foundation of Empirical research in Practical
Pastoral Theology, namely the metaphors and the parables Theology at North-West University
of the pastor and his sheep, where the pastor is intensely
involved with each one of his sheep (Ps 23; Ezk 34; Jn 10). In this section, I will give an overview of the recent use of
Practical Theology, according to Miller-McLemore (2012:6), empirical research by practical theologians at the Faculty of
is more concerned with integrating knowledge within Theology at the NWU. I will limit the scope of the research
theological education and mediating interaction between the to postgraduate studies done between 2010 and 2013
seminary, the congregation and the wider society. Dreyer and articles published in accredited scientific journals by
(2012:513), McClure (2012:269) and De Klerk and De Wet lecturers, postdoctoral fellows and associates in the field of
(2013:x) offer an alternative way to view the relationship, Practical Theology during the same time. The investigation
Page 3 of 9 Original Research
will provide quantitative data, reporting on how many of the • In eight studies, the researchers used a combination of
researchers made use of empirical methods, and qualitative quantitative and qualitative methods. They either used
data, analysing the empirical methods the researchers used an existing inventory or developed a questionnaire
in their research. themselves to examine the phenomenon. They interpreted
the results statistically and then followed the investigation
Quantitative data up by a questionnaire, and/or a semi-structured
interview, and/or counselling sessions. Subsequently,
At every graduation ceremony of the NWU, the list of they made deductions from the data. In one case, the
students who receive a degree at the particular graduation researcher repeated the use of the existing inventory to
ceremony is printed in a booklet. These booklets are available investigate the effectiveness of the counselling sessions.
at the office of the manager of the M and D programmes at the
Faculty of Theology. I have consulted the booklets of 2010 to In the 22 research articles, I distinguished the following
2013 and found that 17 masters and 21 doctoral studies were empirical methods:
completed in the field of Practical Theology. By looking at the
• In two articles, the quantitative method was used and
content of each of these studies, I noticed that 37 of these 38
deductions were made from the results.
postgraduate studies made use of empirical research. That is
• In three articles, the researchers used a mixed method.
a percentage of 97.4%.
They made use of a questionnaire to obtain quantitative
data. In order to obtain the qualitative data, they asked
In order to identify all the practical theological research
the participants to give their comments in the form of a
articles published in accredited scientific journals by
report. They coded the unstructured data by identifying
lecturers, postdoctoral fellows and associates of the Faculty
categories without indicating which coding method
of Theology, I consulted the reports of the research director
they used to establish the categories. They then used the
for the years 2010 until 2013. Surveying these reports, I
categories to develop a second questionnaire. The results
determined that 94 articles were published during these
of the second questionnaire confirmed the results of the
years. Of these 94 articles, only 22 made use of empirical
first questionnaire and the reports. From the results, they
research. That is a percentage of 23.4%.
made certain deductions.
• In two articles, the researchers made use of case studies
Qualitative data
to illustrate the issue under discussion, after which the
researchers made deductions.
For the purpose of this article, it is important to analyse
• In one article, the researcher used a semi-structured
the empirical methods that were implemented in the
questionnaire to compile case studies, from which
postgraduate studies and articles mentioned above.
deductions were made.
• In two articles, the researchers used auto-ethnography
The following empirical methods were used in the 37
and made deductions from the narratives.
postgraduate studies:
• In one article, the researcher used an online survey to
• In four studies, only quantitative methods were used. investigate the specific phenomenon. The survey also
Three of the researchers developed a questionnaire for included a narrative section where the participants could
the purpose of their studies. They distributed it among share further comments. Deductions followed from the
their participants and evaluated the results statistically. data.
One researcher used an existing inventory and made • In one article, the researcher demonstrated the Delphi
deductions from the results. survey method in a practical theological research
• In 25 studies, only qualitative methods were used. endeavour.
Most of the researchers developed a questionnaire • Ten researchers used the following qualitative method
for the purpose of their studies. They distributed it of research: They developed a questionnaire with open-
among their participants and followed it up with semi- ended questions, gave it to a few participants to complete,
structured interviews, based on the questionnaire, to followed it up by an interview to ensure a response to
ensure that they obtained all possible information from all the questions and then analysed the data. Seven of
the participants. The majority of the researchers then the researchers analysed the data by simply identifying
categorised the data according to emerging themes and recurring themes and then making deductions from it.
made deductions from the results. They did not indicate In three articles, the researchers used the eight steps of
how the categories or themes were established. One of Tesch to categorise the data in themes and subthemes.
the researchers used an existing inventory, conducted They then made their deductions.
semi-structured interviews based on the inventory and
made deductions from the data. One researcher made
Discussion of the results
use of case studies by analysing sermons and making
deductions from the results. Another researcher used A high percentage of postgraduate students included
case studies of semi-structured counselling sessions and empirical research as part of their studies, whilst less than
made deductions from it. One researcher used the Delphi a quarter of the articles in accredited journals included
method of research. empirical research. Most of the articles in which empirical
Page 4 of 9 Original Research
research is reported are articles published by postgraduate data (Engler 2014:257; Saldaña 2013:3–4, 8). During the
students and their study leaders, as part of the postgraduate coding process, some codes may appear repeatedly and that
studies. The rest of the articles where empirical research are may be an indication of emerging patterns. These emerging
included, are by postdoctoral fellows and associates. From patterns or similarity among the codes may give rise to
the results of this investigation, it is clear that the Practical categories. Coding is not only labelling, but also linking,
Theology lecturers of the NWU do not often embark on that is, linking data to an idea. It is a cyclic process. By
empirical research in their own research, although they incorporating more cycles into the coding process, richer
expect it from their postgraduate students. meanings, categories, themes and concepts can be generated
from the data (Saldaña 2013:5, 8).
If one considers the empirical methods implemented, it is
evident that most of the researchers used qualitative methods. Practical aspects of coding
The method most frequently used entails the following. The
Saldaña (2013:17) gives practical advice for the coding
researchers developed a questionnaire according to the
theme of the particular study and asked their participants process. He says that it is helpful to type the data on the left
to complete it. After the questionnaire, they often had semi- two-thirds of a page and to leave the right margin open for
structured interviews with the participants in order to ensure notes. Whenever the topic of the data seems to change, the
that all possible information was obtained. The researchers researchers can start a new paragraph. In writing down the
then made conclusions based on the data. I encountered data, researchers need to decide whether they want to give
only a few researchers who mentioned that they coded and a verbatim transcription of the interviews for their specific
categorised the data according to emerging themes. They study. It is the opinion of Smith and Davies (2010:149) that
seldom mentioned the methodology they used during the it is not always necessary and that the essence (gist) of
coding process. Only three researchers mentioned in their the interview is sometimes sufficient. Whilst reading the
articles that they followed the eight steps of Tesch to categorise data, states Saldaña (2010:19–20), the researcher can do
their data in themes and subthemes. One gets the idea that some ‘precoding’ by circling, highlighting or underlining
when these researchers do coding, they do it intuitively. significant words or sentences. However, the author urges
researchers to start the coding process whilst they are
One can wonder about the ‘truth value’ of the qualitative collecting the data, keeping in mind that the codes may
research projects. Schurink, Fouché and De Vos (2012:419) change during later cycles. Saldaña (2010:21–22) suggests
refer to the traditional criteria for good qualitative research,
that researchers should keep their research questions and
namely internal and external validity, reliability and
aims of their studies in mind. The following questions may
objectivity, but qualitative researchers Lincoln and Guma
assist them in their coding decisions:
propose that credibility, transferability, dependability and
conformability are better indicators of good qualitative • What are people doing? What are they trying to
research. Of these four criteria, they consider credibility accomplish?
to be the most important one. Credibility refers inter alia • Exactly how are they doing it? What strategies are they
to the fact that researchers portray accurately what the using?
participants conveyed. One way to increase this is by means • How do they talk about, characterise and understand
of member checks (2012:420). I am of the opinion that the what is going on?
implementation of thorough coding and data analysis will • What assumptions are they making?
significantly contribute to improve the credibility of the • What is going on here? What do I, as researcher, learn
qualitative empirical research of practical theologians at the from these notes? What strikes me?
NWU. This is the focus of the rest of the article.
These questions correspond with aspects, mentioned by
Coding: An important part of data Gibbs (quoted in Smith & Davies 2010:153), that may be coded,
analysis namely activities or behaviour, events, strategies or tactics,
present situations, meanings, participation, relationships or
Smith and Davies (2010:155) argue that coding does not interactions, conditions or constraints, consequences, settings
constitute the totality of data analysis, but it is a method to and the researcher’s own reflections.
organise the data so that underlying messages portrayed
by the data may become clearer to the researcher. Charmaz The number of codes, Saldaña (2013:22–24) states, depends
(2006:46) describes coding as the pivotal link between data on the context, the nature of the data and to what degree of
collection and explaining the meaning of the data. A code fineness the researcher wants to examine the detail. Data
is a descriptive construct designed by the researcher to can be ‘lumped’ together with a single code or can be ‘split’
capture the primary content or essence of the data. Coding into many smaller parts, each bearing its own code. Both
is an interpretive activity and therefore it is possible that two methods have advantages and disadvantages. Even though
researchers will attribute two different codes to the same splitting is time-consuming, it may produce a more nuanced
data. The context in which the research is done, the nature of analysis. On the other hand, lumping gets to the essence of
the research and the personality and interest of the researcher categorising, although it may produce superficial analysis.
will influence which codes the researcher attributes to the The number of codes may change during a second cycle of
Page 5 of 9 Original Research
coding. Saldaña (2013:26, 28) advises that the initial coding examples of in vivo codes: ‘freshman year awful’, ‘found stuff
should be done on hard copies, although electronic resources out’, ‘wasn’t trying so hard’ and ‘friends got closer’ (Saldaña
are available, as hard copies tend to give a better perspective. 2013:91–94).
Coding is usually a solitary act, but he (2013:34–35) advises
that researchers should share their coding and analysis with Process (action) coding
colleagues or even the participants as a way of validating the
A process code is a word or a phrase that captures action. It
findings and enriching the analysis.
is done by using gerunds (‘-ing’ words) as part of the code.
Process coding is useful to identify an on-going action as a
Writing analytic memos: Concurrently with
response to situations, or an action to handle a problem, or
to reach a goal. As a process code usually conveys movement
The analytic memos document how the coding process and shows how things have changed over time, it helps the
is developing and codes may trigger deeper reflection on researchers to give a dynamic account of events. It conveys
the side of the researcher on the meaning of the data. It a trail of the participant’s process, for example: criticising
is important that researchers write down their insights rumours; not caring what people think; finding out who your
(Saldaña 2013:41–42). Analytical memos give researchers the real friends are (Saldaña 2013:5, 96–99).
opportunity to reflect and comment on the following:
Initial (open) coding
• how they personally relate to the participants and the
phenomenon; Initial coding refers to the process of breaking the
• their research questions; qualitative data down into distinct parts and coding these
• the code choices; by using in vivo coding, process coding, and other coding
methods. The researchers then examine these parts closely
• emergent patterns and categories;
and compare them for similarities and differences. During
• problems and ethical dilemmas in the study; and
this process, the researchers may already become aware
• the future direction for the study.
of emerging categories and code them. It is important
to remember that these initial codes and categories
Writing analytical memos can be seen as the transitional
are tentative and may change as the analysis process
phase from coding to the more formal writing of the report
progresses. After initial coding, the researchers need time
on the study. The analytical memos can also be coded and
for reflection by means of the writing of analytical memos
categorised and may even lead to better codes or categories
(Saldaña 2013:100–101).
for the data (Saldaña 2013:49–51).
Focused coding
Useful coding methods for Practical Theology
Saldaña (2013:213) explains that after initial coding, the
Saldaña (2013:51) mentions that grounded theory, one of the researchers embark on focused coding by identifying the
approaches in qualitative research, has six coding techniques most frequent or significant codes in order to develop
in its coding canon. Researchers normally use these coding the prominent categories (it is linked to axial coding). He
methods during two coding cycles. During the first cycle, warns that the researchers should be aware that these
the data is split into segments and in vivo coding, process categories do not always have well-defined boundaries
coding and initial coding may be used. During the second and that the codes in a specific category may have different
cycle, researchers compare codes, note emerging patterns degrees of belonging. Rubin and Rubin (quoted by Saldaña
and reorganise the data into categories by using the focused, 2013:216) recommend that the researchers organise the
axial and theoretical coding techniques. More detail on each categories hierarchically in main categories and subcategories
of the six coding techniques follow, but it is important to note in order to understand the relationship between them.
that researchers can use these coding methods also in non-
grounded theory studies (Saldaña 2013:51). Axial coding
The goal of axial coding is the strategic reassembling of data
In vivo coding
that have been split during initial coding. In the process of
This method of coding is useful for beginner qualitative crossing out synonyms and redundant codes, the dominant
researchers, as the exact word or phrase of the participant codes will become apparent. The axis of the axial coding
serves as a code. In order to distinguish in vivo codes, the is a category. During axial coding, categories are related
researchers put them between inverted commas. The to subcategories and the properties and dimensions of a
researchers look for words or phrases that seem to stand category are specified (Saldaña 2013:218). Central categories
out, for example nouns with impact, action-orientated verbs, describe the key properties of the phenomenon, causal
evocative word choices, clever phrases or metaphors. In vivo categories capture the circumstances that form the structure
coding can be the only coding method used during the first of the studied phenomenon, strategies describe the actions
cycle of data analysis, but it may be limiting. Sometimes the or interactions of people in response to the phenomenon,
participant says something in the best way and other times and consequential categories represent the outcomes of
the researchers do it better. The following phrases serve as the actions or interactions. Thus, through axial coding, the
Page 6 of 9 Original Research
researchers will be able to answer when, where, why, who, how Constant comparative method of Lincoln and
and with what consequences questions (Charmaz 2006:60–61; Guma
Osmer 2008:52; Saldaña 2013:220). In Figure 1 an example of
This method of processing data consists of four stages and
Saldaña (2013:220) serves as explanation.
Poggenpoel (1998:339–340) explains them as follows.
Theoretical (selective) coding
Comparing units applicable to each category
It is the process to select the theoretical code or core category
The researchers identify units of information that can
that functions like an umbrella that covers all codes and
stand separately and code these units. If there are units
categories. It relates to all categories and subcategories.
that are related because they address the same content, the
It addresses the how and why questions to explain the
researchers put them together in provisional categories.
phenomena. However, this is not necessary for every
By comparing the units within each category, researchers
qualitative study (Saldaña 2013:223–224; Schurink et al.
determine the theoretical properties of the category. There
2012:413). In Figure 2 another example of Saldaña (2013:225)
will be descriptive and explanatory categories.
sheds light on this aspect of coding.
Integrating categories and their properties
The central or core category of the study is
Next, the researchers compare the units in the same category
DISCRIMINATING. Adolescents discriminate when they
with the properties of the category. In this way, the category
choose their friends. They discriminate through a process of
properties become explicit, which is necessary to integrate
accepting and excepting. Adolescents socially discriminate
categories.
in their choice of friendships (Saldaña 2013:225–226).
Delimiting the construction
Approaches to data analysis in qualitative
research As the integration of categories progress, the number of
categories becomes less and the categories become saturated.
Poggenpoel (1998:338) mentions five approaches to data
analysis in qualitative research, namely the constant
Writing the construction
comparative method of Lincoln and Guma, the approach
of Huberman and Miles, Morse and Field’s approach, the The researchers write the reports and present the results to
method of Marshall and Rossman and Tesch’s approach. the participants to verify the validity of the results.
Creswell’s (2014:196–200) data analysis process will also be
Approach of Huberman and Miles
discussed as a sixth possible approach.
Poggenpoel (1998:340) states that this approach of data
analysis consists of three processes:
Data reduction
DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND
Once the data is available, data summaries, coding, finding
SOCIALISING themes, clustering and writing stories are ways to select and
condense data.
MAINTAINING FRIENDSHIP SETTING CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIPS
Data display
LABELLING THE GROUPS
The data is then organised to facilitate the thinking about the
meaning of the data.
ACCEPTING THROUGH EXCEPTING
Conclusion drawing and verification
QUALIFYING THE GROUPS DISPELLING STEREOTYPES OF THE GROUPS
Now the researchers make interpretations and draw meaning
Source: Saldaña, J., 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd edn., Sage, from the data by comparing contrasts, noting patterns and
themes, clustering, using metaphors, using triangulation, looking
FIGURE 1: An example of axial coding.
for negative cases and check the results with the participants.
DISCRIMINATING Morse and Field’s approach
In this approach to data analysis, says Poggenpoel (1998:341–
ACCEPTING SOCIAL DISCRIMINATION EXCEPTING
342), the light falls on four cognitive processes.
Comprehending
EXCEPTING STEREOTYPES ACCEPTING STEREOTYPES
Coding is a central process, because it helps the researchers
Source: Saldaña, J., 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd edn., Sage,
London to sort the data, but also to understand the underlying
FIGURE 2: An example of theoretical coding. meanings in the text.
Page 7 of 9 Original Research
Synthesising • The researchers start with one document and whilst going
This involves the analysis of categories by looking for through it, ask themselves ‘What is this about?’ The question
commonalities. does not refer to the content of the document, but to the
topic. Write these topics in the margin of the document.
Theorising • After completing this procedure for several documents,
the researchers make a list of all the topics, one column
Theorising is to select and fit alternative models to the data
per data document, placing all the columns on the same
in order to construct alternative explanations of the data.
sheet. They need to compare all the topics and group
The process continues until the researchers find the best
similar topics together. Write these groups in columns,
explanation for the data.
perhaps with headings that represent the major topics,
the unique topics and leftovers.
Recontextualising
• Abbreviate these topics as codes. With this list of codes,
It is the establishment of the emerging theory from the
the researchers go back to the data and write the codes
particular research so that the theory is applicable to other
next to the appropriate segments of the text. Be open for
settings and populations.
new categories and codes that may emerge. If any ideas
about the data come to mind, the researchers should
Approach of Marshall and Rossman
write it down in their notes (analytic memos).
This approach to data analysis has five stages and in each of the • Find the most descriptive words for the topics, which
stages, the researchers reduce the data to manageable parts. have begun to turn into categories. Try to reduce the
Each stage also involves interpretations as the researchers categories by grouping together those that relate to each
bring meaning to the data (Poggenpoel 1998:342–343). other. Try to look for subcategories. A ‘normal’ number
of categories is between 20 and 50. This is the organising
Organising the data system for the data.
• Make a final decision on the abbreviation of each category
The first step is that the researchers should read and reread the
and alphabetise the codes to ensure that no duplication
data in order to familiarise themselves with the content of the
occurs. The researchers should remember that categories
data. In the process, they can list the data on note cards, do
have fuzzy boundaries and a segment of data can fit in
minor editing of the data and organise voluminous data.
two or three categories.
• Put the data belonging to each category together and
Generating categories, themes and patterns
perform a preliminary analysis, looking at all the material
The researchers need to identify prominent themes, recurring
in one category at a time. The focus is now on the content
ideas and patterns of belief that link people and settings
of each category. During this process, keep the research
together. These become the categories. This is inductive
question in mind in order to discard irrelevant data.
analysis, because the categories emerge from the data.
• If necessary, recode the existing data. The organising
system may help the researchers to give structure to their
Testing emergent hypotheses
research reports.
By looking at the categories from the data and the patterns
between them, it is possible that hypotheses can arise. It is Creswell’s approach
important to test these against the existing data.
Although Creswell (2014:196–200) presents his approach as
a linear, hierarchical process, he states categorically that the
Searching for alternative explanations
six steps are interrelated and do not necessarily follow in the
The researchers should also look for alternative explanations,
order they are given.
describe it and motivate why it is possible.
Organise and prepare the data for analysis
Writing the report
This refers to the transcribing of the interviews and the
This is part of the analytic process, because as the researchers
sorting and arranging of the data if different sources of
choose particular words to summarise and reflect the data,
information are used.
they are busy with interpretinge the process by giving shape,
form and meaning to the data.
Read through all the data
Eight steps of Tesch By doing this, the researchers get a general sense of the
information and possibly its overall meaning. Perhaps the
Tesch (1992:142–145) provides detailed guidelines to develop researchers want to write down general ideas about the data.
an organising system for unstructured qualitative data:
Coding of the data
• Get a sense of the whole by reading carefully through all the
data. This gives the researchers the necessary background It is the process of organising the data into chunks of
information. If something comes to mind about the data, information and writing a word that represents a category
the researchers should write these ideas down. in the margin.
Page 8 of 9 Original Research
Description of the setting or people and categories or Phase 3: Member checking
themes for analysis
In order to ensure the quality of the qualitative empirical
During the coding process, the researchers give detailed research, the researchers pursue to guarantee the credibility
descriptions of the setting or the people involved as well as of the research. In other words, the researchers want to
descriptions of the categories or themes for analysis. ascertain that they portray accurately what the participants
conveyed. One way to increase credibility is to make use of
Present the results of the analysis member checking. After the coding process, the researchers
This is often done in a narrative passage to convey the can ask the participants to verify the validity of the content of
findings of the analysis. It may include a chronology of their specific data as well as the results of the coding process.
events, a detailed discussion of several themes or a discussion The researchers need to address issues indicated by the
of interconnecting themes. participant(s).
Interpretation of the results of the analysis Phase 4: Interpreting results
The aim is to answer the following question: ‘What were the The researchers look at one category at a time and focus on
lessons learned?’ the content of each category. In order to interpret the results
and draw meaning from it, the researchers can compare
Proposed model for coding and contrasts, note patterns and themes, they can cluster, use
metaphors and even look for negative cases. I agree with
data analysis in practical theological
Osmer (2008:4) that the researchers draw on theories in the
literature in an attempt to explain why the patterns in the
results occurred.
After studying the coding techniques as set out by Saldaña
and some of the existing approaches to data analysis
Phase 5: Presenting the data
mentioned above, I propose the following model for coding
The data analysis process culminates in the researchers’
and data analysis during qualitative empirical research in
written reports wherein they discuss the findings of the
practical theological studies. I trust that students and practical
empirical research and give their conclusions.
theologians can implement it fruitfully in their postgraduate
studies and research articles. The model consists of five phases:
Conclusion
Phase 1: Preparing the data An investigation into recent research outputs by practical
The researchers need to decide whether they are going to theologians at the NWU, in all sub-disciplines of Practical
do a verbatim transcription of the data versus just giving Theology, revealed that the qualitative empirical research
the essence (gist) of what the participant conveyed in the skills of lecturers and postgraduate students need further
interview. Then the researchers type the data on two-thirds development, especially in the area of coding and data
of the page, leaving a margin on the right. Whenever a new analysis. I proposed a model for coding and data analysis in
topic starts, the researchers start a new paragraph. During practical theological studies.
this process of preparing the data, the researchers may
Acknowledgements
already do some precoding by circling, highlighting or
underlining significant words or sentences. It is a good idea Competing interests
to start early with the process and not wait until all the data
has been gathered. The author declares that she has no financial or personal
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced her
Phase 2: Coding in writing this article.
The researchers can code the following: activities and