]hp-cos.scisyhp[
2v9421.7070:viXra
Coevolution of agents and networks
in an epidemiological model 1
Damia´n H. Zanette
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıficas y T´ecnicas
Centro At´omico Bariloche and Instituto Balseiro
8400 San Carlos de Bariloche, R´ıo Negro, Argentina
We study the spreading of an infection within an SIS epidemiolog-
ical model on a network. Susceptibleagents aregiven the opportunity
of breaking their links with infected agents, and reconnecting those
links with the rest of the population. Thus, the network coevolves
with the population as the infection progresses. We show that a mod-
erate reconnection frequency is enough to completely suppress the
infection. A partial, rather weak isolation of infected agents suffices
to eliminate the endemic state.
1 Introduction
Among the many potential applications of agent-based models whose pattern
of interactions is represented by a network, a broad class is constituted by
systemswherethatpatternisnotastaticstructure, butevolvesinresponseto
the changing state of the agents. Generally, the evolution of the interaction
network and the dynamics of individual agents occur over different time
scales. For instance, in learning processes –such a those implemented in
real and artificial neural networks [1]– connections change adaptively over
scales that are large as compared with the internal dynamics of agents. At
the opposite limit, in models of network growth, the pattern evolves in the
absence of any dynamics related to agents at the network nodes [2].
When, on the other hand, the dynamical time scales of a population
of agents and its interaction network are comparable, we can speak about
their coevolution. Consider, for instance, agents involved in a cooperation-
defection game, such as in the prisoner’s dilemma [3], where defected agents
are given the opportunity of breaking the connection with their defectors, in
such a way that no further interaction is possible between them. Or, in a
process of opinion diffusion, that agents which do not succeed at reaching an
This is a written version of a talk to be given at the International School on Com-
plexity: Course on Statistical Physics of Social Dynamics: Opinions, Semiotic Dynamics,
and Language (Erice, 13-20 July, 2007).
agreement may elude mutual contacts in the future [4, 5, 6, 7]. In such cases,
a realistic assumption would be that the breaking of interaction links occurs
just after a few, or even one of, such events.
In this talk, we explore a model of agent-network coevolution in a popula-
tion where an infection is spreading, such that non-infected agents are given
the possibility of avoiding contact with their infected partners –perhaps in
response to risk perception [8]. The model is based on an SIS epidemiological
process, where each agent can be susceptible (S) or infected (I). We recall
that in the standard SIS process each infected agent recovers and becomes
susceptible at a fixed rate, say, with probability γ per unit time. Susceptible
agents, in turn, become infected by contagion from infected agents, at a rate
proportional to the infection probability per unit time, ρ, and to the fraction
of infected agents, n . Within a mean-field description of the standard SIS
model, the fraction of infected agents obeys
where n = 1 n is the fraction of susceptible agents. In this description,
for asymptotically long times, n vanishes if ρ γ. Therefore, the infection
is suppressed as time elapses. If, on the other hand, ρ > γ, the fraction of
infected agents approaches a finite value n = 1 γ/ρ > 0, and the infection
is endemic. The transition between these two regimes occurs through a
transcritical bifurcation.
We introduce in the following an implementation of the SIS model on a
network, with agents occupying the nodes and contagion taking place along
the links. A susceptible agent can become infected only if it is connected to
an infected agent. Moreover, susceptible agents have the opportunity, with
a certain probability, of breaking their connection with an infected partner
before contagion takes place, and reconnect the broken link with any other
agent in the population. We show that these reconnection events are able to
control infection spreading, even to the point of completely suppressing the
infection as the reconnection probability grows. This suppression is achieved
with a moderate decrease in the number of network connections per infected
agent.
2 Model and mean-field formulation
The present model is a variation of the model introduced by Gross et al. [9].
Consider a population of N agents at the nodes of a network with M links.
The average number of neighbours per agent is z = 2M/N. At a given time,
each agent can be in one of two states: susceptible (S-agent) or infected (I-
agent). Initially, the M links are distributed at random over the population,
and there is a certain fraction of agents in each state.
Each evolution step is divided into two sub-steps. In the first sub-step,
an agent is chosen at random from the whole population. If it is infected, it
recovers with probability γ, and becomes susceptible. Inthe second sub-step,
a pair of linked agents is chosen at random. If both agents are susceptible
or infected, nothing happens. Otherwise, the S-agent is given the chance
to break the link with its infected neighbour and reconnect it with another
agent, taken at random from the remaining of the population. This rewiring
happens with probability r. Finally, if the rewiring has not occurred, the
S-agent becomes infected with probability λ.
A time unit contains N evolution steps. Thus, each I-agent has a prob-
ability γ per time unit of becoming susceptible, so that the mean duration
of the infection period is γ
−1.
Moreover, each S-agent in contact with an
I-agent becomes in turn infected with probability 2(1 r)λ per time unit.
2.1 Mean-field equations
Although, clearly, themodel is defined bearing inmind its implementation as
a numerical simulation, a formulation in terms of differential equations, from
mean-field arguments, turns out to give an essentially correct description of
thesystem. Todefineourmean-fieldformulation,wefirstintroduceasuitable
set of variables. We call N and N the number of infected and susceptible
agents, respectively. They satisfy N +N = N. Moreover, we denote by M ,
M , and M , respectively, the number of network links joining two infected
agents(II),aninfectedagentandasusceptibleagent(IS),andtwosusceptible
agents (SS). Since the total number of links is preserved by the dynamical
rules, we have M + M + M = M constant at all times. Differential
equations will be formulated for the fractions n = N /N, m = M /M, and
m = M /M. The conservation of the number of agents and links implies
n = N /N = 1 n and m = M /M = 1 m m .
S S I SS SS II IS
The evolution of the above defined quantities is given by the events of
infection and recovery, and by the reconnection of links. When, for instance,
an I-agent becomes susceptible, there is not only a decay in the fraction of
I-agents, but also a change in the fractions m and m . In fact, the links
joining the recovered agent with I and S-agents pass, respectively, from the
II-type to the IS-type, and from the IS-type to the SS-type. A symmetric
situation occurs when an S-agent becomes infected. The number of links
of each type associated to a given agent is calculated using mean-field-like
averages. For instance, the number of II-links associated to an I-agent is
estimated as 2M /N = zm /n , where z = 2M/N is the overall average
number of links per agent. Similarly, the number of IS-links associated to
an I-agent is taken to be M /N = zm /2n . Reconnection events, in turn,
can change an IS-link into an SS-link. The probability for this change is
proportional to the fraction of S-agents in the whole population and to the
reconnection probability r. Finally, it has to be taken into account that both
infection and reconnection only occur when an IS-link is selected, so that
their probabilities are proportional to m .
Putting all these considerations together, the evolution equations for n ,
m , and m read
n = n +λm ,
I ′ I − II IS − I (2)
m = 2m m r˜(1 n )m
IS II − IS − − I IS
IS II IS I
with λ = (1 r)λ/γ and r˜ = 2r/zγ. Primes indicate differentiation with
respect to the rescaled time t = γt. In this formulation, thus, the inverse
recovery probability γ
fixes an overall time scale, and the infection and
reconnection probabilities are accordingly redefined as λ and r˜, which are
the only two parameters left. Note that λ depends on both λ and r, and
that r˜incorporates the only network-specific parameter, namely, the average
connectivity per agent z = 2M/N.
In the absence of reconnection events, r = 0, and provided that we put
m = n2 and m = 2n n = 2n (1 n ), the three lines in Eq. (2) collapse
II I IS I S I − I
I − I I − I
Rewriting this equation in terms of the non-normalized parameters, we reob-
tain the mean-field equation (1) for the SIS model, with ρ = 2λ. The factor
of 2 relating the infection frequencies ρ and λ originates in the fact that, in
our implementation of the SIS model on a network, each agent is (on the
average) chosen twice per unit time to possibly become infected.
2.2 Infection level at equilibrium
Wefocustheattention ontheequilibrium solutions ofEqs. (2), which arethe
candidates to represent the infection level and network structure at asymp-
totically long times. First, we consider the stationary values of the fraction
of infected agents. The analysis is restricted to the case of λ > 1/2 which, in
the absence of reconnection events, corresponds an endemic infection where
a finite fraction of the population is infected at all times, n > 0 for t .
At the fixed points of the dynamical equations (2), the equilibrium frac-
tion of links m and m are related to the equilibrium fraction of infected
agents n as
m ∗ = I , m ∗ = I. (4)
II ˜ ∗ IS ˜
2λ(1 n ) λ
In turn, n satisfies
I − − − I − I I
This polynomial equation has four solutions. One of them tends to infinity
for r˜ 0, and remains real and larger than one for any positive r˜. Since
meaningful solutions to our problem must verify n 1, we disregard this
solution from now on.
The trivial solution n = 0 exists for any value of the normalized in-
fectivity λ and of the normalized reconnection probability r˜. For a given λ,
its stability depends on r˜. As discussed in more detail below, n = 0 is
unstable for small r˜and becomes stable as r˜ grows. The other two solutions
n (1,2) = 1 cos √3sin (6)
I −s3r˜ 3 ∓ 3
α = arctan 1 (7)
(0 α π/2). These two solutions are real for 32λ
27r˜. Otherwise,
they are complex conjugate numbers. The solution n , with the minus
sign in the right-hand side of Eq. (6), approaches 1 (2λ
for r˜ 0.
Thus, it represents the expected fraction of infected agents in the absence of
reconnection. When it is real, it satisfies n < 1, and it is stable as long
as it remains positive. Consequently, along with the trivial solution, n
is another meaningful equilibrium solution to our problem. Finally, n is
negative and stable for small r˜. Depending on λ, it can become positive as
r˜ grows but, at the same time, it becomes unstable. Therefore, it does not
represent a meaningful solution.
Figure1 summarizes, in a bifurcation diagram, the behaviour of n , n ,
and n as functions of the normalized reconnection probability r˜, for three
representative values of the normalized infectivity λ. In the three cases, we
have λ > 1/2, so that –as discussed above– a non-trivial meaningful solution
does exist. Full and dotted lines represent, respectively, stable and unstable
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 ~ 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Figure 1: Bifurcation diagram for the equilibrium fraction of infected agents
n as a function of the normalized reconnection probability r˜, for three nor-
malized infectivities λ. Although only positive values of n are meaningful,
an interval in the negative domain is also shown for completeness. Full and
dottedlines represent, respectively, stable andunstable branches. Forclarity,
the solution n = 0 is plotted in the vicinity of the transcritical bifurcation
only.
branches. For small infectivity (λ = 0.6), the stable solution n crosses
n and becomes negative and unstable, while n becomes stable. This
transcritical bifurcation takes place at r˜ = 2λ 1. As r˜ grows further, n
and the negative stable solution n approach each other, and collide when
n = n = 1 3/4λ. Beyond this tangent bifurcation, which takes place
the two solutions are complex numbers.
Thesituationisdifferentforlargerinfectionprobabilities, asillustratedby
Fig. 1 for λ = 1. Now, for r˜= 0, n is large and, as r˜grows, it is the stable
negative solution n which first reaches n . At the transcritical bifurcation
at r˜= 2λ 1, n becomes positive and unstable, and n becomes stable.
The tangent bifurcation where n and n collide and become complex, at
takes now place when these two solutions are positive. As a
consequence, there is an interval of normalized reconnection probabilities,
between the two bifurcations, where the system is bistable: both n and
n are stable meaningful solutions to the problem. The asymptotic state
is selected by the initial condition for n , and n stands at the boundary
between the two attraction basins.
The regimes of small and large infectivity are separated by the critical
value λ = 3/4 = 0.75, also shown in Fig. 1. At this critical point, the
transcritical and the tangent bifurcation collapse into a pitchfork bifurcation
atr˜= 1/2. Here, thethreeequilibriacollidesimultaneously, andn becomes
stable, while the other two solutions become complex.
A phase diagram of our system over the parameter plane (r˜,λ) is shown
in Fig. 2. The zones of endemic infection, where the fraction of infected
agents at asymptotically long times is positive (n n ), and of infection
suppression (n 0) are separated, for large λ and r˜, by the bistability
region, where both asymptotic behaviours can be obtained, depending on the
initial condition. The three zones are limited by the lines of the transcritical
bifurcation [λ = (1+r˜)/2, TC], where n = 0 changes its stability, and of
the tangent bifurcation [λ ˜ = (27r˜/32)1/3, Tg] where n (1) and n (2) collide and
become complex. These two lines are tangent to each other at the “triple
point” (1/2,3/4), where the bistability region disappears, and the system
undergoes a pitchfork bifurcation [P]. For smaller λ and r˜ bistability is no
more possible, and the zones of infection persistence and suppression are
separated by the transcritical line. The tangent bifurcation takes now place
at negative values of n and n (dotted line).
The inset of Fig. 2 shows the same phase diagram in terms of the orig-
inal, non-normalized reconnection and infection probabilities, r and λ, for
a recovery probability γ = 0.01 over a network with an average of z = 10
bistability
1.5 n fi n(1) Tg
0.02 z = 10
0.5 n fi 0
0.0 0.1 r 0.2
0 1 2 ~r 3 4 5
Figure 2: Phase diagram in the (r˜,λ)-plane, showing the regions of infection
suppression (n 0) and persistence (n n ), and the intermediate
bistability zone. Their boundaries aregiven bythetranscritical (TC) andthe
tangent (Tg) bifurcation lines, which collapse into a pitchfork bifurcation (P)
at (1/2,3/4). The dotted line is the continuation of the tangent bifurcation
line in the zone where n is negative. The inset shows the same phase
diagram in terms of the non-normalized parameters r and λ, for γ = 0.01
and z = 10.
neighbours per site. Note that the relation between non-normalized and nor-
malized parameters is not a mere change of scale, because both r and λ enter
the definition of λ.
Let us summarize our results on the persistence or suppression of the
infection in terms of the non-normalized parameters. First, for small in-
fectivity, λ γ/2(1 r), the infection is always suppressed. In this sit-
uation, the infectivity is just too small to sustain a finite infected popu-
lation. For larger infectivities, on the other hand, the infection can be-
come established, depending on the reconnection probability r. In the range
γ/2(1 r) < λ < 3γ/4(1 r), the infection is endemic if reconnections are
infrequent, r < z(λ γ/2)/(1+zλ). Otherwise, for sufficiently frequent re-
connections, the infection dies out. The transition between both situations
is continuous in the fraction of infected agents, and occurs through a trans-
critical bifurcation. For even larger infection probabilities, λ > 3γ/4(1 r),
the regimes of persistence (low r) and suppression (large r) are separated by
a bistability zone, where the infection persists or dies out depending on the
initial fractionof infected agents. The bistability zone islimited by thetrans-
critical bifurcation quoted above and a tangent bifurcation at a reconnection
probability given by the solution to 27γ2r = 16(1 r)3λ3. The discontinuous
natureofthetangentbifurcationimpliesthattheendemicstatepresent inthe
bistability zone disappears abruptly at the boundary, with a finite jump in
the asymptotic fraction of infected agents, from n = 1 z(1 r)λ/3r > 0
to zero.
2.3 Number of neighbours of infected and susceptible
The variables m and m characterize how the structure of the network is
related to the state of the agents. Reconnection events favor the growth of
the number of SS-links at the expense of IS-links. Thus, for r > 0, S-agents
should asymptotically posses relatively large numbers of neighbours. The
equilibrium values m and m as functions of the equilibrium fraction n of
I-agents are given by Eqs. (4). These equations show, as expected, that the
fraction of links connecting I-agents with any other agent is proportional to
the fraction of I-agents itself.
In order to introduce quantities that define the connectivity of I-agents
and S-agents independently of their respective fractions, we consider the av-
eragenumber ofneighbours peragent ofeachtype. ForI-agents, forinstance,
the average numbers of infected and susceptible neighbours are 2M /N and
M /N , respectively. The average connectivity of I-agents, z , is the sum of
susceptible
0.8 l = 0.6
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
Figure 3: Connectivity of infected and susceptible agents, z and z , relative
to the overall connectivity z = 2M/N, for three values of the normalized in-
fectivity λ, as functions of the normalized reconnection probability r˜. Only
the values corresponding to meaningful stable solutions for the fraction of
infected agents at plotted. The connectivity of infected agents is not plotted
beyond the threshold of infection suppression. The vertical dashed line rep-
resents the finite jump in z at the tangent bifurcation where the solution
n disappears.
these two quantities or, equivalently,
which gives the ratio between z and the overall average connectivity per
agent at equilibrium. With analogous arguments for S-agents, their average
connectivity reads
S = I . (9)
z 1 n ∗ − 2λ ˜ (1 n ∗ )2
Due to the conservation of the total number of links, z and z are univocally
related. This relation can be obtained from Eqs. (8) and (9) by eliminating
n , which yields
In order to describe the correlation between the structure and the state of
the population it is however useful to analyze both z and z as functions of
the relevant parameters. Figure 3 illustrates the behaviour of z and z , as
described in the following, for the infection probabilities λ already considered
in Fig. 1.
For n = n , which stands for the stable equilibrium solution for low
reconnection probabilities, both z and z approach z as r˜ 0. As expected,
in the absence of reconnection events, there is no difference in the number
of neighbours of infected and susceptible agents. Also, as r˜grows from zero,
we have z < z < z . We verify that reconnection tends to increase the
connectivity of S-agents at the expense of I-agents.
The other solution relevant to the epidemiological process, n = n = 0,
corresponds to a purely susceptible population. Accordingly, we find z = z.
Note also that Eq. (8) predicts z = z/2λ, but this value is never realized
due to the total absence of I-agents in this state.
For λ 3/4, the fraction of I-agents decreases monotonically with r˜ and
vanishes continuously at the transcritical bifurcation –or, for λ = 3/4, at
the pitchfork bifurcation. The connectivity of S-agents is z = z both at
r˜ = 0 and at the bifurcation. For intermediate values of the reconnection
probability z is larger than z and attains a maximum. This maximum,
which at first sight may result to be surprising, can be easily explained. In
fact, to sustain a value of z larger than the overall average z, it is necessary
to have I-agents with a relatively low number of neighbours. As the infection
is progressively suppressed by reconnection, the number of I-agents decreases
and, accordingly, their contribution to the average number of neighbours per
agent becomes less significant. At the bifurcation and beyond, S-agents must
account for the whole average, so that z returns to its value for r˜ = 0, i.e.
z = z.
The connectivity of I-agents, in turn, is a monotonically decreasing func-
tion of r˜, and reaches z = z/2λ < z at the bifurcation. This implies that,
even atthethresholdofinfection suppression, I-agentsmaintainafinite num-
ber of neighbours within the population.
For λ > 3/4, again, the connectivity z associated with the solution n
initially increases with r˜, and attains a maximum. In the subsequent decay,
however, it does not reach z = z. In fact, n disappears through a tangent
bifurcation when it is still positive, so that the jump in the infection level
is discontinuous. At the bifurcation, we find z = 2z(2λ + 3)/9 > z. The
connectivity of I-agents decreases with r˜ and, at the bifurcation, its value is
independent of λ: z = 2/3.
From the viewpoint of the interplay of the epidemiological dynamics and
the structure of the underlying network, the most interesting result of this
section is the fact that the infection dies out even when infected agents keep
a substantial connectivity with the rest of the population. In the cases il-
lustrated in Fig. 3, for instance, infected agents preserve more than 60 % of
their connections at the threshold where the infection level vanishes. In other
words, reconnection needs not to completely isolate infected agents to sup-
press the infection. A moderate, partial isolation of the infected population
is enough to asymptotically inhibit the endemic state.
3 Discussion and conclusion
What mechanisms are at work when the infection is suppressed by reconnec-
tion, even when the connectivity of infected agents remains fairly high? To
advance an answer to this question, it helps to consider a simpler dynamical
system for the fraction of I-agents:
I − I − − I I − I
The right-hand side of this equation is just a rearrangement of that of Eq.
(5). The equilibria of Eq. (11) are thus identical to the equilibria for n
in Eqs. (2). Moreover, their stability properties are also the same as in our
originalsystem. Itisimportanttounderstand, however, that(11)and(2)are
not equivalent: they merely share the same equilibrium behaviour in which
regards the fraction of I-agents.
We immediately see that Eq. (11) can be put in the form of the standard
mean-fieldequation(1)foraSISprocessifweintroducetheeffectiveinfection
probability
InEq. (1)thethresholdofinfectionsuppression, wherethetrivialequilibrium
changes its stability, is given by ρ = γ. Imposing this same condition to ρ ,
we find r˜ = 2λ 1. But this is precisely the suppression threshold in the
system with reconnections. Therefore, with respect to the stabilization of the
trivialequilibrium, thesystem(2)iseffectively equivalent tothestandardSIS
model with infectivity ρ . The transcritical bifurcation of Eqs. (2), where
n = 0 becomes stable, can be interpreted as a kind of continuation for
r = 0 of the transcritical bifurcation of the SIS model without reconnection
events.
Theinterpretation ofthetangent bifurcationwhere theendemic statedis-
appears at a positive value of n , for λ > 3/4, is less direct. It can however
be argued that the presence of such a tangent bifurcation, together with the
transcritical bifurcation which stabilizes the trivial equilibrium, constitute
the generic critical behaviour expected for a SIS model like Eq. (11), with
an infection probability which depends on the density of I-agents:
I − I I I − I
Besides the trivial equilibrium, this equation has fixed points at the solutions
−1.
Figure 4 illustrates graphically two representative situations. The dotted
curve is the graph of the right-hand side of Eq. (14) as a function of n . If
the graph of ρ(n ) has a single intersection with the dotted curve (A) and
if, upon variation of parameters in the infection probability, the graph varies
as indicated by the arrow, the intersection crosses n = 0 and a transcritical
bifurcation takes place. The standard SIS model, for which ρ is constant, is
a special case within this situation. More generally, the graph of ρ(n ) may
have two (B) or more intersections with the dotted curve. When parameters
change, it is still possible than one of the intersections becomes involved
in a transcritical bifurcation crossing n = 0, exactly as in situation A.
Now, however, it may well be the case that two intersections approach each
other, and eventually collapse and disappear, as in B. In this case, Eq. (13)
undergoes a tangent bifurcation, as found to happen in our system (2).
In summary, the above discussion shows that the suppression of the en-
demic state as a result of reconnection events can be reasonably understood
in terms of the critical behaviour of a standard SIS model with an effective
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Figure 4: Graphical solution of Eq. (14). The dotted curve represents the
right-hand side of the equation, and full curves are possible graphs of the
left-hand side. Dots stand at their intersections. The arrows illustrate how
the graphs may change upon the variation of parameters, in the cases of a
transcritical bifurcation (A) and of a tangent bifurcation (B).
infectivity, which depends on both the reconnection probability and on the
fraction of infected agents. The transcritical bifurcation which stabilizes the
state where the infection is completely inhibited is interpreted as a contin-
uation of a similar transition in the absence of reconnection. In turn, the
tangent bifurcation –which, for large infectivities, suppresses the infection as
the reconnection probability grows– is a generic phenomenon in SIS models
with density-dependent infectivity [10].
We have studied a model for an epidemiological process in a population
of agents on a network, where contagion can occur along the network links.
The network coevolves with the population as the infection progresses: a
susceptible agent can decide to break a link with an infected partner, and
reconnect it with another agent. Our main result is that this reconnection
mechanism, implemented with moderate frequency, can completely suppress
the endemic state where an infected portion of the population persists at
arbitrary long times. Suppression of the endemic state does not require full
isolationoftheinfected population. Onthecontrary, it canbeachieved while
each infected agent preserves a substantial part of the links with the rest of
the population.
Whether these results are relevant to real epidemiological processes is a
question beyond the present study. Our analysis should be regarded as an
illustration of the kind of collective effects that may emerge from the coevo-
lution of populations of dynamical elements and their interaction network.