Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering
Ain Shams Journal of Electrical Engineering
Vol. 1.No. 1 ISSN: 1687-8582
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association rules
Walaa M.1, Ahmed H.2, Hoda K.2
1. School of Electronic Engineering, Canadian International College, Cairo campus of CBU
2. Ain Shams University, Faculty of Engineering, Computers & systems Department, Egypt
ARTICLE History ABSTRACT
Received Association Rule mining is one of the most important fields in
Accepted data mining and knowledge discovery. This paper proposes an
algorithm that combines the simple association rules derived
from basic Apriori Algorithm with the multiple minimum
support using maximum constraints. The algorithm is
implemented, and is compared to its predecessor algorithms
using a novel proposed comparison algorithm. Results of
applying the proposed algorithm show faster performance than
other algorithms without scarifying the accuracy.
Association Rules; Minimum support; Apriori Algorithm
1. INTRODUCTION bought together. Association rule can be
represented as
It is increasingly important to develop
powerful tools for analysis of the
enormous data stored in databases and The rule means that customers, who buy
data warehouses, and mining interesting computers, buy software as well. Rule
knowledge from it. Data mining is a support and confidence are two measures
process of inferring knowledge from of rule interestingness; they reflect
such huge data. usefulness and certainty of discovered
rules. Support of 2% means that 2% of
Association rule mining searches for all transactions contain both computers
interesting relationships among items in and software. Confidence of 60% means
a given data set. Association rule mining that 60% of the customers who buy
is used in many applications as computers, buy software as well.
economic and financial time series [4]. It
is used in to identify software project Rules explosion that results from
success factors [14]. It is frequently used generating huge number of frequent
in Market Basket analysis [3], [7], [10]. itemsets especially in dense datasets is a
problem of concern. Rule interestingness
For example, in a computer store there is is a concept that is used to filter the
a group of transactions and it is required useless and redundant rules as in [4],
to find what products are frequently [12].
Walaa M. et al.
Some research work like [5], [13] (1) Finding all the frequent
discuss the rule generation problem, they itemsets (whose support is greater than
suggested that mining Simple minsup), also called large itemsets.
Association Rules (SAR) that have a (2) Generating the association
single item as its consequent will be rules derived from the frequent itemsets.
more efficient. If and X are frequent itemsets, the
rule holds if the ratio of support
Given a single value to the minsup ( ) to support(X) is, at least, as large
assumes that all items are of the same as minconf.
nature and have similar frequencies.
Reference [6], [9], [11] dealt with Since the solution to the second sub
multiple level items that represent problem is straightforward [2], major
hierarchies. research efforts have been spent on the
first sub problem like [8], [9].
The paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 explains mining association 2.1 Apriori Algorithm
rules and describes several algorithms
including Basic Apriori, SAR and Apriori algorithm is an influential
multiple minimum supports using algorithm for mining frequent itemsets
Maximum constraints. Section 3 presents [1], [2]. The name of the algorithm is
the new algorithm and the novel based on the fact that the algorithm uses
comparison procedures which highlight prior knowledge of frequent itemsets
the problem of comparing algorithms properties.
that use single minimum support value
and other algorithms using multiple Apriori employs an iterative approach
minimum support values. In Section 4, known as a level-wise search, where k-
results of evaluating performance of the itemsets are used to explore (k+1)-
four algorithms are discussed. The itemsets. First, the frequent 1-itemset is
conclusion is presented in Section 5. found, this is denoted by L , which is
used to find the frequent 2-itemset L
2. MINING ASSOCIATION RULES and so on.
ALGORITHMS
To improve the efficiency of the level-
The problem of mining association rules wise generation of frequent itemsets, a
is to generate all association rules that property called Apriori property is used
have support and confidence greater than to reduce the search space. This property
the user-specified minimum support states that all nonempty subset of a
(called minsup) and minimum frequent itemset must also be frequent. A
confidence (called minconf ) two step process is used to find L from
respectively. L
1) The join step: To find L , a set of k-
The problem of discovering all itemsets is generated by joining L with
association rules can be decomposed into itself. This set of candidate itemsets is
two sub problems: denoted C .
2) The prune step: C is a superset of L ,
that is, its members may or may not be
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association Rules
frequent, but all the frequent k-itemsets After that, candidate 2-itemsets C can
are included in C . A scan of the be formed from L . Note that, the
database is done to determine the count supports of all the frequent 1-itemsets
of each candidate in C , those who comprising each candidate 2-itemset
satisfy the minsup is added to L . To must be larger than or equal to the
reduce the number of candidates in C , maximum of their user specified minsup.
the Apriori property is used. An example This feature provides a good pruning
of Apriori algorithm is found in [2]. effect before the database is scanned for
finding large 2-itemsets.
2.2 Mining Association Rules with
multiple minimum supports using The algorithm then finds all the large 2-
maximum constraints itemsets L for the given transactions by
comparing the support of each candidate
Reference [9] proposed mining 2-itemset with the maximum of the user
association rules with non-uniform specified minsup of the items contained
minimum support values. This approach in the itemset. The same procedure is
allowed users to specify different minsup repeated until all frequent itemsets have
to different items. They also defined the been found. An example of the algorithm
minsup value of an itemset as the lowest is found in [8].
minimum supports among the items in
the itemset. This is not always correct 2.3 Simple Association Rules
because it would consider some items
that are not worth to be considered; just A simple rule is the rule with a single
because one of the items in this itemset, item as its consequent [5]. It is more
its minsup was set too low. In some efficient as the rule AB C has the same
cases it makes sense that the minsup meaning as A BC.
must be larger than the maximum of the
minimum supports of the items It is proved that the rules that have
contained in an itemset [8]. multiple consequents can be derived
from simple rules [5]. It has been
Reference [8] proposed an algorithm that observed that rule confidence (conf) with
gives items different minimum supports. multiple items in its consequent could be
The maximum constraint is adopted in represented by confidence of other rules
finding frequent itemsets. That is, the each with a single item in its consequent.
minsup (denoted by mI for an itemset) is The following proof was given in [5].
set as the maximum of the user specified
minimum supports of the items
contained in the itemset. Under the
constraint, the characteristic of level-by-
level processing is kept, such that the
original Apriori algorithm can be easily
extended to find the frequent itemsets. Thus, one may first concentrate on
The algorithm first finds all the frequent mining simple rules, based on which
1-itemsets (L ) for the given transactions other rules concerned can be derived.
by comparing the support of each item Importantly, the set of simple rules is
with its predefined minsup. smaller in size than the original rule set
Walaa M. et al.
but as ‘equivalently’ rich in semantics. minconf specified is 75%, seven rules are
An example of SAR is found in [5]. generated in Apriori, one of them is not a
simple rule which is A BE. In this
3. MINING SIMPLE ASSOCIATION example, this rule is not generated as it
RULES WITH MULTIPLE could be derived from the rules (A B;
MINIMUM SUPPORTS USING AB E; A E; AE B).
MAXIMUM CONSTRAINTS
Based on the algorithms explained in
section II, a new algorithm is proposed
that mines simple association rules but
with specifying different minsup to each
individual item. The algorithm is called
mining simple association rules with
multiple minimum supports
(SARMSMC).
3.1 The algorithm (SARMSMC)
The proposed algorithm is a combination
between the two algorithms proposed in
[5] and [8]. Figure 1 illustrates the
algorithm steps which can be explained
as follows:
1. A minsup is specified for each item,
then check if each item’s sup-count is
greater than or equals its predefined
Fig. 1. SARMSMC Algorithm
minsup and generate the frequent 1-
itemset in. 3.2 Comparative Procedures between
2. Candidate itemsets are generated single and multiple supports
only if each item’s sup-count in this algorithms
itemset is greater than or equal to the
maximum predefined minsup specified The comparison between any mining
for each of those items (mI). association rules algorithms is either
3. Frequent itemsets are generated if made on number of rules generated by
itemset sup-count is greater than or equal each algorithm or on their processing
to mI. times. To compare the processing times,
4. After finding the frequent k-itemsets, same algorithm parameters should be
the itemset’s subsets at level k-1 only are used which are the minsup and minconf.
found then generate simple rules and But using the same minsup causes
check if the rule’s conf is greater than or confusion when comparing an algorithm
equals minconf. that takes one minsup and other that
takes multiple minsup. If the output of
In the example illustrated in Figure 2, the single and multiple supports
the itemsets are generated according to algorithms is the same, it means that
the steps mentioned above; if the both had equivalent parameters. The
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association Rules
procedures illustrated in the flow chart 2. For each rule, determine which
of Figure 3 are used to specify a minsup itemsets are contained in this rule.
to each item in order to unit the output of 3. Get the sup-count of each itemset.
single and multiple supports algorithm. 4. Calculate the values of mI of each
This will make comparing the processing itemset.
times is based on a reliable aspect by 5. For each item in the itemset, specify
uniting the output. a minsup equals to mI.
6. If any item is specified more than one
minsup, choose the smallest amount.
7. If some items were not specified
any minsup, this means that they did not
appear in the rules generated. They
should be specified a minsup greater
than their sup-count to be excluded from
frequent 1- itemset.
Fig. 2. SARMSMC Example
In Figure 3 these steps are taken to
decide what minsup should be specified
to each individual item when comparing
SAR with SARMSMC.
The comparison procedures are:
1. Take the rules generated from SAR
Fig. 3. Comparison Procedures
algorithm with a specific minsup i.e. 1%
Walaa M. et al.
For example: procedures mentioned above for every
After mining a group of transactions rule to find the minsup that should be
using SAR algorithm, a number of rules specified to each item. The items which
are generated. do not appear in the rules should be
specified a minsup greater than its sup-
If the first rule was: count to be excluded from frequent 1-
AB C itemset.
The itemsets in this rule and their sup-
count are: 4. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A, B Sup = 589
A, C Sup = 725 There are two datasets used to test the
B, C Sup = 1623 four algorithms. The first dataset is the
A, B, C Sup =589 real world dataset used in KDD CUP
support counts specified above, If their [15,16].
specified minsup is equal to their least
number = 589, we guarantee that those BMS-WebView-1 is a dataset contains
four itemsets are generated and so this several months’ worth of clickstream
rule will be generated. data from two e-commerce web sites
minsup (A) = 589 [14]. The second dataset is from
minsup (B) = 589 AdventureWorksDW which is a sample
minsup (C) = 589 database used frequently in SQL Server
2005. These databases are processed to
If the second rule was: be in the form of Transactions (TID,
DB E Items). After data processing and saving
The itemsets in this rule and their it in an XML file, the dataset generated
support counts are: from BMS-Web View-1 has the
D, B Sup = 485 following characteristics:
D, E Sup = 559 Number of transactions: 27,736
B, E Sup = 1513 Number of individual Items: 348
D, B, E Sup = 485 Xml File size: 6.07 MB
For those itemsets to be generated the The dataset generated from
minsup of those items should not exceed AdventureWorksDW has the following
485 which is the least number among characteristics:
their support count so, Number of transactions: 21,255
minsup (D) = 485 Number of individual Items: 37
minsup (B) = 485 Xml File size: 5.58 MB
minsup (E) = 485
The comparison procedures explained in
But the minsup (B) was specified before section 3 are applied when comparing
to be equal to 589. In this case the Apriori with maximum constraints and
smallest amount is chosen which is 485 when comparing SAR with SARMSMC.
to be sure that all itemsets that contain
this item is generated. Repeat the
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association Rules
4.1 Processing Time
The four algorithms mentioned in the
paper are tested and evaluated for time
and accuracy as illustrated in section B.
Follow the procedures mentioned in
section 3, specify a minsup for each item
to test the multiple supports algorithms
and then generate rules at constant
minconf. The processing time of each
algorithm when applied on
AdventureWorksDW is illustrated in
Table 1 and the comparison graph is
illustrated in Figure 4.
Table 1 Processing Times of Apriori,
SAR, Maximum Constraints and
SARMSMC for AdventureWorksDW
Equiv. Max.
sup- Apriori SAR Constrai
count Time Time nts Time
0.2 97 94 93 91
0.175 109 105 104 101
0.15 119 113 112 109
0.125 134 126 127 122
0.1 156 142 148 138
0.075 196 169 181 164
Processing Times
0.05 0.07 0.09 0.11 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21
decreases because the number of
itemsets and rules generated increase.
The processing time of each algorithm
when applied on BMS-Web View-1 is
illustrated in Table 2 and the comparison
graph is illustrated in Figure 5.
Table 2 Processing Times of
Apriori, SAR, Maximum
Constraints and
SARMSMC for BMS-
Web View-1
Equiv. Max.
sup- Apriori SAR Constrai
count Time Time nts Time
1 2741 2767 27 27
0.8 2742 2751 53 51
0.5 2750 2751 167 167
0.4 2760 2786 289 289
0.3 2787 2830 471 470
Processing Time
Fig. 5. Comparison of processing time between Basic
Apriori, SAR, max. constraints and SARMSMC of
Max. constr. BMS-Web View-1
In Figure 5 SARMSMC takes much less
time than Apriori and SAR. The two
single support algorithms almost
Fig. 4. Comparison of processing time between Basic
consume the same time at different
Apriori, SAR, max. constraints and SARMSMC of
AdventureWorksDW values of minsup and this time is bigger
than the multiple supports algorithms.
In Figure 4 SARMSMC takes the least
The time taken by multiple supports
amount of time among other algorithms
algorithm increase when the minsup
and Basic Apriori takes the longest time.
decrease.
The time increases when the minsup
Walaa M. et al.
The main difference between the results Table 3 shows that generating the
of the two datasets used in comparison is itemsets take much long time when the
the number of individual items. There number of individual items are huge.
are 348 items in BMS-Web View-1 Simple association rules only
opposing 37 items in significantly differ in time than mining
AdventureWorksDW. That is the main all rules when the number of individual
reason that makes Apriori and SAR take items is small.
very long time and almost the same
processing time when applied on BMS- 4.2 Accuracy Test, Interestingness
Web View-1 because of generating too Measurements and Algorithm
many itemsets. The multiple supports Complexity
algorithms are more efficient consuming
much less time and generating the same After building a mining model, the
number of rules when applied on this validity of the model should be tested.
kind of dataset. There is no significant The data must be randomly separated
difference in time between generating all into two separate datasets (training and
rules and simple rules on this kind of testing). The training dataset is used to
data because time used to generate build the model, and the testing dataset
itemsets are more significant. is used to test the accuracy of the model.
This is a part of the software engineering
Applying the four algorithms on the two cycle to test many algorithms that solve
datasets and after calculating the time the same problem then test their
taken to generate the itemsets and the efficiency in solving the problem.
time taken to generate the rules at
constant minsup and minconf we get the The two datasets are randomly separated
following results. to test the four algorithms mentioned in
this paper. The separation was in the
Table 3 Itemset and Rule Generation percentage of 10% and 90%. The four
Time algorithms are applied on the training
Itemset Rule and testing datasets at different values of
Generation Generation minsup with constant minconf. Follow
Time (sec) Time (sec) the comparison procedures mentioned in
Apriori 137 12 section 3 to specify the minsup that
SAR 137 3 should be given to each individual item
Adveunt Max. 137 12 while testing the multiple supports
ureWork constrai algorithm. The specification is a
percentage of the minsup assigned to the
SARM 129 3
original dataset, so the algorithms do not
generate the same number of rules and
Apriori 2732 0.5
the time is calculated as the time taken to
SAR 2740 0.4
generate each rule.
BMS- Max. 27 0.5
Web constrai
After performing the tests, the results are
View-1 nts
collected to calculate the accuracy of
SARM 26 0.4
each algorithm by applying the concept
of accuracy index where:
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association Rules
Time index
Equation (1) shows that if an algorithm 80.00
has the accuracy of 100%, it is the 60.00 Time index
highest accuracy among the other
algorithms. It does not mean that it has
100% absolute accuracy.
Apiori SAR Max. constr. SARMSMC
Fig. 7. Time index of the four algorithms of
AdventureWorksDW
Applying the time index on the where:
Figure 6 shows that SARMSMC is faster
than other algorithms by 3%. Basic
Apriori takes the longest time and
Equation (2) shows that if an algorithm SARMSMC takes the shortest. Figure 7
takes 100% time, it takes the longest shows that the accuracy of the SAR is
amount of time among other algorithms. the best among other algorithms and the
difference between the accuracy of SAR
Table 4 shows the results of the accuracy and SARMSMC is in the range of
and time indices of AdventureWorksDW 0.01%.
and Table 5 shows the results of the
accuracy and time indices of BMS-Web Table 5 Accuracy and Time indices of
View-1. BMS-Web View-1
Max.
Table 4 Accuracy and Time indices of SAM
Apriori SAR SMC
AdventureWorksDW aints
Max.
Constr Time-
Apriori SAR SMC
aints inedx % 98.6 100 5.27 5.18
Time- -index % 99.13 100 92.05 85.92
inedx % 100.00 97.77 83.45 81.40
Accuracy These results are illustrated in Figure 8
-index % 97.89 100.0 98.25 99.99 and Figure 9.
These results are illustrated in Figure 6
Accuracy index
and Figure 7.
Accuracy index
100.50 90 Accuracy index
98.50 Accuracy index Apiori SAR Max. constr. SARMSMC
Fig. 8. Accuracy index of the four algorithms of
97.50 BMS-Web View-1
Apiori SAR Max. constr. SARMSMC
Fig. 6. Accuracy index of the four algorithms of
AdventureWorksDW
Walaa M. et al.
Time index
60 Time index 15
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
0 Data Percentage
Apiori SAR Max. constr. SARMSMC
Fig. 9. Time index of the four algorithms of
BMS-Web View-1
Figure 8 shows that the accuracy of the
SAR is the best among other algorithms
and the differences in accuracy between
SAR and SARMSMC is in the range of
15%. Figure 9 shows that SARMSMC is
faster than other algorithms by 95%. It
consumes almost the same time as
Maximum constraints algorithm but
much less time than Apriori and SAR.
The interestingness measurement of the
rules could be calculated using the
following equation [17].
The rules generated from
AdentueWorksDW and BMS-Web
View-1 are 100% interesting because the
support of the items has very low
percentage. In BMS-Web View-1 the
itemset support is in the range of 3% or
5%. In AdventureWorksDW, the
maximum itemset support is in the range
of 26%. So, the lift is all the time greater
than one when using minconf equal to
50% or 30%.
Figure 10 and 11 are used to calculate
the complexity of SARMSMC when
applied on the two datasets. The
algorithms are applied on different
percentages of the datasets at const
minsup and minconf.
)ces(emiT Apiori SAR
Fig. 10. Complexity of AdventureWorksDW
Complexity
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Fig. 11. Logarithmic graph shows the complexity of
AdventureWorksDW
In Figure 10, the time increases when the
amount of data increases for the four
algorithms. That means that SARMSMC
has the same complexity as the other
algorithms when applied on dataset that
has few number of individual items.
In Figure 11, the time increases when the
amount of data increases for Apriori and
SAR. The time is almost constant when
the amount of data increases for
SARMSMC and Maximum constraints.
That means that the complexity of
SARMSMC is smaller than Apriori and
SAR when applied on dataset that has
huge number of individual items.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper presents an algorithm which
is a combination between the simple
associations rules derived from basic
Apriori Algorithm with the multiple
minimum support algorithms. The new
algorithm is faster than any other
algorithms and the accuracy is the best
when applied on dataset that has little
Combined Algorithm for Data Mining using Association Rules
number of individual items. The new Rule, ICDE-98, 1998, pp. 402-411.
algorithm consumes almost the same 4- Brin, S. Motwani, R. Ullman, J. and
time as the maximum constraint Tsur, S. Dynamic Itemset counting
algorithm and the accuracy is affected in and implication rules for market
a bigger percentage when applied on basket data., SIGMOD-97, 1997, pp.
dataset that has huge number of 255-264.
individual items. The rules generated 5- Chen Guoqing, Qiang Wea, De Liu,
from the algorithms are 100% interesting Geert Wets. Simple association rules
when applied on both datasets. (SAR) and the SAR-based rule
discovery @ 2002 Elsevier Science
In this new algorithm the simple rules Ltd.
are generated and at the same time the 6- Han, J. and Fu, Y. “Discovery of
user is given the flexibility to specify a multiple-level association rules from
different minsup for each individual large databases.” VLDB-95.
item. This option overcomes the problem 7- Lakshmanan, Ng. R. T., Han L. J. ,
of rare items that need to be mined too. Exploratory mining and pruning
Generating simple rules decreases the optimizations of constrained
processing time when applied on dataset association rule., SIGMOD-98, 1998.
that has little number of individual items. 8- Lee, Yeong Chy, Hong, Tzung-Pei,
For other type of data, it affects the Lin ,Wen-Yang. , Mining
readability of the rules but does not association rules with multiple
affect the time. minimum supports using maximum
constraints @2005 Elsevier Inc.
A method to produce the exact same 9- Liu B.,, Hsu W., Ma Y.. Mining
rules from multiple supports algorithms association rules with multiple
as generated by a single support minimum supports, in: The 1999
algorithm is presented. It can be used to International Conference on
compare any single support algorithm Knowledge Discovery and Data
with a multiple supports algorithm. Mining, 1999, pp. 337–341.
10- Park, J. S. Chen, M. S. and Yu, P.
6. REFERENCES S., An effective hash based algorithm
for mining association rules,
1- Agrawal R., Imielinksi T., Swami SIGMOD-95, 1995, pp. 175-186.
A.. Mining association rules between 11- Srikant, R., Agrawal, R., Mining
sets of items in large database, in: Generalized Association Rules,
The ACM SIGMOD Conference, Proceedings of the 21st VLDB
1993, pp. 207–216. Conference Zurich, Swizerland, 1995
2- Agrawal R. and Srikant R. , Fast 12- Srikant, R., Vu, Q. and Agrawal, R.
algorithms for mining association ,Mining association rules with item
rules. In Proc. of the VLDB constraints, KDD-97, 1997, pp. 67-
Conference, Santiago, Chile, 73.
September 1994. Expanded version 13- Rastogi, R. and Shim, K. , Mining
available as IBM Research Report optimized association rules with
RJ9839, June 1994. categorical and numeric attributes,
3- Agarwal, C., and Yu, P. Online ICDE –1998.
generation of association
Walaa M. et al.
14- Show-Jane Yen, Yue-Shi Lee. An University, Egypt. He is the vice director
efficient data mining approach for of ICTP government funded project in
discovering interesting knowledge Egypt. Field of interest: software
from customer transactions. @ 2005 engineering, data mining and artificial
Elsevier Ltd. intelligence applications.
15- Girish K. Palshikar a, Mandar S.
Kale , Manoj M. Apte. Association
rules mining using heavy itemsets.
@ 2006 Elsevier
16- Z. Zheng, R. Kohavi, L. Mason, Real
world performance of association
Walaa M. Medhat is an Engineering
rule algorithms, in: Proc. 7th ACM
Instructor in School of Electronic
SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowledge
Engineering, Canadian International
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-
College, Cairo campus of CBU. Field of
2001), 2001, pp. 401–406.
interest: software engineering and data
17- Agathe Merceron1 and Kalina
mining.
Yacef. Interestingness Measures for
Association Rules in Educational
ﺚﺤﺒﻟا ﺺﺨﻠﻣ
Data.
rg/EDM2008/uploads/proc/6_Yacef_
Dr. Hoda Korashy is an associative prof.
Engineering, computers & systems
.
department. Field of interest: database
agents.
.
Dr. Ahmed Hassan is an assistant
Professor in Computers and System
Engineering department, Ain Shams