COMMUNITIES IN AFFILIATION NETWORKS
WITH ATTITUDINAL ACTORS
Moses A. Boudourides
Department of Mathematics
University of Patras, Greece
mboudour@upatras.gr
Network Communities within Analytical Sociology
One of the core issues (if not thecore issue) in analytical sociology is the
investigation of the micro-macro link in social phenomena (Hedström & Swedberg,
1998, Hedström, 2005). Analytical sociology endorses a social mechanism-based type
of explanation according to which causal relationships between social phenomena at
the macro-level are explained throughthe patterns of individuals’ action and
interaction at the micro-level. This explanatory scheme is clearly illustrated by the
concatenationof a number of causal mechanisms encoded in the so-called Coleman’s
boat (Coleman, 1990). In Coleman’sarchitecture, the first causal mechanisms
bridging a certain macro-level phenomenon X (the explanans)with therelevant
underlying micro-level processes are situational mechanisms,through which social
structures constrain individuals’ action and cultural settings shape individuals’
motives and dispositions (desires,beliefs etc.). Subsequently, individuals develop
theiraction andinteraction at the micro-level through some action-formation
mechanisms, typically understood as operating on an informal social network, in
which network actors are the implicated individuals and network ties correspond to
patterns of deployed interactions. Finally, the individuals’ social networkis lifted onto
the macro-level through sometransformational mechanisms, which generate various
intendedand unintended social outcomes identifying a certain social phenomenon Y
(the explanandum). In summary, according to the typology of Coleman’s boat, the
causal macro-level association of the explanans social phenomenon X with the
explanandum social phenomenon Y is established throughthe concatenation of three
general types of social mechanisms: situational, action-formation and
transformational mechanisms (cf. Hedström & Ylikoski, 2010).
In our presentation here, we aim to investigate the macro-(or meso-) level association
of the following two social entities: diversity of attributes and segregation in
communities. By the former, we understand a differentiated cultural field within social
life, which is framed by such qualities or predicates of behavior as values, preferences,
beliefs, positions and opinions that we name altogether “attributes.” By segregation in
communities, werefer to the social orderthat originally separate social groups may
coalesce into higher-orderor broader associations, which are still differentiated to
each other.Such aggregate concrescences of social groups are what we call
communities(a term to be further elucidated in the sequel).
Undoubtedly, the hypothesis that formation ofcommunities could be causally driven
by existingattributes makes perfect sense. For instance, one could think of the
homogenizingor cementingrole that culture plays in human sociality and, therefore,
one couldexpect that common attributesmight smooth out existing frictions,
intensities, differences or disparitiesamong social groups by the concrescence of
certain overarching and more comprehensive clusters of groups, meant as
communities here.However, our intention is to put forward amechanisms-based
analytic explanatory perspective in order to be able to grasp the macro-(or meso-)
level association between attributes and communities. For this purpose, first, we are
going to postulate that distributing attributes over a population of individuals is the
situational mechanism that would connect macro-level cultural attributes to the micro-
levelpopulation of interacting individuals forming a social network. Now, in a social
network, there are many (middle-range) mechanisms that may posit or prove the
existence of groups of actors. Such mechanisms can show up through various formal
methodologies that look into the structural and causal settingsof a given (empirical)
social network. Apparently, the corresponding social network analyses vary in
complexity according to the type of the examined social network. Here, as a first step,
we are going to limit ourselvesin the consideration of the simple case of two-modeor
affiliation networks.As a matter of fact, we intend to consider an affiliation network
composed of personsand groups (of persons), which are given empirically (e.g., by
means of a survey). This is exactly the setting of the renowned “duality” between
persons and groups,which was originally formulated by Georg Simmel (1955) and
subsequently it was explored analytically in the seminal work of Ronald Breiger
(1974).Therefore, what we consider here to be an action-formation mechanism is the
mechanism of network affiliation duality, with the understandingthat the affiliation of
persons into groups was produced by the previous mechanism that had carried out the
distribution of attributes on persons (with technical details about the formal
operationalization of this mechanism to be described in the next section). Finally, the
transformational mechanism that assembles groups into communities (of groups) is
considered to be the mechanism of the emergence of clusters(of both modes) inan
affiliation network with attitudinal actors (to be formally clarified in the following
two sections). Thus, the overall architecture of social mechanisms that we are going to
attend to herein order to explain the macro-or meso-level association of attributes
with communities is given inthe following figure.
Figure 1. The typology of the followed mechanisms.
Having described the social mechanisms called up in our analysis of the causal
relationship between attributes and communities, we need to further expound these
two notions. First, in what concerns the former, as it will become clearin next section
fromthe point of view of the formal structural methodology that we going to follow,
the interference of attributes occurs in two different ways inthis mechanism-based
causal typology. The first instance iswhen attributes are conceived as patterns of
affiliations that actors happen to have withincertain prescribed groupings (of actors).
The second instance is when attributes are construed as patterns of attitudes that
actors may exhibit in their transactions. In both instances, attributes operate formally
as monadic (not dyadic) actors’ characteristics and, thence,the choice of two-mode
networks in our analysis (not to mention the scarcity of empirical data sets of one-
mode networks, in which actors displaya variety of attitudes). However, this is not
just a trivial formal simplification that we are obliged to adopt in order to reduce the
complexity of the studied network. Substantively, one may evokewhat the
anthropologist Siegfried Frederick Nadel (1957) used to argue in the past, i.e.,
“membership roles” correspond completely to “relational roles,” a consequence of
which is Ronald Breiger’scommitment to talk about “two types of social ties:
membership and social-relations” (Breiger, 1974, p. 183).1
Coming to the notion of communities, we need to stress from the beginning that we
are concerned with the relational meaning of the term. Leaving aside technical details
(to be discussed in the last two section), what in principle one understands as
“community detection”in asocial network (with either one-or two-modes) is a
partitionof the set of actors in certaintight-knit subsets of actors, called communities
(Wasserman & Faust, 1994, p. 249). In other words, actors inside a community should
be relatively more densely connected to each other than how (relatively sparsely)
actors among different communities were connected.
Undoubtedly, to say to which community a social network actor belongs is a type of a
group or collective categorization. In any case, a community categorization has
nothing to do with what anindividual actor may expressor imagineof oneself or even
on what one’s group peers think about oneself. To categorize the community to which
an actor belongs is not an issue of an enunciated self-identification, even when an
individual actor speculates on existing affinities with other individual actors. For a
community (in the relationalsense of the term) does not consist of a mere aggregation
of persons, conceived as self-reliant subjects, who cogitate about their destiny or
recognize themselves in arbitrary or sempiternal terms outside the reality of their
social worlds, their everyday practices and life. On the contrary, to categorize an
1Nonetheless, the bias to overrate “affiliational” attributes over attitudinal attributes
is still present in certain areas of sociological erudition, as, for example in Doug
McAdam’s (1986,p. 65) argument of “attitudinal affinity.”
actor’s community is an issue of what the actor does in practical contexts, the
distinctive ways one acts in mundane situations, how one interacts with or with
regards to other actors. Even a person’s autonomy (Castoriadis, 1998) or a personal
identity, i.e., whatever distinguishes a person from others, are singular characteristics,
which develop through a bundle of inter-personal shared significations, embedded in
the relational footing of the multiplex ties, structural and cultural, that persons sustain
with others in the settings of their common social spaces. This is why Harrison White
(2008, p. 157)argues,“communities can be seen as built out of identities rather than
persons.” Moreover, that“the relationship between community as a complex of social
relationships and community as a complex of ideas and sentiments” needs further
exploration, as Craig Calhoun (2009, p. 110) was calling forth rather recently, is still
another reason why communities and attributes should matter for analytical
sociology.2
Affiliation Networks
Typically, in social network analysis, a two-mode network is a social network
comprising two sets of actors(called modes)and being endowed withtiesonly
between the two modes (no ties inside a mode).Furthermore, in social network
analysis, a particular type of two-mode networks arises when there is a certain
inhomogeneity between the two modes. This is the case when the first mode of actors
consists of proper individual actors (i.e., actors beingindividuals or persons) and the
second mode represents either collective actors (like groups or organizations) or
situations (like events or meetings) to which actors of the first modebelong (either as
membersof groups or organizations or as participants to events or meetings). Such a
two-mode networkis usually called an affiliation network (Wasserman & Faust, 1994,
pp. 29-30).
Now, if, in a social network, there was no predefined (prescribed)differentiation
among actors,in the sense that all actors were in a single mode and any actor could
possibly form a tie with any other one, then such a social network could be also called
2The recent article of Shwed & Bearman (2010) represents a good example of how
analytical sociology might cope with the relational notion of communities.
a one-mode network. According to well-known remark made by Stephen Borgatti and
Martin Everett(1997), the difference between one- and two-mode networks can be
seento derive conceptually from the fact that ties in a one-mode network are
construed as relationson pairs of actors (i.e., dyadic attributes on actors), while in a
two-mode network they simply represent (multiple) associations among elements of
two distinct modes of actors (i.e., monadic attributes on actors, as far asthe attribute
of an actor in amode is identified tothe actor(s) of the othermode to which the
formeris associated).
As a matter of fact, the previous interpretation is consistent with the distinction
between a graph and a hypergraphthat is usedtraditionallyin the mathematical field
of Graph Theory. Formally (cf., Wasserman & Faust, 1994, p. 147), a hypergraph
consists of a set of objects and a collection of subsets of objects, in which case each
object belongs to at least one subset and no subset is empty (Berge, 1989, p. 1). The
objects are called points(or vertices) and the collections of objects are called edges. A
graph is a special case of a hypergraph in which the number of points in each edge is
exactly equal to two. In other words, in a graph, edges are defined as pairs of points
(the way, in a one-mode network, ties are dyadic attributes on actors), while, in a
hypergraph, edges are defined as arbitrary nonempty collections of points (the way, in
a two-mode network, ties are monadic attributes associating actors among the two
modes).
Now, if restricted in the case of affiliation networks, according to the previous
discussion, an affiliation network is simply a collection of (monadic) attributes on
actors (i.e., formally, from the graph-theoretic point of view, it constitutes a
hypergraph)-with the understanding that, in an affiliation network, actors’ attributes
represent such heterogeneous associations, as when actors are members of groups or
organizations or they areparticipating in events or meetings etc.
However, what we intend to examine here is the case of affiliation networks, in which,
besides actors’ attributes defining an affiliation network (let us call them actors’
“affiliational” attributesor simply actors’ affiliations and always keep implicit the
fact that they are monadic attributes, not dyadic ones), we have an additional category
of actors attributes that (as it was stated in previous section and it will become further
clear from the context of the empirical data that we are going to analyze in the last
section) we will call actors’ “attitudinal” attributes or simply actors’ attitudes (again
implicitly considered monadic, not dyadic).
Obviously, from aformal point of view (beyond any particular signification of
network terms), an affiliation network with actors’ affiliations andactors’ attitudes is
again an affiliation network with regards to a single (but heterogeneous) monadic
attribute on actors, which associates actors to both their affiliations and their attitudes.
As a hypergraph, we have now two types of edges defined on the same set of points
(actors), one corresponding to edges formed by the pattern of actors’ affiliations and
another one corresponding to edges formed by the pattern of actors’ attitudes; clearly,
the merger (formally, the union) of these two collections of points is still a collection
of points which corresponds to the hypergraph of the original affiliation network
augmented by actors’ attitudes.3
Community Detection
The community detection methodology that we are going to apply hereis the so-
called “modularity maximization technique.” We are concerned with the case that the
social network is represented by a (undirected simple) graph Gon a set of vertices (or
points) V. Let nbe the total number of vertices such that a pair of vertices may form
multiple edges (i.e., the graph is weighted) and let mbe the total number of edges in
the graph. Furthermore, let A = {A } be the adjacency matrix of the graph (which
means that A is a symmetric matrix of order n x n with entries being non-negative
integers such that Â A = 2m). Now, let C = C(G) = {C , C , …, C } be a
i, j = 1, …, n ij 1 2 c
partition of the set of vertices V of the graph (dividing) Ginto csubsets C .
(Technically, a family ofsubsets of V forms a “partition,” whenever » C = V
k= 1, …, c k
and C «C = ∆, for any k, lin {1, 2,..., c}.) Then thepartition Cis called(non-
overlapping)community structure of the graph G and each C is called a community,
if a certain benefit function is maximized over this partition C. The most commonly
3Needless to say that such affiliational networks with attitudinal actors may be
formally represented in other ways too: for instance, as restricted tripartite graphs
(networks) in the construction of Thomas Fararo and Patrick Doreian (1984).
employed benefit function in community partitioning is the following function Q,
called modularity, which is defined (Newman & Girvan, 2004) as follows:
Q = (fraction of links within communities) -(expected fraction of such links).
In the so-called null model, the above expected fraction is calculated on the basis of
thehypothetical existence of a random graph, which would preserve the same degree
distribution with the examined graph G. Hence, the exact expression of modularity
becomes (Fortunato, 2010):
k= 1, …, c k k
where l is the total number of edges inside community C and d is the sum of the
degrees of all vertices in C (in both cases, counting multiplicity of edges). Thus, to
obtain acommunity partitioning one has just to search for that partition, which
maximizes the above modularity function Q. Note that this optimization problem has
been proven to be NP-complete (Brandes et al., 2008) and, therefore, only
approximate optimization techniques, such as greedy algorithms, simulated annealing,
extremal optimization, expectation maximization, spectral methods etc. can be
practically useful.
Communities formed by the data of the IPPS Survey
OnFebruary 15, 2003, massprotests against the imminent (at that period) war in Iraq
took place throughout the world, in which more than seven million people in more
than 300 cities all over the globe had participated. This globally sustained
mobilization was one of the largest peace protests since the Vietnam War on one
single day.4 On this occasion, an international team of social movement scholars set
up a project, called International Peace Protest Survey or IPPS in abbreviation (2003-
4), which was coordinated by Stefaan Walgrave of the University of Antwerp in
Belgium (Walgrave & Verhulst, 2009, Diani, 2009).5 The aim of this project was to
4For more descriptive information see the Wikipedia article
5The survey data bases are accessible at
study the demonstrations of the global protest event of February 15, 2003, and
compare the emergentsocial movement dynamics in 8 countries: UK, Italy, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, USA, Spain, Germany and Belgium. For this purpose, over
10,000 questionnaires were totally distributed and about 6,000 completed
questionnaires were sent back, which has madethe successful response rate quite
satisfactory (well above 50%).
In particular, in the IPPS survey, participating activists (with varying numbers in each
country) were asked to declare their affiliation or involvement with the following 16
(types of) organizations (“affiliational” attributes in the previous terminology):(1)
Church, (2) Anti-Racist Organization, (3) Student Organization, (4) Labor Union -
ProfessionalOrganization, (5) Political Party, (6) Women Organization, (7) Sport -
RecreationalOrganization, (8) Environmental Organization, (9) Art -Music -
EducationalOrg, (10) Neighborhood Organization, (11) Charitable Organization, (12)
Anti-Globalist Organization, (13) Third World Organization, (14) Human Rights
Organization, (15) Peace Organization, (16) Other Organization.
Furthermore, respondents were asked to answer a number of questions, in which they
would express their own opinions and feelings about the meaning, the significance,
the reasons and the implications etc. of the war. In particular, activists participating in
this event were asked to disclose their positions on the following 10 war-related
attitudes (attitudinal attributes in the former terminology): (1) USA Crusade against
Islam, (2) Anti-Dictatorial Regime War, (3) UN Security Council Authorized War,
(4) War for Oil, (5) Racist War, (6) Iraqi Threat to World Peace, (7) Always Wrong
War, (8) War to Overthrow the Iraqi Regime, (9) Feelings against Neoliberal
Globalization, (10) Governmental Dissatisfaction.
On the above data set, we have conducted a community analysis resulting the
community membership of both “affiliational” and attitudinal attributes which is
indicated in the following Table (note that we have disregarded the community
membership of respondents, who after all were anonymized in the survey). Each
column corresponds to one of the 8 countries where the IPPS survey took place and
the numbers in the entries indicate the indices of the community to which the
corresponding attribute belongs.
Table 1. The communities of affiliations and attributes
emergingin the 8 countries of the IPPS survey.
Remarkably, the “mixing” of “affiliational” attributes (organizations) and (actors’)
attitudes in the community partitioning of the 8 IPPS countries appears to be very low.
In 3 countries (Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands), there are no communities,
which include both organizations and actors’ (respondents’) attitudes. This means that,
in these three countries, none of the organizations happens to be tight-knit with none
of the attitudes. In other 4 countries (Italy, Switzerland, Spain and UK), there is a
single community that happens to include both organizations and attitudes. Only in
the USA, the mixing is relatively high, as there are three communities with both
organizational and attitudinal membership. Thus,given that segregation is the
opposite of mixing, what the 8 national IPPS community analyses show is that the
macro-link of attributional diversity with community segregation is not locally
uniform. Of course, incorporating other (cultural and political) variables into the data
set that we have analyzed here could possibly result different patterns of segregation-
mixing across national “localities.” However, in this way, although the considered
constituencies in organizations and attitudes might have changed, the same
mechanism-based analytic methodology that we have developed here would still
apply.Methodological mechanism-based universality is one of the virtues of
analytical sociology when compared to the parochialism of many approaches of
current sociology.