Comment on Masanari Asano et al. A model of epigenetic evolution based
on theory of open quantum systems. Syst Synth Biol, 2013
Vasily Ogryzko, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France
vogryzko@gmail.com
In a recent publication, 'A model of epigenetic evolution based on theory of open quantum
systems' [1], the authors state: "We call our model quantum-like (QL) to distinguish it from
really quantum models in cell biology: reducing cell’s behavior to quantum particles inside a
cell, e.g., Ogryzko [2, 3], McFadden and Al-Khalili [4], McFadden [5]."
Ogryzko vs McFadden-Al-Khalili
While I believe this statement accurately describes McFadden and Al-Khalili’s position (whose
main focus is on proton tunneling and base tautomerization in DNA), to characterize my own
this way would be inaccurate and unfair. Regrettably, the authors appear to have been
influenced by an earlier mischaracterization of my position in McFadden and Al-Khalili’s
paper [4]. Another author making a similar error is Melkikh [6]1. I am concerned that this
misunderstanding will be perpetuated in this nascent field for years to come.
I have never proposed to reduce cellular behavior to the quantum properties of their constituent
molecules. On the contrary, my aim was always to describe the cells themselves with the
operator formalism, hence the recently introduced concept of Quantum Biology at the Cellular
Level (QBCL) [7]. That proposal was based on (i) the recognition of the limits to how much
can be observed concerning an individual biological object (e.g., a single cell) and (ii) an
analogy between self-reproduction and measurement, as noted by Wigner [8]. In its appeal to
quantum theory as a more general (than classical) theory of probabilities [9], my position is, in
fact, much closer to that of Asano et al than to McFadden and Al-Khalili.
My own and McFadden-Al-Khalili approach (i.e., either cell or DNA, respectively, in quantum
superposition) have been directly contrasted [10]. The crucial difference between them goes to
the core of what is truly new in the quantum description of reality, i.e., to the notion of
quantum entanglement (or more generally, non-classical correlations).
Non-classical correlations can create unusual situations - a part B of a quantum-mechanical
system A could effectively behave classically. A case in point, of course, is environmentally
induced decoherence (EID), which accounts for the appearance of a classical world from an
inherently quantum mechanical description via the entanglement of the system under question
(e.g., B) with its environment [11, 12]. Although oversimplifying, imagine (i) a complex
1 The text ‘Goswami and Todd (1997) and Ogryzko (1997) have proposed that adaptive mutations may be
generated by the environment-induced collapse of the quantum wave function that describes DNA as a
superposition of mutational states. For such a mechanism to be feasible, the evolving DNA wave function must
remain coherent sufficiently long for it to interact with the cell’s environment’ from [6], is a copy-paste from
system A2 and (ii) its part B3 engaged in numerous interactions with the remaining degrees of
freedom of A. The resulting reduced density matrix of B ( ) could have its off-diagonal
elements suppressed, i.e.,  will appear as a classical mixture.
Bottom line, we cannot expect to fully leverage the power of quantum mechanics in biological
research if we arbitrarily limit its role to describing the quantum properties of the cell’s
components alone - taking non-classical correlations into account means that the composite
system ('the whole') can behave more quantum than its parts. Not appreciating this point, I
believe, is the principal weakness of McFadden-Al-Khalili approach [10]4. Most of the
arguments for how Life fights decoherence are moot for the same reason: namely, they focus
on the (macro)molecules within cells rather than the cells themselves.
On the other hand, is it plausible to consider a living cell to be a quantum object? The lessons
of decoherence theory tell us that it is not its size per se, but rather the nature of a system's
coupling with the environment that matters. Fully in accord with the notions of
environmentally induced decoherence and einselection [11], a starving cell weakly interacting
with its environment is proposed to be in a preferred state, i.e., resistant to decoherence [7, 10].
Significantly, such preferred states will appear as a superposition in an alternative basis, - e.g.,
'cloning basis', - which becomes important when the cell is placed in conditions allowing it to
self-reproduce [10]. Ostensibly counterintuitive, this particular notion of a 'formal
superposition' is distinct from the notorious Schroedinger's cat paradox [3, 7, 10], contradicting
neither common sense nor observation insofar as the components of superposition (e.g., the
elements of the cloning basis) are indistinguishable before the change in the environment [7,
10].
An intriguing evolutionary consequence of QBCL is 'Basis-Dependent Selection' (BDS), where
(i) both variation and selection take place at the level of an individual organism, and (ii) the
spectrum of heritable variations becomes dependent on the particular selection conditions [3, 7,
10, 13]. BDS is sufficiently general that it works for epigenetic variations as well [7, 10].
Ogryzko vs Asano et al
I would additionally like to contrast my position with that of Asano et al [1]. The authors
advance the notion of 'quantum-like properties', as if to wash their hands of many difficulties -
including complexity, multi-scale organization and decoherence - that thwart the successful
application of quantum physics to biological systems. QBCL, by contrast, is based on the
notion that to understand Life, real quantum theory - 'warts and all' - is needed, albeit applied
in a far more challenging setting than usual.
In justifying my view, I would point out that quantum mechanics has been firmly established as
providing a strikingly accurate description of physical reality. No experimental violations from
its predictions have ever been found. Recent confirmation of the universality of quantum laws,
as demonstrated by the superposition of fullerenes [14] and the detection of quantum
2 E.g., a living cell
3 E.g., DNA
4 in slightly different words, one cannot prepare nucleotide inside a living cell in a specific tautomeric form,
whereas one can prepare a living cell in starved state.
entanglement between systems separated by km distances [15], extends the reach of quantum
mechanics beyond the strictly microscopic world. The world is fundamentally quantum
mechanical whereas the classical descriptions of macroscopic systems are, by contrast, only
approximations.
Living cells contain trillions of electrons and nuclei whose physical (re)arrangements and
interactions constitute their respective intracellular dynamics. As our technology continues to
improve in resolution, the elucidation of intracellular dynamics starting from first (i.e.,
quantum mechanical) principles will become both increasingly important and attainable. An
admittedly intimidating task, I assume the optimistic stance that (and not unlike the simpler
cases in condensed matter physics) we can find an approximation that nonetheless preserves
and faithfully reveal the key features of intracellular dynamics [7, 13].
I highly doubt, however, that approximations arriving at a classical description could be of
much help here. While they can work well - so long as we use coarse-graining (e.g., studying a
large population of individual molecular components of cells or else follow the center of mass
of a cell), - when it comes to describing the intracellular dynamics of an individual cell, the
scope of any coarse-graining procedure becomes severely limited. The renormalization group,
widely used in condensed matter physics [16], is not applicable either, since biological systems
are spatially bounded and not scale-invariant (i.e., exhibit different laws at every new level of
organization [17]). The burden of proof is on those who would claim that classical
approximations can supply an accurate description of intracellular dynamics without sacrificing
their essential aspects. I believe, to the contrary, that any usable approximation must consider
and incorporate non-classical correlations between molecular events in individual cells [7, 13].
Clearly, real quantum physics is needed here. The challenge, however, is to find the proper
level of abstraction that would allow us to see its most important aspects without becoming lost
in the details. Despite the many obstacles to creating a comprehensive and rigorous formulation
of QBCL, it has already suggested some intriguing and testable consequences, such as BDS
[7].
Quantum Biology and Synthetic Biology
The final point I would like to make will be particularly appreciated by the readers of the
journal Systems and Synthetic Biology. In our recent paper [7], we make a case for a synergy
between QBCL and Synthetic Biology. That is, by creating a minimal cell from scratch,
Synthetic Biology can help to rule out alternative classical explanations for some of QBCL’s
predictions.
The problem with testing QBCL is that, so long as we use natural biological systems, the
possibility exists that one or more classical as-yet undiscovered mechanisms could potentially
account for any nontrivial prediction of QBCL5. Indeed, one could always argue that, whatever
the nontrivial phenomenon predicted by QBCL may be, the billions of years of biological
evolution could have been responsible for a classical (if cryptic) mechanism that could
reproduce all of its unique features.
5 e.g., BDS predicts that the biasing of stochastic events (at the cellular or molecular level) towards a more
adaptive outcome is a natural property of living cells (QBCL). However, for every particular case of such
phenomenon, one can alternatively suggest a specialized molecular-biological mechanism
The ultimate goal of Synthetic Biology is to rationally design and construct a biological
system, under the experimenter’s complete control, and in the spirit of Feynman's motto 'If I
can't build it, I don't understand it'. Imagine for a moment a minimal self-reproducing cell
created from scratch - i.e., not only its DNA, but every other molecular component was
designed and synthesized de novo. Given that nothing beyond our control was involved, we
can guarantee the absence of cryptic genes (or of any other mechanisms that could have
emerged in evolution), alternatively accounting for the phenomenon predicted by QBCL. The
observation that the minimal synthetic cell nevertheless behaves according to QBCL, would
close the ‘classical molecular mechanism loophole’ and thus strongly support the QBCL
research program.
Accordingly, it is my hope that synthetic biology will eventually serve as QBCL’s natural
partner, ultimately providing experimental support and validation for its principal claims.