CoMOGrad and PHOG: From Computer Vision to Fast and
Accurate Protein Tertiary Structure Retrieval
Rezaul Karim 1 , Mohd. Momin Al Aziz1 , Swakkhar Shatabda 2 , M. Sohel Rahman 1,
Md. Abul Kashem Mia1 and Farhana Zaman1, Salman Rakin1
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology,
Palashi, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh.
2Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
United International University,
House 80, Road 8A, Dhanmondi, Dhaka-1209, Bangladesh.
Due to the advancements in technology number of entries in the structural database of pro-
teins are increasing day by day. Methods for retrieving protein tertiary structures from this large
databaseisthekeytocomparativeanalysisofstructureswhichplaysanimportantroletounder-
stand proteins and their function. In this paper, we present fast and accurate methods for the
retrievalofproteinsfromalargedatabasewithtertiarystructuressimilartoaqueryprotein. Our
proposed methods borrow ideas from the field of computer vision. The speed and accuracy of
our methods comes from the two newly introduced features, the co-occurrence matrix of the ori-
entedgradientandpyramidhistogramoforientedgradientandfromtheuseofEuclideandistance
as the distance measure. Experimental results clearly indicate the superiority of our approach
in both running time and accuracy. Our method is readily available for use from this website:
1 Introduction
Proteins perform a large array of functions within a living organism. Proteins are polymers of amino-
acidmonomers. Linearsequenceofaminoacidsiscalledtheprimarystructureofaprotein. Thereare
three other levels of structural complexity: secondary, tertiary and quaternary. Secondary structure
is the local spatial arrangement of the backbone atoms formed by intramolecular and intermolecular
hydrogen bonding of amide groups. Tertiary structure refers to the three-dimensional structure of an
entire polypeptide and quaternary structure is the spatial arrangement of two or more polypeptide
1v4180.9041:viXra
chains known as sub-units.
Every protein has a unique, stable and kinetically accessible [1] three dimensional structure or
tertiary structure also known as the native structure. The functionalities of a protein are principally
correlatedtoitstertiarystructure. Thatiswhyaproteinceasestofunctionwhenitstertiarystructure
is broken by denaturation at a high temperature; although, its primary structure may still remain
intact [21]. Proteins with similar tertiary structure have similar ligand binding sites and pockets
[22]. Moreover, tertiary structures are more conserved than amino acid sequence during evolution
[11]. Misfolded proteins are the cause of many critical diseases like Alzheimer’s disease [6]. Therefore,
analysis and study of similar tertiary structures is of great importance in function prediction of novel
proteins, study of evolution, disease diagnosis, drug discovery, antibody design and many other fields.
Following the determination of the first tertiary structure in 1958 using crystallography [12], biol-
ogists have successfully determined a large number of structures by now. Due to recent developments
in X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, there has been a rapid increase
in the number of experimentally determined structures stored in the world-wide repository, Protein
structures. As of February 11, 2014, the number of protein structures stored in PDB was more than
97,789. With this increase in the number of known protein structures, the need for fast and accurate
algorithms for the retrieval of protein tertiary structures is now greater than ever. In the protein ter-
tiary structure retrieval problem, the task is to retrieve proteins having most similar structures from
the known structure database. The results are ranked based on similarity or distance measures.
Thereexistnumerousapproachesintheliteraturethatfocusonfastandaccurateretrievalofprotein
tertiary structures. The traditional way to compare structures is to treat each one as a rigid three-
dimensional object and superimpose one on the other. Differences are then calculated using different
distance metrics, e.g., least-squares method. In the pattern recognition literature, the structures are
often represented by feature vectors and similarity or dissimilarity is measured by comparing the
feature vectors with one another. As a feature to represent the tertiary structure of a protein chain,
the α carbon distance matrix is widely used by many researchers [20, 10]. Here, the 3D coordinate
data is mapped to a two dimensional feature matrix. The α carbon distance matrix gives the intra-
molecular distances of α carbons in a protein chain. This α carbon distance matrix resembles the
tertiarystructureofaproteinandthesecondarystructureelementsconservedinit. Notably,αcarbon
distance matrix based exact algorithms run in O(N!) time assuming that the input matrix is of size
N ×N.
DALI [10]comparesstructuresbyaligningtheαcarbondistancematrices. Eachdistancematrixis
decomposedintosub-matricesoffixedsizewhichiscalledtheelementarycontactpatterns. Itcompares
thosecontactpatterns(pair-wise), andstorethematchingpairsinalistwithamatchingscore. Then,
it assembles pairs in the correct order using Monte Carlo optimization to yield the overall alignment
andthefinalmatchingscore. Inalaterversion,ithasusedbranchandboundmethodtoassemblethe
pairs [9]. The CE method [19] also takes the α carbon distance matrix as the feature vector and uses
combinatorial extension and Monte Carlo optimization to compare protein structures in a way much
similar to DALI. Both DALI and CE require lots of computation and hence the corresponding web
servers respond to the query requests via email only after a certain period that is required for costly
processing. A faster approach based on the α carbon distance matrix as a feature is MatAlign [2]. It
provides an O(N4) dynamic programming solution where N is the dimension of the distance matrix.
MatAligncomparesdistancematrixofthequeryproteinandthetargetproteinrowbyrowandbuilds
up a dynamic programming table based on a row by row matching score. Then, it aligns rows of the
query protein with the rows of the target protein to maximize the corresponding matching score. The
higher is the matching score, the more is the similarity in the corresponding structures.
Marsolo et al. [14] have introduced a wavelet based approach that resizes the distance matrices of
the protein structures before the actual comparison is done. Later on Mirceva et al. have introduced
MASASW [15] that uses wavelet coefficients of distance matrices as the feature vector. It has been
shownin[15]thatDaubechies-2 wavelets improvesaccuracythanothers. MASASW transformsallthe
α carbondistancematricesintoa32×32matrixbyinterpolationandwavelettransformation. Itthen
compares them like MatAlign but with a sliding window to reduce the number of comparisons. The
time complexity of MASASW is O(wWN2) where w and W are window sizes and N is the dimension
of the distance matrices. As has been mentioned above, MASASW assumes N =32.
Despite that several methods are found in the literature for protein structure retrieval, the quest
for even faster and more accurate methods still continues as the number of known protein structures
is growing very fast. In this paper, we present an extremely fast and highly accurate novel method of
retrievingproteinswithsimilartertiarystructuresfromalargedatabase. Inparticular,herewepresent
anultrafastalgorithmbasedontwonovelfeaturevectors. ThesearetheCo-occurrenceMatrixofthe
OrientedGradientof DistanceMatrices(CoMOGrad)andPyramidHistogramof OrientedGradient
(PHOG). Additionally, as will be reported later, our proposed algorithm gives more accurate results
thanthestateoftheartmethods. Verybriefly,muchofthespeedandaccuracywehaveachievedcomes
from the introduction of the novel features from the field of computer vision and pattern recognition.
Ouraimhasbeentointroduceafeaturewhichdoesnotrequireanycomplexalgorithmtocomparethe
tertiarystructures. Rather,asimpledistancemeasuretocalculatethedistancebetweenthetwovector
quantities is used in our approach. As has already been mentioned above, some previous methods in
theliteraturehaveusedtheα carbondistancematrixasafeaturevector. Uponanalyzingthetertiary
structure and α carbon distance matrix represented as a gray-scale image, we have observed that not
all data in the matrix seem to be equally important. We further have realized that the co-occurrence
matrix(aswillbereportedlater)oftheorientedgradientofthedistancematrixisthemostimportant
featurewithrespecttothecomparisonoftertiarystructures. Finally,wehavefoundthattheEuclidean
distance or (cid:96)2 norm of our novel features as the distance measure outperforms the widely used costly
alignment distance/similarity measure of α carbon distance matrices. As a result, the combination of
the above ideas gives us an extremely fast method without sacrificing the accuracy.
Laterinthispaper,wefirstdescribeourproposedapproachalongwiththenovelfeatures. Following
this, we report the experimental results and relevant discussion. Finally, we conclude the paper with
an outline of the future works.
We have carefully analyzed the gray-scale images from the α carbon distance matrices and the
tertiary structures. We have observed that the α helices and the anti-parallel beta sheets appear as
dark lines parallel to the diagonal dark line and parallel beta sheets appear as dark lines normal to
the diagonal dark line. Beta sheets of two strips appear as one dark line normal to the diagonal; beta
sheets of three strips appear as two dark lines normal to the diagonal and one dark line parallel to the
diagonal. In general, for a standard beta sheet, the number of points of co-occurrence of parallel and
anti-parallel diagonal lines depends on the number of strips in the beta sheets. Again, the number of
single parallel lines depends on the number of standard α helices. Moreover, length of those lines near
thediagonalregionisproportionaltothelengthoftheαhelices. Thedistanceoftheparallellinesfrom
the diagonal dark line is proportional to the radius of the α helix. Figure 1 depicts the corresponding
α carbon distance matrix as a gray scale image of a tertiary structure of a protein with beta sheets.
In the gray scale image, the 7 anti-parallel dark lines near the diagonal dark line correspond to the
presence of 8 beta sheets in the corresponding protein structure and the lengths of those dark lines
are proportional to the lengths of the beta sheets. Figure 2 represents the gray scale image of the
correspondingα carbondistancematrixofaproteintertiarystructurewithtwoalphahelices. Herein
Figure 1: Representation of β sheets of domain d1n4ja [13] in α carbon distance matrix gray-scale
image.
Figure 2: Representation of α helices of domain d1irqa [16] in α carbon distance matrix gray-scale
image.
the image, the two parallel dark lines near the diagonal dark line correspond to the presence of two α
helices in the protein structure and the lengths of the dark lines are proportional to the lengths of the
α helices.
In the contemporary literature of computer vision and digital image processing [8] the lines in
digital images are usually recognized from the gradient of the images. This leads us to believe that,
the co-occurrence of gradient angles represents the secondary structure elements more precisely than
just the distance matrix image. The tertiary structure involves the presence of secondary structure
elements(SSEs), theirsizeandpositioninthechainandtheirorientation. Fromtheimagesofprotein
structures and their corresponding α carbon distance matrix gray-scale image, it is clear that the
SSEs are represented by the orientation of dark lines at the near diagonal region of the α carbon
distance matrix image. The position of the SSEs in a protein chain is represented by the position of
thedarklinesattheneardiagonalregionoftheimage. Here,near diagonal region istheregionnearby
the diagonal dark line. The size of the SSEs are represented by the length of the dark line at the
near diagonal region. The orientation of the SSEs are represented by the presence of the dark lines
at the far diagonal regions and the darkness and orientation of those dark lines. Here, far diagonal
region is the region in the image that is distant from the main diagonal dark line. Therefore, we
need to incorporate the gradient orientation angle along with the gradient magnitude and gradient
spatial orientation to incorporate the orientation of the SSEs in the feature vector. We also need co-
occurrenceofgradientangles. BasedonourstudyweintroduceCo-occurrenceMatrixoftheOriented
Gradient (CoMOGrad) as our first feature vector which incorporates gradient orientation angles and
co-occurrence of the gradient orientation angles. This feature enables implementation of an algorithm
that can facilitate more than 100 times faster comparison than MASASW. However, this speed is
achieved at the cost of a slight decrease in the accuracy. Subsequently, we introduce another feature
vector, namely, the Pyramid Histogram of Oriented Gradient (PHOG) by incorporating the spatial
information and gradient magnitude. The combination of both CoMOGrad and PHOG features in
comparing structures results in an algorithm that is not only more accurate but also more than 40
timesfasterthanMASASW incomparingtwostructures. Thedetailsoftheexperimentsarepresented
later in the results section.
2 Methods and Materials
2.1 Feature vectors and feature extraction.
Mapping 3D coordinates to 2D function: Distance matrix of α carbons in residues is a good
candidate to transform the 3D structure to the corresponding 2D vector representation as shown in
MASASW [15] and the wavelet based approach by Marsolo et al. [14]. This distance matrix gives
the pairwise distance between all pairs of α carbons in the polypeptide chain. Proteins with similar
tertiary structures will have similar distance matrices and vice versa. As stated earlier, if we consider
thematrixasamonochromaticimage,α-helicesandparallelβ-sheetswillappearasdarklinesparallel
tothemaindiagonalandantiparallelbetasheetswillappearasdarklinesnormaltothemaindiagonal.
This distance matrix feature also has a very appealing property, i.e., this is translation, scaling and
rotation invariant.
Interestingly, as it is a two dimensional matrix like a digital image we can easily apply image
processing and computer vision algorithms on it. Similarly, we can use this matrix as an adjacency
matrixandinterpretitasagraph. Subsequently,graphtheorytechniquesmayalsobeappliedtosolve
the tertiary structure retrieval problem with this feature. In this paper, we apply ideas from the field
ofimageprocessingandcomputervision. Mostrecentlytheseideashavegottheirnicheinpedestrians
and car detection [23, 18].
Scaling Cα-Cα distance matrix images to the same dimension
Bi-cubic interpolation: Asdifferentproteinchainshavedifferentnumberofαcarbons,thedimen-
sions of their α carbon distance matrices vary. Therefore, we need to scale the distance matrices to
thesamedimension. Forscalingthedistancematrices, weusethemethodsofdigitalimageprocessing
used for image resizing. At first, we scale all the images to the dimension that is a power of 2 and
nearest to their original dimension. As an example, if the image dimension is 80×80 we scale it to
64×64 and if the original image dimension is 100×100 we scale to 128×128. For this step, we use
bi-cubic interpolation.
Wavelet transform: After scaling the images as mentioned above, we apply wavelet transform
to transform all the images to the same dimension. Notably, wavelet transform is the most widely
used technique for image scaling or resizing in digital image processing. Using wavelet transform,
we scale all images to 128×128 dimension as most of the images in the previous step were found
to be of that dimension. For wavelet filter we used Daubechies-2 wavelet [5] as this filter has been
shown to have outperformed other traditional wavelets for protein structure feature representation by
MASASW [15]. Wavelet transform of an image gives four images, namely, the approximate detail,
horizontal detail, diagonal detail and vertical detail. Each of these images has dimension that is half
of the original image. We take the approximate detail to scale a large image to a smaller size since
this is the approximate sub sampled image. For the images with dimension greater than 128×128,
we perform wavelet transform on each images multiple times to get the approximate coefficient of size
128×128. For images with dimension less than 128×128, we first perform wavelet transform on the
images. Thenusingbi-cubicinterpolation,wescaleallfourcoefficientstotwicetheirinitialsize. After
that,withinversewavelettransformonthefourscaledwaveletcoefficients,wegetoriginalimagescaled
uptotwiceitsinitialsize. Withrepeatedapplicationofscalingup(down)theimagesthataresmaller
(higher) than dimension 128×128, we finally get all of them in the desired dimension of 128×128.
Novel features from scaled Cα-Cα distance matrix images
Co-occurrence matrix of oriented gradient (CoMOGrad): After having all the images of
dimension 128×128 we extract our CoMOGrad feature. First we take the gradient of each of the
imagesandcomputethegradientangleandmagnitude. Astheanglevaluesarecontinuousquantities,
we have quantized those values. For quantization, we tuned the number of quantization bins as a
parameter. With experiments using various bin sizes (9, 16, 32 etc), we have found that using 16
bins with bin size 22.5 degree gives excellent results. After quantization to 16 bins, we compute co-
occurrence matrix which is a 16×16 matrix. We convert this 16×16 matrix to a vector of size 256.
This is our CoMOGrad feature vector. With this feature, we can simply take Euclidean distance to
compare structures rather than using the alignment technique of α carbon distance matrices used by
MASASW and MatAlign. Clearly, introduction of this feature makes the comparison method much
simpler and faster.
Pyramid histogram of oriented gradient (PHOG): The use of CoMOGrad gives us an ultra
fast structure retrieval algorithm. However it achieves this speed at the cost of some reduction in
accuracy. From the discussion in the previous sections, it is clear that we have to incorporate the
gradient magnitude and spatial orientation of gradient along with the angular orientation of gradient
toaccuratelydescribethetertiarystructureofaprotein. TheCoMOGradfeatureonlyincludesangular
orientationofgradientandco-occurrenceofangularorientationofgradient. Toincorporatethegradient
magnitude and spatial orientation of gradient along with angular orientation of gradient, we take
anotherfeaturenamedpyramidhistogramoforientedgradient(PHOG)togetherwithourCoMOGrad
feature to improve the accuracy. PHOG was first proposed by Bosch et al. [4] and successfully used
in object classification and pattern recognition. We create a quad tree of the original image with the
originalimageattherootasfollows. Eachnodeofthequadtreehas fourchildren,namely, top-left ,
top-right,bottom-left andbottomright. Eachoftheseimagesareofsizeonefourthoftheoriginalimage.
InFigure3, wehaveshownaquadtreeuptolevel1. Inourexperiments, wehavetakenthequadtree
uptolevel3andachievedexcellentresults. Forquadtreeuptolevel3,thereare1+4+4*4+4*4*4=85
nodes. We create gradient orientation histogram with 9 bins each with 40 degree range for each of the
nodes. Now, we have 85*9=768 features. We incorporate these 768 features to a vector of size 768.
Then, we normalize the vector by dividing it with the sum of its 768 components. This is our PHOG
feature vector. Now, PHOG combined with CoMOGrad gives a total of 256+768=1021 features.
Distance Measure
We use the Euclidean distance or (cid:96)2 norm as the distance measure of our new features. PHOG
combined with CoMOGrad can be seen as a vector of length 1021. Suppose, f and f denote the
feature vectors of the query protein q and a protein i in the database, respectively. Then the distance
Figure 3: Level 1 quad tree of α carbon distance matrix image.
score dq of protein q and i would be calculated according to Eqn. 1 below.
(cid:117)1021
dq i = (cid:117) (cid:116) (cid:88) (|f q [j]−f i [j]|)2 (1)
Clearly, the above distance measure can be calculated in O(N) time where N =1021 is the size of our
feature vector. Also, note that for CoMOGrad alone, N =256 only. Our algorithm needs to compute
dq for each protein i in the database and then sort the results to rank them. As will be reported
later, the (cid:96)2 norm distance of the CoMOGrad and PHOG gives us a fast and much accurate retrieval
algorithm.
3 Results and Discussion
Comograd/. We have implemented our algorithm in Java (jdk 1.6) with Netbeans IDE and MySQL
database. The feature extraction has been done Using MATLAB R2012. Our source code of our im-
retrieval-. The experiments have been run on GNU/Linux debian ubuntu i686 operating system.
Wehaveusedamachinehaving Intel (R)Core(TM)i53470CPU3.20GHzwith4GBRAM.Wehave
compared our methods with the tertiary structure retrieval method, MASASW [15], which is shown
to be the best performer in the literature to date. We have implemented two versions of our method,
one using CoMOGrad and the other combining CoMOGrad with PHOG.
3.1 Benchmark Datasets.
For the experiments, we have used SCOP [7, 17] domains classification. SCOP is well accepted as the
benchmarkintheliterature. Wehavetaken152,487chainsfromSCOP domainasthesearchspaceand
extractedfeaturesfromthem. Asthequeryproteins,wehaveused4965proteinchainsfrom417SCOP
family, 330 superfamily, 234 folds and 11 classes. We have run all 4965 queries over the search space
of 152,487 proteins using our methods and sorted them all in ascending order based on our distance
measure. ForMASASW[15],weranthesameexperimentandsortedresultsindescendingorderbased
on its similarity measure. Then we compare the results considering the top four SCOP labels, namely
class, fold, superfamily and family. List of the query sequences are given in the Supplementary Table
1.
3.2 Accuracy Comparison.
The comparison of the accuracy of the query results among MASASW and our two methods are
provided in Figure 4. In the line graphs plotted in this figure, the horizontal axis entitled “number of
top results” tracks the number of top ranked query results. The vertical axes in each figure entitled
“% of ‘label’ match” indicates the average number of query results that have matched the SCOP
‘label’ with the corresponding query protein. So, each point in the figure reports the average number
query results that have matched the SCOP ‘label’ with the corresponding query protein for a specific
number of top results. We report the results for all the SCOP labels, i.e., class, fold, superfamily and
family.
As an example, suppose, we consider the top 50 results of the query and have run a total of 3
queries. Assume that, among the query results, the numbers of match for the label family are 40,
42 and 48 respectively. Then the average number of family match is (40+42+48)/3=45 and the
percentage of family match for the top 50 retrieval results is (45×100 ) /(50) = 90 percent. The line
graphs are drawn with percentage of matches for class, fold, superfamily and family for the top 5 to
top 50 retrieval results based on the selected 4965 queries.
0 10 20 30 40 50
egatnecrep
100 CoMOGrad
CoMOGrad+PHOG
0 10 20 30 40 50
number of top results
egatnecrep
CoMOGrad+PHOG
number of top results
0 10 20 30 40 50
ylimafrepus
egatnecrep
MASAW CoMOGrad+PHOG 90
0 10 20 30 40 50
number of top results
egatnecrep
MASAW CoMOGrad+PHOG
number of top results
Figure 4: Percentage of matches of Class, Fold, Superfamily and Family for up to top 50 retrieval
results.
Table 1: Comparison of query time.
Method Loading Time Query Time Time Per Query
MASASW 28 min 11 s 42 min 18 s 25.38 s .
CoMOGrad 18 m 31s 1 m 23 0.83 s
CoMOGrad + PHOG 27 min 24 s 5min 32 s 3.32 s.
3.3 Runtime Comparison .
The time required to retrieve the protein tertiary structures for all three methods are reported in
Table 1. The run time is recorded by executing 100 queries for each of the methods. In the table,
Loading Time is the time needed to load the feature vectors from disk to memory which is done once
when the system starts. The Time Per Query in the table is the time needed to compare the feature
vector of a query protein with that of all the 152,487 proteins in our protein database and sort the
resultsbasedonthedistance/similaritymeasureandtoreturnthesortedtoprankedresults. Notethat
the query time reported excludes the loading time. The Query Time in the table indicates the total
timeneededfor100querystructures. Theresultsindicatethatthequerytimeforthevariantwithonly
the CoMOGrad feature is ultra fast albeit at the cost of some reduction in the accuracy. However,
the variant using both CoMOGrad and PHOG as features is both super fast and more accurate than
MASASW.
3.4 Discussion.
The exact algorithm for the matching of tertiary structures with α carbon distance matrix runs in
O(N!) time assuming that the input matrix is of size N ×N. The time complexity of MASASW for
comparingtwofeaturesis O(wWN2),whichassumes N =32asthedimensionofthedistancematrix.
Here, W and w are the size of the sliding windows to align matrices and to align rows, respectively.
TheauthorsofMASASWhaveempiricallyobtainedthemostreasonableandsuitablevaluesforW and
w which are 5 and 8 respectively. Our CoMOGrad feature is a vector of size 256 and the combination
ofCoMOGradandPHOGgivesusafeaturevectorofsizeof1021. Forbothofourmethods, therun
time for comparing two features is just O(N). Therefore, when only the CoMOGrad feature is used,
the time to compare two features is approximately (32×32×5×8)/(256)= 160 times faster than
MASASW.And,thecombinationofCoMOGradandPHOGisapproximately(32×32×5×8)/(1021)=
40 times faster than MASASW in this respect. The feature extraction of the query protein as and
when it is submitted as a coordinate file in the PDB format does not have noticeable effect on the
running time as this operation is done for one, i.e., the query protein only; the features of all the
proteins in the target search space (i.e., in the database) are made available beforehand as they have
already been preprocessed.
Compared to MASASW, the query time of the variant with CoMOGrad is almost 30 times and
thevariantwithCoMOGradandPHOGismorethan7timesfaster. Asseeninourearlierdiscussion,
theoretically the variant with CoMOGrad is 160 times faster and the variant with CoMOGrad and
PHOGis40timesfasterincomparingtwofeatures. However,inadditiontothefeaturecomparison,the
actualretrievalalgorithmneedstoperformasortingoperationontheresultsofthedistance/similarity
valuesofalltheproteinsinthedatabaseagainstthequeryprotein. NotethatbothMASASWandour
two methodsneed tousethis sortingalgorithm. MASASWhoweversorts indescending orderbecause
it uses a similarity measure. As a result the actual improvement in the query time achieved by our
methods does not completely match with the theoretical deduction.
In terms of accuracy, the performance of our method using only the CoMOGrad feature is almost
similar to that of MASASW. Nonetheless, compared to MASASW, the combination of CoMOGrad
andPHOGachieves ahigherdegreeofaccuracy. Theexperimentaldatasetcontainsofproteinstaken
from 417 various families and the number is significant. The most significant achievement of the
novel features we have used is the substantial reduction of the query processing time. Together the
accuracyandreducedqueryprocessingtimemakesthestructuralcomparisonthesimpleststateofthe
art technique.
Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented two novel features, namely, CoMOGrad and PHOG, for faster and
accurate retrieval of the protein tertiary structures. We have compared our results considering all the
levels of SCOP classification hierarchy. We have reported average percentage of matching for class,
fold, super family and family of our retrieval results with the query protein while most of the works
in the literature have only shown similarity on only class and fold; very few in fact have worked
on automated similarity match for the lower levels. Our results are in good compliance with the
SCOP classification. CoMOGrad feature is ultra fast as compared to the state of the art methods
but this extreme speed is achieved at the cost of a slight reduction in the accuracy. The combination
of CoMOGrad with PHOG is also very fast and at the same time is superior in terms of accuracy as
compared to state of the art methods. This creates the possibility to implement a web based service
for the protein tertiary structure retrieval with a truly online behaviour, i.e., that can provide the
results in seconds, while the present web services usually provide query results via email only.