Comparative Analysis of Cryptography Library in IoT
Uday Kumar *Tuhin Borgohain Sugata Sanyal
Tech Mahindra Limited Department of Instrumentation Corporate Technology Office,
Chennai Engineering, Assam Tata Consultancy Services
India Engineering College Mumbai
Guwahati India
udaykumar@techmahindr
a.com sugata.sanyal@tcs.com
borgohain.tuhin@gmail.co
*Corresponding Author
The paper aims to do a survey along with a comparative 2. OVERVIEW:
analysis of the various cryptography libraries that are
In this paper Section 3 will briefly introduce the various
applicable in the field of Internet of Things (IoT). The first half
cryptography libraries available for encryption in general. It
of the paper briefly introduces the various cryptography
will also list all the encryption algorithms available in the
libraries available in the field of cryptography along with a list
various cryptography libraries. In section 4, we will discuss in
of all the algorithms contained within the libraries. The second
details the various cryptography libraries in IoT. In section 5,
half of the paper deals with cryptography libraries specifically
we will do a comparative analysis amongst the various
aimed for application in the field of Internet of Things. The
cryptography libraries discussed in section 4 based on their
various libraries and their performance analysis listed down in
unique features. We conclude the paper in section 6.
this paper are consolidated from various sources with the aim
of providing a single comprehensive repository for reference to
3. CRYPTOGRAPHY LIBRARY
the various cryptography libraries and the comparative analysis
of their features in IoT. There exist numerous cryptography library encompassing
multitudes of encryption algorithms which can be implemented
Keywords for encryption of different messages in various fields. These
ECC, wolfSSL, RELIC, AvrCryptoLib, TinyECC, WiseLib cryptography libraries enable the implementation of various
security measures ([11]) through the use of the containing
algorithms. Some of the most prominent cryptography library
1. INTRODUCTION ([5]) along with their encryption algorithms is listed below:
i. Borzoi: The “borZoi” cryptography library
The implementation of encryption and decryption in the field
implements an algorithm based on elliptic curves (as such
of cryptography provides a solid means of relaying messages
known as Elliptic Curve Cryptography Library) ([4], [9], [10],
to and fro between users without the added risk of the message
[14], [36]). It implements the following algorithms which
being compromised to unwanted personnel. Such encryption-
ranges over a finite field bearing a characteristic 2 (GF2m)
decryption operations are performed by various ways ([3], [7],
([1]):
[15]) through the use of specific set of algorithms. A
a. ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature
cryptography library is a sort of repository of the various
Algorithm)
algorithms available for cryptographic purposes, which
b. Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement
provides the added function of categorising the multitudes of
algorithms into specific collections based on their performance
c. ECIES (Elliptic Curve Integrated Encryption
capacities and functions.
In the field of IoT, microprocessors and embedded devices
borZoi is also implemented with AES Symmetric
with low computational power plays the vital role of exchange
encryption scheme and one other algorithm to produce SHA-1,
of information using the internet infrastructure. Such
its digital signature which are as follows ([1]) :
constraints to computational capabilities and the necessity of
a. AES (Rijndael) Symmetric Encryption Scheme
secure exchange of information calls upon the need to
b. SHA-1 hash algorithm
implement algorithms specifically optimized to run in resource
ii. Crypto++ : Written in C++, this cryptography library
constrained environments. As such cryptography libraries
implements various algorithms ranging from authenticated
aimed for use in microprocessors and embedded devices plays
encryption schemes (like GCM, CCM etc.) to algorithms based
a very important role for providing the necessary security layers
on elliptic curves (like ECDSA, ECNR etc) ([13]). The various
to IoT devices and securing up the overall IoT infrastructure.
algorithms implemented by Crypto++ are as follows ([2]):
a. GCM, CCM, EAX
b. AES (Rijndael), RC6, MARS, CAST-256, Twofish,
c. Panama, Sosemanuk, Salsa20, XSalsa20
d. IDEA, Triple-DES, Camellia, SEED, XTEA,
Skipjack, SHACAL-2, RC5, Blowfish
e. ECB, CBC, CTS, CFB, OFB, CTR
f. VMAC, HMAC, CBC-MAC, GMAC, Two-
g. SHA-1, SHA-2, SHA-3, WHIRLPOOL, Tiger,
RIPEMD-128, RIPEMD-256, RIPEMD-160, RIPEMD-320
h. ECDSA, ECNR, ECIES, ECMQV, ECDH
i. MD2, MD4, MD5, Panama Hash, Square, GOST,
SAFER, SEAL 3.0, DES, ARC4, DESX, RC2, 3-WAY,
WAKE-OFB, CAST-128, SHARK
Table 3: Algorithms in Libgcrypt library
j. Diffie-Hellman, XTR-DH, DH2, MQV,
vi. Bouncy Castle: This particular cryptography library
is written in Java and C# ([41]). Designed mainly for use in
k. PKCS#1 v2.0, OAEP, PSS, IEEE P1363 EMSA2-
devices with low computational memory, this library contains
EMSA5, PSSR
the algorithms listed in Table 4:
l. ESIGN, LUC, RSA, DSA, ElGamal, RW, NR,
iii. Libmcrypt: The “libmcrypt” cryptography library
Table 4: Algorithms in Bouncy Castle library
provides encryption of data and is thread safe. This specific
vii. Cryptlib: The “cryptlib” cryptography library is a
library contains a set of encryption algorithms and modes
library of algorithms which provides security to
which are modular in nature. This nature allows algorithms and
communication and information exchange. Its simple interface
the encryption modes to operate in a much efficient manner.
makes it very user-friendly and its layered structure (the lower
The various algorithms contained within the framework of this
layers each providing a layer of abstraction, the higher layers
library are tabulated in Table 1:
covering up the details of implementation of the algorithms)
makes up the whole library very secure and impermeable to
intrusion to a very high degree. The various algorithms within
this library are tabulated in Table 5:
Table 1: Algorithms in Libmcrpyt library
iv. Botan (formerly known as OpenCL): This
cryptography library is written in C++ and licensed under BSD-
2 ([23], [28]). It was later implemented with a “Card Verifiable
Table 5: Algorithms in Cryptlib library
Certificate” for ePassports and this modified version of Botan
was named “InSiTO”. This library contains a number of
viii. Catacomb: Written using gcc, this cryptography
encryption formats, algorithms and protocols which are
library contains a set of cryptographic primitives and used in
tabulated in Table 2:
Linux operating systems ([9]). Some of the most prominent
categories of algorithms within this library out of its many other
are as shown in Table 6:
Table 2: Algorithms in Botan library
v. Libgcrypt: Written in C language, the “libgcrypt” is
Table 6: Categories of algorithms in the Catacomb library
a multi-platform cryptography library licensed under GNU
ix. Cryptix: The “Cryptix” (say Cx) cryptography
Lesser General Public License GNU General Public License
library was made to provide a library of cryptographic
([32]). It features a multiple precision arithmetic
algorithms to the Java platform as there were a number of issues
implementation and entropy gathering utility ([37]). The
regarding adoption of cryptography in Java ([22]). With the
cryptography algorithms in this library are tabulated in Table
removal of export controls on cryptography, the use of
3:
“Cryptix” (last active development was in 2005) declined with
the increasing availability of other more secure cryptography
libraries. The list of algorithms under this library are shown in
Tale 7:
Table 7: Algorithms in Cryptix library
x. Flexiprovider: This cryptography library is built for
use in encryption of any application built upon the JCA (Java
Cryptography Architecture) ([39]). This encryption toolkit is
supported by CoreProvider (containing algorithms like PKCS
#1, 3DES etc.), ECProvider (which contains algorithms based
on elliptic curve such ECDH key agreement scheme, ECDSA
etc.), PQCProvider (Contains the McEliece cryptosystem in
four variants (CFS signature scheme etc.) and NFProvider
(contains IQRDSA, IQDSA, IQGQ etc.).
xi. LibTomCrypt: The “LibTomCrypt” cryptography
Table 11: Algorithms in Nettle
library is an open source library of cryptographic primitives
([20]).
4. CRYPTOGRAPHY LIBRARIES IN
xii. MatrixSSL: The “MatrixSSL” cryptography library
is designed for devices and application with smaller footprint. IoT
An implementation of embedded SSL and TLS, it contains
4.1 WolfSSL (formerly known as CyaSSL):
various symmetric key and public key algorithms. Some
Written in ANSI C, the “wolfSSL” cryptography library, due
popular algorithms included in this library are given in Table 8:
to its small footprint size and low runtime memory, is aimed to
be used in embedded devices, RTOS and environments facing
constraints in computational resources ([30], [33]). This library
Table 8: Algorithms in MatrixSSL
supports the development of cross-platform algorithms and
xiii. MIRACL: Multiprecision Integer and Rational
houses a large number of algorithms. Moreover it features the
Arithmetic C Library (MIRACL) is a cryptography library
generation of Key and Certificates. “wolfSSL” is licensed
designed for use in constrained environment in terms of size
under GNU General Public License GPLv2.
and computational power ([38]).
“wolfSSL” contains the following categories of
xiv. Mozilla’s NSS: NSS (Network Security Services)
algorithms to be used for cryptographic purposes which are
cryptography library facilitates the encryption in server-based
shown in Table 12:
applications. It mainly supports the following security
algorithms listed in Table 9 for use in server applications:
Table 9: Security algorithms in NSS
xv. OpenPGP: This cryptography library is an open
source variant of PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) which is used for Table 12: Algorithm library of wolfSSL
securing the privacy of end-users and levelling up the security 4.2 AvrCryptoLib: Licensed under GPLv3, the “Avr-
of communication systems by implementation of Crypto-Lib” cryptography library has the implementation of its
authentication methods through the use of PGP ([16], [18]). encryption algorithms in the AVR 8-bit microcontrollers ([34]).
xvi. OpenSSL: Written in C language, the “OpenSSL” is As with all the rest of the cryptography library aimed to be used
a multi-platform library of cryptographic algorithms and in the field of IoT, the “Avr-Crypto-Lib” is optimized for
functions ([40]). It is an open source library licensed under resource-constrained environments in regards to available
Apache License 1.0 and 4-clause BSD License. It implements computational memory and size.
the various SSL protocols and TLS protocols. The various “Avr-Crypto-Lib” contains vast number algorithms
algorithms implemented by “OpenSSL” are tabulated in Table which are categorised in Table 13:
10 as follows:
Table 10: Algorithms implemented by OpenSSL Table 13: Algorithm library of Avr-Crypto-Lib
xvii. Nettle: This is a low-level, multi-platform Besides the above mentioned algorithms, “Avr-Crypto-
cryptography library licensed under GNU Lesser General Lib” also provides MAC functions and Pseudo Random
Public License ([17]). The various algorithms within this Number Generators (PRNGs).
cryptography library are shown in Table 11:
4.3 WiseLib: Written in C++, the “Wiselib”
cryptography library is targeted to be used in networked
embedded devices ([12], [35]). Using “Wiselib”, an individual
can compile algorithms for various platforms like Contiki,
iSense, Shawn (a simulator of sensor network) etc. using its
various in-house algorithms like routing algorithms,
localization algorithms etc. The use of template similar to through the usage of tool-chains. This library also implements
Boost and CGAL facilitates highly efficient compilations of the curves over prime fields only and includes sliding windows
([43]) and Barrett reduction ([44]) for the purpose of
various generic and platform independent codes written for
verification.
various platforms.
4.4 TinyECC: TinyECC is an Elliptic Curve 5.5 RelicToolKit: The inclusion of multiple integer
arithmetic makes its compilation of this library easy for a wide
Cryptography based library which can perform ECC-based
variety of platforms. RelicToolKit provides high level of
PKC operations ([25], [29]). Some of the most prominent customization in terms of:
features of TinyECC are: 5.5.1 Building and inclusion of desired components only
a. Provision of ECDSA, a digital signature for usage in desired platforms.
b. ECIES, a scheme for encryption of public key
c. ECDH, a protocol for key exchange 5.5.2 Desired selection of various mathematical
optimizations for optimum performance of the toolkit in a
4.5 RelicToolKit: Licensed under LGPL v2.1 (and specific platform.
above), the “RELIC toolkit” cryptography library is an efficient
and flexible meta-toolkit ([21]). The main use of the “RELIC 6. CONCLUSION
toolkit” is in its ability to be used for construction of custom From the above comparative analysis of the various features
cryptographic toolkits. available in the different cryptography library the foremost
The various algorithms implemented by the “RELIC conclusion is that not one of the cryptography libraries in the
toolkit” are as follows: IoT environment can be considered as a universal library due
- Multiple-precision integer arithmetic to their varying features and optimizations made for different
- Bilinear maps and extensions fields relate to bilinear specific platforms. This results in the non-existence of a single
maps universal standard library that can be applicable to all IoT
- Elliptic curves: devices around us. Moreover each library contains a specific
 Over prime fields set of features unique to them and optimized for the platform
 Over binary fields where these are applicable. And the use of the above
- Prime and Binary field arithmetic cryptography libraries along with the adoption of various
- Cryptographic protocols security measures that can be adopted in various
The various cryptographic protocols implemented communication modes ([24], [42]) and implementation of
by RELIC are tabulated in Table 14: intrusion detection systems and schemes ([19], [27], [31]) will
lead to a more secure and reliable IoT infrastructure for wide
adoption of its devices by the masses.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Thomas Eisenbarth, Sandeep Kumar, Christof Paar, Axel
Table 14: Cryptographic protocols of RELIC toolkit
Poschmann, and Leif Uhsadel. "A survey of lightweight-
cryptography implementations". IEEE Design & Test of
5. COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE
Computers 24, no. 6 (2007): 522-533.
com (2009).
5.1 WolfSSL: WolfSSL includes OpenSSL compatibility
[3] Sandipan Dey, Hameed Al-Qaheri, and Sugata Sanyal.
layer along with support for OCSP and CRL which are used for
"Embedding Secret Data in Html Web Page." arXiv preprint
validating certificates. Its runtime memory usage is between 1-
36 kB. Sporting a very simple API, this library supports zlib arXiv:1004.0459 (2010).
([30]). king/borZoi-1.0.2.tar.gz.shtml
modular exponentiation using C-interfaces in AVR 8-bit [6] Whitfield Diffie, and Martin E. Hellman. "New directions
assembly language. This leads to reduction in execution time in cryptography".Information Theory, IEEE Transactions
of this cryptography library. Moreover this library allows direct
on 22, no. 6 (1976): 644-654.
access to keys through storage of these keys in the flash
[7] Sandipan Dey, Ajith Abraham, Bijoy Bandyopadhyay, and
memory which results in efficient consumption of SRAM.
Sugata Sanyal. "Data Hiding Techniques Using Prime and
5.3 WiseLib: Implementing elliptic curve over prime
Natural Numbers." arXiv preprint arXiv:1003.3672 (2010).
fields only, this library shuns away from incorporation of
[8] Schneier, Bruce. Applied cryptography: protocols,
optimizations of assembly level for making its codes platform
independent.
algorithms, and source code in C. john wiley & sons, 2007.
5.4 TinyECC: Though mainly made for running in
es/libraries.htm
devices operating on TinyOS, TinyECC can be implemented in
devices other than TinyOS-dependent devices as the library can
be ported to C99 through manual alteration of code parts or
[10] Victor Miller. "Use of elliptic curves in cryptography", [29] An Liu, and Peng Ning. "TinyECC: A configurable library
in Advances in Cryptology—CRYPTO’85 Proceedings, pp. for elliptic curve cryptography in wireless sensor networks",
417-426. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 1986. in Information Processing in Sensor Networks, 2008. IPSN'08.
[11] Sanyal, Sugata, Ayu Tiwari, and Sudip Sanyal. "A International Conference on, pp. 245-256. IEEE, 2008.
payment." In Emergent Web Intelligence: Advanced [31] Punit Rathod, Nirali Mody, Dhaval Gada, Rajat Gogri,
Information Retrieval, pp. 341-369. Springer London, 2010. Zalak Dedhia, Sugata Sanyal, and Ajith Abraham. "Security
[12] Baumgartner, Tobias, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Sándor Scheme for Malicious Node Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc
Fekete, Christos Koninis, Alexander Kröller, and Apostolos Networks", in IWDC, pp. 541-542. 2004.
heterogeneous sensor networks." In Wireless Sensor Networks, [33] Zachary Peterson. "Team AES-Andrew Wang, Sam
pp. 162-177. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. (Jiewen) Wu, and Elton Yang CPE 458: Current Topics in
20-26. [36] Kristin Lauter. "The advantages of elliptic curve
[15] Sandipan Dey, Ajith Abraham, and Sugata Sanyal. "An cryptography for wireless security". IEEE Wireless
LSB Data Hiding Technique Using Natural Number communications 11, no. 1 (2004): 62-67.
[16] Alexander Ulrich, Ralph Holz, Peter Hauck, and Georg [40] John Viega, Matt Messier, and Pravir Chandra. “Network
Carle. "Investigating the openpgp web of trust", in Computer Security with OpenSSL: Cryptography for Secure
Security–ESORICS 2011, pp. 489-507. Springer Berlin Communications". O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2002.
Heidelberg, 2011. [41] Castle, Bouncy. "Bouncy castle crypto apis." U RL
y) [42] Goyal, Vipul, Virendra Kumar, Mayank Singh, Ajith
[19] Animesh Kr Trivedi, Rajan Arora, Rishi Kapoor, Sudip online dictionary attacks." computers & security 25, no. 2
Sanyal, and Sugata Sanyal. "A Semi-distributed Reputation (2006): 114-120.
Based Intrusion Detection System for Mobile Adhoc [43] Dolev, Danny, and Andrew C. Yao. "On the security of
Networks." arXiv preprint arXiv:1006.1956 (2010). public key protocols." Information Theory, IEEE Transactions
[20] Denis, Tom St. "LibTomCrypt." available online at on 29, no. 2 (1983): 198-208.
libtom. org (2004). [44] T. Bingmann. "Speedtest and Comparsion of Open-Source
[22] Gayoso Martinez, V., C. Sanchez Avila, J. Espinosa
Garcia, and L. Hernandez Encinas. "Elliptic curve
cryptography: Java implementation issues." In Security
Technology, 2005. CCST'05. 39th Annual 2005 International
Carnahan Conference on, pp. 238-241. IEEE, 2005.
libraries/
[24] Sugata Sanyal, Rohit Bhadauria, and Chittabrata Ghosh.
"Secure communication in cognitive radio networks",
in Computers and Devices for Communication, 2009. CODEC
2009. 4th International Conference on, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2009.
[26] Muhammad Yasir Malik. "Efficient implementation of
elliptic curve cryptography using low-power digital signal
processor", in Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT),
2010 The 12th International Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 1464-
1468. IEEE, 2010.
[27] Tapalina Bhattasali, Rituparna Chaki, and Sugata Sanyal.
"Sleep deprivation attack detection in wireless sensor
network". arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.0231(2012).
[28] Lloyd, Jack. "Botan Cryptographic Library." h ttp://botan.
randombit. net.