Comparative Assembly Hubs: Web Accessible Browsers for
Comparative Genomics
December 2, 2021
Ngan Nguyen1∗, Glenn Hickey1∗, Brian J. Raney1∗, Joel Armstrong1, Hiram Clawson1, Ann Zweig1, Jim
Kent1, David Haussler1,2, Benedict Paten1∗∗
1 Center for Biomolecular Sciences and Engineering, CBSE/ITI, UC Santa Cruz, 1156 High St, Santa Cruz,
CA 95064, USA.
2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.
* These authors contributed equally to this work. ** Corresponding author: benedict@soe.ucsc.edu
WeintroduceapipelinetoeasilygeneratecollectionsofwebaccessibleUCSCgenomebrowsersinter-
relatedbyanalignment. Usingthealignment,allannotationsandthealignmentitselfcanbeefficiently
viewed with reference to any genome in the collection, symmetrically. A new, intelligently scaled align-
ment display makes it simple to view all changes between the genomes at all levels of resolution, from
substitutions to complex structural rearrangements, including duplications.
Visualization is key to understanding functional and comparative genomic information. Genome browsers
are therefore critical to the study of biology, providing accessible resources for displaying annotations and
alignments. The UCSC Genome Browser [1] is one of the most popular, but creating a browser within
it previously required significant resources, as it was necessary to create a mirror site to host the browser
separately, or to work with the staff of the genome browser to create a browser within their main site.
Assemblyhubs,whichbuildonthesuccessfultrackhubmodel[2],makeiteasytogenerateaUCSCbrowser
simply by hosting the data in the form of flat-files on any publicly addressable URL [1]. This avoids users
having to install and configure the substantial browser code base on their machines and, by using user
hosting, makes updating straightforward. This work extends assembly hubs to allow users to quickly create
“comparativeassemblyhubs”,aframeworkofgenomebrowsersandannotationsinterrelatedbyanalignment.
Integraltothisframework,wehaveaddedsnaketracks,toallowallstructuralvariationstobeviewed. Snake
tracksareanalogoustoalinearizationofthepopularCircosplots[3,4], butimplementintelligentalignment
scaling, making them useful at all levels of detail.
Our software pipeline is comprised of three components, for which we provide an overall distribution that
can be downloaded and installed with just three commands (see Methods), and which should work on unix
distributionssuchasLinux,BSDandOSX.ThefirstcomponentistheCactusalignmentprogram[5],which
takes as input a set of genome sequences and outputs a genome multiple sequence alignment in Hierarchical
Alignment (HAL) format [6]. The second component is HAL tools, which provides a series of command
line tools and C/C++ APIs for manipulating HAL files and building comparative assembly hubs. The final
component is the snake track display, which is part of the UCSC Genome Browser code base [1], and which
provides visualization of alignments directly from HAL files.
The pipeline is run in two stages (see Methods). Firstly, Cactus is run to generate the HAL alignment file,
then the hal2AssemblyHub script (in the HAL tools package) builds the comparative assembly hub using
]NG.oib-q[
1v1421.1131:viXra
ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html). This script takes care of converting the base annotation files into the
display scaleable bigBed and bigWig formats, and translates these annotations (optionally) via a process
of alignment lift-over [7], to all the other genomes. At the end of this process a directory is created that
containsthenecessaryfiles,usingcompressedformatsforminimalspaceusage. Thelocationofthe‘hub.txt’
file, addressable as a public URL, is pasted into the UCSC browser hub page to view the browsers.
Thepipelinebuildsonebrowserforeachinputgenome,and,inaddition,anyancestralorpan-genomesthat
were imputed by Cactus during the alignment process (Paten et al., submitted). To illustrate by example,
Figure1showsacomparativeassemblyhubcontainingE.coli andShigella genomes(seeMethods),displayed
upon one of the E. coli reference genomes, K12 MG1655, with snake tracks, BED and WIG annotations
and lifted-over BED annotations. The top most tracks are K12 MG1655 annotations, including Alignability
(number of genomes mapped to each position), GC%, Antibiotic Resistance Database (ARDB), Genes,
Genomic Islands (GI) and non-coding RNAs (rRNA and tRNA). Below these are snake tracks, showing the
alignment of the genome to a subset of the other genomes and lifted-over ncRNA annotation track (track
K12 W3110 RNA) of E. coli K12 W3110.
Eachsnaketrackshowstherelationshipbetweenthechosenbrowsergenome,termedthereference(genome),
and another genome, termed the query (genome). The snake display is capable of showing all possible
types of structural rearrangement (see Methods). In full display mode (snake tracks in Figure 1), it can be
decomposedintotwoprimitivedrawingelements,segments,whicharethecoloredrectangles,andadjacencies,
which are the lines connecting the segments. Segments represent subsequences of the query genome aligned
to the given portion of the reference genome. Adjacencies represent the covalent bonds between the aligned
subsequences of the query genome. Segments can be configured to be colored by chromosome, strand (as
shown) or left a single color. Red tick-marks within segments represent substitutions with respect to the
reference,showninwindowsofthereferenceof(bydefault,userconfigurable)upto50kilo-bases(Figure1(b-
c)). Zoomed in to the base-level these substitutions are labeled with the non-reference base. An insertion
in the reference relative to the query creates a gap between abutting segment sides that is connected by
an adjacency. An insertion in the query relative to the reference is represented by an orange tick mark
that splits a segment at the location the extra bases would be inserted, or by coloring an adjacency orange,
indicatingthatthereareunalignedbasesbetweenthetwosegmentendsitconnects. Morecomplexstructural
rearrangements create adjacencies that connect the sides of non-abutting segments in a natural fashion, for
example,Figure1showstheknownlargeinversioninK12MG1655’scloselyrelatedstrainK12W3110[8,9].
Duplications within the query genome create extra segments that overlap along the reference genome axis.
For example, Figure 2 shows a tandem repeat region of E. coli KO11FL 162099 displayed along the genome
of E. coli KO11FL 52593 (52593 was engineered by chromosomal insertion of the Zymomonas mobilis pdc,
adhB and cat genes into E. coli W for ethanol production purpose [10]; 162099 is a derivative of 52593
and contains 20 tandem copies of the inserted pdc-adhB-cat genes[11]). To show regions where the query
segments align to multiple locations within the reference, for each snake track we draw colored coded sets
of lines along the reference genome axis that indicate self homologies (intervals of the reference genome that
align to other intervals of the reference genome), and, to maintain the semantics of the snake, align any
query segments that align to these regions arbitrarily to just one copy of the reference (Figure 2).
The pack display option can be used to display a snake track in more limited vertical space. It eliminates
the adjacencies from the display and forces the segments onto as few rows as possible, given the constraint
of still showing duplications in the query sequence (e.g. track W 162099 of Figure 2). The dense display
further eliminates these duplications so that a snake track is compactly represented along just one row (e.g.
tracks SE11 and IAI1 of Figure 2). Clicking on segments moves to the corresponding region in the query
genome, makingitsimpletonavigatebetweenreferences. Variousmouse-oversareimplementedtoshowthe
sizes of display elements, and the snakes and annotations can be reordered by dragging. A “hub central”
configuration page makes managing the large number of possible snake and lifted-over annotations easy.
Export of subregions of the alignment and track intersections can be made via the UCSC table browser
[12]. In the methods we describe a novel algorithm that, analogously to the bigBed and bigWig formats,
creates the scaleable levels of alignment detail, and show that this achieves near constant time page reloads
at all possible zoom levels. We have tested comparative assembly hubs with clades of mammalian genomes,
demonstrating that they are practical even for large animal genomes.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Dr. and Mrs. Gordon Ringold, NIH grant
2U41 HG002371-13 and NHGRI/NIH grant 5U01HG004695 for providing funding.