Computer vision-based recognition of liquid surfaces and phase boundaries
in transparent vessels, with emphasis on chemistry applications
Sagi Eppela* and Tal Kachmanb
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.
bPhysics Department, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
E-mail: sagieppel@gmail.com
Tel: +972 523 202 516
The ability to recognize the liquid surface and the liquid level in transparent containers is
perhaps the most commonly used evaluation method when dealing with fluids. Such
recognition is essential in determining the liquid volume, fill level, phase boundaries and
phase separation in various fluid systems. The recognition of liquid surfaces is particularly
important in solution chemistry, where it is essential to many laboratory techniques (e.g.,
extraction, distillation, titration). A general method for the recognition of interfaces between
liquid and air or between phase-separating liquids could have a wide range of applications
and contribute to the understanding of the visual properties of such interfaces. This work
examines a computer vision method for the recognition of liquid surfaces and liquid levels in
various transparent containers. The method can be applied to recognition of both liquid-air
and liquid-liquid surfaces. No prior knowledge of the number of phases is required. The
method receives the image of the liquid container and the boundaries of the container in the
image and scans all possible curves that could correspond to the outlines of liquid surfaces in
the image. The method then compares each curve to the image to rate its correspondence with
the outline of the real liquid surface by examining various image properties in the area
surrounding each point of the curve. The image properties that were found to give the best
indication of the liquid surface are the relative intensity change, the edge density change and
the gradient direction relative to the curve normal.
Keywords: Liquid-Level sensing, Machine-vision, Interface-Recogntion, Image-processing
1. Introduction
The visual identification of the liquid level and liquid surface in transparent vessels is perhaps
the most commonly used analytical method for dealing with fluids. Such recognition has
applications in a wide variety of fields, ranging from industry bottle-filling to everyday water
and beverage handling (Figure 1). 1-32 One of the fields in which liquid surface recognition is
most commonly used is solution chemistry. The ability to recognize liquid surfaces in the
chemistry laboratory is essential for the estimation of liquid volume and liquid level as well
as for the identification of phase boundaries and phase separation. The identification of such
properties is essential to many laboratory techniques,1, 33 including liquid-liquid extraction,3,
31 column chromatography, distillation, titration and nearly any other method used in solution
chemistry (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Various pieces of axisymmetric liquid-containing glassware vessels used in a chemistry
laboratory and for everyday purposes. From left to right: Plastic and glass bottles, kitchen cups, vial,
graduated cylinder, beaker, boiling flask/round bottom flask, Erlenmeyer flask, separatory funnel,
chromatography column.33
To date, little research has been performed on using computer vision to recognize surfaces
between liquid and air,16, 18-22 and even fewer works have focused on the recognition of
surfaces between phase-separating liquids.1, 3, 31 The methods available are either based on
specific additives such as colored floating beads,1, 3, 31 or assume specific conditions. A
general system that can identify phase boundaries and surfaces with no additives and in
uncertain conditions, similarly to a human observer, is not yet available. Such a system could
potentially be used for the automation of many laboratory processes.1, 3, 34-48 A general system
that can determine the location of a liquid surface in transparent glassware could also be of
use in any field in which liquid handling in a transparent vessel is necessary. In addition, the
determination of the visual properties that characterize liquid surfaces can allow deeper
understanding of the most commonly used and least explored analytical method in chemistry,
that of vision.1 In this paper, we suggest and demonstrate such a method that, while focused
on chemical solvents and glassware, can be applied to any liquid in a transparent vessel. The
method receives the image of the liquid and the boundaries of the liquid container in the
image (Figure 2.b), then determines the location and shape of all liquid surfaces in the image.
No prior knowledge of the number of liquid phases or their properties is required. The only
restriction regarding the vessel shape is that the vessel must be axisymmetric (cylindrical
symmetry), which is by far the most common symmetry for a liquid container in any field.
However, the method can be extended to other container symmetries. The method scans the
vessel area in the image, line by line, and generates curves corresponding to the outlines of all
possible liquid surfaces in the vessel (Section 2). The curves generated are then examined and
rated according to their correspondence to the outlines of real liquid surfaces in the image.
The curve rating is achieved by evaluating a specific property of the image around each point
of the curve and using the result to rank the curve’s correspondence with the liquid surface
(Section 3). Various image properties such as the intensity change and the edge density have
been evaluated as indicators for the liquid surface outline (Section 4). The best indicators
were found to be the relative intensity change normal to the curve as well as the change in
edge density and the gradient direction (Section 4). The main reasons for failed recognition
and false recognitions are also examined (Sections 5-8).
1.1. Computer vision in the chemistry laboratory, hierarchical approach
Vision-based recognition is the most common type of analysis used in dealing with a
chemical process.1, 33 Despite the extensive use of vision-based recognition in the laboratory,
only minor attention has been given to the use of computer vision in chemistry.1, 3, 34, 39, 44, 47,
49-67 A contemporary review addressing the use of cameras and computer vision in chemistry
by Ley and coworkers1 suggests that little research exists thus far in this field. One of the few
examples of computer vision in chemistry is the use of colored floating beads for tracking
interfaces in liquid-liquid extraction.3, 31, 35 The fact that this method has already been
successfully applied in several automatic chemistry systems demonstrates the potential of
machine vision in chemistry. Ideally, a computer vision system for chemistry will be able to
replicate the ability of a human observer to identify the myriad aspects of chemical systems
without assistance or additives. The main challenge in developing such a general computer
vision system is the diversity of the problem. A complete visual analysis of any chemical
system will first require the recognition of the vessel in which the chemical is stored,
followed by the recognition of the phases within the vessel and finally the analysis of the
properties of the phases. Solving all of these problems simultaneously requires a considerable
amount of work and will result in a complex but not necessarily usable solution.
Figure 2. Hierarchical layer approach to computer vision in the chemistry laboratory. Each layer
performs one level of recognition, and then transfers the result to the next layer, which performs another
level of recognition. a) First layer: recognition of the vessel borders. b) Second layer: recognition of the
liquid and air phases within the vessel. c) Recognition and analysis of the properties and type of each
phase (e.g., color, volume, emulsion).
A simple way to avoid this problem is by using a hierarchical layer-by-layer approach. In this
approach, each layer of recognition is performed independently, and the results are passed to
the next layer (Figure 2). Each layer focuses on the recognition of one specific set of features,
assuming that all necessary information has already been found by higher layers. The first
layer recognizes the liquid vessel and traces its boundaries in the image (Figure 2.a). The first
layer then passes the results to the second layer, which recognizes the liquid and gas phases
in the vessel (Figure 2.b). The boundaries of these phases are transferred to the next layers,
which can recognize further features (e.g., emulsion, solids, color). The advantage of the
hierarchical approach is that it allows each step of the recognition to be addressed
independently, which considerably simplifies the problem. The current work will address the
second layer of recognition, the identification of the liquid phases. The boundaries of the
vessel will be assumed to have been found in the previous layer. The recognition of the vessel
boundaries can be achieved either by separating the vessel from the background or by using
the template in the vessel shape (Figure 2.a). Source codes and instructions for performing
vessel-boundaries recognition are available freely (See Supporting Information, section 9).
Figure 3. a) Color image represented as a 2D matrix. Each matrix cell (pixel) contains 3 parameters (R,
G, B) that give the color saturation of Red, Green and Blue at the pixel location. b) The grayscale image is
represented as a 2D matrix. Each matrix cell (pixel) has a single value that gives the gray level intensity in
the pixel location. Intensity ranges from 0 (black) to 255 (white). c) Gradient size image: the value of each
pixel is the size of the intensity gradient in this location. The gradient size is represented as the brightness
level in the figure. d) Edge image: a binary image in which pixels corresponding to edges have a value of 1
(white), while all other pixels have a value of 0 (black).
1.2. Basic concepts in image analysis
This section will provide a brief review of some essential concepts in image analysis that will
be used in this work.
Pixel: All digital images are written as a 2D matrix, where each cell in the matrix is referred
to as a pixel. The value of each pixel represents the color of the pixel location in the image
(Figure 3).68, 69
Color image (RGB): Each pixel in the RGB color image has three components (R, G, B).68,
69 These components correspond to the saturation of the Red, Green and Blue colors in that
pixel (Figure 3.a). Each component can have a value ranging from 0 to 255, where 255 means
full color saturation (Figure 3.a). The combination of only three colors (wavelengths) with
different intensities can generate the majority of the colors perceived by human vision. The
RGB scheme is therefore used in the majority of digital screens, as well as for the storing and
processing of color images.
Grayscale image: Grayscale images are essentially black-and-white images in which each
pixel has a single value that represents the gray level or intensity in this pixel location (Figure
3.b).68, 69 The value of each pixel can range from 0 (black) to 255 (white). For human vision,
the colors of such images are perceived as shades of gray (Figure 3.b). Grayscale images are
commonly used in computer vision because they can be analyzed as 2D matrices or 2D
functions.
Gradient image: Gradient images are essentially the gradient maps of the intensity in the
grayscale image (Figure 3.c).68, 69 The value of each pixel in the gradient matrix represents
the value of the intensity gradient in this pixel location. The gradient size is calculated as the
Pythagorean sum of the difference between the intensity of the pixel and its close neighbors
(in the grayscale image). The importance of the gradient map is that the edges of objects and
patterns in images are usually characterized by a strong intensity change. Therefore, edges in
the image are usually found by locating image areas with a large gradient (Figure 3.c). 68-71
Edge image: The recognition of features in images is usually achieved by first finding the
edges of the features.68-71 Edge recognition is therefore an extremely important aspect of
computer vision. An edge image is a binary matrix (Figure 3.d) in which each pixel (cell) can
have one of two values: 0 (black) or 1 (white) (Figure 3.d). Pixels with values of 1
correspond to edges in the image (Figure 3.d). Edges in the image are usually characterized
by a sharp change in intensity. Therefore, a simple method for the identification of edges is
using all pixels in which the intensity gradient size exceeds some threshold value (Figure
3.c). While more sophisticated methods such as the canny operator70 are usually used, the
methods all use the intensity gradient magnitude as the main indicator for edge recognition.
1.3. Review of research in liquid level recognition
The available approaches on the machine vision-based recognition of liquid surfaces and
phase boundaries could be divided into three major categories.
a) Recognition of the liquid level based on the combination of computer vision with external
additives.1-14 An example of the use of additives is the detection of liquid-liquid interfaces
using a colored floating bead with a density between those of the upper and lower phases,
which causes the bead to float directly on the interface.1, 3, 4 Additives such as laser beams,8-14
shaped light and shaped background patterns5-7 have also been used. The additives are easily
identified in the image. Their position and shape in the image are used to locate the liquid
level.
b) Color-based recognition of liquids can be used in cases where the liquids have a distinct
color. The recognition in this case is achieved by finding the region in the image that
corresponds to the liquid color.1, 19 By setting the background to a unique color, this method
can in theory be applied to any non-transparent liquid.
c) Edge-based detection of the liquid level is perhaps the most efficient nonadditive computer
vision approach when dealing with transparent fluids. This approach uses the edge image or
intensity gradient (section 1.2) to identify the liquid line in the image.15-18, 20-23 Few variations
of this approach have been suggested. One approach is to identify the first line in which the
vertical intensity gradient passes some threshold as the liquid level (Figure 3.c).15 The second
edge-based approach is to identify the longest horizontal edge line in the canny edge image as
the liquid level (Figure 3.d).22 Yet another edge-based approach is to take the average vertical
distance from some reference line to the closest lower edge point in the edge image.16, 18, 20
1.4. General computer vision approach for the recognition of the liquid surfaces
in a vessel
All the existing approaches for recognition of the liquid level have reported good results for
the task for which they were designed. However, these methods are limited by either the use
of specific additives or the need for a specific set of conditions.
A machine vision approach that will replicate the ability of a human observer to find the
boundaries of liquid phases in an image must address four major challenges:
a) The various shapes of vessels in which the liquid can be stored. The large number of
glassware shapes used in chemistry (Figure 1) makes this requirement particularly
important for this field.
b) The liquid surface, which can take various shapes in the image. Current methods
usually assume that the liquid phase boundary will take the shape of straight line. This
assumption is true when the surface is viewed from a small angle (Figure 5.a).
However, depending on the angle of view, the liquid surface shape can take various
forms in the image (Figure 5).
c) Recognizing liquids with unknown properties such as color opacity, density and
emulsion. This requirement is particularly important for the chemistry laboratory
application, where large numbers of different materials are used, often with unknown
properties.
d) Recognition of phase separation for systems with an unknown number of phases. The
ability to identify phase separation as well as the phase boundaries is essential for
many chemistry applications, including liquid-liquid extraction and column
chromatography.
This work will suggest a general approach that confronts these challenges.
2. Scanning possible liquid surface curves
The liquid surface in an image is identified by scanning all curves that correspond to a
possible outline of the liquid surface in a given vessel shape. The curves that overlap with the
outline of the real liquid surface in the image are then identified. This approach is performed
in three steps: a) Generate all curves that correspond to the possible outline of the liquid
surface in a given vessel image (Section 2.1). b) For each curve, find the score that represents
the curve match to the outline of the real liquid surface in the image (Section 2.2). c) Accept
the curves with the best scores or the curves with the scores that pass some threshold (Section
2.3). A detailed description of each step is given in the following sections.
Figure 4. Scheme of the method for tracing the liquid surfaces in an image. a-b) Scan over all horizontal
lines inside the vessel boundaries (in the image). c) For each line, generate all of the horizontal ellipses for
which the current line is the major horizontal axis. The height of the ellipse can range from one pixel to
some fraction of the ellipse width. If the curve thus generated exceeds the vessel boundaries, ignore it. d)
Divide the ellipse into upper and lower curves. The upper curve contains all of the points of the ellipse
above and on the center line. The lower curve contains all of the points on the ellipse on and below the
center line (if the curve is a straight line, use the curve as it is). e) The upper and lower curves are each
separately matched to the image. Each curve is given scores corresponding to the match between the
curves and the liquid surface in the image. f) The higher score of the two curves is taken as the full ellipse
score. g) The scores for all of the curves in all lines are registered. Curves with scores that exceed a
minimal threshold are accepted as surface lines. Curves that are too close to curves with higher scores are
removed.72
2.1. Generating all curves corresponding to possible liquid surfaces outlines
Generating all of the possible curves that could correspond to the outline of the liquid surface
in a given image can result in very large numbers of possibilities, making such a scan
impractical for most purposes. However, the number of possible curves can be dramatically
reduced by assuming that the camera is not tilted to the left or the right. Under this
assumption, all of the possible liquid surface curves could be generated by scanning all
horizontal lines inside the vessel area in the image (Figure 4.b). For each line, all of the
possible shapes of the liquid surfaces (centered on this line) are generated. For axisymmetric
(cylindrical) vessels where the camera distance is larger than vessel radios, the liquid surface
in the image will take the approximate shape of a straight line or a horizontal ellipse (Figure
4.c). The observed height of the ellipse depends on the angle of view (Figure 5.b). The liquid
surface will appear as a straight line if viewed from very far or if the line of sight is the exact
height of the surface (Figure 5.a). The liquid surface will appear as a full circle if the vessel is
viewed directly from above (Figure 5.c). The identification of the liquid level in a transparent
container is mostly performed from the side (Figure 5.b). As result, the maximum height of
the ellipse that is generated could be restricted to some fraction of the line width (30% in this
work).
Figure 5. Effect of angle of view on the observed shape of the surface (for round surfaces). a) Viewed
from the same line or from a large distance (angle of view φ=0), the surface looks like a straight line. b)
Viewed from an angle of φ, the surface looks like a horizontal ellipse of height h=w·Sinφ, where w is the
ellipse width. c) Viewed from directly above (φ=90˚), the surface looks like a circle.
Thus, for each horizontal line inside the vessel boundary in the image (Figure 4.b), all of the
elliptical curves for which the line is the major axis and the ellipse height ranges from 1 pixel
to 30% of the ellipse length are generated (Figure 4.c). The number of scanned curves could
be further reduced by ignoring the curves that exceed the container border (Figure 4.c,
rightmost). Further reduction could be achieved by ignoring the areas in the vessel that are
too narrow relative to the maximum width of the vessel. The last restriction is used because
in most vessels, narrow areas correspond to corks and funnels that rarely contain liquids
(Figure 1).
2.2. Rating correspondence between the curves and outlines of liquid surfaces
Once a curve has been generated, the curve is evaluated and rated by comparing it to the
image. The curve is given a score that estimates its overlap with the outline of the real liquid
surface in the image. The best method to perform such an evaluation on an elliptical curve is
by first dividing the ellipse into upper and lower curves (Figure 4.d). The upper curve
contains all of the points in the ellipse that are on or above the center line. The lower curve
contains all of the points in the ellipse that are on or below the center line (Figure 4.d). Each
of the two curves is matched to the image separately and is given a score that corresponds to
the curve overlap with the outline of the liquid surface (Figure 4.e). The best (highest) score
of the two curves is used as the full ellipse score (Figure 4.f). This method was found to be
much more effective than evaluating the entire ellipse in one step because in the liquid
images, half of the liquid surface contour is farther away from the viewer. The shape of this
half is therefore more affected by diffraction and absorbance and can have a higher deviation
from the elliptical curve, as well as weaker edges. The score of each curve is evaluated by
calculating some image property around each point of the curve. This evaluation is discussed
in sections 3-4.
2.3. Selecting the curves threshold score and determining the number of phases
Once all of the curves have been generated and rated, the next step is to pick the curves that
represent real liquid surfaces according to their scores. The major challenge in this step is the
determination of a threshold score for accepting a curve as the true outline of the liquid
surface in the image. If the vessel is known in advance to contain N liquid phases, it is
possible to pick the N curves with the top scores (not including the top and the bottom of the
vessel). However, there is often no prior knowledge of the number of separate liquid phases
in the image. In such a case, it is necessary to set some threshold score that will determine
which curves will be accepted. A good way to pick such a threshold is as some fraction of the
best score obtained (for all curves). In this method, the curves are first sorted according to
their scores. The threshold score is then taken as a given fraction of the best score
([Threshold Score]=T·[Best Score], 0<T<1). This method is effective even if the vessel is
empty because, in an image of an empty vessel, the curves corresponding to the top and the
bottom of the vessel will still receive relatively high scores that will be used as the threshold.
2.3.1. Avoiding multiple recognition of the same surface
The acceptance of more than one curve for a single liquid surface has proven to be a major
problem. This problem occurs when the liquid surface in the image convolves with multiple
curves and can be partially solved by setting a minimal distance between two accepted
curves. If the gap between the two curves is smaller than the minimal distance, the curve with
the lower score is deleted.72
3. Evaluating and rating the correspondence between the curve and the
liquid surface line in the image
The ability to evaluate the correspondence between a given curve and a liquid surface in the
image is the core of the recognition of liquid surfaces (section 2). This evaluation is
performed by examining some property of the image around each point of the curve and
using this property to calculate a local score for that point. The curve score could be
evaluated by either averaging the local scores for all points on the curve or taking their
percentile. The curve score represents a correspondence level between the curve and the
outline of the liquid surface in the image. Ideally, the property used to calculate the curve
score should be unique to the liquid surface regions in the image. Several image properties
have been examined as indicators for the liquid surface and are discussed in section 4. The
methods used to calculate the curve score are discussed in section 3.1, below.
3.1. Methods for calculating the correspondence score between the curve and the
liquid surface in the image
Three computational methods have been used to evaluate the correlation between the curve
and the outline of the liquid surface in the image. Detailed step-by-step algorithms of these
methods are given in sections 3.1.1-3.1.3 (these sections are not essential for understanding
the rest of the paper and can be skipped). Each of the methods could be used to calculate a
wide variety of image properties and could be applied to the grayscale image, the gradient
map or the edge image (section 1.2), depending on the type of property used as the indicator.
The method by which the curve score is calculated has a considerable effect on the result of
the recognition process. Similar image properties evaluated using different methods often
gave different results in terms of recognition accuracy.
Figure 6. Method 1: Scoring the match between the curve and the liquid surface using a point-by-point
evaluation of the curve surroundings. a-b) For each point in the curve, find the corresponding pixel in the
image (the image can be the grayscale, the gradient map or the edge image, depending on the property
examined). c) Points in the image corresponding to the curve marked with X. d) Find the region that
surrounds each pixel on the curve (the region surrounded by a rectangle).73 e) The average value of all of
the pixels in this region positioned above the curve (marked as U) is calculated as U. The average value of
all of the pixels in this region positioned on or below this curve (marked as D) is calculated as D. The local
score of the point is calculated using U and D ((Table 1-2, column 3). The total curve score is calculated as
either the average or the percentile of the local scores of all of the points in the curve (Table 1-2, column
6).
3.1.1. Method 1: Point-by-point evaluation of the curve surroundings
Method 1 evaluates the curve correspondence to the liquid surface by evaluating some
property of the image in the surroundings of each point of the curve. The method is based on
4 steps (Figure 6):
a) For each point in the curve, find the corresponding pixel in the image (Figure 6.a-c) and
the region surrounding this pixel (the region surrounded by a square in Figure 6.d).
b) The average value of all pixels in this region that are located above the curve is calculated
as U (U, Figure 6.e). The average value of all of the pixels in this region that are located on
the curve or below the curve is calculated as D (D, Figure 6.e).
c) The local score of each curve point is calculated as either UD (the intensity change
normal to the curve) or as (the relative intensity change normal to the curve). The
last equation provided excellent results when used with the grayscale image for the pixel
values.
d) Either the average or the percentile of the local scores is used (in absolute value) as the
curve score (Section 2.2).
3.1.2. Method 2: Direct point-by-point evaluation
Method 2 evaluates the curve correspondence to the liquid surface by examining the values of
the pixels that are located directly on the curve. The gradient direction and the normal
direction of the curve in this point are used. This approach is implemented in four steps.
a) For each point in the curve, find the corresponding pixel in the image.
b) For each pixel on the curve, evaluate the pixel value as I (Figure 7.c). Additionally,
evaluate the curve normal angle  (Figure 7.b) and the grayscale image gradient direction 
at this pixel (Figure 7.a).
c) Calculate the local score as either I or ICOS() . The last equation provides good results
when using the canny edge image70 for a pixel value (I ).
d) Calculate the curve score as the absolute average of the local scores of all of the points on
the curve.
Figure 7. Method 2 for scoring the match between the curve and the liquid surface using point-by-point
evaluation. For each point in the curve, find the corresponding pixel in the image (Panel a-c). Evaluate
the pixel value (I , panel c), the angle of the curve normal (θ, panel b) and the angle of the grayscale
intensity gradient (ϕ, panel a) in this pixel (the curve normal and gradient direction were calculated in a
region of 3X3 pixels around each point). Use these three properties to calculate the local score (Table 1-2,
column 3). The curve score is the average of the local scores for all of the points on the curve.
3.1.3. Method 3: Regions difference
Method 3 evaluates the correspondence between the curve and the liquid surface in the image
by subtracting the average pixel values of one image region from another. The method is
based on three steps.
a) Calculate the average value of all of the pixels in the image that are located directly on the
curve (I Figure 8.b) as I .
b) Calculate the average value of all of the pixels that are positioned above the curve and
adjacent to the pixels on the curve (A, Figure 6.b) as A.
c) Calculate the curve score as I A or . The expression I A provided good results
when used with the canny edge image for pixel values (A,I).
Figure 8. Method 3 for scoring the correspondence between the curve and the l iquid surface using the
difference between the average pixel values of image regions. a-b) For all points on the curve, find the
corresponding pixel in the image (marked I ) and average the value of these pixels (I ). Find all of the
pixels that are adjacent to and above the curve pixels (markedA) and calculate their average value (A).
Use A and I to calculate the total curve score (Table 1-2, column 3).
3.2. Experimental procedure
The methods and the indicator for the liquid surface were evaluated based on the test results
for 147 images of liquid-containing glass vessels. The source code for all methods is
available freely with documentation (See Supporting Information, Section 9). The recognition
times were on the scale of 10-60 seconds for most methods (for approximately 200X250
images with an Intel I7 processor). The vessels used for the images were laboratory glassware
commonly used in synthetic chemistry, including a beaker, a round bottom flask, an
Erlenmeyer flask, a separatory funnel and a chromatography column. Out of 147 total
images, 59 contained one liquid, and 88 contained two liquid phases (Figures 1, 9). The
liquids used included water, oil, hexane, DMF, THF and silica slurry. The results of each
method were evaluated by manually counting the number of the surfaces that were missed
and the number of false recognitions of surfaces (Tables 1-2). The pictures of the vessels
were taken using a simple digital camera (Canon A810) in the organic chemistry laboratory.
Smooth black curtain fabric with no ripples was used as both background and tablecloth.
3.2.1. Evaluation of the methods and indicators
Tables 1-2 give the test results for various methods and indicators used to trace the liquid
surfaces in the images. The two most important parameters in evaluating the effectiveness of
the methods were the miss rate and the false recognition rate (false positives). The miss rate
was calculated as the number of surfaces missed divided by the total number of liquid
surfaces in all images. The false recognition rate per image was calculated as the number of
surfaces that were recognized in the wrong positions divided by the number of images. Both
of these parameters and their ratio can be changed by altering the threshold score for
accepting the curve (Section 2.3). Therefore, there is no straightforward way to rank various
methods for liquid surface recognition. However, it is still possible to identify distinctly
better approaches with both a lower miss rate and a lower number of false recognitions.
Table 1. Results of methods for recognizing liquid surfaces in images, with no consistency check applied a
E n try I n d ic a to r D e s c rip tio n ( S c o re fo r s in g le c u rv e p o in t) L o c a l s c o re e q u a tio n b ,c e q u a tio n ) d ( r P e ix e l v a lu e s in lo c a l s c o I m a g e T y p e s c o re fro m lo c a l s c o re s e E v a lu a tio n m e th o d o f c u rv e M e th o d f T h re s h o ld (0 .) g f o r a ll s u rfa c e s h F ra c tio n o f m is s e d s u rfa c e s (% ) l -a i i q r u s i u d rfa c e s (% ) h F ra c tio n o f m is s e d l -l i i q q u u i i d d s u rfa c e s (% ) h F ra c tio n o f m is s e d F m r a i a m l t s c a e h g e e s ( p % e )j l o c a tio n b u t w ro n g s h a p e (% ) i F ra c tio n o f c o rre c t c u rv e o ( % f s ) a m e s u rfa c e k F ra c tio n o f d o u b le re c o g n itio n s u rfa c e w ith e m u ls io n (% ) m M is s fra c tio n fo r
Relative intensity change normal UD Percentile
1 Grayscale 1 .4 9.8 1.4 23.9 44 2.4 7.5 36.8
to curve (percentile) MAX(U,D) (65%)
Relative intensity change normal UD
2 Grayscale Average 1 .4 7.2 0.7 18.2 78 1.8 10.6 31.6
to curve (average) MAX(U,D)
Percentile
3 Intensity change normal to curve UD Grayscale 1 .3 9.4 0.7 23.9 52 6.1 8.0 42.1
Global relative intensity change UD
4 Grayscale Average 1 .4 9.4 0.7 23.9 84 4.7 6.6 42.1
normal to curve74 MAX(U,D)
Absolute intensity change normal
5 UD Grayscale Average 1 .4 11.5 1.4 28.4 87 2.9 7.2 42.1
Absolute relative intensity change UD
6 Grayscale Average 1 .4 6.8 1.4 15.9 131 5.0 7.3 21.1
normal to curve MAX(U,D)
Average intensity of pixel on
7 I Grayscale Average 2 .75 23.4 19.0 30.7 190 4.4 0.0 47.4
Relative difference between IA
8 average intensity above and on Grayscale As it is 3 .4 13.2 4.1 28.4 85 8.8 5.4 47.4
curve MAX(I,A)
Normalized difference between
9 average intensity above and on Grayscale As it is 3 .4 19.1 7.5 38.6 88 11.6 10.5 57.9
Difference between average
10 IA Grayscale As it is 3 .4 14.5 4.1 31.8 63 9.0 8.5 47.4
intensity above and on curve
Difference between average (Ellipse interior
11 intensity inside and around intensity) - (Ellipse Grayscale As it is - .4 30.2 23.8 40.9 66 1.2 1.2 42.1
surface curve75 outer curve intensity)
Relative edge density change UD
12 Edge Average 1 .5 10.2 3.4 21.6 59 7.1 9.0 21.1
normal to curve MAX(U,D)
13 Average edge density on curve I Edge Average 2 .6 11.1 5.4 20.5 63 8.6 1.0 26.3
Edge density and scalar product
14 of gradient direction and curve ICOS() Edge Average 2 .45 10.2 4.8 19.3 52 2.8 10.9 15.8
Difference between average edge
15 IA Edge As it is 3 .4 7.7 2.7 15.9 72 6.5 15.2 15.8
density above and on curve
Score of the curve in generalized Hough transform curve
16 Edge Average - .3 14.5 6.1 28.4 72 7.0 1.5 26.3
Hough transform (12 angle bins) score
Change in gradient size normal to Gradient
17 UD Average 1 .4 12.8 2.7 29.5 68 3.9 6.3 52.6
curve Size
18 Average gradient size on curve I Average 2 .5 15.7 6.8 30.7 79 5.1 0.0 42.1
Scalar product of gradient and Gradient
19 ICOS() Average 2 .5 9.4 4.1 18.2 80 4.2 13.1 10.5
curve normal Size
Difference between average Gradient
20 IA As it is 3 .4 12.3 2.7 28.4 52 4.4 12.1 36.8
gradient size above and on curve Size
See Table 2 footnotes.
Table 2. Results of methods for recognition of the liquid surfaces with consistency check applied a
E n try I n d ic a to r D e s c rip tio n ( r S s c in o g re le f o c u rv e p o in t) L o c a l s c o re e q u a tio n b ,c e q u a tio n ) d (P ix e l v a lu e s in lo c a l s c o re I m a g e T y p e s c o re fro m lo c a l s c o re s e E v a lu a tio n m e th o d o f c u rv e M e th o d f T h re s h o ld (0 .) g f o r a ll s u rfa c e s h F (% ra
c tio n o f m is s e d s u rfa c e s l -a i i q r u s i u d rfa c e s (% ) h F ra c tio n o f m is s e d l -l i i q q u u i i d d s u rfa c e s (% ) h F o n ra o c f ti m is s e d F m a a l t s c e h e s p e r im a g e (% )j b u t w ro n g s h a p e (% ) i F ra c tio n o f c o rre c t c u rv e lo c a tio
s ( % a m ) e s u rfa c e k F ra c tio n o f d o u b le re c o g n itio n
s u rfa c e w ith e m u ls io n (% ) m M is s fra c tio n fo r
21 Intensity change normal to curve UD Grayscale Average 1 .3 9.4 0.7 23.9 67 3.3 8.5 36.8
Relative intensity change normal to UD
22 Grayscale Average 1 .4 8.9 0.7 22.7 46 2.8 6.1 42.1
curve MAX(U,D)
Global relative intensity change normal UD
23 Grayscale Average 1 .4 11.1 0.7 28.4 39 3.3 7.2 47.4
to curve 74 MAX(U,D)
Absolute intensity change normal to
24 UD Grayscale Average 1 .4 11.5 1.4 28.4 44 1.4 3.8 42.1
Absolute relative intensity change UD
25 Grayscale Average 1 .4 9.4 2.0 21.6 56 2.3 7.0 26.3
normal to curve MAX(U,D)
Relative intensity change normal to UD
26 curve in 1% range (height of curve Grayscale Average 1 .4 10.2 0.7 26.1 57 4.3 5.7 42.1
surroundings is 1% of vessel height)
Relative intensity change normal to
27 curve in 2% range (height of point Grayscale Average 1 .4 7.2 1.4 17.0 88 1.8 2.3 15.8
surroundings is 2% of vessel height)
Average relative intensity change UD Color
28 normal to curve in the Red, Green, and (R, G, B Average 1 .4 8.1 0.7 20.5 49 5.1 7.4 42.1
Blue channels of the RGB color image. channels)
29 Edge density change normal to curve UD Edge Average 1 .4 10.6 2.0 25.0 61 4.8 10.5 21.1
30 Average edge density on curve I Edge Average 2 .45 8.1 2.0 18.2 57 6.9 5.6 10.5
Edge density and scalar product
31 ICOS() Edge Average 2 .4 8.5 3.4 17.0 46 4.7 9.3 15.8
gradient direction and curve normal
Difference between average edge
32 IA Edge As it is 3 .4 10.2 2.0 23.9 46 5.2 9.0 21.1
density above and on curve
Scalar product gradient and curve Gradient
33 ICOS() Average 2 .4 7.2 2.7 14.8 59 4.6 7.3 10.5
normal size
Difference between average gradient Gradient
34 IA As it is 3 .32 10.6 2.0 25.0 54 5.2 10.0 31.6
size above and on curve Size
Relative gradient size change UD Gradient
35 Average 1 .6 8.9 4.1 17.0 59 2.3 2.8 15.8
normal to curve MAX(U,D) Size
Consistency check is used to filter false recognition base on local scores consistency (Section 4.3.1). With consistency check curves were evaluated only
if the relative intensity change normal to the curve was larger than 10% for at least 85% of the points (Section 4.3.1).
The equation used to evaluate the local score for each curve point (Sections 3-3.1).
The parameters for the local score equations are discussed in sections 3.1.1-3.1.3 (Figures 6-8). Iis the value of the pixel located on the point. U is
the average value of the pixels in the point vicinity that are positioned above the curve. D is the average value of the pixels in the point vicinity that
are located on or below the curve (Figure 6). is the angle of the normal to the curve at the point.  is the angle of the intensity gradient of the
grayscale image on the point (Figure 7). I is the average value of the pixels located on the curve. A is the average value of the pixels adjacent to the
curve pixels that are positioned above the curve (Figure 8).
The pixel values used to evaluate the local score (column 3) depend on the image type used for the evaluation (Section 1.2). The pixel values used are
intensity (0-255) for the grayscale image, Sobel gradient size (>0) for the gradient image and 0/1 for the edge image (canny, Section 1.2).
The evaluation of the total curve score from the local scores is performed either by averaging the local scores or by taking the percentile of the local
scores (Section 4.4). The percentile is either the highest positive value exceeded by 65% of the local scores, or the absolute value of the lowest negative
value that is higher than 65% of the local scores (whichever gives the higher result). ‘As it is’ means that the equation in column 3 is the curve score.
The method gives the algorithm used for the calculation (Section 3.1).
Threshold gives the minimum score that the curve needs to receive to be accepted relative to the best score achieved by the curves in this image
([Threshold Score]=[Max Score]•Threshold, Section 2.3).
The number of liquid surfaces that were missed divided by the total number of liquid surfaces of this type in all of the images (Section 5).
The number of curves that were accepted despite not overlapping with the liquid surfaces in the image, divided by the number of images (Section 6).
The number of cases in which the line of the curve matches the line of a real liquid surface, but the curve shape differs from the shape of the real
surface (Section 7).
The number of cases in which multiple curves were identified for a single surface in the image (Section 7).
Miss rate for surfaces with high emulsion (Section 5.2).
4. Image properties as indicators for phase boundaries
Several image properties were examined as indicators for the liquid surface. The indicators
were evaluated using the methods in section 3.1. The evaluation results appear in Tables 1-2.
The image properties that were found to act as the best indicators for the liquid surface are as
follows: a) relative intensity change normal to the curve (Section 4.1.3); b) edge density
difference between the curve and its surroundings (Section 4.3); and c) combination of the
edge density and the scalar product of the curve normal and the gradient direction (Section
4.3.1). The effectiveness of the different indicators is discussed in the following sections.
4.1. Intensity, intensity difference and relative intensity difference
Three major properties of the grayscale images (section 1.3) were examined as indicators for
the liquid surface boundaries. These properties are the intensity, the intensity change and the
relative intensity change (normal to the curve). Of these properties, the relative intensity
change was found to be the best indicator for the liquid surface boundaries.
4.1.1. Intensity
The edges of the liquid surfaces in the images usually exhibit a high intensity (Figures 9-11),
suggesting that the intensity of the pixels along the curve (in the grayscale image) could be
used as an indicator for the liquid surface (Entry 7, Table 1). However, the intensity proved to
be a poor indicator for the liquid surface because image regions with high intensity also
appear in many types of features not related to liquid surfaces (Figures 9-11).
4.1.2. Intensity change
The intensity difference is one of the main indicators used by both human and computer
vision to identify features in images. The liquid surface in an image usually shows a strong
change in intensity normal to the surface boundaries (Figures 9-11), suggesting that the
intensity change can act as an effective indicator. The curve local score evaluation was
performed using the intensity change normal to the curve around each pixel on the curve
(Entry 21, Table 2). This indicator gave good results for surfaces with strong boundaries but
weak results for surfaces with weak and blurry boundaries (Entry 21, Table 2).
4.1.3. Relative intensity difference
The relative intensity change normal to the curve was found to be the best indicator for the
liquid surfaces in the images. This indicator used the intensity change normal to the curve
divided by the intensity as the local score (Entries 1, 22, 23, Tables 1-2). The advantage of
this indicator is that it balances the illumination effect and the boundary strength, which
makes it better for detecting liquid phases with weak boundaries. This approach provided
very good results in terms of the recognition and false recognition rates (Entries 1, 22, 23,
Tables 1-2). Some of the results of this method are shown in Figure 9.
4.2. Intensity change direction and sign consistency
The pixel intensity could either decrease or increase when going from the upper to the lower
side of the curve. Therefore, the intensity change normal to the curve could be either positive
or negative (Section 4.1). When calculating the curve scores, the sign of the change is not
important, and the average change around all of the curve points is taken as an absolute value.
However, the consistency of the direction of the change is important. The methods that
average the absolute values of the local changes (Entry 5-6 Table 1) provided inferior results
compared to the methods that use the absolute value of the average change (Entries 2-3,
Table 1). This result can be explained by the fact that intensity changes could result from
various image interferences and noises, which tend to have an inconsistent direction. As a
result, the intensity changes resulting from noise will tend to cancel each other out when
averaged with the sign included.
Figure 9. Examples of successful recognition of liquid surfaces in images, (The results of Entry 22, Table
2). Above: the original image. Below: the image with all recognitions (true and false) marked in black.
The floor and ceiling of the vessel outline (marked white) are always marked as the top and bottom phase
boundaries.
4.3. Edge-based indicators.
Edges in images are the main property used to identify features by both humans and
computers. Edge images are binary images in which the pixels on the feature edges have
values of one, while the rest of the pixels have values of zero (Figure 3.d).68-71 Several edge
detectors have been developed for computer vision, the most common of which is the canny
algorithm (Section 1.3).68-71 The liquid surfaces are usually characterized by clear edges in
the image (Figure 3.d). We could therefore expect the curves that overlap with the liquid
surfaces to have a high correlation with the edges in the edge image. The average edge
density on the curve was therefore examined as an indicator for liquid surfaces (average value
of the pixel on the curve in the edge image). However, when used alone, this indicator gave
only modest results (Entry 30, Table 2). The main problem in this approach is the large
number of unrelated edges caused by other features in the image (Figure 3.d). One way to
solve this problem is by using the difference between the edge density on the curve and the
edge density on the area directly above the curve. This approach prevents false recognition in
the noisy image areas with high edge density and results in improved accuracy (Entry 32,
Table 2).
4.3.1. Combining edge and gradient direction
Another way to improve the accuracy of the edge base indicators is by using the direction of
the edge relative to the direction of the curve. The edge line resulting from the boundary of
the liquid surface should have the same direction as the curve corresponding to the outline of
this surface. To include the edge direction in the calculation of the curve score, the scalar
product of the gradient direction (Figure 7) and the curve normal was used (Entry 31, Table
2). This approach provided good results specifically for the recognition of the liquid-liquid
surfaces (Entry 31, Table 2). A similar approach is to use the generalized Hough transform
for elliptical curves.68, 69, 76 However, this approach gave inferior results (Entry 16, Table 1).
4.4. Average and percentile-based approaches for evaluating curve scores
Methods 1-2 (Section 3.1.1-2) evaluate the correspondence of the curve to the liquid surface
by evaluating some image property around each point in the curve. This property is then used
to calculate the local score for this point. The curve score could be calculated either by
averaging the local scores of all the curve points or by taking the percentile (highest value
that is exceeded by 65% of the points). Averaging has the advantage of using the scores of all
of the points in the curve. The percentile has the advantage of being more rigid and less
sensitive to noise. When used alone, the percentile-based score gave better results (Entries 1,
3, Table 1). However, the best approach was found to be the combination of the percentile
and the average of the local scores. This approach uses the average to find the curve score
and the percentile as a consistency check for filtering curves with high scores and low
consistency. Hence, the score is calculated by averaging the local scores. However, only
curves in which the local score of 85% of the points passes the minimal value with a
consistent sign are used. This approach was named the consistency check and is discussed in
the following section.
4.4.1. Curve consistency check as the filter for false recognition
The liquid surfaces in the image exhibit an intensity change that is consistent along most of
the surface boundaries (Figures 9-11). Other image features often show a stronger intensity
change across their boundaries. However, such features rarely have a shape that is consistent
with any possible liquid surface in the image, implying that curves that receive a high score
as a result of partial overlap with image features not related to the liquid surfaces could be
filtered out by examining their local score consistency. Filtering out curves with high scores
but low consistency was found to be highly effective in reducing the false recognition rate.
The filtering was performed by using only curves in which 85% or more of the points’ local
scores have the same sign and values that exceed some minimal threshold (setting a minimal
threshold value for the 85th percentile of the local scores). The relative intensity change
normal to the curve was found to be a good indicator for such a consistency check (Section
4.1.3). This filter was applied by demanding that at least 85% of the points on a given curve
will show a relative intensity change of 10% or more with the same sign.77
Adding this filter to various methods considerably reduces the number of false recognitions
without any significant increase in the miss rate. This can be seen by comparing the results of
the methods that were used with a consistency check (Table 2) and without the consistency
check (Table 1). The property used as an indicator for the consistency check does not have to
be the same as the image property used to evaluate the curve score. All methods in Table 2
used a consistency check based on the relative intensity change, and all show considerable
improvement regardless of the property used to calculate the score (Table 2).
4.5. Resolution
The resolution of the scan is essentially the size of the area around each point in the curve
where the indicator property was evaluated (Section 3.1.1). For most liquid surfaces, the
thickest resolution possible was found to give the best results (examination of the pixels
directly on the curve and their direct neighbors, Figures 6-8). However, for dispersive and
emulsive phase boundaries (Figure 10), the examination of pixels that are farther away from
the curve (2% of the container height) was found to give better results (Entry 27, Table 2, last
column) because, in such cases, the phase boundaries are dispersive, and change can occur
over a wider range.
4.6. Use of color
The curve correlation with the liquid surface was also evaluated using a color image (RGB,
Section 1.3). The image was first separated into red, green and blue channels. Each channel
was then evaluated by comparing the channel to the curve as if it were a grayscale image with
an intensity value that corresponds to the color saturation. The curve scores of the red, green
and blue channels were averaged to give the final curve score. However, no real improvement
in accuracy resulted from using the color image (Entry 28, Table 2). This could be explained
by the fact that the all of the images examined in this work contained transparent liquids or
white silica. As result, the color image contained little additional information compared to the
grayscale image. For vividly colored liquids, the use of color in the recognition process
would likely show superior results.1
5. Main causes for missed recognition of phase boundaries
Table 2 shows that the recognition of liquid-air surfaces was achieved with high accuracy
(less than 10% miss rate) for all evaluation methods. The accuracy for the best methods was
nearly perfect, with a miss rate of less than 1%, for liquid-air boundaries (Entries 21-23,
Table 2). The boundaries between phase-separating liquids were missed at a much higher rate
by all of the methods. This high miss rate is caused by two major properties of liquid-liquid
interfaces: a) weak surface boundaries (Figure 10) and b) emulsifying and dispersive phase
boundaries. Both are discussed below.
5.1. Weak surface boundaries.
Weak phase boundaries are characterized by a small change in intensity across the liquid
surface edges (Figure 10). The two main causes of this small change are liquid phases with
similar absorbance and refractive indices and high interphase miscibility. Because all of the
effective recognition methods utilize the intensity change across the surface boundaries in
one way or another, small intensity changes increase the miss rate. However, methods based
on the relative intensity change as the indicator are more immune to this effect (Section
4.1.3).
Figure 10. Examples of missed recognition of the liquid surface as a result of emulsion and weak phase
boundaries (based on the method in Entry 22 of Table 2). Above the original image and below the original
image with all recognitions and false recognitions marked in black. The floor and the ceiling of the vessel
outline (marked white) are always marked as the top and the bottom phase boundaries.
5.2. Dispersive and emulsive surfaces
Emulsion is characterized by droplets of one liquid dispersed in the other liquid. Emulsion
occurs as a result of the incomplete phase separation between the liquid phases (Figure 10).
Emulsive phase boundaries have two negative effects that disrupt their recognition. First, the
emulsion causes the phase transition between liquids to occur over a wide range instead of a
thin line. As a result, instead of a sharp intensity change at the phase boundaries, the image
shows a weak change over a wide range, making identification more difficult (Figure 10).
Another negative effect of emulsion is that the liquid surface is no longer in equilibrium and
therefore no longer minimizes its area to form a flat plane. As a result, the liquid surface will
no longer take the shape of a line or an ellipse in the image. Therefore, the curves generated
during the scan (Section 2.1) can no longer match the liquid surface shape accurately. A
partial solution for the recognition of emulsive phase boundaries is using a lower resolution
(Section 4.5), i.e., using a larger area in the image above and below the curve line when
evaluating the image property used as an indicator for the liquid surface. This practice
improves the recognition rate for the emulsive surfaces but reduces the recognition accuracy
for all other cases (Entry 27, Table 2, last column).
6. False recognition of liquid surfaces
False recognition of a curve as a liquid surface occurs when a curve that does not overlap
with any real liquid surface in the image receives a score that passes the acceptance threshold
(Figures 11-12). One way to reduce the false recognition rate is by increasing the threshold
for accepting the curve as the liquid surface line (Section 2.3). However, increasing the
threshold inevitably increases the miss rate of the real surface lines. The major causes of false
recognition are image features originating from reflections, labels, sharp turns in the
container surface, droplets and nonhomogeneous fluids (Figures 11-12). The edges of these
features can overlap with the elliptical curve in the scan (Section 2) and increase its score. As
a result, the curve can receive a high score and be accepted even when the curve does not
overlap with any real liquid surface in the image. The image features that cause false
recognition can be divided into two categories: a) patterns in the image that do not fit the
shape of any possible liquid surface outline (Figure 11), and b) patterns with an elliptical or
line shape that fits a possible liquid surface (Figure 12). Both categories are discussed below.
Figure 11. Examples of false recognition of liquid surfaces caused by features in the image that do not
resemble the shape of any possible liquid surface. Results of the method in Entry 2, Table 1 (without a
consistency check). Above: The original image. Below: The image with all curves that were recognized as
liquid surfaces marked in black.
6.1. False recognition resulting from patterns that do not fit the shape of any
possible liquid surface
Image features that do not fit the elliptical or line shape of possible liquid surfaces can cause
false recognition by overlapping with the generated elliptical curve (Section 2.1) in specific
areas (Figure 11). The edges of such patterns can be stronger than the edges of the liquid
surface boundaries. As a result, even a small overlap between the pattern and a curve can
affect the curve score and cause it to be accepted as a liquid surface. However, because such
patterns do not follow the shape of any possible liquid surface, their effect might be strong in
some areas but inconsistent along the entire curve. Using the consistency of the edges along
the curve can therefore be used to filter out false recognitions resulting from such patterns.
Percentile-based approaches and consistency check (Section 4.4-4.4.1) have proven to be
highly effective for this purpose.
Figure 12. False recognitions of the liquid surface caused by patterns in the image that follow the outline
of a possible liquid surface. Results of the method in Entry 22, Table 2. Above: The original image.
Below: The image with all recognitions and false recognitions marked in black.
6.2. False recognitions resulting from patterns in the image that follow the shape
of a possible liquid surface
Patterns in an image that have the elliptical or linear shape of a possible liquid surface can
mostly be attributed to sharp turns in the vessel contour, glass surface marks and Lambertian
reflections78 (Figure 12). False recognitions resulting from such patterns represent a hard
problem, because in terms of shape, they cannot be distinguished from real liquid surfaces. It
is possible to determine areas in the vessel that are more susceptible to the appearance of such
patterns (for example, parts of the vessel where the surface bends sharply and narrow regions
that usually correspond to corks (Figure 12)). However, within the limits of a single image,
there is no definitive way to distinguish such patterns from the real liquid surfaces. Such
features can likely be handled by using multiple images from different angles or by
comparing the image of the empty vessel with that of the filled vessel. These approaches,
however, exceed the scope of the current work.
Figure 13. Examples for cases with correct recognition of the liquid surface line but with incorrect curve
shape or recognition of more than one curve for the same surface. Results of method in Entry 22, Table 2.
Above: The original image. Below: The image with all recognitions marked in black.
7. Failing to recognize the exact shape of the liquid surface and multiple
recognitions of the same surface
Recognition of the liquid surface in the correct location of the image but with the incorrect
shape (Figure 13) is a problem that occurs for all of the methods (Tables 1-2). The main
cause of this problem is the deviation of the liquid surface shape in the image from a perfect
ellipse or line. As a result, no curve generated in the scan (Section 2.1) could accurately
match the liquid surface outline in the image. Two causes for distorted liquid surface shapes
are capillary force and emulsion (Figure 13, Section 6.2). Another cause is the fact that in the
image, one half of the liquid surface outline (the upper or lower half) will be farther away
from the viewer (Figure 4.d-e). As a result, its shape in the image will be more distorted by
optical interference and will deviate much farther from the shape of an ellipse. Because each
half of the curve is evaluated independently (Section 2.3), this phenomenon will not lead to a
complete miss of the surface. However, because the recognition is based on the half of the
elliptical curve that gives the best match (Section 2.3, Figure 4.e), the other half of the curve
will inevitably have a worse match to the surface outline (Figure 13). Another case for which
the liquid surface shape deviates from that of an ellipse occurs when the picture of the vessel
is taken from a very small distance relative to the vessel radios. This can cause a large
deviation between the curvatures the upper half and lower half of the surface ellipse. For such
cases it might be necessary to trace the elliptic curve for each half of the liquid surface
separately (with different curvature). Multiple recognitions of the same surface is another
problem that occurs when more than one curve can be fitted to a given liquid surface. The
main cause of this problem is thick surface lines in the image (Figure 13). Requiring a
minimal distance between the accepted curves can reduce but not eliminate this problem
(Section 2.3.1).72
8. Summary and Conclusion
This work examined a general computer vision method for the recognition of liquid surfaces
in transparent vessels. Such recognition is essential for determining the liquid volume, fill
level, phase boundary and the phase separation in various systems. The recognition was
performed by first scanning all curves that correspond to possible liquid surface outlines in
the image. The number of curves could be limited by assuming the liquid container to be
axisymmetric and that the camera and vessel are not tilted left or right. These assumptions
limit the possible shapes of the liquid surfaces in the image to horizontal ellipses and lines.
Once a curve was generated, it was rated according to its correspondence to a real liquid
surface in the image. Dividing the curve into upper and lower halves and evaluating each of
the halves separately was found to improve the recognition accuracy. The rating of the curve
correspondence to a liquid surface was performed by evaluating some image property around
each point of the curve and using the result to determine the curve match score. Several
image properties were examined as indicators for liquid surfaces. The best indicators were
found to be a) the relative intensity change normal to the curve; b) the edge density on the
curve combined with the scalar product of the intensity gradient direction and the curve
normal; and c) the difference between the edge density on the curve and the region directly
above it. Both the consistency of the indicator along the curve and its average were found to
be important in evaluating the curve match to the liquid surface. The indicator consistency
(percentile) along the curve was found to be particularly important for filtering out false
recognitions. The main causes of false recognitions were found to be image features with the
shape of a horizontal line or an ellipse that fit the outline of a possible liquid surface. The
recognition of air-liquid surfaces was achieved with very low miss rates (less than 1% miss
rate for the good methods). However, the miss rate for the boundaries between phase-
separating liquids was much higher (greater than 10% miss rate for all of methods). This
higher miss rate can be explained by the emulsions and weak boundaries in such surfaces.
The emulsive surfaces were the hardest to recognize due to their unpredictable shape and the
blurry boundaries. Using a scan with lower resolution helped to reduce the miss rate for such
surfaces. The results of this work suggest that creating a general recognition method for
liquid systems is essentially possible and can achieve good accuracy in various cases.
However, at this point, no perfect solution has been found with respect to missed recognitions
resulting from weak/distorted surfaces or to false recognitions resulting from surface-like
features. Additive-based methods for tracing interfaces, such as the colored beads method,3,
31, 35 remain faster and more accurate due to their ability to circumvent these problems.
Further work in this field will require better methods of filtering features resulting from
reflections and vessel surfaces, as well as general methods for recognizing phases with non-
flat surfaces. From the chemistry perspective, the ability to recognize the phase boundaries of
liquids can enable the exploration of various solution phenomena from the machine vision
perspective. In addition, such methods can enable the automation of a variety of laboratory
techniques. 1, 3, 43-48
9. Supporting Information
a) The full source code for the recognition process described in paper including
documentation is available at:
www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/46893-computer-vision-based-
recognition-of-liquid-surface-and-liquid-level-of-liquid-of-transparent-vessel
b) Source code and instruction for the recognition of the boundaries of the transparent vessel
(liquid container) in the image are available at:
1) www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/46887-find-boundary-of-symmetric-
object-in-image
2) www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/46907-find-object-in-image-using-
template--variable-image-to-template-size-ratio-
10. Referenceand notes
1. Ley, Steven V., et al. "Camera-enabled techniques for organic synthesis."Beilstein
journal of organic chemistry 9.1 (2013): 1051-1072.
2. Hambrice, Kevin. "A dozen ways to measure fluid level and how they
work."Sensors 21.12 (2004): 14-20.
3. O'Brien, Matthew, et al. "A prototype continuous-flow liquid–liquid extraction system
using open-source technology." Org. Biomol. Chem. 10.35 (2012): 7031-7036.
4. Wang, Ti-Ho, et al. "Liquid-level measurement using a single digital camera."
Measurement 42.4 (2009): 604-610.
5. Chakravarthy, Srivatsan, Rajeev Sharma, and Rangachar Kasturi. "Noncontact level
sensing technique using computer vision." Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE
Transactions on 51.2 (2002): 353-361.
6. Doi, Yuji, Michito Kurahashi, and Hisao Tomikawa. "Method and device for
detecting average liquid level in a bottle." U.S. Patent No. 4,733,095. 22 Mar. 1988.
7. Krause, Friedemann. "Apparatus for the detection of a fluid phase boundary in a
transparent measuring tube and for the automatic exact metering of an amount of liquid."
U.S. Patent No. 5,463,228. 31 Oct. 195.
8. Reza, Syed Azer, and Nabeel A. Riza. "Agile lensing-based non-contact liquid level
optical sensor for extreme environments." Optics Communications 283.18 (2010): 3391-
3397.
9. Liu, X., S. J. M. Bamberg, and E. Bamberg. "Increasing the accuracy of level-based
volume detection of medical liquids in test tubes by including the optical effect of the
meniscus." Measurement 44.4 (2011): 750-761.
10. Singh, Hidam Kumarjit, et al. "Truly nonintrusive liquid-level-sensing method based
on lateral displacement effect of light rays." Sensors Journal, IEEE 13.2 (2013): 801-806.
11. Kiest, Cary S., and Joseph G. LaChapelle. "Non-destructive fill volume measurement
system." U.S. Patent No. 5,568,262. 22 Oct. 1996.
12. Ley, Dietmar, and Ingolf Braune. "Vision-based level control for beverage-filling
processes." Optics for Productivity in Manufacturing. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 1994.
13. Bachur Jr, Nicholas R., and Timothy G. Foley Jr. "System and Method for
Determining Fill Volume in a Container." U.S. Patent Application 12/558,064.
14. Barber, Charles Paul, and Steven Thomas Bryant. "System and method for detection
of liquid level in a vessel." U.S. Patent No. 7,982,201. 19 Jul. 2011.
15. Karathanassi, V., Chr Iossifidis, and D. Rokos. "Application of machine vision
techniques in the quality control of pharmaceutical solutions." Computers in industry 32.2
(1996): 169-179.
16. Pithadiya, Kunal J., Chintan K. Modi, and Jayesh D. Chauhan. "Comparison of
optimal edge detection algorithms for liquid level inspection in bottles."Emerging Trends in
Engineering and Technology (ICETET), 2009 2nd International Conference on. IEEE, 2009.
17. Schinwald, Stefan, Dominik Engel, and Maria Seidler. "Efficient automated liquid
detection in microplates." Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2012 25th
International Symposium on. IEEE, 2012.
18. Yazdi, Leila, Anton Satria Prabuwono, and Ehsan Golkar. "Feature extraction
algorithm for fill level and cap inspection in bottling machine." Pattern Analysis and
Intelligent Robotics (ICPAIR), 2011 International Conference on. Vol. 1. IEEE, 2011.
19. Feng, Fujian, et al. "Liquid Surface Location of Milk Bottle Based on Digital Image
Processing." Multimedia and Signal Processing. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. 232-239.
20. Pithadiya, Kunal J., Chintan K. Modi, and Jayesh D. Chauhan. "Machine vision based
liquid level inspection system using ISEF edge detection technique."Proceedings of the
International Conference and Workshop on Emerging Trends in Technology. ACM, 2010.
21. Yuan, Weiqi, and Desheng Li. "Measurement of liquid interface based on
vision." Intelligent Control and Automation, 2004. WCICA 2004. Fifth World Congress on.
Vol. 4. IEEE, 2004.
22. Zhu, Huasheng. "New algorithm of liquid level of infusion bottle based on image
processing." Information Engineering and Computer Science, 2009. ICIECS 2009.
International Conference on. IEEE, 2009.
23. Zhao, Cuilian, and Yu Chen. "A new liquid level measuring system of standard metal
tank based on sub-pixel edge detection." 2007 IEEE International Conference on Control and
Automation. 2007.
24. Kulkarni, Atul, R. N. Karekar, and R. C. Aiyer. "Liquid level sensor." Review of
scientific instruments 76.10 (2005): 105108.
25. Woodard, Stanley E., and Bryant D. Taylor. "A wireless fluid-level measurement
technique." Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 137.2 (2007): 268-278.
26. Woltman, Scott J., Gregory D. Jay, and Gregory P. Crawford. "Liquid-crystal
materials find a new order in biomedical applications." Nature materials 6.12 (2007): 929-
938.
27. Nakagawa, Tatsuo, et al. "Contactless liquid-level measurement with frequency-
modulated millimeter wave through opaque container." Sensors Journal, IEEE13.3 (2013):
926-933.
28. Liu, Xin, et al. "Optical system to detect volume of medical samples in labeled test
tubes." Optical Engineering 47.9 (2008): 094402-094402.
29. Singh, Hidam Kumarjit, et al. "A new non-intrusive optical technique to measure
transparent liquid level and volume." Sensors Journal, IEEE 11.2 (2011): 391-398.
30. Reverter, Ferran, Xiujun Li, and Gerard Meijer. "Liquid-level measurement system
based on a remote grounded capacitive sensor." Sensors and Actuators A: Physical 138.1
(2007): 1-8.
31. Hu, Dennis X., Matthew O’Brien, and Steven V. Ley. "Continuous Multiple Liquid–
Liquid Separation: Diazotization of Amino Acids in Flow." Organic letters 14.16 (2012):
4246-4249.
32. Gonzalez Ramirez, M. M.; Villamizar Rincon, J. C.; Lopez Parada, J. F. Liquid level
control of Coca-Cola bottles using an automated system. In Electronics, Communications and
Computers (CONIELECOMP), 2014 International Conference on, 2014; IEEE: 2014; pp
148-154.
33. Zubrick, J. W., The Organic Chem Lab Survival Manual. Wiley & Sons: 2007.
34. Thorn, Adam, et al. "Ami-The Chemist's Amanuensis." (2011).
35. Ley, Dietmar, and Ingolf Braune. "Vision-based level control for beverage-filling
processes." Optics for Productivity in Manufacturing. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 1994.
36. Ritterbusch, Kai, Steffen Junginger, and Kerstin Thurow. "Camera grids for
laboratory automation." Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC),
2012 IEEE International. IEEE, 2012.
37. Okamoto, Hideho, and Kohji Deuchi. "Design of a robotic workstation for automated
organic synthesis." Laboratory Robotics and Automation 12.1 (2000): 2-11.
38. Sears, Pamela, and Chi-Huey Wong. "Toward automated synthesis of
oligosaccharides and glycoproteins." Science 291.5512 (2001): 2344-2350.
39. Kazarine, Alexei, et al. "Automated liquid–liquid extraction by pneumatic
recirculation on a centrifugal microfluidic platform." Analytical chemistry 84.16 (2012):
.40. Jamieson, Craig, et al. "Application of ReactArray robotics and design of experiments
techniques in optimisation of supported reagent chemistry."Organic process research &
development 6.6 (2002): 823-825.
41. Pastre, Julio C., Duncan L. Browne, and Steven V. Ley. "Flow chemistry syntheses of
natural products." Chemical Society Reviews 42.23 (2013): 8849-8869.
42. Kadam, Somnath S., et al. "Rapid Crystallization Process Development Strategy from
Lab to Industrial Scale with PAT Tools in Skid Configuration."Organic Process Research &
Development 16.5 (2012): 769-780.
43. Duchesne, C., J. J. Liu, and J. F. MacGregor. "Multivariate image analysis in the
process industries: A review." Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 117 (2012):
116-128.
44. Gouws, Francois S., and Chris Aldrich. "Rule-based characterization of industrial
flotation processes with inductive techniques and genetic algorithms."Industrial &
engineering chemistry research 35.11 (1996): 4119-4127.
45. Hossain, Md Iqbal, et al. "Determination of actual object size distribution from direct
imaging." Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 48.22 (2009): 10136-10146.
46. Ottavian, Matteo, Massimiliano Barolo, and Salvador García-Muñoz. "Maintenance
of Machine Vision Systems for Product Quality Assessment. Part I. Addressing Changes in
Lighting Conditions." Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research 52.35 (2013): 12309-
12318.2013, 52, 12309-12318.
47. Simon, Levente L., et al. "Histogram matching, hypothesis testing, and statistical
control-chart-assisted nucleation detection using bulk video imaging for optimal switching
between nucleation and seed conditioning steps."Industrial & engineering chemistry
research 49.20 (2010): 9932-9944. 48. Tomba, E.; Facco, P.; Roso, M.; Modesti, M.;
Bezzo, F.; Barolo, M., Artificial vision system for the automatic measurement of interfiber
pore characteristics and fiber diameter distribution in nanofiber assemblies. Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 2010, 49, 2957-2968.
49. Ogren, Paul J., et al. "Web camera use in developmental biology, molecular biology
& biochemistry laboratories." The American Biology Teacher 66.1 (2004): 57-63.
50. Mendonça, Ana M., et al. "Automatic segmentation of chromatographic images for
region of interest delineation." SPIE Medical Imaging. International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 2011.
51. Lancaster, Michael, et al. "Real-time image acquisition for absorbance detection and
quantification in thin-layer chromatography." Analytical chemistry78.3 (2006): 905-911.
52. Schoonen, Jan-Willem, et al. "Solvent Exchange Module for LC-NMR Hyphenation
Using Machine Vision-Controlled Droplet Evaporation." Analytical chemistry 85.12 (2013):
5734-5739.
53. Murdock, Richard C., et al. "Optimization of a Paper-Based ELISA for a Human
Performance Biomarker." Analytical chemistry 85.23 (2013): 11634-11642.
54. Chainani, Edward T., et al. "Mixing in Colliding, Ultrasonically Levitated
Drops."Analytical chemistry 86.4 (2014): 2229-2237.
55. Hanselmann, Michael, et al. "Active Learning for Convenient Annotation and
Classification of Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry Images." Analytical chemistry 85.1
(2012): 147-155.
56. Selck, David A., et al. "Increased Robustness of Single-Molecule Counting with
Microfluidics, Digital Isothermal Amplification, and a Mobile Phone versus Real-Time
Kinetic Measurements." Analytical chemistry 85.22 (2013): 11129-11136.
57. liwi s a, Ma dalena, et al. " ood nalysis sin rti i ial Senses." Journal of
agricultural and food chemistry 62.7 (2014): 1423-1448.
58. Li, Rui Fa, et al. "Particle shape characterisation via image analysis: from laboratory
studies to in-process measurements using an in situ particle viewer system." Organic Process
Research & Development 12.5 (2008): 837-849.
59. Gkoutos, G. V.; Rzepa, H.; Clark, R. M.; Adjei, O.; Johal, H., Chemical machine
vision: automated extraction of chemical metadata from raster images. J. Chem. Inf. Comput.
Sci. 2003, 43, 1342-1355.
60. Basu, Amar S. "Droplet morphometry and velocimetry (DMV): a video processing
software for time-resolved, label-free tracking of droplet parameters."Lab on a Chip 13.10
(2013): 1892-1901.
61. Bennett, R. V.; Morzan, E. M.; Huckaby, J. O.; Monge, M. E.; Christensen, H. I.;
Fernández, F. M., Robotic plasma probe ionization mass spectrometry (RoPPI-MS) of non-
planar surfaces. Analyst 2014.
62. Leocmach, Mathieu, and Hajime Tanaka. "A novel particle tracking method with
individual particle size measurement and its application to ordering in glassy hard sphere
colloids." Soft Matter 9.5 (2013): 1447-1457.
63. Pallua, J. D., et al. "Fourier transform infrared imaging analysis in discrimination
studies of squamous cell carcinoma." Analyst 137.17 (2012): 3965-3974.
64. Phillips, Carolyn L., and Gregory A. Voth. "Discovering crystals using shape
matching and machine learning." Soft Matter 9.35 (2013): 8552-8568.
65. Yun, Kyungwon, et al. "Microscopic augmented-reality indicators for long-term live
cell time-lapsed imaging." Analyst 138.11 (2013): 3196-3200.
66. Borchert, Christian, et al. "Image-Based in Situ Identification of Face Specific Crystal
Growth Rates from Crystal Populations." Crystal Growth & Design 14.3 (2014): 952-971.
67. Wang, Wei, Xiaolei Huang, and Ali Esmaili. "Texture-Based Foam Segmentation and
Analysis." Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research50.10 (2011): 6071-6081.
68. Szeliski, Richard. Computer vision: algorithms and applications. Springer, 2010.
69. Treiber, Marco Alexander. An Introduction to Object Recognition. Springer, 2010.
70. Canny, John. "A computational approach to edge detection." Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on 6 (1986): 679-698.
71. Papari, Giuseppe, and Nicolai Petkov. "Edge and line oriented contour detection:
State of the art." Image and Vision Computing 29.2 (2011): 79-103.
72. Preventing multiple recognition of the same surface is implemented by scanning the
accepted curves from higher to lower scores and comparing each curve to all curves with
higher scores. If the distance between curves is smaller than some threshold distance, the
curve is deleted, and the scan continues to the next curve.
73. The most effective region for local score in method 1(Section 2.2), was found to be
the region that contains all the direct neighbors of the pixel, not including the line below the
pixel (for the curve corresponding to the upper ellipse half (Region surrounded by rectangle
in Figure 6.d)).
74. The global relative intensity change ( ) means that instead of dividing the
intensity change by the local intensity maximum (MAX(U,D)), the intensity change is
divided by the average intensity maximum along the entire curve (MAX(U,D)). U is the
average value of U for all points on the curve (Figure 6, section 3.1.1). D is the average
value of D for all points on the curve (Figure 6, section 3.1.1).
75. The curve score is the difference between the average intensity inside the elliptic
curve and the average intensity around the elliptic curve (in a radius of 1 pixel).
76. Ballard, Dana H. "Generalizing the Hough transform to detect arbitrary
shapes."Pattern recognition 13.2 (1981): 111-122.
77. The consistency check using the relative intensity change is performed by requiring
either the relative intensity change of (U-D)/MAX(U, D)>0.1 at 15% percentile or (U-
D)/MAX(U, D)<-0.1 at the 85% percentile.
78. Pedrotti, F. L.; Pedrotti, L. S.; Pedrotti, L. S., "Introduction to optics." Prentice-Hall
Englewood Cliffs: 1993; Vol. 2.