]hp-tnauq[
1v5122.6001:viXra
Composability in Quantum Cryptography
J¨orn Mu¨ller-Quade and Renato Renner
Ifwecombinetwosecurecryptographicsystems,istheresultingsystemstillsecure? Answer-
ing this question is highly non-trivial and has recently sparked a considerable research effort,
in particular in the area of classical cryptography. A central insight was that the answer to
the question is yes, but only within a well specified composability framework and for carefully
chosen security definitions.
In this article, we review several aspects of composability in the context of quantum cryp-
tography. The first part is devoted to key distribution. We discuss the security criteria that
a quantum key distribution protocol must fulfill to allow its safe use within a larger security
application (e.g., for secure message transmission); and we demonstrate—by an explicit exam-
ple—whatcangowrongifconventional(non-composable)securitydefinitionsareused. Finally,
toillustratethepracticaluseofcomposability,weshowhowtogenerateacontinuouskeystream
bysequentially composing roundsof a quantumkey distribution protocol.
In a second part, we take a more general point of view, which is necessary for the study of
cryptographic situations involving, for example, mutually distrustful parties. We explain the
universal composability framework and state the composition theorem which guarantees that
secure protocols can securely be composed to larger applications. A focus is set on the secure
compositionofquantumprotocolsintounconditionallysecureclassical protocols. However,the
resulting security definition is so strict that some tasks become impossible without additional
security assumptions. Quantum bit commitment is impossible in the universal composability
framework even with mere computational security. Similar problems arise in the quantum
boundedstoragemodelandweobserveatrade-offbetweentheuniversalcomposabilityandthe
useof theweakest possible security assumptions.
1 Introduction
Provable security, even for complex security applications, is desirable. However, giving one mono-
lithic securityproofforalargercryptosystemiserrorprone,andamodulardesignisusuallyadvan-
tageous. But this comes with a major difficulty, namely that security definitions are not generally
closed under composition. Therefore, an application may be insecure even if the individual compo-
nents itconsistsofaresecure. During the pastfew years,finding solutionstothis problemhasbeen
a main focus of research in cryptography. This research effort has resulted in the development of
frameworks in which security definitions are universally composable.
Wereviewseveralaspectsofcomposabilityinthecontextofquantumcryptographyandstructure
our exposition into two parts. Section 2 considers the security and composability of Quantum Key
Distribution (QKD), which is the most prominent application of quantum cryptography. In a
second part, starting with Section 3, we consider the problem of composability for general security
applications.
The reason for this organization of the paper is that for the usual treatment of QKD, one
assumes a fixed adversary structure,i.e., Alice and Bob are alwayshonest (in particular, they trust
each other), while only a third party with access to the communication channels is malicious. This
avoids many of the problems that arise in the more general considerations outlined in Sections 3
through 5, where arbitrary parties may be corrupted.
2 Quantum Key Distribution (QKD)
2.1 QKD in a Nutshell
Quantum key distribution (QKD) is the artofdistributing a secretkey to twodistant parties, Alice
and Bob, connected by an insecure quantum channel. Technically, a secret key is simply a random
bitstringforwhichthereisacertainguaranteethatitsvalueisunknowntoanadversary,Eve. Such
akeymaybeusedforavarietyofcryptographictasks. Themostprominentamongthemiscertainly
the secure transmission of secret messages over an insecure channel. Here, the key typically serves
as a one-time-pad for message encryption.
In the past two decades, numerous QKD schemes have been proposed. Although they differ in
manyaspects(suchastheirrealizabilitywithcurrenttechnology),theystillverymuchresemblethe
originalprotocolsput forwardby BennettandBrassard[5](basedonideasby Wiesner [48])andby
Ekert[16]. Wewillnotattemptheretogiveadescriptionoftheseprotocols. Infact,forthepurpose
of this article, it is sufficient to take a rather abstract point of view, where the internal workings of
the protocols are unimportant. (The reader interested in the concrete protocols is referred to the
original articles [5, 16] as well as the recent review articles [38] and references therein.)
The security of QKD basically relies on an intrinsic property of quantum mechanics, namely
that it is generally impossible to copy the state of a system without disturbing the original.1 For
cryptography,thismeansthatanyattemptofanattackerto“steal”appropriatelyencodedinforma-
tion can in principle be detected. This also motivates the basic structure of QKD protocols: first,
Alice and Bob send random signals over the quantum channel and then, in a second step, perform
tests to check for disturbances in the signals, which may be a sign of an attack. Depending on this
test, the protocol typically has one of two different outcomes. Either the disturbances are found to
be too large, in which case the protocol aborts with the declaration that no key can be generated.
Otherwise, if there are no (or only small) disturbances, Alice and Bob use the randomness in the
distributed signals to generate a key.2
AlthoughQKDisoftensaidtobeunconditionallysecure,therearestillafewassumptionsneeded
to prove security of the generated keys. The first (usually implicit in the literature) is that Alice
and Bob are honest, meaning that they both follow their respective part of the protocol.3 Second,
it is assumedthat Alice and Bobcan exchange classicalmessages authentically, i.e., it is impossible
for an adversaryto alter the classical messages exchangedbetween Alice and Bob. In practice, this
is usually achieved by invoking an authentication scheme (see, e.g., [46]) which, however, requires
Alice and Bob to share a short initial key. Because of this latter assumption, QKD is sometimes
called key growing rather than key distribution.
After this brief introduction, we are now ready to have a closer look at the notion of security
used in the context of QKD. We introduce an explicit definition (Section 2.2) and then show its
composability (Section 2.3). As an example, we discuss the problem of generating a continuous
key stream by sequentially composing many rounds of a QKD protocol (Section 2.4). We then
conclude the part on QKD with an example that pinpoints the problems arising when employing
a non-composable security definition, which incidentally has been widely used in the literature
(Section 2.5).
2.2 Security Criteria
To define security, we first need to have a clearer picture of what a QKD protocol is supposed
to do. We start with a list of the properties we expect an ideal protocol to have and then, in a
second step, define security of real protocols by their indistinguishability from the ideal case. In
accordance with the terminology used in the context of multi-party computation, we call these
properties secrecy, correctness, and robustness (see also [22]). We denote by S and S the final
outputs of the protocol on Alice and Bob’s side, respectively. Following the discussion above, the
1More precisely, it is impossible to build a physical device that takes as input an unknown quantum state and
outputs twocopiesofit. Thisimpossibilityisalsoknownasnon-cloning theorem. ForQKD,itisimportanttohave
aquantitative versionofthisstatement, sometimescalledinformation-disturbance trade-off.
2Moregenerally, aprotocol maygenerate keys whoselength depends on anestimate ofthe maximum amount of
informationthatanadversarymayhavegainedbyaneavesdropping attack.
3Dropping this assumption leads to the additional problem of generating randomness by mutually mistrustful
parties,whichisknownascoin flipping [7].
protocol may either generate keys, in which case S and S are two identical random bitstrings of
a certain fixed length ℓ, or it may abort, in which case we set S =⊥ and S =⊥.4 Furthermore,
we denote by E the entire (quantum) system controlled by an adversary. In particular, E contains
all the information that the adversary acquires during the run of the protocol.
We consider here the strongest type of security, namely security against general attacks. This
means that an adversary may arbitrarily tamper with the signals exchanged between Alice and
Bob over the quantum channel.5 In addition, she may eavesdrop (but not alter) the classical
communication. We also introduce the notion of a passive adversary, who does not disturb the
quantum communication. Formally, this simply means that the behavior of the quantum channel
is described by a fixed noise model. For QKD based on qubit-systems, for instance, the standard is
to consider channels that introduce random bit- and phase-flips (with a given probability).
Perfect Security. We now say that a QKD scheme is perfectly secure if the following holds for
any attack.
Correctness: The outputs of the protocol on Alice and Bob’s side are identical (i.e., S =S ).
Secrecy: If the protocol produces a key S (i.e., if S 6=⊥) then S is uniformly distributed and
independent of the state of the system E held by the adversary.6
Robustness: If the adversary is passive then a key is generated (i.e., S 6=⊥).7
It is easy to see that none of these criteria can be dropped without making the task trivial. In
fact,without the correctnessrequirement,aprotocolmayjustproduce uncorrelatedrandomnesson
Alice and Bob’s side. Similarly, without the robustness requirement, a protocol may always output
S =S =⊥.
Approximate Security. Unfortunately, it is (provably) impossible to design a QKD protocol
that is perfectly secure according to the above definition. One thus typically considers a relaxation
where the requirement is that the behavior of the scheme is similar (but not necessarily equal)
to an idealized scheme which is perfectly secure. This can be made precise using the notion of
indistinguishability.
More specifically, one considers a hypothetical device, called distinguisher, which interacts with
eithertherealprotocol,inthefollowingdenotedPreal,oranidealprotocol,Pideal,andthenoutputs
aguessbit B. Thedistinguishermayhaveaccesstoallregularinputsandoutputsoftheprotocol(in
our case,we only have outputs, namely S and S ) as well as to the system E normally controlled
by the adversary. We say that Preal and Pideal are ε-indistinguishable for ε ≥ 0 if, for any such
distinguisher,
Here Pr[B = 1|Preal] and Pr[B = 1|Pideal] denote the probabilities that the distinguisher’s output
B equals 1 when interacting with Preal and Pideal, respectively.
The notion of ε-indistinguishability naturally leads to the following definition of ε-security.
Definition 1. A QKD protocol Preal is ε-secure if it is ε-indistinguishable from a (hypothetical)
protocol Pideal which is perfectly secure, i.e., Pideal satisfies the correctness, the secrecy, and the
robustness criteria above.
4Alternatively, thelengthℓofthegenerated keymaybedeterminedduringtherunoftheprotocol, withℓ=0if
the protocol aborts (see, e.g., [3]). For practical applications, however, itisusuallymoreconvenient toworkwitha
fixedkeylength.
5One sometimes restricts the security analysis to more restricted types of attacks. An example are collective
attacks [6],whereitisassumedthattheadversaryactsoneachofthesignalssentthroughthechannelindependently
andidentically. Thisisusefulbecause,formostprotocols,securityagainstcollectiveattacks impliessecurityagainst
generalattacks [33,34].
6Becauseofthecorrectness property, itissufficienttorequiresecrecyforeitherSA orSB.
7Notethatthispropertyisalwaysrelativetoagivennoisemodelofthequantum channel.
Intuitively, the parameter ε can be understood as the maximum failure probability of the proto-
col Preal, i.e., the maximum probability that Preal deviates from the behavior of the ideal protocol
Pideal.8 Forpracticalconsiderations,isoftenusefultoquantifythe correctness,secrecy,androbust-
ness of a protocol separately. The following definition is an obvious generalization of the above.
Definition 2. A QKD protocol is ε-correct, ε-secret, or ε-robust if it is ε-indistinguishable from a
perfectly correct, secure, or robust scheme, respectively.
Remark3. Onecanshowthat,ifaprotocolisε -correct,ε -secret,andε -robustthenitisε-secure,
The requirements on the different parameters are generally quite diverse. Typically, a relatively
large value ε for the robustness (e.g., ε = 0.1) can be tolerated, because the protocol may just
be repeated in case it does not generate a key. In contrast, the parameter ε for the secrecy can
be interpreted as the (maximum) probability by which an adversary may get secret information
without being detected, which one typically wants to keep small (e.g., ε =10−10).
It is easy to see that ε-correctness is equivalent to the requirement that the outputs S and S
produced by the protocol on Alice and Bob’s side differ only with small probability,
Similarly, for ε-robustness, the requirement is that
holds whenever the adversary is passive. The situation is a bit more subtle (and more interesting)
for the secrecy criterion, which can be made more concrete as follows.
LetS :={0,1}ℓbethekeyspace,i.e.,theoutputS takesvaluesinthesetS∪{⊥}. Furthermore,
for any fixed value s ∈ S ∪{⊥} of S , let the state of the system E be denoted by ρs. The joint
state of S and E can then be represented as a cq-state9
s∈S X ∪{⊥}
where p is the probability that S =s and where {|si} is a family of orthonormalvectors.
It is easy to see that, for any attack, the state resulting from the run of a perfectly secure scheme
has the form
SAE ⊥ |S| E ⊥ E
where p ∈ [0,1] and where ρ′ and ρ′′ are density operators. With these definitions, we arrive at
a reformulation of ε-secrecy in terms of the trace distance [35, 3].10
Lemma 4. A QKD protocol is ε-secret if and only if, for any attack, the cq-state ρ describing
the joint state of the protocol output S and the system E held by the adversary satisfies
2 SAE SAE 1
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
for some state ρperfect of the form (4).
Insecurityproofs,correctnessandsecrecyareusuallyestablishedbyseparatearguments. While
thecorrectnessparameterε isessentiallydeterminedbythequalityoftheerrorcorrection procedure
used to reconcile the raw keys, the secrecy ε rests upon various other elements of the protocol. In
the simplest case, ε is a function of the accuracy of the estimation procedure, which measures the
disturbances of the transmitted signals, as well as of the parameters of the privacy amplification
step, which is used to transform the (partially secret) raw key into a final secret key satisfying (5).
8Thisintuitioncanbemadepreciseinapurelyclassicalcontext [27].
9The state of a bipartite system is called classical-quantum (cq) if the first subsystem is purely classical (in the
sensethatitsstates areperfectlydistinguishable.)
10Lemma4isanimmediateconsequence ofthewellknownone-to-onerelationbetween theindistinguishabilityof
twoquantum states andtheirtracedistance.
Preal Pideal
Areal Areal
Figure 1: Indistinguishability. The combination of the original distinguisher D with Areal gives
a new distinguisher D′ for Preal and Pideal.
2.3 Composing QKD with Other Cryptographic Primitives
Since a secret random string is of little interest by itself, QKD is almost never used as a stand-
alone application. Instead, one typically is interested in higher cryptographic tasks such as secure
messagetransmission. QKDthen justservesasa mechanismto providethe key materialneededby
the application. In addition, QKD often is built on top of other cryptographic primitives such as
authenticationschemes,whosetaskistomakesuretheadversarycannotaltertheclassicalmessages
sent over the insecure channel. Hence, composability of the underlying security definitions is vital
in the context of QKD.
What Does Composability Mean? To geta moreprecise understanding ofthe notionofcom-
posabilityinthecontextofQKD,weconsiderasituationwherethekeyproducedbyaQKDprotocol
PrealislaterusedinanapplicationAreal,e.g.,anencryptionscheme. AssumethattheprotocolPreal
is ε -secure, and let the application Areal be ε -secure, i.e., ε -indistinguishable from an idealized
application Aideal. The claim then is that the composite system, denoted Areal ◦Preal, where the
application Areal is fed with the key produced by Preal, is ε-secure, for ε=ε +ε .
TheclaimbecomesevensimplerinthespecialcasewhereAreal isbasedonone-time-padencryp-
tion. When being fed with a perfectly secretkey,one-time-padencryptionis indistinguishable from
aperfectencryptionprocedure,whichsimplyproducesaciphertextthatisstatisticallyindependent
of the message. We thus have ε = 0. Hence, according to the above claim, when one-time-pad
encryption is combined with an ε -secure QKD protocol Preal, the resulting scheme is ε -secure.
That is, it produces ciphertexts which are ε -indistinguishable from uniform randomness.
Why Is Our Definition Composable? Roughly speaking, the security parameters ε and ε
can be understood as the maximum failure probabilities of Preal and Areal, respectively (see the
paragraph after Definition 1). Hence, according to the union bound, if one combines Preal and
Areal, the totalfailure probabilitycannotbe largerthanε=ε +ε . This alreadygivesanintuitive
understanding why the combined scheme Areal◦Preal is ε-secure, as claimed above.
Wewillnowgiveaslightlymorerigorousargumentforthisclaim. Assumebycontradictionthat
the composite system Areal◦Preal is not ε-indistinguishable from Aideal◦Pideal, i.e., there exists a
distinguisher D whose output B satisfies
(cf. (1)). Assume now that we use the same distinguisher D to distinguish Areal ◦ Preal from
Areal ◦ Pideal, where the latter denotes the composite scheme consisting of the real application
fed with a key produced by a perfect QKD scheme. Because Areal is identical in both cases, we
can alternatively treat Areal as part of a (more complex) distinguisher D′ which now interacts
with either Preal or Pideal (see Fig. 1). Because, by assumption, Preal is ε -secure and, hence,
ε -indistinguishable from Pideal, we find
Pr[B =1|Areal◦Preal]−Pr[B =1|Areal◦Pideal]≤ε . (7)
S0 ◮ P S1 ◮ ℓ 1 bits ◮ P S2 ◮ ℓ 2 bits ◮ ··· ℓ i−1 bits ◮ P Si ◮ ℓ i bits ◮ ···
ℓ bits ℓ bits ℓ bits
continuous keystream
Figure2: Generation of a continuous key stream by sequential composition of rounds of
a QKD protocol. The scheme starts with an initial key pair S0 =(S0,S0). In each round i, the
QKD protocol P generates a fresh pair Si = (Si ,Si ) of keys of length ℓ+ℓ , using ℓ bits of
i A B i i−1
existingkeymaterialforauthentication. ℓbitsofthefreshkeyareaddedtothekeystream,whereas
ℓ bits are passed to the next round for authentication.
Similarly, because Areal is ε-indistinguishable from Aideal, we find
Pr[B =1|Areal◦Pideal]−Pr[B =1|Aideal◦Pideal]≤ε . (8)
Combining (7) and (8) contradicts (6) and, hence, concludes our proof of composability.
2.4 Example Application: Generating a Continuous Key Stream
As already mentioned, composability of the keys produced by a QKD scheme is crucial because
these are typically used in further applications. Here, we consider their use for authentication in
subsequentrounds ofa QKDprotocol. The method describedbelow canbe employedto generatea
continuous stream of key material. This may be of interest for various practical applications, such
as the encryption of a continuous stream of data.
DescriptionoftheScheme. Wearelookingatthe(realistic)situationwherethecommunication
channels connecting Alice and Bob may be completely insecure, so that not even authenticity is
guaranteed. Instead, we assume that Alice and Bob hold an initial key pair (S0,S0) of length ℓ
whichis ε -secure. They then repeatthe followingforany i∈N (seeFig.2). AQKDprotocolP is
invoked, which uses the first ℓ bits of the key pair (Si−1,Si−1) for authentication. The protocol
generates a new (longer) key pair (Si ,Si ) of length ℓ +ℓ, of which the first ℓ bits are stored for
use in the next round, while the last ℓ bits form part of the output stream.
Security Analysis. In the following, we are going to analyze the security of the key stream.
Because of composability, this is conceptually very easy—we simply need to add up the security
parameters. If the protocol P executed in each round i is ε -secure then the security ε of the final
stream is always bounded by
ε≤ ε . (9)
In order to get a reasonable value for ε, we need to make sure that the parameters ε are suffi-
cientlysmall. However,makingε smallgenerallycomesatthecostofincreasingthecommunication
complexity of the protocol as well as the length ℓ of the initial key used for authentication. As
a rough estimate of the performance of a typical QKD protocol, we use here a bound of the form
wheren denotesthenumberofquantumsignalsexchangedduringtheprotocolandwhereγ,ρ,and
ν are positive constants.11 The first term corresponds to the security of the protocol if used with
anauthentic classicalchannel. Note that the exponentcritically depends onthe lengthℓ +ℓ ofthe
key that is generated. The second term is due to the imperfectness of the authentication scheme.
11Valuesofρ=10−2 andγ=ν=10−3 mayberealisticfortextbookprotocolssuchasBB84withsinglephotons.
Wereferto[39,8]foramoredetailednumericalanalysisoftheperformanceofQKDprotocols.
To make sure that (9) converges,it is necessary to increase the number n of exchanged signals
in each round of the protocol. For the purpose of illustration,12 we set
for some constants n∈N and c>0. Inserting this into (10) results in a bound on ε such that the
sum over i is a geometric series. Hence, by appropriately choosing the constants ℓ, n, and c, the
security parameter ε of the key stream can be made arbitrarily small.
2.5 An Explicit Attack Exploiting Non-Composability
The necessity of composable security definitions has only been realized recently. In fact, most of
the original security proofs proposed in the literature were relative to a security criterion that is
not composable. The main purpose of this section is to illustrate what can go wrong if such a
non-composable security definition is used.
Measuring Secrecy. AswehaveseeninSection2.2,thecorrectnessandtherobustnessproperty
areratherunproblematic. Inparticular,bothofthemcanbeexpressedastheconditionthatcertain
probabilities are small (cf. (2) and (3)). This is different for the secrecy property. Intuitively, a key
S is secret if an adversary has only little information about it, in the sense of (5). There are,
however,a varietyofalternativeinformationmeasures,andthis is indeed the sourceof the problem
we are going to describe now.
Onesuchinformationmeasureis the accessible information, denoted I (·:·). It is particularly
suitable to quantify the information a quantum system (in our case the system E held by the
adversary)givesaboutaclassical value(thekeyS ). Theaccessibleinformationisdefinedinterms
of the Shannon mutual information, I(·:·),
I (S :E):=maxI(S :Z) ,
where the maximum is taken over all random variables Z that can be obtained by measuring the
quantum system E.
Recall that, according to Lemma 4, the key S generated by a QKD protocol is ε-secret if and
2 SAE |S| E 1
(cid:13) Xs (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
holds for some ρ′ . (We assume here for simplicity that the protocol always outputs a key, i.e.,
p = 0.) Since a measurement cannot increase the trace distance, this immediately gives a bound
on the distance between the joint distribution P of the key S and the outcome Z of any
measurement applied to E, and a distribution of the form P ×P′ where P denotes a uniform
distribution over the key space,
2 SAZ U Z 1
For small values of ε, Fano’s inequality implies that I(S :Z) and, hence, the accessible information
I (S : E), is small, too.13 In other words, the secrecy criterion (11) is at least as strong as a
criterion based on the accessible information.
The converse, however, is not true. To illustrate this, we construct an explicit example quan-
tum state ρ for which the accessible information is (arbitrarily) small, whereas the key S is
insecurewhenbeing usedforone-time padencryption. The state ρ thus necessarilyviolatesthe
(composable) secrecy criterion (11). From this, we conclude that small accessible information does
not imply secrecy in the sense of Definition 2.
12Theexampleshouldbeunderstoodasaproofofprinciple. Wehavenotattempted tooptimizeparameters.
13More precisely, (11) implies Iacc(SA :E)≤2nε+4h(ε) where n is the key length and h is the binary entropy.
(Sinceεisusuallychosenexponentiallysmallinn,thesameistruefortheterm2nε.)
Construction of the Example. Our example consists of a uniformly distributed (n + 1)-bit
key S = (S ,...,S ) and an n-qubit system E. Furthermore, we consider an n-tuple of bits
R=(R ,...,R ) whose sum modulo 2 equals S ,
but which are otherwise completely random. Then, for any fixed S = s = (s ,...,s ,s ) and
R=r =(r ,...,r ) satisfying (13), we define the state |φs,ri of E by
where |r i , for any i=1,...,n, denotes the state of a qubit encoding the classical bit r in either
some specified standard basis {|0i,|1i} (if s = 0) or the corresponding diagonal basis (if s = 1),
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
In particular, the density operator ρs describing the state of E conditioned on S = s (but ran-
domized over R) is given by
(r1 X,...,rn)
Wenowmoveontotheproofoftheclaimsmadeabove. First,weshowthattheaccessibleinfor-
mation I (S :E) is small. This implies that (12) holds for some small ε (see, e.g., Lemma 12.6.1
of [12]). Second, we describe an attack againsta scheme where the key S is used for one-time-pad
encryption. The attack allows the adversary to learn one bit of the message with certainty. This,
in particular, implies that the (composable) secrecy criterion (11) cannot hold for any non-trivial
value of ε.
Small Accessible Information. We do not attempt here to give a rigorous proof of the above
claim but rather describe the intuition for it. For the details of the argument we refer to [23].
In order to prove that I (S : E) is small, we need to argue that any outcome Z of a mea-
surement applied to E has only negligible correlation with S . To simplify this task, we split
S =(S ,...,S ) into two parts and make use of the chain rule for the mutual information,
A 1 n n+1 1 n
Note that the state of each qubit of E is an encoding of a random bit R , where only the basis
depends on S . The overall state of E conditioned on (S ,...,S ) is thus fully mixed and, hence,
independent of the value of (S ,...,S ). This immediately implies I(S ···S :Z)=0 and it thus
remains to be shown that I(S :Z|S ···S ) is small.
For this, let us first assume that the measurement giving Z consists of n independent measure-
ments applied to the individual qubits of E. Each of them would then result in an estimate for
the value of a bit R , for i = 1,...,n. However, since each bit R is encoded in a random basis
determined by S , and since the bit S is unknown at the time of the measurement, the maximum
probability p of obtaining the correct outcome R is bounded away from 1, i.e., p<1.
Now, recall that the key bit S is equal to the sum modulo 2 of the random bits R ,...R .
Hence, using the measurement strategy described above, the correct value of S can only be
obtained if all the individual measurements are successful. The probability that this happens can
be shownto be exponentially small n.14 We thus conclude that the correlationbetween the key bit
S and the measurement outcome Z is small.
14Moreprecisely,givenZ,theprobabilityofcorrectlyguessingSn+1 isnotlargerthantheprobabilityofguessing
anindependent randombit,except withprobabilityexponentiallysmallinn.
This argument can be generalized to arbitrary measurement strategies [23]. It turns out that
the above individual strategy is essentially optimal, i.e., I(S : Z|S ···S ) is small for any
measurement. In fact, a quantitative analysis15 (for a slightly modified example) gives I(S ,Z)<
and, hence, I acc (S A
.
The Attack. Let us now have a look at what happens if we use the key S = (S ,...,S )
for one-time-pad encryption. By definition, for any message M = (M ,...,M ), the ciphertext
C = (C ,...,C ) is given by C = M ⊕S . In the following, we assume that the adversary has
1 n+1 i i i
full access to C.
Tounderstandtherelevanceoftheexample,itisimportanttorealizethatwecan,ingeneral,not
assumethatthemessageM isuniformlydistributed.16 Tothecontrary,almostanyrealisticmessage
will consist of biased bits or bits that are (partially) known to an adversary. In fact, the history of
cryptographyisfullofexampleswherepriorknowledgeaboutthestructureofthemessageshasbeen
exploited for attacks. For our specific attack, we consider the extreme case where the adversary
already knows the first n message bits (M ,...,M ) but tries to get information about the bit
M . (For example,the firstn bits may containstandardizedheader informationwhile the actual
message starts with the (n+1)th bit.
Given the first n bits of both the message and the ciphertext, the adversary can obviously
determine the first n key bits S ,...,S by S =M ⊕C . This by itself would not be problematic
because, after all, the very nature of a one-time-pad is that it is only used once. However, the
adversarymaynowuseherknowledgeofS ,...,S toextractfurtherinformationfromthequantum
system E. More precisely, because by constructionthe bits S ,...,S determine the basis in which
thevaluesR areencodedinE,theadversarycanapplyameasurementwhichproducestheoutcomes
R ,...,R . From this, she may determine the (n+1)th key bit S = R ⊕···⊕R and, in
1 n n+1 1 n
particular, the message bit M =S ⊕C with certainty.
n+1 n+1 n+1
Discussion. Our example shows that the accessible information is an inappropriate measure for
quantifying secrecy: Even tough the accessible information I (S ,E) that an adversary has on
the key S is small, the key S cannot safely be used for tasks such as one-time-pad encryption.
The example also answers a question raised by Ben-Or et al. in [3]. They have shown that a
QKD protocol which generates an n-bit key S is ε-secure whenever
An immediate implication of our argument above is that this result is essentially tight. In other
words, in order to get (composable) security from a bound on I (S : E), this bound must be
exponentiallysmallinthekeysize. Unfortunately,however,thiscriterionisnotmetbymostknown
security proofs that refer to the accessible information (see [23] for references).
In order to prove security of a given QKD scheme, it is thus more advisable to directly derive a
bound on the trace distance in (11) (rather than on the accessible information). Such a bound can
in principle be obtained by a modification of the well-known argument by Shor and Preskill [40],
which however only applies to specific types of protocols. A more generic approach is to use the
factthatprivacyamplificationbasedonsuitablychosenhashfunctions(e.g.,two-universalhashing)
directly produces keys that satisfy (11), provided the input to the hash function (the raw key) has
sufficiently high entropy [35] (see [14, 42] for specific examples of such hash functions).
3 Composability of General Secure Applications
In the following sections, which constitute the second part of the article, we consider security defi-
nitions for general cryptographic tasks and the problem of composing secure protocols to complex
security applications.
15For technical reasons, the argument of[23] isbased onanextended construction wherethe bitsRi areencoded
withrespecttothree(ratherthantwo)differentmutuallyunbiasedbases.
16It is possible to design encryption schemes whose security is based on the additional assumption that the dis-
tribution of the messages is highly random from the adversary’s point of view [36] (this is also known as entropic
security). Interestingly, theseschemes onlyrequireashortkey.
We will describe a quantum model of security [43, 4, 45] which gives strong composability guar-
antees. Thecompositiontheorem(seeSubsection5.1)statesthataprotocolsecureinthismodelcan
be used in an arbitraryapplication without lowering the overallsecurity. Furthermore an arbitrary
number of protocolsprovensecure in this model can be used concurrently andremain secure in the
model. We will have to neglect many details (already [9] has 128 pages and describes the classical
case). Ourtreatmentwillbeonamoreintuitiveandabstractlevel. Fordetailspleasesee[43,4,45].
Onecouldarguethatthistopicneednotbediscussedinanarticleaboutquantumcryptography
as the most important building blocks of general applications, i.e. protocols like coin flipping, bit
commitment,oroblivious transfer,caninquantumcryptographynotbeachievedwithunconditional
security [1, 28, 25]. However,there still are enough interesting applications for quantum cryptogra-
phy. Even if some tasks are impossible to achieve in principle it is possible to achieve them relative
to security assumptions which are independent of the computational assumptions of classical cryp-
tography [37, 13]. Furthermore, many of the assumptions possible, like the adversarybeing able to
storeonlya limitedamountofqubits orthe adversarybeing unable to maintaincoherencyforlarge
quantum states are very reasonable.
In addition a quantum model of security is not only useful to analyze or prove the security of
quantum protocols, but it can also be used to investigate the security of classical protocols against
quantum adversaries. It was in the context of composability that the question was answered if
quantum attacks on classical protocols give more power to the adversary than a mere speed up of
computations [45] (see Subsection 5.2).
4 Defining Security
Keyexchangeandsecuremessagetransmissionisoneofthemostimportantprerequisitesofgeneral
security applications, however, general applications can require further security properties. As
examples consider secure authentication, digital signatures, online banking, or remote voting. One
of the big differences of such applications to key exchange is that the protocols participants are
mutually mistrusting. Secure function evaluation [49, 17] is a generalization of such cryptographic
applications: InasecurefunctionevaluationasetofplayersP ,...,P wishestoevaluateafunction
f oninputsx ,...,x theyholdrespectivelysuchthatcorruptedplayerscannotchangetheoutcome
ofthe computation(other than choosinga different input) andcorruptedplayersdo not learnmore
about the input of honest players than can be derived from their own input and the output of the
function evaluation. These two properties of secure function evaluation are called correctness and
privacy. However, it turned out that these two properties alone do not cover what one intuitively
requires from a secure computation. Additional properties were added, like the independence of
inputs which demands that it should notbe possible for a corruptedplayer to choose his owninput
dependentonthesecretinputs ofhonestparties. Itiseasytoseethatthepropertyofindependence
ofinputsisnotlogicallyimpliedbyprivacyorcorrectnessifonedoesnotdemandthateachprotocol
participantknows itsinputfromthestart. Therearemoresecuritypropertieswhicharenotimplied
by privacy and correctness: robustness requires that no corrupted player may abort the protocol,
fairness demands that even if an abort cannot be prevented it should not be possible for the
adversary to learn more about the result of the computation than the honest players, and zero
knowledge is the property that a realprotocoltranscriptcouldalso havebeen generatedby a single
machine without knowledge of any secret involved in the protocol. Defining security via a list of
securitypropertiesbecame knownasthelist approach, however,researchersgotthe impressionthat
one might never know if the list of security properties is complete.
4.1 The Simulation Paradigm
A new security definition was needed. It should be convincing and (as general applications are to
beconsidered)independentofthe specificgoalstheattackermighthave. Thefirststeptowardsthis
new definition was the discovery of zero knowledge proofs [18] where the simulation paradigm was
introduced.
Instead of considering different security properties the new notion was based on indistinguisha-
bility. Intuitively speaking, a real protocol is compared to an ideal protocol where a trusted party
collectedthe inputs fromthe protocolparticipants,computes the outputanddistributesthe output
totheparticipants. Iftherealprotocolandtheidealprotocolhaveanindistinguishableinputoutput
behavior the real protocol is said to be at least as secure as the ideal protocol. Such a definition of
security defines security of a real protocol relative to an idealization. The level of security reached
thus also depends on the specification of the ideal protocol.
Inthecaseofquantumkeydistributionwehavealreadyseenasecuritydefinitionwhichcompares
a real key exchange with an ideal situation, however, unlike to the general case it was possible to
reduce this security notion to the fulfillment of separate security properties (see Section 2.2).
In the real model the protocol is attacked by a real attacker which may corrupt protocol par-
ticipants, pools all their data, and lets the corrupted participants deviate from the protocol in an
arbitrary way. In the ideal protocol there is a an ideal attacker (also called simulator) which must
be able to provide an output indistinguishable from the output of the real attacker while having
access only to the inputs and outputs ofthe corruptedplayers. As the idealattackerdoes notlearn
any real protocol messages or secrets which cannot be derived from the input and output of the
corruptedplayerstheindistinguishabilityguaranteesthattherealprotocoldoesnotleakanysecrets
to the real attacker.
However,therearecertain”attacks”whichcannotbeprevented,e.g. anadversarycouldreplace
hisinputbyadifferentvalue. Theseinevitableattacksarenotconsideredtoviolatethesecurityand
hence wemustbe abletomodelthese attacksinthe idealprotocolaswell. Theseinevitable attacks
willbecarriedoutbythesimulator,too. Theidealattackermaycorruptprotocolparticipantsinthe
ideal model, but all the ideal attacker can do is to replace local inputs or to replace local outputs.
Ifthe realattackermaycorruptmorethanaminorityofthe protocolparticipantsthen theattacker
can always abort the computation and we have to give this ability to the ideal adversary as well.
Stating the exact definition here goes beyond the scope of this article (it can be found in [17]),
especially because this notion of security does not yet allow for composition as we will illustrate
below.
Note that this definition of security requiresthe ideal attacker(simulator)to providehis output
only after termination of the protocol, i.e., in retrospect and thus with the benefit of hindsight.
This gives a certain ”advantage” to the ideal attacker without which a simulation would become
impossibleinmostcases. Theabilitytoprovideasimulationofarealprotocolwithoutanyadvantage
over a real attacker would in many cases imply the complete insecurity of the real protocol as the
real attacker could use the program of the simulator to cheat in the real execution of the protocol.
What is important in this context is that this advantage of the simulator should not invalidate the
”idealness” of the ideal model.
This simulation in retrospect does not violate the ”idealness”, because the result of an ideal
protocol is not altered by this (the protocol remains correct) and no secrets of honest participants
are leaked. However, as we will see in Subsection 4.3, this ability of simulating in retrospect does
not play well with composition or with protocols which accept inputs not only at the start, but
also at later times (protocols realizing so called reactive functionalities which are a generalization
of secure function evaluation).
4.2 A Motivating Example: Secure Composition as a Problem
Below we will give two examples illustrating what can happen when protocols are composed. The
first is a classical example from classical cryptography where a message from one subprotocol of a
largerapplicationisfedintoanothersubprotocolandthe overallapplicationbecomesinsecure. The
second example shows that quantum information can be used in different subprotocols such that
entanglement spans over different subprotocols.
4.2.1 Malleability—a Classical Example
A very simple example of this kind is an (simplified) auction protocol. We assume a trusted auc-
tioneer in possession of a RSA public key (n,e). For an auction the auctioneer accepts bids which
are encrypted with his public key. After receiving all the bids the auctioneer decrypts the cipher
texts with his secret key d and publishes the highest bid together with the winner of the auction.
The RSA encryption keeps eavesdroppers from learning bids of competitors. This seems to imply
that the bids of the dishonest participants must be chosen independently of the bids of the honest
participants. However, astonishingly this is not necessarily the case: Given an honest Alice, a dis-
honest Bob and let all encryptions be done by ”textbook RSA17”. If now Alice bids the amount m
then she sends c=me mod n to the auctioneer. Bob can, after learning this ciphertext c compute
2e∗c mod n which equals an encryption of 2∗m with the public key (n,e).
SowithoutknowingtheamountofAlice’sbidBobisabletocomputeaciphertextwhichencrypts
a higher bid and so he will win the auction. This security weakness is calledmalleability [15] and it
is not per se a weakness of textbook RSA, but becomes a problem when textbook RSA is used in
certain larger applications.
4.2.2 Quantum Superpositions can Span over several Subprotocols
Quantum bit commitment, i.e. the cryptographic equivalent to a sealed envelope, has been shown
to be impossible with unconditional security. However, it is tempting to try to circumvent this
impossibilitytheoremofMayers[28]andLo/Chau[25]byaclevercompositionofpossiblequantum
protocols. One could try to build up a secure bit commitment from weaker primitives like cheat
sensitive commitments [19]. However, the impossibility theorem rules this out and therefore shows
that composing quantum protocols can be counter intuitive. One cannot treat the subprotocols as
being ”atomic”andquantumsuperpositionsbeing limitedto occuronlywithinthe subprotocols. It
is possible to keep all quantum information in the different subprotocols in one large superposition
and the attack of Mayers and Lo/Chau does exactly that.
4.3 Types of Protocol Composition
Two kinds of protocol composition can be distinguished:
Simple Composition for which an example was given in the previous subsection. In simple
composition a single instance of a cryptographic primitive is replaced by a real subprotocol. Now
messages from the surrounding protocol which may depend on secrets of uncorrupted parties can
be injected into the subprotocol or vice versa: a corrupted player can use messages from within
a subprotocol outside of this subprotocol. This access to protocol messages which may depend on
secretsofuncorruptedpartiesgiveanenormousstrengthtotheadversarynotpresentinstandalone
models of security. In the quantum world it is additionally possible to entangle messages used in
different protocols.
In the case of Concurrent Composition many instances of the same protocol with correlated
inputs are run concurrently. Apart from the problems of simple composition, that messages from
one protocol could be fed into another [30], an additional problem occurs if one allows more than
a constant number of protocol instances to be run concurrently. Even though each single instance
of the protocol is secure in the sense of simulatability it could be that the multiple rounds of the
different protocol instances are interleaved in a way that messages in one instance of the protocol
affectmessagesinotherprotocolsandnopolynomialtimesimulationstrategytoobtainaconsistent
simulation for all protocols is known.
So in a notion of security allowing for secure composition the simulator should work even if the
protocolisruninanarbitraryapplicationcontext. This impliesthatthe simulationcannotbe done
in retrospect as the real adversary could feed information into surrounding protocols at any time.
This requirement of a straight line simulator is very strict, however, according to [24] it is close to
theminimalrequirementifonewantstocombinetherequirementsofstandalonesimulatabilityand
the notion of security being preserved if run in arbitrary applications.
5 The Universal Composability Framework
The basic idea of the Universal Composability (UC) framework and why this notion of security
allows for secure composition is that the stand alone simulatability definition of security from [17]
is enriched by an additional machine, an environment machine which interacts with the proto-
col and the attacker while it can emulate arbitrary surrounding protocols.18 Starting from this
17This refersto the originallypublished versionof RSA whereaciphertext c fora message mis deterministically
computedviac=me modnanddecryptionisdoneviam=cd modn.
18InSection2.3thisenvironmentwasonlyimplicit,becausetheinteractionwithotherprotocolsissimplerthanin
thegeneralcase: keydistributionhasnoinputandguarantees nosecurityifoneofthepartiesiscorrupted.
classical universal composability framework [9] and independently discovered concept of reactive
simulatability[31,2]twoquantummodelsofsecurityweredefinedin[43,4]. Bothmodelsfollowthe
same motivation, but differ in details which are not of importance in this overview.
The model of [43] is described in three steps. First the machines and their network is defined,
nextthe behaviorofthe machinesis defined accordingto their rolesin a protocol,then the security
definitionisgivenbasedontheindistinguishabilityoftwoprotocols(therealandtheidealprotocol).
In our overview many details have to be omitted. For details consult [43, 45].
Machines and Networks. Quantum machines have internal states which may be quantum and
the state transition operator is a trace preserving superoperator on the Hilbert space spanned by
the tensor product of the possible internal states, the possible inputs and the possible outputs of
the machine. The machines are connected by an asynchronous quantum network, i.e., (quantum)
messages between machines may be blocked or delayed. Only one machine may be active at any
time and the scheduling is message driven, i.e., a machine sending away a message is switching to
a waiting state while the receiving machine is activated19.
The scheduling is classical, i.e., machines are not active and inactive in superposition nor are
messages sent and not sent in superposition. This makes the model usable, but it excludes the
possibility of certain protocols detecting a traffic analysis [29, 41].
Protocol, Adversary, and Environment. Apartfromtheprotocolparticipantswhicharespec-
ifiedbythe protocoltherearetwomoremachinestakingpartinthe protocolexecution. The adver-
sary A (or S in the ideal model) is the machine coordinating all corrupted participants analogous
to the stand-alone model in Section 4.1. The environment machine Z chooses the inputs20, sees
the output, and may communicate with the adversary at any time. The environment machine can
emulate arbitrary surrounding protocols and can hence detect vulnerabilities which would result
from protocol composition.
The Security Definition. We demand the environment machine to produce a classical output
and we say that a protocol π implements an ideal protocol F with perfect security if for every
adversary A there exists an ideal adversary S such that for every environment machine Z the
distribution of the outputs of Z when interacting with A and π equals the distribution of the
outputs ofZ wheninteractingwithS andF. Aprotocolπ realizesF with statistical security ifthe
output distribution ofZ wheninteracting with A andπ is statistically indistinguishable21 fromthe
output distribution of Z when interacting with F and S.
Quantum cryptography usually aims at achieving statistical security where the adversary may
be limited only by the laws of quantum mechanics. It does, however, make sense to also define
computational security in the quantum setting, because quantum cryptography can realize tasks
with computational security which are believed to be impossible classically22.
Amachineissaidtobequantumpolynomialtimeifitcanbeinvokedonlyapolynomialnumberof
timesinthesecurityparameterkandtheinputoutputbehaviorofthemachinecanbesimulatedbya
quantumTuringmachineinpolynomialtimeink. Ifnowallprotocolparticipants,theadversaryand
the environment machine are quantum polynomial machines then we say that a protocol π realizes
F with quantum computational security if for all A there exists a S such that for all Z the output
distribution of Z when interacting with A and π is indistinguishable in quantum polynomial time
fromthe output distributionofZ wheninteracting withF andS. I.e. ifwe denote by out the
randomvariable of the output of Z in the realprotocoland by out the corresponding random
variableforthe idealmodelthenwedemandthatforeveryquantumpolynomialmachineD itholds
that |P(D(out ) → 1)−P(D(out ) → 1)| is negligible in the security parameter (where a
π,A,Z F,S,Z
function ǫ is called negligible if it is asymptotically smaller than any 1/kn for every constant n).
19Onedistinguishedmachine,calledmaster scheduler,willbeinvokedifthisruledoesnotapply.
20Incaseofareactivefunctionalityinputscanalsodependonpreviousoutputs oronprotocol messages.
21Inthecaseofkeydistributionthisamountstoapproximatesecuritywithεnegligible,i.e. asymptoticallysmaller
thanany1/kn.
22E.g. realizingoblivioustransferfromaonewayfunction[50,21].
5.1 The Composition Theorem
TheUCframeworkprovidesaverystrictnotionofsecurityandforaprotocolρsecurelyrealizingan
ideal protocol F in the UC framework strong composition guarantees can be obtained. We denote
byπF thataprotocolπinvokesaprotocolF asasubprotocolandbyπρthatF hasbeenreplacedby
aprotocolρ. We writeπ ≥ρtodenotethattheprotocolπ securelyrealizesρintheUC framework.
Now the (simple) composition theorem (see [43, 45]) states that if ρ ≥ F then πρ securely realizes
πF. Especially if πF securely realizes a functionality G then also πρ realizes G.
If we denote by ρ∗ the concurrent composition of (polynomially many) instances of ρ and by
F∗ the concurrent composition of (polynomially many) instances of F. Then the (concurrent)
composition theorem guarantees that if ρ≥F it also holds that ρ∗ ≥F∗.
Combiningsimpleandconcurrentcompositionweobtainthecompositiontheoremwherealarger
applicationπmayusemultipleinstancesofasubprotocol: Givenaprotocolρwhichsecurelyrealizes
a protocolF in the UC framework,then a protocol
realizesπF∗
in the UC framework.
The UC framework is to a certain extent a minimal requirement for the composition theorem.
In the classical case it was shown in [24] that a security notion comparable to the UC framework
naturally arises if one demands stand alone simulatability (see Section 4.1) and the existence of a
composition theorem.
5.2 Information Theoretical Security and Quantum Adversaries
One very interesting result proven in the quantum universal composability framework regards the
securityofclassicalprotocolswithrespecttoaquantumadversary. Givenaprotocolwhichisproven
to be statistically secureagainsta classic adversary. Does it remainsecureunder quantum attacks?
Is the speed-up of quantum computing the only threat to classical protocols or could a quantum
attackertogetherwithaquantumenvironmentuseentangledquantuminformationtobreakclassical
protocols?
In [45] it was shown that whenever a protocol ρ realizes some ideal protocol F with respect to
statistical security in the UC framework, then ρ securely realizes F in the quantum composability
setting.
This result is very useful. Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) is composable (cf. Section 2.3)
andfromQKDonecanobtaincomposablesecurecommunication[32]. Hencesecurechannelsbased
on quantum cryptography can be used instead of idealized secure channels in many cryptographic
settings, such as secure multiparty computations in presence of an honest majority [11].
5.3 Impossibility of Bit Commitment
Additionally to the impossibility of unconditionally secure bit commitment in quantum cryptog-
raphy [28, 25] a new impossibility result is introduced by the UC framework: Without additional
security assumptions bit commitment cannot be realized with computational security [10]. This
result generalizes to many more cryptographic tasks like coin flipping or oblivious transfer and it
also holds in the quantum case.
The reasonfor this impossibility result is that the simulator may no more act in retrospect and
without additional assumptions every simulation strategy for S could be turned into a cheating
strategy for the adversary A in the real protocol.
Theadditionalassumptionsusedtoallowforacomputationallysecurebitcommitmentcanbea
trustedauthorityprovidingrandomnesstothe protocolparticipantsbeforethe startofthe protocol
(the Common Reference String (CRS)) [10], a trusted authority setting up a trusted public key
infrastructure,orthe availabilityoftamperproofhardware. Whatisworsesuchset-up assumptions
are needed in quantum cryptography, too. The impossibility result of [10] directly carries over to
the quantum case thus in the UC frameworkquantum cryptographicprotocols cannoteven achieve
a computationally secure bit commitment without additional security assumptions.
Soformanycryptographictaskswheretheprotocolparticipantsaremutuallymistrustingonehas
atrade-offbetweenthestrengthofthecomposabilityguaranteesandthestrengthoftheassumptions
needed to achieve these tasks. For certain applications the threats introduced by the additional
assumptions (e.g. the trusted authorities) weigh heavier than the threats introduced by improper
compositionof protocolsandit seems that for this case there is no security notionwhich is without
a compromise.
Aswewillseeinthenextsubsectiontheaboveimpossibilityresultalsoaffectsthecomposability
of protocols in the bounded quantum storage model [13]. To allow for simulatable security in the
bounded quantumstoragemodelthe memory restrictionshaveto be differentin the realand inthe
ideal model, which results in difficulties when applying the composition theorem multiple times.
5.4 Composability in the Bounded Quantum Memory Model
Eventhoughmanyinterestingcryptographictasksarenotrealizablefromscratchthesetaskscanbe
realizedunderveryreasonablesecurityassumptions,e.g. thattheadversaryislimitedinperforming
large coherent operations [37] or that the adversary has a quantum memory which is bounded in
size [13]. It was shown that the protocols in the bounded quantum storage model do compose
sequentially [47], however, the protocols as stated do not allow general composition. With an
example we will illustrate that this seems to be a general problem. To have a useful composition
theoremweneedthattheatleastassecureas relation(≥)istransitive,becauseotherwisewecannot
repeatedly apply the composition theorem in the modular design of a cryptographic protocol. To
be able to conclude from π ≥ρ and ρ≥F that π securely realizes F we need that the simulator in
the protocol ρ should be admitted as a real adversary for ρ if this protocol is to be compared with
F. In [20] it is shown that it is possible to achieve oblivious transfer (and hence bit commitment)
if the real adversary is restricted to have no quantum memory at all. However, the simulator for
this protocol needs quantum memory for the simulation. So if we restrict the simulator to have no
quantum memory oblivious transfer is not realizable any more and having different restrictions for
the real attacker and the simulator results in ≥ not being transitive. A way aroundthis problem is
to generalizethe notion ofat least as secure as to one that explicitly involvesthe memory bound of
the adversary as a parameter, as proposed in [44].
6 Conclusions
This work reviewed composable security in quantum cryptography. In the first part of the paper
the focus was on quantum key distribution (QKD), the most prominent application of quantum
cryptography. We discussed the requirements that a composable security definition must fulfill and
illustratedthe importanceoftheserequirementsbyanattackwhichexploitsatypicalweaknessofa
non-composable(butwidelyused)definitionforsecrecy. Toshowtheutilityofcomposablesecurity,
we constructed a scheme to generate a continuous key stream by sequentially composing rounds of
a quantum key distribution protocol.
The second partof the worktook a more generalpoint ofview, which is necessaryfor the study
ofsecurityapplicationsinvolvinggeneraltasksaswellasmutuallydistrustfulparties. We explained
the universalcomposability frameworkandstated its compositiontheoremwhich givesstrongcom-
posability guarantees. Of special interest was the secure composition of quantum protocols into
unconditionally secure classical protocols. This shows that every unconditionally secure protocol
possibleinthe securechannelmodelisalsopossiblewithQKDanddoesnotevenneedanewproof.
However,there are open problems left. A drawbackof the universalcomposability frameworkis
that some tasks become impossible there without adding new security assumptions. E.g., quantum
bit commitment is impossible in the universal composability framework even with mere compu-
tational security or with respect to an attacker in the bounded quantum storage model. Hence
we observe a trade-off between the strong guarantees provided by universal composability and the
possibility of using fewer security assumptions. Addressing this trade-off remains an open problem.
A concrete approach may be to consider additional (weak) setup assumptions, e.g., a Common
Reference String as used in the classical model [10].
Another open questionregardsa weakness inherentto mostexisting security proofs in quantum
cryptography. Theseproofstypicallyrelyonaspecificmodelforthehardwaretheschemeisbuilton
(e.g.,thephotonsourcesanddetectorsusedforopticalQKD).Obviously,thesecurityclaimsderived
for such a model generally only apply to implementations that strictly match the model. This,
however,isalmostneverthecaseinpractice. Indeed,explicitattacksexploitingthedeviationofthe
implementationfromthe theoreticalmodelhavebeen demonstratedrecently(see, e.g., [51,26]). It
would thus be desirable to have a (composable) framework that allows a more flexible modeling of
the underlying hardware devices.
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Gilles Brassard for helpful comments on an earlier
version of the manuscript.