Compression Rate Method for Empirical Science
and Application to Computer Vision
Daniel Burfoot
Independent Researcher
709 North 7th St., Emmaus, PA 18049
daniel.burfoot@gmail.com
Abstract. This philosophical paper proposes a modified version of the
scientific method, in which large databases are used instead of experi-
mentalobservationsasthenecessaryempiricalingredient.Thischangein
thesourceoftheempiricaldataallowsthescientificmethodtobeapplied
to several aspects of physical reality that previously resisted systematic
interrogation.Underthenewmethod,scientifictheoriesarecomparedby
instantiating them as compression programs, and examining the code-
lengths they achieve on a database of measurements related to a phe-
nomenonofinterest.Becauseoftheimpossibilityofcompressingrandom
data, “real world” data can only be compressed by discovering and ex-
ploiting the empirical structure it exhibits. The method also provides a
new way of thinking about two longstanding issues in the philosophy of
science: the problem of induction and the problem of demarcation.
Thesecondpartofthepaperproposestoreformulatecomputervisionas
anempiricalscienceofvisualreality,byapplyingthenewmethodtolarge
databases of natural images. The immediate goal of the proposed refor-
mulation is to repair the chronic difficulties in evaluation experienced
by the field of computer vision. The reformulation should bring a wide
range of benefits, including a substantially increased degree of method-
ologicalrigor,theabilitytojustifycomplextheorieswithoutoverfitting,
a scalable evaluation paradigm, and the potential to make systematic
progress.Acrucialargumentisthatthechangeisnotespeciallydrastic,
because most computer vision tasks can be reformulated as specialized
image compression techniques. Finally, a concrete proposal is discussed
in which a database is produced by recording from a roadside video
camera,andcompressionisachievedbydevelopingacomputationalun-
derstanding of the appearance of moving cars.
1 Introduction
The ultimate ambition of the field of computer vision is to build machines that
can see as well as humans. Despite decades of research, profound theoretical
insights,sophisticatedmathematics,andthearrivaloffabulouslypowerfulcom-
puters,thisgoaliscurrentlyfaroutofreach.Thepositiontakeninthispaperis
that the critical failure of the field is that is that it does not properly emphasize
the role of empirical science.
1v1815.5001:viXra
This is not, by itself, an especially interesting or original claim. Many re-
searchers have lamented the lack of empirical rigor in computer vision [1,2].
Papers proposing new evaluation methods often contain statements that can
be paraphrased as “despite the fact that topic X is one of the most heavily
researched areas in the field, there is still no good way of evaluating the perfor-
manceofalgorithmsthatperformX” [3,4,5].Thislackofempiricalrigorisnot,
of course, due to vision scientists’ failure to properly understand the scientific
method or its importance. Rather, the problem is that the scientific method, in
the form that it is currently understood, cannot be productively applied to the
questions of interest in the field. It is not obvious, for example, how the scien-
tific method can be used to obtain a high-quality segmentation algorithm. The
central contribution of this paper is a refined or adapted version of the scientific
method, based on large scale lossless data compression, which can be used for
computer vision research.
Section 2 begins with a discussion of the traditional method and shows,
through a series of thought experiments, how the new method can be derived
fromitthroughaseriesofbasicallyminorrevisions.Thenewmethodretainsthe
essential character of the traditional one, but is different enough that it can be
used to justify several new lines of inquiry. In particular, the new method uses
largedatabasesinsteadofcontrolledexperimentsasthekeyempiricalingredients
that are necessary to test, refine, and potentially falsify a theory. Since it is
relatively easy to obtain large databases of natural images, the new method can
be applied to these databases to guide a search for theories of visual reality.
Acriticalaspectofthenewmethodisitsemphasisonempiricalscience.The
NoFreeLunchtheoremofdatacompressionindicatesthatcompressioncanonly
beachievedforsomebitstringsatthepriceofinflatingothers.Thisimpliesthat
the only way to compress a large database of natural images is by discovering
andexploitingtheempiricalregularitiescontainedintheimages.Inotherwords,
every compressor contains an implicit assertion or hypothesis about the data to
which it will be applied, and if it succeeds in achieving compression, that fact
provides empirical evidence that the hypothesis is correct.
A related point concerns the problem of demarcation: how can one tell the
difference between science and pseudoscience? Popper suggested to solve this
problem by accepting a theory as scientific if and only if it makes explicit anti-
predictions, and thereby exposes itself to falsification if the prohibited event
actually occurs as an experimental result [6]. The compression principle sug-
gests an analogous requirement, since the only way to achieve compression is by
reassigning probability away from some outcomes and towards others. Here the
demarcationproblemissolvedbyidentifyingasunscientificthosetheorieswhich
fail to perform such a reassignment (such theories cannot achieve compression).
Furthermore, if the theory performs a probability reassignment, but does so in
a way that does not correspond to empirical reality, it will end up inflating the
database and is therefore falsified.
Another philosophically significant aspect of the new method is its use of
large(“vast”)datasetstoovercometheproblemofinduction.Thisargumentre-
lates to the concept of Kolmogorov complexity [7]. The Kolmogorov complexity
ofalargeandcomplexbitstringisanabsolutequantitythatdoesnotdependon
an observer’s prior belief (encoded in his choice of Turing machine or program-
ming language). If one researcher claims that a new theory achieves a certain
compression rate on a large database, this claim can be verified by all observers
regardless of their prior beliefs. Thus, in this “vast data regime”, statistical in-
ference becomes objective.
The second part of the paper, contained in Section 3, shows how the new
method can be applied to computer vision research. First, Section 3.1 provides
a brief critical review of current evaluation methods. While some progress has
been made recently in this area [3,4,8,9] it is clear that deep conceptual issues
remain [10,11].
Next, Section 3.3 describes the various advantages that can be achieved by
formulating computer vision in terms of large scale image compression. The
most obvious advantage is methodological rigor: a compressor is invoked on
a database, the encoded file size is recorded, and then the decoded version is
checked to make sure it matches the original exactly. The evaluation principle
is also scalable: a single unlabeled database can be used to justify and evaluate
the performance of many different techniques. Since the new method mandates
the use of large unlabeled databases, highly complex models can be developed
without overfitting. Finally, by conducting a determined search for the package
of methods that achieve the shortest possible codelength, the field can make
systematic progress. Thus, by changing the nature of the questions it considers,
the field can realize enormous methodological advantages.
Acrucialargument,containedinSection3.4,isthattheshiftfromthetradi-
tional formulation of vision to the vision-as-compression approach is not really
very drastic. Nearly all computer vision tasks can be easily reformulated as spe-
cial techniques for image compression. For example, image segmentation can be
viewed as a special way of compressing an image by separating the pixels into
homogeneous regions, so that bits can be saved by encoding the pixels with a
region-specific model [12,13]. The stereo matching problem can be reformulated
as a special way of compressing a stereo pair by using the first image, plus a
disparity function, to predict the pixels in the second image [14].
To make the ideas of this paper as concrete as possible, Section 3.2 gives
one simple proposal. Here, a camera is set up next to a highway, and is used to
obtain a large video database. Assuming the background is mostly static, the
major source of variation in the video will be the passing cars. Thus, in order to
achieve good compression rates for these images, it will be necessary to develop
a sophisticated computational understanding of the appearance of automobiles.
This understanding can be built up in several levels, with each level allowing
a better compression rate than the previous one. The first level would exploit
the fact that cars are rigid bodies obeying Newtonian laws of motion. Higher
levels would exploit characteristic visual properties of automobiles, such as the
appearance of the wheels and the windshields.
2 Development of Compression Rate Method
2.1 Traditional Scientific Method
This paper proposes a refined version of the scientific method that is more di-
rectlyapplicabletotheproblemsofinterestincomputervision.Beforedoingso,
it is worth briefly examining the traditional method and the circumstances in
which it can be applied. The scientific method is not an exact procedure, but a
qualitative statement of it goes roughly as follows:
1. Observe a natural phenomenon.
2. Develop a theory of that phenomenon.
3. Use the theory to make a prediction.
4. Test the prediction experimentally.
A full discussion of the philosophical significance of the scientific method is
beyond the scope of this paper, but some brief remarks are in order. The power
of the scientific method is in the way it links theory with experimental observa-
tion;eitheroneofthesealoneisworthless.Thelongcheckeredintellectualhistory
of humanity clearly shows how rapidly pure theoretical speculation goes astray
when it is not tightly constrained by an external guiding force. Pure experi-
mental investigation, in contrast, is of limited value because of the vast number
of possible configurations of objects. To make predictions solely on the basis of
experimentaldata,itwouldbenecessarytoexhaustivelytesteachconfiguration.
As articulated in the above list, the goal of the method appears to be the
verification of a single theory. This is a bit misleading; in reality the goal of the
method is to facilitate selection between a potentially large number of candi-
date theories. Given two competing theories of a particular phenomenon, the
researcher identifies some experimental configuration where the theories make
incompatible predictions and then performs the experiment using the indicated
configuration. The theory whose predictions fail to match the experimental pre-
dictionisdiscardedinfavorofitsrival.Buteventhisviewofscienceasaprocess
of weeding out imperfect theories in order to find the perfect one is somewhat
inaccurate. Most physicists will admit or disclaim that even their most refined
theories are mere approximations, though they are spectacularly accurate ap-
proximations. The scientific method can therefore be understood as a technique
for using empirical observations to find the best predictive approximation from
a large pool of candidates.
Acorecomponentofthetraditionalscientificmethodistheuseofcontrolled
experiments.Tocontrolanexperimentmeansessentiallytosimplifyit.Todeter-
mine the effect of a certain factor, one sets up two experimental configurations
whichareexactlythesameexceptforthepresenceorabsenceofthefactor.Ifthe
experimental outcomes are different, then it can be inferred that this disparity
is due to the special factor.
In some fields of scientific inquiry, however, it is impossible or meaningless
to conduct controlled experiments. No two people are identical in all respects,
so clinical trials for new drugs, in which the human subject is part of the ex-
perimental configuration, can never be truly controlled. The best that medical
researcherscandoistoattempttoensurethattheexperimentalfactordoesnot
systematically correlate with other factors that may affect the outcome. This
is done by selecting at random which patients will receive the new treatment.
Thismethodhasobviouslimitations,however,whichcausedeepproblemsinthe
medical literature [15]. It is similarly difficult to apply the traditional scientific
method to answer questions arising in the field of macroeconomics. No politi-
cal leader would ever agree to a proposal in which her country’s economy was
to be used as an experimental test subject. In lieu of controlled experiments,
economistsattempttotesttheirtheoriesbasedontheoutcomesofso-calledhis-
toricalexperiments,wheretwooriginallysimilarcountriesimplementeddifferent
economic policies.
A similar breakdown of the traditional method occurs in computer vision.
Controlled vision experiments can be conducted, but are of very little inter-
est. The physical laws of reflection and optics that govern the image formation
processarewellunderstoodalready.Clearlyifthesamecameraisusedtophoto-
graph an identical scene twice under constant lighting conditions, the obtained
images will be identical or very nearly so. And a deterministic computer vision
algorithm will always produce the same result when applied to two identical
images. It is not clear, therefore, how to use the traditional method to approach
the problems of interest in computer vision, which include tasks like image seg-
mentation and edge detection.
2.2 Sophie’s Adventures
By making a series of minor modifications to the traditional scientific method,
thispaperdevelopsarefinedversionthatisdirectlyapplicabletotheproblemsof
interest in computer vision. These modifications are illustrated through a series
of thought experiments relating to a fictional character named Sophie.
TheShaman SophieisaassistantprofessorofphysicsatalargeAmericanstate
university. She finds this job vexing for several reasons, one of which is that she
hasbeenchosenbythedepartmenttoteachaphysicsclassintendedforstudents
majoringinthehumanities,forwhomitservestofillabreadthrequirement.The
studentsinthisclass,whomajorinsubjectslikeliterature,religiousstudies,and
philosophy,tendtobeintelligentbutalsoquerulousandsomewhatdisdainfulof
the “merely technical” intellectual achievements of physics.
In the current semester she has become aware of the presence in her class of
a discalced student with a large beard and often bloodshot eyes. This student is
surroundedbyanentourageofsimilarlyodd-lookingfollowers.Sophieisongood
terms with some of the more serious students in the class, and in conversation
with them has found out that the odd student is attempting to start a new
naturalistic religious movement and refers to himself as a “shaman”.
One day while delivering a simple lecture on Newtonian mechanics, she is
surprised when the shaman raises his hand and claims that physics is a propa-
gandistic hoax designed by the elites as a way to control the population. Sophie
blinks several times, and then responds that physics can’t be a hoax because it
makesreal-worldpredictionsthatcanbeverifiedbyindependentobservers.The
shaman counters by claiming that the so-called “predictions” made by physics
are in fact trivialities, and that he can obtain better forecasts by communing
with the spirit world. He then proceeds to challenge Sophie to a predictive duel,
in which the two of them will make forecasts regarding the outcome of a simple
experiment, the winner being decided based on the accuracy of the forecasts.
Sophie is taken aback by this but, hoping that by proving the shaman wrong
she can break the spell he has cast on some of the other students, agrees to the
challenge.
During the next class, Sophie sets up the following experiment. She uses
a spring mechanism to launch a ball into the air at an angle θ. The launch
mechanism allows her to set the initial velocity of the ball to a value of v .
She chooses as a predictive test the problem of predicting the time t that the
ball will fall back to the ground after being launched at t = 0. Using a trivial
Newtonian calculation she concludes that t = 2g−1v sin(θ), sets v and θ to
give a value of t = 2 seconds, and announces her prediction to the class. She
then asks the shaman for his prediction. The shaman declares that he must
consultwiththewindspirits,andthenspendsacoupleofminuteschantingand
muttering. Then, dramatically flaring open his eyes as if to signify a moment of
revelation, he grabs a piece of paper, writes his prediction on it, and then hands
ittoanotherstudent.Sophiesuspectssomekindoftrick,butistooexasperated
to investigate and so launches the ball into the air. The ball is equipped with
anelectronictimerthatstartsandstopswhenanimpactisdetected,andsothe
number registered in the timer is just the time of flight t . A student picks up
the ball and reports that the result is t = 2.134. The shaman gives a gleeful
laugh,andthestudentholdinghiswrittenpredictionhandsittoSophie.Onthe
paperiswritten1<t <30.Theshamandeclaresvictory:hispredictionturned
out to be correct, while Sophie’s was incorrect (it was off by 0.134 seconds).
To counter the shaman’s claim and because it was on the syllabus anyway,
in the next class Sophie begins a discussion of probability theory. She goes over
the basic ideas, and then connects them to the experimental prediction made
about the ball. She points out that technically, the Newtonian prediction t =2
is not an assertion about the exact value of the outcome. Rather it should be
interpreted as the mean of a probability distribution describing possible out-
comes. For example, one might use a normal distribution with mean µ=t =2
and σ = .3. The reason the shaman superficially seemed to win the contest is
that he gave a probability distribution while Sophie gave a point prediction;
these two types of forecast are not really comparable. In the light of probability
theory, the reason to prefer the Newtonian prediction above the shamanic one,
is that it assigns a higher probability to the outcome that actually occurred.
Now, plausibly, if only a single trial is used then the Newtonian theory might
simply have gotten lucky, so the reasonable thing to do is combine the results
over many trials, by multiplying the probabilities together. Therefore the real
reason to prefer the Newtonian theory to the shamanic theory is that:
(cid:89) (cid:89)
newton f,k shaman f,k
Where the k index runs over many trials of the experiment. Sophie then
shows how the Newtonian probability predictions are both more confident and
more correct than the shamanic predictions. The Newtonian predictions assign
a very large amount of probability to the region around the outcome t = 2,
and in fact it turns out that almost all of the real data outcomes fall in this
range. In contrast, the shamanic prediction assigns a relatively small amount of
probability to the t = 2 region, because he has predicted a very wide interval
(1 < t < 30). Thus while the shamanic prediction is correct, it is not very
confident. The Newtonian prediction is correct and highly confident, and so it
should be prefered.
SophietriestoemphasizethattheNewtonianprobabilitypredictionP
only works well for the real data. Because of the requirement that probability
distributions be normalized, the Newtonian theory can only achieve superior
high performance by reassigning probability towards the region around t =
2 and away from other regions. A theory that does not perform this kind of
reassignment cannot achieve superior high performance.
Sophie recalls that some of the students are studying computer science and
for their benefit points out the following. The famous Shannon equation L(x)=
−log P(x) governs the relationship between the probability of an outcome and
the length of the optimal code that should be used to represent it. Therefore,
given a large data file containing the results of many trials of the ballistic mo-
tion experiment, the two predictions (Newtonian and shamanic) can both be
usedtobuildspecializedprogramstocompressthedatafile.UsingtheShannon
equation, the above inequality can be rewritten as follows:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
newton f,k shaman f,k
This inequality indicates an alternative criterion that can be used to decide
between two rival theories. Given a data file recording measurements related to
a phenomenon ofinterest,a scientific theory can be used to write a compression
program that will shrink the file to a small size. Given two rival theories of
the same phenomenon, one invokes the corresponding compressors on a shared
benchmark data set, and prefers the theory that achieves a smaller encoded
file size. This criterion is equivalent to the probability-based one, but has the
advantage of being more tangible, since the quantities of interest are file lengths
instead of probabilities.
The Dead Experimentalist Sophie is a theoretical physicist and, upon tak-
ing up her position as assistant professor, began a collaboration with a brilliant
experimental physicist who had been working at the university for some time.
The experimentalist had previously completed the development of an advanced
apparatus that allowed the investigation of an exotic new kind of quantum phe-
nomenon.Usingdataobtainedfromthenewsystem,Sophiemaderapidprogress
in developing a mathematical theory of the phenomenon. Tragically, just before
Sophie was able complete her theory, the experimentalist was killed in a labo-
ratory explosion that also destroyed the special apparatus. After grieving for a
couple of months, Sophie decided that the best way to honor her friend’s mem-
ory would be to bring the research they had been working on to a successful
conclusion.
Unfortunately,thereisacriticalproblemwithSophie’splan.Theexperimen-
tal apparatus had been completely destroyed, and Sophie’s late partner was the
only person in the world who could have rebuilt it. He had run many trials of
the system before his death, so Sophie had a quite large quantity of data. But
she had no way of generating any new data. Thus, no matter how beautiful and
perfecthertheorymightbe,shehadnowayoftestingitbymakingpredictions.
OnedaywhilethinkingabouttheproblemSophierecallstheincidentwiththe
shaman. She remembers the point she had made for the benefit of the software
engineers, about how a scientific theory could be used to compress a real world
datasettoaverysmallsize.Inspired,shedecidestoapplythedatacompression
principleasawayoftestinghertheory.Sheimmediatelyreturnstoherofficeand
spends the next several weeks writing Matlab code, converting her theory into
a compression algorithm. The resulting compressor is successful: it shrinks the
corpus of experimental data from an initial size of 8.7·1011 bits to an encoded
size of 3.3·109 bits. Satisfied, Sophie writes up the theory, and submits it to a
well-known physics journal.
Thejournaleditorslikethetheory,butareabitskepticalofthecompression
based method for testing the theory. Sophie argues that if the theory becomes
widely known, one of the other experts in the field will develop a similar ap-
paratus, which can then be used to test the theory in the traditional way. She
also offers to release the experimental data, so that other researchers can test
theirowntheoriesusingthesamecompressionprinciple.Finallyshepromisesto
releasethesourcecodeofherprogram,toallowexternalverificationofthecom-
pression result. These arguments finally convince the journal editors to accept
the paper.
The Upstart Theory After all the mathematics, software development, prose
revisions, and persuasion necessary to complete her theory and have the paper
accepted, Sophie decides to reward herself by living the good life for a while.
She is confident that her theory is essentially correct, and will eventually be
recognized as correct by her colleagues. So she spends her time reading novels
and hanging out in coffee shops with her friends.
A couple of months later, however, she receives an unpleasant shock in the
form of an email from a colleague which is phrased in consolatory language, but
doesnotcontainanyclueastowhysuchlanguagemightbeinorder.Aftersome
investigation she finds out that a new paper has been published about the same
quantum phenomenon of interest to Sophie. The paper proposes a alternative
theory of the phenomenon which bears no resemblance whatever to Sophie’s.
Furthermore, the paper reports a better compression rate than was achieved by
Sophie, on the database that she released.
Sophie reads the new paper and quickly realizes that it is worthless. The
theory depends on the introduction of a large number of additional parameters,
the values of which must be obtained from the data itself. In fact, a substantial
portion of the paper involves a description of a statistical algorithm that esti-
mates optimal parameter values from the data. In spite of these aesthetic flaws,
she finds that many of her colleagues are quite taken with the new paper and
some consider it to be “next big thing”.
Sophie sends a message to the journal editors describing in detail what she
sees as the many flaws of the upstart paper. She emphasizes the asthetic weak-
ness of the new theory, which requires tens of thousands of new parameters.
The editors express sympathy, but point out that the new theory outperforms
Sophie’s theory using the performance metric she herself proposed. The beauty
of a theory is important, but its correctness is ultimately more important.
Somewhatdiscouraged,Sophiesendsapoliteemailtotheauthorsofthenew
paper, congratulating them on their result and asking to see their source code.
Their response, which arrives a week later, contains a vague excuse about how
thesourcecodeisnotproperlydocumentedandreliesonproprietarythirdparty
libraries. Annoyed, Sophie contacts the journal editors again and asks them for
the program they used to verify the compression result. They reply with a link
to a binary version of the program.
When Sophie clicks on the link to download the program, she is annoyed to
findithasasizeof800megabytes.Butherannoyanceisquicklytransformedinto
enlightenment,assherealizeswhathappened,andthatherpreviousphilosophy
contained a serious flaw. The upstart theory is not better than hers; it has only
succeededinreducingthesizeoftheencodeddatabydramaticallyincreasingthe
size of the compressor. Indeed, when dealing with specialized compressors, the
distinction between “program” and “encoded data” becomes almost irrelevant.
The critical number is not the size of the compressed file, but the net size of the
encoded data plus the compressor itself.
Sophie writes a response to the new paper which describes the refined com-
pression rate principle. She begins the paper by reiterating the unfortunate cir-
cumstanceswhichforcedhertoappealtotheprinciple,andexpressingthehope
that someday an experimental group will rebuild the apparatus developed by
her late partner, so that the experimental predictions made by the two theories
can be properly tested. Until that day arrives, standard scientific practice does
notpermitadecisivedeclarationoftheoreticalsuccess.Butsurelythereissome
theoreticalstatementthatcanbemadeinthemeantime,giventhelargeamount
of data available. Sophie’s proposal is that the goal should be to find the theory
thathasthehighestprobabilityofpredictinganewdataset,whenitcanfinally
be obtained. If the theories are very simple in comparison to the data being
modeled, then the size of the encoded data file is a good way of choosing the
besttheory.Butifthetheoriesarecomplex,thenthereisariskofoverfitting the
data. To guard against overfitting complex theories must be penalized; a simple
waytodothisistotakeintoaccountthecodelengthrequiredforthecompressor
itself. The length of Sophie’s compressor was negligible, so the net score of her
theory is just the codelength of the encoded data file: 3.3·109 bits. The rival
theory achieved a smaller size of 2.1·109 for the encoded data file, but required
a compressor of 6.7·109 bits to do so, giving a total score of 8.8·109 bits. Since
Sophie’s net score is lower, her theory should be prefered.
2.3 Compression Rate Method
Inthecourseofthethoughtexperimentsdiscussedabove,theprotagonistSophie
articulated what can be considered a new method of scientific inquiry. This
procedure is called the Compression Rate Method (CRM) in the subsequent
development and consists of the following steps:
1. Obtain a “vast” database T relating to a phenomenon of interest.
2. Develop a theory of that phenomenon and use it to construct a compressor.
3. Score the theory by calculating the sum of the length of the compressor and
the length of the encoded version of T.
4. Prefer the new theory to a rival if it achieves a lower score.
Above it was argued that the power of the traditional scientific method de-
pended on two core philosophical elements; these elements are retained in the
new method. Both methods employ theoretical speculation, but this theorizing
is guided, constrained, and verified by empirical data. And both methods pro-
vide a principle for making decisive comparisons between theories, enabling the
scientific community to carry out an efficient and systematic search for the best
possible theory.
In spite ofthis core similarity, thereis a crucial difference between the tradi-
tional method and the CRM. This difference involves the form of the empirical
datausedtoverifyatheory.Physicsandrelatedfieldsdependstronglyontheuse
of controlled experiments to produce the necessary empirical data. In physics,
whenever a new theory of a phenomenon is proposed, it must agree with the
current theory in a very wide range of scenarios, since the current theory has
presumably been shown to make correct predictions on a large number of dif-
ferent configurations. Controlled experiments are therefore necessary to bring
the differing predictions indicated by the two theories into the starkest possible
relief.Incontrast,thenewmethodreliesonlargequantitiesofrawdata.Instead
of point predictions regarding the outcome of controlled experiments, theories
justifiedbythenewmethodarerequiredtomakeprobabilitypredictionsforpo-
tentially complex, high-dimensional data. It no longer makes sense to say that
the current theory makes definitively “correct” predictions for some standard
configurations; rather, the predictions are just “good”. To supplant the current
theory, a new theory need only make better predictions on average.
Because of the relaxation of the requirement for controlled experiments, the
newmethodimmediatelyjustifiesseveralnewlinesofscientificinquiry.Thetype
ofscienceproducedbyCRM-styleinquirydependsonthetypeofdatacontained
in the target database T. If T contains data related to the outcomes of physical
experiments,thenphysicaltheorieswillbenecessarytocompressit.IfT contains
information related to interest rates, house prices, global trade flows, and so on,
then economic theories will be necessary to compress it. But the most obvious
choiceforT issimplyanenormousimagedatabase,suchasthosebuiltbyphoto
sharingwebsiteslikeFlickr.com.Inordertocompresssuchadatabaseonemust
develop theories of visual reality.
Inadditiontojustifyingseveralnewlinesofscientificinquiry,thenewmethod
also bears a much stronger resemblance to human learning. The example of hu-
man learning shows that, if science is defined as any process by which reliable
predictions about the real world are obtained, then the traditional method is
incomplete. Human children are able to obtain highly refined models of various
phenomena that support, in some cases, amazingly accurate predictions. But
children rarely engage in controlled experimentation, and in spite of this are
able to learn complex skills like basketball and object recognition. Instead of
controlledexperimentation,childrenconstantlyengageinhigh-bandwidthinter-
action with empirical reality (also known as “play”), and it is clear that this
activity produces a vast amount of raw sensorimotor data from which sophis-
ticated models of various phenomena can be extracted. The form of the input
dataassumedinthenewmethodisthusmuchclosertothenaturalsettingofthe
learning problem as experienced by human children than either the limited size
labeleddatasetsnormallyusedinsupervisedlearningresearchorthecontrolled
experimental data normally used in physics.
Vast Data and Intersubjective Verifiability The history of statistics has
observed a major philosophical struggle between two schools of thought, which
advocateopposingperspectivesregardingthemeaningandjustificationofstatis-
ticalinference.OnonesidearetheBayesians,whoperforminferencebychoosing
a prior distribution and updating it in response to evidence. On the other side
are the frequentists, who object to the use of priors. The frequentist critique
of Bayesian methods has two parts. The first and more accusatory part is that
Bayesians can (and sometimes do) manipulate the results of their analyses by
picking convenient priors. Since statistical analyses often relate to politically
sensitivetopicssuchasglobalwarmingortheefficacyofnewdrugs,thiscritique
is obviously quite incendiary. The second and more abstract point is that even
if the Bayesians do not engage in active intellectual dishonesty, there is still no
objective way to select a prior. Since two researchers who start from different
priors will reach different conclusions in spite of observing the same evidence,
this appears to render statistical inference completely subjective.
AnymappingS(X)fromdatasetsX toprefix-freecodesthatisnottrivially
suboptimal implicitly defines a probability distribution P(X) = 2−|S(X)| over
data sets. Since every compressor must implement such a mapping, it would
appear that CRM research makes the same philosophical commitment to the
use of prior distributions as do the Bayesians. But in fact there is an important
difference, due to the model complexity penalty term used in the CRM (i.e.
the length of compressor itself). By taking this term into account, the prior
is now determined essentially by the choice of programming language used to
write the compressor. Therefore, CRM researchers can provide an invincible
counterargument to the first part of the frequentist critique, simply by fixing
the programming language in advance and using the same one for all analyses.
Ananalysisoftheconceptofintersubjective verifiability showsthatthecom-
pression principle also provides a strong defense against the second component
of the frequentist critique. The defense begins by noting that not even tradi-
tional science is truly objective. Given the same physical evidence about the
motions of the planets, there is no guarantee whatever that all observers will
draw the same conclusions: some may conclude that the Earth rotates around
the Sun, others may conclude the opposite. Instead, traditional science has a
property called intersubjective verifiability. Every scientist has a unique set of
formative educational experiences, cognitive biases, prefered methods, and ana-
logical schemas with which to interpret the world. Intersubjective verifiability
means that in spite of this intellectual diversity, the correctness of a new theory
in a given field can be verified by every scientist of that field on the basis of
known evidence.
The concept of universal computation provides the same guarantee of inter-
subjectiveverifiabilitytotheoriesjustifiedbysufficientlylargequantitiesofdata.
Toseethis,imaginearesearchsubfieldwhichhasestablishedadatabaseT asits
targetforCRM-styleinvestigation.Thesubfieldmakesslowbutsteadyprogress
for several years. Then, out of the blue, an unemployed autodidact from a rural
villageinIndia,ofwhomnoonehaseverheard,appearswithaboldnewtheory.
He claims that his theory, instantiated in a program P , achieves a compression
rate which is dramatically superior to the current best published results (here
thearbitrarydistinctionbetweentheprogramandtheencodeddataisdropped,
sohiscodelengthisjust|P |).However,amonghisothereccentricities,thisgen-
tleman uses a programming language he himself developed, which corresponds
to a Turing machine A. Now, the other researchers of the field are well-meaning
butskeptical,sinceallthepreviouslypublishedresultsusedastandardlanguage
corresponding to a Turing machine B. But in fact it is easy for the Indian mav-
erick to produce a compressor that will run on B: he simply appends P to a
simulator program S , that simulates A when run on B. The length of the
new compressor is |P | = |P |+|S |, and all of the other researchers can
confirmthis.Now,assumingthedatasetT islargeandcomplexenoughsothat
|P |(cid:29)|S |,thenthecodelengthofthemodifiedversioniseffectivelythesame
as the original: |P |≈|P |. This illustrates the meaning of the word “vast” for
thepurposesofCRMresearch:avastdatabaseisonewhosesizeisfarlargerthan
thecharacteristiclengthofaTuringmachinesimulatorprogram.Inthevastdata
regime, statistical inference attains the same quality of near-objectivity that is
possessed by traditional science.
Data Compression as Empirical Science The following theorem is well
known in data compression. Let C be a program that losslessly compresses bit
strings x, assigning each string to a new code with length L (x). Let U (x) be
the uniform distribution over N-bit strings. Then the following bound holds for
all compression programs C:
Inwordsthetheoremstatesthatnolosslesscompressionprogramcanachieve
average codelengths smaller than N bits, when averaged over all possible N bit
input strings. In the subsequent development this is referred to as the “No Free
Lunch” (NFL) theorem of data compression, as it implies that one can achieve
compression for some strings x only at the price of inflating other strings. At
first glance, this theorem appears to turn the CRM proposal into nonsense. In
fact, the theorem is the keystone of the CRM philosophy because it shows how
lossless, large-scale compression research must incorporate empirical science at
a fundamental level.
Toseethispoint,considerthefollowingapparentparadox.InspiteoftheNFL
theorem,losslessimagecompressionprogramsexistandhavebeeninwidespread
useforyears.Asanexample,thewell-knownPortableNetworkGraphics(PNG)
compression algorithm seems to reliably produce encoded files that are 40-50%
shorterthanwouldbeachievedbyauniformencoding.Butthisapparentsuccess
seems to violate the No Free Lunch theorem.
The paradox is resolved by noticing that the images used to evaluate im-
age compression algorithms are not drawn from a uniform distribution U (x)
over images. If lossless image formats were evaluated based on their ability to
compress uniformly random images, no such format could ever be judged suc-
cessful. Instead, the images used in the evaluation process (which may be based
on formal benchmarks or simple popularity) belong to a very special subset of
all possible images: those that arise as a result of everyday human photography.
This“realworld”imagesubset,thoughvastinabsoluteterms,isminisculecom-
paredtothespaceofallpossibleimages.TheNFLtheorempermitscompression
for some special subset of inputs but requires in exchange the inflation of the
non-special subset.
In the light of the above remarks two equally valid perspectives on the im-
age compression problem can be articulated. In the first view the task of the
compression researcher is to precisely define the special image subset to which
the compressor will assign short codes at the expense of the non-special images.
For obvious technical reasons relating to both the complexity and the feasibility
of implementation of the compressor, this privileged subset must be defined in
a minimalist or implicit manner and not by raw enumeration. The subset spec-
ification must be done by listing properties or features that are present in the
prefered images and absent in the non-prefered ones. The goal then is to obtain
an increasingly sophisticated understanding of the characteristics of real world
images by iterative refinement of the prefered image subset. Thus in this view
research proceeds by proposing a precise and computationally tractable defini-
Fig.1. Histogramsofdifferencesbetweenvaluesofneighboringpixelsinanatu-
ralimage(left)andarandomimage(right).Theclusteringofthepixeldifference
values around 0 in the natural image is what allows compression formats like
PNGtoachievecompression.Notethelargerscaleoftheimageontheleft;both
histograms represent the same number of pixels.
tionofapreferedimagesubsetandmeasuring,bymeansofthecompressionrate
achieved on some benchmark database, the extent to which it overlaps with the
real world or empirical image subset.
In the second perspective the task of the compression researcher is to dis-
cover structures or patterns in the real world images, and develop compressors
capable of exploiting those features. One obvious property of real world images
is that adjacent pixels tend to have very similar values. This property can be
exploitedbyencodingthedifferencesbetweenneighboringpixelvaluesinsteadof
the values themselves. The distribution of differences is very narrowly clustered
aroundzero,sotheycanbeencodedusingshorteraveragecodes.Ofcourse,this
trick does not work for random images, in which there is no correlation between
adjacentpixels(seeFigure1).Inthisperspectiveresearchproceedsbydiscover-
ing properties of real world images and demonstrating how those properties can
be exploited to achieve superior compression rates.
Both of the conceptualizations mentioned above depend strongly on mathe-
maticalorcomputationaltechniques,eitherfortheparsimoniousspecificationof
a prefered image subset or for the development of an algorithm that can exploit
a certain type of image property. But it is also clear that mathematical logic is
only one of the two necessary ingredients, and in some sense the secondary or
auxilliarycomponent.Theprimarycomponentistheempirical investigationre-
quiredtodiscoverthepropertiesofrealworldimagesortocharacterizetheimage
subset to which they belong. The data compression procedure recapitulates the
procedure of physics: it begins with a hypothesis, then develops a mathematical
characterizationofthathypothesis,andfinallyprovesthehypothesisbyshowing
a correspondence between the mathematical theory and empirical reality. Cru-
cially, the hypothesis is not obtained through formal analysis or derivation and
its sole ultimate justification is the empirical correspondence shown in the final
step.
Falsifiability Throughout the history of science, philosophers have struggled
to define what exactly science is and how scientific theories can be separated
from pseudoscientific ones. This is known as the problem of demarcation: given
a theory of astronomy and a theory of astrology, what justification can be used
to identify the former as legitimate science and the latter as mere superstition?
PerhapsthemostfamousanswertothisquestionwasgivenbyKarlPopper,who
proposedtoacceptatheoryasscientificifitwasfalsifiable [6].Afalsifiabletheory
is one that makes explicit anti-predictions regarding the outcome that should
be expected for some experimental configuration. If the anti-predicted outcome
actually occurs when the experiment is performed, then the theory is discarded.
A scientific field that traffics only in falsifiable theories is able to conduct an
efficient search through theory-space, rapidly generating new candidates and
discarding those that do not agree with experimental observations [16].
The principle of demarcation provided by the CRM can be viewed as a con-
tinuous or graduated version of the Popperian principle, and comes about as a
result of the intrinsic difficulty of lossless data compression in light of the No
Free Lunch theorem. Random data cannot be compressed. In order to achieve
compression on a real data set, it is necessary to reassign probability away from
certain outcomes and toward other outcomes. This probability reassignment re-
quirement is just a softened version of the Popperian anti-prediction require-
ment. Just as Popper designates as non-scientific theories that do not make
anti-predictions,theCRMdesignatesasnon-scientifictheoriesthatdonotmake
probability reassignments, since such theories cannot achieve compression. Any
proponent of a new scientific theory justified by the CRM runs the risk of em-
barassment if it turns out that the theory not only fails to compress the dataset
but actually inflates it.
The crucial difference between Popperian science and CRM science is that
the former appears to justify stark binary assessments regarding the truth or
falsehood of a theory, while the latter provides only a number which can be
compared to other numbers. If theories are either true or false, then the com-
pressionprincipleisnomoreusefulthanthefalsifiabilityprinciple.Butiftheories
can exist on some middle ground between absolute truth and its opposite, then
it makes sense to claim that one theory is relatively more true than another,
even if both are imperfect. The compression principle can be used to justify
such claims. Falsifiability consigns all imperfect theories to the same garbage
bin; compression can be used to rescue the valuable theories from the bin, dust
them off, and establish them as legitimate science.
Another difference between the falsifiability principle and the compression
principleisthattheformerappearstoallowatheorytobeevaluatedinabsolute
terms, without reference to any other theory. The CRM assigns a score to an
individualtheory,butthescoreisonlyusefulforthepurposesofcomparison,and
provides very little insight into the absolute quality of the theory. In practice,
though, the actual function of empirical validation is to select between rival
theories. In real situations that require decision-making, it is necessary to reify
sometheorytothestatusofchampion,evenifthe“theory”ismerelyaformalized
admission of total ignorance regarding the phenomenon. In the Popperian view,
the champion theory is the one that has withstood all attempts at falsification.
In the CRM view, the champion theory is the one that achieves the smallest
codelength on the relevant benchmark database.
3 Compression and Computer Vision
Thegoalofcomputervisionresearchistobuildmachinesthatcanseeaswellas
humans. For many who are not familiar with the field, this seems like a rather
simple goal. But it is in fact profoundly difficult, and in spite of several decades
of research, current vision systems cannot perform even at the level of human
children. One might diagnose a number of factors contributing to this lack of
progress. It could be that the mathematical theory employed by the field is not
sophisticated enough, or that modern computers are not fast enough. But the
present paper suggests an alternative hypothesis, which is that the problem lies
in the philosophical foundation of the field.
The words “philsophical foundation” are used here to refer to the answers
to two very concrete questions. The first is the question of evaluation: given
a pool of candidate solutions to a certain task, how does one select the best
one? As discussed in Section 3, there is a substantial amount of work in the
area of empirical evaluation, but it is safe to say that current methods are not
completely satisfying, either from a conceptual or a practical standpoint. The
philosophical difficulties involved in the evaluation of computer vision solutions
standsinstarkcontrasttotheconceptualeasewithwhichtwotheoriesofphysics
can be compared, by finding an experimental configuration for which the two
theories make conflicting predictions and running the experiment.
Behind the question of evaluation lies another, deeper question. This is the
meta-question: what are the important problems in the field, and why are they
important? Computer vision currently can provide only a litany of relatively
weak answers to this question. This paper proposes a decisive, “purist” answer
tothemeta-question:thegoalofvisionistodescribevisualreality,andaproblem
is important if a solution to it can be used to achieve an improved compression
rate on a vast database of natural images. Section 3.3 discusses several advan-
tages achieved by formulating vision research in this way. A crucial argument,
developed in Section 3.4, is that traditional computer vision research is deeply
related to image compression. Many standard vision tasks can be refomulated
asspecializedimagecompressiontechniques.Perhapsthemostimportantpoint,
however,isthatthenewviewallowscomputervisiontobeformulatedasahard
empirical science, like physics or chemistry, in which theories are tested, refined
and often discarded. A segmentation algorithm makes no quantifiable assertion
about empirical reality, but a segmentation-based compressor does.
3.1 Shortcomings in Current Evaluation Methodology
Evaluation is one of the central conceptual difficulties in computer vision; this
sectionpresentsabriefanalysisandcritiqueofcurrentmethods.Sinceeachcom-
putervisiontaskrequiresitsownevaluationprocedure(or“evaluator”)tojudge
candidate solutions, and some have more than one, there are at least as many
evaluators as there are tasks. A comprehensive survey is therefore beyond the
scopeofthepaper,whichinsteadprovidesadiscussionthatshouldillustratethe
basicissues.Beforeproceedingtothediscussion,however,itisworthnotingthat,
historicallyatleast,thefieldhasexhibitedverybadhabitsregardingtheissueof
empirical evaluation. Shin et al. [17] note that, of 23 edge detection papers that
were published in four journals between 1992 and 1998, not a single one gave
results using ground truth data from real images. Even when empirical evalua-
tions are carried out, it is often by a research group that has developed a new
technique and is interested in highlighting its performance relative to existing
methods. The inadequacies of the evaluation methodology currently employed
in computer vision have been lamented at length by several authors [1,2].
Tobeginthediscussion,considerthetaskofimagesegmentation,whichillus-
trates several of the challenging issues that hamper evaluation work in the field
as a whole. Segmentation research dates back at least to 1978 [18]. For many
years,solutionswereevaluatedprimarilybyshowingtheoutputsofanalgorithm
when applied to a small number of images, and appealing to the reader to con-
firm that the results agreed with human perception. A slightly more rigorous
evaluation methodology involved numerical scores based on various aspects of
the segmentation (see the review by Zhang [19]). But the use of such scores is
somewhat circular: one can easily define an algorithm that works by optimizing
the score, and it would then presumably do better than any other technique.
Finally, in 2001, a real empirical benchmark appeared in the form of the
Berkeley Segmentation Dataset [8], which contains “ground truth” obtained by
asking human test subjects to segment images by hand. While the approach to
evaluationassociatedwiththisdatasetisanimportantimprovementoverprevi-
oustechniques,severalissuesremain.Oneobviousproblemwiththisapproachis
that it is highly labor-intensive and task-specific, so the ratio of effort expended
to understanding achieved seems low. A larger issue is that the segmentation
problem has no precisely defined correct answer: different humans will produce
substantially different responses to the same image. Even this might not be so
bad; one can define an aggregate or average score and plausibly hope that using
enough data will damp out chance fluctuations that might cause a low qual-
ity algorithm to achieve a high score or vice versa. But still another conceptual
hurdlemustbecleared:giventwosegmentations,onealgorithm-andonehuman-
generated, there is no standard way to score the former by comparing it to the
latter. Some scoring functions assign high values to degenerate responses, such
asassigningeachpixeltoitsownregion,orassigningtheentireimagetoasingle
region [20]. The question of how to score a segmentation by comparing it to a
human-produced result has become a research problem in its own right, result-
ing in a proliferation of scoring methods [20,5,11]. A more technical but still
importantissueistheproblemofparameterchoice.Essentiallyallsegmentation
algorithms require the choice of at least one, and usually several, parameters,
whichstronglyinfluencethealgorithm’soutput.Thiscomplicatestheevaluation
process for obvious reasons.
Thetaskofedgedetectionisconceptuallysimilartosegmentation,andfaces
many of the same issues when it comes to empirical evaluation. As with seg-
mentation, there is ambiguity in the problem definition: is the goal to recover
perceptually salient edges? If not, then what criterion can be used to determine
if, say, the Canny edge detector is better than the Sobel operator? If so, then
one can in principle evaluate detectors by comparing their output to human-
generated edge responses. This is the approach taken by Bowyer et al. [4]. A
major drawback of this approach is the amount of human effort required: the
authorsreportthatittakes3-4hourstoprovidegroundtruthforasingle512x512
image. This inevitably implies that only a small number of images can be used
in the evaluation; [4] uses 40 images, from four different image categories. The
issue of parameter choice is especially acute in this domain. The authors of [4]
useacomplicatedparametersamplingschemebasedonreceiveroperatingchar-
acteristic (ROC) curves to find good settings for a given image. However, as
shown by Forbes and Draper [21], at least in the case of the Canny detector,
smallchangesintheinputimagecanresultinlargechangesintheedgedetector
response. This suggests that the conclusion of [4], that the Canny achieved the
best results, could in fact be due to the combination of the adaptive param-
eter sampling scheme with the Canny’s large sensitivity to parameter values.
Bowyer et al. [4] claim that the performance results were mostly consistent over
several image categories, but this could be a statistical fluke due to the small
number of images used. This consistency result also contrasts strongly with the
result of Heath et al. [22], which found that for several categories, there were no
statistically significant differences in the performance of the edge detectors.
A third standard task in computer vision is object recognition, which seems
tosupportastraightforwardevaluationprocedure:constructalabeleddatabase
and measure the number of errors made by each candidate solution. In spite
of this seeming simplicity, evaluation of object recognition systems is a quite
challengingproblem[10].Oneissuerelatestothedistinctionbetweeninter-class
and intra-class variation. As an example, the popular Caltech101 database [9]
contains a broad range of object categories (including “brontosaurus”, “eupho-
nium”, and “Garfield”), so that inter-class variation is large. However, the im-
ages show mostly just the object of interest, centered and without much clutter
or occlusion, thus minimizing intra-class variation. Since inter-class variation is
large while intra-class variation is small, the objects are much easier to recog-
nize than they would be in a real world application. Another issue is parameter
overfitting: the publication of a benchmark like Caltech101 generally sparks a
flurryofnewpapers,whichreportprogressivelybetterresultsoveraseveralyear
span. This improvement might not be due to better technology, but instead to
thefine-tuningofalgorithmparameters.Reportsofexceptionalperformanceare
also somewhat misleading: given that some techniques achieve 95% accuracy on
somedatabases[10],anuninitiatedobservermightconcludethattheproblemof
object recognition has been solved, which is obviously not true. But if excellent
benchmark performance does not imply excellent real-world performance, what
exactlyhasbeenlearnedbyusingthebenchmark?Relatedtothisdiscrepancyis
the fact that several techniques can exhibit excellent classification performance
but very poor localization performance (they can guess that the image contains
a chair, but don’t know where the chair is). This is partly because, in some
benchmark databases, the identity of the target object correlates highly with
the background. The correlation improves the performance of “global” methods
thatuseinformationextractedfromtheentireimage.Tosomeextentthismakes
sense, because for example cows are often found in grassy pastures, but a recog-
nizer that exploits this information may fail to recognize a cow in a photograph
of an Indian city.
A final area of consideration involves the two conceptually similar tasks of
stereo matching and optical flow estimation. The key property of these tasks is
that there exists an objectively correct answer, and ground truth corresponding
to this answer can be obtained. The evaluation methods proposed in the litera-
tureforthesetaskscanbebrokendownintotwotypes[3,23,24,25].Thefirsttype
of evaluator depends on using a sophisticated experimental apparatus to obtain
thegroundtruth.Forthestereomatchingproblem,groundtruthcanbeobtained
usinganapparatusthatemploysstructuredlight[24].Fortheopticalflowprob-
lem,anexperimentalsetupisusedinwhichanobjectsprinkledwithflourescent
paintismovedonacomputer-controlledmotionstage,whilebeingphotographed
in both ambient and ultraviolet lighting [25]. Once the ground truth has been
obtained,itisaconceptuallysimplemattertoevaluateasolutionbycomparing
its output to the correct answer. The major drawback to this approach is the
difficulty of using the experimental apparatus, which implies that only a small
number of image sequences are used. A well-known benchmark, hosted on the
MiddleburyStereoVisionPage,containsatotalof38sequences[26].Giventhat
most vision techniques involve multiple parameters, it seems hard to rule out
overfitting as the source of any good performances achieved on such a small
dataset.
For both of the tasks mentioned above, however, there exists a strikingly
simpler evaluation method [3,23,25]. The basic idea is to use the output of the
candidate solution to infer or estimate a new unseen image, and compare the
predicted image to the real thing. The paper [25] proposes the following eval-
uation metric for the optical flow task. First an image sequence is grabbed at
100 Hz. Then a subsequence corresponding to every fourth image (implying a
frame rate of 25 Hz) is fed to the optical flow algorithm. Based on the resulting
flow estimates, interpolation is used to predict the unseen images in the 100 Hz
sequence, and a prediction error is computed. A similar interpolation-scheme
evaluator for the stereo matching task is proposed in [3,23]. Several image sets
are obtained using a trinocular camera. Then, using the extremal images as in-
puts to the stereo matching algorithm, its output is used to infer the middle
image, which is used to calculate the prediction error. One simple function for
the prediction error is the RMSE; another is a modified version of the RMSE
that depends also on the local image gradient. These evaluator methods have
a decisive advantage in that they do not require any special equipment, and so
in principle large quantities of data can be used. Furthermore, as discussed in
Section 3.4, these scores correspond almost exactly to codelengths that would
be achieved by a certain type of compression algorithm.
3.2 Concrete Proposal: Highway Camera
This section turns the abstract idea of applying the CRM to large databases
of natural images into a concrete proposal, by supplying specific details related
to one way of constructing a database and using sophisticated computational
tools to compress it. The proposal calls for setting up a video camera next to
a highway, and producing a target database by taking video from the stream
of passing cars. Since the camera does not move, and there is usually not much
activity on the sides of highways, the main source of variation in the resulting
video will be the automobiles. Therefore, in order to compress the video stream
well, it will be necessary to obtain a good computational understanding of the
appearance of automobiles.
A simple first step would be to take advantage of the fact that cars are rigid
bodies subject to Newtonian laws of physics. The velocity of a car must be a
continuousfunctionoftime.Givenaseriesofimagesattimesteps{t ,t ,t ...t }
itispossibletopredicttheimageattimestept simplybyisolatingthemoving
pixels in the series (these correspond to the car), and interpolating those pixels
forward into the new image, using basic rules of camera geometry and calculus.
Since neither the background nor the moving pixel blob changes much between
frames,itshouldbepossibletoachieveagoodcompressionrateusingthissimple
trick.
Further improvements can be achieved by detecting and exploiting patterns
in the blob of moving pixels. One observation is that the wheels of a moving
car have a simple characteristic appearance - a dark outer ring corresponding
to the tire, along with the off-white circle of the hubcap at the center. Because
of this characteristic appearance, it should be straightforward to build a wheel
detector using standard techniques of supervised learning. One could then save
bitsbyrepresentingthewheelpixelsusingaspecializedmodel.Furtherprogress
could be achieved by conducting a study of the characteristic appearance of
the surfaces of cars. Since most cars are painted in a single color, it should
be possible to develop a specialized algorithm to identify the frame of the car.
Extra attention would be required to handle the complex reflective appearance
ofthewindshield.Notethattheencoderalwayshastheoptionof“backingoff”;
if attempts to apply more aggressive encoding methods fail (e.g., if the car is
painted in multiple colors), then the simpler pixel-blob encoding method can be
used instead.
Additional progress could be achieved by recognizing that most automobiles
can be categorized into a discrete set of categories (e.g., a 2009 Toyota Corolla).
Since these categories have standardized dimensions, bits could be saved by en-
codingthecategoryofacarinsteadofinformationrelatedtoitsshape.Initially,
the process of building category-specific modules for the appearance of a car
might be difficult and time-consuming. But once one has developed modules for
the Hyundai Sonata, Chevrolet Equinox, Honda Civic, and Nissan Altima, it
should not require much additional work to construct a module for the Toyota
Sienna.Indeed,itmaybepossibletodevelopalearningalgorithmthat,through
some sort of clustering process, would automatically extract, from large quanti-
ties of roadside video data, appearance modules for the various car categories.
The above discussion illustrates several important aspects of the proposed
inquiry. A crucial difference between the traditional approach and the CRM
approach to vision research is the shift in mindset away from pure theorizing
and towards the study of specific structures in visual reality. Empirical details
such as hubcaps or windshields almost never take center stage in traditional
computer vision papers - they are either buried in the results section or ignored
entirely. The key insight is that theories of these details can be developed and
rigorously evaluated. On the other hand, the new approach does not dismiss
the possibility of abstract, automated learning methods. These methods are in
some sense the real goal, but their development is postponed until more basic
understandingcanbeachieved.Itshouldalsobeclearthat,ifsuccessful,thetype
ofinquiryoutlinedabovewillyieldpracticalresults,intheformofsophisticated
vision systems that can be used in robotic cars.
The concrete proposal is useful for another reason: it allows skeptical ob-
serverstoformulatetheirobjectionsinpreciseterms.Onesuchobjectionattacks
a key implicit hypothesis of the CRM, which is that improved abstract under-
standing will produce improved compression rates. In other words, in order to
achievethebestpossiblecodelengths,itwillbenecessarytoemployabstractions
such as the position, velocity, outline, and model of a car. If this hypothesis is
incorrect,thenthefruitofCRMresearchwillbeofverydubiousvalue.Another
potential objection is simply that the reasoning behind the proposal underesti-
mates the real difficulty of the problem, thus committing the same error that
was made in the early days of the field. It is possible that even the simplified
roadside video data will contain so much variation that it will be impossible to
makeprogress.Or,similarly,thattheinquirywillbasicallywork,butwillrequire
far more effortthan is justified by theresults it could potentiallyachieve. These
objectionsareplausiblebutnotinvincible,anddonotdisallowareasonablehope
of success.
3.3 Advantages of Vision-as-Compression Approach
The proposal of this paper is to approach vision science by applying the Com-
pression Rate Method to large databases of natural images. The present section
lists several advantages of this idea.
Methodological Efficiency One can imagine an academic journal dedicated
toCRMresearchthatacceptstwotypesofpapers.Thefirsttypeincludesreports
ofnewsharedimagedatabasesforusebythecommunity.Thesesubmissionsare
accompaniedwiththeactualdatabase,whichthejournaleditorsbrieflyinspect,
and then publish on the journal web site where it can be downloaded by other
interested researchers. The second type of submission includes reports of new
compressionratesachievedononeoftheshareddatabases.Asubmissionofthis
typemustbeaccompaniedbytheactualcompressorusedtoachievethereported
result.Aspartofthereviewprocess,thejournaleditorsrunthecompressor,ver-
ify that the real net codelength agrees with the reported result, and then check
thatthedecodedversionmatchestheoriginal.This“trust,butverify”approach
should provide a strong degree of protection against both honest mistakes and
actual academic fraud. In principle, the editors of this journal have an easy job,
sinceanypaperthatlegitimatelyreportsanimprovedcompressionresultshould
be accepted. In practice, it may be necessary for the editors to exercise some
degree of qualitative judgment: a paper that merely tweaks some settings of a
previousresultandtherebyachievesasmallreductionincodelengthisprobably
notworthpublishing,whileaninnovativenewapproachthatdoesn’tquiteman-
age to surpass the current champion probably is (new techniques will probably
require some polishing and refinement before they become competitive). The
ease of evaluating new research is one of the central advantages of the CRM
approach to vision.
A related advantage is the relative ease of building large datasets. A major
problem for traditional computer vision is the effort required to build ground
truth databases. The CRM mandates the use of unlabeled databases, which
are much easier to construct. Of course, it will be necessary to exercise some
ingenuity and foresight when building target databases, especially in the early
stages of research. It is probably impossible to make a lot of progress simply by
using, say, the database of images hosted on Flickr.com. The degree of variation
insuchanimagecollectionseemsunapproachablylarge.Instead,itwillprobably
be more fruitful to use a simplified database that exhibits a smaller degree of
variation; see Section 3.2 for one proposal.
Scalable Evaluation Paradigm The word scalability refers to the rate at
which the cost of a system increases as increasing demands are placed on it.
For example, a process in which widgets are built by hand is not very scalable,
since doubling the number of widgets will approximately double the amount of
labor required. A widget factory, in contrast, might be able to double its output
using only a ten percent increase in labor, and is therefore highly scalable. The
argument of this section is that the current evaluation paradigm of computer
visionhasverybadscalingproperties,whiletheCRMapproachtoevaluationis
highly scalable.
Thecurrentevaluationparadigmcanbethoughtofas“one-to-one”:eachspe-
cificvisiontask,suchasobjectrecognition,imagesegmentation,orstereomatch-
ing, requires its own evaluator method. This one-to-one methodology scales
badly, since the process of developing an evaluator is difficult work, requiring
bothintellectual,andoftenmanual,labor.Furthermore,thisarduouslabormay
very well go unrewarded. Sometimes, after substantial effort has been invested
in developing an evaluator, it turns out the scheme suffers from some flaw (a
possible example of this is the difficulty related to the ROC curve evaluation
scheme [4,21]). Also, it is not obvious that modern evaluators assign consis-
tently higher scores to higher-quality solutions. It may be necessary to conduct
ameta-evaluationprocessinordertoratethequalityoftheevaluators.Because
developing an evaluator is risky and difficult, the current one-to-one evalustor
paradigm is painfully inefficient.
The importance of scalability becomes even more obvious when one realizes
that many vision tasks of current interest, such as image segmentation, edge
detection, and optical flow estimation, are low-level, and not directly useful. In-
stead, the idea is that once good solutions are obtained for the low-level tasks,
they can be incorporated into higher-level systems. These more advanced sys-
tems, then, are the real ultimate goal of research. Of course, under the current
paradigm,eachhigh-leveltaskwillrequireitsownevaluatormethodtocompare
candidate solutions. So the mountain of work required to complete the project
offindingevaluatorsforcurrent tasksistinycomparedtothemountainofwork
that will be required to develop evaluators for future tasks.
Incontrasttothecurrentparadigm,theCompressionRateMethodprovides
the ability to evaluate a large number of disparate techniques using a single
principle. Visual reality contains an practically unlimited number of empirical
regularities, each of which can be characterized and exploited to save bits. As
discussed in the proposal of Section 3.2, a single database of roadside video can
be used to evaluate the performance of a large number of components, such
as motion detectors, wheel detectors, specialized segmentation algorithms, and
learning algorithms that infer car categories.
In addition to greatly reducing the number of man-hours required for eval-
uator development, the compression principle provides a decisive answer to the
question of what the high-level tasks are. According to the CRM, a low-level
system is one that achieves compression by exploiting simple and relatively ob-
vious regularities, such as the fact that cars are rigid bodies obeying Newtonian
laws of motion. A higher-level system is built on top of lower-level systems and
achievesanimproved compressionratebyexploitingmoresophisticatedabstrac-
tions, such as the fact that cars can be categorized by make and model.
Justification of Complex Models A major concern in the field of machine
learning is a phenomenon called overfitting. Since many computer vision appli-
cations rely on machine learning methods, this problem is relevant to computer
vision as well. Overfitting is said to occur when a model achieves very good
performance on the known (“training”) data, but fails to generalize to unseen
(“test”) data. The basic cause of overfitting is that the model is too complex
relative to the data it describes. This situation is illustrated in Figure 2.
Oneofthegreatachievementsofmachinelearningisthediscoveryofmethods
to prevent overfitting. These methods are all similar in spirit: the secret is to
applyapenaltytocomplexmodels,whichismoreorlessseveredependingonthe
amountofdata.Thetechnicalissueishowtoquantifythecomplexityofamodel
in relation to the volume of data. In the VC-theory [27], a quantity called the
VC-dimensionisusedtocharacterizemodelcomplexityandderivegeneralization
bounds.OnetypicalVC-theorygeneralizationboundisthefollowinginequality:
(cid:18) hlog2en +log2(cid:19)
Where R(g) is the real performance of a model g, R (g) is the empirical
performance, n is the number of training samples, h is the VC-dimension of the
model class, and the inequality holds with probability 1−δ. Thus, if the model
complexity term h is small compared to the number of samples n, the bound
is tight and the real performance should be about the same as the empirical
performance (technically R stands for risk, and the goal is to minimize risk, so
the fear is that R(g) could be much larger than R (g)).
Anotherformulationofthemodelcomplexityidea,whichasmentionedabove
is highly related to the CRM, is the Minimum Description Length (MDL) prin-
ciple [28]. Here the goal is to idea is to compress a data set to the smallest
possible size. If a good model can be found, it can be used to encode the data
with a short code. But one must also account for the number of bits required to
encode the model itself. The result is a tradeoff between model complexity and
empiricalperformance,justasintheVCgeneralizationinequalityshownabove.
A key point is that both of these ideas specifically allow the use of complex
models. The only requirement is that a complex model be justified by a corre-
spondingly large amount of data. In terms of Figure 2, if there were thousands
of data points and they all fell on the quartic polynomial, one would certainly
be justified in using it as a model.
Computer vision applications that are built on top of machine learning al-
gorithms must follow the same basic rules regarding model complexity, or suffer
from overfitting. The crucial question is: what is the relevant data set against
which model complexity must be justified? For most computer vision systems,
the answer is the labeled database used to train the classifier. Since labeled
databases are usually quite small, this implies that the resulting models must
be very simple.
However, a critical but underappreciated characteristic of computer vision
is that it is easy to obtain large quantities of raw data. Only labeled data is
in short supply. In the CRM, complex models can be justified by showing that
they achieve net codelength reductions when applied to large databases of raw,
unlabeled data. For example, one could justify the use of a model requiring 100
Mb to specify (larger by orders of magnitude than the models used in typical
learning research) by showing that it saves 500 Mb when used to encode a 10
Gb image database. Of course, simpler is always better: if a 10 Mb model can
be used to achieve the same savings, it should be preferred.
Similar articulations of the idea that more complex models can be justified
when modeling raw data have appeared in the literature. For example, Hinton
et al. note that:
Generative models can learn low-level features without requiring feed-
backfromthelabel,andtheycanlearnmanymoreparametersthandis-
criminative models without overfitting. In discriminative learning, each
training case constrains the parameters only by as many bits of infor-
mationasarerequiredtospecifythelabel.Foragenerativemodel,each
training case constrains the parameters by the number of bits required
to specify the input [29].
Thedistinctionbetweengenerativemodelsanddiscriminativemodelsisroughly
similar to the distinction between unsupervised CRM-style learning and tradi-
tional supervised learning. Hinton develops the generative model philosophy at
greater length in [30]. Note that a generative model is exactly one half of a
compression program (the decoder component).
Fig.2. Illustratingthecomplexmodelpenaltyidea:inthislow-dataregimethe
simple line model should be prefered, even though the complex model achieves
zero error.
Systematic Progress Thomas Kuhn, in his essay on the history of science,
posedafamousrhetoricalquestion:“Isafieldasciencebecauseitmakesprogress,
or is it a science because it makes progress?” [31]. In other words, do true sci-
entific disciplines possess some special methodological characteristic that allows
them to make progress, or is science simply defined as the specific subset of
academic research that shows continual improvement? Kuhn’s point in asking
thisquestionwasnottofindananswer,butmerelytoillustratethatalmostany
field that actually makes cumulative progress is also a science, and vice versa.
Computervisionmaymakeprogress-certainlynewandimpressiveapplications
appearatafairlysteadyrate.Butitisnotclearifitmakessystematic progress.
One sign that the field of computer vision has a problem in this regard is
theconstantreplicationofeffort.Foranygiventask,suchassegmentation,edge
detection,annotation,orimagereconstruction,therearedozens,ifnothundreds,
of candidate solutions to be found in the literature. In and of itself, that may
not be so bad; any unexpected new experimental observation in physics might
meritalargenumberofproposedtheoreticalexplanations.Thedifferenceisthat
the physicists are able to ultimately find the right explanation, at which point
people can go on to new areas of research.
SystematicprogressisbuiltintotheverydefinitionoftheCompressionRate
Method. In effect, an investigation guided by the compression principle must
make clear, quantifiable progress, or grind to a complete halt. By justifying
strong comparisons between competing theories, the CRM enables the commu-
nitytoconductarapidsearchthroughthespaceoftheories.Theabilitytosearch
systematically through the theory-space is one of the reasons fields like physics
can make rapid progress [16].
Themethodalsoprovidesaneasymechanismforresearcherstobuildoneach
others’ work. Given an algorithm that achieves a certain level of performance,
the new researcher can simply add a specialized module that works for certain
types of images, and lies dormant for others. As an example, a researcher could
take a generic image compressor such as PNG, and add a special module for
encoding faces (see Section 3.4). The enhanced compressor would then achieve
must better codelengths for images that include faces. Another researcher could
then add a module for encoding arms and hands (the pixels in these regions
would be narrowly distributed around some mean skin color). Of course, the
improvement achieved by any single contribution may not be huge, but this
mode of research is guaranteed to achieve cumulative progress.
In addition to its ability to measure and facilitate progress, the compres-
sion idea provides another subtle advantage. It provides a software engineering
principle to guide the integration of a large number of separate computational
modules.Givenasetofsoftwaremodulesprovidingtraditionalimplementations
of segmentation, object recognition, edge detection, camera calibration, and so
on, it is not at all obvious how to package these modules together into one in-
tegrated system. An attempt to do so would likely result in little more than
a package of libraries, rather than a real application with a clear purpose. Es-
tablishing compression as the function of the application provides a principle
for binding the modules together. The input is the raw image, the output is
the encoded version, and the software modules are employed in various ways to
facilitate the transformation.
Istheabilitytomakesystematicprogresssufficient forafieldtobeconsidered
ascience?Theanswermightdependonpersonaldefinitions.Onemighthesitate
to call the subfield of AI chess a science, if for no other reason than that it
involves a purely artifical game that has no connection to the real world. But
chessresearchmakessystematicprogress,sincethegameofchesssupportsstrong
comparisons of rival solutions. It is not a coincidence that this subfield has also
produced one of the most dramatic demonstrations of the potential of artificial
intelligence. The approach to vision science proposed in this paper supports
systematic progress while also mandating a comprehensive interrogation of an
important aspect of physical reality.
3.4 Reformulation of Vision as Compression Problem
Abstract Framework Computervision isoftendescribed astheinverseprob-
lem of computer graphics. The typical problem of graphics is to produce, given
a scene description D wrtten in some description language L, the image I that
would be created if a photo were taken of that scene. The goal of computer
vision is to perform the reverse process: to obtain a scene description D from
therawinformationcontainedinthepixelsoftheimageI.Thisgoalcanbefor-
malized mathematically by writing I =G(D )+I where G(D ) is the image
constructed by the graphics program and I is a correction image that makes
upforanydiscrepancies.Thenthegoalistomakethecorrectionimageassmall
as possible:
D∗ =argminC (I )
WhereC issomecostfunctionwhichisminimizedforthezeroimage,such
asthesumofthesquaredvaluesofeachcorrectionpixel.Theproblemwiththis
formulationisthatitignoresonethemajordifficultiesofcomputervision,which
is that the inverse problem is underconstrained: there are many possible scene
descriptionsthatcanproducethesameimage.Soitisusuallypossibletotrivially
generateanytargetimagebyconstructinganarbitrarilycomplexdescriptionD .
Asanexample,ifoneoftheprimitivesofthedescriptionlanguageisacircle,and
the circle primitive has properties that give its color and position relative to the
camera, then it is possible to generate an arbitrary image by positioning a tiny
circle of the necessary color at each pixel location. The standard remedy for the
underconstrainment issue is regularization [32]. The idea here is to introduce
a function h(D ) that penalizes complex descriptions. Then one optimizes a
tradeoff between descriptive accuracy and complexity:
L disc C L
Wheretheregularizationparameterλcontrolshowstronglycomplexdescrip-
tions are penalized. While this formulation works well enough in some cases, it
also raises several thorny questions related to how the two cost functions should
bechosen.Ifthegoaloftheprocessistoobtaindescriptionsthatappearvisually
“correct” to humans, then presumably it is necessary to take considerations of
humanperceptionintoaccountwhenchoosingthesefunctions.Atthispointthe
typical approach is for the practitioner to choose the functions based on taste
or intuition, and then show that they lead to qualitatively good results.
It turns out that the regularization procedure can be interpreted as a form
of Bayesian inference. The idea here is to view the image as evidence and the
description as a hypothesis explaining the evidence. Then the goal is to find the
most probable hypothesis given the evidence:
D∗ =argmaxp(D |I)
=argmin−logp(I|D )−logp(D )
In words, by identifying the conditional probability of an image given a de-
scriptionwiththediscrepancycostfunction(−logp(I|D )=C (I )),andthe
priorprobabilityofadescriptionwiththeregularizationfunction(−logp(D )=
h(D )), the regularized optimization procedure is transformed into a Bayesian
inferenceproblem.Thisarrangementhasthebenefitofeliminatingtheλparam-
eter, but sheds no light on the problem of selecting the two crucial functions.
But more insight can be gained by analyzing the problem in terms of data
compression. Consider a sender and a receiver who have agreed to transmit
imagesusinganencodingschemebasedonthegraphicsprogramandtheassoci-
ated description language L. The sender first transmits a scene description D ,
which the receiver feeds to the graphics program to construct the uncorrected
image G(D ). The sender then transmits the correction image I , allowing the
receiver to losslessly recover the original image. The parties have agreed on a
prior distribution p(D ) for the scene descriptions, and a method of encoding
the correction image that requires a codelength of C (I ). The goal is to find
a good D∗ that minimizes the total codelength:
D∗ =argmin (cid:0) C (I )−log p(D ) (cid:1) (7)
L enc c 2 L
This formulation of the problem is thus equivalent to Equation 6, showing
thatthegeneralproblemofcomputervisioncanbeformulatedintermsofcom-
pression.Iftheprocedureisonlygoingtobeappliedtoasingleimage,thenthis
perspective is not much better than the previous one. But if many images are
goingtobesent,thenthisformulationprovidesacleanprincipleforselectingthe
prior and the cost function: they should be chosen in such a way as to minimize
the total cost for the entire database.
Fig.3. Inverse relationship of graphics and vision.
This abstract analysis shows that there is another, deeper problem in com-
puter vision that is rarely addressed because the standard problem is hard
enough. This is the problem of choosing a description language L. It is not
obvious how the traditional conceptual framework of computer vision can be
used to solve the problem of choosing L. In contrast the CRM provides a direct
answer: given two description languages L and L , prefer the one that can be
used to obtain better compression rates. Note how this criterion simultaneously
evaluates two computational tools: the description language and the algorith-
mic methods used to obtain actual descriptions. Perhaps counterintuitively, it
may be the case that a simplistic description language may be selected by the
compression principle over a more realistic, full-bodied language if the former
supports a better inference algorithm.
The two formulations of the vision problem discussed above exhibit very
different answers to the question of why it is important to obtain good scene
descriptions.Intraditionalcomputervision,agoodscenedescriptionisofinter-
est for qualitative, humanistic reasons. This motivation makes it very difficult
to evaluate methods, since human input is required to determine the quality of
aresult.Incontrast,incompression-basedvisionresearch,agoodscenedescrip-
tion is of interest for quantitative, mechanistic reasons. This takes the human
out of the evaluation loop, making it much easier to compare techniques.
Stereo Correspondence The previous section showed that it was possible to
reformulateaveryabstractversionofthevisionproblemintermsofcompression.
This and the following two sections show how this reformulation can work for
specific vision problems. But for the case of the stereo correspondence problem,
the argument has already been made, by Mumford (emphasis in original):
I’d like to give a more elaborate example to show how MDL can lead
you to the correct variables with which to describe the world using an
oldandfamiliarvisionproblem:thestereocorrespondenceproblem.The
usual approach to stereo vision is to apply our knowledge of the three-
dimensional structure of the world to show how matching the images I
and I from the left and right eyes leads us to a reconstruction of depth
through the “disparity function” d(x,y) such that I (x+d(x,y),y) is
approximately equal to I (x,y). In doing so, most algorithms take into
account the “constraint” that most surfaces in the world are smooth,
so that depth and disparity vary slowly as we scan across an image.
The MDL approach is quite different. Firstly, the raw perceptual signal
comes as two sets of N pixel values I (x,y) and I (x,y) each encoded
uptosomefixedaccuracybydbits,totaling2dN bits.Buttheattentive
encoder notices how often pieces of the left image code nearly duplicate
pieces of the right code: this is a common pattern that cries out for use
in shrinking the code length. So we are led to code the signal in three
pieces: first the raw left image I (x,y); then the disparity d(x,y); and
finallytheresidualI (x,y).Thedisparityandtheresidualarebothquite
small, so instead of d bits, these may need only a small number e and
f bits respectively. Provided d > e+f, we have saved bits. In fact, if
we use the constraint that surfaces are mostly smooth, so that d(x,y)
variesslowly,wecanfurtherencoded(x,y)byitsaveragevalued (y)on
each horizontal line and its x-derivative d (x,y) which is mostly much
smaller.TheimportantpointisthatMDLcodingleadsyoutointroduce
thethirdcoordinateofspace,i.e.todiscoverthree-dimensionalspace!A
further study of the discontinuities in d, and the “non-matching” pixels
visibletooneeyeonlygoesfurtherandleadsyoutoinvent a description
of the image containing labels for distinct objects, i.e. to discover that
the world is usually made up of discrete objects [14].
Notehowasingleprinciple(compression)leadstotherediscoveryofstructure
invisualrealitythatisotherwisetakenforgranted(authorsofobjectrecognition
papers do not typically feel obligated to justify the assumption that the world
is made up of discrete objects). Mumford’s thought experiment also emphasizes
the intrinsic scalability of the compression problem: first one discovers the third
dimension, and then that the world is made up of discrete objects.
Optical Flow Estimation Another traditional task in computer vision is op-
tical flow estimation. This is the problem of finding the apparent motion of the
brightnesspatternsinanimagesequence.Theopticalflowproblemcanberefor-
mulated as a specialized compression technique that works as follows. Consider
a high frame rate image sequence (say, 100 Hz). Because of the high frame rate,
the scene does not change much between frames. Thus, a good way to save bits
would be to encode and transmit full frames at a lower rate (say, 25 Hz), and
use an interpolation scheme to predict the intermediate frames. The predicted
pixel value would then be used as the mean for the distribution used to encode
the real value, and assuming the predictions were good, substantial bit savings
would be achieved while maintaining losslessness. Now, a “dumb” interpolation
scheme could just linearly interpolate a pixel value by using the start and end
frames. But a smarter technique would be to infer the motion of the pixels (i.e.
the optical flow) and use this information to do the interpolation.
The simplest encoding distribution to use would be a Gaussian with unit
variance and mean equal to the predicted value. In that case, the codelength
required to encode a pixel would be simply the squared difference between the
prediction and the real outcome, plus a constant corresponding to the normal-
ization factor. A smarter scheme might take into account the local intensity
variation-iftheintensitygradientislarge,itislikelythatthepredictionwillbe
inaccurate,andsoalargervarianceshouldbeusedfortheencodingdistribution.
The resulting codelength for a single interpolated frame would be:
WhereI(x,y)istherealframeandI (x,y)istheimagepredictedfromthe
optical flow, and the k(·) is a term corresponding to the normalization factor.
Since shorter codelengths are achieved by improving the accuracy with which
I predicts I, this shows that improvements in the optical flow estimation
algorithm will lead to improvements in the compression rate. Indeed, with the
exception of the k(·) terms, the above expression is equivalent to an evaluation
metric for optical flow algorithms proposed by [25] (compare their Equation 1
to the above expression). The compression-equivalent scheme is much simpler
than the other metric proposed by [25], which involves the use of a complicated
experimentalapparatustoobtaingroundtruth.Thecompressionmetricpermits
any image sequence to be used as empirical data.
Segmentation The task of image segmentation has been a subject of research
in computer vision for more than thirty years. A major obstacle in this research
is that there is no single, definitive articulation of what the goal of an image
segmentationalgorithmshouldbe.Theroughoutlinesoftheproblemarewidely
agreed upon: a segmentation algorithm should partition the image into a small
numberofsimple,homogeneousregions.Thedifficultyisintheprecisedefinition
ofthewords“small”,“simple”,and“homogeneous”,regardingwhichthereisno
widespread agreement.
The segmentation problem can be formulated as a compression problem as
follows.Aspecialcompressorisusedthatrepresentsanimageasasetofregions.
Thepixelsofeachregionareencodedusingaspecializedstatisticalmodel.Using
a region-specific model, instead of a generic model for the entire image, can in
principlehelptoreducetheoverallcodelength.However,severalconditionsmust
bemetforthistowork.First,thepixelsassignedtoaregionmustbeverysimilar
tooneanother.Second,theformatrequiresthatthecontoursoftheregionsmust
also be encoded, so the region boundaries must be simple. Finally, encoding the
specialized model requires an overhead cost for each region, so the total number
of regions should be kept to a minimum. These three considerations supply
cleanly justified definitions for the problematic words (homogeneous, simple,
small) mentioned above.
The MDL/compression approach to segmentation has been followed by sev-
eral authors [12,33]. The following is a brief discussion of a method proposed by
Zhang and Yuille [13]. In this paper the segmentation problem is formulated as
a minimization of the functional:
M (cid:26) µ(cid:90) (cid:27)
This functional is a sum over segmented regions. There is an cost associated
withtheregionboundary(contourintegral),acostresultingfromencodingaset
of pixels given a particular region model (logP term), and a constant cost for
encoding a region model (λ). The goal is to find a good set of region boundaries
∂R and associated region model parameters α that minimize the sum. This
illustrates a competition between the need to package similar pixels together so
thatnarrow,region-specificmodeldistributionswilldescribethemwell,andthe
need to use a small number of regions with simple boundaries.
Note that the focus of the paper [13] is on the development of an algorithm
for finding a good minimum of Equation 9. Little effort is spent on finding good
region models or efficient boundary encoding methods. The paper reports only
segmentation results, not compression results. This is because the compression
idea is viewed simply as a trick that allows good segmentations to be obtained.
The purpose of this paper, of course, is to advocate the opposite approach.
Face Detection and Modeling Imagine that the target T used in the CRM
is the image database hosted on the popular internet social networking site
Facebook. This enormous database contains many images of faces.
Faces have a very consistent structure. There is a significant literature on
modelingfaces[34,35],andseveraltechniquesexistthatcanproduceconvincing
reproductions of face images from models with a small number of parameters.
Given a starting language L, by adding this kind of model based face rendering
techniqueanewlanguageL canbedefinedthatcontainstheabilitytodescribe
scenes using face elements. Since the number of model parameters required is
generally small and the reconstructions are quite accurate, it should be possi-
ble to significantly compress the Facebook database by encoding face elements
instead of raw pixels when appropriate.
Howeveritisnotenoughjusttoaddfacecomponentstothedescriptionlan-
guage. In order to take advantage of the new face components of the language
to achieve compression, it is also necessary to be able to obtain good descrip-
tions D of images that contain faces. If unlimited computational power were
available, then it would be possible to test each image subwindow to determine
if it could be more efficiently encoded by using the face model. But the proce-
dure of extracting good parameters for the face model is relatively expensive,
so this brute force procedure is inefficient. A better scheme would be to use a
fast classifier for face detection [36]. The detector scans each subwindow, and if
it reports that a face is present, the subwindow is encoded using the face model
component. Bits are saved only when the detector correctly predicts that the
face-based encoder can be used to save bits for the subwindow. A false negative
is a missed opportunity, while a false positive incurs a cost related to the in-
appropriate use of the face model to encode a subwindow. In other words, the
face model implicitly defines a virtual label for each subwindow, which is true
if the subwindow can be encoded more efficiently using the face model. This
implies that a vast but completely unlabeled image database can now be used
to evaluate the performance of a face detection system.
4 Conclusion
Empirical sciences, such as physics and chemistry, have produced some of the
most remarkable successes in the intellectual history of humankind. Empirical
sciencesproceedbyformulatingtheoriesaboutreality,andthentesting,refining,
andsometimesfalsifyingthosetheoriesbycomparingtheirpredictionstoexperi-
mentalresults.Thisprocess,whenrigorouslyapplied,canleadtorapidprogress.
Underthecurrentparadigmofcomputervision,newideastaketheformofcom-
putational methods or mathematical theorems, not hypotheses about physical
reality. This means that it is difficult to decisively compare ideas, and so it is
hard to make progress.
This paper proposed a way to reformulate computer vision as an empirical
science.Thekeyobstacleisthatthetraditionalscientificmethodcannotbepro-
ductivelyappliedtoanswerthequestionsofinterestinthefield.Thecontribution
ofthispaperisarefinedversionofthescientificmethodinwhichvastdatabases
are used as the empirical component instead of the results of controlled experi-
ments.ByapplyingtheCompressionRateMethodtolargedatabasesofnatural
images, it should be possible to develop empirical theories of visual reality.
TheconnectiontoempiricalsciencecomesfromtheNoFreeLunchtheoremof
datacompression,whichshowsthatcompressioncanbeachievedforsomeimages
only at the price of inflating other images. If a precise computational definition
of “natural images” were available, then one could instruct the compressor to
shrink those images, while inflating non-natural images. This definition is not
available,butthequalityofaproposaldefinitioncanbeevaluatedbymeasuring
the codelength it achieves on a large database. Thus, an increasingly precise
characterization of natural images can be developed by iterative refinement of a
series of proposal definitions.
The compression principle provides new answers to two long-standing issues
inthephilosophyofscience:theproblemofinductionandtheproblemofdemar-
cation. The problem of demarcation is solved by accepting a theory as scientific
if and only if it can be used to achieve compression. Since compression requires
that a theory reassign probability away from some outcomes and toward other
outcomes, this is simply a graduated version of Popper’s principle of falsifia-
bility. The problem of induction is solved by using “vast” databases that have
Kolmogorov complexities that are much larger than the characteristic lengths
of Turing machine simulator programs. In this “vast data regime”, statistical
inference achieves intersubjective verifiability.
Thesecondpartofthepaperdiscussesspecificideasrelatedtotheapplication
of the Compression Rate Method to the field of computer vision. The section
beginswithacriticalsummaryofcurrentevaluationmethodsincomputervision.
Thesemethodssufferfromanumberofpracticalandconceptualdifficulties.One
simpleissueisthatobtaininggroundtruthdatarequiresalotofhumaneffort.An
importantconceptualissueisthatformanycomputervisiontasks,suchasimage
segmentation and edge detection, there is no precisely defined “correct” answer.
More abstractly, the current evaluation paradigm has bad scaling properties,
since each task requires its own evaluator.
The vision-as-compression approach yields many advantages. The approach
providesaverystrongdegreeofmethodologicalrigor,sincenewresultscaneasily
be checked by a third party. It is also a much more scalable evaluation scheme,
sincemultiplemethodscanbeevaluatedusingthesamedatabase.Byusinglarge
databases, it becomes possible to justify the construction of highly complex
theories. Finally, the approach should allows the field to decisively compare
competing theories and thus make systematic progress.
A crucial argument was that the concerns of image compression and com-
puter vision are deeply related: most vision tasks can be reformulated as spe-
cialized compression techniques. The paper discussed stereo matching, image
segmentation, optical flow estimation, and face detection/modeling, but similar
arguments can be made for other tasks, such as egomotion inference and 3D
reconstruction. The paper also provides an abstract formulation of computer
vision as image compression. The point here was that a scene description is
valuable for quantitative, mechanistic reasons (it allows compression) instead of
the qualitative, humanistic reasons.