Complex Workflow Management and Integration of
Distributed Computing Resources by Science Gateway
Portal for Molecular Dynamics Simulations in Materials
Yuri Gordienko, Lev Bekenov, Olexandr Gatsenko, Elena Zasimchuk, Valentin Tatarenko
G.V.Kurdyumov Institute for Metal Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine
gord@imp.kiev.ua
integration of distributed computing resources (like clusters, service grids, desktop grids, clouds) is presented. It is
createdonthebasisofWS-PGRADEandgUSEtechnologies,whereWS-PGRADEisdesignedforscienceworkflow
operationandgUSE-forsmoothintegrationofavailableresourcesforparallelanddistributedcomputinginvarious
heterogeneousdistributedcomputinginfrastructures(DCI).Thetypicalscientificworkflowwithpossiblescenariosof
its preparation and usage is considered. Several typical science applications (scientific workflows) are considered for
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of complex behavior of various nanostructures (nanoindentation of graphene
layers, defect system relaxation in metal nanocrystals, thermal stability of boron nitride nanotubes, etc.). The
advantages and drawbacks of the solution are shortly analyzed in the context of its practical applications for MD
simulations in materials science, physics and nanotechnologies with available heterogeneous DCIs.
Distributed computing infrastructures (DCI), grid computing, cluster, service grid, desktop grid, science
gateway portal, computational physics, molecular dynamics, materials science, physics, nanotechnologies.
1 Introduction
During the last decades new nanoscale materials (nanomaterials) became of a great interest, because of their
unique nanoscale structure and properties, for example, nanocrystals, graphene, carbon nanotubes, boron nitride
nanotubes(BNNT),andtheircomplexes.Moleculardynamics(MD)simulationsofnanoscalestructures,processes,
andpropertiesareverypromising.Theyareespeciallyperspectiveinthewiderangeofphysicalparameters,because
of the possibility for "parameter sweeping"parallelism. Actually, MD simulations can be performed in a brute force
manner in the available heterogeneous distributed computing infrastructure (DCI) based for example on desktop
grids, service grids, clusters, cloud resources. The recent advances in computing algorithms and infrastructures,
especially in development of DCIs, allow us to solve these tasks efficiently without expensive scaling-up. DCIs on
thebasisoftheXtremWeb-HEP[1],OurGrid[2],BOINCSZDG[3],andEDGeS[4]platformsforhigh-performance
distributed computing are very promising way to use the heterogeneous computing resources, especially by means
ofthesciencegateway(SG)technologyonthebasisofWS-PGRADEplatformforworkflowmanagementandgUSE
technology for integration of DCI-resources [5]. The main objective of the work is to demonstrate the capabilities
of the proposed specific SG on the basis of WS-PGRADE platform and gUSE technology for MD simulations
and further data post-processing on the basis of LAMMPS package for molecular dynamics (MD) simulation [6],
and other packages like R for statistical analysis [7], Pizza.py Toolkit for manipulations with atomic coordinates
files [8], AtomEye for visualisation of atomic configurations [9], debyer for simulation of X-ray diffraction (XRD)
1v8545.4041:viXra
created for simulation of several physical processes with various demands for the computing resources: tension of
metal nanocrystals under different physical conditions, tension of ensemble of metal nanocrystals under the same
conditions, manipulations with complex nanostructures like indentation of graphene membranes, thermal stability
of BNNT, etc.
2 Background and Related Works
The user communities outside of computer science itself (for example, in materials science, physics, chemistry,
biology,nanotechnologies,etc.)wouldliketoaccessvariousDCIs(grids,clouds,clusters)inasuchtransparentway,
thattheydonotneedtolearnthepeculiaritiesoftheseDCIs.Usually,variousweb-interfacesandportalsareusedfor
these purposes, for example, MolDynGrid [10] or, especially, SCMS.pro (an open-source project) [11], which allow
users to perform effectively many management operations with jobs, resources, users, etc. The modern tendency is
that scientists would want to concentrate on their scientific applications and get not only convenient management
tools (like in the aforementioned solutions MolDynGrid and SCMS.pro), but also some high-level development
frameworks for construction and management of complex scientific workflows with a tunable set of management
tools in a shape of independent entities (like portlets). In this context, “science gateway” (SG) ideology means a
user-friendly intuitive interface between scientists (or scientific communities) and various DCIs, where researchers
can focus on their scientific goals and less on peculiarities of DCI. Usually, SGs are not specialized for a certain
scientific area and scientists from many different fields can use them. The most important goals of SG are:
• toprovideasimplifiedintuitivegraphicaluserinterface(GUI)thatishighlytailoredtotheneedsofthegiven
scientific community,
• to provide a smooth access to national and international computing and storage resources,
• to combine, create, and use collaborative tools for sharing scientific data on international scale.
Several popular SG technologies are known for development of SG frameworks and instances, for example, WS-
PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridge[5],ASKALON[12],MOTEUR[13],etc.Theyusedifferentenablingcomponentsand
technologies: web application containers (Tomcat, Glassfish, etc.), portal or web application frameworks (Liferay,
Spring, Drupal, etc.), database management systems (MySQL, etc.), workflow management systems [14]. Here the
mostpromisingSGframework,namelyWS-PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridgebundle(whichisanopen-sourceproject),
is described with emphasize on some examples of its usage in several scientific communities like physics, materials
science, nanotechnologies (Fig. 1).
Рис. 1. Architecture of science gateway ideology on the basis of gUSE+WS-
WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DC-bridge framework [5] represents the complex system with many advanced features
(Fig. 1). WS-PGRADE portal technology is a web based front end of the gUSE (grid and cloud User Support
Environment), which is a well-known and permanently improving open source SG framework developed by
LaboratoryofParallelandDistributedSystems(MTA-SZTAKI,Budapest,Hungary),thatprovidestheconvenient
and easy access to DCIs. It gives the generic purpose, workflow-oriented GUI to develop and run workflows
on various DCIs. WS-PGRADE supports development and submission of distributed applications executed
on the computational resources of DCIs. The resources of DCIs (including clusters, service grids, desktop
grids, clouds) are connected to the gUSE by a single point back end, the DCI-Bridge [5]. The main idea of
WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridge approach is: “The Portal is within reach of anyone from anywhere” [15].
3 Science Gateway Internals
“IMP Science Gateway Portal” (Fig. 2) at the premises of G.V.Kurdyumov Institute for Metal Physics (IMP)
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, is based on the WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridge framework. The
applicationdeveloperscanobtainaccesstotheadvancedworkflowdevelopmentfeatures(graph,abstractworkflow,
template,applicationandproject)todevelopnewworkflowapplications.Thebuilt-inrepositorystorestheworkflow
and their components published by the application developers, which can be shared among user communities. But
there are no ready workflows or their templates for a certain scientific area (like physics, materials science, or
nanotechnologies)inthestandardbundleofWS-PGRADE/gUSE/DC-bridge.Thatiswhywedesigned,developed,
tested, managed, and used several scientific workflows for different scientific applications (described below), and
described in details the very complex workflow for MD simulations with complicated post-processing with many
independent components for post-processing and data visualization (with various requirements, like input/output
data format, parameters of running environment, etc.).
Рис. 2. The graphical user interface of “IMP Science Gateway Portal”.
Workflow Management. “IMP Science Gateway Portal” provides easy and simple GUI utilities (on the basis
of WS-PGRADE portlet) for application developers and end users to create workflow components (graph, abstract
workflow, template, application and project) (Fig. 3).
It provides for application developers and end users workflow management options to create, submit, monitor,
save, upload, and retrieve various workflows with one or many jobs (Fig. 4). The process of the complex workflow
creation(Fig.3)andmanagement(Fig.4)canbedemonstratedbytheMDexampleoftensionofmetalnanocrystals
with the following steps:
• registration and signing in “IMP Science Gateway Portal”;
• create a graph scheme for the basic blocks of the workflow (yellow bricks with small squares in Fig. 3);
• determine (create and name) a workflow from the graph;
Рис.3.Thecomplexworkflowwithexecutables(yellowbricks)anddataflows(arrows)
created by means of WS-PGRADE tools for MD simulations.
Рис. 4. The scientific workflow management in “IMP Science Gateway Portal” on
the basis of WS-PGRADE portlet: workflow list with options of operating (a) and
monitoring abilities (b).
• configure the workflow (links between yellow bricks in Fig. 3);
• start execution of the workflow;
• monitor the current status of execution (Fig. 4);
• check the MD simulation results obtained by LAMMPS package (tables in the red rectangles in the center of
• check the MD simulations results converted by Pizza.py Toolkit script package for post-processing (table in
the red rectangle in the bottom of Fig. 5);
• checktheintermediatepost-processedvisualizationsofatomicpositionsobtainedbyAtomEyepackage(images
in the top part of Fig. 5);
• check the intermediate post-processed results of X-ray analysis (of the MD simulations results) obtained by
debyer (tables in the blue rectangles in the bottom part of Fig. 5);
• get the final post-processed results (of the MD simulations results) after X-ray analysis, radial distribution
function (RDF) analysis, and stress-strain (SS) analysis obtained by R-package (plots in the green rectangles
at the left and right sides of Fig. 5);
• get the final post-processed video of visualizations of atomic positions obtained by FFMPEG package (video
in the violet rectangle in the top part of Fig. 5).
The complicated workflow (Fig. 5) for this application contains several independent components (LAMMPS
package,Pizza.pyToolkit,AtomEyepackage,debyer,R-package,FFMPEG),whichcanbecombinedinvarioussets
for the purposes of the end users [16, 17].
Рис. 5. The workflow from Fig. 3 with some examples of input/output data.
Integration of Computing Resources. gUSE allows to scientific communities to compose and execute their
scientific application on various DCIs. Supported types of DCIs are clusters (PBS, LSF), cluster grids (ARC,
gLite,GT2,GT4,GT5,UNICORE),supercomputers(e.g.viaUNICORE),desktopgrids(BOINC)andclouds(via
CloudBroker Platform and GAE). At the moment “IMP Science Gateway Portal” use clusters (PBS), cluster grids
(ARC), desktop grids (BOINC), and plan to use supercomputers and clouds.
User Management. The development and execution functionalities are separated and fitted to the different
expectations of the following two main user groups:
• Theordinaryscientistswithoutextensiveknowledgeofcomputersciencewithlimitedpowerandpermissions,
like common scientists from materials science, physics, chemistry, etc. (mentioned as “end users”). They need
only restricted manipulation possibilities and obtain the scientific applications in the ready state to configure
and submit them with minimal efforts.
• Thedesignersofthescientificprocessesandrelatedsimulationworkflows(referencedas“developers” or“power
users”) need to build and to fit the application to be as comfortable as possible for the end users.
4 Typical Examples of Practical Applications
Several practical applications in materials science are presented below where the different workflows were designed
by WS-PGRADE workflow manager and used for computations in DCI by gUSE technology.
Mechanical Properties of Metal Nanocrystals. This use case is related to MD simulation of relaxation
behavior of nanocrystals after uniaxial tension (Fig. 6a) [18, 19]. The periodic time dependence of internal stress
(Fig. 6b) and the distribution of defects in the crystal structure was observed for different relaxing objects
(single crystals of Al, Cu, and Si), physical conditions (tensile rate, size and orientation of the nanocrystals)
and methodological parameters (potential type, boundary conditions, and others). The oscillatory nature of the
relaxation of internal stresses is associated with the periodic rearrangement of the metastable defect substructure
(pointdefects,dislocations,stackingfaultsandtheirintersections)(Fig.6b).Theseresultsconfirmandsignificantly
extend the known experimental data on the oscillatory nature of the relaxation processes and mechanisms of
evolution of the initial defect substructure of crystals after ultrasound and magnetic effects [20].
Рис. 6. TheevolutionofthedefectsubstructureinAlnanocrystal(after15ps,atoms
in ideal lattice — green color, stacking faults — red color) (a), and oscillation of the
internal stress P for different nanocrystal sizes (b).
Elastic Properties of Graphene. MD simulation of nanoindentation was performed for monolayer graphene
membrane in an atomic force microscope (Fig. 7a). It is shown that graphene membrane deforms and collapses
within a wide range of strain values and applied forces (within the range 1.5-3 mN); internal tensile stresses along
the axis - 0.6-0.8 GPa (Fig. 7b). For a defect-free graphene under uniaxial tension, this corresponds to the tensile
strength of 80-150 GPa and Young’s modulus of 0.8-1.2 TPa. These results confirm and significantly extend the
known experimental data of nanoindentation in a narrow range of parameters and the previous results of computer
simulation of uniaxial tension of defect-free graphene [21].
Рис.7.Nanoindentationofthegraphenemonolayer(mobilecarbonatoms—redcolor,
fixed carbon atoms — yellow color, nanoindentor atoms — gray color) (a) for different
speeds of the nanoindentor (b).
Thermal Properties of Boron Nitride Nanotubes. Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNT) possess exceptional
physical properties, which are a prerequisite for their wide practical applications in the future (Fig. 8a). MD
simulation workflow was used for investigation of thermal stability of BNNT with different chirality, size and
perfection of structure (Fig. 8a). The dynamics (Fig. 8b) and temperature dependence of the BNNT collapse was
observed for BNNTs with various chiralities, sizes and perfection of structure, as well as the simulation parameters
(type of potential, boundary conditions, thermal conditions, etc.). It is shown that the BNNT collapse proceeds by
separation of atoms from BNNT open caps and BNNT collapse depends on their chirality (zigzag, armchair, etc.),
but the mechanism of their collapse (by separation of atoms from the open caps) remains unchanged. These results
confirm and significantly extend the known experimental data on the thermal stability of BNNTs [22].
Рис. 8. The collapse of BNNT (nitrogen atoms — red color, boron atoms — blue
color) (a), the dynamics of the collapse for BNNT characterized by atom coordination
numbers (b).
5 Conclusion
The general purpose and application specific workflows for computer simulations of complex natural processes
in materials science, physics, and nanotechnologies can be easily designed and used in practice on the basis of
the available “science gateway” technologies. One of them was demonstrated by “IMP Science Gateway Portal”
created on the basis of: WS-PGRADE technology for workflow management and gUSE technology for parallel and
distributed computing in various heterogeneous DCIs. Several typical scientific applications were considered as use
cases of its usage. Porting MD-applications to heterogeneous DCI by means of “science gateway” ideology is easy
andefficient,ifWS-PGRADEplatformisused,andparameterdecompositionandsweepingparallelismarepossible.
As a result, MD simulations of complex behavior of various nanostructures (graphene, metal nanocrystals, boron
nitride nanotubes, etc.) can be effectively carried out in the heterogeneous DCI with a low efforts and quite short
learning curve.
The obvious advantages are as follows: smooth access to heterogeneous DCI and software, division of user roles
(administrators:operatorsofportals;powerusers:principalscientists;endusers:scientists,students),possibilityto
make more complex workflows with intuitive GUI (with additional modules, ad hoc changes, etc.), short learning
curve for usual scientists without extensive knowledge in computer science.
Somenon-criticaldrawbacksoftheapproachinclude:non-standardfilenamingconvention(alphanumericonly),
which can cause problems with legacy code with special symbols, tacit "stdout"and "stderr"information style for
some errors in WS-PGRADE, tacit style of manuals and context help. All of them can be alleviated by the proper
improvement of some non-critical components and general documentation.
The“sciencegateway” approach–workflowmanager(likeWS-PGRADE)+DCIresourcesmanager(likegUSE)
at the premises of the portal (like “IMP Science Gateway Portal”) – is very promising in the context of its practical
MD applications in materials science, physics, chemistry, biology, and nanotechnologies.
6 Acknowledgments
The work presented here was partially funded by EU FP7 SCI-BUS (SCIentific gateway Based User Support)
project, No. RI-283481, and partially supported in the framework of the research theme "Introduction and Use of
Grid Technology in Scientific Research of IMP NASU"under the State Targeted Scientific and Technical Program
to Implement Grid Technology in 2009-2013.
[1] F. Cappello, S. Djilali, G. Fedak, T. Herault, F. Magniette, V. Neri, O. Lodygensky: Computing on large-scale
distributed systems: Xtremweb architecture, programming models, security, tests and convergence with grid.
Future Generation Computer Systems, 21(3): 417-437, 2005.
[2] W.Cirne,F.Brasileiro,N.Andrade,L.Costa,A.Andrade,R.Novaes,M.Mowbray:Labsoftheworld,unite!!!.
Journal of Grid Computing, 4(3): 225-246, 2006.
[3] P. Kacsuk, J. Kovacs, Z. Farkas, A. Marosi, G. Gombas, Z. Balaton: SZTAKI desktop grid (szdg): a flexible
and scalable desktop grid system. Journal of Grid Computing, 7(4): 439-461, 2009.
[4] Z.Balaton, Z.Farkas, G.Gombas, P.Kacsuk, R.Lovas, A.C.Marosi, A.Emmen, G.Terstyanszky, T.Kiss, I.Kelley,
I.Taylor, O. Lodygensky, M.Cardenas-Montes, G. Fedak, F.Araujo: EDGeS: the common boundary between
service and desktop grids. Parallel Processing Letters, 18(03): 433-445, 2008.
[5] P.Kacsuk, Z.Farkas, M.Kozlovszky, G.Hermann, A.Balasko, K.Karoczkai, I.Marton, WS-PGRADE/gUSE
generic DCI gateway framework for a large variety of user communities. Journal of Grid Computing, 10(4):
601-630, 2012.
[6] S. Plimpton: Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics. Journal of Computational Physics,
117(1):1-19, 1995.
[7] R Development Core Team: R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
[9] J.Li: AtomEye: an efficient atomistic configuration viewer. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and
Engineering, 11(2): 173-177, 2003.
[10] A.O.Salnikov, I.A.Sliusar, O.O.Sudakov, O.V.Savytskyi, A.I.Kornelyuk: MolDynGrid virtual laboratory as a
partofUkrainianAcademicGridinfrastructure.IEEE International Workshop on Intelligent Data Acquisition
and Advanced Computing Systems: Technology and Applications, 237-240, 2009.
[12] T.Fahringer, A.Jugravu, S.Pllana, R.Prodan, C.Seragiotto, H.L.Truong: ASKALON: a tool set for cluster and
Grid computing. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 17(2-4): 143-169, 2005.
[13] T.Glatard, J.Montagnat, D.Lingrand, X.Pennec, Flexible and efficient workflow deployment of data-intensive
applications on grids with moteur. International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 22(3):
347-360, 2008.
[14] E.Deelman,D.Gannon,M.Shields,I.Taylor:Workflowsande-Science:Anoverviewofworkflowsystemfeatures
and capabilities. Future Generation Computer Systems, 25(5): 528-540, 2009.
[16] Yu.G. Gordienko, O. Baskova, O. Gatsenko: Enabling High-Performance Distributed Computing to e-Science
by Integration of 4th Generation Language Environments with Desktop Grid Architecture and Convergence
with Global Computing Grid. Proceedings of Cracow Grid Workshop’10, Cracow, Poland, pp. 234-243, 2011.
[17] O.Gatsenko,L.Bekenev,E.Pavlov,Yu.G.Gordienko:FromQuantitytoQuality:MassiveMolecularDynamics
Simulation of Nanostructures Under Plastic Deformation in Desktop and Service Grid Distributed Computing
[18] Yu. Gordienko: Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Defect Substructure Evolution and Mechanisms of Plastic
Deformation in Aluminium Nanocrystals. Metallofizika i Noveishie Tekhnologii, 33(9): 1217-1247, 2011 (in
Ukrainian).
[19] A.Gatsenko,A.Baskova,B.Bandalak,V.Tatarenko,Yu.Gordienko:ApplicationofDesktopGridTechnology
in Material Science. 5th Int. Conf. “Distributed Computing and Grid-technologies in Science and Education”
GRID’2012, Dubna, Russia, pp.123-129, 2012.
[20] Y.G.Gordienko, E.E.Zasimchuk, L.P.Steblenko, A.N.Krit, D.V. Kalinichenko: The Oscillatory Nature of
InternalStressRelaxationduetoSelf-organizationofDefectSubstructureinNanocrystals.Int.Conf.NANSYS-
2013, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2013.
[21] A.S.Gatsenko, E.E.Zasimchuk, V.A.Tatarenko, V.L.Karbovsky, Y.G.Gordienko: Elastic Properties and
Strength of Graphene Under Nanoindentation. Int. Conf. NANSYS-2013, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2013.
[22] Y.G.Gordienko,L.P.Sartinska:ThermalStabilityofBoronNitrideNanotubes.Int.Conf.NANSYS-2013,Kyiv,
Ukraine, 2013.