ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
Computer Vision Systems in Road Vehicles:
Kristian Kovacˇic´, Edouard Ivanjko and Hrvoje Gold
Department of Intelligent Transportation Systems
Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences
University of Zagreb
Email: kristian.kovacic@zg.t-com.hr, edouard.ivanjko@fpz.hr, hrvoje.gold@fpz.hr
Abstract—Thenumberofroadvehiclessignificantlyincreased cameras and computer vision methods. Cameras are used as
in recent decades. This trend accompanied a build-up of road part of road infrastructure or in vehicles. They enable moni-
infrastructure and development of various control systems to toring of traffic infrastructure, detection of incident situations,
increase road traffic safety, road capacity and travel comfort. In tracking of surrounding vehicles, etc.
traffic safety significant development has been made and today’s
systems more and more include cameras and computer vision The goal of this paper is to make a review of existing
methods.Camerasareusedaspartoftheroadinfrastructureor computer vision systems from the problem stand point of
in vehicles. In this paper a review on computer vision systems traffic engineering unlike the most reviews done from the
in vehicles from the stand point of traffic engineering is given. problem stand point of computer science. Emphasis is on
Safety problems of road vehicles are presented, current state of
computer vision methods that can be used in systems build
the art in-vehicle vision systems is described and open problems
in vehicles to assist the driver and increase traffic safety.
with future research directions are discussed.
This paper is organized as follows. Second section gives
I. INTRODUCTION a review of road vehicles safety problems followed by the
third section that describes vision systems requirements for
Recent decades can be characterized by a significant in- the use in vehicles. Fourth section gives a review of mostly
creaseofthenumberofroadvehiclesaccompaniedbyabuild- used image processing methods followed by the fifth section
upofroadinfrastructure.Simultaneouslyvarioustrafficcontrol that describes existing systems. Paper ends with a discussion
systems have been developed in order to increase road traffic about open problems and conclusion.
safety, road capacity and travel comfort. However, even as
technology significantly advanced, traffic accidents still take
II. SAFETYPROBLEMSOFROADVEHICLES
a large number of human fatalities and injuries.
According to the survey study results published in [3],
Statistics show that there is about 1.2 million fatalities and
annuallyabout100000crashesintheUSAresultdirectlyfrom
50 million injuries related to road traffic accidents per year
driver fatigue. It is the main cause of about 30% of all severe
worldwide [1]. Also there were 3961 pedestrian fatalities in
traffic accidents. In the case of French statistics, a lack of
2005 in the EU. Most accidents happened because drivers
attention due to driver fatigue or sleepiness was a factor in
were not aware of pedestrians. Furthermore, there has been
one in three accidents, while alcohol, drugs or distraction was
approximately 500 casualties a year in EU because of driver’s
a factor in one in five accidents in 2003 [4].
lack of visibility in the blind zone. Data published in [1]
estimated that there has been around 244000 police reported Based on the accidents records from [3] most common
crashes and 224 fatalities related to lane switching in 1991. traffic accidents causes are:
Statistics published by the Croatian Bureau of Statistics [2]
• Frontal crashes, where vehicles driving in opposite
reveal that in 2011 there were 418 killed and 18065 injured
directions have collided;
persons who were participating in the traffic of Croatia.
• Lane departure collisions, where a lane changing
To reduce the amount of annual traffic accidents, a large
vehicle collided with a vehicle from an adjacent lane;
number of different systems has been researched and develo-
ped. Such systems are part of road infrastructure or road ve- • Crashes with surrounding vehicles while parking,
hicles (horizontal and vertical signalization, variable message passing through a intersection or a narrow alley, etc.;
signs,driversupportsystems,etc.).Vehiclemanufactureshave
implemented systems such as lane detection and lane depar- • Failurestoseeorrecognizetheroadsignalizationand
ture systems, parking assistants, collision avoidance, adaptive consequently cause a traffic accident due to inappro-
cruise control, etc. Main task of these systems is to make the priate driving.
driver aware when leaving the current lane. These systems are
partially based on computer vision algorithms that can detect A. Frontal crashes
and track pedestrians or surrounding vehicles [1].
According to the data published in [3], 30452 of total
Developmentofcomputingpowerandcheapvideocameras 2041943 vehicles crashes recorded in the USA in the period
enabledtoday’strafficsafetysystemstomoreandmoreinclude from 2005 to 2008 occurred because of too close following
CCVW2013 25
PosterSession
ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
of a vehicle in a convoy. About 5.5% of accidents happened
withvehiclesmovinginoppositedirection.Althoughthereare
varioustypesofsystemsthatcanhelptoreducethenumberof
accidents caused by a frontal vehicle crash, computer vision
gives ability to prevent a possible or immediate vehicle crash
fromhappening.Systemcandetectadangeroussituationusing
oneormorefrontalcamerasandafterwardproduceappropriate
response, haptic or audio.
When a possible frontal crash situation occurs, the time
available to prevent the crash is usually very short. Efficiency
Fig.1. Generalin-vehicledriversupportsystemarchitecture.
of crash avoidance systems depends on the time in which
possiblecrashhasbeendetectedpriortoitsoccurrence.Ifshort
amount of time is taken for possible frontal crash detection, recommendation. This accidents number could be reduced if
then longer amount of time is available for driver warning a convenient road signalization detection and driver assistant
or evasive actions to be performed. Such actions need to be systemhadbeenused.Suchsystemcouldwarnthedriverwhen
taken in order to prevent or alleviate the crash (preparation of he is performing a dangerous or illegal maneuver. According
airbags, autonomous braking, etc.). todatain[3],therewere109932accidentscausedbyspeeding
and ignoring speed limits.
B. Lane departure
In some cases drivers are overloaded with information and
Statistics published in [3] denote that 10.8% accidents have a hard time prioritizing information importance. For ex-
happened because vehicles overran the lane line and 22.2% ample, when driving through an area for the first time, drivers
because vehicles were over the edge of the road. From all are usually more concentrated on route information traffic
vehiclesthatparticipatedinaccidents,3.1%wereintentionally signs. Systems for road sign detection and recognition, can
changing lanes or overtaking another vehicle. improve driving safety and reduce above mentioned accidents
percentage by drawing the driver attention to warning signs.
Number of accidents can be significantly reduced by using
a computer vision system for lane departure warning. If the
III. VISIONSYSTEMSREQUIREMENTS
driver is distracted, such system can simply just accentuate
the dangerous action (lane changing) and focus the driver’s To define an appropriate vision system architecture, some
attention. When such system is built into a vehicle, drivers application area related requirements need to be considered.
also tend to be more careful so that they do not cross the lane Because of the specific field of use, the computer vision
markers because they receive some kind of warning otherwise system has to work in real time. Obtained data should be
(vibrating driver seat, audio signal or graphical notice). available in time after a possible critical situation has been
detected.Timewindowforcomputationdependsonthevehicle
C. Surrounding vehicles speed and shortens with the vehicle speed increase. This
can represent a significant problem when small and cheap
Surrounding vehicles represent a threat if the driver is not
embedded computers are used. To overcome this problem al-
aware of them. In case of driver fatigue, capability of tracking
gorithmsthatsupportparallelcomputing,multi-coreprocessor
surroundingvehiclesissignificantlyreduced.Thiscancausean
platforms or computer vision dedicated hardware platforms
accident in events such as lane changing, driving in a convoy,
are used. Alternatively special intelligent video cameras with
parking and similar situations.
preinstalledlocalimageprocessingsoftwarecanbeused.Such
camerascanperformextractionofbasicimagefeatures,object
Depending on complexity of a system that tracks sur-
recognition and tracking.
rounding vehicles, appropriate warnings and actions can be
performed based on current vehicle environment state or state Second important requirement is the capability to adapt to
that is estimated (predicted) to happen in the near future. rapid changes of environment monitored using cameras. Such
System that tracks surrounding vehicles can be used in lane changes can be caused by fog, rain, snow, and illumination
departure warning or parking assistant system also. Main changes related to night and day or entering and exiting
problem of this system are false detections of surrounding tunnels.Incaseswherewholedriversupportorvehiclecontrol
vehicles. Vehicles can be in many different shapes and colors. systemsusemorethenonesensortype(eg.opticalcamerasand
This can cause false vehicle estimations and wrong driver ultrasonicsensors,lidars),systemadaptivenesstoenvironment
actions endangering other drivers and road users [5]. changes is better then in cases with one sensor type. Further-
more, whole system needs to be resistant to various physical
D. Recognition of road signalization influences (e.g. vibrations, acceleration/deceleration) [5]. In
Fig. 1 general in-vehicle vision system architecture is given.
Road signalization (horizontal and vertical) represents the
key element in traffic safety. Driver should always detect and To detect and track vehicles or other kind of objects
recognize both road signalization groups correctly, especially (pedestrians, lane markings, traffic signs, etc.) often different
traffic signs. In case when the driver is unfocused or tired, sensors are used. Sensors can be divided into two categories:
horizontalandverticalsignalizationismostlyignored.Accord- active and passive. Most active sensors are time of flight
ing to the survey [3], 3.8% of total vehicle crashes happened sensors,i.e.theymeasurethedistancebetweenaspecificobject
when drivers did not adjust their driving to road signalization and the sensor. Millimeter-wave radars and laser sensors are
CCVW2013 26
PosterSession
ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
Fig.2. Sameimageinvisiblespectrum(a)andinfar-infraredspectrum(b).
Fig. 3. Original image (left) and same image with perspective projection
transformationapplied(right)[7].
mostly used as active sensors in automotive industry. Active
sensors are so mainly used for surrounding vehicles detection
and tracking. Hough transformation is used to extract parameters of
image features (lines). Main advantage of this method is its
Various cameras are mostly used as passive sensors. Basic
relatively high tolerance to noise and ability to ignore small
camera characteristics include their working spectrum, resolu-
gaps on shapes. After required processing (edge detection)
tion,fieldofview,etc.Intrafficapplicationcameraspectrumis
is done on an image, Hough transformation translates every
crucialsincenight-timecamerasusefar,midandnearinfrared
pixel of a feature in the image from the Cartesian to the polar
spectrum,whiledaylightcamerasusevisiblespectrum.Farin-
coordinate system. Original Hough transform method is used
frared spectrum camera is suitable for detection of pedestrians
for extracting only line parameters although various modified
at night as shown in Fig. 2.
versions of Hough transform have been developed to extract
Computervisionsystemsinvehiclescanbebasedonstereo corner, circle and ellipse parameters.
visionalso.Stereovisionisatechniquethatenablesextraction
of3Ddatafromapairof2Dflatimages.Incaseofa2Dimage For object detection Paul Viola and Michael Jones pro-
pair,usuallywholeoverlappingimageoronlyaspecificregion posed an approach called ’Haar-like features’ that has some
of it is translated from a 2D to 3D coordinate system. resemblance to Haar-wavelet functions [8]. Haar-like-features
methods are used where fast object detection is required [9],
IV. IMAGEPROCESSINGAPPROACHES [10]. This approach is based on dividing a detection window
(windowofinterest)intosmallerregions.Regionsizedepends
Imageprocessingconsistsofbasicoperationsthatprovides on the size of an object that needs to be detected. For each
features for high level information extraction. Simplest image region a sum is computed based on pixel intensity within the
processing transformations are done by point operators. Such processed region. Summed area table (integral image) is used
operators can perform color transformation, compositing and to perform a fast summarization. Possible object candidates
matting (process of separating the image into two layers, canbefoundcomparingdifferencesbetweensumsofadjacent
foreground and background), histogram equalization, tonal regions. For a more accurate object detection, many regions
adjustment and other operations. Point operators do not use need to be tested. Applications such as vehicle detection
surroundingpointsincalculations.Contrariwise,neighborhood requireuseofmorecomplexmethodsthathavecomputational
operators (linear filtering, non-linear filtering, etc.) use infor- demands similar to the Haar-like-features method.
mation from surrounding pixels also. For image enhancement,
linear and non-linear filters (moving-average, Bartlett filter, One of the algorithms used for simplification of extracted
medianfilter,morphology,etc.)areused.Non-linearfilterscan shapes is the Ramer-Douglas-Peucker algorithm [11]. It re-
be used for shape recognition methods also. For example, as duces the number of points in a curve that is approximated
part of vehicle recognition methods [6]. by a series of points. Complex curves with many points
can be too computationally (time) demanding for processing.
Affine transformation is a type of transformation that
Simplifying the curve with this algorithm allows faster and
preserves symmetries (parallelism) and distance ratios when
simpler processing.
applied on certain points or parts of an image. As a conse-
quence of this, specific geometric shape on an image can be
rotated, scaled, translated, etc. This transformation is usually V. EXISTINGROADVEHICLECOMPUTERVISIONSYSTEMS
used for basic operations with a whole specific image region.
Since the first intelligent vehicle was introduced in the
Distanceestimationbetweenvehiclesisimportantintraffic
mid 1970s [12], computer vision systems also started to
applications.Tocalculatethedistancebetweenthecameraand
develop as one of its main sensor systems. Currently there are
a point in space represented by a specific pixel in the image,
many projects that are researching and developing computer
perspective(projection)transformationisperformed.Itiscom-
vision systems in road vehicles. Project goals are related to
putedbyapplyingaperspectivematrixtransformationonevery
developmentofdriversupportsystems,driverstaterecognition
pixel in the image. Perspective transformation assigns a third
and road infrastructure recognition modules for autonomous
component (z coordinate) to every pixel depending on the x-y
vehicles.
componentsintheimage.InFig.3,resultofperspectiveimage
transformationisgiven.Pixelcomponentsintheoriginalimage Computer vision systems in vehicles are part of au-
arexandycoordinates.Afterperspectivetransformationanew tonomous vehicle parking systems, adaptive cruise control,
pixelcomponent(zcoordinate)iscalculatedandswappedwith lane departure warning, driver fatigue detection, obstacle and
theycoordinate.So,pixelsneartheimagebottomoftheimage traffic sign detection, and others. Currently only high class
represent points in 3D space that are closer to the camera and vehicles are equipped with several such systems but they are
pixels near the image top are further away. being more and more included in middle class vehicles.
CCVW2013 27
PosterSession
ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
A. Lane detection and departure warning state due to monotonous driving conditions or other envi-
ronmental factors. This diminished alertness leads to a state
Lane detection system represents not only a useful driver
of fuzzy consciousness followed by the onset of sleep [15].
aid, but an important component in autonomous vehicles also.
If drivers in fuzzy consciousness would get a warning one
To resolve lane detection and departure warning problems,
second before possible accident situation, about 90% of ac-
key element is to detect road lane boundaries (horizontal road
cidents could be prevented [9]. Various techniques have been
signalization and width of the whole road). In work described
developed to help to reduce the number of accident caused
in [13], lane detection is done in two parts. First part includes
by driver fatigue. These driver fatigue detection techniques
imageenhancementandedgedetection.Secondpartdealswith
can be divided into three groups: (i) methods that analyze
lane features extraction and road shape estimation from the
driver’s current state related to eyelid and head movement,
processedimage.InFig.4,moredetailedflowdiagramofthis
gaze and other facial expression; (ii) methods based on driver
algorithm is shown.
performance, with a focus on the vehicle’s behavior including
Authorsof[14]developedanalgorithmthathandlesextra- positionandheadway;and(iii)methodsbasedoncombination
ction of lane features based on estimation methods. Besides of the driver’s current state and driver performance [15].
determining shape of main (current) lane, algorithm has the
Inworkdescribedin[9],twoCCDcamerasareused.First
ability to estimate position and shape of other surrounding
cameraisfixedanditisusedtotrackthedriver’sheadposition.
lanes. Applied lane detection principle is based on two meth-
Camera output is an image in low-resolution like 320x240,
ods. On a straight lane, Hough and simplified perspective
which allows the use of fast image processing algorithms.
transformations mentioned in previous section are used first.
As the driver’s head position is known, processing of second
These transformations enable detection of the center lane.
camera image can focus only on that region. Image of second
To detect surrounding lanes, further processing needs to be
cameraishigh-resolutionone(typically720x576)whichraises
done. Required processing includes affine transformations and
level of detail of the driver’s head. This image is used in
other calculations that retrieve relative vehicle position. If the
further analysis for determining driver’s performance from
lane is a curve with a large radius, this method can be used
mouth position, eye lid opening frequency and diameter of
also. In second method for curved lane with small radius,
opened eye lid [9]. It is visible from experimental results that
edge features are extracted from the original image first. After
at least 30 frames (high-resolution images) can be processed
extracting these features, complete perspective transformation
per second. Such frame rate represents good basis for further
is performed based on camera’s installation parameters. By
research and development of driver fatigue detection systems.
recognizing points on the center lane, curve estimation is
performed.Positionsofotheradjacentlanesarethencalculated In review [15], an approach to driver fatigue detection that
based on known current lane curve parameters. Problems with firstdetectsregionsofeyesandafterwardsextractsinformation
this approach are: (i) incapability to detect lane markers due about driver fatigue from this region is briefly described. To
the poor visibility or object interference (infront vehicles or achievethis,driver’sfaceneedstobefoundfirst.Afterfinding
other objects block the camera’s field of view); and (ii) error the face, eyes locations are estimated by finding the darkest
in estimating current vehicle position due to the curvature of pixels on face. When eye locations are known, software tries
the road [14]. to extract further information for driver fatigue detection. In
order to test the algorithm different test drives were made. If
the driver’s head direction was straight into the camera none
B. Driver fatigue detection
false detection were observed. After head is turned for 30
The process of falling asleep at the steering wheel can be or more degrees, system starts to produce false detections.
characterized by a gradual decline in alertness from a normal Beside described techniques, processing additional features
like blinking rate of driver’s eyes or position of eye’s pupil
are used to improve driver fatigue detection [9].
C. Vehicle detection
There are several sensors (active and passive) that can
be used for vehicle detection. Lot of research was done
regardingvehicledetectionusingopticalcamerasandthisstill
presentsachallenge.Mainproblemofvideoimageprocessing
based vehicle detection is significant variability in vehicle
and environment appearance (vehicle size and shape, color,
sunlight, snow, rain, dust, fog, etc.). Other problems arise
from the need for system robustness and requirements for fast
processing [7].
Most algorithms for vehicle detection in computer vision
systemsarebasedontwosteps:(i)findingallcandidatesinan
imagethatcouldbevehicles;and(ii)performingteststhatcan
verifythepresenceofavehicle.Findingallvehiclecandidates
in an image is mostly done by three types of methods: (i)
knowledge-basedmethods;(ii)stereo-visionmethods;and(iii)
Fig.4. Flowchartofimageprocessingforlanedetection[13]. motion-based methods.
CCVW2013 28
PosterSession
ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
Knowledge-based methods work on the presumption of vehicle features like edges, texture, shadow, etc.
knowing specific parameters of the object (vehicle) being de-
tected(vehicleposition,shape,color,texture,shadow,lighting, D. Real time traffic sign detection
etc.). Symmetry can be used as one of the most important
Traffic sign detection is performed in two phases. First
vehicle specifications. Every vehicle is almost completely
phaseisusuallydonebycolorsegmentation.Sincetrafficsigns
symmetrical viewed from front and rear side and this is used
haveedgesofaspecificcolor,colorsegmentationrepresentsa
in vehicle detection algorithms. Besides symmetry, color of
good base for easier extraction of traffic signs from image
the road or lane markers can be used in vehicle detection
background. In [10], color-based segmentation is done in
also.Usingcolor,movingobjects(vehicles)canbesegmented
two steps: color quantization followed by region of interest
from the background (road). Other knowledge-based methods
analysis. For color model, RGB color space is usually used,
use vehicle shadow, corners (vehicle rectangular shape), verti-
although YIQ, YUV, L*a*b and CIE can be used also. After
cal/horizontal edges, texture, vehicle lights, etc. [7].
color segmentation, shape-based segmentation is performed
Stereo-vision methods are based on disparity maps or for final detection of circles, ellipses and triangles. Second
inverse perspective mapping. In disparity maps, position of phase is traffic sign classification where various methods like
pixels on both cameras that represents the same object are templatematching,lineardiscriminantanalysis,supportvector
compared. Third component of pixel vector (z coordinate) can machine (SVM), artificial neural networks, and other machine
becalculatedbycomparingchangesinpixelsposition.Inverse learning methods can be used [10]. For traffic sign detection
perspective mapping method is based on transforming the AdaBoost [18] and SURF [19] algorithms are used also.
image and removing the perspective effect from it. In stereo-
Traffic sign detection approach described in [11] performs
vision systems mostly two cameras are used although systems
recognition in two main steps. First step is related to a traffic
with more than two cameras are more accurate, but more
signdetectionalgorithmwhosegoalistolocalizeatrafficsign
computationally expensive also. In [16], a computer vision
intheimagewithminimumnoise.Fordetection,imageprepro-
system with three cameras is described. It can detect objects
that are 9 [cm] in size and up to 110 [m] in distance. Such cessing with color-based method threshold is used first. This
method is fast and often suitable for use in real-time systems.
a system has a high level of accuracy when compared to a
After preprocessing, traffic sign approximation is performed
system with two cameras.
with Ramer-Douglas-Peucker algorithm. On localized traffic
Motion-based methods use optical flow for image process- signimage,preprocessingisperformedandimageisconverted
ing. Optical flow in computer vision represents the pattern of to binary image with resolution of 30x30 pixels. Second step
visiblemovementofobjects,surfacesandedgesinthecamera represents the traffic sign recognition based on SVM, often
field of view. Optical flow calculated from an image is shown C-SVM with linear kernel.
inFig.5,wherearrow’slengthanddirectionrepresentsaverage
Thedevelopedtrafficsigndetectionandrecognitionsystem
speed and direction (optical flow) of subimages. Algorithms
described in [20] is based on a video sequence analysis
for this method divide the image into smaller parts. Smaller
rather than a single image analysis. Authors use a cascade of
image parts are analyzed with previously saved images in
boostedclassifiersofHaar-like-features(usuallypixelintensity
order to calculated its relative direction and speed. With this
value) method to detect traffic signs. OpenCV framework is
method static and dynamic image parts can be separated and
used to alleviate the implementation. Main disadvantages of
additionally processed [17].
traffic sign detection based on a Haar-like-features method
Once optical flow of sub-images is calculated, moving boosted classifier cascade are: (i) poor precision compared to
objects(vehicles)candidatescanberecognized.Averification the required precision; and (ii) poor traffic sign localization
method decides which candidates will be referenced as real accuracy where its true location (position in the image) is in
objects.Verificationisdonebycalibratingaspeedthresholdon most cases deviated. Framework for detecting, tracking and
themostefficientvalue.Withthisfiltering,falsedetectionsare recognizing traffic signs proposed in [20] is shown in Fig. 6.
reduced.Forfurtherverification,methodsthatarealsousedin
knowledge based vehicle detection methods (appearance and
template based) are used. These kind of methods recognize
Fig.5. Originalimage(a)andcomputedopticalflow(b)[7]. Fig.6. Flowchartofsigndetectionandrecognitionalgorithm[20].
CCVW2013 29
PosterSession
ProceedingsoftheCroatianComputerVisionWorkshop,Year1 September19,2013,Zagreb,Croatia
Since traffic sign detection is performed on a sequence of supported by the project VISTA financed from the Innovation
images obtained from a moving vehicle, a region trajectory InvestmentFundGrantSchemeandEUCOSTactionTU1102.
where most probably the signs are located can be constructed.
Detection system learns on each detection. If a significant REFERENCES
number of learning samples (traffic sign images) is used,
[1] C.Hughes,R.O’Malley,D.O’Cualain,M.Glavin,andE.Jones,New
systemcanachieveprecisionofupto54%withrecallof96%.
TrendsandDevelopmentsinAutomotiveSystemEngineering. Intech,
2011, ch. Trends towards automotive electronic vision systems for
VI. OPENPROBLEMS mitigationofaccidentsinsafetycriticalsituations,pp.493–512.
[2] E.Omerzo,S.Kos,A.Veledar,K.Sˇakic´Pokrivacˇ,L.Pilat,M.Pavisˇic´,
Main constrain of computer vision systems in vehicles are
A. Belosˇevic´, and Sˇ. V. Njegovan, Deaths in Traffic Accidents, 2011.
their limitations due to hardware specifications. Processing an
CroatianBureauofStatistics,2012.
image through a large number of consecutive methods for
[3] N. H. T. S. Administration, “National motor vehicle crash causation
data recognition and extraction can be very CPU demanding. survey,”U.S.DepartmentofTransportation,Tech.Rep.,Apr2008.
Trade off between quality and cost of every step in image [4] S. Ribaric´, J. Lovrencˇic´, and N. Pavesˇic´, “A neural-network-based
processing should be done in order to make a system maxi- system for monitoring driver fatigue,” in MELECON 2010 15th IEEE
mally optimized. In image processing, two most widely used MediterraneanElectrotechnicalConference,2010,pp.1356–1361.
approaches are basic image features extraction using Hough [5] M. Bertozzi, A. Broggi, M. Cellario, A. Fascioli, P. Lombardi, and
M. Porta, “Artificial vision in road vehicles,” in Proceedings of the
transformation and learning classificators for whole object
IEEE,vol.90,no.7,2002,pp.1258–1271.
recognition.Implementationofclassificatorsliketheonebased
[6] R.Szeliski,ComputerVision:AlgorithmsandApplications. Springer
on Haar-like-features methods allows algorithms to use less
-VerlagLondonLimited,2011.
system resources. Drawback of this method is its low ratio
[7] Z.Sun,G.Bebis,andR.Miller,“On-roadvehicledetection:Areview,”
of accuracy. Contrary to this, Hough method is much more Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 28,
precise,butusesmoresystemresources.Methodsthatperform no.5,pp.694–711,May2006.
complexcalculationsonallimagepixelsshouldbeavoidedand [8] P.ViolaandM.Jones,“Rapidobjectdetectionusingaboostedcascade
used only where they are necessary. ofsimplefeatures,”inComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,vol.1,
2001,pp.I–511–I–518vol.1.
One of the factors that affects vehicle detection accuracy,
[9] L. Lingling, C. Yangzhou, and L. Zhenlong, “Yawning detection for
tracking and recognition of objects in an outdoor environment monitoring driver fatigue based on two cameras,” in Proceedings of
are environmental conditions. Weather conditions such as the12thInternationalIEEEConferenceonIntellligentTransportation
snow, rain, fog and others can significantly reduce computer Systems,St.Louis,Missouri,USA,4-7Oct2009,pp.12–17.
visionsystemaccuracy.Poorqualityofhorizontalroadsignali- [10] C. Long, L. Qingquan, L. Ming, and M. Qingzhou, “Traffic sign
detection and recognition for intelligent vehicle,” in Proceedings of
zationandomittedfieldofviewduetovariousobstacles(often
IEEEIntelligentVehiclesSymposium,2011,pp.908–913.
problem with traffic signs) presents an additional problem to
[11] D.SoendoroandI.Supriana,“Trafficsignrecognitionwithcolor-based
vision based systems also. Significant robustness is required
method,shape-arcestimationandsvm,”inProceedingsofInternational
to overcome this problem. To reduce the influence that these ConferenceonElectricalEngineeringandInformatics,2011.
factors can have on the system, new cameras and appropriate [12] S. Tsugawa, “Vision-based vehicles in japan: the machine vision
image processing algorithms still need to be developed. systems and driving control systems,” Industrial Electronics, IEEE
Transactionson,vol.41,no.4,pp.398–305,August1994.
VII. CONCLUSION [13] T. Quoc-Bao and L. Byung-Ryong, “New lane detection algorithm
for autonomous vehicles using computer vision,” in Proceedings of
Computer vision software used for vehicle detection and InternationalConferenceonControl,AutomationandSystems,ICCAS
obtained recognition consist of many subsystems. Incoming 2008.,Seoul,Korea,14-17Oct2008,pp.1208–1213.
images from one or several cameras need to be preprocessed [14] Y.Jiang,F.Gao,andG.Xu,“Computervision-basedmultiple-lanede-
tectiononstraightroadandinacurve,”inProceedingsofInternational
inthedesiredformat.Obtainedimageisthenfurtherprocessed
ConferenceonImageAnalysisandSignalProcessing,Huaqiao,China,
for high level object detection and recognition.
9-11April2010,pp.114–117.
Detecting an object in a scene can be done by multiple [15] W. Qiong, W. Huan, Z. Chunxia, and Y. Jingyu, “Driver fatigue
detection technology in active safety systems,” in Proceedings of the
methods (eg. Hough and Haar-like-features methods). Use of
2011InternationalConferenceRSETE,2011,pp.3097–3100.
this methods alone is not enough to make the system reliable
[16] T.WilliamsonandC.Thorpe,“Atrinocularstereosystemforhighway
for object detection and recognition. In cases of bad environ-
obstacledetection,”in1999InternationalConferenceonRoboticsand
mentconditions,imagecanbefullofvariousnoise(snow,fog Automation(ICRA’99),1999.
and rain on the image). Besides environment conditions, high [17] M. Bertozzi, A. Broggi, A. Fascioli, and R. Fascioli, “Stereo inverse
vehicle velocity can also affects the image (blur effect). perspective mapping: Theory and applications,” Image and Vision
ComputingJournal,vol.8,pp.585–590,1998.
Current systems that are used in more expensive vehicles
[18] X. Baro, S. Escalera, J. Vitria, O. Pujol, and P. Radeva, “Traffic
are part of driver support systems based on simplified image signrecognitionusingevolutionaryadaboostdetectionandforest-ecoc
processing. Examples are lane detection and traffic signs for classification,” Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions
speedlimitations.Stillproblemsrelatedtorobustnesstodiffer- on,vol.10,no.1,pp.113–126,2009.
ent outdoor environment conditions and real time processing [19] D.Ding,J.Yoon,andC.Lee,“Trafficsigndetectionandidentification
usingsurfalgorithmandgpgpu,”inSoCDesignConference(ISOCC),
of high level features recognition exist.
2012International,2012,pp.506–508.
[20] S. Sˇegvic´, K. Brkic´, Z. Kalafatic´, and A. Pinz, “Exploiting temporal
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
andspatialconstraintsintrafficsigndetectionfromamovingvehicle,”
MachineVisionandApplications,pp.1–17,2011.[Online].Available:
Authors wish to thank Nikola Bakaric´ for his valuable
comments during writing this paper. This research has been
CCVW2013 30
PosterSession