1v6001000/tam-dnoc:viXra
Condensed Matter Physics - Biology Resonance
G. Baskaran‡
Institute of Mathematical Sciences
C I T Campus
Madras 600 113, India
has already begun.
The field of condensed matter physics had its genesis this
centuryandit has hadaremarkable evolution. Acloser look II. NATURE OF CONDENSED MATTER
atitsgrowthrevealsahiddenaiminthecollectiveconscious- PHYSICS
ness of thefield - a part of the development this century is a
kind of warm up exercise to understand the nature of living
CMP is diverse and complex. It addresses issues such
condensed matter, namely the field of biology, by a growing
as why silicon has a diamond like structure using quan-
newbreedofscientistsin thecomingcentury. Throughsome
examples thevitality of thisinteraction will bepointed out. tum mechanical considerations, or the growth dynam-
ics of snow flakes, or the electrical conduction in carbon
nanotubes. There is CMP in the field effect transistor,
I. INTRODUCTION modern computer chips and the sensitive SQUID mag-
netometer that detects the feeble electrical activity that
goes on in our restless brain. ‘Condensed Matter Physics’ (CMP) is a clever name
Thefieldismessybutrewarding. QuantizationofHall
for the study of any form of matter that is condensed -
conductance, that won 2 Nobel prizes, occur amidst dis-
liquids, solids, gels, cells, superfluid He4, quantum Hall
orderandinteraction. Whilethefieldisdiverse,thereare
liquid etc etc. The folklore is that the name ‘Condensed
powerful unifying notions and ideas: spontaneous sym-
Matter Theory’ was coined in Cambridge in the 60’s in
metrybreaking,orderparameter,renormalizationgroup,
the solid state group that involved people like V. Heine
complex collective behavior, quantum coherence, chaos
andP.W.Anderson. Ofcourse,beforethisfieldwaschris-
etc. The idea of renormalizationgroup is an an example
teneditexisted,onitsownrightassolidstatephysicsand
thathasgrownoutofthestudyofcondensedmattersys-
relatedfieldswithverymanysignificantdevelopmentsto
temssuchasliquid-gasphasetransitionandKondoprob-
its credit - the new name gave it an added identity and
lems - it has far reaching application potential including
perhaps a new purpose.
possibility of understanding some hierarchicalstructures
Physics, a part of Natural Science, is an experimental
in biological systems to turbulence in classical fluids.
science. It gains its strength from experiments, observa-
The field of CMP possesses a deep working knowledge
tions, theorizing, and impact on technology and society.
of quantum mechanics, both in theory and experiments.
CMP has a special place in physics because of its close-
This gives it an unique strength and also makes its rela-
ness to a multitude of feasible and often novel experi-
tiontobiologyspecial. The stabilityofatoms,theorigin
ments. This feasibility is intimately tied with the wealth
of chemical bonds, electron transfer, proton tunneling
of matter and associated phenomena around as well as
etc. in biology are truly quantum mechanical. However,
the development in the field of material science and in
itis fair to saythat somemysteriousleakingofquantum
turn technology - both low and high tech. Elegant con-
effects to some unexpected aspects and domains of biol-
ceptsfromquantumphysics,statisticalmechanics,math-
ogy (such as the originof consciousness),apart from the
ematics are combined alive so that it continues to pro-
above obvious ones. are distinct perhaps remote possi-
duce surprises and new phenomena and new concepts.
bilities. CM physicists will not accept such suggestions
This field is also a source for innovative new experimen-
uncritically, but will have a natural edge in unraveling
tal methods that has extended human ‘senses’ to atomic
those which turn out to be meaningful.
scale-modernx-raycrystallography,NMR,neutronscat-
Physicsgainsitspredictivepowerandbecomesaquan-
tering, spectroscopy, scanning tunneling microscope and
titative science because of the powerful use of mathe-
so on.
matics - analysis and approximations intertwined with
The aim of the present article is to provide a point
physical insights, order or magnitude estimates, dimen-
of view that this field has grown, partly with an aim
sional analysis and many modern mathematical ideas
to address deeper issues in the field of living condensed
such as homotopy theory, group theory, algebraic geom-
matter namely biology; and a century of efforts is really
etry, functions of many complex variables etc. In view
awarmupexercisetowardsthis difficultgoal. Thepoint
of the remarkable developments in computers computa-
of view I am providing is perhaps obvious - my main
tional CMP is becoming very popular and powerful. Of-
message is that a true resonance between the two fields
tenyoucandoacomputersimulationorexperimentand
is something that is natural and so likely to happen or
create situations that you find it hard to create in the Brain
laboratory,or study analytically. A brain would naturally like to think about how it
I alluded to the complexity of the study of condensed thinks; why grey matter-a large piece of condensed mat-
matter. This givesitaremarkableabilitytosuggestnew ter possesses consciousness, self awareness, minds eye-I
paradigmsthroughitsemergentcharacter[1],thatcould etc. Physicistshave no clues asto how the lawsof quan-
be helpful elsewhere. The last several decades have seen tum mechanics, thermodynamics or even quantum grav-
some of them: i) spin glass and neural network, and ii) ity for that matter,leads to these profoundproperties in
self organized criticality, power laws etc. These notions a living state of condensed matter. After listening to an
may not have solved the real problem of biology - but illuminatingtalkbyJohnHopfieldonneuralnetworkand
they are some new windows for physicists to look at this associative memory [3] in the fall of 1987 at Princeton,
totally new world of biology. The wealth of phenom- I thought, in a moment of weakness, that I understood
ena in condensed matter is sure to provide seeds of new the physics of the mind ! - soon to realize it is far from
paradigms provided we look for them and and develop a it.
sensitivity to abstract them. It is becoming increasingly clear that all our under-
standingofspinglassphysics,thatcamefrompartlythe
study ofa dilute concentrationofmagnetic impurities in
III. NATURE OF BIOLOGY AS A SCIENCE an otherwise pure gold, has only landed us somewhere
at the plains of the Himalayan range, we have to scale
Like physics, biology is truly an experimental science. MountEverest. The conceptofnetwork,basinofattrac-
Most of the problems in biology are far too complex, at tion, possible hierarchicalor ultra metric organizationof
the moment, to be analyzed threadbare, the way we do attractors,areallbutwordsinconstructingalongpoem.
inphysicswithsomeproblems,usingourexistingknowl- This became clear to me, when I participated in an In-
edge and concepts of physics, chemistry and mathemat- stitute of Theoretical Physics, Santa Barbara workshop
ics. However, after the revolutionary beginning of the on‘Neurobiologyforphysicists’inthefallof1987,where
field of molecular biology [2] at the middle of this cen- neurobiologists humbled us with mind boggling biologi-
tury, biology has taken a new shape, and looks comfort- cal and clinical facts about the brain. But, at the same
ableevenforaphysicisttolookatfromadistance. Very time, oursuccessfulunderstandingofthe neuralnetwork
general principles like Darwin’s natural selection to very of sea slug, an organism that has few hundred neurons,
specific structure and function relations in DNA, pro- gives us hope that perhaps one day we can understand
teins, etc. are dominating the field currently. There are mammalian brain, with all its complexities and hierar-
also many dogmas, hard earned hypothesis and working chies. It is clear that all our efforts so far has been a
principles that pervade this truly diverse field - protein warm up exercise.
structure, signal transduction, brain function to name a Gene
few. Thanks to the experimental tools like x-ray crys- The next example is from DNA. I was surprised, like
tallography, electron microscopy, NMR imaging, ATM, my colleagues,by the findings ofsome physicists [4]that
STM, optical tweezers and so on, that actually came DNA of various living organisms possess some kind of
from physics, the field is undergoing revolutionary de- long range or power law correlation in its nucleotide se-
velopment. quence-thatis,theprobabilitythattwonucleotidessep-
The urgent problem facing a hard core biologist is of- arated by n bases in a strand of DNA, will be both ade-
ten very different fromwhat a physicist, genuinely inter- nine for example,is ≈ n 1 α . It wasclaimedthatthe expo-
ested in biology,is capable of solving in a short time pe- nentα is species dependent -a one parametercharacter-
riod. Thisisthereasonmanybiologistssincerelyfeelthat ization of a species at the level of nucleotide sequence in
physicists can not solve the mysteries of biology. On the DNA !
other hand, physicists like Schroedinger,Max Dellbruke, Soon it became clear that things are much more com-
Crick,Hopfield and others have made truly originalcon- plicated - there are introns, the non coding genes, tan-
tributions and opened up new directions. It is becoming dem repeats and so on that make this long range cor-
clearthatphysicsisnotjustprovidingexperimentaltools relation not very meaningful or insightful. However, it
to other fields such as biology, it is evolving capabilities gave an opportunity to many physicists like me, to get
and insights to understand the spirit of biology. a glimpse of the worldof biology with problems that are
even more challenging than the power law correlation in
the nucleotide sequence. Genetics is full of many sur-
IV. SOME EXAMPLES prises - gene replication, gene repair, translation, gene
regulation etc. All my initial enthusiasm to model the
DNAasaonedimensional4statePottsmodelwithlong
Having made several general remarks let me indicate
rangeinteractionand frustrationsoongavewayto other
some examples,based on my one decade of a distant ad-
glamours of biology.
miration for biology - it is so distant that biology does
Gene regulation is a fascinating subject. This is what
not know that I am dreaming of her !
controls the shape of a blue whale or a butterfly, in its
growth, by a profound regulation of the production of onic couplings and electron correlation effects. Most of
variousproteins,atvariouscellatdifferenttimesstarting the present theoretical efforts I have seen are one elec-
fromthefirstzygote(formedbytheunionofaspermand tron type that are computer intensive. Are we missing
an egg) cell. It is a network that is very different from somesubtleeffects,includingthecorrelationeffectinthe
the neural network or immune network or the spin glass π electron pool of the porphyrine rings ? I think only
or glass. At the same time it is a network that should experiments have to give an answer to these questions
possessomegeneralcharacteristicsofanylargenetworks through possible anomalies. It is interesting that even
-this iswhatpromptedKaufman,forexample,toinvent a diamagnetic response of a pool of π electrons of pla-
a Boolean net to model gene regulation [5]. nar aromatic ring compounds show interesting surprises
Physicistshavecomeacrosssomenetworksandlearned throughcorrelationeffects,asubjectthatworriedpeople
somegeneralprinciples-networkofdislocationthatcon- like Pauling, London [6], K S Krishnan and some in the
trols the mechanical properties of solids under stress, recent times.
shape memory alloys, glasses and spin glasses. Thanks One hears of new experiments where electron transfer
to experiments that guides the theoretical developments along the DNA double helix has been seen [8] indirectly
handinhand,wehavegainedsomeinsightandusefulno- in some experiments. Its possible relevance in biological
tionshavebeendeveloped[7]. ErstwhileCondensedmat- functions is an obvious next question. Physicists with
ter physicists, and my ex collaborator Shoudan Liang is their warm up exercise and training in condensed mat-
deepintogeneticnetandStanLeiblerandNaamaBarkai ter can hope to scale the mountain after knowing many
are deep into biochemical nets apart from other involve- biologicaldetailsandwithhelpfromfuture experiments.
ments. But all our insights from CMP are truly warm Structure and function are catch words in biology of-
up exercises at the base camp. ten used at the level of DNA or enzyme functions. In
Electronandexcitontransportinbiologicalsys- a different context, in bacterial photo synthesis certain
tems geometrical arrangement of porphyrine complexes have
Szent-Gyorgyi, an eminent biochemist, speculated on given new insights into mechanism of energy transport
theimportanceofelectrontransportinbiologicalsystems by exciton. The structure of the basic unit of the so
including DNA. He along with others have speculated called light harvesting complex has been deciphered a
that it could hold some of the the secret of carcinogen- couple of years ago [9]. There are two types of ring
esis. Possible connection to cancer apparently got a lot complexesonecontainingoneconcentriccircleof18por-
of (unjustifiable ?) funds - that is a different story. The phyrine molecules that are stacked in a circle like slides
point is that the lightest of charged particles in biology, in a circular slide box. The other contains two concen-
namely electron, is involved in too many vital activities. tric ringswiththe reactioncenter complexatthe center.
Withinproteinselectrontransportiswellstudiedinbiol- Thesering complexesareorganizedonthe surfaceofthe
ogyforthelastmanydecades. Therearereactioncenters, cell in some quasi periodic fashion. The incident photon
typically a prosthetic group such as a porphyrine com- isabsorbedbythe porphyrinetocreateanexcitonwhich
plexing a metal ion, embedded in protein. On absorbing propagatestoendupinthereactioncentertoactivatean
a light quanta the reaction center releases an electron electron transfer reaction. To this complex geometrical
that tunnels through a couple of tens of angstrom dis- arrangement one can apply, as Ramakrishna and myself
tance throughthe foldedproteinbeforeitis absorbedby attempted among others [10], our knowledge of exciton
anotherspecialcomplex,justtotriggeranotherreaction; transport in molecular crystals. Already there are many
then it continues sometimes ending up in an ion trans- surprises-onealwaysfeltthattheexcitontransportisan
fer across the membrane, if it were a membrane bound incoherenthoppingprocessatthephysiologicaltempera-
protein. tures. Butwithintheringcomplextheexcitontransport
Electron transfer in biological system, even though it has been shown to be coherent experimentally and the-
takes place at room temperature, is clearly a quantum oretically. Our feeling is that between the ring complex
mechanical phenomenon. The theory of Marcus and also , through Forster mechanism, there is some coher-
its generalizations have been used for quantitative esti- ence and possibility of new physics.
mates of the reaction rates. Our experiences with elec- Whatisremarkableisthatthephotosyntheticappara-
tronic conduction in semiconductors, metals or in gen- tusofthepurplebacteria,isprobablythesimplestofthe
eral crystalline materials, where Bloch’s theory applies lot. Whenwecometoevensimplealgaeandplantleaves,
is only a warm up exercise to handle this special disor- thephotosyntheticapparatusismuchmorecomplexand
dered system. Condensed matter systems such as amor- structured,withlightguidesandsoon. Inmanyofthese
phous materials where Anderson theory of localization cases we do not know in detail the basic structural units
applies looks too simple and less structured compared and their organizations - apart from circular complexes
to the mesoscopic biological proteins. We have a disor- there are cylindrical complexes and light guides. What
dered peptide bond skeleton along with the amino acid wehavelearnedinCMPasexcitontransportinsemicon-
sidegroupsthathaveconsiderablenumberofπelectrons, ductorsormolecularcrystalsis truly awarmupexercise
where the electron correlations are important. That is when we come to this very complex photo synthetic ap-
there is more structure including some significant vibri- paratus.
Regulated self assembly V. CONCLUSION
Periodic structures are very dear to condensed mat-
ter physicists. We study how these structures change The trend of many condensed matter physicists tak-
when we heat a solid or how a beautiful sugar crystal ing a serious look at biology is visible for a long time.
grows from a tiny nucleus in a concentrated sugar solu- One also hears of new Institutes and ventures like Santa
tions. There is plenty of physics and statistical mechan- Fe Institute which catalyses new kind of activities and
ics. Some times there are even quantum effects like in exchanges. In a special section devoted to ‘Complexity
the case of Helium solids or solids of light elements such Science’, a recent issue of Science [11] enumerates about
as Li. adozenUniversitiesandLabsintheUnitedStatestrying
Inbiologyveryrarelydowecomeacrossperiodicstruc- to set up new across the disciplinary ventures involving
tures. Since the structure of proteins and DNA imply physics andbiologydepartments, just at the turnof this
importantfunctions, evolutionhasnot chosenstructures century. This has startedhappening ina naturalfashion
that are manifestly periodic. However, there are re- indevelopednationsliketheUSorEurope. Thedevelop-
markable regular, sometimes symmetric and hierarchies ingcountrieswilldowelltorecognizethisandparticipate
of structures. For example if we look at the virus T4, and contribute to this resonance and redefinition among
there are a few types of basic proteins that make up the disciplines in science.
socalledprohead- acomplexofproteinsthathasicosa- When the condensed matter physics - biology reso-
hedralsymmetrythatencapsulatestheviralDNA.Then nancetouchesthespiritofbiology,thenatureofprogress
there is a neck, againmade up of protein complexes and will be substantial.
a body (that looks like a bit of micro tubule) - a cylin- Acknowledgment
der made up of proteins and the legs made of proteins. I thank P.W. Anderson for his critical reading of the
Thistinylittle‘robot’isdifferentfromaperiodiccrystal. manuscript and comments and S. Arunachalam for cor-
However there is some regularity in its making. recting the manuscript.
And condensed matter physicist is tempted to wonder
about the assembly of this complicated macromolecular
robot. The physics is not exactly that ofthe growthof a
sugarcrystal. Itis aselfassemblythatis regulated. Itis
non equilibrium statistical mechanics that is embedded
in a signaling network.
Theregulatedselfassemblyisanewnotionthatisvery ‡ Baskaran@imsc.ernet.in
unique to and ubiquitous in biology. The above is only [1] P.W. Anderson, Science 177 393 (1972)
anexampleofthe manyhierarchicalstructuralorganiza- [2] seefor example,J.D.Watsonet al.Molecular Biology of
tions that one comes across in biology - morphogenesis, the Gene (Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co. 1987);
microtubules,myosincomplex,collagenfibers,fibrilsetc. B. Alberts et al. Molecular Biology of theCell (Garland
In factI learnedaboutthis notionofregulatedselfas- Publishing Inc.,1994)
sembly during my sabbatical at Princeton in 1996, in a [3] J.J.Hopfield,Proc.Nat.Acad.Sc.(USA)792554(82);
CellBiologycourseorganizedby Stan Leibler andFrank G.L.ShawandR.Vasudevan,MathematicalBiosciences
Wilczek. It became clear in that course, that had dis-
12207(1974);W.A.Little,MathematicalBiosciences12
tinguished attendees like Curtis Callan, Stephen Adler 101 (1974)
and others, that there are many challenging and pro- [4] C.-K. Peng et al. Nature 356 168 (92); R. Voss, Phys.
found problems. We physicists returned spell bound at Rev. Lett. 68 3805 (92); Maria de Sousa Vieiera, cond-
mat/9905074
the endofeveryclassonlearningnew wondersincellbi-
[5] S. Kaufman, The Origin of Order (Oxford University
ologyandfelttheneedforseriousinvestigationsbymany
Press, 93)
physicists.
[6] F. London, Phys. Radium 8 397 (1937); see for some
Finallyawordaboutsomemacromolecularstructural
modernworks,Y.AnusooyaandZ.G.Soos,CurrentSci-
changesin biology. Structuralrearrangementsinbiology
ence 75 1233 (1998)
are in plenty. A heme protein, as soon as it gets an
[7] DynamicalNetworksinPhysicsandBiology,LesHouches
oxygen, undergoes a conformational change so that it
School, Ed. D.Beysens and G. Forgacs (Springer97)
can bind the second oxygen more easily and so on. An [8] HansWernerFinkandC.Schonenberger,Nature398407
allosteric protein like the motor protein, once it gets an
ATP undergoes a massive conformational or structural [9] M.Z. Rapiz et al. Trendsin Plant Sciences, 1 198 (96)
change, that is like an elementary step in walking. Our [10] V.I. Novoderezhkin and A.P. Rajivin, Chme. Phys. 211
well known notions such as soft modes or anharmonic 201 (96); Ivan Barvik et al., Chem. Phys. 194 117 (95)
interactions that we are used to in structural changes in and a preprint; S. Ramakrishna and G. Baskaran, un-
simple solids, are far from sufficient to understand even published
thesimplestmacromolecularstructuralchange-wehave [11] Special section on Complex system Science,Science284
to think afresh. People like Frauenfelder, Austin, Stein, 79 - 107 (1999); S. Arunachalam, Current Science 76
Wolynes and others have made a start at this. 1191 (99)