]NM.oib-q[
1v9072.5090:viXra
Conservation of high-flux backbone in alternate optimal and near-optimal flux
distributions of metabolic networks
Areejit Samal
1Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr. 22, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany∗
Constraint-based flux balance analysis (FBA) has proven successful in predicting the flux distri-
bution of metabolic networks in diverse environmental conditions. FBA finds one of the alternate
optimal solutions that maximizes the biomass production rate. Almaas et al have shown that the
flux distribution follows a power law, and it is possible to associate with most metabolites two
reactions which maximally produce and consume a give metabolite, respectively. This observation
led totheconcept of high-fluxbackbone(HFB) in metabolic networks. Inprevious work, theHFB
hasbeencomputedusingaparticularoptimaobtainedusingFBA.Inthispaper,weinvestigatethe
conservation of HFB of a particular solution for a given medium across different alternate optima
and near-optima in metabolic networks of E. coli and S. cerevisiae. Using flux variability analysis
(FVA), we propose a method to determine reactions that are guaranteed to be in HFB regardless
of alternate solutions. We find that the HFB of a particular optima is largely conserved across
alternate optima in E. coli, while it is only moderately conserved in S. cerevisiae. However, the
HFB of a particular near-optima shows a large variation across alternate near-optima in both or-
ganisms. We show that the conserved set of reactions in HFB across alternate near-optima has a
large overlap with essential reactions and reactions which are both uniquely consuming (UC) and
uniquelyproducing(UP).Ourfindingssuggestthatthestructureofthemetabolicnetworkadmitsa
highdegreeofredundancyandplasticityinnear-optimalflowpatternsenhancingsystemrobustness
for a given environmentalcondition.
Introduction tionwith the exactsamevalue for the objective function
[15, 16, 21]. Thus, FBA finds one of many possible al-
ternate optimal solutions for a given environmental con-
The study of the structure and dynamics of complex
dition. Mixed integer linear programming (MILP) has
biological networks is important for understanding the
been used to enumerate different alternate optimal flux
system-level behaviour of living organisms [4, 11]. The
distributionsforagivenenvironmentalcondition[15,21].
metabolic network is one such physicochemical system
However,for largescalemetabolic networks,the number
insidethecellwhichcanbeviewedasacomplexnetwork
of alternate optimal solutions has been shown to be ex-
consisting of metabolites involved in enzyme catalyzed
tremely large, and it is computationally infeasible using
reactions. Recent advances in the development of high-
MILP to enumerate all possible alternate optima [21].
throughput data collection techniques coupled with sys-
Although, it is not feasible to enumerate all alternate
tematicanalysisoffullysequencedgenomeshasledtothe
optima, flux variability analysis (FVA) [16] can be used
reconstruction of organism-specific metabolic networks
to determine the minimum and maximum flux value of
[9]. Although the list of metabolic reactions along with
each reaction across the set of alternate optimal solu-
the involved stoichiometries is largely known for many
tions for a given environmental condition. Specifically,
organisms, we currently lack the knowledge of most ki-
using FVA, we can determine reactions that can have a
netic rate constants and enzyme concentrations in these
nonzero flux in some alternate optima and the reactions
networks. In the absence of detailed knowledge of vari-
whose flux vary across different alternate optima for a
ous kinetic parameters,constraint-basedmodelling tech-
given environmental condition.
niques like Flux balance analysis (FBA), which utilizes
primarily structural information of the network in the
In the FBA approach, we obtain a particular solution
form of stoichiometry of various reactions, have proven
by imposing the optimality criterion wherein a flux dis-
useful in predicting the quantitative behaviour of the
tribution satisfying the governingconstraints along with
cellular metabolism under different environmental con-
maximalbiomassproductionrateispredictedasthephe-
ditions [8, 14, 20, 28].
notype for a given environmental condition. However,
FBA is computational technique which can be used the optimal flux distribution with maximalbiomass pro-
to obtain a particular flux distribution for a given en- duction may not always explain the observed behaviour
vironmental condition that maximizes certain objective for a given environmental condition [10, 12, 24, 26, 27].
functionwhichisusuallytakentobethebiomassproduc- Further,wetlabexperimentshaveshownthattheorgan-
tion rate (see methods section for details). However, for ismmayinitiallygrowsuboptimallyundercertainmedia,
large scale metabolic networks, it has been shown that i.e., the observed growth rate is less than the maximum
there are a large number of different flux distributions value predicted by FBA, and then evolve to grow at the
or alternate solutions for a given environmental condi- predicted optimal rate after several generations [10, 12].
It is plausible that there are multiple objectives that the the S. cerevisiae metabolic network iND750 contains
cell is trying to optimize to different extent under dif- 1061 metabolites and 1149 reactions. For each organ-
ferent environments. Thus, the metabolic network may ism, the two databases additionally provide a biomass
operate under suboptimal growth conditions under cer- productionreactionwhichgivestherelativecontribution
tain environmental conditions. Hence, it is important to of key metabolites towards cellular biomass. We have
study the suboptimal flux distributions, especially, near- investigated here the two metabolic networks under dif-
optimal flux distributions in metabolic networks for dif- ferentenvironmentalconditions correspondingto 89and
ferent environmental conditions. 43 aerobic minimal media for E. coli and S. cerevisiae,
Using the optimal solutionpredicted by FBA, Almaas respectively. UsingFBA,ithasbeenpredictedelsewhere
et al [2] have shown that the distribution of reaction that this set of 89 and 43 aerobic minimal media for E.
fluxesforagivenenvironmentalconditionfollowsapower coli and S. cerevisiae, respectively, considered here are
lawintheE.colimetabolicnetwork. Theobservedpower theonlyaerobicminimalmediathatcansupportnonzero
lawdistributionimpliesaninhomogeneityinthereaction growth in the two networks [23].
network usage with most reactions having small fluxes
and a few reactions having high fluxes. Almaas et al [2]
showedthattheheterogeneityofoverallfluxdistribution Activity and flux variability of reactions under
is also valid to a large extent at the level of individual optimal and near-optimal conditions
metabolites. Further, for most metabolites, they were
able to identity tworeactions that dominate the produc- We can determine the maximum and minimum flux
tion and consumption of a metabolite, respectively. Us- through each reaction that supports optimal growth in
ingthispropertyatthelevelofanindividualmetabolite, a minimal medium using FVA (see methods section for
Almaasetal[2]haveproposedasimplealgorithmtocon- details). Areactionisconsideredto bepossiblyactivein
struct a subnetwork referred to as the “high-flux back- a medium across alternate optima, if the maximum flux
bone” (HFB) which contains the locally maximal flow value that supports optimal growth is nonzero. A reac-
paths for a given environmental condition in the net- tion is considered to have a variable flux in a medium
work . The HFB for a given environmental condition across alternate optima, if the difference between max-
was shown to form a giant connected cluster with large imum and minimum flux value that supports optimal
overlapwith classicalpathwaysdescribed in biochemical growth is nonzero.
literature. It has also been suggested that the HFB can Using FVA, we determined the number of reactions
be used as a network reduction algorithm. that can be possibly active and the reactions with vari-
In this paper, we have studied the activity and flux able flux across alternate optima for each of the 89 dif-
variabilityof differentreactionsacrossalternateflux dis- ferent minimal media in the E. coli metabolic network.
tributions for a given medium under optimal and sub- The number of reactions that can be possibly active in
optimal growth conditions in metabolic networks of E. a medium varies between 278 and 332 reactions across
coli and S. cerevisiae. Almaas et al [2] have used a sin- the 89 minimal media. The number of reactions with
glesolutionobtainedusingFBAfromthe setofdifferent variableflux inamedium variesbetween34and83reac-
alternate optima to compute the HFB of the metabolic tions across the 89 minimal media. These results for the
network for a given medium. In this paper, we have in- E. coli metabolic network are shown in Fig. 1(a). We
vestigated in detail the effect of alternate optima on the find that 11−25% of the reactions that can be possibly
setof reactionsin HFB computed using a single solution active in a given medium to have variable flux across al-
for a givenmedium in E. coli andS. cerevisiae. We have ternate optima for that medium. The results obtained
furtherinvestigatedtheeffectofalternatesuboptimalso- here for the E. coli metabolic network using FVA for 89
lutions corresponding to near-optimal growth condition different aerobic minimal media are consistent with the
on the set of reactions in HFB computed using a sin- results obtained earlier by Reed and Palsson [21] using
gle suboptimal solution for a given medium in the two a larger set of alternate optima for 136 different aerobic
organisms. and anaerobic minimal media.
We also determined the number of reactions that can
be possibly active and the reactions with variable flux
Results and Discussion acrossalternate optima for eachof the 43 different mini-
malmediain the S. cerevisiae metabolic network. These
In this section, we present results from our study of resultsforthe S. cerevisiae metabolic networkareshown
the two metabolic networks: E. coli (version iJR904 in Fig. 2(a). We find that 22− 69% of the reactions
[22]) and S. cerevisiae (version iND750 [7]). The two that can be possibly active in a given medium to have
networks can be downloaded from the BiGG database: variable flux across alternate optima for that medium
iJR904 contains 761 metabolites and 931 reactions and arginine aerobicminimal medium, we find a much larger
Optimal (a)
0 20 40 60Near-optimal 998%0 (b)
0 20 40 60 80
ytilibairav
Suboptimal 5% (c)
1 21 41 61 81
Different media
FIG. 1: Activity and flux variability of reactions under (a) optimal growth, (b) near-optimal growth (≥ 99% of the optimal
rate) and (c) suboptimal growth (≥ 5% of the optimal rate) for 89 different minimal media in the E. coli metabolic network.
Each bar corresponds to one of the 89 different minimal media. The height of the bar gives the number of reactions that can
be possibly active and the height upto which the bar is filled with grey colour gives the number of reactions whose flux vary
across alternate solutions for that medium.
number of possibly active reactions and reactions with is ≥5% of the optimal growth rate. The first of the two
variable flux across alternate optima compared to other suboptimal scenarioswill be referred to as ‘near-optimal
minimal media (cf. Fig. 2(a)). A closer look at the condition’asweaccountforallfluxdistributionsthatal-
data for arginine minimal medium showed that many low growth at ≥99% of the optimal rate. In the second
transport reactions involved in excretion of ammonia, suboptimalscenario,weaccountforallfluxdistributions
guanine, urea and xanthine have a variable flux across which allow growth at ≥ 5% of the optimal rate. We
alternate optima. This observation explains the larger usedFVAtodetermine thenumberofpossiblyactivere-
flexibility under arginine minimal medium within the S. actions andthe reactionswith variable flux in a medium
cerevisiae metabolic network to achieve optimal growth across alternate suboptimal solutions for different min-
rate compared to other media. Even if we exclude the imal media. From here onwards, we refer to the set of
results for the arginine minimal medium, we find that alternate optimal flux distributions for a given minimal
the flux variability for a typical minimal medium in S. medium in shortas ‘alternate optima’. For the firstsub-
cerevisiae isgreaterthanthefluxvariabilityforatypical optimal scenario, we refer to the set of alternate subop-
minimal medium in E. coli under optimal growth con- timal flux distributions which have near-optimal growth
dition. This finding suggests a more evolved structure rate for a given minimal medium in short as ‘alternate
of the metabolic network inside the eukaryote S. cere- near-optima’. Forthesecondsuboptimalscenario,were-
visiae with greater redundancy compared to that of the fer to the set of alternate suboptimal flux distributions
prokaryote E. coli. which have growth rate ≥ 5% of the optimal rate for a
givenminimalmediuminshortas‘alternatesuboptima’.
We investigated both metabolic networks under two
suboptimalscenarios: (a)wherethegrowthrateis≥99% Using FVA, we determined the number of reactions
oftheoptimalgrowthrateand(b)wherethegrowthrate that can be possibly active and the reactions with vari-
Optimal (a)
1 11 21 N3e1ar-optimal 99% (4b1)
1 10 19 28 37
ytilibairav
Suboptimal 5% (c)
1 11 21 31 41
Different media
FIG. 2: Activity and flux variability of reactions under (a) optimal growth, (b) near-optimal growth (≥ 99% of the optimal
rate) and (c) suboptimal growth (≥ 5% of the optimal rate) for 43 different minimal media in the S. cerevisiae metabolic
network. Each bar corresponds to one of the 43 different minimal media. The height of the bar gives the numberof reactions
that can be possibly active and the height upto which the bar is filled with grey colour gives the number of reactions whose
fluxvary across alternate solutions for that medium.
able flux in the two suboptimal scenarios for each of the By comparing the number of possibly active reactions
89 different minimal media in the E. coli metabolic net- in each minimal medium investigated in E. coli (cf. Fig.
work. The number of reactions that can be possibly ac- 1(a)and(b))andS.cerevisiae(cf. Fig. 2(a)and(b))un-
tive in a given medium is obtained to be close to 600 in der optimal and near-optimal conditions, we can clearly
both suboptimal scenarios. Almost all reactions which see that the number is significantly more in the near-
canbe possibly active havevariableflux acrossalternate optimal condition. Thus, a larger set of reactions can
near-optimainthefirstsuboptimalscenario. Further,all be recruited under near-optimal condition compared to
reactions which can be possibly active have variable flux strictly optimal condition. This suggests a high degree
acrossalternatesuboptimainthesecondsuboptimalsce- of flux plasticity in the metabolic network under near-
nario. TheseresultsfortheE.colimetabolicnetworkare optimal condition. In a recent paper, Nishikawa et al
shown in Fig. 1(b) and (c). We find that most reactions [17] have shownthat the maximization of a linear objec-
whichcanbe possiblyactiveinagivenmediumcanhave tive function, suchas growthrate orATP production,in
a variable flux across alternate solutions in near-optimal FBAto obtainaparticularflux distributionleadsto sig-
growth condition (cf. Fig. 1(b)). We found similar re- nificantlylowernumberofactivereactionsunderoptimal
sults for both suboptimal conditions in the S. cerevisiae condition compared to typical non-optimal states. They
metabolic network (cf. Fig. 2(b) and (c)). We empha- attribute this massive spontaneous reaction silencing to
size that although the set of reactions with variable flux the irreversibility of reactions and cascade of inactivity
under both suboptimal scenariosis almostthe same, the propagatedby irreversiblereactionsin the network. Our
amount of flux variability of a reaction is larger in the results obtained using FVA add to the results obtained
second suboptimal scenario compared to the first near- by Nishikawa et al [17]. We have shown here that, even
optimal scenario. in near-optimal growth conditions, the number of possi-
bly active reactions and the reactions with variable flux near-optimasampledhereistoosmall,andthedatacan-
acrossalternate near-optimais muchlargercomparedto notbeusedtodeterminetheoverlapamongthereactions
strictly optimal scenario. inHFB correspondingto differentalternatesolutions for
We end this subsection by mentioning an important a givenmedium. Thus,we devise a simple method using
methodological detail. While implementing FVA, we FVA to determine the set of reactionswhich are guaran-
need to account for reactions that are involved in futile teed to be in any HFB corresponding to different alter-
internal cycles. An internal cycle or Type III extreme nate solutions for a given medium (see methods section
pathwayisasetofinternalreactionsthatcansatisfythe fordetails). Weusedthismethodtodeterminethesetof
steadystatemassbalanceconditionwithoutinvolvement reactions that are guaranteed to be in HFB correspond-
of any exchange flux [5, 19]. Such cycles are thermody- ing to any alternate optima for a given medium in the
namically infeasible and need to be eliminated in any two networks. We alsoobtained the setof reactionsthat
steady state analysis. We determined all internal cycles are guaranteed to be in HFB corresponding to different
in the two metabolic networks studied here, and based alternatenear-optimaforagivenmediuminthetwonet-
on that, decided to constrain the flux of 8 reactions in works. Theseresultsareshownforthe89minimalmedia
E. coli and 16 reactions in S. cerevisiae to zero to avoid in E. coli in Fig. 3(a) and (b) and for the 43 minimal
futile cycles in our simulations (see methods section for media in S. cerevisiae in Fig. 4(a) and (b).
details). We find that atleast3−13%ofreactionsin HFB cor-
responding to a particular optima for a given medium
are not guaranteedto in HFB corresponding to some al-
High-flux backbone under optimal and near-optimal ternate optima for that medium in the E. coli metabolic
conditions network (cf. Fig. 3(a)). However, at least 34− 42%
of reactions in HFB corresponding to a particular near-
In the previous subsection, we have shown that there optima for a given medium are not guaranteed to be in
is variation in the activity as well as flux value of reac- HFB corresponding to some alternate near-optima for
tions across the alternate optima for a given medium in that medium in E. coli (cf. Fig. 3(b)). Similarly, we
both E. coli and S. cerevisiae. Further, we have shown find that at least 11 − 45% of reactions in HFB cor-
thatthenumberofpossiblyactivereactionsandreactions responding to a particular optima for a given medium
with variable flux acrossalternate near-optima is signifi- are not guaranteed to be in HFB corresponding to some
cantly higher in near-optimalcondition comparedto the alternate optima for that medium in the S. cerevisiae
strictly optimal case. In this subsection, we investigate metabolic network (cf. Fig. 4(a)). Even if we discount
the effect of alternate flux distributions on the set of re- the arginine minimal medium, which has an uncharac-
actions in the high-flux backbone (HFB) obtained using teristically larger flux variability in S. cerevisiae under
a particular solution in both optimal and near-optimal optimal conditions (cf. Fig. 2(a)), still at least11−20%
conditions. of reactions in HFB corresponding to a particular op-
Using mixed integer linear programming (MILP) [15, tima for a given medium are not guaranteed to be in
21], we obtained 100 alternate optima and 100 alternate HFB corresponding to some alternate optima for that
near-optima for each of the 89 aerobic minimal media in medium. Further, at least 36−47% of reactions in HFB
E.coliand43aerobicminimalmediainS.cerevisiae(see corresponding to a particular near-optima are not guar-
methods section for details). For each minimal medium anteed to be in HFB corresponding to some alternate
investigated,we obtained the 100 HFB corresponding to near-optima for that medium in S. cerevisiae (cf. Fig.
100 alternate optima. We then calculated the average 4(b)).
number of reactions in HFB across the alternate optima Note that we have used the simplex method to solve
foreachmedium. Theseresultsforthe89minimalmedia theLPprobleminordertosampledifferentalternateop-
in E. coli and 43 minimal media in S. cerevisiae under tima and near-optima. Simplex method tries to return
optimal growth conditions are shown in Fig. 3(a) and a particular solution or flux distribution from the set of
Fig. 4(a), respectively. Similarly, we obtained the av- alternate solutions that has least number of nonzero re-
erage number of reactions in HFB across the alternate action fluxes in it [1]. Thus, our results obtained using
near-optima for each medium. These results are shown MILPregardingtheaveragenumberofreactionsinHFB
for E. coli and S. cerevisiae in Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 4(b), corresponding to a particular solution computed using
respectively. 100 alternate solutions for a given medium may change
In case of both E. coli and S. cerevisiae, for a given withexhaustivesampling. However,ourresultsobtained
medium, we found the set of reactions in HFB corre- usingFVAregardingthesetofreactionsthatareguaran-
spondingtodifferentalternateoptimatodifferfromeach teedtobeinHFBcorrespondingtoanyalternateoptima
other. Thiswasalsotrueforthethesetofreactionsinthe orsuboptima for a givenmedium is independent ofsam-
HFB corresponding to different alternate near-optima. pling.
However, the number of alternate optima or alternate We have shown here that the set of reactions in HFB
Optimal (a)
0 20 40 60Near-optimal 998%0 (b)
1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81
Different media
FIG. 3: Histogram of the average number of reactions in HFB under (a) optimal growth and (b) near-optimal growth for 89
differentminimalmediaintheE. colimetabolicnetwork. Eachbarcorrespondstooneofthe89differentminimalmedia. The
height of the bar gives the average number of reactions in the HFB computed using 100 alternate solutions obtained using
MILP for each minimal medium. Theheight uptowhich thebaris filled with grey colour gives thenumberof reactions which
are guaranteed to bein HFB of all alternate solutions for that medium.
Optimal (a)
0 10 20 3N0ear-optimal 99%4 (0b)
1 11 21 31 41
Different media
FIG. 4: Histogram of the average number of reactions in HFB under (a) optimal growth and (b) near-optimal growth for 43
differentminimalmediaintheS.cerevisiaemetabolicnetwork. Eachbarcorrespondstooneofthe43differentminimalmedia.
TheheightofthebargivestheaveragenumberofreactionsintheHFBcomputedusing100alternatesolutionsobtainedusing
MILP for each minimal medium. Theheight uptowhich thebaris filled with grey colour gives thenumberof reactions which
are guaranteed to bein HFB of all alternate solutions for that medium.
dependsupontheparticularsolutionchosenfromtheset reactionsinthemetabolicnetworkgetexplainedbytheir
of alternate optima to compute it in both E. coli and association with low degree uniquely produced (UP) or
S. cerevisiae. Under optimal condition, only 3 − 11% uniquelyconsumed(UC)metabolite[18,23]. Noticethat
of the reactions in HFB of a particular solution are not if a given reaction consumes a UC metabolite and pro-
guaranteed to be in HFB of some other alternate op- duces a UP metabolite, and the reaction has a nonzero
tima in E. coli which is relatively small. But the corre- flux value across all alternate near-optima for a given
sponding fraction in S. cerevisiae for optimal condition medium,thenitisguaranteedtobeinHFBofanyalter-
is much higher. Also, we have shown for near-optimal nate near-optima. We find that on average 80% of reac-
condition,greaterthan34%ofthe reactionsinHFB ofa tions guaranteed to be in HFB of alternate near-optima
particular near-optima are not guaranteedto be in HFB consume a UC metabolite and produce a UP metabolite
of some other alternate near-optima in both organisms. for a given medium in E. coli while the corresponding
Thus,the setofreactionsin HFB significantlyvariesun- fraction for S. cerevisiae is 77% (cf. Fig. 6). Thus, the
dernear-optimalconditionsacrossalternatenear-optima conserved part of HFB across alternate solutions for a
for a given medium in both organisms. These findings given medium has high density of reactions that satisfy
suggest that the flow patterns in metabolic networks for both UP and UC property. In determining UP and UC
agivenmediuminnear-optimalconditionsismuchmore metabolitesforagivenmedium,weremovedthe blocked
complex anddegenerate comparedto that under strictly reactions [6, 25] for that medium as outlined in Samal
optimal conditions. et al [23].
Our findings also imply that even for a given medium Theabovementionedresultsshowthatmostreactions
the structure of the metabolic network has evolved so that are conserved in HFB regardless of alternate near-
as to allow both structural and flux plasticity [3] in the optima for a givenmedium getexplained by the absence
level of reaction usage to achieve the same optimal or of multiple paths to carry out certain processes in the
near-optimalgrowthobjective throughmultiple flux dis- metabolic network. Our findings also suggests that, in
tributions. Structural plasticity associated with a given most cases, if a metabolite has multiple reactions pro-
mediumcanresultinalternateequallyefficientpathways ducing it and multiple reactions consuming it, we can-
or metabolic routes to be recruited in different alternate not associate the metabolite with a single reaction that
solutions. Fluxplasticityassociatedwithagivenmedium produces it maximally across all alternate near-optima
canresultin differentvalueofreactionfluxes indifferent and a single reaction that consumes it maximally across
alternate solutions. Both structural and flux plasticity all alternate near-optima. These results show that, un-
associated with alternate flux distributions for a given dernear-optimalconditions,themetabolicnetworkofE.
mediumrendersthesetofreactionsinHFB ofaparticu- coli and S. cerevisiae exhibit a high degree of flux plas-
larsolutionforthatmediumvariableacrossalternateso- ticity for a given minimal medium contributing towards
lutions. However, we still find that, under near-optimal the robustness of the system.
condition, atleast 53%ofthe reactions in HFB ofa par-
ticular solution are conserved across HFB of any alter-
nate near-optimafor a givenmedium inboth organisms. Conclusions
Incontrast,wehaveshowninthelastsubsectionfornear-
optimal condition that, almost all reactions that can be In this paper, we have investigated the effect of alter-
possibly active for a given minimal medium have a vari- nate optima and near-optimafor a givenmedium on the
able flux across alternate near-optima for that medium. set of reactions in the high-flux backbone (HFB) com-
Wenowshedlightonwhyatleast53%ofthereactions puted using a particularsolution for that medium in the
inHFBofaparticularsolutionareconservedacrossHFB E. coli and S. cerevisiae metabolic network. Using flux
of any alternate near-optima for a given medium when variability analysis (FVA), we have shown here that the
almost all reactions that can be possibly active for that number of reactions that can be possibly active and re-
medium showvariationintheir flux value. Since, the set actions with variableflux acrossalternate solutions for a
ofconservedreactionsacrossHFB ofany alternate near- given medium under strictly optimal condition is signif-
optimaarealwaysactiveforagivenmedium,itisnatural icantly less than that in near-optimal condition for both
toexpectthissetofreactionstohaveahighoverlapwith metabolic networks. Since, the set of reactions in the
essential reactions for growth in that medium. We find HFB of a particular solution may vary across different
that on average 90% of reactions guaranteed to be in alternatesolutionsforagivenmedium,wedevisedasim-
HFB of alternate near-optima are essential for a given ple method using FVA to determine the set of reactions
medium in E. coli while the corresponding fraction in S. whichareguaranteedtobeinHFBofanyalternatesolu-
cerevisiae is 80% (cf. Fig. 5). Thus, the conserved part tionforagivenmedium. Wefindthatthesetofreactions
ofHFBacrossalternatesolutionsforagivenmediumhas in HFB of particular optima for a given medium shows
high density of essential reactions. small variation across alternate optima for that medium
It has been shown elsewhere that almost all essential in E. coli and moderate variation in S. cerevisiae. How-
E. coli (a)
1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81
Different media
S. cerevisiae (b)
1 11 21 31 41
Different media
FIG. 5: Histogram of thefraction of reactions guaranteed tobein HFB of anyalternate near-optima that areessential for (a)
89 minimal media in E. coli and (b) 43 minimal media in S. cerevisiae.
E. coli (a)
1 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 81
Different media
S. cerevisiae (b)
1 11 21 31 41
Different media
FIG.6: Histogram ofthefraction ofreactionsguaranteedtobeinHFBofanyalternatenear-optimathatsatisfy bothUPand
UC property for (a) 89 minimal media in E. coli and (b) 43 minimal media in S. cerevisiae.
ever, this variation is significantly large in both organ- mostcommonlyusedobjectivefunctionisthemaximiza-
isms when we consider the alternate near-optima for a tion of biomass production rate. The LP formulation of
given medium. We show that the majority of reactions the FBA approachis as follows:
that are guaranteedto be in HFB of any alternate near-
optimaforagivenmediumarealsoessentialforgrowthin Maximize Z
thatmedium. Wealsoshowthatmajorityofreactionsin such that S.v=0
theconservedHFBsetacrossalternatenear-optimafora α ≤ v ≤ β (2)
given medium also satisfy both the uniquely consuming
(UC)anduniquelyproducing(UP)property. Ourresults where vector c corresponds to the objective function, α
show that the structure of the metabolic network allows and β are the lower and upper limits of individual flux
a high degree of structural and flux plasticity within a values.
given environmental condition under near-optimal con-
ditions which enhances the robustness of metabolic net-
works in both organisms. Mixed integer linear programming
For most large scale metabolic networks, FBA finds
Methods oneofmanypossible alternateoptimalflux distributions
that have the same objective value for a given environ-
Flux balance analysis mental condition [15, 16, 21]. We can use mixed integer
linearprogramming(MILP)toenumeratedifferentalter-
nate optima. We have used here the recursive MILP al-
Flux balance analysis (FBA) is a computational mod-
gorithmproposedbyReedandPalsson[21]toenumerate
ellingtechniquewhichcanbeusedtoobtainaprediction
differentalternateoptima. Inthismethod,inadditionto
for the fluxes of all reactions in the metabolic network
constraints in the LP formulation of FBA given by Eq.
and growth rate of the organism [14, 20, 28]. The main
2, the following new constraints are imposed to obtain
assumptions made in the technique of FBA are: (a) the
different solutions:
networkreachesasteadystateforanygivenenvironmen-
tal condition wherein the concentration of all internal
metabolites and velocities of all reactions are constant,
and (b) the cell tries to adjust its intracellular machin-
eryorreactionfluxessoastomaximizeitsgrowthrateor X w i ≥|NZk|−1, k =1...J −1
biomassproduction. Thekeyrequirementforimplement- i∈NZJ
ingFBAistheinformationaboutthestoichiometryofall y i +w i ≤1, ∀i
metabolic reactionsknownto occurinanorganism. The α·w ≤ v ≤β·w ∀i (3)
complete list of reactions along with their stoichiometry
is encapsulated in the stoichiometric matrix S of dimen- In this method each reaction i in the network is associ-
sionsm× nwherem denotesthe numberofmetabolites atedwithtwobinaryvariablesy i andw i . NZJ represents
andndenotesthenumberofreactions. Inanymetabolic the set of reactions with nonzero flux value in the solu-
steady state, each metabolite achieves a dynamic mass tion at iteration J. Given the constraints in Eq. 3, if
balance and the vector v = (v1,v2,...,v n )T representing the binary variable y i =1 then w i =0, which forces both
the fluxes through each reaction must satisfy the equa- upper and lower bounds for reaction i to be zero. Thus,
tion settingy i =1forcesthereactionitoberemovedfromthe
basis of the next iteration. In this recursive algorithm,
S.v=0, (1) at each iteration J, at least one of the nonzero fluxes of
the previous solution
) is removed from the ba-
so as to not violate mass conservation. Eq. 1 gives us sis of the current iteration. The MILP problem givenby
a system of linear equations relating various fluxes in Eq. 2 and 3 is then solved again to generate a different
the network. In addition to linear stoichiometric con- alternate solution.
straints,thereexistthermodynamicconstraintsthatmay
render certain reactions irreversible and flux capacity
constraints which impose limitations on maximum flux Flux variability analysis
through certain reactions. These additional constraints
can be used to further limit the space of allowablefluxes The number of alternate optima in large scale
given by Eq. 1. To obtain a particular solution from metabolicnetworksisextremelylarge,anditcanbecom-
thespaceofallowablefluxes,linearprogramming(LP)is putationallyinfeasibletoenumerateallalternateoptima.
usedtofindafluxdistributionintheallowablespacethat Fluxvariabilityanalysis(FVA)[16]isanalternativetech-
gives the optimal value for an objective function. The niquewhichcanbeusedtodeterminethefluxvariability
associatedwitheachreactioninthecompletesetofalter- UGLT in the S. cerevisiae metabolic network iND750 [7]
nate optimafor agivenmedium. Initially,the maximum to zero to avoid futile cycles. The abbreviations of the
value of the objective function, i.e., Z , is determined. reactionsinthetwometabolicnetworksmentionedabove
This is followed by solving two LP problems for each re- aresameasinthedatabasesiJR904andiND750,respec-
action i in the network. The LP formulationof the FVA tively.
approach is as follows:
Case 1: High-flux backbone
Maximize v
such that S.v=0 The method to determine high-flux backbone (HFB)
for a given medium using a particular solution is as fol-
obj lows [2]:
α ≤ v ≤ β for i=1...n (4)
(a) For each metabolite in the network, remove all
reactions except the reaction that produces the
Case 2: metabolite with largest flux and the reaction that
Minimize v consumes the metabolite with largest flux. The
such that S.v=0 metabolites that are either not produced (con-
sumed) are not taken into account.
α ≤ v ≤ β for i=1...n (5) (b) If metabolite A is an educt and metabolite B is
a product of reaction R, and further R maximally
Inthefirstcase,themaximumfluxthrougheachreaction consumesAandmaximallyproducesB,thenreac-
thatsupportsoptimalgrowthrateZ obj isdetermined. In tion R is part of the HFB.
thesecondcase,theminimumfluxthrougheachreaction
Since,thesetofreactionsinHFBofaparticularsolution
that supports optimal growth rate Z is determined.
may change if it was obtained from a different alternate
Thedifferenceofmaximumandminimumvaluethatsup-
solution, we here propose a simple method using FVA
portsoptimalgrowthrateforeachreactiongivestheflux
to determine the set of reactions that are guaranteed to
variability of that reaction. A slight modification of the
be in HFB of all alternate solutions for a given medium.
LP problemgivenby Eq. 4 and 5 is able to generate the
Our method is as follows:
fluxvariabilityundersuboptimalconditions. Thesubop-
timalconditioncorrespondingtonear-optimalitystudied
(a) UsingFVA,weobtaintheminimumandmaximum
here requires the following change in Eq. 4 and 5: Re-
fluxofeachreactionRinthenetworkthatcansup-
place the condition
.
obj obj port optimal growth for a given minimal medium.
(b) We designatereactionRasproducing(consuming)
Reactions involved in futile cycles metabolite A with largest flux across all alternate
optima, if the minimum flux for R obtained using
WeusedarecentlypublishedalgorithmbyWrightand FVA is greater than the maximum flux for each
Wagner [29] to compute the reactions in E. coli and S. reaction other than R that produces (consumes)
cerevisiae metabolic network that are involved in inter- A.
nal cycles [5, 19] of size ≥ 3. The number of reactions
(c) Foreachmetaboliteinthenetwork,removeallreac-
involved in internal cycles of size ≥ 3 in E. coli and S.
tionsexceptthereactionthatproducesthemetabo-
cerevisiaewasobtainedtobe22and60,respectively. Us-
lite with largest flux and the reaction that con-
ing METATOOL version 5.0 [13], we obtained a total of
sumes the metabolite with largest flux across all
9 and 28 internalcycles of size ≥ 3 in the metabolic net-
alternate optima.
work of E. coli and S. cerevisiae, respectively. In order
to avoid these internal cycles, we followed the standard
(d) If metabolite A is an educt and metabolite B is
procedure of constraining at least one reaction flux in
a product of reaction R, and further R maximally
each internal cycle to zero. By examining the different
consumes A and maximally produces B across all
internal cycles of size ≥ 3, we decided to constrain the
alternate optima, then reaction R is contained in
flux of following reactions: ABUTt2, ACCOAL, ADK1,
HFB of all alternate optima.
GLUT4, PROt4,SERt4,THRt4andVPAMT in the E. coli
metabolic network iJR904 [22] and the flux of follow- Our method described here for alternate optimal solu-
ing reactions: ASPTAm, ACONTm, DCMPDA, FRDcm, tions can also be used to determine the set of reactions
GHMT2r, GLUT5m, MALt2r, NDPK1, NDPK8, NDPK9, that are guaranteed to be in HFB of all alternate near-
PHCDm,SHSL1,SUCCtm,SUCCFUMtm,SUCD2 u6mand optimal solutions.
Acknowledgement 22(15):1930–1931
[14] Kauffman KJ, Prakash P, Edwards JS (2003) Advances
in flux balance analysis. Curr Opin Biotechnol 14:491–
The author wishes to thank Andreas Wagner and
Thimo Rohlf for discussions, and Pierre-Yves Bour-
[15] Lee S, Phalakornkule C, Domach MM, Grossmann IE
guignon for his feedback on the manuscript. He grate-
(2000) Recursivemilpmodelforfindingallalternateop-
fully acknowledges a postdoctoral fellowship from the tima in lp models for metabolic networks. Comp Chem
Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Eng 24:711–716
Leipzig. [16] Mahadevan R, Schilling CH (2003) The effects of alter-
nateoptimalsolutionsinconstrainedbasedgenome-scale
metabolic models. Metab Eng 5:264–276
[17] Nishikawa T, Gulbahce N, Motter AE (2008) Sponta-
neousreactionsilencinginmetabolicoptimization.PLoS
∗ Comp Biol 4:12
Electronic address: samal@mis.mpg.de
[18] Palumbo MC, Colosimo A, Giuliani A, Farina L
[1] Almaas E (2007) Optimal flux patterns in cellular
(2005) Functional essentiality from topology features in
metabolic networks. Chaos 17:026,107
metabolic networks: A case study in yeast. FEBS Lett
[2] Almaas E, KovacsB, Vicsek T, OltvaiZN, Barabasi AL
579):4642–4646
(2004)Globalorganizationofmetabolicfluxesinthebac-
[19] Price ND, Famili I, Beard DA, Palsson BO (2002) Ex-
terium escherichia coli. Nature427:839–843
treme pathways and kirchhoff’s second law. Biophys J
[3] Almaas E, Oltvai ZN, Barabasi AL (2005) The activity
83(5):2879–2882
reactioncoreandplasticityofmetabolicnetworks.PLoS
[20] Price ND, Reed JL, Palsson BO (2004) Genome-scale
Comp Biol 1(7):e68
modelsofmicrobialcells: evaluatingtheconsequencesof
[4] Barabasi AL, Oltvai ZN (2004) Network biology: Un-
constraints. Nat RevMicrobiol 2:886–897
derstanding the cell’s functional organization. Nat Rev
[21] ReedJL,PalssonBO(2004)Genome-scaleinsilicomod-
Genet 5:101–113
els of e. coli have multiple equivalent phenotypic states:
[5] Beard DA, Liang Sd, Qian H (2002) Energy balance
assessment of correlated reaction subsets that comprise
for analysis of complex metabolic networks. Biophys J
network states. Genome Res 14:1797–1805
83(1):79–86
[22] Reed JL, Vo TD, Schilling CH, Palsson BO (2003) An
[6] Burgard AP, Nikolaev EV, Schilling CH, Maranas CD
expanded genome-scale model of escherichia coli k-12
(2004) Flux coupling analysis of genome-scale metabolic
(iJR904 GSM/GPR). Genome Biol 4:R54.1–R54.12
network reconstructions. Genome Res 14:301–312
[23] Samal A,SinghS,Giri V,KrishnaS,RaghuramN,Jain
[7] Duarte NC, Herrgard MJ, Palsson BO (2004) Re-
S (2006) Low degree metabolites explain essential re-
construction and validation of saccharomyces cere-
actions and enhance modularity in biological networks.
visiae iND750, a fully compartmentalized genome-scale
BMC Bioinformatics 7:118
metabolic model. Genome Res14:1298–1309
[24] SchuetzR,KuepferLUS(2007)Systematicevaluationof
[8] EdwardsJS,IbarraRU,PalssonBO(2001) Insilicopre-
objective functions for predicting intracellular fluxes in
dictionsof escherichi colimetabolic capabilities are con-
escherichia coli. Mol Syst Biol 3:119
sistent with experimental data. Nat Biotechnol 19:125–
[25] SchusterS,SchusterR(1991) Detectingstrictly detailed
balanced subnetworks in open chemical reaction net-
[9] Feist AM, Herrgard MJ, Thiele I, Reed JL, Palsson BO
works. J Math Chem 6:17–40
(2009) Reconstruction of biochemical networks in mi-
[26] SchusterS,PfeifferT,FellDA(2008)Ismaximizationof
croorganisms. Nat RevMicrobiol 7(2):129–143
molaryieldinmetabolicnetworksfavouredbyevolution?
[10] Fong SS, R JA, Palsson BO (2005) Parallel adaptive
J Theor Biol 252:497–504
evolution cultures of escherichia coli lead to convergent
[27] Segre D, Vitkup D, Church GM (2002) Analysis of op-
growthphenotypeswith differentgeneexpressionstates.
timality in natural and perturbed metabolic networks.
Genome Res15(10):1365–1372
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA99:15,112–15,117
[11] Hartwell LH, Hopfield JJ, Leibler S, Murray AW (1999)
[28] Varma A, Palsson BO (1994) Metabolic flux bal-
Frommoleculartomodularcellbiology.Nature402:C47–
ancing: Basic concepts, scientific and practical use.
Bio/Technology 12:994–998
[12] Ibarra RU, Edwards JS, Palsson BO (2002) Escherichi
[29] Wright J, Wagner A (2008) Exhaustive identification of
colik-12undergoesadaptiveevolutiontoachieveinsilico
steadystatecyclesinlargestoichiometricnetworks.BMC
predicted optimal growth. Nature420:186–189
Syst Biol 2:61
[13] von Kamp A, Schuster S (2006) Metatool 5.0: fast
and flexible elementary modes analysis. Bioinformatics