To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 1
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
Counting on Beauty: The role of aesthetic, ethical,
and physical universal principles for
interstellar communication.
Guillermo A. Lemarchand
1. Introduction:
The land lies sleeping under the enveloping mantle of night. Bright stars gleam like
jewels from the velvet darkness. Beyond these points of celestial beauty, in depths
frightening in their sheer immensity, lie realms of stellar glory. And beyond again—for
there always must be a beyond—the Milky Way trails its tenuous gown of stardust
across the heavens. Billions of planets, stars, and galaxies, dancing in a cosmic
symphony.
Vast and old beyond understanding, the universe makes us feel lonely. From our
earliest days, humans have strongly sensed that this endless majesty is too immense to
be contemplated only by terrestrial intelligence. One thread that links the ancient Greek
philosophers with modern space scientists is the desire to know whether there are other
inhabited worlds with sentient creatures with whom we are share the vast beauty of the
cosmos. It forces us to ponder the ultimate significance, if any, of our tiny but exquisite
life-bearing planet, and to long for the knowledge that somewhere out there, someone
like us is looking upward toward the heavens and having similar thoughts.
The Principle of Mediocrity assumes that anything seemingly unique and pecu-
liar to us is actually one out of many and is probably average. By this view, the Earth
and humans do not occupy a privileged position in the universe. The history of
evolution of matter and life on Earth should be typical under the same universal
physical laws and similar environmental conditions. Even not expecting the same
evolutionary paths, we assume that the sequence of events may have similar patterns:
the origin of life, the appearance of complex life; the emergence of intelligence, the
development of culture and technology, and membership in the community of galactic
intelligence.
For the first time in human history, we are testing the hypothesis that advanced
civilizations exist elsewhere. Our search is based in the assumption that any advanced
intelligent species must develop certain technological tools to explore their cosmic
environment. The use of advanced technologies for that exploration would generate
signals so different from any natural cosmic source, that if we detect them, we will be
able to identify them as artificial. Behind an artificial interstellar signal, there must be
some intelligent creature with the capacity to solve very complex problems.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 2
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
How should we build a common language to exchange information and wisdom
across the galaxy? Would such a hypothetical universal language, or Lingua Cosmica,
let a civilization communicate its accumulated knowledge, as well as the differing
perceptions, sensations and emotions of its species? We will explore these questions in
the following essay.
2. Epistemic bases for an interstellar language
We introduce the term “cognitive map” to clarify the concept of paradigms, often
discussed by philosophers of science (e.g., Kuhn, 1962). Cognitive mapping refers to
the process by which an organism makes representations of its environment in its own
processing system.
Features of the physical environment are only some of the significant parts of
human cognitive maps. Our cognitive maps must represent such varied objects as living
beings and their behavior, linguistic abstractions, aesthetic judgments, and ethical
values.
With the emergence of symbolic language, environments can be described in
words. Not limited to mapping only sensory perceptions, language permits the mapping
of concepts as well. With languages and their rules, one can reconstruct events that
occur in time. Through language, our species learned how to cooperate in space and
time. To create such an interstellar language, we must propose a set of conjectures to
transform our human cognitive maps into cognitive universals.
A Lingua Cosmica might provide an instrument for interspecies cooperation.
From an ethical point of view, the last may be possible as a consequence of some sort of
Principle of Universal Fraternity, in which advanced intelligent societies choose to help
other species in order to maximize the development of potentialities for all the expres-
sions of life in the universe.
Benjamin Whorf (1897-1941) showed that particular languages, through their
grammatical structures, influence the kinds of thoughts people have, their ways of
perceiving the world, and their ways of conceiving themselves. The process of learning
a language recreates in a new generation the habits of mind, categories of interpretation,
and patterns of behavior that typified their society in the past. The acquisition of
language is vital to forming human cognitive maps, for it opens up a new dimension in
cognitive structures. Every human language maps the environment of its native
speakers, with linguistic information accumulating over many generations. Each
language, therefore, reflects the particularities of the environment in which its speakers
live. The Eskimos, for example, have more than twenty words for snow, while people
living in the tropics can get alone with one or none. An extension to different galactic
environments may present a strong incommensurability problem for exchanging
information based on different cognitive maps.
Alien intelligence will be embodied in different forms, and it will have different
needs, senses, and behaviors. Extraterrestrials could inhabit environments in which
neither science nor technology is needed for survival. The science of an alien civiliza-
tion would reflect their idiosyncratic ways of they perceiving nature, as funneled
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 3
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
through their particular evolutionary history in environments quite different from those
encountered by the precursors of humans. If we, and they, use widely differing
cognitive maps, we may never be able to distinguish any of their manifestations of
intelligence.
SETI researchers believe that the basic principles of our science and the science
of extraterrestrial beings should be fundamentally the same, and we should be able to
communicate with them by referring to those things we share, such as the principles of
mathematics, physics, and chemistry. This view assumes that there is only one way to
conceptualize the laws of nature. Consequently, mathematics and the language of nature
should be universal.
In contrast, Kuhn (1962) envisioned situations in which two theoretical concep-
tions are so different that disputes between them cannot be resolved. In such situations,
the two traditions are said to be incommensurable. The problem, according to Kuhn, is
that each conception of science uses its own method to evaluate its theories. Moreover,
theories themselves affect the very observations that are used to support scientific
paradigms. Kuhn supported his analysis with case studies from the history of scientific
revolutions. For example, he examined the transition from Ptolemaic to Copernican
astronomy, as well as the shift from Newtonian mechanics to special relativity.
Similarly, the standards of evidence, interpretation, and understanding dictated
by the terrestrial cognitive map on the one hand, and by an extraterrestrial cognitive
map on the other hand, may be so different that mutual understanding may be impossi-
ble. To comprehend a radically different scientific view, one must adopt a wholly new
conception of the world, complete with its own distinctive standards of rationality. With
no significant theory-independent standards of rationality, there would be no basis for
communication.
Two different types of incommensurability may limit the exchange of intelligi-
ble information between human and extraterrestrial cultures. In methodological
incommensurability, no rational method for exchanging intelligible information can be
found because of differences in observation and scientific method. In semantic incom-
mensurability, the use of the same term in two different cognitive maps or paradigms
has clear different meanings according to the different epistemological worldviews. For
example, instances of the term “mass” in Newtonian and relativistic mechanics are
incommensurable.
But perhaps such extreme epistemological skepticism may be unwarranted in
SETI. We need not anticipate all possible aliens, but only those similar enough to
ourselves to create radio or laser transmitters. The only way we have to find evidence of
intelligent extraterrestrials is through the detection of artificial signals generated by
technological activities, and many sorts of cognitive universals can be surmised by
considering the pragmatic requirements for building equipment to send and receive
electromagnetic signals. Technological aliens will have evolved thought processes and
communication strategies that will match our own well enough to allow us to compre-
hend them.
Since the early works of Johann Becher (1635-1682) and Gottfried Leibnitz
(1646-1716), it has generally been agreed that mathematics is based on cognitive
universals that cut across cultural and linguistic boundaries between humans. It is also
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 4
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
where we are likely to find cognitive universals that can be used to communicate with
extraterrestrials. The argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges (1952) wisely noted that the
main limitation of any universal language design is the artificiality of the classes and
categories in which the knowledge is organized. As an example he mentioned certain
Chinese encyclopedia entitled ‘Celestial Empire of Benevolent Knowledge’: “In its
remote pages it is it is written that the animals are divided into: (a) belonging to the
emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tame, (d) sucking pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, (g) stray
dogs, (h) included in the present classification, (i) frenzied, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn
with a very fine camelhair brush, (l) etcetera, (m) having just broken the water pitcher,
(n) that from a long way off look like flies.”
Minsky (1985) considered that all intelligent problem-solvers will be subject to
the same ultimate constraints: limitations on space, time, and resources. For intelligent
life forms to evolve powerful ways to deal with such constraints, they must be able to
represent the situations they face, and they must have processes for manipulating those
representations. That is, they must have complex cognitive maps and languages. Every
intelligence must develop symbol-systems for representing objects, causes, and goals,
and for formulating and remembering the procedures it develops for achieving those
goals. During its evolution, each species will eventually encounter certain very special
ideas that are much simpler than other ideas with similar uses. Thus, we can expect
extraterrestrials to know about arithmetic, causal reasoning, and optimization processes.
3. Searching for a Lingua Cosmica
The origin of language is clearly related to cognitive capability. Chomsky claims that
language has a biological basis, the constraints of which lead to certain universals in
human languages. Can we extend our terrestrial cognitive map to create a symbolic
system to exchange information with alien cultures? Can we assume that a Principle of
Mediocrity holds, in which the patterns found in the emergence and evolution of human
language should be average in the galaxy? If there is an evolutionary convergence
among these paths, an analysis of the origins and development of human language may
shed some light on the emergence of extraterrestrial languages, which in turn might
help us create a more intelligible Lingua Cosmica.
In significant ways, our speculations on the likely forms of interstellar messages
may be limited by our own experiences as linguistic beings—-whether or not these
experiences are truly universal. Consider, for example, how lessons learned from child
development on Earth might affect our expectations about any messages we might
receive from extraterrestrial intelligence.
Piaget (1955) observed that children spend much time talking to themselves.
Even conversation between children is often a “collective monologue.” Although two or
more children may appear to be responding to one another, in reality they may only be
pursuing their own monologues, without taking into account the reactions of others
(Merleau-Ponty, 1973). As Piaget noted, early speech is egocentric. Dialogue appears to
be secondary. Might this terrestrial fact influence the sorts of messages we anticipate
from extraterrestrial civilizations?
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 5
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
For decades, scientists have been speculating about the characteristics of alien
contact. Since the early works in the late 1950s, the predominant view has been that an
advanced technological extraterrestrial society would send us some kind of Encyclope-
dia Galactica. In it, they would tell us everything about other worlds, the laws of
nature, and eventually, recipes to avoid self-destruction through the misuse of our
technology and the misconduct our species. During all these years there has been a
basic assumption that signal from ETI would be a one-way message. Extraterrestrials
will speak, and we will listen; they will teach, and we will learn. The vast distances of
interstellar space, with information being sent via electromagnetic waves, implies
timescales of hundreds or thousands of years for each exchange. Only those societies
with long life expectancies would be patient enough to start a dialogue, and not settle
for only monologues.
There is a close analogy between expectations about interstellar communication
and standard theories about the emergence of language in humans. Both start with a
monologue. Just as early human speech is egocentric, our early attempts to design
interstellar languages have been homocentric.
4. Underlying Dimensions of a Lingua Cosmica
The acronym SETI is in some sense misnomer. It is impossible to detect any evidence
of intelligence over interstellar distances, but we may find traces of artificial sources
generated by technological activities. So, the research program is focused in the Search
for Extra Terrestrial Technological Activities or SETTA (Lemarchand, 1992).
In SETTA, as well as in conventional astronomy, the cosmic distances are so
huge that the researcher can only observe from afar, entirely dependent on carriers of
information that traverse the universe. According to our cognitive map of physical laws,
the information carriers are not infinite in variety. All information we currently have
about the universe beyond the solar system has been transmitted to us by means of
electromagnetic waves (radio, infrared, optical, ultraviolet, x-rays, and γ-rays), cosmic
ray particles (electrons and atomic nuclei), and more recently, by neutrinos (Lemar-
chand, 1992, 1994a).
Table 1 summarizes, according to our cognitive map of the universe, the
possible information carriers that may let us find the first evidence of an extraterrestrial
technological civilization. Applying Imre Lakatos epistemological approach for the
SETTA research program, in the hard core of this particular interpretation of reality are
two hypotheses: 1) the Principle of Mediocrity and 2) that the laws of nature that
characterize the information carriers are universal. That is, the laws of physics are
independent of any particular position in space or time. All modern astrophysics
assumes the last hypothesis and considers it irrefutable.
We continue testing other physical theories that constitute a protective belt
around the hard core. In our case, the protective belt includes the complete list of
potential information carriers. We then see which aspects of the protective belt we keep,
and which we need to discard to protect our core assumptions about the universality of
the laws of nature and the Principle of Mediocrity. Regardless of what information
carrier is used, in order to detect that a signal exists and that is of artificial origin, we
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 6
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
define a positive heuristic, for the selection of the appropriate information carrier
following these requirements: the received signal must significantly exceed the natural
background count, the signal must exhibit some property not found in natural sources,
required the least radiated power, not be absorbed by the interstellar media or planetary
atmospheres, not be deflected by galactic fields, permit efficient generation and
detection, travel at high speed. According to our cognitive map the electromagnetic
waves satisfied all the requirements. Using a negative heuristic, we may reject as useful
for interstellar communication several of the information carriers, such as graviton
astronomy, pneumatic astronomy, and particle astronomy, with the possible exception
of neutrinos (Lemarchand, 1992, 1994a). A similar approach, applying both heuristics,
was recently used when the SETI Institute identified its research priorities for the next
two decades (Ekers et al., 2002).
Table 1: The humankind’s cognitive map –or worldview- about the universe outside the Earth was
obtained using the following list of physical information carriers. Applying a positive and negative
heuristic, we may see which of these information carriers are the best ones to obtain evidences of
extraterrestrial technological activities beyond the Earth. This table includes a separate item called
“Imaginary Waves” to call the attention to the fact that there should be several unknowns physical
laws that may be more efficient that the present ones for interstellar communication.
Each observational technique acts as an information filter. Only a fraction (usu-
ally small) of the complete information can be gathered. The diversity of these filters is
considerable. They strongly depend on the technology available at the time. Conse-
quently, cognitive maps about the hypothesized characteristics of an extraterrestrial
message changed over time. At the beginning of the twentieth century, scientists,
including Einstein, speculated about using light-signals to contact Martians. Later on,
Marconi, Tesla, and Todd proposed the use of radio waves to do the same. In the late
1950s, Cocconi, Morrison, Drake, and Shklovskii started the modern radio astronomical
search for interstellar communication, while in the last ten years we have initiated the
nanosecond search for interstellar laser pulses. These few examples show how the
assumptions about the best means of interstellar communication have shifted as
terrestrial technology has evolved.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 7
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
The best search strategy would be based on a set of cognitive universals known
by any extraterrestrial culture. These cognitive universals would reflect the essence of
the physical structure of a hypothetical extraterrestrial artificial signal; they would also
provide the fundamental principles for constructing a Lingua Cosmica.
Obviously, no matter how careful we are in attempting to identify universal
concepts, we will have biases due to our culture (ethnocentrism) and our human nature
(homocentrism). In fact, it may be impossible to avoid these biases, and we may never
know how they affect our ability—or even make it impossible—to recognize, decode,
and respond to communications from extraterrestrial intelligence.
Our human cognitive map of the universe and our best judgments about appro-
priate interstellar communication technology can be described by a cosmic haystack
composed by several dimensions. The large number of possible combinations of the
different dimensions in the cosmic haystack requires the development of a methodology
to find cognitive universals or the key for a Lingua Cosmica.
We use positive and negative heuristics to identify optimal scientific, techno-
logical, aesthetic, and ethical principles for interstellar communication. Applying both
heuristics to the information carriers presented in Table 1, we assume that only
electromagnetic waves satisfy the criteria needed to exchange information across
interstellar distances.
The nature of interstellar communication can be described through the complex
interplay of the different dimensions of the cosmic haystack. We can locate extraterres-
trial signals in time and space by noting when the signal was sent, by identifying the
distance to the signal’s source, and by locating the source in the sky map in terms of
two coordinates that astronomers call right ascension and declination. Just as the source
of the signal can be located in space and time, so too can the nature of the signal itself.
Assuming that electromagnetic waves are the best information carriers, according to our
cognitive map, we may explore the physical properties of this type of signals. Espe-
cially relevant characteristics of the signal include its frequency, width, polarization, the
method by which it is modulated to bear information, and the rate at which information
is transmitted. The content of any information borne by the signal is influenced by the
kind of information, the meaning to be conveyed, and the encoding scheme. The
interplay between these twelve dimensions suggests many possible approaches to
interstellar communication, each based on cognitive constraints plausibly recognized by
both humans and extraterrestrials.
This approach builds upon Dixon’s (1973) anti-cryptography principle, which
suggests that an interstellar signal meant to initiate contact must be designed and
transmitted to maximize the possibility of discovery, both by intentional searches or
serendipitous discovery, for example, by astronomers studying anomalous observations.
To facilitate the discovery of the signal, the sender must minimize the number of
unknowns in the dimensions listed above. This principle helps generate positive and
negative heuristics, which in turn help overcome differences between terrestrial and
extraterrestrial cognitive maps.
To identify the characteristics of optimal signals, we can start by building a ma-
trix that relates all the possible alternatives of the twelve dimensions of the cosmic
haystack, against the restrictions imposed by scientific, technological, aesthetic and
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 8
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
ethical constraints. This will result in a multiplicity of proposals, each satisfying the
anti-cryptography principle. These scientific and technological proposals draw upon
plausibly universal cognitive constraints to identify the best heuristics for designing
interstellar messages that may avoid many of our homocentric biases.
Table 2 relates the twelve dimensions of the cosmic haystack with a set of scien-
tific, technological, aesthetic, and ethical constraints, for developing search strategies
based on cognitive universals that provide a foundation for constructing anti-
cryptographic messages. Far from being complete, Table 2 represents a first attempt to
design a holistic methodology to find cognitive universals. Due to the lack of space in
this essay, this table shows only the last three dimensions of the cosmic haystack (code,
semantics, and kind of information content). The complete version of the table with a
full analysis of all of twelve dimensions and thirty-four proposals that follow from the
matrix may be obtained from the author.
5. Ethical constraints:
In order to improve the lifetime of a technological civilization it is impossible to have
superior science and technology and inferior morals. This combination is dynamically
unstable and we can guarantee a self-destruction within the lifetimes of advanced
societies (105 to 106 years?). The society of Earth has often been described as being in a
stage of technological adolescence. Still struggling with environmental and security
issues that threaten the continued existence of life on our planet, we might wonder
whether advanced extraterrestrials would have similar evolutionary paths. Would
extraterrestrials show the same disparity between technological development and social
maturity that we see on Earth?
When any civilization reaches its technological adolescence, it must either be or
become socially responsible, or face self-annihilation. Otherwise, global extinction
would be very likely, with a life span too short to engage in a long-term interstellar
dialogue.
If individuals within an extraterrestrial society can learn to co-exist peacefully
with one another, might they not extend their attitude of benevolence to civilizations on
other planets as well? Their own success at surviving the threats of planetary extinction
would teach them vital lessons about respect for others that would likely be extended
beyond their own world.
Cognizant of the uniqueness of each planet’s evolutionary history, we might ex-
pect advanced extraterrestrials to avoid interfering with the development of less
advanced species, resulting in a galactic quarantine guided by Lex Galactica (Lemar-
chand, 2000). A consequence of this galactic quarantine may be the so-called Principle
of Universal Fraternity, which may be used by extraterrestrials to design the kind of
information content of an interstellar message and to define a policy to help other
species to maximize the development of its own potentialities.
If such constraints on interspecies relations hold, what implications would it
have for SETTA? First, we might expect that young civilizations would be given only
very limited information about science and technology, for fear of providing tools for
self-destruction.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 9
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
For civilizations more advanced than ours, such constraints might not be as
rigid. Older civilizations, having withstood the test of time, might be able to assimilate
information from other worlds without the same threat to their stability and longevity.
Earthlings would be hard-pressed to provide evidence that we are ready to learn
about advanced technologies. Our unintentional signals, leaking from the Earth’s radio
and television stations, announce our existence to other worlds only to relatively nearby
stars. Beyond about 70 light-years from Earth, intelligent beings will still not have
received signs of terrestrial technology. As a result, they would not be able to send us
age-appropriate interstellar messages. Not wanting to share potentially dangerous
information with us, we might expect signals from other worlds be relatively impover-
ished in information content.
6. Symmetry as an aesthetic cognitive universal for art and science
Lemarchand and Lomberg (1996) introduced the use of aesthetic principles to evaluate
search strategies for interstellar contact. We called attention to some properties of
symmetry that may be used, not only in the coding and meaning of a message, as well
as other aspects of signaling. We also analyzed the universality of particular patterns of
aesthetics, such as the golden section and the radial symmetry in nature, art, and
science.
Symmetry often indicates the deep structure of things, whether they are natural
phenomena or creations of artists and scientists. We find symmetry pleasing, and its
discovery is often surprising and illuminating as well. As it was previously stated this in
one of the hypothesis behind the hard core of the SETTA research program. Indeed, the
assumption that laws of nature are universal is based on notions of spatio-temporal
symmetries. For example, Earman (1978) identified several epistemological characteris-
tics of universal laws of nature: they do not make reference to specific spatio-temporal
locations or coordinates, they are unrestricted in space and time, and they are invariant
under spatio-temporal translations. Thus, symmetry is a necessary condition to consider
a law of physics universal.
Symmetry also serves as a bridge between art and science. Several prominent
scientists consider issues of aesthetics and symmetry when choosing between theories.
Inspire by the views of Albert Einstein (1879-1955) and Hermann Weyl (1885-1955),
more than any other modern physicist Paul Dirac (1902-1984) was preoccupied with the
concept of mathematical beauty as an intrinsic feature of nature and as a methodologi-
cal guide for its scientific investigation. Speaking about the aesthetics of science, he
noted that “A physical law must possess mathematical beauty” and “a theory with
mathematical beauty is more likely correct than an ugly one that fits some experimental
data.” These views about the aesthetics of science and truth may provide an additional
constraint for designing interstellar messages.
Symmetries also represent a kind of invariance under transformation, which im-
plies that symmetrical things contain redundancies. Thus, sometimes information
originates in the breaking of symmetries. Information as well as beauty, it would seem,
are products of the interplay between symmetry (thesis), asymmetry (antithesis), and
dissymmetry (synthesis).
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 10
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
The fact that the concept of symmetry has roots in both science and art make it
useful to build bridges between various disciplines. Ancient Greeks realized that
symmetry represents some of the objective and measurable aspects of beauty, and they
represented symmetry by proportion and asymmetry by the lack of proportion.
Eventually, proportion became a general expression referring to the ratio of two
magnitudes (a/b) or a set of ratios (a/b, c/d, ...). In each case, the pairs of magnitudes in
a proportion are associated with the parts and the whole of an object. The concept of
proportion is important in aesthetics because it can be quantified and used for compari-
son. However, the original meaning of proportion was not just a ratio or a set of ratios,
but the equality of two or more ratios.
The golden section, discussed under a variety of names, has been well-known in
geometry since ancient times. Later it also gained some importance in art as a propor-
tion that symbolizes the harmony between the parts and the whole, and which is
associated with organic shapes, from the DNA molecule to the human body. The term
golden section refers to the division of a line segment or time interval into two parts, so
that the ratio of the smaller part to the larger one is the same as the ratio of the larger
one to the whole. The golden section, then, represents the harmonic resonance between
the parts and the whole. Kepler (1571-1630) provides an excellent example of how
highly the golden section has been regarded: "Geometry has two great treasures: one is
the Theorem of Pythagoras: the other the division of a line into extreme and mean ratio.
The first we may compare to a measure of gold; the second we may name a precious
The Greeks had already noticed that at least three terms are needed to express a
proportion; such is the case of the continuous proportion = . But the problem can be
simplified by using only two of the original terms, and expressing the third term as the
sum of the first two terms. For example, (a/b) = (b/c) can be simplified by making c =
(a + b), so the continuous proportion becomes = . Reshuffling the terms in the
last equation gives us b=a . The constant of proportionality (the numerical
part of this equation) is called the golden section, represented by the Greek letter φ,
which is approximately equal to 0.61803..., or expressed as a fraction, . The
1.61803....
use of this proportion as the foundation for aesthetically pleasing images can be seen
throughout this volume, in the drawings by artist Steve Deihl that introduce each
section of the book.
The golden section has a great variety of interesting mathematical properties,
some of which are not immediately obvious. For example, the Italian mathematician
Leonardo Pisano (1170-1250), known as Fibonacci, described a sequence of numbers
that starts with two 1's, with each subsequent term being the sum of the previous two
terms: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233.... Fibonacci presented this series in
the context of a very artificial exercise about the growth of the number of rabbits from
one generation to the next, without providing further details. Later it was discovered
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 11
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
that the ratios of any two neighboring Fibonacci numbers approximate the golden
section number, with the approximation becoming increasingly accurate the farther into
the series one goes. For example, the ratio between the two terms 8 and 13 is 0.61538....
An even more precise approximation of φ can be found by looking at the ratio of two
successive terms later in the series. For example, the ratio of 34 and 55 is 0.61818....
The golden section makes many appearances in geometry. For example, imagine
we start with a Pythagorean pentagram having all sides of equal length and all inside
angles identical. We can then draw a five-pointed star inside this pentagram, with each
line of the star bisecting two other lines that make up the star. These bisected lines are
cut into pieces that have lengths related by φ. That is, one segment is 0.61803... times as
long as the other segment. In this case, we also see an example of self-similarity, also
seen in the more general class of mathematical objects called fractals. Just as the length
of the shorter segment is 0.61803... times the length of the longer segment, so too is the
longer segment 0.61803... times the length of the entire line before being cut. The
golden section is also found in right triangles with sides having the ratios of 3:4:5 and in
many other areas of mathematics.
6.1. The golden section in the physical world
The golden section and the Fibonacci series appear in the real world in many physical
and biological phenomena. Examples from the physical world include:
• If a beam of light falls upon two sheets of glass that are in contact, there will be
multiple reflections. The number of rays that will emerge from the sheets of
glass depends on the number of times the ray is reflected. The number of emer-
gent rays is always a Fibonacci number.
• A spiral can be formed along the ends of adjacent, perpendicular lines, if the
proportion of the lines to one another is φ. This lovely spiral is seen in some of
the most handsome spiral galaxies, such as M51, M101, and M74.
6.2. The golden section and life patterns
The golden section may also be seen in biology in population growth of successive
generations, in the genealogy of the drone bee, and in the average value of leaf diver-
gence measured on the stems of plants.
The number of petals on many common flowers is a Fibonacci number. For ex-
ample, the iris has 3 petals, the primrose has 5, the ragwort has 13, and the daisy has 34.
Plants with composite floret patterns, like the sunflower, the pinecone, and the pineap-
ple show overlapping clockwise and counter-clockwise spiral patterns. In the sunflower,
there are 21 spirals in clockwise direction, and 34 in the counter-clockwise direction;
the pinecone has five spirals 5 clockwise and 8 counter-clockwise; in the pineapple, the
spirals number 8 clockwise and 13 counter-clockwise.
The same pattern that describes the shape of spiral galaxies, based on the golden
section, also appears in the curve of animal horns and in the seashell of Nautilus
pompilius, the chambered nautilus.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 12
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
6.3. The golden section in human arts
Beautiful patterns based on the golden section have been created by human artists for
2500 years. The Greek sculptor Phidias (5th century BCE) used it, and the proportion of
the height to the length of the facade of the Parthenon being a close approximation to φ.
In the two millennia since the Parthenon was designed, φ has continued to be a touch-
stone for generations of graphic and design artists and architects from Leonardo (1452-
1519) to Mondrian (1872-1944).
We cannot say why this "golden" proportion occurs in processes as seemingly
unrelated as galactic shapes and growth patterns of flowers, horns, and shells. But for
whatever reason, it seems to be deeply embedded in the mathematical description of
phenomena throughout the real universe. It is reasonable to assume that other intelli-
gences studying the cosmos will have discovered this proportion and patterns based
upon it as well. The golden section may be a cognitive universal that has a particular
capacity to connect parts with a whole.
Behind this simple idea there is a very profound concept. Our traditional cogni-
tive maps divide the whole into parts in order to study them and to make the universe
intelligible for us. A different epistemological approach may be the study of the
wholeness and its implicate order (Bohm, 1980). Some decades ago, a group of
physicists started using these ideas to explore the quantum world. Unfortunately, our
language is inadequate to describe the properties of the whole, and so too are our
cognitive maps inadequate. Perhaps some advanced civilizations have reached this
point of development. The golden mean is a simplest expression of these ideas.
7. The application of the golden section as a cognitive universal for inter-
stellar communication codes, semantics, and interstellar artistic works
Table 2 shows various criteria for choosing cognitive universals to compose interstellar
messages. As an example, here I propose a way to convey aesthetic meaning through a
three-dimensional message, allowing us to transmit a hologram or a short two-
dimensional movie.
The golden section is a mathematically incommensurable proportion, what
means that the exact number φ has an infinite number of decimals. One never can use
an exact golden section of time-intervals in a temporal sequence of information bits sent
by an electromagnetic interstellar message that is organized on equal units of intermit-
tent signals. Here all marked time intervals (length of pulses, duration of special
instructions, etc.) can be measured by integer times of the corresponding unit, therefore
all the possible ratios are rational. Anyway, it is possible to express the approximate
value of the golden section in an interstellar message making a dimensional transforma-
tion from space to time, and applying the Fibonacci sequence.
The composer Iannis Xenakis (1971) explored this idea, using magnetic re-
cordings of music. Similarly, the Russian director Sergey Eisenstein (1898-1948) used
the golden section when composing the layout of important scenes in his movie
Bronenosets Potemkin (The Battleship Potemkin, 1925). Such precise measurements,
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 13
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
which are secrets of the composer or movie director, are very rare and can hardly be
detected by the audience.
The most parsimonious proposal for using these cognitive universals in an inter-
stellar message may be the following: the calling signal may start with the first 13
numbers of the Fibonacci series (1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233) encoded in
a binary form, with the sequence repeated over and over again. This series will provide
a clear criterion of artificiality and also a pattern related to aesthetics and life.
We propose transmitting three-dimensional holograms, using an aesthetic cogni-
tive universal. To do so, we describe the construction of a golden cuboid, in which there
are sides of three different lengths, and these lengths are related to one another through
the golden section. Using some elementary algebra, it is easy to show that the dimen-
sions of a cuboid (rectangular parallelopiped) of unit volume can have edges with
lengths (a, b, c) related to the golden section, if we let the shortest side (a) be φ =
(0.61803...) units long, the next longest side (b) be 1 unit long, and the longest side (c)
be the reciprocal of φ (or φ-1 = 1.61803...) units long. When we calculate the volume of
such a golden cuboid by multiplying the three sides (φ x 1 x φ−1), we note that the
volume is 1.
After the calling signal with the first 13 terms of the Fibonacci series, we may
introduce a more subtle information message coded as a sequence of two level signals
(on-off, 0-1, etc.) with 2,986,128 different time intervals. This is a representation of a
three-dimensional golden cuboid message constructed as the product between three
special Fibonacci numbers: 89 x 144 x 233 = 2,986,128. The last number will also place
a limit to the equivalent number of bits for each golden cuboid message unit.
We have proposed these three numbers because of their special qualities. The
number 144 is the only square number of the Fibonacci series; moreover, it lies between
two prime numbers that are also contiguous members of that series (89 and 233). Due to
the particular character of the number 144 in the series, this number may be taken as a
second order basic unit of measurement. In this way we may proceed by dividing each
of the three numbers in the sequence by 144, yielding normalized numbers with a =
89/144 ≈ φ, b = 144/144 = 1, and c = 233/144 ≈ φ-1. The result is a three-dimensional
aesthetic module, in which we can insert representations of solid objects or a sequence
of 144 two-dimensional images to create a short movie. Each of these 144 images will
be have the dimensions of the two prime numbers 89 and 233.
We may also encode more complex information reflecting some interesting aes-
thetical and mathematical properties of this golden cuboid, such as: (1) the ratios
between the areas of the faces follows the relation φ:1:φ-1, (2) the total surface area of
the cuboid is [3 x (φ + 1 + φ-1)] = (6 x φ), (3) four of the six faces of the cuboid are also
golden section rectangles, which may be use to order the temporal sequences of images,
e.g., by creating a movie that unfolds in the direction perpendicular to the non-golden
faces (4) The ratio of the area of the sphere circumscribing the cuboid to that of the
cuboid is 2π:3φ, an interesting relation between primes and incommensurable numbers,
and finally, (5) the cuboid also shows a self-similar or fractal pattern: if two cuboids of
square cross section (φ-1 x φ-1) are cut from the golden cuboid, the edge lengths of the
remaining cuboid are in the same ratio as those of the original cuboid, i.e., 1:φ-1:φ-2 =
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 14
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
φ:1:φ-1. This results in a new golden cuboid, φ-3 times the original size, providing a
property may be useful to encode a higher level of information.
The use of the golden cuboid is only one of the many suggestions in this volume
for designing interstellar messages. The primary purpose of this essay, however, was to
call attention to some of the epistemological principles behind those proposals. In the
process, we have also proposed a methodology for choosing cognitive universals
restricted by scientific, technological, aesthetic, and ethical principles to provide a
holistic framework for considering interstellar communication.
References:
1. Borges, J.L. (1952), El Idioma Analítico de John Wilkins, in Otras Inquisiciones 1937-1952,
Buenos Aires: Sur.
2. Bohm, D. (1980). Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge.
3. Dixon, R. (1973). A Search Strategy for Finding Radio Beacons, Icarus, 20, 187-199.
4. Kuhn,T. S.(1962). The Structure of the Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
5. Earman, J. (1978). The Universality of Laws, Philosophy of Science, 45 , 173-181.
6. Ekers, R.D, Cullers, D.K. Billingham, J. & Scheffer, L.K. (Eds.). (2002). SETI 2020: A Road-
map for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence. Mountain View: SETI Press.
7. Lemarchand, G.A. (1992). El Llamado de las Estrellas, Buenos Aires: Lugar Científico.
8. Lemarchand, G.A. (1994a). Detectability of Extraterrestrial Technological Activities, SETI-
Quest, 1 (1), 3-13.
9. Lemarchand, G.A. (1994b). Passive and Active SETI Strategies using the Synchronization of
SN1987A, Astrophysics and Space Research, 214, 209-222.
10. Lemarchand, G.A. (2000), Speculations on the First Contact: Encyclopedia Galactica or the
Music of the Spheres? In Allen Tough (ed.), When SETI Succeeds: The Impact of High-
Information Contact (pp.153-163). Bellevue: The Foundation for the Future.
11. Lemarchand, G.A. and Lomberg, J. (1996 July) Is There any Universal Principles in Science and
Aesthetics that could help us to Set the Unknown Parameters for Interstellar Communication?
Paper presented at International Astronomical Union Colloquium 160, Capri, Italy.
12. Merleau-Ponty, M. (1973). Consciousness and the Acquisition of Language. Evanston: North-
western University Press.
13. Minsky, M. (1985), Why intelligent aliens will be intelligible?, in E. Regis (ed.) Extraterrestri-
als: Where Are They?, pp.117-128, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
14. Piaget, J. (1955). The Language and Thought of the Child. Cleveland: Meridian.
15. Xenakis, I. (1971), Formalized Music, Bloomington: Indiana University Press
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 15
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
Table 2: SETTA Matrix:
Space of Configuration for an interstellar communication channel
(This is the complete version of the Table in the book only an abridge version will be printed)
Universal Constraints
Convergence
Variable Scientific Technological Aesthetical Ethical
1.Target Search (e.g., A.Using the Principle of Medi- With a “modest” -in cosmic Any advanced civilization
nearby stars, cosmic ocrity, civilizations may evolve terms- technology less than within a sphere of ≈ 70 light
masers, etc.) in suitable planets around solar 100 years old, we are able to years (ly) away may detect
type stars. If we assume that a detect artificial microwave our first radio signals and
distribution of 106 hypothetical signals transmitted from the begin studying our level of
civilizations is homogeneously center of our galaxy by a ethical development in order
distributed in the galaxy, this civilization with a similar to calibrate what kind of “in-
implies that the nearby ETI level of development than formation” would not be
would be some hundreds light our terrestrial one. dangerous for us. Applying
years away. The target search Project Phoenix and The Al- the Lex Galactica (LexGal)
criteria would be determined by len Telescope Array are in and the Principle of Univer-
this type of assumptions. the frontier of our technical sal Fraternity (PUF), even-
Other target candidates are cos- capability. tually, they would be able to
mic masers, that have the possi- There are several optical share with us the first chap-
bility to naturally amplify searches around solar-type ters of their Encyclopedia
artificial signals. This means stars looking for nanosecond Galactica.
that with a modest output trans- pulses.
mitting power it is possible to be
detected in the whole galaxy.
Spatial A third kind of targets are those
Coordinates: galactic objects that may serve
as cosmic synchronizers (e.g.
supernova explosions).
B and C: Positions of solar type
A.Radial Dis- stars, cosmic masers and other
tance:(R), target candidates (e.g. cosmic
spots synchronizers).
B.Right As-
cension:(α) 2. Full-sky survey A. The rationality of full-sky SERENDIP from Arecibo, If an advanced civilization Advanced galactic civiliza-
C.Declina- surveys is based in the fact that Parkes, Italy and the META (R>> 70 ly) is beaming us a tions beaming beacon sig-
it is more easier to detect those II project from Argentina are high information message, nals, would not include a
beacons that are intrinsically the most sensible full-sky by applying the LexGal and high technological informa-
strongest, but remote, that those surveys. There also are some the PUF, the message would tion content message, be-
which are nearer but weakest. full sky amateur observations probably be manifestation of cause they have no
For every 300 civilizations coordinated by the SETI art. For doing so they would possibility to calibrate the
transmitting at certain radio League. have to match their aesthetic level of ethical development
power, there is but one civiliza- Paul Horowitz and col- principles using some “cog- of the recipient societies.
tion which transmits signals ten leagues, have recently started nitive universals” related High information content
times more powerful. The last a full-sky survey of optical with symmetry, asymmetry would put in danger the con-
one would be much easier to de- laser pulses with nanosec- and dissymmetry properties tinuity of the recipient civili-
tect. onds resolution. (e.g. the use of proportions, zation due to the possible
B. 0º ≤ α ≤ 360º There are some projects to golden section and any of the misuse of the new techno-
C.-90º ≤ δ ≤ 90º develop full-time omni direc- limited number of musical logical information. So, for
tional antennas, to look in all scales that the laws of nature the case of R >> 70 ly, only
The galactic plane is the most sky directions, all the time. allows). beacons or eventually “artis-
interesting place to search due to tic messages” would be ex-
the high density of stars, so the pected (e.g. music, visual
probability of discovery a strong arts or an unexpected new
signal there is higher. branch of arts).
3.Long duty cycle Very advanced civilizations A Kardashev’s Type II ETI Even this strategy makes a Omnidirectional transmis-
(Kardashev’s Type II and III) would use the equivalent high symmetrical assumption sion would demand extraor-
would transmit full-time omni- transmitting power of a star of transmitting the same bea- dinary energy resources for a
directionally in order to facili- for interstellar communica- con signal simultaneously to society, as well as a high ra-
Timing tate the detection by every tion (1026-1027 W). all sky directions, the engi- dio polluted environment.
emergent galactic civilization A Kardashev’s Type III ETI neering and ethical variables This would not only be irra-
would use the energy re- would ruled out this option. tional from an engineering
sources of a whole galaxy but also from an environ-
(1037-1038 W). mental ethics point of view.
The full-sky surveys at Har-
vard and Buenos Aires have
ruled out the existence of
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 16
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
Type II and III ETI in the
galaxy employing electro-
magnetic waves at λ=21 cm.
The SETI Ellipsoid is a high The transmitting civilization
4..Nova and Super- Nova and Supernova galactic With a modest transmitting symmetrical and beautiful would not necessary know
nova Ellipsoids for explosions may serve as syn- power it is possible to send solution for the problem of the exact level of ethical de-
temporal Convergence chronizers to coordinate direc- call signals to other civiliza- synchronization between velopment of the recipients.
and others similar pro- tion in the sky with the arrival of tions in that direction. It is transmissions and receptions Applying the LexGal and the
posals that signals to the terrestrial de- also possible to generate fake of interstellar communication PUF, would only transmit a
tectors (Lemarchand, 1994b). pulsar signals in order to im- among unknown partners. beacon signal, just to call the
prove the odds of detection attention, then after receiving
by galactic astronomers [see the first reply would decide
Lemarchand (1994b) for an what chapters of the Ency-
example on how to build a clopedia Galactica are not
message for a nearby star]. dangerous for the recipients.
7. Microwave “magic For example λ = 21 cm corre- The fact that the exploration The hydrogen line wave-
frequencies” (e.g. λ = sponds to the hydrogen emission of the cosmic environment length seems to be the most
21 cm; 18 cm, 19.5 line wavelength. Hydrogen is need the deployment of radio “parsimonious” proposal for
cm, 11.7 cm, 6 cm; the most abundant and simple astronomical studies in these a common communication
13.5 mm; 4.3 mm, element in the universe. Any specific wavelengths make channel (considering that the
2mm, 1.7 mm, 1.5 civilization that would like to the proposal interesting, be- concept of “hydrogen” may
mm, etc) study the distribution of galactic cause we assume that the ga- be a Cognitive Universal)
matter would need to develop lactic astronomers would
radio astronomical studies of the eventually discover the “arti-
galaxy at this wavelength. In ficial signals” while looking
Lemarchand (1992) we can find for natural phenomena.
the scientific justification for the
rest of “magic frequencies.”
Perhaps an ETI with differ-
8. All microwave fre- Noiseless region of the radio ent “cognitive maps” would
Contact quencies between 400 electromagnetic spectrum. propose a different frequency
Frequency and 10,000 MHz with no relevant meaning for
(f) us. Specific equipment is
built to explore the whole re-
or equivalent
gion of the spectrum (e.g
Wavelength Project Phoenix and The Al-
(λ) len Telescope Array).
With modest telescopes, we
9. Flash-light, no spe- For laser nanosecond pulses may detect a nanosecond la-
cific frequency for in- there is no need to specify a fre- ser pulse equivalent to the
terstellar laser pulses. quency, we are looking for the signals that our laser beams
number of arriving photons in a may generate. A specific
very small time slot. transmitting strategy should
be established for selecting
the targets and deciding how
much time they will be
beaming into a specific star.
To improve the detection
odds a common synchroniza-
tion strategy should be estab-
lished.
10. Depends on the The assumptions on the trans- We have the technological From an aesthetical point of From an ethical point of
ETI technological mitting power used by an ETI, capability to detect a signal view the most “parsimoni- view the most “parsimoni-
level of development, defines the required sensitivity from the galactic center ous” strategy will require a ous” strategy will require a
the transmitting strat- for the detection of the calling transmitted with the same minimum output power in minimum output power in
Transmitting egy (e.g. omnidirec- signals at a given R distance equivalent isotropic radiated order to succeed. order to minimize the use of
tional, selected targets, from us. Different strategies de- power available at the Are- societal resources and keep
Output Power
microwave vs. laser fine different transmitting output cibo radar. We can also de- the standards of environ-
(W) beams, etc.), the char- power values. tect laser signals from mental values.
acteristic of targets several hundred light years
(e.g. Exoplanets, full away.
survey, the use natural
amplifiers as cosmic
maser regions, etc.)
11. Elliptical A narrowband signal is inher-
ently polarized with the most
Polarization general polarization being ellip-
tical.
From a technological point
12. Linear Linear polarization contains an of view, the artificial signals
additional unknown, namely the are highly polarized. It is
position angle of the field vec- relatively easy to distinguish
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 17
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
tors. Due to the interaction with the polarization characteris-
the interstellar media, linear po- tics with the present state-of-
larization seems unlikely. the-art technology.
13. Circular Contains the least number of
“unknowns” and is therefore the
most likely. There are only two
possible senses.
14. Amplitude Since one cannot transmit a
negative amplitude, and since a
(0, 1) method is undetectable
during the zero state and thus
might be missed, we can proba-
bly rule out amplitude modula-
tion.
15. Phase Binary phase modulation may However the signal a whole
be achieved by introducing a is not any easier to detect.
180º phase shift into the trans- Also phase modulation is
mitted signal at appropriate least likely to be detected by
times. From an information car- serendipity, since astronomi-
rying standard point, phase cal observations rarely ob-
modulation is superior to the serve phase. So it would be
other methods. important for the design and
detection of high information
Modulation content message but not for
beacon signals.
(m) 16. Frequency Is obtained by switching the
transmitting frequency between
two fixed frequencies at appro-
priate times.
17. Polarization May be achieved by changing
between two orthogonal polari-
zations at appropriate times,
such as two perpendicular linear
polarizations or between left and
right circular polarization
18. Combinations Perhaps, different systems of
modulation would be used si-
multaneously in order to maxi-
mize the transmission of
information and to deploy dif-
ferent levels of message com-
plexities.
19. Narrowband sig- For microwave transmissions, From a technological point
nals the interstellar scintillations set of view the transmission of
a limit to the possible artificial an ultra narrowband signal
narrowband signals (≈1 Hz). An for the generation of a “bea-
ultra-narrowband signal would con” has the advantage that
be the most distinctive charac- the communication range
teristic of an artificial signal. would be larger than using a
broadband signal with the
same output power.
Signal band-
width 20. Broadband signals Nanosecond Laser beams has a Broadband signals are useful
broadband characteristic, and to send huge amounts of in-
(ΔB) the artificial characteristic formation. From a micro-
would be established by the wave detection point of
nanosecond variation of the view, these signals would be
flash-light. use only after the contact is
already established. From the
laser detection point of view
the present technology allow
us to send and received
enormous amounts of infor-
mation using this communi-
cation channel.
21. Beacons (CW sig- Low information rate. The only The easier message to detect,
Signaling rate nals) information would be the loca- transmit and decoded.
(τ) tion of the artificial source and
the transmitting power.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 18
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
22. Small duty cycle The interstellar scintillation
(low information con- place a limit to microwave in- These transmissions are easy
tent) formation rates into a few thou- to generate to detect using
sand bits per second. the state-of-the-art technolo-
gies. It may be difficult to
23. Nanosecond and Using laser beams it is possible decode and interpret the sig-
subnanosecond high to exchange large amounts of in- nals.
information content formation across interstellar dis-
message tances.
24. Beacons No decoding is needed. No spe- Possible solution of the Lex-
cific message is included Gal for those transmissions
in the direction of unknown
recipients.
25. Binary code The most effective method for This method may be useful This method may be com-
maximum range communication to be employed to send some patible with LexGal for the
Code is the two state (binary) one. “aesthetical cognitive univer- case of sending, aesthetical,
(C ) This way of coding is the one sals” (e.g. golden cuboid) ethical or low scientific mes-
that may follow the anti- sage contents.
cryptography principle.
This method may be used
26. Complex codes It is possible to imagine very among advanced technologi-
sophisticated coding systems, cal societies or just to send
but in these cases it would be the first chapters of the En-
practically impossible to be de- cyclopedia Galactica.
coded by emergent societies.
27. Logical Organize the information in a Some attempts where already This method is useful for de-
sequence of increasing complex- made to develop a specific ploying the Encyclopedia
ity, using logical principles, like semantics by Freudenthal, Galactica or a high informa-
in LINCOS. Another option is Devito and others. tion content message. Ac-
by creating numerically coded cording to LexGal, only
symbols and explicitly describ- expected from nearby (R< 70
ing their context within an ex- ly) civilizations, which al-
pression. ready have calibrated our
level of ethical development.
28. Analogical Pictographic communication By 1820, K. Gauss proposed This method would be useful This method is appropriated
systems: The representation of to represent the image of the to communicate different to send aesthetical messages,
images or holograms that repre- geometrical demonstration of forms of visual arts, as well according to LexGal (R>>
sent objects or actions creating the Theorem of Pythagoras as music. 70 ly)
analogies to similar objects or to hypothetical inhabitants of
actions that our cognitive map the Moon. Similar ideas were
would recognize or find it famil- proposed over the years to
iar. communicate with the Mar-
tians or with other stars.
Semantics Drake and others optimized
the proceeding and in 1971
sent a message in this form
to the globular cluster M31.
In the late ’90 Dutil and Du-
mas sent similar semantics
messages to a group of
nearby stars.
29.Heuristic- Binary computing: the binary This proposal requires the This procedure would require
Algorithm code may represent logical in- transmission of a complex large amounts of information
structions for computer process- software that may be useful contents messages, propor-
ing to communicate concepts in tional to the complexity of
a great variety of forms and the “software”. Eventually,
eventually also interact in for the case of the interacting
some way with the message versions, the program may
recipients. be designed in such a way in
order to avoid complex in-
formation to low level of
ethical development socie-
ties. So some “smart” algo-
rithms would work following
the LexGal.
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 19
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
30. Beacon To indicate the location of an From a technological point Using the LexGal and the
advanced technological civiliza- of view this is the easiest PUF, the transmitting civili-
tion in the galaxy and to com- message to be detected (e.g. zation that ignores the level
municate “that we are not CW monochromatic signal). of ethical development of the
alone”. recipients, would chose this
strategy until establishing
which knowledge would not
put in danger the natural evo-
lution of the recipient civili-
zation.
31. Scientific & Information about nature and Description on how to build Scientific and technological
Technological evolution of the universe. De- a new and more efficient information would be share
scription of scientific conceptu- communication system, only in the case of similar
alizations in order manage all travel machine or some sort evolutionary stage between
our environmental variables, of interacting machine to ex- sender and recipient. Apply-
e.g. to travel across wormholes, change information with it. ing the LexGal, the sender
to discover new energy sources, will start with those chapters
to learn more about complex of the Encyclopedia Galac-
systems (life, societies, etc.), tica that will not put in dan-
recipes to avoid self-destruction, ger of recipient self-
etc. annihilation due to the mis-
used of the message content.
This strategy may be the one
that a hypothetical nearby
advanced civilizations (R<<
70 ly) will apply to us, giv-
ing us only those things that
we can manage.
32. Artistic Incommensurability of artistic The diversity of culture, Using LexGal an artistic con-
cognitive maps? what makes a society differ- tent would not put in danger
ent from another one is of self-annihilation to the re-
probably the most important cipient society. The learning
information to be shared with process to perceive the new
others. Visual arts, music and forms of arts would help the
Information an unknown complete differ- recipients to develop new
Content ent conception of art may be and different cognitive maps
(KIC) the most probable high- that would help them to be
information content of an in- prepared for receiving the
terstellar message. The learn- next “chapters” of the Ency-
ing process of new art forms clopedia Galactica.
will induce us to generate
“new” cognitive maps of na-
ture. The history of science
and arts on Earth shows how
this feedback between these
two cultural activities modi-
fied our human cognitive
maps.
33. Ethical Ethical information content Ethical information content For the ancient Greeks, there Ethical information content
would be very important for the will be of high importance in was a strong connection be- may also help to improve our
development of the so-called order to develop “disembod- tween ethics and aesthetics. level of ethical development,
“social sciences”. A galactic ied technologies” to solve For them any ethical solution so this KIC may be an excel-
cross study about the evolution several of the most important for a human problem was lent instrument of the LexGal
of ethical systems in different problems of our present hu- beautiful. Present studies argument and the PUF.
biological systems would be of man society. about the evolution of altru-
an enormous importance to ism in different species
learn how to improve our human shows the appearance of in-
ethical behavior in time. teresting patterns and sym-
metries between the
members of the “societies”
under study.
A hypothetical ethical mes-
sage content may also pre-
sent unexpected aesthetical
patterns that would also help
us to develop new cognitive
maps.
34. Metaphysical- Is God a cognitive universal? As
Religious it was the case of early human
cognitive maps, metaphysical
and religious conceptions of na-
ture were considered part of the
To appear in Between Worlds: The Art and Science of Interstellar Message Composition, 20
Douglas Vakoch (ed.), MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 2006.
epistemological explanation
about the origin and evolution of
the universe. We cannot rule out
completely the possibility that
an ETI will send their own
metaphysical interpretation of
nature.