]CS.oib-q[
2v1552.7070:viXra
Coupling biochemistry and mechanics in cell adhesion: a model
for inhomogeneous stress fiber contraction
Achim Besser and Ulrich S. Schwarz
University of Heidelberg, Bioquant, BQ 0013 BIOMS Schwarz,
Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany
Biochemistry and mechanics are closely coupled in cell adhesion. At sites of cell-
matrixadhesion,mechanicalforcetriggerssignalingthroughtheRho-pathway,which
leadstostructuralreinforcementandincreasedcontractilityintheactincytoskeleton.
Theresulting force acts back to the sites of adhesion, resulting in a positive feedback
loop for mature adhesion. Here we model this biochemical-mechanical feedback loop
for the special case when the actin cytoskeleton is organized in stress fibers, which
are contractile bundles of actin filaments. Activation of myosin II molecular motors
through the Rho-pathway is described by a system of reaction-diffusion equations,
which are coupled into a viscoelastic model for a contractile actin bundle. We find
strong spatial gradients in the activation of contractility and in the corresponding
deformationpatternofthestressfiber,ingoodagreementwithexperimentalfindings.
I. INTRODUCTION
Adhesion of biological cells to each other and the extracellular matrix is one of the hall-
marks of multicellular organisms and a very active area of research in cell biology. Investi-
gating cell adhesion is crucial to understand physiological processes like tissue development
and maintenance, but also disease-related processes like growth and migration of cancer cells
[1, 2]. In general, biological cells have a limited repertoire of possible behaviours, including
spreading, adhesion, migration, division or death, but very sophisticated ways of controling
the switching between these different processes. Traditionally, investigation of this cellular
decision making has focused strongly on the biochemical aspects, including detailed models
for signal transduction [3, 4]. During recent years, it has become increasingly clear that in
Electronic address: Ulrich.Schwarz@bioquant.uni-heidelberg.de
adhesion-related processes, cellular behaviour is not only controlled by biochemical cues, but
also involves many physical determinants like the structural organization of the extracellu-
lar matrix and the cytoskeleton or force generation through molecular motors [5, 6, 7, 8].
For example, it has been shown that the stiffness of the extracellular environment deter-
mines migration of tissue cells [9] and differentation of stem cells [10]. In particular, these
celluar responses have been found to depend on the ability of the cells to contract their
environment with actomyosin contractility and to convert this mechanical process into a
biochemical signal. Although these processes are essential for such important situations like
tissue functioning or cancer cell migration, theoretical models describing the coupling be-
tween biochemistry and mechanics in cell adhesion are still rare, albeit essential for a future
systematic understanding of how multicellular organisms organize themselves.
Cell adhesion is closely related to the actin cytoskeleton, whose organization is central
in determining the structural properties of cells. In cell culture with stiff substrates, the
actin cytoskeleton tends to organize in stress fibers, which are bundles of actin filaments
tensed by myosin II molecular motors [11]. Stress fibers usually end in focal adhesions,
which areintegrin-basedadhesion contactswhich cangrowtoalateralsize ofseveral microns
[12, 13]. Ontheir cytoplasmic side, focaladhesions recruit morethan90components (mostly
proteins) which physically reside in the adhesion structure [14]. In 1992, Ridley and Hall
published a landmark paper demonstrating that the assembly of stress fibers and focal
adhesions is regulated by a small GTPase called Rho [15]. Rho has many isoforms, but the
one mainly associated with focal adhesions is RhoA, which for simplicity in the following
we refered to as Rho. In a companion paper of the same year, Ridley and Hall showed
together with coworkers that another small GTPase called Rac stimulates the formation
of lamellipodia as they appear in cell migration [16]. The main isoform associated with
focal adhesions is Rac1 which for simplicity in the following we will refer to as Rac. While
Rho mainly acts through activation of actomyosin contractility, the main effect of Rac is
activation of actin polymerization, in particular activation of the actin nucleation factor
Arp2/3. It has been reported later that activation of Rac downregulates Rho, leading to
disassembly of stress fibers and focal adhesions [17]. In many situations, Rho and Rac can
be regarded as antagonists, switching the cytoskeleton between different structural states
[18]. They are part of a larger family of small GTPases, called the Rho-family, which for
example also includes Cdc42, which stimulates the formation of filopodia and maintains
cell polarity [19]. Apart from regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, the small GTPases from
the Rho-family have many other functions in the cell, for example in cell cycle control and
differentiation.
Although the small GTPases from the Rho-family are simple molecular switches, they
are regulated by many different factors. In general, GTPases are upregulated by guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which convert the inactive Rho-GDPform to the active
Rho-GTPformbyexchanging GDPforGTP.TheyaredownregulatedbyGTPase-activating
proteins (GAPs), which stimulate Rho-GTPase activity, thus leading to GTP-hydrolysis
and transforming the active Rho-GTP to the inactive Rho-GDP. For the 20 members of
the Rho-family, 60 different GEFs and 70 different GAPs as well as more than 60 different
downstream targets have been identified [20]. At the current stage of affairs, there is no
way how this complex network can be modeled in full detail. However, certain parts of this
network have been well characterized by biochemical assays, in particular different parts of
the Rho-mediated signal transduction pathway leading from focal adhesions to actomyosin
contractility.
Here we focus on the role of Rho as stabilizing factor for mature adhesion. During recent
years, it has been shown that Rho is the central component of a biochemical-mechanical
feedback loopwhich regulates matureadhesion. Indetail, it hasbeenshown that application
of force on focal adhesions triggers their growth in a Rho-dependent manner [21] (reviewed
in [13, 18]). Two main downstream targets of Rho leading to stress fiber formation have
been identified. The formin mDia leads to actin polymerization, while the Rho-associated
kinase ROCK leads to phosphorylation of myosin light chain and thus to increased motor
activity. Together these effects lead to formation of and contractility in stress fibers and
therefore to increased force levels at focal adhesions. In this way, a positive feedback loop is
closed forupregulation of mature adhesion characterized by focal adhesions andstress fibers.
This biochemical-mechanical feedback loop is schematically depicted in Fig. 1. An essential
part of this feedback loop is the growth of focal adhesion under force, which recently has
been the subject of different modelling approaches [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27] (reviewed in [28]).
However, thesemodelshavefocusedmainlyonthemechanical andthermodynamicaspectsof
the growth process, neglecting the interaction of mechanics and biochemical signaling. The
positive feedback loop between contractility and growth of adhesions has been modelled
before in the framework of kinetic equations, but without addressing the details of force
generation anditsregulation by signaling pathways [29]. Similar kinetic equations have been
used to model the antagonistic roles of Rho and Rac in cell adhesion, but again without
addressing the details of force generation and regulation [30]. Recently force generation
has been addressed in more detail in a model for whole cell contractility and stress fiber
formation [31, 32]. However, no details of the signalling pathway have been modelled except
for an unspecified activation signal.
Because the actin cytoskeleton is very dynamic and interacts with many different molec-
ular factors, including actin-associated proteins and molecular motors, it is very difficult to
model its mechanical properties in a general way. However, modelling becomes feasible if
one focuses on one of the well-characterized states of the actin cytoskeleton, for example the
lamellipodium or stress fibers. Because here we are mostly interested in mature cell adhe-
sion in culture, we will focus on the latter case. Modelling stress fibers can be approached
from different perspectives. An obvious starting point are their common characteristics with
muscle fibers, which is a linear sequence of sarcomeres, each containing around 300 myosin
II molecular motors working collectively together as they slide the actin filaments relatively
to each other. This field has been pioneered by the Huxley-model [33], which later has
been modified in many regards, e.g. in regard to filament extensibility [34] or by a detailed
modelling of the myosin II hydrolysis cycle [35]. In contrast to muscle fibers, stress fibers
are more disordered and a complete description therefore requires a model for their assem-
bly process from polar filaments interacting through molecular motors. Such a description
has been achieved in the framework of a phenomenological theory which however does not
model the details of the underlying motor activity [36, 37]. This theory does predict differ-
ent dynamical states of the system, including a stationary state of isometric contraction as
observed in stress fibers.
Although being less ordered than muscle on the level of electron microscopy, stress fibers
do exhibit a periodic organization. Fig. 2 shows experimental data for fibroblast adhesion to
a stiff substrate [38]. The image of a whole cell shown in Fig. 2A reveals a banding pattern
in the stress fibers. The green regions correspond to the actin crosslinker α-actinin while the
red regions correspond to myosin II molecular motors. Non-muscle myosin II is known to
assemble into bipolar minifilaments consisting of 10-30 myosins, as depicted in the cartoon
of a stress fiber in Fig. 1. In contrast to muscle, the striation pattern of stress fibers shows
considerable variability along the length of a stress fiber. In particular, it has been observed
that upon stimulation of contraction with the drug calyculin A, only the sarcomeres in the
periphery (close to the focal adhesions, Fig. 2B) shorten, while those in the center (close to
the cell body, Fig. 2C) elongate. The exact time course of the striation width is shown in
Fig. 2D and E for control and stimulation experiments, respectively. This demonstrates that
activation of contractility leads to strong spatial gradients in the striation pattern. Thus it is
not sufficient to model only one sarcomeric unit as it is typically done for muscle [33, 34, 35].
Rather at least a one-dimensional chain of such sarcomeres has to be considered.
Here we introduce a new one-dimensional model for stress fibers which essentially models
them as linear sequence of viscoelastic Kelvin-Voigt bodies, whose stationary state is deter-
mined by the elastic part. The action of the molecular motors inside each sarcomeric unit
are included on the level of a linearized force-velocity relationship. The signaling pathway
is modeled as a system of reaction-diffusion equations. For this study, we have conducted
an extensive survey of the relevant literature and have collected the measured rate and
diffusion constants in such a way that they now can be used for mathematical modelling.
The coupling between the biochemical signaling pathway and the mechanical stress fiber
model proceeds by introducing a spatially varying fraction of active molecular motors. The
local activation level is thereby determined by the outcome of the signaling pathway. A
continuum limit of the mechanical model for many sarcomeric units in series results in a
partial differential equation with mixed derivatives. The whole system of reaction-diffusion
equations for the signal transduction and the partial differential equation for the mechanical
part can be solved simultaneously. By feeding the force resulting from the mechanical model
back into the activation of the signaling pathway, we obtain for the first time a model for
the closed biochemical-mechanical feedback cycle described above. As a first application of
our model, here we show that it predicts heterogenous contraction of stress fibers, in good
agreement with experiments. In general, our work shows how models for the coupling of
biochemistry and mechanics can be deviced in a meaningful way.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we start with our model for the part of the
Rho-pathway which is relevant for our purposes. We then introduce our mechanical model
for one sarcomeric unit of the stress fibers in Sec. III and its continuum limit for a whole
stress fiber in Sec. IV. In Sec. V our model predictions for inhomogeneous contraction upon
activation of contractility by calyculin are compared to the experimental results. Finally we
conclude in Sec. VI.
II. BIOCHEMICAL MODEL FOR THE RHO-PATHWAY
In this study we concentrate on stress fibers and their regulation by the Rho-pathway.
In Fig. 1 we introduce a coordinate system for our one-dimensional model: the stress fiber
extends along the positive x-direction and the endpoints at x = 0 and x = L correspond
to two focal adhesions. Because the two focal adhesions are treated as equivalent, our
model has inflection symmetry around x = L/2. In Fig. 3, we schematically depict the
biochemical part of our model in the spatial context of the focal adhesion at x = 0 (by
symmetry, the same description applies to the one at x = L). Three compartments have to
be considered: the focal adhesion, the cytoplasm and the stress fiber. In our model, each
of these compartments corresponds to one or two important biochemical components. The
reaction pathway is a linear sequence of activating or inihibitory enzyme reactions initiated
at focal adhesion, transmitted through the cytoplasm by diffusion and resulting in spatially
dependent myosin activation in the stress fiber. In the following we discuss each reaction
step in detail and show how these processes are translated into reaction-diffusion equations.
The abbrevations used for the biochemical components are compiled in Tab. I, together with
a short description of their functions. The model equations are summarized in Tab. II.
Our modelling of the biochemical signaling pathway starts with the activation of Rho at
focal adhesions. The Rho-protein has a lipophilic end that serves to anchor it to lipid mem-
branes [39]. Complexation with guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) shields
the hydrophobic parts of the Rho-protein and make it inactive as well as soluble in the
cytoplasm [40]. It is expected that Rho is released from these complexes at focal adhesions.
More importantly, focal adhesions are known to recruit different Rho-GEFs, thus activating
Rho at the focal adhesions. The active Rho is then able to bind Rho-associated kinase
(ROCK) and thereby activate its kinase activity [41]. Since the active ROCK is bound to
Rho-GTP, we assume in our model that these components are not diffusible but are local-
ized to the focal adhesions. For the same reason, we neglect the direct interaction of ROCK
and myosin which has been reported to occur in vitro. Active ROCK phosphorylates the
diffusible myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) at its myosin-binding subunit (MBS).
MLCP and its antagonistic partner myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) are the main reg-
ulators of myosin contractility in the context we are interested in. Both enzymes interact
with the regulatory myosin light chain subunit (MLC) of the myosins. Depending on the
respective activities, MLC gets either phosphorylated or dephosphorylated. MLC, in turn,
controls the myosin binding to actin filaments. Only if MLC is phosphorylated myosin is
able to bind actin filaments and perform its ATPase cycle that converts chemical energy into
mechanical work, e.g. contraction of stress fibers [42]. By phosphorylating MLCP, ROCK
effectively enhances the phosphorylation level of MLC. In this way, Rho-activation can lead
to an increase in myosin contractility in the stress fiber.
Our model for the biochemical reaction-diffusion system assumes that each enzyme stim-
ulation follows Michaelis-Menten kinetics [43]. In Michaelis-Menten kinetics, production
first increases linearly with educt concentration and then saturates at a maximal production
velocity if educt concentration exceeds the value set by the Michaelis-Menten constant. The
precise molecular process corresponding to the conversion of force into a biochemical signal
at focal adhesions has not been identified yet. However, it is expected that mechanical forces
exerted onto focal adhesions eventually initiate the loading of Rho-GTP leading to ROCK
activation. For lack of information we therefore lump the focal adhesion associated pro-
cesses into one equation that effectively describes the conversion of ROCK into its activated
form (presumably complexed with Rho-GTP). The mechanical force F that stimulates the
activation is treated as enzyme in the framework of Michaelis-Menten kinetics:
∂ROCK(t) r
The variable ROCK denotes the activated form of ROCK and we assume that the overall
concentration of ROCK is constant at ROCK . The force exerted by the stress fiber
onto the focal adhesion, F (t), stimulates the conversion of ROCK into its activated form
with maximum velocity r F (t) and Michaelis-Menten constant K . The parameter r is
equivalent to a rate constant but relates mechanical force to a chemical reaction. For this
reason the units of r are given as [nM/snN]. The force F (t) will depend on the stress
fiber deformation. The second term accounts for the degradation of activated ROCK to its
inactive form, with maximum velocity V−1 and Michaelis-Menten constant K−1 . Since we
expect ROCK in its active form to be associated with focal adhesions, we omit diffusive
contributions to this equation.
One main effector of ROCK is MLCP which we regard as a diffusible compound leading
to a reaction-diffusion equation:
∂MLCP(x,t) V−2 MLCP-P(x,t) ∂2MLCP(x,t)
Here, the variables MLCP-P and MLCP denote the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated
form of myosin light chain phosphatase, respectively. The first term accounts for the de-
phosphorylation of MLCP-P with maximum velocity V−2 and Michaelis-Menten constant
K−2 . The second term allows for the diffusion of the phosphatase with diffusion constant
D. The phosphorylation level of MLCP is also regulated by the active form of ROCK which
catalyzes the reverse reaction, that is the conversion of the phosphatase into its phosphory-
lated form. However, ROCK is only active in the vicinity of focal adhesions located at each
end of the stress fiber. Therefore this source term can be incorporated into the boundary
conditions for Eq. (2), in the sense that the diffusive flux into the boundary has to balance
the conversion into its inactive form:
∂MLCP(x = 0,t) R ROCK(t)MLCP(x = 0,t)
∂x K +MLCP(x = 0,t)
The same relation, but with inverted sign is valid at the other end at x = L, compare the
overview in Tab. II. The reaction is again modelled with Michaelis-Menten kinetics, where
R = r v is the product of a rate constant r with an effective volume v of the focal
adhesion in which the reaction takes place. K is the usual Michaelis-Menten constant. For
the phosphorylated form of the phosphatase (MLCP-P) equations similar to Eq. (2) and
Eq. (3) are valid, but with inverted signs of the source terms and a diffusion constant which
in principle can be different, see Tab. II.
MLCP together with MLCK regulate the phosphorylation level of MLC. Since myosin in
stress fibers form mini-filaments which are bound to actin filaments, we neglect diffusion of
this compound, leading to the rate equation for the phosphorylated fraction n of MLC:
By allowing only the ratio of the phosphorylated fraction to vary, we assume that the overall
amount of myosin in the stress fibers is fixed. MLC is phosphorylated by MLCK with a
maximum velocity V = r MLCK and respective Michaelis-Menten constant K . Here we
assume that the concentration of MLCK is constant within the cell. The kinase is antago-
nized by MLCP that dephosphorylates MLC with a rate constant r−3 and Michaelis-Menten
constant K−3 . The factor I is an inhibition parameter defined below. Since MLCP has
spatial dependent source terms and is diffusible, the inhibition of MLC by the phosphatase
will vary in space.
To complete the biochemical modelling we have to specify how the induction of calyculin
is treated in our model. Calyculin is an inhibitor of MLCP and thereby enhances the phos-
phorylation level of MLC. We model the interaction of calyculin with its target MLCP as a
competitive inhibition leading to the additional factor I in the last term of Eq. (4) [44]. In
the presence of calyculin I > 1 (in absence of the drug: I = 1) which effectively increases
the Michaelis-Menten constant K−3 and thus decreases the rate of MLC dephosphorylation.
Hence more myosin motors will be activated and cell contractility is stimulated. The in-
duction of the drug is then modelled by switching instantaneously the inhibition parameter
from I = 1 to I = 3. Thereby we omit the time delay caused by the internalization of the
drug.
The used parameter values for the reaction-diffusion system are based on an extensive
survey of the literature and are summarized in Tab. III. If a range of values is reported
in the literature, we chose an intermediate value for this parameter. If no value could be
found in the literature, we made reasonable assumptions based on similar parameters in
other systems. No attempt was made to fit the parameters to some target function. We
first analyze the properties of this reaction diffusion system assuming that the boundary
force exerted onto the focal adhesions is held at a constant level. This would be the case
if the myosin forces were in a stationary state and not regulated by the biochemical signals
emerging from focal adhesions. We impose artificial initial conditions that all components
(ROCK, MLCP-P and n) are at zero activation level but set the boundary force to 5 nN, a
typical force observed for fibroblast [45]. This mechanical stimulation triggers the accumu-
lation of active ROCK at focal adhesions, see Eq. (1), creating a sink for the active form of
MLCP. Thus in those boundary regions MLCK dominates and increases MLC phosphory-
lation. Closer to the center of the cell MLC rather remains in its unphosphorylated form.
The width of the interfacial region of intermediate MLC-phosphorylation level is mainly
determined by the diffusiveness of the phosphatase. The faster the diffusion, the wider the
intermediate region. On a typical timescale of a few minutes all components equilibrate to
their steady state concentration profile, where MLC is highly phosphorylated at the bound-
aries, but is poorly activated at the center of the stress fiber. In Fig. 4 we show the typical
equilibration of the phosphorylated fraction of MLC, n(x,t), as obtained from a solution of
the full system of biochemical reaction-diffusion equations. Below we will argue that this
phosphorylation profile of MLC implies a spatially varying myosin motor activation leading
to an inhomogeneous stress fiber contraction.
III. SARCOMERIC UNIT OF STRESS FIBER MODEL
A minimal model for stress fibers has to take into account not only the viscoelastic but
also the contractile properties of the fiber due to myosin motor activity. For the mechanical
response of a sarcomeric unit we take the usual Kelvin-Voigt model for viscoelastic material
[46]. It consists of a dashpot with viscosity η and a spring of stiffness k connected in parallel.
These two modules represent viscous and elastic properties of the material, respectively.
The Kelvin-Voigt model is the simplest viscoelastic model which in the stationary state is
determined by elasticity, in contrast to the Maxwell model, which flows in the stationary
limit. ThustheKelvin-Voigtmodelistheappropriatechoiceforstressfibers, whichcancarry
loadat constant deformationover a long time. In order to cope with the contractile behavior
of stress fibers, we introduce an additional contractile element that represents the activity
of motor proteins. For illustrative reasons we first derive the governing differential equation
for such a viscoelastic and contractile element (vec-element) before we proceed to the stress
fiber model. This ansatz is similar to the two-spring model which we have introduced before
to explain the physical aspects of rigidity sensing on soft elastic substrates [47].
The considered vec-element is depicted in Fig. 5. The properties of the additional con-
tractile element is given by the specific force-velocity relation of the molecular motor. For
simplicity, we use the linearized relationship:
(cid:18) v (cid:19)
F is the actual force exerted by a motor moving with velocity v. v is the zero-load
velocity and F is the stall force of the motor, that is the maximal force allowing motor
movement. In the following description for the stress fiber, the stall force will depend on
the active fraction of the myosin, compare Eq. (13), such that myosin contractility may vary
spatially. The sum of all internal forces, F, exerted by the vec-element reads
The crucial point is that the motor force F (v) is related to the contraction velocity v which
relates to the displacement u(t) simply by
The minus sign comes from the fact that the directed motor movement causes a relative
sliding of the anti-parallel orientated actin filaments leading to contraction of the element
with velocity v. Thus the displacement u(t) becomes negative upon motor activity. If there
are no external forces, all internal forces have to balance, F = 0, and we arrive at the
following differential equation for the displacement u(t):
The term originating form the motor activity decomposes into two contributions. First it
increases the viscosity of the damping term (dissipative signature of the motor) and second
it contributes a constant force to the inhomogeneous part of the equation (contractility of
the motor). Assume vanishing initial displacement u(t = 0) = 0, the solution to equation
Eq. (8) is given by:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Here τ = η /k corresponds to the relaxation time ofthe Kelvin-Voigt model with aneffective
viscosity η = η + F /v . Thus the system appears to be more viscous for stronger
and slower motors and subsequently the motor activity slows down any relaxation due
to perturbations of the system. The steady state deformation u(t → ∞) = −F /k is
determined by the ratio of stall force and spring stiffness.
IV. CONTINUUM VERSION OF STRESS FIBER MODEL
We model a stress fiber as a string of vec-elements whose viscoelastic and contractile
properties may vary spatially. For example the contractile strength of the vec-elements
will vary spatially because the biochemical signal will cause different myosin activation
levels along the fiber. Starting from a discrete description depicted in Fig. 6 we derive the
governing continuum equation. Similar to the preceding discussion, the force F on the site
n is the sum of spring forces, viscous drag and the forces built up by the motor proteins:
F n = η n+1
(u n −u n−1 )+k n+1 (u n+1 −u n )−k n (u n −u n−1 )+F mn+1 −F mn
Here, we allow that the stiffness of the spring, the viscosity as well as the motor force vary
spatially. In order to deduce a continuum description we expand the functions η,k,uand F
at x = na assuming that these functions are smooth within the small distance a. Keeping
only leading order terms yields:
Note that the leading differential operator ∂ acts onη and u. The same holds for the second
term. If k does not vary spatially, it simplifies to k∂2. Like for a single vec-element, we argue
that the motor force F depends on the displacement u(x,t). The contraction ∆ within
the n-th element generated by the respective motor is given by ∆ n = −(u n − u n−1 ). The
contraction velocity is therefore v(x,t) = ∆˙ (x,t) ≈ −a∂ ∂ u(x,t). The found expression for
the velocity is inserted into the force velocity relation Eq. (5) leading to:
(cid:18) v ∂t∂x (cid:19)
In contrast to Eq. (5), here the stall force is not constant but depends on the phosphorylated
fraction n(x,t) of MLC along the stress fiber. This comes from the fact that along a myosin
minifilament and depending on MLC phosphorylation, a larger or smaller fraction of myosin
heads is able to bind to actin and perform ATP-cycles. The more myosin heads are active
the larger the maximum force that the bundle can exert to the actin filaments. In our
model we regard the ensemble of myosins within a cross-section of a stress fiber as one large
contractile unit with an effective stall force that depends linearly on the active fraction n of
myosin heads:
The effective stall force, F (x,t), would reach the maximum force F if all myosins
within this cross section would be working (n = 1). In the following we set F = 50 nN
which will result in boundary forces exerted by the fiber of about 5 nN which corresponds
to typical values observed in experiments [45]. Eq. (11) together with Eq. (12) and Eq. (13)
lead to the final model equation for the stress fiber:
where the effective viscosity η (x,t) = η(x)+F (x,t)/v , similar to the findings in Eq. (8),
although here the viscosity varies spatially. Interestingly, only the variation of the motor
force appears on the right hand side of the equation. As a consequence, a homogeneous
motor activity will not contribute to the displacements within the string.
To obtain some intuition for this equation, assume that the spatially varying stall force
is given e.g. by the steady state solution n of the reaction diffusion system, depicted in
Fig. 4, such that F (x) = F n (x). For this simplifying case where the stall force does
stall max ss
not vary in time, Eq. (14) can be integrated and the time dependent solution for u(x,t) is
given by:
+ 1 e − τ t− (x t ′ 0 ) t F (t ′ )e t τ ′ ( − x t ′ 0 )dt ′ (15)
aη (x′) Z b (cid:19)
Here, we have set τ(x) = η (x)/k(x), the typical relaxation time with which perturbations
decay at a certain position. E.g. the initial conditions ∂ u(x,t ) can be regarded as per-
turbations to the steady state and they decay with exp(−t/τ(x)). The three integration
constants can be identified as the displacement at the left boundary, u(x ,t), the force ex-
erted to the left boundary, F (t), and the initial strain along the fiber, ∂ u(x,t ). They are
determined by the boundary and initial conditions. Experiments by Peterson et al. [38] are
arranged with cells on stiff substrates to which the ends of the stress fiber are connected by
focal adhesions. Therefore, the appropriate boundary conditions are fixed ends for the fiber,
namely u(x ,t) ≡ 0 and u(x ,t) ≡ 0. From the second condition one is able to calculate the
missing integration constant F (t) for any initial condition ∂ u(x,t ). The force on the left
boundary F (t) is given as solution to an inhomogeneous Volterra equation of the first kind:
with the kernel
and inhomogeneous part g(t) dependent on the initial condition ∂ u(x,t ):
In order to solve the integral equation Eq. (16) for F (t), we calculate its time derivative,
leading to:
This equation yields an explicit expression for the initial force F at t=0:
By inspection of the kernel Eq. (17) and the inhomogeneous part Eq. (18) one finds that the
initial forceonto theboundary has a finite value, even forthe initial condition ∂ u(x,t ) = 0.
Eq. (19) also yields an iteration rule for the time course of F (t), by applying a quadrature,
where F (t ) from Eq. (20) is used as a starting value. The solution for F (t) is shown in
Fig. 7. The boundary force is rising from its initial value and then quickly saturates at
about 4.8 nN. The result for F (t) can then be set into the general solution (Eq. (15)) for
the displacement u(x,t) along the fiber. Fig. 8 shows this solution, by using the steady
state activation level for the myosins (F (x) = F n (x)) shown in Fig. 4 and assuming
stall max ss
the initial condition ∂ u(x,t ) = 0 as well as the boundary conditions u(0,t) ≡ 0 and
u(L,t) ≡ 0. Beside the analytical solution, indicated by circles, we also included the direct
numerical solution of Eq. (14) for comparison. The numerical solution was derived by using
the MATLAB algorithm ”pdepe”. The sinusoidal shape of the function u results from
stronger contractile motors close to the boundaries causing the fiber elements to displace
into the direction of the boundaries. Hence the displacement u is positive (negative) along
the right (left) half of the fiber. It is worth noting that the mechanical equilibration of the
stress fiber occurs within seconds in contrast to the biochemical system which equilibrates
over minutes.
V. ROLE OF FEEDBACK
We already argued that the system of focal adhesions and stress fibers exhibit a closed
biochemical and mechanical positive feedback loop. Despite this fact the previous results
were derived under the assumption that the mechanically triggered biochemical signals at
FAs originate from a constant force. In order to model the full biological system, the varying
boundary forces have to be fed back into the equation describing the mechanotransduction
Eq. (1). Since the stress fiber model does not include any cross-links (e.g. intermediate
contacts to the substrate) the tension γ within the fiber has to be constant and therefore
equals the boundary forces:
b e x t x stall
This relation now connects the biochemical signaling to the mechanical deformation of the
stress fiber. Thus, the coupled system of reaction equations, Eq. (1) to Eq. (4), and the
mechanical equationEq.(14)havetobesolvedsimultaneously. Thiscanbedonenumerically
by using the MATLAB algorithm ”pdepe”. The whole system of equations and the used
parameter values are summarized in Tab. II and Tab. III, respectively.
By doing a steady state analysis we find, that this system of equations exhibit two stable
steady states for the used parameter values: the first state is characterized by a generally low
activation level n (x) of the myosin motors resulting in marginal boundary forces whereas
in the second state myosin motors are non-uniformly activated and the exerted forces reach
a few nN. This bistability is characteristic for a positive feedback system [3]. The first ”non-
active” state would correspond to cells that failed to establish mechanical stress whereas the
second ”active” state correspond to cells that are well adhered to the substrate. In order to
simulate the drug experiments by Peterson et al. [38], we start with the system residing in
this ”active” state and then, at t=0, we perturb the system by turning on the stimulation
with calyculin. This is modelled by switching instantaneously the inhibition parameter from
I = 1 to I = 3, thereby omitting the time delay caused by the internalization of the drug.
The stimulation with calyculin reduces the phosphatase activity and elevates the myosin
activation level everywhere leading to a quick increase in the boundary forces exerted by
the stress fiber. The time course of the force exerted onto the focal adhesions is shown
in Fig. 9. Subsequently, the positive mechanical feedback triggers additional signaling at
focal adhesions activating myosin motors preferentially at the cell periphery. This results in
strong spatial gradients in myosin motor activity, see Fig. 11. The strong peripheral motors
then contract the fiber to the cost of the central regions where the fiber has to elongate. This
can be further analyzed by using the numerical solution for the displacement u(x,t). The
steady states of the displacement u before and after stimulation with calyculin are shown
in Fig. 10. The stimulation strongly increases the displacement along the fiber resulting
in substantial contraction of the fiber close to the boundaries but in expansion around the
cell center. This finding becomes more apparent in the shown striation pattern calculated
from the displacement after stimulation (upper string) compared to the striation pattern of
a completely undistorted fiber (lower string). The bands close to the boundaries have been
contracted whereas the bands around the center have been expanded, compare also Fig. 13.
We have to stress that the presented stress fiber model is continuous, thus the model cannot
distinguish between α-actinin bands or MLC bands. The color code in Fig. 10 and Fig. 13 is
therefore arbitrary. We also derive the local relative change of density within the fiber which
is given in general as the negative trace of the strain tensor δρ = (ρ−ρ )/ρ = −tr(u ).
rel 0 0 i,j
Since the model is one dimensional this simplifies to δρ = −∂ u(x,t), plotted in Fig. 12.
The local relative change of band width at a certain position within the fiber, is then
simply given by: (w(x,t) − w )/w = −δρ (x,t) = ∂ u(x,t). The figure shows that the
inhomogeneous motor activity causes a contraction of the bands up to about 55% close to
the fiber ends (the relative change in density is positive), whereas the pattern expand up to
15% at the middle of the fiber (the relative change in density is negative).
The experimental time course data for the sarcomer length shown in Fig. 2 is intrinsically
averaged over a certain area in the peripheral and central regions of the cell. In order to
compare the model results with the experimental finding we therefore define central (center
±10µm) and peripheral (edges ±10µm) regions of the cell, indicated by vertical lines in
Fig. 12. The expected sarcomer length at a certain position along the fiber is given by
In the following analysis this measure is averaged over the defined central and peripheral
regions, respectively. The deduced time courses for the mean pattern bandwidths in the
distinct regions are shown in Fig. 13. The expected steady state striation patterns are illus-
trated as insets. Upon stimulation with calyculin, the peripheral mean bandwidth shrinks
from its initial value of about 0.97 µm down to 0.83 µm, whereas in the central regions,
the bands elongate from about 1.03 µm up to 1.13 µm. Interestingly the inital mean band-
width at the center and periphery yet differ in the initial unperturbed steady state of the
cell (1.03 µm compared to 0.97 µm). This results from the fact that the unperturbed fiber
already exerts moderate forces on to the focal adhesions which results in slight spatial gra-
dients in myosin activation. These gradients then sharpen upon stimulation with calyculin,
see Fig. 11 as well as Fig. 12. The model results agree qualitatively with the experimental
findings by Peterson et al. [38] and the quantitative measurements are within the same order
of magnitude (compare Fig. 2). It is worth mentioning that the amplitude of contraction
or elongation of the fiber scales inversely with the fiber stiffness k: the softer the fiber, the
stronger the mechanical deformation will be. Thus, a lower k value would simply explain the
reported higher values for sarcomer contraction of about 30-40%. In our calculation we used
k = 45nN/µm, a value reported by [48]. The experimentally measured equilibration time
of the stress fiber upon stimulation is about 20 min (Fig. 2) which compares to about 3 min
for the model results. These quantitave difference originate from two model simplifications.
First, we lump the focal adhesion associated processes into one equation thereby we shortcut
the activation of ROCK and neglect prior activation steps of e.g. Rho-Gef or Rho-GTPase.
Considering these steps would cause an additional time delay. Secondly, the stimulation
with calyculin happens instantaneously in the model omitting the time delay caused by the
internalization of the drug. Refining the model and eliminating these simplifications will
further decrease the differences in equilibration times.
To highlight the importance of the mechanical feedback we also include the expected
results for a system neglecting this feedback shown as dashed lines in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12.
Here the homogeneous induction of the drug cause an almost uniform elevation of myosin
activation within the cell. Slight differences between cell center and cell periphery would
persistbutrathermarginallyextend(Fig.11). Infactstimulationleadsalsoheretoamplified
distortions of the striation pattern. However, the changes in bandwidths are significantly
smaller compared to the system incorporating the feedback (Fig. 12). Thus the closed
biochemical and mechanical feedback loop is an essential feature required to describe the
strong distortions of striation patterns upon homogenous drug induction.
VI. CONCLUSION
Herewehavepresentedforthefirsttimeamathematicalmodelfortheclosedbiochemical-
mechanical feedback loop triggering the upregulation of focal adhesions and stress fibers
which is typical for cell culture on stiff substrates. In regard to the biochemical part, we
present for the first time a reaction-diffusion model for Rho-signaling from focal adhesions
towards stress fibers. Our modelling is based on an extensive review of the literature, which
provides the list of diffusion and reaction constants summarized in Tab. III. In regard to
the mechanical part, we introduced a new model for stress fibers which takes into account
the special viscoelastic and contractile properties of the sarcomeric units. For a linear chain
of many such units, we derived a continuum equation which we solved both analytically and
numerically. Combining the two model parts resulted in a complete model for the feedback
loop of interest. We found that this feedback loop leads to bistability between weak and
strong adhesion and to strong spatial gradients in the deformation pattern. In fact, the
experimental results can be only explained by incorporating the feedback loop. Our model
shows how coupling of mechanics and biochemistry can be modeled in general. In the future,
it might be used to address also other issues in the context of cell adhesion, including cell
adhesion to soft elastic substrates or to cyclically stretched substrates.
In our model, spatial variations in the deformation pattern result from inhomogeneous
reaction-diffusion fields. This prediction should be experimentally tested in the future. In-
deed it has already been reported that MLC-phosphorylation is larger at the periphery than
at the center (both before and after stimulation with calyculin) [38], exactly as predicted by
our model. Our model does not account for inhomogeneities resulting fromspatial variations
in mechanical properties (e.g. local accumulation of myosin II, actin or α-actinin), although
in principle the model is capable to describe these. A detailed experimental analysis in-
cluding detailed measurements of local actin and myosin accumulation would be needed to
disentangle the relative contributions of biochemical and mechanical factors to the inhomo-
geneous deformation pattern.
An intriguing aspect of our model is the way different stress fibers might cooperate inside
a living cell. Conceptually it is easy to generalize our model to describe a system in which
many stress fibers share the signaling input and many focal adhesions share the mechanical
output. However, it remains a challenge to model also the dynamics of the actomyosin
system if it is not completely condensed into stress fibers.
Acknowledgements We thank Dominik Meidner for helpful discussions on numerically
solving partial differential equations. This work was supported by the Center for Modeling
and Simulation in the Biosciences (BIOMS) at Heidelberg.
[1] B. M. Gumbiner. Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis.
Cell, 84:345–357, 1996.
[2] S. Huang and D. E. Ingber. The structural and mechanical complexity of cell-growth control.
Nat. Cell Biol., 1:E131–E138, 1999.
[3] J. J. Tyson, K. C. Chen, and B. Novak. Sniffers, buzzers, toggles and blinkers: dynamics of
regulatory and signaling pathways in the cell. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol., 15:221–231, 2003.
[4] B. N. Kholodenko. Cell-signalling dynamics in time and space. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.,
7:165–76, 2006.
[5] D. E. Discher, P. Janmey, and Y.-L. Wang. Tissue cells feel and respond to the stiffness of
their substrate. Science, 310:1139–1143, 2005.
[6] V. Vogel and M. Sheetz. Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell. Biol., 7:265–75, 2006.
[7] U. S. Schwarz. Soft matters in cell adhesion: rigidity sensing on soft elastic substrates. Soft
Matter, 3:263–266, 2007.
[8] T.LecuitandP.-F.Lenne. Cellsurfacemechanics andthecontrolofcellshape,tissuepatterns
and morphogenesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol., 8:633–644, 2007.
[9] C.-M. Lo, H.-B. Wang, M. Dembo, and Y.-L. Wang. Cell movement is guided by the rigidity
of the substrate. Biophys. J., 79:144–152, 2000.
[10] A. Engler, S.Sen, H. L. Sweeney, and D. E. Discher. Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage
specification. Cell, 126:677–89, 2006.
[11] T. D. Pollard and W. C. Earnshaw. Cell biology. Saunders, Philadelphia, 4th ed. edition,
2004.
[12] B. Geiger, A. Bershadsky, R. Pankov, and K.M. Yamada. Transmembrane crosstalk between
the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2:793–805, 2001.
[13] A. Bershadsky, N. Q. Balaban, and B. Geiger. Adhesion-dependent cell mechanosensitivity.
Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol., 19:677–95, 2003.
[14] R. Zaidel-Bar, S. Itzkovitz, A. Ma’ayan, R. Iyengar, and B. Geiger. Functional atlas of the
integrin adhesome. Nat. Cell Biol., 9:858–67, 2007.
[15] A J Ridley and A Hall. The small GTP-binding protein Rho regulates the assembly of focal
adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors. Cell, 70(3):389–399, 1992.
[16] A J Ridley, H F Paterson, C L Johnston, D Diekmann, and A Hall. The small GTP-binding
protein Rac regulates growth factor-induced membrane ruffling. Cell, 70(3):401–410, 1992.
[17] E E Sander, J P ten Klooster, S van Delft, R A van der Kammen, and J G Collard. Rac
downregulates Rho activity: reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular
morphology and migratory behavior. J. Cell Biol., 147(5):1009–1022, 1999.
[18] KeithBurridgeandKristerWennerberg. RhoandRactakecenter stage. Cell,116(2):167–179,
2004.
[19] A. Hall. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science, 279:509–514, 1998.
[20] S. Etienne-Manneville and A. Hall. Rho GTPases in cell biology. Nature, 420:629–35, 2002.
[21] D.Riveline,E.Zamir,N.Q.Balaban,U.S.Schwarz,B.Geiger,Z.Kam,andA.D.Bershadsky.
Focal contact as a mechanosensor: externally applied local mechanical force induces growth
of focal contacts by a mDia1-dependent and ROCK-independent mechanism. J. Cell Biol.,
153:1175–1185, 2001.
[22] Alice Nicolas, Benjamin Geiger, and Samuel A. Safran. Cell mechanosensitivity controls the
anisotropy of focal adhesions. PNAS, 101(34):12520–12525, 2004.
[23] A. Nicolas and S. A. Safran. Elastic deformations of grafted layers with surface stress. Phys.
Rev. E, 69(5):051902, 2004.
[24] Tom Shemesh, Benjamin Geiger, Alexander D. Bershadsky, and Michael M. Kozlov. Focal
adhesions as mechanosensors: A physical mechanism. PNAS, 102(35):12383–12388, 2005.
[25] Achim Besser and Samuel A. Safran. Force-Induced Adsorption and Anisotropic Growth of
Focal Adhesions. Biophys. J., 90(10):3469–3484, 2006.
[26] D. Raz-Ben Aroush and H.D. Wagner. Shear-Stress Profile along a Cell Focal Adhesion. Adv.
Mater., 18(12):1537–1540, 2006.
[27] Alice Nicolas and Samuel. A. Safran. Limitation of Cell Adhesion by the Elasticity of the
Extracellular Matrix. Biophys. J., 91(1):61–73, 2006.
[28] Alexander Bershadsky, Michael Kozlov, and Benjamin Geiger. Adhesion-mediated
mechanosensitivity: a time to experiment, and a time to theorize. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.,
18(5):472–481, 2006.
[29] Igor L. Novak, Boris M. Slepchenko, Alex Mogilner, and Leslie M. Loew. Cooperativity
between cell contractility and adhesion. Phys. Rev. Lett., 93(26):268109, 2004.
[30] G. Civelekoglu-Scholey, A. Wayne Orr, I. Novak, J.-J. Meister, M.A. Schwartz, and
A. Mogilner. Model of coupled transient changes of Rac, Rho, adhesions and stress fibers
alignment in endothelial cells responding to shear stress. J. Theor. Biol., 232(4):569–585,
2005.
[31] Vikram S. Deshpande, Robert M. McMeeking, and Anthony G. Evans. A bio-chemo-
mechanical model for cell contractility. PNAS, 103(38):14015–14020, 2006.
[32] R. M. McMeeking V. S. Deshpande and A. G. Evans. A model for the contractility of the
cytoskeleton including the effects of stress-fibre formation and dissociation. Proc. Royal Soc.
A, 463:787–815, 2007.
[33] A. F. Huxley. Muscle structure and theories of contraction. Prog. Biophys. Chem., 7:255–318,
1957.
[34] S. M. Mijailovich, J. J. Fredberg, and J. P. Butler. On the theory of muscle contraction: fila-
ment extensibility and the development of isometric force and stiffness. Biophys. J., 71:1475–
84, 1996.
[35] T. A. J. Duke. Molecular model of muscle contraction. PNAS, 96:2770–2775, 1999.
[36] K Kruse and F Ju¨licher. Actively contracting bundles of polar filaments. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
85(8):1778–1781, 2000.
[37] Karsten Kruse and Frank Ju¨licher. Self-organization and mechanical properties of active
filament bundles. Phys. Rev. E, 67(5 Pt 1):051913, 2003.
[38] L. J. Peterson, Z. Rajfur, A. S. Maddox, C. D. Freel, Y. Chen, M. Edlund, C. Otey, and
K. Burridge. Simultaneous stretching and contraction of stress fibers in vivo. Mol. Biol. Cell,
15:3497–3508, 2004.
[39] M. C. Seabra. Membrane association and targeting of prenylated Ras-like GTPases. Cell.
Signal., 10(3):167–172, 1998.
[40] Andrew P. Somlyo and Avril V. Somlyo. Signal transduction by G-proteins, Rho-kinase and
protein phosphataseto smooth muscle and non-muscle myosin II. J. Physiol., 522(2):177–185,
2000.
[41] Jianhua Feng, Masaaki Ito, Yasuko Kureishi, Kazuhito Ichikawa, Mutsuki Amano, Naoki
Isaka, Katsuya Okawa, Akihiro Iwamatsu, Kozo Kaibuchi, David J. Hartshorne, and Takeshi
Nakano. Rho-associated Kinase of Chicken Gizzard Smooth Muscle. J. Biol. Chem.,
274(6):3744–3752, 1999.
[42] K E Kamm and J T Stull. The function of myosin and myosin light chain kinase phosphory-
lation in smooth muscle. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol., 25(1):593–620, 1985.
[43] James D. Murray. Mathematical biology. Springer, New York, 2002.
[44] E. Klipp, R. Herwig, A. Kowald, C. Wierling, and H. Lehrach. Systems Biology in Practice.
Concepts, Implementation and Application. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2005.
[45] N. Q. Balaban, U. S. Schwarz, D. Riveline, P. Goichberg, G. Tzur, I. Sabanay, D. Mahalu,
S. Safran, A. Bershadsky, L. Addadi, and B. Geiger. Force and focal adhesion assembly: a
close relationship studied using elastic micro-patterned substrates. Nat. Cell Biol., 3:466–472,
2001.
[46] Y.C.Fung. Biomechanics: mechanical properties of living tissues. SpringerVerlag, NewYork,
1993.
[47] U. S. Schwarz, T. Erdmann, and I. B. Bischofs. Focal adhesions as mechanosensors: the
two-spring model. BioSystems, 83:225–232, 2006.
[48] S. Deguchi, T. Ohashi, and M. Sato. Tensile properties of single stress fibers isolated from
cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. J. Biomech., 39:2603–2610, 2006.
[49] DJ Hartshorne, M Ito, and F Erdoedi. Myosin light chain phosphatase: subunit composition,
interactions and regulation. J. Muscle Res. Cell M., 19(4):325–341, 1998.
[50] Hisashi Nagamoto and Koichi Yagi. Properties of Myosin Light Chain Kinase Prepared from
Rabbit Skeletal Muscle by an Improved Method. J. Biochem., 95(4):1119–1130, 1984.
[51] T. M. Butler, S. R. Narayan, S. U. Mooers, and M. J. Siegman. Rapid turnover of myosin
light chain phosphate duringcross-bridge cycling in smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol.-Cell Ph.,
267(4):C1160–1166, 1994.
[52] Mutsuki Amano, Masaaki Ito, Kazushi Kimura, Yuko Fukata, Kazuyasu Chihara, Takeshi
Nakano, Yoshiharu Matsuura, and Kozo Kaibuchi. Phosphorylation and Activation of Myosin
by Rho-associated Kinase (Rho-kinase). J. Biol. Chem., 271(34):20246–20249, 1996.
[53] David R. Hathaway and Robert S. Adelstein. Human Platelet Myosin Light Chain Kinase
RequirestheCalcium-BindingProteinCalmodulinforActivity. PNAS,76(4):1653–1657, 1979.
[54] MH Nunnally, SB Rybicki, and JT Stull. Characterization of chicken skeletal muscle myosin
light chain kinase. Evidence for muscle-specific isozymes. J. Biol. Chem., 260(2):1020–1026,
1985.
[55] D C Bartelt and D J Moroney, Sand Wolff. Purification, characterization and substrate
specificity of calmodulin-dependentmyosin light-chain kinase from bovine brain. Biochem. J.,
247(3):747–756, 1987.
[56] MD Pato and RS Adelstein. Purification and characterization of a multisubunit phosphatase
from turkey gizzard smooth muscle. The effect of calmodulin binding to myosin light chain
kinase on dephosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem., 258(11):7047–7054, 1983.
[57] J. Lippincott-Schwartz, E. Snapp, and A. Kenworthy. Studying protein dynamics in living
cells. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Bio., 2(6):444–456, June 2001.
[58] S Umemoto and JR Sellers. Characterization of in vitro motility assays using smooth muscle
and cytoplasmic myosins. J. Biol. Chem., 265(25):14864–14869, 1990.
[59] Sanjay Kumar, Iva Z. Maxwell, Alexander Heisterkamp, Thomas R. Polte, Tanmay P. Lele,
Matthew Salanga, EricMazur, andDonald E.Ingber. Viscoelastic Retraction of SingleLiving
Stress Fibers and Its Impact on Cell Shape, Cytoskeletal Organization, and Extracellular
Matrix Mechanics. Biophys. J., 90(10):3762–3773, 2006.
Abbreviation full name function
GDP/GTP guanosine diphosphate/ small molecule without and with
guanosine triphosphate a third phosphate group, energy
source of conformational changes
GEF guanine nucleotide activates GTPases by exchanging
exchange factor GDP for GTP
GAP GTPase-activating protein stimulates GTP-hydrolysis, con-
verting active GTPases (GTP-
bound) to their inactive (GDP-
bound) form
GDI guanine nucleotide binds to inactive form of GTPases,
dissociation inhibitor the complex is soluble in the cyto-
MLC myosin light chain subunit of myosin II molecular mo-
tors, regulates myosin binding to
actin filaments
MLCK myosin light chain kinase phosphorylates MLC
MLCP myosin light chain phosphatase dephosphorylates MLC
MLCP-P phosphorylated MLCP inactive form of MLCP
MBS myosin-binding subunit subunitof MLCPwhosephosphory-
lation makes MLCP inactive
ROCK Rho-associated kinase ROCK phosphorylates MLCP at its
myosin-binding subunit (MBS)
I effect of calyculin inhibits MLCP from dephosphory-
lating myosin, thus enhancing con-
tractility
TABLE I: Abbreviations and full names of the biochemical components. For each component, a
short description of its function is given.
Model equations
∂MLCP(x,t) = V−2 MLCP-P(x,t) +D∂2MLCP(x,t) (m2)
∂t K−2+MLCP-P(x,t) p ∂x2
∂x e ∂x∂t ∂x ∂x a∂x stall
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Boundary conditions at x=0,L
∂MLCP(x,t) = ±V2 ROCK(t)MLCP(x,t) (bc2)
∂x D K2+MLCP(x,t)
∂MLCP-P(x,t) = ∓V2 ROCK(t)MLCP(x,t) (bc3)
∂x Dp K2+MLCP(x,t)
u(x,t) = 0 stiff boundaries (bc5)
Abbreviations
F (x,t) = F n(x,t)
b e x t x stall
TABLE II: Summary of model equations. Eqs. (m1-m4) describe successive biochemical signaling
events: (m1) focal adhesion associated activation of ROCK; (m2) and (m3) phosphorylation and
diffusion of MLCP and dephosphorylation and diffusion of MLCP-P; (m4) regulation of the active
fraction of the myosins, which is identified with the phosphorylated fraction of MLC. Eq. (m5) is
the mechanical model equation for stress fibers, where u(x,t) is the displacement along the fiber.
The boundary conditions for the partial differential Eqs. (m2), (m3), (m5) are given by (bc2),
(bc3), (bc5) respectively. In Eq. (bc2), (bc3), the upper (lower) sign is valid for the left x = 0
(right x = L) boundary. For the sake of clarity, we have introduced the listed abbreviations for
the stall force F , the effective viscosity η and the force exerted onto the boundary F . The
presented results have been derived with the assumptions that: (I) The diffusion properties of
the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated form of the phosphatase are the same, hence D = D .
(II) The viscoelastic properties of the stress fiber do not vary in space, therefore k(x) → k and
Timedependentreactionvariables
Abbreviation Meaning Usedvalue Referencevalues References
ROCK activatedformofROCK 0...5nM &1nM [41]
MLCP unphosphorylatedformofMLCP 0...1.2µM 1.2±0.3µM [49]
MLCP-P phosphorylatedformofMLCP 0...1.2µM 1.2±0.3µM [49]
n fractionofactivemyosin 0...1 [MLC-phos]/[myosin]
Reactionconstants
MLCK myosinlightchainkinase 0.1µM &100nM [50]
M myosinconcentration 30µM 25...30µM [51]
K1 Michaelisconstant 5nM (novalue)
K−1 Michaelisconstant 4.7nM (novalue)
K2 Michaelisconstant 0.1µM 0.10±0.01µM [41]
K−2 Michaelisconstant 15µM (novalue)
K3∗M Michaelisconstant 20µM 52.1±7.1µM [52]
34.5±2.8µM [41]
7.7...96.0µM [54]
19...53µM [50]
K−3∗M Michaelisconstant 10µM 10µM [56]
r1 rateconstant 0.3nM/snN (novalue)
V−1 maximumvelocity 1.8nM/s (novalue)
r2 rateconstant 2.41/s 2.36±0.10 1/s [41]
R2 maximumvelocity 4.8µm/s r2∗vb
V−2 maximumvelocity 0.1µM/s (novalue)
r3∗M rateconstant 101/s 2.00±0.36 1/s [52]
3.85±0.095 1/s [41]
5.17 1/s [53]
7.37...171.3 1/s [54]
70...100 1/s [50]
4.64 1/s [55]
V3 maximumvelocity 1.0µM/s r3∗MLCK
r−3∗M rateconstant 211/s 211/s [56]
D diffusionconstantofMLCP&MLCP-P 14µm2/s 10...100µm2/s [57]
vb effect. react. vol. ofFAs 2.0µm (novalue)
I inhibitionparameter 1→3 (novalue)
Parametersofmechanicalmodel
Fmax stallforce 50nN (novalue)
v0 maximummotorvelocity 1.0µm/s ≈0.1...1µm/s [58]
a vec-elementspacing 1.0µm 1.0µm [38]
k springstiffness 45nN/µm 45.7nN/a [48]
η viscosity 45nNs/µm ≈τk=45.7nNs/a [48,59]
L fiberlength 50µm ≈20...80µm
TABLE III: Model parameters based on literature search. We have set the model parameters
such that they fit into the reported range. The equation for the phosphorylated fraction of MLC
is normalized to the total myosin concentration denoted by M. In order to make the involved
reaction constant comparable to the literature values we give K
and r−3 scaled with
M. Eq. (1) translates mechanical forces into biochemical activation. For this reason the units of
the rate constant r are given as [nM/snN]. The typical relaxation time, τ, of stress fibers is
of the order of a few seconds [59] therewith we roughly estimate the viscosity value as η ≈ τk
where we use τ = 1s. Myosin activation by calyculin is modelled as competitive inhibition of the
phosphatase. The inhibition parameter I is switched instantaneously from I = 1 to I = 3. Some
of the reported values have been measured for the interactions of protein fractions and not for the
native proteins. Furthermore, the experiments have been doneon proteins extracted from different
species.
FIG. 1: Cells adhere to the extracellular matrix by integrin-mediated contacts called focal adhe-
sions. These contacts are the anchor points of stress fibers, which are actin filament bundles held
together bythecrosslinkermoleculeα-actinin andmyosinIImolecularmotors. Themyosinsareas-
sembled inmyosin mini-filaments. Due tomyosin motor activity stress fibersare undertension and
exert forces to focal adhesions. This mechanical stimulus initiates biochemical signals (Rho-signal)
that originate from focal adhesions and propagate into the cytoplasm, altering in turn myosin
activity. Therefore the system of focal adhesions and stress fibers are connected by a biochemical
and mechanical positive feedback loop (inset). The spatial part of our model is one-dimensional
with one stress fibers extending between the two focal adhesions at x = 0 and x = L.
FIG. 2: (A) Peterson et al. [38] studied the deformation of stress fibers in fibroblasts by using
fluorescently labelled α-actinin (in green) and myosin light chain (in red). These two components
arrange sequentially along the stress fibers and thereby form regular striation patterns. Myosin
contractility was stimulated with the drug calyculin A. Then an inhomogeneous striation pattern
results: stress fibers contract at the cell periphery (B) but expand at the cell center (C). These
results were quantified by time course measurements of the mean pattern bandwidths in the re-
spective regions. Compared with the control (D), stimulation of contractility leads to very strong
spatial gradients (E) on the time scale of tens of minutes.
FIG. 3: Signaling pathway that controls myosin contractility depicted in its appropriate spatial
context: mechanical cues are transduced to various biochemical signals at focal adhesions, however
the precise mechanisms have not been resolved yet. One possible mechanism is that a Rho-GEF
is activated by a mechanosensitive process at focal adhesions. Rho-GEF then promotes Rho-GTP
loading and subsequent complexation with Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) which gets activated.
Active ROCK is able to phosphorylate myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) at its myosin-
binding subunit (MBS). MLCP and MLCP-P are freely diffusible in the cytoplasm and thus can
reach the myosins in the stress fibers. Increased phosphorylation of MLCP to MLCP-P by ROCK
effectively leads to increased phosphorylation of myosin light chain (MLC), thus increasing myosin
contractility.
FIG. 4: Spatial dependence of the active myosin fraction n(x,t) at four different time points
t ∈ {30s,60s,120s,180s} as well as for the steady state, n (x): We solve the biochemical model
implying the artificial initial conditions that all components are at zero activation level, but set
the boundary force to 5nN. Because of this mechanical trigger at focal adhesions, MLC gets
preferentially activated at the boundaries via the Rho-pathway which leads to a steady increase
of the myosin activation level. Due to diffusible compounds in the Rho-pathway, the increased
activation level is smoothed out towards the center of the cell.
FIG. 5: The viscoelastic and contractile element (vec-element) consists of a spring of stiffness k, a
contractile module of contraction force F and a dashpot of viscosity η that are all connected in
parallel. Springand dashpottaken alone are the usual Kelvin-Voigt model of viscoelastic material.
The properties of the contractile module are characterized to first order by the linearized force-
velocity relation.
FIG. 6: We model a stress fiber as a string of vec-elements such that the spring stiffness k ,
the viscosity η and the motor force F can vary spatially. E.g. the latter will vary spatially
due to different myosin activity at the periphery compared to the center. The displacement of a
certain site n is denoted by u . The force F onto this site n consists of elastic, viscous and motor
contributions, compare Eq. (10). In the following we assume fix boundary conditions, namely
u(0,t) ≡ 0 and u(L,t) ≡ 0 where L is the total length of the fiber.
0 1 2 3 4 5
time t [sec]
FIG. 7: Time course of boundary force F (t). The solution of the Volterra equation, Eq. (16),
indicated by circles, was calculated by applying an iteration rule further explained in the main
text. The dashed line is the boundary force deduced from direct numerical solution of Eq. (14)
which we include for comparison. For the assumed initial condition, ∂ u(x,0) = 0, the boundary
forceincreases fromits non-zerovalueat t = 0, given byEq.(20)andquickly saturates atsomehow
larger values.
FIG. 8: We first analyze the solution of the mechanical equation Eq. (14) by assuming a steady
state myosin activation level, n (x), shown in Fig. 4. For this simplifying case where the myosin
activation level is not time dependent, Eq. (14) can be solved both numerically and analyt-
ically. Fig. 8 shows the analytical solution, Eq. (15), indicated by circles whereas the direct
numerical solution of Eq. (14) is indicated by dotted lines. The solution is given at time points
t ∈ {0.1s,0.2s,0.5s,1.0s,3.0s} as well as for the steady state u (x), assuming the initial condition:
∂ u(x,0) ≡ 0 and the boundary conditions: u(0,t) ≡ 0 and u(L,t) ≡ 0.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
time t [sec]
FIG. 9: At t = 0 calyculin is added to the system. Then myosin motors along the filament get
activated and further increase the tension within the fiber. The time course of the force F (t)
transduced to the boundaries is shown.
FIG. 10: Steady state solution of the displacement u(x) along the fiber before (dashed line) and
after (solid line) stimulation with calyculin. The stimulation strongly increases the deformation of
the fiber resulting in substantial distortion of the expected striation pattern (upperline) compared
to the striation pattern of a completely undistorted fiber (lower line). The upper striation pattern
wascalculatedfromthedisplacementdata. Thebandsclosetotheboundarieshavebeencontracted
(about 55%) whereas the bands around the center have been expanded (about 15%), compare also
Fig. 12.
FIG. 11: Steady state profile of the active myosin fraction before stimulation with the drug (dash-
dotted line), after stimulation including the mechanical feedback (solid line) and after stimulation
but neglecting the mechanical feedback (dashed line). For the latter case, homogeneous induction
of the drug cause an almost uniform elevation of myosin activity. Slight differences between center
and periphery persist but rather marginally extend, whereas the closed feedback system result in
an amplification of the spatial differences of myosin activation.
FIG. 12: Relative change in density along the fiber in the steady state before stimulation with the
drug (dashed-dotted line), after stimulation with the drug including the feedback (solid line) and
after stimulation but neglecting the mechanical feedback (dashed line). Positive values correspond
to a compression of the fiber, whereas negative values indicate elongation. In case of the closed
feedback (solid line) the fiber strongly contracts close to the boundaries up to 55% but elongates
at the center to about 15%. In order to compare the model results with the experimental findings,
we arbitrarily define central (center ±10µm) and peripheral (edges ±10µm) regions of the cell,
indicated by vertical lines.
FIG. 13: Time courses of the mean bandwidth of the fiber in the center (upper curve) and in
the periphery of the cell (lower curve): The shown values are averages of the bandwidths at the
center ±10µmforthecentral regionandattheedges±10µmfortheperipheralregion. Thedefined
intervals arealsoshowninFig.12. Theexpectedsteady statestriation patternsforthetwodistinct
regions are shown as insets. These results agree qualitatively with the experimental findings by
Peterson et al., shown in Fig. 2.