PROCEEDINGS COINs15
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY THROUGH THE LENS OF WIKIPEDIA – A COMPARISON
OF HISTORICAL LEADERSHIP NETWORKS IN THE ENGLISH, CHINESE, JAPANESE,
AND GERMAN WIKIPEDIA
Peter A. Gloor1, Patrick de Boer1, Wei Lo2, Stefan Wagner3, Keiichi Nemoto4, Hauke Fuehres5
MIT1, Zhejiang University2, FHNW3, Fuji Xerox4, galaxyadvisors5
Cambridge USA1, Hangzhou China2, Brugg Switzerland3, Tokyo Japan4, Aarau Switzerland5
pgloor@mit.edu, pdeboer@mit.edu, spencer_w_lo@zju.edu.cn, stefan.wagner@fhnw.ch,
keiichi.nemoto@fujixerox.co.jp, hfuehres@galaxyadvisors.com
network is calculated, as shown in figure 1. From all
ABSTRACT the links originating and pointing back to a particular
people page, only the links to and from people living
In this paper we study the differences in historical
at the same time as the person discussed on that page
worldview between Western and Eastern cultures,
are included.
represented through the English, Chinese, Japanese,
and German Wikipedia. In particular, we analyze the
historical networks of the World’s leaders since the
beginning of written history, comparing them in the
four different Wikipedias.
INTRODUCTION
In this project we are using Wikipedias in different
languages as a window into the “soul” of different
cultures, replacing anthropological fieldwork with
statistical analysis of the treatment given by native
speakers of a culture to different subjects in
Wikipedia.
One of the most popular categories in Wikipedia is Figure 1: Link construction among contemporary
the people pages, talking about the most important people pages
people of all ages. Wikipedians have put together
“notability criteria” that clearly define if a person For instance, in the graph shown in figure 1 above,
deserves inclusion into Wikipedia or not. In this from all the links to the page about Plutarch, only the
paper we look at the most prominent people pages links from and to Hadrian, Caesar, and Nero are kept,
over all times in the English, Chinese, Japanese, and while the links to Pyrrhus, who died well before
German Wikipedia, resulting in a comparison Plutarch was born, and the pages to medieval
between the Western and Eastern worldview. historian Syncellus and modern historian Pisani are
ignored as well. Repeating this process leads to 4900
unique networks for the English Wikipedia (less for
PEOPLE NETWORK CONSTRUCTION the Chinese and Japanese Wikipedia, as their history
does not go as far back). For each of these networks,
Our goal was to create a social network of all people
the most central people are determined using the
that every lived, since the beginning of time. As a
PageRank algorithm. To get a second selection
proxy, we only take people that made it into
criteria among the influencers, their indegree, i.e.
Wikipedia, fulfilling Wikipedia’s notability criteria.
other people pages pointing back to them, is taken.
As a second requirement, a link between two people
can only exist if both of them were living at the same
Figure 2 illustrates the Wikihistory application
time. For each Wikipedia, we start with all pages
running in a Web browser that we developed based
tagged as “people pages”, in the English Wikipedia
on the network extracted above. It shows the network
this are for instance 800,000 pages. In the next step
of most influential people in the English Wikipedia in
all people pages are dated, by extracting the dates of
the year 0 – note that Jesus is not yet part of the
birth and of death of each individual. Moreover, the
network, he will show up in year 1.
links originating and pointing to their Wikipedia page
are gathered. Using this information, for each year
through history, from 3000 BC to 1950 CE, a link
As tables 1 and 2 illustrate, in China and Japan only
famous warriors and politicians have a chance to
make it into the top ten and top fifty – the East seems
far less religious than the West – while the Western
Wikipedias are more balanced with half of the top ten
as well as the top fifty of all times being religious
leaders or artists or scientists. Historians play a
special role. Both Sidney Lee, a relatively minor
Victorian professor of English and history, who
wrote 800 biographies, and Ikuhiko Hata, a 19
century Japanese military biographer owe their
prominent position to their prolific biography writing,
as they get many backlinks from the references on the
pages of contemporary politicians they wrote about.
Mary_(mother_of_Jesus)& English Chinese Japanese German
Paul_the_Apostle& Politicians 26 46 47 23
Figure 2: Sample screen shot of Wikihistory at 0 BC Religious 11 1 0 5
Artists/ 13 3 3 22
IT’S ALL ABOUT EMPERORS AND WARS Scientists
Cultural 10 48 31 31
Who are the most important people of all times? The
answer to this question is quite different in the US,
the UK, and German-speaking countries than it is in Table 2: Distribution of different people categories in
China and Japan. Looking at the top ten and top 50 4 Wikipedias among the top 50 people of all times
people lists also confirms that most English language
Wikipedia editors come from the US and the UK, The second striking difference comes from outgroup
while Chinese language editors come from Taiwan, leaders included into the top 50. While the English
Hong Kong, and mainland China. Wikipedia includes 80% non-English leaders among
the top 50, just two non-Chinese made it into the top
English Chinese Japanese German 50 of the Chinese Wikipedia: Napoleon III and
George_W._B Mao_Zedong Ikuhiko_Hata Adolf Hitler
Tokugawa Ieyasu. The Japanese Wikipedia is slightly
more balanced, with almost 40 percent non-Japanese
Yuan_Shikai Tokugawa_ Johann
leaders, half of them Chinese Emperors, the others
William_ Ieyasu Wolfgang von
Shakespeare Goethe people like Adolf Hitler, Plato, Cicero, and Augustus.
Jay_Chou Toyotomi_ Aristotle
Sidney_Lee Hideyoshi CONCLUSIONS
Oda_Nobuna Adolf_Hitler Benedict XVI
Jesus ga The Internet enables researchers to more easily
Charles_II_of Tokugawa_Ie Oda_Nobuna Plato compile rankings of the most important world leaders
_England yasu ga of all times (Murray 2003, Hidalgo 2014). Our work
Emperor_Gao Hirohito Martin Luther
is unique in that we extract language-specific
Aristotle zong_of_Tang
rankings that allow us to compare the worldview for
Cao_Cao Tokugawa_ Otto von
dozens of different cultures. Probing the historical
Napoleon Hidetada Bismarck
Kangxi_ Tokugawa_ Johannes perspective of many different language-specific
Muhammad Emperor Iemitsu Paul II Wikipedias gives an X-ray view deep into the
Emperor_Hui Chiang_ Kai-­‐ Johann historical foundations of cultural understanding of
zong_of_Song shek Heinrich different countries.
Charlemagne Zedler
Yongle_ Tokugawa_ Johann