Cultural Anthropology through the Lens of Wikipedia: Historical
Leader Networks, Gender Bias, and News-based Sentiment
Peter A. Gloor, Joao Marcos, Patrick M. de Boer, Hauke Fuehres, Wei Lo, Keiichi Nemoto
pgloor@mit.edu
MIT Center for Collective Intelligence
In this paper we study the differences in historical World View between Western and
Eastern cultures, represented through the English, the Chinese, Japanese, and German
Wikipedia. In particular, we analyze the historical networks of the World’s leaders
since the beginning of written history, comparing them in the different Wikipedias
and assessing cultural chauvinism. We also identify the most influential female
leaders of all times in the English, German, Spanish, and Portuguese Wikipedia. As
an additional lens into the soul of a culture we compare top terms, sentiment,
emotionality, and complexity of the English, Portuguese, Spanish, and German
Wikinews.
1 Introduction
Over the last ten years the Web has become a mirror of the real world (Gloor et al. 2009).
More recently, the Web has also begun to influence the real world: Societal events such as
the Arab spring and the Chilean student unrest have drawn a large part of their impetus from
the Internet and online social networks. In the meantime, Wikipedia has become one of the
top ten Web sites1, occasionally beating daily newspapers in the actuality of most recent
news. Be it the resignation of German national soccer team captain Philipp Lahm, or the
downing of Malaysian Airlines flight 17 in the Ukraine by a guided missile, the
corresponding Wikipedia page is updated as soon as the actual event happened (Becker 2012.
Futterer et al. 2013). In a long-term project at the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence, we
are using Wikipedia to provide a mirror of today’s historical understanding of World history
by different cultures.
We are using Wikipedias in different languages as a window into the “soul” of different
cultures, replacing anthropological fieldwork with statistical analysis of the treatment given
by native speakers of a culture to different subjects in Wikipedia. One of the most popular
categories in Wikipedia is the people pages, talking about the most important people of all
ages. Wikipedians have put together “notability criteria” that clearly define if a person
deserves inclusion into Wikipedia or not. In earlier work we have used the people pages in
Wikipedia to identify the most influential thought leaders, idea givers, and academics through
social network analysis techniques (Frick et al 2013), and have calculated maps of the most
influential people in the different language Wikipedias (Kleeb et. al 2012).
In this paper we introduce Wikihistory, a dynamic temporal map of the most influential
people of all times in four different Wikipedias (English, German, Chinese, Japanese), and
then look at the different distributions of gender in the English, Portuguese, Spanish, and
German Wikipedia, resulting in a comparison among cultures on the subject of gender
equality. In addition we also compare sentiment and emotionality in the English, Spanish,
Portuguese, and German Wikinews, a hand-curated News page which is part of Wikipedia.
1.1 Bias of Wikipedia
For different parts of our analysis we rely on the English, German, Chinese, Japanese,
Portuguese, and Spanish Wikipedias. While the German, Japanese, and Portuguese
Wikipedias are more or less representative of their language spaces, things are more complex
for the English, Chinese, and Spanish Wikipedias. Owing to the global dominance of the
English language, the English Wikipedia is by far the largest, with 1,4 million monthly page
edits in the US (with US population 308 million) and 486,000 page edits in the UK (with a
UK population of 62 million). While the English Wikipedia could claim to reflect the
dominant view of the World, it comes with a heavy bias towards worldview of the US and
UK. This is in contrast to the Chinese Wikipedia, with 51,000 monthly edits in Hong Kong
(with a population of 7 million), 46,000 monthly edits in Taiwan (with a population of 23
million) and 35,000 monthly edits in mainland China (with a population of 1.3 billion
people). As Wikipedia is officially blocked in China, editing is done to a large part in Hong
Kong and Taiwan, however, as we will see below, based on the importance of communist
heroes in the Chinese Wikipedia, we suspect that Chinese censors are actively editing the
Chinese Wikipedia.
The Spanish Wikipedia on the other hand draws on a widely distributed editor base in
Spain, but also many contributors in the more populous Latin American countries such as
Colombia and Mexico, and some very active editor communities in Chile and Argentina.
To a smaller extent English Wikipedians also exhibit some political bias, as they have a
reputation of having a leftist liberal bent. In a study Greenstein and Zhu (2012) found that
compared to the early days of Wikipedia, the liberal bias, while still there, has been reduced.
They found that phrases like “civil rights” and “trade deficit” favored by Democrats are still
more prominent than phrases like “economic growth” and “illegal immigration” favored by
Republicans. We expect that the Japanese and German Wikipedias show a similar bias.
2 Methodology for Network Creation
Our goal was to create a social network of all notable people in humankind’s history. Given
our subjective view of the past and the fact that our collective memory forgets facts over
time, we had to approximate this social network using a proxy: We only consider people that
made it into Wikipedia, for whom we assume that they fulfill Wikipedia’s notability criteria.
In this social graph, people are considered vertices. For every underlying people page on
Wikipedia, all references to other people are used to infer edges to other vertices. The amount
of mentions is used to calculate the weight of each directed edge. As a second requirement, a
link between two people can only exist if both of them were living at the same time. For the
English Wikipedia, we therefore start with the 900,000 pages tagged as “people pages”. All
900,000 people pages are dated, by extracting the dates of birth and of death of each
individual. Using this information, 4900 networks through history, from 3000 BC to 1950 CE
are calculated, as shown in figure 1.
Figure 1. Construction of social network of a historical personality
For instance, in the graph shown in figure 1, from all the links to the page about Plutarch,
only the links from and to Hadrian, Caesar, and Nero are kept, while the links to Pyrrhus,
who died well before Plutarch was born, and the pages to medieval historian Syncellus and
modern historian Pisani are ignored as well. Repeating this process leads to 4900 unique
networks (less for the Chinese and Japanese Wikipedia, as their history does not go as far
back). For each of these networks, the most central people in the graph are determined using
the PageRank algorithm (Page et al. 1999). We consider central people as being highly
influential to other people in the graph. To get a second selection criteria among all the
influencers, their indegree, i.e. other people pages pointing back to them, is taken.
3 The Top 50 of All Times
Who are the most important people of all times? The answer to this question is quite different
in the US, the UK, and German-speaking countries than it is in China and Japan. Looking at
the top ten and top 50 people lists also confirms that most English language Wikipedia
editors come from the US and the UK, while Chinese language editors come from Taiwan,
Hong Kong, and mainland China.
3.1 English Wikipedia Analysis
The 50 most important people in the English Wikipedia from 3000BC of 1900AD are
primarily politicians (26, kings and generals), followed by religious leaders (13), and poets
and historians (11) (Table 1).
The disproportionally large role of the historians clearly stands out as they shape our view on
the past. It seems that it pays to be a historian, to write one's own place in history. This is
clearly shown by Sidney Lee, a relatively minor Victorian professor of English and history,
who wrote 800 biographies and hereby secured his place in the annals.
Not only is a minor 19th century biographer under the top 10 influencers of all times (which
is also an artifact of our collection method), but also classical historians like Polybius,
Tacitus, and Plutarch get very high ranks. Treating biographers and historians well so they
write positively about world leaders is of course no new insight: Roman emperor Vespasian
was paying historians Tacitus, Suetonius, Josephus and Pliny the Elder, in return they speak
suspiciously well about him, shaping his positive image in history. Caesar and Winston
Churchill took this concept one step further, writing their history themselves. As today’s
history is written in Wikipedia, the conclusion seems obvious: treat Wikipedians well!
The next three networking pictures illustrate the English Wikipedia Leadership networks
through the ages, with snapshots taken at 600BC, at 0AD, and at 600AD. In correspondence
with the availability of written records, in 600BC the Greek philosophers – documented in
classical texts by Roman librarians – and Babylonian kings – documented in writings on the
walls of historical buildings – are in the center, but there is also a noticeable cluster of
Chinese leaders, as well as historical figures around Buddha.
English(Wikipedia((600BC(
Pythagoras(
Nebuchadnezzar_II((
Duke_Zhuang_II_of_Qi(
Maya((mother(of(buddha)(
Figure 2. Global leadership network of the English Wikipedia in 600BC
Around 0AD, Roman emperors, consuls and writers are in the center, as well as biblical
figures. Jesus has not been born yet, but his mother Mary has a prominent position in the
biblical cluster.
English(Wikipedia((0AD(
Paul((the(Apostle)(
Figure 3. Global leadership network of the English Wikipedia in 0AD
Around 600AD, the Catholic Church with Popes, monks, and saints stands out. Greek
orthodox church fathers around Babai the Great form a separate cluster. The Chinese
emperors and generals form another cluster of almost similar size, representative for the
subsequent blossoming of the Tang dynasty starting in 618, commonly seen as the high point
in Chinese civilization.
English(Wikipedia(566AD(
Honorius_of_Canterbury(
Brendan( Babai_the_Great((
Paulinus_of_York((
Pope_Gregory_I((
Mary( Gao_Wei((
Emperor_Wen_of_Sui(
Figure 4. Global leadership network of the English Wikipedia in 0AD
English Chinese Japanese German
1 George W. Bush Mao Zedong Ikuhiko Hata Adolf Hitler
William Johann Wolfgang
2 Shakespeare Yuan Shikai Tokugawa Ieyasu von Goethe
3 Sidney Lee Jay Chou Toyotomi Hideyoshi Aristoteles
4 Jesus Oda Nobunaga Adolf Hitler Benedikt XVI.
Charles II of
5 England Tokugawa Ieyasu Oda Nobunaga Platon
6 Aristotle Emperor Gaozong of Tang Hirohito Martin Luther
7 Napoleon Cao Cao Tokugawa Hidetada Otto von Bismarck
8 Muhammad Kangxi Emperor Tokugawa Iemitsu Johannes Paul II.
Johann Heinrich
9 Charlemagne Emperor Huizong of Song Chiang Kai-shek Zedler
Johann Sebastian
10 Plutarch Yongle Emperor Tokugawa Ienari Bach
Wilhelm II.
11 Julius Caesar Kangxi Emperor Emperor Meiji (Deutsches Reich)
William III of Tokugawa
12 England Hongwu Emperor Tsunayoshi Karl V. (HRR)
Tokugawa Wolfgang
13 Homer Jiajing Emperor Yoshimune Amadeus Mozart
14 Bede Koxinga Emperor Go-Daigo Bonaparte
Athanasius of Minamoto no
15 Alexandria Wang Shichong Yoritomo Richard Wagner
Emperor Go- Georg Wilhelm
16 Dante Alighieri Emperor Daizong of Tang Shirakawa Friedrich Hegel
Marcus Tullius
17 Gautama Buddha Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Ashikaga Takauji Cicero
18 Tiberius Zhengtong Emperor Ashikaga Yoshimitsu Pius XII.
Ludwig van
19 Cyril of Alexandria Emperor Xizong of Tang Emperor Go-Toba Beethoven
20 Bernard of Clairvaux Qianlong Emperor Emperor Saga Karl Marx
21 Moses Dong Zhuo Ashikaga Yoshimasa Friedrich Schiller
22 Tacitus Yuwen Tai Ashikaga Yoshinori Joseph Goebbels
Edward III of
23 England Qianlong Emperor Emperor Toba Abraham Lincoln
24 Justinian I Huan Xuan Emperor Kanmu Heinrich Himmler
25 David Emperor Huizong of Song Emperor NinmyÅ Denis Diderot
26 Ashoka Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Emperor Daigo Benito Mussolini
27 Origen Emperor Renzong of Song Emperor Junna Thomas Jefferson
Temür Khan, Emperor
28 Septimius Severus Chengzong of Yuan Emperor Seiwa Immanuel Kant
Emperor Wu of Liu
29 Polybius Emperor Taizong of Song Song Friedrich II. (HRR)
30 Confucius Fu Jian Emperor Montoku Heinrich Heine
31 Alexander Severus Sima Ying Emperor Uda Bertolt Brecht
Patriarch Eutychius Fujiwara no
32 of Alexandria Emperor Taizong of Song Michinaga Andrew Jackson
Emperor Wen of Liu Gerhart
33 Tutankhamun Wang Mang Song Hauptmann
34 Akhenaten Emperor Shunzong of Tang Cao Cao Franziskus (Papst)
Emperor Xiaowu of
35 Ramesses II Shi Jingtang Liu Song Ludwig XIV.
Pope Benjamin I of Emperor Xiaowen of
36 Alexandria Wang Yangming Northern Wei Franz Liszt
Emperor Ming of Liu
37 Teti Hong Xiuquan Song Konrad Adenauer
Emperor Wu of
38 Amenemhat II Napoleon III Southern Qi Plutarch
Emperor Xiaowu of Liu George
39 Pepi II Neferkare Song Emperor Wu of Liang Washington
40 Merneith Sima Shi Sun Quan Pablo Picasso
41 Terence Möngke Khan Augustus Nietzsche
42 Cato the Elder Chang Yuchun Pompey Albert Einstein
43 Charles Martel Emperor Ming of Han Tiberius Barack Obama
44 Gilgamesh Tuoba Huang Mark Antony Augustus
Alexander von
45 Deborah Yuwen Huaji Alexander the Great Humboldt
46 Lugalbanda Mu Ying Plato Josef Stalin
47 Kubaba Emperor Wen of Liu Song Cicero Heinrich IV. (HRR)
48 Fu Xi Zhu Xi Emperor Wu of Han Benjamin Franklin
49 Henry I of England Confucius Ptolemy I Soter Angela Merkel
Emperor Ming of Southern
50 Petrarch Qi Octavia the Younger Friedrich Engels
Table 1: Top 50 most important people of all times in 4 Wikipedias (most important at the top) Red
denotes politicians, black religious leaders, blue scientists and artists
3.2 Chinese Wikipedia Analysis
Eminent leaders in the Chinese Wikipedia show a markedly different picture. Other than in
the English Wikipedia, the top 50 leaders of all times are mostly emperors and generals.
While in the English Wikipedia only 26 out of 50 people fell into that category, in the
Chinese Wikipedia there are only 4 people who are not political and military leaders, among
them three Confucian scholars including Confucius himself, plus one of the most popular
Chinese pop musicians (who is mostly unknown outside Chinese speaking countries).
As tables 1 and 2 illustrate, in China and Japan only famous warriors and politicians had a
chance to make it into the top ten and top fifty – the East seems far less religious than the
West in their view on the past – while the Western Wikipedias are more balanced with half of
the top ten as well as the top fifty of all times being religious leaders, artists or scientists.
Historians play a special role. Both Sidney Lee and Ikuhiko Hata, a 19 century Japanese
military biographer, owe their prominent position to their prolific biography writing, as they
get many backlinks from the references on the pages of contemporary politicians they wrote
about.
Note that due to the smaller size of the Chinese Wikipedia, the indegrees of the top 50
Chinese leaders are much lower than for the English Wikipedia leaders. This means that in
the lower ranks of the top 50 a few more incoming links can have a large effect on the
ranking of a person. Also Chinese leaders do not go back as far in history as the Egyptian
pharaohs and the ancient kings of the middle east, where a combination of year-ring dating
and listing of dynasties allows to date ancient leaders back to 3000BC. The oldest entries in
both Wikipedias which are Chinese are from 800BC. Mythical earlier emperors like the
Yellow Emperor who reigned from 2698 to 2598 BC are not included in the dead people
category, as historians are not certain if he ever really existed as a single real person.
The Chinese Wikipedia leaders have far fewer links to people outside China than leaders on
the non-Asian Wikipedias we have looked at. One could therefore see them as more inward-
looking, i.e. China focused. Napoleon III (not Napoleon I) and Tokugawa Ieyasu are the only
non-Chinese/Japanese among the top 50 leaders. The English Wikipedia is far more diverse,
including Confucius, Buddha, and Fu Xi besides military leaders from ancient Egypt and
Sumeria together with the leaders of the Western World.
A big restriction of the Chinese Wikipedia is the censorship executed by the Chinese
government, which might influence the scant inclusion of Western politicians, scientists, and
religious leaders.
3.3 Japanese Wikipedia Analysis
Other than the Chinese Wikipedia, the Japanese Wikipedia is not subject of any censorship,
and can thus rightfully claim to represent the opinion and collective intelligence of the
Japanese population. The top person article by in-degree, just like the article about the
historian Sidney Lee in the English Wikipedia, is about a military historian who wrote about
all the politicians, mostly generals, referenced in the Japanese Wikipedia. Amazingly, the
fourth most central article in the Japanese Wikipedia is about Adolf Hitler.
3.4 Cultural Chauvinism
There are striking differences in the number of out-group leaders, i.e. leaders not part of the
language sphere of a particular Wikipedia, included among the top 50. While the English
Wikipedia includes 80% non-English leaders among the top 50, only two non-Chinese made
it into the top 50 of the Chinese Wikipedia: Napoleon III and Tokugawa Ieyasu. The Japanese
Wikipedia is slightly more balanced, with almost 40 percent non-Japanese leaders, half of
them Chinese Emperors, and people like Adolf Hitler, Plato, Cicero, and Augustus.
English Chinese Japanese German
Politicians 26 46 47 23
Religious Leaders 11 1 0 5
Artists/ Scientists 13 3 3 22
Cultural In-group 10 48 31 31
Table 2: Distribution of different people categories in 4 Wikipedias among the top 50 people of all times
A part of that effect might also come from the different sizes and ethnic profiles of the editors
of the different Wikipedias, as the English Wikipedia probably includes articles written about
Chinese leaders written by Chinese and Japanese living abroad, while the articles in the
Chinese and Japanese Wikipedia are most likely written by ethnic Chinese and Japanese.
4 Differences in Gender Equality
In a subsequent analysis, we studied the percentage of female leaders in the different cultures.
Although, in theory, Wikipedia people pages are tagged by gender, many of them don't
include this mapping. We therefore created a heuristic algorithm that collects keywords in
different languages and analyzes the frequency of those words on each page. It counts, for
example “she”, “he”, ”herself”, etc., for the English Wikipedia. In the Portuguese Wikipedia
we used words such as “ela”, “ele”, etc. The same approach was used for the German and
Spanish Wikipedias. To verify the accuracy of this method we compared the results with a
subset of people pages that include the gender tag. We found that this approach got the
gender right in more than 90% of the people pages in those four languages.
4.1 Top 50 Gender Analysis
While many societies have made great progress towards gender equality over the last 100
years, we wanted to measure the pace of this progress. We tracked the evolution of the share
of women among the people represented in the different Wikipedias. We found that the 50
most important women in the Wikipedias from 2000BC to 2000AD are almost exclusively in
two categories, namely politicians (mostly queens) and artists (writers, actresses and singers
for example).
German English Spanish Portuguese
politicians 10 14 12 11
artists 38 36 35 34
politicians 20.83% 28.00% 25.53% 24.44%
Table 3. Split between politicians and artists among the top 50 most influential women of all times in
different Wikipedia s
Table 4 lists all the names in the four Wikipedias. The first group consists of
politicians and queens. In this group the most prominent member is Queen Elisabeth II,
showing that people’s fascination with the British Royals is unbroken. In our metrics, she
consistently leads the female leadership ranking. Also, in the German and Portuguese
Wikipedias we find German chancellor Angela Merkel and Brazilian president Dilma Rusself
among the top 5 positions in their corresponding countries, illustrating that in the last
decades’ women have been accumulating more influence in global politics. Another
interesting result is the position of American politician Hillary Clinton. She is present among
the most influential top 50 women in all Wikipedias but the English. We can speculate that
maybe she has more influence overseas than inside her own country due to her position as
foreign minister. We also have to note that this analysis was completed 2 years before Hillary
announced her aspirations for the US 2016 Presidential race.
In the art categories we find a more diversified distribution between writers, singers
and actresses. It also seems that the United States exerts a dominating influence in this area in
the rest of the world. Many actresses that worked or work in the US show business, such as
Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, or Barbra Streisand, have a high PageRank in the different
Wikipedias.
German English Spanish Portuguese
1 Elisabeth II. Elizabeth II Michelle Bachelet Maria II de Portugal
2 Angela Merkel Queen Victoria Marilyn Monroe Madonna
3 Maria Theresia Joan Baez Isabel I de Inglaterra Isabel II do Reino Unido
4 Katie Fforde Simone Signoret María Teresa I de Austria Dilma Rousseff
5 Marlene Dietrich Benazir Bhutto Mary Pickford Maria I de Portugal
6 Rosamunde Pilcher Eudora Welty Katharine Hepburn Vitória do Reino Unido
7 Margaret Thatcher Gertrude B. Elion Elizabeth Taylor Judy Garland
8 Hannah Arendt Betty White Hillary Clinton Cher
9 Greta Garbo Annette Bening Margaret Thatcher Fernanda Montenegro
10 Elfriede Jelinek Eunice Kennedy Shriver Greta Garbo Barbra Streisand
11 Sigrid Roth Ruth Bader Ginsburg María Estela Martínez de Meryl Streep
12 Maria (Mutter Jesu) Susan Hayward Vivian Malone Jones Marilyn Monroe
13 Thea Leitner Mary J. Blige Eva Perón Gal Costa
14 Ella Fitzgerald Margaret Beckett Madonna Sophia Loren
15 Maria Stuart Barbara Jordan Gabriela Mistral Britney Spears
16 Marilyn Monroe Zora Neale Hurston Barbra Streisand Marta Suplicy
17 Jane Fonda Rosalynn Carter Britney Spears Christina Aguilera
18 Bette Davis Sarah Vaughan Jane Fonda Roberta Flack
19 Elizabeth Taylor Heidi Klum Marlene Dietrich Maggie Smith
20 Billie Holiday Helen Clark Juana de Arco Rihanna
21 Nelly Sachs Donna de Varona Whitney Houston Helen Mirren
22 Liza Minnelli Julie Walters Virginia Woolf Elis Regina
23 Diana Ross Patti Smith Christina Aguilera Kate Winslet
24 Katharine Hepburn Harriet Tubman Mariah Carey Maria Teresa da Áustria
25 Beatrix Michelle Pfeiffer George Sand Angelina Jolie
(Niederlande)
26 Joan Crawford Allison Janney Meryl Streep Lauren Bacall
27 Katarina Witt Carole King Aretha Franklin Whitney Houston
28 Shirley MacLaine Alice Munro Ella Fitzgerald Judi Dench
29 Elisabeth I. Faye Dunaway Shakira Marília Pêra
30 Romy Schneider Willa Cather Josefina de Beauharnais Janet Jackson
31 Claudette Colbert Margaret Sanger Ingrid Bergman Isabel I de Castela
32 Toni Morrison Kirstie Alley Judy Garland Nigar Jamal
33 Ingrid Bergman Joanna of Castile Liza Minnelli Jennifer Lawrence
34 Barbra Streisand Sheryl Crow Simone de Beauvoir Cate Blanchett
35 Whoopi Goldberg Sally Ride María Josefa de Austria Mary Pickford
36 Sigrid Undset Jennifer Hudson Ava Gardner Maria Antonieta
37 George Sand Serena Williams Billie Holiday Penélope Cruz
38 Nadine Gordimer Donna Shalala Samuel Johnson Sissy Spacek
39 Gabriela Mistral Shirley Chisholm Lady Gaga Whoopi Goldberg
40 Doris Lessing Olivia Newton-John Angela Merkel Hillary Clinton
41 Pearl S. Buck Kristin Scott Thomas Nicole Kidman Jennifer Lopez
42 Marie Antoinette Margaret, Maid of Maria Callas Ingrid Bergman
43 Helen Hayes Candice Bergen Vanessa Redgrave Barbara Stanwyck
44 Meryl Streep Wilma Rudolph Joan Crawford Isabel I de Inglaterra
45 Hillary Clinton Martha Griffiths Mercedes Sosa Jodie Foster
46 Judy Garland Antonina Houbraken Janet Jackson Shirley MacLaine
47 Alice Munro Claire Danes Rita Hayworth Francisca de Bragança
48 Britney Spears Marion Cotillard Julia Roberts Sandra Bullock
49 Goldie Hawn Sappho Tina Turner Januária Maria de
50 Isabella I. Alice Hamilton Rihanna Lady Gaga
(Kastilien)
Table 4. Top most important female leaders of all times in four Wikipedias
4.2 Longitudinal Gender Analysis
By analyzing the percentage of women over the last century, we can see how the fraction of
women among the World’s leaders is increasing over time (Figure 2). Our data shows the
Portuguese Wikipedia having the highest percentage on women among the Wikipedias we
analyzed, followed by the Spanish and English.
Figure 5. Percentage of women among Wikihistory leaders from 1900 to 2000
One fact that may have influenced this result is the number of total people pages in the
Portuguese Wikipedia (93,000), which is significantly lower than the English Wikipedia
having ten times more people pages, translating to a lower sample size. The graph shows a
linear increase in the percentage of women until 1995, when the percentage really explodes to
parity between women and men in the English, Spanish, and Portuguese Wikipedias. This
explosion, however, might also be an artifact of the smaller number of people pages for the
last 20 years, as there are very few people, other than Justin Bieber or Malala Yousafzai (the
youngest ever peace Nobel-Prize winner), that fulfill the notability criteria of Wikipedia at
such a young age. Nevertheless, it seems that in this smaller sample of young high-achievers
we attain gender equality.
5 Comparing Different Cultures through Wikinews
We complement our historical analysis of Wikpedia with an analysis of the treatment of late
breaking news by Wikipedians in Wikinews, a hand-curated news page of whatever
Wikipedians consider most newsworthy on any given day. In particular, we use Wikinews to
analyze sentiment and emotion in different cultures. Wikinews is part of Wikipedia. It is a
free and open news web site where users create the content based on digesting news from
sources such as Reuters, Bloomberg, and CNN. The main focus in this project is to analyze
what kinds of news are more relevant in each culture and the sentiment related to those news.
For example, we want to investigate if some cultures focus more on bad or good news. Or,
whether some topics are considered more newsworthy in some cultures than in others.
5.1 Data Collection
We collected the news using the Wikinews pages in the English, German, Spanish and
Portuguese. In those pages, we can find the most relevant events of each year through the
eyes of the Wikipedians. In particular, whenever they consider a particular topic newsworthy,
they will add a short sentence on the Wikinews page as an anchor, and create a new
Wikipedia page for the entire event. For each language, we collected all the links to the pages
in Wikipedia and connected those links with each other. This approach creates four distinct
networks, one for each language (see Figures 6 to 9 bellow). As we can see, some Wikipedias
have a more complex and connected news network. This is not surprising because for
example the English Wikipedia has more content and is more updated than the Portuguese.
The total number of articles is also quite different between the different Wikipedias.
Figure 6. Portuguese Wikinews network
Figure 7. Spanish Wikinews network
Figure 8. German Wikinews network
Figure 9. English Wikinews network
As we can see in the network pictures in Figures 6 to 9, the most central nodes are usually
countries. News are linked to location pages related to where an event happened as opposed
to one main subject like war, company names, or people. Unsurprisingly, we observe a heavy
location bias, in that intra-cultural news get much more detailed treatment. This means that
Wikipedia editors of one language upload news that happened in the country with the same
language more frequently than outside news (Figure 10). For the Spanish Wikipedia, due to
the many countries sharing the same language, we observe a more equal distribution of topics
by betweenness centrality. As many different countries are appearing on the Spanish
Wikinews with similar centrality, this illustrates that people from many of those countries
seem to be contributing. The “popularity” of one country in other cultures and languages can
show how one country has the attention of others. For example, we can see how the United
States is a big player on all Wikinews, illustrating how the world pays attention to what the
US is doing and its presence in global politics.
Betweenness'('English' Betweenness'('German'
Germany" London"
Pakistan" Ukraine"
Iran" Türkei"
Japan" Indien"
Israel" Österreich"
London" Volksrepublik"China"
Barack"Obama" italienische"
China" Berlin"
UN" Vereinigtes"Königreich"
People's_republic_o Schweizer"
French" Russland"
Australia" Frankreich"
Indian" Vereinigte"Staaten"
Russians" USA"
United"States" Deutschland"
0" 200000000" 400000000" 0" 4000000" 8000000"
Betweenness'('Portuguese' Betweenness'('Spanish'
Estado"Islamico" Pakistan"
Lybia" guerra"civil"siria"
Futebol" Mexico"
Nasa" Francia"
Reino"Unido" Venezuela"
syrios" Peru"
Estados"Unidos" Al"Qaeda"
Ãfrica"do"Sul" Siria"
Espanha" Reino"Unido"
EUA" ArgenKna"
Portugal" Chile"
ONU" Union"Europea"
Russia" Espana"
escala"Richter" Colombia"
Brasil" Estados"Unidos"
0" 20000" 40000" 60000" 80000"100000" 0" 1000002"000003"000004"000005"00000"
Figure 10. Most important topics by betweenness in the different language Wikinews
We used the sentiment, emotionality, and complexity functions of the tool Condor
(Brönnimann 2014) to calculate these metrics for all four Wikinews datasets. The overall
negativity of sentiment stands out, below the neutrality threshold of 0.5. This confirms the
popular belief, that people are much more interested in negative than in positive news.
However, we also notice that some Wikinews datasets are more positive than others (Figure
11). For instance, the English language Wikipedia is the most negative while German,
Portuguese and Spanish are significantly most positive. It also seems that Spanish Wikinews
uses more complex language than the others, which might be due to the many countries that
share the same language. Spanish speakers in Spain might be saying similar things in other
words than speakers in Mexico, Chile, or Argentina. The same could be claimed for the
English Wikinews, due to United States, United Kingdom, Australia (etc.) editing. However,
in this case, the population of the United States is considerably larger than that of the others
combined. German Wikinews basically just covers one country, where the language might be
used more consistently, leading to less complex language. On the other hand, the Germans
seem to be less emotional than the Spanish, Portuguese, or the English, confirming a national
stereotype.
Emo?onality"
Complexity"
English" German" Spanish" Portuguese"
Figure 11. Sentiment, emotionality, and complexity of the pages linked to WikiNews in the different
6 Related work
Charles Murray’s list of “Human Accomplishments” (Murray 2003) shows the most
innovative people in history. The list is led by Isaac Newton and Gallileo Gallilei. It is based
on a compilation of history textbooks, where “accomplished” people have to be listed
multiple times in different languages and sources. Murray’s list has been combined in the
list created from 11,340 Wikipedia people pages, where a person has to be listed in at least 25
different language Wikipedias. The list has been hand curated to remove obviously non-
significant characters. Our analysis approach is purely based on data and not hand-curated,
making a claim to higher objectivity. Secondly, to be included into the Pantheon, a person
also needs to be in (Murray 2003). The Pantheon seems to be heavily biased towards Greek
philosophers, as the top five entries are Aristotle, Plato, Jesus Christ, Socrates, and Alexander
the Great.
7 Conclusions
The Internet enables researchers to more easily compile rankings of the most important world
leaders of all times (Murray 2003, Hidalgo 2014). Our work is unique in that we extract
language-specific rankings that allow us to compare the worldview for dozens of different
cultures. Probing the historical perspective of many different language-specific Wikipedias
gives an X-ray view deep into the historical foundations of cultural understanding of different
countries.