2v3101.6070:viXra
Cycles in Nonlinear Macroeconomics
Anatoly V. Voronin
Kharkiv National Economic University
9a Lenin Ave., 61001 Kharkiv, Ukraine
E-mail: voronin@hneu.edu.ua
Sergey I. Chernyshov
Lemma Joint Stock Insurance Company
3 Kolomenskaya St., 61166 Kharkiv, Ukraine
Tel.: +38 (057) 759 12 99
Fax: +38 (057) 759 12 98
E-mail: press@traffic.net.ua
URL: www.lemma.ua
Preface vii
1 Instability and cycles in the Walras-Marshall model 1
1.1 Nonlinearity in the Walras model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 A modified Walras-Marshallmodel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2 Periodicregimesinnonlinearmodelsofthemultiplier-accelerator 21
2.1 A multiplier-accelerator model with finite duration of an invest-
ment lag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.2 A model of the multiplier-accelerator with a continuously dis-
tributed lag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.3 Cyclic regimes in a nonlinear model of the multiplier-accelerator
with two degrees of freedom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3 Self-organization in Keynesian models 41
3.1 The dynamics of GDP growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.2 The LS-LM Keynes model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.3 Bifurcations in the nonlinear Kaldor model . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4 Dynamics of economic processes with a lag 63
4.1 Instability of price dynamics in Fisher’s model . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.2 The cyclicity of innovation processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Instead of the conclusion 79
iv CONTENTS
vi CONTENTS
’Alllinearsystemsareequallyhappy, whereaseachnonlinearsys-
tem is unhappy in its own way.’
Yu. Bolotin, A. Tur, and V. Yanovskii
”Constructive Chaos”
Nonlinear dynamics is one of the most important and prospective trends of the
development of economic science. Powerful modern techniques of qualitative
theory of differential equations and related subjects of mathematical topology
providebroadpossibilitiesofobtainingsubstantialresultsofqualitativecharac-
ter, in the first place, in solving the problems of economic forecasting. Mathe-
maticaleconomicsischaracterizedbytwoprincipallydifferentwaysofmodeling,
i.e., static and dynamic ones. Following N. D. Kondratev [25], we shall dwell
onamoredetailedandconcretecharacterizationofthesetwopurelytheoretical
approaches to the study of economic reality.
Thestatictheoryconsiderseconomicprocessesintermsoftheirinstantman-
ifestation, without any regard to inertial changes in time. The static approach
tothemodelingofeconomicrealityisbasedontheconceptoftheequilibriumof
interrelated elements of an economic system. The concept of equilibrium itself
hadbeensufficiently wellfamiliarto scientistsconcernedwithmechanicsbefore
the appearance in 1776 of Adam Smith’s prominent work ”An Inquiry into the
Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations” wherein, as it seems, the author
managed to find an analogy between the economic balance and the resultant
force in mechanics. A. Smith put forwardthe most substantialpostulate of the
general theory of equilibrium: namely, an ability of the system of competition
toachievesuchadistributionofresourcesthat,inasense,provestobeefficient.
On positions analogous to those of A. Smith stand also the constructions of
D. Ricardo who put forward the thesis of the freedom of competition and the
freedomofmovementoflaborandcapitalfromonesphereofeconomicrelations
to another. D. Ricardo was aware of the fact that the actual price, the actual
level of wages and incomes are variables with respect to time, and, at that, he
suggested that there exist a tendency towards attaining a certain natural level
of equilibrium for the above mentioned characteristics.
An exhaustive formulation of the general concept of equilibrium rightfully
belongstoL.Walras,arepresentativeoftheschoolofmarginalism(ormarginal
utility). Works by L. Walras, S. Jevons, and V. Pareto unified the theory of
equilibriumwithregardtoanapplicationtothespheresofexchange,production,
capital and money. They were subsequently elaborated by J. Hicks and P.
Samuelson. On the whole, these works are of rather broad, comprehensive
character: economyisconsideredasasetofindividualconsumersandproducers,
and the number of involved variables is absolutely unlimited. The system of
viii PREFACE
general equilibrium is closed in the sense that the whole set of variables is
determined by given conditions. In order to verify the compatibility of the
system with the state of equilibrium, one only has to compare the number of
equations with the number of unknown variables. However, there exists the
problem of the existence of the point of equilibrium and of its uniqueness.
The dynamic analysis ineconomics formedin parallelwith economic theory
itself. Aconfrontationbetweenthedynamicandstaticapproachescanbeeasily
traced throughout the whole history of the economic thought. Apparently, the
reason lies in principal differences between the understanding of the balance
of the equilibrium of forces and casual dynamics. There is a vast choice of
literature references concerned with the theory of economic dynamics. Among
a large number of different problems of evolutionary economics, the problems
of economic growth and of business cycles are the most important ones. In the
treatmentofN.D.Kondratev,thesedistinctionsbetweendynamicprocessesare
interpretedasevolutionary(nonrecurrent,irreversible)andwave-like(recurrent,
reversible). Byevolutionary(orirreversible)processesonemeansthosechanges
that in the absence of external perturbative interactions flow in a certain, one
and the same, direction. Examples of such processes are given by tendencies
of population growth, increase in the total volume of production, etc. N. D.
Kondratev terms as wave-like (or reversible) those processes of changes that
at each point in time have their specific direction and, consequently, change it
permanently. In these processes, the phenomenon, being at a given moment
in a given state and changing it afterwards, sooner or later may return to the
initialstate. Theprocessesofchangesinthepricesofdifferentconsumergoods,
interest rates, the level of unemployment, etc. may serve as examples.
Inourview,moreattentionshouldbepaidtotheissueofslow(low-frequency)
oscillations in economics, i.e., to the so-called long cycles (waves). N. D. Kon-
dratev himself, while singling out long waves of economic activities, related
them to the industrial revolution at the end of the XVIIIth - beginning of the
XIXthcenturies,theconstructionofrailwaynetworks,thedisseminationofnew
communication means (telephone, telegraph) and of electric power, as well as
rapiddevelopmentofautomotiveindustry[2]. Nowadays,themostwide-spread
concept is that of five long cycles whose length is approximately equal to 50
years:
the end of the XVIIIth century - the first third of the XIXth century;
thesecondthirdoftheXIXthcentury-theearly90softheXIXthcentury;
the end of the XIXth century - the 30s of the XXth century;
the 40s of the XXth century - the 70s of the XXth century;
from the 80s of the XXth century up to the present time.
Letustrytounderstandtheverynatureofthemechanismofthelongcycle.
To initiate the expansion phase of the cycle, it is necessary to accumulate not
only inventions but also capital as well as a desire of entrepreneurs to increase
investments. For the industrialist, the dynamics of profit is a factor of primary
importance. As a matter of fact, the expansion wave of the long cycle devel-
ops as a system of mutually related and mutually stimulating phenomena: an
innovation provides a possibility to improve the production conditions, to re-
duce production costs and to increase profit, which stimulates entrepreneurs to
introduce innovationsunder the conditionof availabilityofnecessaryresources.
Innovations give rise to an increase in profit, which generates additional invest-
ments, an increase in the volume of demand and a general positive movement
of the growth rate of business factors.
However,atacertainmomentthe dynamicsofthe processexhibits areturn
point. Atechnologicalbasisforthis isprovidedbysubstantialweakeningofthe
factorsthatinitiatedtheexpansionphaseofthecycle. Acessationoftheiraction
slows down the growth of profitability and then decreases it, which reduces
the interest of business structures in further innovations and investments. The
industryslowsdownitsgrowth,andnegativeeffectsoftheeconomiclife,typical
of long-wave decline, appear. In the process of this decline, an increase in
the number of new inventions takes place, which creates a prerequisite for the
completion of the decline and the beginning of a new expansion wave.
N. D. Kondratev’s undoubted merit consists in the fact that he based his
conclusions on an analysis of long temporal series of prices of the commodity
output, of interest rates, wages, etc. The above-described dynamics is merely
a simplified scheme, because the actualchanges in the economy are much more
complicated and diverse.
The modern status of macroeconomics cannot be understood without an
evaluationofthe contributionof J.M. Keynes. As a matter offact , he created
macroeconomics as a science in the 1930’s in order to explain the causes of the
Great Depression that proved to be the most large-scale recession of the XXth
centuryand,assuch,themostimportanteventinthemodernhistoryofbusiness
cycles [18]. The theory, existing at that time, could not explain why the GDP
of the USA had fallen by one third from 1929 to 1933 and the unemployment
levelhadrisento one fourth ofthe total workforce. The classicaltheories were
bases on the assumption that the economy was at competitive equilibrium,
with the market regulating everything. In particular, high unemployment had
togiverisetothereductioninwageratesdowntothelevelwheretheemployers
would agree to employ all those who were willing to work for these wages and
unemploymentwoulddisappearbyitself. However,inpractice,thiswasnotthe
case. Therefore, Keynes put forward radically new ideas whose essence could
be reduced to two major postulates.
Firstly, the economy is not at competitive equilibrium at each separate mo-
ment; that is, the ”invisible hand” of the market does not fulfil its duties. The
basic reason for this equilibrium is the conservation of fixed prices and wage
rates for a long time and the absence of adaptation to the current market con-
ditions. Secondly,thelevelofthe developmentoftheeconomyisdeterminedby
theaggregatedemand,andthelatter,initsturn,dependsonsomeunexplained
factors that were vaguely termed by Keynes as ”the brute of investors”. On
the basis of these two assumptions, the edifice of the theory of macroeconomics
was erected. According to its postulate, the volume of the GDP of the country
is influenced by the scale of expenditure of consumers, investors and the gov-
ernmenton commodities andservices. Therefore,business cycles are stipulated
exactly by oscillations of the demand rather than by resources of the country.
The firstand mainformalKeynesianmodelIS-LMwas formulatedonthe basis
of the Keynesian theory by J. Hicks in 1937.
In the course of the next several decades, up to the mid-70s, the discus-
sion went on mostly in the mainstream of the Keynesian theory. The issue was
whether the government should at all try to revive the economy in the periods
ofdecline and,if it wereso, by whatmeans. Accordingto the above-mentioned
position, the government had to react to the decline by increasing government
spending. From a point of view of other scientists and specialists, stabilization
should be achieved by means of control over money supply: this point of view
gave rise to the development of the doctrine of monetarism according to which
the main objective of the state is to avoidstrong oscillations of the money sup-
ply. Nevertheless,the positions ofboth the antagonisticscientific trends agreed
on the point that the basis driving force of the cycle were oscillations of the
volume of demand, and, therefore, the main differences between ”Keynesians”
and ”monetarists” were almost completely obliterated.
However,inthe mid-1970sthe wordeconomyfacedanew phenomenon,i.e.,
stagflation, that could not be satisfactorily explained within the framework of
theKeynesianconcept. Atthattime,thereappearedcriticalworksofR.Lucas,
subsequentlythe1995NobelPrizewinner,whocriticizednotonlytheeconomic
policy of the authorities but alsothe whole Keynesiantheory of business cycles
for the disregard of optimum behavior of business agents including the forma-
tion of rational expectations. He suggested that, in contrast to investors and
consumers in Keynes’s models that followed certain formal rules of behavior,
businessagentsmade,ontheaverage,correctforecastsofthefuturestateofthe
economy and adhered to the strategy of maximizing their own profits. All this
created a demand for some alternative theory of business cycles.
This niche was occupied by the American economists F. Kydland and E.
Prescott, who won the 2004 Nobel Prize for Economics. In their seminal paper
[45], they proposed a new description of a real business cycle based on the fact
thatfirmsmaximizedtheprofitandmadedecisionstoinvesttakingintoaccount
the expectation of future demand for their product and of the development of
technologies.
Kydland and Prescott presented a series of dynamic models and showed
what kind of behavior of basic economic variables (GDP, investment, and sav-
ings) was to be expected depending on the effect of technological shocks upon
labour productivity and changes in external market conditions. The authors
demonstrated that the results of modelling were in satisfactory agreementwith
the observed regularities. Besides, they drew an important conclusion that a
considerable part of oscillations of GDP in many countries correspondedto the
predictionsofequilibriummodels. Inotherwords,thereisnoneedtointroduce
into these models deviations from market equilibrium in the Keynesian spirit
and to realize governmental stabilization policy.
For fairness, it should be noted that the theory of cycles of F. Kydland and
E.Prescottbyno means explainsallthe phenomena ofactualeconomicreality:
itispermanentlysubjectedtoconstructivecriticismby”newKeynesianists”. In
particular,themoststrikingexampleofdisagreementbetweenrepresentativesof
these two schools is anattempt to explain the technologicalboom of the 1990s.
Oneisjustleftwithexpectationsthatinnottooremotefutureaconsensuswill
be achieved concerning the actual sources of business cycles.
In our point of view, the achievement of this goal is impossible without ac-
cepting the fact that economics, in essence, is a developing system and should
beconstructedwithinthe frameworkofthe theoryofdevelopingsystemswhose
constructivenessis convincinglyprovedby the example ofchemical kinetics, bi-
ology and other natural sciences. In this theory, it is shown that in the process
of proceeding to the goal in the presence of substantially nonlinear feedback
couplings, there emerges a whole hierarchy of instabilities that leads to the ap-
pearance of limit cycles, homoclinic structures and to spontaneous formation
of chaos. As a result of such transformations (bifurcations), several different
states of business equilibrium may appear (the so-called effect of bistability).
The methods of nonlinear mechanics allow us to predict the moment of the oc-
currence of a chaotic regime in the system under investigation, the number of
possible states of equilibrium and to determine the character of their stability.
All this, in its turn, generates a principal general problem of the construction
of alternative scenarios of complex, irreversiblydeveloping system. It would be
in order to mention here the statement of G. Malinetskii [28]: ”Indeed, social-
technological objects are complex hierarchy systems, with various processes in
them developing at different characteristic time scales. The rate of their insta-
bility, the limits of their predictability are different as well. In the economic
system,the horizonofthe forecasthasfallensharply: whereasjust15yearsago
5-year directive or indicative planning was a norm in the world, nowadays this
isoutofquestion. Intheworld,thereismoreandmoresupplyof’quickmoney’
and less and less supply of ’slow money’. However, on the other hand, sta-
ble development of the society requires slowly changing strategic goals, scales
of social values and norms, culture and ideology. One needs technique, the-
ory and formalism that would allow one to analyze possible dynamics of such
’different-time-scale’ systems and to direct their development on this basis.”
One can hardly question the fact that exactly the mathematical technique
of nonlinear dynamics provides the very tools that allow us to approachclosely
the solution of the problem of ”designing the future”, of finding stable and safe
ways of social and economic evolution. The experience of the application of
methods and models of nonlinear dynamics has shown that many complex de-
velopingsystemscanbesatisfactorilydescribedwiththehelpofasmallnumber
of variables, the order parameters. The determination of the order parameters
isrealizedby reductionofthe multidimensionalsystemtoasubspaceofasmall
dimension owing to methods of the theory of bifurcations and of the theory of
central manifolds. However, exactly this fact predetermines the locality of the
carriedoutanalysisofdynamicbehaviorofthestudiedsystem. Itsapplicability
is admissible only in small neighborhood of the bifurcation point, to solutions
xii PREFACE
ofsmallamplitude. Inwhatfollows,weshallpresentotherperiodicsolutionsof
smallamplitudegeneratedasaresultoftheAndronov-Hopfbifurcationoflimit
cycles and shall determine the character of their stability.
In this book, the choice of the discussed models is made more or less arbi-
trarily. The authors consider the models that are rooted in basic principles of
traditional economics, neoclassical synthesis and Keynesianism.
Instability and cycles in the
Walras-Marshall model
Economics operates such notions as the quantity of goods (productive factors)
and their price. In every market, there exist groups of sellers and buyers. In
this chapter, a model of the market for one kind of goods will be considered.
In the model of a single market the variables, i.e., functions of time, are the
volumesof bought andsoldgoods as well as their prices. The basic principle of
modelingofthemarketinteractionistheformationofbalancerelationsbetween
thevolumesofthe demandandthe supplyofgoodsand,accordingly,the prices
of the demand and the supply.
Theproblemofjointactionofdemandandsupplyasindicatorsdetermining
quantitative relations between the volume of a commodity and its price in a
givenmarketisverypreciselycharacterizedby A.Marshall[29]: ”We couldask
on equal grounds whether the price is regulated by utility or production costs,
orwhetherasheetofpaperiscutbytheupperorthelowerbladeofthescissors.
Indeed, if one blade is kept motionless and cutting is carriedout by the motion
oftheotherblade,wecan,withoutagooddealofthinking,arguethatcuttingis
done by the second blade. However,such an argument is not completely exact,
and it may be justified only by a pretension to mere popularity rather than to
an exact scientific description of the realized process.”
For more concrete understanding of the modern phenomenological basis of
demand and supply, we should present a definition of these notions, using the
formulations given, e.g., in [16].
Bythecommoditydemandonemeansthequantityofthiscommoditythat
an individual, a group of individuals or the population on the whole are ready to
buy per unit time under certain conditions. A list of these conditions includes
the tastes and the preferences of the buyers, the price of this commodity, the
income rate, etc. By the demand price one means the maximum price the
buyers agree topay for a fixedquantityof a given commodity. Atthesametime,
the dependence of the volume of the demand on its determining factors iscalled
2CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
the demand function.
Analogously, the supply serves as a characteristic of the readiness of the
seller to sell a certain quantity of the commodity in a fixed period of time.
By the volume of the supply one means the quantity of a certain com-
modity that one seller or a group of sellers are willing to sell in the market per
unit time under certain conditions.
Theseconditions,asarule,includethepropertiesoftheappliedmanufactur-
ingtechnology,thepriceofthegivencommodity,thepriceratesoftheemployed
resources,taxrates,subventions,etc. The supply price isthe minimum price
at which the seller agrees to sell a certain quantity of a given commodity. The
dependence of the volume of the supply on the structure of its determining fac-
tors is calledthe supply function. Letus point outthatthe supply function
as well as the demand function can be represented in three ways: in the form
of numerical tables, graphically, and analytically. In what follows, we shall use
only analyticalrepresentations for the functions of the demand and the supply.
1.1 Nonlinearity in the Walras model
Inclassicaleconomictheory,oneemploystwoequallyadmissiblebutprincipally
differentversionsofthe descriptionofthe mechanismofaninteractionbetween
the demand and the supply. The first approach, worked out by L. Walras,
postulates that the driving force of changes in the price is the volume of excess
demand under a given instant value of the price. In a dynamic aspect, the
processoffindingtheequilibriuminL.Walras’sspiritcanberepresentedinthe
form of the differential equation
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where P =P (t) is the price of the commodity;
YD =YD(P) is the volume of the demand;
YS =YS(P) is the volume of the supply;
m>0 is a constant of the time of the limit process;
t is time.
Thesignofthequantity∆Y =YD YS,calledthevolumeofexcessdemand,
determines the direction of the changes in the price. It is obvious that for
∆Y > 0 the market price rises, whereas for ∆Y < 0 it falls. The condition of
the existence of an equilibrium price P is the existence of the solution to the
There exists also a different approach to the problem under consideration,
attributed to A. Marshall. Its essence is that a change of the volume of the
mass of commodities in a given market is determined by the influence of the
difference between the demand price and the supply price, to which the sellers
(orthemanufacturers)respondbyanincreaseoradecreaseinthevolumeofthe
1.1. NONLINEARITY IN THE WALRAS MODEL 3
supply of the commodity. In a mathematical form, this statement is expressed
by means of the following differential equation:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where Y =Y (t) is the volume of the commodity;
PD(Y) is the demand price;
PS(Y) is the supply price;
m>0 is a time constant.
In Eq. (1.3), a surplus of the demand price over the supply price stimulates
an increase in Y; and if the supply price is higher than the demand price, the
value of Y decreases. An equilibrium value of the volume of the commodity Y
is determined from the equation
The algebraic equations (1.2) and (1.3) may have only one or several so-
lutions. It means that both a unique state of equilibrium as well as a set of
equilibrium states is possible. It is obvious that the nonuniqueness of equilib-
rium values of the volume and of the price of the commodity is explained by
the presence of nonlinear relations in the basic equations.
An important problem is an analysis of the stability of the available states
of equilibrium. It is necessary to ascertain the reasons why an equilibrium vol-
ume of the market remains constant under certain, remaining within certain
limit values, fluctuations of the price, or on the other hand, why, under a given
equilibriumpricerate,changesin the volume ofthe commodity alsotakeplace.
In what follows, by the stability of equilibrium we understand an ability of the
overbalanced market to return again to the initial state owing to the action
of endogenous factors. Besides, the problem of the stability of market equilib-
rium is directly related with the problem of the necessity to employ additional
measures to regulate market relations.
First of all, let us consider the problem of stability of the economic model
(1.1) described L. Walras’s theory. Let us set the coefficient m = 1 in Eq.
(1.1). In the neighborhood of the equilibrium point P = P determined by
the solution of Eq. (1.2), we can approximately represent the functions of the
demand YD(P) and of the supply YS(P) in the form of polynomials obtained
by the truncation of the corresponding Taylor series
YD(P) i (P P )i, YS(P) i (P P )i, (1.5)
diYD(P ) diYS(P )
d = E , S = E , i=0,k.
i dPi i dPi
If we introduce a new variablex=P P , which is a deviationofthe price
from its equilibrium value, equation (1.1) takes the form
4CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
where x˙ = dx, F (x)= k aixi, a =d S . Note that from(1.2) it follows
dt k i=0 i! i i − i
a = 0, because d = S = Y , which is an equilibrium volume of the market.
At the same time, x = 0 is a stationary point (the state of equilibrium) of Eq.
(1.6).
The differential equation (1.6) is called a dynamic system of the first order.
The phase space of the considered system is one-dimensional, therefore, the
studied process of change in the price can be represented by the motion of an
image point on the phase straight [8].
Indeed, in general, the main elements that determine the partition of the
phase straightinto trajectoriesare the states ofequilibrium of the system. The
values x=x that make the function F (x) vanishare themselves independent
phase trajectories. The restof the trajectories consistof line segments between
the roots of the equation F (x) = 0, or of rays forming half-intervals between
one of the roots and infinity. The direction of the motion of the image point
along these trajectories is determined by the sign of the function F (x): for
F (x)>0 the image point moves to the right, whereas for F (x)<0 it moves
to the left. If the form of the curve z = F (x) is known, it is not difficult to
establish concrete partition of the phase straight into trajectories.
An example of such partition is given in Fig. 1.1, where the arrows show
the direction of the motion of the image point. From the structure of the par-
tition of the phase straight into trajectories, it follows directly that the states
of equilibrium of the system at the points x , x are stable, whereas they are
unstableatthepointsx ,x ,x . ItisdirectlyseeninFig. 1.1thatinthestable
states of equilibrium the derivative F′ (x) < 0, whereas in the unstable states
F′ (x) > 0. The value F′ (x) = 0 may occur at points of both the stable and
unstable state of equilibrium. (This situation itself deserves independent con-
sideration,because itrequiressome additionalconditions for the determination
of the type of stability of the stationary point.)
As the characterof the change ofthe variable in the first-ordersystem(1.6)
is completely determined by the explicit form of the function F (x), it is of
interest to consider cases of different values of the order of the polynomial k.
Letk =1. ThenF (x)=a xisalinearfunction,andthereexiststhesingle
state of equilibrium x = 0. The stability condition in this case is F′ (0) < 0.
This inequality reduces to the relation d <S which is the classical condition
of stability of L. Walras.
Let us try to interpret the linear stability of L. Walras using the notion of
the elasticity of the demand and supply functions to price.
According to the definition of elasticity, in our notation, we have:
η = 1 E , η = 1 E ,
or, taking into account that d =S =Y ,
η = 1 E , η = 1 E , (1.7)
1.1. NONLINEARITY IN THE WALRAS MODEL 5
Figure 1.1: The dependence of the excess-demandfunction on price deviations.
where η , η are coefficients of the demand and supply elasticities to price.
They are dimensionless, i.e., relative, quantities.
Therefore,the inequalitya =d S <0canbe easilyreducedto theform
Given that Y , P are always positive, the condition of L. Walras is for-
mulated as follows: for the stability of the linear system (1.6) with k = 1, it is
necessary that the elasticity of the volume of the supply to price should exceed
the corresponding demand elasticity, i.e., η >η . In other words, if we intro-
ducethequantityη =η η conditionallytermedanexcess-demandelasticity
to price, the stability of (1.6) is determined by the signof η: for η <0, we have
stability, and, on the contrary, for η >0, we have instability.
Let us consider the peculiarities of the behavior of the system (1.6) in the
case k = 2. Here, F (x) = a x+ a2x2 is a quadratic function of the initial
variable.
The equation F (x) = 0, or a x+ a2x2 = 0, has two roots: x1 = 0 and
x2 = 2a1. To determine the character of stability of each singular point, it is
ne E cess − ary a2 to evaluate F′ (x ).
As a result of differentiation, we have:
F (x )=a +a x . (1.9)
The substitution of the values of x1 and x2 in expression (1.9) yields
F ′ (0)=a , F ′ 1 = a .
2 1 2 − a − 1
(cid:18) 2 (cid:19)
6CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
Figure 1.2: The diagram of the transcritical bifurcation.
It is thus obvious that the stability of both the states of equilibrium is
completely characterized by the sign of the quantity a (or η).
In this case, if a > 0, i.e., if the demand is more elastic than the supply,
the state of equilibrium x1 =0 is unstable, whereas x2 = 2a1 is stable.
On the contrary,for a <0 (the demand is less elastic than the supply), x1
is a stable state of equilibrium, and, accordingly, x2 is an unstable one.
Inanoncoarsesituation,whena isasmallquantitychangingitssigninthe
neighborhoodofzero,the so-calledtranscriticalbifurcationappearsillustrating
a change of stability of the states of equilibrium: see Fig. 1.2, where a <0.
As a result of this bifurcation, the singular points x1 and x2 merge for
a = 0, i.e., when the elasticity of the demand is equal to that of the supply,
to form the single two-fold state of equilibrium x = 0. At the same time, the
condition a =0 is important.
Here, we can observe a considerable difference between the behavior of the
nonlinear system from that of the linear model, which manifests itself in the
present of two equilibrium values that are transformed into one and the same
point of equilibrium as a result of a transcritical bifurcation.
It seems to be reasonable to attribute pithy economic meaning to the co-
efficient of the quadratic term, a , in terms of elasticities of the demand and
supplyfunctions. Tothisend,itisnecessarytofindthederivativesofthecorre-
sponding types of elasticity with respectto the price atthe point P . Skipping
over intermediate transformations, we present the following expressions for the
quantities d and S as functions of η′ , η′ , η , η :
2 2 D S D S
2 P2 D E − D D
(cid:0) (cid:1)
2 P2 S E − S S
(cid:0) (cid:1)
1.1. NONLINEARITY IN THE WALRAS MODEL 7
Subtracting the second equation of (1.10) from the first one, we get
2 P2 D− S E D D− D− S
2 P2 E D D−
It is worth noting that the dependence of the coefficient a on the excess-
demand elasticity η and on its derivative with respect to the price η′ is a linear
function.
Letusconsiderthecasewhenthefunctionofanexcessdemandinthesystem
(1.6) is cubic. This takes place for k =3, and, accordingly,
F (x)=a x+ 2x2+ 3x3 (a =0).
The cubic equation F (x)=0 may have, depending on the coefficients, one
or three real roots, and, accordingly, the system (1.6) may have one or three
states of equilibrium.
By analogywith the previous case, the stability of each state of equilibrium
is determined by the sign of F (x ).
Let the system (1.6) have the representation
x˙ =a x+ 2x2+ 3x3. (1.12)
Assuming the parameters a , a to be small, sign-alternating quantities,
we consider the deformation of the saddle-node bifurcation with an additional
degeneracy in the quadratic term [4]. In the saddle-node case, the truncated
system with a =0, a =0 takes the form
x˙ = 3x3. (1.13)
After some thinking, we can arrive at the conclusion that there exist small
perturbations of the function a3x3 when the system possesses one or three
hyperbolic fixed points (the states of equilibrium) in the neighborhoodof x =
0, as well as certain ”unusual” perturbations when the system possesses two
fixed points, with one of them being nonhyperbolic. All the above-mentioned
possibilitiescanbe accountedforbyadding low-orderterms. Itis customaryto
represent this deformation in the form of the equation
where u=x+ a2, θ = a2
2 a , θ =a
2 .
a3 1 a3 3a3 − 1 2 1 − 2a3
are also sm(cid:16)all quant(cid:17)ities. The dynamics of this vector field is
formed,withtheaccuracyoftopologicalequivalence,byitsfixedpointsandthe
typesoftheirstability. Generallyspeaking,mathematicaltheoryofsingularities
8CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
providesthe meansforasystematicstudyofzerosoffamiliesofmappings,with
one of the examples being given by the right-hand side of Eq. (1.14).
Let us find the bifurcation set of parameters in the parameter plane θ , θ
by demanding that the right-handside of (1.14) and its derivative with respect
to the variable u vanish:
By eliminating the variable u from both the equations of the system (1.15),
we arrive at the following bifurcation set:
8θ3+9a θ2 =0. (1.16)
The bifurcation diagram of the system (1.14) is presented in Fig. 1.3 for
the case a < 0. The system (1.14) may possess one or three coarse states of
equilibrium. These states of equilibrium merge in pairs on bifurcation lines G
and G [formula (1.16)] that form Neile’s semicubical parabola with the origin
at the point A = (0,0). The point A corresponds to merging of all the three
states of equilibrium into one state. For the values of the parameters in the
plane θ , θ that lie inside the parabola (region 2), the system (1.14) possesses
threestatesofequilibrium(twostablestatesandoneunstablestateinbetween),
whereas for the ”outside” values of the parameters (region 1) there exists one
(stable) state of equilibrium.
Itshouldbenotedthat,forbifurcationvaluesoftheparameters,aprojective
mapping of the manifold ψ(u,θ ,θ ) = 0 onto the parameter space has fold-
type singularities. The dynamic system in the neighborhood of the bifurcation
exhibits hysteresis. Let us change the parameters in order to cross the semicu-
bicalparabola,whilekeepingwatchonthestableequilibriumregime(Fig. 1.3).
In the process of motion from left to right, the ”breakdown of equilibrium” of
equilibrium occurs on the right branch G , whereas in the case of the reverse
motionitoccursontheleftbranchG . Thisphenomenoniscalled”ahysteresis
loop”.
From formula (1.16), it is not difficult to obtain an explicit form of the
bifurcationsetintermsoftheinitialparametersa ,a . Using(1.14)and(1.16),
we derive the relation
8a a =3a2. (1.17)
Furthermore, if we take into account the expressions for a and a in terms
ofthe demandandsupply elasticitiestoprice,using (1.8)and(1.11), we obtain
the following expression for the bifurcation line:
E 3 E E D S −
In the equality (1.18), the value of the excess-demand elasticity η and its
derivative with respect to the price
are small quantities. Therefore, we can
1.1. NONLINEARITY IN THE WALRAS MODEL 9
Figure 1.3: Bifurcation diagrams of the ”triple-equilibrium” bifurcation.
10CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
argue that the above-mentioned bifurcation can be observed in the initial dy-
namic system for very close values of the demand and supply elasticities, and
of their derivatives, i.e.,
D ≈ S D ≈ S
Such a type of behavior cannot be explained by means of the methods of
comparative statistics traditionally applied in economic analysis. Exactly the
analysis of the dynamics of the system in the neighborhood of the state of
equilibriumhasshownthatthebehaviorofthesystemisnolongercharacterized
byauniqueandsmoothreactiontosmallshifts ofthe parameters. Atthe same
time, there emerge a variety of states of equilibrium, including multiple and
sudden jumps stipulated by the irreversibility of the flowing processes.
Analogously, one can carry out an investigation into the dynamics of the
process of establishing the equilibrium value of production according to the
concept of A. Marshall, described by the differential equation (1.3.) However,
in contrast to the Walras model, in this case an analysis of the stability of the
studied dynamic system involves such substantial economic characteristics as
the values of elasticities of the prices of the demand and of the supply to the
production volume.
Itshouldbenotedthattheaboveresultsaskformoreprofoundunderstand-
ing of P. Samuelson’s principle of correspondence whose validity relies on the
suggestionofpredeterminedstabilityoftheeconomicsystem,withchangeability
bearing a smooth character.
1.2 A modified Walras-Marshall model
Uptonow,wehaveconsideredtheprocessesofchangesofthe marketpriceand
of the volume of commodity production as independent, and the mathematical
models(1.8)and(1.11)havebeenstudiedseparately. Therefore,inwhatfollows,
inordertostudythedynamicsofamodelofacertainindustrialobject,weshall
make anattempt to unify the equations ofWalras andof Marshallinto a single
economic system, where the processes of production and of formation of the
price are mutually related [13].
The issue of price formation in productive economic systems has always
been and still remains relevant both for theoretical economic analysis and for
thesolutionofconcretepracticalproblemsoftheenterpriseaswell. Inourview,
itis importantto synthesizetwomajorfactorsofpriceformation. Thus,onthe
onehand,classicaltheoryofmarketpriceformationarguesthatthemarketprice
corresponds to the equality of the demand and of the supply in the commodity
market. On the other hand, according to the theory of the firm, it is known
that, in the case of productionbalance, the price of the products manufactured
by the enterprise corresponds to the marginal production costs. Thus, the first
approachtreatspriceformationfromthepointofviewoftheconsumer,whereas
thesecondonedoesitfromthepointofviewoftheproducer. However,realities
of the economic life witness that the processes of changes in the price and in
the volume of production flow simultaneously and are interrelated. Therefore,
1.2. A MODIFIED WALRAS-MARSHALL MODEL 11
it seems to be reasonable to consider the market mechanism of balancing the
demandwiththesupplyandtheproductionprocessofaccountingfortheprofit
and costs simultaneously, within the framework of a unified dynamic system,
according to the methodology presented in the work [5].
As the starting point, we consider a mathematical model describing the
dynamics of the interaction between the prices and the volume of production
(manufacturing):
where P is the price of the produced and sold product;
Y is the volume of the product in natural terms (the market supply of the
commodity);
D(P) is the market demand for the product in natural terms;
P (Y) is the supply price, equal to the marginal production costs, i.e.,
C′ (Y) are the production costs (expenses);
α,β areconstantpositiveparametersdescribingcharacteristictimesoftran-
sient processes.
The first equation of the system of the two ordinary differential equations
(1.20) is the classicalmodel of marketprice formation in the form of L. Walras
(orP.Samuelson). Theyarebasedontheschemeofpriceformationsearchingfor
the balancebetweenthe demandandthe supply: for D(P)>Y the price rises,
whereas for the opposite sign of the inequality it falls. The second equation
of (1.20) describes the process of establishing the balance between the price
and the marginal production costs with respect to the production (the value of
production). Here,itisassumedthatthebalanceisdisturbedanditisnecessary
to regulate the volume of production: if P >P (Y), the profit of the producer
P Y C(Y) rises with an increasing the production volume, whereas in the
opposite case one should decrease production activities.
The model is based on substantial simplifications. Firstly, the production
is assumed to be single-product. Secondly, a local outlet without competition
is considered, when the whole supply is formed by one producer. However, in
spiteoftheabove-mentionedassumptions,themodel(1.20)admitscomplicated
typesofbehavior,andtheiranalysiswillbethesubjectoffurtherconsideration.
Aformalanalysisofqualitativepropertiesofsystem(1.20)shouldstartwith
theconsiderationofsingularsolutionsthatcharacterizethestatesofequilibrium
of the economic model.
By making the left-hand sides of (1.20) vanish, we obtain two constraint
relations between equilibrium values of the price
and of the volume
:
P =P (Y ). (1.21)
Let us assume that the system of algebraic equations (1.20) has, at least,
onepositivesolution(P∗,Y∗ ). concerningthe volumeofthe demandD(P),we
12CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
pointoutthatthe dependence onthe priceis asubstantiallynonlinearfunction
and there exists a Taylor expansion up to the third order in the neighborhood
of the point
:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
i=0,3.
The cost (expenses) function is represented by a quadratic function of the
volume of production:
where S , S , C are constant parameters.
Accordingly, the marginal costs (the supply price) are described by the for-
Then, the system of equations (1.21) can be represented as follows:
S D(P )+S P =0,
Y ∗ = − 0. (1.22)
Having preliminarily changed the time scale, it is convenient to study the
system(1.20)intermsofnewvariablesthatrepresentdeviationsfromthe equi-
libriumvaluesP˜ =P P∗ ,Y˜ =Y Y∗ . Inthiscase,thesystem(1.20)reduces
to the form
where γ = α. (cid:16) (cid:17)
Asisobvious,equations(1.23)possessthetrivialstateofequilibriumP˜ =0,
Y˜ =0.
To study the stability of the trivial state of equilibrium, we write down an
explicitexpressionforthecharacteristicequationofthelinearpartofthesystem
(1.23):
The quadratic equation (1.24) has negative real parts under the conditions
S d <1. (1.25)
Theinequality(1.25)determinesrestrictionsontheparametersoftheinitial
system for stability in the linear approximation.
1.2. A MODIFIED WALRAS-MARSHALL MODEL 13
Letusconsideringreaterdetailthesituationinthevicinityoftheboundary
of the region of stability, taking into account the equality
where µ is small, sign-alternating quantity. It is obvious that, in this case, the
divergenceofthevectorfieldofthesystem(1.23)isequaltothesmallparameter
µ. Therefore,for µ<0 the type of the singular point (the state of equilibrium)
is a stable focus, whereas for µ >0 it is an unstable focus. In other words, for
µ=0, in the neighborhoodofthe equilibriumstate, there occurs the formation
(annihilation) of a limit cycle as a result of the Hopf bifurcation.
Let us verify the validity of the conditions of Hopf’s theorem as applied to
the system (1.23). The eigenvalues are determined (for µ=0) by the equality
where i2 = 1, ω2 = γ d2, i.e., they are purely imaginary. Upon the substi-
tution of (1.26) in the quadratic equation (1.24) and subsequent differentiation
with respect to the parameter µ, we obtain for µ=0:
From (1.28), it follows that the real part of the eigenvalue with respect to
the parameter does not vanish, i.e., the eigenvalues in the complex plane cross
theimaginaryaxiswithanonzerovelocity. Asaresult,alltheconditionsofthe
Hopf bifurcation theorem are fulfilled.
Let us turn once again to (1.26) in order to give meaningful interpretation
of this equality.
The above-mentionedcondition can be fulfilled is the parameters d and S
have the same sign. As in the following the value S = C′′ (Y) will figure as
the bifurcation parameter, its positivity characterizes concavity of the function
of expenses C(Y), whereas its negativity, accordingly, characterizes convexity.
From an economic point of view, S < 0 determines a positive effect of the
volume of production (C′′ (Y) < 0), whereas S > 0 means that a rise in the
costs outruns the output of the products (C′′ (Y) > 0), i.e., the production is
resource-consuming.
In orderto determine essentialparameters of the limit cycle that character-
ize its stability and the structure of periodic solutions, we reduce the system
of differential equations (1.23) to the Poincar´e normal form by means of a cor-
responding change of variables P˜ = x , Y˜ = d x +ωx . As a result of the
reduction, we obtain for µ=0:
x˙ = ωx + 2 1 + 3 1,
d d x2 d d x3
x˙ =ωx 1 2 1 1 3 1. (1.29)
2 1 − ω 2 − ω 6
14CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
Usingtheexplicitformofthecoefficientsofthenonlineartermsofthesystem
(1.29), we derive an expression for the first Lyapunov quantity:
d γ d2 +d2d
l (0)= 3 − 1 2 1 . (1.30)
1 16(γ d2)
(cid:0) −(cid:1) 1
For l (0) < 0, a stable limit cycle takes place, and a corresponding regime
of self-oscillations is called ”soft”. On the contrary,if l (0)>0, the limit cycle
is unstable, the self-oscillations break down ”rigidly”, with a manifestation of
irreversibility (hysteresis). The case l (0) = 0 is the most complicated one in
the sense of a variety of phase-plane structures of the system (1.29), because
there appearsa possibilityof simultaneouscoexistenceof twolimit cycles(with
one being stable and the other one unstable) that subsequently merge into a
single multiple limit cycle. This bifurcation has codimension two and will not
be studied in detail in this Chapter.
The periodic solution of small amplitude ε (up to a choice of the initial
phase) is itself written down in the form [37]
x (t)=εcos
(cid:18) (cid:19)
ε2d 4πt 4πt
+ 2 3d d cos +2ωsin +O ε3 ,
12ω2 1 − 1 T T
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
x (t)=εsin
(cid:18) (cid:19)
ε2d 4πt 4πt
+ 2 3d ωcos 2d ωsin +O ε3 . (1.31)
12ω2 1 − T − 1 T
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Here, ε2 = 2γ(S1−d1) is the amplitude; T (ε)= 2π 1+τ ε2+O ε3 , τ =
l1(0) ω 2 2
is the period of the cycle dependin(cid:0)g, generally sp(cid:0)eak(cid:1)(cid:1)ing, on
the a(cid:16)mplitude.(cid:17)
Thus, by the example of the system of two nonlinear differential equations
(1.29), it is easy to establish that, in contrast to a linear system, periodic solu-
tions are no longer harmonic, and the period and the amplitude of the oscilla-
tions are interrelated.
As an illustration of the obtained results, consider examples of economic-
capacity cycles for different groups of commodities with regard to the depen-
dence of the demand functions onthe income, followingthe classificationofthe
Swedish economist L. Tornquest [36].
Example 1. The demand function for essential commodities has a repre-
1.2. A MODIFIED WALRAS-MARSHALL MODEL 15
whichreflectsthefactthatanincreaseindemandfortheseessentialcommodities
graduallyslowsdownwithanincreaseintheincomeandhasahasalimitq >0.
The parameter C is called the constant of half-saturation of the income.
Assuming that an equilibrium income is a function of the price,
we express the demand in the form D = D(P). After corresponding transfor-
mations, we get
D(P)= 1 − 1 . (1.32)
With the help of (1.22) and (1.32), we write down the equation for an equi-
librium price:
(P ∗ )2 (S S C )P ∗ S q =0. (1.33)
Differentiating (1.32) with respect to the price, we obtain the coefficients of
the demand function:
d = 1 , d = 1 , d = 1 . (1.34)
From(1.34), it follows that the quantities d , d arenegative numbers,and,
therefore, by (1.30), the emerging limit cycle is stable. At the same time, the
reasonfortheemergenceofthecycleisthefactofpositiveinfluenceoftheeffect
of the scale of production of the given group of commodities, i.e., S <0.
Example 2. The demand-for-luxury-goods function is represented in the
E = 1 − 2 .
By analogy with Example 1, we express the demand as a function of the
price:
D(P)= 2 2 2, (1.35)
where q , b , C are positive parameters.
The equation for an equilibrium price has the form
2 0 1 2 2 1 0
Assuming that (1.30) has at least one positive root
, we evaluate the
coefficients of the powers of P:
q (b +C ) 2q (b +C ) 6q (b +C )
d = 2 2 2 , d = 2 2 2 , d = 2 2 2 . (1.37)
In this case, the coefficients d and d are positive numbers, and the sub-
stitution of their values in (1.30) ensures the condition l (0) > 0, which is an
indication of a catastrophic loss of stability of the limit cycle. As d > 0, the
emergenceofalimitcyclerequiresthefulfillmentoftheconditionS >0,which
16CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
is possible only for resource-consumingproductionwith anoutrunning increase
in the costs.
Let us consider one more version of the model (1.20), assuming, as a pre-
liminary, that the supply price P is a nonlinear function of the volume of
production. Forsimplicity,weconsiderthequantitiesP andY tobe deviations
from certain equilibrium values
.
Concerning the demand function D(P) and the price, we put forward an
assumption that they quadratically depend on their arguments, i.e.,
D(P)=d d P,
P (Y)=S S Y.
Then, the system (1.20) can be represented in the form
P˙ =d d P Y,
Y˙ =b2 P +S Y S , (1.38)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where b2 =γ.
One can argue that a linear analysis of the stability of (1.38) completely
correspondstothepreviouslyobtainedresultsforthesystem(1.23),includinga
verificationofthevalidityofHopf’stheorem,uptothesubstitutionofb2 forthe
parameter γ. Therefore, assuming the closeness of the bifurcation parameter
S to the quantity d1, we transform (1.38) to the normal form of the given
bifurcation with the help of the change of variables x = P, x =
(ω2 =b2 d2). After some transformationsand the introduction of a new time
scale τ =ωt, we obtain:
x˙ = x + 2 1,
d d b2d S x2 b2d S x2
x˙ =x + 1 2 − 1 2 1 + 1 2x x b2S 2. (1.39)
2 1 ω2 2 ω2 1 2 − 2 2
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Let us represent the system of two ordinary differential equations (1.39)
in the form of a differential equation for the complex variable Z = x +ix ,
Z¯ =x ix :
where g = 1 d + i d d b4S ;
11 4ω 2 ω 1 2 − 2
g = 1 d +2b2d S + i d d +b2S b2 2d2 ;
20 4ω 2(cid:0) 1(cid:0)2 ω 1 2(cid:1)(cid:1) 2 − 1
g = 1 d 2b2d S + i d d +b2S b2 2d2 .
02 4ω (cid:0) 2 − 1 2 ω (cid:0) 1 2 2(cid:0) − 1(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
Now, we possess all the necessary information for the evaluation of the first
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)
Lyapunov quantity
l = Img g .
1.2. A MODIFIED WALRAS-MARSHALL MODEL 17
Taking into account the explicit form of the coefficients of Eq. (1.40), we
get:
l = 1 b6S2 d2 . (1.41)
1 16ω3 2 − 2
(cid:0) (cid:1)
From(1.41),itisobviousthatford2 >b6S2thelimitcycleisstable,whereas
for d2 >b6S2 the instability of the limit cycle takes place.
In Fig. 1.4, we present cyclic changes of the price and of the volume of the
commodity ofthe consideredstate ofequilibrium forthe followingvalues of the
parameters of the system (1.38):
b=1; d =0.5; d =2; S =0.5; S =1.5.
Theconditiond2 = b3S makestheexpressionforthefirstLyapunovquan-
tity vanish. This may mean that the initial system (1.38) possesses two limit
cyclesthatcanmergeintoonetwo-foldcyclebymeansoftrajectorycompaction.
This situation is possible, if the second Lyapunov quantity, l , does not vanish.
Setting for definiteness S = d2, as a result of evaluation, we obtain l = 0.
Moreover,l , the next (third) Lyapunov quantity also vanishes under the given
conditions. The fact that all the first three Lyapunov quantities vanish means
that the state of equilibrium is a center, not a focus. In other words,the initial
system (1.38), for
S = 1, S = 2, (1.42)
turns into a conservative one, with the conservation of the phase volume.
Let us write down the explicit form of (1.38), eliminating the parameters
S ,S with the help of Eqs. (1.42):
P˙ =d d P Y,
Y˙ =b2P +d Y 2 . (1.43)
It is important for us to find the first integral of the system (1.43). To this
end,wetransformthevariablesP andY withthehelpofthelinearsubstitution
Y =P , Y = P + + , (1.44)
1 − b 2 ξ b 2a
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where ξ2 = b−d1, a= d2 , ω2 =b2 d2.
b+d1 4ω1 − 1
Then, equations (1.43) can be represented in the form
Y˙ =aY2+aξ2Y2 ξ2+1 Y + ,
1 1 2 − 2 4a
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Y˙ =2aY Y . (1.45)
18CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
Figure 1.4: The limit cycle in the system (1.38).
1.2. A MODIFIED WALRAS-MARSHALL MODEL 19
The system (1.45) can be reduced to a total differential equation:
aY2+aξ2Y2 ξ2+1 Y + dY =2aY Y dY . (1.46)
1 2 − 2 4a 2 1 2 1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
ByintroducingtheintegratingfactorY
−2into(1.45),weobtainthefollowing
equation:
aξ2 + dY =2ad 1 . (1.47)
− Y 4aY2 2 Y
(cid:18) 2 2 (cid:19) (cid:18) 2(cid:19)
The integration of Eq. (1.45) yields
Y2 =ξ2Y2 Y ln Y +KY , (1.48)
1 2 − a 2 | 2 | 2 − 4a
where K is an arbitrary constant determined from the initial conditions.
Thus, expressions (1.44) and (1.48) determine a functional interrelation be-
tweenthepriceandthevolumeofthecommodity,whichisapermanentbalance
between the income of the producer and his expenses at any moment of time.
Returning to the system (1.38), we should be reminded of the fact that the
coefficients d , d are the demand elasticity and its derivative with respect to
the price, whereas S , S are price demand elasticity and its derivative with
respect to the volume of the commodity, i.e.,
d =η , d =η , S =η , S =η .
1 D 2 D 1 S 2 S
(It is understood that the elasticities and their derivatives are evaluated at
the trivial state of equilibrium.)
Then, conditions (1.42) take a somewhat different form:
The first expression in (1.49) implies a transition from a stable state of
equilibrium to an unstable one with the formation (or annihilation) of a limit
cycle,whereasthesecondexpressionin(1.49)determinestheboundarybetween
the types of stability of self-oscillation regimes.
20CHAPTER1. INSTABILITYANDCYCLESINTHEWALRAS-MARSHALLMODEL
Periodic regimes in
nonlinear models of the
multiplier-accelerator
2.1 A multiplier-accelerator model with finite
duration of an investment lag
InthisChapter,weconsideranexampleofacertainkindofmultiplier-accelerator
modelsthatillustratesataphenomenologicalleveldifferentaspectsoftheprob-
lems of business cycles. As the starting point, we use the investment model
of Goodwin [1] that possesses a nonlinear element built in the system of a
multiplier-accelerator interaction. The dynamics of this model is characterized
by the lag of two types: from the point of view of investment demand, there is
a finite-duration lag of the action of the accelerator, whereas there is a contin-
uously distributed lag on the part of supply.
As the main variable, the model involves profit or an output Y =Y (t). An
excess demand is formalized by the equation
where D is a cumulative demand comprising a consumer demand C, an invest-
ment demand I, and independent expenses G. All the above-mentioned terms
are the actual costs. It is assumed that the consumption C is directly pro-
portional to the profit and the lag is absent, i.e., C = cY, where the quantity
0 < c < 1 characterizes a marginal propensity to consume. We also assume
that the actual investments outlay is carried out with a certain fixed lag of
the duration of θ units of time after an investment decision F (t) is made, i.e.,
I(t) = F (t θ). Exactly here, the action of the accelerator manifests itself as
a functional relation between the volume of investment decisions F(t) and an
instantaneousvelocityofthe changeinthe profit(outputvolume) dY(t). Inthe
22CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
most general form, this relation can be represented as follows:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where ϕ is a certain nonlinear function possessing the property of saturation.
Inotherwords,forsmallchangesintheprofit,theclassicallinearaccelerator
comes into play, whereas for a further increase in the profit (output volume),
the function F reaches its upper bound F determined by the resource and
capacity limits of the structure of the production.
Whenthevolumeoftheproductionoutputsubstantiallydecreases,thequan-
tity F tends to its lower bound F that depends, generally speaking, on the
amortization quota of the fixed capital. For the sake of convenience of further
mathematical transformations, within the framework of the model under con-
sideration, we restrict ourselves to a Taylor expansion of the function ϕ(x) up
to the third order:
≈ 1 2 2 3 6
where ϕ , i=1,3, are corresponding derivatives of the function ϕ(x).
Giventhatwehavealreadydescribedthemaincomponentsofthecumulative
demand function, we obtain the following equation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Concerning the independent expenses G, it should be noted that they can
be considered fixed, i.e., G=const.
Consider next the situation on the part of supply. The main assumption
is that value of the output volume Y lags behind the value of the cumulative
demand D. The lag is considered to be continuously distributed, and it can be
represented by a linear first-order differential equation:
where ε>0 is aconstantofthe time lagcharacterizingthe dynamicsofadjust-
ment between the demand and the supply.
Abalancesynthesisofthe demandandthesupply, by(2.2)and(2.3),yields
a differential equation with a retarded argument:
dt − dt − −
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Equation (2.4) represents the general multiplier-accelerator model of Good-
win with nonlinear interactions.
With regard to the form of (2.4), it is nothing but a mixed differential-
difference equation.
2.1. AMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORMODELWITHFINITEDURATIONOFANINVESTMENTLAG23
Asisobvious,equation(2.4)hasasingularsolutionY∗ = G thatrepresents
an equilibrium level of profit (output volume) resulting from the action of the
static multiplier. In what follows, it is reasonable to introduce the variable
that represents a deviation of the profit from its equilibrium
value.
In terms of the new variable y(t), equation (2.4) takes the form
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where s=1 c is a marginal propensity to save.
Thegivenmodel,representedbyEq. (2.5),determinesthedynamicsofprofit
(output volume) in terms of deviations from the above-mentioned equilibrium
level Y∗ = G .
For the sake of a further analysis of dynamic properties of the considered
processofchangesinprofit,itisnecessarytocarryoutasequenceofmathemat-
icaltransformationsandsimplifications that will allowus to reducedthe mixed
first-orderdifferential-differenceequationto anordinarydifferentialequationof
higher order [35].
Let us introduce new time τ = t θ instead of t. Then, equation (2.5) can
be represented as
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Our next step consists in expanding the left-hand side of Eq. (2.6) into a
power series in θ, while retaining terms containing the first power of θ. We
obtain:
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
d2y dy 1 dy
(cid:18) (cid:19)
In Eq. (2.7), we substitute the explicit form of the function ϕ as a cubic
polynomial. As aresultoftransformations,we obtainanordinarysecond-order
differential equation:
d2y ε+θs ϕ dy s sϕ dy 2 s2ϕ dy 3
+ − 1 + y 2 3 =0. (2.8)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Making the change of variables y = y , dy = y , we represent (2.8) in the
form of a system of two differential equations:
24CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
dy s ϕ ε θs sϕ s2ϕ
2 = y + 1− − y + 2y2+ 3y3. (2.9)
Itisnaturaltobeginthequalitativestudyofthe dynamicsystem(2.9)from
an investigation into the states of equilibrium. As is obvious, equations (2.9)
possessonly the trivialstate of
equilibriumy∗
=0. To classify the type
ofthis singularpoint,it isnecessaryto find characteristicnumbers ofthe linear
part of (2.9) determined by the quadratic equation
From the explicit form of (2.10), one can infer that the singular point of
the system (2.9) may be either a stable (unstable) node or a stable (unstable)
focus. Of primary interestfor us is the situationwhen a complex focus changes
its stability,whichmaybeaccompaniedbythe formationofalimitcyclegiving
rise to a corresponding self-oscillation regime. In this case, we represent the
solution of (2.10) in the form
where ω2 = s , i2 = 1, and µ = ϕ1 −ε−θs is a small quantity. In other words,
for µ=0, accordingly, the eigenvalues are purely imaginary: λ = iω.
By differentiation expression (2.10) with respect to the parameter µ, we
obtain: λ ′ = dλ = 1. This means that the eigenvalues λ cross the imaginary
axis with a nonzero velocity. Therefore, we can argue that the conditions of
Hopf’s bifurcation theorem are fulfilled, and the system (2.9) allows for the
formation of a limit cycle from the complex focus.
It would be in order here to draw attention to the reason for the occur-
renceofinstability in the multiplier-acceleratormodel. As itseems,exactly the
accelerator ”blows up” the damped oscillations induced by the multiplier and
generates a structural self-sustained oscillation motion (self-oscillations). We
have already seen that instability occurs in a given economic system when one
of its parameters changes. It is most natural to consider as a variable parame-
ter the coefficient of the linear accelerator ϕ whose critical value ϕ∗ = ε+θs
changes the direction of damping in the system (2.9). Thus, the coefficient ϕ
plays the role of a bifurcation parameter. The criterion of stability can now be
writtendowninthe formϕ <ϕ∗ . Alinearanalysisshowsthatwhenϕ ,while
increasing,passesthroughthe value
,a loss ofstability of the focus is caused
by a pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues of the matrix of the coefficients of
the linear part of the system (2.9).
The loss of stability at ϕ =ϕ∗ occurs under the conditions of Hopf’s theo-
remthat statesthat, inadditionto a stationarysolution, there appearperiodic
solutions.
However, Hopf’s theorem itself does not provide information on whether
theseperiodicsolutionsdescriberegimesthatcanbeactuallyobservedassteady
ones. Periodic solutions may prove to be unstable and, accordingly, unobserv-
ablewithouttheuseofspecialprocedures. Therefore,thenextgoalofourstudy
2.1. AMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORMODELWITHFINITEDURATIONOFANINVESTMENTLAG25
of emerging periodic solutions in the system (2.9) is to derive explicit formulas
describing their stability, amplitude, and period.
To achieve the above-mentioned goal, we shall use the techniques presented
in[37]. For the sakeofconvenienceofthe applicationofthe proposedmethods,
we shall retain original notation.
In order to reduce the system (2.9) to the normal Poincar´e form, we make
the change of variables y =x , y = ωx . As a result, for µ=0, we obtain
x˙ =ωx 2x2+ 3x3. (2.12)
2 1 − 2 2 6 2
Let us representthe system ofthe two ordinarydifferential equations (2.12)
in the form of a complex differential equation with respect to the variable z =
x +x :
z2 z¯2 z3 z2z¯
20 11 02 30 21
+g +g , (2.13)
wherez¯isthecomplexconjugateofz,andtheinversechangeofvariablesyields
x =Rez, x =Imz.
For further evaluation, we need only the coefficients g , g , g , and g .
20 11 02 21
Their explicit forms are
g = g =g = 2, g = 3. (2.14)
20 11 02 21
Given expressions (2.14), we obtain the following:
1) the value of the first Lyapunov quantity
Rec (0)= 3 ; (2.15)
2) the amplitude of small oscillations
3) an approximate value of the period of oscillations
T 1+ 2 ρ2 . (2.17)
≈ ω 24ε2θ2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
The periodic solutionitself, up to the choice of the initial phase, in terms of
the original variable, is written down in the form
s T 12εθ T
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
26CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
Itis importantforus toknowthe signofthe coefficientsϕ thatdetermines
the sign of the first Lyapunov quantity in (2.15). For ϕ > 0, Rec (0) > 0,
and, accordingly, the limit cycle is unstable; that is, rigid excitation of self-
oscillations takes place, accompanied by the phenomenon of hysteresis. How-
ever,the assumptionofthe positivityofϕ is unrealistic,becausethe condition
of achieving the limit saturation F (F ) under an increase (decrease) in
the velocity of changes of profit Y will not be satisfied. Therefore, we should
set ϕ <0 (Rec (0)<0). In this case, a stable limit cycle is generated with a
soft excitation regime of self-oscillations.
While analyzing the explicit form of the approximate solution for Y (τ) in
expression (2.18), we should note the contribution of the coefficient ϕ . A
nonzero value of ϕ introduces certain asymmetry into the structure of the
resulting oscillations. Obviously,they are nonharmonic even for smallvalues of
the amplitude. Besides, the coefficient ϕ induces an increase in the period of
oscillations with a growth in their amplitude.
An economic meaning of the asymmetry of the cycle consists in a difference
between the duration of periods of expansion and that of periods of decline,
which, on the whole, is a characteristicfeature of nonlinear models of economic
dynamics.
Somewhat earlier, we considered in detail the influence of the accelerator
parameter ϕ on the degeneracy of the linear part of the system (2.9) that
directlyinducedabifurcationoflimit-cyclegenerationfromanequilibriumstate
ofthe complex-focustypeandthe establishmentofthe regimeofself-sustaining
oscillations [12].
Summarizing,wewanttoemphasizethat,inthepresentstudyofbehavioral
properties of the nonlinear multiplier-accelerator model of Goodwin, we have
ascertained the mechanism of the occurrence of a cycle; we have determined
the type of its stability, and we have given meaningful interpretation of the
influence of all the parameters of the nonlinear accelerator on peculiarities of
the self-oscillation regime.
2.2 A model of the multiplier-accelerator with
a continuously distributed lag
In the previous Section, we have studied in detail an example of one nonlinear
model of the multiplier-accelerator characterized by the occurrence of a stable
limitcycleintheneighborhoodofanequilibriumstate. Inthatcase,anessential
element in the construction of the accelerator has been a finite-dimension lag
in the functional relation between the measure of the volume of investment
decisionsandtheinstantaneousvelocityofthechangeinprofit(outputvolume).
As basic assumptions in the synthesis of the initial model, we have employed
nonlinear dependence of the accelerator on the derivative of profit, as well as
linear dependence of the consumption function on the value of profit.
In the present consideration, the multiplier-accelerator model will be rep-
2.2. AMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHACONTINUOUSLYDISTRIBUTEDLAG27
resented in a different form. First of all, we assume that the action of the
accelerator is now expressed in terms of a continuously distributed lag [14].
According to R. Allen [1], if the investment function I(t) represents the
actually induced investment at the moment of time t, caused by changes in the
output volume Y (t), the lag is described by the differential equation
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
whereϕisanonlinearacceleratorfunction,andtheparameterβ >0character-
izes the rate of changes in the investment function I(t). Concerning ϕ dY , it
shouldbenotedthatitsbehaviorforsmallchangesintheprofitisclosetolinear
(cid:0) (cid:1)
one,whereaswithafurtherincreasein dY theacceleratorfunctiongrowsslower
and may even become non-monotonic. We shall assume that the mechanism of
the action of the accelerator is satisfactorily described by the cubic parabola
where ϕ , i=1,3, are corresponding derivatives of ϕ(u).
The next step consists in the introduction of a lag into the model of the
multiplier. In ananalysisthat follows,we shallalsoemploy a continuousrepre-
sentationfor the descriptionof the action of the multiplier effect by means of a
corresponding differential equation.
Let us assume that on the part of cumulative demand, a lag is absent. The
planned consumption is given by C = C(Y), and independent expenses are
determined by the quantity G.
Then,thecumulativedemandcanberepresentedintheformoftheequation
Here,we giveup the hypothesis thatthe consumptionfunction is linearand
assume that C(Y) is a substantially nonlinear function of the output volume
Y.
In the most general case, we restrict ourselves to representing C(Y) in the
form of a third-order polynomial, i.e.,
The coefficients C , i = 1,3 have the same meaning as in the case of the
accelerator function. Moreover, C >0, whereas C and C may have opposite
signs.
The parameter of independent expenses G is considered to be constant.
Consider the situation on the part of supply. Here, a response of the out-
putvolumeY tothe cumulativedemandis consideredto be non-instantaneous,
inertial, i.e., there exists a continuously distributed lag in the form of a corre-
sponding differential equation:
28CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
where 1 is a time constant of the multiplier
Equations (2.19)-(2.21) completely determine the system of two nonlinear
differential equations that describe an interaction between the multiplier and
the accelerator. This system is represented as follows:
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
Given that ϕ(0) = 0, the system (2.22) has singular solutions determined
by the system of algebraic equations
I =0. (2.23)
The first equation of (2.23), by the explicit form of C(Y), may have up to
three rootsthat representthe coordinatesof an equilibrium state of the system
(2.22).
We represent the system of two differential equations (2.22) in the form of
a single second-order differential equation:
d2Y β dY dY
dt2 − − α dt dt −
(cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
where C′ (Y)= dC(Y).
With the help of (2.24), we have succeeded in eliminating dependence on
the variable I(t). In what follows, we shall operate a vector field composed
of the variables Y (t) and dY(t). Introducing the coordinates y = Y (t) and
y = dY(t), it is reasonable to transform Eq. (2.24) into a system of two first-
order differential equations:
2 1 − − α 2 2 1 − 1
(cid:18)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
As is obvious, the system (2.25) possesses the same states of equilibrium as
the system (2.24) does.
Let the coordinates of a single point be given as
=0), where
the solution of the equation C(y ) y +G = 0. In order to analyze behav-
ioral properties of the system (2.25) in the neighborhood of the given state of
equilibrium, we introduce new variables u =y y∗ and u =y .
1 1 − 1 2 2
Given the explicit form of the nonlinear consumption function C(Y), as a
resultofsome transformations,we arriveatthe systemof differentialequations
2.2. AMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHACONTINUOUSLYDISTRIBUTEDLAG29
2 − 1 1− − 2 3 1 2 2
3 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 6
where S =1 C C y∗ C (y1 ∗)2 .
− 1 − 2 1 − 3 2
Let us consider a particular case of the system (2.26) under the conditions
ϕ =0, C y∗ +C =0. Under the above-mentioned restrictions, the quadratic
terms in (2.26) vanish; that is, there is symmetry with respect to the change
u u , u u . Furthermore, under the assumption that
C C2+3C (1 C )
G= 2 2 3 − 1 ,
(cid:0) 3 (cid:1)
the equation for singular points y is factorized as follows:
y2 C C2+3C (1 C )
(C y +C ) 1 + 2 y 2 3 − 1 =0. (2.27)
3 1 2 6 3C 1 − 3C2
(cid:18) 3 3 (cid:19)
Accordingly,y∗ = C2 isthecoordinateofthestateofequilibriuminwhose
neighborhood the behavior of the system (2.26) is being studied. To ensure
the positivity of y∗ , we assume that C < 0, C > 0, and the parameter S =
1 C + C2 2 >0.
After the above-mentionedsimplifications, the system (2.26) takes the form
2 − 1 1− − 2 3 6
Weshallbeconcernedwithqualitativepropertiesofthesystem(2.28)inthe
neighborhood of the trivial state of equilibrium
= 0. To determine
the type of equilibrium, it is necessary to ascertain spectral properties of the
linear part of (2.28) with the characteristic equation
The explicit form of the quadratic equation (2.29) is analogous to that of
the characteristic polynomial in [12]. Therefore, when analyzing the situation
withthe occurrenceofaperiodic regimeinthe system(2.29)resultingfromthe
change of stability of the singular point of the type of a complex focus
30CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
wecanarriveattheconclusionthatthereasonforthiseffectistransitionofthe
linear parameter of the acceleratorthrougha certaincritical value ϕC = αS+β.
Note that the derivative of the eigenvalue λ with respect to the parameter
µ is nonzero:
= =0.
Inthiscase,wemayarguethattheconditionsofHopf’stheoremaresatisfied,
and a limit cycle around the trivial state of equilibrium is generated in the
system (2.28) from a complex focus.
Thefactthataself-oscillationregimeispresentisratherremarkableinitself;
however,itdoesnotprovidemuchinformation. Hopf’sbifurcationtheoremdoes
notgiveany answerto the questionaboutthe uniqueness ofthe limit cycleand
the character of its stability.
Toresolvetheposedproblems,wereduce(2.28)tothenormalPoincar´eform
for µ =0, using the change of variables u =x , u = ωx :
1 1 1 2 − 2
αβC x3 x2x x3
2 2 − ω 6 3 2 3 6
The system (2.30) can be reduced to the complex differential equation
Z3 Z2Z¯ ZZ¯2 Z¯3
30 21 12 03
where Z =x +ix , Z¯ =x ix ;
g = 3 − 3− ω ; g = 3 3− ω ;
30 (cid:16) 8 (cid:17) 21 (cid:16) 8 (cid:17)
g = − 3 − 3− ω ; g = − 3 3− ω .
12 (cid:16) 8 (cid:17) 03 (cid:16) 8 (cid:17)
Makinguseoftheexplicitexpressionsforthecoefficientsg ,itisnotdifficult
to determine the first Lyapunov quantity:
l (0)=Re 21 = 3 3 . (2.32)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
As before [5], we assume that, as a result of the effect of investment sat-
uration, ϕ < 0, whereas the coefficient C > 0. Therefore, a sign change
in expression (2.32) is possible, which is a manifestation of different types of
stability of the limit cycles. From (2.32), the stability of the limit cycle for
C +βω2ϕ < 0 (l (0) < 0) follows directly, whereas for the opposite sign of
the inequalities an unstable self-oscillation regime with a catastrophic loss of
stability takes place.
2.2. AMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHACONTINUOUSLYDISTRIBUTEDLAG31
The case when the first Lyapunov quantity is small and alternates the sign,
is of much greater interest.
As is well-known [6], the behavior of dynamic systems in the vicinity of
the parameter values satisfying the equality C +βω2ϕ = 0, such that the
first Lyapunov quantity l vanishes, substantially depend on the sign of the
secondLyapunovquantity l . Depending on the first and the second Lyapunov
quantities,aswellasonthesignoftherealpartoftherootsofthecharacteristic
equation µ , in small neighborhood of the state of equilibrium on the phase
plane,oneortwolimitcyclesmayexistwithallpossiblecombinationsofstability
and instability: namely, one stable or unstable limit cycle, or two limit cycles
(a stable one inside an unstable one or vice versa).
The second Lyapunov quantity is determined by the expression
l = Img g . (2.34)
2 −12ω 30 12
Aftersubstitutionin(2.34)oftheactualvaluesoftheparameters,weobtain:
l = 3 C βω2ϕ ,
2 6ω2 3 − 3
(cid:0) (cid:1)
or, by the validity of C βω2ϕ =0,
l = 3. (2.35)
Asisobvious,thequantityl doesnotvanishforanyvaluesoftheparameters
and is strictly positive, i.e., l >0.
If we make a conversion from the complex-valued variables to polar coordi-
nates,wegettwoindependent equationsfortheamplitude andthe phaseofthe
cycles:
The states of equilibrium for the first equation of (2.36) satisfy the bi-
quadratic equation
Equation (2.37) may have either none or one, or two positive solutions (cy-
cles).
In Fig. 2.1, we present the corresponding bifurcation diagram. The line
H = (µ ,µ ):µ =0 relates to the usual Hopf’s bifurcation. The state of
equilibrium is stable for µ <0, and it is unstable for µ >0. If we move along
the line µ = 0 to the points where µ < 0, the complex second-order focus
on the phase plane will generate an unstable (coarse) limit cycle, whereas the
focusitselfbecomesnon-coarseandstable.
Shouldweenter,whilecrossingH−
32CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
Figure 2.1: The bifurcation diagram.
region 2, the stable complex focus generates a stable limit cycle. In region 2,
boththe cycle,the stable oneandthe unstable one,coexistsimultaneously;the
merge and disappear on the line T = (µ ,µ ):µ2 =4l µ , µ <0 .
1 2 2 2 1 2
The line T characterizes the bifurcation of the double cycle. Further in
(cid:8) (cid:9)
region 3, limit cycles are absent.
In Fig. 2.2, the region of the coexistence of the two limit cycles is shown.
In conclusion of this investigation, we would like to point out the following:
the presence of two limit cycles in the initial dynamic system of the multiplier-
acceleratorisstipulatednotonlybythenonlinearityoftheacceleratorfunction,
but also by substantial nonlinearity of the consumption function, because ex-
actly a relation between nonlinear coefficients of these functions ensures the
bifurcation of the double cycle.
2.3 Cyclic regimes in a nonlinear model of the
multiplier-accelerator with two degrees of
Consideramodelofthemultiplier-acceleratorwithspatialinhomogeneity. Such
amodelreflectspeculiaritiesofinterregionaltradeinthepresenceofanimport-
export multiplier, which agrees with the already studied multiplier of local ex-
penses, as well as with the general concept of Keynes and Samuelson [30, 31].
LetthequantityofanimportedcommoditydependonthelocalprofitY,which
is nowa functionoftime t andofa generalizedspatialcoordinater. Assuming,
asthefirstapproximation,thattheactionislocal,wesupposethatthecommod-
ity is imported from the nearest neighborhood of a considered point, whereas
2.3. CYCLICREGIMESINANONLINEARMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHTWODEGREESOFFREEDOM33
Figure 2.2: The stable and unstable limit cycles.
the exportedproductisproducedunderthe influence ofthe samepropensityto
import in the neighborhood of this point. Then, the net trade surplus is deter-
mined by the product of a constant propensity to import and a profit margin
in export-importoperations. In other words,the above-saidcanbe represented
in the form of the following expression:
where X is an export volume;
M is an import volume;
m is a constant propensity to import.
The spatial model of the multiplier-acceleratoris representedin the form of
asinglesecond-orderdifferentialequationwithanonlinearinvestmentfunction:
∂2Y ∂2Y ∂Y ν ∂Y 3
(cid:18) (cid:19)
where S is a marginal propensity to save;
ν is the coefficient of the accelerator.
In our consideration, we assume that all the parameters of the model, i.e.,
S, ν, andm, areconstantpositive quantities thatdo notdepend either ontime
or on the spatial coordinate.
The model described by Eq. (2.38) is a rather complicated mathematical
object that exhibits a variety of forms of spatial-temporal organization. There-
fore, in what follows we shall focus on dynamic processes, having preliminarily
subdividedthespaceintotwopartsinterrelatedbytheregionaltrade. Thiswill
allow us to study such phenomena as frequency matching and quasi-periodic
34CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
motion. Inotherwords,wemayencounteranew formofthe attractor,namely,
an invariant torus.
The partial differential equation (2.38) is represented in the form of two
coupled ordinary differential equations of the second order:
1 1 1 1 − 2 2 1 − − 1 1 − 3 1
2 2 2 2 − 1 1 2 − − 2 2 − 3 2
Here, we have assumed that the parameters of the accelerator, the rates of
accumulation and of import are different for each region of the subdivision.
Previously,forthemodelofthemultiplier-acceleratorinoneregion,wehave
found periodic regimes with the emergence of corresponding self-oscillations,
and we have studied the character of their stability. As it seems, for the model
withtworegions,cyclicmotionisalsopossible. Moreover,quasi-periodicmotion
with two matched frequencies is possible as well.
Let us represent the system (2.39) in the traditional form of a system of
first-order differential equations. This new system is four-dimensional.
Let x =Y , x =Y˙ , x =Y , and x =Y˙ . As a result, the system (2.39)
1 1 2 1 3 2 4 2
takes the form
2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 1
4 1 1 2 2 3 2 2 4 2
Obviously, the system (2.40) has trivial equilibrium x∗ = 0, i = 1,4. The
matrix ofthe linear partof(2.40), correspondingto this singular point, has the
(S +m ) ν 1 S m 0
A= − 1 1 1 − − 1 2 . (2.41)
m 0 (S +m ) ν 1 S
(2.41) has the characteristic polynomial
2 2 2 2 1 2
Equation (2.42) is a fourth-order equation; hence, it has four roots. Of
primary interest for us is the situation when (2.42) has two pairs of complex
conjugate roots with small parameters in their real parts, i.e.,
λ = 1 iω , λ = 2 iω . (2.43)
1,2 1 3,4 2
2.3. CYCLICREGIMESINANONLINEARMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHTWODEGREESOFFREEDOM35
Under the assumption that ν = 1 + S + α , i = 1,2, there exist, for
α =0, critical values of the parameters of the accelerator νc =1+S that are
responsible for a possible formation of limit cycles.
For α =α =0, equation (2.42) reduces to to the biquadratic equation
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 2
which, for λ2 = ω2, yields an equation for the frequencies:
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 2
As the free term in (2.44) is positive, equation (2.44) has two positive roots
that determine the squared frequencies:
ω2 = 1 1 2 2 ± ,
1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 2
For definiteness, we assume that ω > ω . If we compare the values of the
so-called eigenfrequencies ω¯ = √S +m , i = 1,2, it is not difficult to prove
that ω > ω¯ , whereas ω < ω¯ . It means that the common frequency of the
matched oscillations is either higher than the maximum natural frequency or
lower than the minimum natural frequency. On the other hand, in the case
of free oscillations, the matched system will never be able to oscillate with an
intermediate, compared to natural frequencies, frequency. From an economic
point of view, this fact means that a connection between two regions by means
of trade relations either speeds up or slows down a cycle of business activity in
both the regions.
For further considerationof the properties of the four-dimensional flux that
possesses a state of equilibrium with two pairs of purely imaginary eigenval-
ues, it is necessary to construct the normal form for the system of ordinary
differentialequations (2.40). This canbe done by means ofa sequence of linear
transformations of the initial variables as follows:
2 2 1 2 2 4
x = S +m ω2 y + S +m ω2 y ,
3 1 1 − 1 1 1 1 − 2 3
x = ω(cid:0) S +m ω2(cid:1) y (cid:0)ω S +m (cid:1)ω2 y . (2.45)
4 − 1 1 1 − 1 2 − 2 1 1 − 2 4
The transformation(cid:0)(2.45) convert(cid:1)s the syst(cid:0)em of four ord(cid:1)inary differential
equations in real variables into a system of two complex differential equations
that takes the following form in terms of the polar coordinates Z
eiϕ j:
1 1 1 11 1 12 1 2
2 2 2 21 1 2 22 2
36CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Here, ρ2 = ρ2 + ρ2; α , α are small sign-alternating parameters; the
coefficients | Z |
1 eiϕ j, 2 j = 1 1,2, 2 are functions of the initial parameters of the
system.
We canlearnalotaboutthedynamicsofthesystem(2.45)fromtheconsid-
eration of a plane vector field obtained by discarding the angular coordinates,
following the methods proposed in [42].
Inordertoreducethenumberofparameters,wescalethevariablesρ andρ .
Settingρ¯ =ρ a andρ¯ =ρ a ,droppingfornotationconveniencein
1 1 | 11 | 2 2 | 22 |
whatfollowsthe baroverρ andρ ,and,ifnecessary,scalingthe time variable,
we obtain:
d= 1, b (cid:0) = a 12 , c= (cid:1)a 21 .
The system (2.47) is characterized by twelve topologically different situa-
tions, presented in the following table:
Case 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
This classification is based on an analysis of secondary ”pitchfork” bifurca-
tions from nontrivial states of equilibrium of the plane vector field. Note that
the singular point (ρ ,ρ ) = (0,0) is always a state of equilibrium; besides, up
to three states of equilibrium may exist in the positive quadrant:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(ρ ,ρ )= 0, − 2 , for α d<0; (2.48)
r !
(ρ ,ρ )= 2 − 1, 1 − 2 , for 2 − 1, 1 − 2 <0,
1 2 s Q r Q ! Q Q
where Q=d bc, d= 1.
In general, the behavior of the system remains comparatively simple until
the occurrence of secondary Hopf bifurcations from the fixed point
. In order to detect such bifurcations, we linearize the
(cid:16)q q (cid:17)
2.3. CYCLICREGIMESINANONLINEARMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHTWODEGREESOFFREEDOM37
dynamic equations in a small neighborhood of this singular point. As a result,
we obtain the following matrix:
T = 1 1 2 1 2 ,
(cid:18) 1 2 2 1 2 (cid:19)
whose trace is
and the determinant is
Q 2 − 1 1 − 2
Taking into account the conditions of the existence of the singular point
(2.48), we infer that the secondary Hopf bifurcation may occur only on the
straight line
and, at that, Q>0.
Fromthisfact,itfollowsimmediatelythatthesecondarybifurcationdoesnot
occur in cases 2, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12. It is also possible to show that this bifurcation
does not occur in cases 1, 3, 4, 5, because, for its realization, it is important
that the angular coefficient of the straight line (2.49) should lie in between the
angularcoefficientsofthestraightlinesthatcorrespondtothe”pitchforks”,i.e.,
which is equivalent to
in a corresponding sector of the plane (α ,α ).
As can be shown by means of simple evaluation, in each case, this require-
ment does not ensure the condition Q>0.
Consider case 8, in which a Hopf bifurcation may occur. Some bifurcation
sets and phase portraits for this case are represented in Fig. 2.3.
On the Hopf-bifurcation line (2.49), the system
(cid:0) (cid:1)
2 2 b+1 1 1− 2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
is integrable, whereas the function
1 2 1 2 1 1 2
(cid:0) (cid:1)
38CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
Figure 2.3: A partial bifurcation set of the secondary Hopf bifurcation.
Figure 2.4: The level line R(ρ ,ρ ) for case 8.
2.3. CYCLICREGIMESINANONLINEARMODELOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATORWITHTWODEGREESOFFREEDOM39
with θ = 2(1−c), β = 2(1+b), and γ = 1+b, is constant along the solutions. In
case 8, we have: b>0>c, Q= 1 bc>0, and α = α<0; therefore, level
lines of this function have the form shown in Fig. 2.4.
As the system (2.51) is integrable, the secondary Hopf bifurcation is de-
generate. Therefore, to study the topology of this bifurcation in full detail, it
is necessary to consider in (2.49) terms containing higher powers of the initial
variables.
Unfortunately,wedonotpossessnecessaryinformation,becausenonlinearity
in the accelerator model is restricted to cubic terms, whereas an exhaustive
analysis requires terms of the fifth order. Nonetheless, it is possible to discuss
some conclusions that can be drawn on the basis of the obtained results about
the total four-dimensional flux of the system (2.46). It is necessary to bear in
mind that here we have two rotations ϕ˙ = ω and ϕ˙ = ω . Moreover, the
ratioofthe frequenciesω :ω thatshouldbe restoredfor finalconclusions. As
is easy to see, the initial four-dimensional system (2.46) possesses four types of
attractors corresponding to the fixed points of the plane system (2.47):
1) the trivial fixed point (ρ =0,ρ =0);
2) a periodic orbit with the period 2π (ρ =ρ∗,ρ =0);
≈ ω1 1 1 2
3) a periodic orbit with the period 2π (ρ =0,ρ =ρ∗ );
≈ ω2 1 2 2
4) an invariant two-dimensional torus with the periods
5) an invariant three-dimensional torus with the periods
, , O .
1 2 (cid:18) (cid:19)
The last (long) period on the tree-dimensional torus is associated with a
secondary Hopf bifurcation in the plane system (2.47). Here, we can foresee
thepresenceofsubtleresonanceeffectsandphenomenathatremainoutsidethe
scope of our consideration. Thus, we expect to find a narrow ”wedge” around
thelinesecondaryHopfbifurcationwherechaoticdynamics,includingtransver-
salhomoclinicorbitsand”horseshoes”,takesplace. Consequently,wecanargue
thatthe multiplier-acceleratormodel ofbusiness cycleswith a nonlinearinvest-
mentfunction, extended to the caseofinterregionaltrade,andwhose motionis
induced by a linear multiplier of import, may initiate random motion.
This factimplies thatprocessesofeconomicforecastingareproblematic. As
it seems, short-term forecasts are the most efficient ones, because exponential
divergence of close trajectories does not occur over small periods of time.
40CHAPTER2. PERIODICREGIMESINNONLINEARMODELSOFTHEMULTIPLIER-ACCELERATOR
Self-organization in
Keynesian models
As a science, macroeconomics was born owing to J. M. Keynes and, in the first
place, to his outstanding work ”The General Theory of Employment, Interest
andMoney”where,forthefirsttime,theproblemsofmacroeconomicsappeared
as the main subject of the research. Keynes’s viewpoints, revolutionaryat that
time, had substantially formed as a result of an analysis of the reasons for the
occurrence of the Great Depression. The global crisis of 1929-1933 prompted
Keynes, as well as many other economists after him, to study seriously the
economy as an integral system [27].
In this Chapter, we shall pay attention to some problems of economic dy-
namics,the modelsofwhicharebasedonthe postulatesofKeynes’stheory. As
such, the following models will be successively considered:
1) the model of the growth of the gross domestic product;
2) the LS-LM Keynes model;
3) the Kaldor model.
3.1 The dynamics of GDP growth
In the construction of long-term programs of social-economic development and
in macroeconomic modeling, the most important, in terms of criteria, factor is
the volume of GDP per capita. Following the post-Keynesian tradition, con-
sider,asthebasisofthemodelofGDPgrowth,themainmacroeconomicidentity
for the volume of the total income:
where Y is the GDP volume in value terms.
Let us analyze the terms of expression (3.1) from the point of view of their
economic meaning.
42 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
1) C = C(y) is the consumption volume that depends on GDP. We shall
assume that C(y) is a nonlinear function that can be representedby quadratic
dependence:
C(y)=C +C y+C y2,
where C is autonomous consumption; C is the limit propensity to consume
for small values of y; C characterizes extremal properties of the consumption
curve. If C < 0, then C(y) has a maximum, which agrees with Keynes’s
postulate that the propensity to consume declines with an increase in income.
For C < 0, the function C(y) has a minimum, according to the Modigliani-
Duesenberry hypothesis of relative income [32].
2) I = I Y,dY is the investment function. We assume that investment
react only to the rate of changes in GDP, i.e., it carries out the function of a
(cid:0) (cid:1)
simple accelerator:
where υ is the marginal capital coefficient.
3) G is the volume of government expenditure. In a simplified version, we
assume that the quantity G is independent of GDP and is constant in time.
4) N is the volume of pure export characterizing the factor of external
economic activities.
By analogy with G, we also assume that N =const.
Taking into account all the above assumptions, we can represent the model
(3.1) in the form of an ordinary differential equation:
υ = R+(1 C )Y C Y2, (3.2)
dt − − 1 − 2
where R=C +G+N =const.
SingularsolutionstoEq. (3.2)thatcorrespondtostatesofstaticequilibrium
can be found from the condition
C Y2 (1 C )Y +R=0. (3.3)
The quadratic equation (3.3) has the following representation for the roots:
Y ∗ = − 1 ± , A= 4C R+(1 C )2. (3.4)
1,2 2C − 2 − 1
If C < 1, which is usually assumed, and A > 0, then Y∗ are different
positive numbers. In other words, equation (3.2) has two states of equilibrium,
and the coefficients C and R have the same sign at that. In the case A = 0,
there exists a double state of equilibrium:
1−C1.
For A<0, equation (3.3) has no real solutions, i.e., equation (3.2) does not
possess states of equilibrium. If the coefficients C and R have opposite signs,
3.1. THE DYNAMICS OF GDP GROWTH 43
one of the roots is a positive number, whereas the other one is negative. As
the negative solutionhasno economicmeaning in this case,one speaks abouta
single state of equilibrium.
For the convenience of a further analysis of the properties of the differential
equation (3.2), we introduce new variables X = Y 1−C1, τ = t. As a result
of the change of variables, equation (3.2) takes the form
= C X2. (3.5)
Expression (3.5) is a typical differential equation with separable variables.
The integral curve that passes through the point τ =0, X(0)=X for C >0
is given by the following equations:
4X C √A+Atanh √Aτ
(cid:16) (cid:17)
4C √A+4X C2tanh √Aτ
(cid:16) (cid:17)
4X C √ A+Atan √ Aτ
4C √ A+4X C2tan √ Aτ
2 − 0 2 (cid:0) − (cid:1)
It is not difficult to notice that, for differ(cid:0)ent valu(cid:1)es of the quantity A, the
solutions to the differential equation (3.5) differ substantially with regard to
their properties,i.e., evenfor smallvariationsofA inthe neighborhoodofzero,
aqualitativechangeinthescenariooftheevolutionofX(τ)takesplace. There-
fore,the developmentofthe situationcanbe diagnosedby means ofqualitative
methods, without resort to complicated and expensive calculations. In qual-
itative forecasting, special attention should be paid to those factors that can
change the dynamics of GDP growth either in negative or positive direction.
In other words, if the process under consideration is in a zone of stable de-
velopment, the rest of qualitative information (such as the actual trajectory of
development) becomes less important. As a rule, in macroeconomic modeling,
mistakes and errorsof approximationin the parameters of the model are possi-
ble; accounting for perturbations of exogenous character is also rather difficult.
In this regard, it is reasonable to draw conclusions not about a single trajec-
toryofdevelopment, but ratherabouta regionof spaceof possible trajectories.
Theevaluationofsuchregionsisthe subjectofqualitativetheoryofdifferential
equations.
LetusnormalizethevariableX(τ)insuchawaythatwillallowustoreduce
the number of parameters in the differential equation (3.5) to a single one.
For X(τ)= U(τ), equation (3.5) takes the form
44 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
Figure 3.1: The bifurcation diagram for the case of ”double equilibrium”.
LetU∗ =U∗ (A)beastateofequilibriumofEq. (3.9)forcertainforcertain
fixed values of the parameter A, and let λ(A)=f′ (U∗,A).
For λ < 0, the state of equilibrium U∗ is stable, whereas it is unstable for
λ > 0. For small variations of the parameter A, the behavior of the trajectory
(3.9)intheneighborhoodofthestateofequilibriumwithλ=0doesnotchange
qualitatively.
Thus, the inequality λ = 0 is the condition of non-degeneracy that singles
out a coarse case.
Intheneighborhoodofthestateofequilibrium,thecoarsesystemismodeled
by the linearized equation (3.9):
Adifferentsituationoccurswhen,for certainvalues ofthe parameterA, the
eigenvalue λ vanishes in the vicinity of the state of equilibrium:
and the condition of non-degeneracy, f” = 0, is fulfilled. In this case, U∗ is
a double root of the equation
)=0.
A model equation for this bifurcation depends on a single parameter and
has the form (3.9). Then, for A > 0, the system (3.9) possesses two states
of equilibrium: namely, a stable one and an unstable one. (The latter is the
boundaryoftheattractionregionofthestablestateofequilibrium.) ForA=0,
they merge into a ”semi-stable” state of equilibrium and a non-coarse system
appears. For A<0, the states of equilibrium disappear: see Fig. 3.1.
Let us monitor the stability of the state of equilibrium. Thus, when the
parameterapproachesthebifurcationvalueA=0,theattractionregionshrinks
on one side, and, after the disappearance of equilibrium, all the solutions leave
the considered phase space. In economic applications, such a phenomenon is
called ”a break-downof equilibrium”.
3.1. THE DYNAMICS OF GDP GROWTH 45
Note that, for the bifurcation value of the parameter A = 0, the projective
mapping f(U,A) = 0 onto the parameter space has a ”fold”-type singularity.
In other words, there occurs a loss of stability, i.e., a catastrophe of the ”fold”
type.
An important quantitative parameter of the zone of stable development, in
the model of economic development, is represented by the parameter A, which
is a measureofthe distancebetween the states ofequilibrium Y andY (or X
and X ):
A=C2(Y Y )2 =C2(X X )2.
2 1 − 2 2 1 − 2
In the case, when A is sufficiently far from zero, one of the states of equi-
librium is stable, whereas the second one is unstable. Such a situationis rather
typicalof,forexample,thestudyoflogisticeconomicgrowth. WhenAtendsto
zero,the two states of equilibriummerge into a single one, andone can observe
a state of dynamic uncertainty in the sense of the stability of economic growth
trajectory, with a possible ”ejection” of the corresponding trajectory into the
regionof depressive dynamics. Returning to the basic macroeconomic equation
(3.2), we can formulate the condition of stability: the derivative of the con-
sumption function with respect to the GDP volume at the point of equilibrium
should be larger that unity:
In this case, according to the Keynes absolute-income hypothesis, the con-
sumption function is linear:
Then,from(3.11),itfollowsthatexponentiallyunstablegrowthisobserved,
because earlier we have assumed that the condition C <1 is fulfilled.
In other words, the model of economic growth with a linear consumption
function can be stable only under the condition that a marginal propensity to
consumeis largerthanunity. As is obvious,sucha conditioncannotbe fulfilled
in practice for an arbitrary GDP volume. This, in turn, induces a discussion
aboutdifferencesinthebehavioroftheconsumptionfunctioninshort-termand
long-term periods.
Theconsumptionfunctionwehavementionedbeforeandwhichrestsonthe
relative-income hypothesis is devoid of such shortcomings.
Thus, the problem of studying the stability of economic growth, described
by Eqs. (3.1) and (3.2), under the above-mentioned substantial simplifying
assumption,hasbeenreducedtostructuralpropertiesoftheconsumptionfunc-
tion. Quite naturally, there always exist certain parameters that, for some
reason, do not fit into our formal analysis. This fact hampers the application
of structural methods of macroeconomic forecasting, such as, e.g., simulative
modeling. For this reason, in the present work, we employ the methodology of
ascertaining, analyzing and forecasting economic processes and phenomena of
self-organizationbymeansofqualitativemethodsoftheexaminationofdynamic
models. By ascertaining substantially nonlinear processes of self-organization,
46 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
we are able to single out the controlled factors as well as those factors that are
beyond out influence [34].
As a result of our investigation, we have clearly demonstrated that the
macroeconomic model of growth may have several states of static equilibrium.
Accordingly, in dynamics, there exist evolutionary trajectories that correspond
to the states of equilibrium of the system. In the case when the structure of
the economy is coarse, small perturbations of the environment are unable to
”dislodge” it from its trajectory of growth. In the situation of a non-coarse
system, evensmalljumps ofthe parameters(or a ”shock”)maycause a sudden
transitiontoadifferentstateofequilibrium,andthetrajectoriesofdevelopment
undergo qualitative changes. On the other hand, a merger of states of equilib-
rium is accompanied by a bifurcation with a catastrophic loss of stability. In
this work, for a quadratic consumption function, we have studied effects in the
vicinity of a double state of equilibrium, with the occurrence of a ”fold”-type
catastrophe. Taking into account higher-order nonlinearity makes possible to
observeabifurcationofthreefolddegeneracyofthestateofequilibrium,withan
”assembly”-typecatastrophe,offourfolddegeneracyofthe stateofequilibrium,
with an ”swallow-tail”-type catastrophe, etc.
Aqualitativestudyofpropertiesofthemacroeconomicmodelshouldprecede
the elaborationof efficient methods of the managementofthe economicsystem
on the basis of self-organization principles. The use of self-organization allows
one to optimize shortages of the functioning of the economic system and to
preventthe controlparametersfromentering a zone ofundesirable bifurcations
and catastrophes [22].
3.2 The LS-LM Keynes model
Consider the dynamic economic system proposed by J. M. Keynes in his work
”The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money” [20]. This model
representstheconditionsofmutualbalanceinthegoodsandmoneymarketand
is called, accordingly, the LS-LM model. In its simplest form, a business cycle
is described by the system of ordinary differential equations
AccordingtoW.Zang[19],alltheparametersandvariablesherearepositive,
and their meaning is the following: Y = Y (t) is the volume of the national
income; R = R(t) is the interest rate; I = I(Y,R) is the investment demand
function that increases with respect to the volume of the national income, i.e.,
∂I =I >0, and decreases with respect to the interest rate, i.e., ∂I = I <
∂Y Y ∂R − R
0; S = S(Y,R) is the savings function that increases with respect to both the
variables, i.e., ∂S = S > 0, ∂S = S > 0; L = L(Y,R) is the total demand
for money that increases with respect to the income, i.e., ∂L = L > 0, and
3.2. THE LS-LM KEYNES MODEL 47
decreases with respect to the interest rate, i.e., ∂L = L < 0; M is the
constant supply of money; τ and τ are corresponding time constants.
The system (3.12) illustrates the action of a simple mechanism: an excess
demandforinvestment,comparedtothevolumeofsavings,leadstoanincrease
in the national income, and vice versa; in the case when the total demand for
money resources is higher than the available supply, the interest rate increases.
Concerning the investment demand function, it should be noted that the
values of I(Y,R) stand in a direct relationship to the volume of the national
income and in an inverse relationship to the interest rate. On the other hand,
this means that an increase in the income or in the interest rate will stimulate
the population to enhance the savings; and under the condition of growth in
the output (income) volume, the demand for money L(Y,R) increases.
Forthesystem(3.12),weassumetheexistenceof,asaminimum,onepositive
singular solution Y , R , which represents the state of static equilibrium of the
LS-LM model. For algebraicevaluation of the combinationof the values of the
national income and of the interest rate, it is necessary to solve the following
system of equations:
I(Y ,R )=S(Y ,R ),
L(Y ,R )=M. (3.13)
It is sufficient to confine the analysis of dynamic properties of the system
(3.12) to a local domain of the two-dimensional space of the initial variables
Y (t) and R(t) near the state of equilibrium Y , R .
To this end, we introduce new variables Y¯ (t) = Y (t) Y and R¯(t) =
R(t) R , with the meaning of deviations from the equilibrium values of the
income and of the interest rate, and expand the right-hand sides of the system
(3.12) in a Taylor series at the point of equilibrium, retaining the first and
the second powers of the corresponding variables. For convenience, we drop
the bar over the variables and, without loss of generality, set τ = τ = 1,
As a result, the system (3.12) can be represented in the form
dY Y2 R2 3
=F Y F R+F +F YR+F +O Y 2, R2 2 ,
Y R YY YR RR
(cid:16) (cid:17)
dR Y2 R2 3
=L Y L R+L +L YR+L +O Y 2, R2 2 , (3.14)
Y R YY YR RR
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where the coefficients of the quadratic terms are the second-order derivatives
with respect to the corresponding variables at the point of equilibrium Y , R ,
and F =I S >0, F =I +S >0.
Y Y R R Y R
The matrix of the linear part of (3.14) at the point of equilibrium has the
following representation:
A= Y − R ,
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
48 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
with the characteristic polynomial
λ2 trA λ+detA=0, (3.15)
where trA=F L is the trace ofthe matrix A, anddetA=F L F L
Y R R Y Y R
is the determinant of the matrix A.
In the case when trA < 0 and detA > 0, we can argue that the system
(3.14) is stable in the linear approximation. We shall consider in more detail
the situation in a small neighborhood of the boundary of the region of linear
stabilitytrA=µ,whereµisasmallsign-alternatingquantity. Thismeansthat
thequantitiesF andL aresufficientlyclosetoeachother,andwhentheyare
exactly equal to each other, the divergence of the vector field of the variables
Y (t), R(t) passes through zero.
AsdetA>0,wecansetω2(µ)=detA=F L F L andF =L +µ.
R Y Y R Y R
Equation (3.14) then takes the following form:
ω2 =F L L2.
Differentiating (3.16) with respect to the parameter µ, at µ=0, we obtain:
= i R . (3.17)
From (3.16), it follows that the real part of the derivative of the eigenvalue
does not vanish.
In other words, the eigenvalues cross the imaginary axis with a non-zero
velocity.
Thus, the conditions of Hopf’s bifurcation theorem are fulfilled, and, in the
system(3.14), whenthe stabilityofthe complex-focus-typestate ofequilibrium
changes,the formation(orannihilation)of abifurcationofthe limitcycle takes
place,accompaniedbythe generationofacorrespondingself-oscillationregime.
As a bifurcation parameter, we have chosen F = L , which is equivalent
to the condition
I S L =0.
To analyzethis bifurcation,we construct,using the changeofvariablesY =
F x , R=L x +ω x , the normal form of the system (3.14) at µ=0.
R 1 R 1 0 2
As a result of transformations with the change of the time scale τ =ωt, we
obtain the system
x˙ = x +a 1 +a x x +a 2,
1 2 20 11 1 2 02
x˙ =x +b 1 +b x x +b 2, (3.18)
2 1 20 11 1 2 02
F2F +2F L F +L2F
a = R YY R R YR R RR ;
3.2. THE LS-LM KEYNES MODEL 49
a =F + R RR ; a = 0 RR ;
11 YR F 02 F
F2(F L F )+2F L (F L F )+L2 (F L F )
b = R R YY − YY R R R YR − YR R R RR − RR ;
F2L F F +L (F L F ) F
b = R YR − R YR R R RR − RR ; b =L RR.
11 ω F 02 RR − F
Thesystemoftwoordinarydifferentialequations(3.18)isthenormalPoincar´e
form; it can be directly applied for the evaluationof the main characteristicsof
the forming limit cycles, such as the amplitude, the frequency, and the period
of oscillations; it can also be applied for the determination of the stability of
periodic solutions. The relevant formulas are given work by V. Zang [19]; it is
shown therein that the limit cycle can be either stable or unstable, depending
on the values of the typical parameters.
Itwouldbeinorderheretoemphasizethatthe above-mentionedworkdeals
withthesituationwhentheforminglimitcycleisuniqueandhasaquitedefinite
typeofstability. However,atthesametime,themostimportantquestioninthe
studies of the Hopf bifurcation concerns the maximum number of limit cycles
that can be generated from the state of equilibrium (the fixed point) under
parametric excitation of the given system. This problem is completely resolved
only for the quadratic case of polynomial systems by N. N. Bautin [6]: it is
shown that the maximum number of limit cycles that can be generated in the
quadratic system from a focus-type singular point is equal to three.
To determine maximum multiplicity of the limit cycle in the system of dif-
ferential equations (3.18), it is necessary to evaluate the first three Lyapunov
focus quantities.
Letusrepresentthesystem(3.18)intheformofasinglecomplexdifferential
equation in the variable Z =x +ix , for µ=0:
g =g (a ,b ), j,k =0,2, j+k =2.
jk jk jk jk
The singular point turns from a focus into a center under the following
conditions:
1) µ=g =0;
3) µ=Im(g g )=Im g¯3 g =Im g3 g =0;
20 11 11 02 20 02
4) µ=g 20 4g¯ 11(cid:0)= g 02 (cid:1) 2 g 11(cid:0) =0. (cid:1) (3.20)
− | |− | |
Expressions (3.20) constitute the conditions for the existence of the first
integral, or the Hamiltonian, of the system (3.18). In such a system, there
exists an infinite set of periodic trajectories that continuously depend on the
50 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
initial conditions. Quite naturally, isolated closed trajectories (limit cycles)
cannot exist under the Hamiltonian conditions.
In the paper by H. Zoladek [48], the followingformulasfor the evaluationof
the three Lyapunov quantities for Eq. (3.19) are given:
l = Im(g g ),
2 20 11 20 11 11 02
l = Im 4 g 2 g 2 (g +g¯ )g¯2 g .
3 −64 | 11 | −| 02 | 20 11 11 02
(cid:16)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17)
Thus, using (3.21), it is notdifficult to establishthe cyclicityof the singular
point:
1) no cycles are present if
2) a single cycle is present if
3) two limit cycle coexist if
20 11 20 11
3) three limit cycles are observed if
By virtue of the relation between (3.18) and (3.19), i.e.,
g = (a a +2b +i(b b 2a )),
20 20 02 11 20 02 11
11 20 02 20 02
we obtain a parametric restriction on the existence of three limit cycles.
According to the condition (3.25),
a a +2b =4(a +a ),
20 02 11 20 02
b b 2a = 4(b +b ),
20 02 11 20 02
2b =3a +5a ,
2a =5b +3b . (3.26)
Relations(3.26)constitutealgebraicconditionsoftheexistenceofthreelimit
cycles in a system of the general form (3.18). They have been obtained by
directevaluationofthecorrespondingLyapunovquantitiesforthesix-parameter
3.2. THE LS-LM KEYNES MODEL 51
Figure 3.2: Relative disposition of bifurcation surfaces in the neighborhood of
the bifurcation l =0.
quadratic system without the use of any canonical models of the type of the
systemofBautin, Andronova et al. [6], which employsa five-parameterformof
the representationof considered models.
In the presence of parametric perturbations, we write down the following
differentialequationcharacterizingthedynamicsoftheamplitudeofoscillations
with three small parameters β , j =1,3:
Here, β =µ, β =l , β =l , and l =0.
1 2 1 3 2 3 6
The bifurcation diagram of the system for the case l < 0 is presented in
Fig. 3.2 [4].
The plane N corresponds to bifurcation formation of a limit cycle from the
fixed point O (the state of equilibrium). On the half-plane N− the loss of
stability of the focus is ”soft”, whereas it is ”rigid” on N . The curved surface
K corresponds to a non-local bifurcation of co-dimension one ”double cycle”.
The part K of this surface corresponds to a stable, from the outside, multiple
cycle. Theotherpart,K ,correspondstoanunstable,fromtheoutside,multiple
cycle. On the surface K, there is a rib of return C, i.e., a common line for the
above-mentionedpartsofthesurfaceofthe multiplecycle. Onthe lineC,there
formsanon-localbifurcationofco-dimensiontwo,i.e.,abifurcationofamerger
ofthreecycles. Thelineoftheintersectionofthehalf-planeN− andthesurface
K corresponds to a bifurcation of co-dimension ”one plus one” accompanied
simultaneouslybyachangeofthestabilityofthefocusandamergerofaremote
pair of cycles.
In Fig. 3.3, we present the bifurcation diagram in the neighborhood of 0
(zero) for l <0.
Returning to the description of the initial Keynes model (3.1), we want
to emphasize that we have used a set of restrictions on the parameters of the
linearpartofthesystem(3.14)thathasallowedustosatisfytherequirementsof
52 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
Figure 3.3: The bifurcation diagram for the bifurcation l =0 with l <0.
Hopf’stheoremontheexistenceofthelimitcycle. Atthesametime,wehavenot
stipulated any restrictive conditions on the coefficients of the quadratic terms,
and, therefore, we may argue that, in the most general case, the maximum
possible number of limit cycles in the neighborhood of the state of equilibrium
Y , R is equal to three.
Up to this point, we have studied the behavior of the system (3.14) on
one boundary of the stability region determined by the trace of the matrices
of dynamics. In what follows, we shall assume that both the trace and the
determinant of this matrix are small sign-alternating quantities. Let detA =
µ and trA=µ .
In this case, the characteristic equation (3.15) takes the form
For µ = µ = 0, the eigenvalues are multiple and equal to zero: λ = 0.
Such degeneracy in the linear part of (3.14) may lead to the formation of the
Bogdanov-Takens bifurcation [7]; a study of this bifurcation is the subject of
what follows.
As is obvious, in this case, one should choose two bifurcation parameter
determined by the expressions for the trace and the determinant of the matrix
A:
F L F L = µ . (3.29)
R Y − Y R − 1
Let the functions, found from condition (3.29), serve as the bifurcation pa-
rameters:
3.2. THE LS-LM KEYNES MODEL 53
F = R R 2− 1. (3.30)
The next important stage is the construction of a corresponding normal
form for the considered bifurcation of co-dimension two. Making the change of
variables Y =L y +y , R=L y , we obtain the following system:
y˙ =y +m y2+m y y +m y2,
1 2 20 1 11 1 2 02 2
y˙ =µ y +µ y +n y2+n y y +n y2, (3.31)
2 1 1 2 2 20 1 11 1 2 02 2
m = R YY +L L + Y YR,
20 2L R YR 2
m = R YR +L , m = Y YY ,
11 L YR 02 2
n = L2 F RL +2L L F RL
20 2 R YY − L YY Y R YR − L YR
(cid:18) (cid:18) Y (cid:19) (cid:18) Y (cid:19)
+L2 F RL ,
Y RR − L RR
(cid:18) Y (cid:19)(cid:19)
n =L F RL +L F RL ,
11 R YY − L RR Y YR − L YR
(cid:18) Y (cid:19) (cid:18) Y (cid:19)
n = R F R L .
02 2 RR − L RR
(cid:18) Y (cid:19)
Carrying out a nonlinear reduction of the variables y and y , i.e.,
y =u + 11 02u2+m u u ,
1 1 2 1 02 1 2
y =u m u2+n u u ,
2 2 − 02 1 02 1 2
anddroppingtermsoforderhigherthantwo,wearriveatthe followingsystem:
2 1 1 2 2 20 1 11 20 1 2
Bymeansofthesubstitutionw =u +δ,w =u ,weeliminatefrom(3.32)
the linear, in the variable u , term:
2 1 2 1 20 1 11 20 1 2
θ = 20 µ2 1 2 ,
1 (n 11 +2m 20 )2 2− n 11 +2m 20
54 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
Figure 3.4: The diagram of the Bogdanov-Takens bifurcation in the system
(3.34) for S = 1.
2 1− n +2m 2
Tocompletetheconstructionofthenormalformofthesystem(3.31)-(3.33),
we need yet another scaling of the variables, ξ = w1 , ξ = sign(K)w , and
1 n20K2 1 n20K2 2
of time, t= K τ, K = n11+2m20 =0:
2 1 2 1 1 1 2
1 11 20 1 2 2
Eliminating θ and θ , we express the small parameters a , α in terms of
µ , µ :
The bifurcation diagram for the case S = 1 is represented in Fig. 3.4.
Our analysis ofthe system (3.34) we beginwith the evaluations of the coor-
dinates of the fixed point. As is obvious, since ξ = 0, they are positioned on
the horizontal axis in the phase plane and satisfy the quadratic equation
3.2. THE LS-LM KEYNES MODEL 55
Equation(3.36)mayhavefromzerototworoots. Thediscriminantparabola,
(cid:8) (cid:9)
is related to the ”fold” bifurcation. Along this line, the system (3.34) has
equilibrium with the zero eigenvalue. If α = 0, the ”fold” bifurcation is non-
degenerate, and, on crossing the line T from left to right, two states of equilib-
rium are formed.
Denoting the left and the right states of equilibrium by E and E , respec-
tively, we get:
E = ξ0 ,0 = α α2 4α ,0 .
1,2 1,2 2 − 2 ± 2− 1
(cid:18) (cid:18) q (cid:19) (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
The point α = 0 separates the two branches, T− and T
, of the ”fold”-
bifurcationline for α
>0,respectively. Alongthe line T−, a stable
nodeE coexistswithasaddlepointE ,and,inthe vicinity ofT , anunstable
node E coexists with a saddle E .
The vertical line α =0 is the line on which the state of equilibrium E has
a pair of eigenvalues of the zero sum: λ +λ =0. The lower part
is related to a non-degenerate Hopf bifurcation, whereas the upper half-line
is a non-bifurcation line related to a neutral saddle. As a result of the Hopf
bifurcation,a stable limit cycle is generated,i.e., the first Lyapunovquantity is
negative.
The cycle exists in the neighborhood of H, for α <0.
ThestateofequilibriumE isstillasaddleforallthevaluesoftheparameters
to the left of the line T. Here, there are no other local bifurcations.
Letuspassaroundthepointα =α =0incircleofasmallradiuscounter-
clockwise. In region 1, both states of equilibrium and cycles are absent. When
passing from region 1 to region 2 through the part T− of the multiplicity line,
two states of equilibrium are formed in the system (3.34): namely, a saddle E
andastablenodeE . Further,thenodeturnsintoafocusthatlosesstabilityas
aresultofaHopfbifurcation,whichisaccompaniedbytheformationofastable
limit cycle on the neutrality line of the focus H. This limit cycle disappears on
the line P = (α ,α ):α = 6 α2, α <0 , being destroyed as a result of a
1 2 1 −25 2 2
global bifurcation on the loop of the separatrix of the saddle. (The period of
(cid:8) (cid:9)
motion along the cycle grows to infinity at that.) Finally, when passing from
region 4 to region 1 through the part T of the multiplicity line, the unstable
node merges with the saddle, and both of them disappear.
Using formulas (3.35), we write down the equations for the bifurcation lines
in terms of the initial parameters µ , µ :
a) the line of the ”fold” bifurcation is given by
{ 1 2 1 2 6 }
56 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
b) the line of the Hopf bifurcation is given by
1 2 2 2− 1 2 2 1
(cid:26) (cid:27)
c) the line of global bifurcation is given by
1 2 2− 1 2− 1 2 2 1
(cid:26) (cid:27)
This point completes our study of the Bogdanov-Takens bifurcation of co-
dimension two, as applied to the system (3.14). The case S = +1 can be
studied using the substitution t t, ξ ξ . Here, a substantialdifference
liesinthe instability ofthe limitcycle. Besides,itis importantto notethatthe
limitcycleinthevicinityofthe pointoftheBogdanov-Takensbifurcationhasa
frequencywhichisproportionaltothesquarerootofthesmallparameter. This
means that a business cycle in the Keynes model may have a very largeperiod,
which rather difficult to detect in numerical simulations of the initial model.
3.3 Bifurcations in the nonlinear Kaldor model
Themainassumptionofthismodel,constructedintheKeynesianspirit,isthat
theinvestmentandsavingsfunctionsaresubstantiallynonlinearfunctionsofthe
incomeY andofthefixedassetsrateK [41]. Asregardstheinvestmentfunction
I = I(Y,K), it is assumed that the limit propensity to invest I = ∂I is
positive,althoughitisvariable. Thismeansthatittakestheso-called”normal”
value for ”normal” values of the income rate Y. For values of income that are
lower than a given ”normal” interval, the limit propensity to invest declines
as a result of losses of income in the period of low activity rate compared to
the ”normal” rate. It also decreases for values of Y that are higher than the
”normal” interval because of a positive effect of the scale of expenditure and
an increase in it. Thus, the investment function is an S-shaped curve. Besides,
Kaldor assumes that a higher capital assets rate leads to a decrease in the
marginal efficiency of the fixed assets; that is, ∂I = I <0 (I >0).
Thesavingsfunctionisalsononlinear: S =S(Y,K). Thelimitpropensityto
saveS = ∂S ispositiveandlessthanunity,althoughitvaries. Thisassumption
may be justified as follows: there exists a ”normal” rate of the propensity to
save that corresponds to a ”normal” interval of changes in the income. Below
this interval, the savings decrease towards consumption, whereas above this
interval, they increase. In other words, the savings function is an upturned
S-shaped curve.
Additionally, Kaldor assumes that S = ∂S is a positive quantity; that
is, the savings function is shifted upwards with an increase in the capital rate.
This assumption is questioned by a number of researchers [40, 44], because
Kaldorhimselfdidnotprovideanysatisfactoryjustificationforit. Inourfurther
consideration, we shall assume that S may change sign.
3.3. BIFURCATIONS IN THE NONLINEAR KALDOR MODEL 57
Figure 3.5: The structure of the states of equilibrium in the Kaldor model.
In Fig. 3.5, we present qualitative dependencies of the investment and sav-
ings functions on the income rate, for a fixed value of the capital rate.
The dynamic Kaldor model is represented by the following equations:
whereI (Y,K)istherealizedinvestment,which,generallyspeaking,isdifferent
from the planned one I(Y,K); the quantity α>0 characterizes the rate of the
change of the income in the time domain.
ThefunctionsI(Y,K)andS(Y,K)aresymmetricwithrespecttothepoint
of equilibrium. (Such an assumption is completely justified.) We also assume
that the dependence of the above-mentioned functions on the variable I is
linear, and that the realized investment coincides with the planned one, i.e.,
I = I. It is then convenient to introduce new variables Y˜ = Y Y and
K˜ = K K that constitute deviations of the initial investment an − d capital
rates from their equilibrium values at the point C.
By symmetry, the investment and income functions are odd, and they can
be represented in the following form:
I Y˜,K˜ = I K˜ +I Y˜ +I Y˜3+O Y˜5 ,
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
S Y˜,K˜ =S K˜ +S Y˜ +S Y˜3+O Y˜5 . (3.40)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
58 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
Here,I andS arethecorrespondingcoefficientsoftheTaylorseriesexpan-
sion of the initial function, and, besides, the condition I > S holds. Thus,
the system (3.39) has the following explicit form:
Y Y K K 3 3
K˜ =I Y˜ I K˜ +I Y˜3. (3.41)
The system (3.41) has three states of equilibrium:
a) the trivial one, Y˜ =0, K˜ =0, which corresponds to the point C in Fig.
b) nontrivial ones, Y˜ = SYIK+SKIY , K˜ = SKIY+SYIKY˜ , which
1,2 ∓ − SKI3+S3IK 1,2 S3IK+SKI3 1,2
corresponds to the points A andqB in Fig. 3.5.
The points A, B and C represent possible variants of static equilibrium.
In [41], it is argued that equilibrium at the point C is unstable, whereas it is
stable at the points A and B. At the point C, the instability of equilibrium
is due to the fact that, for y < y < y , savings exceed investments and a
surplus appears in the goods market, which provokes a further decline in the
production. In the case y < y < y , since the volume of investments exceeds
that of savings, a deficiency of goods occurs, which stimulates a growth in the
production.
As regards the stability of the points A and B, we point out that a devi-
ation from A or B to the right leads to a goods excess and to a decrease in
their production, whereas a deviation to the left leads to a deficiency and to a
growth in the production. The state of the economic system that corresponds
to the point A is characterized by a low volume of investments that is insuffi-
cient for a complete reimbursement of the worn-out capital. A decrease in the
capital, after a certain time, will raise the entrepreneurs’ propensity to invest,
andthe demand for investments will grow,which will leadto an increasein the
investment function I(Y,K); equilibrium will be destroyed.
On the contrary, the point B represents a state of equilibrium with high
economic activities. As a result of an achieved optimal capital volume, the
demand for investments starts to fall, the value of the function I(Y,K) begins
to decrease, and the economy leaves the state of equilibrium.
In the process of changes in market conditions, when the graphs of the
savings and investment functions move towards each other, the points A and
C may merge. In the opposite case, the points B and C may merge. It is
important that these states of equilibrium, i.e., A, B and C, become unstable.
In this regard, it is reasonable to study in detail the situation, when all the
three states of equilibrium, A, B and C, are sufficiently close to eachother and
may merge into a single point. Our further consideration will be devoted to a
detailedanalysisofpropertiesofthedynamicsystem(3.41),takingintoaccount
the above-mentioned assumption.
Considerthe behaviorofthe system(3.41)inthe vicinityofthetrivialstate
3.3. BIFURCATIONS IN THE NONLINEAR KALDOR MODEL 59
of equilibrium. The linear part of (3.41) has the characteristic polynomial
K Y Y Y K K Y
Let us assume that the coefficients in (3.42) are small quantities, i.e., µ =
α(I S +I S ) and µ = α(I S ) I . In this case, the system
− Y K K Y 2 Y − Y − K
(3.41) may have a Bogdanov-Takens bifurcation, i.e., a so-called ”double-zero”
bifurcation [46]. As bifurcation parameters, we choose the following ones:
K Y − Y − 2 K − IY Y − Y − αIY 2
As µ and µ are small quantities, it is obvious that S < 0. Making the
change of variables Y˜ = [α(I S ) µ ]U +U and K˜ = I U , we reduce
Y − Y − 2 1 2 Y 1
the system to the form of a nonlinear oscillator.
We have:
U˙ =U +a U3+a U2U +a U U2+a U3,
1 2 30 1 21 1 2 12 1 2 03 2
U˙ =µ U +µ U +b U3+b U2U +b U U2+b U3, (3.43)
2 1 1 2 2 30 1 21 1 2 12 1 2 03 2
30 I Y − Y − 2 21 I Y − Y − 2
a = 3 (α(I S ) µ ); a = 3 ;
12 I Y − Y − 2 30 I
b = α S 3 +µ a ; i+j =3; j =0,3.
ij Y − I 2 ij
(cid:20) (cid:18) 3(cid:19) (cid:21)
Toconstructthe normalPoincar´eformofthesystemofordinarydifferential
equations(3.43), we performanonlinear reductionof the variablesofthe state:
U =V + 21 + 12 V3+ 12 03 V2V +a V V2,
1 1 3 6 1 2 1 2 03 1 2
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
U =V a V3+ 12V2V +b V V2. (3.44)
2 2 − 30 1 2 1 2 03 1 2
As a result of transformations, taking into account expressions (3.44), we
obtain the following representation of the system (3.43):
V˙ =µ V +µ V +MV3+NV2V , (3.45)
2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2
where M =b , N =b +3a .
For µ = 0, µ = 0, we have: N = 3α3(I S )2 SYI3 S +I S ,
1 2 Y − Y IY − 3 Y − Y
M = α4(I S )3 SYI3 S . It is reasonable to r (cid:16) educe the system (3.45 (cid:17) ),
Y − Y IY − 3
(cid:16) (cid:17)
60 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
Figure 3.6: The bifurcation diagram for S =+1.
which is already a normal Poincar´e form, to a still simpler form by means of
the linear transformation
x =p M V , x =p2 M V , τ = t,
1 | | 1 2 | | 2 p
p= = .
Finally, we get: (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) M (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) α (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) I Y − S Y − S 3Y − S Y I I Y 3 (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
x˙ =p2µ x +pµ x +Sx3 x2x , (3.46)
2 1 1 2 2 1− 1 2
where S =sign(p)= 1.
As regards the system (3.46), it is not difficult to notice that it is invariant
with respect to the substitution x x and x x , and it always has
trivial equilibrium E = (0,0). The two other possible states of equilibrium
have the coordinates E = Sµ ,0 ; they exist for µ <0, if S =1, and
1,2 ± − 1 1
for µ >0, if S = 1.
1 − (cid:0) p (cid:1)
Important, for the system (3.46), is the fact that all the three states of
equilibrium merge into the single trivial one for µ =0.
Let S =1. The bifurcation diagram is presented in Fig. 3.6.
In region 1, there is the single trivial state of equilibrium E that is a sad-
dle point. On crossing the lower branch of the line R = (µ ,µ ):µ =0 ,
1 { 1 2 1 }
a ”pitchfork” takes place, accompanied by the appearance of a pair of sym-
metric saddles E , until the trivial equilibrium E becomes a stable node.
This node turns into a focus in region 2 that, on crossing the half-line R =
3.3. BIFURCATIONS IN THE NONLINEAR KALDOR MODEL 61
Figure 3.7: The bifurcation diagram for S = 1.
(µ ,µ ):µ =0, µ <0 , undergoes a Hopf bifurcation accompanied by the
{ 1 2 1 2 }
generation of a stable limit cycle.
On crossing the line R = (µ ,µ ):µ = pµ , µ <0 , a global hetero-
3 1 2 2 −5 1 1
clinic bifurcation, accompanied by the appearance of corresponding orbits that
(cid:8) (cid:9)
arerelatedtothesaddlesE ,takesplace,and,inregion4,aheterocliniccycle
is formed. Further, allthe three states ofequilibrium coexistup to the crossing
of the upper part of the straight line R , and a return to region 1 takes place.
Consider the case S = 1. The corresponding bifurcation diagram is de-
picted in Fig. 3.7.
Inregion1,thereisthesingletrivialequilibriumE thatisastablenode;fur-
ther, it goes over to a focus. On the half-line L = (µ ,µ ):µ =0, µ <0 ,
1 { 1 2 2 1 }
a Hopf bifurcation takes place, and a stable limit cycle is generated. Two un-
stable nodes separate from the trivial equilibrium on crossing the upper part
of the line L = (µ ,µ ):µ =0, µ >0 , when passing from region 2 re-
2 { 1 2 1 2 }
gion 3, as a result of a ”pitchfork” bifurcation. In region 3, all the three
states of equilibrium are localized inside a ”large” limit cycle. On the half-
line L = (µ ,µ ):µ =pµ , µ >0 , the nontrivial focuses E undergo
3 { 1 2 2 1 1 } 1,2
a Hopf bifurcation. This bifurcation leads to the appearance of two ”small”
unstable limit cycles around the nontrivial states of equilibrium. The points
of equilibrium become stable. Thus, in region 4, there are three limit cy-
cles: an external ”large” one and two internal ”small” ones. Along the line
L = (µ ,µ ):µ = 4pµ , µ >0 , the ”small” cycles form a symmetric fig-
4 1 2 2 5 1 1
ure that resembles the Bernoulli lemniscate, with the center at E , as a result
(cid:8) (cid:9)
of the occurrence of a global homoclinic bifurcation. Along the line L , the
saddle E has two homoclinic orbits. These orbits can be transformed from
one into the other by means of symmetry transformations. On crossing the
line L , when passing from region 4 to region 5, not only the ”small” cycles
62 CHAPTER 3. SELF-ORGANIZATION IN KEYNESIAN MODELS
are destroyed, but also an external ”large” unstable cycle is generated. Then,
in region 5, two ”large” cycles coexist: the external one is stable, while the
internal one is unstable. These two cycles merge and disappear along the line
L = (µ ,µ ):µ =k pµ , µ >0 , where k = 0.752.... This is a saddle-
5 { 1 2 2 0 1 1 } 0
node bifurcation of the limit cycle. After the occurrence of this bifurcation,
there are no limit cycles in the system. In region 6, all the three states of
equilibrium are present: the trivial saddle E and two stable nontrivial focuses
(nodes) E . The nontrivial states of equilibrium merge with the trivial one
on the lower part of the line L = (µ ,µ ):µ =0, µ >0 as a result of a
2 { 1 2 1 2 }
”pitchfork” bifurcation, and we return to region 1.
Thus, the behavioral properties of the system (3.46) are determined by
comparison between the quantities I S and S SYI3. If the condition
Y − Y 3 − IY
I S > S SYI3 is fulfilled, then S = sign(p) = 1. In the opposite case
Y − Y 3 − IY −
I S >S SYI3, we get: S =+1. Returning to the question of the choice
Y − Y 3 − IY
of the sign of the quantity S , we note that states of equilibrium of the saddle
type are possible in the initial dynamic system (3.41) only under the condition
S < IKSY, i.e., for S <0.
Thus,inthischapter,wehavedemonstrateddynamicbehavioroftheKaldor
model in its whole variety, in the case when three states of equilibrium degen-
erate into a single one. We have also followed the hierarchy of instabilities
accompanied by a cascade of corresponding bifurcations [11].
Dynamics of economic
processes with a lag
Inmanyeconomicmodels,whenconstructingbalancerelations,onehasto take
into account a lag responsible for various interactions. In Chapter 2, we have
alreadyconsideredtheGoodwinmodelinvolvingalagoftwotypes: onthepart
of the demand for investments there is a lag with fixed duration of the action
of the accelerator, whereas on the part of the supply there is a continuously
distributedlag. Inthischapter,weshalldemonstratetheapplicationofmethods
ofthetheoryofnonlinearoscillationsintheclassofdifferentialequationswitha
lagandofintegro-differentialequationsthatmayhaveacontinuouslydistributed
lag.
4.1 Instability of price dynamics in Fisher’s model
In modern economic literature, there is a sufficiently detailed qualitative de-
scription of the mechanism of the formation of domestic prices of the output
based on an analysis of the dynamics of financial flows in export-import opera-
tions. Atthesametime,specialattentionispaidtosuchanimportantfactoras
an index of the trade balance whose surplus or deficit determines the direction
of price change.
Beforeproceedingwiththeconsiderationofaformalizedmathematicalmodel
based on classical Fisher’s macroeconomic equation, it is necessary to put for-
ward a number of assumptions [41]:
1) a free-trade scheme, without any influence of governments and monopo-
listic structures, is considered;
2)therateofthenationalincomeisconsideredtobesufficient,andtheprice
rate is determined on the basis of qualitative theory of the currency of money;
3) in the course of the considered period, changes in the supply of money
stock arestipulated exclusively by a surplus (or deficit) of the balance oftrade;
64CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
4) since exchange rates are considered to be fixed, they can be set equal to
unity, which is equivalent to complete unification of international operations;
5) transportation expenses, insurances and other costs are not taken into
account either for commodity or financial flows.
In what follows, we use the following notation: Q is money supply; V is the
rate of the currency of money; Y is the national income rate (a constant); P is
theindexofthedomesticprice;P istheindexoftheexportprice(aconstant);
M is the volume of import; X is the volume of export.
The basic equation of Fisher’s model has the form
QV =PY. (4.1)
The volume of export is a decreasing function of the domestic price:
Onthe contrary,the volume ofimportis anincreasingfunction ofthe domestic
price:
A relationofthe formP∗X(P∗ ) P M(P∗ )=0 characterizesa condition
oftrade balance equilibrium, and it is assumedthat this algebraicequationhas
positive solutions that determine equilibrium values of the domestic price
.
Adisturbanceofequilibriumisaccompaniedbychangesinthemoneysupply
and is expressed by means of the following equation:
From expression (4.1), it follows that a change in the money supply leads
to a change in the domestic price P = P (t). We assume that this change is
not instantaneous, i.e., there is a time lag determined by a constant positive
quantity τ. In this case, equation (4.1) takes the form
From (4.2) and (4.3), we obtain a differential-difference equation that de-
scribes the dynamics of the domestic price:
Let us assume that the export function X(P) and import function X(P)
are inherently nonlinear and can be expanded in a Taylorseries up to the third
power in the neighborhood of the state of equilibrium
(cid:0) (cid:1)
4.1. INSTABILITY OF PRICE DYNAMICS IN FISHER’S MODEL 65
∂iM(P∗),withi=0,3,arecorresponding (cid:0)
i i!∂Pi i i!∂Pi
ofthefunctionsX(P)andM(P)atthe pointofequilibriumP∗ . Weintroduce
a new variable P¯(t) = P (t) P∗ that has the meaning of a deviation of the
domesticpricefromitsequilibriumvalue. Inthiscase,takingintoaccount(4.5),
equation (4.4) reduces to the following:
dt¯ Y 1 − 2 − 3 −
(cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3)
where t¯=τt, G i =X i−1 +P∗X i P M M i , i=1,3.
It is reasonableto beginananalysisofthe processdescribedby (4.6)with a
study of the conditions of local stability, restricting ourselves only to the linear
part, i.e.,
The characteristic equation for (4.7) is given by
Using a well-known result of the theory of stability of differential-difference
equations[43], as appliedto (4.7), we obtainthe necessaryandsufficientcondi-
tions of linear stability:
0< 1 < . (4.9)
From the form of the left-hand part of the double inequality (4.9) it follows
that the quantity G is negative, whereas the right-hand part of (4.9) sets the
upper bound for the absolute value of G .
Condition (4.9) has a rather transparent and meaningful interpretation. To
demonstrate this interpretation, we perform a transformation of the initial pa-
rameters of the considered model (4.6).
1 0 − X − M
under the condition P∗X =P M .
Thequantitiesη andη areelasticitiesoftheexportandimportfunctions
with respect to the price P. As X > 0, the condition G < 0 is equivalent to
η +η > 1, which corresponds to the so-called Marshall-Lerner conditions
[41]. At the same time, condition (4.9) reduces to
66CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
Thus,theeconomicinterpretationoftheconditionsoflocalstabilityconsists
in the fact that the sum of the elasticities not only must be larger than unity,
but it also must be smaller than an additional critical value. In other words,
instability in the considered economic model may arise not only when the sum
oftheelasticitiesissufficientlysmall,butalsointhecasewhenitsvalueismuch
larger.
Let us study behavioral properties of the initial dynamic system (4.6) in a
small neighborhood of the bounds of the inequality (4.10). First, we consider
thesituationwhenstabilityislostatthelowerbound. Tothisend,weintroduce
a small parameter ν =1 η η .
In this case, when the sign of ν changes, the eigenvalue of the linearized
problempassesthroughzero,and a stationaryvalue
may either not existor
split into severalstationary states. This means that a bifurcation of stationary
solutions takes place.
The differential-difference equation (4.6) can be represented as follows:
dt¯ 1 − 2 − 3 −
where A = τVG , i=1,3.
One should bear in mind that the quantity A is small, i.e., G = X ν .
Additionally, we assume that A is also small if we introduce a small quantity
ν = G2. Using the techniques of the central manifold method [46], one can
prove that the differential-difference equation (4.11), under the condition that
A , A are small and the time lag is finite, is topologically equivalent to the
differential equation
in the neighborhood of P¯ =0.
By means of the linear change of variables P˜ =P¯+ A2 , equation (4.12) is
represented as follows:
2A3 A A A2
α = 2 1 2, α =A 2 .
1 27A2 − 3A 2 1 − 3A
The transformation P˜(t¯) = β W (t¯) yields an explicit form of the normal
Poincar´eform for the differential equation (4.13):
√A 1 β 2 2 ±
4.1. INSTABILITY OF PRICE DYNAMICS IN FISHER’S MODEL 67
Figure 4.1: The diagram of the ”cusp-of-the-beak” bifurcation.
For definiteness, we set S = 1.
Equation(4.14)canhavethree statesofequilibrium. A”fold”bifurcationis
determined by a curve R on the plane β ,β , given by a projection of the line
(cid:26) 2−
to the parameter plane. By eliminating V from these equations, we obtain the
projection:
The curve R is called a(cid:8)semicubical parabola, and(cid:9)it has two branches R ,
R that meet tangentially at the ”cusp-of-the-beak”point (a cusp bifurcation),
for β = β = 0. The corresponding bifurcation diagram is represented in Fig.
4.1.
In region 1, in front of the boundary line, there are three states of equilib-
rium: two stable states and one unstable state. In region 2, behind the separa-
tionline,thereisasinglestateofequilibriumwhichisstable. Anon-degenerate
”fold” bifurcation takes place on crossing either R or R at any point of the
parameterplane β ,β , except for the origin. If the curve is crossedon passing
from region 1 to region 2, the right stable state of equilibrium merges with the
unstable one, and both of them disappear. Analogously, the left stable state of
equilibrium merges with the unstable one on the line R .
On approaching the ”cusp-of-the-beak” point, in front of the region1, all
the three states of equilibrium merge into a single one as a triple root of the
right-hand side of the initial equation (4.14). Of importance is also the fact
that,inthecourseofthetransitionfromastableregimetoanunstableone,the
68CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
phenomenon of hysteresis is observed in (4.14), and a catastrophe occurs [46].
The case S =1 can be considered analogously.
Let us now clarify the situation when the sum of the elasticities η +η is
closetotherightboundoftheinequality(4.10). Weintroduceintoconsideration
a small parameter µ = A + π . Then, the differential-difference equation
(4.6) can be transformed into
(cid:0) (cid:1)
dt¯ − 2 − 2 − 3 −
(cid:16) (cid:17)
The characteristic equation for the linear part of (4.15) is given by
=0. (4.16)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
We should find out when this equation has a pair of purely imaginary roots
λ= iω, i2 = 1, ω >0.
If λ= iω, then the conditions
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
hold.
Fromthisfact,itfollowsthat,forµ=0,equation(4.16)hasapairofpurely
imaginary roots for ω = π. It is not difficult to show that (4.16) has no roots
with positive real parts.
As λ is analytic with respect to µ, the differentiation of (4.16), at µ = 0,
yields:
= 2 .
Thus, allthe conditionsof Hopf’s theoremonthe existence ofperiodic solu-
tions are satisfied,because the realpartof the derivative ofthe eigenvalue with
respect to the parameter does not vanish.
Basedontheabove-mentionedconsiderations,weshalldemonstratethatEq.
(4.15) has a family of periodic solutions P¯ (t¯) (ε >0), where ε is a measure of
the amplitude max t¯ P¯ ε (t¯) , and ε is sufficiently small at that.
The problem reduces to a study of the bifurcation of the generation (anni-
(cid:12) (cid:12)
hilation) of a cycle in(cid:12) the d(cid:12)ifferential-difference equation (4.15). To reduce this
functionalequationtoacomplexdifferentialequation,weusethemethodofthe
central manifold [37].
Equation(4.15)containsa number ofparameters;therefore,to simplify fur-
ther consideration, we make the substitution P¯ (t¯)= A1u(t¯).
For µ=0, equation (4.15) takes the form
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where γ = X0G3.
4.1. INSTABILITY OF PRICE DYNAMICS IN FISHER’S MODEL 69
By the central manifold theorem, equation (4.17) reduces to a differential
equation in a complex variable:
iπ Z2 Z¯2 Z2Z¯
Z˙ = Z +g +g ZZ¯+g +g +..., (4.18)
20 11 02 21
2 11i 3γπ 7
(cid:20)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
D = 2 , D¯ = − 2 .
The existence of concrete values of the coefficients of the nonlinear part of
Eq. (4.18) allows us to use the formulas of [37] in order to determine stability,
the direction of generation, the period, and the asymptotic form of periodic
solutions of small amplitude of the limit cycle that realizes the Andronov-Hopf
bifurcation from the stationary state. Using (4.19), we obtain an explicit form
of the first Lyapunov quantity:
1 1+ π2 5 − 2 5 4 − 5 5 4
4 (cid:26) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:27)
The real part of (4.20) is negative for
γ >γ = − = 0.826.... (4.21)
This means that the limit cycle is stable if γ > γ , and it is unstable if
the condition (4.21) is not fulfilled. For the stable limit cycle, the following
expressions for the major characteristics are derived:
1) the amplitude is given by
(cid:18) − (cid:19)
2) the period is given by
T =4 1+ ε2 ;
(cid:18) (cid:19)
3) the asymptotic form of the periodic solution is given by
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
At the same time, the cycle is generated in the direction µ > 0, and the
emerging periodic solution is asymptotically stable. The corresponding regime
70CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
ofthe generationof self-oscillationsis calledsoft. Onthe contrary,if the condi-
tion γ <γ is realized, an unstable limit cycle takes place. The loss of stability
with the generation of self-oscillations occurs rigidly, i.e., a sharp transition
(jump) to anew stationaryregime. Ina realisticsystem,sucha lossofstability
results in a catastrophe.
The most complicated behavior of the initial system (4.17) is exhibited in
the situation when the parameter γ is close to its critical value γ , i.e., when
the quantity ξ =γ γ is small. Inthis case,one canobservein the considered
systemtheso-calledBautinbifurcation[37]thatischaracterizedbyapossibility
of the coexistence of both the stable and unstable limit cycles.
To analyze qualitative properties of the above-mentioned bifurcation, we
should expand the right-hand side of (4.17) in a Taylor series up to fifth-order
terms. After that, we should employ the central manifold method to reduce
the functional equation to a complex differential equation involving nonlinear
fifth-order terms, which is necessary for the evaluation of the second Lyapunov
quantity C (0)=0.
In this case, the complex differential equation has the form
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Depending onthe signofε , ε andC , the followingscenariosare possible:
1) C < 0, ε < 0. When ε passes from negative values to positive ones,
the system softly achieves a stable self-oscillation regime;
2)C <0,ε >0. Whenε passesfromnegativevaluestopositiveones,the
system rigidly achieves a stable periodic self-oscillation regime. It is generated
beforethelossofstabilitybythestateofequilibrium,togetherwithanunstable
oscillation regime that settles on the state of equilibrium at the very moment
when stability is lost;
3)C >0, ε <0. The lossofstabilityis soft. However,the generatedcycle
is quickly annihilated in the process of merging with an unstable one, coming
from a distance. After that, a new regime is rigidly excited in the system;
4) C >0, ε >0. This is classical rigid excitation.
Consequently, whatever the sign of C (0), for corresponding sign of ε , our
analysis reveals a qualitatively different, compared to the one-parameter case,
phenomenon: for C (0) < 0 there exists a rigidly excited stationary regime,
whereas for C (0) > 0 a softly excited regime turns out to be short-lived. In
order to establish which of the two cases (C (0) < 0 or C (0) > 0) is realized
in reality, one has to perform scrupulous evaluation of the second Lyapunov
quantity, which is in itself a rather good exercise in symbolic transformations.
Thus, as a result of the study of dynamic properties of the differential-
differenceequation(4.4)inasmallneighborhoodoftheboundariesoftheregion
of local stability, we can arrive at the conclusion that there exists a bifurcation
of co-dimension two (this fact is in itself far from being trivial):
1) on the left boundary (η +η = 1), a ”cusp-of-the-beak” bifurcation
takes place;
4.2. THE CYCLICITY OF INNOVATION PROCESSES 71
2) on the right boundary (η +η = 1+ Yπ ), a Bautin bifurcation of
the limit cycle takes place.
In conclusion, we want to point out that the application of mathematical
methods to an analysis of concrete objects is associated with numerical results
and a corresponding meaningful interpretation. In this sense, the role of qual-
itative theory of differential-difference equations is somewhat different: it puts
stress on a search for characteristic features of the phenomenon as a whole, on
qualitative forecasts of its behavior. The objectives of the authors are the de-
terminationofirreducibletopologicalstructuresthatformthe phaseportraitof
the system. The appliedpartconsistsinestablishinga correspondencebetween
these structures of the phase space and the considered economic processes, to-
gether with carrying out a bifurcation analysis. At the same time, we have to
take into account the properties of the realistic object that impose restrictions
on both the phase variables and the parameters of the initial equations [9].
4.2 The cyclicity of innovation processes
Presently,thehumanityisconcernedwithasearchforinnovationwaysofstable
development of civilization. A new paradigm of the 21st century, i.e., the con-
cept of stable development, has explicitly systematic, synergetic character. By
stabledevelopmentweshouldunderstandasynthesisofthenecessitiesofstable
economic, ecological and social evolution, which is realized simultaneously on
global,nationaland regionallevels; and, as is known,simultaneous cooperative
action is the essence of the synergetic effect.
In this work, by economic development we shall understand a substantially
nonlinear process, characterized by spasmodic transitions from one stationary
state to another. A fundamental basis of economic (innovation) forecasting is
formed by prediction theory of N. D. Kondratev [24] and innovation theory of
Y. A. Shumpeter [47], further developed by the modern Russian economist Yu.
Yakovets [38].
The main theoretical prerequisites for the justification of qualitative fore-
casting are the following:
1)a predictionofeconomicinnovationsis basedonaccountingfor the inter-
actionofthelawsofstatics(thatdeterminesamultiplebalanceofthe function-
ing of the economic system), of cyclic dynamics (a combinationof the observed
cyclesofvariousduration),andofsociogenetics(thelawsofheredity,variability
and selection in the dynamics of technological and social-economic systems);
2) depending on the period and the intensity of influence on the economy,
evolutionary cycles differ substantially: there are medium-term, long-term and
super-long-termcycles. Innovationoscillationsfacilitate technologicalcrisesac-
companied by changes in the structure of innovations. At the beginning of a
super-long-term cycle, the most important seminal innovations are initiated;
onceduring afew centuries,they radicallychangethe structure ofthe economy
by forming a new technological way of production. Kondratev’s half-century
cycles are characterized by basic innovations that determine the competitive-
72CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
ness of the production in the framework of a given technological formation of
the economy. Medium-term cycles (of 10-12 years of duration) are caused by
changes in the prevailing generations of technology; they are realized in the
cluster of basic innovations and in the wave of improving ones. Thus, we may
arguethatinnovation-technologicalcyclesofvariousperiodsserveasthebasisof
economiccycles ofcorrespondingduration: medium-termcycles (of 10-12years
ofduration),long-term(Kondratev’s)cycles,andsuper-long-term(civilization)
cycles [39].
A ratherdetailed description ofthe phases of the innovationcycle andtheir
application to an analysis of dynamic structure of the economy is contained in
themonograph[26]. Conventionally,asthebeginningofthecycle,weshalltake
a decrease in the efficiency of the prevailing generations of technics (technol-
ogy) that leads to a decrease in the rate of economic growth and a drop in the
standard of living of a substantial part of the population. This stimulates sci-
entific andengineeringactivities in the directionofobtaining new technological
solutions.
However, conditions for their innovative application are generated only at
the end of the depression phase and in the phase of revival, when a renewal of
fixedcapitaltakesplaceandthe volumeofinvestmentsgrows,whichstimulates
ademandforinnovations. Therateofeconomicgrowthaccelerates,employment
increases, and a growth in the standard of living of the population is observed.
Bytheendoftherevivalphase,theseprocessesreachtheirmaximum. However,
in the stability phase, against a background of a considerable income rate, the
rate of growth falls until a crisis causes a sharp drop in the rate of growth
andadeclineinthegrossdomesticproduct(GDP),whichsubstantiallyreduces
investments.
In the monograph by S. Yu. Glaziev [17], it is pointed out that, simulta-
neously with the acceleration of economic development, the influence of coun-
teracting factors increases: this conclusion is drawn on the basis of multiple
statistical measurement of the dynamics of GDP for different countries. As a
result, economic growth either stabilizes or acquires cyclic character. These
arguments are illustrated by a mathematical model that reflects feedback be-
tween the rate of economic growth and the rate of the gross national product
per capita. It is assumed that the influence of counteracting factors increases
withcumulativegrowthofGDP.Inotherwords,weassumethatthe rateofthe
growthofthecumulativevolumeoftheproductionofanewproductdependson
theaverageweightedcumulativeproductionvolumeinthepastandnotonlyon
its volume at the moment. As a result, the dynamics of the production volume
can be described by the integro-differentialequation
y˙ =y r y (t+s)Q( s)ds , (4.22)
(cid:18) Z (cid:19)
where y (t) is the cumulative volume of the production of the new product;
Q(t) is a function characterizing cumulative growth of the production;
r > 0 is a parameter that has the meaning of a technological limit of pro-
duction growth.
4.2. THE CYCLICITY OF INNOVATION PROCESSES 73
As a rule, as Q(t), one employs a function with a corresponding set of
characteristic time lags. In terms of the theory of automatic control, Q(t)
is an impulsive transition function of a linear control system with an input
signal y (t). The output of such a system is given by the quantity u (t) =
0 y (t+s)Q( s)ds,whichisaconvolutionofthefunctionsy (t)andQ(t).
In what follows, we shall use an operator representation of Q(t) in the form of
a fractionally linear function of arbitrary order, namely,
λn−1+...+b
1 λ+b 0 , (4.23)
under the normalization condition
Q( s)ds=1.
The nonlinear integro-differentialequation(4.22) has two states of equilibrium:
2) y∗ =r.
The state of equilibrium
= 0 is of no practical interest for our analysis,
becauseitimpliescompleteabsenceoftheGDP.Thesecondsingularpoint,y∗
r, characterizing the limit of GDP growth, is a major economic factor; hence,
our objective will be a study of dynamic properties of the process described
by the integro-differential equation (4.22) in the neighborhood of this state of
equilibrium.
Let us rewrite Eq. (4.22) in terms of a new variable y =y r that has the
meaning of a deviation of the production volume from its equilibrium value:
The characteristic equation of the linear part of (4.22) has the form
where Q (λ) is defined by expression (4.23).
Let us consider the simplest case n = 1, Q = b0 . To satisfy the nor-
malization condition, it is necessary that b ,a > 0. Then, equation (4.25) is
represented in the form of the quadratic equation
Note that, for a2 4rb , the state of equilibrium y∗ = 0 is a stable node.
However, for a2 < 4rb , in the vicinity of the equilibrium point, stable oscil-
lations with the attenuation rate a are observed. This type of equilibrium is
called a stable focus. In this system, a transition from a node to a focus has no
bifurcation character,which means that the system is stable.
74CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
In the sense of the diversity of dynamic behavioralproperties, the situation
with n=2 is more interesting. In this case,
2 λ2+a λ+a
and the spectral equation (4.25) takes the form of the cubic equation
If the coefficients of Eq. (4.26) satisfy the relation
a (a +rb )=rb , (4.27)
we obtain the solution λ = iω, λ = a , where ω2 = a0b0 , r = a1a0 ,
1 b0−a1b1 b0−a1b1
i2 = 1. As the parameters ω and r are positive, for the coefficients we have:
a ,a ,b >0, and b >a b at that.
1 0 0 0 1 1
The presence of a pair of purely imaginary eigenvalues in the spectrum of
the linear part of the integro-differentialequation (4.24) implies a possibility of
the excitation of a self-oscillation regime, i.e., an occurrence of a limit cycle as
a result of an Andronov-Hopf bifurcation.
In order to transform the integro-differential equation (4.24) into a system
of nonlinear differential equations, we make the change of variables x = y,
x =u r, x =u˙ . As a result, we arriveat the following system of ordinary
third-order differential equations:
x˙ = rx x x ,
x˙ =x , (4.28)
x˙ =b x (a +b r)x a x b x x .
3 0 1 0 1 2 1 3 1 1 2
Now, we shall demonstrate the application of Hopf’s bifurcation theoremto
the system of autonomous differential equations (4.28).
First of all, we should decide on the choice of the bifurcation parameter
whose critical value allows for the existence of purely imaginary eigenvalues,
i.e., of those whose real part vanishes (Reλ = 0), whereas the imaginary
part is nonzero (Imλ = ω). It is convenient to take r as the bifurcation
parameter and to study the properties of (4.28) in a small neighborhood of the
critical value r = a1a0 . That is to say, we consider the value r = r +µ,
0 b0−a1b1 0
whereµisasmallquantity. Inthiscase,theeigenfrequencyofthesystem(4.28)
in the linear approximationis defined by the expression
In the new notation, the characteristic equation (4.26) takes the form
(cid:0) (cid:1)
4.2. THE CYCLICITY OF INNOVATION PROCESSES 75
For µ=0, equation (4.30) has the above-mentioned solution
1,2 3 1 1,2 3
Let us differentiate Eq. (4.30) with respect to the parameter µ. For µ =0,
we obtain:
dλ (b a b )ω+i a b +b ω2
′ 0 1 1 1 0 1
(cid:0) 1 (cid:1)
Reλ ′ (0)=
Thus, all the conditions of Hopf’s theorem are fulfilled, and we may argue
thatthereexistsabifurcationofthegenerationofacyclefromacomplexfocus.
Using the change of variables
x = 1y + y , x = 2 +y , x =y a y ,
1 b 1 b 3 2 ω 3 3 1 − 1 3
we represent the system of nonlinear differential equations (4.28) in the form
thatis convenientforthe constructionofthe normalPoincar´eform. Asaresult
of the transformation, we obtain (µ=0):
y˙ = ωy +F (y ,y ,y ),
1 2 1 1 2 3
y˙ =ωy +F (y ,y ,y ), (4.32)
2 1 2 1 2 3
y˙ = a y +F (y ,y ,y ),
3 1 3 3 1 2 3
F (y ,y ,y )=A ϕ(y ,y ,y ), i=1,3;
i 1 2 3 i 1 2 3
ϕ(y ,y ,y )= 1 y y + 1y y + y y + y2;
1 2 3 b ω 1 2 b 1 3 b 2 3 b 3
Let us reduce the order of the system of differential equations by means of
the introduction of the new coordinates
z =y +iy , z¯=y iy , ν =y .
As a result, equations (4.32) are represented as follows:
76CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
For the sake of a further analysis of the main characteristics of the limit
cycle, we use the central manifold method, which yields the relation
(cid:16) (cid:17)
20 1 20 11 1 11 02 1 − 02
h = H(z,z¯,0), i+j =2.
ij ∂zi∂z¯j
As a resultofthe substitutionof expressions(4.34) into (4.33), after certain
necessary transformations,we obtain
z2 z¯2 z2z¯
20 11 02 12
G = G = 2 − 1 , G =0,
20 − 02 2ω 11
a (b a b ) ω(2b a b )+i a b +2b ω2
1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1
(cid:0)0 1 (cid:0)1 (cid:1)(cid:1)
NowwepossessallthenecessarydatafortheevaluationofthefirstLyapunov
quantity:
C (0)= 21 + G 2. (4.36)
1 2 6ω | 02 |
From (4.35) and (4.36), it follows that
a (b a b )(2b a b )
ReC (0)= − 1 0 − 1 1 0 − 1 1 <0, (4.37)
since b >a b and, accordingly, 2b >a b .
0 1 1 0 1 1
Let us considerpeculiarities of the limit cycle that is generatedfroma com-
plex focus when a pair of roots cross the imaginary axis. A stable focus takes
place when µ<0. When µ passesthroughzero,the focus atthe originlosesits
stability. For µ=0, the focus at the origin is stable but non-coarse: the phase
curves approach zero exponentially.
Forµ>0,thephasecurves,havingmovedawayfromthefocusatadistance
proportional to µ2, get wound round the stable limit cycle. In other words,
the loss of stability under the change of the sign of µ is accompanied by the
excitation of a stable limit cycle whose radius grows as µ2.
Thus, the stationary state loses stability, and a stable periodic regime is
generated in the direction µ > 0; its amplitude is proportional to the square
root of the deviation of the parameter from its critical value. Corresponding
excitation of self-oscillations is called soft.
4.2. THE CYCLICITY OF INNOVATION PROCESSES 77
Concerning the obtained limit cycle, it is not difficult to derive explicit ex-
pressions for its main characteristics following the methods of [37]:
a) the amplitude is given by
(cid:18) 1 (cid:19)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
b) the period is given by
′(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:1)
τ = ReC (0) ImC (0) . (4.39)
(cid:18) (cid:19)
The periodic solution itself, up to the choice of the initial phase, takes the
y =Rez, y =Imz, y =Re w z2 ,
Z =εe 2π T it + iG 02 ε2 e −4π T it 3e 4π T it(cid:0) +O (cid:1) ε3 . (4.40)
From (4.40), it follows: (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:0) (cid:1)
2πt A a ε2 4πt A a ε2 4πt
y (t)=εcos 1 1 cos + 2 1 sin ,
1 T − 3ω2 T 6ω2 T
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
2πt A a ε2 4πt A a ε2 4πt
y (t)=εsin 2 1 cos 1 1 sin , (4.41)
2 T − 3ω2 T − 6ω2 T
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
3 ω2+a2 − 1 ω 1 2 2
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Returning to the initial variables, we obtain an approximate form of the
solution for the cumulative volume of the production of the new product:
for its relative speed (rate) of growth, we have:
Theabove-describedmechanismofthegenerationofaneconomiccyclehasa
numberofcharacteristicfeaturesthatcannotbeexplainedwithintheframework
of classical linear theory.
Firstly, incontrasttothe linearmodel,economicoscillationprocessesinthe
form (4.41)-(4.43) do not possess symmetry. This means that, inside the cycle,
its phases may be different both with respect to their form and meaning. In
particular, expansion and decline have different duration. Secondly, according
78CHAPTER 4. DYNAMICS OF ECONOMIC PROCESSES WITH A LAG
to (4.38), the amplitude of oscillations depend on internal parameters of the
model, and it is not an entirely external characteristic.
Thirdly, the period of the cycle is a function of its amplitude, which, to a
certain extent, explains the irregularity of cyclic dynamics.
Furthermore, the evolution curve of the cumulative national product is a
superposition of oscillations with different frequencies with respect to a certain
trend. Such a trend canbe represented,for example,by a logistic curve: in our
case, logistics easily manifests itself when the lag Q(t) is switched off.
As an illustration of the justification of the applicationof the mathematical
models of economic development employed in this study, we should remind
the reader of the statement of Y. A. Shumpeter quoted in [17]: ”Since a long
time ago, experts in political economy have a habit to mention ’trends’ and
’lags’; they are probably aware of the fact that businessmen react not only to
given quantities but also to the rate of their changes, not only to the existing
quantities but also to those that are expected in the future. In any case, in the
recentyears,exacttheoriesoflaggingadaptation,ofexpectedactions,etc. have
been developed. Technical means have been developed or borrowed from other
fields. As regardsthe latter, the introduction to economic theory of functional,
developed by Vito Volterra, has been the most important event... As it seems,
thenewmethodspointtothepossibilityofacolossalvarietyofwave-likemotions
in the economic life that can be applied to the explanation of cycles without
any reference to the principle of the realization of new combinations... These
new techniques of the analysis substantially extend our abilities to explain the
forms of the manifestation of reality...”.
The results obtained in this study agree with the laws of cyclic dynamics:
they demonstrate the irregularity of the evolution of the economic system, a
periodic change of the phases of the cycles of complex systems and a change of
the cycles themselves [21].
This, in turn, implies the relevance of the prediction of cycles and of cri-
sis phenomena, of timely detection and identification of negative tendencies of
development for the methodology of social-economic forecasting. At the same
time, one should alwaysbear in mind that cyclicity is a generalproperty of the
behavior of a large number of dynamic systems of various nature, and, when
making extrapolation to the future of the tendencies formed in the past, it is
necessaryto be able to apply powerfulmoderntechniques of the theory of non-
linear oscillations. This approach allows us to provide a high quality analysis
of crisis states of the studied objects and systems, it also facilitates a search
for optimal, efficient ways of leaving these states in order to create anti-crisis
programs of economic and social development of the society.
Instead of the conclusion
Nowadays,thetheoryofeconomiccyclesseemstobethemostdisputablesection
of macroeconomics. What kinds of economic or non-economic factors generate
oscillation motion? What is the mechanism of their propagation in the econ-
omy? Do cyclic oscillations form a constituent part of economic growth, or
shouldthey be regardedas deviations from a long-termtrend? How should the
government build an anti-cyclic policy, or, generally speaking is such a policy
alwaysnecessary? Whatmathematicalproblemsareencounteredbyresearchers
intheir formalizeddescriptionofoscillationprocessesinthe economy? Exhaus-
tive answers to these andmany other important questions have not been found
so far.
From the point of view of synergetic economics, there are no economic evo-
lutionary systems that always exhibit stability. An evolutionary system always
experiences transformation effects of external and internal forces that are able
to realize sudden structural changes, including cycles. We want to clarify this
statement by the example of an analysis of behavioral properties of the phe-
nomenon of a competitive interaction between different economic subjects [23].
Thenotionofeconomiccompetitionisacomplicatedandcomplexcategory:
it is built on the basis of a variety of approaches. An overwhelming majority
of researchers single out price competition and structural competition. In the
firstapproach,the mechanismof competition is realizedatthe expense ofprice
changes,whereasin the secondapproach,conditionsofthe productionofgoods
undergo competition. Defining the essence of competition, one should take
into account necessary constituents of the process that can be conditionally
subdivided into three groups: behavioral, structural, and functional.
Behavioralunderstandingofcompetitionhasbeeninterpretedsincethetime
of A. Smith as pair (without an agreement) competition for the most lucrative
selling conditions that occurs between sellers (or buyers). At the same time,
he considered price change to be the main method of competition. Later, the
behavioralpropertiesofcompetitionimprovedinthedirectionofmoreaccurate
formulation of its objective and methods.
The structural constituent of competition is formed by an analysis of the
wholemarketorofitssegmentswiththeaimtodeterminethedegreesoffreedom
of the seller and of the buyer. The functional filling of competition contains
innovation, that is, a competition between the old and the new, etc.
Beforeturningto adirectanalysisofpeculiaritiesofthe modelsofeconomic
80 INSTEAD OF THE CONCLUSION
competition, it is necessary to point out the following: economic systems, as
a rule, are far from their equilibrium, they are open to commodity and money
flows, they have complex inhomogeneous structure and a regulation system of
theendogenicmediumundertheinfluenceofexogenicfactors. Therefore,math-
ematical formalization of the processes of economic competition is, in itself, of
considerable difficulty. This should be contrasted with the situation in physics,
chemistry and biology where mathematics has already become a natural lan-
guageofthedescriptionoftheobservedprocesses. Withregardtospecificprop-
ertiesofeconomicphenomena,onerefersspecificallytomathematicalmodelsin
economics. Here, by the model one should understand rather rude abstraction
andidealizationthat representsmathematicalformalizationnotofthe develop-
ing system of the economic space (market) itself but only of some qualitative
and quantitative characteristics of the processes that flow therein. A general
feature of many phenomenological models of the market economy is the pres-
ence of autocatalytic (by analogy with biophysics and population dynamics)
terms that determine the possibility of growth, of the facts of the appearance
of unstable stationarystates that facilitate the excitation of self-oscillationand
quasistochastic regimes.
Complexprocessesinthesystemsofmarketself-regulationarestipulatedby
the presence in the structural schemes of feedback contours (loops) (e.g., the
”invisible hand” of Adam Smith); they are of both positive and negative types,
which, in turn, predetermines the formulation of the problem of the study of
structural stability of the considered objects and systems. In the equations of
local competitive interactions, the feedbacks are described by nonlinear func-
tionals whose character allows for the initiation of the excitation of complex
dynamic regimes accompanied by corresponding attractors. The presence of
nonlinear relations and of induced instabilities implies the use of the synergetic
paradigm as a means of the description of competitive interactions in the eco-
nomic medium. It is necessary to state that the classical linear principle of
superposition loses its validity in a complex and nonlinear world represented
by the market. In such a situation, it is impossible to argue that the whole is
equal to the sum of its constituent parts. We should expect that the evolution
ofeconomicsystemsconstitutes aspecific transformationofallthe participants
of the market interaction by means of the establishment of a coherent relation
and of mutual adjustment of the parameters of their evolution. In this case,
a nonlinear synthesis should be understood not as the unification of rigidly es-
tablished, fixed objects, but rather as the unification of developing structures
that are characterized by different economic ”ages” and by ”memory” and are
positioned at different stages of the evolution.
Thus, the complexity of the economic system is related to coherence. By
coherence we shall understand the adjustment of the rates of business activity
of the participants of the market by means of diffusive (mixing) dissipative
processesthatmanifest themselvesmacroscopicallyasseeming economic chaos.
The constructionof acomplex marketcompetitive organizationrequiresco-
herentunificationof the constituent substructures,the adjustment oftime con-
stantsoftheir evolution. As aresultofsuchasubstantiallynonlinearsynthesis,
different structures get into a unified temporal world, that is, they acquire one
and the same sharpening impetus and begin to function at one and the same
economic rate.
The development of the concept of the construction of the system of per-
fect market competition leads to the understanding of the fact that arbitrary
structures under arbitrary conditions or mutual relations, positioned at arbi-
trary stages of development, cannot be included in a unified, complex social-
economic formation. It seems that there exist a restricted choice of formations
and of methods of the construction of a complex evolutionary whole. The se-
lectivity and quantization of the methods of the unification of the parts into a
whole is related to an imperative demand for existence in the whole temporal
world. This is a natural, inherent basis for quantization in the process of inte-
grationofcomplexdissipativeeconomicsystems. Inthecasewhentheeconomic
subjects,integratedintoaunifiedcompetitionmedium,differinthe sharpening
impetus, they develop at different rates in the vicinity of a given singularity,
which, in turn, provokes undesirable market imbalance. In the world economy,
this means, for example, that the development rate, the standard of living, in-
formationsupply,etc. differsubstantiallyfordifferentcountriesandgiveriseto
a dangerous difference in their potential.
To restore the efficiency of market competition, it is necessary to observe
certain topology of the ”architecture” of the cross-relations. In other words, if
theoverlapregionissmall,theeconomicsubjectswilldevelopwithout”feeling”
each other and will live in different temporal worlds. On the contrary, if the
overlap is excessively large, the structures will quickly merge into strategic al-
liances in the given market and possibly, may even form a unified dynamically
growingstructure with a growthlimit equal to the market volume, which leads
to degeneration of competition.
Now,itis possible toproceedwith the characterizationofthe mathematical
essence of economic competition for several participants of the market. In this
work, we have restricted ourselves to the case of the competition of two eco-
nomicsubjectsinasinglemarket. Toconstructkineticequationsofcompetitive
interactions,it is necessaryto make a number of assumptions that characterize
the considered phenomenon at a qualitative level. It seems that the most im-
portant issue is an analysis of the balance of the growth rates of the processes
and factors that prevent positive development. Let us assume that the growth
rate of each competitor depends on a potential increase in the volume of a cer-
tain type of goods and on an unrealized possibility of growth for this type, as
it has been the case for each isolated participant of the market in the absence
of competition. However, the unused possibility of quantitative growth for this
typeofgoodsundertheconditionofmixingofflowsofgoodsisamorecomplex
quantity. It demonstrates the availability of a free place for this type of goods
in the presence of goods expansion by another participant of the market.
For two participants of market competition, we obtain a system of two au-
tonomousnonlineardifferentialequationsthatresemblemodelsofmathematical
biophysics (of population dynamics) of the Volterra type [10], as well as their
various modifications with various response functions [33].
82 INSTEAD OF THE CONCLUSION
A theoretical analysis (including a bifurcation one) of such models in a suf-
ficiently complete manner is given in the book by A. D. Bazykin [3].
Ofspecialinterestforthepracticeofeconomicforecastingistheformulation
ofcriteriaofclosenessoftheparametersofthesystemtodangerousboundaries,
when, on crossingthese boundaries,the system in a catastrophic waygoes over
to a qualitatively different state. In this case, the character of the dynamics of
the volumes of goods in the market changes drastically: for example, a spas-
modic transition from monotonous economic growth to relaxation oscillations
takes place. Such boundaries of the regions of changes of the parametersof the
considered dynamic system are called bifurcation boundaries.
A special position in the studies of models of the competitive economy is
occupied by processes that are characterized by cyclic behavior. The ascer-
tainment of hidden periodicity, a search for the so-called ”economic clocks” of
variousnature is alwaysa validissueinthe studies ofthe problemsofeconomic
dynamics.
Now, we shall discuss a mathematical model of economic competition that
is described by a system of two ordinary differential equations with quadratic
nonlinearity. Such systems appear in competitive dynamics when one uses a
Taylor-expansion approximation of the second order for response functions in
generalized Volterra models. The study of the issue of the excitation of self-
oscillation regimes (limit cycles) is a very interesting and difficult problem of
qualitative theory of differential equations. Up to now, there is still no solution
to Hilbert’s sixteenth problem, posed in 1900: Find the maximum number of
limit cycles and determine their mutual arrangement in a system of two differ-
ential equations with quadratic nonlinearity. Among the main results for this
system, we may note the following [15]:
1)acompleteclassificationoftheirsingularpoints(anode,afocus,asaddle,
and a center) is given;
2)acomplete qualitativeanalysisofthe systemswitha center-typesingular
point is carriedout. A topologicalclassificationof phase portraits is given,and
a corresponding partition of the parameter space of such systems is performed;
3) it is proved that limit cycles of quadratic systems are convex;
4) limit cycles cannot surround a node-type singular point;
5) a systemthat hasan algebraiclimit cycle in the formofanellipse has no
other limit cycles;
6) a quadratic system that has a non-coarse focus and a phase straight line
or two singular points with zero divergence has no limit cycles;
7) a system with four singular points, two of which are focuses, with one of
them being non-coarse,may have limit cycles only around one of the focuses;
8) the maximum number of limit cycles generated by a focus or a center is
equal to three;
9) a quadratic system may have at least four limit cycles arranged as 3:1,
i.e., three limit cycles around one focus and one limit cycle around the other
10) the total number of limit cycles in a quadratic system is finite.
Three bifurcations of limit cycles are known:
1) the bifurcation of the generation (annihilation) of a limit cycle from a
complex focus;
2) the bifurcation of a separatrix cycle from a homoclinic or heteroclinic
closed trajectory;
3) the bifurcation of a multiple limit cycle.
The first bifurcation is studied completely only for the case of quadratic
systems: the number of limit cycles generated from the singular point is equal
tothree. For asystem withcubic nonlinearity, thecyclicity of thesingular point
is equal to not less than eleven!
Asregardsthesecondbifurcation,wemayarguethat,atpresent,thereexists
a complete classification of separatrix cycles, and the cyclicity of most of them
is know.
The third bifurcation is the most complicated one, and it is insufficiently
explored.
Unfortunately, all these bifurcations are of local character: when studying
them, one considers only a certain sufficiently small neighborhood of a singular
point, of a separatrix limit cycle or a multiple limit cycle and a corresponding
sufficiently small neighborhood of the parameters of the system.
AfinalsolutionofHilbert’ssixteenthproblemrequiresacompletequalitative
studyofthesystemasawhole(bothonthewholephaseplaneandinthewhole
parameter space), that is, global theory of bifurcations is needed. Besides, all
local bifurcations of limit cycles should be joined together.
Our detailed characterizationof bifurcationproperties of cyclic dynamics of
the competitive interaction is by no means casual. Exactly here, the instabil-
ity properties of the system with respect to small deviations of the parameters
manifest themselves most strikingly. Only in nonlinear systems near bifurca-
tion boundaries, qualitative differences in the character of the behavior of the
considered object are observed. An example of such restructuring of topology
is provided by the transition from a stable aperiodic region to an unstable self-
oscillation regime that occurs in a catastrophic manner. On the phase plane,
thisis illustratedby separatrices, i.e., linesthatseparatedifferentattractionre-
gions (attractors). In other words, if a small perturbation ”throws” the system
over a separatrix, it gets into the zone of influence of another attractor, which
cardinally restructures the phase portrait.
We have already studied in sufficient detail the qualitative peculiarities of
market dynamics for two participants of competition. Certainly, this is only a
particular case of complex organization of the economic system. It seems that
the perfection ofthe marketrelations shouldbe directedtowardsan increasein
the quantity of the participants of the market.
As is well known, the appearance in the market of a third participant of
competition may initiate in the system a chaotic regime accompanied by the
appearance of a new type of the attractor. This ”strange” attractor radically
changesthedynamicsofthesystemofcompetitiverelations,whichsubstantially
narrowsthehorizonofeconomicforecasting. Therefore,themostimportantidea
that follows from synergetics is that stable development and the dynamically
developing process of the evolutionof the market necessitates a certainportion
84 INSTEAD OF THE CONCLUSION
of chaos, the spontaneity of development and self-organization, and a certain
portionofexternalmanagementonthe partofstateinstitutions thatshouldbe
adjusted to each other. Both the two extremes, i.e., pure chaos, spontaneous
market mechanisms of selection and the ”survivalof the strongest”,on the one
hand, and total external management, full control and a protectionist policy
vis-`a-vis selected structures, on the other hand, are unacceptable.