Data Management for High-Throughput Genomics
Uwe Röhm José A. Blakeley
University of Sydney Microsoft Corporation
Sydney, Australia Redmond, USA
roehm@it.usyd.edu.au joseb@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT processing of small and precise business data records. Everything
beyond these core assumptions is a challenge for current database
Today's sequencing technology allows sequencing an individual engines. This includes large BLOB-style attributes – such as gene
genome within a few weeks for a fraction of the costs of the sequences –, uncertain data – such as most scientific data –,
original Human Genome project. Genomics labs are faced with computational intensive data processing functions – such as
dozens of TB of data per week that have to be automatically sequence alignment algorithms –, and efficient support for data
processed and made available to scientists for further analysis. provenance and annotation management. But perhaps most
This paper explores the potential and the limitations of using importantly, database systems are not easy to deploy and use by
relational database systems as the data processing platform for the average scientist. They not only require some specific
high-throughput genomics. In particular, we are interested in the technical skills, but also a certain way of thinking about data
storage management for high-throughput sequence data and in design and declarative data access which apparently is not widely
leveraging SQL and user-defined functions for data analysis embraced by the scientific community.
inside a database system. We give an overview of a database
A common perception in the Bioinformatics community is that
design for high-throughput genomics, how we used a SQL Server
“Traditional DBMSs require significant performance tuning for
database in some unconventional ways to prototype this scenario,
scientific applications, a task that scientists are neither well
and we will discuss some initial findings about the scalability and
prepared for, nor eager to address. […] Most importantly, the
performance of such a more database-centric approach.
complex data structures and data types needed to represent the
1. INTRODUCTION data and relationships are not supported well in most
Genetic analysis labs are facing a serious data management databases”[15]
problem: The development of high-throughput gene sequencing
In this paper, we are interested to find out whether this perception
instruments makes mass genomics feasible, but at the same time
is true. We study two different scenarios from high-throughput
produces gigabytes of sequencing data per experiment that need to
genomics, the 1000 Genomes project [1] and digital gene
be stored, aligned and analyzed. While it took 10 years and $3B
expression analysis [20], and investigate how current database
dollars to produce a first draft of the human reference genome
technology can be used for efficient data management. In
(approx. 3.5 billion base pairs (bp)), the current generation of
particular, we are interested in leveraging the extensibility and file
sequencing instruments is able to sequence between 2 to 4 billion
streaming features of the latest SQL Server 2008 for processing of
bases in only a few days [8][19].
gene sequence data [5][10].
The current approach to data management for high-throughput
Our findings show that there are shortcomings in both approaches:
genomics is file-centric and involves a large number of separate
Existing file-centric efforts for genomics violate all best practices
files containing a text-format or a proprietary binary format. Most
of the database community, from basically non-existing data
of these formats are insufficiently documented and do not include
models to strong data-program dependencies. At the same time,
meta-data. Some file formats that include metadata (e.g., HDF5)
current DBMSs lack optimizations for complex user-defined
do not separate the data’s representation from its conceptual data
functions and in general do not support the right abstractions for
model. This makes data workflow management very complicated
probabilistic data or data provenance. Nevertheless, we show
and the analysis becomes inefficient. The current file-centric
how efficient genomic data management can be achieved with
approach simply does not scale to the terabyte needs of high-
today’s extensible database systems and which trade-offs between
throughput genomics.
strict data modeling and external tool support have to be made.
On the other hand, traditional database technology also has
shortcomings that prevent it from becoming commonly used in 2. BACKGROUND
this scientific domain: Database systems are optimized for fast Let us first have a look at the current state-of-the-art in high-
throughput genomics and in extensible database technology.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 2.1 Gene Sequencing Workflows
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
Gene sequencing workflows consist of five phases (cf. Figure 1):
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
Phase -1: Sample Preparation
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
Using sophisticated chemical processes, a sequencing lab first
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
prepares several so-called libraries of DNA/mRNA samples by
CDIR2009, January 4–7, 2009, Asilomar, CA, USA.
Copyright 2009 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.
Figure 1 Typical Gene Sequencing Pipeline reference sequences into its own internal formats (intermediate
binary files); the output of its short-read alignment is another
proprietary binary file which then has to be converted into a
human readable form before it can be further processed. Note that
the final output is a ‘human readable’ text file which actually
complicates the further processing in the data analysis step.
2.1.1 Example 1: 1000 Genomes Project
The 1000 Genomes Project is an international effort to sequence
the individual genomes of 1000 humans [1]. One of the
participating labs is the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute in
Cambridge,UK. The institute has currently 28 Illumina sequencers
deployed in a 24x7 production mode. Each sequencer is producing
750 GB of raw level-0 image data per run. After the initial image
analysis phase, this results in one short-read file per lane, each of
chopping and replicating the original nucleotide sequences into the size between 1 and 2 GB. This totals about 75 TB of raw
fragments that are short enough to be processed by the current level-0 data and 0.5 TB of level-1 data per week. This level-1 data
sequencer machines (the current technology limit is about 300bp). is then aligned against the Human Reference genome, resulting in
Each library is then prepared onto a flowcell (or slide) that millions of alignments (for quality purposes, individual genomes
consists of 8 physical lanes. One lane is normally reserved for a are sequenced with 40x coverage). The tertiary data analysis
control sample, while the remaining seven contain the material to phase finally calls the consensus over all alignments, and looks
be sequenced. Each lane is logically divided into about 300 tiles for variations between individual genomes (single nucleotide
which are the actual unit-of-measurement of the sequencers. polymorphisms (SNPs)).
Phase 0: Sequencer Run 2.1.2 Example 2: Digital Gene Expression Studies
The content of a flowcell is sequenced in one run of a high- NextGen sequencing is also a promising technique for digital
throughput sequencing instrument. E.g., the commonly used gene expression studies [20]. The level of activity of a certain
Illumina Solexa needs between 2.5 and 5 days for one run [8]. The gene is reflected by the amount of messenger RNA (mRNA)
results are thousands of images as raw level-0 data that show all found in a cell. State-of-the-art for gene expression studies are
the base signals in one tile for a certain sequence position. Microarrays that only test for a pre-defined set of genes. NextGen
sequencing allows performing this analysis in silico: mRNA is
Phase 1: Primary Data Analysis
transformed into DNA fragments, which are then sequenced. The
Next comes an image analysis and base-calling step. The output is
resulting level-1 data, called tags, are evidence for gene activities:
level-1 data, a separate file for each lane consisting of millions of
the more active a gene, the more mRNA was produced, the higher
short sequence fragments (so-called short-reads) from 35 to 300bp
the frequency of the corresponding tag. To identify the genes that
(depending on the technology used). Together with some meta-
are expressed in the cell, the reads are aligned against a reference
data about each read (ids, tile, coordinates and quality data) this
genome and the alignments are ranked (level-2 data). As tertiary
sums up to several Gigabytes of sequencing data per experiment.
data analysis, one performs a differential expression analysis of
Phase 2: Secondary Data Analysis different samples, e.g. comparing healthy cells with cancer cells.
The next step is to align the small reads to larger sequences. There The data volumes in this second scenario are much smaller than in
are two principle approaches: In de novo sequencing experiments, the previous re-sequencing scenario, because only a faction of the
the output is unknown and alignment is a computational genome is active in a cell and tags are repeating.
expensive process of identifying and assembling overlaying The Role of Databases. Even though high-throughput sequencing
fragments to create contigs; in contrast, re-sequencing produces massive data volumes and we need to efficiently manage
experiments and digital gene expression studies align the reads and analyze these data, database systems play only a surprisingly
against a known set of reference sequences (such as the human small role. Most data, in fact all level-0 to level-2 data, is stored in
genome) to quantify the genes expressed in the samples. The a zoo of proprietary file formats in a cluster file system. The only
results are ranked lists of (potential) matches as level-2 data. exception is the workflow meta-data (which samples are sampled
already to what degree etc) which is stored in a relational DBMS.
Phase 3: Tertiary Data Analysis
The last step is to qualitatively analyze the alignments, e.g. by 2.2 Extensible Database Systems
comparing the matches of different sequence samples (differential
Many DBMSs can be extended with user-defined procedures and
expression analysis); this is based on statistical analysis and also
functions [12]. In some systems, these programmability facilities
requires access to further information about the matched genes
are used to support an object-relational data model, but recent
such as their functions or participation in metabolic pathway.
developments target the extensibility of the query processing level
There are several short-read alignment tools available which by providing table-valued functions and even user-defined
implement the secondary data analysis phase of re-sequencing / aggregates. Some DBMSs run their extensions in a hosted runtime
digital gene expression experiments such as MAQ (free/open such as the JVM or the .Net CLR [2][3].
source), SOAP (free/open source), Eland (part of the Illumina The normal usage scenario for stored procedures and functions is
suite), SX Oligo Search (proprietary), and SlimSearch to implement business transactions that execute with some control
(proprietary) [9]. These tools can be highly parameterized and flow and logic inside the DBMS engine. Our idea is to leverage
typically produce several intermediate outputs. For example, such programmability features of modern database engines for
MAQ first transforms the output files from a sequencer and the implementing advanced gene sequence processing algorithms.
2.3 Basic SQL Server 2008 Concepts into a table. To accomplish this conversion CLR TVFs use a pull
model to stream as a collection of rows. SQL Server requests
An example for an extensible DBMS is Microsoft SQL Server.
(pulls) and processes one row of data from the CLR TVF at a time
Since version 2005, it integrates a .NET CLR hosting runtime.
as opposed to the TVF materializing the entire relation and then
The following section briefly describes some basic .NET and CLR
the entire relation being processed. This allows the query engine
hosting concepts that are referenced throughout this paper.
to begin consuming results immediately after the first row is
2.3.1 .NET Runtime Hosting in SQL Server 2008 produced instead of having to wait for the entire return table to be
In the .NET framework, many different high-level programming populated. To become a CLR TVF a class implements the
languages can be used to construct programs. The compilation of IEnumerator interface.
the program produces a file, called an assembly, containing the
2.3.3 User Defined Types in SQL Server 2008
compiled code in the Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL).
SQL Server supports UDTs as a mechanism to extend the scalar
The .NET Framework supports a mechanism called custom
type system of SQL. SQL Server UDTs, implemented as CLR
attributes for annotating classes, properties, functions and
classes or structs, are designed to model atomic scalar types such
methods with additional information or facets the application may
as monetary currency, geometry and spatial types, etc. UDTs
want to capture in metadata. SQL Server uses these annotations to
allow users to define a type using the .NET framework, and to
complement the specification of extensibility contracts for user-
deploy and use these types within the database. Once deployed,
defined functions (UDFs), types (UDTs), and aggregates (UDAs).
UDTs can be used everywhere a native SQL Server scalar type
Managed code is MSIL executed in the CLR rather than directly
can be used. UDTs can hold state up to 2GB data.
by the operating system. Managed code applications gain CLR
services such as automatic garbage collection, runtime type 2.3.4 User Defined Aggregates in SQL Server 2008
checking, and security support. These services help provide
CLR UDAs give users the ability to write their own aggregates to
uniform platform- and language-independent behavior of
suite their own specific needs. Some common cases include
managed-code applications. At execution time, a just-in-time
aggregates for string processing, and statistical or mathematical
(JIT) compiler translates the MSIL into native code (e.g., Intel
computations. CLR UDAs are tightly integrated into the system,
X86 code). During this translation, code must pass a verification
are used by users just as with native aggregates, and can be
process that examines the MSIL and metadata to find out whether
parallelized by the system just like built-in aggregates (SUM,
the code can be determined to be type safe.
COUNT, MIN, MAX). Aggregates can hold state up to 2 GBs and
Figure 2 Integration of the CLR inside MSSQL. the contract for aggregation accepts multiple columns or
expressions as inputs.
2.3.5 Page/Row Compression in SQL Server 2008
SQL Server 2008 also supports row and page compression for
tables and indexes. Row compression uses variable-length storage
formats for numeric types and fixed-length character strings. Page
compression combines row, prefix, and dictionary compression
over several rows [11]. The following examples create tables T1
and T2 with row and page compression, respectively:
CREATE TABLE T1 (c1 int, c2 nvarchar(50))
WITH (DATA_COMPRESSION = ROW);
CREATE TABLE T2 (c1 int, c2 nvarchar(50))
SQL Server and the CLR have different internal models for WITH (DATA_COMPRESSION = PAGE);
managing system resources including memory management,
2.3.6 FileStreams and SQL Server 2008
synchronization primitives, and thread scheduling. SQL Server
acts as the operating system for the CLR when it is hosted inside The massive data volumes of scientific data management require
the SQL Server process (see Figure 2). SQL Server encapsulates efficient support of binary large objects (BLOBs), an area for
all operating system primitives in a component called the SQL which DBMS are known to not necessarily shine [15]. Microsoft
OS. The Hosting Layer coordinates assembly loading, security SQL Server 2008 introduced a new functionality of storing BLOB
management, application domain management, and escalation data as files in the file system rather than with the normal
policy when critical exceptions occur. relational storage engine. Those FileStream BLOBs are under full
transactional and managerial control of the database system – all
2.3.2 User Defined Functions in SQL Server 2008 shared access is synchronized via the concurrency control of SQL
CLR UDFs provide a mechanism for extending SQL Server with Server and all file data is managed by the DBMS utilities (e.g.
new scalar and table-valued routines written in .NET languages. backup/restore, database consistency check). All FileStream
Any static method can be registered as a scalar CLR UDF. For BLOBs can be accessed directly using standard Win32 file system
example, a new function for a mathematical or statistical APIs from client programs; this access does not go through the
operation not natively supported by SQL Server can be written as database’s buffer pool, but rather supports efficient streaming
a static function in C# and registered as a CLR UDF. CLR UDFs access of the FileStream content to clients [10][14]. As the name
also allow SQL Server to leverage the functionality available in suggests, this functionality is mainly targeting efficient access to
the .NET framework such as, e.g, the library for compression large BLOBs such as images or videos.
(System.IO.Compression).
In this paper, we are interested to find out how well such external
Table-valued functions (TVFs) provide a mechanism for FileStream BLOBs can be used for storing sequence data.
converting raw data (i.e., in a text/binary file or on the network)
3. DATA MODELING 3.2 Relational Schema Design
The common approach to data management for bio-data is to keep Next, we apply the usual relational mapping rules to our
data in files of various proprietary formats. Each file format is conceptual design to come up with a set of normalized relations
optimized for a specific task, lacking a common data model. for storing the sequence data. Although a natural step in relational
Many formats are optimized for a textual display of the contained database designs, the outcome is a drastic departure from the
data. For example, the common FASTA file format for gene or state-of-the-art in file-centric bio-data management – both
protein sequences contains line-wrapped sequences to 60 base workflow management data and sequencing data are now
pairs per line for better readability integrated in one schema. This allows scientists to explore the
context of their experimental results with a simple navigational
Figure 3 FASTQ File Example
query. Furthermore, a normalized relational schema strives to
@IL4_855:1:1:954:659 minimize redundancies. Instead of repeating the short-read
GTTTTTATGGTTTTAGATCTTAAGTCTTTAATCCAA sequences in each relation, they are linked back to the base
relation with the level-1 data by foreign-key relationships.
@IL4_855:1:1:497:759 Example. In the 1000 Genomes Project, the result of the
secondary data analysis is a set of alignments of the short-read
Another example is the FASTQ file format (cf. Figure 3) where sequences from one experiment against the Human reference
each entry consists of 4 lines [6]: An entry name, the actual short genome. With a file-centric data management, the alignments file
sequence data, and a comment line. The fourth line is the textual actually lists each aligned short-read with the id and position of
‘printable’ representation of so-called Phred Quality values per- the reference sequence it has been aligned to. In our normalized
base. These are the logarithmic-transformed error probabilities schema, this is represented by the Alignment table that links
from the image analysis phase (value range: 0 to 100) that have with a foreign key back to the actual short-read in the Read table.
been shifted into the visible ASCII character space.
3.3 Physical Database Design
These are good examples of practices that violate the fundamental
principle of large-scale data management, data independence. We finally have several possibilities on how to organize an
efficient physical database design for our sequencing data:
3.1 Conceptual Design
A full relational approach imports all data into the relations and
As a first step, we want to develop a concise conceptual data
makes the relational database engine solely responsible for all
model for gene sequencing experiments that is to be shared
data management. Such a database-centric approach has all the
throughout all data processing phases. The goal is to identify all
advantages of central data management with a database system
data entities and their relationships used in sequencing workflows.
such as transactions, declarative query processing with automatic
Important inputs for this design phase are example files for all
query optimization by the DBMS, controlled shared access to the
workflow phases and a description of the expected analysis
database, and backup/recovery facilities. But at the same time, the
results. We used an implementation of the Entity-Relationship
DBMS becomes responsible to process the sequence data such as
data model, the EDM, as a modeling tool [4].
sequence alignments and base calling. The alternative of running
Figure 4 Conceptual Data Model
those data analysis steps outside the DBMS would otherwise
mean to export the relational data into the proprietary file formats
expected by the analysis tools. This would render the intended
central data management with a database system ad absurdum.
In contrast, a hybrid approach keeps (some) base data in files
and accesses them through a wrapping mechanism in a relational
view in the DBMS. The benefit is that existing bioinformatics
tools can be used almost unchanged: they are allowed to process
their files as expected and even with the same file-scan and seek
API calls as before. Only their file opening code would have to be
adapted as access to the files is now managed by a DBMS. In
addition, we can query the base data in the database, combine
(join) it with other relations and also make use of the database’s
access control and backup facilities.
Example. We demonstrate the hybrid approach using the
FileStream feature of SQL Server 2008: We want to store short-
read sequences of a typical sequencing workflow in their original
Figure 4 shows the model for high-throughput sequencing starting FASTQ format, while at the same time being able to access them
from level-1 data (due to its size, level-0 data is deleted after the via SQL queries. This requires importing the data into the
primary data analysis as soon as quality control was performed). relational schema as a special BLOB that is stored as FileStream
There are two challenges for our model: Firstly, the short-read and then accessing the sequence data through a relational wrapper
sequences are conceptually probabilistic data that has some error table-valued function (TVF). The following Transact-SQL (T-
probability values associated with each base (cf. FastQ example SQL) statements create a corresponding ShortReadFiles
above). Secondly, the data model contains both workflow table, import the FASTQ file (in this brief example, we just bulk-
provenance data and the level-1 to level-3 sequence data. import the data; note that external tools can also write the file
content using the normal WriteFile() API calls when needed) and Figure 5 Sequencing Diagram of File Wrapper TVF
list the content using a ListShortReads() TVF function:
CREATE TABLE ShortReadFiles (
guid uniqueidentifier ROWGUIDCOL PRIMARY KEY,
sample INT,
reads VARBINARY(MAX) FILESTREAM
) FILESTREAM_ON FILSTREAMGROUP;
/* Bulk-Import new FileStream row */
INSERT INTO ShortReadFiles (guid, sample, lane, reads)
SELECT NEWID(), 855, 1, *
FROM OPENROWSET(BULK’D:\855_s_1.fastq',SINGLE_BLOB);
The solution is to separate the file parsing logic from the file-
/* check meta-data of the filestream table content */
streaming. Instead of reading individual lines form a text file with
SELECT guid, ample,lane,reads.PathName(),DATALENGTH(reads)
each MoveNext() call, we wrote a paging function that scans
FROM ShortReadFiles;
through the file in larger chunks of data (cf. the ReadChunk()
/* check content of one FileStream column using a TVF */ call in Figure 5). The parsing code works on an internal byte
SELECT * FROM ListShortReads( 855, 1, 'FastQ'); buffer of the iterator that has been filled by the previous
ReadChunk() call. An additional buffer-wrap check is needed in
4. DATA PROCESSING the parsing code, because the chunks are not guaranteed to be
multiple of file entries; if the end of the chunk is reached before
There are many specialized bioinformatics algorithms for pro-
the parsing of the current entry is finished, a paging algorithm
cessing and analyzing sequencing data. If databases shall have a
moves the current incomplete entry to the start of the buffer and
more prominent role for bio-data management, they have to
fills the remaining buffer with the next chunk. Finally, we can
support such functionality too – either as embedded functions or
by integrating with the existing file-based programs or Perl scripts stream fast through a FileStream BLOB by using the GetBytes
such as MAQ or NCBI Blast. In the following, we study on how function together with the SequentialAccess flag that
we can achieve efficient data access to FileStream data inside the implements pre-fetching on FileStream data. The following code
database, and how this can be leveraged to implement some gives an overview of our table-valued FileStream wrapper:
analysis steps directly with SQL.
Iterator::Create():
filePos = 0; bufferPos = 0; bufferOffset = 0;
4.1 File Wrapper Functions
bufferSize = buffer.length(); bytesRead = ReadChunk();
The main challenge with the hybrid approach is to be able to
efficiently access the file content from the relational query engine. Iterator::MoveNext():
To be able to do so, we need to provide efficient set-valued file while ( bytesRead > 0 ) do
wrapper functions. Given the large data sizes of today’s genomics if (bufferPos >= bytesRead) then
(file sizes of 500 MB and more are not unusual) an efficient, bytesRead = ReadChunk();
streaming-like access is important. fi
pos = ParseShortReadEntry(buffer, bytesRead, bufferPos);
Most database engines allow extending the core database if ( pos > 0 ) then
functionality with user-defined functions and stored procedures. bufferPos += pos;
In SQL Server, one can write user-defined functions in either T- return true;
SQL, or in any .NET language. User-defined functions can be else // paging algorithm
either scalar or table-valued. The API for providing TVFs follows MemCopy(buffer, bufferPos, 0, bytesRead-bufferPos);
the standard iterator interface of a relational query engine [17]. bufferOffset = bytesRead-bufferPos;
This means that programming a table-valued function is much bufferPos = bytesRead; // will trigger next ReadChunk()
closer to implementing a user-defined relational operator than fi
writing a schema-level UDT method. done
return false; // end-of-file reached
Figure 5 above shows a sequence diagram of the interaction
between the query processor (QP) and a table-valued file wrapper Iterator::ReadChunk():
function (TVF) that parses data stored in a FileStream BLOB. The len = bufferSize – bufferOffset;
actual TVF does not do much but rather all data access (and file read = sqlinput.GetBytes(0, filePos, buffer, bufferOffset, len);
parsing) logic concentrates in the TVF’s result iterator. The query filePos += read; bufferPos = 0;
processor uses this iterator to scan through the result set and calls if ( read > 0) and (bufferOffset > 0) then
for each row an explicit data conversion function (FillRow) that read += bufferOffset;
converts the internal CLR data into the equivalent SQL data types. bufferOffset = 0;
Given this iterator-oriented contract between the query engine and
return read;
the file wrapper function, how can we provide fast streaming
Iterator::ParseShortReadEntry(…):
access to data stored in a FileStream?
// encapsulates file parsing logic – returns 0 if buffer end reached
4.2 Typical Genomic Queries 4.2.3 Example 3: Consensus Calling
One of the main benefits of a database-centric (and also the Next, we consider an example for a tertiary data analysis that
hybrid) approach is that we can use declarative SQL queries to allows us to make good use of the extensibility features of modern
analyze the bio-data. The query processor then can provide us DBMS. The consensus calling step of a re-sequencing project,
with automatic parallelization of the data access. such as the 1000 genomes project, aggregates all alignments for
the same sample to one result sequence (e.g. the one individual
In the following, we just give a few examples for how data access
genome of a person that has been sequenced multiple times). The
to relationally stored bio-data can be done using SQL queries.
alignments overlap and the algorithm has to decide on the
resulting base symbol for each position of the result sequence.
4.2.1 Example 1: Unique Short-Reads
Figure 6 illustrates this process.
One of the first steps of a digital gene expression study [20] would
Figure 6 - Consensus Calling Overview
be to rank the level-1 sequence results by their frequency: How
often were certain sequence tags found in the sample (ignoring all
uncertain sequences, i.e. such which contain at least one ‘N’
symbol)? The corresponding short-read analysis (sometimes
referred to as binning) is a typical scripting problem where in one
example a 26-line Perl script was found to perform this function.
The same functionality can be achieved with an aggregation-
In an extensible database system, we can solve this task in a
group-by query as follows:
declarative way with one SQL query and a combination of several
Query 1 - Binning Unique Short Reads TVFs and UDAs. A conceptually clean approach is as follows:
SELECT ROW_NUMBER() Query 3 - Consensus Calling in SQL
OVER (ORDER BY COUNT(*)DESC),
SELECT chromosome, AssembleSequence(pos,b)
FROM(SELECT chromosome,pos,CallBase(base,qual) b
short_read_seq FROM Alignments JOIN [Read] ON (…)
FROM [Read] CROSS APPLY PivotAlignment(pos,seq,quals)
WHERE r_e_id=1 AND r_sg_id=2 AND r_s_id=1 WHERE a_e_id=… // join condition
AND CHARINDEX('N',short_read_seq)=0 GROUP BY chromosome, pos )
GROUP BY short_read_seq GROUP BY chromosome
This is a query where the CLR integration of a database engine
Note how the filtering for short-reads without ‘N’ symbol
can shine. The core idea behind Query 3 is to decompose the
becomes a straight forward WHERE predicate. The main
consensus calling algorithm into small building blocks, which are
challenge is to determine a rank number for each tag. In our
then naturally combined in a declarative query:
query, we use a proprietary extension of T-SQL, the
ROW_NUMBER() function, to determine the result row number. PivotAlignment(pos, seq, quals) is a table-valued
function that transforms a given DNA sequence with quality
4.2.2 Example 2: Digital Gene Expression Analysis values (seq, quals), that is aligned against a reference sequence at
The following is an example of a tertiary data analysis: We would position (pos), into a list of (position, base, qual) tuples.
like to determine which genes are expressed in the short-reads
CallBase(base,qual) is a user-defined aggregate function that
found in a certain sample of a digital gene expression experiment.
aggregates all bases that have been aligned against the same
We hence have to analyse against which reference sequences the position to the consensus base. This base calling can take the
short reads have been aligned to and how often. Again, this is a quality values of each aligned short read into account too.
classical example of a scripting problem, which given our
AssembleSequence() is another user-defined aggregate that
relational approach can be expressed by a simple grouping query:
does the reverse of PivotAlignment(), namely concatenating all
Query 2 - Gene Expression Analysis called bases to the resulting consensus sequence.
INSERT INTO GeneExpression Query 3 first pivots all aligned short reads into a long list of
SELECT a_g_id, a_e_id, a_sg_id, a_s_id, (position, base) pairs that represent the individual bases aligned
SUM(t_frequency), COUNT(a_t_id) against the reference sequence. Next, it groups those individual
FROM Alignment JOIN Tag ON (condition) bases per position and chromosome. The actual base calling is
WHERE a_e_id=1 AND a_sg_id=1 AND a_s_id=1 then done as an aggregation step on these groups. Finally, it
GROUP BY a_g_id, a_e_id, a_sg_id, a_s_id assembles the resulting consensus sequence – again as an
aggregation over all groups of the same chromosome.
This query groups all aligned tags by the gene id (a_g_id) and
determines the total frequency and count of the tags aligned However, this approach will generate a large intermediate result
against the same gene. Most of the query’s complexity is due to when pivoting each alignment into its individual bases and then
the use of composite primary keys. For example, each tag is grouping those by position and chromosome. An optimisation is
associated to a sample of a specific experiment (a_e_id, a_sg_id, hence to combine base-calling and result sequence assembly in
a_s_id). This is a result of the normalization of the schema. It one AssembleConsensus() UDA that combines all overlapping
however also allows to easily select alignments from a specific alignments for a given chromosome at once without pivoting. To
experiment or sample. avoid constructing the large intermediate result as internal state of
that function, we propose a sliding window processing technique
and to scan over the alignments in order of their starting position.
5. EVALUATION thereby repeating those textual identifiers in several tables, then
the storage space increases massively.
We prototyped two sequencing scenarios: (a) digital gene
expression studies, and (b) the 1000 Genomes project using the The solution is to normalize the schema and to introduce synthetic
proposed hybrid data management approach on SQL Server 2008. unique ID values for each database entry. In a plain normalized
In the following, we present some initial results on the quality of relational schema we achieve the same storage efficiency as with
our approach in terms of processing and storage overheads. We the original files. The more compact IDs and the minimized
concentrate on the most significant results. The test environment redundancy compensate for any overhead of the relational tuple
is a Dell OptiPlex 755 (2 Intel Q6600 dual core CPUs at 2.4 GHz, storage. We can further improve this by using transparent row- or
8 GB DDR2 RAM, two 250GB SATA disks) under Windows page-level compression in the tables [11]. This experiment
Server 2008 Enterprise. illustrates that the storage representation in a database approach
compares well with a file-centric approach.
5.1 Data Size Comparison
5.1.2 Data from the 1000 Genomes Project
First, we are interested in storage efficiency of the different data
management approaches. We compare the storage requirements of We also studied the storage efficiency of the different approaches
the original separate input files (Files), with the hybrid FileStream with data from a re-sequencing experiment. Table 2 compares the
approach, and several full-relational approaches. The example storage requirements of the different processing stages of one lane
data sets are two complete sets of level-1, level-2 and level-3 data short-reads data from the 1000 Genomes project: ca. 6.2 million
from a single flowcell lane of two different high-throughput short reads, which are aligned against the 25 chromosomes of the
sequencing experiments. Human reference genome.
Table 2 Comparison of Storage Efficiency (1000 Genomes)
5.1.1 Digital Gene Expression Data
In Table 1, we compare the amounts of data produced by a digital
gene expression study: a 490 MB short-reads file for one lane, a
16 MB output file from a unique tag analysis, 45.8 MB
alignments data (output of a run of MAQ against the Human
reference genome) and a 1.8 MB result file of a gene expression
analysis of the alignments.
Table 1 Comparison of Storage Efficiency (Digital Gene Expr)
The characteristics of this data set are different than for digital
gene expression studies: Almost all short reads are unique which
leads to an order of magnitude larger number of alignments. Still,
the results in principle support our previous findings. FileStreams
have no storage overhead as compared to the original data files. A
simple 1:1 import of the data that keeps its textual identifiers is
actually larger than the original data sizes, while a normalized
schema using numerical identifiers and foreign keys is much
smaller (e.g. for the alignments, we can save 40% space this way).
As we can see, FileStreams have no storage overhead as However, the database internal compression on page and row
compared to the original files. The data is just stored in its original level is much less effective on this data set than in the previous
format and size on a FileStream as on a file on disk. For the scenario. The reason is that the short-reads are much less uniform
purely relational representations, the results are more diverse. and hence the common-prefix- and dictionary-based compression
algorithms over only a small subset of the data fitting on one disk
If we import all sequence data files unchanged (1:1) from the
page do not perform that well. In this case, larger chunking or a
source files, the storage size almost doubles. Note that this is not
different compression algorithm would be beneficial (e.g. a bit-
the proposed normalized schema, but a simulation of a user trying
encoding of the sequences could reduce the size to just about a
to use a relational database in a ‘straightforward’ manner just
quarter). This could be achieved by introducing a corresponding
based on the input file formats. The reason is twofold. First, there
domain-specific short-read data type.
is a slight overhead with the internal row structure in the storage
engine. Second, the main reason for the overhead is redundancies
with id attributes. Since there is no central ID management in a 5.2 File Wrapping Performance
file-centric storage or schema information to declare key Next, we are interested in the performance of different approaches
attributes, the common approach is to construct for each record a to access short-read data depending on the physical design. In
unique name by combining several attribute values. In other particular, we want to compare the plain file access with a purely
words, the approach is to materialize a composite primary key. relational access and different approaches to scan FileStream data.
For example, the name of an individual short read entry in a In the following scenario, we execute a SELECT COUNT(*)
FASTQ file is a string that combines the name of the sequencer FROM File query with those varying functions. The example
machine with the flowcell id, the lane and tile numbers on the data set is a short-reads file in FASTA format with 5,028,052
flowcell, and the x and y coordinates on the tile where that lines of short read data from one lane of a sequencing experiment.
sequence has been located. If one imports the data files with those Note that in this experiment, the function did not perform any
textual IDs into a relational schema that mimics the file structures, record conversions.
Command line program (C#) ~ 5 secs Some secondary data analysis can be implemented solely in SQL,
T-SQL Stored Procedure several minutes such as some preparation steps for digital gene expression studies.
CLR-based Stored Procedure with StreamReader 21 secs In Section 4.2.1, we were discussing a declarative way for binning
CLR-based Stored Procedure with Chunking 7 secs unique short reads as preparation step for the actual sequence
CLR-based TVF with Chunking 14 secs alignment. We compared the runtime performance of Query 1
versus an equivalent Perl script, which we found used by some
These results demonstrate that CLR-based stored procedures and
bioinformatics colleagues, over a 500 MB short-read data set.
user defined functions can provide performance comparable to
Both approaches where producing the same 565,526 unique reads.
file-based tools. TVFs are slower than stored procedures due to
The Perl script ran for 10 mins, while SQL Query 1 on SQL
the overhead of the iterator-interface logic – but they provide a
Server 2008 finished in just 44 sec.
streaming access to the data, while stored procedures materialize
their set-valued result [17]. Figure 7 - Resource Consumption of Perl Script
The biggest performance bottleneck is the actual data conversion
of FileStream records into SQL tuples, which is done by the
FillRow() function in Figure 5. This requires not only parsing of
the original data, but also copying each attribute value from the
FileStream buffer into a corresponding result tuple. As the
FileStream buffer resides inside the CLR, the data has also to be
copied and converted from the CLR sandbox into the SQL query
engine. This adds a large overhead on the pure streaming
performance as shown above.
5.3 Data Analysis Capabilities
Let us finally consider how well database systems support the The main reason is that the Perl script follows a typical sequential
different data analysis phases of a typical genomics workflow: scripting approach to bio-data processing. As we see in Figure 8,
it first reads all data into main memory (dark green line – CPU
5.3.1 Primary Data Analysis read activity), before it then processes the data until finally
Our approach starts from level-1 data – the short read sequences. writing the result back to disk. All throughout this processing,
Hence the image analysis of the raw image data still has to be file- only about a quarter of the available CPU power is used (dark red
centric. The only support needed is that the tools write the line) because it runs sequentially on just on of the four available
resulting level-1 data into FileStreams managed by the DBMS. cores. In contrast, SQL Server automatically parallelized the
This approach is consistent with the current practice of query and made use of all four cores, resulting in a much faster
sequencing labs that keep level-0 data only for a few weeks for runtime (as shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9 below).
quality control purposes, before deleting it.
Figure 8 - Multi-Core-CPU Usage of SQL Query 1
Recently, the Sequence Read Format (SRF) was proposed as a
common container format for level-1 short-read data [16]. SRF
files include not only the actual short reads and quality values, but
also some core information from the image analysis steps such as
intensity and signal-to-noise ratio values. In our experiments, we
did concentrate on the currently still more common FastQ format.
Our hybrid approach would however naturally extend to
encapsulate SRF files as FileStreams too. 5.3.3 Tertiary Data Analysis
The most interesting case for using a database engine for genomic
5.3.2 Secondary Data Analysis data management is the tertiary data analysis phase.
The core idea of the hybrid approach is to leverage on the existing
In Section 4.2.3, we discussed a way for implementing the
tools and algorithms for secondary data analysis such as MAQ by
consensus calling step of a sequencing project in one SQL query
allowing them to still work on the same input files. This requires
using some user-defined aggregate functions. We conducted
opening files through the new FileStream-aware file system APIs.
some initial experiments with different versions of Query 3 on a
The remaining access and access speed is unchanged.
data set of 2 GB consensus data from just a single lane of human
Alternatively, we can implement the alignment algorithms directly
genome sequence data. The results again show how the query
in the DBMS as stored procedures. Previous work showed that
optimizer gives us parallelism for free, but they also highlight
this is possible, although with limited scalability [13].
some current limitations for sequence processing in databases.
Figure 9 - Parallel Query Plan for Unique-Read Binning in SQL (Query 1)
Figure 10 - Parallel Query Plan for Consensus Building in SQL (Query 3; excerpt)
Figure 10 above shows the query execution plan for Query 3 explored different physical data representations for it, including a
(note: due to lack of space, only an excerpt with the core parallel novel hybrid design that wraps level-1 sequence data as
join is shown – the remaining upper execution plan, with the FileStreams so that existing tools can still be used. Based on this,
second parallelized aggregate and the projection, is truncated on we demonstrated how the integration of modern programmability
the left). This query runs on the normalized database schema features with declarative SQL queries, such as CLR-based user-
which stores short reads centrally in a Read table and links to the defined functions and aggregates, can be used for secondary and
remaining information via foreign keys. The query hence first has tertiary data analysis.
to join the alignments with the short read tables to retrieve the
Our experimental results show that a normalized database in
sequences for each alignment. Due to physical data independence,
combination with the FileStream BLOB storage can reduce the
we can choose appropriate clustered indexes on those tables so
storage requirements as compared to purely file-based approaches.
that the query processor can do this join in about 7 seconds (with
We also demonstrated how declarative querying of biological data
a warm buffer pool) by using a parallel merge join. This
can be concise, flexible, and how a database query processor can
corresponds to about 1.6 million alignments per second.
provide transparent parallel processing – given the right physical
The overall performance is dominated by the next processing step. design choices. We also identified some performance bottlenecks
If we pivot each aligned sequence using the PivotSequence user- due to missing native data types and the difficulties for the query
defined TVF as discussed in Section 4.2.3, we produce a huge optimizer to determine the selectivity and the optimal
intermediate result on the temporary tablespace, which we then parallelization steps for UDTs and UDAs.
have to group for the base call and sequence assembly steps. Overall, we believe a database-centric approach can bring many
Although conceptually clean, this approach means blocking data modeling and performance advantages to the management of
operations in the execution path and large amounts of disk writes high-throughput genomic data.
for the intermediate results. Hence it is not practical.
For fastest performance, the database needs to use a non-blocking, 6.1 Future Work
parallelized query plan and to processes the alignments in order. There are several interesting directions for future work: We have
When we scan once over all alignments in ascending order of seen that the bioinformatics area can benefit a lot from conceptual
alignment positions, we can develop a UDA that builds the modeling. But more work needs to be done to successfully
consensus sequence in a sliding-window fashion. Two issues propagate and apply the principles of good data design and
remain: The query optimizer has to find a partitioning of the input physical data independence needs to the scientific community.
data that allows for parallel processing of separate alignment
Our case study so far did just scratch the surface of the actual
streams even though alignments on the partition borders overlap
secondary data analysis stage that requires efficient alignment
the next partition – and hence need to be considered in both.
algorithms. It would be interesting to investigate how a set of core
Secondly, the final result is one consensus sequence per
functions and alignment algorithms such as MAQ could be
chromosome – which in the case of the Human genome means a
integrated into database systems. There were already some
resulting sequence string of more than 100 MBytes.
approaches to do so for the popular BLAST alignment algorithm
Consensus calling hence needs an approach to efficiently handle a [18]. But none has looked into multi-sequence alignments for
large internal BLOB result, such as a specific sequence data type high-throughput sequencing yet. We also did not study
that supports streaming inside a database engine. A more thorough appropriate indexing. Previous studies, e.g. on integrating BLAST
evaluation of this tertiary data analysis step is planned, but we are into database systems, showed though that efficient indexing
currently lacking the required full set of alignment data from plays a key role in performance optimizations for sequence
several DNA samples of the same individual for this experiment. alignment in databases [7][13].
Our investigation of the storage requirements demonstrated that it
6. SUMMARY would be beneficial to introduce specific genomic sequence data
In this paper, we outlined an approach to data management for types that support internal compression to reduce the storage
high-throughput sequencing workflows by leveraging the data requirements for large-scale genomic experiments. Furthermore,
modeling, storage, query, and extensibility tools of relational one of the benefits of declarative querying over large amounts of
DBMSs. We developed an E-R model for genomic data and data is the possibility to introduce automatic parallelisation.
However, our performance results in Section 5 showed that there [6] FASTQ Format Specification. URL:
defined functions and aggregates. We are currently looking into
[7] E. Hunt: “Indexed Searching on Proteins Using a Suffix
these technical aspects and further performance improvements.
Sequoia.” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 27(3):24-31,
Besides those system engineering aspects, there are also many 2004.
interesting problems on the data model side. Short-read sequence
data is probabilistic data as represented by the quality values
www.illumina.com/downloads/GenomeAnalyzer_SpecSheet.pdf
associated with each read. However, so far many algorithms
[9] Maq Tool: Mapping and Assembly with Qualities. URL:
simply ignore those quality values, and also our own conceptual
model does not integrate these aspects well, resulting in separate
probabilistic databases hence seems natural. msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb933993(SQL.100).aspx
A final important, also quality-related aspect is data provenance [11] MSDN: Page Compression Documentation. URL:
alignment algorithm with certain parameters was used to align
[12] L. A. Rowe, M. Stonebraker: “The POSTGRES Data
them against (a specific version of) the Human reference genome?
Model”. In: Proceedings of VLDB 1987, p. 83-96.
These are central questions to control the quality of sequencing
results and to identify potential problems or missing data. Our [13] U. Röhm and T-M. Diep. “How to BLAST your Database -
current approach does not cover these data provenance aspects. A Comparison Study of Stored Procedures for BLAST
Recently, there is a lot of interest in the database community on Searches”. In: Proceedings of DASFAA'2006, pp. 807-816.
data provenance management and it will be interesting to see how [14] R. Sears, C. van Ingen and J. Gray: "To BLOB or Not To
those approaches can be adapted for high-throughput genomics. BLOB: Large Object Storage in a Database or a Filesystem?”
Acknowledgements Microsoft Technical Report MSR-TR-2006-45, April 2006.
We are grateful to Matt Wood and Roger Pettett from the Sanger [15] Todd Smith. FinchTalk BLOG article, March 2008.
Olson from Geospiza, Inc., Seattle, for many fruitful discussions. [16] Sequence Read Format initiative. URL:
7. REFERENCES
[17] SQLServer Online Books: “CLR Table-Valued Functions”,
[2] A. Acheson et al: “Hosting the .NET Runtime in Microsoft [18] S. Stephens, J.Y. Chen, J.Y., and S. Thomas: “ODM
SQL Server.” In: Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMOD BLAST: Sequence homology search in the RDBMS”. IEEE
Conference, pp.860-865, 2004. Data Engineering Bulletin, 27(3): 20–23, 2004.
[3] J.A. Blakeley, M. Henaire, C. Kleinerman, I. Kunen, A. [19] U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science: “Human
Prout, B. Richards, and V. Rao: ".NET Programmability and Genome Project Information”, 2008.
Extensibility in Microsoft SQL Server." In: Proceedings of
[20] V. E. Velculesco and K. W. Kinzler. ”Gene Expression
ACM SIGMOD, 2008.
Analysis goes Digital”. Nature Biotechnology, 25(8), pp.
[4] J.A. Blakeley, S. Muralidhar, A. Nori: “The ADO.NET 878-880, August 2007.
Entity Framework: Making the Conceptual Level Real.” In:
Proceedings of ER Conference, 2006.
[5] J. A. Blakeley, S. Ozer, C. van Ingen and A.S. Szalay: "SQL
Server: A Data Platform for Scientific and Engineering
Applications." Microsoft Technical Report, March 2008.