Decentralized Algorithms for 3D Symmetric
Formations in Robotic Networks:
a Contraction Theory Approach
Sumeet Singh, Student Member, IEEE, Edward Schmerling, Student Member, IEEE, Marco Pavone, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper presents decentralized algorithms for i + 1 modulo n, where n is the number of robots. This
formationcontrolofmultiplerobotsinthreedimensions.Specif- approach is attractive due to its decentralized nature and low
ically, we leverage the mathematical properties of cyclic pursuit information requirements, namely relative position, and has
along with results from contraction and partial contraction
led to its popularity in recent years [13]–[15]. In this paper,
theory to design decentralized control algorithms that ensure
global convergence to symmetric formations. We first consider we adopt the cyclic pursuit strategy proposed in [16] (that,
regular polygon formations as a base case, and then extend the in turn, generalizes earlier results in [14], [15]), where each
results to Johnson solid and other polygonal mesh formations. robot follows its neighbors on both sides, that is, robots
The algorithms are further augmented to allow control over i + m and i − m, where m = {1, 2, ...N} is a look-
formation size and avoid collisions with other robots in the
ahead parameter up to a horizon N. This is referred to as the
formation. The robustness properties of the algorithms are
assessed in the presence of bounded additive disturbances and symmetric cyclic control algorithm. To prove stability (i.e.,
their effect on the quality of the formation is quantified. Finally, convergence to a desired formation), we exploit contraction
we present a general methodology for embedding the control theory. Contraction theory is a relatively recent innovation
laws on complex dynamical systems, in this case, quadcopters, in control system design [17], and hinges upon an exact
and validate this approach via simulations and experiments on
differential analysis of convergence. At its core, contraction
a fleet of quadcopters.
theory studies exponential convergence of pairs of system
trajectories towards each other, and by extension, to a desired
I. INTRODUCTION target trajectory. This represents a generalization with respect
to traditional Lyapunov analysis which studies convergence to
Recently there has been much interest in decentralized, the origin, i.e., to a zero trajectory [18]. Partial contraction
multi-robot systems due to the plethora of possible applica-
theory extends this concept by considering the convergence
tions and performance advantages. These systems have many
of trajectories to a “set of properties,” for example, a flow-
attractivepropertiessuchasrobustnesstosingle-pointfailures,
invariant subspace [19], [20].
scalableimplementation,andpotentiallyloweroperatingcosts
The contributions of this paper are as follows. First, we
when compared with monolithic approaches. Furthermore,
study convergence of the symmetric cyclic control algorithm
multiple robots can together accomplish tasks which may be
to a polygon formation in 3D. Our analysis differs from
impossible or very difficult for any single robot on its own
the analysis in [16] in that it considers a refined notion
[1]–[3].
of the target formation (necessary to properly constrain a
A prototypical problem in this context is decentralized
polygonformation).Ouranalysis(asin[16])leveragespartial
formationcontrol,thatis,theproblemofensuringconvergence
contraction theory and, in addition, yields insights into the
to a desired formation via control algorithms amenable to a
various tuning parameters for the controller and their impact
distributed implementation [4]–[6]. Most existing results con-
on performance metrics such as convergence rate and control
sider two-dimensional formations [7]–[9], however, a number
saturation. Second, we extend the definition of the target
of robotic applications would require three-dimensional (3D)
formation to accommodate combinations of regular polygons
formations. For example, it may be desired to deploy a set
suchasthesetofconvexregularpolyhedraknownasJohnson
of small satellites to surround a larger damaged spacecraft
solids, as well as more general polygonal mesh formations.
to provide complete 3D reconstruction and visualization of
Control laws and sufficient conditions for convergence are
theexternalstructure.Additionalexamplesincludedifferential
derived for these relatively complex polyhedron formations,
atmospheric, deep space, or underwater measurements of en-
paving the way for innovative mission concepts [21]. Third,
vironmental phenomena, and filming sport and entertainment
we provide extensions to the algorithm to control the size of
events [10]–[12].
theformation,andpreventcollisionswithotherrobots.Fourth,
Accordingly, the objective of this paper is to design and
we analyze the robustness properties of the symmetric cyclic
rigorously analyze decentralized control algorithms for 3D
controller under bounded additive disturbances and provide
formations. Our approach leverages the simple, yet effective
performanceboundswithrespecttotheformationerror.These
strategy of cyclic pursuit. Essentially, the cyclic pursuit strat-
resultsprovidetheoreticalinsightsintoexperimentsperformed
egy entails letting each robot i follow its leading neighbor
on board the International Space Station which highlighted
theremarkablerobustnesspropertiesofcycliccontrollers[15].
SumeetSinghandMarcoPavonearewiththeDepartmentofAeronautics
andAstronautics;EdwardSchmerlingiswiththeInstituteforComputational Finally, we present a control hierarchy for implementing the
and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, formationcontrollawsonacomplexdynamicalsystem,inthis
{ssingh19, schmrlng, pavone}@stanford.edu.
case, a fleet of quadcopters.
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbytheStanfordGraduateFellowship(SGF)
andtheKingAbdulazizCityforScienceandTechnology(KACST). The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section II
1v74520.1151:viXra
introduces the mathematical background for contraction and forsystem(1).Third,thematrixM(x,t):=Θ(x,t)T Θ(x,t)
partial contraction theory and circulant matrices which forms is referred to as the contraction metric.
thebasisforallsubsequentanalysis.SectionIIIformalizesthe Wenextdiscusspartialcontractiontheory,whichallowsone
problem, introduces the formation subspace and symmetric toaddressquestionsmoregeneralthantrajectoryconvergence.
cyclic control law, and provides conditions for convergence Consider system (1), and assume there exists a flow-invariant
to a regular polygon. In Section IV, we extend the results linear subspace M ⊂ Rn, i.e., a linear subspace with the
to polyhedral formations. Section V provides extensions to property that, for all t,
the algorithm for controlling formation size and preventing
collisions among the robots. We also assess the robustness
properties of the symmetric cyclic controller under bounded
Assume that the dimension of M is p and let (e ,...,e )
additivedisturbances.InSectionVI,wedemonstratetheappli- be an orthonormal basis of Rn where the first p vec 1 tors for n m
cationofourformationcontrollawsonquadcopters,providing a basis for M. Let U¯ be a p × n matrix whose rows are
verificationviasimulationsandhardwareexperiments.Finally, eT,...,eT. Let V¯ be an (n − p) × n matrix whose rows
in Section VII, we draw our conclusions and provide avenues 1 p
are eT ,...,eT. One can easily verify that matrix V¯ is sub-
for future work. p+1 n
unitaryandsatisfiesthepropertiesV¯TV¯+U¯TU¯ =I ,V¯V¯T =
A preliminary version of this paper appeared as [22]. This n
I , and x∈M if and only if V¯x=0. We will refer to V¯
extended and revised version contains as additional contribu- n−p
as the projection matrix of M. The main theorem in partial
tions: (1) extensions to the control algorithms for forming
contraction theory can be stated as:
more complex polygonal mesh formations, controlling for-
mation size, and avoiding collisions, (2) additional numerical Theorem II.2 (Partial Contraction [20]). Consider a flow-
results, and (3) hardware experimental results on a fleet of invariant linear subspace M and its associated projection
quadcopters. matrix V¯. A particular solution x (t) of system (1) converges
exponentially to M if the auxiliary system
II. MATHEMATICPRELIMINARIES y˙ =V¯f (cid:0) V¯Ty+U¯TU¯x (t),t (cid:1)
A. Notation
iscontractingwithrespecttoy.Ifthisistrueforallparticular
Given a square matrix A, the symmetric part of A, i.e.,
solutions x , all trajectories of system (1) will exponentially
(1/2)(A+AT), is denoted by A . The smallest and largest p
sym converge to M from all initial conditions.
eigenvalues of A are denoted, respectively, by λ (A)
and λ (A). Accordingly, the matrix A is positive definite Combining Theorems and II.1 and II.2, one obtains a
(denoted A (cid:31) 0) if λ (A) > 0, and negative definite powerfultooltoproveconvergencetoadesiredflow-invariant
(denoted A ≺ 0) if λ (A) < 0. Let I denote the k-by- subspace.
k identity matrix. Let A⊗B denote the Kronecker product
Corollary II.3 (Convergence to Flow-invariant Subspace
between matrices A and B. The null space of a matrix A
[20]). A sufficient condition for global exponential conver-
is denoted by N(A). Finally, the set of eigenvalues of A is
gence to M is
denoted by λ(A).
V¯ V¯T ≺0, uniformly.
B. Contraction and Partial Contraction Theory
Inthispaper,thesubspaceMwillrepresentadesiredrobot
This section reviews basic results in nonlinear contraction
formation.
theory [17], [23]. The basic stability result in contraction
theory reads as follows. Remark II.4 (Non-orthonormal V). Note that the applica-
tion of partial contraction theory requires the rows of the
Theorem II.1 (Contraction [17]). Consider a general system
projection matrix V¯ to be orthonormal. However, the ma-
of the form
trix V characterizing a subspace M may not be row-wise
orthonormal, e.g., when it is obtained by combining a set of
where x is the n×1 state vector and f is a n×1 nonlin- linearly independent equations. Nonetheless, as long as the
ear, continuously differentiable vector function with Jacobian equations are independent, the matrix V will be full row rank
∂f/∂x. If there exists a square matrix Θ(x,t) such that and can be transformed via an invertible matrix T into an
Θ(x,t)T Θ(x,t) is uniformly positive definite and the matrix orthonormal counterpart V¯ which satisfies (1) V = T V¯, (2)
V¯x = 0 ⇔ x ∈ M, and (3) V¯ ∂f V¯T ≺ 0 ⇔ V ∂f VT ≺ 0
(cid:18) ∂f (cid:19) ∂x ∂x
is uniformly negative definite, then all system trajectories C. Circulant and Block-Circulant Rotational Matrices
converge exponentially to a single trajectory. In this case, the
A circulant matrix of order n is a square matrix with the
system is said to be contracting.
following structure:
A few remarks are in order. First, a matrix Θ(x,t) is
uniformly positive definite if there exists β > 0 such that 1 2 n
∀(x,t), λ (Θ(x,t))≥β,andisuniformlynegativedefinite  n 1 n−1
min C = . . . . (2)
if there exists β >0 such that ∀(x,t), λ max (Θ(x,t))≤−β.  . . . . . . 
Second,thematrixF isreferredtoasthegeneralizedJacobian c c ··· c
The elements of each row are identical to the row above, but via a coordinate transformation). We encode such a formation
shifted one position to the right and wrapped around. Thus, a via the subspace:
circulant matrix can be compactly denoted as:
M ={x∈R3n :
C =circ[c 1 c 2 ... c n ]. (x i+1 −x i )=R 2π/n (x i+2 −x i+1 ),i=1,...,n−2, (4a)
A useful circulant matrix with dimensions n × n used in eT z (x n −x n−1 )=eT z (x 1 −x n )}, (4b)
this paper is defined below, parametrized by the integer
wheretheindicesareconsideredmodulon,andR denotes
a counterclockwise rotation around e . The n−2 constraints
L :=circ[1,0,...,0, −1 ,0,...,0]. in (4a) will be referred to as rotational constraints while the
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) single constraint in (4b) will be referred to as the in-plane
(m+1)stelement
constraint. The in-plane constraint, not considered in [16], is
needed in order to ensure that all robots lie in the same plane
D. Kronecker Product (which is not ensured by the rotational constraints alone as
LetAandBbematricesofsizem×nandp×qrespectively. they permit spiral formations). The following lemma shows
The Kronecker product of A and B is defined as: that the constraints (4a) and (4b) are indeed necessary and
sufficient for the definition of a regular polygon.
a B ··· a B
A⊗B = . . . . , Lemma III.1 (Polygon Constraints). The set of constraints
 . .  (4a) and (4b) are necessary and sufficient for the definition of
a m1 B ··· a mn B a regular polygon with normal direction e z .
where A⊗B has dimensions mp×nq. If λ is an eigenvalue RemarkIII.2(PolygonDegreesofFreedom). Theconstraints
of A with eigenvector v , and similarly λ and v are an (4a)and(4b)togetherformasetof3n−5linearlyindependent
eigenvalue and eigenvector pair for B then the corresponding equations in 3n variables. The five missing equations corre-
eigenvalueandeigenvectorpairforA⊗B isλ λ andv ⊗ spond to five distinct degrees of freedom: three in translation,
v . We also note the following identity: (A⊗B)(C⊗D)= one in scaling, and one in in-plane rotation. That is, the
AC⊗BD,whereA,B,C andD havecompatibledimensions polygon may be translated anywhere in space, scaled in size,
in order for the products AC and BD to be well defined. or rotated within the desired plane about the plane normal.
In the following, we will denote by C the set of block-
L⊗R Both(4a)and(4b)canbecompactlyrepresentedasthenull
circulant matrices that can be written as L⊗R , where L is
β space of a certain matrix, as shown in the following lemma.
a circulant matrix and R is a rotation matrix about the axis
e := (0,0,1)T with rotation angle β. From the properties Lemma III.3 (Compact Constraints). Let W :=
of the Kronecker product, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors [I ,0 ] and W := [0 ,1,0]. Define
of a matrix in C are given, respectively, by the product the 3(n−2)+1×3n matrix
of eigenvalues and Kronecker product of eigenvectors of the (cid:20) (cid:21)
circulant matrix L and the rotation matrix R
pn z (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) :=Pn∈CL⊗R
III. SYMMETRICPLANARFORMATIONS :=Wn
A. Problem Setup Then the rotational and in-plane constraints in equation (4a)
and (4b) are equivalent to the equation Vx=0.
Consider n ≥ 3 mobile robots (uniquely labelled by an
integeri∈{1,...,n}).Denotethepositionofrobotiattimet Note that W
captures the rotational constraints, while
(t),wherex
(t)∈R3.Theoverallstatevectorisdenoted W
captures the in-plane constraint. The subspace M
by x = (xT,xT,...,xT)T. The dynamics of each robot are then be characterized as the null space of matrix V, i.e.,
given by V x=0⇔x∈M n .
x˙ =g (x)+u (x,t), (3) Our standing assumption throughout this paper is that the
robots’ internal dynamics, i.e., g(x), are flow-invariant with
where u i is the control action. It is desired to design the respect to M n :
control actions so that (a) they drive the global state vector x
to a desired symmetric formation, and (b) they are amenable Assumption 1 (Flow-invariance). The internal dynamics are
flow-invariantwithrespecttothedesiredformation,thatisfor
to a decentralized implementation. As in [16], our strategy is
all x∈M one has Vg(x)=0.
to “encode” a symmetric formation as a formation subspace n
as discussed next. The proofs for all theorems and lemmas
introduced in this section are provided in the appendix. C. Symmetric Cyclic Controller
We consider the class of symmetric cyclic controllers pro-
posed in [16] (in turn generalizing the pursuit controllers
B. Formation Subspace
introduced in [14]):
In this section we consider regular polygons in 3D as
desired symmetric formations – the extension to non-planar u = (cid:88) N k (cid:2) R (x −x )+RT(x −x ) (cid:3) , (6)
formations (which represents the main contribution of this i m m i+m i m i−m i
paper)isdiscussedinSectionIV.Considerthecasewherethe m=1
direction normal to the desired formation polygon is aligned whereN isthelook-aheadhorizon(0<N <n−1),k >0
withthevectore (thegeneralcasecanbereducedtothiscase isagain,R isarotationmatrixarounde withrotationangle
α , and (x −x ) and (x −x ) denote the relative Theorem III.5 (Polygon Convergence). Assume
m i+m i i−m i
coordinates among robot i and its i+m and i−m neighbors,
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19) N (cid:19)
w th h e e c re on m tro = l l { a 1 w ,. i . s ., s N pa } tia a l n ly d -d su e m ce m nt a r t a i l o iz n e i d s , m a o s d e u a l c o h n r . o N b o o t t e o t n h l a y t s x u , p t λ max P n∂ ∂ x g P n T − 1 m ≤i i ≤ n n (cid:88) k m λ( ik m) <0, (9)
requiresrelativepositioninformationfromasetofneighboring
robots. where
Then, the symmetric cyclic controller can be written in (cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)
2 2πm(i−1)
compact form as λ( ik m) = 2π(2(i−1)+k)j cos(kα m )− cos kα m + n
u=− (cid:88) N k [L ⊗R +LT ⊗RT]x (cid:20)(cid:18) e 2π(i− n 1+k)j −1 (cid:19)(cid:18) e 2π(i n −1)j −1 (cid:19)(cid:21)2 .
Then the robots governed by system (3) under the symmetric
(cid:88) cyclic controller (6) globally converge to a regular polygon
m m formation, i.e., to the formation subspace M .
Note that due to the necessary inclusion of the in-plane
where L := L ⊗ R + LT ⊗ RT ∈ C and
m m m m m L⊗R constraint, the eigenvalues in Theorem III.5 differ from those
L:= (cid:80) k L . In order to apply partial contraction theory, in [16].
the control law needs to be flow-invariant (note that, by Remark III.6 (Formations of Fixed Size). Theorem III.5
Assumption 1, the internal dynamics are flow invariant). The provides a sufficient condition to ensure that the robots con-
next lemma shows that this is indeed the case. verge to a regular polygon formation. Note that depending on
the internal dynamics g(x) and the rotation angle α , the
Lemma III.4 (Flow-invariance). Subspace M is flow-
n polygon formation will be contracting, expanding, or of fixed
invariantwithrespecttothesymmetriccycliccontrollawgiven
size. For instance, if g(x) = 0, by setting α < mπ/n the
in equation (7).
polygon formation will contract towards a point; by setting
α >mπ/n the polygon formation will expand as the robots
Wearenowinapositiontoapplypartialcontractiontheory m
travel along rays emanating from the center of mass of the
to show that, under some assumptions, the symmetric cyclic
formation; by setting α = mπ/n the polygon formation
controller drives the system to the desired formation subspace m
will be of fixed size, where the size depends on the initial
M .
conditions. The freedom in scaling the formation will be
As the encoded constraints are linearly independent, V is
utilized later to control the formation size.
full row rank, guaranteeing the existence of an orthonormal
counterpart V¯ (see Remark II.4). In the following, to prove Foragivennumberofrobots,theprimarydesignparameters
c u o si n n v g er V¯ ge . n L c e e t t U¯ o b M ea n , m w a e tri w x i w ll h a o p s p e ly ro p w a s rt r i e a p l r c e o s n en tr t a a c n tio o n rth th o e n o o r r y - i l n oo t k h - e a s h y e m ad m h e o tr r i i c zo c n yc N lic .I c t o i n s tr c o le ll a e r r t i h n a c t lu in d c e re th a e si g n a g in th s e k g m ai a n n s d u t n h i e -
mal basis for the orthogonal complement of the subspace formlyscalesalleigenvaluesoftheprojectedJacobian,thereby
defined by the rows of V¯. According to Theorem II.2, we increasing the exponential convergence rate. However, this is
want to show that for system attheexpenseofamoreaggressivecontrollerwhichincreases
the risk of control saturation. On the other hand, increasing
the look-ahead horizon, while imposing greater information
requirements for each robot, also increases the convergence
the associated auxiliary system
rate but at a lower risk of control saturation. This is due
(cid:18) (cid:19)
to the fact that the symmetric cyclic controller leverages the
p p degree of asymmetry at each node of the polygon. Increasing
the look-ahead horizon therefore improves the “estimate” of
is contracting. Note that by Assumption 1 and Lemma III.4 thisasymmetry,ratherthansimplymagnifyingthecontrollaw
the closed-loop dynamics are invariant with respect to M n . by increasing the gain. This intuition is exemplified by the
Then, according to Corollary II.3, one requires following simulation.
(cid:18) (cid:19) For simplicity, we assume that the internal dynamics g(x)
V¯ −L V¯T ≺0, uniformly. are zero. In order to compare the control signals due to
varying choices in gains and look-ahead, we maintain the
By Remark II.4, since V and V¯ are related by an invertible same lower bound on the closed-loop convergence rate, i.e.,
(cid:0) V¯LV¯(cid:1)
. Figure 1 shows the Euclidean norm of the net
transformation, the above stability requirement can be re- min
controlsignal,i.e.,(cid:107)Lx(t)(cid:107) forsixrobotsstartingatthesame
formulated in terms of V directly. By factoring V as W P 2
initialconditions.ThecontrolsignalinFigure1ademonstrates
(see equation (5)) one obtains the condition
a significantly lower peak value than the signal in Figure 1b
(cid:18) (cid:19)
∂g despite the fact that the two closed-loop systems possess the
W P −L PTWT ≺0, uniformly. (8)
n n ∂x n n same lower on bound on convergence rate.
Performinganeigenvalueanalysisof(8)yieldsthemainresult Remark III.7 (General Plane of Convergence). For polygons
not orthogonal to e , one can use a similarity transformed
of this section. The details of the proof are provided in the z
versionofthecontrolrotationmatrixR toobtainanalogous
appendix. m
convergence results. Let RTe be the desired polygon normal
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
(a) Control norm with N = 2,
k =2.
(b) Control norm with N = 1,
k =6.928.
(a)Partialpolyhedralsurfaceofa (b) Complete polyhedral surface
Fig. 1: Comparison of control effort with varying gains and cube. of a cube.
look-ahead horizon.
Fig. 2: Partial and complete representations of a bounded
polyhedron (cube) with same vertex set.
where R is an arbitrary rotation matrix. Define R :=
R η TR m R η to be the similarity transform of R m . We now face of F can be described by a set of linearly independent
replaceR intheindividualcontrollawgivenin(6)byR ,
m ms constraints on its vertices. When considering these faces in
and the expression in (7) becomes:
combination, we must ensure that the full set of constraints
N (i.e., due to all faces in F) remain linearly independent.
u=−(I ⊗RT) k L (I ⊗R )x This motivates the search for a PPS representation of the
n η m m n η
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)m=1 (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) polyhedronthatisminimalinthesensethatitdoesnotinduce
:=RT η :=Rη (10) redundant constraints yet still retains enough information to
N fix the positions of each vertex (robot). We note that this
=− k L x=−L x, reduced set of linear constraints for the PPS will retain the
m=1 translational and scaling degrees of freedom associated with
the PPS’s constituent polygons (see Remark III.2). Thus all
where L := RTL R and L := (cid:80) k L . The further discussion of the terms “face” or “polygon” in this
m=1 sectionwillimplicitlyassumetranslationandscaleinvariance.
expression for the projection matrix V becomes:
In the following subsection, we show that a suitable minimal
V =W P R . (11) PPS representation can always be constructed for any given
convex polyhedron.
The convergence analysis under control law (10) is virtually
identical to the one provided above for the case where the
polygon is orthogonal to e . The generalized control law (10) A. Formulation of a Minimal Partial Polyhedral Surface
will be leveraged in Section IV to design control laws for
We first introduce some terminology (adapted from [24]):
polyhedral formations.
Definition IV.2 (Development of a Polyhedral Surface [24]).
IV. POLYHEDRALFORMATIONS A development D is defined as the tuple (Q,R) where Q is
a set of polygons as defined in Section III and R is a set of
In this section we extend the results of Section III to
rules that identify common edges between polygons. The sets
polyhedral formations. Specifically, we first focus on convex
Q and R satisfy the following properties:
polyhedra having regular faces and equal edge lengths, re-
ferredtoasJohnsonsolids.Generalizationstootherpolygonal 1) For every pair of adjacent polygons Q i ,Q j ∈ Q, there
mesh formations are discussed at the end of this section. is a rule r ij ∈ R which encompasses two pieces of
information, namely, it identifies (a) the two shared
Definition IV.1 (Convex Polyhedral Solid and Polyhedral
vertices between the two polygons, and (b) the dihedral
Surface). A convex solid polyhedron, or simply polyhedron,
angle formed between the planes of the two polygons.
is defined as a body bounded by a finite number of polygons
2) It is possible to create a path between any two polygons
such that it lies on one side of the plane of each polygon.
in the collection by following the common edges (i.e., a
Equivalently, it is the convex hull of the polygon vertices. A
development cannot be split into disconnected parts).
complete polyhedral surface is the set of bounding faces for
3) Each side of every polygon is either matched with no
a polyhedron. A partial polyhedral surface (PPS) is a subset
edge of any other polygon, or with exactly one edge of
of the faces of a complete polyhedral surface.
another polygon in the collection.
Figure 2 illustrates the distinction between a complete and
Every development defines a unique (complete or partial)
partial surface of a convex solid in the definition above. In
polyhedral surface F, but multiple developments may corre-
Figure 2a, only a portion of the surface of the Johnson solid
spond to the same surface. The surface in Figure 2a corre-
(cube) is specified, and thus the PPS formed by the faces
sponds to a development with three squares, while the surface
in Figure 2a contains un-matched edges. The set of these
in Figure 2b corresponds to a development with six squares
unmatched edges (shown in dashed form in Figure 2a) is
(this development is commonly referred to as the polyhedral
termed the boundary of the PPS. The complete polyhedral
net[25]).Ourgoalistobeabletousethedevelopmentforthe
surface displayed in Figure 2b encompasses the entire surface
PPS in Figure 2a as a viable representation of the complete
of the solid cube.
polyhedral surface in Figure 2b by leveraging the following
ConsidernowapolyhedronP withcompletepolyhedralsur-
result:
face F. As an extension to the discussion in Section III, each
Lemma IV.3 (Completion of a Polyhedral Surface [24]).
EveryboundedconvexPPSF(cid:48) givesrisetoauniquecomplete
polyhedral surface F without adding new vertices. If A(cid:48)
denotes the set of vertices for F(cid:48), then the completion F is
given by the surface of the convex hull of A(cid:48).
We are now ready to present the first step in constructing
a PPS representation of a complete polyhedral surface where
the set of linear constraints induced by the faces of the PPS
are linearly independent.
Lemma IV.4 (Minimal Development). Let F be a complete
polyhedralsurfaceandletAdenoteitssetofvertices.Suppose
Fig. 3: Indexing of robots for a general polyhedron.
D =(Q,R)isadevelopmentforF.Chooseasetofpolygons
Q(cid:48) ⊂Q that satisfies the following properties:
For each Q
∈Q, define the matrix E¯(k) ∈R|Vk|×n as
1) Tree: Within the dual graph of F, the subgraph induced (cid:40)
by Q(cid:48) is a tree, [E¯(k)] = 1 if j k =i, (12)
2) Vertexspan:ThesetofverticesspannedbyQ(cid:48)isidentical ij 0 otherwise.
to the set of vertices spanned by Q.
Thus [E¯(k)] equals one if robot j’s index within face k is
GivenQ(cid:48)satisfyingthepropertiesabove,wenowconstructthe
equal to i. D
efine x(k) ∈ R3|Vk| to be the positions of the
set of rules R(cid:48) ⊂ R corresponding to the polygons selected
robots in face Q . Using (12), we may write x(k) as
in Q(cid:48): k
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Then, the tuple D(cid:48) := (Q(cid:48),R(cid:48)) is a well-posed development where x ∈ R3n is the global state vector, and E(k) :=
(essentially a spanning tree of the graph D) and therefore E¯(k)⊗I 3 . As a direct extension of Section III-B, the face Q k
defines a PPS F(cid:48). Furthermore, the completion of F(cid:48) is the (by assumption a regular polygon) is defined as the subspace
original surface F. M(k) as follows:
Proof. Properties 1) and 3) of Definition IV.2 hold for Q(cid:48),R(cid:48) M(k) ={x(k) ∈R3|Vk| :
by construction. Property 2) holds because the ‘tree’ assump-
tion for Q(cid:48) ensures that there exists a path between any two R ηk (x( i+ k) 1 −x( i k))=R 2π/n R ηk (x( i+ k) 2 −x( i+ k) 1 ), (14a)
polygonsinQ(cid:48) byfollowingcommonedges.ThusD(cid:48) iswell- i=1,...,|V |−2,
defined and therefore describes a PPS F(cid:48).
The ‘vertex span’ assumption ensures that the convex hulls z ηk |Vk| |Vk|−1 z ηk 1 |Vk|
oftheverticesofF andF(cid:48) areidentical.SinceF,acomplete whereR isarotationmatrixdefinedsuchthatRT e =n .
polyhedral surface, is the surface of this convex hull, by ηk ηk z k
The desired Johnson polyhedral formation is the convex hull
Lemma IV.3 the completion of F(cid:48) is F.
ofavertexsetwhichcanberepresentedasasubspaceM ⊂
R3n defined by the polygonal constraints that stem from each
The key message of Lemma IV.4 is that a PPS is sufficient face in Q, that is
todescribeapolyhedron(i.e.,thedesiredformation)provided
that it encompasses all vertices of the polyhedron and its M n = (cid:92) M( |V k k ) | . (15)
faces are connected. More precisely, each face within the k:Qk∈Q
PPS defines a set of linear constraints on its vertices, the By Lemma III.3, the constraints in (14a) and (14b) can be
combination of which completely determine the convex hull compactlyrepresentedasthenullspaceofa3(|V |−2)+1×
matching the desired formation. The further restriction that 3n matrix, denoted by V(cid:101)(k). In other words, x ∈ M(k) ⇔
the faces induce a tree graph is an important step, as shown |Vk|
next,towardsensuringthatthecombinedlinearconstraintsare V(cid:101)(k)x=0. Using (11) and (13), one can write V(cid:101)(k) as
t.
.
V(cid:101) (k) =W
E(k). (16)
DenoteL:=|Q|,thenumberofpolygonsinF.Wenowmake Thus, the subspace M n in (15) may be equivalently re-stated
explicit the notion of rules of a development. as the intersection of null spaces:
Let Q denotethe kth polygonin Q. EachQ isassociated (cid:92)
tofrobotsV ,andaunitoutwardnorma
ln (pointing
outward from the interior of the polyhedron). The number of k:Qk∈Q
robots n is equal to the number of vertices in the polyhedron Note that the rules R are implicitly encoded in the indexing
andeachrobotisuniquelyassociatedwithavertex.Eachface used to write down the constraint matrices V(cid:101)(k) and their
induces a counterclockwise (with respect to n ) sub-indexing nullspace intersection. Given our representation of the PPS
of the robots, specifically, let i denote the index of robot i in in terms of the set Q, we can now combine (15) and (16) to
face k, where i=1,...,n and k =1,...,L, see Figure 3. If form the global constraint matrix V(cid:101):
robot i does not belong to face k, then we use the convention
(cid:104) (cid:105)T
The global formation subspace M is then defined to be the does not belong to any previous constraints in V(1) or V(2).
null space of V(cid:101), i.e., Thein-planeconstraintforV(2) furtherreducesthedimension
of the solution set by constraining the rotational degree of
x∈M n ⇔V(cid:101)x=0. freedom for Q 1 : there is only one orientation of Q 1 (up to
reflection, i.e. negative scaling) under which the edge shared
Asconstructed,V(cid:101) isnotyetfullrowrank.Ageometricexpla-
bythetwofacesisorthogonalton .Thereforeallconstraints
nation for this linear dependence is that once the orientations 2
in [V(2)] are independent.
of two adjacent PPS faces are fixed, the in-plane rotational
Inductive Hypothesis: Assume that the set of equations
degreesoffreedomfortheremainingfacesvanish.Thisnotion
is formalized in the following (relatively straightforward)
[V(cid:101)(k)]x = 0 and [V(k)]x = 0 are equivalent and that [V(k)]
is full row rank.
corollary of Lemma III.1, the proof of which is provided in
the appendix. We now prove that [V(cid:101)(k+1)]x = 0 and [V(k+1)]x = 0 are
also equivalent and that [V(k+1)] is full row rank. The induc-
Corollary IV.5 (Reduced Polygon Constraints). Assume two tivehypothesis[V(k)]x=0encodesruleswhichassemblethe
neighboring robots j and j+1 of face Q k are constrained to faces of Q k (which form a tree by the ordering assumption)
lie in a plane normal to n k , where the indices {j,j +1} ∈ intoauniquePPS.Now,fromourorderingassumption,Q k+1
{1,...,|V k |}aremodulo|V k |.Thentherotationalconstraints mustshareexactlyoneedge(i.e.,exactly2robots)withaface
given in (14a) are necessary and sufficient for the definition within Q , and that the edge must lie in a plane normal to
of a regular polygon with normal direction n k . n k+1 .ThetreestructureofQ k preventsanyadditionalshared
edges.FromCorollaryIV.5,therotationalconstraintsencoded
Since stability analysis using partial contraction is contin-
in V(k+1) are indeed sufficient to fully constrain Q . Thus,
gent upon a full row rank constraint matrix, we present a re- k+1
ductionofV(cid:101) thatdiscardsredundantconstraints.Considerthe [V(k+1)]x=0 and [V(cid:101)(k+1)]x=0 are equivalent.
following reduced constraint matrix V with similar structural To see that [V(k+1)] is full row rank, we note that each
properties as V(cid:101): successiverotationalconstraintwithinV(k+1) involvesatleast
one robot not represented by any of the existing constraints
(cid:105)T
within[V(k)]orV(k+1).Then,bysimilarreasoningasforthe
base case, all constraints in [V(k+1)] are independent.
V(cid:101)(k) if k =1,2, By induction, both claims are proven.
(W ⊗I )P R E(k) k =3,...,L,
Remark IV.7 (Polyhedron Degrees of Freedom). Note that
where, as defined in Lemma III.3, W r|Vk| =
V has a total of
(cid:80) L
linearly independent
[I ,0 ]. That is, in-plane constraints have k
been removed from all but two (adjacent) faces within Q, (cid:18) L (cid:19)
specifically, Q 1 and Q 2 . The following lemma shows that the equations for a total of 3 |V k |−6L+6 variables.
reduced constraints that stem from (19) are equivalent to the k=1
Threedegreesoffreedomcorrespondtothethreetranslational
original set of constraints using V(cid:101)(k), and that the resulting
degrees of freedom. The final degree of freedom corresponds
global constraint matrix V is full row rank. to scaling the polyhedron by some constant α ∈ R. Applying
Lemma IV.6 (Minimal Representation of V). Denote the set a negative scaling factor may be interpreted as inverting the
ofequationsV(cid:101)(k)x=0whereV(cid:101)(k) hastheformgivenin(16) entire formation.
for k = 1,...,L as the full-constraint set. Similarly, denote
thesetofequationsV(k)x=0whereV(k) hastheformgiven
in(19)asthereduced-constraintset.Then,thesolutionstothe B. Polyhedral Formation Control Law
two sets of equations are identical. That is,
Havingcharacterizedthedesiredformationasthenullspace
x∈M ⇔Vx=0. of a full row rank matrix, we turn our attention to the control
laws. The control law for each robot is given by the sum
Furthermore, V is full row rank. of a number of contributions, one for each face in which
the robot represents a vertex. Specifically, let u(k) denote
Proof. We assume without loss of generality that the faces i
Q (and thus the corresponding constraint matrices V(k)) the contribution to the control law for robot i due to face
k, obtained by generalizing the symmetric cyclic controller
are ordered so that for any j = 1,...,L all faces Q
presented in Section III-C, namely:
along the unique path between Q and Q satisfy i ≤ j.
Let Q = {Q ,...,Q } denote a partial list of faces,
ined by th
f equations [V(k)]x = 0, where u(k)= (cid:88)
(cid:105)T
, k ≤ L. Similarly, let
m ms i+m i ms i−m i
(cid:104) (cid:105)T
[V(cid:101)(k)]= V(cid:101)(1)T ··· V(cid:101)(k)T . We proceed by induction. where N k < |V k | − 1 is the look-ahead horizon for face
Basecasek =2:ItisclearthatN (cid:0) [V(2)] (cid:1) =N([V(cid:101)(2)])as k, k m (k) > 0 is a gain, R m (k s ) = R η T k R m (k)R ηk with R m (k) =
[V(2)] = [V(cid:101)(2)]. To see that [V(2)] is full row rank, we note R mπ/|Vk| , and x( i+ k) m and x( i− k) m are neighboring robots within
that V(1) is full row rank (Lemma III.1) and each successive facek(modulo|V |).ThechoiceR(k) =R stemsfrom
rotationalconstraintwithinV(2) (countingaroundthepolygon therequirementthatrobotsconvergetoapolygonoffixedsize
starting from the shared edge) involves at least one robot that within each face (see Remark III.6).
Thenetcontrolforeachrobotisthengivenbythesuperpo- (9), required for convergence to a single regular polygon. In
sition of the contributions from each face in which the robot particular, we now have the addition of cross-terms in the
is a vertex, i.e., projectedJacobianduetotheinteractionsbetweenthevarious
faces. Additionally, when working with the auxiliary system,
u = (cid:88) u(k), i=1,...,n. (21) we did not leverage the results of flow-invariant subspaces
i i as they were introduced in Section III. This is because if the
k:ik(cid:54)=∞
globalstatevectorxconvergestooneofthesubspacesdefined
The control laws in (20) and (21) highlight the information byV(k),thentheglobaldynamicswillnotnecessarilybeflow-
requirements for each robot in the formation. In particular, invariant with respect to the given face or any other faces in
we assume that each robot knows: (a) what face(s) it belongs M . This is due to two reasons: (a) only the rotational set
to, (b) relative position with respect to its forward and rear of constraints are used to define faces other than the ones
neighbors within each face, (c) the number of robots in these indexed by k = 1 and k = 2, which we know are insufficient
faces, and (d) the rotation matrix R η that accompanies the ontheirowntodescribearegularplanarpolygon,and(b)the
relative position measurements. In a scenario where there symmetric cyclic control law for each robot as defined in (21)
are a large number of robots in the overall formation, these introducescouplingbetweenvariousfaces.Thus,convergence
information requirements are fairly minimal, emphasizing the is predicated on the decay of the symmetric cyclic controller
decentralized framework that underpins this work. to zero for all faces.
Using (20) and (10), the overall control vector stemming
Figure 4 shows simulation results demonstrating conver-
from face k is given by
gence to example 3D formations.
where L(k) = RT L(k)R and L(k) = L ⊗R(k)+LT ⊗
mη ηk m ηk m m m m
. The overall closed-loop dynamics are then given by
For simplicity, we are considering zero internal dynamics. A
sufficient condition for convergence to the desired formation,
i.e.,tothesubspaceM n ,isprovidedbythefollowingtheorem. (a) Hexagonal Box (12 robots) (b) Octahedron (6 robots)
Theorem IV.8 (Polyhedron Convergence). Assume Fig. 4: Convergence to polyhedra. Faces with bold edges
correspond to the set Q.
(cid:20) (cid:18) L (cid:19) (cid:21)
Remark IV.10 (Nonsymmetric Tree-Based Formations).
Lemma IV.4 sets forth the essential properties of polyhedral
Then, the closed-loop dynamics (22) globally converge to a
surface developments required for the preceding control law
Johnson polyhedral formation, i.e., to the formation subspace
and convergence analysis to apply. That is, viable targets un-
M .
n der this theory consist of any formation of robots expressable
Proof. Let V¯ represent the orthonormal counterpart of V, astheverticesofspatially-orientedregularpolygonsarranged
whose existence is guaranteed given the results of Lemma according to a tree structure. Johnson solid formations are
IV.6.First,weneedtoshowthatthedynamicsin(22)areflow a particularly motivating example, given their symmetry, but
invariant. Indeed, as an immediate consequence of Remark othergridandmeshformationsarealsopossible.Forinstance,
III.6 and the fact that the rotation angle is set equal to Figure 5 illustrates an example where a curved dome is
mπ/|V |, one has represented by the vertices of a tree of squares (Q), and the
symmetric cyclic controller is defined and assembled using
x∈M ⇒u(k)(x)=0, for all k =1,...,L, (24)
n equations(20)and(21).Notethatalthoughthereare20robots
andhencex∈M ⇒V¯u=0,i.e.,thedynamicsin(22)are in this formation, each robot only requires relative position
flow invariant. measurementswithrespecttothreeotherrobots(therobotsin
Consider, then, the following auxiliary system for (22): the top square require relative measurements with respect to
fourotherrobots)inthegroup.Thus,inadditiontohighlight-
y˙ =V¯ (cid:32) (cid:88) L −E(k)T L(k)E(k)(cid:0) V¯Ty+U¯TU¯x (cid:1) (cid:33) . ing the applicability of our approach to the formation control
η p of nonsymmetric formations, this example also underlines the
k=1 sparsity of the decentralized formation control laws.
Since the dynamics are flow invariant, and an invertible
transformation exists between V and V¯, then by Remark II.4 In future work, we intend to investigate strategies for
accommodating local robot failures. For instance, in the reg-
and by applying Corollary II.3, one obtains the claim.
ular polygon case, a single point of failure simply requires
the robots to reinitialize their indices within the group and
RemarkIV.9(ConditionsforPolyhedronConvergence). Note subsequentlyconvergetoasmallerpolygon.Inthepolyhedron
thattheconditiongivenin(23)ismarkedlymorecomplexthan case this can be problematic if the failed robot is coupled
to the symmetric cyclic control law introduced in (6), now
expressed as a hybrid dynamical system:
i m m i+m i m i−m i
where R (x) is a rotation matrix around e with rotation
(a) Dome shape formed by the (b) Tree of polygons (squares) Q α s0 ∈R >0 is a s gain, and τ ∈ s R >0 is a s c 0 on s stant time lag.
convex hull of the robots. used to derive the formation con- In equation (25) the rotation angle has been modified
trol laws. equallyforallrobotsbytheamountα ,whichisafunctionof
theaverageinter-robotdistanceerrorp¯.Thetimelagparameter
Fig.5:Dome-shapedformationwith20robots.Theformation
τ accounts for the finite time required to compute p¯, e.g.,
may be extended to collectively film sports or entertainment
by using discrete average consensus techniques [26]. That
events.
is, the angle α used in the time interval [kτ,(k + 1)τ) is
computed using the average inter-robot distance error at time
to multiple faces. In this scenario, a global restart may be
(k−1)τ.Tosimplifynotation,wewilluse(x,τ)toreference
required with a new configuration that fits the reduced set of
the continuous/discrete hybrid dynamics expressed in (25).
robots.
Astherotationanglemodificationisthesameforallrobots,
the net control law can still be expressed using circulant
matrices:
V. EXTENSIONS
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
In this section we present a number of extensions to the m=1 :=Lm(x,τ)
symmetric cyclic controller discussed in Sections III and IV. (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
In Subsection V-A, we provide extensions to control the
formation size, and investigate convergence properties under
To analyze convergence to the desired formation, first define
delays. Subsection V-B details a heuristic control law for
M to be a subset of the original invariant subspace M ,
preventingcollisionsthroughuseofRepulsivePotentialFunc-
correspondingtothespaceofregularpolygonformationswith
tions. Finally, in Subsection V-C, we study the disturbance
inter-robot neighbor distance equal to ρ. Thus,
rejection properties of the symmetric cyclic controller given
in (7) with respect to bounded additive disturbances. M nρ ={x:x∈M n ∧(cid:107)x i+1 −x i (cid:107)=ρ,∀i}. (27)
To prove convergence to this subspace, we first start with a
lemmatoprovethatthesubspaceM isindeedflow-invariant
with respect to (26).
A. Control Over Formation Size
Lemma V.1 (Flow-invariance). The subspace M is flow-
We first address control over the size of a regular polygon invariant with respect to the dynamics given in (26).
formation. By setting α = mπ/n in (6), the formation
m Proof. Given that the symmetric cyclic controller can still be
converges to a regular polygon of fixed, but uncontrolled size
expressedusingcirculantmatricesasin(26),byLemmaIII.4,
(in particular, the size depends on the initial conditions). In
the claim follows.
[16],theauthorsintroduceanadditionaltermto(6)tocontrol
the size of the formation, however, the auxiliary system used Having shown that M (which contains M ) is flow-
to study convergence using partial contraction does not admit invariant with respect to our modified dynamics, we now
the necessary stationary zero solution. We present a different present sufficient conditions to ensure that x converges to the
approachtothesizecontrolproblembysimplymodifyingthe manifold M . The proof for the following theorem relies on
rotation angle α embedded within the cyclic controller. severalintermediateresultswhicharedetailedintheappendix.
Let ρ be the desired polygon side-length for the formation
Theorem V.2 (Polygon Convergence with Desired Size). Let
and define p (x):=1−(cid:107)x −x (cid:107)/ρ to be the normalized
i i+1 i C =2Γ, where
error in the inter-robot distance between robots i and i+1,
(cid:112)
.
:
.
such that f(cid:48)(0) > a. The last (technical) property is required Assume
to ensure sufficient control authority near p¯= 0 and will be (cid:18) N (cid:19)
formalized in Theorem V.2. Some examples for f include inf min (cid:88) k λ(m) >0,
the hyperbolic tangent function, or the saturation function αm∈[mπ/n−αs0 ,mπ/n+αs0 ]
(|f s (p i )|=min{|p i |,1}).Considerthefollowingmodification (28)
where λ(m) has the form given in Theorem III.5, and suppose and equals zero for d > r , where d = (cid:107)x −x (cid:107) and
ik ij 2 ij j i
the time lag parameter τ satisfies the following bound: v(r ,r ) := 2(r −r )log(r −r )−r is a constant. The
1 2 2 1 1 2 1
(cid:26) (cid:27) normalized force magnitude can be derived from the RPF by
τ <min , , (29) taking the derivative with respect to d giving:
undefined if d ≤r ,
.
Then the robo
ts converge to a regular polygon with the
0 ij ij 1
if d >r .
desired side-length ρ. That is, x converges to the manifold
M nρ . Notice that both V ij and f cij asymptotically approach +∞
as d → r , and are C1 continuous for d > r . We now
Remark V.3 (Time Lag Bound). Note that the bound for the
formulate the collision avoidance controller for robot i as
time lag parameter τ given in (29) can be relaxed by using
follows:
a value for Γ that is strictly smaller than the one given in n
Theorem V.2. The derivation of this relaxed bound is detailed u colli =− f cij (d ij )(x j −x i ). (32)
in the appendix. j(cid:54)=i
Remark V.4 (Control Over Formation Center). The control Thusthecollisionavoidancecontrolleraddsanon-zero(flow-
laws may be trivially extended to also permit control over invariantwithrespecttoM )“escape”velocitytotheexisting
the geometric center of the formation. For instance, let x symmetric cyclic controller for robot i if and only if there
represent the desired center and let x := (1/n) (cid:80)n x existsanotherrobotjwithintheithrobot’scollisionavoidance
be the instantaneous geometric center. In similar spirit to the zone.
continuous/discrete dynamics in (25), the center control law Notice that f
is unbounded as d
which makes
u for robot i may be expressed as: convergence analysis with respect to the subspace M in-
tractable. In particular, it becomes difficult to upper bound
c c c 0 the maximum eigenvalue of the Jacobian of the collision
where k ∈ R is a gain and the time lag parameter avoidancecontroller.Inlieuofthisanalysis,wepresentMonte
τ accounts for the finite time required to compute x in Carlo simulation results in Section VI for six quadcopters
a decentralized fashion (e.g., using message passing). By attempting to converge to a polygon while implementing the
leveraging analysis similar to that presented in the proof for collision avoidance controller above.
Theorem V.2, it is possible to derive a bound on the steady
state error (cid:107)x −x (cid:107).
c 0 C. Robustness Analysis
Remark V.5 (Size Control Extension to Polyhedra). The To conclude our analysis of the symmetric cyclic control
size controller discussed in this subsection may be trivially algorithm, we investigate the robustness properties of the
extended to the formation control of polyhedra by decoupling closed-loop dynamics given in (7) in the presence of ad-
thepolygonQ 1 fromallotherpolygonsQinthePPS.Thenet ditive disturbances. We quantify robust performance by the
controlforallrobotsinQ 1 isgivenbythemodifiedsymmetric Euclidean norm of the deviation of the perturbed system
cyclic controller in (26) plus a “rotational controller” that trajectoryfromthenominalcontractingtrajectorywithrespect
rotates the robots within the plane such that the first face has tothemetricV¯TV¯,whereV¯ istheorthonormalcounterpartof
anorientationcompatiblewithadjacentfaceswithinthePPS. the nominal projection matrix as defined in (5). The analysis
The control for all other robots in the polyhedron is given presentedinthissectionisrestrictedtozerointernaldynamics
by the standard symmetric cyclic controller as given in (20) (i.e., g(x) = 0) and to convergence to regular polygons. An
and (21). The proof for convergence is then also decoupled analogous proof can be derived for the Johnson polyhedron
by treating Q 1 as an independent polygon with respect to the case.
remaining PPS. An example rotational controller along with Let z(t) = V¯x(t) represent the dynamics of the un-
a proof of correctness is provided in the appendix. perturbed system under the action of the symmetric cyclic
controller (7). Then,
B. Collision Avoidance
For collision avoidance, one must account for the size of
eachrobotintheformation.Inparticular,weassumethateach Considertheperturbeddynamicsz (t)underanadditivestate
robot is completely contained within a sphere of radius r 1 . and/or time-dependant disturbance:
To design a collision avoidance controller, we make use of
Repulsive-Potential-Functions (RPF) [27]. z˙ d (t)=−V¯Lx d (t)+d(x d ,t). (34)
Consider a “collision-detection” zone around each robot
Here the disturbance is measured in the transformed z coor-
parametrized by two variables r <r , where r denotes the
1 2 2 dinates.Letδ(t)representthedifferencebetweenthenominal
radius of the boundary of a robot’s detection region. The RPF
and perturbed trajectories at time t. Specifically, let δ (t) :=
between any two robots i and j can be written as follows: z
V (d ):=− (r 2 −r 1 )2 +2(r −r )log(r −d )−d δ x equal 0 at t = 0 as the trajectories are assumed to start
ij ij r −d 2 1 1 ij ij from the same initial conditions. Then,
LetR¯2(t):=δT(t)δ (t);R¯ representstheEuclideandistance
of the perturbed trajectory from the nominal one in the
transformed coordinates, referred to as the formation error.
The following theorem characterizes the robustness of the
symmetric cyclic controller.
Theorem V.6 (Cyclic Control Robustness). Assume that the
nominal system is contracting with contraction rate Λ =
(cid:0) V¯LV¯T(cid:1)
< 0 and that the disturbance is norm
bounded with upper bound d¯. Then the formation error in (a) Comparison for (cid:107)δ (cid:107). (b) Bound tightness.
thetransformedz coordinates,thatisR¯,isupperboundedas
Fig. 6: Tightness for robustness bounds. Parameters: n =
Proof. Startingfrom(35),δ x =(V¯TV¯+U¯TU¯)δ x =V¯Tδ z + VI. FORMATIONCONTROLOFQUADCOPTERS
U¯TU¯δ . Now, U¯TU¯δ ∈M , so V¯L(U¯TU¯δ )=0. Thus,
x x n x In this section we demonstrate the use of the symmetric
δ˙ (t)=−V¯LV¯Tδ +d(x ,t). cyclic control laws developed in Sections III, IV and V-A on
a fleet of quadcopters.
Pre-multiplying by 2δ (t) we obtain:
2δTδ˙ = d(δ z Tδ z ) =−2δT (cid:0) V¯LV¯T(cid:1) δ +2δTd(x ,t). A. Quadcopter Dynamics and Control
z z dt z z z d
Let x and v denote the position and inertial velocity
Letting R¯2 =δ z Tδ z , one can write respectivelyoftheith quadcopter,resolvedinaninertialframe
:
dt dt z z z d
Yaw (ψ ), Pitch (θ ), and Roll (φ ) with rotation order ZYX.
Noting that: The angular velocity of the ith quadcopter with respect to the
−δT (cid:0) V¯LV¯T(cid:1) δ ≤−λ (cid:0) V¯LV¯T(cid:1) δTδ =ΛR¯2, inertialframe,resolvedinthequadcopterbodyframe,isgiven
z z min z z byω .LetRi denotetherotationmatrixtotransformvectors
and intheinertialframeto theith quadcopterbodyframe.Finally
δ z Td(x d ,t)≤(cid:107)δ z (cid:107)(cid:107)d(x d ,t)(cid:107)=R¯(cid:107)d(x d ,t)(cid:107), l r e e t sp m ec q t i iv a e n l d y, I f i or de th n e ote ith th q e u m ad a c s o s p a t n e d r. moment of inertia tensor,
we get: The translational dynamics of the quadcopter are given by:
Thus,  0   0 
R¯˙ ≤ΛR¯+(cid:107)d(x d ,t)(cid:107), (37a) v˙ i =R i i b T  0 +0,
where T is the net thrust produced by all four propellers and
By the comparison theorem [28], the claim follows. i
g is the gravitational acceleration. Note that the direction of
Remark V.7. The bound R¯(t) describes the time-varying positive thrust is opposite the body z−axis. The rotational
deviation from a nominal contracting trajectory. In the limit dynamics of the quadcopter are given by:
t → ∞, the steady state bound R¯ ss := d¯/|Λ| provides a 1 (cid:20) 0 (cid:21)
measure of the steady state formation error. Physically, it q˙ = (cid:12)q ,
represents a bound on the degree of asymmetry at each node i 2 ω i i
(cid:18) (cid:19)
of the formation, as measured by the set of linear constraints
usedtodefinethesubspace,thatis,(4a)and (4b).Theinverse i i i i i i
proportionality between R¯ and |Λ| highlights a trade-off
where (cid:12) denotes the quaternion product and M is the net
between increased robustness, control saturation, and sensor i
torque on the quadrotor as a result of differential thrust forces
requirements.
and reaction moments generated by the motor/propeller pairs.
Figure 6 provides insights into the tightness of the bound. As the dynamics of the motors are significantly faster than
Here, disturbances were introduced into the system via error those of the quadcopter as a rigid body, we assume that the
in the control rotation angles. The rotation angle in R m for net thrust force and moment generated by the propellers can
robot i is equal to α˜ i (t)=α 0 +δ αi (t) where α 0 =mπ/n is be commanded instantaneously.
t r w h a h n e e d n r o o e m m δ l i y na f , r l o c δ¯ m on a tr ∈ o u l n [ a i − f n o 1 g r , l m e 1] a d ◦ n i . s d t T r δ i h α b e u i ( t p t io ) lo n i t s t o e a v d e p r e c r u t t h r u e v r e b r s a a n t i i g n o e n F , [δ i s g a α u m i r , e p δ¯ l α e 6 i d a ] a p n le d N x o tr t n a ic o n e n sl l a i t n t h i e a o a t n r a t l h d e d y y n r n a o a m t m a i t c i i c o a s l n , s t m h y e s a r t t e e r m i b x y . R r I e n i i s b ul o t c r i o n d u g e p r i l n e t s o a t f i h n a e i c r o l a y r t p t c i o t o r u a m d t e e -
correspo α n i d to α t i he actual formation error R¯, the bound in (36), the symmetric cyclic control laws for formation control of
and the numeric integration of the expression in (37a). Figure quadcopters, we employ a two-level control hierarchy where,
6b quantifies the tightness of (36) and (37a) by plotting the at the high level, the symmetric cyclic control laws in (6),
percentage difference with respect to the actual deviation. (21) or (25) are used to generate a desired inertial velocity
reference for each quadcopter. The lower level control system positionofthequadcopterswithinaballofradius5mcentered
then simply tracks this reference, and incorporates both thrust at x (all simulations initialized the quadcopters in hover
and attitude control. Several velocity tracking controllers for mode). Additionally, upon initialization, the quadcopters were
quadcoptershavealreadybeenpresentedintheliterature[29], assigned indices such that their projection onto the desired
[30]. In the appendix we present an example controller used planeofconvergenceformedanon-intersectingpolygon.This
for numerical simulations. is an example of a systematic (and decentralizable) method
for the quadcopters to identify their nearest neighbors for
symmetriccycliccontrol.Inspiteofthesamespeedconstraint
B. Numerical Simulations and Experiments
of 3m/s, no collisions were recorded while the formation
Wenowpresentsimulationandexperimentalresultsdemon- consistently converged in terms of shape, size and geometric
strating the application of the above two-level control hier- center.
archy on a group of six quadcopters. The quadcopters were For experimental validation, we implemented the control
initialized randomly in hover mode (v i =0) around the point algorithmsonagroupoffourquadcopters,eachequippedwith
[0,0,−2]T. The size control parameters were: desired inter- aPX4Pixhawkautopilot[31].Thelowlevelvelocitytracking
quadcopter distance ρ = 2.0m, function f s (p¯) = tanh(p¯), controller detailed in the appendix is virtually identical to
and gain α s0 =5π/180. The desired formation center x c was the on-board Pixhawk controller. Relative position measure-
selectedasthepoint[0,0,−10]Tm.Thesymmetriccycliccon-
ments between neighboring quadcopters were provided by a
troller used a look-ahead horizon N = 1 and gain k 1 = 0.5. Viconmotioncapturesystem.Thedesiredinter-robotneighbor
Thedesiredplaneofconvergencewastilted42owithrespectto
separation ρ was set to 1.65m. Due to limitations in testing
thehorizontal.Weassumedatimelagτ =0.1s.Thecollision space, a less aggressive collision avoidance controller was
avoidance parameters were r 1 = 0.4m, r 2 = 1.2m, and the implemented:
controller was slightly modified to take advantage of relative
velocity measurements: (cid:88)
u =− k tanh(ρ−d )(x −x ), if d ≤r ,
colli coll ij j i ij 2
u =− (cid:88) n (d ij −r 2 )2 (x −x ), j(cid:54)=i
colli j(cid:54)=i d ij (d ij −r 1 )2 j i (40) where k coll is a gain with value 1.2, and r 2 = 0.9m. In
addition,thespeedconstraintwasfurtherrestrictedto0.7m/s,
if r <d ≤r and v <0,
1 ij 2 sij while the cyclic (k ) and center (k ) control gains were set to
where v = (v −v )·(x −x )/d is the line-of-sight 0.25 and 0.15 respectively. Note that in all of the experiments
sij j i j i ij
velocity between robots i and j. Additionally, the desired wherethequadcopterswereinitializedoutsideofthecollision
velocity (given by the sum of the cyclic, center and collision detection regions, the collision avoidance controller did not
avoidance controllers) was subject to saturation constraints become active.
to prevent aggressive maneuvering and increased collision Figures 8a and 8b show the quadcopters in initial and final
risk. In particular, each quadcopter was limited to a speed (tetrahedron) configurations respectively. Figure 8c shows the
of 3m/s. Figure 7a shows the resulting 3D trajectories as time evolution of the formation error (cid:107)V¯x(cid:107) over all three
well as a shaded plane that outlines the final positions of phases of flight – autonomous takeoff, formation control, and
the quadcopters. Figure 7b shows the evolution of the inter- landing. Figures 9a and 9b show the time evolution of the
quadcopterdistanceswithrespecttoquadcopter1.Noticehow inter-quadcopter distances and the error in geometric center.
two neighboring quadcopters entered the collision detection Thequadcoptersdemonstratedrelativelyquickconvergencein
region for quadcopter 1 before converging to the desired terms of formation shape, size and center, thereby validating
separation. the two-level formation control methodology 1.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we studied decentralized control algorithms
for 3D formations such as regular polygons, Johnson solids,
and more generally, connected regular polygonal meshes. The
algorithms are desirable for their simplicity in that they only
requirerelativepositionmeasurementsbetweenneighborsand
an agreement between the robots on the desired orientation in
space. Our approach leveraged the mathematical properties of
cyclic pursuit along with results from contraction and partial
contraction theory. In addition, we provided extensions to the
algorithm for controlling the formation size and preventing
collisions, and quantified the robustness of the symmetric
cycliccontrollerunderboundedadditivedisturbances.Finally,
we validated our algorithms via numerical simulations and
(a) Quadcopter 3D trajectories (b) Inter-quadcopter distances (in
with size and center control. metres) for Quadcopter 1. hardware experiments on a fleet of quadcopters.
This work allows several possible avenues for extension.
Fig. 7: Planar formation simulation.
First, we would like to study (sub-)optimality properties of
To test the collision avoidance controller, we ran a Monte
Carlo simulation with 100 samples randomizing the initial playlist?list=PL8-2mtIlFIJr4fVjJeyQqymbkKfhsKKYX
(a) Quadcopters upon initialization in hover mode.
(a) Error in geometric center.
(b) Quadcopters in final tetrahedron con-
figuration.
(b) Inter-quadcopter neighbor separations. ρ=1.65m.
Fig. 9: Formation accuracy.
[5] J. Lawton, R. Beard, and B. Young, “A decentralized approach to
formationmaneuvers,”IEEETransactionsonRoboticsandAutomation,
(c) Tetrahedron formation error. The three shaded regions in-
vol.19,no.6,pp.933–941,Dec2003.
dicate the flight modes (from left to right: takeoff, formation
[6] W.RenandR.Beard,“DecentralizedSchemeforSpacecraftFormation
control, landing). FlyingviatheVirtualStructureApproach,”AIAAJournalofGuidance,
Control,andDynamics,vol.27,no.1,pp.73–82,Jan-Feb2004.
Fig. 8: Quadcopter tetrahedron formation.
[7] J.Marshall,“CoordinatedAutonomy:PursuitFormationsofMultivehi-
cleSystems,”Ph.D.dissertation,UniversityofToronto,2005.
[8] J. Chen, D. Sun, J. Yang, and H. Chen, “Leader-Follower Formation
the symmetric cyclic controller by introducing an objective Control of Multiple Non-holonomic Mobile Robots Incorporating a
Receding-horizonScheme,”InternationalJournalofRoboticsResearch,
cost function to be minimized (e.g., time or control effort),
vol.29,no.6,pp.727–747,2010.
andusingittoguidegainselectionand/orlook-aheadhorizon. [9] L. Consolini, F. Morbidi, D. Prattichizzo, and M. Tosques, “Leader
Second, we plan to investigate various examples for internal follower formation control of nonholonomic mobile robots with input
constraints,”Automatica,vol.44,no.5,pp.1343–1349,2008.
dynamics g(x) and their interplay with the symmetric cyclic
[10] D.P.Scharf,F.Y.Hadaegh,andS.R.Ploen,“ASurveyofSpacecraft
controller when analyzing convergence. Third, the modifica- FormationFlyingGuidanceandControl,PartII:Control,”inAmerican
tion of the symmetric cyclic controller for formation size is ControlConference,vol.4,Boston,MA,Jun.2004,pp.2976–2985.
a little cumbersome in that it requires all robots to compute [11] Y. Cao, W. Yu, W. Ren, and G. Chen, “An Overview of Recent
Progress in the Study of Distributed Multi-Agent Coordination,” IEEE
a shared quantity. Consequently, we would like to investigate
TransactionsonIndustrialInformatics,vol.9,no.1,pp.427–438,Feb
size controllers that do not rely upon consensus techniques. 2013.
[12] F.Guerriero,R.Surace,V.Loscri,andE.Natalizio,“Amulti-objective
approach for unmanned aerial vehicle routing problem with soft time