Decentralized Rigidity Maintenance Control with
Range Measurements for Multi-Robot Systems
Daniel Zelazo, Antonio Franchi, Heinrich H. Bu¨lthoff, and Paolo Robuffo Giordano
Abstract—This work proposes a fully decentralized strategy The challenges associated with the design and implemen-
for maintaining the formation rigidity of a multi-robot system tation of multi-agent systems range from hardware and soft-
using only range measurements, while still allowing the graph
ware considerations to the development of a solid theoretical
topology to change freely over time. In this direction, a first
foundation for their operation. In particular, the sensing and
contribution of this work is an extension of rigidity theory to
weighted frameworks and the rigidity eigenvalue, which when communication capabilities of each agent will dictate the
positive ensures the infinitesimal rigidity of the framework. We distributed protocols used to achieve team objectives. For
then propose a distributed algorithm for estimating a common example, if each agent in a multi-robot system is equipped
relative position reference frame amongst a team of robots with
with a GPS-like sensor, then tasks such as formation keeping
onlyrangemeasurementsinadditiontooneagentendowedwith
or localization can be trivially accomplished by communica-
thecapabilityofmeasuringthebearingtotwootheragents.This
first estimation step is embedded into a subsequent distributed tion between robots of their state information in a common
algorithm for estimating the rigidity eigenvalue associated with world-frame. However, in applications operating in harsher
theweightedframework.Theestimateoftherigidityeigenvalueis environments,i.e.,indoors,underwater,orindeep-space,GPS
finallyusedtogeneratealocalcontrolactionforeachagentthat
is not a viable sensing option (Scaramuzza et al., 2014).
bothmaintainstherigiditypropertyandenforcesadditionalcon-
Indeed,inthesesituations,agentsmustrelyonsensingwithout
straints such as collision avoidance and sensing/communication
range limits and occlusions. As an additional feature of our knowledge of a common inertial reference frame (Franchi
approach, the communication and sensing links among the et al., 2012a). In these scenarios, relative sensing can provide
robots are also left free to change over time while preserving accurate measurements of, for example, range or bearing, but
rigidity of the whole framework. The proposed scheme is then
without any common reference frame.
experimentally validated with a robotic testbed consisting of 6
A further challenge related to the sensing capabilities of
quadrotor UAVs operating in a cluttered environment.
multi-robot systems is the availability of these measurements.
Index Terms—graph rigidity, decentralized control, multi-
Sensing constraints such as line-of-sight requirements, range,
robot, distributed algorithms, distributed estimation.
and power limitations introduce an important system-level
requirement, and also lead to an inherently time-varying
I. INTRODUCTION description of the sensing network. Successful decentralized
coordinationprotocols,therefore,mustalsobeabletomanage
The coordinated and decentralized control of multi-robot
these constraints.
systemsisanenablingtechnologyforavarietyofapplications.
Theseissuesleadtoimportantarchitecturalrequirementsfor
Multi-robot systems benefit from an increased robustness
the sensing and communication topology in order to achieve
against system failures due to their ability to adapt to dy-
thedesiredhigherleveltasks(i.e.,formationkeepingorlocal-
namic and uncertain environments. There are also numerous
ization). The connectivity of the sensing and communication
economic benefits by considering the price of small and cost-
topology is one such property that has received considerable
effectiveautonomoussystemsasopposedtotheirmoreexpen-
attention in the multi-robot communities (Robuffo Giordano
sivemonolithiccounterparts.Currently,thereisagreatinterest
et al., 2011, 2013; Ji and Egerstedt, 2007). However, con-
inimplementingthesesystemsfromdeepspaceinterferometry
nectivity alone is not sufficient to perform certain tasks when
missionsanddistributedsensinganddatacollection,tocivilian
only relative sensing is used. For these systems, the concept
search and rescue operations, among others (Akyildiz et al.,
of rigidity provides the correct framework for defining an
2002; Anderson et al., 2008a; Bristow et al., 2000; Lindsey
appropriatesensingandcommunicationtopologyarchitecture.
et al., 2011; Mesbahi and Egerstedt, 2010; Michael et al.,
Rigidityisacombinatorialtheoryforcharacterizingthe“stiff-
2009; Murray, 2006).
ness” or “flexibility” of structures formed by rigid bodies
D.ZelazoiswiththeFacultyofAerospaceEngineering,Technion-Israel connected by flexible linkages or hinges.
InstituteofTechnology,Haifa32000,Israeldzelazo@technion.ac.il The study of rigidity has a rich history with contributions
A Franchi is with the Centre National de la Recherche Scien-
from mathematics and engineering disciplines (Connelly and
tifique (CNRS), Laboratoire d’Analyse et d’Architecture des Syste`mes
(LAAS), 7 Avenue du Colonel Roche, 31077 Toulouse CEDEX 4, France. Whiteley, 2009; Jacobs, 1997; Krick et al., 2009; Laman,
antonio.franchi@laas.fr 1970; Shames et al., 2009; Tay and Whiteley, 1985; Eren
H.H.Bu¨lthoffiswiththeMaxPlanckInstituteforBiologicalCybernetics,
etal.,2004).Recently,rigiditytheoryhastakenanoutstanding
Spemannstraße 38, 72076 Tu¨bingen, Germany hhb@tuebingen.mpg.de.
H. H. Bu¨lthoff is additionally with the Department of Brain and Cognitive role in the motion control of mobile robots. The rigidity
Engineering,KoreaUniversity,Seoul,136-713Korea. framework allows for applications, such as formation control,
P. Robuffo Giordano is with the CNRS at Irisa and Inria Rennes
toemploycontrolalgorithmsrelyingononlyrelativedistance
Bretagne Atlantique, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France
prg@irisa.fr. measurements, as opposed to relative position measurements
3v5350.9031:viXra
from a global or relative internal frame (Anderson et al., to only relative distance measurements among neighbors, so
2008a,b;BaillieulandMcCoy,2007;Kricketal.,2009;Olfati- as to ultimately allow for a fully distributed and range-based
Saber and Murray, 2002; Smith et al., 2007). For example, in implementation of the rigidity maintenance controller. To this
(Krick et al., 2009) it was shown that formation stabilization end,wefirstshowthatiftheformationisinfinitesimallyrigid,
using only distance measurements can be achieved only if it is possible to distributedly estimate the relative positions of
rigidity of the formation is maintained. Moreover, rigidity neighboring robots in a common reference frame from only
represents also a necessary condition for estimating relative range-based measurements. Our approach relies explicitly on
positions using only relative distance measurements (Aspnes the form of the symmetric rigidity matrix developed here,
et al., 2006; Calafiore et al., 2010a). in contrast to other approaches focusing on distributed im-
In a broader context, rigidity turns out to be an important plementations of centralized estimation schemes, such as a
architectural property of many multi-agent systems when a Gauss-Newton approach used in Calafiore et al. (2010b).This
common inertial reference frame is unavailable. Applications first step is then instrumental for the subsequent development
that rely on sensor fusion for localization, exploration, map- of the distributed estimation of the rigidity eigenvalue and
ping and cooperative tracking of a target, all can benefit eigenvector needed by the rigidity gradient controller. This
from notions in rigidity theory (Shames et al., 2009; Aspnes is obtained by exploiting an appropriate modification of the
et al., 2006; Calafiore et al., 2010b; Williams et al., 2014; Wu power iteration method for eigenvalue estimation following
et al., 2010). The concept of rigidity, therefore, provides the from the works (Robuffo Giordano et al., 2011; Yang et al.,
theoretical foundation for approaching decentralized solutions 2010) for the distributed estimation of the connectivity eigen-
to the aforementioned problems using distance measurement value of the graph Laplacian and now applied to rigidity.
sensors, and thus establishing an appropriate framework for Finally,weshowhowtoexploittheweightsonthegraphedges
relating system level architectural requirements to the sensing to embed constraints and requirements such as inter-robot
and communication capabilities of the system. and obstacle avoidance, limited communication and sensing
ranges, and line-of-sight occlusions, into a unified gradient-
A. Main Contributions based rigidity maintenance control law.
Ourapproach,therefore,canbeconsideredasacontribution
In general, rigidity as a property of a given formation
tothegeneralproblemofdistributedstrategiesformaintaining
(i.e., of the robot spatial arrangement) has been studied from
certainarchitecturalfeaturesofamulti-robotsystem(i.e.con-
eitherapurelycombinatorialperspective(Laman,1970),orby
nectivity or rigidity) with minimal sensing requirements (only
providinganalgebraiccharacterizationviathestate-dependent
relativedistancemeasurements).Additionally,wealsoprovide
rigiditymatrix(TayandWhiteley,1985).Inourpreviouswork
athoroughexperimentalvalidationoftheentireframeworkby
(Zelazo et al., 2012), we introduced a related matrix termed
employing a group of 6 quadrotor UAVs as robotic platforms
the symmetric rigidity matrix. A main result of (Zelazo et al.,
to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach in real-world
2012)wastoprovideanecessaryandsufficientconditionsfor
conditions.
rigidity in the plane in terms of the positivity of a particular
The organization of this paper is as follows. Section I-B
eigenvalue of the symmetric rigidity matrix; this eigenvalue
provides a brief overview of some notation and fundamental
we term the rigidity eigenvalue. This result is in the same
theoretical properties of graphs. In Section II, the theory
spirit as the celebrated Fiedler eigenvalue1 and its relation to
of rigidity is introduced, and our extension of the rigidity
the connectivity of a graph (Godsil and Royle, 2001). A first
eigenvalue to 3-dimensional weighted frameworks is given.
contribution of this work is the extension of the results on
Wethenproceedtopresentageneralstrategyforadistributed
the rigidity eigenvalue provided in (Zelazo et al., 2012) to
rigidity maintenance controller in Section III. This section
3-dimensional frameworks, as well as the introduction of the
will provide details on certain operational constraints of the
concept of weighted rigidity and the corresponding weighted
multi-robot team and how these constraints can be embedded
rigidity matrix. This notion allows for the concept of rigidity
in the control law. This section also highlights the need
to include state-dependent weight functions on the edges of
to develop distributed algorithms for estimating a common
the graph, weights which can then be exploited to take into
reference frame for the team, outlined in Section IV, and
account inter-agent sensing and communication constraints
estimation of the rigidity eigenvalue and eigenvector, detailed
and/or requirements.
in Section V. The results of the previous sections are then
A gradient-based rigidity maintenance action aimed at
summarized in Section VI where the full distributed rigidity
‘maximizing’therigidityeigenvaluewasalsoproposedin(Ze-
maintenance controller is given. The applicability of these
lazoetal.,2012).However,whilethisgradientcontrollawwas
results are then experimentally demonstrated on a robotic
decentralized in structure, there was still a dependence on the
testbedconsistingof6quadrotorUAVsoperatinginaobstacle
availability of several global quantities, namely, of the robot
populated environment. Details of the experimental setup and
relative positions in some common reference frame, of the
results are given in Section VII. Finally, some concluding
valueoftherigidityeigenvalue,andoftherigidityeigenvector
remarks are offered in Section VIII.
associatedwiththerigidityeigenvalue.Amaincontributionof
this work is then the development of the machinery needed to
B. Preliminaries and Notations
distributedly estimate all these global quantities by resorting
The notation employed is standard. Matrices are denoted
1ThesecondsmallesteigenvalueofthegraphLaplacianmatrix. by capital letters (e.g., A), and vectors by lower case letters
(e.g., x). The ij-th entry of a matrix A is denoted [A] . The the position vector in R3 for the mapped node. We refer to
rank of a matrix A is denoted rk[A]. Diagonal matrices will the matrix p( ) = p(v ) p(v ) T Rn×3 as the
be written as D = diag d ,...,d ; this notation will also position matrix. We now provide some basic definitions.
be employed for block-diagonal matrices. A matrix and/or a
Definition II.1. Frameworks ( ,p ) and ( ,p ) are equiva-
vector that consists of all zero entries will be denoted by 0;
lent if p (u) p (v) = p (u) p (v) for all u,v ,
whereas, ‘0’ will simply denote the scalar zero. Similarly, the
(cid:107) (cid:107)
vector 1 n denotes the n 1 vector of all ones. The n n and are congruent if (cid:107) p 0 (u) − p 0 (v) (cid:107) = (cid:107) p 1 (u) − p 1 (v) (cid:107) for
× × all u,v .
identity matrix is denoted as I n . The set of real numbers will { }∈V
be denoted as R, and denotes the standard Euclidean Definition II.2. A framework ( ,p ) is globally rigid if every
2-normforvectors.The (cid:107) K · ro (cid:107) neckerproductoftwomatricesA framework which is equivalen G t to 0 ( ,p ) is congruent to
and B is written as A B (Horn and Johnson, 1991). ( ,p ). G
Graphsandthematri ⊗ cesassociatedwiththemwillbewidely G 0
used in this work; see, e.g., (Godsil and Royle, 2001). An Definition II.3. Aframework( ,p 0 )isrigidifthereexistsan
undirected (simple) weighted graph is specified by a vertex (cid:15) > 0 such that every framework ( ,p 1 ) which is equivalent
set ,anedgeset whoseelements G characterizetheincidence to ( ,p 0 ) and satisfies p 0 (v) p 1 G (v) <(cid:15) for all v , is
rela V tion between d E istinct pairs of , and diagonal cong G ruent to ( ,p 0 ). (cid:107) − (cid:107) ∈V
weight-matrixW,with[W] 0theweightonedgee .
kk ≥ k ∈E DefinitionII.4. Aminimallyrigidgraphisarigidgraphsuch
In this work we consider only finite graphs and denote the
that the removal of any edge results in a non-rigid graph.
cardinalityofthenodeandedgesetsas =nand =m.
Two vertices i and j are called adjacent (or neighbors) when Figure 1 shows three frameworks illustrating the above
i,j .The neighborhood of the vertex i is the set = definitions.TheframeworksinFigure1(a)arebothminimally
j i,j . An orientation of an undirected graph rigid and are equivalent to each other, but are not congruent,
is the assignment of directions to its edges, i.e., an edge e is andthereforenotgloballyrigid.Byaddinganadditionaledge,
an ordered pair (i,j) such that i and j are, respectively, the as in Figure 1(b) (the edge v 4 ,v 5 ), the framework becomes
initial and the terminal nodes of e . globally rigid. The key feature of global rigidity, therefore, is
The incidence matrix E( ) Rn×m is a 0, 1 -matrix that the distances between all node pairs are maintained for
with rows and columns indexed by the vertices and edges differentframeworkrealizations,andnotjustthosedefinedby
of such that [E( )] has the value ‘+1’ if node i is the the edge set.
initial node of edge e , ‘ 1’ if it is the terminal node, and By parameterizing the position map by a positive scalar
‘0’ otherwise. The degree of vertex i, d , is the cardinality of representingtime,wecanalsoconsidertrajectoriesofaframe-
the set of vertices adjacent to it. The degree matrix, ∆( ), work.Thatis,thepositionmapnowbecomesp: R R3
and the adjacency matrix, A( ), are defined in the usual and is assumed to be continuously differentiable with respect
way (Godsil and Royle, 2001). The (graph) Laplacian of to time. We then explicitly write ( ,p,t) so as to represent
, L( ) = E( )E( )T = ∆( ) A( ), is a positive- a time-varying framework. In this direction, we can define a
G G G G G − G
semidefinite matrix. One of the most important results from
algebraic graph theory in the context of collective motion
control states that a graph is connected if and only if the
secondsmallesteigenvalueoftheLaplacianispositive(Godsil
and Royle, 2001).
TableIprovidesasummaryofthenotationsusedthroughout G=(V,E) agraphdefinedbyitsvertexandedgesets
the document.
Ni(t) time-varyingneighborhoodofnodevi∈V
p(i) positionvectorinR3 ofthemappednodevi∈V;
ps s∈{x,y,z}coordinateofpositionvectorfornodei
II. RIGIDITYANDTHERIGIDITYEIGENVALUE p(V) stackedpositionmatrixofallnodes(Rn×3)
ξ(i) velocityvectorinR3 ofthenodevi∈V
Inthissectionwereviewthefundamentalconceptsofgraph (G,p,W) aweightedframework
rigidity (Graver et al., 1993; Jackson, 2007). A contribution R(p,W) rigiditymatrixofaweightedframework
of this work is an extension of our previous results on R symmetricrigiditymatrixofaweightedframework
the concepts of the symmetric rigidity matrix and rigidity
λ7,v7 (v) rigidityeigenvalueandeigenvector
(cid:96)ij distancebetweennodesvi,vj ∈V,i.e.,(cid:107)p(vi)−p(vj)(cid:107)
eigenvalue for 3-dimensional ambient spaces (Zelazo et al., λˆi agenti’sestimateoftherigidityeigenvalue
2012), and the notion of weighted frameworks. vˆs s-coordinateoftheagentiestimation
oftherigidityeigenvector
pˆi,c agentiestimateofrelativepositionvectorpi−pc
A. Graph Rigidity and the Rigidity Matrix pˆ stackedvectoroftherelative
rk.
x) theav p e o r s a i g ti e on o
1 . (cid:80) ..n n
( ,p), where = ( , ) is a graph, and p : Rd v2 i x agentiestimateofavg(vˆx◦vˆx)
m G aps each vert G ex to a V po E int in Rd. In this work we V co → nsider z i x i y agentiestimateofavg(pˆy,c◦vˆx−pˆx,c◦vˆy)
zxz agentiestimateofavg(pˆz,c◦vˆx−pˆx,c◦vˆz)
frameworks in a three-dimensional ambient space, i.e., d=3. z i yz agentiestimateofavg(pˆy,c◦vˆz−pˆz,c◦vˆy)
Therefore, for node u , p(u) = px py pz T is i
(cid:2) (cid:3)
v4 v4 v5 AnexampleofaninfinitesimallyrigidgraphinR3 isshown
in Figure 1(b). Furthermore, note that infinitesimal rigidity
v1 v2 v1 v2 impliesrigidity,buttheconverseisnottrue(TayandWhiteley,
1985), see Figure 1(c) for a rigid graph in R3 that is not
infinitesimally rigid.
v5 The infinitesimal motions in (2) define a system of m
v1 v2 v1 v2 linear equations in the vector of unknown velocities ξ =
[ξT(v ) ... ξT(v )]T R3n.Thissystemcanbeequivalently
written as the linear matrix equation
(a) TwoequivalentminimallyrigidframeworksinR3.Theframeworkonthe R(p)ξ =0,
right side is obtained by the reflection of the position of v5 with respect to
the plane characterized by the positions of v1, v2, and v3 (as illustrated in where R(p) Rm×3n is called rigidity matrix (Tay and
Whiteley, 1985). Each row of R(p) corresponds to an edge
v4 e = u,v and the quantity (p(u) p(v)) represents the
nonzero coefficients for that row. For example, the row corre-
v1 v2 sponding to edge e has the form
v5 (cid:20) vertex u vertex v (cid:21)
(cid:124)t
i(cid:122)n
:
finite(cid:125)simal rigidi(cid:124)ty can(cid:123)t(cid:122)hen be(cid:125)restated in
Lemma II.6 (Tay and Whiteley (1985)). A framework ( ,p)
(b) An infinitesimally and globally (c) A non-infinitesimally rigid frame-
rigidframeworkinR3. work (note that vertexes v1 and v3 are in R3 is infinitesimally rigid if and only if rk[R(p)]=3n G 6.
connected). −
Note that, as expected from Definition II.5, the six-
Fig.1. ExamplesofrigidandinfinitesimallyrigidframeworksinR3.Notice dimensional kernel of R(p) for an infinitesimally rigid graph
thatinFigs.(a)and(b)the3Dpointsassociatedtoeachvertexdonotlieon
only allows for six independent feasible framework motions,
thesameplane,whileinFig.(c)the3Dpointsarealigned.
that is, the above-mentioned collective roto-translations in R3
set of trajectories that are edge-length preserving, in the sense space. Note also that, despite its name, the rigidity matrix is
thatforeachtimet t 0 ,theframework( ,p,t)isequivalent actuallycharacterizinginfinitesimalrigidityratherthanrigidity
to the framework ( ,p,t 0 ). More formally, an edge-length of a framework.
preserving framework must satisfy the constraint
p(v,t) p(u,t) = p(v,t 0 ) p(u,t 0 ) =(cid:96) vu , t t 0 (1) B. Rigidity of Weighted Frameworks
(cid:107) − (cid:107) (cid:107) − (cid:107) ∀ ≥
and for all v,u . We now introduce an important generalization to the con-
One can { simil } ar ∈ ly E assign velocity vectors ξ(u,t) R3 to cept of rigidity and the rigidity matrix by introducing weights
each vertex u for each point in the configuration space to the framework. Indeed, as discussed in the introduction,
such that our aim is to propose a control law able to not only maintain
infinitesimalrigidityoftheformationasperDefinitionII.5,but
− − ∀{ }∈E to also concurrently manage additional constraints typical of
Note that this relation can be obtained by time-differentiation multi-robot applications such as collision avoidance and lim-
of the length constraint described in (1). These motions are ited sensing and communication.This latter objective will be
referred to as infinitesimal motions of the mapped vertices accomplished via the introduction of suitable state-dependent
p(u,t), and one has weights, thus requiring an extension of the traditional results
on rigidity to a weighted case.
Definition II.7. A d-dimensional weighted framework is the
Fortheremainderofthispaper,wedroptheexplicitinclusion
triple ( ,p, ), where = ( , ) is a graph, p : Rd
of time for frameworks and simply write ( G ,p) and p(u) is a fun G ction W mapping ea G ch ver V tex E to a point in Rd, V an → d :
and ξ(u) for the time-varying positions and velocities. The ( ,p) Rm is a function of the framework that assign W s a
velocity vector ξ(u) will be treated as the agent velocity input G →
scalar value to each edge in the graph.
throughout the rest of the paper (see Section III).
Infinitesimal motions of a framework can be used to define Using this definition, we can also define the corresponding
a stronger notion of rigidity. weighted rigidity matrix, R(p, ) as
Definition II.5. A framework is called infinitesimally rigid if
every possible motion that satisfies (2) is trivial (i.e., consists W G
of only global rotations and translations of the whole set of where W( ,p) Rm×m is a diagonal matrix containing the
points in the framework). elements of the vector ( ,p) on the diagonal. Often we
will simply refer to the weight matrix W( ,p) as W when Proposition II.13 (Zelazo et al. (2012)). Let p( ) Rn×3
the underlying graph and map p is understood. be the position matrix for the framework ( ,p). The rigidity
matrix R(p) can be defined as
Remark II.8. Note that the rigidity matrix R(p) can also be
considered as a weighted rigidity matrix with W( ,p) = I. R(p)= E ( )T E ( )T (I p( )), (5)
G l G 1 ··· l G n n ⊗ V
Another useful observation is that the unweighted framework
( ,p) can also be cast as a weighted framework (K ,p, ), where E l ( i )(cid:2)is the local incidence matri(cid:3)x for node v i .
whereK n isthecompletegraphonnnodesand[W( ,p)] ii is A more detailed discussion and example of these definitions
1whenevere i (K n )isalsoanedgein ,and0otherwise. are provided in Appendix B.
Lemma II.6 and Corollary II.11 relate the property of
Weighted rigidity can lead to a slightly different interpre-
infinitesimal rigidity for a given (weighted) framework to the
tation of infinitesimal rigidity, where the introduced weights
rank of a corresponding matrix. A contribution of this work
might cause the rigidity matrix to lose rank. That is, an
is the translation of the rank condition to that of a condition
unweightedframeworkmightbeinfinitesimallyrigid,whereas
on the spectrum of a corresponding matrix that we term the
a weighted version might not. This observation is trivially
symmetric rigidity matrix. For the remainder of this work,
observed by considering a minimally infinitesimally rigid
we will only consider weighted frameworks, since from the
framework ( ,p) and introducing a weight with a 0 entry on
G discussion in Remark II.8, any framework can be considered
any edge. We formalize this with the following definitions.
as a weighted framework with appropriately defined weights.
Definition II.9. The unweigted counterpart of a weighted The symmetric rigidity matrix for a weighted framework
framework ( ,p, ) is the framework (ˆ,p) where the graph ( ,p, ) is a symmetric and positive-semidefinite matrix
ˆ=( , ˆ) i G s suc W h that ˆ and the e G dge e i is also an d G efine W d as
if and only if
orresponding weig
is non-zero
(i.e. [W( G ,p)] =0). := R(p, )TR(p, ) R3n×3n. (6)
G ii (cid:54) R W W ∈
Definition II.10. A weighted framework is called infinites- An immediate consequence of the construction of the sym-
imally rigid if its unweighted counterpart is infinitesimally metric rigidity matrix is that rk[ ]=rk[R(p, )] (Horn and
rigid. Johnson, 1985), leading to the following corollary.
We now present a corollary to Lemma II.6 for weighted CorollaryII.14. Aweightedframework( ,p, )isinfinites-
frameworks. imally rigid if and only if rk[ ]=3n 6.
Corollary II.11. A weighted framework ( ,p, ) in R3 is The rank condition of Corollary II.14 can be equivalently
infinitesimally rigid if and only if rk[R(p, )]=3n 6. stated in terms of the eigenvalues of . Denoting the eigen-
values of as λ λ ... λ , note that infinitesimal
Proof: The statement follows from the fact that R 1 ≤ 2 ≤ ≤ 3n
rigidity is equivalent to λ = 0 for i = 1,...,6 and λ > 0.
rk[R(p, )] = rk[Rˆ(p)], where Rˆ(p) is the rigidity matrix i 7
for the u W nweighted counterpart of ( ,p, ). Consequently, we term λ 7 the Rigidity Eigenvalue. We will
G W now show that, in fact, for any connected graph,2 the first six
eigenvalues are always 0.
C. The Rigidity Eigenvalue The first result in this direction shows that the symmetric
In our previous work (Zelazo et al., 2012), we introduced rigidity matrix is similar to a weighted Laplacian matrix.
an alternative representation of the rigidity matrix that trans-
Proposition II.15. Thesymmetricrigiditymatrixissimilarto
parently separates the underlying graph from the positions of
the weighted Laplacian matrix via a permutation of the rows
each vertex. Here we recall the presentation and extend it to
and columns as
the case of 3-dimensional frameworks.
Definition II.12 (Zelazo et al. (2012)). Consider a graph R 3 ⊗ G V 3 ⊗ G
=( , ) and its associated incidence matrix with arbitrary with (cid:0) (cid:1)
orientation E( ). The directed local graph at node v is the
sub-graph = G ( , ) induced by node v such that j Q2 x Q x Q y Q x Q z
G j V E j j Q(p( V ))=  Q y Q x Q2 y Q y Q z ∈ R3m×3m, (8)
= (v ,v ) e = v ,v . Q Q Q Q Q2
j j i k i j z x z y z
The local incidence matrix at node v j is the matrix whereQ x ,Q y ,andQ z arem × mdiagonalweightingmatrices
for each edge in such that for the edge e =(v ,v ),
E ( )=E( )diag s ,...,s Rn×m G k i j
G G { }∈ [Q ] =(ps ps), s x,y,z
where s =1 if e and s =0 otherwise. s kk i − j ∈{ }
∈E and px (py, pz) represents the x-coordinate (y-coordinate, z-
Note, therefore, that the local incidence matrix will contain i i i
coordinate) of the position of agent i.
columns of all zeros in correspondence to those edges not
adjacent to v j . This also implicitly assumes a predetermined 2If the graph is not connected, there will be additional eigenvalues at the
labeling of the edges. origin corresponding to the number of connected components of the graph,
see(GodsilandRoyle,2001).
Proof: The proof is by direct construction using Propo- The remaining two eigenvectors follow the same argument as
sition II.13 and (6). Consider the permutation matrix P as above. It is also straightforward to verify that u , u , and u
are linearly independent of the first 3 eigenvectors.
n ⊗ Theorem II.16 provides a precise characterization of the
P = I 0 1 0 . (9)
 n ⊗(cid:2) (cid:3)  eigenvectors associated with the null-space of the symmetric
n ⊗(cid:2) (cid:3) rigidity matrix for an infinitesimally rigid framework.
and let Eˆ = E ( )T (cid:2) E ( (cid:3))T . It is straightfor-
l G 1 ··· l G n Remark II.17. It is important to note that the chosen eigen-
ward to verify that
(cid:2) (cid:3) vectorsassociatedwiththenull-spaceofthesymmetricrigidity
... matrix are expressed in terms of the absolute positions of the
nodes in the framework. We note that these eigenvectors can
(I n ⊗ (px)T)EˆTW =E( G )W (px i − px j )  , alsobeexpressedintermsoftherelativepositionofeachnode
  ...   toanyarbitraryreferencepointp c = px c py c pz c T ∈ R3.
  For example, vector u 4 could be replaced by
diagonal matrix of size m×m (cid:2) (cid:3)
where px represents the first co(cid:124)lumn of th(cid:123)e(cid:122)position ve(cid:125)ctor. upc =PT px1− c p n x ,
The structure of the matrix in (7) then follows directly.3 4  c n − 
The representation of the symmetric rigidity matrix as a
weighted Laplacian allows for a more transparent understand- that is a linear combination of the null-space eigenvectors
ingofcertaineigenvaluesrelatedtothismatrix.Thenextresult u 1 ,u 2 and u 4 . The use of eigenvectors defined on relative
shows that the first six eigenvalues of must equal zero for positions, in fact, will be necessary for the implementation
any connected graph . R of a distributed estimator for the rigidity eigenvector and
G eigenvaluebasedononlyrelativemeasurementsavailablefrom
TheoremII.16. Assumethataweightedframework( ,p, ) onboard sensing.
has weights such that the weight matrix W( ,p) is invertible
and the underlying graph is connected. Th G en the symmetric Theorem II.16 can be used to arrive at the main result
rigidity matrix has at leas G t six eigenvalues at the origin; that relating infinitesimal rigidity to the rigidity eigenvalue.
is, λ i = 0 for i 1,...,6 . Furthermore, a possible set Theorem II.18. A weighted framework ( ,p, ) is infinites-
of linearly independent eigenvectors associated with each 0 G W
imally rigid if and only if the rigidity eigenvalue is strictly
eigenvalue is,
positive, i.e., λ >0.
n Proof: The proof is a direct consequence of Corollary
PT 0 ,PT 1 ,PT 0 ,
  0   0 n   1  II.14 and Theorem II.16.
 n Another useful observation relates infinitesimal rigidity of
(py)   (pz)  0  a framework to connectedness of the underlying graph.
PT (px) ,PT 0 ,PT (pz) ,
 −      CorollaryII.19. Rigidityoftheweightedframework( ,p, )
0 − (px) − (py)  implies connectedness of the graph . G W
where  P is defin  ed in (  9).    G
 The connection between infinitesimal rigidity of a frame-
Proof: Recall that for any connected graph, one has work and the spectral properties of the symmetric rigidity
E( )T1 n = 0 (Godsil and Royle, 2001). Therefore, P PT matrix inherits many similarities between the well studied re-
must have three eigenvalues at the origin, with eigenvectors lationshipbetweengraphconnectivityandthegraphLaplacian
u = 1T 0T 0T T , u = 0T 1T 0T T , and matrix (Mesbahi and Egerstedt, 2010).
u = 0T 0T 1T T . We now demonstrate that the In the next section, we exploit this similarity and propose
3 (cid:2) n (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
remaining three eigenvectors proposed in the theorem are a rigidity maintenance control law that aims to ensure the
indeed i (cid:2) n the null-space o (cid:3) f the symmetric rigidity matrix. rigidity eigenvalue is always positive. Such a control action
Let u = (py)T (px)T 0T T . Observe that (I will be shown to depend on the rigidity eigenvalue, on its
WE( )T)u = bT − bT 0T T is such that b ⊗ is eigenvector,andonrelativepositionsamongneighboringpairs
[W] G (py 4(cid:2) py) only 1 for 2 edges e (cid:3) = v ,v , 1 and expressed in a common frame. The issue of how every agent
± kk i − j (cid:2) (cid:3) k { i j } ∈ E inthegroupcandistributedlyestimatethesequantitieswillbe
0 otherwise. Similarly, b is [W] (px px) only for edges
2 ± kk j − i addressed in Sections IV and V.
e = v ,v . The invertibility assumption of the weight
matrix also guarantees that [W] =0. It can now be verified
kk (cid:54) III. ADECENTRALIZEDCONTROLSTRATEGY
that from this construction one has
FORRIGIDITYMAINTENANCE
Q2 Q Q Q Q
x x y x z The results of Section II highlight the role of the rigidity
Q Q Q2 Q Q (I WE( )T)u =0.
 y x y y z  3 ⊗ G 4 eigenvalue λ as a measure of the “degree of infinitesimal
Q Q Q Q Q2 7
z x z y z rigidity” of a weighted framework ( ,p, ). It provides a
linear algebraic condition to test the infinitesimal rigidity of a
3Amoredetailedproofforthetwo-dimensionalcaseisprovidedin(Zelazo
etal.,2012). frameworkand,especiallyinthecaseofweightedframeworks,
00 5 10 15 20 λ25 30 35 40 45 50
00 1 2 3ℓuv 4 5 6 7
Fig. 2. A possible shape for the rigidity potential function V λ (λ7) with
λmin=5.
provides a means of quantifying “how rigid” a weighted
framework is. Moreover, the symmetric rigidity matrix was
shown to have a structure reminiscent of a weighted graph
Laplacian matrix, and thus can be considered as a naturally
distributed operator.
The basic approach we consider for the maintenance of
rigidity is to define a scalar potential function of the rigidity
eigenvalue, V (λ ) > 0, with the properties of growing
unbounded as λ λmin >0 and vanishing (with vanishing
7 → 7 derivative) as λ (see Fig. 2 for one possible shape
→ ∞ or V with λmin = 5). Here, λmin represents some predeter-
mined minimum allowable value for the rigidity eigenvalue
determined by the needs of the application. In addition to
maintainingrigidity,thepotentialfunctionshouldalsocapture
additional constraints in the system, such as collision avoid-
anceorformationmaintenance.Eachagentshouldthenfollow
the anti-gradient of this potential function, that is
where ξ(u) is the velocity input of agent u, as defined
in (3), and p = px py pz T is the position vector of u u u u
the u-th agent. This strategy will ensure that the formation
(cid:2) (cid:3) maintains a “minimum” level of rigidity (i.e., λmin) at all
times. Of course, this strategy is an inherently centralized
one, as the computation of the rigidity eigenvalue and of
its gradient require full knowledge of the symmetric rigidity
matrix. Nevertheless, we will proceed with this strategy and
demonstratethatitcanbeimplementedinafullydecentralized
manner.
In the sequel, we examine in more detail the structure of
thecontrolscheme(10).First,weshowhowtheformalization
of weighted frameworks allows to embed additional weights
within the rigidity property that enforce explicit inter-agent
sensing and communication constraints and group require-
ments such as collision avoidance and formation control. For
instance, the weighting machinery will be exploited so as to
inducetheagentstokeepadesiredinter-agentdistance(cid:96) and
to ensure a minimum safety distance (cid:96) from neighboring
agents and obstacles. With these constraints, the controller
will simultaneously maintain a minimum level of rigidity
while also respecting the additional inter-agent constraints.
We then provide an explicit characterization of the gradient
of the rigidity eigenvalue with respect to the agent positions,
and highlight its distributed structure. Finally, we present the
00 1 2 3ℓuvo 4 5 6 7
00 1 2 3 ℓu 4 v 5 6 7 8
Fig. 3. The shape of γ
((cid:96)uv) for D = 6 (a), γ
((cid:96)uvo) for (cid:96)min = 1
(b),andβuv((cid:96)uv)for(cid:96)0=4(c).
general control architecture for implementing (10) in a fully
decentralized way.
A. Embedding Constraints in a Weighted Framework
In real-world applications a team of mobile robots may not
be able to maintain the same interaction graph throughout the
duration of a mission because of various sensing and commu-
nication constraints preventing mutual information exchange
and relative sensing. Furthermore, additional requirements
such as collision avoidance with obstacles and among robots,
aswellassomedegreeofformationcontrol,mustbetypically
satisfied during the mission execution. Building on the design
guidelines proposed in (Robuffo Giordano et al., 2013) for
dealingwithconnectivitymaintenance,webrieflydiscusshere
a possible design of weights aimed at taking into account
the above-mentioned sensing and communication constraints
andgrouprequirementswithintherigiditymaintenanceaction.
To this end, we start with the following definition of
neighboring agents:
DefinitionIII.1. Twoagentsuandvareconsideredneighbors
if and only if (i) their relative distance (cid:96) = p(u) p(v)
uv is smaller than D R+ (the sensing range), (ii (cid:107) ) the d − istanc (cid:107) e
(cid:96) between the segment joining u and v and the closest uvo
obstaclepointoislargerthan(cid:96) (theminimumline-of-sight
visibility), and (iii) neither u nor v are closer than (cid:96) to
any other agent or obstacle.
Conditions (i) and (ii) are meant to take into account
two typical sensing constraints in multi-robot applications:
maximumcommunicationandsensingrangesandline-of-sight
occlusions.Thepurposeofcondition(iii),whichwillbebetter
detailed later on, is to force disconnection from the group if
an agent is colliding with any other agent or obstacle in the
environment. In the following we will denote with the set
of neighbors of agent u induced by Definition III.1.
This neighboring definition can be conveniently taken into
account by designing the inter-agent weights as state-
dependent functions smoothly vanishing as any of the above
constraints and requirements are not met by the pair (u, v)
with the desired accuracy. Indeed, the use of state-dependent
weights allows us to consider the ensemble of robots in the
context of weighted frameworks, as introduced in Definition
II.7. In particular, we take the underlying graph to be the
completegraphK andthemappcorrespondstothephysical
position state of each agent in a common global frame. The
weightsarethemaps ,andtheweightedframeworkisthe Remark III.3. We further highlight the following properties
triple (K ,p, ) with, therefore, = v =0 . whoseexplicitproofcanbefoundin(RobuffoGiordanoetal.,
W N { ∈V|W (cid:54) }
Following what was proposed in (Robuffo Giordano et al., 2013): the chosen weights are functions of only relative
2013), and recalling that (cid:96) represents the distance between distances to other agents and obstacles, while their gradients
the segment joining agents u and v and the closest obstacle with respect to the agent position p (resp. p ) are functions
point o, we then take of relative positions expressed in a common reference frame.
Furthermore, = and ∂Wuv =0, v / . Finally,
the evaluation
withα =α ((cid:96) , (cid:96) ),β =β ((cid:96) ),γa = performedinadecentralizedwaybyagentu(reps.v)byonly
γa ((cid:96) uv ), γb u = v γ u b k | ( k (cid:96) ∈Su ) a v n k d | k s ∈ u S c v h tha u t v uv uv uv resorting to local information and 1-hop communication.
uv uv uv uv uvo
• – lim (cid:96)uk→(cid:96)min α uv =0,
u , As shown the next developments, these properties will
– lim (cid:96)vk→(cid:96)min α uv =0,
v , and be instrumental for expressing the gradient of the rigidity
– α uv 0 if (cid:96) uk (cid:96) min or (cid:96) vk (cid:96) min , for any eigenvalue as a function of purely relative quantities with
k u , k v ; respect to only 1-hop neighbors.
(cid:96) uv
=(cid:96) 0 ;
• • l l i i m m (cid:96) (cid:96) u u v vo → → D (cid:96)m γ i u n a v γ u = b v 0 = w 0 it w h i γ th u a v γ u ≡ b v 0 ≡ ∀ 0 (cid:96) u ∀ v (cid:96) u ≥ vo D ≤ ; (cid:96) min . B. The Gradient of the Rigidity Eigenvalue
As explained, (cid:96) min is a predetermined minimum safety dis- We now present an explicit characterization of the gradient
tance for avoiding collisions and line-of-sight occlusions. of the rigidity eigenvalue with respect to the agent positions,
Figures 3(a)–(c) show an illustrative shape of weights γa , as used in the control (10). We first recall that the rigidity
γ u b v and β uv . The shape of the weights α uv is conceptually eigenvalue can be expressed as
equivalent to that of weights γb in Fig. 3(b).
This weight design results in the following properties: for λ 7 =v 7 T R v 7 ,
a given pair of agents (u, v), the weight will vanish
(because of the term γa γb ) whenever W the sensing and where v 7 is the normalized rigidity eigenvector associated
uv uv withλ .Fornotationalconvenience,weconsiderthepermuted
communication constraints of Definition III.1 are violated 7
(maximum range, obstacle occlusion), thus resulting in a rigidity eigenvector Pv 7 = (vx)T (vy)T (vz)T T ,
decreased degree of connectivity of the graph (edge u, v where P is defined in Theorem II.16. For the remainder of
(cid:2) (cid:3)
G { } the work, we drop the subscript and reserve the bold font
islost).Thesamewillhappenastheinter-distance(cid:96) deviates
toomuchfromthedesired(cid:96) becauseofthetermβ .Finally, v for the rigidity eigenvector. Note that in fact, the rigidity
eigenvalue and eigenvector are state-dependent, and therefore
the term α will force complete disconnection of vertexes u
alsotime-varyingwhentheformationisinducedbythespatial
andv fromtheothervertexesandthereforeacompletelossof
orientation of a mobile team of robots, or due to the action
connectivityforthegraph wheneveracollisionwithanother
agent is approached.4 G ofstate-dependentweightsonthesensingandcommunication
links.
We now recall from Corollary II.19 that infinitesimal rigid-
ity implies graph connectivity. Therefore, any decrease in the We can now exploit the structure of the symmetric rigid-
degreeofgraphconnectivityduetotheweights vanishing ity matrix for weighted frameworks. Using the form of the
willalsoresultinadecreaseofrigidityofthew W eig u h v tedframe- symmetric rigidity matrix given in (7), we define Q˜(p( ))=
w a o d r i k sco (K nn n e , c p te , d W g ) ra ( p i h n ). pa B r y tic m u a la in r, ta r i i n g i i n d g ity λ is > ob 0 v ( io in us th ly e l c o o s n t te fo x r t ( a I n 3 d ⊗ ob W ser ) v Q e ( t p h ( a V t ))(I 3 ⊗ W) as a generalized weight matrix,
of weighted frameworks) over time, it is then possible to
preserve formation rigidity while, at the same time, explicitly R 3 ⊗ G V 3 ⊗ G
considering and managing the above-mentioned sensing and The elements of Q˜(p( )) are entirely in(cid:0)terms of the r(cid:1)elative
communication constraints and requirements. V
positions of each agent and the weighting functions defined
Remark III.2. We note that the purpose of the weight β on the edges as in (11).
in (11) is to embed a basic level of formation control into the The rigidity eigenvalue can now be expressed explicitly as
rigidity maintenance action: indeed, every neighboring pair
will try to keep the desired distance (cid:96) thanks to the shape of
λ7= (cid:88) Wij (cid:16) (px
the weights β uv . More complex formation control behaviors (pz−pz)2(vz−vz)2+2(px−px)(py−py)(vx−vx)(vy−vy)+
i j i j i j i j i j i j
could be obtained by different choices of functions β uv (e.g., 2(px−px)(pz−pz)(vx−vx)(vz−vz)+
i j i j i j i j
.
z) (cid:17) = (cid:88) WijSij.
rigidity property of the configuration. (12)
From(12),onecanthenderiveaclosed-formexpressionfor
4As for collision with obstacles, an equivalent behavior is automatically ∂λ7,s x, y, z ,i.e.,thegradientofλ withrespecttoeach
obtainedfromweightsγ u b v ,seeagain(RobuffoGiordanoetal.,2013)fora a ∂ g p e s int’s ∈ po { sition. } In particular, by explo 7 iting the structure of
full explanation. Also note that, because of the definition of weights Wuv,
onehasNu⊆Su butSu(cid:54)⊂Nu. thetermsS ij andthepropertiesoftheemployedweights ij
Robot i Position Estimator Environment
...
Rigidity Estimator
...
...
pk,k 2Ni(t) pˆc k ,k 2Ni(t) eigenvalue (λˆ 7 ) and of the relative components of the
eigenvector (vˆ), labeled as the rigidity estimator in the
figure. This procedure is explained in section V;
k k p 2 k  Ni p ( i t k ) pˆc i λˆ vˆ 7 i 3) λ t ˆ han a k n s d t vˆ o ), th e e a s c e h e a s g t e im nt a c te a d n q fi u n a a n ll t y iti i e m s p ( l r e e m la e t n iv t e th p e os c i o ti n o t n ro s l ,
action(10)inadistributedwayformaintaininginfinites-
imal rigidity of the formation during the group motion
(while also coping with the various constraints and
requirements embedded into weights ). Maintaining
infinitesimal rigidity guarantees in turn convergence of
the position estimator from measured distances of step
vˆk,k 2Ni(t)
1), and thus closes the ‘estimation-control loop.’
We finally note that the proposed control architecture also
Fig.4. Controlarchitecturefordistributedrigiditymaintenance.
implicitly assumes the initial spatial configuration of the
agents(i.e.,theirpositionsp( )attime0)tobeinfinitesimally
(see, in particular, the previous Remark III.3), it is possible to rigid (with, in particular, a λ 7 > λm 7 in). This assumption on
reduce ∂λ7 to the following sum over the neighbors, the group initial condition is formally stated below.
7 = (cid:88) Wij (cid:16) 2(py
.
ijSij, λ 7 >λm 7 in.
i (13) Thepurposeofrequiringaminimumlevelofrigidity(λmin)
and similarly for the y and z components. is discussed in greater detail in Section VII.
The gradient (13) possesses the following key feature: it is
a function of relative quantities, in particular of (i) relative IV. DECENTRALIZEDESTIMATIONOF
components of the eigenvector v, (ii) relative distances, and POSITIONSINACOMMONFRAME
(iii)relativepositionswithrespecttoneighboringagents(see,
As explained, evaluation of the gradient control (13) re-
again, Remark III.3 for what concerns weights ), thus
W ij quires that each agent has access to the relative positions of
allowing for a distributed computation of its value once these
its neighboring agents. A main focus of this work, however,
quantities are locally available. The next sections IV and V
is to achieve rigidity maintenance using only relative distance
will detail two estimation schemes able to recover all these
measurements. In this section, we leverage the infinitesimal
relativequantitiesbyresortingtoonlymeasureddistanceswith
rigidity of the formation to estimate the relative position with
respect to 1-hop neighbors owing to the infinitesimal rigidity
respect to a common reference point, p , shared by all agents.
of the group formation. c
In particular, each agent i, with i = 1...n, will be able to
compute an estimate pˆ of its relative position p =p p
i,c i,c i c
C. The Control Architecture −
to this common point. By exchanging their estimates over 1-
Theexplicitdescriptionofthegradientoftherigidityeigen- hop communication channels, two neighboring agents i and j
value in (13) motivates the general control architecture for can then build an estimate pˆ pˆ of their actual relative
the implementation of the rigidity maintenance action in (10). position p p in a common reference frame. Notice that
We observethat each agentrequires knowledge ofthe rigidity both the graph (i.e., neighbor sets, edges, etc.) and the robot
eigenvalue,appropriatecomponentsoftherigidityeigenvector, positions are time-varying quantities. However, in this section
and relative positions with respect to neighboring agents in we omit dependency on time for the sake of conciseness.
a common reference frame. As already mentioned, all these Wealsonotethatthiscommonreferencepointdoesnotneed
quantities are inherently global quantities, and thus a fully to be stationary, i.e., it can move over time. In the following,
distributed implementation of (10) must include appropriate wechoosethepointp tobeattachedtoaspecialagent inthe
estimators for recovering these parameters in a distributed group, determined a priori. This agent will be denoted with
manner. the index i and, in the remainder of this section, we set p =
As a preview of the next sections in this work, Figure 4 p . We now proceed to describe a distributed scheme able to
depicts the general architecture needed by each agent to recover an estimation of the relative position p = p p
implement the rigidity maintenance control action (10): for any agent in the group by exploiting the mea i s ,c ured r i e − lativ i e c
1) exploiting measured distances with respect to its 1-hop distances and the rigidity property of the formation.
neighbors, and owing to the formation rigidity, each To achieve this estimation, we first introduce additional
agent distributely estimates relative positions in a com- assumptions on the capabilities of the special agent i . While
mon reference frame, labeled as the position estimator all agents other than i are able to measure only the relative
inthefigure.ThisblockisfullyexplainedinsectionIV; distance to their neighbors, the special agent i is required to
2) theoutputofthepositionestimatoristhenusedbyeach be endowed with an additional sensor able to also measure,
agent to perform a distributed estimation of the rigidity at any time t, the relative position (i.e., distance and bearing
angles)ofatleast2non-collinearneighbors;5thesetwosensed i-th agent (i=i ):
neighbors will be denoted with the indexes (ι(t), κ(t))
= (cid:88) ((cid:107)pˆ j,c −pˆ i,c (cid:107)2−(cid:96)2 ij )(pˆ j,c −pˆ i,c )−
Remark IV.1. We stress that the agent indexes ι(t) and κ(t) δ pˆ −δ (pˆ −(p −p ))−δ (pˆ −(p −p )),
iic i,c iι ι,c ι ic iκ κ,c κ ic
are time-varying; indeed, contrarily to the special agent i , (15)
ι(t) and κ(t) are not preassigned to any particular agent in
where δ is the well known Kronecker’s delta.6 The estima-
themulti-robotteam.Thereforethespecialagenti onlyneeds ij
c tor (15) is clearly decentralized since:
tomeasureitsrelativepositionsp p andp p with
respecttoanytwoagentswithinit
κare • (cid:96) ij is locally measured by agent i;
effectivelyarbitrary),withthepointsp ,p andp being • pˆ i,c is locally available to agent i;
non-collinear t t . We believe this
ot too • pˆ j,c can be transmitted using one-hop communication
restrictiveinpr ∀ ac ≥ tice,asitonlyrequirethepresenceofatleast from agent j to agent i, for every j i ;
onerobotequippedwitharangeplusbearingsensorwhileall • (p ι
p ic )and(p κ
p ic )aremeasuredbyagenti c andcan
the remaining ones can be equipped with simple range-only be transmitted using one-hop communication to agents ι
sensors. and κ respectively.
In order to show the relation between the proposed decentral-
In the following we omit for brevity the dependency upon
ized position estimator scheme and the infinitesimal rigidity
the time t of the quantities ι and κ.
property, one can restate (15) in matrix form as
In order to perform the distributed estimation of p =
p p , i 1,...,n we follow the approach presented pˆ˙ = (pˆ)pˆ+R(pˆ)(cid:96)+∆c (16)
in (Calafiore et al., 2010a), with some slight modifications
where (pˆ) and R(pˆ) are the symmetric rigidity matrix and
dictated by the nature of our problem. Consistently with our R
notation, we define pˆ = pˆT ... pˆT T R3n. For the rigidity matrix computed with the estimated positions,
1,c n,c ∈ (cid:96) R|E| is a vector whose entries are (cid:96)2 , i,j , and
compactness, we also den (cid:2) ote by (cid:96) ij the me (cid:3) asured distance ∆ ∈ c R|E| containstheremainingtermso i f j th ∀ e { righ } t-h ∈ an E d-side
(cid:107) p j − p i (cid:107) , as introduced in Definition III.1. We then consider of (1 ∈ 5).
the following least squares estimation error:
e(pˆ)= 1 4 {i(cid:88),j}∈E (cid:0) (cid:107) pˆ j,c − pˆ i,c (cid:107) 2 − (cid:96)2 ij (cid:1) 2 + 1 2(cid:107) pˆ ic,c (cid:107) 2+ P ri r g ( o i p d p 1 os th it e p i n o c n )T the IV. v 2 e . cto I ( r f p n o th f e p tr c u f ) r e T am v e a T w lu o i e s r s k an p i i s s − ol ( a ( i 1 n te fi n d ni l ⊗ t o e c s a p im l c ) m al i l n = y - )
+ pˆ (p p ) 2+ pˆ (p p ) 2. imizer of e(pˆ). Therefore, there exists an (cid:15)>0 such that, for
2(cid:107) ι,c − ι − ic (cid:107) 2(cid:107) κ,c − κ − ic (cid:107) (cid:2) all initial conditions satisfying pˆ (cid:3) (0) p (1 p ) < (cid:15),
(14) the estimation pˆconverges to p (cid:107) (1 − p − ). n ⊗ c (cid:107)
Notice that the quantities (cid:96) , p p , and p p are mea-
ij ι − ic κ − ic We point out that the estimator in the form (16) is identical
sured while all the other quantities represent local estimates
to the formation controller proposed in (Krick et al., 2009).
of the robots.
Consequently,wereferthereadertothisworkforadiscussion
The nonnegative error function e(pˆ) is zero if and only if:
on the stability and convergence properties of this model. A
• (cid:107) pˆ j,c − pˆ i,c (cid:107) is equal to the measured distance (cid:96) ij for all similarestimationschemeisalsoproposedin(Calafioreetal.,
the pairs i,j ;
{ }∈E 2010a). We briefly emphasize that the property of having the
• (cid:107) pˆ ic,c (cid:107) =0; true value of relative positions p (1 n p c ) as an isolated
• pˆ ι,c and pˆ κ,c are equal to the measured relative positions local minimizer of (14) is a conse − quence ⊗ of the definition of
p p and p p , respectively.
ι − ic κ − ic infinitesimalrigidityandofthenon-collinearityassumptionof
Note that the estimates pˆ ic,c , pˆ ι,c and pˆ κ,c could be directly the agents i c , ι, and κ.
set to 0, (p ι
p ic ), and (p ι
p ic ), respectively, since the first We finally note that, in general, the rate of convergence of
quantityisknownandthelasttwoaremeasured.Nevertheless, a gradient descent method is known to be slower than other
we prefer to let the estimator obtaining these values via a estimation methods. However, we opted for this method since
‘filtering action’ for the following reasons: first, the estimator is its directly amenable to a distributed implementation and
provides a relatively simple way to filter out noise that might requires only first-order derivative information.
affecttherelativepositionmeasurements;secondly,implemen-
tation of the rigidity maintenance controller only requires that
V. DISTRIBUTEDESTIMATIONOFTHE
(pˆ pˆ ) (p p ),whichisachievedifpˆ p pˆ
j,c − i,c → j − i j,c → j − ic,c RIGIDITYEIGENVALUEANDEIGENVECTOR
andpˆ p pˆ foranycommonvalueofpˆ .Therefore
AsseeninsectionIV,whenthemulti-robotteampossesses
any additional hard constraint on pˆ (e.g., pˆ 0) might
≡ theinfinitesimalrigidityproperty,itispossibletodistributedly
unnecessarily over-constrain the estimator.
estimate the relative positions in a common reference frame
Applying a first-order gradient descent method to e(pˆ), we
for each agent. However, the proposed distributed rigidity
finally obtain the following decentralized update rule for the
maintenance control action (10) requires knowledge of some
5Formationrigidityimpliespresenceofatleast2non-collinearneighbors
foreachagent(Laman,1970). 6δij =0ifi(cid:54)=j andδij =1otherwise.
additional global quantities that are explicitly expressed in result and refer the reader to Yang et al. (2010) for details of
the expressions (13) and (10). In particular, each agent must the proof, noting that the proof methodologies are the same
know also the current value of the rigidity eigenvalue and for the system (17) as that proposed in Yang et al. (2010).
certain components of the rigidity eigenvector. In this sec-
TheoremV.1. Assumethattheweightedframework( ,p, )
tion we propose a distributed estimation scheme inspired by G W
with symmetric rigidity matrix is infinitesimally rigid and
the distributed connectivity maintenance solution proposed in R
hasdistinctnon-zeroeigenvalues,andletvdenotetherigidity
(Yang et al., 2010) for obtaining the rigidity eigenvalue and
eigenvector. Then for any initial condition vˆ(t ) R3n
eigenvector. 0 ∈
such that vTvˆ(t ) = 0, the trajectories of (17) converge
For the reader’s convenience, we first provide a brief 0 (cid:54)
to the subspace spanned by the rigidity eigenvector, i.e.,
summary of the power iteration method for estimating the
lim vˆ(t) = γv for γ R, if and only if the gains k ,k
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a matrix. We then proceed t→∞ ∈ 1 2
and k satisfy the following conditions:
to show how this estimation process can be distributed by 3
1) k ,k ,k >0,
employing PI consensus filters and by suitably exploiting the 1 2 3
2) k >k λ ,
structure of the symmetric rigidity matrix. 1 2 7
3) k >k λ .
Furthermore, for any choice of constants k ,k ,k > 0, the
A. Power Iteration Method 1 2 3
trajectories of (17) remain bounded and satisfy
The power iteration method is one of a suite of iterative
algorithms for estimating the dominant eigenvalue and eigen- vˆ(t) max vˆ(t 0 ) ,√3n , t t 0 .
(cid:107) (cid:107)≤ (cid:107) (cid:107) ∀ ≥
vector of a matrix. Following the same procedure as in (Yang (cid:110) (cid:111)
Inparticular,thetrajectoryconvergestotherigidityeigenvec-
et al., 2010), we employ a continuous-time variation of the
algorithm that will compute the smallest non-zero eigenvalue
and eigenvector of the symmetric rigidity matrix. lim vˆ(t) = 3n 1 2 λ .
The discrete-time power iteration algorithm is based on the t→∞(cid:107) (cid:107) (cid:115) (cid:18) − k 3(cid:19)
following iteration, Remark V.2. The power iteration proposed in (17) assumes
Ax(k) Akx(0) that the symmetric rigidity matrix is static. However, in a
x(k+1) = = . dynamic setting the parameters of the rigidity matrix are a
(cid:107) (cid:107) (cid:107) (cid:107) function ofthe stateof therobots ina multi-robot system,and
Under certain assumptions for the matrix A (i.e., no repeated boththesymmetricrigiditymatrixandtheexpressionofitsnull
eigenvalues), the iteration converges to the eigenvector asso- spaceareinherentlytime-varying.Whiletheproofprovidedin
ciated to the largest eigenvalue of the matrix. (Yangetal.,2010)doesnotexplicitlyaddressthetime-varying
To adapt the power iteration to compute the rigidity eigen- case,ourexperiencesuggeststhatthedynamicsof(17)isable
vector and eigenvalue, we leverage the results of Theorem to track even a time-varying rigidity eigenvector, so long as
II.16 and consider the iteration on a deflated version of the the dynamics of the robots are slower than the estimator. The
symmetric rigidity matrix, i.e. ˜ =I TTT α for some speedofconvergenceof(17),ofcourse,isalsotunablebythe
smallenoughα>0.Thepoweriterationmethodestimatesthe constants k .
largest eigenvalue of a matrix. As all the eigenvalues of the
RemarkV.3. Anotherimportantsubtletyofthedynamics(17)
symmetric rigidity matrix are non-negative, the largest eigen-
value of the deflated version ˜ will correspond to 1 αλ , is the requirement that the rigidity eigenvalue is unique.
R − When the rigidity eigenvalue is not unique, the associated
and thus can be used to estimate λ . The constant α ensures
the matrix ˜ is positive semi-definite.The columns of the eigenvector can belong to (at least) a two-dimensional sub-
contain the eigenvectors corresponding to
space , so that (17) can not be expected to converge to
∈ a unique eigenvector but rather to an equilibrium point in
the zero eigenvalues of , for example, as characterized in
R (see, e.g., (Yang et al., 2010)). This can pose difficulties
Theorem II.16. Note that the power iteration applied to the
matrix ˜ will compute the eigenvector associated with the in real-world conditions since non-idealities such as noise in
rigidity R eigenvalue.7 measuring the agent states (used in evaluating the symmet-
ric rigidity matrix ), and discretization when numerically
The continuous-time counterpart of the power iteration
integrating (17), can make the equilibrium point for (17) in
algorithm now takes the form (Yang et al., 2010)
to abruptly vary over time, thus preventing a successful
vˆ˙(t)= k TTT+k +k vˆ(t)Tvˆ(t) 1 I vˆ(t),(17) L convergence of the estimation of v.
− 1 2 R 3 3n −
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17)
where vˆ is the estimate of the rigidity eigenvector, and the
B. A Distributed Implementation
constants k ,k ,k > 0 are chosen to ensure the trajectories
convergetotherigidityeigenvector.8 Wepresentherethemain The results of section V-A provide a continuous-time esti-
mator for estimating the rigidity eigenvalue and eigenvector
7Assumingtherigidityeigenvalueisuniqueandtheframeworkisinfinites- of the symmetric rigidity matrix. The estimator given in
imally rigid (i.e., the rigidity eigenvalue is positive). We will discuss the (17), however, is a centralized implementation. Moreover,
implicationsofthisassumptionlater.
certainparametersusedin(17)areexpressedusingacommon
8Notethattheconstantαusedtodescribethedeflatedsymmetricrigidity
matrixiseffectivelyreplacedbyk2 inthisformulation. reference frame (i.e., the quantity TTT, see Theorem II.16
and Remark II.17) or require each robot to know the entire G (t)
estimator state (i.e., the quantity vˆ(t)Tvˆ(t) in (17)). We
propose in this sub-section a distributed implementation for Consensus
the rigidity estimator that overcomes these difficulties, in vx(t) X
particular by leveraging the results of Section IV. In the same  py(t)
spiritasthesolutionproposedin(Yangetal.,2010),wemake PI I 0 0 TTT vy(t)
Consensus 2vz(t)3
use of the PI average consensus filter (Freeman et al., 2006) Filter X ⇥ ⇤ 4 5
to distributedly compute the necessary quantities of interest,
and strongly exploit the particular structure of the symmetric PI
rigidity matrix. Filter
Ourapproachtothedistributionof(17)istoexploitboththe
built-indistributedstructure(i.e.,thesymmetricrigiditymatrix
)andthereductionoftheotherparameterstovaluesthatall
agentscanobtainviaadistributedalgorithm.Inthisdirection, Fig. 5. Block diagram showing PI consensus filters in calculation of
TTTvˆ(t).
we now proceed to analyze each term in (17) and discuss
the appropriate strategies for implementing the estimator in a
distributed fashion.
however, a direct application of the consensus protocol will
ConcerningthefirsttermTTTvˆ,TheoremII.16providesan
notbesufficient.Indeed,itisexpectedthateachagentwillbe
analytic characterization of the eigenvectors associated with
physicallymoving,leadingtoatime-varyingdescriptionofthe
the zero eigenvalues of the symmetric rigidity matrix (assum-
matrix TTT (see Remark V.2). Additionally, the underlying
ing the graph is infinitesimally rigid). To begin the analysis,
network is also dynamic as sensing links between agents are
weexplicitlywriteoutthematrixT andexaminetheelements
inherently state dependent.
of the matrix TTT. Following the comments of Remark
The use of a dynamic consensus protocol introduces ad-
II.17, we express the null-space vectors in terms of relative
ditional tuning parameters that can be used to ensure that
positions to an arbitrary point p = px py pz R3; in
c c c c ∈ the distributed average calculation converges faster than the
particular, the point p will be the special agent i described
c (cid:2) c (cid:3) underlying dynamics of each agent in the system, as well as
in Section IV.
the ability to track the average of a time-varying signal. We
employ the following PI average consensus filter proposed in
T= 1 0 n 1 0 0 0 p p x y 1− py c 1 p n x pz − 0 pz c 1 n pz 0 pz1 (Freeman et al., 2006),
 0 0 n 1 c n 0 − px1 px py1− c p n y 
Fort  heremainderofthisdiscussion,weassumethatallagents  w˙(t) = − n K − L( P (t) G ) I 0 G w(t)
have access to their state in an estimated coordinate frame (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) − G (cid:21)(cid:20) (cid:21)
relative to the point p , the details of which were described + n u(t) (21)
in Section IV. (cid:20) (cid:21)
To simplify notations, we write as in Section IV, for exam- y(t)= I 0 . (22)
ple,py,c =py py1 ,andp =p p .Followingourearlier n w(t)
notation, we a − lso c pa n rtition t i h ,c e vec i to − r vˆ c into each coordinate, The paramete (cid:2) rs K ,K (cid:3) (cid:20) R an (cid:21) d γ R are used to ensure
vˆx, vˆy, and vˆz. Let avg(r) denote the average value of the stability and tune the spe ∈ ed of the fi ∈ lter. An analysis of the
elements in the vector r ∈ Rn, i.e. avg(r) = n 11T n r. Then it stability and performance of this scheme with time-varying
is straightforward to verify that graphs is given in (Freeman et al., 2006). Figure 5 provides a
1 1Tvˆk(t)=navg(vˆk(t))1 , k x,y,z (19) block diagram representation of how the PI consensus filters
n n n ∈{ } are embedded into the calculation of TTTvˆ(t) (in only the
p (p )Tvˆk(t)=navg(p vˆk)p , i,j,k x,y,z ,
i,c j,c j,c i,c x-coordinate).
As for the second term in (17), as shown in II-C the sym-
where ‘ ’ denotes the element-wise multiplication of two metricrigiditymatrixisbyconstructionadistributedoperator.
vectors. The term vˆ(t) can be computed using only information
Thischaracterizationhighlightsthat,inordertoevaluatethe exchanged between neighboring agents, as determined by the
termTTTvˆ,eachagentmustcomputetheaverageamongstall sensing graph.
agentsofacertainvaluethatisafunctionofthecurrentstateof The final term in (17) is a normalization used to drive the
the estimator and of the positions in some common reference eigenvector estimate to the surface of a sphere of radius √3n.
frame whose origin is the point p . It is well known that the Using the same analysis as above, it can be verified that
consensus protocol can be used to distributedly compute the
average of a set of numbers (Mesbahi and Egerstedt, 2010). 1 vˆ(t)=(avg(vˆ(t) vˆ(t)) 1)vˆ(t). (23)
The speed at which the consensus protocol can compute this (cid:18) (cid:19)
valueisafunctionoftheconnectivityoftheunderlyinggraph This quantity can therefore be distributedly computed using
and the weights used in the protocol. In this framework, an additional PI consensus filter.
1 1T +py,c(py,c)T +pz,c(pz,c)T py,c(px,c)T pz,c(px,c)T
TTT = n n px,c(py,c)T 1 1T +px − ,c(px,c)T +pz,c(pz,c)T − pz,c(py,c)T (18)
 − px,c(pz,c)T n n py,c(pz,c)T 1 1T +px − ,c(px,c)T +py,c(py,c)T 
UsingtheresultofTheoremV.1andthePIconsensusfilters, was presented in Sections IV and V, with the complete set
each agent is also able to estimate the rigidity eigenvalue. of filter equations summarized in (24)–(33). Note that both
estimation strategies implicitly require that the underlying
CorollaryV.4. Letv2(t)denotetheoutputofthePIconsensus
i formation is infinitesimally rigid (see also Assumption III.4).
filter for estimating the quantity avg(vˆ(t) vˆ(t)) for agent i.
Then agent i’s estimate of the rigidity eige ◦ nvalue, λˆi, can be The final step for implementation of the rigidity maintenance
7 controlleristhentoreplaceallthestate-variablesgivenin(13)
obtained as
k with the appropriate estimated states computed by the relative
λˆi = 3 1 v2(t) .
7 k − i position estimators and rigidity eigenvalue estimators. The
local controller for each agent is thus given as,9
In summary, each agent im(cid:0)plements t(cid:1)he following filters:
• Estimation of a common reference frame using (15).
• • E A st P im I- a C ti o o n n se o n f s t u h s e fi ri l g te id r it f y or ei t g r e a n c v k e in c g tor th u e sin a g ve ( r 1 a 7 g ) e . of the ξ i x=− ∂V ∂λ (λˆ 7 i 7 ) j (cid:88) ∈Ni Wij (cid:16) 2(pˆx i,c −pˆx j,c )(vˆ i x−vˆ j x)2+
i,c j,c i j i j i,c j,c i j i j
).
onsensus filter for tracking the quantity described ∂
• A PI-Consensus filter for tracking the average of the
in conjunction with all the estimation filters of (24)-(33).
square of the rigidity eigenvector estimate, (23).
For completeness, we now present the full set of filters that Remark VI.1. The interconnection of the relative position
each robot executes in (24)-(33). These equations are written estimator, rigidity eigenvalue estimator, and gradient con-
only for the x-coordinate associated with all the quantities. troller leads to a highly non-linear dynamics for which a
Observe, however, that the filters needed for the y and formal proof analysis is not straightfoward. While we are
z coordinatesdonotrequireadditionalintegrators,as − similar currently working towards a deeper analysis in this sense, the
fi − lters can be vectorized (for example, the PI filters can be approach taken in this work is to exploit the typical (although
combinedasin(21)).Forthereadersconvenience,asummary informal) time-scale separation argument commonly found in
of the notations and variable definitions used in (24)-(33) is many robotics applications relying on feedback control from
provided in Table I. an estimated state (as, e.g., when using an extended Kalman
filter). Basically, the estimator dynamics is assumed “fast
Remark V.5. Equations (24)-(33) show that each agent re-
enough”suchthatitstransientbehaviorcanbeconsideredas
quires a 10-th order dynamic estimator for estimating the
a second-order perturbation with respect to the robot motion
rigidityeigenvectorandeigenvalue.Thisfilteriscomprisedof
(see also (Yang et al., 2010)) for an equivalent assumption in
threePI-Consensusfilters,anrelativepositionestimationfilter,
the context of decentralized connectivity maintenance control.
andthepoweriterationfilter.Animportantpointtoemphasize
is the order of the overall filter is independent of the number
VII. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
of agents in the ensemble, and thus is a scalable solution.
In this section we report some experimental results aimed
VI. THERIGIDITYMAINTENANCECONTROLLER at illustrating the machinery proposed so far for distributed
rigidity maintenance. The experiments involved a total of
The primary focus of this work until now was a detailed
N = 6 quadorotor UAVs (5 real and 1 simulated) flying the
description of how the rigidity of a multi-robot formation can
environment shown in Fig. 6. A video illustrating the various
be maintained in a distributed fashion. The basic idea was
phasesoftheexperiment(MultimediaExtension1)isattached
to follow the gradient of an appropriately defined potential
to the paper.
function of the rigidity eigenvalue; this control strategy was
All the quadrotor UAVs were implementing the rigidity
presented in (13). The fundamental challenge for the imple-
maintenance action (34) in addition to the estimation filters
mentation of this control strategy was twofold: on the one
presented in (24)-(33). Additionally, for two of the quadrotor
hand,rigidityofaformationisaninherentlyglobalpropertyof
UAVs (namely, quadrotors 1 and 2) an exogenous bounded
the network, and on the other hand, the control law depended
velocity term ξ∗ R3 was also added to (34); this allows for
on relative position measurements in a common reference i ∈
two human operators to independently control the motion of
fame.
quadrotors 1 and 2 during the experiment, so as to steer the
A truly distributed solution based on this control strategy
whole formation and trigger the various behaviors embedded
requires each agent to estimate a common inertial reference
frameandalsoestimatetherigidityeigenvalueandeigenvector
9The control is shown in the x-coordinate; a similar expression can be
of the formation. The solution to these estimation problems obtainedforthey-andz-coordinates.
vˆ˙x = k n vx+zxy(t)pˆy +zxzpˆz (t) k W vˆx(t) vˆx k (vx 1)vˆx (24)
i − 1 i i i,c i i,c − 2 ij i − j − 3 i − i
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
i,c (cid:107) j,c − i,c (cid:107) − ij j,c − i,c − iic i,c − iι ι,c − ι − ic − iκ κ,c − κ − ic
v˙x =γ(vˆx vx) K vx vx(t) +K wx wx (26)
i i − i − P i − j I i − j
∈Ni(cid:0)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
w˙x = K vx vx (27)
i − I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
v˙2x =γ (vˆx)2 v2x K v2x v2x +K w2x w2x (28)
i i − i − P i − j I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
w˙2x = K v2x v2x (29)
i − I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
z˙xy =γ((pˆy vˆx pˆx vˆy) zxy) K zxy zxy +K wxy(t) wxy (30)
i ◦ − ◦ − i − P i − j I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
w˙xy = K zxy zxy (31)
i − I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
z˙xz =γ((pˆz vˆx pˆx vˆz) zxz) K zxy zxy +K wxy wxy (32)
i ◦ − ◦ − i − P i − j I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
w˙xz = K zxz zxz (33)
i − I i − j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
in the weights (formation control, obstacle avoidance,
sensing limitations).10
Our experimental quadrotor platform is a customized ver-
sion of the MK-Quadro11 implementing the TeleKyb ROS
framework12 for flight control, experimental workflow man-
agement and human inputing. Attitude is stabilized with a
fast inner loop that takes advantage of high-rate/onboard
accelerometerandgyroscopemeasurementswhilethevelocity
stabilizationisachievedbyaslowercontrolloopthatmeasures
the current velocity thanks to an external motion capture
system. The motion capture system is also used to obtain
relative distance measurements among the robots and the two
bearing measurements needed by the special robot i . The
reader is referred to (Franchi et al., 2012b) for a detailed
description of the quadrotor-based experimental setup.
We start illustrating the behavior of the relative position
estimator described in Sect. IV and upon which all the subse-
quent steps are based (estimation of λ and v and evaluation Fig. 6. Two snapshots of the reported experiment. Left: simulated 3D
7 viewsshowing,inparticular,theinter-agentlinks(red–almostdisconnected
of the control action (10)). As explained in Sect. IV, owing
link, green – optimally connected link). Right: corresponding pictures of
to the formation infinitesimal rigidity, the scheme (15) allows the experimental setup. The two highlighted quadrotor UAVs are partially
each agent i to build an estimation pˆ of its relative position controlledbytwohumanoperators
p p with respect to the agent i , with i = 1 in this
experiment. Figures 7(a–e) report the behavior of the norm of
the estimation errors p p pˆ for i=2...6 together errors keep low values over time, thus effectively allowing
(cid:107) − − (cid:107)
with their mean values (dashed horizontal black line). It is everyagenttorecoveritscorrectrelativepositionwithrespect
then possible to verify how the relative position estimation to p from the measured relative distances.
AsfortherigidityeigenvalueestimationofSect.V,Fig.8(a)
10We note that, being ξ∗ bounded, its effect does not threaten rigidity reports the behavior of λ (t) (solid blue line), of the 6
maintenance since the control action ξi in (10) always results dominant as estimations λˆi(t) (solid colored lines almost superimposed to
V λ 1 ( 1 λ m 7 i ) kr → oko ∞ pte i r f .d λ e 7(t)→λm 7 in. λ 7 (t)), and of 7 the minimum threshold λm 7 in =7.5 (horizontal
12ros.org/wiki/telekyb dashed line). From the plot one can verify: (i) the accuracy
00 50 100 150 200 250 300
0.02 00 50 100 150 200 250 300
00 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
00 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
00 50 100 150 200 250 300
40 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
Fig.7. Behaviorof(cid:107)pi−pc−pˆi,c(cid:107),i=2...6,thenormoftheestimation
error for the relative positions of agents 2...6 w.r.t. agent ic = 1. The
horizontaldashedblacklinerepresentsthemeanvalueofeacherrornormover
time.Notehowtheestimationerrorskeepalowvalueduringthegroupmotion
andthusindicatetheabilityofeachrobottorecoveritsrelativepositionwith
respecttotherobotic=1byonlyexploitingmeasureddistanceswithrespect
toitsneighborsandtheinfinitesimalrigidityoftheformation
in recovering the value of λ (t) (note how the 6 estimations
are almost superimposed on the real value) and (ii) that
λ (t) > λmin at all times apart from few isolated spikes,
implying that formation rigidity was maintained during the
task execution. As an additional indication of the eigenvalue
estimation performance, Fig. 8(b) shows the total estimation
error for the rigidity eigenvalue
which again confirms the accuracy of the estimation strategy.
Figures 9(a–o) report the behavior of the 15 weights W
defined in (11) and associated to the all the possible edges of
graph in order to show their time-varying nature because of
theconstraintsandrequirementslistedinSect.III-A.Notehow
thevalueofsomeweightdropstozeroovertime(e.g.,W (t)
at about t = 25 [s] or W (t) at about t = 210 [s]), thus
indicating loss of the corresponding edge. In the same spirit,
00 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
Fig. 8. Left: behavior of λ7(t) (blue line) and the 6 estimations λˆi
(dashedcoloredlines)whichresultalmostcoincident.Right:behaviorofthe
overallrigidityeigenvalueestimationerrore λ (t)asdefinedin(35)
Fig.10showsthetotalnumberofedges ˆ oftheunweighted
graph ˆ (i.e., of non-zero weights W | , E s | ee Definition II.9) uv G during the group motion. These results highlight the time-
varying nature of graph which, as explained in the previous
G sections, is not constrained to keep a given fixed topology but
is free to lose or gain edges as long as infinitesimal rigidity
of the formation is preserved.
Finally, Figs. 11(a–f) report the behavior over time of p (t)
(the i-th agent position, solid lines) and of p (t) (the i-th
quadrotor position, dashed lines) while tracking the motion of
p (t). The two position vectors result almost perfectly coinci-
dent, thus indicating a successful tracking performance of the
quadrotors (and the soundness of our modeling assumptions).
As a further confirmation of this fact, the norm of the overall
tracking error defined as
e (t)= i=1(cid:107) i − i,real (cid:107) (36)
is also reported in Fig. 12.
VIII. CONCLUDINGREMARKS
This work presented a fully distributed solution for the
rigidity maintenance control of a multi-robot system. As dis-
cussedintheintroduction,rigidityisanimportantarchitectural
feature for multi-robot systems that enables, for example,
formation keeping and localization using only range-based
measurements. The main theme of this work, therefore, was
the distributed implementation of a number of algorithms
for estimation and control in a multi-robot system related to
rigidity maintenance. In particular, we demonstrated how the
rigidity eigenvalue and eigenvector, used to decide if a for-
mation is infinitesimally rigid, can be distributedly estimated
usingasuiteofestimatorsbasedondynamicconsensusfilters
andthepoweriterationmethodforeigenvalueestimation.The
rigidity property also allowed for estimation of a common
inertialreferenceframeusingonlyrangebasedmeasurements,
alongwithonesingleendowedagentthatisabletosenseboth
range and bearing. The estimation of these quantities were
then embedded in a gradient-based distributed control action
ensuring each agent moves in a way that guarantees rigidity
of the formation is maintained. This control scheme also
explicitlyhandlesavarietyofpracticalmulti-robotconstraints,
0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.10 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300 21W
0.85 0.8 0.75 0.7 0.65 0.6 0.55 0.50 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.20 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.20 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.40 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.20 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.6 0.5 0.4
00 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.7 0.6 0.5
0.20 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.6 0.5 0.4
00 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.9 0.8 0.7
0.6 0.5 0.4
0.20 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.85 0.8 0.75
0.650 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0.9 0.8 0.7
0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3
0.10 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
00 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
00 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
0 50 100tim15e0[s]200 250 300
Fig. 9. Behavior of the 15 weights Wuv(t) for all the possible edges of
graph G. Note how the values of weights Wuv(t) vary over time because
ofthesensing/communicationconstraintsandrequirementsembeddedwithin
their definition (see sec. III-A). Some weights (e.g., W24 and W45) also
temporarily vanish indicating loss of the corresponding edge (and, thus, the
time-varyingnatureofgraphG)
140 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
−40 50 100 150 200 250 300
Fig.10. TotalnumberofedgesinthegraphG duringthegroupmotion
includingsensingandcommunicationranges,collisionandob-
stacle avoidance, and line-of-sight requirements. The validity
of the proposed algorithms was demonstrated by a team of 6
]m[laer,1 p , 1 p
−40 50 100 150 200 250 300
]m[laer,2 p , 2 p
−30 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
−40 50 100 150 200 250 300 time[s]
−40 50 100 150 200 250 300
−50 50 100 150 200 250 300
Fig.11. Figs.(a–f):behaviorofpi(t)(solid)andp i,real(dashed):theseare
basically superimposed, showing the accuracy of the quadrotors in tracking
the reference trajectory pi(t). In the plots the following color code is used:
blue/red/greensolid/dashedlinescorrespondtothex/y/zcomponentsofpi(t)
andp i,real
00 50 100 150 200 250 300
Fig. 12. Behavior of the tracking error e track (t) defined in (36) showing
againthegoodtrackingperformanceofthe6quadrotors
quadrotor UAVs flying in a cluttered environment.
Thisworkalsohighlightedanumberofdirectionsforfuture
research. In particular, the estimation of the rigidity eigen-
value assumed that there is a separation between the rigidity
eigenvalue and the next largest eigenvalue, i.e. λ λ >0.
Whilethereportedexperimentalresultsshowedalargedegree
of robustness w.r.t. this effect, there remain both theoretical
and practical questions related to this problem. For instance,
it would be interesting to complement the rigidity mainte-
nance controller with an additional term meant to maintain a
minimum separation among λ and λ . Another extension is
to relax the requirement for having a special agent endowed
with additional sensing capabilities (i.e. range and bearing).
This would lead to a distributed solution involving only range
measurements for all robots in the ensemble.
Despite these remaining challenges, this work has suc-
cessfully demonstrated the power of distributed strategies for
multi-robotsystems.Indeed,itisremarkabletoobservethebe-
haviorofthemulti-robotteamrunningmanydistributedfilters
toachieveacommonglobalobjective.Therefinementofthese
strategies will no doubt become an important requirement as (a) Agraph. (b) Localdirectedgraphatanode.
autonomous multi-robot systems are integrated more into a
Fig.13. Exampleofadirectedlocalgraph.
variety of application domains.
Let = ( , ) be a sub-graph induced by node v such
APPENDIXA:INDEXTOMULTIMEDIAEXTENSIONS that
ijrr.org. E { |{ }∈E}
Here we emphasize that the original graph is undirected,
Extension Type Description
while in the new induced graph we assign a direction to
1 Video Experiments of rigidity mainte- i
the edge such that node v is always the tail. Furthermore,
nance with a group of UAVs j
observe that = .13 This is illustrated in Figure 13.
APPENDIXB:RIGIDITYMATRIXEXAMPLE To continue with the K 3 example, we can write the local
incidence matrix for node v as
The development of the alternative representation of the 1
Rigidity Matrix given in Proposition II.13 of the document
is aided by a simple example. To begin, we make some
E ( )= 1 0 0 .
qualitativeobservationsoftherigiditymatrix.Forthisexample G  − 
we consider a framework in R2 with the complete graph on −
3 nodes (denoted K 3 ). The rigidity matrix can be written by Note that this matrix is not truly an incidence matrix for the
inspection as graph ; “placeholders” for the other edges in the graph
are kept. As a result, the local incidence matrix is defined as
E ( ) R|V|×|E| to have zero-columns corresponding to the
px px py py px px py py 0 0 l G j ∈
p 1 x − p 2 x p 1 y− p 2 y 2 − 0 1 2 − 0 1 px px py py . edges not in E j .14
 1 − 0 3 1 − 0 3 px px py py p 3 x − p 1 x p 3 y− p 1 y Now, consider the local incidence matrix as the difference
2 − 3 2 − 3 3 − 2 3 − 2 operator,
Forthecompletegraphandanarbitraryorientationassigned
to each edge, the incidence matrix E( ) can be written as px py px px py py
G E ( )T p 1 x p 1 y = p 1 x − p 2 x p 1 y− p 2 y .
1 1 0 l G 1  p 2 x p 2 y   1 − 0 3 1 − 0 3 
E( )= 1 0 1 . 3 3
− − Note that this is identical to the the first 2 columns of the
The transpose of the incidence matrix functions as a “dif- rigiditymatrixR(p).Infact,thisshowsthattherigiditymatrix
ference” operator. If the position of each agent is formed into can be written entirely in terms of local incidence matrices,
a vector, we have as formally stated in Proposition II.13 of the main document.
px py px px py py
E( )T p 1 x p 1 y = px 1 − px 2 py 1 − py 2 .
G  p 2 x p 2 y   px 1 − px 3 py 1 − py 3  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
3 3 2 − 3 2 − 3
The point to illustrate here is that this difference operation Part of Heinrich Bu¨lthoff’s research was supported by the
between positions is redundantly embedded inside the rigidity BrainKorea21PLUSProgramthroughtheNationalResearch
matrix. This fact can be made more precise by defining Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education.
a directed local graph at node v from the graph as Correspondence should be directed to Heinrich H. Bu¨lthoff.
in Definition II.12 in the main text. Intuitively, the idea is
that each node only has some local information about the 13Here, we assume that the directed edges (vi,vj) and (vj,vi) are
connectivity of the entire graph; indeed, it only knows of the equivalenttotheundirectededge{vi,vj}.
existence of other nodes that it can sense. In this way, we 14Thisrepresentationalsoassumesthatalltheedgeshavebeenassigneda
label,andthislabelingismaintainedevenforthelocalgraphs(localgraphs
can define a sub-graph induced by each node in the graph as
do not relabel their edges; for example if edge 2 is not in local graph Gj,
follows. thenthesecondcolumnofE(Gj)willbezero).
REFERENCES M. Ji and M. Egerstedt. Distributed Coordination Control of Multi-
agent Systems While Preserving Connectedness. IEEE Trans. on
I. F. Akyildiz, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci. A survey
onsensornetworks. IEEECommunicationsMagazine,40(8):102– Robotics, 23(4):693–703, August 2007.
L.Krick,M.E.Broucke,andB.A.Francis. Stabilisationofinfinites-
114, 2002.
B. D. O. Anderson, B. Fidan, C. Yu, and D. van der Walle. UAV imally rigid formations of multi-robot networks. International
formationcontrol:Theoryandapplication. InV.D.Blondel,S.P. Journal of Control, 82(3):423–439, 2009.
Boyd, and H. Kimura, editors, Recent Advances in Learning and G.Laman.Ongraphsandrigidityofplaneskeletalstructures.Journal
Control,volume371ofLectureNotesinControlandInformation of Engineering Mathematics, 4(4):331–340, 1970.
Sciences, pages 15–34. Springer, 2008a. Q. Lindsey, D. Mellinger, and V. Kumar. Construction of cubic
B.D.O.Anderson,C.Yu,B.Fidan,andJ.M.Hendrickx.Rigidgraph structures with quadrotor teams. In 2011 Robotics: Science and
control architectures for autonomous formations. IEEE Control Systems, Los Angeles, CA, Jun. 2011.
Systems Magazine, 28(6):48–63, 2008b. M. Mesbahi and M. Egerstedt. Graph Theoretic Methods in Mul-
J. Aspnes, T. Eren, D. K. Goldenberg, A. S. Morse, W. Whiteley, tiagent Networks. Princeton Series in Applied Mathematics.
Y.R.Yang,B.D.O.Anderson,andP.N.Belhumeur. Atheoryof PrincetonUniversityPress,1edition,2010.ISBN9780691140612.
network localization. IEEE Trans. on Mobile Computing, 5(12): N. Michael, J. Fink, and V. Kumar. Cooperative manipulation and
1663–1678, 2006. transportation with aerial robots. In 2009 Robotics: Science and
J. Baillieul and L. McCoy. The combinatorial graph theory of Systems, Seattle, WA, Jun. 2009.
structuredformations. In200746thIEEEConferenceonDecision R.M.Murray.Recentresearchincooperativecontrolofmulti-vehicle
and Control, pages 3609–3615, December 2007. systems. ASME Journal on Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and
J. Bristow, D. Folta, and K. Hartman. A Formation Flying Tech- Control, 129(5):571–583, 2006.
nology Vision. In AIAA Space 2000 Conference and Exposition, R. Olfati-Saber and R. M. Murray. The combinatorial graph theory
volume 21, Long Beach, CA, April 2000. of structured formations. In 41th IEEE Conf. on Decision and
G. C. Calafiore, L. Carlone, and M. Wei. A distributed gradient Control, pages 3609–3615, Las Vegas, NV, Dec. 2002.
method for localization of formations using relative range mea- P. Robuffo Giordano, A. Franchi, C. Secchi, and H. H. Bu¨lthoff.
surements. In 2010 IEEE Int. Symp. on Computer-Aided Control Bilateral teleoperation of groups of UAVs with decentralized
System Design, pages 1146–1151, Yokohama, Japan, Sep. 2010a. connectivitymaintenance. In2011Robotics:ScienceandSystems,
G.C.Calafiore,L.Carlone,andMingzhuWei. AdistributedGauss- Los Angeles, CA, Jun. 2011.
Newton approach for range-based localization of multi agent P. Robuffo Giordano, A. Franchi, C. Secchi, and H. H. Bu¨lthoff. A
formations. InComputer-AidedControlSystemDesign(CACSD), passivity-baseddecentralizedstrategyforgeneralizedconnectivity
2010IEEEInternationalSymposiumon,pages1152–1157,2010b. maintenance. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 32
R. Connelly and W. J. Whiteley. Global Rigidity: The Effect of (3):299–323, 2013.
Coning. DiscreteComputationalGeometry,43(4):717–735,2009. D. Scaramuzza, M. C. Achtelik, L. Doitsidis, F. Fraundorfer, E. B.
T. Eren, O. K. Goldenberg, W. Whiteley, Y. R. Yang, A. S. Morse, Kosmatopoulos, A. Martinelli, M. W. Achtelik, M. Chli, S. A.
B. D. O. Anderson, and P. N. Belhumeur. Rigidity, computation, Chatzichristofis,L.Kneip,D.Gurdan,L.Heng,G.H.Lee,S.Ly-
and randomization in network localization. In IEEE INFOCOM nen,L.Meier,M.Pollefeys,A.Renzaglia,RolandSiegwart,J.C.
2004, volume 4, pages 2673–2684. IEEE, 2004. Stumpf,P.Tanskanen,C.Troiani,andS.Weiss. Vision-controlled
A. Franchi, C. Masone, V. Grabe, M. Ryll, H. H. Bu¨lthoff, and microflyingrobots:fromsystemdesigntoautonomousnavigation
P. Robuffo Giordano. Modeling and control of UAV bearing- and mapping in GPS-denied environments. IEEE Robotics &
formations with bilateral high-level steering. The International Automation Magazine, 2014.
Journal of Robotics Research, Special Issue on 3D Exploration, I. Shames, B. Fidan, and B. D. O. Anderson. Minimization of
Mapping, and Surveillance, 31(12):1504–1525, 2012a. the effect of noisy measurements on localization of multi-agent
A.Franchi,C.Secchi,M.Ryll,H.H.Bu¨lthoff,andP.RobuffoGior- autonomous formations. Automatica, 45(4):1058–1065, 2009.
dano. Shared control: Balancing autonomy and human assistance B. Smith, M. Egerstedt, and A. Howard. Automatic generation
with a group of quadrotor UAVs. IEEE Robotics & Automation of persistent formations for multi-agent networks under range
Magazine, Special Issue on Aerial Robotics and the Quadrotor constraints. In 1st Int. Conf. on Robot communication and
Platform, 19(3):57–68, 2012b. coordination, pages 1–8, 2007.
Randy A. Freeman, Peng Yang, and Kevin M. Lynch. Stability and T.TayandW.Whiteley. Generatingisostaticframeworks. Structural
Convergence Properties of Dynamic Average Consensus Estima- Topology, 11(1):21–69, 1985.
tors. In45thIEEEConf.onDecisionandControl,pages338–343, R. K. Williams, A. Gasparri, A. Priolo, and G. S. Sukhatme.
San Diego, CA, 2006. Evaluating Network Rigidity in Realistic Systems: Decentraliza-
C.D.GodsilandG.Royle. AlgebraicGraphTheory. Springer,2001. tion, Asynchronicity, and Parallelization. IEEE Transactions on
ISBN 978-0-387-95241-3. Robotics, 2014.
J. Graver, B. Servatius, and H. Servatius. Combinatorial Rigidity. C. Wu, Y. Zhang, W. Sheng, and S. Kanchi. Rigidity guided
GraduateStudiesinMathematics.AmericanMathematicalSociety, localisation for mobile robotic sensor networks. International
Providence, RI, 1993. ISBN 0821838016. Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing, 6(2):114, 2010.
R. Horn and C. Johnson. Matrix Analysis. Cambridge University P.Yang,R.A.Freeman,G.J.Gordon,K.M.Lynch,S.S.Srinivasa,
Press, New York, 1985. andR.Sukthankar. Decentralizedestimationandcontrolofgraph
R.A.HornandC.R.Johnson.TopicsinMatrixAnalysis.Cambridge connectivity for mobile sensor networks. Automatica, 46(2):390–
University Press, New York, NY, 1991. 396, 2010.
B. Jackson. Notes on the Rigidity of Graphs. In Levico Conference D. Zelazo, A. Franchi, F. Allgo¨wer, H. H. Bu¨lthoff, and P. Robuffo
Notes, 2007. Giordano. Rigidity maintenance control for multi-robot systems.
D.Jacobs. AnAlgorithmforTwo-DimensionalRigidityPercolation: In 2012 Robotics: Science and Systems, Sydney, Australia, Jul.
The Pebble Game. Journal of Computational Physics, 137(2): 2012.
346–365, November 1997.