Université Pierre & Marie Curie - Paris 6
Synthèse de l'activité scientifique en vue de l'obtention
d'une Habilitation à Diriger des Recherches
Inna KUPERSTEIN
U900 Institut Curie/INSERM/Mines ParisTech
Bioinformatics and Computational Systems Biology of Cancer
Institut Curie, rue d’Ulm 26, 75248, Paris
DECIPHERING CELL SIGNALING
REWIRING IN HUMAN DISORDERS
Soutenu le 14 December
Devant le jury composé de :
Président :
Guido Kroemer
Rapporteurs :
Marie Beurton-Aimar
Lodewyk Wessels
Fabrice André
Examinateurs :
Simon Saule
Denis Thieffry
Emmanuel Barillot
ABSTRACT 3
INTRODUCTION 6
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE: A DISORDER OF PROTEIN MISFOLDING AND SYNAPTIC FAILURE 7
CANCER: A SYSTEMS BIOLOGY DISORDER 7
1. MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF NEURODEGENERATION 12
CHAPTER AT GLANCE 12
1.1 PHOSPHORYLATION CASCADES AND OXIDATIVE STRESS RESPONSE IN NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES 12
1.2 MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF SYNAPTIC AND NEURONAL TOXICITY IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE. 14
2. CANCER: A COMPLEX SYSTEM 18
CHAPTER AT GLANCE 18
2.1 FORMALIZATION OF BIOLOGICAL KNOWLEDGE AS SIGNALING NETWORK MAPS 18
2.2 MOLECULAR PORTRAITS OF CANCER: DATA VISUALIZATION AND ANALYSIS USING SIGNALING NETWORK MAPS
3. NETWORK MODELING IN PRE-­‐CLINICAL RESEARCH 26
CHAPTER AT GLANCE 26
3.1 EXPLAINING SYNERGISTIC EFFECT OF COMBINED TREATMENT IN CANCER 26
3.2 FINDING METASTASIS INDUCERS IN COLON CANCER THROUGH NETWORK ANALYSIS 28
3.3 COMPLEX INTERVENTION GENE SETS DERIVED FROM DATA-­‐DRIVEN NETWORK ANALYSIS FOR CANCER
PATIENTS RESISTANT TO GENOTOXIC TREATMENT 31
4. COMPEX SYNTHETIC INRETACTION MECHANISMS 34
CHAPTER AT GLANCE 34
4.1 KINETIC TRAP OF A PATHWAY: NEW MECHANISM OF SYNTHETIC LETHALITY 34
4.2 SYNTHETIC LETHALITY MECHANISMS AND ORGANIZATIONAL PRINCIPLES OF CELL SIGNALING AT DIFFERENT
CONCLUSIONS 40
REFERENCES 41
COMPLETE LIST OF PUBLICATIONS AND COMMUNICATIONS 45
In this synthesis I provide an overview on my scientific activity during more than
10 years. The main transversal topic connecting all scientific projects in which I
participated, is cell molecular mechanisms implicated in human disorders. Trained
as biologist, I have dedicated first part of my career to studying neurodegenerative
mechanisms. Whereas, in the second part of my career I focused on deciphering
complexity of cancer mechanisms by computational systems biology approaches,
which is my current scientific activity, also reflecting the future interest. Four
chapters of the synthesis chronologically describe the major areas of my interest:
Chapter 1 is dedicated to the experimental part of the work on
mechanisms of neurodegeneration, with focus on oxidative stress signaling and
synaptic toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease.
Chapters 2-4 are devotes to the work in the field of systems biology of cancer and
represent sequential steps of multidisciplinary project on signaling rewiring in
cancer and new therapeutic intervention schemes development:
Chapter 2 describes how to address complexity of cancer by systematic
representation of signaling implicated in the disease in the form of comprehensive
signaling network maps and impact of this approach on interpretation of cancer
omics data.
Chapter 3 summarizes studies on application of signaling networks
modeling for finding synthetically interacting genes in cancer; predicting drug
synergy and suggesting complex therapeutic intervention sets.
Chapter 4 deals with more fundamental topic of mechanistic principles in
synthetic lethality. The first part is dedicated to new synthetic lethal paradigm that
we suggested following modeling studies. In the second part, I discuss synthetic
lethal mechanisms at several scales of intra- and inter-cellular signaling, from
molecules to functional modules in cell and toward synthetic interactions between
different cell types.
The synthesis is concluded by describing challenges and future directions in the
field of signaling rewiring studies in human disorders, articulating the
complementarity of experimental and computational approaches.
RESUMÉ [FRENCH]
ETUDE DES RESEAUX DE SIGNALISATION DANS LES MALADIES
Dans ce mémoire je présente un panorama de mon activité scientifique depuis plus de
dix ans. Le principal axe transversal reliant tous les projets scientifiques auxquels j’ai
participé est celui des mécanismes moléculaires de la cellule impliqués dans les maladies
humaines. Biologiste de formation, j’ai dédié la première partie de ma carrière à l’étude
des mécanismes neurodegénératifs, tandis que la seconde partie a été consacrée à l’étude
de la complexité des mécanismes du cancer par des approches computationnelles de
biologie des systèmes. Ces derniers constituent mon activité scientifique actuelle et mon
centre d’intérêt futur. Les quatre chapitres de mon mémoire décrivent dans l’ordre
chronologique mes domaines majeurs d’intérêt:
Le chapitre 1 est dédié à la partie experimentale de mon travail sur les
mécanismes de neurodégénération, avec un focus sur le stress oxydatif signaling et la
toxicité synaptique dans la maladie d’Alzheimer.
Les chapitres 2-4 sont consacrés au travaux dans le domaine de la biologie des systèmes
du cancer et représentent les étapes successives d’un projet multidisciplinaire d’étude des
réseaux de signalisation du cancer et de la recherche de nouveaux schémas
d’intervention thérapeutique:
Le chapitre 2 décrit d’une part comment appréhender la complexité du cancer
par une représentation systématique de la signalisation impliquée dans cette maladie,
sous la forme de cartes aussi complètes que possible du réseau de signalisation; il montre
d’autre part l’impact de cette approche sur l’interprétation de données omiques de
tumeurs.
Le chapitre 3 résume les études utilisant la modélisation de réseaux de
signalisation pour trouver les gènes en interaction synthétique dans le cancer, prédire les
synergies entre drogues, et proposer des schémas complexes d’intervention
thérapeutique.
Le chapitre 4 aborde de façon plus fondamentale les principes mécanistiques de
l’interaction létale synthétique. La première partie porte sur un nouveau paradigme
d’interaction synthtique que nous avons suggéré suite à une étude de modélisation
mathématique. Dans la seconde partie, je discute les mécanismes de létalité synthétique à
différentes échelles de signalisation intra- et inter-cellulaire, de la molécule aux modules
fonctionnels de la cellule, et jusqu’aux interactions synthétiques entre différent types
cellulaires.
Le mémoire se conclut par la description des défis et directions futures dans le domaine
des réseaux de signalisation des maladies humaines, s’appuyant sur la complémentarité
des approches experimentales et computationnelles.
Dedicated to the respected and beloved ones
The knowledge of cell molecular mechanisms implicated in human diseases is
expanding and should be converted into guidelines for deciphering pathological
cell signaling and suggesting appropriate treatment. The basic assumption is that
during a pathological transformation, the cell does not create new signaling
mechanisms, but rather it hijacks the existing molecular programs. This affects not
only intracellular functions, but also a crosstalk between different cell types
resulting in a new, yet pathological status of the system. There is a certain
combination of molecular characteristics dictating specific cell signaling states
that sustains the pathological disease status. Identifying and manipulating the key
molecular players controlling these cell signaling states, and shifting the
pathological status toward the desired healthy phenotype, are the major challenge
for molecular biology of human diseases.
From the beginning of my career I have been interested in understanding the
mechanistic basis of biological functions. Going from the detailed information
about cell signaling to an abstract model is the way to find regularities in the
functioning of a biological system. I strongly believe that a combination of
knowledge about emerging principles of a biological system behavior, together
with specific molecular perturbations in each patient will help to come up with
individual intervention schemes.
The projects depicted in this synthesis represent a combination of my expertise in
experimental sciences, specifically cell signaling, with computational systems
biology. Each scientific project inevitably requires development of new
appropriated methods. Thus, the description of my work combines together the
methodological and the scientific achievements.
My diverse arsenal of knowledge and methods is an asset for multidisciplinary
studies represented in this document and also for the ongoing and future to-come
projects. Among others, my scientific role is to bring together biologists,
clinicians, biostatisticians and developers to match various approaches to the
current scientific challenges.
INTRODUCTION
Neurodegenerative diseases as Alzheimer´s, Parkinson, Huntington´s and cancer
are two common chronic disorders in the elderly. Neurodegeneration is
characterized by progressive dysfunction and eventual loss of neurons, whereas
cancer is associated with uncontrolled and excessive cell proliferation. Therefore,
these two types of disease seem to be on opposite ends of the cell growth
regulation spectrum. Indeed, inverse association between neurodegeneration and
cancer has been observed (Lin et al., 2015, Thinnes, 2012).
The initiation of these diseases has a different nature. Neurodegeneration is
associated with increased synaptic and neurotoxicity eventually leading to
neuronal death, either caused by, or concomitant with, protein misfolding,
aggregation and deposition in the brain tissue (Lim and Yue, 2015). Conversely,
in cancer, oncogene activation and accumulation of mutations disrupts cell
regulation mechanisms resulting in augmented cell survival and/or proliferation
(Wade and Wahl, 2006).
During the disease progression multiple and probably common molecular
mechanisms are getting involved, but these processes are regulated in an opposite
manner in the two disorders. It is obvious that perturbations of mechanisms
involved in cell survival and death regulation are affected differently. Therefore it
is important to delineate what are the “switch mechanisms” determining the
decision to “die” in the case on neurodegeneration or “repair and live”, in the case
of cancer. There might be genetic polymorphisms, or epigenetic mechanisms
determining a predisposition to malfunction of an underlying common
mechanism, dictating prone-to-death state of cells (‘neurodegenerative
phenotype’) or prone-to-survive/grow state of cells (‘cancer phenotype’). Thus, in
the ‘neurodegenerative phenotype’, cell may be susceptible to cell death stressors
such as aggregated proteins, hyperphosphorylation, oxidation, inflammation or
other unknown risk factors. Conversely, cells would have a greater likelihood of
surviving under stressors, while concomitantly becoming more susceptible to
cancer development if they are bearing the ‘cancer phenotype’ (Behrens et al.,
2009). There are several key players in the cell signaling that are discussed in the
literature as candidate ‘switchers’ among others, p53, WNt, Pin1, that coordinate
between cell cycle to cell death and regulated in cancer and in neurodegeneration
in an opposite manner. In addition, it is important to keep in mind that more and
more cell functions are discovered to be associated with each one of these
disorders, as immune response, angiogenesis, metabolic pathways, etc. (Heppner
et al., 2015, La-Beck et al., 2015). These observations are pointing to importance
of analysis and comparison of these two disorders at the higher level of signaling
rewiring, taking into account the whole complexity of signaling network inside the
cell and also investigating the impact of different biological functions, provided by
interplay between various cell types.
Alzheimer’s disease: a disorder of protein misfolding and synaptic
Alzheimer´s disease (AD) is age-related neurodegenerative disorder characterized
by accumulation of neurotoxic misfolded and aggregated amyloid-beta peptides
(Aβ). The Aβ peptides form pathogenic assemblies ranging from small oligomers
to large masses of amyloid and each state of the aggregation is characterized by
different toxicity potential. Once believed to be brain region-specific and static,
these protein aggregates have been recently shown to propagate their
conformation through the brain. The outcome of Aβ accumulation is functional
compromise of the nervous system.
It is still open question, which are the critical toxic misfolded assemblies initiating
synaptic dysfunctions, whether oligomers or larger aggregates? What are the
precise molecular mechanisms initiating dysfunctions of synapses and neural
circuits? What is the role of additional biological systems e.g. vascular, immune,
in the neurodegeneration? Whether some processes are reversible and whether
preventive actions are possible to preclude Aβ accumulation and consequent
neurodegeneration?
These questions are mostly addressed experimentally and examples of some
discoveries are discussed in the Chapter 1. In addition, since there is more and
more available omics data accumulated by high-throughput technologies and
pieces of information describing various aspects of AD signaling, systems biology
approaches gaining importance in the AD research (Xia et al., 2014, Santiago and
Potashkin, 2014).
Cancer: a systems biology disorder
Molecular biology of cancer has witnessed two parallel evolutions in the last
decades, which are complementary and together contributed to our understanding
of the biological mechanisms of the pathology, and to the evolution of its clinical
treatment. The first of these evolutions is the careful work of biologists who have
deciphered in great detail the intricacy of molecular mechanisms that govern
tumor initiation and progression, and reported these discoveries in the form of
scientific papers.
The second evolution was made possible by the advent of high-throughput
technologies like microarrays and later next-generation sequencing, allowing
accumulation of molecular profiles of tumours, with exhaustive description of the
mutational landscapes, gene expression patterns and epigenetic modifications for a
large number of samples. Nearly, 20 000 tumour samples have been profiled so far
by two main international efforts, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA,
have contributed to precision oncology, which can be defined as the use of
molecular profiles of tumours and constitutional genome to orient the choice of a
therapy for a given patient (Topol, 2014, Berns and Bernards, 2012).
However, despite availability of the omics data there is still no clear understanding
of molecular mechanisms that would explain a correlation between the data and
particular phenotypes in each case. Taking into account the information about
biological signaling machinery in cells may help to better interpret the patterns
observed in omics data of tumours. This will allow rationalized medicine approach
for patients stratification, drug response prediction and treatment assignment
(Barillot et al., 2012, Calzone et al., 2014).
To enable data analysis in the context of molecular mechanisms, the information
on these mechanism should be systematically and adequately represented. The
knowledge about molecular signaling mechanisms in cells is dispersed in
thousands of publications, mostly in human-readable form precluding application
of methods and algorithms developed in the field of bioinformatics and systems
biology. There is a need in formalized compilation of the knowledge in a
computer-readable form. The current solution is representation of relationships
between cellular molecules in a form of pathway diagrams found in various
pathway databases (Chowdhury and Sarkar, 2015, Bauer-Mehren et al., 2009). As
the amount of information about biological mechanisms steadily increases, a
different approach for organization, and structuring of this data is essential. The
aim is to create more global picture of cell signaling with sufficient granularity of
molecular details representation, capturing crosstalks and feedback loops between
molecular circuits. For this purpose, comprehensive signaling network maps
covering multiple cellular processes simultaneously are more suitable than
disconnected pathway diagrams. Our advances and contribution to this field are
discussed in the Chapter 2.1.
Visualization and analysis of omics data in the context of signaling networks
allows better interpretation of the data and verification of deregulated mechanisms
(Carter et al., 2013, Krogan et al., 2015). Several developments facilitating
visualization and analysis of high-throughput data are shown in the Chapter 2.2.
Furthermore, data analysis in the context of signaling networks can help to detect
data distribution patterns across molecular mechanisms on the signaling maps,
verifying network variables as enriched functional modules (‘hot’ deregulated
areas), key players, ‘bottleneck’ points (Wang et al., 2015). Correlating those
network variables with the phenotype, as drug resistance or patient survival,
followed by clustering methods allows to stratify patients according to their
integrated network-based molecular portraits and to suggest appropriate
intervention scheme (Dorel et al., 2015). Application of signaling network to
explain mechanism of drug action in cancer is shown in Chapter 3.1.
Structural analysis and modeling of different scenarios (e.g. mutants, fusion, sub-
cellular re-localization) using networks allow to verify synthetic interactions
between molecular players, explain phenotypes and rise a hypothesis for
experimental validation (Cohen et al., 2013). How in silico studies of cell
signaling can lead to mechanistic predictions, validated in the experimental model
is discussed in Chapter 3.2.
The extreme case of negative synthetic interaction is synthetic lethality (SL). The
classical paradigm explains synthetic lethal interactions as a phenomena where
combinations of two gene deletions significantly affects cell viability, whereas
single deletion of each one of those genes does not (Kaelin, 2005). Synthetic
lethality (SL) provides a conceptual framework for the development of cancer-
specific drugs. The idea of SL treatment approach is to take an advantage of the
specificities in tumor cells which bearing abnormal function of one of the genes
from the synthetic lethal pair. Targeting synthetic lethal partner allows then
selective killing of tumor cells, and avoiding or limiting side effects on normal
cells (Fang, 2014).
The attempt to identify SL pairs in different cancers can be addressed in several
ways. For example, experimental approaches may include classical study of
molecular mechanism using knockout cell or animal models. Additional, wider
approach is high-throughput screens of synthetic lethality using siRNA, shRNA or
CRISPR/Cas9 technologies. The sub-set of this method is gene-drug synthetic
lethality screening aiming to retrieve genes-sensitizers for the drug. Those
methods already provided a bunch of information of SL gene and gene-drug pairs
and lead to generation of SL databases and networks (Measday et al., 2005, Ooi et
al., 2006). Several SL targets are assumed as druggble for some cancers (Fece de
la Cruz et al., 2014). However, the experimental methods are time and resources
consuming and can cover only limited number of SL pairs. Another very
significant drawback of these approaches is that they address only pairwise SL
interactions, but not bigger SL sets.
According to the current understanding, signaling pathways create a complex
network with forward and backward regulatory loops, and many redundant
pathways, therefore the synthetic lethality pairs paradigm should be extended to
the synthetic lethal sets or combinations paradigm (Garg et al., 2013, Huang et al.,
2014). Increasing number of synthetically interacting players above two would
expand the experiments due to high number of possible combination that is
unachievable. The alternative (or complementary) to the experimental is the
computational approach that allows to test in silico multiple synthetic interactions
combinations considering very big comprehensive signaling networks. Example of
this approach application to suggest interventions sets inferred from network
analysis with patient data is shown in Chapter 3.3.
Data from SL screens and knowledge of signaling networks structure allows to
infer the organizational principles of pathways and reduction of pathawys up to
abstract models. These models are suitable for mathematical modeling to better
understand the system’s properties and synthetic relationships between players in
the model. Using this approach we performed in silico simulations that lead to
discovery of new mechanism of SL, as described in Chapter 4.1.
In addition, systematic representation of signaling in a form of networks, analysis
and modeling collectively can provide enough material to try and retrieve
emerging principle of signaling organization and to classify the spectrum of
synthetic interactions, in particular synthetic lethality. Classification of synthetic
interactions mechanisms at different scales of inter- and intracellular signaling is
discussed in Chapter 4.2.
Similarly, aforementioned systems biology approaches exploiting comprehensive
cell signaling network maps, can be useful for analyzing perturbations in cellular
processes not only in cancer, but also in other human disorders, as immune
diseases, stroke, cardiovascular diseases and neurodegeneration.
1. MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF NEURODEGENERATION
CHAPTER AT GLANCE
The main player associated with Alzheimer's disease is amyloid-beta peptide (Aβ) which is
aggregated and deposited in the brain tissues during the course of the disease. The chapter
describes studies on the role of metal ions, oxidative stress and lipid composition on the
physiological vs. cytotoxic potential of Aβ and regulation of neuronal phosphorylation cascades.
Moreover, Aβ peptides vary in their lengths and the balance between different peptides types in
the brain dictates their aggregation status. The synaptotoxic and cytotoxic potential of the
aggregates and consequent effect on neuronal and cognitive functions are shown. The impact of
these discoveries on therapeutic approaches in Alzheimer's disease is discussed.
1.1 Phosphorylation cascades and oxidative stress response in
neurodegenerative diseases
The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
Working hypothesis
During my PhD, I've focused on studying mechanisms involved in oxidative stress
response after stroke and consequent neurodegeneration during Alzheimer's
disease (AD). It has been known, that the major inducers of neuronal loss in AD
are amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ) that gaining neurotoxic properties while their un-
controlled accumulation and aggregation. In addition, the AD brains are
characterized by increased oxidizes species content. Finally, the correlation
between stroke incidents followed by oxidative response and induction of AD
symptoms has been found (Zhao and Zhao, 2013). Therefore, the working
hypothesis of the project was that oxidation-related processes might be connected
to the Aβ-induced neurodegeneration, however the mechanism of action has to be
elucidated.
Methodologies
Primary neuronal cell cultures, mice and rat stroke models were used to study oxidative stress
in combination with additional stimuli as Aβ peptides or various pro- and anti-oxidant
compounds. I have developed an in vivo method for combination of compound injection with the
transient brain ischemia induction in mice and rat models by fine-tuned control of brain blood
supply without direct brain surgical intervention. Phosphorylation cascades perturbations in
cell models and in the brain tissue from mice and rat models were assessed using basic
molecular biology techniques as Western blots, PCR, confocal imaging, antioxidants activity
bio-assays, etc.
We have discovered that Aβ peptides, the main players in AD, have dual role in
neuronal viability regulation and shown it in primary cell culture and in rat model.
Aβ peptides can serve a neuroprotective role by ‘buffering’ the oxidation agents,
but can be switched to neurotoxic compounds during prolonged oxidative stress.
(Kuperstein and Yavin, 2003, Kuperstein et al., 2004). In addition, we have found
bi-phasic regulation of phosphorylation signaling cascades in neurons involved in
the switch mechanism from pro-survival to pro-degenerative (Kuperstein et al.,
2001, Kuperstein and Yavin, 2002). The study suggested the new concept of
physiological role for Aβ peptide in neurons that has not been considered in the
field before. In addition, we’ve demonstrated one of the possible molecular
mechanisms involved in the oxidative stress-dependent neurotoxicity and neuronal
death caused by Aβ peptides in their toxic state. These findings were used in
development of a combinational treatment scheme in AD with anti-oxidant and
anti-aggregation compounds together (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Dual role of Aβ on neuronal viability. Effect of different Aβ peptides in presence or
absence of metals ions on (A). mitochondrial activity and (B). neuronal toxicity in cell culture,
demonstrating that ions are promoting Aβ aggregation (not shown) and consequent
neurotoxicity. (C). Physiological concentration of Aβ is neuroprotective against acquit oxidative
stress in brain tissue. (D). Kinase inhibitors are used to find out the key kinase pathway
involved in the switch between cell survival and cell death.
In this collective work I coordinated technician and several students. The project resulted in
four major publications, number proceedings publications and collaboration with the pharma
start-up company for development of anti-AD treatment schemes.
1.2 Molecular mechanisms of synaptic and neuronal toxicity in
Alzheimer’s disease.
VIB-KU Leuven and IMEC-nanoelectronics and nanotechnology research center, Leuven, Belgium
Working hypothesis
During my post-doc, I've been involved in two international collaborative projects:
(1). MEMOSAD-Verum European network for Memory Loss in Alzheimer's
Disease: Underlying Mechanisms and Therapeutic Targets. The project aimed to
study amyloid-beta peptides (Aβ) neurotoxic properties and modes of neuronal
death in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). (2). ASAP-Artificial SynAPse consortium
were I participated in design and development of nanoelectronic tool Artificial
SynAPse for middle-throughput analysis of synaptic and neuronal toxicity.
Artificial SynAPse device has been used during the studies on the neurotoxic
potential of Aβ peptides, under the first project.
Aβ peptides are deposited in the amyloid plaques in the brain tissue of AD
patients. Therapeutic approaches attempt dissolving those plaques to reduce
amyloid levels, considering that the deposits are drivers of the disease. However, a
low correlation between the total burden of amyloid deposited in brain and the
degree of neurodegeneration in the patients was found lately. AD brains contain
heterogeneous mixture of Aβ peptides varying in length, modifications and
aggregation potential. The local environment in vicinity of amyloid plaques may
affect aggregation status of Aβ peptides (Breydo and Uversky, 2015). The
working hypothesis of the study was that Aβ might have non-equal neurotoxic
properties and induce various mechanisms of neurotoxicity depending on the
mixture composition and aggregation status of the peptides in the brain.
Methodologies
Biophysical, biochemical and behavior approaches were applied. The mixtures of most
abundant Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides were prepared in various peptides ratios. Combinations of
typical natural lipids were added to assess the role of plaques environment in Aβ aggregation.
Conformational properties of aggregation species in Aβ mixtures were studied using the
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Dynamic light scattering (DLS) methods. The
aggregation/dissociation kinetics were measured by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(FTIR) and ThT fluorescence methods. Primary neuronal cultures were used to assess effect of
Aβ mixtures on spontaneous synaptic activity recorded on the Artificial SynAPse device and
using the patch-clamping techniques. The composition of synapses was visualized under the
confocal microscopy following the fluorescent staining of synaptic markers. The neurotoxicity
was assessed using several viability and apoptotic assays. The cognitive and behaviour
consequences of brain exposure to the Aβ mixtures were studied in mice models using learning
and memory tests as open field-behaviour recording; passive avoidance and
contextual/auditory-cue fear conditioning. Finally, distribution of Aβ species in the brain tissue
was visualized using the immunofluorescent staining technique.
Part I. It is assumed that Aβ aggregation reaction proceeds ‘forward’ in an
irreversible manner from Aβ peptide to amyloid fibrils found in plaques. We’ve
shown that natural lipids resolubilize amyloid fibrils toward small soluble highly
neurotoxic Aβ species that diffuse through the brain and cause memory
impairment. The balance between toxic and inert Aβ pools is determined in part
by the relative amounts of lipids around the plaques. Therefore, the plaques should
be considered as reservoirs of potential toxicity in AD. For example, stroke,
trauma or any metabolic perturbations in the brain may result in release of free
lipids initiating amyloid fibrils dissociation into toxic Aβ species. The results
could also explain why the amount of amyloid deposits and the severity of
associated disease symptoms in AD do not necessarily correlate (Martins et al.,
2008). In this study we introduced a new understanding of dynamics in the
amyloid plaques in AD. The possibility that inert amyloid plaques could be turned
into highly neurotoxic species should be considered while designing treatments for
AD. Therefore the therapeutic strategies aiming at dissolving amyloid plaques
should be critically revised (Figure 2).
Figure 2. Lipids induce disassembly of mature Aβ fibrils into soluble toxic oligomers. (A).
Electron microscopy micrographs demonstrating lipid-induced dissociation of mature fibrils
into oligomes that penetrate to the neuronal cells. (B). The purified fraction of Aβ oligomers
(C). causes neuronal cell death and (D). learning and memory formation dysfunction in mice.
Part II. Differences in neurotoxicity and consequent AD severity might be
dictated by the equilibrium between the peptides in the Aβ pool. We have shown
that a minor increase in the Aβ42:Aβ40 ratio stabilizes toxic Aβ species and
activate mechanism of ‘synaptic apoptosis’ involving components of apoptotic
machinery that extends lately to the whole cell apoptosis. In addition these Aβ
species diffuse in the brain and interfere with learning and memory (Figure 3).
The concept that the absolute quantity of Aβ peptides in the brain is less important
than the relative Aβ peptides ratio in the pool reflected in their potential to
generate stable highly neurotoxic Aβ species was suggested. The finding is
important for development of new drugs type aiming to restore the correct ratios
between Aβ peptides. This approach promises to lead to the treatment that will
prevent neurotoxicity in AD, regardless the amount of Aβ found in the brain
(Kuperstein et al., 2010). Following this work, development of new generation of
drugs controlling Aβ conformation has been initiated in collaboration with a
pharma company.
Figure 3. The ratio between Aβ peptides of different length (A). dictates aggregation dynamics
and toxic conformation of oligomers (B). interfering with synaptic firing, (C). synaptic structure
and cell viability.
Part III. Detecting effect of neurodegenerative agents at synapses is crucial for
considering drugs that would protect synapses at early stages in neurodegenerative
process. To allow such developments, synaptic functionalities have to be followed
is a systematic way. I have participated in developing a new approach combining
neurobiology and nano-scale engineering that lead to construction of Artificial
SynAPse device. This neuro-electronic hybrid combines nanoelectronic chip with
highly dense and sensitive electrodes; special bio-mimetic surfaces for neuronal
growth-on-chip and elaborated signal processing system that allowed to scale
down the size of recording area and increase number of recording spots and to
improve signal recognition. Currently this and the next-generation Artificial
SynAPse devices are used for drugs screening. This project has lead to initiation
of the association Neuro-Electronics Research Flanders (NERF)
In these projects I coordinated the collaboration between the teams and supervised
technician, students and post-doc involved in the projects. The projects resulted in publication
of two major papers, several proceedings; press release on the discoveries; initiation of new
drug development; release of nano-electronic device. The work was awarded by the Verum
foundation prize.
2. CANCER: A COMPLEX SYSTEM
Institut Curie, Paris, France
CHAPTER AT GLANCE
The chapter discusses formalization of biological knowledge into a comprehensive map as Atlas
of Cancer Signaling Network (ACSN) and Google Maps-based tool NaviCell that supports map
navigation. The application of maps for omics data visualization in the context of signaling
maps by NaviCell Web Service module is shown. Finally, new tool NaviCom is presented,
allowing generation of network-based molecular portraits of cancer using multi-level omics
data. The chapter summarizes the achievements of multidisciplinary projects involving
numerous collaborations. Ongoing efforts, future plans and perspectives are outlined.
2.1 Formalization of biological knowledge as signaling network maps
Working hypothesis
Deregulation of molecular mechanisms leading to cancer concerns various
processes such as cell cycle, cell death, DNA repair and DNA replication, cell
motility and adhesion, cell survival mechanisms, mechanisms of immune system
angiogenesis and tumor microenvironment. Usually most of them are involved in
the same tumor and modified as the tumor evolves. It is assumed that in
pathological situations the normal cell signaling network is affected by
deregulated coordination between pathways or disruption of existing molecular
pathways, rather than by creating completely new signaling pathways and
molecular interactions. The most common abnormalities in pathological situations
are perturbations at the level of gene expression, protein abundance or protein
posttranslational modifications, irregular ‘firing’ or silencing of particular signals,
wrong sub-cellular localization of particular molecules and so on.
Such quantitative rather than qualitative network changes compared with normal
cell signaling could be studied in the context of comprehensive signaling networks
by analyzing experimental data obtained from cancer samples, cancer-related cell
lines or animal models. This approach helps to understand interplay between
molecular mechanisms in cancer, deciphering how gene interactions govern
hallmarks of cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011) in specific context and use
this knowledge to stratify patients accordingly. This will lead to new therapeutic
strategies, rationalizing the use of targeted inhibitors (Dorel et al., 2015).
An advantage of representing the biological processes in a graphical form is
demonstrating collectively multiple cross-talks between components of different
cell signaling processes. This allows understanding the global picture and
connectivity between processes that is very difficult to keep in mind just from
reading multiple scientific papers. Once the processes are depicted together as
diagrams, the relationship between molecular circuits in cells can be appreciated,
which makes signaling network maps also didactic tools.
For computational systems biology of cancer, this approach dictates the following
strategy: 1) represent formally and in sufficient amount of details the existing
knowledge about those molecular processes whose involvement in cancer clearly
demonstrated; 2) collect and integrate existing quantitative data on cancer genesis
and progression and develop methods to analyze them in the light of the
knowledge of a normal cell; 3) create mathematical models able to describe
distortions of normal cell functioning as a cause of cancer, and to predict the effect
of various perturbations; 4) use data analysis and mathematical modeling to
suggest new therapeutic schemes.
Despite existence of a large variety of pathway databases and resources
(Chowdhury and Sarkar, 2015), only few of them depict processes specifically
implicated in cancer and none of those resources depicts the processes with
sufficient granularity. In addition, pathway browsing interfaces and data
integration tools are not very advanced. The current project aims to formalize
knowledge on cancer-related processes as comprehensive signaling network maps,
developing algorithms for map navigation, data analysis in the context of maps
and data interpretation for basic research and in clinical studies.
Methodologies and Results
Construction and update of Atlas of Cancer of Signaling Networks (ACSN)
involves manual mining of molecular biology literature and participation of the
databases because it contains more comprehensive description of cancer-related
mechanisms retrieved from the most recent literature, following the hallmarks of
cancer. Cell signaling mechanisms are depicted using CellDesigner tool (Kitano et
al., 2005) at the level of biochemical interactions, forming a large network of 4600
reactions covering 1821 proteins and 564 genes and connecting several major
cellular processes. Currently ACSN contains representation of molecular
mechanisms that are frequently deregulated in cancer such as cell cycle, DNA
repair, cell death, cell survival, and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT).
Cell signaling mechanisms are depicted on the maps in great detail, together
creating a seamless map of molecular interactions, presented in the form of a
global ‘geographic-like’ molecular map (Figure 4A). ACSN has a hierarchical
structure, composed of interconnected maps of biological process implicated in
cancer. Each map is further contains functional modules mainly corresponding to
canonically-defined signaling pathways (Figure 4C).
The navigation interface include features such as scrolling, zooming, markers and
callouts using Google Maps technology adopted by NaviCell (Kuperstein et al.,
view levels on maps achieved by gradual exclusion of details and abstraction of
information upon zooming out (Figure 4B). ACSN is associated with a web-based
blog system WordPress for collecting feedback from the community on content of
the map that facilities maintenance and updating of ACSN (Kuperstein et al.,
2015).
Figure 4. Atlas of Cancer Signaling Networks. (A). Distribution of frequently mutated
oncogenes across human cancers visualized on the ACSN maps; (B). Google-like features of
NaviCell for visualization and annotation of map entities; (C). Zoom in on a survival map to
observe signaling processes.
ACSN is a unique resource of signaling in cancer that did not exist in the field, the
amount of information embedded and organized in ACSN is enormous. Together
with NaviCell, it optimized for integration and visualization of cancer molecular
profiles generated by high-throughput techniques, data from drug screenings or
synthetic interactions studies. Integration and analysis of these data in the context
of ACSN may help in understanding the biological significance of the results,
guiding the scientific hypothesis and suggesting potential intervention points for
cancer patients. In addition, since ACSN covers major cell signaling processes, the
resource and associated methods for data analysis using ACSN are suitable for
applications in many biological fields and for studying various human disease.
The atlas is being extended with additional maps depicting molecular mechanisms
of DNA replication, telomere maintenance, angiogenesis, immune response and
others that will be integrated into future releases of the atlas. The atlas will cover
not only intracellular, but also extracellular processes as tumor microenvironment.
An additional level of complexity will be added to the atlas in a near future,
representing different types of cells surrounding tumor, and interplay between
them, to enable modeling of complex phenotypes.
2.2 Molecular portraits of cancer: data visualization and analysis
using signaling network maps
The data integration into the ACSN is possible using NaviCell Web Service, an
user-friendly environment embedded into the NaviCell tool, allowing to upload
several types of “omics” data (expression data for mRNA, microRNA, proteins,
mutation profiles, copy-number data) and visualize them simultaneously in the
context of molecular interaction maps. Depending on the nature of data, different
types of visualization modes can be required to achieve the informative picture
(heat maps, bar plots, glyphs and map staining). The data can be visualized at
different zoom levels. Sample annotation files unloaded together with the data can
serve for defining groups of samples. A novel mode of data visualization for
continuous data (e.g. expression) provided by NaviCell Web Service is a ‘map
staining’. Using the background of the map for visualizing the values mapped to
individual molecular entities or group of entities (e.g. score of functional module
activities) results in colorful background of the network map that represents the
data distribution pattern (Bonnet et al., 2015). All those approaches for data
integration into the signaling maps described above allow to rationalize the
information embedded into the data: compare samples or group of samples; find
typical patterns of data distribution across the molecular mechanisms depicted on
the maps; grasp deregulated ‘hot area’ on the maps and major involved players
and draw hypothesis as to which mechanisms to concentrate the work in the
samples under study. These signaling network-based molecular signatures of
samples thus help to stratify patients or samples (Figure 5).
NaviCell Web Browser Session
(Firefox – Chrome – Safari)
NaviCell proxy
Apache web server - php
(Data exchange and visualization)
NaviCell RESTful web API
Python API R API Java API Garuda gadget
Python code R code Java code
Figure 5. NaviCell Web service. (A). General architecture of the NaviCell Web service server.
Client software (light blue layer) communicates with the server (red layer) through standard
layer). A session (with a unique ID) is established between the server and the browser (yellow
layer) through Ajax communication channel to visualize the results of the commands send by the
software client. (B). BC gene expression data integration and analysis using ACSN. The mRNA
expression data from TCGA collection has been used for evaluation of functional modules
activities and ACSN coloring as ‘map staining’ for four BC types. The four BC subtypes are
characterized by different patterns of module activities.
Various omics data are available on the public and local databases (Lapatas et al.,
2015). However, there are no tools that support import of big datasets from these
databases and displaying them on signaling network maps in efficient way and
with optimized visualization settings. To answer to this demand, we developed
NaviCom, a python package and web interface for automatic simultaneous display
of multi-level data in the context of signaling network map
is empowered by a cBioFetchR R package to import high-throughput data sets
from cBioPortal to NaviCell and navicom Python module allowing automatized
simultaneous visualization of multi-level omics data on the interactive signaling
network maps using NaviCell environment. NavCom proposes several
standardized modes of data display on signaling networks maps to address specific
biological questions (Dorel et al, in revision). (Figure 6A).
Figure 6. NaviCom. (A). General architecture of NaviCom environment. The NaviCom
interface provides the user with an updated list of studies from cBioPortal and links to ACSN
and NaviCell maps collections. When visualization is launched, NaviCom starts a new NaviCell
session and calls a cgi on the server. The cgi downloads cBioPortal data to the NaviCell session
and displays them to generate the molecular portrait selected by the user. (B). Molecular
portrail of Breast Invasive Carcinoma (Nature 2012) from 825 samples visualized on ACSN
Cell cycle map. Visualization settings: expression-map staining/ copy number-heat map/
mutations-blue triangle/ methylation-pink diamond/proteomics-yellow circle.
This tool enables generation of complex molecular portraits from multiple omics
datasets from cBioPortal. We aim to create signaling network-based molecular
portrait for each disease and studied samples in the context of ACSN or any map
prepared in NaviCell format (Figure 6B).
In near future the NaviCom platform will be extended and will provide access to
any type of omics data from wide range of databases (TCGA, ICGC, HGMB,
METABRIC, CCLE). In addition, to allow broader description of molecular
mechanisms implicated in studied sample, signaling networks available in
databases as Kegg (Kanehisa et al., 2012), Reactome (Croft et al., 2010) and
others, will be also integrated and used for high-throughput data analysis via
NaviCom platform.
I lead this ongoing muntidisciplinary project and supervise the activities of the team. During
the projects, five original papers, one book chapter; dozen of proceedings; press releases on
the developments have been published. Some of the papers were selected to the highlights
talks at international computational biology conferences and were topics for invited seminars.
The project has been awarded by the “Thought leader award” grant from Agilent supporting
the ongoing collaboration with the Agilent Genespring team for integration of
ACSN/NaviCell and GeneSpring features. ACSN, NaviCell and NaviCom are in the process
platform for systems biology and biomedical research and also the basis for numerous
collaborative projects.
3. NETWORK MODELING IN PRE-­‐CLINICAL RESEARCH
Institut Curie, Paris, France
CHAPTER AT GLANCE
This chapter is dedicated to applications of signaling networks for basic research and pre-
clinical studies. In the first project we created differential network-based molecular signatures of
sensitivity of two DNA repair interfering drugs. This study allowed us to suggest drugs synergy
that has been confirmed for breast cancer cell lines. In the second example, I show how network
analysis and modeling help to reveal key regulators of invasion. The prediction allowed to
develop the transgenic mice model of early invasive colon cancer. In the third project, we
performed a structural analysis of signaling network together with omics data from ovary cancer
patients resistant to genotoxic treatment. Following this study we retrieved synthetic lethal gene
sets and suggested intervention combinations to restore sensitivity to the treatment. The
approaches developed for these projects represent a more general paradigm applicable for other
studies.
3.1 Explaining synergistic effect of combined treatment in cancer
Working hypothesis
Using DNA repair inhibitors to target cancer cells is a promising therapy but its
application is limited by the compensatory activities of different repair pathways.
For example, PARP inhibitors that act as synthetic lethal with BRCA deficiency,
appear however less efficient in patients with active Homologous Recombination
(HR) repair (Lord et al., 2015). During treatment, some tumors escape through
compensatory mutations that restore the HR activity or stimulate the activity of
alternative repair pathways such as Non-homologous End Joining (NHEJ).
A new class of DNA repair pathways inhibitor (Dbait or DT01) has been recently
developed, consisting of 32bp deoxyribonucleotides DNA double helix that
mimics double strand breaks (DSB). It acts as an agonist of DNA damage
signaling thereby inhibiting DNA repair enzyme recruitment at the damage site
(Quanz et al., 2009). However, study of Dbait effects on multiple types of cancer
cell lines shows occurrences of resistance in cancer type-independent manner.
Since such promising treatments are facing some hurdles including acquired
resistance, finding sensitizing agents to restore response to treatment in cancer is
needed.
Methodologies and Results
Depending on genetic background, different breast cancer tumors vary in their
sensitivity to DNA repair inhibitors, as PARP inhibitors and Dbait. To understand
molecular mechanisms underlining these differences, a combination of
experimental and bioinformatics approaches was applied. Triple Negative Breast
Cancer (TNBC) cell lines were studied for their sensitivity to Dbait (DT01) and
the PARP inhibitor Olaparib showing wide distribution of responsiveness to these
drugs, that in many cases in not correlated (Figure 7A). We performed integrative
analysis of omics data from these cell lines covering mRNA expression, copy
number variations and mutational profiles and found that at least 70 non-
overlapping genes were robustly correlated with sensitivity to each one of the
drugs (not shown). Analysis of the omics data in the context of ACSN maps
confirms that different specific defects in DNA repair machinery are associated to
Dbait or Olaparib sensitivity (Figure7B). In addition, we identified group of
deregulated functional modules across ACSN specifically associated with each
one of the drugs and established a predictive drug response network-based
molecular portraits. These molecular signatures highlighted different involvement
of mechanisms between cells sensitive/resistant to Dbait and Olaparib, suggesting
a rational for combination of these two drugs. We confirmed synergistic
therapeutic effect of the combined treatment with Dbait and PARP inhibitors in
TNBC, while sparing healthy tissue (Figure 7C) (Jday et al., in preparation).
Survival to DT01 (%/NT)
120" MDAMB231( 120" BC173(
0" 0.1" 1" 0" 0.1" 1"
Olaparib [µM]
120" MCF10A( 120" MCF12A(
60" 60" 40" 40"
0" 0.1" 1" 0" 0.1" 1"
Figure 7. Sensitivity of TNBC cell lines combination of DNA repair inhibitors. (A).
Correlation analysis of survival to DT01 and Olaparib in TNBC and control cell lines. (B).
Molecular portraits of DT01 and Olaparib sensitive/resistant TNBC cell lines visualized on
120 DT01 sensitive DT01 resistant
110 MCF7 HCC70184B5 BTRC PARP1
100 BC173 BT20 MDAMB231 RB1 RB1
8 9 0 0 HeLa BRCA1 HCC38 MDAMB46 M 8 CF10A He M L C a F C 1 T 2 L A AN T A P P 5 C 3 4 14-3-3 PP2A 14-3-3 TP53 SCC1
70 HCC1937 BC227 ATM
HeLa BRCA2 RB1
60 HCC1187 TP53 TP53 SCC1 ATM
10 MDAMB436 POLI
0 60 80 100 120 POLL BRCA2 ATM PA RP1
C CSA OG W G R 1 N PRKCD DNA-P B K W R R C N A 2 F F A A N N C C I D F 2 A NCD2 FANC PO I LI PARP1 PARP1A TM PBRIT1
TNBC cell lines WRN FANC F F A NCB
Olaparib sensitive Olaparib resistant
Cyclin D GINS4
MDM2 BRIT1
Control cell lines
XRCC3 BRCA2 NEIL2
DNA-PK XRCC3 P W O R L N B TNKS POLB WRN BRIT1 UBE2T BRCA2 FANCB WRN FANCB
mRNA Up loss
Copy number Mutations Olaparib [µM] expression Down gain
DNA repair map. (C). Cell survival to combination of DT01 and Olaparib. With DT01(black
line), without DT01(grey line),dashed lines indicate calculated cell survival for additive effect of
two drugs.
In this ongoing project I supervise scientific activity of a technician and co-supervise a PhD
student.
3.2 Finding metastasis inducers in colon cancer through network
Working hypothesis
Evolution of invasion and metastasis, in particular in colon cancer, has been
studied in experimental models, however, the mechanism that triggers the process
is still not clear and the available mice models of colon cancer are far from being
satisfactory (Hung et al., 2010, Trobridge et al., 2009). With aim to create an
experimental mouse model of invasive colon cancer, one needs to address the
question what are the major players and the driver mutations inducing invasion.
One of early events of metastasis is assumed to be epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT) (Nieto, 2011).
Methodologies and Results
In order to identify interplay between signaling pathways regulating EMT, we
manually created a signaling network in CellDesigner tool (Kitano et al., 2005)
based on the information retrieved from around 200 publications (Figure 8A). This
signaling map is now integrated into the ACSN. We performed structural analysis
and simplification of the EMT network that highlighted the following EMT
network organization principles, which is in agreement with current EMT under-
standing: (1) Five EMT transcription factors SNAIL, SLUG, TWIST, ZEB1 and
ZEB2 that have partially overlapping sets of downstream target genes can activate
the EMT-like program. (2) These key EMT transcription factors are under control
of several upstream mechanisms: they are directly induced at the transcriptional
level by the activated form of Notch, NICD, but are downregulated at the
translational level by several miRNAs (namely, mir200, mir34, mir203 and
mir192) that are under transcriptional control of p53 family genes. Interestingly,
some key EMT transcription factors can inhibit microRNAs, in this way
sustaining their own activation. (3) According to the network structure, all five
key EMT transcription factors should be activated ensuring simultaneous
activation of EMT-like programme genes and downregulating miRNAs. In
addition, the EMT key inducers also inhibit apoptosis and reduce proliferation. (4)
The activity of Wnt pathway is stimulated by transcriptional activation of the gene
coding for b-catenin protein by Notch-induced TWIST or SNAI1. The Wnt
pathway, in turn, can induce the expression of Notch pathway factors, creating a
positive feedback loop. In agreement with other studies, the Wnt pathway does not
directly induce EMT, but helps to maintain it. (5) Components of the Wnt and
Notch pathways are negatively regulated by miRNAs induced by the p53 family
(p53, p63 and p73). The balance between the effect of positive (Notch and Wnt)
and negative (p53, p63 and p73 mediated by miRNAs) regulatory circuits on EMT
inducers dictates the possibility of EMT phenotype (Knouf et al., 2012, Moes et
al., 2012, Siemens et al., 2011, Fre et al., 2009).
Based on those features of the network we performed network complexity
reduction using BiNoM up to core regulators of EMT, apoptosis and proliferation
that were preserved through all levels of reduction (Bonnet et al., 2013). The
reduced network has been used for comparison between the wild type and all
possible combinations of single and double mutants for achieving EMT-like
phenotype (Figure 8B,C).
We predicted that in Apc-/-/p53-/- double mutant, Wnt activation does not induce
EMT, because p63/p73 induced microRNAs can still inhibit the Wnt and Notch
pathway. When Notch is activated in an Apc-/- background, cell proliferation is
increased as has been observed in the mice models. At the same time, EMT is
inhibited by the microRNA expression induced by, resulting in non-invasiveness.
This explains the observed absence of metastases in NICD/Apc-/- mice. Finally, in
NICD/p53-/- double mutant, other members of p53 family cannot rescue the
function of p53 anymore as constitutively activated Notch inhibits the activity of
both p63 and p73. NICD activates the transcription of the EMT key inducers and
inhibits the production of microRNAs by suppressing p63/p73 in the context of
p53-/-. Notch and p53 have opposite effects on EMT inducers, and overexpression
of NICD and knocking-out p53 should have synergetic effect. Furthermore, EMT
inducers may activate the Wnt pathway, possibly resulting in a positive feedback
loop that will amplify Notch activation and maintain an EMT-like program.
Therefore, our computational analysis of the signaling network leads to the
prediction that the simultaneous activation of Notch and loss of p53 can promote
an EMT-like phenotype (Figure 8D, E).
To validate this hypothesis, we created a transgenic mouse model expressing a
constitutively active Notch1 receptor in a p53- deleted background, specifically in
the digestive epithelium. Importantly, green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression
linked to the Notch1 receptor activation allows lineage tracing of epithelial tumor
cells during cancer progression and invasion (Figure 8F). These mice develop
digestive tumours with dissemination of EMT-like epithelial malignant cells to the
lymph nodes, liver and peritoneum and generation of distant metastases (Figure
8G). We have explored early inducers of the EMT program in human disease and
confirmed in invasive human colon cancer samples that EMT markers are
associated with modulation of Notch and p53 gene expression in similar manner
as in the mice model (Figure 8H), supporting a synergy between these genes to
permit EMT induction (Chanrion et al., 2014).
Simplis'c)model)of)
EMT)regula'on
D Wild type Phe E notypes observed in
single and double mutants
NICD& p p7 6 3 3 & & p53&
EMT inducers
gene$ RNA$ protein$
Notch& miRNA& Notch ! P53 "
Notch !
Notch!/p53"
NICD& p p7 6 3 3 & & p53&
EMT inducers EMT
gene$ RNA$ protein$
PROLIFERATION METASTASIS
Figure 8. Prediction of synthetic interaction combination to achieve invasive phenotype in
colon cancer mice model (A) Comprehensive signaling network of EMT regulation; (B).
Scheme representing major players regulating EMT after structural analysis and reduction of
signaling network complexity; (C) and (D) Mechanistic model explaining EMT inducers
regulation involving Notch, p53 and Wnt pathways; (E) Phenotypes in single and double
mutants; (C) Lineage tracing of cell in tumor and in distant organs; (F) Immunostaining for
major EMT markers; (G) Regulation of p53, Notch and Wnt pathways in invasive colon cancer
in human (TCGA data).
Our prediction of synthetic interaction between Notch and p53 demonstrated that
there are alternative ways to reach permissive conditions to induce EMT, in
addition to those already described in the literature. This idea was not intuitive and
actually contradictory to the commonly accepted dogma in the colon cancer field.
The study evokes an important message that gathering cell signaling mechanisms
together may undercover un-expected interactions and lead to discovery of new
mechanisms in regulation of cell phenotypes that may significantly affect the
understanding of basic molecular processes implicated in cancer and change the
therapeutic approaches. In addition, the comprehensive EMT signaling network is
reach resource of information can be used in further studies. Finally, the new EMT
mice is a relevant model mimicking the invasive human colon cancer and a system
for therapeutic drugs discovery (Kuperstein et al., 2015).
In this project I supervised scientific activity of one postdoc. The projects resulted in
publication of two papers, several proceedings and press communication. Some of those
papers were selected to the highlights talks at international computational biology
conferences and were topics for invited seminars.
3.3 Complex intervention gene sets derived from data-­‐driven
network analysis for cancer patients resistant to genotoxic treatment
Working hypothesis
The idea of SL treatment approach is to take an advantage of the specificities in
tumor cells which display abnormal expression or function of one gene from
synthetic lethal pair. Targeting synthetic lethal partner allows then selective killing
of tumor cells (McLornan et al., 2014). This approach is applied in BRCA2
mutated breast canser cases using PARP inhibitors, however there is frequent
escape from the treatment, requiring to more complex solution. One of the reasons
for treatment failure is the robustness of cell signaling network ensured by
redundant mechanisms that provide the possibility to bypass drugs effect (Dietlein
et al., 2014). Therefore the ways for identifying and blocking those active
compensatory pathways should be found.
One of the approaches is taking into account the signaling network structure and
find the most optimal synthetic lethal combinations of genes (most probably more
than pairs) (Huang et al., 2014, Acencio et al., 2013, Zeng et al., 2014). Thus,
analyzing synthetic lethal (SL) combinations in the context of patien’s omics data
as mutation profile, genome, transcriptome, epigenome, etc. to prioritize and chose
the appropriate SL set of genes. These analyses may contribute to network-based
patients stratification and prediction of sensitivity to traditional drugs, but also
help suggesting rationalized treatment schemes adjusted to each patient.
Methodologies and results
Genotoxic treatment as Cisplatin, that induces un-repairable DNA damage and cell
death specifically in cancer cells, is often inefficient due to backup mechanisms in
the DNA repair signaling. To overcome Cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer, we
looked for synthetically interacting combinations of genes to suggest intervention
gene sets.
A comprehensive map of cell cycle and DNA repair signaling network constructed
from literature curation was used for this study
composed of three interconnected cell cycle, DNA repair and checkpoints layers
covering the most recent knowledge on molecular mechanisms implicated in these
processes (Kuperstein et al., 2015). We derived a state transition graph from the
map including all paths leading to repaired DNA and genes regulating each step
(Figure 9A). Using OCSANA algorithm for searching the minimal cut sets (MCS)
on the state transition graphs, considering genes that regulate each step as potential
target for interference (Vera-Licona et al., 2013), we identified MCSs whose
knock-out completely abort DNA repair (Figure 9B). The coherence of the method
has been validated using experimentally–proven SL pairs, verifying the
enrichment of the SL pair in real vs. randomly-generated (pseudo)-MCSs (Figure
9C).
For selection of the best MCS to be targeted, we need to find those where part of
the components are already altered in the patient, allowing to exploit this
background and targeting the remaining components in the set, achieving synthetic
lethality. MCSs were evaluated for each patient (TCGA ovarian cancer dataset)
using genomic, expression and mutation data integration and correlation with
patient’s resistance/sensitivity to Cisplatin. The top-correlated MCSs were ranked
according for the mutation status of each gene. Those MCSs that were enriched
with genes harboring inactivating mutations, were suggested as best intervention
combinations to restore sensitivity to Cisplatin by inhibiting the remaining ‘active’
genes in the set (Figure 9C, table insert). This approach is relevant for
complementing genotoxic chemotherapy by targeting specifically cancer cells and
exploiting certain defects in the DNA repair machinery in each patient (Russo et
al., in preparation).
A Comprehensive map of DNA repair B State transition graph and all regulators of DNA repair steps
C D Top ranked intervention sets
Three top groups of patients
associated with unique MCS lists XRCC5%MU R S e 8 s 1 is %P ta A n R t P ( 2%POLD42 APEX2%PAR S P e 3 n % s P it O iv L e D ( 1%RAD502
XRCC5%PARP2%POLD4%SLX1A2 XRCC5%POLD1%POLQ%RAD502
EXO1%XRCC5%PARP2%POLD42 APEX2%XRCC5%POLD1%RAD502
Resistant XRCC5%PARP2%POLD4%RPA32 PARP3%POLD1%POLQ%RAD502
PRKDC%MSH2%PARP2%POLD42 APEX2%POLD1%RAD50%DNTT2
!
Sensitivity-
associated
Resistance
associated
Figure 9. Intervention gene sets for Cisplatin-resistant ovary cancer patients. (A).
Comprehensive map of DNA repair. (B). State transition graph of DNA repair map with
regulators of each state transition (regulators of level 1). (C). Enrichment of SL from shRNA
screen lines (DECIPHER project) in ‘real’ vs. pseudo-MCSs. (D). Projection of top 3 principal
components of TCGA ovarian cancer patients groups associated with unique MCSs. Survival
curves comparing Cisplatin resistant and sensitive patients associated with unique MCS sets.
Table: Top 5 intervention sets for Cisplatin resistant and sensitive groups (green-inhibited gene,
red-activated gene).
In this ongoing project I supervise scientific activity of a technician.
4. COMPEX SYNTHETIC INRETACTION MECHANISMS
Institut Curie, Paris, France
CHAPTER AT GLANCE
This chapter discusses various aspects of synthetic interactions in cell signaling. The first part of
the chapter describes how the mathematical modeling of homologous recombination pathway
combined with the analysis of synthetic lethal screens lead to discovery of a new type of
synthetic lethality mechanism. The second part reviews different models of synthetic lethality
mechanisms at several scales, starting from molecular complexes, through molecular pathways
and up to the functional modules and different cell types. Taking into consideration this
systematic knowledge will help to significantly broaden the canonical interpretation of synthetic
interactions, in particular synthetic lethality, with direct implications to molecular pathways
understanding and therapy approaches.
4.1 Kinetic trap of a pathway: new mechanism of synthetic lethality
Working hypothesis
The classic interpretation of synthetic lethality stipulates that two synthetic lethal
genes work in parallel, mutually compensatory pathways (Bandyopadhyay et al.,
2010). However, a significant number of synthetic interactions are caused by
defects in genes participating in the same molecular pathway (Michaut et al.,
2011). The canonical interpretation of pathways assumes only forward
propagation. However, the view of molecular pathways as unidirectional, linear
reaction cascades is too simplistic. Pathway steps can be reversible which leads to
forward and backward propagation of molecular events along the pathway and
increases robustness and fidelity of the process.
Methodologies and results
The homologous recombination DNA repair pathway is one of the rare examples
of a pathway were forward and backward steps are well described (Heyer et al.,
2010). In addition, it has been recently shown that one of the intermediates of
homologous recombination process is toxic to cells if accumulates above certain
concentration for sufficient time period (Figure 10A).
To better understand the system properties of genetic relationships in this
pathway, we represented homologous recombination (HR) in a form of simplest
model of DNA repair pathway with reversible steps and alternative compensatory
pathway. The simplest model contains three statuses of DNA (Substrate-damaged
DNA, Intermediate, Product-repaired DNA) (Figure 10B). We performed
analytical study of dynamic features using the simplest linear mathematical model
(Figure 10C). We have recapitulated observed genetic scenarios, among others,
classical synthetic lethality between pathways (BRCA2-PARP) and the RAD54
mutants that refers to the situation when genetic background dictates susceptibility
to accumulation of genetic instability (Figure 10D). We proposed a novel
mechanism, within-reversible-pathway synthetic lethality that involves reversible
pathway steps, catalyzed by different enzymes in the forward and backward
directions. The cell death happens due to kinetic trapping of a pathway into the
step resulting in toxic intermediate accumulation because of the mutations in the
enzymes catalyzing ‘in’ and out’ reactions (Figure 10D, scenario ‘4’). The
prediction has been validated in Srs2-Rad54 mutants in yeast, where one of the
intermediates of homologous recombination process is toxic to cells if
accumulates above certain concentration for sufficient time period due to
invalidating mutations of the Srs2 and Rad54, catalyzing ‘in’ and ‘out’ reactions
of the corresponding step.
In order to assess the probability of appearance of within-pathway synthetic
lethality in other processes, we ranked all pathways from the KEGG database
(Kanehisa et al., 2012) according to their normalized proportion of synthetic lethal
interactions within the pathway calculated using yeast gene interaction screen
results (Costanzo et al., 2010). Interestingly, HR ranks at the top among DNA
repair pathways (Figure 10E).
There is considerable evidence that many molecular pathways include reversible
steps catalyzed by different enzymes in the forward and backward directions. Any
of those processes can be theoretically trapped into one of their intermediate states
if two regulators of forward and backward steps are inactive. In these cases,
kinetic trap can be due to the accumulating intermediate or blockade of proper
signal propagation or perturbed resource recycling, etc. (Figure 10F).
Damaged DNA
E2B mediat E2F
Repaired DNA
Pathway steady states for various combinations 1 10 S
of parameters in the model I 2 P
The cell is dead if:
Death from Toxicity)
Amount of I is higher than [I] for sufficiently
long period of time ΔI
Death from DNA Damage)
Amount of S is higher than [S] for sufficiently
long period of time ΔS
!!
!
!
Alternative
1 10 N he o a r l m th a y l! ! s c t e a ll t . e ! !of!DNA!repair!in! 1 P ! l B et e h t a w li e t e y n .! !pathway!synthe,c!
I 2 I Recapitula,on!of!PARP!
0.1 5 0.1 5 inhibi,on!in!BRCA!mutants.!!
Time! Representa,ve!of!cancer!cell! Time!
fate!characterized!by!slow!
accumula,on!of!DNA!damage! S
S leading!to!genomic!instability.!! 10 S I 1 SubBlethal!levels!of!toxic! P Within!single!!pathway!
10 intermediates!and!unBrepaired! I 2 synthe,c!lethality.!!
I 2 DNA!increase!DNA!errors!and! Recapitula,on!of!Srs2B
0.1 favor!cancer!cells!selec,on.!! 0.1 Rad54!mutants!
Recapitula,on!of!rad54! P
P mutants!in!the!presence!of!DNA!
damage.!
Time! Time!
!)ua(!level!ecnatsbuS
!)ua(!level!ecnatsbuS
!)ua(!level!ecnatsbuS
!)ua(!level!ecnatsbuS
Model!diagram! Dynamics!plot! Descrip,on! Model!diagram! Dynamics!plot! Descrip,on!
Kine,c!trap!is!a!generic!feature!of!cell!pathways!
KEGG Pathway
Pathway size pathway
interactions
of negative complexes
interactions,
of negative
D!
1.! 2.!
3.! 4.!
E! F!
Normalized!propor,on!of!synthe,c!lethal!interac,ons!
within!one!pathway!(KEGG!pathway!database)!
Normalized proportion of negative interactions
1Homologous recombination 20 27 26 0.137
2N-Glycan biosynthesis 31 59 46 0.099
3Various types of N-glycan biosynthesis 30 49 35 0.080
4Non-homologous end-joining 10 3 3 0.067
5Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids 9 2 2 0.056
6Steroid biosynthesis 14 4 4 0.044
7Mismatch repair 20 8 7 0.037
8Nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism 14 3 3 0.033
9Glycerophospholipid metabolism 34 17 17 0.030
10Terpenoid backbone biosynthesis 18 4 4 0.026
11Sphingolipid metabolism 13 2 2 0.026
12Cell cycle - yeast 125 196 176 0.023
13Base excision repair 17 4 3 0.022
14DNA replication 30 10 9 0.021
15Valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis 11 1 1 0.018
16Lysine biosynthesis 11 1 1 0.018
17Phagosome 34 12 10 0.018
18Protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum 80 69 54 0.017
19Citrate cycle (TCA cycle) 33 9 9 0.017
20RNA degradation 58 38 28 0.017
21Pyruvate metabolism 33 8 8 0.015
22Propanoate metabolism 12 1 1 0.015
23MAPK signaling pathway - yeast 57 25 23 0.014
24Nitrogen metabolism 22 3 3 0.013
25Protein export 22 5 3 0.013
26Other types of O-glycan biosynthesis 13 2 1 0.013
27Meiosis - yeast 127 103 87 0.011
28Pentose phosphate pathway 28 4 4 0.011
29Glycosylphosphatidylinositol(GPI)-anchor biosynthesis 25 3 3 0.010
30Pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis 15 1 1 0.010
Figure 10. Kinetic trap model of synthetic lethality within a single reversible pathway. (A).
DNA repair pathway with reversible step. (B). Abstract representation of Homologous
recombination (HR) pathway with reversible steps, containing substrate (S), intermediate (I),
product (P) and alternative, compensatory pathway. (C). Pathway steady states for various
combinations of parameters in the mathematical model of DNA repair with reversible steps and
a toxic intermediate. (D). Modeling possible scenarios of single and double synthetic lethal
mutations in the simplest model. The edge thickness denotes the relative speeds between
different states of DNA. Scenario ‘4’ represents within singe pathway kinetic trap model of
synthetic lethality. (E). Normalized proportion of synthetic lethal interactions within single
pathway across KEGG pathway database, calculated using data on the genome-wide screening
of genetic interactions in yeast (Costanzo et al., 2010). (F). Examples of molecular processes
with alternative pathways and potential to kinetic trap into a toxic intermediate.
These results significantly broaden the interpretation of synthetic lethal effects,
which fundamentally impacts on understanding of pathways propagation in the
cell. The concept of synthetic lethality has been applied to cancer therapy, and our
modeling results suggest new cancer therapy, targeting a single pathway to induce
synthetic lethality in pathological cells by trapping reversible pathways into the
step where toxic intermediates will accumulate in cancer cells (Zinovyev et al.,
2013).
4.2 Synthetic lethality mechanisms and organizational principles of
cell signaling at different scales
Working hypothesis
Availability of high-throughput techniques makes it possible to assay genetic
interactions of many genes in parallel in systematic way (high-throughput
screens). This data on genetic interactions together with the latest findings on
signaling and metabolic pathways helps building higher level models of cell
organization and discovering new mechanisms of synthetic interactions. Despite
systematic phenomenological classification of genetic interactions, we still lack an
exhaustive classification of the mechanistic principles of the extreme case of
negative genetic interaction, synthetic lethality. We describe mechanisms of
synthetic lethality at several scales, starting from molecular complexes, through
molecular pathways and up to the level of functional modules and cells.
Methodologies and results
Synthetic lethal interactions are frequently observed within or between members
of molecular complexes. Absolute loss of catalytic activity in the essential
complex may result in cell death (Figure 11A). It was estimated that among all
synthetic lethal genetic interaction pairs, 9-14% belong to the same biological
pathway. The mechanisms explaining synthetic lethal interactions in the same
pathway vary depending on the architecture of the pathway. There are synthetic
lethal mechanisms as defect accumulation, internal redundancy, intrinsic buffering
and kinetic trap (Figure 11B).
The most known interpretation of synthetic lethality is when two genes function in
parallel pathways that collectively contribute to a common essential biological
function. However, in a view of recent findings, this classical paradigm of
between pathways synthetic lethality was extended and can be subcategorized in
three classes of synthetic lethality mechanisms as redundancy, buffering and
synergy (Figure 11C).
The phenotype readout used in the large-scale genetic screenings is the cell
growth, which is complex phenotype with many cellular functions contributing.
Cell growth is a combination of cell death, cell replication and cell senescence
rates, etc. and each of these processes can be addressed as an independent
phenotype. Moreover, it is possible to study phenotypes not directly connected to
cell growth. Clustering of genes by functional similarity led to the observation that
synthetic interactions are more frequent between functional modules with related
biological functions rather than between functional modules that have independent
cellular roles. For example, genes involved in the functional module of cell
polarity more frequently have synthetic interactions with genes involved into the
cytoskeleton remodeling module. Genes related to the checkpoints module
synthetically interact with the genes from the sister-chromatid cohesion, DNA
replication and DNA repair module. Genes responsible for protein folding
synthetically interact with the genes from Endoplasnatic reticulum (ER) module,
etc. Therefore, it is more probable to anticipate synthetic lethal combinations in
functionally-related modules (Figure 11D, upper panel).
In cancer biology, many phenotypes contributing to the disease, are dictated by
different cells. For example, phenotypes as Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT), different modalities of cell death (apoptosis, necrosis), types of DNA
repair mechanisms (single strand, double strand, stalled replication fork) are
mostly related to cancer cell. Whereas immune response (innate, adaptive),
vascularization signaling (angiogenesis), etc., are dictated by different types of
cells. Synthetic interactions at the level of different cell type should be considered.
Systematic description of orchestration between these players will allow to point
to multi-phenotypic synthetic lethality (Figure11D, lower panel). (Kuperstein et
al., in preparation).
Within molecular complexes Within pathway
A. Negative interactions between two redundant catalytic A. Accumulation of partial pathway defects
subunits within a complex
S I P viable
S P S P S P
S I P viable
Cat1% Cat1% Cat1% S I P dead
Sc1 Sc2 Sc1 Sc2 Sc1 Sc2
Cat2% Cat2% Cat2%
B. Within pathway redundancy
viable viable dead
S I P viable
B. Negative interactions between two scaffold or binding S I P viable
proteins within a complex
S I P dead
S P S P S P
C. Within pathway intrinsic buffering
Sc1 C1% Sc2 Sc1 C 1% Sc2 Sc1 Sc2 S I P viable
S I P viable
viable viable dead
S I P dead
D. Within reversible pathway kinetic trap
S I P viable
S I P viable
S I P dead
Between pathways Between modules
A. Symmetric compensation for the same essential function
(redundant pathways)
S P viable
S P viable
Pathway(2(
Pathways(1(
B. Asymmetric compensation (a pathway and its capacitor)
S1 P1 Phenotype 1 viable
S1 P1 Phenotype 1 viable
S1 P1 Phenotype 1 dead
C. Synergy of different non-essential pathways
Phenotype viable
Phenotype viable
Phenotype dead
Figure 11. Mechanisms of synthetic lethality as different scales of cell signaling.
Pathway(3(
A. Genetic interactions are more frequent inside functional modules
Functional Functional
module 1 module 2
Pathways(5( 6(
B. Multi-phenotype genetic interactions
Phenotype 1 Phenotype 2
CONCLUSIONS
A fundamental question of signaling regulation in human disorders can be
addressed by experimental and computational approaches, together helping to
understand the principles of signaling rewiring. It will have an impact on
personalized intervention schemes, in particular those based on combination of
drugs.
Organization and formal representation of the knowledge of cell signaling
followed by analysis of network features will provide a more global view on
molecular mechanisms and will facilitate modeling of cell fates. It has a potential
to explain mutant phenotypes, and reveal new molecular interactions. Considering
the topology of signaling networks and studying network perturbations together
with high-throughput data can guide us toward an optimal intervention strategy in
patients or in studied experimental systems.
Current advances in systems biology and systems medicine allow a standard,
unambiguous representation of molecular processes involved in different human
diseases, providing a comprehensive platform to interpret experimental results.
The collective research effort on different human disorders will lead to the
identification of emerging disease hallmarks (Mazein et al., in preparation).
Typical systems biology project workflow