Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
Design and Implementation of an Unmanned
Vehicle Using A GSM Network without
Microcontrollers
Sourangsu Banerji,
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering,
RCC-Institute of Information Technology, India
ABSTRACT : In the recent past, wireless mobile device which is controlled by means that it
controlled vehicles had been extensively used in does not restrict its motion with an origin external
a lot of areas like unmanned rescue missions, to the device i.e. the possibility of an existence of
military usage for unmanned combat and a radio control device, a cable between the control
many others. But the major disadvantage of and the vehicle or an infrared controller. A RCV
these wireless unmanned robots is that they is always controlled by a human operator and
typically make use of RF circuits for maneuver takes no positive action autonomously.
and control. Essentially RF circuits suffer from The IR system follows the line of sight
a lot of drawbacks such as limited frequency approach which involves the process of actually
range i.e. working range, and limited control. pointing the remote at the device being controlled;
To overcome such problems associated with RF this makes communication over obstacles and
control, few papers have been written, barrier quite impossible. To overcome such
describing methods which make use of the problems, a signaling scheme utilizing voice
GSM network and the DTMF function of a cell frequency tones is employed. This is known as
phone to control the robotic vehicle. This paper Dual Tone Multi-Frequency (DTMF), Touch-
although uses the same principle technology of Tone or simply tone dialing. A valid DTMF signal
the GSM network and the DTMF based mobile is the sum of two tones, one from a low group
phone but it essentially shows the construction (697-941Hz) and the other from a high group
of a circuit using only 4 bits of wireless data (1209-1633Hz) with each group containing four
communication to control the motion of the individual tones. DTMF signaling therefore play
vehicle without the use of any microcontroller. an important role in distributed communication
This improvement results in considerable systems such as multiuser mobile radio.
reduction of circuit complexity and of
manpower for software development as the In this paper, phones making use of the GSM
circuit built using this system does not require network interfaced directly with the DTMF
any form of programming. Moreover, practical decoder and the motor driver is used to remotely
results obtained showed an appreciable degree control an unmanned robotic vehicle thus
of accuracy of the system and friendliness overcoming the distance barrier problem and
without the use of any microcontroller. communication over obstacles with very minimal
or no interference but is solely network
Keywords - DTMF decoder, GSM network, Motor dependant. The design of an unmanned vehicle
driver, Microcontroller, Unmanned Surface Vehicles proposed here does not make use of any
(USVs). microcontroller. The transmitter used, is a
handheld cell phone.
1. INTRODUCTION
A literature review is given in section 2
In principle, RF (Radio Frequency) can be
followed by our proposed model in section 3. The
regarded as the control which deals with the use
hardware design framework is discussed in
of radio signals to remotely control any device. A
section 4. The circuit design; construction and
remotely controlled vehicle may be defined as any
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
working are explained in sections 5 and 6. We implemented the design of an unmanned
Experimental results, comparison and cost vehicle using the same technology as described in
analysis are covered in sections 7, 8 and 9. The the papers mentioned earlier, modified the
applications and future scope is discussed in the existing circuit and code described in paper [3]
sections 10 and 11. Lastly we conclude our paper. and gave a thorough and detailed analysis of the
design paradigm which is the best possible
2. LITERATURE REVIEW explanation to our knowledge till date in [4].
In 1898, Nikola Tesla built the first propeller-
However, upon implementation we also found
driven radio controlled boat, which can be
that the proposed method could also be
regarded as the original prototype of all modern-
implemented without using a microcontroller,
day uninhabited aerial vehicles and precision
which was one of the key elements in the design
guided weapons. Records state that it is the first
of the circuit. In case of motion control as
among all remotely controlled vehicles in air, land
described in these papers [1-4], we found that a
or sea. It was powered by lead-acid batteries and
considerable amount of circuit complexity can be
an electric drive motor. The vessel was designed
reduced when we omit the use of the
in such a way that it could be maneuvered
microcontroller. And the need for writing any
alongside a target using instructions received from
software code is also absent.
a wireless remote-control transmitter. Once in its
position, a command would be sent to detonate an
3. PROPOSED MODEL
explosive charge contained within the boat’s
forward compartment. The weapon’s guidance
system introduced a secure communications link
between the pilot’s controller and the surface-
running torpedo in an effort to assure that control
could be maintained even in the presence of
electronic counter measures.
Wireless controlled unmanned vehicles which
are used nowadays typically use RF circuits for
motion and control. But RF circuits suffer from
the disadvantage of limited working range which
results in limited control. As RF circuits’ follows Figure 1 Functional Block Diagram
LOS (Line of sight) approach, it fails miserably in
NLOS (Non-Line of Sight) conditions involving
obstacles and barriers. To overcome these, one
method was proposed by Awab Farikh et al,
(2010) [1] which typically makes use of the
DTMF technology along with a microcontroller
based circuit for maneuver and control of these
unmanned robotic vehicles.
Similarly, Ashish Yadav et al, (2012) [2] also
proposed the construction of an unmanned vehicle
which could be especially used for ground combat
using a similar technology. Recently, Sabuj Das
Gupta et al (2013) [3] discussed in detail about
how the method described in [1] could be
implemented using a microcontroller by providing
the necessary circuit details and the software code.
Figure 2 Block Diagram of the proposed model
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
The diagrams in fig.1 and fig. 2 describe the Integration of both the band split filter and
overall system. The robotic vehicle is basically digital decoder functions makes the DTMF
operated with the help of any GSM enabled decoder a complete receiver. Switch capacitor
mobile phone which makes a call to the phone techniques for high and low group filters are used;
stacked on the robot. The phone at the receiver digital counting techniques are used to detect and
end perceives the DTMF tone from the decode all 16 DTMF tone pairs into a 4 bit code.
mobile/cordless phone at the transmitter end and The external component count is minimized as an
feeds the signal as input to the DTMF decoder. on chip provision of a differential input amplifier
The DTMF decoder processes the tone and feeds clock oscillator and latched three state bus
the output as input to the motor driver. interfaces are provided. The functional description
Accordingly the robotic vehicle operates. The of the MT8870 is given in the following sections:
mobile that makes a call to the mobile phone
stacked in the vehicle basically acts as a remote. 4.1.1 Filter Section:
So this simple robotic car does not require the Separation of the low group and high group
construction of receiver and transmitter units, tones are achieved by applying the DTMF signal
thereby further reducing the circuit complexity. to the input of the two sixth order switched
capacitor band pass filter, the band width of
4. HARDWARE DESIGN FRAMEWORK whose correspond to the low and high group
The blocks of the receiver model which is seen in frequencies. Prior to limiting each filter output is
fig.2 are explained in detail in this section: followed by a single order switched capacitor
filter section which conditions the signal; limiting
4.1 DTMF DECODER is performed by the use of high gain comparators
An MT8870 (fig. 3) series DTMF decoder is which are provided with hysteresis to prevent
used here. The MT8870 series use digital counting detection of unwanted low level signals. Full rail
techniques to detect and decode all the 16 DTMF logic swing is provided at the output of the
tone pairs into a 4-bit code output. The need for comparators at the frequency of the incoming
pre-filtering is eliminated using the built-in dial DTMF signals.
tone rejection circuit. In single-ended input
configuration when the input signal given at pin 2, 4.1.2 Decoder Section:
is effective, the correct 4-bit decoded signal of the In the decoder section, there is a decoder
DTMF tone is generated and transferred to Q1 employing digital counting techniques to
(pin 11) through Q4 (pin 14) outputs of the DTMF determine the frequencies of the incoming tones
decoder which are given as input to the and to verify whether they correspond to standard
corresponding input pins of the motor driver. DTMF frequencies or not. Use of a complex
averaging algorithm protects against tone
simulation by extraneous signals such as voice in
addition to providing tolerance for small
frequency deviations and variations.
The development of this averaging variation
algorithm is to ensure an optimum combination of
immunity to talk off and tolerance to the presence
of interfering frequencies (third tone) and noise.
As the presence of two valid tones is recognized
(this is referred to as the signal condition) the
early steering (E ) output will go in to an active
state. Subsequent loss of signal condition, if any,
will force E to assume an inactive state.
Figure 3 DTMF decoder configuration
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
4.1.3 Steering Circuit:
The receiver checks for a valid signal duration
before registration of a decoded tone pair. An
external Resistance Capacitance (RC) of time
constant E performs the check. Logic high on E
causes the collector voltage (V ) to rise as the
capacitor discharges. The function of the decode
algorithm is to estimate the time required to detect
the presence of two valid tones top, the tone
frequency and the previous state of the decode
logic. E indicates and initiates an RC timing
circuit.
Figure 4 Motor driver configuration
If both tones are present for the minimum
guide time (t ) which is determined by the It basically consists of four drivers. The pins
external RC network, decoding of the DTMF IN1 through IN4 and OUT1 through OUT4 are
signal takes place and the resulting data is latched input and output pins respectively of driver 1
onto the output register. Indication that new data through driver 4. Drivers 1 and 2 as well as
is available is given when the delay steering (S ) drivers 3 and 4 are enabled by enable pin 1 (EN1)
output is raised high. The time required to receive and pin 9 (EN2) accordingly. When enable input
a valid DTMF signal (T ) is equal to the sum of EN1 (pin 1) is high, drivers 1 and 2 are enabled
time to detect the presence of valid DTMF signals and the outputs corresponding to their inputs are
(t ) ,guard time and the tone present. active high. Similarly, enable input EN2 (pin 9)
enables drivers 3 and 4.
4.2 MOTOR DRIVER
5. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM
The L293D is a quad, high-current, half-H
In this section, the circuit diagram of the
driver designed to produce two way drive currents
project is shown below (fig. 5). The construction
of up to 600 mA at voltages ranging from 4.5V to
and the working methodology of the circuit of the
36V which makes it easier to drive the DC motors
unmanned robotic vehicle have been discussed in
(fig.4).
the following section.
Figure 5 Circuit Diagram
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
6. CONSTRUCTION & WORKING tones may not be received by the DTMF decoder
at all or a very weak signal would be received by
The unmanned vehicle could either have a two
the decoder, which cannot be easily decoded by it
wheel drive or a four wheel drive. We choose to
[4].
go with a four wheel drive as it provides a better
control and more torque than the two wheel
system. The circuit as shown in fig.5 has been
designed on a breadboard.
The breadboard on which the circuit was
constructed is mounted on a steel chassis. In
addition the cell phone (receiver one) which is
attached to the vehicle is also mounted on the
chassis (not shown in the figure). Motors which
are used for motion of the robotic car are fixed to
the bottom of the steel chassis. In the four wheel
drive system which we had used in the
configuration of our circuit, the motors on both Figure 6 Working Model
the sides are managed independently of one
another. However a single L239D motor driver IC The DTMF tones are fed as input to the DTMF
is enough to control the four motors. Now to decoder which produces the 4 bit equivalent of the
operate the vehicle, we need to make a call to the received tone and passes it on to the motor driver
cell phone attached to the circuit on the receiver as input. The motor driver on receiving the
side. Moreover, we should note, that the call is corresponding input drives the motor as specified.
only possible if the operator on the transmitter
side knows the cell phone number of the other We see that when key ‘6’ is pressed on the
phone. Any GSM enabled phone can be used as mobile phone, the robotic car executes forward
the transmitter; which sends the DTMF tones motion. When we press key ‘9’ on our mobile
through the existing GSM network. phone, the car moves in the reverse direction.
When we press key ‘4’, the car takes a left turn.
The tones are received by the receiver phone When we press key ‘2’ on our mobile phone, the
accordingly. One thing to keep in mind is that the vehicle turns in the right direction. Similarly when
cell phone at the receiver side should be kept in ‘0’ is pressed on the cell phone, the vehicle halts.
auto answer mode, so that the call can be taken Five keys on the keypad are used for motion
after a single ring. The DTMF tones which are control of the unmanned car.
received are fed to the circuit through the headset
of the cell phone. 7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The experimental values of the frequency of
Referring to our circuit diagram (fig.5), the sinusoidal waves for DTMF and the voltage level
ring and the tip refer to the two wires that go into
at the out-put pins of MT8870 and L293D motor
them, which we will get when we will split open driver were measured. These values are
the headset wire of our cell phone. If we cut open juxtaposed with the theoretical values in the Table
the ear phone wire we will see three wires coming 1 and 2 respectively. Table 3 shows the HEX
out. They are: reading obtained from output pins of MT8870 and
1. Red wire (headset right output-Ring), L293D. Table 4 shows how the robot’s resultant
2. Blue wire (headset left output-Tip) and movement is achieved as a combination of the
3. Copper wire (ground wire).
right and left motor movements. We also
The wires are laminated and the lamination compared the output value of the motor driver
should be removed before they are inserted into given in Table 5 when input was given from:
the ring and tip positions as shown in the circuit 1. Microcontroller and
diagram. If this procedure is not followed, the 2. DTMF decoder directly.
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
Frequency Readings
Output of L293D Motor Driver
LOWER HIGHER VOLTAGE ACROSS
FREQUENCY FREQUENCY(Hz) MOTORS MOTOR
TH. EXP. TH. EXP. MICRO
2 697 672 1336 1320 CONTROL
4 770 731 1209 1201
LEFT(MOTION) 4.20 4.80
6 770 731 1477 1475 LEFT(REST) 0.01 0.09
8 852 855 1336 1322 RIGHT(MOTION) 4.20 4.80
RIGHT(REST) 0.01 0.09
5 770 735 1336 1325
8. COST ANALYSIS
Voltage Readings
Cost analysis is an integral part of any project
OUPUT OUTPUT
that is carried out. In this section, we try to
VOLTAGE VOLTAGE
LOGIC provide an approximate cost estimate of the
OF OF L293D
project. The components used here can be brought
from any of the online electronics stores which are
TH. EXP TH. EXP.
found on the internet. Although, most of the
.
components used in this project can be found in
LOW 0.03 0.09 0 0.11
any college laboratory. A list of the components
HIGH 4.97 4.80 5 4.82 and their prices are given in the following table
(Table 6):
Hex readings corresponding to robot’s movement
KEY OUTPUT INPUT ROBOT’S Cost of the Components
PRES OF OF NET Components Quantity Cost
SED MT8870 L293D MOVEMENT
MT8870 I.C. 1 $1.95
6 0110 0110 Forward L293D I.C. 1 $1.50
100kilo-ohm Resistor 2 College Lab
9 1001 1001 Left turn
330kilo-ohm Resistor 1 College Lab
4 0100 0100 Right turn
0.47 uF 1 College Lab
22pF 2 College Lab
2 0010 0010 Backward
0.1uF 1 College Lab
0 0000 0000 Stop
Crystal (3.57MHz) 1 $0.15
Geared Motors 4 $12
Breadboard 1 College Lab
Combination of Left and Right Motor Movement
Battery(6V) 1 $4.50
INPUT RIGHT LEFT RESULTANT Total $20.1
MOTOR MOTOR MOTION
From the table above we can see that this
ACTION ACTION
unmanned vehicle can be made with components
0110 Forward Forward Forward
which are cheap and very readily available in the
1001 Reverse Reverse Reverse market. The circuit was designed keeping in mind
the implementation cost considerations. This total
0100 Forward Stop Left
project cost is around or under $20 and if
0010 Stop Forward Right manufactured in bulk the cost will be even less.
0000 Stop Stop Stop
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
9. COMPARISION 11. FUTURE SCOPE
In the previous two sections, we have seen that As the microcontroller which is essentially “a
our proposed model achieves a considerable micro-computer on a chip” is not used we are
amount of accuracy as is evident from Table 5 in truly unaware and not certain at this point of time
case of motion control. More specifically looking whether extra functions can be added to the
at the circuit diagram it is clearly visible that our robotic vehicle in addition to direction control.
circuit requires much less components to obtain Considerable amount of intensive research in this
the same objective as is proposed in papers [2-4]. area is required to come to any such definite
From convention reduced circuitry results in less conclusion. Even if it is possible then as described
complexity. in paper [4] the project can be extended to include
IR sensors, a camera or even a system for
A cost analysis shows that our proposed design
password protection of the USV. Now, IR sensors
method is also quite cost effective. This reduces
can be automatically used to detect and avoid
manufacturing costs also. There is no need of any
obstacles if the vehicle goes beyond the line of
programming so deployment of manpower to
sight. Coming to password protection, a brilliant
program the circuit is also not required.
scheme has already been described in paper [5]
where the purpose had been achieved without the
10. APPLICATION
use of any microcontroller. Moreover, still
These unmanned vehicles can have various research is needed to see whether the inclusion of
scientific uses in hazardous and unknown a camera with the vehicle could be achieved
environments. USVs have also been used for without the use of a microcontroller and without
space exploration purposes examples of which are much circuit complexity.
Voyager-I and the Martian explorers Spirit and
Opportunity. Similarly, military usage of these 12. CONCLUSION
robotic vehicles dates back to the first half of the
The basic aim to develop an USV which
20th century [6].
overcomes the drawbacks of the conventionally
used RF circuits has already been achieved in
Remote controlled vehicles are used by many
papers [1-2]. But the method proposed in this
police department bomb-squads to defuse or
paper can be said to improve upon the current
detonate explosives. Current USV's can hover
design or provide an alternative to the existing
around possible targets until they are positively
one. The design described here does not make use
identified before releasing their payload of
of any microcontroller and it can be seen that even
weaponry. USVs also play an increased role in
without the usage of the microcontroller we
search and rescue. These vehicles could be used in
achieve similar and comparable accuracy in
case of natural calamities & emergencies. This
direction control. Whether new functions which
can also be a great asset to save the lives of both
are described in the section 11 can be added is
people and soldiers.
beyond the scope of this paper. As discussed in
section 9, the advantage of this system can be
In recent times, there has been a serious
summarized as reduced circuit complexity,
endangerment to the wildlife. Many animals are
reduced cost of manufacturing and ease of
significantly on the verge of extinction. These spy
deployment. In addition to these advantages, the
robotic cars can be used to patrol the different
robotic car constructed based on the design in this
sections of the forested areas for any suspicious
paper would have the same benefits associated
activity and since it is a live streaming device as
with the designs described with microcontroller.
well as mobile, it can keep the forest guards
constantly updated and alert about the status of
Acknowledgements
different areas which are vulnerable to attack. As
a result, it can help to prevent further destruction We would like to thank Prof. Saraswati Saha,
of the forest resources by enabling correct Department. Of Electronics & Communication
prohibitory action at the appropriate time. Engineering, RCC-Institute of Information
Original Publication: Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 14, Issue. 1, 2014.
Technology, Kolkata, for constantly supporting
and advising on our project.