1v1081070/htam:viXra
Deterministic modal Bayesian Logic: derive the
Bayesian inference within the modal logic T
Fr´ed´eric Dambreville
D´el´egation G´en´erale pour l’Armement, DGA/CEP/GIP
16 Bis, Avenue Prieur de la Cˆote d’Or
F 94114, France
In this paper a conditional logic is defined and studied. This conditional logic,
DmBL, is constructed as a deterministic counterpart to the Bayesian conditional. The
logic is unrestricted, so that any logical operations are allowed. A notion of logical
independence is also defined within the logic itself. This logic is shown to be non-
trivialandisnotreducedtoclassical propositions. Amodelisconstructedforthelogic.
Completenessresultsareproved. Itisshownthatanyunconditionedprobabilitycanbe
extendedtothewholelogicDmBL.TheBayesianconditionalisthenrecoveredfromthe
probabilistic DmBL.Atlast,itisshown whyDmBLiscompliant withLewis’ triviality.
Keywords: Probability, Bayesian inference, Conditional Logic, Modal Logic, Probabilistic Logic
1 Introduction
Bayesianinference is a powerfulprinciple for modeling and manipulating probabilistic infor-
mation. In many cases, Bayesian inference is considered as an optimal and legitimate rule
for inferring such information.
• Bayesian filters for example, and their approximations by means of sequential Monte-
Carlo, are typically regarded as optimal filters [4, 32, 9],
• Bayesian networks are particularly powerful tools for modeling uncertain information,
since they merge logical and independence priors, for reducing the complexity of the
laws, with the possibility of learning [35, 30, 13].
Although Bayesian inference is an established principle, it is recalled [26] that it has been
disputed until the middle of the XXth century, in particular by the frequencist community.
Whatmade the Bayesianinferenceestablishedischiefly alogicaljustificationofthe rule[11,
26]. Some convergence with the frequencist interpretation achieved this acceptation. Cox
derived the characteristics of Probability and of Bayesian conditional from hypothesized
axiomsabouttheprobabilisticsystem,whichthemselveswerereducedintermsoffunctional
equations. Typical axioms are:
• The operation which maps the probability of a proposition to the probability of its
negation is idempotent,
• The probability of A∧B depends only of the probability of A and of the probability
of B given that A is true,
• The probability of a propositionis independent of the way it is deduced (consistency).
It is noticed that Cox interpretation has been criticized recently for some imprecision and
reconsidered [16, 15, 25].
In some sense, Cox justification of the Bayesianconditional is not entirely satisfactory,since
it is implicit: it justifies the Bayesian conditional as the operator fulfilling some natural
properties, but does not construct a full underlying logic priorly to the probability. The
purpose of this paper is to construct an explicit logic for the Bayesian conditional as a
conditional logic:
1. Builda(deterministic)conditionallogic,priorly to any notion of probability. Thislogic
will extend the classicalpropositionallogic. It will containa conditionaloperator (·|·),
so that the conditional proposition (ψ|φ) could be built for any propositions φ and ψ,
2. Beinggivenaprobabilitypovertheunconditionedpropositions,derivetheprobabilistic
Bayesianconditionalfromanextensionpoftheprobabilitypoverthisconditionallogic.
More precisely, the Bayesianconditional will be derived by p(ψ|φ)=p (ψ|φ) .
The construction of an explicit underlying logic provides a better unders(cid:0)tandin(cid:1)g of the
Bayesianconditional,but willalsomakepossiblethe comparisonwithotherrulesfor manip-
ulating probabilistic information, based on other logics [14].
It is known that the construction of such underlying logic is heavily constrained by Lewis’
triviality[29],whichhasshownsomecriticalissuesrelatedto the notionofconditionalprob-
ability; refer alsoto [24, 23, 37]. In particular,Lewis’ resultimplies stronghypotheses about
thenatureoftheconditionals. Inmostcases,theconditionalshavetobeconstructedoutside
the space of unconditioned propositions. This result implied the way the logic of Bayesian
conditional has been investigated. Many approaches do not distinguish the Bayesian condi-
tional from probabilistic notions. This is particularly the case of the theory called Bayesian
Logic [3], which is an extension of probabilistic logic programming by the way of Bayesian
conditioning. Other approaches like conditional logic or algebra result in the construction
of conditional operators, which finally arise as abstraction independent of any probability.
These logical constructions are approximating the Bayesian conditional or are constrained
in use. The Bayesian inference is a rich notion. It is also evocated subsequently, how the
Bayesianinference has been applied to the definition of default reasoning systems [8].
Since Lewis’ triviality is a fundamental reference in this work, it is introduced now. By the
way, different logical approaches of the Bayesian conditional are evocated, and it is shown
how these approaches avoid the triviality.
Lewis’ triviality. Let Ω be the set of all events, and M be the set of measurable subsets
of Ω. Let Pr(M) be the set of all probability measures defined on M. Lewis’ triviality [29]
may be expressed as follows:
LetA,B ∈M with ∅(B (A(Ω. Then, it is impossible tobuild aproposition (B|A)∈M
Lewis’trivia(cid:0)lity th(cid:1)usmakesimpossible the constructionofa (Bayesian)conditionaloperator
within the same Boolean space.
Proof. For any propositions C,D, define π (D)=π(D|C)= π(C∩D), when π(C)>0.
The proof of Lewis’ result relies of the following calculus:
Denoting ∼B =Ω\B, it is inferred then:
which contradicts the hypotheses π(B)6=0 and π(A)6=1.
In fact, the derivation (1) relies on the hypothesis that (B|A)∈M, which implies by defini-
If the proposition (B|A) is ou(cid:0)tside M(cid:1) , it becomes necessary to build for any probability π
its extension π over the outside propositions; in particular, it will be defined π (B|A) =
π(B∩A)/π(A),foranyA,B ∈M. Inpractice,thereisnoreasontohaveπ (D)=π (D|C)
C (cid:0) (cid:1)
for D 6∈M; then, the above triviality does not work anymore.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
The propertyπ 6=π (·|C) issomewhatcounter-intuitive. Inparticular,itmeansthatcon-
ditionals are not conserved by conditional probabilities. However, it allows the construction
(cid:0) (cid:1)
of a conditional logic for the Bayesian conditional; our work provides an example of such
construction.
ProbabilisticlogicandBayesianlogic. Probabilisticlogic,asdefinedbyNilsson[31,33,
34], has been widely studied in order to model and manipulate the uncertain information.
It tracks back from the seminal work of Boole [7]. In probabilistic logic, the knowledge,
while logicallyencodedby classicalpropositions,is expressedby means of constraintsonthe
probability over these propositions. For example, the knowledge over the propositions A,B
may be described by:
whereA→B ≡¬A∨B andv |1≤i≤4 areknownboundoverthe probabilities. Equations
like (2) turn out to be a linear set of constraints over p. In other words, it is then possible
to characterize all the possible values for p by means of a linear system. For example, if our
purpose is to know the possible values for p(B), we just have to solve:
Notice that probabilistic logic by itself does not manipulate conditional probabilities or any
notion of independence. Proposals for extending the probabilistic logic to conditionals has
appeared rather early [1], but Andersen and Hooker [2, 3] introduced an efficient modeling
and solve of such problems. This new paradigm for manipulating Bayesian probabilistic
constraints has been called Bayesian Logic.
For example, let us introduce a new proposition C to problem (2). Assume now that the
new system is characterizedby a bound over the conditional probability p(C|A∧B) and by
an independence hypothesis between A and B. The set of constraints could be rewritten as:
The constraint on p(C|A∧B) turns out to be linear, since it could be rewritten:
but constraintp(A∧B)=p(A)p(B) remainsessentially a non-linearconstraint. Constraints
involvingbothconditionalandnon-conditionalprobabilitiesalsogeneratenon-linearity. In[2]
and more thoroughly in [3], Andersen and Hooker expose a methodology for solving these
non-linear programs. In particular, the structure of the Bayesian Network is being used in
order to reduce the number of non-linear constraints.
Bayesian Logic is a paradigm for solving probabilistic constraint programs, which involve
Bayesianconstraints. Since it does not construct the Bayesianconditional as a strict logical
operator, this theory is not concerned by Lewis’ triviality. Bayesian Logic departs funda-
mentally from our approach, since Deterministic modal Bayesian Logic intends to build the
logic underlying the Bayesianconditional priorly to the notion of probability.
ConditionalEventalgebra. InConditionalEventAlgebra[21,22,18,10],theconditional
could be seen as an external operator (|), which maps pairs of unconditioned propositions
toward an external Boolean space, while satisfying the properties related to the Bayesian
conditional. TherearenumerouspossibleconstructionsofaCEA.Infact,mostCEAsprovide
conditionalruleswhicharericherthanthestrictBayesianconditional. Forexample,theCEA,
denoted DGNW [21], is characterizedby the following properties:
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
Property (3) infers the general Bayesian rule: (cid:12)
but also a Boolean morphism:
Notice thatthe externalspacehypothesisis fundamentalhere, anditis notpossible to write
(a|Ω)=awhereΩisthesetofallevents. Inparticular,DGNWallows(a|b)∧(b|Ω)=(a∧b|Ω),
but not (a|b)∧b=a∧b.
Now,property (3)defines muchmore combinations thanthe strict Bayesianconditional. In-
deed, the combination(a|b)∧(c|d) is reducedfor anychoice ofa,b,c,d,whichis notpossible
with a classical Bayesian combination.
The counterpart of such nice properties is the necessity to restrict the conditional to uncon-
ditioned propositions. It is yet proposed in [21] a closure of DGNW:
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
but this closure is not com(cid:12)patible with(cid:12) a probabilistic interpretation and fails to satisfy
the intuitive relation P (a|b) (c|d) = P (a|b)∧(c|d) /P(c|d). More generally, CEAs are
practically restricted to only one level of conditioning, and usually avoid any interferences
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
betweenunconditionedandco(cid:12)nditionedpropositions. These restrictionsarealsothe way,by
which CEAs avoid Lewis’ triviality.
Conditionallogics. Conditional isanambiguousword,sincetheremaybedifferentmean-
ingowingtothecommunity. Eventheclassicalinference,φ→ψ ≡¬φ∨ψ,iscalledmaterial
conditional. Despiteclassicalinferenceissystematicallyusedbymathematicians,itsdisjunc-
tivedefinitionmakesitimproperforsomeconditionsofuse. Forexample,itis knownthatit
isbyessencenon-constructive,anissuewhichtracksbacktothefoundationofmodernmath-
ematic[38]. Somehow,thepossibilitytoinferfromthecontradictionisalsocounter-intuitive;
by the way, the Bayesianinference makes no sense, while inferring from the contradiction.
Inthe frameworkofBayesianinference,weareinterestedindefining the lawofaconditional
independently of the factual state of the hypothesis. Thus, the Bayesian conditional could
be relatedto the notionofCounterfactual conditional. The classicalinference is actually not
counterfactual,sinceitisbydefinitiondependentofthehypothesis. Fromnowon,thenotion
of conditional will refer to counterfactual conditionals, and related extensions.
A non-classicalinference is often related to a modal paradigm. While first defining counter-
factual conditionals (an example of such conditional, VCU, is detailed in section 3.2), the
philosophers David Lewis and Robert Stalnaker [28, 36] based their model constructions on
the possible world semantics of modal logic (other authors also consider Kripke model ex-
tensions [19]). Stalnaker claimed that it was possible to construct such conditional, denoted
>, within the universe of events, so as to match the probabilistic Bayesian conditional, i.e.
p(A > B) = p(B|A) = p(A∧B)/p(A). Lewis answered negatively [29] to this conjecture.
However,thiswasnottheendoftheinteractionbetweenconditionallogicsandprobabilities.
Onthe basisofthe semantic,Lewis proposedanalternativeinterpretationofthe probability
p(A>B), called Imaging [27].
It is not our purpose to detail these notions here, but we point out the following:
• Theprobabilisticinterpretationoftheconditionalbyimagingdoesnotprovideaninter-
pretationoftheprobabilisticBayesianconditional. Nevertheless,Stalnaker’sconjecture
couldbeweakenedsoastoovercomethetriviality: asalreadyexplainedinourprevious
discussion, the triviality could be avoided by constructing the conditionals outside the
classical propositions space and extending the probability accordingly,
• The existing conditional logics are still rough approximations of the Bayesian condi-
tional. This point will be discussed in details later. But for example, it seems that the
negationoperatorsoftheexistingconditionallogicsareusuallyrelaxed,whencompared
to the Bayesianconditioning (refer to the logicVCU defined in section 3.2). Typically,
is notretrieved.1 Itcontradictsthe axiom⊢φ>φ (Id)whichiswidelyacceptedinthe
literature; refer to deduction (18) in section 3.2.
Default reasoning. Default reasonings are related to logical systems which are able to
deduce what normally happens, when only partial information are available. The idea is to
use default rules or default information. Then, the most plausible assumptions are deduced,
in regardsto the current information. Of course,some conclusions may be retracted, if they
are corrected by new sources of information.
ItisnoticedthattheBayesianinferenceisableofsomekindofdefaultreasoning,byadapting
the belief of a proposition according to an hypothesis. In fact, the system P for default
reasoning could be derived from a Bayesian interpretation [1, 17, 8]. The ε−semantic is
particularly enlightening. Let us denote φ ⇒ ψ the default, which means “ψ is normally
true, when φ holds true”. Then let us interpret φ ⇒ ψ by the constraint p(ψ|φ) ≥ 1−ε,
where ε is an infinitesimal.2 Now, it is deduced from the Bayesian inference:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
From hypotheses φ ⇒ ψ and φ ⇒ η, it would come p(ψ|φ) ≥ 1−ε and p(η|φ) ≥ 1−ε ,
where ε and ε are infinitesimals, and then by (6):
1ThispropertycouldalsoberelatedtotheBooleanmorphism(4)ofCEA.
2Noticethatthedefinitionof⇒isameta-definition(oralsoasecond-orderdefinition).
This deduction conduces to the well known Cautious Monotonicity rule:
CM : .
The rule CM already infers some default reasoning:
Assume b ⇒ f (birds normally fly), p ⇒ b (penguins normally are birds) and
p ⇒ ¬f (penguins normally do not fly). Then by applying CM on p ⇒ b and
p ⇒ ¬f, it comes p∧b ⇒ ¬f. The non-monotonic inference ⇒ is thus able to
handle sub-cases.
Fromthe infinitesimalprobabilistic interpretation,the followingrules ofP are alsodeduced:
SystemP sharessomecommonruleswithexistingconditionallogics(e.g. (Id)isinVCUand
Right Weakening (RW)isasub-caseofrule(CR)ofVCU;refertosection3.2). However,the
default ⇒ appears as a meta-operator, which acts as an external operator over the classical
propositions only. Contrary to CEA DGNW, equation (4), the default propositions φ ⇒ ψ
do not constitute a Boolean space which maps from the classical propositions by a Boolean
morphism. Both properties (internal operator and Boolean morphism) are desirable, for a
logical interpretation of the Bayesian conditional. But system P allows default reasoning,
while DGNW and VCU (and DmBL, defined subsequently) are incompatible with it (equa-
tion (3), axiom Ax.4 of VCU defined in section 3.2).
Alsorelatedtothe infinitesimal interpretationis the rankingofthe models (typically,a rank
is interpreted as an infinitesimal order). The ranking conditions the way the defaults are
prioritized. There has been various extension of system P (alternative inferences, ranking
methods). In some recent works, Lukasiewicz et al. [5] proposed a probabilistic extension
of default reasonings (including system P), which is not restricted to an infinitesimal prob-
abilistic interpretation. Each default is then associated to an interval of constraint for its
probability.
Why a new conditional logic? The previous approaches and uses of the Bayesianlogic
implyrestrictionsorapproximationstothelogicalinterpretationoftheBayesianconditional.
BayesianlogicdoesnotprovidealogicalinterpretationoftheBayesianconditional,butrather
a methodology for solving the programrelatedto a probabilistic Bayesianmodeling. Condi-
tional event algebras provideaninterestinglogicalinterpretationoftheBayesianconditional,
but are highly constrained in their definition; from a logical viewpoint, the impossibility to
handle or to combine multiple-levels conditionals constitutes a limitation in terms of the
coherence of the models. Existing conditional logics are insufficient for characterizing the
Bayesian conditional properly. The default reasoning systems and their interpretation by
means of the probabilistic Bayesian inference are quite interesting and a source of inspira-
tion, but they are mainly a consequence of the probabilistic Bayesian inference and account
for the Bayesian conditional only partially. Our work intends to overcome these limitations,
byconstructinganewconditionallogicwhichisinaccordancewiththeBayesianconditional.
It is not our purpose, however,to enrich the Bayesianrule, as it is proposed in most CEA.
Ourlogic,denotedDeterministic modal Bayesian Logic (DmBL),isconstructedaccordingto
a modal background(system T). The conditionaloperatoris defined in parallelto a relation
oflogicalindependence. Thisrelationisdefinedwithinthelogic,andnotatameta-level. The
probabilisticBayesianinferenceisrecoveredfromthederivedlogicaltheoremsandthelogical
independence. This processimplies anextension of probability fromthe unconditioned logic
toward DmBL. As a final result, a theorem is proved that guarantees the existence of such
extension (Lewis’ result is thus avoided).
Section 2 is dedicated to the definition of the Deterministic modal Bayesian Logic. The
languages, axioms and rules are introduced. In section 3, several theorems of the logic are
derived. A purely logicalinterpretation of Lewis’ triviality is made, and DmBL is compared
with other systems. A model for DmBL is constructed in section 4. A partial completeness
theorem is derived. The extension of probabilities over DmBL is investigated in section 5.
The probabilistic Bayesian inference is recovered from this extension. The paper is then
concluded.
2 Definition of the logics
Deterministic modal Bayesian Logic was first defined without modality as Deterministic
Bayesian Logic in a previous version of this document [12]. The non-modal definition is
uneasy to handle. For this new modal definition, we have been inspired by the seminal work
ofLewis[28],andalsobymorerecentworksofLauraGiordanoetal.,whichusethemodality
forspecifyingtheconditionalbehavior[19,20]. Theuseofthemodalityisinstrumentalhere;
for this reason, modal appears in lower case in our terminology.
Modal logic is a powerful tool, but not intuitive at first sight. We thus decided to introduce
the modality softly, by interpreting it (in part) from probabilistic considerations: modalities
will be used in order to characterize properties generally true for any possible probability.
Nevertheless, this instrumental use of modalities allows an abstraction which makes our
construction independent to any notion of probability.
Introducingthemodalnotation. Thisparagraphintendstoexplaintheintuitionbehind
the subsequent modal definition of DmBL. Some generalizations are not justified here, but
the axioms are extrapolated from results, which are easily proved.
The logicofa systemis the collectionofbehaviorswhicharecommonto anyinstance ofthis
system. Let us consider the example of probability on a finite (unconditioned) propositional
space. Forconvenience,define P the setofstrictly positive probabilitiesoverthis space,that
is p∈P is such that p(φ)>0 for any non-empty proposition φ:
P= p p is a probability and ∀φ6≡⊥, p(φ)>0 .
When the proposition φ(cid:8)is(cid:14)always true (i.e. φ is the set of all even(cid:9)ts), it is known that
p(φ)=1 for any possible probability p. This could be interpreted logically as follows:
This is a typical logical relation related to the probabilities. Notice however that:
φ→∀p∈P, p(φ)=1 is false in general,
because unless φ is always true, the property ∀p∈P, p(φ)=1 is necessary false.3
It is also obvious that ∀p∈P, p(φ)=1 infers φ (consider the cases ⊢φ and 0φ):
Another proposition is easily derived:
This last proposition could be conside(cid:0)red as a modus ponens encoded by me(cid:1)ans of the
probabilities (it is recalled that φ → ψ ≡ ¬φ ∨ ψ). Now, by using the abbreviation
3Infirstorderlogic,beingabletoproveBwhenhypothesizingAimpliesthatA→Bisproved(assumption
discharge). Onthissecondorderexample,theassumptiondischargedoesnotworkanymore!
✷φ= ∀p∈P, p(φ)=1 , the propositions (7), (8) and (9) are turned into:
(cid:0) (cid:1) ⊢φ implies ⊢✷φ,
TheseareexactlythemodalaxiomsandruleofthesystemTofmodallogic. SystemTisthe
backbone of our conditionallogic, DmBL. Additional axioms are also introduced for charac-
terizingtheconditional(·|·). Theseaxiomsareextrapolatedfromunconditionedprobabilistic
characterizations. For example, it is proved for unconditioned propositions:
Sinceitisalsoknownthatp(ψ|φ)+p(¬ψ|φ)=1foranyp∈P,itwillbeassumedtheaxiom:
Of course, property (10) normally holds for unconditioned propositions only, so that ax-
iom (11) comes in fact from an extrapolation of (10).
Similarly, it is noticed that:
Since p(ψ|φ)+p(⊥)≤p(¬φ∨ψ)+p(⊥) for any p∈P, it will be assumed the axiom:
Since p(ψ ∨ η|φ) + p(⊥) ≤ p(ψ|φ) + p(η|φ) for any p ∈ P, it is also extrapolated that
which constitutes a modus ponens for the co(cid:0)nditional. Axio(cid:1)ms (11), (13) and (14) are not
completely new. In particular, they infer the Boolean morphism (4) of CEA. They are not
fully implemented by the existing conditional logics, however.
In order to complete this introduction, it is also noticed that:
The interpr(cid:0)etation and proof of (1(cid:1)5) is(cid:0)simple: when φ is a “subset” of ψ, then e(cid:1)ither φ is
emptyorp(ψ|φ)=1foranystrictlypositiveprobabilityp. From(15),itisthenextrapolated:
In fact, these extrapolatedaxioms imply const(cid:0)raints,when ex(cid:1)tending the probabilities p∈P
over the conditioned propositions. This paper intends to prove that these constraints are
actually valid, in regard to Lewis’ triviality. It is now time for the logic definition.
Language. Let Θ={θ /i∈I} be a set of atomic propositions.
The language L of the classical logic related to Θ is the smallest set such that:
and φ→ψ ∈L
for any φ,ψ ∈L
The language L of the modal logic T related to Θ is the smallest set such that:
and φ→ψ ∈L
for any φ,ψ ∈L
The language L of the Deterministic modal Bayesian Logic related to Θ is the smallest set
such that:
In the construction of the propositions, the unary operators have priority over the binary
operators;for example ¬φ∨ψ =(¬φ)∨ψ. The following abbreviations are defined:
• It is chosen a proposition θ ∈Θ, and it is then denoted ⊤=θ →θ and ⊥=¬⊤,
• ✸φ=¬✷¬φ,
⊤ and ⊥ are ide(cid:0)alistic nota(cid:1)tions for the tautology and the contradiction. The operator ×
describes the logical independence between propositions. The independence relation × and
the conditional (|) are thus conjointly defined.
We also define abbreviations for the notion of proof:
• ⊢φ means “φ is proved”,
The meta-relation ≡ is the logical equivalence.
Rules and axioms. The classical Logic C is characterized by the Modus ponens and the
classical axioms c∗ described subsequently.
The modal Logic T is characterized by the Modus ponens, the classical axioms c∗ and the
modal rule/axioms m∗ described subsequently (c.f. also [6]).
TheDeterministic modal Bayesian Logic,i.e. DmBL,ischaracterizedbytheModus ponens,
the classical axioms c∗, the modal rule/axioms m∗ and the Bayesian axioms b∗:
Modus ponens. ⊢φ and ⊢φ→ψ implies ⊢ψ,
m1. ⊢φ implies ⊢✷φ,
m3. ⊢✷φ→φ,
DmBL , a weakened version of DmBL, is defined by replacing b5 by the alternative axioms:
The axioms m∗ and b1 to b4 have been introduced i(cid:0)n the previous(cid:1)paragraph. The axiom
b5implements the symmetry ofthe logicalindependence. The specific notations ⊢ , ⊢ and
⊢ will be used for denoting a proof in C, T or DmBL/DmBL respectively. The following
section studies the logical consequences of the axioms.
3 Logical theorems and comparison with other systems
DmBL/DmBL implies the classicalandthe T-systemtautologies;the propertiesofclassical
logic and of the T-system are assumed without proof. Since both DmBL and DmBL are
studied, the possibly needed axioms b5∗ are indicated in bracket.
3.1 Theorems
The proofs are done in appendix A. Next theorem is proved here as an example.
Interpretation: atautologyisindependent withanyotherpropositionanditssub-universeis
the whole universe.
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
The remaining proof(cid:0)is obvious.(cid:1)
Axioms order. Axiom b5 implies b5.weak.A.
The empty universe [b5.weak.A]. ⊢✷¬φ→(ψ×φ). In particular (ψ|⊥)≡ψ.
Proof is immediate from corollary.
Sub-universes are classical [b5.weak.A].
Evaluating (⊤|·) and (⊥|·) [b5.weak.A]. Is proved ⊢ ✷ψ → ✷(ψ|φ). In particular
Interpretation: a non-empty proposition sees itself as ever true.
Notice that this property is compliant with (⊥|⊥)≡⊥.
Inter-independence [b5.weak.A]. ⊢(ψ|φ)×φ.
Interpretation: a proposition is independent of its sub-universe.
Independence invariance [b5.weak.A].
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Interpretation: a propositionindependent with itselfis either a tautologyora contradiction.
Interpretation: when propositions are independent and th(cid:0)eir disjunctions are sure(cid:1), then at
least one proposition is sure.
Independence and regularity [b5.weak.A].
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:16) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:17)
Interpretation: unless it is empty, a proposition may be removed from a logical equation,
when it appears in the both sides and is independent with the equation components.
Corollary 2. Being given ψ and φ such that ⊢✸φ, the proposition (ψ|φ) is uniquely defined
as the solution of equation X ∧φ≡ψ∧φ (with unknown X) which is independent of φ.
b5.weak.B).
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Interpretation: equivalence is compliant with the conditioning.
Corollary. Axiom b5 implies b5.weak.B. In particular, DmBL is weaker than DmBL.
Corollary of b5 or b5.weak.B. ψ ≡η implies (φ|ψ)≡(φ|η).
Together with the properties of the system T and left equivalences, this last result implies
thattheequivalencerelation≡iscompliantwiththe logicaloperatorsofDmBL/DmBL . In
particular, replacing a sub-proposition with an equivalent sub-proposition within a theorem
still makes a theorem.
Reduction rule [b5]. Axiom b5 implies φ (ψ|φ) ≡φ.
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
Markov Property [b5].
t−2 t−1 t−1
t t−1 τ τ t t−1 t τ
! !! (cid:12) !!
Interpretation: the Markovpropertyholds,whenthe conditioningisindepe(cid:12)ndent ofthe past
and the past is possible.
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
Thisis aquite(cid:0)limite(cid:12)d(cid:1)resultanditis tempting toassumethe additionalaxiom“ (η|ψ) φ ≡
(η|φ∧ψ) (∗)”. Thereisareallycriticalpointhere,sinceaxiom(∗)impliesactuallyalogical
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
counterpart to Lewis’ triviality: (cid:12)
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
Interpretation: if φ and ψ(cid:0)are not exclusive and(cid:1)not equivalent, then they are independent.
This is irrelevant and forbids the use of axiom (∗).
3.2 Some comparisons with other systems
Conditional Event Algebra. As explained in introduction, CEAs characterize the con-
ditional by means of an external operator. The conditional are limited to only one level of
conditioning, but consequently, the combination rules of the conditionals are richer than for
the strict Bayesian conditionals. On the contrary, DmBL handles several level of condition-
ing,butisnotaddressedtoproviderichercombinationsthanthestrictBayesianconditionals.
Thus, DmBL implements the necessary Bayesianproperties:
• In DmBL, the conditioning constitutes a Boolean morphism (sub-universes are classi-
cal). The property (4) of the CEA DGNW [21] is thus recoveredand generalized,
• The Bayesian inference p(ψ|φ)p(φ) = p(φ∧ψ) is derived from the extension of proba-
DGNW alsoprovidesthe relation(a|b∧c)∧(b|c)=(a∧b|c), whichis relatedto the general
Bayesian inference p(a|b∧c)p(b|c) = p(a∧b|c). The general Bayesian inference is a direct
consequenceoftheBayesianinference,andthuscanbederivedfromDmBLtoo. Butisthere
a logical counterpart in DmBL to the general Bayesian inference? This logical counterpart
would be expressed by means of a double proposition:
At this time, we are not able to decide if these propositions are derived from DmBL or are
even compatible with DmBL.
Comparison with an existing conditional logic. The axioms of the conditional logic
VCU(VCUisanabbreviationforthe axiomssystem)[28]areconsideredhereandcompared
to DmBL. This example is representative of the difference with the other conditional logics.
Theorems derived in section 3.1 are referred to.
Axioms and rules of VCU:
(Ax.1) φ>φ has a partial counterpart in DmBL, i.e. ⊢✷¬φ∨✷(φ|φ) (theorem).
(derived from theorems).
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
(CR) Counterfactual rule. This is a multiple-task rule. First, it allows the introd(cid:12)uction of
tautologiesinsideaconditional,secondly,itimplies somelinearityofthe conditionalwith∧:
This rule is recoveredin DmBL from the fact that sub-universes are classical:
It is noteworthy that Ax.1 and CR, with n=1 and ξ =φ, infer the rule:
Being proved φ→ψ, it is proved φ>ψ . (17)
It appearsthat Ax.2,Ax.4, Ax.5, Ax.6 and CRare recoveredin DmBL, Ax.1 is weakenedin
DmBL and Ax.3 is not implemented in DmBL.
Conversely, b3 is implemented by VCU. b2 is not implemented by VCU, but it could be
shownthatVCUcompletedbyb4impliesb2. b4isnotimplementedbyVCU.b1isobtained
from(17),whileweakenedby✷¬φ. b5isrelatedtothenotionoflogicalindependence,which
is not considered within VCU. Then we have to point out three fundamental distinctions of
DmBL compared to VCU:
1. In DmBL, the negation commutes with the conditional (b4). More generally, sub-
universes are classical in DmBL,
2. InDmBL,thedeductionsontheconditionalsareoftenweakenedbythehypothesisthat
the condition is not empty; for example, ✷¬φ in rule b1, or theorem ⊢(φ|φ)∨✷¬φ,
3. DmBL manipulates a notion of logical independence of the propositions.
In fact, point 1 (commutation of the negation) makes point 2 (deduction weakened by the
non-empty condition hypothesis) necessary. For example, ⊥ > ⊤ is derived from (17); by
using both Ax.1 and the negation commutation, it is then deduced:
which is impossible. Notice that this deduction is also done in DmBL, if we replace the
Thisexample,basedonVCUandDmBL,illustratesafundamentaldifferencebetweenDmBL
and other conditional logics. DmBL considers ⊥ as a singularity, and will be cautious with
this case when inferring conditionals. This principle is not just a logical artifact. In fact,
it is also deeply related to the notion of logical independence, as it appears in the proof of
theorem Independence and proof.
4.1 Toward a Model
In this paragraph, it is discussed about the link between Kripke models [6, 19, 20] for
DmBL/DmBL and a more basic structure called conditional models.
From now on, P(W) denotes the set of all subsets of set W.
Definition. AKripkemodelforDmBL(respectivelyDmBL )isaquadruplet(W,R,H,f),
where W is a set of worlds, R ⊂ W ×W is an accessibility relation, H : L −→ P(W) is an
assignment function, f :H(L)×H(L)−→P(W) is a conditioning function, and verifying:
• H(cid:0)(φ)=W(cid:1) for(cid:0)any φ such t(cid:1)hat ⊢φ is an axiom of the form m3, b1, b2, b3, b4,
or b5 (respectively b5.weak.A and b5.weak.B).
Itisnoticedthattherulesandaxiomsc∗,modusponens,m1andm2andarecompliantwith
the model by construction.
Definition2. AconditionalmodelforDmBL(respectivelyDmBL )isaquadruplet(W,M,h,f)
such that W is a set of worlds, M ⊂P(W) is a set of admissible propositions, h:Θ−→M
is an assignment function, f :M ×M −→M is a conditioning function, and verifying:
• M isaBooleansub-algebraofP(W),i.e. A∩B ∈M andW\A∈M foranyA,B ∈M,
β1. A⊂B and A6=∅ imply f(B,A)=W, for any A,B ∈M,
β2. f(B∪C,A)⊂f(B,A)∪f(C,A), for any A,B,C ∈M,
β3. A∩f(B,A)⊂B, for any A,B ∈M,
β4. f(W \B,A)=W \f(B,A), for any A,B ∈M,
β5. f(B,A)=B implies f(A,B)=A
(respectively β5w. f(B,A)=B implies f(B,W \A)=B), for any A,B ∈M).
Remarks. A conditional model does not implement the modalities. In both models, the
function f is the representation of the conditional (|).
Modeltransfer. Let(W,M,h,f)beaconditionalmodelforDmBL(respectivelyDmBL ).
Let R=W ×W and define H by:
Then (W(cid:0),R,H(cid:1),f) is(cid:0)a Kripke mo(cid:1)del for DmBL (respectively DmBL ).
The proof is easy, but tedious. It is detailed in appendix B.
Conditional models are defined from the classical and conditional operators only. In fact,
such models have been set first for a non-modal construction of the Bayesian logic [12]. In
this paper a free conditional model is constructed for DmBL , with completeness results.
The conditional model is translated into a DmBL Kripke model. The derived model is
of course not complete for DmBL in regards to the modalities, but the completeness still
holds in regards to the conditional operator. The model transfer property also suggests that
the conditional operator is not constructed from the modal operator: it is even possible to
construct(|)when✷istrivialinthe model(R=W×W impliesH(φ)=W orH(✷φ)=∅).
In section5, a model for DmBL is also derivedbut not constructed. This model of DmBL is
non-trivial (it is possible to extend any unconditioned probability over this model), but no
completeness result is provided.
4.2 Construction of a free conditional model for DmBL
In the sequel, Θ is assumed to be finite. A free conditional model for DmBL will be
constructed as a limit of partial models. These models are constructed recursively, based on
the iteration of (|) on any propositions.
4.2.1 Definition of partial models
Inthis sectionareconstructedasequence(Ω ,M ,h ,f ,Λ ) anda sequenceofone-to-
n n n n n n∈IN
one morphisms (µ ) such that:
• M is a Boolean sub-algebra of P(Ω ), h : Θ → M and f : M ×M → M , (f
n n n n n n n n n
will be partially defined)
n n n+1 n n n n n n+1 n
and ∀θ ∈Θ, h (θ)=µ h (θ) , (as a consequence, µ is a Boolean morphism)
• For any A,B ∈M such th(cid:0)at f ((cid:1)B,A) is defined, then f µ (B),µ (A) is defined
n n n+1 n n
n+1 n n n n (cid:0) (cid:1)
• Λ is a lis(cid:0)t of elements o(cid:1)f M ,(cid:0)which is u(cid:1)sed as a task list of the construction (refer to
the subsequent paragraphs).
Remark. The functions f represent the partial construction of (|). The morphisms µ
characterize the “inclusion” of the partial models.
In a subsequent section, a conditional model Ω ,M ,h ,f will be defined as the limit
of (Ω ,M ,h ,f ) associated to (µ ) .
n n n n n∈IN n n∈IN
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Notations and definitions. For any A∈M , it is defined ∼A=Ω \A.
Any singleton {ω} may be denoted ω if the context is not ambiguous.
For any m>n and A∈M , it is defined A =µ ◦...◦µ (A).
n [m] m−1 n
The Cartesianproductofsets AandB is denotedA×B; the functions idandT aredefined
over pairs by id(x,y) = (x,y) and T(x,y) = (y,x); for a set of pairs C, the abbreviation
Initialization. Define (Ω ,M ,h ,f ,Λ ) by:
• f (A,∅)=f (A,Ω(cid:8) )=A for any(cid:14)A∈M(cid:9) ,
• Λ = (s ,f ,λ ) is a list defined by s = 0, f = card(M )−2 and λ is a one-to-one
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
mapping from [[s ,f −1]] to M \{∅,Ω }, such that λ (2t)=∼λ (2t+1), ∀t.
0 0 0 0 0 0
Step n to step n+1.
Let (Ω ,M ,h ,f ,Λ ) and the one-to-one morphisms (µ ) be constructed.
k k k k k 0≤k≤n k 0≤k≤n−1
Notice that λ (s )=∼λ (s +1) by construction of Λ .
Define b =λ (s ).
Then, construct the set I and the sequences Γ (i),Π (i)| according to the cases:
n n n i∈In
Case 0. There is m<n such that {b ,∼b }={b ,∼b }.
Then, notice that b =b by the subsequent construction of Λ.
Let ν be the greatest of such m; then define I =µ (b )×∼µ (b ),
n n [n] n [n] n n [n] n [n] n
†Remark: case 0 means that the construction of f(·,b ) and of f(·,∼b ) has already begun
over the propositions of M .
Case 1. Case 0 does not hold;
Define I ={b }, Π (i)=i and Γ (i)=∼i for any i∈I .
Remark: case 1 means that f(·,b ) and f(·,∼b ) are constructed for the first time.
Setting. (Ω ,M ,h ,f ,Λ ) and µ are defined by:
n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1 n
n i∈In n n n n n
S (cid:18)(cid:16)(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:17) (cid:16)(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:17)(cid:19)
• f (A,∅)=f (A,Ω )=A for any A∈M ,
n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1
• For any A ∈ M \{b ,∼ b ,∅,Ω } and any B ∈ M such that f (B,A) is defined,
n n n n n n
then f µ (B),µ (A) is defined and f µ (B),µ (A) =µ f (B,A) ,
n+1 n n n+1 n n n n
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
n+1 n+1 n n i∈In n n
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:18) (cid:16)
(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)
n+1 n n i∈In n n
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:18) (cid:16) S (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)
• Λ =(s ,f ,λ ) is such that:
n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1
n+1 n n+1 n+1 n+1
– λ is a one-to-one mapping from [[s ,f −1]] to M \{∅,Ω },
n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1 n+1
n+1 n n n+1 n
).
This definition ensures a cyclic and full construction of f(·,b ) and f(·,∼b ).4
The first steps of the model construction are illustrated by a simple example in appendix F.
Short explanation of the model. In fact, (ω,ω′)∈Π (i)×Γ (i) should be interpreted
should compare this construction to the proof of completeness in appendix D for a better
comprehension of the mechanisms of the model.
4In regards to the mapping µ, the list Λn+1 is the list Λn plus any propositions of Mn+1\{∅,Ωn+1}
whicharenot/no more listedinΛn.
4.2.2 Properties of (Ω ,M ,h ,f ,Λ ,µ )
n n n n n n n∈IN
It is proved recursively:
• µ :M →M is a one-to-one Boolean morphism,
• If A,B ∈M and f (B,A) is defined, then f µ (B),µ (A) =µ f (B,A) ,
f n n n+1 n n n n
β˜1. Let A,B ∈M such that f (B,A) is defined. (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Then A⊂B and A6=∅ imply f (B,A)=Ω ,
β˜2. Let A,B,C ∈M such that f (B,A), f (C,A) and f (B∪C,A) are defined.
Then f (B∪C,A)=f (B,A)∪f (C,A),
β˜3. Let A,B ∈M such that f (B,A) is defined.
Then A∩f (B,A)=A∩B,
β˜4. Let A,B ∈M such that f (B,A) and f (∼B,A) are defined.
β˜5w. Let A,B ∈M such that f (B,A) and f (B,∼A) are defined.
Then f (B,A)=B implies f (B,∼A)=B.
Proofs are given in appendix C.
4.2.3 Limit
The limit Ω ,M ,h ,f is defined as follows:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
∞ n n∈IN n n+1 n n
Useful definitions:
– Foranyn∈INandanyA∈M ,A = (ω | )∈Ω ω ∈A . The subset
n ∞ k k∈IN ∞ n
A is a mapping of A within Ω . It is noticed that this mapping is invariant
(cid:8) (cid:14) (cid:9)
with µ, i.e. (A ) =A for m>n,
– Foranyn∈IN,M = A A∈M . ThestructureM isanisomorphic
n:∞ ∞ n n:∞
mapping of the structure M within Ω . It is noticed that (M | ) is a
n ∞ n:∞ n∈IN
(cid:8) (cid:14) (cid:9)
monotonic sequence, i.e. M ⊂M ,
• Set M = M ,
• Let A,B ∈ M(cid:0) . T(cid:1)hen there is n and a,b ∈ M such that A = a , B = b and
f (b,a) is defined (subsequent proposition). Set f (B,A)= f (b,a) .
This definition is justified by the following propositions: (cid:0) (cid:1)
Proposition 1. For any n∈IN, m>n and A∈M , (A ) =A .
Proof. By definition of Ω ,
✷✷✷ (cid:8) (cid:14) (cid:9) (cid:8) (cid:14) (cid:9)
Corollary M ⊂M .
Proposition 2. M is a Boolean subalgebra of P(Ω ) and is isomorph to M by the
morphism A7→A . As a consequence, M is a Boolean subalgebra of P(Ω ).
Proof is obvious from the definition of M .
From now on, M will be considered as a subalgebra of P(Ω ).
Proposition 3. Let A,B ∈ M . Then there is n and a,b ∈ M such that A = a ,
B =b and f (b,a) is defined.
Proof. Since(M | )isamonotonicsequence,thereism∈INsuchthatA,B ∈M .
k:∞ k∈IN m:∞
Let a,b∈M be such that A=a and B =b .
By definition of the list Λ , there is p∈[[s ,f −1]] such that λ =a.
As a consequence, f (b ,a ) exists.
But then hold A=(a ) and B =(b ) .
Finally n=p+1 answers to the proposition.
Proposition 4. The definition of f does not depend on the choice of n.
Proof. Letn, m>n, a,b∈M andc,d∈M suchthatA=a =c andB =b =d .
Assume also that f (b,a) and f (d,c) exist.
Then (a ) =c and (b ) =d .
Since M and M are isomorph, it follows a =c and b =d.
But it is derived from • that f (b ,a )=f (b,a) .
Finally f (b,a) = f (d,c) .
Proposition 5. Ω ,M ,h ,f verifies β1, β2, β3, β4 and β5w.
The properties β∗(cid:0)are inherited from(cid:1)M ,f | , by means of the properties β˜∗.
Conclusion. Ω ,M ,h ,f is a conditional model for DmBL .
(cid:0) (cid:1)
4.2.4 Implied Kripke model for DmBL
By means of the Model transfer property, a Kripke model for DmBL is derived from
Ω ,M ,h ,f . This Kripke model is denoted B = Ω ,R ,H ,f .
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
4.2.5 Completeness for the conditional operator
It is above the scope of this work to construct a model of DmBL , which is complete for
both the modal and the conditional operators. However, it is shown here that B is a model
of DmBL , which is complete for the conditional operator.
Proposition 1. By construction, (Ω ,H ) is a complete model for the classical logic C,
when H is restricted to the propositions of L .
Proposition 2. Let φ ∈ L be a proposition constructed without ✷ or ✸. Then ⊢ φ in
DmBL if and only if H (φ)=Ω .
Proof is done in appendix D.
Proposition 2 expresses that B is complete for the conditional operator.
4.3 Coherence properties
ThemodelBclearlyshowsthatDmBL iscoherent. Italsodemonstratesthattheconditional
operator(|)isnottrivial. Since(Ω ,H )isacompletemodelforC,DmBL isanextension
of the classical logic: ⊢φ implies ⊢ φ, for any φ∈L . But a stronger property holds:
Non-distortion. Letφ∈L . Assume that⊢✷φ∨✷¬φ inDmBL . Then⊢ φor⊢ ¬φ.
Interpretation: DmBL does not “distort” the classical propositions. More precisely, a prop-
erty like ⊢ ✷φ∨✷¬φ would add some knowledge about φ, since it says that either φ or ¬φ
is “sure”. But the non-distortion just tells that such property is impossible unless there is a
trivial knowledge about φ within the classical logic.
Since B is a model for DmBL , it comes H (✷φ∨✷¬φ)=Ω .
B ∞ B ∞ B ∞
But (Ω ,H ) is a complete Boolean model for C, which implies ⊢ φ or ⊢ ¬φ.
Anothernon-distortion propertyisderivedsubsequentlyinthecontextofprobabilisticDmBL .
5 Extension of probability
5.1 Probability over propositions,
a minimal† definition.
† This definition is related to finiteprobabilities and excludes any Bayesian consideration.
Probabilities are classically defined over measurable sets. However, this is only a manner to
modelthenotionofprobability,whichisessentiallyanadditivemeasureofthebeliefoflogical
propositions [33]. Probability could be defined without reference to the measure theory, at
leastwhenthe propositionsarecountable. Thenotionofprobabilityisexplainednowwithin
a strict propositional formalism. Conditional probabilities are excluded from this definition,
but the notion of independence is considered.
Intuitively, a probability over a space of logical propositions is a measure of belief which is
additive(disjointpropositionsareaddingtheirchances)andincreasingwiththepropositions.
Thismeasureshouldbezeroedforthecontradictionandsetto1forthetautology. Moreover,
a probability is a multiplicative measure for independent propositions.
Definition for classical propositions. A probability π over C is a IR+ valued function
such that for any propositions φ and ψ of L :
Coherence. π(⊥)=0,
Finiteness. π(⊤)=1.
Property. The coherence and additivity imply the increase of π:
Since π is non-negatively valued, π(φ)≥π(φ∧ψ).
Definition for DmBL/DmBL . Inthiscase,wehavetodealwithindependencenotions.
A probabilityP overDmBL/DmBL is a IR+ valued function, which verifies(replace ≡ by
≡ and π by P) equivalence, additivity, coherence, finiteness and:
for any propositions φ and ψ of L.
5.2 Probability extension over DmBL
Property. Let π be a probability defined over C, the classical logic, such that π(φ) > 0
for any φ 6≡ ⊥. Then, there is a (multiplicative) probability π defined over DmBL such
that π(φ)=π(φ) for any classical proposition φ∈L .
Remark: this is another non-distortion property, since the construction of DmBL puts no
constraint over probabilistic classical propositions.
Proof is done in appendix E.
Corollary. Let π be a probability defined over C. Then, there is a (multiplicative) prob-
ability π defined over DmBL such that π(φ)=π(φ) for any φ∈L .
For any real number e>0, define the probability π over L by:
(cid:8)V (cid:14) Q (cid:9)
Let π be the extension of π over DmBL as constructed in appendix E.
By E.2.3, there is a rational function R such that π (φ)=R (e) for any φ∈L.
Now 0≤R (e)≤1; since R (e) is rational and bounded, lim R (e) exists.
φ φ e→0+ φ
Define π(φ)=lim R (e), for any φ∈L.
The additivity, coherence, finiteness and multiplicativity are obviously inherited by π.
At last, it is clear that π(σ)=π(σ) for any σ ∈Σ.
5.3 Model and probability extension for DmBL
Let K be the set of all (multiplicative) probabilities P over DmBL such that P(φ) > 0 for
any φ6≡⊥, and define the sequences K(φ)=(P(φ)) for any φ∈L.
Then define L =K(L)= K(φ) φ∈L ; The space L is thus a subset of
.
The operators ¬, ∧ and (|) are canonically implied over L :5
(cid:8) (cid:14) (cid:9)
5Theoperators∨and→arederivedfrom∧and¬asusually;mo(cid:0)dalities(cid:12)areno(cid:1)tcons(cid:0)idered.(cid:1)
Since any P ∈ K verifies the equivalence property, it comes K(φ) = K(ψ) when φ ≡ ψ in
DmBL . As a direct consequence, L ,¬,∧,(|) is a conditional-like model of DmBL (the
structureis aBooleanalgebrabutnotderivedfromsetoperators. This isthe only difference
(cid:0) (cid:1)
with conditional models).
Property. L ,¬,∧,(|) is a conditional-like model of DmBL.
Proof. Let P(cid:0)∈K; P is m(cid:1)ultiplicative.
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Since moreover (φ|⊥)≡φ and (⊥|φ)≡⊥ in DmBL , the model verifies β5.
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) ∗
Noticethatitwasonlyneededtheequivalenceandmultiplicativepropertiesforthe elements
of K. It is thus possible to construct a more general model by relaxing K.
Probability extension. For any K(φ)∈L and any P ∈K, define the IR+-valued map-
ping P K(φ) =P(φ) (this mapping, a projection, is indeed well defined).
By construction, P is naturally a multiplicative probability over L . Moreover, the prob-
(cid:0) (cid:1) K
abilitybextensions defined in appendix E are also elements of K. As a consequence, the
deductions of sectibon 5.2 are still working for L . The extension property is thus derived:
LetπbeaprobabilitydefinedoverC. Then,thereisa(multiplicative)probability
π defined over DmBL such that π(φ)=π(φ) for any φ∈L .
Non-distortion. Let φ be a classical proposition. Assume that ⊢ ✷φ∨✷¬φ in DmBL.
Then ⊢ φ or ⊢ ¬φ.
Proof. ConsidertheKripkemodelforDmBLderivedfromtheconditionalmodel L ,¬,∧,(|) .
In this model, the value of H(✷φ) is either K(⊥) or K(⊤).
Itfollows∀P ∈K, P(φ)=1or∀P ∈K, P(¬φ)=1,andbytheprobabilityextension:
∀π, π(φ)=1 or ∀π, π(¬φ)=1, where π denotes any probability over C.
At last, ⊢ φ or ⊢ ¬φ.
5.4 Properties of the conditional
Bayes inference. Assume a (multiplicative) probability P defined over DmBL/DmBL .
Define P(ψ|φ) as an abbreviation for P (ψ|φ) . Then:
the closure of CEA DGNW fails on this relation (refer to the introduction).
(cid:0) (cid:12) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
About Lewis’ triviality. Thepreviousextensiontheoremshaveshownthatforanyprob-
ability π defined over C, it is possible to construct a (multiplicative) probability π over
DmBL whichextends π. This result by itself shows thatDmBL avoidsLewis’ triviality. But
a deeper explanation seems necessary.
Assumeφ∈L anddefinetheprobabilityπ overC byπ =π(·|φ). Letπ betheextension
ofπ overDmBL. It happens that π 6=π(·|φ), whichimplies that Lewis’triviality does not
work anymore. It is noticed that although π(·|φ) is a probability over DmBL in the classical
meaning (it is additive, coherent and finite), it is not necessarily multiplicative.
Conditional probabilities do not maintain the logical independence and the con-
ditioning.
This limitation is unavoidable: otherwise the derivation (1) of the triviality is possible, even
if (ψ|φ) is not equivalent to a classical proposition.
6 Conclusion
Inthis contribution,the conditionallogicsDmBL andDmBL , aslightrelaxationofDmBL,
have been defined and studied. These logics have been introduced as an abstraction and
extrapolationofgeneralprobabilisticproperties. DmBLandDmBL implementtheessential
ingredients of the Bayesian inference, including the classical nature to the sub-universe, the
inference property and a related concept of logical independence. For this reason, DmBL
and DmBL extend and refine the existing logical approaches of the Bayesian inference.
The logicsarecoherentandnon-trivial. A modelhasbeen constructedforthe logicDmBL ,
which is complete in regards to the conditionals. It has been shown that any probability
over the classical propositions could be extended to DmBL/DmBL , in compliance with
the independence relation. Then, the probabilistic Bayesian rule has been recovered from
DmBL/DmBL .
There are still many open questions. For example, it is certainly possible to bring some
enrichment to the conditional of DmBL, by means of additional axioms. Is it possible to
recoversomespecificequivalencesofotherexistingsystems? Fromthestrictlogicalviewpoint,
theDeterministicmodalBayesianLogicoffersalsosomeinterestingproperties. Forexample,
the notion of independence in DmBL have nice logical consequences in the deductions (e.g.
regularity with an inference). This property should be of interest in mathematical logic.