Diffusion controlled reactions, fluctuation dominated kinetics,
and living cell biochemistry
ZoranKonkoli
ChalmersUniversityofTechnology,Gothenburg,Sweden
DepartmentofMicrotechnologyandNanoscience-MC2
BionanoSystemsLaboratory
zorank@chalmers.se
In recent years considerable portion of the computer science community has focused its attention
on understanding living cell biochemistry and efforts to understand such complication reaction en-
vironmenthavespreadoverwidefront,rangingfromsystemsbiologyapproaches,throughnetwork
analysis(motifidentification)towardsdevelopinglanguageandsimulatorsforlowlevelbiochemical
processes.Apartfromsimulationwork,muchoftheeffortsaredirectedtousingmeanfieldequations
(equivalenttotheequationsofclassicalchemicalkinetics)toaddressvariousproblems(stability,ro-
bustness,sensitivityanalysis,etc.). Rarelyistheuseofmeanfieldequationsquestioned. Thisreview
willprovideabriefoverviewofthesituationswhenmeanfieldequationsfailandshouldnotbeused.
Theseequationscanbederivedfromthetheoryofdiffusioncontrolledreactions,andemergewhen
assumptionofperfectmixingisused.
1 Introduction
The emphasis of this review is on discussing the use of the framework of diffusion controlled reactions
to model the living cell biochemistry. No attempt is being made to provide a comprehensive list of
referencesforsuchacomplexfield. Instead,selectedtopicshavebeencarefullychosentohelpthenon-
expertsgaintheglimpseoftherelevantissues. Firstaimistointroducegeneralframeworkfordescribing
livingcellbiochemistryandgivefewexamplesofmathematicalmodelsoneneedstosolve. Secondgoal
istoillustratethatthemeanfieldequationsarelowestorderapproximationofamorecomplicatedsetof
equations. Final aim is to discuss these equations of motion, the way they are solved, and behavior of
solutions.
First,fewwordsabouttheproblem. Chemicalreactionkineticsinvivodifferssignificantlyfromthe
oneinpipette[1]. Geometryofthelivingcellinteriorcanbequitecomplicatedandthereisexperimental
evidence that the cell is structured in many ways, already starting at the cytoplasm level. For example,
for a single cell the total amount of protein content can be as high as 17-30% by weight which results
in extremely structured and crowded space. In addition, the cell interior (roughly 10µm in diameter)
is further partitioned in smaller spaces such as organelles (e.g. mitochondria with 50 nm in diameter),
and roughly 50% of the cell volume is filled by organelles. For typical physiological concentrations of
individualproteinsof1nM onegetsN ∼1nM(10µm)3∼1000copiesofindividualprotein. Thiscan
resultinlargespatio-temporalfluctuationsofproteinnumber. Also,deliveryofproteinscanbecomean
issue.
There are two ways to theoretically study such complicated reaction environment, either by per-
forming stochastic simulations or by constructing equations of motion that describe time evolution of
averagedquantities(e.g. concentration). Thefocuswillbeonthelater. Itwillbearguedthatanyattempt
todescribeintracellularchemicalreactionsintermsofmeanfieldequations(thatassumeperfectmixing)
S.BarryCooper&VincentDanos(eds.):FifthWorkshopon (cid:13)c Z.Konkoli
DevelopmentsinComputationalModels—ComputationalModelsFromNature Thisworkislicensedunderthe
Z.Konkoli 99
might fail spectacularly. Intracellular dynamics is intrinsically stochastic due to low number of chem-
icals, exclusion effects are important and, ultimately, many scales interact at the same time with large
degree of spatio-temporal organization. To develop theoretical framework that can be used to describe
suchsituationisfarfromtrivial. Thetheoryofdiffusioncontrolledreactionsnaturallysuggestsitselfin
this context. In the following some generic features of diffusion controlled reaction will be discussed
withaparticularemphasisonmathematical/physicalmodelsthatareusedtodescribethem. Thevalidity
of the truncated equation of motion approach will be critically reviewed, with a particular emphasis on
itssimplestform,themeanfieldequations/kineteics.
2 Diffusion controlled reactions: mathematical model
Diffusioncontrolledreactionsareubiquitousinnature. Theyappearinthematter-antimatterannihilation
in the early universe, epidemics spreading and occur frequently at small scales in the living cell. Few
references on the topic can be found in [2, 3, 4, 5]. Reviews [2, 3] provide gentle introduction to the
field. Unfortunately,thefieldofdiffusioncontrolledreactionisrathertechnicalandpaper[4]istutorial
ofbasictechniquesonecanuse. Onedimensionalsystemsarereviewedin[5]. Thisworkprovidesrather
lengthyaccountofexperimentalandtheoreticalapproachesusedtodescribeonedimensionaldiffusion-
controlledreactions.
Perhapsthesimplestwaytointroducediffusion-controlledreactionsisthroughtwostochasticbench
mark models: the A+A → P or A+B → P reaction diffusion models. (For simplicity reasons, both
reaction result in same product, though this obviously needs not be the case.) It is assumed that one
can clearly separate two time scales in the problem, related to the rates of transport D and the reaction
processesλ.
There are two ways to describe the system, either by using off- or on-lattice models. In this review
on-lattice models will be used, thought results obtained for such model hold for off-lattice models as
well. For example, assuming that the spacing in the lattice is h, continuous models can be obtained by
taking the h → 0 limit, and by re-scaling variables in the appropriate way (e.g. see reference [4] for
details).
Byassumption, particlesAandBmoveonthelatticewithjumprates(diffusionconstants)D ≡D
and D respectively. Further, it is assumed that a pair of particles X and Y at r and r(cid:48) reacts with rate
σ (r−r(cid:48)) where X,Y ∈{A,B}. Here the assumption of translational invariance have been used. For
simplicityreasonsitwillbeassumedthatσ (r−r(cid:48))=λ∆ andσ (r−r(cid:48))=δ∆ where∆ equals
A,A r,r(cid:48) A,B r,r(cid:48) r,r(cid:48)
one (zero) for r=r(cid:48) (r(cid:54)=r(cid:48)). More complicated model can be obtained by allowing for finite reaction
range but such models are much more technical without conveying anything beyond what short range
modelsalreadydo(withinthescopeofthisreview). Pleasenotethatinthecaseoflatticemodelsallrates
have the dimension 1/s. These rates are re-scaled when limit h→0 is taken, leading to the parameters
thatcanbedirectlyrelatedtoexperiments.
Reactants and products are confined in a reaction volumeV ∼Ld, where L denotes the size of the
system and d dimension. (As will be discussed, the dimensionality of the system is the most important
parameter that governs validity of mean field equations.) It is assumed that typical size of molecules
participating in reactions isa. The setup forthe A+B reaction is shown in Figure 1. (Tovisualize A+A
system just imagine that all B particles are changed into A.) Particles A and B can be almost anything,
molecules, excitons, electron-hole pairs, sellers and buyers on the stock market etc. P denotes reaction
product.
Figure 1 depicts three distinct regimes. Panel (a) shows a situation when L(cid:29)a and reactants have
100 Diffusioncontrolledreactions
Figure1: A+Breactioninthreedifferentregimes. Panel(a): reactantradiusamuchsmallerthansizeof
thesystemL. Insuchacasereactantshavelotofspacetomove. Panel(c): crowdedsituationwhereais
ofthesameorderofmagnitudeasL. Panel(b)representsintermediatecase.
space to move and do not disturb each other. Such situation is often modeled by assuming that the
size of the reaction volume L is infinite. Also it is assumed that products of the reaction P do not
exertinfluenceonthereactantsleadingtoasimplificationthatreactantsannihilatewithoutfurthertrace
leadingtoA+B→0/ (orA+A→0/). TheseapproximationsareverygoodwhenL(cid:29)a. Panel(c)shows
an opposite situation when a∼L (and still a<L). In such a case reactants do not have space to move
andoneneedstoconsiderexclusioneffects. Panel(c)showsintermediatecase. Inthefollowingthetwo
extremecases(a)and(b)willbediscussed. Thelivingcellharborsreactionswithbothtypesofbehaviors
dependingontherelativesizesofreactantsandreactionvolumes. Astimegoesonthereaction-diffusion
systemexhibitsvarietyofbehaviors,asdiscussedin[6].
System constructed so far is stochastic. To study its behavior one could perform stochastic simu-
lations and there are variety of techniques for doing it. However, in the following another approach is
followedwhereequationsareconstructedthatdescribetimeevolutionofaveragedquantitiesofinterest
(variousobservablessuchasparticlenumber,correlationfunctions,varianceofparticlenumberetc). In
the following section the generic behavior of the diffusion controlled reactions will be discussed. The
emphasiswillbeonintuitiveunderstanding. Thetechnicalsideoftheproblemwillbepresentedlater.
3 Qualitative analysis of diffusion controlled reactions in infinite (large)
Figure2showsasketchofasnapshotoftheA+A→0/ reactiondiffusionsystem. (Lateronrealfigures
fromthesimulationwillbeshown.) Interestingphenomenahappenwhenreactionrateλ islotlargerthan
the diffusion rate D. Large spatial density fluctuations may develop as time flows. For that particular
reason it is far from trivial to predict how particle number N (t) or particle density ρ (t) =N (t)/V
vanishintime. Theproblemathandisacomplexmanybodyproblemandthemechanismthatgoverns
itsbehaviorisillustratedinthefigure.
Evenifreactantsweremixedwellinitially,reactionscreatespatialfluctuationsthatdiffusioncannot
smear out. Figure 2, panel (b), shows a cavity that is created when A particles, emphasized by gray
shadeinpanel(a),annihilate. TheAparticlethatisleftinthemiddleofthecavitywillnotbeannihilated
unlessdiffusionfillsinthecavitybyotherAparticles. However,ifdiffusionprocessesaremuchslower
than the reaction processes D(cid:28)λ it takes longer time to fill the cavity. Even if this cavity is filled by
Z.Konkoli 101
(a) reactants mixed well (b) cavity created by reaction
A A A A A A A A
A A A A A A
A A A A A A A
A A A A A A A A
Figure 2: Reactions create spatial fluctuations. Diffusion is slow in filling in the cavity and spatial
fluctuationsremainleadingtothefluctuationdominatedkinetics.
(a) Domains (b) Domains slightly mixed (c) Domains formed again
A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A
A A A A A A B A A A A A
A A A A A A A A B A A A A A
AA AA AA AA AA A A A A A A A A A A
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B B A B B B B B B
B B B B B B B A B B B B B
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
Figure 3: Spontaneous formation of domains for A+B reaction. Panel (a): Assumption is made that
domains are formed. Panel (b): domains are mixed by diffusion. Diffusion process should ruin domain
structure. Panel(c): Domainsgetreestablishedduetothepresenceofreactions.
particlestherewillbeothercavitiesthatemergeduetothereactionsgoingon. Insuchacasedynamics
of the system is plagued by spatial fluctuations in particle density. Since particles are not mixed well it
takeslongertimetoannihilateallparticles.
The fluctuation dominate regime of A+B reaction looks slightly different from the one for A+A re-
action. ThebehaviorofthesystemdifferssignificantlydependingonwhetherD =D . Inthefollowing
such situation will be only discussed. Figure 3 depicts typical particle distribution when particles are
mixedwell(e.g. att=0)andafterthereactionsproceedforsometime. IfD(cid:28)δ domainsrichinAorB
particlesdevelop.
Figure 3 shows how reactions lead to spontaneous formation of domains. Even if diffusion tried to
mix particles minority species is immediately annihilated. For example, upper part shows a situation
whentwoBmolecules(insuchacaseminorityspecies)diffusesintothedomainrichwithAparticles. B
moleculeswillbeimmediatelyannihilated. SameholdsforAmoleculesinthelowerpartofthepanel(b).
Themechanismjustdiscussedindeedshowupinthesnapshotsoftheparticledistributionthatoriginate
fromstochasticcomputersimulations. PleaseseeFigure4fordetails. ThesimulationinFigure4isdone
using improved minimal process algorithm [7] and clearly shows formation of domains. This is a well
knowresult[10].
102 Diffusioncontrolledreactions
Figure 4: Snapshots of the A+B reaction dynamics in fluctuation dominated regime. Red denotes A
particles, Bdenotesblueparticles, andwhiteindicatessamenumberofAandBparticles. Intermediate
colors correspond to intermediate cases. Black color denotes absence of particles. One can see that
domainsrichinAandBparticlesareformedastimegoeson.
4 Mathematical analysis of the diffusion controlled reactions: pair ap-
Thetypeofthekineticsdiscussedintheprevioussectionisreferredtoasfluctuationdominatedkinetics
since presence of reactions lead to appearance of spatio-temporal fluctuations. Equally often the term
anomalouskineticsisusedtodescribesuchsystemswhereinthiscontext”anomalous”indicatesdevia-
tion from mean field kinetics. The fluctuation dominated kinetics cannot be described using mean field
equationsandinthissectionitwillbediscussedwheretheproblemis.
The problem at hand, i.e. a set of particles moving and reacting on the lattice can be described in
termsofthemasterequation,
c(cid:48)→c c→c(cid:48)
whereP(c,t)describesprobabilitythatsystemisinthestatecattimet. TheR(c→c(cid:48))denotetransition
rates which can be deduced from details of the model described previously. Here and in the following
thedotoverasymboldenotesthetimederivative.
Theobservablesofinterestdenoteaveragequantitiessuchasdensitiesρ(r,t)orcorrelationfunctions
ρ(r,r(cid:48),t) where r, r(cid:48), etc point to lattice sites. There are couple of ways how to obtain equations for
timedependenceofobservables. ForexampleonecanmaptheprobleminEq.(1)tofieldtheoryanduse
variousfield-theoretictechniquestoconstructequationsofmotion.[8,16]Analternativetothisapproach
is to construct equations directly starting from (1), as discussed in [4]. In either case calculations are
rather technical and will be omitted. Only final form of equations will be stated here. Equations of
motionhavethesameformregardlesswhethermultipleoccupancyorsingleoccupancyoflatticesitesare
allowed(thoughformofboundaryconditionsmightdiffer). Workin[16]focusesonmultipleoccupancy
situation while work in [4] deals with single occupancy situation. For large volumes both approaches
Z.Konkoli 103
giveessentiallythesameresults.
Toillustratehowthemeanfieldequationsemergeitisusefultolookatthesimplestpossibleexample,
theA+Aannihilationprocess. Aftertakingthecontinuumlimit(e.g. x=hr,x(cid:48)=hr(cid:48),etc)theequations
thatdescribeA+Areaction-diffusionsystemaregivenby
andtwopointdensityisdefinedthrough
x x(cid:48)
Equation (3) shows that two point density depends on three point density. Such behavior continues
ad infinitum. One needs to cut the hierarchy in order to be able to use it. The most common approx-
imation is pair approximation, where book-keeping of pair correlations is only done. This amounts to
approximatingthreepointdensityas[4,16]
where χ(x,x(cid:48),t) denotes pair correlation function defined through ρ(x,x(cid:48),t) ≡ ρ(x,t)ρ(x(cid:48),t)χ(x,x(cid:48),t).
Usingthepairapproximationandafterassumingtranslationalinvariance,ρ(x,t)=ρ(t)andχ(x,x(cid:48),t)=
χ(x−x(cid:48),t),resultsinfollowingequations:
wherek(t)= dVσ(x)χ(x,t)andpaircorrelationfunctionsatisfies
withinitialconditiongivenbyχ(x,t =0)=1,whichdenotesperfectmixingatt=0.
Equation(5)isalwaysexactwhileEq.(6)isvalidonlyinthepairapproximation. Onecanseefrom
Eq. (5) how mean field result emerges. If χ(x,t)=1, i.e. reactants are mixed all the time, k(t)=λ
becomes constant and one obtains law of classical chemical kinetics, with a solution ρ(t) = ρ /(1+
λρ t)andforlargetimesonehasρ(t)≈1/λt ∝t−1. The-1isreferredtoasameanfieldexponent.
From figures 2, 3, and 4 it is clear that χ(x,t)(cid:54)=1 since diffusion can not mix reactants well. Such
behaviorcanbetracedbacktotheEq.(6)wherefirsttermdescribesmixingbydiffusionandsecondterm
howreactionsburnholeinthepaircorrelationfunction. Oncetheequationissolvedonecanseethatfor
D(cid:28)λ andd≤2paircorrelationfunctionneverequalsone.
To get the correct kinetics rather technical analysis needs to be done for each particular case. Such
analysisisbeyondthescopeofthisreview. Theresultsareasfollows. ForA+Areactionthemeanfield
resultholdsford>2. Ford<2thecorrectresultisgivenby
where constant A only depends on the dimensionality of the problem and dependence on the reaction
rate λ has been lost. d/2 is the anomalous kinetics exponent (different from mean field exponent for
d<2). Atd=2oneobtainslogarithmiccorrections,ρ(t)∝lnt/t.
104 Diffusioncontrolledreactions
FortheA+Bmodelonehasfollowingbehavior. Tosavethespaceonlythecasewithequaldiffusion
constants D =D =D and equal amount of A and B particles at t=0, ρ (x,0)=ρ (x,0)=ρ , will
be discussed. In such a case mean field equations reduce to ordinary differential equations in time;
ρ˙ (t) = ρ˙ (t) = −δρ (t)ρ (t). One has the same scaling behavior as in the case of A+A reaction;
ρ (t) = ρ (t) ≈ 1/δt. This is the correct result for d > 4. However, for d < 4 one has anomalous
kineticswithexponentd/4,
The constant B depends both on dimensionality and the initial concentration of particles. To see tech-
nical details of the calculations that lead to the results in (7) and (8) please see [9] and [10, 11, 12]
respectivelyandreferencestherein. Thecalculationsarerathertechnical. TheA+Bhasnotbeensolved
yet bellow and at d =2, though exact derivation of lower and upper bounds exists that confirm critical
exponentin(8).
Toillustrateimportanceoffluctuationdominatedkineticswhenstudyinglivingcellbiochemistryan
particularexamplewillbediscussed. ThemodelwhereA+B,A+B,andB+Breactionsoccuratthesame
time was suggested previously [13, 14, 15, 16]. The behavior of the system depends very much on the
equalityofdiffusionconstants. AssumptionsD (cid:54)=D [13]andD =D [14,15,16]stemfromdifferent
setupsandleadtoverydifferentbehaviorofthesystem.
TheD =D caseisanotoriousexampleofhowmeanfieldcangowrong. InparticulartheABBA
model suggested and studied in [14, 15, 16] shows dramatic failure of mean field approach. The model
ariseswhenonewantstoincludestericeffectsintothesimplestpossiblewayandresultsinthefollowing
set of reactions: A+A, A+B, and B+B with rates λ, δ, and λ respectively. Please note that the A+A
and B+B reactions have the same rate constant. Also rate constants are such that δ >λ. (The opposite
case can be also studied but is not interesting in the context of this review). The mean field equations
for such model are given by ρ˙ =−λρ2−δρ ρ and ρ˙ =−λρ2−δρ ρ . By mapping the problem
A A A B B B A B
toPoincaresphere[15]largetimebehaviorisgivenbyρ (t)/ρ (t)∝tδ/λ−1,whenρ (0)>ρ (0). The
type of molecule that is minority at t=0 simply has to vanish asymptotically. Majority species survives
only. However,thecarefulcalculation[15,16]revealsthattheratioρ (t)/ρ (t)saturatestoconstantfor
largetimesandminorityspeciessurvives. Thisisanexamplethatthemeanfielddescriptionspectacularly
failstodescribe.
5 Diffusion controlled reactions in restricted geometries
In previous subsections diffusion controlled reactions in the infinite volumes have been discussed. In
here,focuswillbeshiftedondiscussingdiffusioncontrolledreactionsinrestrictedgeometries. Atypical
situation of interest is depicted in figure 1, panel (c). When size of the reactants is comparable to the
size of system extreme crowding conditions arise and in situation like this one cannot neglect presence
ofproductmolecules(evenifbackreactionisabsent).
Comparedtotheinfinitevolumecasediffusioncontrolledreactionsinsmall(restricted)volumesare
relativelyunexplored. Therearesomepioneeringeffortsinthisarea,e.g. theworkbyKhairutdinovand
Serpone,Tachiya,orRamamurthy;seereferences[17,18,19]forreviewsonthesubject. Insuchsystems
thenumberofreactantstendstobesmallandtheeffectsoffluctuationsareenhanced. Themethodsused
tostudybulksituation(infinitevolume),iftheyindeedwork,havetobeheavilymodified.
Themaindifferencefromthecasewhenthevolumeisfiniteisthattheparticledecayisgovernedby
anexponentialdecaylaw,insteadofthepowerlawfoundininfinitesystems. Suchbehaviorcomesfrom
the fact that configuration space becomes strictly discrete. When number of particles becomes low one
Z.Konkoli 105
needstocountthemonebyone. Theaverageofthenumberofparticlesbehavesasn(t)=c 1 +c 2 e−E 1 t+
c 3 e−E 2 t+.... In such a case the transition rate operator entering master equation attains eigenvalues
that are well separated. And when time is large enough one has (E −E)t (cid:29)1 for i=2,3,4,... and
first two terms in the expansion for n(t) dominate resulting in the exponential decay. Please note that
even the very large system with large number of particles might eventually arrive in the regime where
particle/densitydecayisexponential(e.g. asdiscussedin[6]).
One can naturally wonder about the usefulness of pair approach in the context of reactions in re-
strictedgeometries. Itwasshownthatapproachcanbeusedbutithasseveredrawbackinsmallreactions
volumeswhensymmetriesorconservationlawsexist[6].
6 Relevance for understanding the living cell biochemistry
Theimportanceofpropermodelingofthelivingcellbiochemistryhasbeendiscussedin[20]andthere
arecoupleofreasonswhytheframeworkofdiffusioncontrolledreactionsandthefluctuationdominated
kineticsarerelevantformodelingofthelivingcellbiochemistry. Thediffusionistheubiquitoustransport
mechanism in the living cell and there are one million reactions happening in the cell per second. In
thatsensetheframeworkofdiffusioncontrolledreactionsiscertainlyrightchoiceofthecomputational
platform.
Many important biochemical details are not addressed in the reaction-diffusion framework such as
effects related to structured water, chain like structure of molecules, or processes on the time scales
much smaller than the reaction times. Nevertheless, the formalism captures the most important aspects
of the problem with a clear separation between transport and reaction processes and provides a well
definedmathematicalformulationoftheproblem. Thestructureoftheconfigurationspaceandtransitions
among the states are well defined. Calculation of observables is straight forward, thought technically
complicated. Also,shouldaneedoccuronecanperformsimulationofthesystembasedonthereaction-
diffusionframework.
If one wants to use the diffusion controlled reactions framework couples of issues have to be dealt
with. For example, it is not clear whether to use rather technical diffusion-controlled reactions formal-
ism or simplified version of it such as mean field calculations (classical chemical kinetics). In general,
one cannot say when the classical chemical kinetics is applicable and when expect appearance of the
fluctuationdominatedkinetics. Thereareseriesofproblemswherevalidityofmeanfieldequationsisan
issue. For example, the stability, sensitivity, or robustness analysis based on mean field equations. The
exampleoftheABBAmodeldiscussedinthereviewshowsthatevenatqualitativelevelmeanfieldcan
fail miserably. Thus in general mean field kinetics should be used with caution. It is important to be
awareoftherisks.
Todeterminewhethermeanfieldequationsarevalidratherlengthyandtechnicalanalysisneedstobe
doneforeachnewmodel. Centralissueistoidentifythecriticaldimensionofthesystem. Forexample,
d =2forA+Areactionintheinfinitevolume,andd =4forA+Breactionforthesituationdiscussedin
previoussections. Unfortunately,powercountingtechniquesfromfieldtheorydonotalwayswork. For
example,usingpowercountingonecanpredictcriticaldimensionforA+AproblembutnotforA+B.
Thevalueofcriticaldimensionisdeterminingfactorthatgovernsvalidityofmeanfieldequations. In
threedimensions(d=3)A+Areactiondoesnotsufferfromanomalouskineticsandmeanfield(classical
kinetics) approach can be safely used. However, if one studies reactions on surface (d=2) or line (d=1)
one has to be careful. The situation is more alarming or A+B reaction. The A+B reaction is always
critical (it always suffers from anomalous kinetics) regardless whether occurring in bulk (d=3), surface
106 Diffusioncontrolledreactions
(d=2)orline(d=1)sinceitscriticaldimensionequalsd =4.
Should one use the computer simulations, there are couple of issues to be aware of. If one solely
counts the particles in the cell then perfect mixing is assumed. In such a case effects related to spatio-
temporalfluctuationsareignored. Togobeyondthatsimplificationandaccountforpositionofparticles
oneneedstoformalizetheprobleminmathematicaltermsandnaturallyendsupusingtheframeworkof
diffusion controlled reactions. Simulations done at that level account for most important aspects of the
problem. Also,fluctuationdominatedkinetics(ifitappears)isautomaticallytakencareof. Forexample,
one does not need to worry about validity of the mean field equations. In that respect, there is no need
to perform rather technical and time consuming analysis, such as finding the critical dimension of the
system. Simulationsareveryattractiveapproachtodescribinglivingcell.
However, though extremely useful, in silico experiments are heavily dependent on the computer
resources,thecpupower,thememoryetc. Thereiscertainlyanupperlimitonthenumberofparticlesone
cansimulate. Theequationofmotionapproachdiscussedinthisreviewcouldbeinterestingalternative
inthesituationwhentherearelargenumberofparticlesinthesystemandtherearenotthatmanyparticle
types. Admittedly, the situation in the living cell is the opposite (large number of particle types in low
copynumbers). Nevertheless,equationofmotionapproachcouldbeusefulsinceitcouldbeadjustedto
describelowparticlenumberasshownin[6].
Extremely important issue is whether effects related to fluctuation dominated kinetics appear in the
livingcellandtowhatextent. Thepropertiesofthediffusioncontrolledreactionsdiscussedinprevious
sections might have profound effects on our understanding of the living cell biochemistry. One of the
importantquestioniswhetherthelivingcellexploitsthesepropertiesinanywaytosuccessfullyperform
its function. For example, the living cell environment exhibits kinetics in all dimensions. As a rule
of thumb, lowering the dimensionality results in increasing deviation from mean field results. Two
dimensional reactions at the membrane surface are certainly very different from the one in the bulk. In
thatsensefluctuationdominatedkineticsshouldbeabundantinthelivingcell. However,carefulanalysis
needstobedone,sincelivingcellisfinite.
The problems discussed so far get even more complicated when structure of the cell is taken into
account. New issues emerge that need to be addressed. Understanding interplay between geometrical
shapethatsustainsthereactionsandtopologicalstructureofthepathwaysisoneofthecentralproblems.
Ultimately,thequestioniswhetherwecanunderstandtheshapeoftheorganelleswithreferencetotheset
ofreactionstheysustain. Unfortunately,therolethatthegeometryplaysforcellfunctionispoorlyunder-
stood,seereviewpapers[22,20]andreferencestherein. Inthatcontextdiffusioncontrolledreactioncan
provideusefultoolforthattypeofanalysis. Themathematicalplatformforstudyinggeometry-reaction
interplayframework(GRIP)havebeensuggestedin[20,21].
The framework of diffusion controlled reactions is studied extensively in the statistical physics and
chemistry community. However, the study of the fluctuation dominated kinetics has been extensively
done within the statistical physics community. Interestingly, in publications that address computational
cellbiologycomparativelylittleattentionhasbeenpayedtotheeffectsrelatedtofluctuationdominated
kinetics, and in particular validityof mean field equation, though some work exists (e.g. [23, 24]). The
goalofthisreviewistopointoutthesefacts.