Differential Evolution Approach to Detect
Recent Admixture
Konstantin Kozlov, Dmitry Chebotarov, Mehedi Hassan, Martin Triska,
Petr Triska, Pavel Flegontov, Tatiana Tatarinova
Feb 20, 2015
The genetic structure of human populations is extraordinarily com-
plex and of fundamental importance to studies of anthropology, evo-
lution, and medicine. As increasingly many individuals are of mixed
origin, there is an unmet need for tools that can infer multiple ori-
gins. Misclassification of such individuals can lead to incorrect and
costly misinterpretations of genomic data, primarily in disease stud-
ies and drug trials. We present an advanced tool to infer ancestry
that can identify the biogeographic origins of highly mixed individ-
uals. reAdmix can incorporate individual’s knowledge of ancestors
(e.g. having some ancestors from Turkey or a Scottish grandmother).
Background
The ability to trace individuals to the point where their DNA was formed
at the population level poses a formidable challenge in genetic anthropology,
population genetics and personalized medicine [1]. The vast progress accom-
plished in developing resources for identifying candidate gene loci for medical
care and drug development [2] was largely unmatched by the field of bio-
geography and ancestral inference. Only in the past decade have researchers
begun harnessing high-throughput genetic data to improve our understand-
ing of global patterns of genetic variation and its correlation to geography.
This is not surprising, because the genetic variation is largely determined by
demographic history of inbreeding or admixture which often vary between
geographic regions. Although in the past few years we have witnessed a
growing interest in biogeography methods, only a few computational tools
exist, particularly for analysis of mixed individuals [3, 4, 5, 6].
These methods can be either local (focusing on origin of chromosomal seg-
ments), such as Lanc-CSV [7], LAMP-LD [8], and MULTIMIX [9], global (av-
erage ancestral proportions across the genome), such as ADMIXTURE [10],
STRUCTURE [11, 12], or both, such as HAPMIX [13], LAMP [8, 14]. Some
popular applications are PCA-based [3]. For humans, PCA was shown to be
accurate within 700 kilometers in Europe [3]. The Spatial Ancestry Anal-
ysis (SPA) [4] is an advanced tool that explicitly models allele frequencies.
However, estimated by the percentage of individuals correctly assigned to
their country of origin, the accuracy of both PCA and SPA remain low
for Europeans (40 ± 5% and 45 ± 5%, respectively) and are even less for
non-Europeans [4], suggesting their limitation for biogeographic applica-
tions [4, 15, 16]. Note, that the country of origin does not necessarily correlate
with ethnicity. SPAMIX [17] is reported to have an accuracy of 550Km for
two-ancestral admixtures, which is impressive but insufficient. Algorithms
like mSpectrum [18], HAPMIX [13] and LAMP [8] achieve good accuracy at
a continent resolution [18], but do not achieve country-level resolution. Re-
lated tools like BEAST [19], STRUCTURE [12], and Lagrange [20] are either
inapplicable to autosomal data or cannot be used to study recent admixture
in humans, animals, and plants. We note that looking at Y chromosome and
mtDNA alone is insufficient for detailed biogeographic analysis, since closely
related populations have similar distributions of haplogroups.
To address these limitations, we have recently developed an admixture-
based tool, Geographic Population Structure (GPS), that can accurately infer
ancestral origin on unmixed individuals [21]. GPS infers the geographical
origin of individual by comparing the his/her “genetic signature” to those
of reference populations known to exhibit low mobility in the recent past.
GPS’s accuracy was demonstrated by classifying 83% worldwide individuals
to their country of origin and 65% to a particular region of the country.
Applied to over 200 Sardinian villagers, GPS placed 25% of them in their
villages and ≈ 50% within 50 kilometers of their villages.
However, contemporary individuals often migrate to different areas and
bear offspring of mixed geographical origins. GPS would incorrectly predict
such offspring to the central point between the parental origins, which would
be unsuitable for pharmacology, forensics, and genealogy; therefore, GPS is
not equipped to handle mixed individuals. Moreover, often individuals have
an indication of at least one of their possible origins, which can be used to
improve the prediction, but existing tools are not designed to consider such
information. To address these limitations, we propose reAdmix, a novel
tool that models individuals as a mix of populations and can use user input
to improve its predictions. We demonstrate the accuracy of reAdmix on a
simulated dataset and compare its performance with three alternative tools.
reAdmix can be useful for professionals trying to match cases and controls
in disease studies, scientists studying bio-diversity and origins of humans,
animals, and plants, as well as many people seeking answers about their
past.
Results and discussion
reAdmix expands the admixture based approach, described in [21]. It re-
quires building a dataset of worldwide populations (reference set ), by ap-
plying an unsupervised ADMIXTURE [10] analysis with various number of
components. As shown in Elhaik et al. [21], the most suitable number of
components was verified using a PCA-based analysis. After choosing an opti-
mal number of ancestral populations, K, allele frequencies inferred for each of
the ancestral populations with ADMIXTURE formed a reference dataset for
subsequent steps. Individuals were projected onto this reference dataset of
K ancestral populations using ADMIXTURE in a supervised mode. In other
words, an individual’s genotype was “broken down” into a predefined set of
ancestral components. These admixture proportions represent a tested indi-
vidual in the space of K putative ancestral populations (for example, in case
of K = 9, the ancestral populations are North-East Asian, Mediterranean,
South African, South-West Asian, Native American, Oceanian, South-East
Asian, Northern European, Sub-Saharan African). Details of the admixture
components calculations are described in the Methods section. The task
of reAdmix is to present individual’s ancestry as a weighted sum of modern
reference populations (e.g. 25% French, 25% German, 50% Japanese) based
on these K admixture components. The goal is to find the smallest number
of reference populations that represent the tested individual with the high-
est possible accuracy. We used the reference population panel with known
admixture components relative to putative-ancestral population. Prepara-
tion of this dataset is described in the Methods section of this manuscript.
reAdmix can operate in unconditional (nothing is known about the tested
individual) and conditional (there is partial information about individual’s
ancestors) modes. If the prior information contradicts the individual’s geno-
type, it is discarded. See Methods for detailed description of the reAdmix
approach.
Briefly, the tested individual and the N reference populations are rep-
resented as points inside the standard simplex in K-dimensional space, via
their K admixture coefficients. For example, the genome of an individual
that consists of 50% population X, 25% population Y , and 25% population
Z can be represented by the corresponding point T as a convex combination:
T = 0.5X + 0.25Y + 0.25Z,
where each population is represented by a vector of K admixture coefficients, for
example:
X = [0.1,0.15,0.25,0,0,0.5,0,0,0].
Thus, the question of determining the population mixture of an individual,
i.e. the parental populations and their proportions, can be translated into
the following problem in the K-dimensional admixture space: find a repre-
sentation of a given test point as a convex combination of a subset of N
reference points.
Note that both test and reference points have the property that their
coordinates, being admixture proportions, sum to one; therefore they be-
long to the standard (K − 1)-dimensional simplex defined by the equation
= 1. The set of all convex combinations of the N reference popula-
tion points (their convex hull ) is a polytope, a higher-dimensional analogue
of polyhedron, inside the standard simplex. Our problem has a solution if
the test point is located inside this polytope. The solution is not necessar-
ily unique: when N exceeds K + 1, the point can be represented by several
convex combinations of reference populations. Hence, there are multiple mix-
ture combinations can explain the individual’s admixture. One way to get
parametric uniqueness is to find the smallest dimension simplex containing
the given point and reduces the combinatorial freedom. Although there may
still be many simplices of the same dimension containing the same point,
it becomes unlikely when the dimension of the ambient space gets higher.
Another way is to take advantage of prior information provided by the user
(e.g. if the individual knows some of his/her ancestry).
We conducted several tests of reAdmix accuracy described below. The
tests were performed on the computer with Intel Xeon 2x5650@2.67GHz CPU
(24 cores HT), 24 Gb RAM, and took about 50 sec and 40 Mb RAM per one
sample. In optimization runs, five worker threads were employed in parallel.
Comparison with GPS using unmixed individuals
To test the performance of reAdmix we first applied it to worldwide un-
mixed samples, whose admixture coefficients were averaged over individuals
with the same self-reported origin. The program was tested under two condi-
tions: either no prior information or random incorrect prior information was
supplied. reAdmix correctly identified the individuals as unmixed in 96%
and 86% for these experiments, respectively. Two scores were then com-
puted: percent of individuals matching the correct population and distance
to correct population. reAdmix correctly determined the population of 96%
of the samples. The incorrectly predicted individuals were placed within an
average distance of 35 kilometers to their reported location. When incorrect
prior information was provided, the quality did not drop drastically: 88% of
samples was mapped to the reported population, with an average distance
of 165 kilometers to the correct geographical location. These results indicate
the robustness of reAdmix.
Simulated marriages
Next, we simulated multiple mixture scenarios and tested the ability of
reAdmix to correctly identify the populations in each mixture and their
mixture proportions. We considered several relevant scenarios for an Amer-
ican of a European descent where individuals may have two, three or four
European/Near Eastern origins and tested the ability of reAdmix to cor-
rectly identify the populations and proportions in simulated mixed families.
These mixtures are currently common for big cities in North America. Indi-
viduals of mixed origin were simulated from admixture vectors of un-mixed
individuals. For each of the three scenarios, we randomly generated 300
family structures by sampling from population means from different popu-
lations in the reference dataset and computed the weighted average of their
corresponding admixture coefficients with varying error term:
T = w × r + ϵ × N mean = 0,st.dev = w × σ(r) ,
where ϵ is the scaling parameter and the error is normally distributed with zero
mean and the standard deviation equal to the weighted sum of deviations for
mixture components. Notice, that admixture vectors do not contain
chromosomal positions, and, therefore, information about haplotype blocks is
not utilized in our approach.
We tested the algorithm in unconditional and conditional modes. A single
correct population was provided for the tests of the conditional mode. We
also tested the case in which the mixture weights are known to be equal
a priori. Our simulation results are shown in Tables 1-2. The scenarios
are named according to the percentage of mixed ancestral population, e.g.
“50x50”. The “Correct position” is defined as a prediction within 320 km
of the reported location. The number of cases with at least one correctly
predicted origin in conditional mode gives the number of cases in which the
unknown population is also predicted correctly, and hence it can be less than
the number of correctly predicted positions. Conditioning on one population
reduces the average distance to correct population more than two-fold.
Next, in order to represent an increasing trend of marriages between
spouses of a different ethnicity we added several Native American popula-
tions. The most common type of cross-ethnic marriages in the US is Euro-
pean/Latino couples, accounting for 43% of cross-ethnic marriages [22]. Due
to the sparse coverage of Amerindians and the large geographic distances
between populations compared to European ones, we expected a significant
decline in reAdmix performance, however, the decline was less severe than
expected (Tables 3-4).
Testing the four-way admixtures
Finally, we compared reAdmix to mSpectrum[18], HAPMIX [13] and LAMP [8,
14] programs. We used the benchmark of Sohn et al.[18]. In this bench-
mark, four-way admixtures were generated using Russian, Bantu Kenya,
Pima, and Yi populations in proportions η(1) = (0.2, 0.8, 0, 0) and η(2) =
(0.8, 0.15, 0.03, 0.02). This corresponds to (19.8 : 80.2 : 0 : 0) and (83.3 :
13.1 : 1.5 : 2.1) in the space of European, African, Native American and
East Asian ancestries. Tables 6 and 5 and Figure 1 show comparative
performance of the four methods using the two- and four-way admixed indi-
viduals. Proportions determined by reAdmix (in unconditional mode) were
the closest to the true mix of ancestries. In case of two-ways admixed in-
dividuals reAdmix in unconditional mode was able to determine not only
Table 1: Accuracy of reAdmix ancestry predictions for different mixture sce-
narios from European populations. Percentage of mixed ancestral population is
given in the “Scenario” column. “Correct position” is defined as a predic-
tion within 320 km of reported location. “Correct populations” is defined as a
geographically correct prediction where the method correctly discriminated
between neighboring populations.
Scenario Prior Correct posi- At least one Correct popu- Average
tion (%) correctly pre- lations (%) distance
dicted origin to correct
(%) population,
none 100 83 16 505
50x50 1 100 75 31 8
pop.
equal 100 81 26 251
sn one 98 80 1 572
1 100 61 2 240
pop.
99 79 0 729
1 100 61 0 427
25 pop.
the continent of origin, but the precise population mix (Russian and Bantu
Kenya) and proportions (0.2 and 0.8). In case of the four-ways admixed in-
dividuals, there are 2317 different ethnic composition at a country level with
the same admixture composition in the space of European, African, Native
American and East Asian ancestries. Therefore, selection of the “best” ethnic
composition is intrinsically difficult or even impossible when the number of
components (K) is small and the mixture is complex. In our web application
we use larger values of K.
Applicability to other species
reAdmix can be applied to analyze geographic origin of other species, pro-
vided there is a sufficient collection of ancestry-informative markers for the
T RUE reAdmix mSpectrum HAPMIX LAMP
TRUE reAdmix mSpectrum HAPMIX LAMP
Figure 1: Performance of reAdmix, mSpectrum, HAPMIX and LAMP using
two-way (top) and four-way (bottom) admixed individuals. Color coding: red
- European, green - African, yellow - Native America, blue - East Asian, and
white - unassigned.
Table 2: Accuracy of reAdmix ancestry predictions for different mixture sce-
narios from European populations with error term, ϵ, to simulate variability of
admixture proportions within populations. Percentage of mixed ancestral
population is given in the “Scenario” column. “Correct position” is defined as a
prediction within 320 km of reported location. “Correct populations” is defined
as a geographically correct prediction where the method correctly discriminated
between neighboring populations.
Scenario Error, Correct posi- At least one Correct popu- Average
ϵ tion (%) correctly pre- lations (%) distance
dicted origin to correct
(%) population,
0.01 99 72 6 401
50x50 0.03 99 74 5 363
0.05 99 73 5 386
0.01 99 81 0 588
50x25x25 0.03 99 79 0 553
0.05 98 79 0 557
0.01 99 81 0 600
25x25x25x 98 78 0 618
250.03 0.05 98 80 0 623
organism of interest. Elhaik et al [21] estimated that thinning of the 150,000
Geno2.0 set of markers to 40,000 randomly selected SNPs resulted in 3%
error in admixture coefficients. In order to justify usage of even smaller
genotyping datasets, we calculated the expected bias from supplementing
the reference set with admixture components of populations genotyped over
fewer markers down to randomly selected 500 markers. For that, we ran-
domly selected 500 markers for nine populations from 1000 genomes dataset,
and generated admixture proportions using ADMIXTURE program. The
resulting proportions were compared to those obtained using the complete
marker set. We found very small differences in the admixture proportions
that slowly increased for thinner marker sets. Even with 500 markers, the
largest observed difference (6%) was within the within-variation of our pop-
ulations and did not affect the assignment accuracy. These results confirm
the robustness of admixture-based approach and its usability for datasets as
Table 3: Accuracy of reAdmix ancestry reconstruction for different mix-
ture scenarios from European and Native American populations. Percentage
of mixed ancestral population is given in the “Scenario” column. “Correct
position” is defined as a prediction within 320 km of reported location. “Cor-
rect populations” is defined as a geographically correct prediction where the
method correctly discriminated between neighboring populations.
Scenario Condit Correct posi- At least one Correct popu- Average
i tion (%) correctly pre- lations (%) distance
dicted origin to correct
(%) population,
none 98 89 30 329
50x50 1 99 87 36 2
pop.
equal 99 88 36 135
sn one 86 81 18 1390
1 94 72 4 362
pop.
86 85 0 1484
1 90 71 0 759
25 pop.
small as 500 ancestry informative markers (markers whose frequencies are
significantly different, between two or more populations). We are currently
developing reAdmix portals for Arabidopsis thaliana, Medicago truncatula,
Oryza sativa, Elaeis guineensis and Drosophila melanogaster.
Earlier [21], we demonstrated that sample sizes used to generate database
reference populations varied between N = 2 and N = 15 and were not
correlated with prediction accuracy (r = 0.01). For well covered areas, the
sizes can be as small as N = 2. Note, that a fully sequenced genome is not
required for reAdmix method, only a collection of SNPs. This extends the
applicability of the reAdmix to species with limited genomic information.
Table 4: Accuracy of reAdmix ancestry predictions for different mixture
scenarios from European and Native American populations with error term,
ϵ, to simulate variability of admixture proportions within populations. Per-
centage of mixed ancestral population is given in the “Scenario” column.
“Correct position” is defined as a prediction within 320 km of reported loca-
tion. “Correct populations” is defined as a geographically correct prediction
where the method correctly discriminated between neighboring populations.
Scenario Error, Correct posi- At least one Correct popu- Average
ϵ tions (%) correctly pre- lations (%) distance
dicted origin to correct
(%) population,
0.01 97 83 12 354
50x50 0.03 97 83 9 391
0.05 98 84 7 357
0.01 88 80 2 1156
50x25x25 0.03 85 77 2 1254
0.05 88 81 1 1147
0.01 85 82 0 1554
25x25x25x 85 82 0 1526
250.03 0.05 87 82 0 1441
Conclusions
The ability to identify the geographic origin of an individual using genomic
data poses a formidable challenge due to its complexity and potentially dan-
gerous misinterpretations [23]. Knowledge of biogeography and recent ances-
try are essential for research in multiple fields such as biodiversity, genealogy,
anthropology, sociology, and forensics, as well as personalized medicine and
epidemiology in which ancestry is an important covariate. Development of
reAdmix is a response to the high demand for improved and accurate an-
cestry identification methods, it can accurately measure admixture and infer
biogeography in complete-genome data sets that are now practical to gener-
ate. reAdmix is a computationally efficient and organism-independent tool
that can be easily applied to a variety of species where sufficient collection
of ancestry-informative markers are available. We expect to improve perfor-
Ethnicity True ReAdmix mSpectrum HAPMIX LAMP
European 79.3 79.2 83.5 68.1 63.2
African 15 15 13.5 13 13.5
Nat. American 3.5 3.5 2.6 2.6 8.9
East Asian 2.2 2.3 0.4 10.4 14.4
Other 0 0 0 5.9 0
Table 5: Performance of reAdmix, mSpectrum, HAPMIX and LAMP using
four-way admixed individuals. Estimation errors for the four-way admixture
were 0.10,4.89, 15.24, 20.96, respectively.
Ethnicity True ReAdmix mSpectrum HAPMIX LAMP
European 20 20 18.9 15.7 17.1
African 80 80 79.5 76.7 77.8
Nat. American 0 0 1.2 0.3 1.6
East Asian 0 0 0.4 1.3 3.5
Other 0 0 0 6 0
Table 6: Performance of reAdmix, mSpectrum, HAPMIX and LAMP using
two-way admixed individuals. Estimation errors for the two-way admixture
were 0.01, 1.70, 8.18, and 5.28, respectively.
mance of reAdmix with inclusion of additional world-wide reference samples and
further computational development.
Reference database
150K Dataset
To create a reference set we used 600 worldwide individuals collected as part
of the Genographic Project and the 1000 Genomes Project and genotyped on
the GenoChip [24], containing 150K ancestry-informative markers, and 1043
Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) samples genotyped on Illumina
650Y array, containing 661K markers. SNP marker set of the GenoChip ar-
ray (Genographic Project) was selected as a basic one, i.e. for each individual
only SNPs overlapping with this set were taken, as this array is enriched for
ancestry-informative non-selectable markers [24, 21]. We used the reference
dataset from Elhaik et al. [21] as a base and added additional entries using
supervised ADMIXTURE [25] analysis. Mean admixture coefficients were
computed for each population in the database(see Elhaik et al. [21] for de-
tails). In the Dodecad Ancestry Project synthetic “zombies” are generated
from the ADMIXTURE components. The concept of “reconstructed hypo-
thetical ancient-like individuals” is similar to ancestral population used in
our analysis. Here is the brief description of the approach:
1. Find allele frequencies of putative ancestral populations:
• run ADMIXTURE [25] analysis in unsupervised mode on the en-
tire reference dataset (possibly several times);
• use CLUMPP [26] software to align and find consensus between .P
matrices resulting from different runs and create a single .P matrix (L
× K, where L is the number of loci, K is the chosen number of
putative ancestral populations).
2. For each k = 1...K, create (m ≈ 15) individual genotypes by sampling
the genotype at each locus j = 1...L independently from binomial dis-
tribution (n = 2, p = P (j, k) ). Genotype here is understood as number
of copies of specific allele (0,1,or 2). These are the “zombie” genotypes,
i.e. they represent a likely genotype of an individual from an ancestral
population.
Following prior work of Elhaik et al. [24, 21], the resulting admixture
coefficients were obtained from ADMIXTURE [25] analysis on an individual
genome relative to K = 9 putative ancestral populations representing the
genetic diversity of different geographic regions. This selection allows for di-
rect comparison with prior work. However, larger values of K are feasible to
consider. We will continue inclusion of additional world-wide reference sam-
ples and experimenting with the number of components to achieve optimal
performance of reAdmix.
33K Dataset
An additional reference dataset was constructed from microarray genotyping
data on various worldwide populations. This dataset contains a smaller num-
ber of ancestry-informative markers, but a larger number of reference popu-
lations available in literature. This dataset is enriched for Native American,
Chukotko-Kamchatkan, Siberian populations, as well as populations from
South and North Caucasus. GenoChip ancestry-informative markers were
selected in all datasets. Filtering of the resulting dataset was performed us-
ing the PLINK software [27] with the following criteria: maximum missing
rate per SNP marker was 5%; maximum missing rate per individual was 50
(it was set so high to accommodate some important populations). The final
dataset contained 1, 564 individuals from 86 populations and 33, 039 SNPs.
We used unsupervised ADMIXTURE [25] analysis for K ranging from 2 to
20. For each value of K, 100 admixture analysis runs were generated with
different random seeds. The best run was chosen according to the highest
value of log likelihood. We selected K = 14, since this number of components
is high enough to provide the desired resolution, but at the same time is free
of complicated ancestral populations substructure, that appears at higher
values of K. Ten-fold cross-validation (CV) plots and admixture coefficients
for various values of K are shown in the Supplementary Materials.
reAdmix approach
Instead of attempting to solve an “exact admixture” problem, we aim to find
the smallest subset of populations whose combined admixture components
are similar to those of the individual within a small tolerance margin. The
reason for this is that the admixture proportions we use cannot be considered
exact neither for the reference populations that consists of certain heterogene-
ity nor for the test individual, because the observed admixture proportions
are merely maximum likelihood estimates, which may fail to accurately rep-
resent the actual proportions of ancestral genomes. Geometrically speaking,
we seek to find a small subset of population points, such that their convex
hull is adjacent to the test point in terms of maximum distance, defined as
the maximum difference in the absolute values of two admixture coefficient
vectors. The reAdmix algorithm solves this problem in two modes: condi-
tional and unconditional. The conditional mode starts the search from one or
more populations a priori provided by the user, whereas in the unconditional
mode, no information is available.
The reAdmix algorithm consists of three phases (see Figure 2):
1. Iteratively build the first candidate solution, increasing the size by one
population at each iteration, according to a criterion discussed below,
until a maximum number of ancestral populations is found. The max-
imum number of the ancestral populations is a parameter which is
defined using prior information about the ancestry composition, and
roughly corresponds to the time-frame in question, represented by the
number of generation. For example, to find the origin of one’s grand-
parents the maximum number should be set to four, however the results
may be like those of individual T that in the simplest scenario may in-
dicate common origins to two grandparents. Improve the candidate
solution by exchanging populations in the solution for ones outside the
solution space, if this substitution reduces the error.
2. Generate the predefined number M of additional candidate solutions
randomly and apply the Differential Evolution (DEEP) stochastic op-
timization technique to the combined set of the first and additional
candidate solutions. The DEEP method is run for the G predefined
number of iterations using the objective function (3) described below
that estimates the admixture proportions. The resulting set of M + 1
solutions is subjected local optimization over all populations close to
the obtained set. This resolves the problem of misplacing related pop-
ulations such as Belorussian, Russian, and Ukrainian.
3. The populations that have stable membership in the solution across
Figure 2: Flowchart of reAdmix.
the set, that is, are part of solution in at least 75% of cases, should
be identified and reported, with their averaged estimates of admixture
proportion.
Let the reference dataset R = (r ) denote the matrix of admixture propor-
tions of populations with respect to putative ancestral populations. We refer
to the rows r = (r , . . . , r ) of matrix R as population vectors. Let the
admixture proportions of a test sample be denoted as T = (t , . . . , t ). Let
S denote the solution vector, i.e. tuple of indices of populations that are
present in test sample’s admixture, and A = (a , a , . . . , a ) the correspond-
ing vector of mixture proportions to estimate. The K-component vector
P = a r + a r + ··· + a r is the approximation of T.
1 s(1) 2 s(2) p s(p)
reAdmix algorithm description
Initialization. The set of populations present in individual’s ancestry (S) is
either empty (unconditional mode) or contains modern-day populations (con-
ditional mode), provided by the user. Vector of proportions A is undefined.
Set T = T , copy of the original test vector, as T will change throughout the
algorithm.
Phase 1. Build and improve the initial solution set.
1. Repeat the following steps until desired size of the solution set is
reached:
- Find the population vector with the highest affinity score (1) (see
below) with respect to the current value of the test vector T, j =
argmax⟨ F(r,T)⟩ .
- Append this population to the solution set S = S ∪ {j}.
- Calculate the weight of the population vector to be proportional to
the maximal possible (account for possible error) w = max[w : w ·
r < t+ε]×β, where the scaling factor β is empirically determined.
- Subtract from the test vector T the product of the population
vector and its weight: T = T − w r .
2. Improve the initial solution set by swapping populations with those
outside of it. For all populations x in the current solution and for all y
outside the solution, replace x with y, if the change reduces the error.
Phase 2. Optimize the solution by global stochastic (1) and local search
(2).
1. Stochastic step: The initial solution is combined with M randomly
generated vectors of populations’ indices of the same size. Differential
Evolution Entirely Parallel (DEEP) method is applied to this set of
putative solutions for G number of iterations. This makes it possible
to identify the alternative combinations of populations that provide the
lesser or the same error value as DEEP accepts only those substitutions
in the parameter vectors that reduce the value of the objective function.
2. Local optimization: After obtaining the preliminary solution, a local
optimization over all populations close to the preliminary solution is
carried to identify the best possible solution. This step selects between
related populations (e.g. Belorussian, Russian, and Ukrainian) that
could have been misplaced in previous steps.
Phase 3. Averaging. To make a reliable estimate, the populations that
have stable membership in the solutions across the set, that is, are part
of solution in at least 75% of cases, should be identified and reported, with
their averaged estimates of admixture proportion. We recommend to average
across least M = 10 solutions to achieve stable results. The remaining popu-
lations should be considered potential contributing populations that may be
grouped and reported as a regional population (e.g., South Europeans).
Affinity score
Affinity score of a vector P to a test vector T
is the value of the weight α such that the difference between prediction and true
value of test vector d = T − αP minimizes the loss function
The goal of the second term is to penalize for inclusion of too many ancestral
populations (i.e. when αP > T).
Objective function
Population weights are considered optimal if they minimize the absolute
error of the solution, i.e. the maximum absolute error between the ap-
proximation defined by S, A, and T . The function finds proportions A = (a ,
a , . . . , a ) corresponding to the elements of approximation defined by S =
(s ,s ,...,s ) such that the absolute solution error
f (S, T ) = min max P − T , (3)
,...,ap) k=1...K
where P = a r + a r + · · · + a r , is minimal. The minimization of
1 s(1) 2 s(2) p s(p)
absolute error is an instance of Chebyshev approximation linear programming
problem. To solve it we use lpSolve package [28].
Differential Evolution Entirely Parallel Method
Recently, many promising optimization techniques have been developed based
on the Differential Evolution originally proposed by Storn and Price in [29,
30]. To solve our optimization problem, we adopted the Differential Evo-
lution Entirely Parallel (DEEP) method [31] incorporating into the original
algorithm such enhancements found in the literature as the possibility to take
into account a value of the objective function for each parameter vector at
the recombination step [32], and to control the diversity parameter vectors
by the adaptation of the internal parameters [33]. DEEP starts from a set
of the randomly generated parameter vectors q, i = 1, ..., N P . The size of
the set N P is fixed. The first trial vector is calculated by:
v = q + S(q − q )
where q is the member of the current generation g, S is a predefined scaling
constant and r , r , r are different random indices of the members of pop-
ulation. The second trial vector is calculated using “trigonometric mutation
rule” [32].
3 2 r2 r3 1 3 r3 r1
i ri r1 r2 r3
is the main objective function to be minimized. The combined trial vector in
case of binomial recombination type is defined as follows:
where U (0, 1) is a random number uniformly distributed between 0 and
1 and p is the probability of crossover. In case of the exponential type of
recombination the first trial vector v is used continuously while random
number is less than p.
Several different objective functions can be used to decide if the trial
vector will replace the current one in the set. The trial vector is accepted if
the value of the main objective function decreased. In the opposite case the
additional objective functions are considered if they are defined. The trial
vector replaces the current one if the value of any other objective function is
better, and a randomly selected value is less than the predefined parameter
for this function.
It is worth noting that the DEEP method was previously successfully
applied to several systems biology problems [34, 35, 36]. The distinctive
features of the DEEP method are the flexible selection rule for handling
multiple objective functions and substitution strategy that takes into account
the number of iterations between updates of each parameter vector. Several
oldest vectors are substituted with the same number of the best ones after
predefined number of iterations. Different types of experimental observations
or a priori knowledge can be included in one fitting procedure using the new
selection rule. We are currently developing a nonparametric [37, 38] version
of the reAdmix approach.
The algorithm was implemented in C programming language as the soft-
ware package with interface that allows a user to formulate the objective
function using different computer languages widely used in biomedical appli-
cations, such as Octave, R, etc. The control parameters of the algorithm are
defined in the data file that uses the INI-format. The package provides the
simple command line user interface.
One of the parameters of the algorithm determines the number of parallel
threads used to calculate the objective function. We utilized the Thread Pool
the pool with the defined number of worker threads. The calculation of
objective function for each trial vector is pushed to the asynchronous queue.
The calculation starts as soon as there is an available thread. The thread
synchronization condition is determined by the fact that objective function
is to be calculated once for each individual in the population and on each
iteration.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author’s contributions
TT formulated the problem and conceptualized the method, DC and KK
implemented the method, MH and MT developed the interface, PF and PT
prepared the testing and reference datasets, TT, KK, and DC interpreted the
results and wrote the paper.
Acknowledgements
Funding: TT was supported by grants from The National Institute for Gen-
eral Medical Studies (GM068968), and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (HD070996). KK was
supported by the “5-100-2020” Program of the Ministry of Education and
Science of the Russian Federation.