Disperse two-phase flows, with
applications to geophysical problems
Luigi C. Berselli
Dipartimento di Matematica
Universita` di Pisa
Pisa, ITALY, berselli@dma.unipi.it
Matteo Cerminara
Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa
Istituto Nazionale di Vulcanologia e Geofisica
Pisa, ITALY, matteo.cerminara@sns.it
Traian Iliescu
Department of Mathematics
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA, iliescu@vt.edu
In this paper we study the motion of a fluid with several dispersed
particles whose concentration is very small (smaller than 10−3), with
possible applications to problems coming from geophysics, meteorol-
ogy, and oceanography. We consider a very dilute suspension of heavy
particles in a quasi-incompressible fluid (low Mach number). In our
case the Stokes number is small and –as pointed out in the theory
of multiphase turbulence– we can use an Eulerian model instead of
a Lagrangian one. The assumption of low concentration allows us to
disregard particle–particle interactions, but we take into account the
effect of particles on the fluid (two-way coupling). In this way we
can study the physical effect of particles’ inertia (and not only passive
tracers), with a model similar to the Boussinesq equations.
]hp-oa.scisyhp[
1v8445.3041:viXra
The resulting model is used in both direct numerical simulations
and large eddy simulations of a dam-break (lock-exchange) problem,
which is a well-known academic test case.
Keywords: Dilute suspensions, Eulerian models, direct and large
eddysimulations,slightlycompressibleflows,dam-break(lock-exchange)
problem.
MSC2010classification: Primary: 76T15;Secondary: 86-08,86A04,
35Q35.
1 Introduction
One of the characteristic features of geophysical flows (see for instance [8])
is stratification (the other one is rotation). In this manuscript, we study
some problems related to suspensions of heavy particles in incompressible -or
slightly compressible- fluids. Our aim is a better understanding of mixing
phenomena between the two phases, the fluid and solid one. We especially
study this problem because (turbulent) mixing with stratification plays a
fundamental role in the dynamics of both oceanic and atmospheric flows. In
this study, we perform the analysis of some models related to the transport
of heavy dilute particles, with special emphasis on their mixing. Observe
that mixing is very relevant near the surface and the bottom of the ocean,
near topographic features, near polar and marginal seas, as well as near the
equatorial zones [21]. Especially in coastal waters, precise analysis of trans-
port and dispersion is needed to study biological species, coastal discharges,
and also transport of contaminants. The other main motivation of our study
is a better understanding of transport of particles (e.g. dust and pollution)
in the air. This happens -for instance- in volcanic eruptions or more gener-
ally by natural and/or human generation of jets/plumes of particles in the
atmosphere.
Following [1], in the physical regimes we will consider, it is appropriate
to use the Eulerian approach, that is the solid-phase (the particles) will be
modeled as a continuum. This choice is motivated by the presence of a huge
number of particles and because we are analyzing the so called “fine particle”
regime (that is the Stokes number is much smaller than one). In this regime,
aLagrangianapproachcouldbecomputationallyexpensive, andtheEulerian
approach may offer more computationally efficient alternatives. We will ex-
plain the precise assumptions that make this ansatz physically representative
and we will also study numerically the resulting models, with and without
large scales further approximation. In particular, we will model the particles
as dust, investigating a model related to dusty gases, and which belongs to
the hierarchy of reduced multiphase models, as reviewed by Balachandar [1].
These models represent a good approximation when the number of fine par-
ticles to be traced is very large and a direct numerical simulation (DNS)
of the fluid with a Lagrangian tracer for each particle would be too expen-
sive. As well explained in [1], the point-like Eulerian approach for multiphase
fluid-particle dynamics becomes even more efficient in the case of large eddy
simulations (LES), because the physical diameter of the particles has to be
compared with the large eddy length-scale and not with the smaller Kol-
mogorov one. We will use the dusty gas model in a physical configuration
that is very close to that modeled by the Boussinesq system, and this ex-
plains why we compare our numerical results with those reported in [27, 2].
Observe that the dusty gas model reduces to the Boussinesq system with a
large Prandtl number if: a) the fluid velocity is divergence-free; and b) the
relative ratio of solid and fluid bulk densities is very small (see Sec. 2 and
Eq. (6)).
The approach we will use for multiphase fluids is well-described in Mar-
ble [23]. More precisely, when the Stokes time –which is the characteristic
time of relaxation of the particle velocity with respect to the surrounding
fluid– is small enough and the number of particles is very large, it could
be reasonable to use the Eulerian approach (instead of the Lagrangian). In
Eulerianmodelsboththecarrierandthedispersedphasearetreatedasinter-
penetrating fluid media, and consequently both the particulate solid-phase
and fluid-phase properties are expressed by a continuous field representation.
Originally we started studying these models in order to simulate ash plumes
coming from volcanic eruptions, see [10, 6, 5, 31], but here we will show
that the same approach could be also used to study some problems com-
ing from other geophysical situations, at least for certain ranges of physical
parameters.
Our model is evaluated in a two dimensional dam-break problem, also
known as the lock-exchange problem. This problem, despite being concerned
with a) a simple domain; b) nice initial and boundary conditions; and c)
smoothgravityexternalforcing,containsshear-drivenmixing,internalwaves,
interactions with boundaries, and convective motions. The dam-break prob-
lemsetuphaslongservedasaparadigmconfigurationforstudyingthespace-
time evolution of gravity currents (cf. [9, 12, 28, 29]). Consequently, we set
up a canonical benchmark problem, for which an extensive literature is avail-
able: The vertical barrier separating fluid and fluid with particles is abruptly
removed, and counter-propagating gravity currents initiate mixing. The time
evolution can be quite complex, showing shear-driven mixing, internal waves
interacting with the velocity, and gravitationally-unstable transients. This
benchmark problem has been investigated experimentally and numerically
for instance in [3, 16, 17, 18]. Both the impressive amount of data and the
physical relevance of the problem make it an appropriate benchmark and a
natural first step in the thorough assessment of any approximate model to
study stratification. The results we obtain validate the proposed model as
appropriate to simulate dilute suspensions of ash in the air. In addition,
we found that new peculiar phenomena appear, which are generated by com-
pressibility. Even if the behavior of the simulations is qualitatively very close
to that of the incompressible case, the (even very slightly) compressible char-
acter of the fluid produces a more complex behavior, especially in the first
part of the simulations. To better investigate the efficiency and limitations
of the numerical solver, the numerical tests will be performed by using both
DNS and LES. Complete discussion of the numerical results will be given in
Section 3.
Plan of the paper: In Section 2 we present the reduced multiphase
model we will consider, with particular attention to the correct evaluation of
physical parameters that make the approximation effective. In Section 3 we
present the setting of the numerical experiments we performed. Particular
emphasis is posed on the initial conditions and on the interpretation and
comparison of the results with those available in the literature.
2 On multiphase Eulerian models
In order to study multiphase flows and especially (even compressible) flows
with particles, some approximate and reduced models have been proposed
in the literature. In the case of dilute suspensions, a complete hierarchy
of approximate models is available (see [1]) on the basis of two critical pa-
rameters determining the level of interaction between the liquid and solid
phase: The fractional volume occupied by the dispersed-phase and the mass
loading, (that is the ratio of mass of the dispersed to carrier phase). When
they are both small, the dominant effect on the dynamics of the dispersed-
phase is that of the turbulent carrier flow (one-way coupled). When the
mass of the dispersed-phase is comparable with that of the carrier-phase,
the back-influence of the dispersed-phase on the carrier-phase dynamics be-
comes relevant (two-way coupled). When the fractional volume occupied by
the dispersed-phase increases, interactions between particles become more
important, requiring a four-way coupling. In the extreme limit of very large
concentration, we encounter the granular flow regime.
Here, we consider rather heavy particles such that ρ >> ρ (air), or
(cid:98)s (cid:98)f
ρ ∼ ρ (liquid), where in the sequel the subscript “ ” stands for solid, while
(cid:98)s (cid:98)f s
“ ” stands for fluid. Here a hat . denotes material densities (as opposed
f (cid:98)
to bulk densities): In particular, we suppose ρ ∼ 400 − 3000kg/m3. A
rather small particle/volume concentration must be assumed (to have dilute
suspensions), that is
(cid:15) := s < 10−3,
where V is the volume occupied by the particles over the total volume V.
When (cid:15) is smaller than 10−3, particle-particle collisions and interactions can
be neglected and the particle-phase can be considered as a pressure-less and
non-viscous continuum. In this situation the particles move approximately
with the same velocity of the surrounding fluid, and the theory has been de-
veloped by Carrier [4] (see a review in Marble [23]). With these assumptions
the bulk densities ρ := (1 − (cid:15) )ρ and ρ := (cid:15) ρ are of the same order of
f s (cid:98)f s s(cid:98)s
magnitude, about 1kg/m3 in the case dust-in-air (two-way coupling). In the
case of water with particles the ratio ρ /ρ is of the order of 10−3, hence
particles behave very similarly to passive tracers (almost one-way coupling).
Another assumption required by Marble’s analysis is that particles can be
considered point-like, if their typical diameter d is smaller than the smallest
scale of the problem under analysis, that is the Kolmogorov length η (DNS),
or the smallest resolved LES length-scale ξ (LES).
To describe the gas/fluid-particle drag, we observe that it depends in a
strong nonlinear way on the local flow variables and especially on the relative
Reynolds number:
(cid:98)f s f s
where µ is the gas dynamic viscosity coefficient and u and u are the fluid
andsolidphasevelocityfield, respectively. Ontheotherhand, forapoint-like
single particle and in the hypothesis of small velocities difference (Re < 1),
the drag force (per volume unit) acting on a single particle depends just
linearly on the difference of velocities:
f = s (u − u ), with τ := (cid:98)s (cid:98)f s,
where τ is the particle relaxation time or Stokes time, which is the time
needed to a particle to equilibrate to a change of fluid velocity [1], and ν :=
µ/ρ is the fluid kinematic viscosity. In particular, in the case of water with
particles we have ρ /ρ ∼ 1, while in the case of a gas ρ /ρ >> 1 and hence
(cid:98)s (cid:98)f (cid:98)s (cid:98)f
  s (water),
  (cid:98)s s (air).
In order to measure the lack of equilibrium between the two phases, we have
to compare τ with the smallest time of the dynamics. In the turbulent
regime, the smallest time is the Kolmogorov smallest eddy’s turnover time
(LES).Itispossibletocharacterizethissituationbyusingasnon-dimensional
parameter –the Stokes number– which is defined by comparing the Stokes
time with the fastest time-scale of the problem under analysis St := τ /τ.
If St < 10−3 (the “fine particle regime”), we say that we have kinematic
equilibrium between the two phases and so we can use in a consistent way
the dusty gas model. In order to have also thermal equilibrium between the
two phases, one has to assume that the thermal relaxation time (cf. [23]) is
small, that is:
τ := (cid:98)s s s << 1.
Comparing the kinetic and thermal relaxation times, we get the Stokes ther-
St := = = St = Pr St, (2)
τ τ τ 2 k 2
i.e., the particle Prandtl number, where C is the solid-phase specific heat-
capacityatconstantvolumeandk isitsthermalconductivity. Toensurethat
the dusty gas model is physically reasonable, both kinematic and thermal
equilibrium must hold, that is, both Stokes numbers should be less than
10−3. This implies that we have a single velocity u = u = u for both
phases and also a single temperature field T = T = T .
To check that our assumptions are fulfilled, we first show that if the
Stokes number is small, then also the thermal Stokes number remains small.
Indeed, using the typical value of the dynamic viscosity µ = 10−3Pa · s
(water) or µ = 10−5Pa·s (air), specific heat capacity C = 103J·kg−1 ·K−1
and thermal conductivity k ∼ 1W·m−1 ·K−1, we can evaluate the particle
Prandtl number in both cases:
s k 103 ∗10−5
Hence formula (2) shows that St (cid:46) St.
Summarizing, we used the following assumptions:
a) Continuum assumption for both the gaseous and solid phase;
b) The solid-phase is dispersed ((cid:15) < 10−3), thus it is pressure-less and
non-interacting;
c) The relative Reynolds number between the solid and gaseous phases
is smaller than one so that it is appropriate to use the Stokes law for
d) The Stokes number is smaller than one so that the Eulerian approach
is appropriate;
e) All the phases, either solid or gaseous, have the same velocity and tem-
perature fields u(x,z,t), T(x,z,t) (local thermal and kinematic equi-
librium). We showed that this assumption is accurate if the Stokes
number is much smaller than one.
In this regime, the equations for the balance of mass, momentum, and energy
are:
where ρ := ρ + ρ is the mixture density, e :=
is the internal
mixture energy, and g is the gravity acceleration pointing in the downward
vertical direction. The stress-tensor is
(cid:20) ∇u+∇uT 1 (cid:21)
with µ(T) the dynamic viscosity, possibly depending on the temperature T,
and D the spatial dimension of the problem. The Fourier law for the heat
transfer assumes (cid:126)q = −k∇T, where k is the fluid thermal conductivity. We
denote by C and C the fluid and solid phase specific heat-capacity at con-
stant volume, respectively. System (3) is completed by using the constitutive
law p = p(ρ,ρ ,T). In the case of air and particles (the one for which we will
present the simulations) p = ρ RT, where R is the air gas constant.
Remark 1. The correct law would be p = f , but in our dilute setting
1−(cid:15)s
(cid:15) is very small, which justifies the approximation p = ρ RT. A different
constitutive law must be used in the presence of water or other fluids.
Remark 2. Note that the constant particle pressure ∇p = 0 is justified
by the lack of particle-particle forces. Note that in the case of uniform par-
ticle distribution (ρ /ρ = C), the equations (3) reduce to the compressible
Navier-Stokes equations, with density multiplied by a factor C. Some numer-
ical experiments (with ρ /ρ (cid:54)= C) were performed in [30], where the dusty
gas model was applied to volcanic eruptions, i.e. a flow with vanishing initial
solid density ρ and particles injected into the atmosphere from the volcanic
vent.
Denoting by s y = ρ /ρ the solid-phase mass-fraction, we can rewrite the
system (3) with just one flow variable (ρu) as follows:
In the following, we will also assume to have an iso-entropic flow with a per-
fectgas(whichisareasonableapproximationfortheair,seeforexample[24]).
We can thus substitute the energy equation (4-d) by the constitutive law
streamline starting at (x(0),z(0)) for t = 0 (we have not been able to find
this expression in the literature; for its full derivation see [5]). In particular,
a simple calculation shows that γ(x(t),z(t),t) = γ(x(0),z(0),0) ∼ γ. More-
(where a(x(0),z(0),0) ∼ a and γ(x(0),z(0),0) ∼ γ are motivated by the
small density variations compared with a constant temperature), we can con-
sequently study the following system (with p = aργ; and a, γ are constants
determined from the initial conditions):
Here the iso-entropic assumption is justified. Indeed, since the Reynolds
number is typically much greater than 1, and the Prandtl number is of the
order of 10, the two dissipation terms T : ∇u and ∇ · q (corresponding
to the conduction of heat and its dissipation by mechanical energy) can be
neglected. Moreover, since C ∼ C and the temperature fluctuations are
small, we can disregard the heat transfer from solid to fluid phase.
Observethatifρ = constant, T = constant, andifweusetheBoussinesq
approximation, we get from (4) the following system:
which is exactly the Boussinesq equations, except that there is no diffusion
for the density perturbation (i.e., infinite Prandtl number). Thus, numerical
results concerning (5) are comparable with results from the classical Boussi-
nesq equations, see [27, 2].
3 Numerical results
To validate the Eulerian model for multiphase flows (5), we use it to perform
both DNS and LES of a dam-break (lock-exchange) problem.
3.1 Model configuration
Since we want to compare our results with accurate results available in the
literature, we use a setting which is very close to that in [27], in terms of both
equations and initial conditions. In particular, we consider a two dimensional
rectangular domain −L/2 ≤ x ≤ L/2 and 0 ≤ z ≤ H with an aspect ratio
large enough (L/H = 5) in order to obtain high shear across the interface,
and to create Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) instability. We use this setting because
in a domain with large aspect ratio, the density interface has more space to
tilt and stretch.
For this test case, the typical velocity magnitude is (for further details see
e.g. [27]) U = gρ h(H −h)/ρ H, where H is the layer thickness and h the
volumetric fraction of denser material times H. From now on, with a slight
abuse of notation, we denote by g the modulus of the gravity acceleration.
In our simulation we set h = H/2, from which we get
U = .
We use the characteristic length-scale (cid:96) to non-dimensionalize all the equa-
tions in (5). In order to have τ = (cid:96)/U when H = 2(cid:96), we need to set
ρ /g = ρ /2. Moreover, we choose a dimensional system where the initial
solid bulk density is ρ = 1, which yields g = 2ρ . The Froude number is
2−1/2 for all the simulations, so we are free to choose a ρ such that ρ (cid:29) ρ .
We set ρ = 100. In these non-dimensional units, the Reynolds number is
Re = (ρ+ρ )U (cid:96)/µ = (ρ +1)/µ,wesetthedynamicviscosityµ = 0.02348837
such that the maximum Reynolds number we consider is
Re = 4300.
Oneoftheinherenttime-scalesinthesystemisthe(Brunt-V¨aisa¨l¨a)buoyancy
which is the natural time related to gravity waves. In order to have a quasi-
incompressible flow, we set Ma = U /c = 0.01. Using our non-dimensional
variables, the perfect gas relationship is p = ρ R and the speed of sound
is c = γR. We want c = 100 and γ = 1.4, so we set R = 7142.857143 and
p = 7.142857143∗105. Experiments are performed at different resolutions
(from about 104, up to about 106 grid cells), see the next section for details.
The initial condition is a state of rest, in which the fluid with particles on
the left is separated from the fluid (without particles) on the right by a sharp
transition layer. Since the tilting of the density interface puts the system
gradually into motion, the system can be started from a state of rest. Due to
the (slight) compressibility of the fluid some peculiar phenomena occur close
to the initial time. These effects are not present in the incompressible case,
cf. the discussion below.
We consider the isolated problem, so that the iso-entropic approxima-
tion is valid and consequently we supplement system (5) with the following
boundary conditions: The boundary condition for the density perturbation
y is no-flux, while free-slip for the velocity:
and n·∇y = 0,
where n is the unit outward normal vector, while τ is a tangential unit
vector on ∂Ω. In the two dimensional setting we use for the numerical sim-
ulation (the two dimensional rectangular domain Ω =] − L/2,L/2[×]0,H[)
the boundary conditions become:
 ∂u ∂y L L
 = 0, u = 0, = 0, at z = 0,H, − < x < ,
  2 = 0, u = 0, s = 0, at x = ± , 0 < z < H.
3.2 On the initial conditions
We considered as initial datum the classical situation used in the dam-break
problem, with all particles confined in the left half of the physical domain
(with uniform distribution), while a uniform fluid fills the whole domain.
Moreover, we have an initial uniform temperature T(x,z,0) = T and pres-
sure distribution p(x,z,0) = p . Suddenly the wall dividing the two phases
is removed and we observe the evolution.
Even if our numerical code is compressible, we started with this setting,
widely used to study incompressible cases, since we are in the physical regime
of quasi-incompressibility. The compressibility is mostly measured by the
Mach number. For air we have a typical velocity U ∼ 4m/s, hence the
Mach number of air in this condition is around 0.01, as we choose for our
simulations. Ontheotherhand,forwaterwewouldobtainU ∼ 0.04m/sand
Ma ∼ 2.510−5. Nevertheless, aswewillseeespeciallyinFig.6, eventhisvery
small perturbation creates a new instability and new phenomena for times
very close to t = 0. In particular, new effects appear for 0 < t < T . These
effects seem limited to the beginning of the evolution. The characteristic
time of the stratification (for a DNS) is defined as (see [8, § 11])
where ∆ρ is the density difference between the ground level and the height
H of the upper boundary wall. In particular, we know that for the gaseous-
phase, the stable solution is the barotropic stratification, due to the gravity
acceleration:
(cid:18) (cid:19) 1 (cid:18) (cid:19) γ
and in the case of perfect gases we recover the fact that the typical stratifi-
cation height for the atmosphere (R ∼ 287) is
z = = ∼ 104m,
while for water in the iso-thermal case we would obtain
z = = ∼ 105m.
Since η is small in both cases, we can use the following approximation:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
For a domain with volume V and mass m, in the incompressible case the
stable stationary configuration is with vanishing velocity and ρ = m.
On the contrary, in our slightly compressible case, the stable stationary con-
figuration is:
= .
The length η has to be compared with the height of the domain H, in order
to evaluate the importance of stratification. For instance, if we use realistic
values of density, pressure, and gravity acceleration for air (to come back
to dimensional variables) we get that the height of the domain is H ∼
600m, while for water we get H = 0.6m. In the case of air we obtain
density variations due to gravity which are of the order of 5%, while for
water they should be of the order of 0.0003%. This explains that in the
case of water, the dominant variations of density, which are of the order of
1%, are those imposed by the initial configuration of particles. On the other
hand, in the case of particles in air, the one we are mostly interested to,
the two phenomena create fluctuations which are comparable in magnitude,
and this can be seen in Fig. 7. In particular, in Fig. 7, one can see that the
fluctuations created by the non-stratified initial condition affect the behavior
of the background potential energy defined below. In the case of air, we
have that T < T , and thus the effects of these instabilities (due to the
initial heterogeneity) will be observed before the mixing effects, which are
dominant in the rest of the evolution. On the other hand, this effect can not
be seen by analyzing just the mixed fraction, see Fig. 4 and the discussion
below.
We will also compare the results obtained from DNS with those obtained
bydifferentLESmodels, asdiscussedlateron. TheaccuracyoftheLESmod-
els is evaluated through a posteriori testing. The main measure used is the
background/reference potential energy (RPE), which represents an appro-
priate measure for mixing in an enclosed system [32]. RPE is the minimum
potential energy that can be obtained through an adiabatic redistribution of
the masses. To compute RPE, we use directly the approach in [32], since the
problem is two-dimensional and computations do not require too much time
RPE(t) := g ρ (x,z,t)z (x,z,t)dxdz,
where z (ρ(cid:48)) is the height of fluid of density ρ(cid:48) in the minimum potential
energy state. To evaluate z (ρ(cid:48)), we use the following formula:
z (x,z,t) = H(ρ (x(cid:48),z(cid:48),t)−ρ (x,z,t))dx(cid:48)dz(cid:48),
whereHistheHeavisidefunction. Itisconvenienttousethenon-dimensional
background potential energy
which shows the relative increase of the RPE with respect to the initial state
by mixing. Further discussion of the energetics of the dam-break problem
can be found in [8, 25, 26, 27].
With these considerations we are now able to compute the maximum
particle diameter fulfilling our hypothesis (St < 10−3). First, we must
evaluate the smallest time-scale of the dynamics. As described in Tab. 2,
we used three different resolutions. The ultra-res resolution can be con-
sidered as a DNS, so the smallest time-scale of the simulation is the Kol-
mogorov time τ η = Re− 2 1 = 1.525 ∗ 10−2, while the smallest length-scale is
η = Re−3 4 = 1.883∗10−3. The other two resolutions have been used for LES:
We have ξ = 8.696∗10−3 and ξ = 4.348∗10−2 for the mid-res and low-res
resolutions, respectively. By using the relationship τ = τ (ξ/η)2, we found
τ = 4.229∗10−2 and τ = 1.237∗10−1, respectively. In Tab. 1 we report the
dimensional maximum particle diameter for which the dusty gas hypothesis
is fulfilled (cf. Eqs. (1)) at various resolutions.
ultra-res mid-res low-res
water 6.3 µm 10 µm 18 µm
gas 82 µm 140 µm 240 µm
Table 1: The dimensional maximum particle diameter fulfilling the dusty gas hy-
pothesis.
3.3 Numerical methods and results
We tested our numerical code on a well documented test case. At the initial
time the particles occupy only one side of the computational domain. Then
–abruptly– the wall dividing the fluid with particles from the fluid without
particles is removed and the two fluids start mixing under the effect of grav-
ity. The situation is complex even in the two dimensional case. Results of
numerical simulations with the DNS and also LES models are presented in
this section. All simulations are obtained by using OpenFOAM(cid:13)R, which is
an Open Source computational fluid dynamics code used worldwide. The
numerical algorithm we used is PISO (Pressure Implicit with Splitting of
Operators [13, 19]), which allows the user to choose the numerical scheme
andorderforboththetimeandspacediscretization. Inparticular, wechoose
a second order unbounded and conservative scheme for the Laplacian terms;
a central second order scheme for interpolation from cell center to cell faces;
a second order scheme for the gradient terms; and a bounded second cen-
tral scheme for the divergence term [20]. On the other hand, we choose a
second order bounded and implicit time scheme (Crank-Nicolson), with an
adaptive time stepping based on the maximum initial residual of the previ-
ous time step [22], and on a threshold that depends on the Courant number
(C < 0.2).
The linear systemis solved by using the PbiCG solver (Preconditioned bi-
ConjugateGradientsolverforasymmetricmatrices) andthePCG(Precondi-
tioned Conjugate Gradient solver for symmetric matrices), respectively, pre-
conditioned by a Diagonal Incomplete Lower Upper decomposition (DILU)
and a Diagonal Incomplete Cholesky (DIC) decomposition. The tolerance
has been set to 0.01 for the initial residual and to 10−15 for the final one.
The high-resolution DNS, denoted ultra-res in the remainder of the pa-
per, were performed on a HPC architecture (BLUGENE/Q system installed
at CINECA) with 1024 cores. These ultra-res runs took about 5 days.
The medium-resolution simulations, denoted by mid-res, were performed on
62 cores (using the HPC infrastructure of INGV, Pisa section) for about
2 days. Since many options for LES of compressible multiphase flows are
available, we chose to compare the ones that OpenFOAM has built-in, to de-
tect the most promising for our test case. In Fig. 3-5-6 we especially address
this topic. More specifically, the LES runs were performed using either the
compressible Smagorinsky model or the one equation eddy model, that is in
Eq. (5) the stress tensor T is replaced by
(cid:20) ∇u+∇uT 1 (cid:21)
In both cases we define a subgrid-scale (SGS) stress tensor as in [15] by
B = kI−2C kδdev(D),
where k is the SGS kinetic energy, C = 0.02, δ is the grid-scale, D =
sym(∇u), and dev(D) = D − Tr(D)I/D. In the Smagorinsky model, k is
obtained by using the equilibrium assumption
ρD : B+ e k3/2 = 0,
where C = 1.048. Finally, the SGS viscosity is µ = C ρδ k.
On the other hand, in the one equation eddy viscosity model (which is
the compressible counterpart of the so called TKE model [7]), k is obtained
through the following balance law:
(cid:18) (cid:19)
keeping µ = C ρδ k. We perform our simulations at three different
resolutions, see Table 2.
low-res N=10,580
mid-res N=264,500
ultra-res N=1,058,000
Table 2: N is the number of nodes of the different homogeneous meshes for our
simulations.
Together with the DNS simulation done on the ultra-res mesh and the
four LES done on low-res and mid-res meshes, we also performed two under-
resolved simulations without SGS model, denoted by low-res DNS* and mid-
res DNS*.
To illustrate the complexity of the mixing process that we investigate, in
Fig. 1 we present snapshots of DNS for the density ρ of particles’ concentra-
tion at different times (it is represented in a linear color scale for 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1).
We notice that the results are similar to those obtained in [2, 26]. Thus, the
DNS time evolution of the density perturbation will be used as benchmark
for other numerical simulations, since (as in [27]) the number of grid points is
large enough to resolve all the relevant scales and to consider simulations at
ultra-res as a DNS. We study this problem varying both the mesh resolution
(cf. Table 2) and the SGS LES model (Smagorinsky and one equation eddy
model). Fig. 2 displays snapshots of the solid-phase bulk densities at time
t = 4 for the three different mesh resolutions: DNS at ultra-res, DNS* at
mid-res, and DNS* at low-res. Fig. 3 displays snapshots of the solid-phase
bulk density at time t = 7. To generate the plots in Fig. 3, we use two LES
models (the Smagorinsky and the one equation eddy model) at two coarse
resolutions(mid-resandlow-res). ToassessthequalityoftheLESresults, we
used the DNS at ultra-res as benchmark. Fig. 3 shows that the LES models
yield similar results. From Fig. 3 we can deduce that, even if the overall qual-
itative behavior is reproduced in four LES simulations, the results obtained
at low-res are rather poor and only the bigger vortices are reproduced. On
the other hand, the LES results at mid-res are in good agreement with the
Figure 1: Snapshots of the solid-phase bulk density at a) t/T = 0.637, b) t/T =
1.114, c) t/T = 4.297, d) t/T = 8.276, in ultra-res DNS at Re = 4300.
Figure 2: Snapshots of the solid-phase bulk density at t/T = 0.637 evaluated with
different resolutions, (a) low-res DNS*, (b) mid-res DNS*, (c) ultra-res DNS.
DNS and the one equation eddy model seems to be better performing when
looking at the smaller vortices. The two LES models required a comparable
computational time and a comparison based on more quantitative arguments
will be discussed later on, see Fig. 5 and 6 and discussion therein.
Figs. 1-3 show that, just as in the case of the Boussinesq equations, the
system rapidly generates the Kelvin-Helmholtz billows along the interface of
gravity waves, which are counter-propagating. These waves are reflected by
the side walls and gradually both billows grow by entraining the surrounding
fluid. Later the mixing increases so much that individual billows cannot be
seen anymore.
In order to check whether our DNS results are an appropriate benchmark
for the LES results, we compare our ultra-res DNS results with those in [27].
Since we chose analogous initial conditions and since our two-phase model is
comparable with the Boussinesq equations (cf. Eq. (6)), we expect similar
qualitative results for all the flow variables. In Fig. 4 we compare our ultra-
res DNS results with those from [27] using the mixed mass fraction, which
is a quantity measuring the mixing. The mixed mass fraction is defined as
Figure 3: Snapshots of the solid-phase bulk density at t/T = 1.114 evaluated
with different LES models: (a) low-res Smagorinsky, (b) low-res one eq. eddy, (c)
mid-res Smagorinsky, (d) mid-res one eq. eddy, (e) ultra-res DNS.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
ultra-res DNS
ultra-res Ozgokmen et al. 2007
Figure4: Timeevolutionofthemixedmassfraction. DNSresultsfromthecurrent
study (solid) and from Ref [27] (dashed). Both simulations use the same mesh
resolution.
the fraction of volume were the density perturbation is partially mixed. In
particular, in our simulations with homogeneous meshes, it is obtained evalu-
ating the percentage of cells such that 1/3 < ρ < 2/3 (cf. [27]). The plots in
Fig. 4 show that the two simulations yield similar results, as expected. The
main difference is in the time interval 2 < t/T < 4, where our simulation
seems to mix slightly more than the simulation from [27]. As we will discuss
later, this is probably due to the mixing induced by the creation of strati-
fication. In Fig. 5 we plot the evolution of the mixed mass fraction for all
our simulations. Fig. 5 yields the following conclusions: At the low-res, the
one equation eddy model performs the best, followed by the DNS*, and the
Smagorinsky model (in this order). At the mid-res, the Smagorinsky model
performs the best, followed by the one equation eddy model, and the DNS*
(in this order).
The main measure used in the assessment of the accuracy of the models
employed to predict mixing in the dam-break problem is the non-dimensional
background potential energy RPE* defined in (7), cf. [32]. Figure 6 plots
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
ultra-res DNS
low-res DNS*
low-res Sma
low-res OneEq
mid-res DNS*
mid-res Sma
mid-res OneEq
Figure 5: Time evolution of the mixed mass fraction with 1 < ρ < 2 for the
various low resolution LES models. The DNS results (solid) serve as benchmark.
the background energy of the various LES models. The DNS results serve
as benchmark. Fig. 6 yields the following conclusions: At the low-res, the
one equation eddy model performs the best, followed by the DNS*, and the
Smagorinsky model (in this order). At the mid-res, the one equation eddy
model again performs the best, followed by the DNS*, and the Smagorinsky
model (in this order).
Apart from the above LES model assessment, we also observe that new
important phenomena appear in the compressible case: While in the incom-
pressible case the RPE is monotonically increasing, in our investigation it
is initially decreasing, it then reaches a minimum, and it finally starts to
increase monotonically, as expected. In order to better understand this phe-
nomenon, we have to compare the background energy of the homogeneous
initial condition with that of the stratified initial condition. Evaluating the
initial potential energy (PE ), the available energy (APE ), and the back-
ground energy (RPE ) for the homogeneous initial density of the solid-phase,
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
ultra-res DNS
low-res DNS*
low-res Sma
low-res OneEq
mid-res DNS*
mid-res Sma
mid-res OneEq
Figure 6: Time evolution of the non-dimensional background energy (RPE∗), for
the LES models at various resolutions. The DNS results (solid) serve as bench-
mark. The time is normalized with T .
we get:
PE /g = 10, APE = 5, RPE /g = 5. (8)
If we consider the initial distribution of fluid and particles in the stratified
case, with ρ (x,z,0) = 0.01ρ (x,z,0), and ρ = 100, we get
s f f,homog.
where H(x) is the Heaviside step function. Evaluating the same energies
(as those in (8)) for the stratified density distribution considered and using
H = 2 and L = 10, we get
PE /g = , APE = PE , RPE = PE , (10)
str. str. str. str. str.
RPE −RPE −η
RPE∗ = str. 0 = < 0. (11)
str. RPE 3(1−η)
These analytical computations show that the RPE of the stratified state is
smaller than that of the homogeneous state. In the next section we will
discuss this issue in more detail.
3.4 A few remarks on the model without the barotropic
assumption.
In this section, we compare the results of the previous sections with some
low-res simulations obtained from the same test case, by using system (4),
i.e. without the assumption of a barotropic fluid. The simulations with
model (4) are more time-consuming and so we performed them only at low-
res(simulationswithfinermeshresolutionareinpreparationandtheirresults
will appear in the forthcoming report [5]).
Thebarotropicassumptionisbasedonthefactthatthethermalandkine-
maticdiffusion(∇·q andT : ∇u)inEq.(4)arenegligible, sothattheentropy
s of the system is constant along streamlines, i.e. (∂ +u·∇)s(x,z,t) = 0
(cf. [11] for the one-phase case and [5] for the multiphase case): This is a
reversibility assumption. Indeed, the background energy can be considered
as a sort of entropy, measuring the potential energy dispersed in the mix-
ing [32]. The fact that the transformation is reversible allows the background
energy to decrease. On the contrary, if we remove this assumption, coming
back to the full multiphase model (4) (including the energy equation), we
find that the background energy becomes monotone, see Fig. 7. This fig-
ure suggests that the barotropic assumption may be not completely justified
during the initial time-interval needed to adjust from the homogeneous to
the stratified condition (probably this transformation can not be considered
fully iso-entropic). Nevertheless, the barotropic assumption seems justified
after the time T .
Moreover,thestratifiedinitialconditionmakesthesimulationmorestable
and accurate, but also less diffusive, even at low-res. The RPE* is mono-
tonically increasing when using model (4) (low-res irreversible) and, starting
with the stratified initial condition, decreases the mixing and brings it closer
to that of the DNS.
Note that the low-res DNS* irreversible with homogeneous initial data
and the ultra-res DNS start from the same datum. Even if the low-res DNS*
is under-resolved, the behavior of the RPE* is correct and it is monotoni-
cally increasing. The behavior, at the beginning of the evolution, is closer
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
ultra-res DNS
low-res DNS*
low-res DNS* irreversible initially homogeneous
low-res DNS* irreversible initially stratified
Figure 7: Plot of RPE* obtained by using model (4). Low res DNS* compared
with the ultra-res DNS and the low-res DNS*. The line with “··(cid:3)··” represents
RPE*startingfromtheinitialcondition(9), whilethelinewith“--∗--”represents
the same quantity starting from the homogeneous initial state. The solid line and
the line with “- -×- -” are the RPE* obtained with the barotropic model (5)
with homogeneous initial state, with the ultra-res DNS and the low-res DNS*,
respectively.
to the DNS than the behavior of the LES described in Fig. 6, obtained from
the barotropic model (5). On the other hand, after this transient time the
behavior becomes comparable with that of the previous low-res barotropic
simulation (low-res DNS* vs. low-res DNS* irreversible and homogeneous).
The comparison of the results obtained at various resolutions and with dif-
ferent LES models for the barotropic and non-barotropic equations deserves
further investigation and we plan to perform it in the near future.
4 Conclusions
We examined a two-dimensional dam-break problem were the instability is
due to the presence of a dilute suspension of particles in half of the domain.
The Reynolds number based on the typical gravity wave velocity and on the
semi-height of the domain is 4300, the Froude number is 2−1, the Mach num-
ber is 10−2, and the Prandtl number is 1. The particle concentration is 10−3,
and the Stokes number is smaller than 10−3 (fine particles). The importance
of stratification, measured as the density gradient times the domain height
(−∂ ρ /ρ H), is about a few percent (∼ 5%). Even if the problem is quasi-
incompressible and quasi-isothermal, we used a full compressible code, with
a barotropic constitutive law. We employed a homogeneous and orthogonal
mesh with three different grid refinements ranging from 104 to 106 cells. A
posteriori tests confirm that the finer grid can resolve all the scales of the
problem. The code that we used was derived from the OpenFOAM(cid:13)R C++
libraries.
We compared our quasi-isothermal two-phase simulations with the anal-
ogous mono-phase problem, where the mixing occurs between the same fluid
at two different temperatures, as reported in [27]. As we showed in Section 2,
thisispossiblesincethetwophysicalproblemsbecomemathematicallyequiv-
alent in the regimes under study. As expected, we found a good agreement
between the two sets of numerical results. We reported the evolution of the
background (or reference) potential energy (RPE), a scalar quantity measur-
ing the mixing between the two fluids. The main contributions of this report
are the following: We implemented a multiphase Eulerian model (that can
be used in more complex physical situations, with more than two phases, and
also involving chemical reactions between species, as in volcanic eruptions).
We also showed the effectiveness of the numerical results obtained program-
ming with an open-source code. More importantly, we discovered that pecu-
liar effects due to compressibility influence the mixing. In the literature we
found that the mono-phase, incompressible Boussinesq test case has a mono-
tonically increasing RPE. On the other hand, in our numerical experiments
with slightly compressible two-phase flow, we found that the RPE initially
decreases because of the stratification instability, and then it increases mono-
tonically because of the mixing between the particles and the surrounding
fluid. Indeed, even if the flow is quasi-incompressible (Ma = 0.01), it turns
out that stratification effects are not negligible. We reported the preliminary
results in the two-dimensional case. We plan to perform three-dimensional
numerical simulations of the same problem in a future study.