Droplet break-up with negative momentum
Fluid Dynamics Videos
Laurent Tanguy, Dong Liang, Roland Zengerle and Peter Koltay
IMTEK - University of Freiburg,
Georges-Koehler-Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
HSG-IMIT - Institut fr Mikro- und Informationstechnik,
Georges-Koehler-Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
BioFluidix GmbH, Georges-Koehler-Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
March 1, 2022
1 Introduction
The ejection of liquid droplets from a nozzle is highly important field of
fluid dynamics. The Weber number describes the amount of kinetic energY
that is needed to overcome the surface tension and tO create a free-flying
droplet with positive momentum. According to literature Weber numbers
above 12 [1] assure the creation and the safe break up of liquid droplets.
However, even when Weber numbers decrease below 8, it is still possible to
observedropletbreak-upsometimeswithparticulareffects. Wepresenthere
fluid dynamics videos for droplet break-up at low Weber numbers where the
supplied energy is smaller than the surface energy of the generated droplet,
resulting in a negative momentum of the droplet. This situation is there
characterized by the droplet formation, break-up from the nozzle and then
return of the droplet back into the nozzle. The inverted droplet momentum
isduetothefactthatduringthedropletformationthesurfacetensionbegins
to slow down the flow velocity inside the droplet and finally inverts the flow
direction and the average momentzum of the droplet, while the droplet tail
still breaks off from the nozzle due to necking an a local positiv flow at the
tail of the droplet. Thus after the break-up finallky occures the average
droplet momentum is already oriented toward the nozzle. It is therefore
possible to observe the droplet returning into the nozzle.
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v8704.0121:viXra
2 Materials and set-up
In order to experimentally observe this rare phenomenon, we used a PipeJet
P9 dispenser from BioFluidix, GmbH [2]. This dispenser is based on a piezo
stack actuated piston providing a precisely controlled displacement to a 500
micrometer wide liquid filled polyimide tube with open end (nozzle). The
fluid inside the tube is pushed out of the nozzle by direct displacement, cre-
ating droplets with adjustable volume between 15 and 60 nl, provided the
kinetic energy - controlled by the displacement velocity - is high enough to
overcome surface tension. While the droplet velocity is controlled by the
displacement velocity, the volume of the droplets can be adjusted by the
magnitude of the displacement. In order to observe droplet break-up with
negative momentum, one starts with a regular droplet ejection at an arbi-
trary setting of displacement and velocity that leads to stable droplet pro-
duction. Then the velocity of the piston is incrementally reduced by small
steps. Thus, the kinetic energy transmitted to the droplet can be carefully
controlled, while the droplet mass remains approximately constant. When
the total supplied kintetik energy is dropping slightly below the surface en-
ergy of the droplet, still a droplet break-up can occure. However, in this
casethetotaldropletmomentumhastobecomenegativetomaintainenergy
conservation.
A high-speed camera was used to record the droplet formations, breaks-up
and free flights under several experimental conditions. The framerate was
10602 fps for each experiment. The results of the experiments can be seen
in the linked videos where droplets of different volumes (i.e. different piston
displacement) were created first with positive momentum, then with nega-
tive momentum where they can be seen returning back into the nozzel, and
finally no droplet break-up when the piston velocity is still further reduced.
For each droplet volume the displacement velocity has to be precisely ad-
justed, as the phenomenon only occurs only for a narrow range of velocities.
Thevideoshowsthatdrop-on-demanddropletbreak-upcanalsobeachieved
atWebernumbersbelow8(consideringthenozzlediameterascharacteristic
dimension). This conditions is characterized by the fact that the kinetic en-
ergy alone is not sufficient to separate the droplet from the bulk fluid. The
protruding liquid jet reaches a state where its kinetic energy falls to zero
and the velocity of the jet head begins to revert towards the nozzle direction
due to the surface tension slowing down the jet. If surface tension is high
and the droplet tail thin, like in the presented experiments, the droplet tail
can still neck-off to form a temporarily free flying droplet, while the average
droplet momentum is already inverted. Since the total momentum of the
droplet is already inverted at that time, the droplet returns back into the
nozzle and merges with the bulk fluid. This interpretation is supported by
computationalfluiddynamicssimulationsusingtheVolumeofFluidmethod
to model surface tension effects. In 2D-simulations performed with decreas-
ing flow velocities at the nozzle, droplet break-up with negativ momentum
can be observed with the same characteristics like in the experiment. The
velocity field vizualized inside the droplet clearly indicates that the momen-
tum (i.e. flow direction) is already inverted at the time the droplet finally
breaks off. As shown in the videos there is a good qualitative agreement
between the simulation and the experiments.
ThisvideohasbeensubmittedtotheGalleryofFluidMotion2012which
is an annual showcase of fluid dynamics videos.
4 References
1-M.PilchandC.A.Erdman, Use of breakup time data and velocity history
datatopredictthemaximumsizeofstablefragmentsforacceleration-induced
breakup of a liquid drop, International Journal of Multiphase Flow, vol. 13,
6, pp. 741-757, 1987.
2 - W. Streule, T. Lindemann, G. Birkle, R. Zengerle, P. Koltay, PipeJet: A
Simple Disposable Dispenser for the Nano- and Microliter Range, Journal
of the Association for Laboratory Automation, vol. 9, pp. 300-306, 2004.