]NM.oib-q[
1v3410.6011:viXra
Dynamic modeling of gene expression in
prokaryotes: application to glucose-lactose
Escherichia coli
diauxie in
Jaroslav Albert, Marianne Rooman
BioSystems, BioModeling and BioProcesses,
Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles, CP165/61,
av. Roosevelt 50, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium
Coexpression of genes or, more generally, similarity in the expression
profiles poses an unsurmountable obstacle to inferring the gene regula-
tory network (GRN) based solely on data from DNA microarray time
series. Clustering of genes with similar expression profiles allows for a
course-grained view of theGRN and a probabilistic determination of the
connectivity among the clusters. We present a model for the temporal
evolution of a gene cluster network which takesinto account interactions
ofgeneproductswithgenesand,throughanon-constantdegradationrate,
with other gene products. The number of model parameters is reduced
by using polynomial functions to interpolate temporal data points. In
this manner, the task of parameter estimation is reduced to a system of
linear algebraic equations, thusmaking the computation time shorter by
ordersofmagnitude. Toeliminateirrelevantnetworks,wetesteachGRN
forstabilitywithrespecttoparametervariations,andimposerestrictions
on its behavior near the steady state. We apply our model and methods
toDNAmicroarray timeseries’ datacollected onEscherichia coli during
glucose-lactose diauxie and infer the most probable cluster network for
different phases of theexperiment.
Keywords: Gene regulatory networks, DNA microarray, gene product
degradation, gene clustering, optimization, dynamic robustness
1 Introduction
Theinformationencodedinthegenomeoflivingorganismshaspresentedanew
level of complexity that continues to challenge the mind. Both theoretical and
experimental studies have proven to be very difficult mainly due to the large
dimension of the system of interacting genes. Even the simplest of prokaryotic
cellscontainsome4000genesofwhichasignificantfractionparticipatesdirectly
or indirectly in regulating (enhancing or inhibiting) the expression of one an-
other. Despitethesedauntingobstacles,progressinunravelingGeneRegulatory
Networks(GRN)hasbeenmade mainlydue tonew experimentalmethods that
allow for more detailed studies of the intricate mechanisms within the living
cells.
In particular, owing to the development of DNA microarrays techniques, it
hasbecomepossibletoprobethebehaviorofthousandsofgenessimultaneously
overacertaincourseoftime. Theadvantageofrecordingthetemporalevolution
of the genome (or at least a large part of it) as compared to having the same
information on only a handful of genes is obviously quite important and has
led to the onset of new types of studies, e. g. see [1] and [2]. The challenge
of inferring the GRN however still persists due to the abovementioned problem
of large dimensionality, but also because of (still) partial and noisy data. This
makes improvements in both theory and experiment equally important.
The difficulty ofdealing witha largenumber ofgeneshas forcedone to pro-
ceedtovarioussimplificationsoftheGRNproblem. Inmanystudiesresearchers
havemadeuseofsimplemodelsforthegene-geneproduct(GP)interactionsin-
cluding BooleanandBaysiannetworks[3], and linear coupled differential equa-
tions as in the works by [4], [5] and [6]. Although simple models are attractive,
especially when dealing with a large number of genes, they often suffer from
lack of physical relevance. The biochemical interactions on the molecular level
are known to be more complicated than most simple models can account for.
Nevertheless, the correlations between genes that many simple models predict
can provide a course-grained view of the GRN. Another popular trend in sim-
plifying the GRN problem is to focus on a subset of genes that are known to
regulate each other under the assumption that no other gene has a regulatory
influence on this sub-network. This type of approximationmakes more compli-
cated models, i.e. non-linear models, feasible as was shown in [7] and [8].
An additional difficulty is related to the fact that many genes are coex-
pressed and exhibit thus basically the same expression profiles, and that even
non-coexpressed genes may have similar profiles under certain circumstances
and/or during a certain time span. As a consequence one cannot obtain the
informationabout the correlationsamong all genes from DNA microarraydata
alone, regardless of the quality or complexity of the model at hand. This issue
can be partly resolved by grouping genes with similar expression profiles into
clusters, which allows one to shift focus from individual genes to the study of
how clusters influence each other. Consequently, the dimension of the problem
is reduced to the number of clusters, which in many cases is much less than a
hundred. Suchadrasticreductionindimensionalityalsoopensthedoortomore
complicated (and hence more accurate) models, and can reveal a more realistic
course-grained picture of the GRN. The last difficulty we address here is the
multitude ofpossible GRNs thatgeneratethe samegene (orcluster)expression
profile. This is sometimes referred to as gene elasticity [9].
In this paper we attempt to further the methods of identifying the con-
nections among gene clusters on the basis of DNA microarray time series and
proposecriteriathat eliminate many possible solutions forthe gene cluster net-
work. The system under consideration consists of E. coli bacteria in a glucose-
lactose environment. The GRN model we design takes into account gene-GP
and GP-GP interactions that are derived from physical arguments. Our work
is a further step towards reliably predicting cluster gene networks on the basis
of DNA microarraytime series.
The paperis structuredasfollows. Insectiononewegiveabriefdescription
of the known regulatory mechanisms in prokaryotic cells and derive a phys-
ical model that describes them. We then adapt this model to be suited for
cluster-cluster interactions. In section two we discuss the procedure of param-
eter identification and parameter reduction. The application of our model to
E. coli during glucose-lactose diauxie is covered in section three where we also
discuss the criteria for GRN selection. In the last section, we summarize our
results and discuss possible issues as well as outlooks for further studies in this
field.
2 Modeling the biochemical processes
The living cell is like a smallfactory whose products (GPs), i.e. RNA and pro-
teins, sustain it, allow it to divide, and eventerminate its life. The cell absorbs
variouschemicalsfromtheenvironmentandusesthemformanypurposes. Some
ofthemserveasfueltodriveitsinternalmachinery,othersareusedforintra-cell
orcell-to-cellsignalpropagationandmanyotheressentialfunctions. Genesand
their promotersequencesactaspieces ofsoftwarethatholdthe instructions for
synthesizing RNA molecules, some of which, i.e. the (messenger) mRNAs, are
then translated into proteins; all RNAs and proteins are collectively referredto
as GPs and we will make no distinction between them in what follows.
The GPs that bind to regulatory promoter sites and hence regulate the
transcription of genes (direct regulation) are called transcription factors (TF).
Other GPs which are not TFs themselves but bind to TFs can also influence
gene regulation (indirect regulation). In fact, virtually all GPs can play a role,
either directly or indirectly, in the regulationof gene expression. Depending on
the external environment some genes may be highly active (expressed) while
others can have low output or even be completely off. Which gene is expressed
and when depends on the abundance of specific GPs and their affinity to bind
the gene’s regulatory sites or other GPs. Since gene regulation is much more
complicated in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes(see e.g. [10]) we concentrate on
the latter. Hence, the rest of this article deals exclusively with prokaryotes.
2.1 A model of prokaryotic gene regulation
In figure 1. we show a toy model of three genes that mutually interact through
their GPs. The arrowsindicate the gene-GPandGP-GP interactionpathways.
Because of thermodynamic instabilities, degradation by enzymes, transport to
othercellcompartments,andeffectsofdilutionuponcellgrowth,GPsinevitably
degrade or loose activity in some characteristic time. Depending on this time
Figure 1: A GRN of three genes showing the regulatory pathways. The cir-
cle, square, and pentagon represent the GPs synthesized by genes 1, 2, and 3,
respectively (from left to right), and the broken circle, square, and pentagon
represent degraded GPs. The + and signs correspond to activation and re-
pressionrespectively. ThethirdgenesynthesizesaGPthatisnotaTFasitdoes
not directly regulate any of the other two genes. Also shown is the interaction
among the different GPs.
GPs can have either long or short lasting influence on genes. In what follows
we present a mathematical description of how the GPs influence a gene’s tran-
scription rate.
We begin by assuming that time delays between the production of GPs and
their influence on a gene are negligible compared to the times over which the
concentrationlevelschangesignificantly. Thisassumptionissupportedbycom-
paring the typical diffusion and transcription rates, and amounts to neglecting
the effects of translational regulation and any distinction between RNA and
proteins.
ThemostgeneralsetofdifferentialequationsdescribingasystemofM genes
under constant environment has the form
where i=1,...,M. R
), X=(X1,...,X
influencefunction,theconcentrationvectorofGPsandthesetofallparameters
pertaining to gene i, respectively. The influence function consists of two terms:
i i i i i i
f (X,C )>0, g (X,C )<0. (3)
The first term in Eq. (2) depends on the abilities of various GPs to bind a
promoterofgenei,i. e. thebindingaffinities,andontheefficiencyofrecruiting
the RNA-polymerase, while the second term gives the rate of GP degradation.
To understand the structure of f , let us first look at a simple example of two
TF’s competing for the same promoter. Suppose that the transcription of gene
i is enhancedby twoactivators1 and 2. The probabilitythat say1 willbind to
the promoter is (see [11])
A i 1+A i1X1+A i2X2
with X1 and X2 being the concentrations of GP 1 and 2. The index A stands
for activation. The parameters A i1 and A i2 are proportional to the frequencies
of collisions between the gene’s promoter and the GPs 1 and 2, and to their
binding affinities. The term 1 in the denominator indicates that the promoter
may be unoccupied, and the term A i2X2 comes from the fact that the GPs 1
and 2 compete for the same promoter. Indeed, if the concentration of GP 2
becomes very large, the probability for GP 1 to bind the promoter becomes
low. On the other hand, if the converse were to occur this probability would
approachone.
For a transcription to occur the part of the promoter which admits only
activators must be occupied while the part that admits repressors must be
unoccupied. The probability for such a scenario is given by the probability
that an activator is bound to the promoter multiplied by the probability that
the converseis true for a repressor. The probability for gene i to havea certain
rate of transcription is then
i i A i S i
where Γ =(A ,S ), Aj 0, Sj 0,
i i i i ≥ i ≥
P (X,A )= i j (6)
P (X,S )= i j . (7)
The repeated index j sums over all the GPs which influence gene i: AjX =
A X . The total probability for gene i to be occupied by any activator is
i i (1+AjX )(1+SjX )
Notethatinderivingthisequationwemadetheassumptionthattheexpression
of a gene may be activated or repressed by a single GP, and does not require
complexesofGPsorcascadesofinteractingGPs. Themotivationforthischoice
is that most genes in prokaryotes are regulated by forming DNA-protein com-
plexes involving single proteins.
Since X is a stochastic variable we have to average the transcription rate
over an ensemble of many cells under the same external conditions:
The parameter r is the maximum transcription rate corresponding to the sat-
uration point at AjX and is taken to be independent of the particular
combination of GPs that bind to gene i. Note that by averaging over an en-
semble, the stochastic variables of the system become determininstic. For that
purposewefirstwriteinEq. (9)X =x +η wherex istheaverageexpression
of gene i over an ensemble of identical cells and η is a Gaussian noise function
of the same gene. We then expand with respect to η:
i i i i i i i j
∂x h i h i
(cid:20) j (cid:21)
Since η =0foraGaussianfunction,the firstorderapproximationofthe rate
function f in Eq. (10) yields
i i i i i i (1+Ajx )(1+Sjx )
Various environmental conditions within the cell can cause the GPs to de-
grade, or loose their activity, after some characteristic time τ [12]. Since the
abilityofaGPto influenceagenedepends onhowlongitremainsactive,those
GPs with a long τ are more likely to bind a gene’s promoter. The converse
is true for GPs with short τ . We hypothesize that GPs mutually interact to
either prolong (e.g. through stabilizing complexes) or shorten (e.g. through
degradationby proteases) their τ in order to provide another channel for gene
control. The nature of GP-GP interaction is too complicated for our purposes
here and will not be treated on the molecular level. Instead we want to write
down a course-grained expression that corresponds to the behavior expected
from the arguments just outlined. In particular,we expect that overabundance
of any one GP would saturate its influence on other GPs. On the basis of this
assumption, we define a general X-dependent degradation rate k of the form:
1 k (X,ℓ )= K i ++K i −eK i jXj , (12)
τ i ≡ i i 1+eK i jXj
where ℓ =(K+,K−,K ), K± 0, <Kj < , and τ is the characteristic
time ass i ociate i d wi i th G i P i. i T ≥ he tw − o ∞ param i eter ∞ s K+ an i d K− symbolize the
maximumandminimumdegradationraterespectively. ThematrixelementsKj
givetheinfluenceofGPj onGPi. NoticethatwhenKjX islargeandpositive,
k (X,ℓ ) approachesK− whichcorrespondsto the longestτ forGP iwhile the
opposite limit yields K+ - the shortest τ . The sign of each matrix element
Kj determines whether GP j has a stabilizing (a plus sign) or destabilizing (a
minus sign) influence on GP i. As before, Eq. (12) must be averaged over the
ensemble of cells. The degradation term g of Eq. (2) can now be written as
Making the same substitution as before, X = x +η , and expanding to the
second order on η leads, after ensemble averaging, to the following first order
approximation:
g (x,ℓ )= K i ++K i −eK i jxj x (14)
i i − 1+eK
Combining Eqs. (11) and (14), the influence function in Eq. (1) becomes
i i i i i i i i
= r Aj i x j K i ++K i −eK i jxj x . (15)
2.2 A model of gene cluster regulation
Giventhatgeneswithsimilarexpressionprofilescannotbedifferentiatedonthe
basisofdatafrommicroarraytimeseries,weareledtogroupgenesintoclusters
accordingtothesimilarityoftheirprofiles. Thiscompelsustorewriteourmodel
in terms of gene clusters and treat the deviations in concentration levels from
the cluster averageas external perturbations. Let us write x =X¯ +ξ , where
ξ isthedeviationofgeneifromtheaverageconcentrationX¯ ofclusterq. This
transforms all terms of the form Ajx into ApX¯ +Ajξ , where Ap = Aj is
i j i p i j i j i
the sum over all genes in cluster p denoted N , and the sum over p goes over
all clusters N . Inserting this into Eq. (1), expanding the right hand side up
to first order on ξ, and averaging over cluster q and over the ensemble of cells
where X¯ =(X¯ 1,...X¯
q i j i i i
q i=1(cid:20)j=1(cid:18) j j(cid:19) (cid:21)
In what follows, we only consider the zeroth order approximation: δ =0.
To complete our journey from genes to clusters we must reformulate the
functions under the summation in Eqs. (18), (19). The concentration levels
X¯ already represent the cluster average, but the parameters r , Ap, Sp, K+,
K−, and Kp need to be replaced with some effective parameters ρ , αp, βp,
κ+, κ−, and κp, respectively. Even though doing this alters the local behav-
ior of the multivariable functions defined in Eqs. (18) and (19), their general
behavior will remain the same given an appropriate set of effective parameters.
In other words, if one takes several functions that follow a certain behavior,
i.e. startinglinearlynearzeroandsaturatingforlargevalues,theiraveragewill
produce a function with the same behavior. A downside to this reformulation
is a loss of oversight of the connection between the original set of parameters
(r ,Ap,Sp,K+,K−,Kp) and the effective set a (ρ ,αp,βp,κ+,κ−,κp). The
q q q q q q ≡ q q q q q q
above reasoning thus yields the following model:
q 1+eκp qX¯
This model contains a largenumber ofparameters comparedto the number
ofdata points, whichraisesthe issue ofoverfitting. In the following sectionswe
address this problem and demonstrate how a lower bound on the total number
of parameters necessary to fit the data can be determined through parameter
reduction.
3 Parameter identification
Having formulated a dynamical model of the cluster network we move on to
identifying the unknown parameters a. A standard practice is to define a dis-
tance function
√N t N c " q=1t=1(cid:20) dt − (cid:21) #
where N is the number oftime points providedby the data, andN represents
the numberofclusters. Inordertoestimatethe derivativesdX¯ (t)/dt onemust
chooseaninterpolatingfunctionfittingthedatapoints(discussedfurtherinthe
next section). The function ϕ (X¯,a) defines the model; it is given by eq. (17).
Minimizing d(a) with respect to all the parameter sets a gives the model that
fits the data the best.
The minimization problem depends heavily on the total number of param-
eters to be optimized and so, reducing the number of parameters is a valuable
endeavor. Wecanstartbynoticingthatiftheparametersetsa foreachcluster
q are independent of each other one can minimize the parameter function
√N t " t=1(cid:20) dt − (cid:21) #
with respect to the parameters a for each cluster separately. In this manner,
the problem is reduced from optimizing 3N (N +1) parameters in one step to
optimizing 3(N +1) parameters N times.
3.1 Parameter reduction
We now present a useful method for reducing the number of parameters of
specific types of models, namely those of the form ϕ (X¯,ωpX¯ ,ν ), where at
leastsomeofthe parameters,i. e. ωps,rangefrom to+ . The remaining
parameters, ν , are positive.
Thetemporalprofileofeachclusterconsistsofdiscretetimepoints. Inorder
to determine the functions dX¯ /dt one must interpolate the data points with a
smooth continuous curve. We chose for that purpose polynomial functions of
order w:
X¯ = c tn. (25)
Inserting Eq. (25) into ϕ (X¯,ωpX¯ ,ν ) gives
q q p q q qn q pn q
where we again sum over repeated indices. We can now define the new matrix
element B =ωpc which allows us to rewrite Eq. (24) as
d (B ,ν )=
c ntn−1 ϕ (c tn,B tn,ν ) 2 . (27)
qn q qn qn q
√N t " t=1 − #
X(cid:2) (cid:3)
The number of parameters to be determined for each cluster now equals w+1
plus the number of elements in the set ν . This simple procedure reduces the
number of parameters and provides a degree of control when interpolating the
data points. For instance, one may want to use low order polynomials at the
expense of good data fit in order to reduce the number of parameters and thus
avoid the problem of overfitting.
After determining the new parameters B by minimizing Eq. (27) we can
solve for the original matrix elements ωp. Notice however, that if w is less
than the dimension of matrix ωp we end up with many different solutions for
the parameter set (ωi0,...,ωiw) depending on what integers we assign to the
indices i0...i
. For instance, if w = 4 then we may solve for the parameter
sets (ω1,ω3,ω7,ω8,ω9) or(ω2,ω5,ω6,ω10,ω12), and so on. Regardlessofwhich
q q q q q q q q q q
parameter set we chose to solve for, the fit initially determined by minimizing
d will be the same. The number of parameter sets, and thus the number of
solutionsforeachcluster,isN !/[(w+1)!(N w 1)]!. Hencethetotalnumber
of ways the clusters can be connected to give the same value of d is [N !/[(w+
w 1)!]]Nc.
The advantage of this method is twofold: firstly, it allows one to obtain all
solutionsfortheparametersωp whichyieldthesamevalueofd;andsecondly,to
obtainthesesolutions,oneonlyhastosolveasetoflinearalgebraicequationsfor
each set (ωi0,...,ωiw), thus significantly reducing the computation time. In the
next section we will discuss criteria for selecting solutions most likely adopted
by nature.
4 Modeling the glucose-lactose diauxie in E. coli
We chose to model the gene expression profile of E. coli during glucose-lactose
diauxie. The DNA microarray data was collected by Traxler et al [13]. The
diauxie experiment is designed to observe the response of an organism to envi-
ronmental stress, i.e. starvation. In the case at hand, the E. coli colony was
exposed to a mixture of two sugars, glucose and lactose. The initial reaction
of the colony was to feed exclusively on glucose while steadily growing in size.
Once glucose was exhausted the growth came to a halt for a certain amount of
timeafterwhichitwasresumedduetotheonsetoflactoseconsumption. While
the exactmechanism ofthis metabolic switch is notknown it has been hypoth-
esized that the gene network of the organism becomes rewired in response to
the changing environment (decrease in glucose) in order to survive. We want
to model this metabolic transition and study how the cluster network changes
with the varying conditions of the environment.
The model we presented in the earlier section does not include any explicit
time dependence due to environmentalchanges. We introduce this feature into
our model according to the following observations and the conceptual model
of glucose-lactose diauxie presented in [13]. The growth arrest happens very
abruptlyandthereforeshouldnotbe linearlyproportionalto the depletionrate
ofthe glucose. Rather,the sudden dropin the growthrate shouldbe the result
oftheglucoselevelcrossingacertainthresholdbelowwhichanewGRNbecomes
active. TheprimaryfunctionofthenewGRNshouldbetorapidlydecreasecell
growth while continuing to feed on glucose. During the time of growth arrest
(mixedphase)the systemmakesasmoothcrossoverfromthe glucosetolactose
phaseinwhichthe cellgrowthis resumedagain. The systemthusends up with
the GRN that is most suited for the consumption of lactose and cell growth.
The processes just described can be represented in symbols as
where g and l stand for glucose and lactose, respectively. The glucose and
lactosephasesare describedby the models ϕg andϕl, respectively,whereasthe
mixed phase is a superposition of two models defined by ϕ
2gl.
functions allowing for these transitions are taken to have sigmoidal shapes:
hgl(t,n )= ,
Heretheexponentsm andm arepositivenumbersthatdeterminehowabruptly
the system transits fromthe glucoseto the mixed phase andfrom the mixed to
the lactose phase, respectively. The constants τ and τ give the points in time
oftherespectivetransitions. Inthemixedphase,thesystemmakesatransition
from one network to another characterized by the exponent n and the time
constant τ which we consider to be half way through the mixed phase. The
functions in Eq. (29) can be thought of as average fractions of cells with a
particular GRN. Although they have not been derived from experimental ob-
servation,usingsigmoidalfunctionsisastandardpracticeinstudyingbiological
transitions.
4.1 Data analysis and gene clustering
Until this point we have been considering protein concentration levels as the
quantity that is available from experimental data. However,the DNA microar-
ray experiments detect the presence of mRNA molecules - the precursors of
proteins. The pathwayfrom mRNA to proteins occurs very quickly in prokary-
otes and so, the concentrations of these two quantities have an approximately
linear relationship [14] [2]. Hence the data on the levels of mRNA can be iden-
tified with data on protein levels.
The DNA microarray experiments as they are currently performed do not
measure the absolute mRNA concentration directly. What they measure is
the intensity of light emitted by the mRNAs after they are illuminated by a
laser. The intensity I is approximately proportional to the absolute mRNA
concentration X. The actual relationship between I and X follows a sigmoidal
curveofthe formI =aX/(1+bX)wherea andb areprobe specific parameters
[15]. ForsimplicityweassumethatthelinearapproximationI =aX issufficient
for our purposes. The DNA microarraydata are usually presented in the form
with I0i being some constant background intensity or the intensity at a given
time point in a well-defined environment. The index i refers to a particular
gene. Solving this expression for X gives
eZi ln2. (31)
As we discussed earlier, a standard practice in microarray data analysis
is gene clustering, to cope with the indistinguishability of groups of gene pro-
files. AlthoughinprincipleonemaychoosetoclusterthemRNAconcentrations
/I0i ,itismorerelevanttoclustertheZ
’s. Themainreasonforthisisthat
the standarddeviation of mRNA concentrations measuredby DNA microarray
techniques,due to noise andsystematicexperimentalerrors,hasbeen shownto
grow linearly with the expression level when this level exceeds some threshold.
Takingthelogarithmmakestheseerrorsadditiveratherthanmultiplicative[16].
The clustering is thus less sensitive to the large errors on large concentrations
when applied to the logarithms of the concentrations, and thus to the Z ’s.
Thegenesareclusteredonthebasisofthesimilarityoftheirtemporalexpres-
sionprofiles. Weuseforthatpurposeanordinarytree-likeclusteringalgorithm,
which starts by considering each gene as forming a class on its own and then
groups classes two by two. In each step, the two classes are merged for which
the averagedistance betweenallpairsofgeneprofiles, Z (t) andZ (t), takenin
either ofthe twoclasses,is minimum. The distancebetween the gene profilesis
defined as
" N t t=1 − #
The procedure stops when the average distance < D > in the newly created
classexceedsacertainthreshold. Wechosethisthresholdtobe0.45whichleads
to 12 clusters, each represented by the average profile Z¯ (t). This clustering
methodcouldbemodifiedbye. g. addingashiftorintroducingascalingfactor
inthedistancefunctionD ,however,forourpurposesthesimplestonesuffices.
One could also choose different thresholds, but we limited ourselves here to a
threshold giving a sufficiently low number of clusters while keeping the profiles
in each cluster reasonably similar.
The variation of each profile around the mean is defined as Z = Z¯ +z .
Making an expansion on z , Eq. (31) then becomes
X i =eZ¯ q ln2(1+z ln2). (33)
Insertingthisexpressionintoourmodel,Eq. (16),simplyredefinesallmodelpa-
rametersasC
ew andthedeviationfunctionasξ
ln2.
The DNA microarray data is inflicted with random noise which makes the
temporal evolution of concentration levels seem more disjunct than it actually
is. In order to alleviate this problem we apply a simple filtering procedure to
eachcluster. We define the cluster averageas a linear combinationof Z¯ (t ) at
the nthtime pointandthe twoneighboringpoints n 1andn+1. Insymbols:
While other filtering methods exist, this one is the simplest and has been suc-
cessfully used before [4].
4.2 Criteria for network selection
We used the global minimization algorithms on Mathematica to minimize the
distance functions defined in Eq. (24) for each cluster. Since only a few time
points of the data set belong to the glucose phase, our modeling procedure
cannotbereliablyappliedinthistemporalregionwithouttheriskofoverfitting.
Forthis reason,webeginouranalysiswiththe glucose-lactosetransitionphase,
whichweestimatetostartatthethirdtimepoint,andcontinuewiththelactose
phasepassedthetimepointnumbereightuntilthelast(seventeenth)timepoint.
Hence,the number oftime points ineachrespectivephaseis: Ng =3, Ngl =6,
and Nl =10. These time points span a few hours.
Asmentionedbefore,thenumberofpossiblenetworkswhichgivethesamefit
isverylarge. However,agoodfitdoesnotguaranteethatthetemporalevolution
ofthesystemwillbestablewithrespecttothesmalldeviations∆ (t)=X¯ (t)
Xˆ (t), whereXˆ (t) isthe modeledcurveandX¯ (t)the interpolateddatacurve.
SinceourmodelcontainstermssuchasCpX¯ ,onecanseethatadeviationfrom
theinterpolatedcurveX¯ (t)=Xˆ (t)+∆ (t)willleadtoCpX¯ +Cp∆ . Unless
q q q q p q p
Cp∆ is small it will cause the system to deviate more and more after each
iterationofthe differentialequationsolvingalgorithm. We thereforearguethat
small parameters are likely to lead to greater stability than large parameters.
While we do not give a formal proof here we report that running simulations
with different sets of parameters do support this argument. Although large
parametervaluesmakethe systemunstable,the oppositecannotalwaysbe said
ofsmallparameters. Onceweselectthesolutionsetwiththesmallestparameter
values we must weed out the ones that fit the data points poorly. This can be
done by computing the quantity
" N t N c n=1 | − | #
and keeping the parameter sets which give the lowest Ω.
Another restriction we impose on the possible solutions is that the system
mustsettleinafixedpointaftersomerelaxationtimeintheabsenceofexternal
perturbations. We argue that the fixed point should be of the same order
of magnitude as the average vector X¯ = (1/N ) X¯(t ). We base this
assumption on the observation that even the most abrupt changes during the
diauxie experiment lead to the log intensity levels no larger than Z 2. It is
thereforereasonableto suppose that fixedpoints whichdiffer by morethanone
order of magnitude from X¯ are not biologically meaningful. We quantify this
criterion by defining the scalar quantity
where t was chosen to be three times the difference between the first and the
last time point.
Randommutations in the genes andGPscanbe beneficialto biologicalsys-
tems; however,in many cases they degrade their performance andevenbecome
lethal. Other random variations such as temperature, pH factor, diet change,
etc. can also hinder the phenotype of a biological system. All of these changes
translate into the alteration of some network connections, i.e. parameters αp,
βp, and κp. However, survival of biological systems partly relies on the fact
that their parameters are not rigid but can vary within a certain range (see
Gutenkunst et al [17]). A system whichis robustwith respectto perturbations
ofthenetworkconnectionsisthereforewellsuitedforsurvival(formoredetailed
discussion of robustness, see [18]). We define a parameter robustness function
1 Nt Nc Ns ∂Xˆ (t )
N t N c N s n=1i=1s=1 ∂C s ! 
where the dummy variable s runs over all model parameters N and C stands
for a particular parameter. The partial derivative compares a system with
one of its variables perturbed by a small amount to the unperturbed system.
Those networks which gave the smallest value of µ were preferentially selected
as possible candidates over the others. We should mention that small values of
µ can have two implications. Either the system is very sensitive to only a few
parameter changes, or it is mildly sensitive to many parameter perturbations.
The former wouldimply that certainparametervalues mustbe preservedatall
cost in order for the system to function properly, while the latter necessitates
that a large alteration in one, or several, of the parameters must occur for a
significantphenotypicchange. Irrespectiveofwhichoneofthesescenariostakes
place, a system with the lowest µ is said to be most robust.
5 Results and Discussion
The abundance of the information obtained from DNA microarraysscales with
the number of time points. Given the scarcity of data points in the glucose
phase and the fact that the concentration levels are nearly constant (probably
becausethe systemhasreachedasteadystateorfixedpoint),wecannotobtain
reliableinformationaboutthe genenetworkinthis temporalregion. Therefore,
westartatthethirdtimepointwhichmarksthebeginningofthegrowtharrest.
The last three points approachanother plateau due to depletion of the lactose.
Since we do not introduce this feature to our model we stop at the fourteenth
point.
Following the procedures of parameter reduction and parameter identifica-
tiondetailedintheprecedingsectionswefoundthatthemixedphaserequiresa
polynomialof order eight to have a good interpolationbetween the data points
(see Eq. (25)). In the lactose phase the interpolating polynomial turned out to
be of order four. The global optimization algorithms give less reliable results
as the number of parameters grows. For this reason, we separated the problem
into two parts. First, we consideredEq. (22)to be independent ofthe κp’s, i.e.
K (X¯)=κ++κ−, which leavesEq. (21) as the source of transcriptioncontrol.
We then minimized the distance function Eq. (24) with respect to ρ , κ±, αp
and βp, and recorded how well it fitted the data. Second, we set Eq. (21) to a
constant, i.e. F (X¯)=ρ , and optimized the distance function d with respect
to ρ , κ±, and the B ’s.
The applicationof this approachto the lactose phase showedthat imposing
the latter assumption (F (X¯) = constant) allowed us to fit the data orders
of magnitude better than when imposing the former assumption (K (X¯) =
1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
0 5 10 15 20 25
Figure 2: Temporal expression profile of cluster 9. The vertical axis is propor-
tionaltotheabsoluteconcentrationlevelsX¯,whilethehorizontalaxisrepresents
the time in hours. The dots and the solidline representthe data points filtered
accordingto Eq. (34) andthe modeledcurve,respectively. The transitionfrom
mixed to lactose phase occurs at time 2.4 hours. a) Temporal evolution dur-
ing the diauxie. b) Extrapolation of the expression profile well outside of the
experimental data showing the expression level approaching a fixed point.
constant) for clusters 1 through 10. For clusters 11 and 12 we had to include
allparameterscontainedinourmodelandfoundthatthe onlynonzeroβp’sare
those with the index p having values p =4,8,12 and p= 11 for cluster 11 and
12 respectively.
Applicationoftheprocedurejustoutlinedtothemixedphaseyieldedsimilar
results,namely,thatkeepingF (X¯),ratherthanK (X¯),constantforallclusters
gives a much better fit of the data. However,in the mixed phase, minimization
with respect to the parameters B of Eq. (27) yielded κp’s that were very
large. Duetothiscomplicationweresortedtotheconventionalwayofparameter
identification,Eq. (24),andoptimizedd withrespecttotheoriginalparameters
κp’s. The latter gave good results while keeping the κp’s small.
These results suggestthat the effects ofGP-GP interaction,as describedby
the secondterm of Eq. (21), are absolutely necessary in gene regulation during
the glucose-lactose diauxie. They also imply that the rate of transcription,
corresponding to the first term of Eq. (21), is relatively constant indicating
that the GPs which participate in gene activation are abundant while the ones
that inhibit transcription are low in concentration. Another observation one
can make is that the GRN is completely connected in the mixed phase and
becomes more sparse in the lactose phase. This means that in the mixed phase
there is no room for different parameter sets - only one network accomplishes
the temporal profiles given by the data.
Incontrast,thenumberofpossibleparametersetsinthelactosephaseisvery
large. In order to pick out the most probable network in the lactose phase we
employedthe networkselectioncriteriadescribedintheprevioussection. First,
we selectedfor eachcluster the five parametersets with the smallest parameter
values and then ran simulations for 350 randomly chosen combinations among
the clusters (refer to section 3A). For each combination we computed the three
quantities Ω, χ and µ (Eqs. (35), (36), (37)), which monitor the goodness of
fit,the approachtoafixedpointandtherobustness,respectively. Weendedup
with only 10 combinations that yielded small values for all three criteria. Note
that the fixed point criterion χ showed a discontinuity in the possible values it
could take centering around the numbers 1 or 15. Figure 4 shows a three
dimensional plot representing Ω, χ, and µ. One can see that the concentration
ofpointsnearesttozeroisrelativelylow. Theisolatedgroupof10pointswithin
the circle comprises the best candidates for the GRN in the lactose phase. For
a particular GRN in the lactose phase, we exhibit in Figs 3 a and 3 b the data
fit of cluster 9 between the time points 1 and 14, and the extrapolated curve
showingthe fixedpoint,respectively. Fortemporalprofilesofthe otherclusters
refer to Fig 1. and Fig 2. of the supplementary material.
Although the “true“ GRN cannot be determined with certainty, one can
hope to at least identify the connections that are indispensable. By comparing
differentpossible GRNs wecanassignmoreimportanceto the connectionsthat
appear most often. We define the averageconnectivity:
where M = 10 is the number of GRNs considered and κp is the connection
between clusters p and q (see Eq. (22)) given by the nth GRN. The associated
standard deviation is given by:
qp " M h qi− nq #
betweenclusters q andp. If a connection κp has a largevalue its contribution
togeneregulationissignificant. However,ifσ isalsolarge,i.e. σ κp ,the
qp qp ∼h qi
certaintyofthisconnection’svalueislowandonecannotconsideritssignificance
withconfidence. Anotherimportantcommonfactoristheuniformityofthesign
foreachconnection. Ifaconnectionhasapositivesigninonesolution,itshould
have the same sign in all the other solutions.
Figure 3: Plot of Ω, χ, and µ. The points within the circle correspond to the
best candidates for the ”true“ GRN.
Tohaveanobjectivemeasureofhowimportantaconnectionis,onthebasis
ofitsstrength,standarddeviationandsign,wedefineasignificancefactorwhich
ranges from 0 to 1:
where κ is the value of the largest average connection and N is the
number of times a connection changes sign. In figure 4 we showed the gene
networkinthe lactosephase,withonlythe significantconnectionsindicated, as
defined by S 0.1.
5.1 Concluding remarks and outlook
WehavepresentedadetailedanalysisoftheproblemofGRNinferencethrough
the designofamodelwhichcapturesthe biochemicaleffects betweengenesand
GPs as well as the interaction among the GPs themselves. We hypothesized
that the most important role of the GP-GP interaction is to vary (increase or
decrease) the characteristic time during which a GP can perform its function.
The agreement between data and simulation based on our model suggests that
the role of the interaction among GPs is essential in GRNs. To our surprise,
the regulation of genes by direct binding of GPs to the genes’ promoters, as
describedbyEq. (11),amountedtoaconstantindependentoftimeinallexcept
two clusters, 11 and 12, in the lactose phase. Although one may be tempted
to conclude from this result that the transcription rates of nearly all genes are
constant in both phases, leaving the non-constant degradation rate in charge
of the gene regulation, it should be kept in mind that Eqs (21) and (22) deal
with gene clusters, not individual genes. The transcription rates of all genes in
a particular cluster may exhibit temporal variations while yielding a constant
valuewhenaveragedoverthecluster. Therefore,ourresultsmustbeinterpreted
Figure 4: A plausible gene cluster network in the lactose phase based on our
criteria. The full lines correspondto the κp’s ofEq. (22) while the dashedlines
represent the αps and βps in Eq. (21).
in the context of cluster network and cannot be directly compared to data on
networks containing individual genes.
The cluster network in the lactose phase is very sparse compared to that in
the mixed phase. Previous works on the dynamic robustness of GRNs suggests
thatbiologicalnetworkswithlowconnectivityarebettersuitedforsurvivalthan
more densely connected networks [19]. Our results suggest that under external
stress,e.g. starvation,theGRNofE. coli becomeshighlyconnectedinorderto
adapttothesuboptimalconditions. Thisimpliesthatwhileinthemixedphase,
E. coli is morevulnerabletorandomexternalperturbations,upontransitionto
the lactose phase the robustness with respect to environmentalinsults becomes
restored.
The complete connectivity of the mixed phase can also be taken to mean
that upon depletion of glucose the different cells try different GRNs, each of
whichis possiblysparse[20]. Underthis assumption,the DNAmicroarraydata
would correspond to a superimposition of different GRNs experimented by the
system until it finds the right GRN, which allows it to feed on lactose. More
experimental and theoretical work will be needed to settle this issue.
Acknowledgements We thank E.Bojilova,T.Konopka,andJ.M.Kwasi-
groch for useful discussions. We acknowledge support from the Belgian State
Science Policy Office through an Interuniversity Attraction Poles Programme
(DYSCO), and the Belgian Fund for Scientific Research (FNRS) through a
FRFC project. MR is Research Director at the FNRS.