]MB.oib-q[
1v0262.2080:viXra
SPIN-08/09, ITP-UU-08/09, DCPT/08/09
Dynamics of icosahedral viruses: what does
Viral Tiling Theory teach us?
(Contributiontotheproceedingsofthe‘SecondMathematical VirologyWorkshop’,Edinburgh(6-10August2007)
Kasper Peeters1 and Anne Taormina2
1Institute for Theoretical Physics
Utrecht University
P.O. Box 80195, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands.
2Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Durham
Durham DH1 3LE, U.K.
We presenta top-downapproachto the study of the dynamics oficosahedralvirus cap-
sids, in which each protein is approximated by a point mass. Although this represents a
rather crude coarse-graining, we argue that it highlights several generic features of vibra-
tionalspectrawhichhavebeenoverlookedsofar. We furthermorediscussthe consequences
ofapproximateinversionsymmetry aswellasthe roleplayedby ViralTiling Theoryinthe
study of virus capsid vibrations.
1 Introduction
It has been experimentally observed that viruses can alter their shape to fulfill specific func-
tions. In particular, they may swell during maturation [1–6], twist to release their genetic
material during infection, or morph during assembly. Such large scale conformational changes
are consistent with the widespread hypothesis that viruses do vibrate, and it is therefore of
interest to study their dynamics with the help of mathematical and computational techniques
which have been tried and tested in the context of biomacromolecule vibrations (see [7] for a
review).
Normal mode analysis is one such method [8–11], which has been successfully applied to
the study of proteins and a variety of viruses to date [12–15]. A major challenge is the huge
number of degrees of freedom involved in such systems. Several degrees of coarse-graining, as
well as group theoretical methods (inspired by their successful application to small molecules
and fullerenes [16–18]), have been implemented in computer simulations in order to extract in-
formation on the low-frequency modes of vibration which are thought to berelevant for protein
and virus function [19, 20]. Although such theoretical data become increasingly available for
icosahedral systems [14, 15, 21] thanks to advances in computer power, a clear and insightful
vibrationalpatternacrossicosahedralviruseshasnotemergedyet. Theartofcoarse-grainingis
a delicate one, as it is often argued that excessive coarse-graining producesa dynamical picture
that has little to do with reality. We actually need a hierarchy of coarse-grained calculations,
which hopefully reveal complementary aspects of the dynamical jigsaw.
1E-mail: kasper.peeters@aei.mpg.de
2E-mail: anne.taormina@durham.ac.uk
We argue here that even the crudest approximation, where each capsid protein is treated
as a point mass located at its centre of mass, is helpful in highlighting dynamical features that
are present in more sophisticated normal mode analyses, but have been overlooked so far. Our
initial mathematical motivation was to assess to which extent Viral Tiling Theory, a recently
proposed model for icosahedral viral capsids which solves a classification puzzle in the Caspar-
Klug nomenclature [22, 23], provides a new insight in the dynamics of viruses. In particular,
we ask whether there is a correlation between the vibrational patterns of viruses with a given
number of coat proteins and their viral tiling.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe Viral Tiling Theory in
the context of the viral capsids RYMV (T = 3), HK97 (T = 7ℓ) and SV40 (pseudo T = 7d),
with emphasis on how the underlying icosahedral symmetry manifests itself in different subtle
ways for these three cases. In particular, it has implications for the group theoretical analysis
of normal modes of vibrations. An expanded version of these remarks, applicable to viruses
and phages of all T numbers, is available in [24]. Section 3 provides a simple normal mode
analysis for the three capsids above, where group theoretical techniques reminiscent of those
used in calculations of vibrational modes of small molecules are implemented. This paves
the way for the more extensive study performed in [25], which reveals an intriguing universal
pattern of low frequency normal modes. We conclude with some open questions prompted by
our investigations.
2 Tilings of Rice Yellow Mottle, Hong-Kong 97 and Simian
Viral tiling theory provides an elegant way of encoding the icosahedral symmetry of viral
capsids by keeping track of the location of coat proteins and the orientation of capsomers on
the viral shell, while also keying in the dominant3 bond structure between those proteins.
TheRice Yellow Mottle Virus(RYMV) belongs tothe Sobemovirusgenus. Itis classified as
aT = 3virusintheCaspar-Kluglabellingsystem[26],anditsicosahedralcapsidaccommodates
180 coat proteins or subunits which are clustered in 12 pentamers around the 5-fold axes and
20 hexamers about the 3-fold global symmetry axes of the icosahedron. The location of the
proteinsareconsistentwithatriangulartiling`alaCaspar-Klug,andeachtriangulartileencodes
trimer interactions between coat proteins, as represented in Fig. 1. The HK97 bacteriophage
on the other hand has a T = 7ℓ capsid made of 420 proteins arranged in 12 pentamers and
60 hexamers, with four types of dimer interactions modelled by rhomb prototiles; see Fig. 2.
The SV40 virus is a member of the Polyomaviridae family and has a pseudo T = 7d capsid
which accommodates 360 coat proteins organised in pentamers through two types of spherical
prototiles, namely rhombs, encoding two types of dimer interactions, and kites encoding trimer
interactions, as representedinFigure2of reference[27]. SV40is anexample ofan all-pentamer
capsid, for which the Caspar-Klug classification is not applicable, and whose symmetries are
captured by Viral Tiling Theory.
Inordertoextract qualitative featuresofvibrational patternsfromviralcapsids, werestrict
ourselves to a coarse-grained approximation where each capsid protein is replaced by a point
mass whose location coincides with the centre of mass of the protein considered. This centre of
mass is calculated by taking into consideration all crystallographically identified atoms of the
protein, according to data stored in theProtein Data Bank or equivalently the VIPER website.
We then assess how much deviation there is between the above distribution of point masses
and a theoretical distribution exhibiting a centre of inversion. On the basis of the experimental
3Insomecases,thereexiststrongerbondsbetweenproteinspertainingtodifferenttiles;RYMVisanexample.
Figure1: Inthe above picture, the location of the T = 3RYMVcapsid proteins coincide with the
location of the centre of mass of each of them, calculated from the experimental data collected in
the file 1f2n.vdb. A triangular tiling (dashed lines) is superimposed on the icosahedral structure,
and the colour coding is faithful to that of the VIPER website: the A chain is blue, the B chain,
red and the C chain, green. The grey shaded triangular prototiles highlight trimer interactions
between capsid proteins, while the blue shaded region corresponds to the fundamental domain
of the proper rotation subgroup I of the full icosahedral group H .
data available to us, we argued in [24] that the SV40 capsid has an approximate centre of
inversion, while RYMV 4 and HK97 do not. This has subtle consequences for the group-
theoretical properties of normal modes of vibrations: when the capsid exhibits an effective
centre of inversion, the group involved is the full icosahedral group H with 120 elements
(usually called I in the science literature), while it is reduced to its subgroup I of 60 proper
rotations in the absence of a centre of inversion.
A viral capsid with N ‘point mass’ coat proteins has 3N degrees of freedom, and hence 3N
modes of vibrations, of which 6 are associated with 3 rotations and 3 translations of the capsid
as awhole. Thesearetherefore not genuinenormal modes of vibration. Group theory accounts
for the degeneracies of these vibrational modes, and provides a mean to organize the normal
mode spectrum of a given capsid [28]. A key ingredient in this exercise is the construction of
the displacement representation of the given capsid, which is a reducible representation of H
or I according to whether the distribution of capsid proteins exhibits a centre of inversion or
not. Such representation consists of 120 (resp. 60) matrices Γ displ (g), g ∈ H (resp.I) of size
3N × 3N, which encode how proteins are interchanged under the action of each element g,
as well as how the displacements of each protein from the equilibrium position are rotated
under the action of g. The latter information is gathered in 3×3 rotation matrices R(g) which
form an irreducible representation of H (resp. I), while the former is encoded in permutation
matrices P(g) of size N ×N, so that we have
The permutation matrices P(g) act on vectors whose components are the vector positions
~r 0,i = 1,..,N of the N proteins at equilibrium. The entry P (g) of the permutation matrix
is 1 if ~r 0 is mapped on ~r 0 by g, and is zero otherwise.
Once the displacement representation is constructed, it remains to invoke the well-known
property that it can be written in block diagonal form with the help of a (3N ×3N) matrix
4The argument for RYMVis similar to the argument given for TBSV in [24].
Figure 2: The location of the T = 7ℓ HK97 capsid proteins coincide with the location of
the centre of mass of each of them, calculated from the experimental data collected in the file
2fte.vdb. A rhomb tiling (dashed lines) is superimposed on the icosahedral structure, and the
colour coding is faithful to that of the VIPER website: A chain (blue), B chain (red), C chain
(green), D chain (yellow), E chain (cyan), F chain (purple) and G chain (pink). The rhomb
prototiles highlight four types of dimer interactions between capsid proteins, while the blue
shaded region corresponds to the fundamental domain of the proper rotation subgroup I of the
full icosahedral group H .
where the multiplicities n are obtained via the following character formula
dimH X dimI X
Thecharactersχp(g)ofirreduciblerepresentationsoftheicosahedralgroupcanbefoundin[24],
while the characters of the displacement representations χdispl(g) are obtained by inspection
of the displacement representation considered. Note that, in view of the very definition of the
permutation matrices P(g) given in the previous subsection, and the fact that the characters
of a representation are the traces of its constituent matrices, one has
χdispl(g) = Tr(P(g))Tr(R(g)) = ±(numberofproteinsunmovedbyg)·(1+2cosθ), (2.4)
where θ is the angle of the proper rotation associated with g, and the minus sign is taken when
g ∈ H \I. So χdispl(g) is zero when θ = 2π or whenever g is such that no protein of a given
capsid is kept fixed under its action.
The decomposition of the displacement representation of a given capsid boils down to the
knowledge of the coefficients n in (2.3) which, in view of the expression (2.4), are non zero
whenever atleast onecapsid protein isunmoved undertheaction of an element g (and θ 6= 2π).
It can be shown that distributions of capsid proteins with no centre of inversion are such
that the only group element which keeps any ‘point mass’ protein unmoved is the identity
element g = e (and underits action, all N proteins are obviously fixed). The second expression
5Theexplicit form ofthematrix U isnotneededat thisstage, butratherwhentheforce matrixispartially
diagonalised toobtain the frequencies of vibration.
in (2.3) thus yields
where we used dimI = 60 and χdispl(e) = 3N (taking the plus sign and θ = 0 in (2.4)).
Recalling that χp(e) = p, we arrive at the following decomposition formula,
3N 60 n + + + + +o
The number N of capsid proteins is always a multiple of sixty, N = 60k. In the many cases
wheretheproteinsareorganised in12pentamersandanumberofhexamers, k is theT-number
of the Caspar-Klug nomenclature. Then, the number of non-degenerate normal modes in the
singlet (symmetric) representation Γ1 is 3T, while the number of p-fold degenerate normal
modes (corresponding to the p-dimensional representation Γ p ) is 3p2T, for p = 3,4 and 5. In
particular, N = 180 for RYMV, and the displacement representation decomposes into
540,RYMV + + + + +
The 6 non-genuine modes belong to two copies of the Γ3 irreducible representation. There are
ninenon-degenerateandforty-five5-folddegenerateRamanactivemodes,aswellastwenty-five
3-fold degenerate infrared active modes.
Since N = 420 for HK97, the displacement representation decomposes into
1260,HK97 + + + + +
andbythesameargumentas above, onearrivesattwenty-one non-degenerateandonehundred
and five 5-fold degenerate Raman active modes, as well as sixty-one 3-fold degenerate infrared
active modes.
The normal modes of the SV40 capsid would be organised according to the decomposition
(2.6) with N = 360 if we were not taking into account that the protein distribution on the
capsid exhibits an approximate centre of inversion. We would have
1080,SV40 + + + + +
Instead, we use the first expression in (2.3) and note that the distribution of ‘point-mass’
proteins on the capsid is such that, besides the identity element g = e in H which leaves all N
proteinsunmoved,thefifteenrotationsg ,i = 1,..,15aboutthe2-foldaxesoftheicosahedron,
when combined with the inversion g , produce 15 further elements g g which altogether
leave 24 capsid proteins unmoved. Those fifteen group elements are in the same conjugacy
class and therefore have the same character χp(g g (i) ) = 1 for p = 1,5, χp(g g (i) ) = −1 for
p = 3,3′ andχ4(g g (i) ) =0. Takingintoaccountthatforthesegroupelements, Tr(R(g g (i) )) =
−(1+2cosπ) = 1, wearrive at thefollowing decomposition of thedisplacement representation,
The six non-genuine modes of vibrations are confined to one copy of the 3-dimensional irre-
ducible representation Γ3, and one copy of the 3-dimensional irreducible representation Γ3.
There are twelve non-degenerate and forty-eight 5-fold degenerate Raman active modes, and
fifty-two 3-fold degenerate infrared active modes .
3 Low frequency modes
Our calculation of the low frequency normal modes is based on a spring-mass model, where the
N ‘point-mass’ proteins are connected by a network of elastic forces described by a harmonic
potential which is manifestly rotation and translation invariant,
X 2 mn m n m n
The associated force matrix or ‘Hessian’ is given by
 κ m p m p (cid:12) ifm = n,
Fij = ∂2V (cid:12) =     p X 6=m mp (r m −r p )2 (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)r=r0 (3.12)
mn ∂r m i ∂r n j (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) x=x0   −κ mn (r m − (r r n ) − i(r r m ) − 2 r n )j (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) otherwise.
m n (cid:12) (cid:12)r=r0
In the above formulae, the vector ~r0 refers to the equilibrium position of protein m and the
vector ~r of components ri , to its position after elastic displacement, all vectors originating
at the centre of the capsid. The masses of the proteins are all set to unity (reflecting the fact
that the various protein chains in a capsid have masses which are too good approximation
identical), and κ is the spring constant of the spring connecting protein m to protein n.
The set of non-zero spring constants we choose, i.e. the topology of the elastic network we
adopt, is dictated by the information derived from the association energies listed in VIPER for
RYMV (1f2n.vdb), HK97 (2fte.vdb) and SV40 (1sva.vdb). Fig. 3 encodes the bonds provided
by VIPER before acting on them with the icosahedral group in order to generate the complete
spring network.
Hong-Kong’97H2fteL
RiceYellowMottleVirusH1f2nL SimianVirus40H1svaL
Figure 3: Inter-protein bonds are given for (a) RYMV, (b) HK97 and (c) SV40. The relative
strengths are represented by line segments of varying thickness, from the strongest bonds (thick
lines) to the weakest (thin lines). The above diagrammes should be read in conjunction with
the figures of Section 2.
We have used the relative values of these energies, and therefore we are left with one
parameter κ in the force matrix, which sets the overall scale of the vibration frequencies. We
arenotawareofanyexperimentalmeasurementsofassociationenergiesbetweencapsidproteins
for the viruses and phages we are considering, and the absolute theoretical values calculated in
[29] must be taken with extreme caution.
The force matrices Fij we consider here have size 3N × 3N with N = 180 for RYMV,
N = 420 for HK97 and N = 360 for SV40. Although computers can handle a brute force
diagonalisation of such matrices, and provide eigenvalues which are the square of the sought
frequencies of vibration of normal modes, a group theoretical approach reduces considerably
the size of the matrices to be diagonalized and above all, yields information on the distribution
of normal modes within irreducible representations of the icosahedral group. This proves to be
useful in an analysis of universal features of such vibrations.
Wehavecalculated thelowestfrequencymodesofvibrationfortheRYMV,HK97andSV40
capsidsusingwell-knowngrouptheoreticalmethods. TheassociationenergieslistedinViperfor
RYMVallow forastablecapsid. Crucialtothestability aretheC-armslinkingtogetherdistant
proteinsoftheCchaininFig.3a. Thespectrumofthefirst40lowfrequencymodesispresented
in Fig. 4a. Apart from the six zero modes associated with the rotations and translations of the
capsid as a whole, and which belong to two copies of the irreducible representation Γ3 of I,
one notices a cluster of 24 normal modes of very low and similar frequencies organized in a sum
of irreducible representations according to Γ5 +Γ3′ +Γ5 +Γ4 +Γ3′ +Γ4. This low plateau is
disrupted by a significant jump in wave number.
RiceYellowMottleVirusH1f2nLspectrumHlowest40modesL Hong-Kong’97spectrumHlowest40modesL
0.001 0.00001
(a) 10 20 30 40 (b) 10 20 30 40
Figure 4: Spectrum of low frequency normal modes for the RYMV capsid (a) and the HK97
capsid (b). The triangular-shape modes ✄ belong to 3-dimensional irreducible representations
Γ3 of the icosahedral group, while the triangular-shape modes △ belong to 3-dimensional ir-
reducible representations
. Accordingly, the diamond-shape modes belong to 4-dimensional
irreducible representations and the pentagon-shape modes to 5-dimensional irreducible repre-
sentations. The x-axis labels the normal modes while the y-axis gives the wave numbers in
cm−1 (up to an overall normalisation which cannot be fixed from Viper data).
A similar analysis was performed for HK97. The association energies listed in Viper for
HK97allow foranearly-stable capsid,withninestrictly zeromodesinsteadof thesixexpected.
The 21 subsequent modes have similar frequencies, as can be seen from Fig. 4b. They are
organized in the following sum of irreducible representations of I: Γ4 +Γ4 +Γ5 +Γ3′ +Γ5. If
the spurious triplet of zero modes were lifted by the addition of extra bonds in the spring-mass
model of HK97, one would again observe a cluster of 24 low frequency normal modes forming a
plateau disrupted by a jump of the same scale as that appearing in RYMV. We have observed
this phenomenon in a large number of viral capsids, and we will detail our findings in [25].
The SV40 case is particularly interesting because it does not quite fit with the above
observations. As mentioned in Section 2, the viral capsid has a near centre of inversion,
and one might want to explore the implications of treating the normal mode analysis with a
symmetry-corrected ‘point-mass’ protein distribution. This, however, destabilizes the capsid,
as the vertices of some triangular cells in the network become collinear. We will therefore
refrain from considering a capsid with a centre of inversion, and perform the normal mode
analysis as in the two previous cases (RYMV and HK97). Once more, we have plotted the low
frequency spectrum in Fig. 5.
Symian Virus 40 H1svaL spectrum Hlowest 40 modesL
10 20 30 40
Figure 5: Low frequency normal modes for the SV40 capsid. Symbol conventions as in Fig. 4.
Apart from the six zero modes associated with the rotations and translations of the capsid
as a whole, one could argue that the next 23 modes should be considered as a cluster since
their frequencies are very similar. However the plateau in this case is not disrupted by a
spectacular jump in frequency, as the seven subsequent frequencies are roughly 1.6 larger than
the first 23 non-zero modes. Early comparison with Murine Polyomavirus vibrational patterns
does not shed light on the significance of these all-pentamer viral capsids spectra, and more
investigations are needed.
4 Conclusion
We have discussed the vibration spectrum of icosahedral virus capsids, obtained from a coarse-
grained model in which protein chains and their interactions are replaced by a spring-mass
model. The goal of this programme is to understand, in a top-down approach, how properties
of the capsid structure, such as an approximate inversion symmetry or a particular tiling type,
reflect themselves in the vibrational spectrum. We believe this a useful complement to existing
bottom-up approaches, which are rooted in all-atom computations.
A comparison of our results with the spectra obtained in earlier all-atom computations
reveals some interesting similarities. The most striking one is the existence of a low-frequency
plateau of 24 modes, separated by a rather large gap from the remainder of the spectrum. This
plateau is present for RYM as well as HK’97 and a large number of other virus capsids. It
has been seen before in isolated examples [13, 14, 30], but the simplicity of our model offers
a better chance to understand the general reason behind its existence (more details will be
provided in [25]).
WhileViralTilingTheoryprovidesabeautifulclassificationofthestructureofviruscapsids,
its role in understanding the vibration spectra is at present less clear. Besides the bonds which
bind together proteins on the same tile, many other bonds are required in order to obtain a
stable capsid. These other, inter-tile bonds are often of a similar strength as the bonds on a
single tile. In fact, it is an interesting mathematical problem to understand the best network
topology (in terms of the optimal number of bonds) required for stability of a capsid.
The present analysis focuses exclusively on the viral capsid, ignoring in particular the
interaction of the virion with its environment and the presence of matter within the shell,
which are undoubtedly worth considering in more elaborated models. Large-scale simulations
have revealed that some virus capsids are unstable without RNA content [21]. It would be
interesting to understandthis instability, as well as the effect of RNAcontent, for larger classes
of capsids.