]EP.oib-q[
1v0704.0111:viXra
Dynamical graphs for the SI epidemiological model
Jose L. Herrera
Gilberto Gonza´lez-Parra
Email:gcarlos@ula.ve
Grupo Matem´atica Multidisciplinar, Facultad de Ingenier´ıa.
Universidad de los Andes, M´erida, Venezuela.
October 2011
In this paper we study the susceptible-infectious (SI) epidemiological model using
dynamical graphs. Dynamical structures have been recently applied in many areas
including complex systems. Dynamical structures include the mutual interaction be-
tween thestructuretopology andthecharacteristics ofits members. Dynamical graphs
applied to epidemics consider generally that the nodes are individuals and the links
represent different classes of relationships between individuals with the potential to
transmit the disease. The main aim in this article is to study the evolution of the SI
epidemiological model and the creation of subgraphs due to the dynamic behavior of
the individuals trying to avoid the contagious of the disease. The proposed dynamical
graph model uses a single parameter which reflects the probability of rewire that rep-
resent actions to avoid the disease. Thisparameter includes also information regarding
the infectivity of the disease. The numerical simulations using Monte Carlo method
show that the dynamical behavior of individualsaffects the evolution of the subgraphs.
Furthermore, it is shown that the connectivity degree of the graphs can change the
arise of subgraphs and the asymptotic state of the infectious diseases.
MSC classes: 62P10 60J10
Keywords:Graph dynamics, SI epidemic model, Coevolution, Adaptative social
behavior, Extinction time.
Corresponding author
1 Introduction
One of the most important issues related to real world is health. Thus, epidemic attracts a
lot of attention. The dynamical behavior of epidemic diseases have been studied for a long
time, SI,SIS,SIRand SIRS are important andfundamental epidemic models [1, 2]. There
are several approaches to study epidemics on dynamical structures. One important branch
are the models that include interactions between the network topology and the states of the
nodes [3, 4, 5].
Other approach is the deterministic, which use generally models that rely on systems of
differential equations that represent the number of individuals in various categories through
continuous variables. Systems of ordinary differential equations ODE are well-known tools
that have been used to model different type of diseases [1, 2]. However, the classical con-
tinuous models have some drawbacks such that it neglects local characteristics that may
affect the evolutionary process. Continuous models have a well developed theoretical foun-
dation and its analysis are easier than in the discrete individual models. Traditional classical
mathematical epidemic models assume that the population is fully mixed. In these models
describing different populations as continuous variables is a poor approximation in small
populations. An alternative model is a Markov process with a discrete population and time,
in which the probability of transition from (s, i) to (s -1, i +1) is given by βsi∆t, where
s is representing the susceptible individuals and i the infectious ones. This process can be
simulated stochastically on computer by using Monte Carlo simulations.
It has been suggested recently that many social, biological, and communication systems
possess two universal characters, the small-world effect and the scale-free property [6]. In
viewofthewideoccurrenceofcomplexnetworksinnature, itisimportanttostudytheeffects
oftopologicalstructuresonthedynamicsofepidemicspreading [6,3]. Animportantprevious
result is that infections with low spreading rates will prevail over the entire population
in scale-free networks, which radically changes many of the conclusions drawn in classic
epidemic modelling [6, 7].
The classical SI epidemiological model has been proposed and applied to the circulation
oftheFelineImmunodeficiency Virus(FIV)withindomestic cats. FIVisalentivirus whichis
structurally similar to the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and induces feline AIDS
(Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome) in cats. Additionally, Chagas disease and avian
influenza have been modeled with SI models [8, 9].
Here we propose a graph dynamical model to study the evolution of disease that follow SI
behavior. Simulating graphs have the disadvantage of being computationally intensive: an
epidemicinapopulationofjustafewhundredthousandnodescantakehoursofcomputation
to obtain averaged results over a range of model parameters. However, that is a once-off cost
of doing away with the assumption of a fully-mixed population, and the range of possibilities
it provides makes it a necessary trade-off. Mean-field approach may be used when large
populations are simulated.
There are several important studies that deal with epidemics using graphs [10, 11, 12].
On the other hand some interesting research using adaptative networks to model disease
spread have been presented [13, 14, 15]. For instance in [16] authors propose a interesting
susceptible-infected-susceptible (SIS) epidemic model coupled with opinion dynamics to in-
vestigate the effects of social impact on the epidemic spreading in complex networks. The
model consists of two types of nodes with different behavior patterns, active nodes and
passive nodes.
The main aim in this article is to study the evolution of the SI epidemiological model
and the creation of subgraphs due to the dynamic behavior of the individuals trying to avoid
the contagious of the disease. The proposed dynamical graph model uses a single parameter
which reflects the probability of rewire in order to avoid the disease. The numerical simula-
tions are performed using Monte Carlo method in order to study the dynamics of the disease
and the evolution of the subgraphs. This framework allows to analyze the simultaneous time
evolution of the disease and the underlying graph topology. In this paper, we study the time
evolution of the disease and the underlying graph topology assuming that the infectivity of
the disease β is coupled to the probability p r to relink to a different node (individual). We
study the proposed graph model using different connectivity degrees, disease transmission
rates and graph structure at the initial stage.
As usual we describe the stochastic contact graph with members of the population rep-
resented by vertices and with social contacts between individuals represented by edges. An
edge can be seen as a social contact with the potential to transmit the disease if one of the
nodes is infectious [17]. The number of edges of a graph at a vertex is called the degree
of the vertex. A well known definition is the degree distribution of a graph p k, where p k
is the fraction of vertices having degree k. The degree distribution is fundamental in the
description of the model using heterogeneous graphs.
The layout ofthispaper isasfollows. InSection2theunderlying classical compartmental
mathematical model is introduced with a brief introduction to network modeling and the
algorithms to simulate the disease evolution. Monte Carlo simulations results are performed
in Section 3. Discussion and conclusions are presented in Section 4.
2 The proposed SI dynamical graph model
The classical SI model considers a populationwithonlytwo compartments, susceptible: S(t)
and infected, I(t). The compartmental deterministic mathematical model canbe represented
analytically by the following nonlinear system of ordinary differential equations,
where β is the transmission rate due to the contact with infected individuals. The SI model
has many variants that include births, deaths, seasonal transmission rates or stochastic
components [1, 2, 18].
There aredifferent approaches to simulate the evolution of a disease in a dynamical graph
which depend on the assumptions to approximate the model to the real world. Here, we
assume that the relink process is coupled to the intrinsic infectivity of the disease. It is
important to remark that we do not included birth and death process since this is a first
approach. Therefore, we assume a constant network size in all the Monte Carlo simulations.
However, birth and death process may be included easily [18].
An important issue that need to be considered in the simulation of the networks, is that
in the contagion process the value of the probability of contagion per unit time β needs to be
modified for each ∆t in order to have an equivalent model to the continuous one [19]. Here
we are interested in studying the effect of an equivalent value of β and we use a parameter
βˆ which it is not equal to the parameter β of the continuous model (1).
Here we present the steps of the algorithms that simulate the evolution of the epidemics
inthedynamical graph. Thenumber ofnodes(individuals) andthetotalconnections orlinks
in the initial social network maintain invariant in the simulation. However, the connections
between nodes changes over the simulation. It is clear that several different algorithms may
be used for the process evolution.
The main idea in this model is that the relink process is coupled with the disease trans-
mission. In our proposed paradigm we assume that if the disease transmission is high an
individual disregard the possibility of changing his/her relationships with infected individu-
als since she/he think that any way he/she will get infected. We study in this case the effect
that has the relink process on the dynamics of the diseases. Additionally, we study the effect
that has the connectivity degree < k > and the initial network structure on the evolution of
the epidemics in the coupled model.
The steps of the algorithm that simulates the evolution of the epidemics in our coupled
dynamical graphs are the following:
• Create an initial graph with N nodes where (N − 1) are susceptible and only one node
is infected.
• Advance one time step ∆t and choose one node randomly.
If the selected node is susceptible then we select from his neighborhood nodes one
randomly. If this node is infected then with probability
the susceptible node is
infected and with probability (1
) the susceptible node break the contact and links
with another node randomly.
If the selected node is infected then we select from his neighborhood nodes one ran-
domly. If this node is susceptible then with probability
the susceptible node is
infected and with probability (1
) the susceptible node break the contact and links
with another node randomly. If the selected node is infected the graph stays invariant.
• Based on the previous steps the graph topology may change in each time step ∆t.
Then go to step 2 and this process finish when there are not susceptible nodes in the
graph or there are not active links, i.e. all the infected nodes are only linked to infected
nodes or insulated.
3 Monte Carlo simulations of the SI graph based model
This section is devoted to present the simulation results for the coupled SI graph model
proposed. Simulations are made using the Monte Carlo method, assuming constant popula-
tion and connections. Comparisons between different networks varying connectivity degree,
disease transmission rate, relink probability and initial network structure are performed in
order to investigate the effect that have these parameters on the transient and stationary
states. Moreover the calculations are based upon different number of runs and population
sizes. However, only some representative cases are shown.
In order toinvestigate the dynamics ofthe SIgraphit isnecessary toreproduce the initial
conditionsofthepopulation. Therefore, initiallyitisallocatedonlyoneinfectedindividual in
one of the communities in order to mimic the arrival of one infected individual to a region.
In regard to the initial structure of the network we use three type of networks; random,
regular and small world. It is important to notice that double connections and self-loops are
not considered here. Additionally, the mean and standard deviations are computed.
The simulations are performed varying the probability of disease transmission
the left hand side of Figure 1 it can be seen that the proportion of susceptible individuals
in the stationary state approaches to zero when the probability of disease transmission
increases (relink probability decreases). Additionally, there are less susceptible individuals
at the stationary state for a connectivity degree < k >= 8 since the disease reach more
individuals. Analogously, on the right hand side of Figure 1 it can be seen more infected
individuals at the stationary state for a connectivity degree < k >= 8. Notice that for
approximately βˆ < 0.04 the disease does not propagate since the infected node are isolated.
Inregardtotheextinctiontimeoftheepidemics itcanbeobservedonthelefthandsideof
Figure 2 a very interesting behavior. At βˆ ≈ 0.06 it is obtained a maximum extinction time
for the network with connectivity degree < k >= 8 and at βˆ ≈ 0.11 for a connectivity degree
< k >= 4. This means that the disease spread easier on networks with higher connectivity.
In addition, the maximum point may be interpreted as a point where some difficulties are
presented for the disease to reach susceptible individuals in a fast way. For instance the
infected nodes are almost isolated and cannot propagate the disease easy, but the dynamical
graph still active. Thus, for larger values of
the disease reach more individuals in a faster
way and for lower values of
the infected nodes are isolated faster. Thus, the main result
obtained here is that when the probability of disease transmission
increases over a critical
c the extinction time decreases, which reflects that the graph is inactive (no more
infectious).
One interesting result that helps to understand the dynamics of the epidemiological SI
graph is presented on the right hand side of Figure 2. It can be seen that the second biggest
subgraph in the network with connectivity degree < k >= 8 has the biggest size at βˆ = 0.05.
On the other hand, the second biggest subgraph in the network with connectivity degree
< k >= 4 has the biggest size at βˆ = 0.109. In the network with connectivity degree
< k >= 8 it has obtained a bigger second biggest subgraph. It is important to remark, that
the points of maximum disjoint can be related to the points of maximum extinction time.
This fact seems to have a logical explanation since a network with highest disjoint has more
difficulties to propagate the epidemics in a easy way. Finally, it is important to mention
that the region where is obtained the second biggest subgraph is close related to the highest
extinction time. As we mentioned before this happens when the infected nodes are almost
isolated and can not propagate the disease easy, but the dynamical graph still active. Froma
practical point of view, this fact is important for health institutions since they are interested
in data regarding the time period of the epidemic.
4 Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we studied the susceptible-infectious (SI) epidemiological model using dy-
namical graphs. Dynamical structures have been recently applied in many areas including
complex systems. Dynamical graphs applied to epidemics consider generally that the nodes
are individuals and the links represent different classes of relationships between individuals
with the potential to transmit the disease.
We studied the evolution of the SI epidemiological model and the creation of subgraphs
due to the dynamic behavior of the individuals trying to avoid the contagious of the disease.
In the proposed dynamical graph model we use a single parameter which reflects the prob-
ability of rewire that represent actions to avoid the disease. In this way we assumed that
the infectivity of the disease β is coupled to the probability p r to relink to a different node
(individual). We studied the proposed graph model using different connectivity degrees,
disease transmission rates and graph structure at the initial stage.
The numerical simulations using Monte Carlo method show that the dynamical behavior
ofindividualsaffectstheevolutionofthesubgraphsinthecoupledSIgraphmodel. Numerical
results show that the proportion of susceptible individuals in the stationary state approaches
to zero when theprobability of disease transmission
increases (relink probability decreases)
as was expected. However, the main result obtained is that when the probability of disease
transmission
increases over a critical value
c the extinction time decreases, which reflects
that the graph is inactive (no more infectious).
In addition, we obtained that the region of maximum disjoint of the graph can be related
to region of maximum extinction time. This fact seems to have a logical explanation since a
network with highest disjoint has more difficulties to propagate the epidemics in a easy way.
This fact can is due to that the infected nodes are almost isolated and cannot propagate the
disease easy, but the dynamical graph still active. From a practical point of view, this fact is
important for health institutions since they are interested in data regarding the time period
of the epidemic.
We can conclude that the rewire probability changing the structure of the network has
an important influence on the evolution of the epidemics. As expected the rewire probability
protects more individuals from the society against the disease, but not necessarily a higher
rewire probability means that the epidemic extinct faster. Moreover, the results obtained in
this paper show that the transmission disease and network topology, play an important role
in determining the evolution and outcome of a particular epidemic scenario on an adaptive
network.