]NM.oib-q[
1v22870.8051:viXra
Dynamical features of the MAPK cascade
Juliette Hell1 and Alan D. Rendall2
1Freie Universit¨at Berlin, jhell@zedat.fu-berlin.de.
2Johannes Gutenberg-Universit¨at Mainz, rendall@uni-mainz.de.
The MAP kinase cascade is an important signal transduction system
in molecular biology for which a lot of mathematical modelling has been
done. Thispapersurveyswhathasbeenprovedmathematicallyaboutthe
qualitative properties of solutions of the ordinary differential equations
arising as models for this biological system. It focusses, in particular,
on the issues of multistability and the existence of sustained oscillations.
It also gives a concise introduction to the mathematical techniques used
in this context, bifurcation theory and geometric singular perturbation
theory, as they relate to these specific examples. In addition further di-
rectionsarepresentedinwhichtheapplicationsofthesetechniquescould
be extendedin thefuture.
1 Introduction
Animportantprocessincellbiologyisthetransmissionofinformationby
signalling networks from the cell membrane to the nucleus, where it can
influence transcription. This provides the cell with a possibility of react-
ing to its environment. A common module in many signalling networks
is the mitogen activated protein kinase cascade (MAPK cascade). It is
thesubject of what follows. The MAPK cascade isa pattern of chemical
reactions which is widespread in eukaryotes[46]. The individualproteins
which make up the cascade differ between different organisms and be-
tween differentexamples within agiven organism but what is common is
a certain architecture. The cascade consists of three parts which we will
call layers. Each layer is a phosphorylation cycle or, as it is sometimes
called, a multiple futile cycle [44].
A multiple futile cycle consists of a protein X which can be phos-
phorylated by a kinase E at n sites. The resulting phosphoproteins can
be dephosphorylated by a phosphatase F. The cases of interest for the
MAPK cascade are n = 1 and n = 2. The following sketch shows the
MAPK cascade with three layers. Each plain arrow marked with an en-
zyme represents an enzymatic reaction, i.e Y G //Z stands for the
chemical reactions Y +G⇄YG→Z+G. Thedottedarrows between a
phosphorylatedproteinandanenzymeinthenextlayerstandforequality,
i.e. Z //G meansZ =G. The first layerof thecascade isa simple
phosphorylation,i.e. n=1. Thenextlayersaredoublephosphorylations,
i.e. n = 2. The species Xi are the proteins in the cascade, or in more
detail X1 = MAPKKK (MAP kinase kinase kinase), X2 = MAPKK
(MAP kinase kinase), X3 =MAPK (MAP kinase).
!!
X1 X1P (1)
(cid:5)(cid:5) (cid:25)(cid:25)
(cid:22)(cid:22) (cid:24)(cid:24)
X2 X2P X2PP
(cid:4)(cid:4) (cid:26)(cid:26)
(cid:24)(cid:24) (cid:24)(cid:24)
X3 X3P X3PP
Itisimportantthatevenwhenthereismorethanonesitewherethepro-
teincanbephosphorylatedthereisonlyonekinaseandonephosphatase.
Thus different phospho-forms of the protein may compete for binding to
one of the enzymes. A MAPK cascade consists of three layers, each of
which is a multiple futile cycle with a different protein. The connection
between the layers is that the maximally phosphorylated forms of the
protein in the first and second layers are the kinases which catalyse the
phosphorylations in the second and third layers, respectively. The most
extensivelystudiedexampleinmammalsisthatwheretheproteinsinthe
three layers are Raf, MEK and ERK.
The subject of what follows is mathematical modelling of theMAPK
cascade. It turns out that this system has a rich dynamics which needs
mathematical modellingforitsunderstanding. Pioneeringworkinstudy-
ing this question was done by Huang and Ferrell [22]. In that paper
theauthorspresentedboththeoreticalandexperimentalresultsandcom-
paredthem. TheirexperimentswheredoneincellextractsfromXenopus
oocytes. Onthetheoreticalsidetheywrotedownasystemofordinarydif-
ferential equations describing the time evolution of the concentrations of
thesubstancesinvolved in theMAPK cascade andsimulated theseequa-
tions numerically. The results of the simulations reproduced important
qualitative features of the experimentaldata.
In order to model the reactions taking place it is necessary to make
assumptions about the kinetics. In many enzymatic reactions the con-
centrations of the enzymes are much less than those of the correspond-
ing substrates. This cannot necessarily be assumed in the case of the
MAPK cascade. In particular there are substances, for example thedou-
bly phosphorylated form of MEK, which are the substrate for one reac-
tion and the enzyme for others. For this reason the model in [22] uses a
Michaelis-Menten scheme for each reaction with a substrate, an enzyme
and asubstrate-enzymecomplex without makingan assumption of small
enzymeconcentration. Theelementaryreactionsinvolvedareassumedto
obeymassactionkinetics. Therearesevenconservationlawsforthetotal
amounts of the threesubstrates and thefour enzymes which are not also
substrates (one kinase, E1 and three phosphatases, Fi, i = 1,2,3). It is
assumedthatthephosphorylationanddephosphorylationaredistributive
and sequential. In other words in any one encounter of a substrate with
anenzymeonlyone(de-)phosphorylationtakesplace,afterwhichtheen-
zymeisreleased. Toaddorremovemorethanonephosphategroupmore
than one encounter is necessary. The phosphorylations take place in a
particular order and the dephosphorylations in the reverse order. These
assumptions are implemented in the model of [22]. They have also fre-
quentlybeenadopted inotherliteratureconcerned with themodelling of
thissystemandwewillcallthemthestandardassumptions. Theauthors
of[22]mentionthattheyalsodidsimulationsforcaseswhereoneormore
ofthereactionsisprocessive(i.e. morethanonephosphategroupisadded
orremovedduringoneencounter). Thestandardassumptionsmaynotbe
correct inallbiological examplesbuttheyareaconvenientstartingpoint
for modelling which can later bemodified if necessary.
In real biological systems the MAPK cascade is part of a larger sig-
nalling network and cannot be seen in isolation. Nevertheless, one can
hope to obtain insights by first understanding the isolated cascade and
later combiningit with otherreactions. Similarly it can behelpfultoap-
proach an understanding of the cascade itself by studying its component
parts, the multiple futile cycles.
The most frequentapproaches tothesemodelling questionsin thelit-
erature use simulations and heuristic considerations. An alternative pos-
sibility,whichisthecentralthemeofthispaper,istoprovemathematical
theoremsaboutcertainaspectsofthedynamicswiththeaimofobtaining
insights complementary to those coming from the numerical procedures.
Thenumberofmathematically rigorous resultsonthissubject knownup
to now is rather limited. The aim of this paper is to survey the results
of this type which are available and to outline perspectives of how they
might beextended. Atthe same time it gives an introduction tosome of
thetechniqueswhichareusefulin thiskindofapproach. Thedescription
starts from the simplest models and proceeds to more complicated ones.
We discuss successively the simple futile cycle, the dual futile cycle and
the full cascade. The description also proceeds from simpler dynamical
features to more complicated ones, from multistationarity to multistabil-
ity and then to sustained oscillations. After this core material has been
treated further directions are explored. What happens when the basic
cascade is embedded in feedback loops? What happens in systems with
other phosphorylation schemes?
2 The simple futile cycle
In this section we look at the case n = 1 of the multiple futile cycle, in
other words we isolate the first layer of the cascade (1). We omit the
index 1 of the chemical species for clarity in this section, since the other
layers will play no role here. Modelling this system in a way strictly
analogous tothatappliedtotheMAPKcascadein[22]leadstoasystem
of six equations for the substrates X and XP, the enzymes E, F and
the substrate-enzyme complexes X · E and XP ·F. There are three
conserved quantities, which are the the total amounts of the enzymes
and thesubstrate,Etot =[E]+[X·E],Ftot =[F]+[XP ·F]andXtot =
[X]+[XP]+[X·E]+[XP·F]. wherehereandinthefollowing[Z]denotes
theconcentrationofthespeciesZ. Thesecanbeusedtoeliminatethreeof
the equations if desired. When the evolution is modelled by mass-action
kinetics, thesemanipulations can bedone explicitly.
Suppose we have a system x˙i = fi(x), x = (x1,...,xn) ∈ Rn repre-
senting the dynamics of a chemical reaction network. The xi(t) are the
concentrationsofthesubstancesinvolvedasfunctionsoftimeandthedot
denotes the time rate of change. A stationary solution (or steady state)
is one which satisfies for all i ∈ {1,...,n}, xi(t) ≡ xi,0 for some fixed
concentrations x0 = (x1,0,...,xn,0). Thus it satisfies x˙ = 0 or equiva-
lently f(x0) = 0. A solution x(t) is said to converge to the steady state
x0 if limt→∞x(t)=x0. This is an idealization of the situation where an
experimental system settles down to a steady state on a sufficiently long
time scale. For instance in the experiments of [22] the system was found
to approach a steady state after 100 minutes. Corresponding behaviour
was found in the simulations. There is no reason why a chemical system
should behave in this simple way for all initial data. The results of [22]
indicatethatitdoessoforthedataconsideredthere. Evenifforapartic-
ular system all solutions converge to a steady state, it may be that there
exist more than one steady state for fixed values of the total amounts of
the substances involved. In the language of chemical reaction network
theory [12], theremay bemore thanone steady statein one stoichiomet-
ric compatibility class. This is the phenomenon of multistability. It is
important for biological processes such as cell differentiation.
In the case of the simple futile cycle it was proved in [6] that there
is always exactly one steady state for fixed values of the total amounts
Etot, Ftot and Xtot and that all other solutions converge to that steady
state. Thesteadystateisgloballyasymptoticallystableandbistabilityis
ruledoutinthiscase. Wecannotenterintothedetailsoftheproofofthis
resultherebutitisappropriatetomentionsomeofthekeyideasinvolved.
Suppose that the system x˙i = fi(x) has the property that ∂fj/∂xi > 0
for all i6=j and all x. Then the system is called monotone. If a system
does not satisfy this property we may try to make it do so by reversing
thesignsofsomeofthevariables. Inotherwordswereplacethevariables
xi by yi = ǫixi, where each ǫi is plus or minus one. In general a system
is called monotone if there is a mathematical transformation of this kind
whichmakesallpartialderivativesoftherighthandsidesoftheequations
withi6=jpositive. Thereisagraphicalcriteriontodecidewhetherthisis
possible. Defineagraphwhichhasavertexforeachvariablexiandwhich
has an oriented edge connecting node i to node j if ∂fj/∂xi 6= 0. Label
each edgewith thesign ofthecorrespondingderivative. Alternativelywe
can use the convention that a positive sign is represented by a normal
arrow while a negativesign is represented byablunt-headedarrow. This
object is called the species graph. For example the species graph of the
simple futile cycle is thefollowing.
,,XP oo XE rr (2)
!!
"" (cid:15)(cid:15)
(cid:15)(cid:15)
44XPF // X mm
Since the use of terms concerning feedback loops is not always consis-
tentbetweendifferentsourcesintheliteraturewespecifytheterminology
whichwewilluse. Afeedbackloopisasequenceofarrowswhichstartsat
onenodeandendsatthesamenode,i.e. acycle. Itiscalledapositiveor
negative feedback loop according to whether the number of edges with a
negativesignitcontainsisevenorodd. Morepreciselythisobjectmaybe
called a directed feedback loop, while the corresponding definition where
the orientation of the edges is ignored is called an undirected feedback
loop. Suppose we have a system of ordinary differential equations for
whichthesignofthederivative∂fj/∂xi isindependentofxforeachfixed
iandj. Thenitcanbeprovedthatthesystemismonotoneifandonlyif
thespeciesgraphcontainsnonegativeundirectedfeedbackloopsoflength
greater than one. In the case of the simple futile cycle the species graph
containsatleastonenegativefeedbackloop. Thisistruebothforthefull
six-dimensionalsystemandforthethree-dimensionalsystemobtainedby
eliminating the concentrations of E, F and XP using the conservation
laws. However, it was shown in [6] that thereis a different typeof trans-
formation whichmakesthissystemmonotone. Inthistransformation the
concentrations are replaced as variables by the extents of the reactions.
Theresultingmonotonesystemhasadditionalgoodpropertiesandthisal-
lowsthepropertyofconvergencetoauniquesteadystatetobeconcluded
for theoriginal system.
Many chemical systems have interesting limiting cases obtained by
letting certain combinations of reaction constants tend to zero. This can
lead to a significant reduction in the number of variables in the system
andmakeanalyticalinvestigationssimpler. Undersuitablecircumstances
solutionsofthelimitingsystemapproximatesolutionsoftheoriginal sys-
tem in a certain parameter regime. This can be illustrated by the case
of the simple futile cycle. For the species E,F,X ·E,XP ·F involving
theenzymesE,F,aloneorin acomplex, scale theconcentrationswith a
parameterǫ>0whiletheremainingconcentrations[X]and[XP]arenot
rescaled. In other words, if y = ([E],[F],[X·E],[XP ·F]) is the vector
of their concentrations, define y˜= ǫy, where ǫ is a positive constant. If
x=([X],[XP])isthevectoroftheremainingconcentrations,theoriginal
system with mass-action kinetics is of the form
where f,g are linear in each of the concentrations, i.e. entries of the
vectors x,y. The smallness of ǫ corresponds to the fact that the amount
of enzymes is small compared to the amount of theother species. Define
a new time coordinate by τ = ǫt and let a prime denote the derivative
with respect to time τ. The time τ is called the slow time scale because
itsvelocity dτ =ǫissmall. Thisgivesrisetoasystemofthegeneralform
In the limit ǫ → 0, and dropping the tildes, the second equation ǫy =
g(x,y) changes from being an ordinary differential equation to being an
algebraic equation0=g(x,y). Underfavourableconditionsthisequation
can besolvedfor y in termsof xandtheresulty=h(x)substitutedinto
the first equation to givean equation for x alone,
Theresultisasystemwithfewerunknowns. Thedegenerationtoanalge-
braic equation means that thelimit is singular. It may beasked whether
thesolutionsthemselvesneverthelessbehaveinaregularwayinthelimit
and indeed this is the case under certain conditions. The appropriate
mathematical techniques for studying this are known as geometric sin-
gular perturbation theory (GSPT) as introduced by Fenichel, see [13].
This theory will be discussed in more detail below. The particular type
of limit just exhibited for the simple futile cycle is sometimes called a
Michaelis-Mentenlimit. Inthiscaseitleadstoatwo-dimensionalsystem.
The conservation law for the total amount of substrate survives in the
limit in a simplified form and can be used to reduce the system further
to a single equation. Let the reaction constants for complex formation,
complex dissociation and product formation be denoted by ki, di and ai
respectively, with i = 1 corresponding to phosphorylation and i = 2 to
dephosphorylation.
XP +F XP ·F //X+F
The Michaelis constants are defined as usual by Km,i = di
ki. Then the
equation can bewritten as
d k2Ftot(Xtot−[XP]) k1Etot[XP]
dt Km,2+Xtot−[XP] Km,1+[XP]
Afterthisreductionitispossibletogetanexplicitformulafortheunique
steady state by solving a quadratic equation in the variable [XP] [17].
For ǫ small the total amounts of the enzymes are small compared to the
total amount of substrateand thisis sometimes described bysaying that
the enzymes are close to saturation. Varying one of the parameters in
the system and monitoring the concentration of phosphorylated protein
gives a response function. The main concern of [17] is the form of this
function, which corresponds to the property of ultrasensitivity: A small
changeintheparameterleadstoalargechangeinthevalueoftheresponse
function. This property is quantitative rather than qualitative and not
obviously amenable to the application of the analytical techniques to be
discussed in this paper. It is an interesting question, whether these tech-
niquescanbeextendedsoastogivemoreinformationaboutquantitative
properties. This will not be discussed further here except to mention
that ultrasensitivity was also thecentral featureof interest in [22], where
theresponseoftheconcentrationofmaximallyphosphorylatedERKasa
function of that of the first kinase in thecascade was investigated.
3 The dual futile cycle
This section is concerned with thecase n=2 of themultiplefutile cycle.
The second layerof theMAPK cascade (1) isan exampleof a dualfutile
cycle. We omit the index indicating the layer in this section, since we
considerasingle layerofthecascade. Thebasicsystem withmass action
kineticscanbefound,forinstance,in[44]. ItispossibletodoaMichaelis-
Menten reduction in a similar way to that done in the last section. We
recall thatthis consists in scaling theconcentration Z of thespecies con-
taining one of the two enzymes E, F, alone or in a complex, via the
transformation y˜=ǫy of theirconcentration vectory,aswell as thetime
byτ =ǫt. Thelimitǫ→0canbereducedtoalowerdimensionalODEby
solvinganalgebraicequation. Thisleads,afterusingallconservationlaws
to eliminate as many variables as possible, to a two-dimensional system,
whichwillbecalledtheMMsystem(forMichaelis-Menten). Moredetails
on this can be found in [20]. The system can be written in theform
,1 Etot[X] + k2K m
,1 Ftot[XP] (.8)
m,1 m,3 m,2 m,4
d [XPP]= k3K m
,3 Etot[XP] − k4K m
,4 Ftot[XP] (9).
m,1 m,3 m,2 m,4
WhenusingtheconservationlawforXtot wehavethechoice,whichofthe
threeconcentrations[X],[XP]or[XPP]toeliminate. Heretheequation
for [XP] has been discarded and on the right hand side of the equations
[XP]shouldberegardedasanabbreviationforXtot−[X]−[XPP]. Inthis
casetheMMsystemismonotone,asdefinedintheprevioussection. Since
it is two-dimensional this implies that all solutions converge to steady
states. Moreover it can be shown using GSPT that for ǫ small but non-
zeroalmost allinitialdatagiverisetosolutionswhichconvergetosteady
states [45]. For general ǫ it was not known until very recently whether
thecorrespondingstatementwastrue. In[11]theauthorsusedcomputer-
assisted methodstofindperiodicsolutionsofthissystem,indicatingthat
the statement is false for general ǫ. They do not only use dynamical
simulationsbutalsousecomputeralgebratohelpimplementatheoretical
approach to finding Hopf bifurcations. They do not obtain evidence for
the existence of stable periodic solutions, so that it would be consistent
with theirfindingsif periodic solutions, while present,were only relevant
for exceptional initial conditions. Despite the results of [11] the global
behaviourofsolutionsofthedualfutilecycleismuchlesswellunderstood
than that in the case of thesimple futile cycle.
Whathasbeenprovedisthatmultistationarity(existenceofmorethan
one steady state) occurs in the dual futile cycle for certain values of the
parameters [44]. In fact it is known that there exist up to three steady
statesforgivenvaluesofthetotalamountsandthattherearenevermore
than three. The proof of the existence result can be split into two steps.
Inthefirststeptheequationsforsteadystatesarepartlysolvedexplicitly.
Thisleavesasystemoftwoequationsfortwounknowns. Thesecondstep
involves taking a limit of these equations as a parameter ǫ tends to zero.
ThislimitisessentiallytheMichaelis-Mentenlimitdiscussedabove. Since
wearedealingwithsteadystatesthefactorǫintheequationforyplaysno
roleandthelimitisregular. Inthelimitasingleequationforonevariable
is obtained and this is relatively easy to analyse. It is possible to find
cases where thereare threesolutions of theequation F(x)=0for steady
states of the equation with ǫ = 0, all of which satisfy dF/dx 6= 0. This
implies,usingtheimplicitfunctiontheorem,thatcorrespondingsolutions
exist for ǫsmall butpositive. This argument gives noinformation on the
importantissueofstabilityofthesesolutions. Asteadystatex0 willonly
beobservedinpractise ifit isstable. Thismeansthatifasolution starts
closeenoughtox0 itwillstayclosetox0forallfuturetimes. Forexample
ifthelinearizationattheequilibriumx0 hasonlyeigenvalueswithstrictly
negative real parts, then theequilibrium x0 is stable.
Onthelevelofsimulations multistationarity was alreadyobserved for
the system with mass action kinetics in [30] and it was found that two
of the three steady states are stable. Simulations in [32] indicated that
these features are already present in theMM system. On theotherhand
untilrecently therewas nomathematical proof of bistability for thedual
futile cycle. A strategy suggested by what has been said up to know for
obtainingsuchaproofistofirstprovebistabilityfortheMMsystemand
then use GSPT to conclude the corresponding result for the mass action
system. Thisstrategywascarriedoutin[20]andinthatpaperweproved
bistability. Wenow sketch themain lines of theproof.
Intheprevioussection, wesawthattheMMreductionisthesingular
limit as ǫ → 0 of the system on the slow time scale (4), where g(x,y˜) =
0⇔y˜=h(x). Now consider the fast time scale, i.e. the same equations
expressedintheoriginaltimet,augmentedbythetrivialevolutionofthe
parameter ǫ. This system is called theextended system.
The curve {(x,y˜= h(x),ǫ =0)} is a curve of equilibria in the extended
system. The linearization of the extended system (10) at such an equi-
librium admits two zero eigenvalues with the corresponding eigenvector
being (0,0,1) pointing in direction of ǫ orthogonally to the (x,y)-plane,
andasecondvectorinthe(x,y)-planetangenttothecurve{(x,h(x))}. If
thelinearizationDyg(x,h(x),0)admitsonlyeigenvalueswithstrictlyneg-
ative real parts, then the center eigenspace (i.e. the eigenspace spanned
bytheeigenvectorsassociated topurelyimaginary eigenvalues)isexactly
two dimensional. The eigenspace is tangential to a manifold called the
center manifold: see [41] for details about center manifold theory. The
(local) centermanifold Mc(x,h(x),0) ofsuch an equilibrium isan invari-
ant manifold containing all bounded solutions sufficiently near the equi-
librium. Thecentermanifold Mc can bewritten as agraph ofafunction
Ψ overthecenter eigenspace:
withΨ(x,0)=h(x). ThemanifoldMc istangenttothecentereigenspace
of the extended system at each equilibrium (x,h(x),0). Because of the
equationǫ˙=0,theinvariant2-dimensionalcentermanifoldMc isfoliated
by invariant 1-dimensional leaves ǫ= constant. If the leaf at ǫ= 0 con-
sistsofhyperbolicequilibria(i.e. thelinearization thereadmitsnopurely
imaginary eigenvalues) connected by heteroclinic orbits as depicted in
figure 1, then this dynamics is preserved in the leaves at ǫ small. Fur-
thermore, the linearization theorem of Shoshitaishvili (see [27], Theorem
5.4) tells us that, if Dyg(x,h(x)) has only stable eigenvalues, the center
manifold Mc is attracting. Hence hyperbolic equilibria that are stable in
the MM-reduced system (5) give rise to stable equilibria in the extended
system. Undoingthe scaling y˜=ǫy providesus with stable equilibria for
the original mass-action system (3).
InordertoapplyGSPTinthiscontextthemainpropertytobechecked
concerns the eigenvalues of the matrix A = Dyg(x,h(x)). By this we
meanthematrixofpartialderivativesofthefunctiongwithrespecttothe
variablesyatapoint(x,h(x)). Theconditiontobecheckedforthecenter
manifold Mc to be attracting is that the real parts of these eigenvalues
are negative. Fortunately in this case the calculation can be reduced to
onefortheeigenvaluesoftwobytwomatrices, whichisrelativelysimple.
TheremainingpartoftheargumentistoprovebistabilityfortheMM
system. When this has been done and if the stable steady states are
hyperbolic (i.e. the linearization of the system at those points have no
eigenvalues with zero real parts) then GSPT tells us that these steady
states continue to exist and be stable for ǫ small but non-zero. For more
details we refer to [20]. Bistability for the MM system is proved using
bifurcationtheoryandnowsomemoreinformation willbegivenconcern-
ing that technique. Consider a system of ordinary differential equations
PSfrag replacements
Figure 1: Sketch of the phase portrait of the extended system with a curve of
equilibria {y = h(x) ≡ 0}. The one dimensional dynamics of the MM-reduced
system consists of one unstable equilibrium connected via heteroclinic orbits to
two stable equilibria. This dynamics persists on the invariantǫ-leavesfor small
ǫ.
x˙ =f(x,α)andasteadystate(x0,α0),i.e. f(x0,α0)=0. Hereαdenotes
oneormoreparameters. Thelinearizationofthesystemat(x0,α0)isthe
matrix of partial derivatives A=Dxf(x0,α0). If no eigenvalue of A has
zerorealparttheequilibriumx0issaidtobehyperbolic. Thenforαclose
to α0 there is a unique solution of f(x∗(α),α) = 0 with x∗ close to x0
by theimplicit function theorem. Thestability properties of thesolution
are preserved, the dynamics nearby is the same as the dynamics of the
linearized system bytheHartman-Grobman Theorem (see[18], Theorem
1.3.1). For instance if x0 is stable then x∗(α) is stable. If, on the other
hand, A has an eigenvalue whose real part is zero then (x0,α0) is said to
be a bifurcation point and the qualitative dynamics of the system may
change at that parameter value. For instance as the parameter is varied
one steady state may split into several. In other words, new branches of
equilibriamaycomeintobeingatthecriticalparametervalueα0. Identi-
fying a suitable bifurcation is a way of proving that several steady states
exist for certain parameter values.
For example, consider a system x˙ = f(x,α) with one unknown x de-
pending on two parameters, α=(α1,α2). Denote by a prime the partial
derivative of a function of x and α with respect to x. Suppose that
f(0,0)=0, f′(0,0)=0, f′′(0,0)=0 and f′′′(0,0)6=0 and that an addi-
tionalquantitydependingonderivativeswithrespecttotheparametersis
non-zero. Theeigenvalueofthelinearization Athatcrosses zerodepends
on the two parameters. In this example there is only one eigenvalue of
the Jacobian, which is f (0,0)=0. When the above mentioned quantity
isnon-zero,itguaranteesthatthecrossinghappensatanon-zerovelocity
with respect to the parameters and transversally to the imaginary axis.
This is called a transversality condition. See [27] for details. These are
thedefiningpropertiesofwhatiscalledagenericcuspbifurcation. There
is asurface ofequilibria overthetwodimensional parameter spacewhich
develops a fold at (0,0). In a cusp region of the parameter space, three
equilibria coexist - two stable ones and an unstable one. See Figure 2.
Thenthereareparametervaluesnearzeroforwhichthesystemhasthree
PSfrag replacements
ou i ǫ n t = p p u u λ 1 t t (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:1)
Mc (cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
(cid:1) α2
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:0)(cid:1)
Figure 2: Bifurcation diagram for a generic cusp bifurcation: the unstable
branchofthe surfaceofequilibria is shaded,as wellas the regionin the param-
eter plane where two stable and one unstable equilibria coexist.
steady states close to zero. The case of relevance for the examples con-
sidered in this paper is that where f (0,0) < 0 and from now on we
will only discuss that case. There two of the steady states close to zero
are stable and one unstable. Now suppose there are several variables xi
and thatat thepoint (0,0) thederivativeA=Dxf hasazeroeigenvalue
of multiplicity one. The kernel of A is of dimension one. The qualita-
tive behaviour of solutions near the steady state is determined by the
restriction of the dynamics to a curve, the one dimensional centre man-
ifold, which is tangent to the kernel of A and invariant under the flow.
Whilethelocalstableandunstablemanifoldscontainallinitialconditions
for solutions that converge exponentially to the equilbrium in forward or
backward time direction respectively, the center manifold contains local
bounded dynamics that depends heavily on the nonlinear terms. In this
waythegeneralcasemaybereducedtotheone-dimensionalcasealready
discussed when thekernelof A isof dimension one. In fact thedynamics
in the stable and unstable directions corresponding to eigenvalues with
nonzero real parts donot change. These are themain techniquesused in
the proof of bistability in [20].
It is clear that in order to linearize about a steady state we first have
tohavethatsteadystate. Itisnottoodifficulttofindsteadystatessince
there are many parameters in the problem which can be varied. In [20]
steadystateswereconsideredforwhichtheconcentrationsofX andXPP
areequal,sincethissimplifiesthealgebra. Moreoveritwasassumed that
all Michaelis constantshavea common valueK. In thiscase therelation
(cid:18) (cid:19)
holds. A bifurcation point was found under the restriction that q2 =
(k1k4)/(k2k3)<1. The bifurcation occurs when KXtot =
.
ItisimportanttonotethathereMichaelis-Menten reductionwascar-
ried out for the whole system and not for the two phosphorylation steps
separately. The latter alternative leads to a different set of equations. It
was used in [25], where the effect of embedding a MAPK cascade in a
negative feedback loop was investigated. Consider, for instance, thedual
futilecyclewhichisthethirdlayerofthecascadein[25]andtheequation
for theunphosphorylated protein. It is of theform
d k7Etot[X] k7Ftot[XP]
which is clearly different from the corresponding equation in the MM
system introduced above, even when all Michaelis constants are taken to
be equal (which is done in the simulations of [25]).
The results just discussed only givelimited information on theregion
of parameter space in which bistability occurs. In contrast, in [8] rigor-
ousquantitativeresultsonmultistationarity wereproved. Rathergeneral
conditions on the reaction constants were exhibited for which there are
one or three steady states.
Bistabilityisimportantforthepropertyofbeinga‘goodswitch’: con-
sider our system as an input-output relation where the input consists of
thevaluesoftheconservedquantitiesandtheoutputconsistsoftheequi-
libriumreachedbythesystemafteracertainamountoftime. Forcertain
valuesoftheinput,thestableequilibriumreachedbythesystemisunique
and, say, on the lower part of the folded surface of equilibria. When the
inputentersthecuspregion, theoutputremainson thelowerpart of the
fold until the cusp region is left: at this point, the output switches to
the upper part of the folded surface. In fact, the same phenomenon of
switching is present when the parameter (input) is one dimensional and
there exists a S-shaped curveof equilibria. See figure3.
PSfrag replacements x
Figure 3: The input-output relation follows the lower stable equilibria until
it becomes unstable through a fold (also called saddle-node) bifurcation, then
jumps to the upper stable branch. Hence such an input-output relation is a
good switch.
Sometimes when modelling phosphorylation systems theenzymecon-
centrationsarenotincludedexplicitlyandinstead massactionkineticsis
used for thesubstrates alone. If this is donefor thecycle with two phos-
phorylations, orindeed for a cyclewith any numberof phosphorylations,
adynamicalsystemisobtainedwhichhasauniquestationarysolutionto
which all other solutions converge. This is because it can be shown that
the system is a weakly reversible system of deficiency zero and the Defi-
ciencyZeroTheoremofchemicalreactionnetworktheory(see[12])canbe
applied. This type of argument was used to prove corresponding results
for the kinetic proofreading model of T cell activation in [39] and for the
multiplephospho-rylationofthetranscriptionfactorNFATin[35]. These
systems only describe small parts of the network involved in T cell acti-
vation, which also contains a MAPK cas- cade. A comprehensive model
ofthisphenomenonpresentedin[1]istoolarge tobeaccessible bydirect
analytical investigation. Interestingly a very much simplified version of
this model introduced in [14] reproduces some of the key features of T
cell activation such as specificity, speed and sensitivity. In the simplified
model theMAPK cascade is represented bya simple response function.
4 The MAPK cascade
The starting point of this section is the model of the MAPK cascade in-
troduced in [22]. Simulations in [34] revealed the presence of bistability
andsustainedoscillations inthismodel. Mathematically thelattercorre-
spondtoperiodicsolutions,i.e. solutionswhichsatisfyx(t+T)=x(t)for
sometimeintervalT butarenotsteadystates. In[34]similarresultswere
obtained for the truncated cascade consisting of just the first two layers.
Michaelis-Menten reduction for the MAPK cascade is made difficult by
thefactthatthereisnotacleardivisionbetweensubstratesandenzymes.
Thisissuewasstudiedin[42]. Afurtherdevelopmentoftheseideasin[43]
indicated that periodic solutions already occur in the Michaelis-Menten
limit. Itwas shownin [20]that asmall modification of theseideasallows
aMichaelis-Mentenlimitoftheequationsforthetruncatedcascadetobe
defined which is well-behaved in the sense of GSPT. Since the truncated
system contains a species, X1P, which is a product in the first layer and
an enzyme in the second layer, the ǫ-scaling of the MM-reduction has
to be carried out using two different powers of ǫ. We first define a new
variable X1 replacing [X1P] as follows.
The concentration vector is split into three vectors v0,v1,v2. The vector
v2 isthevectorofconcentrationsofspeciescontainingtheenzymesofthe
first layerof thecascade, alone orin a complex,i.e. v2 =([E1],[F1],[X1·
E1],[X1P ·F1]). This vector is rescaled by v˜2 =ǫ2v2 The vector v1is the
vector of concentrations of species containing X1 or the enzymes X1P =
E2 and F2 of the second layer of the cascade, alone or in a complex, i.e.
This vector is rescaled by v˜1 = ǫv1. Finally, the vector v0 contains the
concentrations of the remaining species, i.e. x = ([X2],[X2P],[X2PP])
and is not rescaled. Furthermore the reaction constants of the first layer
are also rescaled by ǫ. A slow time variable τ = ǫt is introduced: the
timederivativew.r.t. tisdenotedbyanupperdotwhilethetimederiva-
tive w.r.t. τ is denoted by . Using conserved quantities to reduce the
dimensionoftheconcentrationvectorsandthenewvariableX1,wegeta
system of the form
x =f(x,y,z),
X1P],[X2P·F2],[X2PP·F2])Thelimitǫ→0ofthissystemallowsaMM-
reductionthatiswell-behavedintermsofGSPT.Formoredetailssee[20],
[21]. This result was extended tothe full cascade in [21].
The facts just listed indicate that thestrategy used to provebistabil-
ity in the dual futile cycle might also be used to prove the existence of
sustained oscillations in the truncated MAPK cascade, i.e. layers 1 and
2 of cascade (1). Here the relevant type of bifurcation is a Hopf bifurca-
tion where thelinearization at an equilibriumadmits apair ofimaginary
eigenvalues for a critical parameter. By a classical theorem of Hopf, if
under variation of a parameter a pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues
of the linearization passes through the imaginary axis (away from zero)
withnon-zerovelocitythenthereexistperiodicsolutionsforatleastsome
parametervalues. See[27],[18]fordetails. In[21]itwasprovedthatHopf
bifurcations occur in the MM system for the MAPK cascade. As a con-
sequence periodic solutions occur. If an additional genericity condition
(hyperbolicityoftheperiodicorbit)weresatisfiedthenitcouldfurtherbe
concluded using GSPT that periodic solutions also occur in the mass ac-
tion systemforthetruncatedMAPK cascade. Infact it hasnotyetbeen
possible to prove hyperbolicity. Instead it was proved that the Hopf bi-
furcationitselfcanbeliftedtothemassactionsystemandthisthengives
the existence of periodic solutions of that system. Unfortunately these
arguments give no information on the stability of the periodic solutions
involved. Itisinterestingtolookatthissituationinthelightofresultson
feedbackloops. Ithasbeenprovedthatasystemcanonlyadmitastable
periodic solution if it includes a directed negative feedback loop [5], [36].
It can easily checked directly that this condition holds in the case of the
MM system for thetruncated MAPK cascade.
The results for the truncated cascade imply analogous results for the
fullcascadebyanotherapplicationofGSPT.Whatmustbeshownisthat
the truncated cascade can be represented as a limit of the full cascade
whichiswell-behavedinthesenseofGSPT.ConsidertheMMsystemfor
the full cascade. Let Z be the concentration of a protein in the first or
second layer and define a new variable by Z˜ = ǫ −1Z. Let ci be any of
therateconstantsinthethirdlayeranddefinec˜i =ǫci. Thetransformed
system has a limit for ǫ→0 which is well-behaved in the sense of GSPT
andthelimitingsystemistheMMsystemforthetruncatedcascade. Thus
in the context of theMM system theHopf bifurcation can be lifted from
the truncated to the full cascade. It can then be further lifted from the
MM system for thefull cascade to themass action system.
In [33] an in vitro model of the MAPK cascade was introduced. The
substances involved are modified in such a way that certain features of
the reaction network are modified. In the first layer Raf is constitutively
active which means that for modelling this layer can be ignored. In the
third layer ERK can only be phosphorylated once, on tyrosine and not
on threonine. (In the wild type system MEK has the unusual property
ofbeingadualspecificitykinasewhichcanphosphorylateboththreonine
andtyrosine.) Thisleadstoacascadewith twolayerswherethefirsthas
two phosphorylation steps and the second only one:
(cid:30)(cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:31)
(cid:31)(cid:31)
Here X3 =ERK. This was modelled mathematically in a certain way in
[33]andit wasprovedthatforthatsystem ofequationsthereisaunique
steady state and all othersolutions converge to it. If, on the other hand,
thesystemismodelledindirectanalogytowhatwasdonein[22]asystem
isobtainedwhichmightpotentiallyadmitHopfbifurcationsandhencepe-
riodic solutions. It was written down in [21] but attempts to prove the
existenceofHopfbifurcationsusingthemethodsappliedtothetruncated
MAPKcascadehavenotsucceeded. Simulationsdonein[47]indicatethat
there may be chaotic behaviour in the MAPK cascade. The approach of
the authors was via (numerical) bifurcation theory. They discovered the
presenceoffold-Hopfbifurcations(wherethelinearizationofthesystemat
thebifurcationpointhasonezeroandapairofnon-zeroimaginaryeigen-
values)andHopf-Hopfbifurcations(wherethelinearization ofthesystem
atthebifurcation pointhastwopairsofnon-zeroimaginary eigenvalues).
See [27] for more details on these types of bifurcations. Bifurcations of
these types are often associated with chaos. Simulations for initial data
close to the bifurcation points gave pictures consistent with the presence
of chaotic behaviour.
In [34] a heuristic explanation for the existence of oscillations in the
MAPKcas-cadewasgiven,involvingtheembeddingofabistablesystem
inanegativefeedbackloop. Thispointofviewplayednoroleintheproof
oftheexistenceofperiodicso-lutionsusingbifurcation theorywhichhas
just been discussed. It could, however, in principle lead to an alternative
proofofthatresultwhichcouldalsoprovidein-formationonthestability
of the periodic solution. A corresponding strategy, which makes use of
the Conley index (see [7]), has been developed and applied to a system
related to that considered in [25]. More details can be found in [4], [16]
and [15].
5 Embedding the cascade in feedback loops
GiventhatmodellingpredictsoscillatorybehaviourintheMAPKcascade
it is of great interest to try to observe it experimentally. This has been
done in [37]. Oscillations were found in the concentration of activated
(i.e. doubly phosphorylated) ERK which had a period of about fifteen
minutes and lasted up to ten hours. This effect was monitored by ob-
serving the translocation of ERK tagged with GFP between the cytosol
andthenucleus. ThisisrelevantbecauseactivatedERKisimportedinto
thenucleusandinactiveERKisexportedintothecytosol. Mathematical
models presented in [37] are more complicated than the basic model of
[22] in several ways.
One is that a two-compartment model is used so that transport be-
tweencytosolandnucleusisincluded. ThisnetworkissketchedinFigure
4 below, where Raf =X1, MEK =X2, ERK =X3. A second is that the
fact is included that ERK and MEK which are not fully phosphorylated
canbindtoeachother( /o /o /o ✕ ✕ o/ o/ o/ inFigure4). ThisprotectsERK
from phosphorylation by MEK and thus represents a kind of negative
feedback. Note that the tendency of this type of feedback to encourage
bistability was already pointed out in [28]. A third way is that a nega-
tivefeedbackduetherepression of SOSbyERKisincluded( ✕ in
Figure 4). This is important since SOS influences the rate of phosphory-
lation of Raf. This last effect is modelled in a simple phenomenological
manner. It was discovered that certain aspects of the experimental data
donotfitthemathematicalmodelwithanisolatedcascade. Inparticular
this concerns the facts that the oscillations are found for a large range
of total amounts of ERK and that the period of the oscillations is found
to depend only weakly on the total amount of EGF, thesubstance being
used to stimulate the cascade. It is assumed that the phosphorylation
of Raf is proportional to the amount of EGF. Incorporating the negative
feedback loop viaSOSin themodelallows theexperimentalresultstobe
reproduced.
Yet another type of negative feedback which may lead to oscillations
arisesviathecompetitionofasubstrateofERKwithaphosphatasebeing
reduced byincreasing degradation of theactivated substrate[29]. Inthis
papertheauthorspresentbothmassaction andreducedmodels andfind
periodic solutions in simulations.
6 Alternative phosphorylation mechanisms
In this paper we have concentrated on distributive phosphorylation. If
thisispartlyreplacedbyprocessive(butstillsequential)phosphorylation
thenthisoften resultsinsimplerdynamics. Forinstanceitwasprovedin
[9]thatwhenphosphorylation,dephosphorylationorbotharereplacedin
the dual futile cycle by their processive versions, then there is a unique
steady state for fixed values of the total amounts. This follows from
the deficiency one algorithm of chemical reaction network theory. The
result was generalized to the analogue of the multiple futile cycle with
strictly processive and sequential phosphorylation in [10]. In addition it
was proved that all other solutions converge to the steady state. Note
that other types of (partially) processive phosphorylation may also be
considered [19].
Oneof themost important roles of oscillations in biology isthat they
can act asclocks, forinstance thosedefiningcircadian rhythms. Many of
these clocks are dependendent on translation but a clock has been found
in cyanobacteria which is not. It uses only phosphorylation states of the
proteins KaiA, KaiB and KaiC. This has been demonstrated by recon-
structing the clock in vitro [31]. In KaiC the phosphorylation is cyclic
rather than sequential. In other words the first of two sites to be phos-
phorylated is also the first to be dephosphorylated. This motivated the
study of oscillations in dual phosphorylation models more general than
theusualdualfutilecycle[24]. Inthatpaperthecaseofunorderedphos-
phorylationwasconsidered,i.e. thatwherethetwo(de-)phosphorylations
may take place in any order. Simulations indicate that this is sufficient
to produce sustained oscillations.
WhiletheMAPKcascade isatypeofphosphorylation systemof cen-
tral importance in eukaryoticsignalling pathways, signalling pathwaysin
prokaryotes more often use a different type of phosphorylation system
known as a two-component system [40]. These are uncommon in eukary-
otesandunknowninmammals. Thecentralmechanismisasfollows. The
two components are proteins generically called HK and RR. The protein
HK is a histidine kinase which, under appropriate conditions, phospho-
rylates itself on a histidine. RR, the response regulator, catalyses the
transfer of thephosphategroup from thehistidineof HKtoan aspartate
inRR.InthiswaytheRRisactivated. HKcanalsodephosphorylateRR.
WhatistheadvantageoftheprocessofphosphorylationofRRtaking
place in two steps rather than directly? It has been suggested that the
motivation is that the two-step process leads to absolute concentration
robustness [38]. This means that the output signal is independent of the
total concentrations of the enzymes, so that the system achieves inde-
pendencefrom thestochasticvariation in proteinlevelsbetween different
cells.
Bistability has been observed in two-component systems. The condi-
tions for bistability in these systems have been discussed in [23]. This
dynamical property has also been studied in [2]. The case treated there
is that of a split kinase. This means that instead of one kinaseHK phos-
phorylatingitselfonekinasebindstoasecondwhichthenphosphorylates
the first. These authors investigated bistability in different models using
bothdynamicalsimulationsandtheChemicalReactionNetworkToolbox.
The latter is a computer programme which provides positive or negative
results on bistability on thebasis of chemical reaction network theory.
Some signaling pathways include phosphorelays in which the phos-
phategroupistransferredfrom onespeciestothenext. Theyalsohavea
cascadestructure,inmanycaseswithfourlayers. Insomelayers,aphos-
phate group can easily be lost by hydrolysis. Furthermore some species
can be bifunctional, i.e. able to give as well as take a phosphate group
to/from the species on the next layer. As for the MAPK cascade, such
phosphorelayscanbeembeddedintranscriptionalfeedbackloops. Seefor
example[26]wheremathematical resultshavebeenobtainedon theform
of response functions and bistability in certain cases. There are many
possibletopologiesforthesesystemsandquestionsarisewhicharesimilar
to those which could be posed for the MAPK cascade: how complicated
should the architecture of the network be in order to achieve a ‘good
switch’ property of the input-output relation? We saw that bistability
could give an answer. Furthermore the methods explained in the previ-
ous sections could give insight on thedynamics beyond thesteady states
(heteroclinic structure, oscillations).
7 Summary and outlook
TheMAPK cascadeisasystem ofchemical reactions occurringas apart
of many signal transduction networks. This cascade on its own has the
potential to give rise to complicated dynamical behaviour such as multi-
stability,sustainedoscillationsandevenchaos. Thepositiveandnegative
feedbackloopsinwhichthecascadeisembeddedinrealbiologicalsystems
presentevenmorepossibilitiesforgeneratingthistypeofphenomena. One
wayoftryingtoobtaindeeperinsightsintotheconditionsleadingtodiffer-
enttypesofdynamicalbehaviouristocarryoutmathematically rigorous
investigations of systems of ordinary differential equations modelling the
cascade. In this context it is natural to start by studying small building
blocks in detail and build up from there. In particular we can pass from
single layersofthecascade tothefullcascade without feedbackandthen
the full cascade with feedback.
In the first four sections of this paper the results on the MAPK cas-
cade or parts of it which have been proved rigorously are summarized.
In the case of a single phosphorylation loop it could be shown that the
dynamicsaresimple: thereisonlyonesteadystateandit isglobally sta-
ble. For a series of several phosphorylation loops it has been known for
sometimethatmultiplestationarysolutionsarepossibleandinformation
is available on their number. More recently it could be proved that for
a system with two loops there are parameter values which give bistabil-
ity, thus confirming previous conclusions based on numerical simulations
and heuristic considerations. It could also be proved that for theMAPK
cascade (or even for the first two layers of it) there exist periodic solu-
tions. An introduction is given to some of the mathematical techniques
used to obtain these results, geometric singular perturbation theory and
bifurcation theory.
Cases are pointed out where further progress would be desirable. It
could not yet be proved that the oscillations in the MAPK cascade are
stable although simulations indicate that this is the case. In fact if they
werenotstablethenitwouldbehardtofindthembysimulations. There
are also no analytical results available on the presence of chaos. Obtain-
ing results of this kind would require analysing bifurcations much more
complicated than those treated up to now. It would also be valuable to
obtain more results which in addition to showing that certain types of
behaviourcanoccurinagivensystemalsogiveusefulinformation onthe
range of parameters for which it occurs.
The fifth section contains some remarks of the influence of feedback
loops on the dynamics of the cascade. This should be a fruitful field
of application for the techniques already developed for the cascade on
its own. Interestingly it seems based on simulations that the range of
parametersforwhichbistabilityorsustainedoscillationsoccurisincreased
by the presence of feedback loops and this may be important for the
question of whether these features are present for biologically reasonable
parameters and if so, whether the ranges of these parameters are large
enough to allow theoscillations to beobserved experimentally.
Thesixthsectiondiscussessomegeneralizationstoothertypesofphos-
phorylation systems. The focus in this paper is on distributive and se-
quentialphosphorylationandthismirrorsamoregeneraltendencyinthe
theoreticalliteratureonthissubject. Replacingdistributivebyprocessive
phosphorylation in some reactions appears to lead to a simplification of
thedynamics. Ontheotherhanddistributiveunorderedphosphorylation
can lead to oscillations not present in the corresponding sequential case.
Hereagain thereis alot of potential for furtheranalytical investigations.
Remarks are also made on the relations to signal transduction networks
based on two-component systems.
Phosphorylation systems involved in signal transduction give rise to
many challenges formathematical analysis whichhaveonlystarted tobe
addressed. Itistobehopedthatfurtherprogressinthisdirectionwillbe
rewarded by a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of the biological
processes involved.