]TS.nif-q[
1v3802.9070:viXra
Economic dynamics with financial fragility
and mean-field interaction: a model
C. Di Guilmi a, , M. Gallegatia, S. Landinib
aDepartment of Economics, Universit`a Politecnica delle Marche, Piazzale Martelli
8, 60121 Ancona, Italy
bIRES Piemonte - Istituto Ricerche Economiche e Sociali del Piemonte, Via Nizza
18, 10125 Turin, Italy
Following the statistical mechanics methodology, firstly introduced in macroeco-
nomics by Aoki [1, 2, 3], we provide some insights to the well known works of
(author?) [7, 6]. Specifically, we reach analytically a closed form solution of their
models overcoming the aggregation problem. The key idea is to represent the econ-
omy as an evolving complex system, composed by heterogeneous interacting agents,
that can partitioned into a space of macroscopic states. This meso level of ag-
gregation permits to adopt mean field interaction modeling and master equation
techniques.
Key words: Complex dynamics, master equation, financial fragility, mean field
interaction, heterogeneity
PACS: 05.10.Gg, 89.65, 89.75.Fb
1 Introduction
Aim of the present work is to replicate the mechanism of the models intro-
duced in [6] and [4] and to resettle them in a dynamic stochastic framework,
as defined by Aoki [1, 2, 3]. The quantitative previsions of [4] (and of its de-
velopments [12]) replicate a number of stylized facts, strengthening the idea
that the economy would be better represented as a complex dynamical sys-
tem rather than a mere sum of identical and perfect informed agents. Any
Correspondingauthor: Corrado Di Guilmi, Department of Economics, Universita`
Politecnica delle Marche, Piazzale Martelli 8, 60121 Ancona, Italy. Email address:
c.diguilmi@univpm.it.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier 20 November 2018
attempt to resolve analytically this kind of models must face the aggregation
issue, since the problem of how to sum up heterogeneous and evolving agents
cannot be dealt with the consuete tools of the economist [14]. Masanao Aoki
[1,2,3]managedtoremove therepresentative agenthypothesis, introducingin
economics the ground-breaking concept of mean-field interaction, that makes
feasible the analytical aggregation of heterogeneous agents, replacing the un-
realistic mechanic determinism of mainstream framework with a set stochastic
tools borrowed from statistical mechanics. Mean-field interaction can be de-
fined as the average interaction model that substitutes all the relations among
agents that, otherwise, could not be analytically treated[5]. All the agents
are clusterized in a pre-defined set of states, basing on one particular feature
(the micro-state, e.g. the level of production for each firm) that determines
the characteristics and the evolution of the aggregate (the macro-state, e.g.
the total level of output). The accent is not on the single agent, but on the
number or proportion of agents that occupy a certain state at a certain time.
These levels are governed by a stochastic law, that defines also the functional
of the probability distributions of aggregate variables and, if existing, their
equilibrium distributions. The structure of the work is the following: firstly,
we specify the hypothesis for the stochastic structure of the system (section
2 and for the firms that compose it (section 3)); then (section 4), we develop
the probabilistic framework, setting the dynamical instruments needed for the
aggregation.
2 Structure of the system and definition of states
We set up a model in continuous time for a system of heterogeneous and inter-
acting agents, partitioned into groups or states. In this paragraph we state the
hypothesis that are at the root of this stochastic dynamics, and in particular
the definition and the structure of the states. Our system is articulated in two
states. This partition permits to isolate the effect of bankruptcy costs on the
aggregate dynamics. Moreover, the application of recently proposed methods
for systems with higher order of states [20] would entail a too high price in
terms of computational complication respect to the expected improvement in
the realism of the model. Along time, a single firm can be in one of the two
states, depending on its financial soundness, proxied by the equity ratio (the
ratio among the net worth and the total assets). Therefore there are two types
of firms: the “good” firms, that have a high equity ratio, and the “bad” firms,
that have a low equity ratio that exposes them to the risk of demise1. System
works in countinuos time [10]: t T R .
The economy is populated by a ∈ fixed ⊂ number of firms N = N(t) : t T,
each indexed by i for any given time.
1 To be complete, there is also a third type, the “ugly” firms, i.e. the failed ones,
as explained in the following.
The system’s vector of states ω is identified by the financial condition of the
firm:
0 a (t) a¯
where a¯ represents the threshold of equity ratio, that individuates firms that
are in a critical financial situation, and, therefore, for which the probability of
bankruptcy is bigger than 0 and where a (t) is the equity ratio for firm i at
time t.
In what follows we set a (t) = x for firms which equity ratio is under the
threshold and a (t) = y for firms which equity ratio is over the threshold.
The cardinality of the j-th state, to say the number of firms in state j = 0,1
is given by
By assumption, the dynamics of the occupation number N follows a continu-
ous time jump Markov process, defined over a state space Ω = (x,y) equipped
with the following counting measure N (.) : Ω T N, so that (Ω,N (.))
is a countable sample space. In the following we indicate with x the case of
firms with equity ratio below the threshold a¯ and with y the alternative case:
such that N (.) evaluates thecardinality of microstates: N (t) = N (t)
ω = x and N = N (t) ω = y. The relative frequency of firms
is indicated in small letters: n = N /N. A-priori probability of ω = 1 is
indicated by η:
A firm entries into the system in state x and fails (and thus exits from the
system) only if it is in state x (i. e. if its probability of bankruptcy is bigger
than 0); in order to maintain constant the number of firms N we assume that
each bankrupted firm is immediately substituted by a new one. Therefore
failures of firms do not modify the value of N := N(x). Firms move from x
to y or vice versa according to the following transition rates:
j j | j N − (3)
j j − | j N
where ζ is the transition probability from state y to x (firms whose finan-
cial position is deteriorated from a period to another, with equity ratio that
becomes lower than a¯) and ι the probability of the inverse transition (firms
whose equity ratio improved becoming bigger than a¯). Having already indi-
cated with Nj the occupation number of firms in state j, transition rates can
be evaluated according to:
In statistical mechanics terms, this kind of system can be defined as a statis-
tical ensemble with conservative cardinality, described by a continuous time
Markov process over a discrete state space with the structure of a birth-death
process.
3 The Firms
3.1 Hypothesis
Theassumptionsregardingfirmsarethesameoftheoriginalmodelsof(author?)
[6, 7], as modified by [4], except for the following specifications. Respect to
the theoretical construction proposed by [4] this model does not consider any
credit market. There is no direct but a mean-field interaction. Differently from
[4] the total number of firms N does not change over time. Firms are identical
within each state. The production function of a generic firm i is:
where k is the physical capital and q is the physical output. It follows that the
demand of capital function for a single firms will be equal to:
The multiplicative shock price u (t) has uniform distribution with support
[0.75;1.25] and E(u˜) = 1. Given all the above specified hypothesis, the profit
function for a generic firm i can be expressed by:
Once a firm get failed, it faces bankruptcy costs C (t)µ growing with the size
of firm, proxied by the volume of its sales, and quantified by:
3.1.1 Transition probabilities
A firm goes bankrupted if it ”consumes” all its own capital, then A 0.
So that, analogously with [4], we can express the bankruptcy condition as a
function of the price shock:
P(t) K (t)
Substituting equation 6 into the above expression and, without loss of gener-
ality, normalizing reference price P(t) = P(t) to 1, it is possible to simplify
the r.h.s. of the above equation:
Recalling that the random variable u˜ has support [0.75;1.25], the critical
thresholds of shock prices for having bankruptcy will be:
u¯ = 0.75 u˜ (t) < 0.75
(0.75;1.25)
u¯ = 1.25 u˜ (t) > 1.25
Then, it is possible to indicate the probability µ(t) of failure for a firm as a
function of u˜(t) :
u¯(t) 0.75
Equation (12) permits to determine endogenously the threshold a¯: indeed it
can be interpreted as the minimum value of equity ratio which ensures the
surviving of the firm, i. e. for which the probability of bankruptcy is equal to
zero, and, therefore, it can be expressed as:
With an analogue procedure, we can specify the transition probabilities ζ and
ι as dependent variables of the price shock u (t). Indicating the critical values,
respectively with u¯ (t) and u¯ (t) we obtain:
i 2 − 1 ≡ ι
since the thresholds, that for the 11 is equal to 0, here become equal to,
respectively (a¯(t) a (t)) and (a (t) a¯(t)). The range of variation of the
two thresholds is truncated as done in 10. It is straightforward now to get the
transition probability for each state:
3.2 Firms object function.
A firm decide the optimal quantity to produce in order to maximize its profit,
using the information at its disposal. Under the stated hypothesis the object
function of a generic firm i can be then expressed as:
We suppose that firms take into consideration the present level of failure prob-
ability, thereforethatµ(t ′ ) = µ(t),andthatPe(t ′ ) = P(t ′ ) = P(t) = 1without
loss of generality. The first order condition is:
Consequently we get two different optimal levels of production for firms in
state x and for firms in state y, respectively:
since µ = 0 for firms in state y.
4 Stochastic inference
4.1 Master equation and stationary points
In order to specify the dynamics of the joint probabilities, and, by this way,
the stochastic2 evolution of the system, following [2, chap. 3], [8, page 252]
and [11, page 62] we make use of the following master equation:
with boundary conditions:
These conditions ensure that the distributions functions consider only con-
sistent values, that is to say N [0;N] and, therefore, n [0;1]. Since
an analytical solution for master equations can be obtained only under very
specific conditions [23], we solve it with an approximation method, based on
led and lag operators3. We assume that the number of firms in state x at a
given moment is determined by its expected mean (m), the drift, and by an
additive fluctuations component of order N
around this value, that is to
say the spread:
Solving the modified master equation (see Appendix a) we find an explicit
formulation for the macroscopic equation:
2 Indeed, “the master equation describes the time evolution of the probability dis-
tribution of states, not the time evolution of the states themselves” [2, page 7].
3 For a detailed exposition see [2] or [8].
This equation describes the dynamics of the drift. It can be interpretated as
the long-run trend of the occupation number and, then, keeping all the other
relevant variables unchanged, of the production. Now we can determine the
stationary value of E(n ) = m and the consequent steady state equilibrium of
the economy, simply setting the r.h.s. of the (20) to 0:
Once demonstrated the existence of a dynamical equilibrium point, a deeper
insight on system’s dynamic is needed in order to verify the convergence of the
dynamics toward the equilibrium distribution. The solution of the differential
equation (20) is:
m(t) = m e
that, setting an initial point m , yields to:
that verifies the convergence and the stability of the equilibrium since the
second term goes to 0 as t .
4.2 Aggregate output
The aggregate output of the system will be:
Keeping constant all the other variables, dynamic fluctuations in the level of
Y(t) are due to the changing in the levels of N and N . Once quantified the
equilibrium distribution of the drift, we are able now to obtain the steady
state value of aggregate production:
1 λ 2cµ 1 λ
Ye = N = N (q q ) (25)
As can be easily seen the factor inside the brackets of the (25) is equal to
that testifies the consistency of the model. Since the aggregate production
function depends on m, also its dynamic will be convergent to a stationary
level. Dynamics comes out tobedependent onthetransitionrates λandγ and
on the differences in firms level of production. The dynamics of these factors
are studied in the next section.
4.3 Equilibrium distribution and critical points
Equating the master equation to 0, it is possible to obtain the Kolmogorov
condition that equates the probability fluxes entering in a state with the fluxes
coming out from that state. Formally, using equations 4 and 20:
Setting m˙ to 0 and rearranging, the stationary configuration of the system can
be expressed as:
Being in Markovian space, we can make use of Brook’s lemma [15] that defines
local characteristic for this kind of chains:
ζ! N k! j Y =1 (1 − η(N j ))
By means of Hammersley and Clifford theorem (see [16] as demonstrated in
[17]),thestationaryprobabilityofthemarkovianprocessforN ,whendetailed
balance holds, can be expressed by:
where U(Nj) is the Gibbs potential [9]. The parameter β may be interpreted
as an inverse measure of the uncertainty of the system. The above formulation
allows us to express explicitly the values of the a-priori probabilities:
so that:
It is easy to verify that large values of β associated with positive values of
g(N ) cause η(N ) to be larger than 1 η(N ), making transition from state
y to state x more likely to occur than the opposite one. On the other hand,
values of β close to 0, make η(N ) close to 0.5. To get a deeper insight on the
meanings of β let us carry out the potential equation. In binary models and
for great N, the equation of the potential is:
where H(N) is the Shannon entropy for the vector of occupation numbers.
g(N ) is a function that evaluates the relative difference in the outcome as a
function of N . In intuitive terms, to individuate the stationary points of prob-
ability dynamics we need to individuate its peak. β is an inverse multiplicative
factorforentropy: thisimpliesthenthat,forverylargevaluesofβ,theentropy
component does not play any role. On the contrary, as β approaches 0, the
weight of the entropy component grows. In terms of the present model, a rela-
tive high value of β means that the uncertainty in the system is low, with few
firms exposed at bankruptcy risk and, due to this, the bankruptcy probability
µ plays a negligible role [1, pp. 55 and following]. Therefore for values of β
around 0, and a more relevant volatility in the system, in order to individuate
the peak of probability dynamic we need to find the local minimum of the
potential. [2] shows that the points in which the potential is minimized are
also the critical point of the aggregate dynamics of p . Deriving the potential
respect to Nj:
1 dH(N ) 1 N
g(Nj) = j = ln j (33)
−2β dN j −2β N N j!
Solving the following MaxEnt problem [21]:
1 0 1 1 0 0
with suitable Lagrange multipliers equal to, respectively, λ = 1 α and
λ = β we get a closed solution for β:
y (t) y(t)
Setting U = 0 and using equation (35), we get an explicit formulation for
g(N ) in stationary condition:
that quantifies the mean difference (for states) of the outcome.
From equation 33 it follows that the point of local minimal of the potential is
given by:
that, if the rates of entries and exits are equated, (i. e. if ι = ζ), reproduces
exactly the 27. Therefore, making use of the 30 we can write:
that is the maximum likelihood estimation of the Gibbs distribution of the
firms in state N . Let us analyze the different behavior of the stationary dis-
tribution for different values of β.
β Given equation 33, the critical points in which the potential is
minimized are also the zeros of the function g(N ):
This suggests that β may be interpreted as an inverse index of uncertainty[1].
Considering equation 36:
g(N ) = 0 y y = 0
Under the specified conditions, there is no uncertainty in the system, since no
firm can go bankrupted and, therefore, the level of production is unambigu-
ously determined. Indeed the value of β can go to infinity if N N or if
µ 0, since both situation imply a convergence among the different targets
of production at micro level and, then, a minimum degree of uncertainty in
the system.
β 0 In this second case, in order to individuate the critical points of
the dynamics, a further deepening is needed. β can go to 0 if and only if
1, that is to say, if the system is populated, quite in the same pro-
portion, of firms in state x and of firms in state y. But this is not informative
about the behavior of the g(N) since the first factor of the equation 33 goes
to infinity (given that β 0) while the second goes to 0. The Cox and Miller
hazard function[18], with a density function analogousto the one of equal to a
standard Brownian motion’s first-passage[19], in terms of m can be expressed
as:
F(m) = 1+e
Now, we have to calculate the probability that a firm passes from a state to
anotherinresponsetoasmallvariationinthedifference ofrelativeproduction,
conditional on the current difference among y and y (quantified by g(m),
from equation 36). We can then rewrite the conditional hazard function in the
following way:
and then:
Supposing that η(m ) = m , we finally obtain:
h(y y m ) = 2βm (43)
Therefore, we may conclude that for values of β close to 0, the critical point
of probability dynamics, here found by minimizing the potential, is a value of
m approximately equal to β itself. In other words, β may be considered the
as the conditional hazard rate in the range where β is small. The potential
then is minimized for a fraction m of firms in state x when the value of the
conditional hazard function is approximately equal to β.
5 Concluding remarks
In this work we apply Aoki’s methodology to the model presented in [6] and
modified, introducing interacting heterogeneous agents, in [4]. The adoption
of the statistical mechanical approach, based on mean field interaction and
aggregate stochastic dynamic analysis, leads to a stable analytical solution,
without recurring to computer simulations. We start from very general con-
ditions and hypothesis, embodied in a stochastic framework, and, finally, we
obtain an explicit macroscopic equation that describes the evolution of the
system and its long term equilibrium solution. The dynamics is analyzed by
means of master equation solution techniques enriched by the use of MaxEnt
and hazard function analysis.
Appendix A
The master equation has now to be expressed as Q˙(s), a function of s, and
then becomes:
∂t − dt ∂s
with transition rates reformulated in the following way:
equation (.1) can be expressed as:
We rewrite again now the master equation (17) and the transition rates by
means of lead and lag operators. The use of these operators allows to express
the master equation in a more treatable form, making the two probability
flows (in and out) homogeneous. Specifically the transition probabilities (4)
become:
k k k+1 k+1
so that the master equation will be expressed in this way:
Using the modified transition rates (.6) and expanding the so obtained master
equation in inverse powers of s to the second order we get:
∂τ − dτ ∂s
−1 (cid:16)1 (cid:17)∂ 2
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
At this point, in order to match the component of the same orders of powers
of N between and equations (.1) and (.9), we need to rescale the variable
τ = tN. Knowing that:
and taking the derivatives, up to the second order, it is possible to obtain
what Aoki defines as diffusion approximation [2]:
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Equating the terms of order N
for the polynomial identity principle we
get:
d(s)) Q(s)