1v7751040/hp-ortsa:viXra
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
International JournalofModernPhysicsD
(cid:13)c WorldScientificPublishingCompany
EFFECTIVE GEOMETRY IN ASTROPHYSICS
S.E.PEREZBERGLIAFFA
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas F´ısicas, Rua Dr. XavierSigaud 150,
Urca 22290-180 Rio de Janeiro, RJ– Brazil
sepb@cbpf.br
Received(DayMonthYear)
Revised(DayMonthYear)
The effective metric is introduced by means of two examples (non-linear electromag-
netism and hydrodynamics), along with applications in Astrophysics. A sketch of the
generalityoftheeffectisalsogiven.
Keywords: Effectivegeometry,Astrophysics,ClassicalFieldTheory.
1. Introduction
One of the fundamental building blocks of Einstein’s General Relativity is the fact
that every form of matter and energy couples to gravity. As M. Novello put in a
picturesqueway,“I fall,then I exist”1.If this universalcouplingwerebroken,grav-
itation could not have been identified with the geometry of spacetime, experienced
byeveryformofmatter.Thisfeaturedistinguishesgravityfromtheotherforcesthat
weknow:nootherinteractionhasthisuniversalcharacter.Inspiteofthis,incertain
circumstances it would be useful to have partial geometrization schemes, in which
particles move following geodesics of a metric determined by the interactionwith a
backgroundfield.Quiteunexpectedly,thisgeometrizationprogramhasbeencarried
out in systems that are very different in nature: ordinary non-viscous fluids, super-
fluids, flowing and non-flowing dielectrics, non-linear electromagnetism in vacuum,
and Bose-Einsteincondensates, to name some of them2. As we shall see below, the
underlyingfeaturesharedbythesesystemsisthatthe behaviourofthefluctuations
around a background solution of the equations of motion (EOM) is governed by
an “effective metric”. More precisely, the particles associated to the perturbations
do not follow geodesics of the background spacetime but of a Lorentzian geometry
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
2 S. E. Perez Bergliaffa
described by the effective metric, which depends on the background solution and
on the features of the interaction.
The effective geometry has permitted the simulation of several configurations
of the gravitational fielda, such as wormholes and closed space-like curves for
photons3,4, and warped spacetimes for phonons5. Particular attention has been
paidtoanalogblackholes6,becausethesewouldemitHawkingradiationexactlyas
gravitationalblack holes do,andare obviouslymucheasierto generatein the labo-
ratory. The fact that analog black holes emit thermal radiation was shown first by
Unruh in the case of dumb black holes7, andit is the prospect of observingthis ra-
diation(thustestingthehypothesisthatthethermalemissionisindependentofthe
physics atarbitrarilyshortwavelengths7) thatmotivates the questfor a realization
of analog black holes in the laboratory.
Alessexploredconsequenceofthe effectivemetric approachis thatthe geomet-
ricaltoolsofGeneralRelativitycanbeusedtostudynon-gravitationalsystems8.In
particular, we shall see below that in a few instances the idea of effective geometry
has been applied in Astrophysics.I shall begin by presenting in Sec. 2 the basics of
the idea ofeffective geometryinthe example ofnon-linearelectromagnetism,along
with its application to magnetars. In Sec. 3 it will be shown that the notion of
effective metric also arisesnaturallyin hydrodynamics,and we shallsee that it can
be fruitfully applied to the problem of accretiononto a black hole. In an appendix,
it will be shown that the effective geometry is a generic consequence of perturbing
theequationsofmotionofagivenfieldtheoryaroundafixedbackground9.Weshall
close with a discussion.
2. The effective metric in non-linear electromagnetism
Historically, the first example of the idea of effective metric was presented by W.
Gordon in 192310, who showed that light with wave-vector k in a moving non-
dispersive medium with slowly varying refractive index n and 4-velocity uµ moves
according to gµνk k =0 (see Ref. 11 for details), where
is the effective metric for this problem. It must be noted that only photons in the
geometricopticsapproximationmoveongeodesicsofgµν:theparticlesthatcompose
thefluidcoupleinsteadtothebackgroundflatmetric.Afterthisearlycontribution,
the effective metric occasionally re-surfacedin the literature9. A good deal of work
has been devoted lately to non-linear electromagnetism, the case we shall examine
next.We shallconcentrateinnon-linearelectromagnetictheoriesinvacuum.Letus
aOnlysomekinematical aspects ofGeneral Relativitycanbeimitatedbythismethod12,butnot
itsdynamicalfeatures(seehowever Refs.9and13).
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
EffectiveGeometry in Astrophysics 3
start with the action
where F FµνF , and is an arbitrary function of F. Notice that γ is the
determinant of the background metric, which we take in the following to be that
of flat spacetimeb. Varying this action w.r.t. the potential A , related to the field
by the expression F =A A =A A , we obtain the Euler-Lagrange
where δL. In the particular case of a linear dependence of the Lagrangian
with the invariant F we recover Maxwell’s equations of motion.
As mentioned in the Introduction, we want to study the behaviour of pertur-
bations of these EOM around a fixed background solution. Instead of using the
traditional perturbation method15, we shall use a more elegant method set out by
Hadamard16, in which the propagation of high-energy photons is studied by fol-
lowing the evolution of the wave front. It is assumed that the field is is continuous
through the wave front, but its first derivative is not. To be specific, let Σ be the
surface of discontinuity defined by the equation Σ(xµ) = constant. The disconti-
nuity of a function J through the surface Σ will be represented by [J] , and its
definition is
[J] lim J J .
The discontinuities of the field and its(cid:0)first derivative a(cid:1)re given by
wherethevectork isnothingbutthenormaltothesurfaceΣ,thatis,k =Σ .Let
usapplythistechniquetothecaseofanonlinearLagrangianfortheelectromagnetic
field, given by (F). Taking the discontinuity of the EOM (3), we get
whereη Fαβf .DefiningF∗ 1 η Fαβ,whereη isthecompletelyanti-
symmetricLevi-Civitatensor,thesecondMaxwellequationisgivenbyF∗µν =0
or equivalently,
The discontinuity of this equation yields
f k +f k +f k =0. (7)
Multiplying this equation by kλFµν gives
bThesametechniques canbeappliedwhenthebackgroundiscurved(seeforinstanceRef.14).
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
4 S. E. Perez Bergliaffa
where k2 k k γµν. Substituting in this equation the term fµνk from Eq.(5)
which can be written as gµνk k =0, where
We then conclude that the high-energy photonsc of a nonlinear theory of electro-
dynamics with = (F) do not propagate on the null cones of the background
metric butonthe nullconesofaneffectivemetric,generatedbythe self-interaction
oftheelectromagneticfield.Itisimportanttorealizethatallthequantitiesinthese
expressionsareevaluatedatthebackgroundconfiguration.Inotherwords,thenon-
linear EOM must be solved for a given source in order to calculate the effective
metric for that background. Note also that there are two metrics in the problem:
the backgroundmetric(whichis seenbyalleverytype ofmatter butphotons),and
the effective metric (experienced only by high-energy photons).
Let us briefly sketch the case in which the Lagrangian depends also on the
invariant G=FµνF∗ . The EOM for a nonlinear = (F,G) are
L F L G ;ν ;µ
Following the procedure employed in the case = (F), it can be shown that
light rays do not follow geodesics of the background spacetime but of the effective
where (cid:2) (cid:3)
and Ω (i = 1,2,3) depend on and , with i,j = F,G. We see that in gen-
eralnonlinearelectrodynamicsdisplaysbi-refringence.Thatis,thetwopolarization
statesofthephotonpropagateinadifferentway.Insomespecialcases,thereisalso
bi-metricity (one effective metric for each state)15. Bi-metricity is absent in every
theory in which ∆=0, as for instance in Born-Infeld17.
Itisknownthatnon-linearEOMfortheelectromagneticfieldariseinthestrong-
fieldregime,whenquantumcorrectionsmustbe takeninto account.Objects likeas
magnetars18, charged black holes, and super-conducting cosmic strings may have
such very intense fields. As an example of the usefulness of the effective metric in
this realm, let us discuss the corrections to gravitational redshift in magnetars19.
cForconsiderations ontheregimeinwhichHadamard’sapproachisvalid,seeRef.13.
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
EffectiveGeometry in Astrophysics 5
Gravity effects cause the observedenergies of the spectral lines of excited atoms in
a compact object to be shifted to lower values by a factor
(cid:18) (cid:20) (cid:21)(cid:19)
If,asinthecaseofmagnetars,theobjectisendowedwithmagneticfieldlargerthan
the critical value B 1014G, corrections to this expression coming from non-
linearities originatingin vacuum polarizationare to be expected. These corrections
can be calculated using Eq. (10). As shown in Ref. 19, Eq. (14) must be replaced
z+1 − c2R = − R (15)
≃ (cid:0)[1+βB2(cid:1)]2 1 [(cid:0)1+0.19B(cid:1)2 ]2 1
where M is the mass of the star in units of M ⊙, R its radius in units of 10 km,
and B is the B-field in units of 1015 G. We see than that in certain cases the
assumed gravitational effects may be in fact a mixture of gravitation with non-
linear electromagnetism. This correction may be pointing out to inconsistencies in
the determination of the quotient mass/ratio,inferred from the redshift19.
3. Acoustics in flowing fluids
Anotherexampleoftheideaofeffectivemetriccomesfromfluidmechanics8,20.The
equationsofmotionforinviscidfluidsinaNewtonianbackgroundarethecontinuity
and the Euler equation,
where φ is the gravitational potential and Φ is the potential associated to other
external forces. Assuming that there is no vorticityd means that ~v = ~ψ. If the
fluid is barotropic we can write ~h = 1~p. Under these assumptions, the Euler
equation reduces to
Next we shall linearize the EOM around a given background using ρ = ρ +ǫρ +
O(ǫ2),andsimilardevelopmentsforpandψ,wherethe backgroundquantitieshave
a0subindex.Keepingterms upto firstorderinǫ,we getfromthe linearizedEOM:
− t ∂p 0 t 1 0 ∇ 1 ∇ 0 ∇ 1 − ∂p 0 0 t 1 0 ∇ 1
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
dTherestrictionofnonzerovorticityisliftedinRef.21.
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
6 S. E. Perez Bergliaffa
This messy equation can be rearrangedby introducing c−2 = ∂ρ, and the metric
.
(c2 v2) . . vj
ρ 0 − s− 0 − 0
g µν = c  ... . ... .
s .
 vj . . δ 
 − 0 ij 
Withthesedefinitions,Eq.(19)canbewrittenasawaveequationforthescalarfield
ψ , namely ψ = 0, where is the d’Alembertian in curved spacetime, defined
in terms of the effective metric g by
As in the case of the non-linear electromagnetic field, the dynamics of the fluctu-
ations of the scalar field are governed by an effective metric, but note that fluid
particles couple only to the Minkowski background metric. Sound waves instead
couple only to the effective metric, which has only two degrees of freedom (to be
chosen from ψ (x), ρ (x), and c (x)) instead of the 6 degrees of freedom that a so-
lutionofEinstein’seqns.mayhave.NotealsothatInEinsteingravity,themetricis
determined by the distribution of matter through Einstein equations.The effective
metric instead is related algebraically to the distribution of matter.
With a metric to our disposal, many of the notions of GR (like horizon and
ergosphere) can be translated to this context. For example, take a closed 2-surface
S. If ~v 0 is everywhere inward pointing on S, and ~v 0⊥ is greater than the local c s ,
then the sound will be swept inwards by the flow, and trapped in S, which is then
an outer-trapped surface. The trapped region is the region containing outer-trapped
surfaces, and the acoustic (future) event horizon is the boundary of the trapped
region.
These ideas are relevant in the problem of the stability of accretion onto a
black hole. Moncrief22 showed that the perturbations ψ of a non-self-gravitating
perfect fluid in stationary potential flow accreting onto a Schwarzschildblack hole
are governedby the equation ∆ψ =0, where ∆ is built with the effective metric
γ = g + 1 s u u .
(cid:18) s(cid:19)(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
In this equation, n is the particle number density, h is the enthalpy, g is the
Schwarzschildmetric, and the velocity of sound in the background flow is given by
s = .
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:18) (cid:19)s
The causal properties of sound propagation are determined by γ . In particular,
the sound cones of γ lie inside of the light cones defined by g . It is easy to see
that there is a sonic horizon, which in the spherically symmetric case,is locatedat
g + s =1.
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:12)r=rs
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
EffectiveGeometry in Astrophysics 7
Using arguments based on energy-momentum conservation, Moncrief was able to
show22 that the norm of ψ is bounded by the initial value of the energy, E . In
particular, no unstable perturbation can exist outside the sonic horizon.
4. Conclusion
We have seen two examples in Astrophysics in which that the concept of effective
metric is useful: magnetars and accretion disks. Other applications of this idea in
the same field are the effect of lensing in charged black holes23, the influence of
non-linearities in the velocity of gravitational waves24, and the stability of stellar
coronasand winds25. The effective metric has been applied even in Cosmology26,27
In fact, as shown in the Appendix, in every problem in which the dynamics is non-
linear and we are interested in the perturbations, the effective metric is bound to
play a role. It is precisely this generality, joined with the power of the techniques
of General Relativity, that makes the effective geometry a useful tool in several
branches of Physics and Astrophysics.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank FAPERj and ICRA-BR for financial support, and
themembersofthe OrganizingCommittee ofthe IWARA2003fortheirhospitality
during the workshop.
As shown by Barcelo´ et al., the emergence of a curved Lorentzian geometry is a
genericresultofthe linearizationofaclassicalfieldtheory aroundabackground.A
sketch of the proof of this statement followse. Let us take a scalar field Lagrangian
= (φ, φ). Using the expansion
we can linearize the action for . With the help of the EOM for the background
field, the EOM for the fluctuations are
(cid:27)φ0
∂ ν φ 1 !−
(cid:27)(cid:19)φ0
φ 1 =0.
Thesubindex0meansthatthequantitiesareevaluatedatthebackground.Defining
eSeeRef.9fordetails.
December 7, 2018 22:58 WSPC/INSTRUCTION FILE procolinda
8 S. E. Perez Bergliaffa
the EOM for the fluctuations takes the form
where is the DAlembertian built with g (φ ) and the background-dependent
potential is given by
(cid:27)(cid:27)
.
We obtain the result that the kinematics of the fluctuations of the scalar field La-
grangian = (φ, φ) is governed by an effective (curved) geometryf.