Efficiency, Robustness and Stochasticity of Gene
Regulatory Networks in Systems Biology:
λ Switch as a Working Example
Xiaomei Zhu1), Lan Yin2), Leroy Hood3), David Galas3), and Ping Ao4),*
1) GenMath, Corp. 5525 27th Ave.N.E., Seattle, WA 98105, USA
2) School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, PR China
3) Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34 St., Seattle, WA 98103, USA
4) Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
November 30 (2005); updated February, 7 (2006)
Phage λ is one of the most studied biological models in modern molecular biology. Over
the past 50 years quantitative experimental knowledge on this biological model has been
accumulated at all levels: physics, chemistry, genomics, proteomics, functions, and more.
All its components have been known to a great detail. The theoretical task has been to
integrate its components to make the organism working quantitatively in a harmonic
manner. This would test our biological understanding and would lay a solid fundamental
for further explorations and applications, an obvious goal of systems biology. One of the
outstanding challenges in doing so has been the so-called stability puzzle of λ switch: the
biologically observed robustness and the difficulty in mathematical reconstruction based
on known experimental values. In this chapter we review the recent theoretical and
experimental efforts on tackling this problem. An emphasis is put on the minimum
quantitative modeling where a successful numerical agreement between experiments and
modeling has been achieved. A novel method tentatively named stochastic dynamical
structure analysis emerged from such study is also discussed within a broad modeling
perspective.
Running title: systems biology study of λ switch
Keywords: phage λ, genetic switch, robustness, efficiency, cooperation, stochastic processes,
dynamical landscape, systems biology
* Corresponding author. E-mail: aoping@u.washington.edu; fax: (206) 685-8047; ph: (206) 543-7837
“I assign more value to discovering a fact, even about the minute thing, than to lengthy
disputations on the Grand Questions that fail to lead to true understanding whatever.”
Galileo Galilei (1564-1642)
1. Introduction
The completion of Human Genome Project prompts the biological and medical research
into a new phase never experienced in biology previously. It is evident that a vast
uncharted territory is luring ahead with tremendous promises [1]. Great questions with
important conceptual and practical implications have been asked and discussed [2-4].
Speculations on the general principles underlying those great questions and general
methodologies to solve them have been extensively debated since the beginning of this
century [5,6]. One of the present authors has been steadily promoting such exposition and
has been contributing to this trend [7]. Such efforts are needed not only as “a call to
arms”, they also help to define the various emerging fields. Nevertheless, in the practical
research a full range of endeavors has to be explored. New tools will be invented to solve
new problems and to try on remaining old problems. In the present review we therefore
turn our attention to the other side of consideration, not as an indication to underestimate
the value of grand themes but as an example to balance the grandeur. Instead of asking
general questions and receiving limited answers, we wish to ask limited questions on a
limited system and to find as complete answers as possible, along with a few general
answers. We have been carrying this effort during past few years. Such a methodology
has been very effective ever since the dawn of modern science, first exemplified by
Galileo. Specifically, we will focus our attention to the robustness and stability of a
genetic switch [8,9] in phage λ, arguably the biological model started the modern
molecular biology [10].
In modern information age switch-like structure is a building block in all architectures. It
is the realization of the binary digit, the unit of information and the “atom” today. As
biology has been increasingly viewed as an information science [11-13], it would be
desirable to have a thorough understanding of this building block. Indeed, detailed
analyses have demonstrated that the response of a complexity network is often dealt with
various switches [14] and that genetic networks were shown to have the computational
ability [15]. By drawing a close analogy to the integration circuitry in electronic wiring
board, this methodology has been successfully employed in the modeling of genetic
regulation during the earlier developmental stages in sea urchins [16]. Nowadays, the
studying of switching in biology has been ranging from responses to environmental
changes [17,18], developmental biology [19-21], neural networks [22,23], physiological
response [24,25], genetic regulation [26-29], signal transductions [30], memory effect
[31,32], olfactory perception [33], synthetic biology [34], biotechnological applications
[35-38], to photosynthesis [39] and many other areas [40-43]. Even in cell cycle
processes, if viewing such a process not as driving by a cycling engine but as what
controlled by a traffic light, the switch-like structure is likely to play a dominant role [44-
46]. Switch has indeed established itself as one of the fundamental elements in biological
processes and as a paradigm for both experimental and theoretical studies in biology.
Why then has so much effort been expended on studying on a particular virus genetic
switch, the λ switch? To paraphrase what Ptashne already stated [8], this is a fair question
desiring a clarification at beginning. After all, every case in biology is at least partly
accidental and special, and workings of every organism have been determined by its
evolutionary history, and the precise description we give of a process in one organism
will probably not apply in detail to another. Thus both robustness and stochasticity in bio-
structure must be included and carefully studied. This has been well illustrated in the
context of the fundamental biological processes such as mentioned in previous paragraph.
As already indicated above, at various stages of development, depending in part on
environmental signals, cells choose to use one or another set of genes, and thereby to
proceed along one or another developmental pathway. It would be of great value to know
what molecular mechanisms determine these choices. Hence, the λ life cycle is indeed a
prototype for this problem with the structure of feedback loops and the effect of
stochasticity. In addition, we have a nearly complete understanding of all its parts, its
genome was in fact known [47] long before the completion of Human Genome Project,
and the corresponding quantitative knowledge has been accumulated at all levels: physics,
chemistry, DNA, protein, and functions [8,48,49]. Despite such a long history of
quantitative studies, the stability and robustness of the λ switch remained as one of
outstanding puzzles for computational biology at least till 2004 [9,50,51]. The theoretical
challenge has been to put all its components together as a harmonic working organism,
one of major tasks of systems biology.
In addition, one might wonder the value of using a quantitative and detailed modeling.
Biological theories are generally known for their descriptive nature. For example, when
Darwin presented his evolutionary theory, no single equation had been used. It was rather
remarkable that though one of Darwin’s main predictions, the age of Earth, was in direct
conflict with known physics at his time, it was physics not Darwin’s theory that was later
gone through a fundamental transformation to resolve this glare contradiction, to the
good of both physics and biology. Nevertheless, it would be wrong to conclude that a
quantitative method would be of no use in biology. In fact, some subfields in biology,
such as physiology and population genetics, are among those most mathematical in
natural sciences [3]. As biology is becoming an information science [11-13], more would
be so in the future. The important question is that what would be the right framework of
mathematical description [9,52]. It is true that an excessive use of mathematical language,
which might be attractive to a modeler, generally does not enhance the understanding of a
specific biological phenomenon [53]. For example, with excessive parameters any
phenomenon can be described by a set of equations. Such a situation is not acceptable
under Ockham’s razor. The other extreme is to look for effective description with the
hope to capture the biological essence. This later description is necessarily gross and
qualitative, though extremely popular and particularly successful in biology. However,
many features are obviously left behind by such an approach. It would be desirable to
have a detailed quantitative study which can bridge those two types of approaches. The
phage λ genetic switch provides precisely one of the excellent opportunities in biology to
do so [54]: One side is an on-off Boolean type description for the genetic switch and
other side is the detailed physical and chemical equations.
The rest of the review is organized as follows. Salient biological experimental studies on
phage λ switch are summarized in section 2. Its key biochemical modeling elements are
summarized in section 3. The stochastic dynamical structure analysis method is discussed
in section 4 within the minimal quantitative model of phage λ. Calculated results and the
comparison to biological data are discussed in section 5. In section 6 we summarize what
have been done and place the minimum quantitative modeling methodology in a broader
context. In section 7 the research effort on λ switch is put into an optimistic outlook.
2. Phage λ Genetic Switch
2.1. Phage λ life cycle
Bacterophage λ is a virus that grows on a bacterium [8,55,56]. It is one of the simplest
living organisms. Almost all its parts have known during past 50 years. The genome of
phage λ consists of a single DNA molecule wrapped in a protein coat. Upon infection of
the host E. coli cell, the phage λ injects its genome inside the bacterium and leaves the
protein coat outside. Inside the bacterium it chooses one of two modes of growth. Phage
λ uses molecular-genetic apparatus of the cell for running and executing its own
ontogenetic subprograms to produce new λ phage particles, resulting in the lysis of the
cell. Or, it can establish dormant residency in the lysogenic state, integrating its genome
into the DNA of its host and replicate as a part of the host genome. In these two different
life cycles, different sets of phage genes are expressed as a result of molecular
interactions. Realistic modeling of the robustness and stability of such a process has been
remained one of the most important challenges in biocomputation and bioinformatics.
Because the analogous molecular interactions to phage λ are likely to underlie many
developmental [8] and epigenetic [56] processes, one wishes to acquire deep
understandings on the regulation of major biologic functions on molecular level through
the study of the genetic switch of phage λ. One of these functions is the programming of
the epigenetic states: The ways the phage decides if it is going to follow lysogenic or lytic
growing state. Over past five decades, the extensive biological investigations have
provided a fairly good qualitative picture in this respect. There exists a plausible scenario
to guide the understanding of the experimental observations [8].
The maintenance and operation of the genetic switch is another function performed by
the gene regulatory network [8,55,56]. The phage growing in lysogenic state remains
latent unless it is provoked. For example, switching to lytic state happens when a signal
is sent to activate RecA proteins which cleave CI monomer, sending the phage into lytic
growth. It is observed that the phage λ genetic switch is both highly stable and highly
efficient. When the phage grows in lysogenic state, it remains latent for many generations.
Spontaneous induction happens less than once in a million cell divisions. Once the phage
is exposed to an appropriate signal, it changes to lytic state at almost 100% rate. Such a
coexistence of stability and efficiency of the genetic switch in phage λ has been
considered a mystery from the theoretical and mathematical modeling side.
Lytic Phase Lysogenic Phase
Reinfection
circulation
Decisionon lysis vslysogeny
Cell lysis
Phage DNA replication Integration of phage
(lytic growth)
Cell division
Packing of DNA Spontaneous decision
into heads, and on switching from
assembling of Phage DNA replication lysogeny to lysis:
phage heads and
λ genetic switch
tails to generate
progeny phages
Figure 1. The schematic diagram of phage λ life cycle. The stochastic dynamics of rare spontaneous
decision on switching from lysogenic phase to lytic phase is the focus of the present chapter. The induction
by UV light and other SOS processes are not considered here.
2.2. Modeling effort
There have been continuous mathematical and numerical activities on modeling phage λ.
The rationale is rather straightforward: The biological functions should emerge as the
systems property from the model based on the molecular mechanism of phage regulatory
elements and their independently measured parameters. The elegant physical-chemical
model formulated by Shea and Ackers [48] for gene regulation of phage λ has become
the base for the later studies. However, soon afterwards, Reinitz and Vaisnys [57] pointed
out that the inconsistency between the theoretical results and experimental data may
suggest additional cooperativity. Arkin et al. [58] performed stochastic simulation on
phage λ development for the decision of lysogeny in the very early stage, demonstrating
that this process is stochastic. Recently, Aurell and Sneppen [59] analyzed the robustness
of phage λ genetic switch, using a method based Onsager-Machlup functional [58], and
concluded that their theoretical analysis could not reproduce the robustness of phage λ
genetic switch. Their further study confirmed their earlier results [51]. Similar puzzling
was found mathematically from a different perspective [50].
The coexistence of the switch stability and switching efficiency is an apparent
inconsistency for the following reasons. The lysogenic state is exceptionally stable. The
fluctuations in the growth environment, the so-called extrinsic fluctuations, and the
intrinsic fluctuation in the genetic switch, due to the discrete nature of chemical reactions,
do not easily and accidentally flip the switch. Then when the phage is “threatened”, how
can the switching process become so complete with so little outside intervention? The
question about internal inconsistencies in these models naturally arises: Whether the
easily operable induction, or highly efficient switching, in Shea and Ackers’ work [48] is
a result of sacrificing the robustness of the genetic switch. Phrasing differently, if a model
were so constructed that it faithfully reproduces the observed robustness of the genetic
switch, whether or not it would lose the efficiency of the switch. Undoubtedly a credible
model of phage λ should reproduce the properties of robustness, stability and efficiency
of the genetic switch simultaneously. From such a model we should also be able to
calculate the observed quantities of phage development such as the protein numbers and
lysogenization frequencies. We hope to show that a foundation for such a mathematical
framework against the experimental data is there, thanks to recent theoretical efforts on
phage λ [9,48,57-59].
2.3. Modeling strategy
Our procedure is first to summarize a minimal quantitative model for the phage λ genetic
switch motivated by both first principles and biological observations. We then ask the
question that whether or not this minimal modeling can be successfully used to
quantitatively reproduce various experimental results and is qualitatively correct in
biology. If successful, the necessary modifications of molecular parameters in the
modeling may be viewed as the in vivo and in vitro differences. Additional or different
molecular processes inside a cell should be responsible for such differences. Some of
them may be identifiable by current experimental techniques. If the answer to above
question would be negative, we would conclude that the minimum quantitative modeling
would not be enough. More biological causes should be looked for instead. We will show
that the answer so far is positive. By combining a newly developed powerful nonlinear
dynamics analysis method, which takes the stochastic force into account [61-63] and
classifies the stochastic dynamical structure into four different elements, with the
previously established physical-chemical model [48] a novel mathematical framework
was formulated to calculate the following quantitative characteristics of epigenetic states
and developmental paths [9,64]: the protein numbers in one bacterium, the protein
number distributions, the lifetime of each state, and the lysogenization frequencies of
mutants using the wild type as reference. We should emphasize that our review here is
focused on a specific biological system, though we have made an effort to put such work
in perspective.
3. Towards Quantitative Modeling
3.1. Binding configurations
The genetic switch controlling and maintaining the function of phage λ consists of two
regulatory genes, cI and cro, and the regulatory regions, O and O on the λ DNA.
Established lysogeny is maintained by the protein CI which blocks operators O and O ,
preventing transcription of all lytic genes including cro [8,55,56]. In lysogeny the CI
number functions as an indicator of the state of the bacterium: If DNA is damaged such
as by the UV light the protease activity of RecA is activated, leading to degradation of CI.
A small CI number allows for transcription of the lytic genes, starting with cro, the
product of which is the protein Cro.
The decision making, or the switching, is centered around operator O , and consists of
three binding sites O , O and O , each of which can be occupied by either a Cro
dimer or a CI dimmer [55,56]. As illustrated in Fig.2, these three binding sites control the
activity of two promoters P and P for respectively cI and cro transcriptions. The
transcription of cro starts at P , which partly overlaps O and O . The transcription of
cI starts at P , which overlaps O . The affinity of RNA polymerase for the two
promoters, and subsequent production of the two proteins, depends on how Cro and CI
bound to the three operator sites and thereby establishes lysogeny with about 500 CI
molecules per bacterium. If, however, CI number becomes sufficiently small, the
increased production of Cro flips the switch to lysis.
cI transcript crotranscript
Figure 2. The O controlling region of the phage λ genetic switch. The mathematical study [9,64]indicates
that the cooperative binding of CI dimers at the O and O sites is a key to the robustness of the genetic
switch. Such a cooperative binding enhances the positive CI feedback. When the CI positive feedback is
turned on by the existing CI dimers, CI proteins are synthesized. The phage evolves to the lysogenic state.
Otherwise Cro proteins are synthesized and the phage evolves to lytic state.
There have been numerous quantitative experimental studies on the stability in the
switching of bacteriophage λ. Recently, the frequency of spontaneous induction in strains
deleted for the recA gene has been reported independently by three groups [65-67], which
was reviewed by Aurell et al. [67]. They all confirmed two earlier important
observations that there is a switching behavior and that the switch is stable. In addition,
they all obtained consistent numerical values for the switching frequency, in spite of the
use of different strain backgrounds, done at different continents and at different times.
However, computational and mathematical attempts to quantitatively understand this
behavior have not been successful, even permitting the possibility that the wild type may
be more stable [59,67].
More recent data [68] suggest that the wild type may be two orders of magnitude more
stable than previously observed value in Ref.[66]: The switching rate to lytic state may be
less than 4×10-9 per minute. In addition to the call for more experimental studies, this
puts the theoretical modeling in a more challenging position. This wild type data was
used as the main input to further fix the model in Ref’s.[9,64]. The previous data were
also discussed to illustrate a pronounced exponential sensitivity in such a modeling,
summarized below.
State P O 3 O 2 O 1 P i(s) j(s) k(s)
RM R R R R
5 R R 2 0 0
6 R R 2 0 0
7 R R 2 0 0
8 R R R 3 0 0
10 C 0 1 0
11 C 0 1 0
12 C C 0 2 0
13 C C 0 2 0
14 C C 0 2 0
15 C C C 0 3 0
16 C R 1 1 0
17 C R 1 1 0
18 C C R 1 2 0
19 C R 1 1 0
20 R C 1 1 0
21 C R C 1 2 0
22 R C 1 1 0
23 R C 1 1 0
24 R C C 1 2 0
25 C R R 2 1 0
26 R C R 2 1 0
27 R R C 2 1 0
28 RNA 1 0 1
29 R RNA 1 0 1
30 C RNA 0 1 1
31 RNA R 1 0 1
32 RNA R R 2 0 1
33 RNA R C 1 1 1
34 RNA 0 0 1
35 RNA R 1 0 1
36 RNA C 0 1 1
37 RNA C 0 1 1
38 RNA C R 1 1 1
39 RNA C C 0 2 1
40 RNA RNA 0 0 2
Table I. The 40 configurations corresponding to right operator (adapted from Ref’s.[74-76]). R
stands for CI (λ repressor) dimer and C for Cro dimer.
The CI and Cro protein molecules in the cell are assumed to be in homeostatic
equilibrium. There are not always the same numbers of CI and Cro dimers bound to the
operators at any particular time. These numbers are fluctuating, and the equilibrium
assumption should give the size of these fluctuations. The key inputs are CI and Cro
dimerization constants and the Gibbs free energies for their bindings to the three operator
sites O 1, O 2 and O 3 [69-75] (See the legend of Table I and II for a more detailed
description.).
Following Ackers et al. [76] and Aurell et al. [67], we encode a state s of CI and/or Cro
bound to O by three numbers (i,j,k) referring to O , O and O respectively. The
R R3 R2 R1
coding for s is 0 if the corresponding site is free, 1 if the site is occupied by a CI dimer,
and 2 if the site is occupied by a Cro dimer. The probability of a state s with i(s) CI
dimers and j(s) Cro dimers bound to O is in the grand canonical approach of Shea and
Ackers [48]
For example, if CI occupies O , Cro O and O , we have i(s) = 1, j(s) = 2, k(s) = 0, and
p (s) = p (221). RNA polymerase (RNAp) can occupy either O and O , or O and
R R R1 R2 R2
O , not other configurations. There are total 40 states represented by s (Table I). The
normalization constant Z is determined by summing over s: Z = Ê [CI]i(s) [Cro]j(s)
[RNAp] k(s) exp(-∆G(s)/RT) . Here [ ] denotes the corresponding protein dimer
concentration in the bacterium, ∆G(s) the binding energy for binding configuration s, R
the gas constant and T the temperature.
3.2. Deterministic model
We further simplify the expression of p (s) by noticing that protein CI and Cro control
the operator [8,55,56]. If O and O are unoccupied by either CI or Cro, RNAp binds to
them with a probability determined by RNAp binding energy. The case that RNAp first
binds to O and O then blocking CI and Cro binding is excluded based on the
assumption that only CI and Cro controls the regulatory behavior. In addition to
experimental observation, this assumption is justifiable if the time scale associated with
CI and Cro binding is shorter than the RNAp binding. Except for an overall constant,
which we include into the rate of transcription, the RNAp binding is no longer relevant.
We therefore take it out of the expression p (s). The total number of states is reduced to
27. This simplification was first used by Aurell and Sneppen [59]. We will drop the
subscript R for binding probability p . We should point out that previous experimental
and theoretical results had been concisely reviewed by Aurell et al. [67], whose
convention we shall follow.
The dimer and monomer concentrations are determined by the formation and de-
association of dimers, which gives the relation of dimer concentration to the total
concentraion of proteins as
Here ∆G = - 11.1 kcal/mol is the dimer association free energy for CI.
Similar expression for [Cro] is
Cro Cro Cro
Here ∆G = - 7 kcal/mol is the dimer association free energy for Cro. Here [N ] and
[N ] are the monomer concentrations of CI and Cro respectively.
CI and Cro are produced from mRNA transcripts of cI and cro, which are initiated from
promotor sites P and P . The rate of transcription initiation from P when stimulated
by CI bound to O is denoted T , and when not stimulated T u. The number of CI
molecules produced per transcript is E . The overall expected rate of CI production is
CI CI Cro RM cI
Here N and N are the protein numbers for CI and Cro inside the bacterium
respectively. The converting factor between the protein concentration and the
corresponding protein inside the bacterium is listed in Table II. Similarly, the overall
expected rate of Cro production is
f (N , N ) = T E [p(000 )+ p(100)+ p(200) ]. Eq.(5)
Cro CI Cro R cro
We use T E E , and T u from Aurell and Sneppen [59], which were deduced from
RM, cI, cro RM
the resulting protein numbers in lysogenic and lytic states.
The free energies ∆G(s) are determined from in vitro studies, that is, they are obtained
outside of the living bacterium. The in vivo conditions for inside a living bacterium could
be different. The measured protein-DNA affinities could depend sensitively on the ions
present in the buffer solutions as well as other factors. This observation will be important
in our comparison between theoretical results and experimental data. On the other hand,
the in vivo effects of such changes should be compensated for, as e.g. changed KCl
concentrations are by putrescine [77] and other ions and crowding effects [78]. We note
that Record et al. [78] already observed that there may exist a significant difference
between in vivo and in vitro molecular parameters. The data quoted in Darling et al. was
obtained at KCl concentration of 200mM, which resembles in vivo conditions. Therefore,
though we expect a difference between the in vivo and in vitro data, the difference may
not be large, typically within 20-30% of the in vitro values.
The mathematical model which describes the genetic regulation in Fig.2 is a set of
coupled equations for the time rate of change of numbers of CI and Cro in a cell [57]:
CI CI CI Cro
Cro Cro CI Cro
where the net production rates are
F = f (N ,N ) - N /t
CI CI CI Cro CI CI
F = f (N ,N ) - N /t Eq. (7)
Cro Cro CI Cro Cro Cro
Eq.(6) and (7) represent the minimum deterministic model. Here dN/dt is the rate N
changes. The production terms f and f are functions of CI and Cro numbers in the
bacterium. With no Cro in the system, the curve of f vs. CI number has been
experimentally measured [79]. As reviewed in Aurell et al. [67] these measurements are
consistent with the best available data on protein-DNA affinities [69,71,80] dimerization
constants[81], initiation rates of transcriptions of the genes, and the efficiency of
translation of the mRNA transcripts into protein molecules. The decay constant t is an
effective life time, proportional to the bacterial life-time, since CI molecules are not
actively degraded in lysogeny, while t is about 30% smaller [82]. We comment that
there is considerably more experimental uncertainty in the binding of Cro, both to other
Cro and to DNA, than the binding of CI, see e.g. Darling et al. [74,75]. As a minimal
mathematical model of the switch, we take t and t from data, and deduce f and f
CI Cro CI Cro
at non-zero number of both CI and Cro with a standard set of assumed values of all
binding constants, which are summarized by Aurell et al. [67] and are adopted here
(Table II with differences in cell volume and converting factor, as well as the in vivo and
in vitro differences)
3.3. Positive and negative feedbacks; in vivo vs in vitro
Both positive and negative feedbacks are employed in this genetic switch. For CI (Cro), it
has a positive feedback effect on itself and a negative feedback effect on the production
of Cro (CI) [8]. Evidently, these feedbacks are systems effects: breaking them down into
disintegrated parts the feedback effects would disappear. They emerge only when a
proper integration is done. Such a systems effect is well known in engineering [83].
In establishing the minimum deterministic model, another major implicit assumption is
on the time scales. We have assumed that the dimerization process is a fast process on the
scale of Cro and CI production, hence can be treated as algebraic constraints. The
dimerization has been subjected to continuous experimental [84] and theoretical [85]
studies. It was concluded by in vitro experiment [84] that the Cro dimerization is slower
than that of CI. Nevertheless, the Cro dimerization time is on the order of fraction of a
minute [84], which is much smaller than the typical time of order of 20 minutes used in
our modeling (c.f. Table II). We may be able to apply the useful quasisteady state
approximation [86]. Thus, the algebraic constraints appears to a reasonable assumption
for such a minimum modeling used in [9,59,64,67]. Other cellular processes have also
been implicitly assumed to be fast. All their residual effects will be treated as extrinsic
stochastic effect contribution, and will be incorporated into the minimum modeling in the
name of intrinsic vs extrinsic noises, to be discussed below.
We specify further the meaning of minimum deterministic modeling. First of all, such a
model should be viewed as what the system might be, not as what it must be. Many
features are not explicitly contained in it, such as the nonspecific binding [87] and the
looping [88,89]. The non-specific binding was already demonstrated to be not crucial, but
the looping may well be, to which we will come back later. Nevertheless we point out
that by assuming the minimum deterministic modeling, we tentatively and tactically
assume it has captured all the essential features of the λ switch by aggregating molecular
processes around it. In do so it suggests another understanding of the difference between
in vivo and in vitro: All the parameters we adopted from in vitro measurement would
indeed take a different value in vivo, because there exist numerous other biological
processes inside the cell which contribute to this difference. If the minimum model is
essentially correct, it should be able to account for experimental data in a quantitative
manner, along with predictions to be further tested. We will show below that we have
indeed achieved this goal after several decades of theoretical efforts.
4. Stochastic Dynamical Modeling
4.1. Minimum quantitative model
Stochasticity is ubiquitous in biology. For the present modeling, it is particularly easy to
motivate it. If the numbers of CI and Cro were macroscopically large, then Eq.(1) would
be an entirely accurate description of the dynamics, because the fluctuation in number is
an order of N1/2 and the correction is an order of 1/N1/2, which would be negligibly small
when N would be very large. The numbers are however only in the range of hundreds.
Hence the fluctuation is not negligible. The actual protein production process is
influenced by many chance events, such as the time it takes for a CI or a Cro in solution
to find a free operator site, or the time it takes a RNA polymerase molecule to find and
attach itself to an available promoter, suggesting more stochastic sources. As a minimal
model of the network with finite-N noise, we therefore consider the following system of
two coupled stochastic differential equations, with two independent standard Gaussian
and white noise sources:
dN /dt = F + z (t)
dN /dt = F + z (t) Eq.(8)
Cro Cro Cro
We further assume that the means of the noise terms are zero, i.e. <z (t)> = <z (t)> = 0,
with the variance
Cro Cro Cro
Eq.(8) and (9) consist of the present minimum quantitative model. Here the symbol < …
> denotes the average over noise. Eq.(9) defines a 2µ2 diffusion matrix D. The noise
strength may contain contributions from the production and decay rates, assuming each is
dominated by one single independent reaction, as used by Aurell and Sneppen [59]. Such
a noise may be called the `intrinsic' noise. Other noise sources, ‘extrinsic’ noises, also
exist [90-93]. We treat the noise to incorporate both intrinsic and extrinsic sources: All
are assumed to be Gaussian and white. The consistent of this assumption should be tested
experimentally, as will be the case below. Certain probability events, however, may not
behave as Gaussian and white in the present context of modeling, which can be
determined by separate biological experiments, such as the p 240 mutation [68] to be
discussed below.
It has been demonstrated [61-63] that there exists a unique decomposition such that the
stochastic differential equation, Eq.(8), can be transformed into the following form, the
four dynamical element structure:
with the semi-positive definite symmetric 2µ2 matrix Λ defining the dissipation
(degradation), the anti-symmetric 2µ2 matrix Ω defining the transverse force, the single
valued function U defining the potential landscape, and the noise vector x(t), and the two
dimensional vectors:
Nτ = (N , N );
xτ = (x , x ), Eq.(11)
here τ means the transpose of the vector. The connection between the noise x and the
matrix Λ is similar to that of z and D of Eq.(9):
<x(t)> = 0
Cro Cro Cro
The decomposition from Eq.(8 ) and Eq.(9 ) to Eq.(10) and Eq.(12) is determined by the
following set of equations:
One may solve for Λ, Ω in terms of F = (F , F )τ and D from Eq.(13) and Eq.(14).
Indeed, this can be formally done. Once Λ, Ω are known, the requirement that Eq.(10)
can be reduced to Eq.(8) gives (Λ + Ω ) F = -“U(N), which is used to obtain U. In
general this decomposition is an involved mathematical and numerical endeavor. Further
simplification follows from the simplification of friction matrix. Typically the diffusion
matrix D is unknown biologically: There are no enough measurements to fix the noise
explicitly. Therefore we may treat the semi-positive definite symmetric matrix Λ as
parameters to be determined experimentally. In our calculation, we then assume that D is
a diagonal matrix. Following from Eq.(14), Λ is a diagonal matrix for two dimensional
case. The experimentally measured fraction of recA-1 lysogens that have switched to lytic
state is used to determine the elements of Λ.
Here we would like to give an intuitive interpretation of the mathematical procedure.
Eq.(8) corresponds to the dynamics of a fictitious massless particle moving in two
dimensional space formed by the two protein numbers N and N , with both
deterministic and random forces. It is easy to check that in general “µF(r) ∫ 0 and “∏F(r)
∫ 0. Therefore F(r) cannot be simply represented by the gradient of a scalar potential due
to both the force transverse to the direction of motion and force of friction. The simplest
case in two dimensional motion when both transverse force and friction exist is an
electrically charged particle moving in the presence of both magnetic and electric fields,
which is precisely in the form of Eq.(10).
Proceeding from Eq.(10), we note that we may interpret the semi-positive definite
symmetric Λ matrix as the friction matrix, and the antisymmetric matrix Ω as the result
of a `magnetic' field. The friction matrix represents the dissipation in physics. It is
analogous to the degradation in biology. The scalar function U takes the role of a
potential function which would determine the final steady distribution of the phage. The
global equilibrium will be reached when the final distribution function is given by
CI Cro CI Cro
The potential U, the landscape of the system, is depicted in Fig. 2 (c.f. Fig. 4).
Figure 3. Illustration of the dynamical structure of a genetic switch. The dynamic state of the network is
represented by a particle whose position is given by instantaneous protein numbers. The potential function
maps a landscape in the protein number space. For a genetic switch, there are two potential minima
corresponding to two epigenetic states. The area around each of the minima forms the attractive basin. The
state of the network always tends to relax to one of the minima. The fluctuation may bring the network
from one minimum to another with a rate given by Kramers rate formulae [94,95].
The phage sees two minima and one saddle point in the potential landscape. Those two
minima correspond to the lytic and lysogenic states. Once the phage is at one of the
minimum, the probability rate for it to move into another minimum is given by the
Kramers rate formulae in the form [94,95]:
P = w exp( - ∆U ) Eq.(16)
with the potential barrier height ∆U = (U – U ), the difference in potential
b saddle initial minimum
between the saddle point and the initial minimum, and the time scale, the attempt
frequency w determined by the friction, the curvatures of potential and values of
transverse force around the saddle and the local minimum. We remark here that the
attempt frequency is in general a complicated function of dynamical quantities in Eq,(10).
It’s form will be determined empirically in the present paper. We refer readers to Ref.[95]
for the general mathematical discussions.
4.2. Stochastic dynamical structure analysis
Eq.(10) gives the dynamical structure of the gene regulatory network in terms of its four
dynamical components: the friction, the potential gradient of the driving force, the
transverse force, and the stochastic force. Such a dynamical structural classification
serves two main purposes. It provides a concise description for the main features of the
genetic switch by itself and it provides a quantitative measure to compare different gene
regulatory networks, for instance between the wild phage and its mutant. Such an
analysis of experimental data based on Eq.(10) will be tentatively named the dynamical
structure analysis.
The potential may be interpreted as the landscape map of the phage development. Each of
the epigenetic state is represented by a potential minimum and its surrounding area forms
an attractive basin. The dissipation represented by the friction gives rise to the adaptivity
of the phage in the landscape defined by the potential: The phage always has the
tendency to approach the bottom of the nearby attractive basin. The potential change near
the minimum, together with the friction, gives the time scale of relaxation: The time it
takes to reach equilibrium after the epigenetic state is perturbed. Once we know the
friction and the potential around the minimum, we have a good grasp of the relaxation
time, τ = η/U″, here η is the strength of friction, U″ the second derivative of potential,
both in one dimensional approximation along a relevant axis. The relaxation time is
independent of the amplitude of the perturbation near the potential minimum, when U″ is
a constant.
Two remarks are in order here. 1. The meaning of friction matrix is the same as in
mechanics: If there is no external driving force, the system tends to stop at its nearby
minimal position. The closest corresponding concept in biology is `degradation’: There
is always a natural protein state under given condition. 2. It turns out that the transverse
force is not a dominant factor in the present switch-like behavior. However, its existence
is the necessary condition for oscillatory biological behaviors, which will not be
discussed further in the present paper.
Another time scale provided by the potential is the lifetime of the epigenetic state, which
is given by the Kramers rate formulae, Eq. (16), through the potential barrier height. Such
a scale measures the stability of epigenetic state in the presence of fluctuating
environment. In the case of phage λ, the lifetime for lysogenic state is very long, unless
the phage is mutated at its operator sites. When the phage is provoked, the height of the
potential barrier separating lysogenic and lytic states is reduced. The lifetime of lysogenic
state is drastically reduced due to its exponential dependence on the barrier height and
switching takes place. Looking at it from a different angle, the stochastic force gives the
phage ability to search around the potential landscape by passing through saddle points
and drives the switching event. The Kramers rate formulae is a quantitative measure of
this optimization ability.
5. Quantitative Comparison between Theory and Experiment
5. 1. Determining in vivo parameters.
First we need to decide the free energies to be used in the theoretical model. Without
exception, all the binding energies measured so far for phage λ are determined from in
vitro studies. The difference between the in vivo condition and the in vitro condition
could include the ion concentration in the buffer solutions and the spatial configuration of
the genomic DNA, for instant looping [96-98]. The relative large change of the
cooperative energy from in vitro to in vivo in Table I may be partly due to the looping
effect, though there is no direct consideration of looping in present model. We note that
in the in vivo conditions all the operators are in the same kind of environment, including
the ion condition and the DNA configuration. The reason for the latter is that the
operators are closely located to each other in the genome. If there is a bending of the
genomic DNA which increase or decrease DNA-protein bindings, these closely located
and short operator sites are mostly likely experience the same amount of change.
Therefore, we assume that in addition to the in vitro DNA-protein binding energy, overall
binding energy differences are added to all the CI and Cro protein respectively:
in vivo binding energy for CI (Cro) = in vivo binding energy for CI + ∆G (∆G ).
To determine ∆G (∆G ), we need more experimental input than the in vitro
measurement. To avoid unnecessary uncertainty in the model, we try to include a
minimal number of parameters. The cooperative binding between two CI dimers is
included. The cooperative bindings between two Cro dimers, between CI and Cro dimers,
the unspecific CI and Cro bindings are not included. Our later calculation verifies that CI
cooperative binding is essential to the genetic switch properties while the bindings we
ignore do not have significant influence on the calculated results. There are three
parameters we need to adjust, the difference between in vivo and in vivo binding energy
for CI (∆G ), for Cro (∆G ), and for the cooperativity of CI dimers (∆G(cooperative)).
We first use the CI numbers of both wild type and mutant λO 121 to determine ∆G ,
then we determine ∆G(cooperative) and ∆G by requiring both the lytic and lysogenic
states of wild type are equally stable, calculated from Kramers rate formulae. The
adjusted in vivo binding energies and other parameters we use for the modeling are given
in Table I. Using these adjusted parameters the robustness of the phage’s genetic switch
is reproduced (shown in Fig. 4).
2000 Cro 300
0 1000 2000 3000 4000(a) 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700(b)
Figure 4. Lines of d<N >/dt = 0 (solid) and d<N >/dt = 0 (dashed), here < > is the average to stochastic
force, for: (a) the wild type phage, λO 321, with parameters taken directly from in vitro measurement; (b)
the wild type phage with parameters adjusted allowing in vivo and in vitro differences. For mutants λO 121
λO 323 see Ref.[9]. For (b) these two lines have three intersections. These three fixed point in Eq.(2)
coincide with the potential extrema, minima and saddle point, in Eq.(10).
The mutant lO 3'23' studied by Little et al. [66] was characterized by Hochschild et al.
[99] for binding to O 3'. To produce the desired protein level, we obtained that the
binding energy between O 3' and Cro protein is 1.8 kcal/mol smaller than that of the O 3
and Cro protein, consistent with the result of Hochschild et al. The CI binding energy
from O 3 to O 3' is slightly increased, 1 kcal/mol, also consistent with the measurement.
RT 0.617 kcal/mol
Effective bacterial volume 0.7×10-15 l
T 0.115 /s
T u 0.0105 /s
t CI 2.9×103 s
t Cro 5.2×103 s
Converting factor between protein number and concentration 1.5×10-11
in vitro free energy differences for wild type λ
∆G (001) -12.5 kcal/mol
∆G (010) -10.5 kcal/mol
-9.5 kcal/mol
-25.7 kcal/mol
∆G (011) -22.0 kcal/mol
∆G (110) -35.4 kcal/mol
∆G (111) -14.4 kcal/mol
-13.1 kcal/mol
-15.5 kcal/mol
-2.7 kcal/mol
∆G(cooperative)
dimerization energy
-11.1 kcal/mol
CI2 -7.0 kcal/mol
in vitro free energy differences for O 3' binding
∆G (100) -10.5 kcal/mol
∆G (200) -13.7 kcal/mol
in vivo free energy differences - in vitro free energy differences
∆G –2.5 kcal/mol
∆G -4.0 kcal/mol
∆G(cooperative) -3.7 kcal/mol
Table II. Parameters used in the modeling. CI dimer affinities to O , O and O areafter Darling et al.
[74,75]. Cro dimer affinities to O , O are after Takeda et al. [70,80], Jana et al. [73], Kim et al. [71],
as stated in Aurell et al. [67]. The CI dimerization energy is from Koblan and Ackers [81], Cro dimerization
energy from Jana et al. [72,73]. The bacterial volume is taken from Bremmer and Dennis [100]. E and
E are taken from Shean and Gottesman [101], Ringquist et al. [102], and Kennell and Riezman [103.] The
in vitro parameters have been summarized by Aurell et al. [67], which we largely follow. However, we here
point out two differences: 1) Our effective bacterial volume, estimating from the typical size of the
bacterium, assuming a tube of about 0.7micrometer in diameter and 2 micrometers in length, is about factor
3 smaller; and 2) The normalization factor for the concentrations, calculated against the numbers of water
molecules, is about factor of 60 smaller. The difference between in vivo and in vitro values is consistent
with qualitative experimental observation [8]. The wild type data of Little [68] is used to determine the in
vivo and in vitro difference.
We assume that friction matrix Λ is a diagonal constant matrix. Similar to Aurell and
Sneppen [59], we assume the stochastic fluctuations in Eq.(2) scale with the square root
of protein number divided by relaxation time: D = Const×τ /N , and D =
CI CI CI,lysogen Cro
Const×τ /N , where N is the CI number at lysogenic state and N is
Cro Cro,lysis CI,lysogen Cro,lysis
the Cro number at the lytic state. The Const is to be determined by experiments. In Eq.(7),
we note that if the antisymmetric matrix Ω is small, that is, |det (Ω)| << det(Λ) then Λ is
the inverse of D. We calculate Ω assuming Λ = D-1 and find that indeed in the regions of
concern, i.e. the potential valley connecting two potential minima through the saddle
points, Ω is negligible. The final parameters we have used are
11 CI CI,lysogen
Λ = 0.040×τ /N . Eq.(17)
22 Cro Cro,lysis
5.2. Stochastic dynamical structure analysis of λ switch
The original problem, described by Eq.(8), may be interpreted as a set of two dimensional
differential equation describing a particle motion, if we view the protein number N and
N as the coordinates and the particle position to be (N (t) N (t)) at time t. There is a
Cro CI Cro
deterministic force Fτ = (F , F ) and a stochastic force acting on such a particle. The
deterministic force has the characteristics of a friction, a potential force, and a transverse
force at the same time. The decomposition we have discussed earlier, Eq.(10) allows to
separate these components. We discuss them respectively here.
The wild type phage l and some of its mutants sees two minima and one saddle point in
the potential energy landscape (Fig. 5). Those two minima correspond to the lytic and
lysogenic states (cf. Fig. 3). The positions of the potential minima give the average
protein number for lytic and lysogenic states. There is a relatively narrow valley
connecting these two minima. The highest point along this valley is the saddle point.
Since the areas with large potential are not easily accessible and the low-lying potential
region forms a valley, we may visualize the potential along the valley and illustrate it in a
one dimensional graph as shown in Fig.3 and Fig.6.
CCII 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Figure 5. The potential U of wild type phage plotted on logarithmic scale (a) and as a contour map (b).
There are two potential minima corresponding to the lysogenic and lytic states. Connecting these two states
is a narrow potential valley. The highest point along this valley is the saddle point. The most probable state
of the phage is at either of the potential minima. The fluctuation may bring the phage from the original
potential minimum, moving along the valley and across the saddle point to reach another potential
minimum. The rate for such a switching event is given by the Kramers rate formulae.
The antisymetric matrix Ω may be represented by a single scalar B along the z direction
ΩF = B z× F, assuming x= N , y=N . The transverse field B for the wild type is
obtained by numerically solving Eq.(13). This field is small except at the region along
two axes. Along the two axes, the transverse B field has no effect, since the motion is
guided by the steep potential to a valley. Once the phage evolves away from origin when
both CI and Cro number are small, in the later development the transverse force may be
taken out of Eq.(10) without changing the dynamics of the phage. In both the calculation
of the relaxation time and the lifetime of lysogenic state, we may ignore the transverse
force for the above reason.
The protein number distributions of Cro and CI has also been calculated in Ref.[9]. We
refer readers there for details as well as for the analysis of other quantities, such as the
robustness and stability.
5.3. Switch efficiency
Efficiency is an important feature which so far has received relative less attention in
literature. We present the discussion in some detail here.
The analysis of robustness of phage λ genetic switch demonstrates that its epigenetic
states are stable against the variations in parameters and robust against major changes in
terms of mutations. Then how does the switching take place? From theoretical point of
view, there are two channels that the phage can be induced from lysogenic growth to lytic
growth. In reality phage seems to use both of these strategies. For clarity, we begin by
discussing these two channels separately.
The first channel of induction is to increase the noise level of CI protein number while
keeping all the other conditions intact. Mathematically it means to increase z in Eq.(8)
and D in Eq.(9), while keeping all the other terms in Eq.(8) and Eq.(9) unchanged. The
friction matrix Λ is changed through the decomposition procedure. As a result, the
potential energy U is also changed. Therefore for different noise level, the phage moves
in different potential landscape. Such a change of noise level has a drastic effect. It
changes the minima of the potential well of lysogen by making it shallower. As a good
approximation, the barrier height of the lysogen potential well scales inversely with the
noise strength. Doubling the noise level reduces the potential barrier by half. As a result,
the increased noise level drastically decreases the lifetime of lysogenic state, as shown in
Fig. 10. The lifetime of the lytic state, on the other hand, remains unchanged. The
combination of these two changes in the potential landscape brings the phage to lytic
growth efficiently.
The second channel is through the deterministic terms in Eq.(8). For the deterministic
terms, for example, introducing CI monomer cleavage is equivalent to substitute N in
Eq.(8) with αN , here α is a factor represent cleavage strength (Fig. 11). If α is smaller
than 0.02, we find that lysogenic state is no longer stable, i.e. no longer a potential
minima. The interpretation of such a small α is that almost each of the CI monomer is
cleaved. If α is small, say 0.1, meaning 90% CI monomers are cleaved, the lysogenic
state is still stable with a lifetime almost unchanged. Apparently a uniform CI cleavage
alone without introducing extra noise to CI levels is not an efficient way for induction.
Phage may have used both of these two channels. The second channel is obviously used,
since RecA cleaves CI monomers. The strong indication that the first channel is also used
comes from the observations that without external stimulus, the recA+ phage shows a
much shorter lifetime for the lysogenic state compared to recA- phage. Such a significant
reduction of lysogen lifetime without activating RecA proteins on an observable scale can
be explained by doubling of the CI noise level. Fig.6 gives schematic explanations of the
switching process.
Figure 6. (a) Illustration of the switching mechanism from the current work. Before switching the phage
grows in lysogenic state. The potential barrier separating the lysogenic state and the lytic state is high.
When recA is activated, this barrier is lowered. The lifetime of lysogenic state reduces drastically and the
phage switches to lytic state. (b) Switching mechanism of Shea and Ackers [48]. In their work fluctuation
was not included. Switching was only possible when the lysogenic state is no longer a potential minimum.
When stochastic effect is included, the switching happens when the lysogenic potential minimum become
too shallow to confine fluctuation.
In the early work by Shea and Ackers [48], stochastic effect was not included. In their
model even a shallow lysogenic potential minimum would confine the phage to continue
growing in lysogenic state. Switching happens only when the lysogen potential minimum
disappears completely. For the parameters they used, they find that when 20% of CI
monomers were cleaved, such a switching would happen. As pointed out by Aurell et al.
[67], in these early works the genetic switch modeling results do not show the observed
robustness. After we require that the genetic switch should demonstrate the observed
robustness, the disappearance of the lysogenic potential minimum is pushed down to 2%.
However, the actually switching happens before the disappearance of lysogen potential
minimum when the lysogen potential minimum is too shallow to confine the fluctuations.
If 10% of CI monomer is cleaved, at least we expect a 10-fold increase in D due to the
reduced CI monomer numbers. The potential barrier for lysogenic state reduces to less
than 1, therefore becomes too shallow to allow continual lysogenic growth.
5.4. Quantitative comparison with experiment of Little et al.
We summarize the calculation results related to measurement of Little et al. [66] in Table
III since their data are most update and systematic. In their experiment, they measured
the free phage per lysogenic cell for both recA+ and recA- phage, but did not convert the
recA+ into fraction of lysogens that switched to lytic state. If we assume the burst size for
both the recA+ and the recA- phage are similar, our calculation for the RecA+ protein
agrees with their measurements quantitatively.
Phage Relative CI level in Relative Cro Switching frequency Switching frequency
genotype lysogen level in lysis to lytic state (recA-) to lytic state (recA+)
per minute per minute
Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical
(experimental) (experimental*))
Table III. Comparison between the calculation and the experiment data (in parentheses) by Little et al. [66]
Here *) indicates that the estimated wild type data from Little (private communication) [68] is used. The
wild type biological data were used to find out the difference between in vivo and in vitro molecular
parameters, as listed in Table I. The relative CI level and switch rate of λO 121 were used to fine tune
parameters. Rest theoretical entries are then calculated directly from our model.
In Table III the bi-stability of the gene switch in phage λ is assumed, and the protein
levels in the lytic state are calculated. This is of course not the case for the wild type,
hence posts a question to test the calculated Cro level experimentally. One way to realize
the bi-stability may be by suppressing the lyses, achieving the so-called anti-immune
phenotype [104,105].
As discussed in section IV of formulation of the present stochastic model, we have made
the simplified assumption of treating all chance or probability events as Gaussian white
noise. This assumption affects two testable biological quantities: the lifetime of lysogenic
state, Eq.(16), and the shape of CI number distribution in lysogenic state, Eq.(15) and Fig.
7. Simultaneous measuring both of them can be used as a consistent check to the
Gaussian white noise assumption. For example, we have treated the effect of recA+ to
switching dynamics as that of a Gaussian white noise to simplify our calculation, in the
same reasoning of minimal modeling type approach in the present paper. In fact, we have
assumed that with recA+ the total noise strength doubles. Using this assumption we
calculated the lytic switching rates, represented by the last column of Table III. The CI
distribution with recA+ should be twice as broad as in the case with recA-. Both results
are subjected to the further experimental test.
There may be some chance events that cannot be treated as Gaussian white noise in the
present formulation. One example has been already suggested in biological experiments
[68], the p 240 mutation which greatly weakens the promoter therefore the ability to
produce CI. This mutation makes the lysogens barely stable, and is estimated to
responsible for at least 99% of observed lytic switching in the wild type. We have used
this input for both Table II and III. We have re-calculated the switching rates to lytic state
of all strands, assuming the same minimal model, with the same forms of functions for
the switching rate, but with the previous experimental data [66]. The switching rates
obtained in this way are: wild type(λ+), 2×10-7; λO 121, λO 2×10-6; λO 323, 7×10-5;
λO 3'23', 5×10-7. Indeed, the stability of the wild type decreases by more than 2 orders of
magnitude. The overall noise strength is increased by 60% for the wild type, resulting a
broader CI distribution in lysogenic state. There is no appreciable change in other
quantities, such as the protein level. The only noticeable overall change in molecular
parameters is the in vivo cooperative energy, from –6.4 kcal/mol to –6.7 kcal/mol. A
good overall quantitative agreement exists between modeling and experiment.
It is a fact that any mathematical modeling in natural science should have empirical input
to completely fix its mathematical structure. For the modeling of phage λ there is an
already large body of molecular data which enables us to nearly pin down our model. The
additional freedom in our parameters is fixed by data from wild type, such as the
switching frequency. Above less-than-expected sensitivity of our mathematical structure
to this frequency that a few percentage of change in molecular parameters can result in
two orders of magnitudes change in frequency is a remarkable demonstration of the
internal consistence of our modeling. It demonstrates that the switching is exponentially
sensitive to some molecular parameters. In addition to more theoretical effort to go
beyond our present minimal modeling, it is clear that more experiments are needed in this
direction to test the present model: The precise in vivo molecular parameters and the
distributions and time-correlation of protein numbers in our model should be viewed as
predictions.
5.5. Experimental determination of dynamical elements
We have introduced four dynamical quantities for a gene regulatory network: friction,
potential, the transverse force and the stochastic force. The friction and the strength of the
stochastic force are related. For the genetic switch, the transverse force is irrelevant to the
dynamic properties. Therefore the two crucial quantities for a genetic switch are the
friction and the potential. Those quantities can be calculated from the more microscopic
modeling with molecular parameters. The present quantitative success lies in the
allowance of the in vivo and in vitro differences, and of various noise contributions.
However, those four quantities may be directly determined biologically.
There are three different types of experimental data to determine the dynamical elements
of the local potential function for a genetic switch, the degradation (the friction in
physical sciences), and the barrier height (Fig. 7). The first type is the protein distribution
around each of the epigenetic states. It is given mathematically by
here r is a normalization constant. The protein distribution is explicitly measurable.
Once r(N) is measured experimentally, the local potential U(N) near the potential
minima can be determined as: U(N) = - ln (r(N) ) + ln (r ).
The second type of experimental data is the relaxation time, a measure of how long it
would take for the system to return to its local equilibrium after a small perturbation. It is
determined by both the potential near the minimum and the degradation,
here η is the strength of friction, which gives the friction matrix Λ along the path of
relaxation. U″ the second derivative of potential. Since potential can be obtained from
r(N), relaxation time can be used to obtain friction: η = τ U″.
Potential Barrier
Crossing Time
Relaxation
Figure 7. Three types of experiments directly probe the dynamical structure of a genetic switch and
determine the dynamic components. The measurement of protein number distribution determines the
potential function at each of the epigenetic state. The additional information on the relaxation time
determines the strength of friction. The lifetime of each epigenetic state determines the height and shape of
potential barrier.
The third type of experimental data is the lifetime of epigenetic states, the measure of
switching rate from one state to another. The probability of phage evolving from one
epigenetic state of growth to another is given by the Kramers rate formulae, our Eq.(16),
P = w exp(- ∆U ) ,
where ∆U is barrier height and w is the attempt frequency. w is given by the friction
and the curvature of the potential barrier. The curvature of the potential is related to the
height of the potential barrier and the shape of potential near its minimum. Therefore ∆U
can be determined from the lifetime of its epigenetic state: ∆U = ln(w ) – ln(P).
The genetic switch for phage λ is a complex dynamical system. It took decades of
ingenious experimental research and laborious work to collect parameters needed for this
mathematical modeling. For a more complicated system, resource and time may limit the
ability to study each molecular element in such a great detail. A method that is less
demanding on the details yet still can capture the main features is of great interest. Above
dynamical structure analysis provides such a guidance to build such a phenomenological
model, as illustrated in .
We emphasize that the quantities introduced in dynamical structure theory, the friction,
the potential gradient, the transverse force and the stochastic force associating with the
friction are all measurable quantities at the given description level. These are quantities
similar to temperature, pressure, and free energy in thermodynamics, which can be
determined by the microscopic details but can also be measured independent of those
details. Once the relationship between these quantities are established, as shown in
Eq.(10), we are ready to write down the effective equation of motion for the network
without resorting to details.
5.6. Stochasticity, robustness, cooperation, and efficiency
Starting from realization that noise is important in the initiation of transcription in phage
λ [58], stochasticity has been increasingly viewed as one of the most important elements
in the dynamical modeling of biological processes [106-108]. Both the intrinsic and
extrinsic noises are shown to exist in biological processes and are analyzed theoretically
[90-93]. The parameterization in the form of Eq.(17) is a way to account for both noise
contributions.
Robustness has been viewed as one of the central features in biological processes [109-
111]. Numerous recent studies have established its importance [112-117]. Combing with
stochasticity, the work reviewed here [9,64] established a quantitative criterion, Eq.(16),
for the robustness. The potential landscape function, U(N) in Eq.(10), emerged from the
stochastic dynamics provides a graphic representation for the robustness. Those results
again confirm the importance of noise.
Finally, we wish to point out that a complete rigid system, that is, an absolute robust
system with no flexibility, is not viable from the evolution point of view [118,119]. Such
a structure would not survive the stringent evolutionary process. This may be illustrated
in the switch efficiency discussed above. It is also implied by the ability that the phage λ
can switch from lysogenic to lytic state when provoked [8], a feature can be captured
based on the present minimum model, though no explicit and detailed mathematical
analysis has been published yet along this direction. Thus, the stochasticity seems to
provide the critical link to understand both robustness and flexibility. We believe such a
feature can indeed be understood from the evolutionary point of view [119].
6. Perspective on Mathematical Modeling
6.1. Major prediction of the minimum quantitative modeling
We have shown that thanks to continuous theoretical and experimental efforts the
minimum quantitative modeling has achieved the status of quantitative agreement with
experimental biological data. New predictions, such as protein distributions, are made
and discussed in Ref.[9]. There is one prediction on the cooperative energy which stands
out as an excellent indicator for success of both recent theoretical and experimental
efforts.
Ever since 1980’s, it has been found that it is rather difficult to model stability of λ
switch with known parameter constraints [48,57], even allowing the possibility of up to
30% difference between in vivo and in vitro parameter values [51]. It has been found the
cooperation energy would play an important role [120,121]. Thus, it has been
hypothesized that additional effects beyond the minimum model would be needed. One
of the most promising one is a stronger cooperative effect. Indeed, independent of
theoretical need, additional effect, the looping, has been found experimentally [89,97].
A brief account of this effort may be relevant. Four years ago four of the present authors
began a mathematical study on phage λ. Nevertheless, tried all known methods to us at
that time we could not solve the stability puzzle. Effectively we were in the same
situation as what reported in Ref’s.[57,67]. One of major problems for us was that even
allowing the possibility to vary the parameter values drastically in the name of in vivo
and in vitro difference, the parameter space appears too big for an effective research. This
difficulty was partially verified in retrospective in Ref.[51], where the change of
parameters value appeared not large enough in order to explain the experimental within
the minimum quantitative model. Out of this frustration it was realized three years ago
that one must have an effective quantification criterion for the stability. It turned out that
the landscape idea rooted deeply in both physics and biology appears to be such a
candidate. Driving by this need for quantification, a mathematically consistent
construction method for such a landscape function was quickly discovered. With this new
method it was relatively easy to explore bigger parameter space. One critical parameter,
the cooperative energy, was then found to double its value in order to have the desired
stability, the value in bold face value for ∆G(cooperative) of -3.7 kcal/mol in Table II.
We note this value is about twice of what tried in Ref.[51].
Interestingly such a value was indeed observed in an independent biological experiment
[89]. In writing this review, we further noticed that such a big value was suggested to be
possible in an independent theoretical investigation based on thermodynamic
consideration [88]. Given all those independent efforts: theoretical [9,88] and
experimental [89,97], successful [64] and failed [51], present authors believe that such an
agreement between the theoretical prediction [64] and experimental value [89] on the
cooperative energy may not be accidental. It indicates that that the minimum quantitative
model may have indeed captured the essential biological features of this genetic switch,
with its first nontrivial and verified prediction.
6.2. Relation to other modeling methodologies
There has been a tremendous amount of literature on biomodeling and biocomputation. It
is both impossible in the present article to give an adequate survey of various
methodologies. Nevertheless we would like to present the following two classification
schemes, according to mathematical and to scientific structures, to place our method in a
broader context.
From a mathematical point of view, a modeling may be classified according to whether it
is discrete or continuous and whether it is deterministic or stochastic. The classical
modeling of deterministic and discrete is the Boolean logic circuit [122]. The works of
Shea and Ackers [48] as well as others [57,123,124] are the fine examples of
deterministic and continuous modeling. Examples of stochastic and continuous modeling
are Arkin et al. [58], Aurell and Sneppen [59]. Naturally, there are methods of combining
various features. One of such fine examples is the hybrid of continuous and discrete
modeling of Tchuraev and Galimzyanov [125]. Of those modeling methods according
this classification, the simplest one is that based on the Boolean logic circuit. It is clearly
an approximation, but in many cases well serves specific biological purposes. It is in fact
currently the dominant modeling and presentation methodology in biology. The most
difficult but most detailed modeling is the continuous and stochastic formulation. Many
of its predictions are necessarily probabilistic in nature, corresponding nicely to
biological phenomena. Our present method belongs to this last category. Nevertheless,
we should point out that no method would be definitely better than the rest. The choice of
modeling method must be appropriate to biological questions under addressed.
From the scientific structure point of view, the modeling may be classified into the first
principle modeling and the completely empirical modeling. It is believed that chemical
reactions and other physical processes lie behind various biological processes. Hence it
should be possible to predict biological functions based on the physical-chemical
principles. This first principle modeling methodology has been followed by Shea and
Ackers [48] and by Reinitz and Vaisnys [57], by many others [58,59,123]. Ours is also of
this type. The advantages of first principle modeling are that it shows the unity of
sciences and that additional insight and information can be obtained from the lower level
scientific descriptions. The evident disadvantage of this modeling, in addition to the
difficulty of specifying all needed micro-parameters, is that higher level processes often
show emerging phenomena. It is difficult to make predictions based on the properties of
system’s components. The outstanding stability puzzle of phage λ genetic switch [51,59],
one of simplest possible living genetic switch, and the enormous effort [9,48,51,57-59,67]
to quantitatively model its behavior, clearly illustrate this situation.
The other extreme, as comparing to the first principle modeling, is to treat the system in
question autonomously, inferring its properties completely from empirical studies.
Statistical analysis methods play a dominant role in this approach. The advantage of this
modeling is that it establishes the independent role of the investigating scientific layer. It
is consistent with the view that at each scientific level autonomous laws can be uncovered.
Equipped with biological insights, it has been employed successfully in numerous
biological studies. The proposals of Waddington [126] on developmental landscape and
of Monod and Jacob [127] on gene regulation mechanism are such fine examples. In
reality, particularly in molecular biology, what typically encountered is in between those
two extremes, as demonstrated by the Boolean logic circuit modeling5 [122] and by
others [123-125,128]. Interestingly, even in the empirical modeling setting, we have,
however, briefly discussed the direct and transparent connection of our method to
empirical data in subsection 5.5., though it is rooted in first principle modeling. This
suggests that our method can be used in this extreme, too. Further investigation in this
direction should be carried out.
The statistical analysis also suggests an important issue in mathematical modeling: the
number of variables and the associated problem of “curse of dimension”. Regarding to
the matching of data to appropriate modeling methodologies, there is another issue of
“parsimony of experimental data”, which is particularly acute in a real time modeling at
present. We will not discuss those issues here.
continuous
Statistical
High dimensions
First principle
Stochastic
Deterministic o
Low dimensions
Figure 8. The schematic diagram of modeling methodologies. The coordinates are classified
according to mathematical descriptions which define a three dimensional space: many degrees of freedom
(high dimensions) to few degrees of freedom (low dimensions) (x-direction); from deterministic to
stacohastic (y-direction); discrete to continuous (z-direction). The broken lines which defines a sphere are
classified according to scientific understandings: from first principles (inside) to statistical methods
(outside). Both scientific methodologies encompass all mathematical descriptions.
To summarize the unique characters of the present novel method, the stochastic
dynamical structure analysis, mathematically it is a continuous and stochastic formulation
with four dynamical elements. In terms of scientific structure, it is equivalent to the first
principle modeling. Nevertheless it can be directly related to empirical data to establish
its autonomy.
6.3. Literature sampling
First of all, the book by Ptashne [8] on phage λ is a must read, where an excellent review
on experimental work up to 2004 can be found. Because both the λ repressor and the lac
operon are instrumental in the current molecular and synthetic biological studies, the
book by Mulller-Hill [129] is another must read. A good summary of earlier study on
phage lambda can be found in Ref.[130]. A broader and recent general review can be
found in Ref.[131].
For a recent phage λ studies reviewed from the switch point of view, Ref.[132] is a good
start. Five switches were identified there for the developmental process. The stability
puzzle was put into sharp focus in Ref.[67]. Looping study has been studied in Ref.[88]
theoretically and in Ref.[89,97] experimentally. The phage from evolutionary point of
view was studied in Ref.[133]. More studies on the role of Cro can be found in Ref.[84]
and [85]. More interesting dynamical behaviors were reported experimentally in Ref.[134]
and [135]. The effect of degradation time on stability was considered theoretically in
Ref.[136]. Various other features on genetic switch have been recently explored in
Ref’s.[137-142].
7. Third Age of Phage
Because of its enormous biomass in the biosphere on Earth, the importance of phage has
already been recognized in the current ecological study [47,143,144], and title of this
section is borrowed from Ref.[144]. The presentation of theoretical effort in this chapter
has shown that the phage has been playing an important role in the study of fundamental
biology in the post Human Genomic era, too, along with the experimental effort [145].
The quantitative and detailed modeling of gene regulatory networks is evidently at its
beginning. There are numerical possibilities to go beyond the minimal quantitative
modeling reviewed here. For example, even for the phage lambda genetic switch, it is a
simplification. It would be desirable to have quantitative demonstration on how some of
the in vivo and in vitro differences arise by incorporating more degrees of freedoms, such
as the left operon and what would be the quantitative differences. A further extension
would be to model all five switches of the lambda developmental processes [132], to
obtain a comprehensive quantitative understanding of the whole process. Deep biological
questions, such as why the phage chooses such a structure or what are the evolution
principles guided this choice [66,128], not discussed yet adequately by any measure.
Nevertheless, we do wish to point out that the study of phage λ genetic switch has
revealed a novel mathematical structure [9] and already put one of the deep rooted
concepts in biology, the landscape [126,146-148], back on a firm mathematical and
biological ground. Numerical recently quantitative phage studies [9,49-
51,58,59,66,67,74-76,132-142] have pushed our understanding of systems biology onto
another level, complementary to high-throughput and large-scale analyses. It should be
optimistic that its study will generate more new biological understandings and will have
an influence beyond biology, as biology has already inspired the theories of general
systems [149] and cybernetics [150]. In view of its past glorious successes (For example,
one may count how many Nobel Prize winners in physiology and medicine and in
confident that more discoveries are waiting ahead.
Acknowledgements
We thank J.J. Collins, J.W. Little, B. Muller-Hill, S.M. Stoylar, G. Wegrzyn for critical
comments and M. Mossing for an updating on literature. This work was supported in part
by the Institute for Systems Biology (L.H. and D.G.) and by a USA NIH grant under
HG002894 (P.A.).