1v6356.2021:viXra
TheAnnalsofAppliedStatistics
2011,Vol.5,No.4,2668–2687
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2011
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVE CROSS-VALIDATION FOR TUNING AND
COMPARING MODELS, WITH APPLICATION TO
DRUG DISCOVERY
By Hui Shen, William J. Welch
and Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver
University of British Columbia, University of British Columbia
and North Carolina State University
Cross-validation (CV)iswidelyusedfortuningamodelwith re-
spect to user-selected parameters and for selecting a “best” model.
For example, the method of k-nearest neighbors requires the user
tochoose k,thenumberof neighbors, andaneuralnetwork hassev-
eraltuningparameterscontrollingthenetworkcomplexity.Oncesuch
parametersareoptimizedforaparticulardataset,thenextstepisof-
tentocomparethevariousoptimizedmodelsandchoosethemethod
with the best predictive performance. Both tuning and model selec-
tion boil downtocomparing models, eitheracross different valuesof
the tuning parameters or across different classes of statistical mod-
els and/or sets of explanatory variables. For multiple large sets of
data, like the PubChem drug discovery cheminformatics data which
motivated this work, reliable CV comparisons are computationally
demanding, or even infeasible. In this paper we develop an efficient
sequential methodology for model comparison based on CV. It also
takes into account the randomness in CV. The number of models is
reduced via an adaptive, multiplicity-adjusted sequential algorithm,
where poor performers are quickly eliminated. By exploiting match-
ingofindividualobservations,itissometimesevenpossibletoestab-
lish the statistically significant inferiority of some models with just
one execution of CV.
Received December 2008; revised June 2011.
1Supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada,
theNational Institutesof Health,USAthrough theNIHRoadmap for Medical Research,
Grant1P20HG003900-01,andtheMathematicsofInformationTechnologyandComplex
Systems, Canada.
Key words and phrases. Assaydata,cheminformatics, drugdiscovery,k-nearestneigh-
bors, multiplicity adjustment, neural network, PubChem, randomized-block design, se-
quential analysis.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2011,Vol. 5, No. 4, 2668–2687. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
2 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
1. Introduction. Theapplication area thatmotivated thisresearch illus-
tratestheenormouscomputationalburdenthatcanoccurwhencross-valida-
tion(CV)isusedtotuneandselectstatisticalmodels.OurExploratoryCen-
ter for Cheminformatics Research, funded by the National Institutes of
HealthRoadmapforMedicalResearch,iscomparingstatisticalmodelingme-
For a given assay, activity (the response variable) against a particular bi-
ological target is measured for thousands or tens of thousands of drug-
like molecules. Several high-dimensional sets of chemical descriptors (ex-
planatory variables) are available to characterize the chemical properties
of the molecules. A statistical model attempts to relate biological activity
to the chemical descriptors as part of drug discovery. Currently, for each
assay, the web-based Cheminformatics Modeling Laboratory or ChemMod-
Lab [Hughes-Oliver et al. (2011)] compares, via CV, 16 statistical methods,
many of which are computationally demanding, and five candidate sets of
descriptor variables. Thus, 16×5=80 modeling strategies are assessed and
compared on data sets with thousandsof observations and high-dimensional
explanatory variables.
Moreover, ideally each of these 80 strategies should betuned with respect
to one or more user-selected parameters, greatly increasing the number of
candidatemodelstobecompared.Forexample,aneuralnetworkhasseveral
user-defined tuning parameters controlling the network complexity, such as
thenumberofhiddenunitsandadecayparameter.Ifmanysetsofvaluesfor
the tuning parameters are tried, potentially hundreds or thousands of com-
putationally demandingmodelsneedtobecomparedforthelargePubChem
data sets.
CV [Stone (1974)] is widely used for this type of study, albeit usually
on a much smaller scale. In a 10-fold cross-validation, for example, the ob-
servations are split into 10 groups or folds, one group is considered as test
data for assessing prediction accuracy, and the other nine groups are used
for model fitting. This process is repeated with each of the groups in turn
as test data. Thus, further increasing the computational burden already de-
scribed, a fixed model (a statistical model with given values of all tuning
parameters and a descriptor set) has to be fitted 10 times.
Thereisyetanotheradditiontothecomputationalchallenge. CVisbased
on a random split of the data, and, as we illustrate in Section 2, there can
be considerable variation from one split to another. Thus, numerous data
splits may be necessary to compare models reliably.
Thus, the overall computational effort appears to be simply infeasible for
the comprehensive comparisons we have outlined for large PubChem assay
data sets. To our knowledge, currently all comparisons of this type hence
have some degree of unreliability and/or suboptimality, due to randomness
in CV and lack of effective tuning, respectively.
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 3
Much theoretical work has been done on CV. Stone (1974, 1977) focused
mainlyonpropertiesforleave-one-out (orn-fold)CV.Li(1987),Shao(1993)
and Zhang (1993) investigated v-fold CV procedures for linear models and
general v. Burman (1989) established theoretical results for v-fold CV for
a wider class of models. More recently, Dudoit and van der Laan (2005) de-
rived asymptotic propertiesfor abroad definitionof CV(e.g., leave-one-out,
v-fold, Monte Carlo, etc.) for model selection and performance assessment,
andYang(2006)establishedtheconsistencyofCVforclassification.Thethe-
oretical developments parallel the extremely wide use of CV by researchers
for assessing and selecting models, for example, Dietterich (1998), Hawkins,
Basak and Mills (2003), Sinisi and van der Laan (2004) and Hughes-Oliver
et al. (2011).
In this article we will focus on 10-fold CV, though the methodology ap-
plies to v-fold CV for any feasible v. We propose a data-adaptive approach
involving multiple repeats of CV for the candidate models. At any stage,
the CV analyses available from repeated data splits are used to perform
amultiplicity-adjusted statistical test toeliminate all candidatemodelsthat
are inferior to at least one other. Only those models that survive move on to
the next stage and have a further CV performed to increase the test power
based on a new, common data split. In this way, during model tuning, very
poor settings of the tuning parameters are quickly dismissed and computa-
tionaleffortisconcentratedonthebestsettings.Thesearchterminateswhen
one setting emerges as the winner, or when the differences in performance
between thesurvivingsettings arepractically unimportantwithsomestatis-
tical confidence.Asimilarapproachisusedtocompareoptimizedmodels.In
the PubChem application there will be one optimized model for each statis-
tical modelingstrategy, thatis,aclass ofmodelssuchas k-nearestneighbors
withoneoftheavailable descriptorsets.Itisalsopossibletocombinetuning
with comparison across optimized models in one dynamic search.
Second, we develop more efficient tests for comparing models. This ex-
tends the idea of matching by using the same data splits across CVanalyses
[e.g., Dietterich (1998)]. By matching at the level of individual observations
rather than data split, moderate differences in performance between models
can sometimes be detected with just one set of CV analyses from one data
split. Thus, poor performers are potentially eliminated with a minimum of
computing.
Overall, the aim of this article is to develop a sequential approach for
comprehensiveandreliablemodeltuningandselectionviaCV.Inparticular,
for the PubChem applications, users of ChemModLab will have automatic
comparisonofavastnumberoftunedmodelingstrategies, withareasonable
turn-around time.
Related to our sequential tests via CV, Maron and Moore (1997) devel-
oped a “racing” algorithm to test a set of models in parallel. The algorithm
4 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
sequentially increases data points to build and test candidate models before
using all of the data. In their paper, leave-one-out CV was used to compute
the prediction error. In contrast, our algorithms use all the data points at
all stages, 10-fold CV is implemented to estimate the prediction error, and
computational speed-up is achieved by reducing the number of models.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe a typical Pub-
Chem data set and the performance assessment measures relevant to the
application. In Section 3 we illustrate that there may be substantial varia-
tion in CV performance estimates from one random data split to another,
requiring multiple data splits for reliable comparison. Section 4 describes
three data-adaptive algorithms for sequentially comparing models. Whereas
Section 4isfocusedontuningagiven modelingstrategy, thatis,agiven sta-
tistical method and set of data, Section 5 considers tuning and comparisons
across qualitatively different modeling strategies, that is, different types of
statistical models and/or different explanatory variable sets. The PubChem
data set is used throughout for illustration. Finally, some conclusions are
presented in Section 6.
2. PubChem AID362 data and assessment measures. ChemModLab
[Hughes-Oliver et al. (2011)] catalogs the data for five assays: AID348,
AID362, AID364, AID371 and AID377. (“AID” stands for “Assay ID.”)
In this paper we will focus on AID362, a formylpeptide receptor ligand
binding assay that was conducted by the New Mexico Molecular Libraries
Screening Center; the same CVcomparison methodologies would beapplied
independently to other assays in PubChem.
AID362 has assay data for 4,275 molecules. Various responses are avail-
able, but here we work with a binary inactive/active (0/1) measure. Of the
4,275 molecules, only60wereassayed tobeactive. Viacomputational chem-
istry,ChemModLabgenerates fivesetsofdescriptor(explanatory)variables:
Burden numbers, pharmacophore fingerprints, atom pairs, fragment finger-
prints and Carhart atom pairs, with 24, 121, 395, 597 and 1,578 variables,
respectively.
The purpose of building a statistical model here is to predict the AID362
inactive/active assay response from the descriptor variables. Note that the
descriptorvariablesareproducedbycomputational chemistry.Thus,itisfea-
sible to compute them cheaply for vast numbersof compoundsin a chemical
library or even in a virtual library of chemical formulas for molecules that
have not yet been synthesized. The aim of the predictive model, built from
assay data for relatively few molecules, is to choose the molecules in the big-
ger library that are most likely to be active when assayed. Such a focused
search generates “hits” for drug development more efficiently than assaying
all the compounds available, even if this is feasible.
The typical rarity of active compounds and the aim of identifying a small
number of promising compounds in a large library means that special pre-
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 5
dictive performance measures have been developed for modeling in drug
discovery. Misclassification rate, often used for a binary response, is not ap-
propriate, as even the useless, null model that always classifies as “inactive”
will have a high accuracy rate when active molecules are so rare. The objec-
tive is more to rank compounds in terms of their probability of activity, so
that a sample of the desired size of the most promising compounds can be
chosen from a library.
A widely used criterion is a simple function of the number of hits found,
h , among 300 compounds selected using a predictive model. Specifically,
suppose a predictive model generates pˆ, the probability that compound i
among N unassayed compounds is active (i=1,...,N). We then order the
compound indices via the permutation π such that pˆ ≥···≥pˆ . Sup-
pose first there are no ties. The 300 compounds indexed by π ,...,π
are selected for assay, and h is simply the number of actives (hits) found
among them. In general, if pˆ ties with the a+b estimated probabilities
pˆ π(300−a+1) ,...,pˆ π(300+b) for a≥1 and b≥0, then h 300 is defined as
(1) h 300 =h 300−a + h tie ,
where h 300−a and h tie are the number of hits found among the compounds
with indices π(1),...,π(300−a) and π(300−a+1),...,π(300+b), respec-
tively. This is the expected number of hits if a compounds are randomly
selected from the a+b with tied probabilities to make a total of 300 se-
lected. No ties for pˆ is just a special case of (1) with a=1 and b=0.
Initialenhancement(IE),used,forexample,byHughes-Oliveretal.(2011),
is just (h /300)/r, where r is the activity rate in the entire collection of N
compounds. Thus, it measures the rate of finding actives among the 300
chosen compounds relative to the expected rate under random selection.
A good model should have IE values much larger than 1. As IE is just a lin-
early increasing function of h , the two criteria are equivalent, and we use
the simpler h in this article. Users concerned about the arbitrariness of
selecting 300 compounds may prefer the average hit rate (AHR) proposed
by Wang (2005), which averages performance over all selection sizes but fa-
vors models which rank active compounds ahead of inactive compounds in
terms of pˆ. Algorithms 1 and 3 in Section 4 could be applied directly to
AHR without modification.
Indefiningtheassessmentmeasureh ,wehaveassumedthereisatrain-
ing data set to build a model and a further independent test set of N com-
pounds available to assess it. This article is concerned with CV, however,
where the same n observations are used for training and for testing. Under
10-fold CV, for instance, when a particular data fold is removed to serve as
test data, the model fitted to the remaining data generates the pˆ values for
the compounds in that fold. After cycling through all 10 folds, the pˆ values
are put together so that there is a pˆ for all n compounds. We then define
6 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
h (or an alternative criterion) exactly as above except that we choose 300
compounds from the n≥300 instead of from an independent set of size N.
3. Variation in cross-validation. We now demonstrate that there can be
substantialvariation intheperformanceestimates from10-fold CVfromone
random split of the data to another, potentially requiring multiple splits for
reliable model tuning or selection. For illustration, the PubChem AID362
assay data will be modeled using a neural network (NN) [see, e.g., Ripley
(1996)] with one hidden layer and a variation of Burden numbers [Burden
(1989)] as the descriptor set. For the AID362 assay, there are 60 active
compounds among 4,275 molecules, and the Burden number descriptor set
has 24 variables.
We will tune two important parameters of the NN: the number of units
in the hidden layer, which controls the size or complexity of the network,
andadecay parameter,wheresmaller values shrinkthenetwork weights less
and lead again to a more complex network. In this tuning study, size takes
the values 5, 7 and 9, and decay takes the values 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001. Thus,
tuning will select among 3×3=9 models generated by all combinations of
the two tuning parameters.
For each model, 10-fold CV is run for 100 random splits of the data, and
the histograms in Figure 1 show the estimated distributions of the h as-
sessment measure defined in (1). We can see that there are considerable dif-
ferences between the h distributions across the tuning parameters values
considered, that is, tuning is important. There is also considerable varia-
tion within a fixed set of tuning parameter values. For example, for size=5
and decay=0.01, which is one of the better performing models, h ranges
from 26 to 37. We will take the population mean performance over a large
number of repeated cross-validations as a reliable measure of performance,
reliable in the sense that random cross-validation variation is eliminated.
Table 1 displays the observed sample means of h with their standard er-
rors. Models 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 have better sample means than models 1, 3, 4
and 7. Moreover, the standard errors are fairly small relative to the differ-
ences between the sample means across these two groups, suggesting that
the weaker performers could be dismissed with fewer than 100 random data
splits, whereas finding the best parameter values among the better models
will take considerable work (though perhaps not requiring 100 random data
splits).ThisisthebasicideaunderlyingtheadaptivealgorithmsofSection4.
Such a comparison should take into account that data split would nat-
urally be a blocking factor. Every time a random data split is generated,
all models under consideration are assessed via CV using this same split.
Thus,the 100 data splits leading to the data in Figure 1 are 100 blocks. Fig-
ure 2 shows the results for five blocks, with each line representing one split.
The approximate parallelism of the curves indicates that including split as
a blocking factor will lead to more powerful comparisons. Figure 2 also sug-
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 7
Fig. 1. Histograms showing the distribution of h values from 10-fold CV across 100
datasplitsforneuralnetworkswithdifferentvaluesofsizeanddecay,andBurdennumbers
as the descriptor set.
gests that comparing models based on just one split may lead to a biased
estimator of performance. For each curve, suppose we select the model (set
of tuningparameter values) with thelargest observed value of h .We note
firstthat,probablyduetoselection bias,theh valueofthewinningmodel
tends to be in the upper tail of its distribution in Figure 1. Second, for the
fifth split, suboptimal model 3 has the best value of h . Thus, there is
a need for multiple splits for reliable assessment and comparison.
8 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
Sample means of h for 10-fold CV across 100 data splits for neural networks with
different values of size and decay, and Burden numbers as the descriptor set, applied to
the PubChem AID362 assay data
Neuralnetworkmodel
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Size 5 5 5 7 7 7 9 9 9
Decay 0.1 0.01 0.001 0.1 0.01 0.001 0.1 0.01 0.001
# of hits 18.7 31.2 28.7 18.6 30.2 30.7 18.5 30.7 31.4
S.E. 0.18 0.24 0.27 0.19 0.24 0.27 0.18 0.22 0.26
Rank 7 2 6 8 5 3 9 4 1
4. Algorithms for adaptive model search via sequential CV.
4.1. Algorithm 1 (data splits as blocks). Suppose there are m models to
becompared.For much of this article, we will becomparing m sets of values
for the tuning parameters of a given type of statistical modeling method,
in the context of a fixed descriptor (explanatory variable) set. Comparisons
across qualitatively different statistical models and/or different sets of ex-
planatory variables are also possible, however (Section 5). The algorithm
will attempt to remove models sequentially until m is reduced to 1.
At each iteration, a new random data split is created for CV, and 10-fold
(or v-fold in general) CV estimates of performance are computed for the
surviving models. For each model, CV requires 10 model fits for the new
split. Thus, regular CV is applied; the various algorithms to be described
Fig. 2. h values for 10-fold CV and five data splits (five lines) for neural networks
with different values of size and decay, and Burden numbers as the descriptor set.
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 9
are efficient by reducing the number of times such a regular CV analysis has
to be performed.
Specifically, suppose there are m surviving models, and results from run-
ning 10-fold CV are available for s≥2 random splits. The assessment mea-
sure is computed for every model and split. We will use h in (1), but for
this first version of the algorithm any user-defined measure could be em-
ployed, for example, the average hit rate in Section 2 or, for a continuous
response, the empirical predictive mean squared error. In general, y will
denote the CV assessment measure for model i and data split j.
If a randomly chosen split is applied across all models, split is a blocking
factor, and we can model y as generated by
whereµisanoveralleffect,τ istheeffectofmodeli,β istheeffectofsplitj,
and ε for i=1,...,m and j=1,...,s are random errors, assumed to have
independent normal distributions with mean 0 and variance σ2. This is the
model for a randomized block design, though we point out that randomiza-
tion within a block, for example, executing the analyses for the m models
in a random order, has no relevance for such a “computer experiment.”
We want to test the hypotheses
H :τ =τ versus H :τ 6=τ
0 i i′ 1 i i′
for all i6=i. For a particular pair of models indexed by i and i, rejecting
H in favor of H at some significance level implies that one of the models
may be eliminated as inferior to the other. After removing all such domi-
nated models, at the next iteration, further CV computational effort will be
concentrated on the surviving models.
At least initially, m may be large, and a multiplicity-adjusted test is de-
sirable. Tukey’s test[Dean andVoss (1999),Chapter4, Montgomery (1997),
Chapter 3] is a common choice for such multiple comparisons, and we adopt
it throughout. Other tests for multiple comparisons could be applied, such
as Fisher’s least significant difference test or Duncan’s multiple range test,
etc. [Montgomery (1997), Chapter 3]. Let
denote the sample mean performance over the s splits for model i (i =
1,...,m). For any i6=i, the null hypothesis H is rejected in favor of H at
level α if
10 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
Fig. 3. Adaptive model search via sequential CV (Algorithm 1: iterate until one model
is left or a maximum of S data splits has been performed).
is the Tukey value, q (m,(m−1)(s−1)) is the studentized range statis-
tic with m and (m−1)(s−1) degrees of freedom, and MSE(m,s) is the
mean squarefor error undera randomized-block analysis of variance with m
models (treatments) and s splits (blocks). A set of simultaneous 100(1−α)
percent confidence intervals for all pairwise differences τ −τ for i6=i is
(m,s)).
Theproperties of statistical tests in analysis of variance modelsin general
are often justified via randomization [e.g., Kempthorne (1952, 1955)]. As
already noted, randomization of models to a split (block) is irrelevant here,
and it is questionable whether the nominal significance level α is actually
achieved under the null hypothesis. In any case, as the algorithm iterates
and more blocks are added, a sequence of tests is performed. Even if each
stage has the correct significance level for removing a model when it is not
inferior, the entire procedure would not. Overall, then, α is best viewed as
controlling a greedy algorithm, where larger values would remove models
more aggressively, and the gain in computational speed is accompanied by
more risk of converging to a suboptimal model. We use α=0.05 throughout
for empirical demonstrations and compare the solutions found with more
exhaustive searches.
Figure 3 gives pseudo code for the above sequential algorithm. It iterates
until only one model is left, subject to a maximum of S random data splits
and hence S CV analyses for any model. We use S =100 hereafter. Note
thatthisalgorithmneedsatleasttwoexecutionsofCVforeachinitialmodel
from two random data splits.
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 11
Algorithm 1 applied to tuning the values of size and decay for a neural network for the
PubChem AID362 assay data with Burden numbers as the descriptor set. The models
surviving after each split are denoted by a check mark
Neuralnetwork model
of splits 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X X X X X X X X
2 X X X X X X
3 X X X X X X
4 X X X X X X
5 X X X X X
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
57 X X X X X
58 X X X X
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
68 X X X X
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .
For illustration, we revisit the PubChem AID362 example in Section 3,
wherethedescriptorsetisformedfromBurdennumbers,andtheproblemis
to tune the parameters decay and size for a neural network model. The nine
candidate models, that is, the nine combinations of decay and size values,
were given in Table 1.
Table 2 shows the results of applying Algorithm 1 to this example. After
s=2 splits, the average h values for the nine models, y¯ ,...,y¯ , are
17.5,33.0,27.0,17.0,30.0,28.5,16.5,31.5,29.0,
MSE(9,2)=3.39, and the Tukey value is 7.51 for significance level α=0.05.
Since y¯ 2. −y¯ i· >7.51 for i=1, 4 and 7, these three models are dismissed.
Recall from Table 1 that they are indeed the worst when averaged over 100
splits,butthesequential algorithm eliminates themafter justtwo CVsplits.
Hence, in Table 2, only models 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 9 survive the second split
and are included for a third round of CV based on another split. After five
splits,model3isremoved.Models5,6and8areremoved after58,69and70
splits,respectively.Thetworemainingmodels,2and9,arestillincontention
when the algorithm stops due to restricting the computational effort to 100
splits.Fromtheaverage h valuesgiven inTable1,weknowthatthesetwo
models are very similar in performance, and are hard to distinguish. This
motivates Algorithm 3 in Section 4.3, but next we improve Algorithm 1.
12 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
4.2. Algorithm 2 (observations as blocks). Algorithm 1 in Section 4.1
needs at least two CV data splits for every one of the m models, which
may be computationally expensive if m is large. We now describe another
multiplicity-adjusted test, aimed at eliminating bad models after only one
CV data split.
Unlike Algorithm 1, the revised algorithm is applicable only to an as-
sessment measure that is a sum or average of contributions from individual
observations. The criterion h in (1) is of this form, and we continue to
use it, but we note that only the active compounds in the data set can
make a nonzero contribution to h , and it is sufficient to consider them
only. Specifically, suppose there are A≥2 active compounds in the data set
(A=60 for the AID362 assay). For any given model, its CV analysis leads
to estimated probabilities of activity pˆ ≥···≥pˆ for the n compounds
in the data set. We can write
where y is the contribution from active compound j. From the definition
of h in (1),
1, if active compound j is one of the first
300−a compounds selected,
(5) y ∗ =  , if active compound j appears among the
a+b compounds with pˆtying with pˆ ,
0, otherwise.
(Recallthatpˆ π(300) tieswiththea+bestimatedprobabilitiespˆ π(300−a+1) ,...,
pˆ with a≥1 and b≥0, which includes no ties if a=1 and b=0.)
Forexample,supposeaCVanalysisleadstoestimated probabilitiesofac-
tivitypˆ ≥···≥pˆ suchthatpˆ hastheeighttiespˆ ,...,pˆ .
Ofthe,say,A=60activecompounds,25haveestimatedprobabilitiesamong
pˆ ,...,pˆ ; they each have y =1 in (5) because they must each con-
tributeone hitto h .Another two active compoundshave estimated prob-
abilities among pˆ ,...,pˆ ; they each have y =3/8, the probability
ofbeingselected 298th,299thor300thwhentheeightselections 298,...,305
are made in random order.
We now consider CV to compare m models based on one common ran-
dom data split. Let y be the contribution of active compound j to h
for model i, for i=1,...,m and j =1,...,A. A multiplicity-adjusted test
parallels that in Section 4.1. In the randomized-block analysis, the blocks
are now the A active compounds rather than data splits (there is only one).
If a randomly chosen split is applied across all models, we can model y as
generated by
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 13
Fig. 4. Algorithm 2 applied to tuning a neural network (NN) for the PubChem AID362
assay data with Burden numbers as the descriptor set. NN sizes of 5, 7 and 9 are denoted
by small, medium and large plotting symbols, respectively, and decay values of 0.001, 0.01
and 0.1 are denoted by ▽, ◦ and △, respectively. The two models surviving after 100 splits
are connected with dashed lines.
where µ is an overall effect, τ is the effect of model i, β is the effect of
active compound j, and the ε are random errors, assumed to have inde-
pendent normal distributions with mean 0 and variance σ . Similarly, the
Tukey value in (3) is replaced by
where the studentized range statistic q has degrees of freedom m and (m−
1)(A−1). Analogous hypothesis tests eliminate all models significantly dif-
ferent from the one with the best observed performance.
If s≥2 data splits have been made, we could define blocks in terms of
activecompoundsand datasplits,thatis,thenumberofblockswouldbesA.
Some experimentation indicates that Algorithm 1 in Section 4.1 eliminates
inferior models faster, however, for s≥2. Thus, for Algorithm 2 we use the
Tukey test based on active compoundsas blocks only for the firstdata split.
After very poor models are eliminated, a second split is made and the data-
adaptive search proceeds for the surviving models as in Section 4.1 with
s≥2 splits as blocks.
We now revisit the example of tuning a neural network in Section 4.1
(the results for Algorithm 1 were presented in Table 2). Figure 4 depicts
Algorithm 2’s progress, plotting h versus split. After running one split of
10-fold CV, the model with size=5 and decay=0.01 has the largest h
14 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
value. The vertical line drawn down from this value has length T (m,A),
where m=9 and A=60. It is based on Tukey’s test with the 60 active
compounds as blocks. The h values for models 1, 4 and 7 fall below this
line and they are eliminated with one CV split. For 2,3,... splits, y¯ i·, the
average of h over the splits, is plotted for the surviving models, and the
vertical lines have length T (m,s), where m is the number of models sur-
viving to s splits. It is seen that after 2, 3 or 4 splits of CV, no further
models are eliminated. After 5 splits, model 3 is dismissed,and after 9 splits
models 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 still survive. The two models with the largest h
averages, models2and9,areconnected withdashedlines inFigure4.These
models are still competitors after 100 splits of CV. The vertical line drawn
at 100 splits is very short; nonetheless, these models are so close in per-
formance that they cannot be distinguished. Again, this motivates Algo-
rithm 3.
4.3. Algorithm 3 (modified stopping criterion). As has already been il-
lustrated, if the predictive performances for several candidate models are
very similar, it can take many data splits and CV analyses to distinguish
them. Particularly for model tuning, it would be more efficient to mod-
ify the stopping criterion so that the algorithm stops once it is clear that
the current leading performer cannot be beaten by a practically important
amount.
Weimplementsuchastoppingcriterionviatheconfidenceintervalsin(4).
Again, rank the m>1 models surviving at any iteration in terms of their
average predictive performances, that is, y¯ (1)·≥y¯ (2)·≥···≥y¯ (m)·. Notation-
ally, we will use s (number of splits) for the number of blocks in these
averages, but the same method can be applied with observations as blocks
as in Section 4.2. From (4),
(m,s)) for i=2,...,m.
At some confidence level, we want to be sure that τ −τ <p for all i=
2,...,m,where p is a given practically insignificant performancedifference.
Thus, to stop with the model giving y¯ (1)· declared as the winner, y¯ (i)·−y¯ (1)·
+T α (m,s)<p 0 for all i=2,...,m. As the y¯ (i)· are nonincreasing with i, the
revised stopping criterion is simply
.
For the example of tuning a neural network for the AID362 assay data
and Burden number descriptors, the values of y¯ (2)·−y¯ (1)·+T
for data splits 1–38 are as follows:
10.59,6.96,5.08,3.16,3.27,2.60,2.14,2.20,1.67,...,1.05,0.91.
(The hybrid observations/splits as blocks algorithm of Section 4.2 is being
used here.) If we take p =1 as the practically insignificant performancedif-
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 15
Fig. 5. Algorithm 3 applied to tuning a neural network (NN) for the PubChem AID362
assay data with Burden numbers as the descriptor set. NN sizes of 5, 7 and 9 are denoted
by small, medium and large plotting symbols, respectively, and decay values of 0.001 and
0.01aredenoted by ▽ and ◦,respectively. Theresults forsplits1–7areasinFigure4and
are not shown. All NNs with decay of 0.1 have been eliminated by split 8, as is the NN
with size of 5 and decay of 0.001.
ference,thealgorithmstopsafter38splitsof10-foldCV,withsurvivingmod-
els2,5,6,8and9.Model2withsize=5anddecay=0.01 wouldbedeclared
the “tuned” model for practical purposes. If we set p =2, the algorithm
stops after just nine splits. Models 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 are again the survivors,
and again model 2 is declared the winner for the neural networks/Burden
numbers modeling strategy. Figure 5 illustrates the iterations of the algo-
rithm. In particular, the vertical lines shown to the right of the performance
averages for 8, 9, 37 and 38 splits start at y¯ (2)· and have length T α (m,s).
If they extend less than p 0 past y¯ (1)· [i.e., y¯ (2)·+T α (m,s)<y¯ (1)·+p 0 ], then
the revised stopping criterion (6) is satisfied.
Recall that when we try to establish the one winning model via Algo-
rithms 1 or 2, 100 data splits and CV analyses are insufficient to separate
models2and9.Therefore,themodifiedstoppingcriterionsavesconsiderable
computing time here.
5. Comparing statistical methods or explanatory variable sets. Recall
that Section 1 described 80 statistical methods/descriptor set modeling
strategies compared by ChemModlab. When comparing qualitatively dif-
ferent statistical methods and/or explanatory variable sets, there are two
possible search implementations:
16 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
• Tune then compare:
Step 1. Tune each modeling strategy independently by repeating one of
the algorithms in Section 4. For ChemModLab, this would mean
80 tuning searches.
Step 2. Compare the tuned models, again by applying one of the algo-
rithms in Section 4.
Asweshallillustrate,theCVanalysesinStep1canbereusedinStep2,
possibly leading to minimal further computing at Step 2. This approach
is preferred when one wants to assess the performance of every modeling
strategy after tuning. It requires many searches in Step 1, however.
• Simultaneously tune and compare: Carry out one search, simultaneously
tuning and comparing the model strategies.
Thisapproach,weshallsee, can requiremuch less computing.Its draw-
back, however, is that it does not necessarily provide accurate estimation
of the predictive performances of suboptimal strategies; we justinfer they
are dominated by the winning strategy.
Forsimplicity,wewillillustratethesetwosearchimplementationsbycom-
paring two statistical methods/descriptor sets for the AID362 PubChem
assay. Extension to all 80 strategies explored by ChemModLab is straight-
forward. One strategy is a neural network with Burden number descriptors,
which we call NN/Burden. NN/Burden was investigated in Section 4, and
we already know that size=5 and decay=0.01 provides good values of the
tuningparameters. Thesecond strategy is k-nearest neighborswith Carhart
atom pairs as explanatory variables, which we call KNN/Carhart.
For KNN/Carhart, we need to tune k, the number of neighbors. We con-
sider k in the range 1,2,...,10. Figure 6 shows the results of running Algo-
rithms 2 and 3 in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. Algorithm 2 stops after 11 CV data
splits, and the model with k=8 emerges as the winner. (This agrees with
more exhaustive computations to check our algorithm.) If we use the stop-
ping criterion p =1 in (6), the algorithm stops after just eight data splits.
With p =2, only five data splits are required. All these variants point to
k=8.
We now consider the tune-then-compare implementation for comparing
NN/ Burden with KNN/Carhart. For definiteness, we take p =2 in (6)
as the stopping criterion. In Step 1, the two strategies are tuned indepen-
dently, which has already been described. In Step 2, NN/Burden (size=5
and decay=0.01) is compared with KNN/Carhart (k=8). Running Algo-
rithm3inSection4.3forthreedatasplitsissufficienttoestablishthattuned
KNN/Carhart is better than tuned NN/Burden at significance level 0.05.
The 95% confidence interval for the difference in mean h is [2.31,11.29].
In Step 1, the total number of model fits (with 10 fits per 10-fold CV) is
10(9+6×4+5×4)=530 for NN/Burden and 10(10+7+4×3)=290
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 17
Fig.6. Algorithms2and3appliedtotuningk-nearestneighbors(KNN)forthePubChem
AID362 assay data with Carhart atom pairs as the descriptor set. Values of k=4,...,10
are denoted by the plotting symbols 4,...,9,0.
for KNN/Carhart. The same data splits were used for NN/Burden and
KNN/Carhart. Thus, for Step 2, the first splits from Step 1 can be reused
and no further CV computations are required. Therefore, the total number
of model fits in both steps to establish that KNN/Carhart (with k=8) is
superior is 530+290=820. No model required more than 10 random splits
to define the CV folds.
For the simultaneous tune and compare implementation, the nine NN/
Burden models (with different values of size and decay) and the 10 KNN/
Carhartmodels(withdifferentvaluesofk)areputtogetheras m=19initial
models. The results of running Algorithm 3 in Section 4.3 with p =2 are
shown in Table 3. We see after just one split, with the active compounds
as blocks, three NN/Burden models and one KNN/Carhart model are elim-
inated. After two data splits, with splits as blocks, only one NN/Burden
model and five KNN/Carhart models survive. After three splits, the re-
maining NN/Burden model is eliminated. The five KNN/Carhart models
leftsurvivethroughfivesplits,whenthestoppingcriterionissatisfied.These
models have k=6,7,8,9 and 10 and average h values of 35.6, 37.1, 37.7,
35.9 and 36.7, respectively. Therefore, we will again choose KNN/Carhart
with k = 8 as the overall best model. The total number of model fits is
10(19+15+6+5×3)=550, with no model requiring more than five ran-
dom splits of the data.
The second approach, simultaneously tuning and comparing models, re-
quires less computer time here because the best KNN/Carhart models out-
18 H.SHEN,W. J. WELCH AND J. M. HUGHES-OLIVER
Simultaneously tuning NN/Burden and KNN/Carhart models for the PubChem AID362
assay data. The size and decay values for the NN/Burden models are defined in Table 1;
KNN/Carhart model k has k-nearest neighbors. The models surviving after each split are
denoted by a check mark; KNN/Carhart models 2–5 and 6–10 survive the same number
of splits, respectively
NN/Burdenmodel KNN/Carhartmodel
of splits 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2–5 6–10
0 X X X X X X X X X X X X
1 X X X X X X X X
performalltheNN/Burdenmodels,andthelattercanbequicklyeliminated.
In contrast, the tune-then-compare implementation spends much computa-
tional effort in tuning the inferior modeling strategy, NN/Burden. It does,
however, lead to an accurate, quantitative assessment of the difference in
predictive performance between NN/Nurden and KNN/Carhart.
6. Conclusions and discussion. Throughout we used 10-fold CV, even
for k-nearest neighbors where it is computationally straightforward to use
n-fold(leave-one-out) CV.Weused10-foldCVforconsistencyacrossmodel-
ing methods: n-fold CV would be computationally infeasible for the method
of neural networks also considered here and for many other methods. In
addition, n-fold CV has well-known limitations. Theoretically, Shao (1993)
showed its inconsistency in model selection. For applications like the molec-
ular databases in PubChem, it is also well known that n-fold CV can give
over-optimistic estimates of predictive performance if the data have sets of
similar compounds (“twins”). It is easy to predict one such compound’s
assay value from its near-analogs.
We illustrated that tuning a model may have a large effect on predictive
performance. We also showed that the variation in CV performance esti-
mates from one data split to another may necessitate multiple data splits
for reliable comparison of different sets of tuning parameter values or of
different tuned statistical modeling methods/explanatory variable sets. The
data-adaptive algorithms developed in Sections 4 and 5 attempt to make
reliable comparisons based on enough data splits, but sequentially focus the
computational effort on models with better predictive performance.
ThebasicsequentialalgorithminSection4.1usesdatasplitsasablocking
factor, and hence requires at least two data splits for each candidate model.
EFFICIENT, ADAPTIVECROSS-VALIDATION 19
The variation in Section 4.2 uses individual observations as the blocking
factor, and can sometimes eliminate very inferior models after just one data
split and CV analysis. To use observations as blocks, the performance mea-
sure must be an average over observations. The specialized h measure
appropriate for the PubChem data set used throughout is of this type, as
are more traditional metrics such as mean squared prediction error in re-
gression problems or misclassification rate for classification problems.
Thesame approach can beapplied to tuninga modelingstrategy with re-
spect to user-specified parameters and to comparing tuned modeling strate-
gies. Simultaneously tuning and comparing will be computationally efficient
relative to nonsequential strategies if there are many poor modeling strate-
gies that are dominated by other methods.
Parallelization of the algorithms is straightforward, as regular 10-fold CV
is always used for a specific model and data split. Thus, with 10 processors,
say,each processorsimplyperformsoneofthe10fitsofasingleCVanalysis.
With more than 10 processors, the 10 fits for each of two or more models on
the same split could be sent to the processors. Reconciling the results from
the parallel computations is fairly trivial; it is model fitting that dominates
computational complexity here.
Theproposeddata-adaptiveCValgorithmissequential.Ateachiteration,
a multiplicity-adjusted statistical test is developed to eliminate all inferior
modeling strategies. An issue not addressed in this article is how to take
account of the multiple testing across iterations. This is the topic of future
study.
We gave an example where two different sets of explanatory variables
were compared. In practice, some statistical models also have to be “tuned”
with respect to selection of variables within a given set. This could also
be done via our sequential CV algorithms, at least for a small number of
candidate subsets of variables. Much adaptation would be necessary if there
isacombinatorialexplosionofpossiblesubsets,andagainthisisfuturework.
In practice, some tuning parameters are usually treated as continuous
factors, for example, decay for a neural network. Future study will also
include sequential CV algorithms for continuous factors.