Efficient analysis and representation of geophysical processes
using localized spherical basis functions
Frederik J. Simonsa, Jessica C. Hawthornea and Ciar´an D. Begganb
a Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Guyot Hall, Princeton, NJ, USA
b School of GeoSciences, University of Edinburgh, Grant Institute, Edinburgh, UK.
While many geological and geophysical processes such as the melting of icecaps, the magnetic expression of
bodiesemplacedintheEarth’scrust,orthesurfacedisplacementremainingafterlargeearthquakesarespatially
localized, many of these naturally admit spectral representations, or they may need to be extracted from data
collected globally, e.g. by satellites that circumnavigate the Earth. Wavelets are often used to study such
nonstationary processes. On the sphere, however, many of the known constructions are somewhat limited. And
in particular, the notion of ‘dilation’ is hard to reconcile with the concept of a geological region with fixed
boundaries being responsible for generating the signals to be analyzed. Here, we build on our previous work on
localized spherical analysis using an approach that is firmly rooted in spherical harmonics. We construct, by
quadratic optimization, a set of bandlimited functions that have the majority of their energy concentrated in an
arbitrary subdomain of the unit sphere. The ‘spherical Slepian basis’ that results provides a convenient way for
the analysis and representation of geophysical signals, as we show by example. We highlight the connections to
sparsity by showing that many geophysical processes are sparse in the Slepian basis.
Keywords: spectralanalysis,sphericalharmonics,statisticalmethods,geodesy,inversetheory,satellitegeodesy,
sparsity, earthquakes, geomagnetism
1. THE SPHERICAL SLEPIAN BASIS
WedenotethecolatitudeofageographicalpointˆrontheunitspheresurfaceΩ= ˆr: ˆr =1 by0 θ π and
{ (cid:107) (cid:107) } ≤ ≤
the longitude by 0 φ<2π. We use R to denote a region of Ω, of area A, within which we seek to concentrate
a bandlimited function of positionˆr=(θ,φ). We use orthonormalized real surface spherical harmonics,1,2 thus
expressing a square-integrable real function f(ˆr) on the surface of the unit sphere as
∞ l (cid:90) (cid:90)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
f(ˆr)= f lm Y lm (ˆr), f lm = fY lm dΩ, and Y lm Y l(cid:48)m(cid:48) dΩ=δ ll(cid:48) δ mm(cid:48) . (1)
The Slepian basis for the domain R is the collection of bandlimited functions
L l (cid:90) (cid:30)(cid:90)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Maximizing equation (2) leads to the spectral-domain Hermitian, positive-definite eigenvalue equation
L l(cid:48) (cid:90)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) g l(cid:48)m(cid:48) =λg lm , with D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) = Y lm Y l(cid:48)m(cid:48) dΩ, 0 l L, (3)
l(cid:48)=0m(cid:48)=−l(cid:48) R
but we may equally well rewrite eq. (3) as a spatial-domain eigenvalue equation:
(cid:90) (cid:88) L (cid:18) 2l+1 (cid:19)
whereP istheLegendrefunctionofintegerdegreel,whicharisesinthissettingasaconsequenceofthespherical
harmonic addition theorem.1–3 Eq. (4) is a homogeneous Fredholm integral equation of the second kind, with
]hp-oeg.scisyhp[
1v3045.9090:viXra
a finite-rank, symmetric, Hermitian kernel, and the finite set of bandlimited spatial “Slepian” eigensolutions
g (ˆr),g (ˆr),...,g (ˆr) is orthonormal over the whole sphere Ω and orthogonal over the region R:
1 2 (L+1)2
(cid:90) (cid:90)
g g dΩ=δ , and g g dΩ=λ δ . (5)
WhentheconcentrationregionisacircularlysymmetriccapofradiusΘcenteredontheNorthPolethesolutions
to eq. (4) break down by order m and are separable in θ and φ, and the colatitudinal parts g(θ), which depend
only on m, are identical to those of a Sturm-Liouville equation which can be solved in the spectral domain by
diagonalization of a simple tridiagonal matrix with an almost linear spectrum.3,4 We define a space-bandwidth
product or ‘spherical Shannon number’ by the sum of the eigenvalues,
(L (cid:88) +1)2 (cid:88) L (cid:88) l (cid:90) A
α lm,lm 4π
The complete set of bandlimited spatial Slepian eigenfunctions g ,g ,...,g , irrespective of the particular
1 2 (L+1)2
region of concentration that they were designed for, are a basis for bandlimited scalar processes anywhere on
the surface of the unit sphere.3,5 This follows directly from the fact that the spectral localization kernel (3)
is real, symmetric, and positive definite: its eigenvectors g ,g ,...,g form an orthogonal set, thus
1lm 2lm (L+1)2lm
the Slepian basis functions g (ˆr), α = 1,...,(L+1)2 given by eq. (2) simply transform the same-sized limited
set of spherical harmonics Y (ˆr), 0 l L, l m l that are a basis for the same space of bandlimited
sphericalfunctionswithnopowerabovethebandwidthL. Aftersortingtheeigenvaluesindecreasingorder,this
transformation orders the resulting basis set such that the energy of the first N functions, g (ˆr),...,g (ˆr), with
eigenvaluesλ 1,isconcentratedintheregionR,whereastheremainingeigenfunctions,g (ˆr),...,g (ˆr),
N+1 (L+1)2
areconcentrat ≈ edinthecomplimentaryregionR¯ =Ω R. Asintheone-andtwo-dimensionalcase,6–8 therefore,
thereducedsetofbasisfunctionsg ,g ,...,g canberegardedasasparse,global,basissuitabletoapproximate
bandlimited processes that are primarily localized to the region R. The dimensionality reduction is dependent
onthefractionalareaoftheregionofinterest, i.e. thefulldimensionofthespace(L+1)2 canbe“sparsified”to
an effective dimension of N =(L+1)2A/(4π) when the signal of interest lies in a particular geographic region.
An example of Slepian functions on a circular region on the surface of the sphere can be found in Figure 1.
2. PROBLEMS IN GEOPHYSICS (AND BEYOND)
Withalloftheforegoingestablishedasfactandreferringagaintotheliteraturecitedsofarforproofandfurther
context, we return to considerations closer to home, namely the estimation of geophysical signals from noisy
and incomplete observations collected at or above the surface of the spheres “Earth” or “planet”. We restrict
ourselves to real-valued scalar measurements, contaminated by uncorrelated additive noise, which we may not
know but which we shall describe by idealized models. We focus exclusively on data acquired and solutions
expressed on the unit sphere. We have considered generalizations to problems involving satellite data collected
at an altitude and/or potential fields elsewhere.4,5,9,10 Two different statistical problems arise in this context,
namely, (i) how to find the “best” estimate of the signal given the data,5 and (ii) how to construct from the
data the “best” estimate of the power spectral density of the signal in question.10 In this contribution we limit
ourselves to problem (i) as it is here that the connections to sparsity are most readily apparent.
Thus, let there be some data distributed on the unit sphere, consisting of ‘signal’, n and ‘noise’, s, and let
there be some region of interest R Ω, in other words, let
unknown/undesired ifˆr Ω R.
Weassumethatthesignalofinterestcanbeexpressedbywayofsphericalharmonicexpansionasineq.(1), and
that it is, itself, a realization of a zero-mean, Gaussian, isotropic, random process, namely
∞ l (cid:90)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
s(ˆr)= s lm Y lm (ˆr), s lm = sY lm dΩ, s lm =0 and s lm s l(cid:48)m(cid:48) =S l δ ll(cid:48) δ mm(cid:48) . (8)
(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105)
For convenience we furthermore assume that the noise is a zero-mean stochastic process with an isotropic power
spectrum, i.e. n(ˆr) = 0 and n lm n l(cid:48)m(cid:48) = N l δ ll(cid:48) δ mm(cid:48), and that it is statistically uncorrelated with the signal.
(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105)
We refer to power as white when S = S or N = N, or, equivalently, n(ˆr)n(ˆr(cid:48)) = Nδ(ˆr,ˆr(cid:48)). Our objective is
(cid:104) (cid:105)
to determine the best estimate sˆ of the spherical harmonic expansion coefficients s of the signal. While in
the real world there can be no limit on bandwidth, practical restrictions force any and all of our estimates to be
bandlimited to some maximum spherical harmonic degree L, thus of necessity sˆ =0 and Sˆ =0 when l>L:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Thislimitation,combinedwiththestatementseq.(7)ondatacoverageandtheregionofinterest,naturallyputs
us back in the realm of ‘spatiospectral concentration’. As we shall see, solving the problem at hand will gain
from involving ‘localized’ Slepian functions rather than, or in addition to, the ‘global’ spherical harmonics basis.
This leaves us to clarify what we understand by “best” in this context. While we adopt the traditional
statistical metrics of bias, variance, and mean squared error to appraise the quality of our solutions,11,12 the
resulting connections to sparsity will be real and immediate, owing to the Slepian functions being naturally
instrumental in constructing efficient, consistent and/or unbiased estimates of sˆ and/or Sˆ. Thus, we define
v = sˆ2 sˆ 2, b= sˆ s, (cid:15)=sˆ s, and (cid:15)2 =v+b2, (10)
(cid:104) (cid:105)−(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105)− − (cid:104) (cid:105)
where the lack of subscript indicates that we can study variance, bias and mean squared error of the estimate of
the coefficients sˆ but also of their spatial expansion sˆ(ˆr), or indeed of their power spectrum Sˆ.
Signal estimation from noisy and incomplete spherical data
Spherical harmonic solution
Paraphrasing results elaborated elsewhere,5 we write the bandlimited solution to the damped inverse problem
(cid:90) (cid:90)
where η 0 is a damping parameter, by straightforward algebraic manipulation, as
L l(cid:48) (cid:90)
sˆ lm = (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:0) D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) +ηD¯ lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) (cid:1)−1 dY l(cid:48)m(cid:48) dΩ, (12)
l(cid:48)=0m(cid:48)=−l(cid:48) R
where D¯ lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48), the kernel that localizes to the region R¯ =Ω R, compliments D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) given by eq. (3) which
localizes to R. Given the eigenvalue spectrum of the latter, its inversion is inherently unstable, thus eq. (11) is
an ill-conditioned inverse problem unless η > 0, as has been well known, e.g. in geodesy.13,14 As can be easily
shown, without damping the estimate is unbiased but effectively incomputable; the introduction of the damping
termstabilizesthesolutionatthecostofaddedbias. AndofcoursewhenR=Ω,eq.(12)issimplythe spherical
harmonic transform, as in that case, eq. (3) reduces to eq. (1), in other words, then D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) =δ ll(cid:48) δ mm(cid:48).
Slepian basis solution
We could seek a trial solution in the Slepian basis designed for this region of interest R by writing
Thiswouldbecompletelyequivalenttotheexpressionineq.(9)byvirtueofthecompletenessoftheSlepianbasis
for bandlimited functions everywhere on the sphere and the unitarity of the transform (2) from the spherical-
harmonic to the Slepian basis. The solution to the undamped (η =0) version of eq. (11) would then be
which, being completely equivalent to eq. (12) for η = 0, would be computable, and biased, only when the
expansionineq.(13)weretobetruncatedtosomefiniteJ <(L+1)2 topreventtheblowupoftheeigenvaluesλ.
Assuming for simplicity of the argument that J =N, the essence of the approach is now that the solution
will be sparse (in achieving a bandwidth L using N Slepian instead of (L+1)2 spherical harmonic expansion
coefficients) yet good (in approximating the signal as best as possible in the mean squared sense within the
region of interest R) and of geophysical utility (assuming we are dealing with spatially localized processes that
aretobeextracted,e.g.,fromglobalsatellitemeasurements).15 Inlightofthereasoningbehindeqs(11)–(15),it
is worth rereading the 1967 paper by W. M. Kaula,16 which, written long before the advent of Slepian functions
and the associated mathematical machinery, paved the way for many other studies.5,17,18
Bias and variance
In concluding this section let us illustrate another welcome by-product of our methodology, by writing the mean
squarederrorforthesphericalharmonicsolution(12)comparedtotheequivalentexpression(14)forthesolution
in the Slepian basis. We do this as a function of the spatial coordinate, in the Slepian basis for both, and, for
maximum clarity of the exposition, using the contrived case when both signal and noise should be bandlimited
as well as white (both stipulations being technically impossible to satisfy simultaneously). In the former case,
(cid:88) (cid:88)
while in the latter, we obtain
(cid:88) (cid:88)
(cid:104) (cid:105) α α α
All (L+1)2 basis functions are required to express the mean squared estimation error, whether in eq. (16) or in
eq. (17). The first term in both expressions is the variance, which depends on the measurement noise. Without
dampingortruncationthevariancegrowswithoutbounds. Dampingandtruncationalleviatethisattheexpense
of added bias, which depends on the characteristics of the signal, as given by the second term. In contrast to
eq. (16), however, the Slepian expression (17) has disentangled the contributions due to noise/variance and
signal/bias by projecting them onto the sparse set of well-localized and the remaining set of poorly localized
Slepian functions, respectively. The estimation variance is felt via the basis functions α = 1 N that are well
concentrated inside the measurement area, and the effect of the bias is relegated to those α=N+1 (L+1)2
functions that are confined to the region of missing data.
When forming a solution to our problem in the Slepian basis by truncation according to eq. (15), changing
the truncation level to values lower or higher than the Shannon number N amounts to navigating the trade-off
space between variance, bias (or “resolution”), and sparsity in a manner that is captured with great clarity by
eq. (17). We refer the reader elsewhere5 for more details.
3. EXAMPLES AND APPLICATIONS
Sparsity of errors in approximation
Suppose that instead of eq. (11) we were to minimize
which would lead to our forming the estimate from the partially observed data d directly as
While this might seem to be the natural approach in the absence of information outside the region of interest R,
this would be equivalent to solving eq. (11) using a non-optimal damping constraint of η =1, as we have noted
elsewhere,5 and eq. (12) furthermore shows this is so since D lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) +D¯ lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) =δ ll(cid:48) δ mm(cid:48). Nevertheless, we use
thisexamplebecauseitissimpleandinformative,andithasbeenstudiedbyothersbefore.14,19 If,forsimplicity
we assume that both signal and noise have a white power spectrum, the spectral error covariance matrix is
(cid:15) lm (cid:15) l(cid:48)m(cid:48) =ND lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) +SD¯ lm,l(cid:48)m(cid:48) , (20)
(cid:104) (cid:105)
ascanbederivedbycombiningeq.(19)witheqs(3)and(7)–(8). Theerrorsarecorrelated, andareduetonoise
in the region R where data exist, and contaminated by signal from the missing region R¯ =Ω R. It now makes
immediate intuitive sense to desire a parameterization whose estimated coefficients have a diagonal covariance
matrix. Let this parameterization be in terms of Slepian functions and thus this estimator
which is to be contrasted with eq. (19), and the associated error covariance will be diagonal and given by
α β α α αβ
(cid:104) (cid:105) −
Eq. (22) follows from eq. (20) by the unitarity of the transform (2) and the properties (1) and (3).
An example of this behavior can be found in Figure 2, where the mean squared errors (cid:15)2 and (cid:15)2 are
(cid:104) lm(cid:105) (cid:104) α(cid:105)
plotted for the noiseless case, N =0, as a percentage of the signal strength, S. The geometry is that of a typical
satellite survey characterized by a ‘polar gap’ R¯ =Ω R consisting of a pair of axisymmetric caps at the North
andSouthPole, respectively, eachoneofvariouscolatitudinalradiiΘ=0◦,3◦,5◦,7◦, and10◦. Thewedgeshape
of the errors in Figure 2a–d is bounded by the line m = (l+1/2)sinΘ . This relation substantiates earlier,
heuristic,findings:14,19 itidentifiesΘ asthe‘turningcolatitude’2 separatingtheoscillatoryfromtheevanescent
parts of an asymptotic approximation of the Legendre functions at a given degree l and order m. Compared
to the error structure of the spherical harmonic solution (19) shown in Figure 2a–d, the error structure of the
Slepian basis solution (21) shown in Figure 2e–h is decidedly more sparse.
Sparsity from geometry
Geophysical signals that are regional in nature are sparse in the Slepian domain — provided the Slepian basis
constructed is commensurate with the localization of the signal itself. To illustrate this we focus no longer on
estimatingthefieldbutratherontherepresentationandapproximationofthesolutiononceithasbeenobtained.
To this end we will drop the hats, omit the angular brackets on all symbols, and ignore observational noise.
A bandlimited signal can be represented equally well in the spherical-harmonic as in any kind of Slepian
basis of the same bandlimitation. When the signal is local and the chosen Slepian basis is similarly localized,
approximating the function by the expansion truncated at the Shannon number will be advantageous
L l (L+1)2 N
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
both because the quality of the approximation will be high in the region of interest and because the Shannon
numberoftermscontributingtothereconstructionwillbeasignificantsavingsoverthefullnumberofexpansion
coefficients. Aspereq.(6)thissparsityisthusmostly“geometric”inoriginandtheefficiencygainsaredependent
on the area of the region of interest expressed as a fraction of the area of the entire unit sphere.
Using the double orthogonality definitions (5) it is easy to derive from eq. (23) that the mean squared error
(mse) over the region of interest of such an approximation will depend on the signal terms neglected in the
expansion, andthatthe“R-averagemse”asafractionoftheR-averagemeansignalstrengthshouldbegivenby
(cid:90) (cid:30)(cid:90) (L+1)2 (cid:44)(L+1)2
(cid:88) (cid:88)
The quality of the regional approximation is high, because λ 1 when α N and λ 0 when α>N.
Figure3illustratesthisbyexpandingtheregional“Banguianomaly”inthelithosphericmagneticfieldinboth
the spherical-harmonic and Slepian bases. As can be seen in Figure 3a–b, the radial component of the Earth’s
main field, shown according to the POMME model20 bandpass filtered to between degrees 17 and 72, contains
someveryprominentenergynearBangui,thecapitaloftheCentralAfricanRepublic. Theoriginofthisanomaly
remainsdebated.21 Windowingaspatialexpansionofthefieldbetweendegrees17and36withaSlepianwindow
of L = 36 concentrated to a circular patch of radius Θ = 18◦ results in the rendition shown in Figure 3c–d.
In the spherical harmonic domain, the windowed anomaly now contains energy between degrees l = 0 72, as
can be easily derived.9 Almost 80% of the spherical harmonic expansion coefficients are significant in that their
absolute value rises above a threshold of one thousandth of their maximum absolute value. Switching bases and
expanding the signal in the L = 72 Slepian basis localized to the same Θ = 18◦ region (i.e. those portrayed in
Figure 1) results in a very small number of significant expansion coefficients. Indeed, the partial reconstruction
using the first N =130 basis functions reveals that the anomaly is extremely well captured inside of the region
of interest while the contribution to the signal is comprised of the energy of a mere 41 coefficients that are
significant according to the same criterion, as shown in Figure 3e–f.
Sparsity from (geo)physics
It has long been known that earthquakes perturb the terrestrial gravity field.22 Recently, thanks to the time-
variable gravity measurements of the GRACE satellite pair,23 the study of such changes has received renewed
attention.15,24–26 Following seismological convention,2 let us denote the hypocenter of an earthquake, which is
to be considered as a point source, as r =(r ,θ ,φ ), and let us vectorize the symmetric ‘moment tensor’ as
(cid:2) (cid:3)
M= M M M M M M . (25)
In a coordinate system r(cid:48) = (r,θ(cid:48),φ(cid:48)) that is centered on the epicenter of the earthquake, the first-order Eule-
rian gravitational potential perturbation in a spherically-symmetric non-rotating Earth is given by a sum over
‘spheroidal normal-mode’ eigenfunctions P (r) (which depend on the Earth model, in our case prem27),
∞ ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88)(cid:88) 2l+1
· n l n l 4π n l s
where l is the usual spherical harmonic degree, ω the temporal frequency, and the vector excitation amplitude
n l s n lm s n lm s lm
withmtheusualsphericalharmonicorder,andwiththeassociatedLegendrefunction,P ,evaluatedattheepi-
centralangulardistanceθ(cid:48). Thevectorfunctions C and S arecombinationsofnormal-modedisplacement
eigenfunctions and their radial derivatives,2,28 and need to be precomputed in the Earth model of choice.
Solutions (26) for a variety of end-member earthquake sources are shown in Figure 4. As suggested by the
summation limits of eq. (27), the patterns with which earthquakes perturb the Earth’s gravity field have the
symmetriesofmonopoles,dipoles,andquadrupoles.2,28 Theyshouldthusbeeminentlysuitabletorepresentation
and amenable to analysis in the Slepian basis, in which, in other words, this type of geophysical signal is sparse.
TothestandardtreatmentusingsphericalSlepianfunctionsweaddonesophistication,namelyrotationabout
their center of figure. As we have noted the Slepian basis set on circularly symmetric domains is degenerate and
separableinto‘colatitudinal’eigenfunctionswhicharesolutionstoaSturm-Liouvilleequationthatcanbesolved
spectrally with great ease,3–5 and order-dependent ‘longitudinal’ functions that control the axial symmetry. To
computethefunctionsshowninFigure1wefirstdeterminedthesphericalharmonicexpansioncoefficientsofthe
solutions to eq. (3) centered on the North Pole, and subsequently rotated those to the colatitude and longitude
ofthedesiredcapcenter. NowweshallrotatetheresultingfunctionsoverathirdEulerangleabouttheircenter.
We begin by a bait-and-switch for convenience — compared to Section 1 we will now work in the basis of
complex surface spherical harmonics,1,2 according to which the real Slepian and complex spherical harmonic
expansion coefficients of the real signal s(ˆr), s and s , respectively, are related via the unitary transform
(cid:88) (cid:88)
s = g∗ s and s = g s , (28)
α αlm lm lm αlm α
where the g form an (L+1)2 (L+1)2 complex matrix. We shall here be concerned with obtaining the
‘localized’coefficientss onlywhenthesphericalharmonicexpansioncoefficientss are“known”,e.g. bybeing
given in the form of so-called ‘Level-2’ GRACE data products.15,29 Alternatives to this approach that can work
directly from the raw data collected are discussed elsewhere.5,25,30
Next,weadorntheSlepianbasisfunctions,g ,theirsphericalharmonicexpansioncoefficients,g ,andthe
Slepian expansion coefficients of the signal, s , by three upper indices, ω, θ and φ, describing, respectively, the
rotation about their center of symmetry, 0 ω <2π, and its colatitude, 0 θ π, and longitude, 0 φ<2π.
Thus, the “mother” Slepian basis set, concentrated over the circular region R centered on the North Pole,
bandlimited to L, and of Shannon number N, consists of the functions g000(ˆr); they spawn a family of functions
gφθω(ˆr), α = 1,...,(L+1)2, centered at the geographical locations (θ,φ) on the unit sphere and rotated by ω.
For convenience we write no superscripts when (φ,θ,ω) = (0,0,0). The triad (φ,θ,ω) contains the three Euler
angles that generate a Slepian basis of arbitrary orientation anywhere on the sphere: first, by rotation over ω
aroundthez axis,thenbyθ abouttheoriginaly,andfinallybyφaroundtheoriginalz axisagain. Thespherical
harmonic coefficients of the rotated gφθω and the mother set g are then related by1,2
where (l) (φ,θ,ω)isa(2l+1) (2l+1)unitarytransformationmatrixof‘generalized’Legendrefunctions,31,32
Dmm(cid:48) ×
Dmm(cid:48) mm(cid:48)
dulynotingthatd(l) (θ)=d(l) ( θ). Itisnowconvenient31,33 todecomposeageneralrotationto(φ,θ,ω)into
mm(cid:48) m(cid:48)m −
one over (φ π/2, π/2,θ) followed by another over (0,π/2,ω+π/2). In that case eq. (29) can be rewritten as
g α φθ lm ω = (cid:88) (cid:88) d( m l) m(cid:48) (cid:16)π 2 (cid:17) d( m l) (cid:48)(cid:48)m(cid:48) (cid:16)π 2 (cid:17) eim(ω+π/2)eim(cid:48)θeim(cid:48)(cid:48)(φ−π/2)g αlm(cid:48)(cid:48) . (31)
The expansion of the signal s(ˆr) into the rotated Slepian basis gφθω(ˆr) is given, as in eqs (13) and (28), by
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Combiningeqs(31)–(32)andrearrangingthesummationswecanwritethe‘fastSlepianexpansion’asadiscrete
Fourier transform,33,34 to be calculated on a grid of frequencies by FFT of the operator Tα ,
mm(cid:48)m(cid:48)(cid:48)
α mm(cid:48)m(cid:48)(cid:48)
mm(cid:48)m(cid:48)(cid:48) mm(cid:48) 2 m(cid:48)(cid:48)m(cid:48) 2 αlm(cid:48)(cid:48) lm
Figure 5 applies this procedure to the time-variable gravity field as seen by GRACE for the Slepian basis
of colatitudinal radius Θ = 10◦ and bandwidth L = 60 centered at θ = 85◦ and φ = 95◦ and for varying
rotationsω. Thegravitational-potentialperturbationduetothe2004Sumatra-Andamanearthquakeisaclearly
visible step in the time series of the expansion coefficients belonging to the α = 1 best concentrated m = 1
Slepian functions, expressed as height anomalies in m above the Earth’s reference geoid. The orientation of the
best-fitting fault plane can be derived from their relative contributions.
Figure 6, finally, shows our best overall estimate of the geoid perturbation due to the Sumatra-Andaman
earthquake. Figure 6a–b show renderings of the signal projected onto the best-concentrated m=0 and m= 1
components, respectively, of a Slepian basis with Θ = 10◦ and L = 60 and varying center locations. Each
pixel in Figure 6a and each arrow in Figure 6b plots the results from a different Slepian basis centered at the
applicable locations (θ,φ) shown. Figure 6c shows the results from an inversion for the statistically significant
“coseismic” step-changes of the geoid due to the earthquake in each of the well-concentrated basis functions
of the single Slepian basis with Θ = 10◦ and L = 60 centered at θ = 85◦ and φ = 95◦, allowing also for
exponential“postseismic”relaxation.25,26 Figure6d showsthesignalpredictedindependentlybyexpandingthe
geoid change obtained from a combined seismological-geodynamical forward model of the earthquake rupture
and the associated coseismic perturbations in a simplified Cartesian Earth model.15,24 More ample discussion
of these models and their differences will take place in the geophysical literature.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FinancialsupportforthisworkhasbeenprovidedbytheU.S.NationalScienceFoundationunderGrantsEAR-
0105387 and EAR-0710860. We thank Shin-Chan Han, Mark Panning and Mark Wieczorek for discussions, and
YannCapdevilleformakinghisnormal-modeeigenfunctioncodeminosypubliclyavailable. Computeralgorithms
are made available on www.frederik.net.