2nd International Conference on Advances in Social Science, Humanities, and Management (ASSHM 2014)
Electrical Engineering and Electronics Teaching Aiming
for Excellence Engineer Program
Hao Wang1 Qincui Fu2
1 School of Economics and Management, East China Jiaotong University, Nanchang, China
2 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, East China Jiaotong University, Nanchang, China
Abstract country, fulfilling the strategy of talents state. In 2012,
our school’s mechanical design and manufacturing spe-
Electrical Engineering and Electronics is an important cialty, vehicle engineering specialty, communication en-
basic course for the non-electrical specialties of science gineering specialty were approved the second batch of
and technology disciplines. It plays an important role in "Excellent Engineer Education Program" pilot specialty.
cultivating students’ engineering practice ability. In order Electrical Engineering and Electronics is an important
to accompany the implementation of Excellence Engineer basic course for the non-electrical specialties of science
Program and to meet the future oriented engineering in- and technology disciplines, including the basic
dustry’s demand for high-technology and creative talents, knowledge and its application in the various disciplines
curriculum innovation and teaching reform are carried of strong, weak electricity. The course has the character-
out. Aiming at Excellence Engineer Program, in the pro- istics of wide range of knowledge, strong practicality and
cess of construction of Electrical Engineering and Elec- fast knowledge update. In order to accompany the im-
tronics course, research on innovative design for teaching plementation of Excellence Engineer Program and to
and experiment is carried on in our school from the as- meet the future oriented engineering industry’s demand
pects of curriculum content, teaching model, experi- for high-technology and creative talents, curriculum in-
mental procedures. novation and teaching reform are carried out. The teach-
ing reform not only can help students master the basic
Keywords: Electrical Engineering and Electronics, Ex- theory, knowledge and skills in electrical and electronic
cellence Engineer Program, teaching reform technology, but also is beneficial to training students'
practical ability and creative ability, improve the engi-
neering specialty students' engineering consciousness,
1. Introduction
engineering quality and engineering practice ability, lay a
In China, restricted by the traditional concept and funds good foundation for future study and application of a
input, the patterns of engineering education of colleges deeper, more professional knowledge and skills.
and universities converged with those of science educa- Aiming at Excellence Engineer Program, in the process
tion. Since the enrollment expansion, the practice content of construction of Electrical Engineering and Electronics
of engineering education has three trends: authentication, course, research on innovative design for teaching and
mechanistic, unification. The engineering education lacks experiment is carried on in our school from the aspects of
of the cultivation of abilities of autonomy, design, inno- curriculum content, teaching model, experimental proce-
vation. The training mode of emphasizing theory and ne- dures.
glecting practice results in the cycle phenomenon that en-
terprises have a severe shortage of technology, practical 2. Reform of Course Contents and Teaching Mode
talents, while the employment rate of university graduates
is more and more low. It causes the engineering leading Today, in the implementation of Excellence Engineer
talents are very scarce. This has become the critical factor Program, Electrical Engineering and Electronics, as a
restricting the industrialization process in our country. technical basic course of engineering non-electrical ma-
Facing the urgent requirement of the development and jors, its teaching focus is not to let students grasp the
upgrading of Chinese economy and the overall enhance- deep theory, but lies in the cultivation of students' ability
ment of international competitiveness, to foster a large of applying the knowledge in electrical and electronic
number of engineering and technical talents of innovative technology to their respective professional and innovative
ability, adapting to the needs of economic and social de- development in their respective professional. Therefore,
velopment of our country, the Ministry of Education pro- the design of the course must be considered to build a
posed the Excellent Engineer Education Program (herein- complete and plastic knowledge framework for the stu-
after referred to as Excellence Engineer Program). The dents, but also from the engineering application point of
implementation of the program marked the start of the view, to establish two-way and interact between theoreti-
quality project of engineering education. Its goal is to fos- cal knowledge and practical application.
ter various high-quality engineering and technical talents The course contents of Electrical Engineering and
of innovative ability and adapting to the needs of eco- Electronics can be divided into three levels. The first
nomic and social development, to serve for taking a new level refers to the basic theory, the concept and principle
road to industrialization, building an innovation oriented of electrical and electronic, these contents have
© 2014. The authors - Published by Atlantis Press 87
independent chapters according to the theoretical system. tors by the virtual instrument such as multi-meter, oscil-
The second level refers to the related knowledge loscope. The simulation result is near the actual situation
necessary for the application of theory in engineering of the physical circuit, very suitable for emulation and
practice, for example, low voltage electrical appliances debugging in the courses such as Circuit Analysis, Ana-
and electrical automatic control technology, sensor and log Circuit and Digital Circuit. Before the actual opera-
automatic detection technology, analog to digital and tion, students can preview the whole experiment process
digital to analog conversion etc., which plays a role of through the EDA software, and in the actual operation,
bridge from theory to practice. The third level is the put into practice with the physical circuit and instruments
training of general scientific method and specific research and equipment. The experimental teaching model of theo-
methods of electrical and electronic. ry teaching, computer simulation and putting into practice
The teaching contents belong to the first level, in can not only stimulate students’ interest in learning and
teaching need detail derivation. The teaching contents make students master the application method of modern
belong to the second level, focusing on application, in EDA technology, but also enhance the application and
teaching need to design preview problems, guiding practical ability and give students free space. And then
students to access to information and self-study. students can target any application, design all kinds of
In the third level, through the inquiry teaching mode, circuits to observe their work condition, to find out the
learning and research blending as a whole, for the difference of circuits. The essence of the experimental
purpose of cultivating the ability and improving thinking, teaching model is a kind of cultivation mode of inde-
engineering case teaching method is tried out, the typical pendent learning, as an old saying "good delegate to the
teaching cases which have practical value in engineering fish, it is better to delegate to fish".
application are designed, the teaching contents with 3.2. Strengthen the Reform of Experimental Con-
engineering application background are supplemented. In tents and Method and Cultivate Students' Com-
the process of teaching, the first level and the second one prehensive Design Ability
in the curriculum system consist of the blending and
progressive relation, focusing on training students' ability In the experimental contents, the verification experiments
of scientific analysis and insight. Design of engineering are properly compressed, at the same time designing and
case should consider the teaching needs for each comprehensive experiments are strengthened. Emphasis
professional, as well as the current development trend of is placed on the cultivation of comprehensive application
different disciplines synthesizing, crossing and ability and innovation ability of students. Some verifica-
infiltrating, and focus on the introduction of basic tion experiments which have the characteristics of basic
concepts from different disciplines in the analysis of teaching selected, the student can deepen the understand-
examples, expound the use of basic principle of electrical ing of theory content and also exercise the use of instru-
and electronics in every discipline. mentation. On this basis, the comprehensive and design
experiments are strengthened, such as the AC motor con-
trol experiment can be extended to design and synthesis.
3. Reform of Experimental Teaching
In designing comprehensive experiments, in order to
avoid students’ blindness in the process of experiment
Electrical Engineering and Electronics has the character-
and ensure the security of experiments, modern teaching
istic of practice. Strengthening the laboratory construc-
methods of EDA technology should be made full use of.
tion and attaching importance to practice is always the
Students are required to give EDA simulation results of
most important aspects in the course construction. Aim-
the designed circuit before actual operation, which are
ing at Excellence Engineer Program, we try to reform the
approved by the teacher later, and then can begin to ex-
content system of experimental teaching, experimental
periment. In the comprehensive experiment, students are
conditions and experimental mode, increase the virtual
allowed to group by themselves and not strictly limited
experiment, opening experiment, comprehensive experi-
operation time. There are the following two methods: the
ment, small system production, to vigorously increase the
one is that the teacher design some comprehensive sub-
students' interest in study, experimental skills and appli-
ject, let students choose the topic and then complete the
cation ability of electrical and electronic technology and
design; the other is that students design subject by them-
cultivate innovation spirit.
selves, teacher audit after. Only in this way can we com-
3.1. Introduction of EDA Technology and Use of Ad-
bine theory and practice, enhance the interest of students,
vanced Experimental Teaching Means
cultivate students’ ability of using the knowledge to anal-
By introducing the EDA software into the whole process ysis and solve the question and innovation ability. In the
of teaching and experiment, helping students realize the process of experimental teaching, we pay attention to the
construction of the virtual electronic laboratory, students heuristic teaching method, change the previous method of
can use EDA software to simulate the actual working explaining the experimental process and steps in detail.
process of various circuits in learning theory. Take Multi- By using heuristic teaching, teachers guide the students to
sim of NI Company for example, students can input the do experiments, that is, only tell about matters needing
circuit diagram, choose a variety of virtual signal genera- attention, less about specific contents, especially in the
tor as the outside excitation, observe the circuit working design experiments of some high level. In order to culti-
process, the output waveform and the quantitative indica- vate students' self-study ability, teachers do not repeat the
explanation of the basic knowledge learned before, just 3.4. Increase Opening-up of the Laboratory and Im-
according to the design task put forward references, let prove Utilization Rate of the Laboratory.
students self-study. At the same time, adopting the meth-
od of combining collective guidance with individual In the reform of experimental teaching methods and
question-and- answer, the tutor guides students to consult means, one important link is the open-up laboratory,
the manuals, diagrams and literatures according to the which guarantees students of fulfilling design and com-
topic. In addition, in the course of the experiment, the prehensive experiment. The open laboratory provides
circuit do not work correctly is one of the most common students more experimental resources and experimental
fault, the tutor need not directly point out the cause of the sites, offers students of poor experimental skills two
fault, but to remind students to use what has been learned hands-on opportunities and lets students of strong exper-
to solve their problems independently. imental skills obtain the sublimation in practice. Students
3.3. Using Resources of Research Laboratory to do comprehensive experiment designed by their own
Serve for Undergraduate Practice Teaching make them change from being arranged by the tutor pas-
sively into designing and implementing actively, cultivat-
At present many colleges and universities propose the ing students' comprehensive quality.
transition from teaching to teaching-and-research, and
research laboratories in accordance with past routine,
4. Conclusions
generally is used for scientific research, only open to
graduates. Due to science and technology develop more Combining with teaching of Excellence Engineer Pro-
and more quickly and the update cycle of experimental gram pilot class, our school make the enhancement of
equipment is short, the utilization rate of some equipment students' self-learning ability, engineering quality and in-
is very low. While to the undergraduates, this equipment novation consciousness as the primary goal of the reform
is very superior, but not used, it is also a waste of re- of the Electrical Engineering and Electronics course,
sources. Work in the research laboratory has the obvious through the reform and innovation of curriculum content,
characteristics of practicality, innovation, which fully teaching model and experimental procedures, promote
meets Excellence Engineer Program’s requirements for the development of Inquiry-based teaching model, im-
undergraduate practical teaching. Therefore, the school plement Excellence Engineer Program by the reform of
should afford policy and financial support, expand the the Electrical Engineering and Electronics course’s teach-
scale of the laboratory, transform research laboratory into ing and experiment.
teaching-and-research laboratory. Undergraduate students
enter the laboratory, engaged in some simple basic work,
5. Acknowledgements
with the ability to improve, and then participate into more
high level research. Because the research laboratory has This research was supported by Jiangxi Province Educa-
the characteristics of preciseness and innovation, students tional Department Teaching Reform and Research Project
in the research work can inherit the spirit of practice and (No.JXJG-12-5-23) and Scientific Research Foundation
innovation from the mentor and senior there and get en- of East China Jiaotong University (No.11DQ08).
lightenment. At the same time, the organization and man-
agement of research laboratory is similar to enterprise