Emergence of proto-organisms from bistable stochastic differentiation and
Salva Duran-Nebreda ,1,2 Adriano Bonforti ,1,2 Rau´l Montan˜ez ,1,2 Sergi Valverde,1,2 and Ricard Sol´e 1,3,2
1ICREA-Complex Systems Lab, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Dr Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
2Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, UPF-CSIC, Psg Barceloneta 37, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
3Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA
Theriseofmulticellularityintheearlyevolutionofliferepresentsamajorchallengeforevolution-
ary biology. Guidance for finding answers has emerged from disparate fields, from phylogenetics
tomodellingandsyntheticbiology,butlittleisknownaboutthepotentialoriginsofmulticellular
aggregatesbeforegeneticprogramstookfullcontrolofdevelopmentalprocesses. Suchaggregates
should involve spatial organisation of differentiated cells and the modification of flows and con-
centrationsofmetaboliteswithinwelldefinedboundaries. Hereweshowthat,inanenvironment
where limited nutrients and toxic metabolites are introduced, a population of cells capable of
stochasticdifferentiationanddifferentialadhesioncandevelopintomulticellularaggregateswith
a complex internal structure. The morphospace of possible patterns is shown to be very rich,
including proto-organisms that display a high degree of organisational complexity, far beyond
simple heterogeneous populations of cells. Our findings reveal that there is a potentially enor-
mous richness of organismal complexity between simple mixed cooperators and embodied living
organisms.
Keywords: Multicellularity,MajorTransitions,Complexity,Evolution
I. INTRODUCTION ganismality(18)emergingfromaminimalsetofassump-
tions, including(a)multistability(19), incorporatedasa
Multicellularityhasevolvedmultipletimesthroughthe stochastic bistable phenotype (20), allowing for two cell
history ofour planet, leading to awide arrayof spatially types (1 and 2), (b) differential adhesion, which can lead
organised living structures such as aggregates, sheets, to spatial segregation of different proto-tissues and per-
clusters or filaments (1). The transition to multicellular- vadesseveralkeyprocessesofdevelopment(5,21)and(c)
ity required the emergence of alternative cellular states a selective environment where the presence of external
alongwithstable,physicalinteractionsamongpreviously nutrientandtoxicwasteforcestheselectionofgenotypes
isolated cells (2-5). In our present-day biosphere, mul- with higher fitness. Both types of cells can survive only
ticellular systems display intricate spatial and temporal in presence of nutrient, which is transformed into inter-
patternsimplementedbydevelopmentalprograms,which nal energy, and die if exposed to high concentrations of
are tightly controlled by genetic networks (6,7). But an waste. Cells of type 2 have the additional capability of
early stage might have involved non-inherited stochastic degradingwasteinmedium,attheexpenseoftheircapa-
phenotypic switches and physical aggregation phenom- bility of elaborating nutrient. Previous models involving
ena that could have given rise to some class of cooper- the evolution of undifferentiated multicellularity (22,23)
ating multicellular assemblies (8,9). This is supported have shown that appropriate metabolic trade-offs might
by the well-known observation that single-celled organ- pervade the coexistence of cell clusters. Our model goes
isms can behave as multicellular systems using precisely a step further by allowing alternative cell states to or-
theseprocesses(10)particularlyinthefaceofhigh-stress ganize in space. We find that if the system is allowed
events(11-13). Simplemulticellularsystems,suchasAn- to exploit spatial organization, its evolution gives rise
abaena, where cell differentiation is induced under nitro- not only to cell heterogeneity, but also to nested sub-
gendeprivation,ormixobacteria(10)areexamplesofthe structuresandtothecreationofaninternalenvironment,
minimal types of multicellular organisation (14,15). A thus suggesting that combining differential adhesion and
minimal form of multicellularity is provided by persister multistability provides the necessary toolkit for evolv-
cells and phase variation phenomena, i.e. slow-growing ing proto-organisms in a robust manner. The results re-
cell subpopulations that can spontaneously switch back ported here indicate that the generative potential which
andforthamongmultipleresistantphenotypes,asabet- is typical of the morphological landscape can also be ob-
hedgingstrategyinfrontofpotentialcatastrophe(16,17). tainedbyasimple, previouslyunexploredsetofpattern-
forming rules, where cell-cell communication or genetic
In this paper we aim to explore the potential for or-
networks are not taken in account. It contains the three
key components of evolved MC (24) namely (a) fitness-
coupled spatial patterning, (b) cooperation and special-
ization and (c) a transition from ”simple” to ”complex”
∗jointfirstauthor
†correspondingauthor multicellular forms.
]EP.oib-q[
1v97020.1151:viXra
II. MODEL SPECIFICATIONS
Our assumption is that aggregative organisms involv-
ing multiple cell states present a better fitness than
single-stateorganismsinahabitatwithlimitedresources
and toxic molecules. To delve into the accuracy of our
assumption, we consider a model in which cells are able
to stochastically switch between two different metabolic
states,andpresentdifferentialcell-celladhesion(Fig. 1).
If a cell is able to survive to the habitat’s conditions,
it will spread its offspring, allowing to achieve maximum
fitnessbymeansofanevolutionaryprocessinvolvingmu-
tation of parameters.
A. Metabolism and competition kp
A selective environment is introduced including both
anincomingexternalnutrient(N)andatoxicwaste(W) kq
as well as an internal currency molecule (E). A regular
L L square lattice (Ω) is used. Each site (i,j) Ω
is characterized by a state, indicated as S . This state
can be 0 if the site is empty and either 1 or 2 if the site
is occupied by cells. These two values indicate two dif-
ferent cell types with different adhesion and metabolic
properties. Both N and W are added continuously to
the empty lattice sites and passively diffuse through the FIG. 1 Minimal description of our model for the emergence
external medium and across nearest cells. Energy E is of proto-organisms. The world is defined as a regular 2D
created by cellular metabolism, as an intracellular prod- lattice continuously seeded with nutrients and toxic metabo-
uct of nutrient processing. Cells of type 2 can allocate lites in the empty space (white), where two types of cells
(grey and black) can coexist. In (a) we show the example of
resources for waste degradation, at the cost of reduced
an evolved proto-organisms displaying complex nested struc-
nutrient elaboration, following a linear tradeoff (ε > 0)
tures (b). (c) Cells can stochastically switch between the
consistent with a maximum metabolic load and shared
two available phenotypes, which can have different adhesive
resources for protein synthesis. For type-1 cells we have
and metabolic properties. Phenotypic switching in both di-
(cid:15)=0. Allthreemoleculesexperiencelineardegradation. rections may occur with a certain probability (kp, kq), while
Thespatialdynamicsaredescribedbyadiscretesetof (1−kp,1−kq)aretheprobabilitiesthatnochangeoccursfor
coupled differential equations. For each site (i,j) Ω: grey or black cells respectively. Cells also interact with the
localfieldsofanurturingsubstance(N)andatoxicmetabo-
ij =αI (η +π )N +D 2N lite (W), which are involved in cell duplication, survival and
ij N ij ij N ij
∂t − (cid:53) death. The metabolism of black cell includes the ability to
degrade waste (blue arrow). (d) In our model cells move by
∂E swappinglocationswithaneighboringcell,providedthatthe
=π ij N ij η E E ij final energy is reduced, in accordance with their (evolved)
adhesion properties.
ij =βI η W +D 2W
ij ij ij W ij
ij (1,Sij) (2,Sij) ij W
ε)γδ include decay and active removal of N and
W,respectively. WehaveusedtheDirac’sdeltafunction
δ = 1 if k = l and zero otherwise. Similarly, the input energyisequallysplitamongthetwo(i.e. noasymmetric
terms I =δ /λ for each site are effective provided divisions are considered). Conversely, cells die if the W
ij (0,Sij)
that the site is empty. The normalisation factor λ (the value surpasses another fixed threshold (Θ ), if E falls
fractionofsitesoccupiedbycells)ensuresaconstantflux below a critical value (Θ ), or with a small random
of N and W throughout the lattice. A cell divides when probability (ξ), releasing their contents (N, W and E
itsE-valueincreasesbeyondafixedthreshold(Θ )and as nutrient) to the surrounding medium. Following this
thereisanemptysiteinthevicinity. Thisnewcellinher- formulation, there is a natural competition for resources
its the genotype and the phenotypic state of the progen- thatcanpromoteselectionofdifferentmulticellularcom-
itor with a small chance of mutations (see SI), and the munities.
extinction
unicellular
FIG. 2 Impact of energy availability and waste input on the selected phenotypes. Here we show a representative region of
the system for different nutrient (α) and waste (β) input values after 5×105 iterations of the genetic algorithm (a). The
multicellular region of this phase space is confined by a minimum energy density below which aggregates cannot grow, but is
otherwiseexpandedbyincreasingfluxesofbothN andW. Mutualinformation(b)ofthecellularstatesforneighbourhoodsof
size 3 (see SI). Genetic diversity (c), calculated from the final normalized genotypes (see SI). As α and β become larger, more
spatial structure is observed and increasingly diverse genotypes are established, eventually settling to more than one species
coexisting (see below).
B. Stochastic switching genetics of pairwise interactions among neigbouring sites:
We introduce genetics in our model in the form of a (0,0) (0,1) (0,2)
stochastic transition between phenotypes (Fig. 1c) rele- = (1,0) (1,1) (1,2) 
vant for cell sorting and metabolism, as it is assumed in (2,0) (2,1) (2,2)
phase and antigenic variation in certain microbial popu-
which is symmetric, i. e. = , and has
lations (16,25,26). Specifically, cells can switch between (a,b) (b,a)
= 0. Other approaches (32) consider each cell as
states with evolvable probabilities p,q [0,1], i. e.: (0,0)
∈ formed by a number of sites, thus allowing for a bet-
ter matching with the underlyng physics of cells. For
→ ij → ij simplicity, we keep our model confined to a one cell-one
site scheme. Since cell-cell (and cell-medium) interac-
where κ is a fixed scaling factor, introduced to account
tions are necessarily local (Fig. 1c), a given cell can only
for the time scale separation between adhesion kinetics
interact with a set Γ of eight nearest neighbors. The
and genetic processes. Therefore, the phenotypic transi-
model allows cell movement between neighboring posi-
tionsarenotdependentonanymolecularcuenorcellular
tions by switching the two local states provided that the
memory beyond their current state.
final state is more likely to happen, i. e. consistent with
the optimization of both cell adhesion energies. This is
given by an energy function:
C. Minimal model for cell adhesion (cid:2) ij + kl (cid:3)
(cid:88) J(Sij,Skl) J(Skl,Sij)
H (2 δ δ )
preferences(27,28). FollowingSteinberg’sdifferentialad- which averages the interaction matrix of both cells. The
hesion model (DAH) we assume that cells movement are superindexes denote the adhesion matrix of a particular
drivenbytheminimizationofadhesionenergybeingcells site and normalise the effect of interacting with empty
moreorlesspronetoremaintogether,avoidingtheexter- medium.
nalmedium,ormaximizingcontactwithit(5,28-31). An At each step, we choose a random neighbor for each
adhesion (or interaction) matrix weights the strength site, compute the new energy and compare it to the
originalone . Ifthedifference∆ = isnegative, can regenerate the protective layer in case it breaks or
adecreaseintheglobalenergywouldoccurandthusthe even create a whole new proto-organism, thus acting as
stateswapisalwaysapplied. Instead,when∆ >0,the apropagule(seeSM1)andeffectivelydefiningarudimen-
largestthedifferencethelesslikelythechangeisassumed tarylifecycle. Moreover, giventhespatialconstraintsto
to happen, with a probability following the Boltzmann the local concentration and flows of metabolites caused
rule (for more details see SM1): by the organisation of cell types, ecosystem engineering
is also present (33,34).
ij → kl 1+e∆ /T
As defined, the transition is likely to occur if an energy C. Convergent evolution towards multicelullarity
reduction takes place, with a noise factor introduced by
T,actingasaneffective”temperature”. Asmallstochas- Beyond the small scale dynamics of the system, the
ticitypreventsthesystemfromgettingtrappedintolocal particular paths taken by each population in the evo-
energy minima. lutionary process were also analyzed. In figure 3 we
display the evolutionary dynamics of three different sce-
narios using a reduced genotype space. In particular,
III. RESULTS we find that the tendency to form homo-aggregates of
each cell type and the waste degradation potential yield
A. Resource and waste levels influence selection for a functional clustering of individuals into discrete sub-
complex multicellularity populations or species (see SI for a principal compo-
nent analysis of the population genotypes). These pop-
In order to analyse the prevalence of multicellular ulations will generate aggregates of a particular type if
traits, we have explored the role played by nutrient and 2 (a,0) (a,a) (0,0) < 0, and will display unicellular
wasteinputsinselectingdifferentphenotypesbyevolving traits -i.e. will tend to attach to the external medium-
thedifferentparameters. TheresultsareshowninFigure otherwise. Also, cells will process more waste at the ex-
2a. Simulations are started with type 1 cells only with pense of efficiency in nutrient absorption the lower the ε
no adhesion (i. e. , =0 for all adhesion strengths) values.
thus behaving as random walkers (since ∆ = 0 and The first example shows the evolution of a “simple”,
thus P(S ij S kl ) = 1/2). This parameter space dis- undifferentiatingaggregativespecies(M1)undermedium
playsthreemainphases,includingacell-free(extinction) energeticconditionsandhighinputsofwaste. Theother
phase, a second phase with sparse distribution of uni- two -different runs of the same parameter set- display
cellular populations (lower domain) and an intermediate coexisting species, giving rise to complex multicellular
phase (marked by a thick line) associated to organismal phenotypeswithdifferentiationanddivisionoflabor. In-
structures. Moreover, different measures were applied to terestingly, all three cases share the same lineages for a
these endpoint states of evolutionary processes (Fig. 2b- short period at the beginning of the simulation yet soon
c),showinganoverallincreaseincomplexityforthemul- divergeintodifferentevolutionaryhistories. Forinstance,
ticellularregionofthisphasespaceintermsofstructural inthesecondscenariothetype1unicellularlineage(U1)
organizationandgeneticdiversity(seeSI).Inparticular, acquires a protective aggregative layer that is also profi-
the increase in genetic diversity is due to the existence cientinprocessingwaste(thusbecomingM2U1),whilein
of multiple distinguishable species that create different, the third case it is the aggregative species M1 that fills
complex spatial arrangements, as measured by the spa- the U1 niche once this strain disappears, evolving into
tial mutual information measure. M1U2 (see also SM2 3 & 4). The evolution of these mir-
ror multicellular proto-organisms M2U1 (Fig. 3b) and
M1U2 (Fig.c) -which are essentially the same phenotype
B. Cellular embodiment enables niche construction with switched adhesion properties between the two cell
types, yet coming from different lineages-, is a clear ex-
Within the multicellular region of this phase space, ample of convergent evolution and path-dependance in
proto-organisms display consistent spatial and temporal our system. Figures 3e-f show the population dynamics
structures of remarkable complexity. Typically, an outer and the evolution of the mutual information of the sys-
layer of cells that develops aggregative features in or- tem in each simulation. In the first case, the population
der to withstand the mounting levels of toxic waste, and follows a classic logistic growth and has a fixed, stable
which surrounds and protects an internal environment MI.Theothertwo,instead,displayheavyfluctuationsin
with lower W and N levels, suitable to be colonized both the population levels and the mutual information,
by cells that preferentially expose to the environment. evenshowingsignsofquasi-periodicdynamics(b). Itcan
Within these ”container” other cell types (not viable also be clearly observed the emergence of a new species
outside these boundaries) can coexist (Fig 1a). These and its impact in the mutual information in the third
nestedstructuresdefineaproto-organism,reminiscentof dataset (arrow marks the branching of the main species
biologically relevant organisations like Volvox sp., and M1 into M1U2 at approximatelly 6 105 iterations).
M1M2R M2U1
-30 -30 -30
-20 -20 -20
30 150 20 150 50
0 2 4 6 8 10
0 2 4 6 8 10
U1 M1 M1M2R M2U1 M1U2 M1M2
0 2 4 6 8 10
time( 105it) time( 105it) time( 105it)
FIG. 3 Speciation process in our GA. The plots on the first row show the evolutionary dynamics of populations of cells
in different parameter sets (α,β), forming distinct branches or “species”. Here, individuals are represented as dots in time
coordinates (z axis) as well as a reduced genotype space (x, y, and colour). More precisely, we use the tendency of grey
cells to adhere to other grey cells Φ (2J −J −J ), the tendency of black cells to adhere to other black cells Ψ
(2J −J −J )andtheabilitytoprocesswasteε. Anisosurfaceofgenotypedensityisalsoshown(seeSI).Thelines
on the bottom face of each cube mark axes origin and the the starting population genotype at Φ=Ψ=0. As a guide for the
eye, we provide a representation of each of the main lineages at the bottom of the figure. On the second row, for each run we
showthepopulationdynamicsofeachcelltypeinfractionoflatticeoccupiedf (redandyellowfortypes1and2respectively)
as well as the mutual information evolution in bits, right axis (blue). Points represent actual values while lines are moving
averages (binning window: 9 data points).
D. Collective fitness and epistatic interactions Some genotypes appear to be viable in only one of the
two environments, while some (especially M1U2/M2U1)
In previous examples some species are shown to coex- provide efficient growth in both, possibly being the most
ist while others appear to be mutually exclusive, imply- fit genotype in fluctuating environments.
ingarichrepertoireofunderlyingecologicalinteractions. Interestingly, the nature of the ecological interaction
In order to better understand the fitness dependencies among genotypes U1 and M1 is shown to switch from
and evolution of multicellular traits in our model, we straight competition in the low W and N scenario to
performed controlled experiments with some of the most parasitism in the high W and N scenario. In fact, in
commonlyobservedgenotypesandtwodifferentenviron- the first scenario both genotypes survive when alone but
ments: one with abundance of nutrient and waste, and a they compete for scarce resources when together, mark-
morestringentonewithlowerlevelsofnutrientandtoxic ing a decrease in the fitness of both genotypes. On the
metabolites. In each simulation the lattice was inocu- contrary, in the latter scenario only M1 survives when
lated with a few cells of one or two genotypes: namely genotypesarealone,butcreatesaprotectivelayerforU1
U1, M1, M1U2/M2U1, M1 and U1 together, M1M2 when genotypes live together, so that U1 can survive at
and M1M2R. Figure 4a shows the normalised popula- theexpensesofM1,whichreceiveslessN andseesitsfit-
tion size in each scenario attained after 103 iterations. ness decrease. As commented previously, this is mainly
increases the growth rate of the whole, resorting after-
0.3 M1 wards to competition between cells. This suggests that,
M1M2R underthissimplerules,anoptimumpropagulesizeexists
and a fitness beyond the individual has emerged.
IV. DISCUSSION 0.1
Emerging multicellularity can be described as cooper-
0 ativegroupsofcellsassembledfromindependentreplica-
tors (18). This transition might have involved different
paths, from mixed aggregates to clonal organisms with
simple developmental plans and life cycles. The existing
FIG. 4 Fitness characterization of the most commonly ob-
literature usually deals with cooperators achieving some
served species in the GA. In (a) we show the occupied frac-
tionofthelattice(f)after103 algorithmiterationsofgrowth kind of selective advantage as a consequence of mutual-
ism, including spatial clustering or structured communi-
without mutation by different genotypes or combinations of
them. For two environments (α = 0.36,β = 0.193 in filled ties,asitoccursinbiofilms(35-37). Buttrueorganismal-
boxesandα=0.56,β =0.247inwhiteboxes),anemptylat- ity, with a diverse set of cellular phenotypes arranged in
ticewasinoculatedwithafewcells(basaldottedline)ofone space as a functional structure, has not been previously
or two genotypes, from left to right: U1, M1, M1U2/M2U1, described as emerging from evolved interactions among
M1 and U1 together (M1 shown), M1 and U1 together (U1 simple virtual cells embodied as darwinian entities.
shown),M1M2andM1M2R.Boxesrepresentthelimitsofthe
Herewehaveprovidedaminimalsetofrulesgrounded
first and the third quartile of the data, the central line is the
in biological processes that shift the selective pressures
medianvalueandbarsstandforthemostextremevaluesnot
towards aggregative behaviour and division of labor.
considered outliers, which are plotted individually as circles
Morphological complexity (38) increased throughout our
(50 simulations for each condition). §,†, and ‡ link datasets
simulations and a fitness transfer was shown to be in
that were found to have different mean values (t-test, signif-
icance p < 10−4). In (b) and (c) we show the impact of the place with the evolution of ε. Interestingly, those cells
initial cell number (N ) on growth rates (∆N/∆tN ) for the with lower values of ε, also displayed stronger attach-
same environments and genotypes previously used (25 simu- ment between them (lower Ψ). This suggests that from
lations of each condition). In the high W environment (c) a a game theoretical perspective cells become “intelligent”
cooperative domain is found below a finite population size, playersandtrytosurroundthemselveswithotherplayers
in which adding cells to the propagule non-linearly increases whosestrategyisthemostmutuallybeneficial. Although
growth rates. Beyond this fitness peak, cells compete for re-
ourcellsliveinannon-clonalenvironment(39),theycan
sourcesandspace,leadingtoacumulativedecreaseinfitness
manipulate who do they stand next to, potentially shap-
similartotheresultsobtainedinthelowW environment(b).
ing local genetic relatedness. This would ensure that the
investment in W reduction mostly benefits cells with a
similar genotype, paving the way for the evolution of co-
operative and altruistic behavior (40).
caused by the capacity of multicellular entities to create
As a premise for this model, we have assumed the ex-
an internal environment, which can be colonized by uni-
istenceof deathpromotingagents intheenvironment, of
cellular species, similarly to a parasitic microbiome-host
which there are several naturally occurring candidates,
relation. Figures 4bc, on the other hand, characterize
like: oxygen (41,42), secreted antibiotics (43) or exoen-
the interactions between cells of the same genotype by
zymes and toxins (44,45). We think that a particularly
varying the initial population size (N ) in the same en-
interesting scenario is the one given by niche construc-
vironments. Using the initial population and the growth
after 103 iterations we approximate the specific growth tion (46), in which the efforts to exclude extant microor-
ganisms from the population by other ecological play-
rate following:
ers might drive the evolution of multicellularity. Such
relation would entail a coupling between ecological and
δN ∆N ∆N organismal complexity, a link that has eluded previous
δt ≈ ∆t 0 ≈ ∆tN efforts in artificial life research (see (47) and references
therein).
We observe that regardless of the genotype, cells com- By allowing our virtual cells to evolve through muta-
pete for resources and space in the low energy input sce- tion of parameters affecting interactions with the exter-
nario (b), meaning that each cell added to the initial nal fields as well as with other cells, we provide a clear
population decreases the growth rate of the whole. A framework to evolve complexity under selection. The re-
very different set of interactions appears to be in place sult of this is a system that spontaneously evolves, un-
in the high waste environment (c), giving rise to a co- der many parametric conditions, to a complex, spatially
operation domain in which increasing the propagule size organized multicellular state. The embodied structures
emerging from the interplay of cell sorting and stochas- 39: 217-39.
tic phenotypic switching display interesting and relevant
features,includingspatialmodificationofconcentrations 2. Bonner, J. T. 2001. First signals: the evolution
and flows of resources as well as temporal dynamics re- of multicellular development. Princeton University
sembling proto-life cycles. In these spatial communities, Press. Princeton.
pattern formation is enforced by the optimization of nu-
3. Nedelcu,A.M.andRuiz-Trillo,I.(eds.) 2015. Evo-
trient uptake along with an efficient removal of waste.
lutionary Transitions to Multicellular Life: Princi-
In doing so, our cell assemblies arrange themselves in
ples and Mechanisms. Springer-Verlag, London.
fitness-coupled collectives, indicating that organismality
mightbeaninevitableoutcomewhilesolvingtheconflict
4. RokasA.2008. TheOriginsofMulticellularityand
associated to simultaneously dealing with both require-
the Early History of the Genetic Toolkit For An-
ments.
imal Development. Annu. Rev. Genet. 42: 235-
Our analysis also suggests that in the context of the
251.
evolution of organismality proposed in (18) our proto-
organismswouldfitinthehighcooperation-reducedcon- 5. Forgacs, G., and Newman, S. A. 2005. Biological
flict category. This class of entities harbours species of physics of the developing embryo. Cambridge U.
disparate complexity, yet all showing a fitness-relevant Press, Cambridge.
division of labor and differentiation, which stand at the
core of our model. Specifically, some artificial organisms 6. Carroll SB. 2001.Chance and necessity: the evo-
have been shown to include an exclusively cooperative lution of morphological complexity and diversity.
domain and specialisation in terms of a metabolic trade- Nature 409: 1102-1109.
off, producing a fitness transfer from one cell type to the
7. Erwin DH, Davidson EH (2009) The evolution of
other. Differentiation into terminal lineages (i.e. gener-
hierarchical gene regulatory networks. Nat. Rev.
ating asoma), although notcontemplatedin ourcurrent
Genet. 10:141–148.
formulation,appearstobeabasicrequirementtofurther
reduce conflict among cells and attain “true multicellu-
8. Newman,S.A.andBaht,R.2008. Dynamicalpat-
larity”.
terning modules: physico-genetic determinants of
The model presented here can be improved by incor-
morphological development and evolution. Phys.
porating a more realistic physics allowing for movement
Biol. 5: 015008.
of aggregates (48) as well as heterogeneous media (49)
where resources and waste might be generated in a non- 9. Newman,S.A.,Forgacs,G.andMu¨ller,G.B.2006.
homogeneous fashion. Similarly, we have limited our- Beforeprograms: thephysicaloriginationofmulti-
selves to a binary switch, therefore confining the func- cellular forms. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 50: 289-299.
tional cell diversity to two main classes. We also as-
sume that cell types are always alive, excluding the pos- 10. Shapiro JA, Dworkin M (Eds) 1997. Bacteria as
sibility of having material scaffolds formed through the Multicellular Organisms. Oxford University Press,
differentiation processes, as it occurs with many soli- Oxford.
tary and colony-forming microorganisms in shallow wa-
11. Balaban NQ, Merrin J, Chait R, Kowalik L and
ters. No less relevant in this context is the potential
Leibler S. 2004. Bacterial persistence as a pheno-
of creating multicellular systems by means of artificial
typic switch. Science 305:1622-1625.
evolution experiments (50-52) or synthetic biology ap-
proaches (53-56). There is a great potential associated
12. Lewis K 2007. Persister cells, dormancy and infec-
to the use of existing genetic components to engineer
tious disease. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5: 48-55.
pattern-formingmodules. Ourproposedminimalsystem
might help defining feasible paths to implement proto- 13. Lewis K 2010. Persister cells. Annu. Rev. Micro-
organisms. biol. 64: 357-372.
Aknowledgments
14. Zhang, C., Laurent S, Sakr, S., L. Peng and S.
We thank the members of the Complex Systems Lab Bedu. 2006. Heterocyst differentiation and pat-
for useful discussions. This work has been supported by tern formation in cyanobacteria: a chorus of sig-
the European Research Council Advanced grant, by the nals. Mol. Microbiol. 59, 367-375.
Bot´ın Foundation by Banco Santander through its San-
15. N.S.WingreenandS.A.Levin. 2006. Cooperation
tander Universities Global Division, a MINECO fellow-
among Microorganisms. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci
ship and by the Santa Fe Institute.
USA. 4, 1486-1488.