Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Michael Elkin · Ingemar Andre · David
B. Lukatsky
Energy fluctuations shape free energy
of nonspecific biomolecular interactions
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Understanding design principles of biomolecular recognition is a
key question of molecular biology. Yet the enormous complexity and diver-
sity of biological molecules hamper the efforts to gain a predictive ability for
the free energy of protein-protein, protein-DNA, and protein-RNA binding.
Here, using a variant of the Derrida model, we predict that for a large class
of biomolecular interactions, it is possible to accurately estimate the relative
free energy of binding based on the fluctuation properties of their energy
spectra, even if a finite number of the energy levels is known. We show that
the free energy of the system possessing a wider binding energy spectrum
is almost surely lower compared with the system possessing a narrower en-
ergyspectrum.Ourpredictionsimplythatlow-affinitybindingscores,usually
wasted in protein-protein and protein-DNA docking algorithms, can be ef-
ficiently utilized to compute the free energy. Using the results of Rosetta
docking simulations of protein-protein interactions from Andre et al., Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,16148(2008),wedemonstratethepowerofour
predictions.
Keywords Fluctuations; free energy of biomolecular interactions.
D. B. Lukatsky
DepartmentofChemistry,Ben-GurionUniversityoftheNegev,84105Beer-Sheva,
Tel.: +972-8-642-8370
Fax: +972-8-647-2943
E-mail: lukatsky@bgu.ac.il
DepartmentofComputerScience,Ben-GurionUniversityoftheNegev,84105Beer-
Sheva, Israel
DepartmentofBiochemistryandStructuralBiology,LundUniversity,22100Lund,
]MB.oib-q[
2v9254.1011:viXra
1 Introduction
Recenthigh-throughputexperimentsdemonstrateahighlevelofmulti-specific
andnon-specificbindinginprotein-protein[1],protein-DNA[2],andprotein-
RNA [3] interactions in a living cell. These observations challenge a conven-
tionalapproachofmolecularbiologyusuallyfocusingonjustasinglepathway
orfunction,orasinglebindingpartnerforaprotein.Thissuggeststhatinor-
dertopredictcorrectlythepropertiesofmolecularinteractionnetworks,one
needs to take into account the effect of multiple binding, essentially comput-
ing the free energy of the system rather than the energy of individual states.
The latter statement is quite intuitive as any protein in a cell interacts with
thousands of proteins (or DNA binding cites), and even if one (or few) of its
interaction partners have stronger binding affinity than others, still weaker
interactions are not negligible and they may become even dominant. Yet the
complexity of biological molecules and a lack of knowledge of accurate inter-
molecularinteractionpotentialshampercomputationaleffortstopredictthe
free energies of protein-protein, protein-DNA, and protein-RNA binding. A
key question is how to estimate the binding free energy based on the par-
tial knowledge of the binding energy spectrum. Each energy in the binding
energy spectrum is defined here as the inter-molecular interaction energy of
a particular bound state of interacting molecules (e.g., particular binding
configuration of protein-protein or protein-DNA complex).
It was recently shown that global symmetry properties of proteins, both
on structural and sequence levels, generically define the properties of their
binding energy spectrum [4,5,6,7,8,9]. In particular, it was shown analyti-
callyin[4]thattheprobabilitydistributionfortheinteractionenergiesofho-
modimers,P(E),isalwayswiderascomparedtoheterodimers,σ /σ =
√ homo hetero
2,whereσisthedispersionofP(E).Thisstatisticallawwasalsoconfirmed
computationally, using one of the most advanced methods for computing
protein-protein interactions applied to a large dataset of protein complexes
from the protein data bank (PDB) [6]. It was also predicted that proteins
possessingahigherlevelofstructuralcorrelations(clustering)ofaminoacids
intheirinterfaces,demonstrateawiderbindingenergyspectrum,aswell[7].
It was shown recently that protein sequences with enhanced strength of di-
agonal correlations of amino acid positions demonstrate a similar property
[8,9].Intuitivelyitmeansthattheclusteringofaminoacidsofthesametype
statistically enhances the dispersion of the binding energy spectrum [8,9].
Sequences with a higher level of such clustering will possess a larger disper-
sion than sequences with a lower level of clustering [8,9]. We have recently
analyzed the properties of the energy spectrum of nonspecific protein-DNA
binding [10]. Similar to the case of protein-protein interactions, we also ob-
served that the width of the protein-DNA binding energy spectrum depends
on the correlation properties of DNA, such as the symmetry and the length-
scale of DNA sequence correlations [10].
We emphasize that in all of those examples the average interaction ener-
giesofthecomparedspectraarealwaysidentical,andonlythedispersionsof
the energy spectra are different, Fig. 1. The predicted effects are thus essen-
tially governed by the fluctuations of energy, and go beyond the mean field.
The case where the average energies are not equal is also discussed below.
We assume here that the probability distribution, P(E), is Gaussian. This
is an accurate assertion since, practically, the binding energy, E, is a sum
of thousands of binary inter-atomic interactions, and this sum is normally
distributed according the the central limit theorem [4].
Here,weestimatetherelativefreeenergyoftwointeractingsystemschar-
acterized by the same average binding energies, (cid:104)E (cid:105) = (cid:104)E (cid:105), but different
dispersions,σ >σ ,Fig.1A.Weshowthatthefreeenergy,F,ofthesystem
possessing a wider binding energy spectrum, is always shifted towards lower
free energies compared to the system possessing a narrower P(E), even if a
finite number of energy levels is known, Fig. 1A. In particular, we show that
the partition function, Z , is almost surely larger than Z , with the proba-
bility, P(Z > Z ) ≥ 1−C/M, where C(σ ,σ ) is a finite constant, and M
is the number of the energy levels used to compute the partition function.
Wenotethatinhisseminalwork[11],Derridahasestablishedthatinthe
random energy model, where the energy spectrum of the system, P(E), is
Gaussian, and the partition function, Z = (cid:80)M exp(−E(i)/k T), for each
realizationofP(E)withM energystates,E(i) ,thequenchedaverageofthe
free energy, (cid:104)F(cid:105) = −k T (cid:104)lnZ(cid:105), is equal to the annealed average, (cid:104)F(cid:105) =
−k T ln(cid:104)Z(cid:105), in the thermodynamic limit of large M:
(cid:104)F(cid:105)=−k T lnM − , (1)
if the temp√erature T is above some critical temperature, T > T
k T ∼ σ/ lnM [11], and σ is the standard deviation of P(E). Using an
examplefromtheRosettadockingsimulationsofprotein-proteininteractions,
we show below that Eq. (1) provides an accurate estimate for the relative
free energy, when M reaches only few thousands.
We stress that our model is applicable to interacting systems without a
pronouncedlow-energy(ground)stateintheirenergyspectra.Theexistence
of such a ground state corresponds to a strong, specific binding. On the
contrary, a large class of weakly interacting biomolecules in a living cell,
such as nonspecific protein-protein, protein-DNA, or protein-RNA binding,
representsthesystemswhereourmodelisoperational.Suchrelativelyweak,
nonspecific interactions, often called “promiscuous interactions”, have been
shown to play an important role in different cellular processes, and in many
cases, the effect of such weak interactions becomes the dominant factor in a
living cell [12].
Weconsidertheensembleoftheinteractionenergies,{E(i)},oftwointeract-
ing biomolecules, where each energy, E(i), corresponds to a given conforma-
tion (i.e., a given interaction state), i, of these molecules.
Webeginwiththedefinitionofthefreeenergyofthesystem,F =−lnZ,
wherethepartitionfunction,Z = (cid:80)M e−E(i),andweassumeforsimplicity
−6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Fig. 1 Calculation of the free energy and fluctuations of the free energy from the
energy spectrum. A. Example: Gaussian probability distributions for the interac-
tion energy, E, characterized by the identical average energies, (cid:104)E (cid:105) = (cid:104)E (cid:105), and
different dispersions, σ /σ = 2. E is represented in the units of k T. B. Com-
puted average free energy differences, (cid:104)∆F(cid:105) = (cid:104)F(σ )−F(σ )(cid:105), as a function of
the ratio of dispersions. Circles with error bars represent the simulation results,
where the quenched averaging is performed (see the text). We used M =1000 for
each computation of the partition function, and the averaging is performed with
respect to 200 realizations. (cid:104)∆F(cid:105) is represented in the units of k T. Error bars
represent free energy fluctuations, and show two standard deviations. Solid curve
represents the analytical result, Eq. (7).
that k T = 1, and the energy, E, is represented in the units of k T; here
k is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. We also
assumethattheenergy,E,obeystheGaussiandistribution,P(E),withzero
mean,(cid:104)E(cid:105)=0,andstandarddeviation,σ.ThesetofM energyvalues,E(i),
is obtained as a statistical realization of P(E). In what follows we compare
thestatisticalpropertiesofZ computedbasedontherealizationsdrawnfrom
two distributions with different values of standard deviation, σ > σ , Fig.
1A.
Since Y =e−E is a lognormal random variable, it is well-known [14] and
canbereadilyverifiedthattheexpectation,(cid:104)Y(cid:105),andthevariance,VAR(Y),
of Y are given by (cid:104)Y(cid:105)=eσ2/2 and VAR(Y)=e2σ2 −eσ2. We note that Eq.
(1) simply follows from (cid:104)F(cid:105)=−ln(M(cid:104)Y(cid:105)).
For a large number M, let Y(1),Y(2),...,Y(M) be independent random
variables, so that each of them is distributed identically to Y. Since Z =
(cid:80)M Y(i), by linearity of the expectation, (cid:104)Z(cid:105) = M · eσ2/2. Also, since
Y(1),Y(2),...,Y(M) are independent, it follows that
and the standard deviation of Z, σ(Z)= VAR(Z).
ConsidernowtwonormalindependentrandomvariablesE andE ,both
having zero mean. We assume further that the standard deviation σ of E
is greater than the standard deviation σ of E , i.e., σ > σ > 0. Let
=e−E1 andY
=e−E2 bethecorrespondinglognormalrandomvariables.
NextweshowthatasymptoticallyalmostsurelyitholdsthatZ >Z ,where
Z = (cid:80)M Y(i) and Z = (cid:80)M Y(i).
1 i=1 1 2 i=1 2
Lemma 1 Let σ ,σ , σ >σ >0, be two positive constants. Then
is a positive constant that depends only on σ and σ .
Proof Chebyshev’sinequality(see,e.g.,[13],p.43)statesthatforanyrandom
variable X with expectation (cid:104)X(cid:105) and standard deviation σ , and any b>0,
By the preceding argument (see Eq. (2)), for i=1,2,
√ (cid:112)
(cid:104)Z i (cid:105) = M ·eσ i 2/2, σ(Z i ) = M · e2σ i 2 −eσ i 2.
A = (cid:104)Z 1 (cid:105)+(cid:104)Z 2 (cid:105) = M · eσ 1 2/2+eσ 2 2/2 .
(cid:104)Z (cid:105)−A = A−(cid:104)Z (cid:105) = (cid:104)Z 1 (cid:105)−(cid:104)Z 2 (cid:105) = M · eσ 1 2/2−eσ 2 2/2 . (5)
Denote Q =
and D = M ·Q. Observe that since σ > σ , both
D and Q are positive. Consequently, (cid:104)Z (cid:105)−D = (cid:104)Z (cid:105)+D = A. Also, by
Chebyshev’s inequality (see Eq. (4)),
1 1 1 1 (cid:112) 1
1 e2σ 1 2 −eσ 1 2
≤ · .
It follows that
1 e2σ 1 2 −eσ 1 2
Analogously,
1 e2σ 2 2 −eσ 2 2
2 2 2 2 2 M Q2
Hence, by union bound,
Since the right-hand side of the inequality (Eq. (3)) tends to 1 as M
grows,itfollowsthattheeventZ >Z occursasymptoticallyalmostsurely.
ThisargumentgeneralizesdirectlytothescenariowhenZ = (cid:80)M1 Y(i) and
Z = (cid:80)M2 Y(i),whereM andM are(notnecessarilyequal)largeintegers.
2 i=1 2 1 2
The generalized inequality is
1 1 2 2 (eσ
(cid:18) (cid:19)
It is easy to understand the obtained results intuitively. In the calculation of
thepartitionfunction,Z = (cid:80)M e−E(i),M energiesE(i) aredrawnfromthe
Gaussiandistribution.However,onlyasubsetoflowestenergiesprovidesthe
dominant contribution to Z. The contribution from high energies is small,
e−|E| (cid:28)1. Since this dominant subset is localized in the low energy tail, the
distributionwithalargerstandarddeviationwillobviouslydeliverthelarger
partition function.
The major practical implication of our result is the ability to estimate
the relative free energy of biomolecular interactions without performing the
actual calculations of the free energy. We establish that a simple, direct
relationship between the average free energy difference and the standard
deviations of the energy spectra, Eq. (1),
isaccurateforasystemwhereonlyafinitenumberofenergylevelsisknown.
We note that our analytical definition of the average free energy relies on
the annealed definition of the average, (cid:104)F(cid:105) = −ln(cid:104)Z(cid:105). In systems without
frustration the latter definition is known to be in excellent agreement with
the quenched averaging, (cid:104)F(cid:105) =−(cid:104)lnZ(cid:105), unlike the case of highly frustrated
systems such as spin glasses [11] or proteins below the glass transition tem-
perature [15]. Indeed, the quenched averaging performed numerically is in
excellentagreementwiththeanalyticalresult,Fig.1B.Theerrorbarsinthis
plot represent the magnitude of the free energy fluctuations. Yet, our cen-
tral result in this paper is stronger than the statement described by Eq. (7).
Here we predict for two systems, that even if a single calculation of the free
Fig. 2 Snapshot of assymetric (we use the term “heterodimeric” to describe such
symmetry) (A), and symmetric (we use the term “homodimeric” to describe such
symmetry)(B)bindingmodesfromRosettadockingsimulationsofproteinL(PDB
code: 1hz6). The structures represent the lowest energy binding modes (using the
same energy term as in ref. [6], the interchain pair potential in the Rosetta low
resolutiondockingenergyfunction)fromanassymetricorsymmetricdockingsim-
ulation of protein L dimers. Position of centroid atoms, representing the sidechain
atoms, is shown as spheres.
energy is performed for each system, using a single realization of the proba-
bilitydistributions,P(E )andP(E ),anditisknownthatσ >σ ,thenwe
guarantee that F <F with the probability approaching one, provided that
the number of measured energy levels, M, in each realization is sufficiently
large. Finally we note that if one of the distributions, P(E ), is shifted from
zero mean by the energy, (cid:104)E (cid:105) = E , the free energy, Eq. (7) gets trivially
shiftedexactlybythismagnitude,(cid:104)∆F(cid:105)=E −(σ2−σ2)/2.Thisisbecause
thefluctuationcontributiontothefreeenergydifferencedependsexclusively
on the widths of the corresponding energy spectra.
3 Example: Free energy of nonspecific protein-protein interaction
We now apply our results to the calculation of the free energy of nonspe-
cific protein-protein interactions. We use an example from Andre et al. [6],
where the Rosetta docking simulations of self-interacting protein L in ho-
modimeric and heterodimeric conformations were performed [6] (see Fig. 2).
In particular, these simulations provide the interaction energies of ∼30,000
homodimeric and ∼ 22,000 heterodimeric conformations, respectively Fig.
3A.Eachoftheseconformationsischosenrandomly,withoutanyenergyop-
timization. Based on these energies, we computed the free energy difference
∆F = F −F , as a function of the energy sample size, M, where,
homo hetero
F = (cid:80)M exp(−E(i) ), and analogously for F (see Fig. 3B). The
homo i=1 homo hetero
0.5 −0.12 0.2
00 0.4 0.8
−4 −2 0 2 4 0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2
E M x 10 4
Fig. 3 Example:Calculationofthefreeenergyofnonspecificself-bindingforpro-
tein L, using the Rosetta docking scores obtained by Andre et al. in ref. [6]. A.
Computedprobabilitydistributions,P(E),oftheRosettadockingenergiesforpro-
tein L in symmetric (i.e. homodimeric, shown in black) and nonsymmetric (i.e.
heterodimeric, shown in gray) conformations [6]. Snapshots from these Rosetta
dockingsimulationsareshowninFig.2.Theinteractionenergy,E,isindimension-
lessRosettascoreunits.Thereareoverall29,976homodimeric,{E(i) },and22,038
heterodimeric, {E(i) }, conformations sampled, respectively. B. Computed free
energy difference between homodimers and heterodimers, ∆F = F −F ,
homo hetero
as a function of the energy sample size, M, where, F = (cid:80)M exp(−E(i) ),
homo i=1 homo
and analogously for F . The horizontal line represents the expectation value,
(cid:104)∆F(cid:105)=−(σ2 −σ2 )/2, Eq. (7), where σ and σ are the standard
homo hetero homo hetero
deviations of the corresponding energy spectra. Inset represents the relative devi-
ation of ∆F from the expectation value, δ = |∆F −(cid:104)∆F(cid:105)|/|∆F +(cid:104)∆F(cid:105)|, as a
function of M.
keyresulthereisthatthefreeenergyofhomodimericconformationsisalways
lowerthenthecorrespondingfreeenergyofheterodimericconformations,Fig.
3B.Afterthesamplesize,M,reachesonlyfewthousandsconformations,the
freeenergydifferencereachesitsexpectationvalue,(cid:104)∆F(cid:105),withtheaccuracy
reaching 90-95% (see inset in Fig. 3B). The estimate performed above, Eq.
(6),gives:P(Z >Z )≥0.95,ifM =5000,whereZ andZ
homo hetero homo hetero
are the corresponding partition functions, each obtained based on M energy
values.Wesuggestthereforethatourmethodshouldprovideanefficientway
to estimate the free energies of nonspecific biomolecular binding.
4 Conclusion
Themajorityofmacromoleculardockingalgorithmsrejectsthelower-affinity
binding scores and retain only one or few lowest energy conformations. We
suggestedhereasimplemethodbasedonDerrida-typerandomenergymodel
[11], how those wasted scores can be used in order to estimate the free en-
ergy of binding. Our conclusions can be applicable to different biomolecular
systems,suchasprotein-protein,protein-RNA,andprotein-DNAcomplexes.
The input energy spectra, P(E), may come from different configurations of
two interacting biomolecules, or they can come from a single biomolecule
interacting with a set of partner binders. It is important to note that our
conclusions hold true even when the probability distribution, P(E ) with a
largerstandarddeviationthanP(E ),σ >σ ,issampledbyasmallernum-
ber of states, M < M ! The free energy F will be reduced compared with
F in the latter case due to the fact that the dominant contribution to the
partition function comes from the lower-energy tails of P(E ) and P(E ),
and thus a wider energy spectrum will always deliver a lower free energy.
In conclusion, we stress that our model is applicable to weakly interact-
ing systems, without a pronounced energy minima in the interaction energy
spectrum. We use the term “nonspecific binding” or “promiscuous binding”
to describe such systems. Nonspecific binding is widespread in a living cell.
In practice, the majority of the interactions are actually nonspecific. Tradi-
tionally,suchnonspecificinteractionsareneglected,whichleadstosignificant
inaccuracies in the computation of the free energy of the system. Here, we
suggested a possible method to estimate the relative free energies of nonspe-
cific binding.
WethankA.Afek,D.Andelman,D.Frenkel,O.Furman(Schueler),W.Gel-
bart, and E. I. Shakhnovich for helpful discussions. D. B. L. acknowledges
the financial support from the Israel Science Foundation grant 1014/09.