On a practical level, this controlled de-
Engineering Carbon Nanotubes struction allows us to effectively separate
semiconducting SWNTs from mixtures of
and Nanotube Circuits Using SWNTs and to easily generate nanotube-
basedFETs.Morefundamentally,theprocess
canallowinsightintothecomplexelectronic
Electrical Breakdown
structureandtransportpropertiesofMWNTs
and SWNT ropes. By removing the stress at
Philip G. Collins, Michael S. Arnold, Phaedon Avouris* the occurrence of individual conductance
steps,thesecompositenanowiresmaybere-
Carbon nanotubes display either metallic or semiconducting properties. Both characterizeduponthelossofeachconstitu-
large, multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs), with many concentric carbon shells, ent conductor. Multiple complementary
andbundlesor(cid:210)ropes(cid:211)ofalignedsingle-wallednanotubes(SWNTs),arecom- transport measurements can, for example,
plexcompositeconductorsthatincorporatemanyweaklycouplednanotubes probedeeperanddeeperintotheinnershells
thateachhaveadifferentelectronicstructure.Herewedemonstrateasimple of a MWNT so that transport through its
andreliablemethodforselectivelyremovingsinglecarbonshellsfromMWNTs different shells can be compared. Here, we
andSWNTropestotailorthepropertiesofthesecompositenanotubes.Wecan willfirstdescriberepresentativeexperimental
removeshellsofMWNTsstepwiseandindividuallycharacterizethedifferent results obtained with a MWNT, and then
shells. By choosing among the shells, we can convert a MWNT into either a addressSWNTdevices.
metallicorasemiconductingconductor,aswellasdirectlyaddresstheissueof The different shells of a MWNT are pre-
multiple-shell transport. With SWNT ropes, similar selectivity allows us to sumed to alternate in a random fashion be-
generateentirearraysofnanoscale(cid:222)eld-effecttransistorsbasedsolelyonthe tween m and s states (9). We directly tested
fractionofsemiconductingSWNTs. this assumption by using controlled break-
down followed by low-bias or low-tempera-
Carbon nanotubes exhibit several technolog- rent-carrying nanotubes selectively without ture measurements, which are believed to
ically important characteristics. Metallic (m) affectingparallelnanotubescarryinglittleor probe only the outermost shell of a MWNT
nanotubes can carry extremely large current nocurrent.Forexample,thecurrentdistribu- (10, 11). As in previous measurements on
densities (1, 2); semiconducting (s) nano- tion in a MWNT favors the outermost shell SWNTs (3, 4), we differentiate between s-
tubescanbeelectricallyswitchedonandoff becauseitisindirectcontactwiththeexter- and m-shells by measuring the conductance
as field-effect transistors (FETs) (3, 4). The nalelectrodes.Thisdistributioncanleavethe G as a function of gate voltage V using a
two types may be joined covalently (5, 6). innermostshellscarryinglittleornocurrent, relativelysmall,10-mVsource-drainbias.An
Unfortunately, no methods exist for reliably which protects them during current-induced m shell is characterized by a G that is inde-
preparingonlymorsnanotubes(ornanotube oxidation. In a bundle or SWNT rope, the pendentofV ornearlyso,whereasansshell
junctions) either by selective synthesis or distribution of current is more uniform be- canbeelectrostaticallydepletedofcarriersby
through post-synthesis separation. This lack cause many individual nanotubes can simul- thegate.
of control, compounded by nanotubes’ ten- taneouslybeingoodcontactwiththeexternal Figure 2 shows the room temperature
dencytobundletogether,hasbeenseenasthe electrodes. Generally, there is no reason for G(V) for various different layers within a
primary block to nanotube-based electronic some SWNTs to be favored over others, but particular MWNT. Initially, this 9.5-nm di-
technology. we can use an electrostatically coupled gate ameter m-MWNT had n shells. Figure 2A
Herewedemonstrateasimpleandreliable electrode to select the s-SWNTs and deplete shows the strong modulation in G(V) ob-
method for permanently modifying MWNTs them of their carriers. Once depleted, the servedafterremovingthreeoftheoutermost
and SWNT ropes to tailor the properties of s-SWNTs are protected from damage in the shells.Removingafourthlayerresultedinan
these bundled nanotubes (7). Our approach samewayastheinnershellsofaMWNT,and mG(V),andremovingyetanotherproduced
usescurrent-inducedelectricalbreakdownto high current densities can be used to initiate anothersG(V).Weinterpretthisvariationas
eliminateindividualshellsoneatatime.Car- oxidationofthemetallicSWNTs. asignatureofthealternatingcharacterofthe
bonnanotubescanwithstandremarkablecur- The removal of carbon shells from these carbonshellsbeingremoved.
rent densities, exceeding 109 A/cm2, in part composite conductors can be observed both G did not fall to zero for a particular
due to their strong carbon-carbon bonding. electrically and with the use of microscopy. s-shell solely because of the contribution of
However,athighenoughcurrentsnanotubes Electrically, the breakdown of a single car- inner m-shells that remain conducting. Note
ultimately fail. In MWNTs, this failure oc- bonshellresultsinapartialconductancedrop that the depletion minimum of the G(V)
curs in air at a certain threshold power that typically occurs within a few millisec- curveforshelln-3coincideswiththeconduc-
through the rapid oxidation of the outermost onds.Whenstressedatsufficientlyhighbias, tanceoftheunderlyingshelln-4.Inthiscase,
carbon shell (8). Because the oxidation of multipleindependentdropsoccurasonecar- theouter,s-shell(n-3)couldbefullydepleted
defect-free graphite can proceed only at ex- bonshellafteranotherisbroken.Theresult- by the gate, but the measured conductance
tremely high temperatures, it was concluded ingstaircaseofcurrentasafunctionoftime included leakage through the underlying m-
thattheprimaryfactorinthebreakdownini- is shown in Fig. 1A, as eight shells of a shell. Additional measurements show that
tiation was current-induced defect formation MWNT are sequentially removed. Either thisleakageisenergeticallyfrozenoutinthe
and that self-heating plays only a secondary atomicforceorscanningelectronmicroscopy low-temperature, low-bias limit [in agree-
role. can resolve the gradual thinning of both ment with previous suggestions (12)], indi-
We have used this process to break cur- MWNTsandSWNTropes(Fig.1,BandC). catingthattheintershellcouplingisthermally
Usingtheformermethod,MWNTdiameters activated.
canbedeterminedbeforeandafterthinning; With further breakdown of this MWNT,
IBMT.J.WatsonResearchCenter,YorktownHeights,
NY10598,USA. the change in apparent diameter has a linear wecanreachthelimitofveryfew,verysmall
correspondence with the number of break- diameter shells. Upon removing the tenth
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-
mail:avouris@us.ibm.com downstepsobserved. carbon shell, the MWNT began to behave
706 27APRIL2001 VOL292 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
likeaperfect,intrinsicFETwitharegionof (16, 17), so that progressively smaller car- toward an exponential characteristic of the
zero conductance even at room temperature bonshellsshouldinfactexhibitlargerband form I 5 A exp (V/V), where V 5 0.50 V
duetothecompletedepletionofcarriers(Fig. gaps.IfweconsideronlytheinitialMWNT (Fig. 3B). Apparently, a tunneling barrier
2B). Similar characteristics were found for diameterandtheintershellspacing,wecan dominates the I-V of the innermost shells,
individual s-SWNTs (3, 4), although the estimate the diameter of each carbon shell most likely because these shells can only
SWNTsusedwerestronglyp-type(i.e.,hole and calculate the expected ratios between couple to the external electrodes through a
carriers) and did not have symmetric G(V) band gaps of the innermost shells. As barrier composed of many graphitic layers.
characteristics.Thecompletedepletionofthe shown in Table 1, the calculated ratios For intermediate shells not in direct contact
MWNT indicates that no m-shells remain, agree well with the experimental ratios, as withtheelectrodes,theunusualshapeofthe
and this behavior persisted until the 14th definedbytheconductancepeaksoneither measuredI-Vcurvescanbeunderstoodqual-
carbonshellwasremoved,atwhichtimethe side of the conductance gap. itatively as the result of a depth-dependent
MWNT circuit finally opened. On the basis Next, we discuss the electrical character- barrier in series with a nanotube’s intrinsic,
oftheknownintershellspacingofnearly0.34 istics of the same 9.5-nm MWNT in the longitudinal I-V characteristic. This series
nm (13, 14), a MWNT of this diameter can opposite,high-biasregime.Figure3Ashows barrier explains the gradual increase of the
haveatmost14shells,inagreementwithour asequenceofhigh-biascurrent-voltagechar- biasrequiredtoreachcurrentsaturationseen
shell-by-shellcount. acteristics (I-Vs) effectively characterizing in Fig. 3. Furthermore, the transition from
A striking feature of Fig. 2B is the theMWNTwithn,n-1,n-2,etc.shellsuntil linear to nonlinear I-V curves observed here
gradual increase of the zero conductance only a single shell remains (18). Each I-V and the abundance of similar nonlinear I-Vs
region as the final s-shells are removed. curve shows unmistakable current saturation reported previously suggests that transport
The width of this region is proportional to at a steadily increasing bias similar to that experimentsoftendonotdirectlycontactthe
the band gap of the semiconductors, with observed in individual SWNTs (19) but at current-carryingcarbonshellofaMWNTbut
conductionaboveandbelowthegapdueto much higher currents. The removal of each rather contact partial or incomplete shells
electron and hole carriers, respectively shell from the MWNT appeared to decrease sometimesobservedbytransmissionelectron
(15). A remarkable characteristic of s-car- this saturation level by a fixed amount of microscopy(13).
bonnanotubesisthattheirbandgapenergy ;20 mA, in agreement with Fig. 1A. This Our measurements confirm the varying
is inversely proportional to their diameter step-by-step decrease indicates that at high nature of MWNT shells, quantitatively ad-
bias all of the MWNT shells contributed to dress the electronic barrier between these
transport. Furthermore, the series of I-V shells,andattempttoisolatethecontribution
curvesshowsthebiasnecessarytobringeach of a single shell to the overall conductance.
subsetofshellsintocurrentsaturation. Untilnow,theoryandexperimenthavebeen
Besides the decrease of the current satu-
ration value, the sequence of I-V curves in
Fig. 3 also shows increasing nonlinearity as
shellsareremoved.Asemilogplotofselect-
ed I-Vs shows the trend from a linear I-V
Fig.3.(A)ByrecharacterizingtheMWNTafter
thelossofindividualshells,thecontributionof
Fig.1.(A)Thepartialelectricalbreakdownofa Fig.2.Byhaltingthestressoneachbreakdown eachshelltotheI-Vcanbedetermined.Onthe
MWNTatconstantvoltagestressproceedsina event,aMWNTmaybecharacterizedafterthe basisoftheuniformspacingofthesequenceof
series of discrete steps corresponding to the lossofeachconstituentshell.(A)Thelow-bias I-Vcurves,itappearsthateachshellsaturates
loss of individual carbon shells from the conductance G(V) changes between s and m at the same current and that all of the shells
MWNT.Equallyspaceddottedlinesemphasize behaviors due to the changing nature of the contributetoconductionatmoderateandhigh
the surprisingly regular spacing. (B) Images of outermostshellateachstageofbreakdown.(B) bias.Thedashedlinemarkstheestimatedpo-
partially broken MWNTs show clear thinning, When the last metallic shell (labeled n-9) has sitionofanI-Vcurvethatwasnotacquired.(B)
withadecreaseinradiusequaltotheintershell been removed, the remaining semiconducting A semilog plot of selected I-Vs indicates a
spacing (0.34 nm) times the number of com- shells can be completely depleted to give re- tendencytowardexponentialI-Vsfortheinner-
pleted breakdown steps. The two segments of gionsofzeroconductance.Takingtheindicated mostshellsduetotheeffectivebarrierbetween
this sample were independently thinned by 3 peaks (arrows) in G(V) to correspond to the themandtheexternalelectrodes.Similarbar-
and10shells,asdepictedbythecoloroverlays. conduction and valence band edges, we can riers likely play a role in all shells except the
(C) Similar thinning, as observed in SWNT determinetheelectronicbandgapsofdifferent outermost one and help explain the nonlinear
ropes. shellswithinaconstantofproportionality. I-VsreportedforsomeMWNTsbutnotothers.
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL292 27APRIL2001 707
divided over these issues. MWNTs are too more, it suggests little electronic interaction densities favor multiple SWNTs and SWNT
complextocreatearealistictheoreticalmod- betweenthedifferenttypesofSWNTs.Mea- bundles that, because of the variability of
el; conversely, previous experiments had surements of the temperature dependence of SWNT properties, are dominated by m-tubes
beenunabletodirectlyprobetheinnercarbon G(V) with and without metallic neighbors and are useless as s-channels. At present, no
shells. The powerful technique of controlled could address this issue of interactions and method exists for the synthesis of purely s-
breakdown introduced here has the potential determineatwhatenergyrange,ifany,such SWNTsorfortheseparationofs-SWNTsfrom
toprovideinsightintothetransportproperties interactionsbecomeimportant(18). SWNTmixtures.
ofthesecomplexconductors. To see how far this technique may be ex- To demonstrate the potential of the con-
Similarmeasurementshavebeenperformed tended,wemeasuredverythickropescontain- trolled breakdown technique to solve these
on ropes of SWNTs. A SWNT rope differs ing hundreds of SWNTs. Even these samples issues,wefabricatedsmallarraysofindepen-
from a MWNT in many consequential ways. couldbeconvertedeffectivelyintoFETs(Fig. dentlyaddressableSWNTFETs.Usingstan-
First,eachSWNTinasmallropecanconnect 4C).However,inthiscasethegradualdecrease dard lithography, an array of electrodes
independentlytotheexternalelectrodes.Thus, ofG haltedbeforeitreachedzero,presumably (source, drain, and gate) was defined on top
ropes,muchmorethanMWNTs,maybemod- becausem-SWNTsatthecoreoftheropewere ofadilutefilmofSWNTropes(Fig.4,Dand
eled as independent, parallel conductors with encasedbys-SWNTs.Theultimatedestruction E). The SWNT density was adjusted to en-
totalconductanceG(V)5G 1G(V),where of these weakly coupled m-SWNTs required surethatatleastoneropeshortedeverysetof
G isthecontributionofthemnanotubesand highervoltagesandasacrificeofsomeofthe electrodes while minimizing the unwanted
G is the gate-dependent conductance of the s surroundings-SWNTs.Asaresult,aropewith connectionsbetweendevices.Ropesbetween
nanotubes(20).Second,multipleSWNTswith- manys-SWNTsandalarge,initialmodulation source and drain electrodes were converted
in a rope are in contact with air, a potentially ofG .10mSmayonlyresultinaFETwith intoFETsbyselectivebreakdown,andstray
oxidizing environment, so many carbon shells G ;1mS. connections were removed entirely by com-
canfailatonce,ratherthantheuniform,shell- The controlled breakdown technique is pletebreakdown.
by-shellfailureobservedinMWNTs.Andlast- extremely valuable not only for the study of Our preliminary results indicate that the
ly, the SWNTs within a small rope do not MWNTsandSWNTinteractionsbutalsofor generation of SWNT FETs can be achieved
electrostaticallyshieldeachotheraseffectively the fabrication of nanotube-based electronic with greater than 90% certainty from this dis-
as the concentric shells of a MWNT. As a devices. Until now, SWNT FETs have been orderedstartingmaterial(21).Figure4Fsum-
result, the gate electrode is quite effective at fabricatedindividually.Typically,SWNTsin marizesresultsfor32devicesincorporatingone
depleting carriers from the s-SWNTs. In this solution are spread on top of prefabricated ormoreSWNTropes.Beforemodification,the
state,current-inducedoxidationcanbedirected electrodearrays.Averylowsurfacecoverage rope conductances varied widely due to the
solelyatthem-SWNTswithintherope. ensures that one SWNT at most connects a distribution of rope sizes as well as contact
In Fig. 4, A and B depict G(V) for two source and drain electrode. At this density, effects,andveryfewdevicescouldbesubstan-
small SWNT ropes before and after con- the great majority of circuits remain discon- tiallydepletedbythegate.Uponbreakingthe
trolledbreakdown.Theunperturbedsamples nected, but some incorporate an m-SWNT m-SWNTs, the conductance of each rope de-
had a conductance that could be partially andothershaveans-SWNT. creased but the remaining channel was solely
modulated by the gate electrode, much like Although this technique has proven valu- semiconducting and could be fully depleted.
thecaseforMWNTs.WithV heldat110V able for the initial characterization of SWNT The resulting devices have reasonable FET
to deplete the predominantly p-type properties,practicalapplicationswillsurelyre- characteristicswithswitchingratioslimitedpri-
s-SWNTs, a stress of several volts was ap- quirethereliablegenerationofmanydevicesin marilybycontactresistances,adifficultytobe
plied to the rope. As the m-SWNTs in the parallel. Achieving densely packed FETs, for addressed separately. We anticipate that the
ropeweredestroyed,G decreasedtozero.In example, requires purely s-SWNTs at a high multiple, small SWNT bundles, which can be
contrast, the modulating component G(V) enoughdensitytoguaranteeinterconnectionsat producedbychemicalvaporgrowth,mayalle-
did not change. The constancy of G(V) in- all of the desired positions (whether grown in viate the difficulties encountered with large
dicatesthatthedepleteds-SWNTswerevery situbychemicalvapordepositiontechniquesor bundles and result in FETs having excellent
effectively protected from damage. Further- grownexsituanddeposited).Suchhighsurface conductivitiesandswitchingratios.
Althoughthisstudyfocusedonthepartic-
Fig.4.(AandB)Stressingamix- ular system of carbon nanotubes, the same
ture of s- and m-SWNTs while principlesmayapplybroadlytovariousmo-
simultaneously gating the bun- lecular electronics systems. We have shown
dle to deplete the semiconduc-
tors of carriers resulted in the
selective breakdown of the m- Table 1. Comparison of relative band gaps from
SWNTs. The G(V) curve rigidly experiments (Fig. 2B) with calculations based on
shifted downward as the theexpecteddiameterdependence.Theonlypa-
m-SWNTs were destroyed. The rametersaretheinitialdiameterofthetubeand
remaining current modulation is the 0.34 nm spacing between adjacent shells.
wholly due to the remaining s- Calc.,calculated;Meas.,measured.
SWNTs. (C) In very thick ropes,
somes-SWNTsmustalsobesac-
Relativebandgap(eV)
ri(cid:222)ced to remove the innermost Diameter
m-SWNTs. By combining this (nm)
Calc. Meas.
technique with standard lithog-
raphy, arrays of three-terminal, n 9.5
nanotube-based FETs were cre- ; ;
ated(DandE)outofdisordered n-10 2.7 0.24 0.22
bundles containing both m- and n-11 2.0 0.33
s-SWNTs. Although these bun- n-12 1.3 0.49 0.48
dlesinitiallyshowlittleornoswitchingbecauseoftheirmetallicconstituents,(cid:222)naldeviceswith n-13 0.7 1.00 1.00
goodFETcharacteristicswerereliablyachieved(F).
708 27APRIL2001 VOL292 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org
that arrays of molecular devices can be pro- Selective Bond Dissociation and
duced by design with the use of external
electricalmeansandwithoutaneedforactual
Rearrangement with Optimally
controlatthenanometerscale.Discretionary
modificationallowedthedefinitionofuseful
Tailored, Strong-Field Laser
electronic elements from a random mixture.
Thoughwehaveappliedthissolutiontosolve
the problem of variation inherent to carbon Pulses
nanotubes, one could imagine generating
similar results using mixtures of carefully
Robert J. Levis,1* Getahun M. Menkir,1 Herschel Rabitz2
chosenmolecules.Inthatmoregeneralsense,
the possibilities for active circuitry have yet Weusedstrong-(cid:222)eldlaserpulsesthatweretailoredwithclosed-loopoptimal
tobeexplored. controltogovernspeci(cid:222)edchemicaldissociationandreactivitychannelsina
seriesoforganicmolecules.Selectivecleavageandrearrangementofchemical
ReferencesandNotes bonds having dissociation energies up to approximately 100 kilocalories per
1. H.Dai,E.W.Wong,C.M.Lieber,Science272,523 mole(about4electronvolts)arereportedforpolyatomicmolecules,including
(1996). (CH ) CO (acetone), CH COCF (tri(cid:223)uoroacetone), and C H COCH (aceto-
2. J.E.Fischeretal.,Phys.Rev.B55,R4921(1997). 3 2 3 3 6 5 3
3. S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren, C. Dekker, Nature phenone).ControlovertheformationofCH 3 COfrom(CH 3 ) 2 CO,CF 3 (orCH 3 )
393,49(1998). fromCH COCF ,andC H CH (toluene)fromC H COCH wasobservedwith
3 3 6 5 3 6 5 3
4. R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel, Ph. highselectivity.Strong-(cid:222)eldcontrolappearstohavegenericapplicabilityfor
Avouris,Appl.Phys.Lett.73,2447(1998).
manipulating molecular reactivity because the tailored intense laser (cid:222)elds
5. L.Chico,V.H.Crespi,L.X.Benedict,S.G.Louie,M.L.
Cohen,Phys.Rev.Lett.76,971(1996). (about 1013 watts per square centimeter) can dynamically Stark shift many
6. R.Saito,G.Dresselhaus,M.S.Dresselhaus,Phys.Rev. excitedstatesintoresonance,andconsequently,themethodisnotcon(cid:222)nedby
B53,2044(1996).
resonantspectralrestrictionsfoundintheperturbative(weak-(cid:222)eld)regime.
7. MWNTsforthisstudywereprovidedbyW.deHeer
andweregrownbystandardarctechniques.SWNTs
were provided by R. Smalley and were grown by Thecontroloforganicchemistrywithoptical (5), and management of pulse propagation
metal-catalyzedlaserablation.Bothtypesofnano- fieldshasbeenalong-sought-aftergoal.This throughnonlinearmedia(6).Thefirstimple-
tubesweredispersedindichloroethaneandpuri(cid:222)ed
objectivegoesbeyondtraditionalphotochem- mentation of this scheme for dissociating
solelybycentrifugation.
8. P. G. Collins, M. Arnold, M. Hersam, R. Martel, Ph. istry,wherevariationintheproductdistribu- bonds was demonstrated in groundbreaking
Avouris,Phys.Rev.Lett.86,3128(2001). tion is obtained by tuning a monochromatic workonorganometallicsystems(7)andhas
9. R.Saito,G.Dresselhaus,M.S.Dresselhaus,J.Appl. radiationsourcetoexcitedstatesofaprecur- since been demonstrated in the cleavage of
Phys.73,494(1993).
sor molecule. Here, we focus on whether a weaklyboundclusterspecies(8).Thecontrol
10. A.Bachtold,etal.,Nature397,673(1999).
11. S. Frank, P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang, W. A. de Heer, suitably tailored laser pulse can guide a dis- of organic reactivity, where bond strengths
Science280,1744(1998). tribution of products to a specific channel, exceed ;50 kcal/mol, remains an open and
12. C.Scho‹enenberger,A.Bachtold,C.Strunk,J.-P.Sal-
characterized by dissociation or rearrange- importantareaofopticalcontrolresearch.
vetat,L.Forro,Appl.Phys.A69,283(1999).
13. S.Iijima,Nature354,56(1991). ment,asillustratedinFig.1.Successfulcon- We demonstrate a potentially universal,
14. C.-H.Kiang,M.Endo,P.M.Ajayan,G.Dresselhaus, trolinthiscontextimpliescooperativeinter- ultrafastlaserexcitationproceduretoachieve
M.S.Dresselhaus,Phys.Rev.Lett.81,1869(1998).
action between a (perhaps complex) time- controlovermolecularreactivity.Thisproce-
15. Theuseofhigh-voltagepulsestobreakshellsleadsto
somerearrangementoftrappedchargesontheun- dependentelectricfieldofthelaserpulseand dure is based on closed-loop learning of op-
derlyingSiO substrate.Tosimplifythecomparison the precursor molecule’s dynamics to alter timally shaped, strong-field, near-infrared
amongshells,wecenteredeachcurveinFig.2Bnear the product distribution in a desirable and pulses(centeredaround800nm)guidedjust
V 50.
g variable manner. The objective is to maxi- by the desired product. A strong-field laser
16. J.W.Mintmire,B.I.Dunlap,C.T.White,Phys.Rev.
Lett.68,631(1992). mize the yield of a specified product by pulse(;1013Wcm22)impliesthattheasso-
17. R.Saito,M.Fujita,G.Dresselhaus,M.S.Dresselhaus, means of a suitable closed-loop laboratory ciatedelectricfieldmagnitudeisontheorder
Phys.Rev.B46,1804(1992).
learning procedure that determines the opti- of the valence electron’s binding energy in
18. High-biasI-Vcurvesmustbeacquiredinhighvacuum
to suppress destructive oxidation. Between each mallaserpulse.Thecapabilityofcontrolling the molecule. This magnitude is a critical
curve, the MWNT was exposed to air in order to reactivity, especially of organic species, by enabling feature for broad-scale application
removesinglecarbonshellsinacontrolledmanner.
thismeanscouldhaveimplicationsindiverse uponconsiderationofthebandwidthrequired
Four-andtwo-probemeasurementsareperiodically
compared to monitor the contact resistance R to industrial and biological or medicinal set- for the effective control of chemical reac-
eachnanotube.Thedatashownhereareforsamples tings.Forexample,microelectroniclithogra- tions. Weak-field, continuous wave pulses
exhibitingconstantR ofafewkilohmsthroughout
c phy, the fabrication of gene chips, and pho- mustbepreciselytunedtoamolecularreso-
the series of measurements. Samples with high R
tendtofailatthecontact,asopposedtotheshell- c todynamic therapy could all benefit from nance for coupling; Fig. 2A represents such
by-shellmechanismdescribedhere. highlycontrollablephotochemistry. an excitation scheme for most conventional
19. Z.Yao,C.L.Kane,C.Dekker,Phys.Rev.Lett.84,2941 Since the introduction of the concept of photochemical reactions. Ultrafast laser sys-
(2000). teaching lasers to control photodynamics temsallow;0.1eVofbandwidthfora25-fs
20. Forexample,seeH.Stahl,J.Appenzeller,R.Martel,
Ph. Avouris, B. Lengeler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5186 withclosed-loopmethods(1),theprocesshas pulse (for example, 775 to 825 nm for a
(2000). been used for optimization of laser-induced near-infrared pulse). The relatively small
21. Theremaining10%formopencircuitsbeforewecan
fluorescence(2),stimulatedRamanemission bandwidtharoundthelasercarrierfrequency
achievecompleteswitching.Imagingthesesamples
typicallyrevealslargecontaminantparticlesormulti- from molecules (3), high harmonic genera- limits control in the weak-field case (Fig.
ropecrossings,whichlikelyresultinweak,dissipative tion (4), ultrafast semiconductor switching 2B). However, with strong-field pulses, the
links.
nominal eigenstates of the molecule can be
22. We thank R. Martel for valuable discussions, K. J.
Chanforassistancewithlithography,andB.Ekfor 1DepartmentofChemistry,WayneStateUniversity, placedintoresonancethroughacombination
expert technical assistance. M.A. acknowledges the Detroit,MI48202,USA.2DepartmentofChemistry, ofStarkshifting(upto;10eVinourexper-
supportofanIBMsummerinternship. PrincetonUniversity,Princeton,NJ08540,USA. iment) (9) and multiphoton excitation (10 to
4January2001;accepted5March2001 *Towhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressed. 50 photons using the Ti:sapphire laser cen-
www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL292 27APRIL2001 709