Enhanced Gravity Model of trade:
reconciling macroeconomic and network models
Assaf Almog,1 Rhys Bird,2 and Diego Garlaschelli3,2
1Tel Aviv University, Department of Industrial Engineering, 69978 Tel Aviv, Israel
2Instituut-Lorentz for Theoretical Physics, Leiden University, Niels Bohrweg 2, 2333 CA Leiden, Netherlands
3IMT School for Advanced Studies, Piazza S. Francesco 19, 55100 Lucca, Italy
The structure of the International Trade Network (ITN), whose nodes and links represent world
countries and their trade relations respectively, affects key economic processes worldwide, includ-
ing globalization, economic integration, industrial production, and the propagation of shocks and
instabilities. Characterizing the ITN via a simple yet accurate model is an open problem. The
traditional Gravity Model (GM) successfully reproduces the volume of trade between connected
countries, using macroeconomic properties such as GDP, geographic distance, and possibly other
factors. However, it predicts a network with complete or homogeneous topology, thus failing to
reproduce the highly heterogeneous structure of the ITN. On the other hand, recent maximum-
entropy network models successfully reproduce the complex topology of the ITN, but provide no
information about trade volumes. Here we integrate these two currently incompatible approaches
via the introduction of an Enhanced Gravity Model (EGM) of trade. The EGM is the simplest
model combining the GM with the network approach within a maximum-entropy framework. Via
a unified and principled mechanism that is transparent enough to be generalized to any economic
network, the EGM provides a new econometric framework wherein trade probabilities and trade
volumes can be separately controlled by any combination of dyadic and country-specific macroe-
conomic variables. The model successfully reproduces both the global topology and the local link
weightsoftheITN,parsimoniouslyreconcilingtheconflictingapproaches. Italsoindicatesthatthe
probability that any two countries trade a certain volume should follow a geometric or exponential
distribution with an additional point mass at zero volume.
I. INTRODUCTION of the empirical network structure. Reliable models of
the ITN can better inform economic theory, foreign pol-
icy, and the assessment of trade risks and instabilities
TheInternationalTradeNetwork(ITN)isthecomplex
worldwide.
network of trade relationships existing between pairs of
countries in the world. The nodes (or vertices) of the
ITN represent nations and the edges (or links) represent
their (weighted) trade connections. In a global economy
extending across national borders, there is increasing in- Inthispaper,weemphasizethatcurrentmodelsofthe
terestinunderstandingthemechanismsinvolvedintrade ITNhavestronglimitations,andthatnoneofthemissat-
interactionsandhowthepositionofacountrywithinthe isfactory,fromeitheratheoreticaloraphenomenological
ITN may affect its economic growth and integration [1– point of view. We point out equally strong (and largely
5]. Moreover, in the wake of recent financial crises the complementary) problems affecting on one hand tradi-
interconnectedness of economies has become a matter of tional macroeconomic models, which focus on the local
concern as a source of instability [6]. As the modern ar- weight ofthelinksofthenetwork,andontheotherhand
chitecture of industrial production extends over multiple morerecentnetworkmodels,whichfocusontheexistence
countries via geographically wider supply chains, sudden of links, i.e. on the global topology of the ITN. We then
changes in the exports of a country (due e.g. to unpre- introduce a new model of the ITN that preserves all the
dictable financial, environmental, technological or even good ingredients of the models proposed so far, while at
political circumstances) can rapidly propagate to other the same time improving upon the limitations of each of
countries via the ITN. The assessment of the associated them. The model can be easily generalized to any (eco-
trade risks requires detailed information about the un- nomic) network and provides an explicit specification of
derlying network structure [7]. In general, among the thefullprobabilitydistributionthatagivenpairofcoun-
possible channels of interaction among countries, trade tries is connected by a certain volume of trade, fixing an
plays a major role [2–4]. otherwise arbitrary choice in previous approaches. This
The above considerations imply that the empirical distribution is found to be either geometric (for discrete
structure of the ITN plays a crucial role in increasingly volumes) or exponential (for continuous volumes), with
many economic phenomena of global relevance. It is an additional point mass at zero volume. This feature,
therefore becoming more and more important to char- which is different from all previous specifications of in-
acterize the ITN via simple but accurate models that ternational trade models, is shown to replicate both the
identifyboththebasicingredientsandthemathematical local trade volumes and the global topology of the em-
expressions required to accurately reproduce the details pirical ITN remarkably well.
]hp-cos.scisyhp[
3v84300.6051:viXra
II. PRELIMINARIES: BUILDING BLOCKS OF More complicated variants of Eq. (1) use additional
THE MODEL factors (with associated free parameters) either favoring
or resisting trade [9, 10]. Like the GDP and geographic
Before we fully specify our model, we preliminarily distances, these factors can be either country-specific
identify its building blocks by reviewing the strengths (e.g. population)ordyadic(e.g. commoncurrency,trade
and weaknesses of the two main modelling frameworks agreements, shared borders, common language, etc.). In
adopted so far. general, ifwecollectivelydenotewith(cid:126)n i thevectorofall
node-specific factors and with D(cid:126) the vector of all dyad-
specific factors used (note that these vectors may have
A. Gravity models of trade different dimensionality), Eq. (1) can be generalized to
We start by discussing traditional macroeconomic
=F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) F >0, (2)
modelsofinternationaltrade. Thesemodelshavemainly
focused on the volume (i.e. the value e.g. in dollars) of where the functional form of F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) need not be
trade between countries, largely because the economic ofthesametypeasinEq.(1),andφ(cid:126)isavectorcontaining
literatureperceivestradevolumesasbeinga priori more allthefreeparametersofthemodel(likec,α,β,γ forthe
informative than the topology of the ITN: the striking particularcaseabove). Indeed,althoughinthispaperwe
heterogeneity of trade volumes observed between differ- focus on the GM applied to the international trade net-
ent pairs of countries is clearly not captured by a purely work, our discussion equally applies to many other mod-
‘binary’ description where all connections are effectively els of (socio-economic) networks as well. For instance,
given the same weight. Based on this argument, empha- the recently proposed Radiation Model (RM) [11] is also
sis has been put on explaining the (expected) volume of described by Eq. (2), where (cid:126)n and D(cid:126) include certain
trade between two countries, given certain dyadic and
geographicalanddemographicalvariables. Ourfollowing
country-specific macroeconomic properties.
discussionappliestoboththeGMandtheRM,aswellas
Jan Tinbergen, the physics-educated1 Dutch
any other model described by Eq. (2). Similarly, it does
economist who was awarded the first Nobel memo-
notonlyapplytotradenetworks,sinceboththeGMand
rial prize in economics, introduced the so-called Gravity
the RM have been successfully applied to other systems
Model (GM) of trade [8]. The GM aims at inferring the
aswell,includingmobilityandtrafficflows[11–14],com-
volume of trade from the knowledge of Gross Domestic
munication networks [15], and migration patterns [16]
Product, mutual geographic distance, and possibly addi-
(the latter representing - to our knowledge - the earliest
tional dyadic factors of macroeconomic relevance [9, 10].
applicationoftheGMtoasocio-economicsystem,dating
In one of its simplest forms, the GM predicts that, if i
back to 1889 [17]).
and j label two different countries (i,j =1,...,N where
It is generally accepted that the expected trade vol-
N is the total number of countries in the world), then
umespostulatedbytheGM,alreadyinitssimplestform
the expected volume of trade from i to j is
given by Eq. (1), are in good agreement with the ob-
(cid:104) w ij (cid:105) =c GDPα i GDPβ j R i−j γ c,α,β,γ >0, (1) s re e s rv u e lt d , fl in ow F s ig b . e 1 tw w e e e s n h t o r w ad a in t g yp c i o c u a n l t lo ri g e - s l . og To pl i o ll t u c s o tr m a p te ar t i h n i g s
whereGDP istheGrossDomesticProductofcountryk, the empirical volume of the realized (bilateral) interna-
R isthegeographicdistancebetweencountriesiandj, tional trade flows with the corresponding expected val-
and c,α,β,γ are free global parameters to be estimated. ues calculated under the GM as defined in Eq. (1) (with
In the above directed specification of the GM, the flows parameters calculated as reported in Table I). The fig-
w and w can be different. An analogous undirected ureshowsthetypicalqualitativeconsistencybetweenthe
specification exists, where the volumes of trade from i to GMandtheempiricalnon-zerotradevolumes. However,
j and from j to i are added together into a single value it should be noted that, while Eqs. (1) and (2) define
w = w of bilateral trade. In the latter case, Eq. (1) the expected value of w , the full probability distribu-
still holds but with the symmetric choice α = β. With tion from which this expected value is calculated is not
this in mind, we will keep our discussion entirely general specified, and actually depends on how the model is im-
throughout thepaper and, unless otherwisespecified, al- plementedinpractice. IntheGMcase,thedistributionis
low all quantities to be interpreted either as directed or chosen to be either Gaussian (corresponding to additive
as undirected. Only in our final empirical analysis we noise,inwhichcasetheexpectedweightscanbefittedto
will adopt an undirected description for simplicity. theobservedonesviaasimplelinearregression[18,19]),
log-normal(correspondingtomultiplicativenoiseandre-
quiringalinearregressionoflog-transformedweights[20]
aswedidtoproduceFig.1andTableI),Poisson[20], or
1 Jan Tinbergen studied physics in Leiden, where he carried out
more sophisticated [21] (see [22] for a review). The ar-
a PhD under the supervision of the theoretical physicist Paul
Ehrenfest. Tinbergen defended his thesis in 1929, and then be- bitrariness of the weight distribution already highlights
camealeadingeconomist. HewasawardedthefirstNobelmemo- afundamentalweaknessofthetraditionalformulationof
rialprizeineconomicsin1969. the model. Moreover, for both additive and multiplica-
10−5 100 105 1010
10−2 100 102 104 106
10−2 100 102 104 106
10−5 100 105 1010
FIG.1. Empirical non-zero trade flows vs. the corresponding expectation under the traditional Gravity Model.
Log-log plot comparing the empirical volume (y-axis) of all non-zero bilateral trade flows in the ITN with the corresponding
expectedvolume(x-axis)predictedbytheGravityModeldefinedinEq.(1),withparametersestimatedasreportedinTableI.
Top left: year 1970, top right: year 1980, bottom left: year 1990, bottom right: year 2000. The black line is the identity line
corresponding to the ideal, perfect match that would be achieved if the empirical weights were exactly equal to their expected
values, i.e. in complete absence of randomness.
tive Gaussian noise, the model can produce undesired that the GM can be fitted only to the non-zero weights,
negative values. i.e. the volumes existing between pairs of connected
A related but more fundamental limitation of the GM countries. If used in this way, the model effectively dis-
is that, at least in its simplest and most natural imple- regards the empirical structure of the network, both as
mentations, it cannot generate zero volumes – thereby input (thus making predictions on the basis of incom-
predictingafullyconnectednetwork[22–24]. Thismeans plete data) and as output (thus failing to reproduce the
topology). Operatively, the GM can be used only after
the presence of a trade link has been established inde-
pendently [22]. As observed in [21], “Omitting zero-flow
Traditional Gravity Model
observations implies that we loose information on the
Year c α, β γ
causes of (very) low trade”, because any fit to positive-
1970 9.9·108 0.91 0.81
onlyflowswouldsignificanltyunderestimatetheeffectsof
1980 3.1·109 0.83 0.89
factors that diminish trade. This problem is particularly
1990 1.5·1010 0.97 0.93
critical since roughly half of the possible links are found
2000 4.3·1010 1.05 0.93
not to be realized in the real ITN [25–28]. Clearly, the
same problem holds for the RM and any more general
TABLEI.ParametervaluesforthetraditionalGravityModel
used in Fig. 1 and calculated by fitting Eq. (1) (with the model of the form specified in Eq. (2).
symmetryconstraintα≡β)toallnon-zeroempiricalbilateral While there are variants and extensions of the GM
tradeflowsviaanOrdinaryLeastSquare(OLS)regressionof that do generate zero weights and a realistic link density
log-transformed weights. (e.g. the so-called Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood
models[20]and‘zero-inflated’gravitymodels[21]),these informative than the knowledge of the corresponding
variants systematically fail in reproducing the observed weighted properties (e.g. node strengths). Indeed, while
topology[10,22]. Inotherwords,whilethesemodelscan the binary network reconstructed only from the knowl-
generatethecorrectnumberofconnections,theytendto edgeofthedegreesofallcountriesisfoundtobetopolog-
putmanyofthelatterinthe‘wrongplace’inthenetwork. ically very similar to the real ITN, the weighted network
Indeed, even in its generalized forms, the GM predicts a reconstructed only from the strengths of all countries is
largelyhomogeneousnetworkstructure,whiletheempir- foundtobemuchdenserandverydifferentfromthereal
icaltopologyoftheITNismuchmoreheterogeneousand network[26–28]. Thisissomewhatsurprising,giventhat
complex[22,23]. Establishedempiricalsignaturesofthis the economic literature largely postulates that weighted
heterogeneity include a broad distribution of the degree properties are per se more informative than the corre-
(number of connections) and the strength (total trade sponding binary ones.
volume) of countries [25–35], the rich-club phenomenon The solution to this apparent paradox lies in the fact
(whereby well-connected countries are also connected to that,whiletheknowledgeoftheentire weightednetwork
eachother)[36,37],strongclusteringand(dis)assortative is necessarily more informative than that of its binary
patterns[26,27]. Thesehighlyskewedstructuralproper- projection(inaccordancewitheconomicpostulates),the
ties are remarkably stable over time. However, their are knowledgeofcertainmarginal propertiesoftheweighted
not replicated by any current version of the GM [22]. network can be unexpectedly less informative than the
knowledge of the corresponding marginal properties of
the binary network. In fact, it turns out that if the de-
B. Network models of trade grees of countries are (not) specified in addition to the
strengths of countries, the resulting maximum-entropy
model can(not) reproduce the empirical weighted net-
As we mentioned at the beginning, many processes of
work of international trade satisfactorily [27, 40, 41].
great economic relevance crucially depend on the large-
scale topology of the ITN. In light of this result, the An important take-home message is that, in contrast
sharp contrast between the observed topological com- withthemainstreamliterature,modelsoftheITNshould
plexity of the ITN and the homogeneity of the network aimatreproducingnotonlythestrengthofcountries(as
structuregeneratedbytheGM(includingitsextensions) the GM automatically does by approximately reproduc-
calls for major improvements in the modelling approach. ing all non-zero weights), but also their degree (i.e. the
In particular, in assessing the performance of a model number of trade partners) [26–28, 41]. In addition to
of the ITN, emphasis should be put on how reliably the these studies, an alternative approach, the Linear Grav-
(global) empirical network structure, besides the (local) ityTransportationModel(LGTM),hasalsodemostrated
volume of trade, is replicated. In the network science the importance of the ITN topology [46]. In this model
literature, successful models of the ITN have been de- the monetary flow is balanced for each country (node)
rived from the Maximum Entropy Principle [24–28, 38– based on the number of trade partners (degree). The
44]. These models construct ensembles of random net- model produces expectations of the GDP of countries
worksthathavesomedesiredtopologicalproperty(taken thatareconsistentwithrealdata,usingboththevolume
asinputfromempiricaldata)andaremaximallyrandom of trade flows and the topology of ITN as input. These
otherwise. Typically, the constrained properties are cho- studies indicate that, in order to devise improved mod-
sentobethedegreesand/orthestrenghtsofallnodes. In els of the ITN, one should include the degrees, which
this way the models can perfectly replicate the observed are purely topological properties, among the main tar-
strongheterogeneityofthesepurelylocalproperties,and get quantities to replicate. This is the guideline we will
at the same time illustrate its immediate (i.e. prior to follow in this paper.
invoking any other more complicated network formation UnliketheGM,maximum-entropymodelsoftradeare
mechanism) structural effects on any higher-order topo- a priori non-explanatory, i.e. they take as input struc-
logical property of the network. In the different con- turalproperties(asopposedtoexplanatoryeconomicfac-
text of financial networks, where the main challenge is tors) to explain other structural properties. However,
a reliable inference of the unobserved topology of a net- theycaninfactbeusedtoselecta posteriori anexplicit,
work(typicallyofinterconnectedfirmsorbanks)starting empiricallyvalidatedfunctionaldependenceofthestruc-
frompartial,node-aggregateinformation[45],maximum- ture of the ITN on underlying explanatory factors. For
entropy models have recently turned out to deliver the models with country-specific constraints, this operation
best-performing reconstruction methods so far [43–45]. canbecarriedoutasfollows. Mathematically,controlling
In general, different choices of the constrained proper- fornode-specificpropertiesisrealizedbyassigningoneor
ties lead to different degrees of agreement between the more Lagrange multipliers, also known as ‘hidden vari-
model and the data. This can generate intriguing and ables’or‘fitnessparameters’(cid:126)x ,toeachnode. Ifacertain
counter-intuitive insight about the structure of the ITN. choiceoflocalconstraintsisfoundtoreplicatethehigher-
For instance, contrary to what naive economic reasoning order properties of the real-world network satisfactorily,
would predict, it turns out that the knowledge of purely then one can look for an empirical relationship between
binary local properties (e.g. node degrees) can be more thevaluesoftheassociatedhiddenvariablesandthoseof
candidatenon-topological,country-specificfactorsofthe ondly, even if the structure of the ITN can be repli-
type(cid:126)n ,liketheGDPortotalimport/export. Ifthehid- catedsatisfactorilyintermsofthe‘GDP-only’modelde-
den variables are indeed (at least approximately) found fined in Eq. (3) [25, 30, 32], recent analyses have found
to be functions of some country-specific factors (i.e. if evidence that certain metric (although not necessarily
(cid:126)x f(cid:126)((cid:126)n )), then one can replace (cid:126)x with f(cid:126)((cid:126)n ) in the geographic2) distances do also play a role in determin-
ma ≈ ximum-entropy model, thus reformulating the latter ing the topology of the ITN [47]. Together, these two
as a model with explanatory variables (i.e. ‘regressors’) pieces of evidence call for an inclusion of dyadic factors
oftrade,preciselyliketheGM.Alreadyinoneoftheear- in w ij and p ij , and highlight a limitation of current
(cid:104) (cid:105)
liest studies on the ITN topology [30], the approach out- maximum-entropymodelsbasedonlyoncountry-specific
lined above led to the definition of a GDP-driven model constraints.
forthebinarystructureofthenetwork,where(cid:126)x GDP Combiningalltheaboveconsiderations,itisclearthat
(i.e., inthiscase(cid:126)x istakentobeone-dimension ∝ al). The an improved model of the ITN should aim at retaining
model, which is a reformulation of a maximum-entropy therealistictradevolumespostulatedbymodelsbasedon
model for binary networks with given degrees, predicts Eq. (2) (including the GM, the RM, and possibly many
that the probability of a trade connection existing from more), while combining them with a realistic network
country i to country j is topologygeneratedby(extensionsof)maximum-entropy
models. Such a model should also aim at providing the
i j full probability distribution, and not only the expected
1+δ GDP i GDP j values as in Eq. (1), of trade flows and, unlike the GDP-
only model in Eq. (3) [25] or its current weighted ex-
where δ is a free parameter that allows to reproduce the
tension [42], allow for the inclusion of both dyadic and
empirical link density. The model has been tested suc-
node-specific macroeconomic factors.
cessfully in multiple ways [24, 25, 30, 32, 38].
The GM in Eq. (1) and the maximum-entropy model
inEq.(3)havecomplementarystrengthsandweaknesses,
III. THE ENHANCED GRAVITY MODEL OF
the former being a good model for non-zero volumes
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(while being a bad model for the topology) and the lat-
terbeingagoodmodelforthetopology(whileproviding
In this Section, we introduce what we call the En-
no information about trade volumes). An attempt to
hancedGravityModel(EGM)oftrade. TheEGMmath-
reconcile these two complementary and currently incom-
ematically formalizes the two ingredients that, in the
patible approaches has been recently proposed via the
light of the previous discussion, any ‘good’ model of eco-
definitionofanextensionofthemaximum-entropymodel
nomic networks should feature: namely, realistic (trade)
to the case of weighted networks [42]. Since, as we men-
volumes and a realistic topology, both controllable by
tioned, a maximum-entropy model of weighted networks
macroeconomic factors.
with given strengths and degrees [40] can correctly repli-
catemanystructuralpropertiesoftheITN[41],itmakes
sense to reformulate such model as an economically in-
A. A single model for topology and weights
spired model of the ITN. Indeed, like in the binary case,
the hidden variables enforcing the constraints are found
ThefirstlessonwehavelearntisthatEq.(2)issuccess-
tobe strongly correlatedwith theGDP,thus allowingto
ful in reproducing link weights only after the existence
express both p and w as functions of the GDP [42].
ij (cid:104) ij (cid:105) ofthelinksthemselveshasbeenpreliminarlyestablished.
The resulting model is confirmed to be in good accor-
This implies that Eq. (2), as a model of real-world trade
dance with both the topology and the volumes observed
flows, is actually unsatisfactory and should rather be re-
in the real ITN.
formulatedasaconditionalexpectation oftheweightw ,
Unfortunately, in the above approach the choice of ij
giventhatw >0. Inotherwords, ifa denotestheen-
country-specific constraints (degrees and strengths) only ij ij
try of the adjacency matrix A = Θ(W) of the ITN (de-
allows for regressors that have a corresponding country-
fined via the step function as a = Θ(w ), i.e. a = 1
specific nature. This makes the model in Ref. [42] in- ij ij ij
compatible with the inclusion of dyadic variables of the
type D(cid:126) and represents a strong limitation for (at least)
ij 2 Building on the hypothesis of the existence of underlying hid-
two reasons. Firstly, one of the main lessons learnt from
den metric spaces in which real-world networks are embedded,
the traditional GM is that the addition of geographic Ref.[47]modelstheITNbylookingforanoptimalembeddingof
distances improves the fit to the empirical volumes sig- countries in some abstract metric space. The resulting inferred
nificantly. Indeed,inthelightofthelargebodyofknowl- distancesareinterpretedasincorporatingallpossiblesourcesof
empirically revealed trade costs, possibly including geographic
edge accumulated in the international economics litera-
distancesaswell. However,sincethepostulatedembeddingspace
ture, it is hard to imagine a realistic and economically
iseitheraunidimensionalcircleorahyperbolicplane,thesedis-
meaningful model of international trade that does not tances are necessarily different from the usual geographic dis-
allowforsimplepair-wisequantitiescontrollingfortrade tances Rij appearing in the GM and measured as geodesics on
costs and incentives, including geography [9, 10]. Sec- oursphericaltridimensionalworld.
if w > 0 and a = 0 if w = 0), an improved model onasinglepairi,j ofnodesandintegratingoutallother
should be such that Eq. (2) is replaced by pairs, we can define the dyadic distribution q (w) indi-
cating the probability (mass or density) that w takes
=F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) F >0, (4) the particular value w. Note that the event w ij > 0 in-
dicates the presence of a trade link (i.e. a = 1). By
where w ij a ij = 1 is the conditional expected weight contrast, the event w ij = 0 indicates the absence of a
of the (cid:104) trad | e link fr (cid:105) om country i to country j, given trade link (i.e. a ij = 0) but is also included as a pos-
that such link exists. This operation ensures that, what- sible outcome in q ij (w). The normalization condition
ever the new model looks like, its predictions for the ex- is therefore w 0 q ij (w) = 1 (for integer weights) or
(cid:82) ≥
pected trade volume between connected pairs of coun- dw q (w) = 1 (for continuous weights, in which
tries remain identical to the ones proposed in more tra- cas≥eweanticipatethatq (w)willhaveadelta-likepoint
ditional macroeconomic models. For instance, choosing mass at w = 0) for all i,j. Note that we are not as-
F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) = c GDPα i GDPβ j R i−j γ as in Eq. (1) al- suming independence of the trade volumes w ij and w kl
lowsustoretain(inalmostintactform)alltheempirical between two distinct country pairs, or equivalently the
knowledge that has accumulated in the econometrics lit- factorization of P(W) into the product i,j q ij (w ij ) of
erature since Jan Tinbergen’s introduction of the GM. dyadic probabilities. However, we will later find that
An important difference, however, is that in our model the desired model has precisely this independence prop-
the trade volumes will be drawn from a different proba- erty. Importantly, unlike in the traditional GM, in our
bility distribution. approach dyadic independence is a consequence and not
The second lesson we have learnt is that, in analogy a postulate.
with Eq. (4), Eq. (3) should be generalized to allow for We now look for the form of q ij (w) that enforces both
both dyadic (D(cid:126) ) and node-specific ((cid:126)n ) factors as fol- Eqs. (4) and (5). Let us consider the latter first. In
terms of q (w), the probability p that i and j are con-
lows: ij ij
nected (irrespective of the volume of trade) is given by
G ψ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) the complement of the probability q ij (0) that they are
p ij = (cid:104) a ij (cid:105) = 1+G ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) G>0, (5) not connected, i.e.
ψ(cid:126) i j ij
(cid:26)(cid:80)
q (w) (integer)
p =1 q (0)= (cid:82) w>0 ij (6)
where a crucial requirement is that G can in general be ij − ij w>0 q ij (w) dw (real)
different from F in Eq. (4) and, correspondingly, the
vector ψ(cid:126) of parameters can be different from φ(cid:126). Note where, for real-valued weights, q ij (0) denotes the point
that, since p is monotonic in G, the above expression mass, i.e. the magnitude of the delta-like probability
is entirely general, i.e. we have put no restriction on the density function q ij (w), at w =0. Imposing that Eq. (6)
functional form of p . It is also worth noticing that the has the form dictated by Eq. (5) leads to the following
explanatoryfactorsusedinEqs.(4)and(5)neednotco- unique choice for q ij (0):
incide. However, to avoid using different symbols for the
arguments of the two functions, we adopt the conven- q (0)= G>0. (7)
tion that D(cid:126) ij and (cid:126)n i denote the sets of all factors used ij 1+G ψ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij )
as arguments of either F or G, and that these functions
We now relate q (w) to Eq. (4) in a similar manner.
can have flat (i.e. no) dependence on some of their argu- ij
Theexpectedtradevolume,irrespectiveofwhetheralink
ments. Forinstance,Eq.(5)reducestoEq.(3)bysetting
(cid:126)n = GDP and assuming flat dependence on D(cid:126) , or it exists, is
reduces to the hyperbolic model in Ref. [47] by setting (cid:26)(cid:80)
w q (w) (integer)
D(cid:126) ij equal to the hyperbolic distance and assuming flat (cid:104) w ij (cid:105)≡ (cid:82) w w > > 0 0 w q ij i ( j w) dw (real) (8)
dependence on (cid:126)n .
We want our model to produce both Eq. (4) as the (note that the event w = 0 does not contribute to the
desired (gravity-like) conditional expectation for link abovequantity). Ontheotherhandtheconditional prob-
weights and Eq. (5) as a realistic expected topology. ability that w equals w, given that the link is realized
To do so, we introduce the full probability P(W) that (w >0), is
the model produces a weighted network specified by the
N N matrixWwithentries(w ij ). Wearefreetochoose qij(w) w >0
ether w takes non-negative integer values (in which
ij | 0 w =0
case P(W) is a multivariate Probability Mass Function,
orPMF)ornon-negativerealvalues(inwhichcaseP(W)
and its expected value gives the conditional expectation
is a multivariate Probability Density Function, or PDF). of the link weight, given that the link exists:
The distribution P(W) is the key quantity that fully
specifies the model and determines both the topology w ij
w a =1 = (cid:104) (cid:105). (10)
and the link weights of the ITN. From P(W), focusing (cid:104) ij | ij (cid:105) p
Setting Eq. (10) equal to Eq. (4) leads to (where the sum extends over all weighted graphs with
N nodes, non-negative integer link weights, and such
(cid:104) w ij (cid:105) =
F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i
,(cid:126)n
D(cid:126) ij
(cid:126)n
,(cid:126)n
(cid:126)n
D(cid:126)
i ,(cid:126)n
j ,D(cid:126) ij )
qs.
.
.
ψ(cid:126) i j ij Eq. (5), we select a
(for all pairs i = j) as
(11) the two sets of con (cid:104) stra (cid:105) ints sp (cid:104) ecif (cid:105) ying our model. (cid:54) In this
Equation(11)carriesanimportantmessage. Itreveals way, if we introduce α and β as the (real-valued) La-
that, while a superficial inspection of Eq. (8) might sug- grangemultipliersrequiredtoenforcetheexpectedvalue
gestthattheexpectedtradevolume (cid:104) w ij (cid:105) isindependent of a ij = Θ(w ij ) and w ij respectively (where Θ(x) = 1
of the topology of the ITN, i.e. on q ij (0) or equivalently if x > 0 and Θ(x) = 0 otherwise), then the maximum-
G, this is actually not the case. In fact, q ij (0) is cou- entropy problem becomes equivalent to one solved ex-
pled to the other values q ij (w) (with w >0) through the actly in Ref. [48]. There, it was shown that upon intro-
normalization condition manifest in Eq. (6). This neces- ducing the so-called Hamiltonian
sarily implies that the topology of the ITN must have an
immediate effect on the expected volume of trade between H(W)= (cid:88)(cid:2) α Θ(w )+β w (cid:3) , (13)
ij ij ij ij
any two countries. This effect is rigorously quantified in
Eq.(11), whichshowsthat w dependsonbothF and
(cid:104) (cid:105)
G. This result confirms the inconsistency of the tradi- (representing a linear combination of the quantities
tional GM defined in terms of Eq. (1) and of any of its whose expected value is being constrained) and the par-
extensions of the form given by Eq. (2). By contrast, the tition function Z = (cid:80) e H(W), the maximum-entropy
expected topology of the ITN is independent of the ex- probability P (W) with constraints a and w is
(cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:104) (cid:105)
pected volumes of trade, since p depends on G but not found to be
onF. Thissimplebut,tothebestofourknowledge,pre-
viously unrecognized result highlights a nontrivial asym- P (W)= e − H(W) = (cid:89) q (w ), (14)
metry between weights and topology in the ITN and, by
extension, in any (economic) network described by our
generic expressions involving F and G. This basic find- where, given x
αij (0,+ ) and y
ingprovidesanaturalexplanationfortheaforementioned ≡ ∈ ∞ ≡ ∈
empirical observation that the topology of the ITN and
severalothernetworkscanbesatisfactorilyreconstructed x Θ(w) yw(1 y )
from aggregate local constraints [26, 40], while the same q (w) ij ij − ij , w 0 (15)
result does not hold for the weighted structure of the
≡ 1 y ij +x ij y ij ≥
same network(s) [27, 28], unless topological information
is the resulting (maximum-entropy) probability that the
is explicitly included as an additional constraint [40, 41].
linkfromnodeitonodej carriesaweightw. Thisprob-
ability is called the Bose-Fermi distribution, as it unifies
the Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac distributions encoun-
B. Maximum entropy construction
teredinquantumstatisticalphysics[48]. Westressagain
that all our formulas apply to both directed and undi-
Equations (7) and (11) fix two important properties rected representations of the network and, correspond-
we require for q (w) and ultimately P(W), but they ingly, the sums and products over i,j should be inter-
do not specify these probability distributions uniquely. preted as i = j in the directed case (where the pairs i,j
To do so, we invoke the Maximum-Entropy Principle to and j,i are different) and as i<j in the undirected one
ensure that the functional form of P(W) is maximally (where the pair i,j is the same as the pair j,i). As we
random, given the desired constraints. As well known, had anticipated, the factorization of P (W) in terms of
this procedure is guaranteed to lead to the least biased products of q (w) shows that, for this particular choice
inference, i.e. to introduce no unjustified ‘hidden’ as- of the constraints, pairs of nodes turn out to be statisti-
sumption in picking a specific form of P(W) [43, 44]. callyindependentasinthestandardGMapproach, even
In applying this method we will focus primarily on the if we have not assumed this independence as a postulate
caseofinteger-valuedlinkweights,sincethisrequirement in our approach.
matches the datasets in our analysis. The case of real- Importantly, while the constraints used in the
valued link weights is treated in the Appendix and the maximum-entropy models of the ITN considered so far
corresponding key results are briefly reported at the end in the literature are observed topological properties (e.g.
of this Section. the degrees and/or the strengths of nodes), the con-
We look for the form of P(W) that maximizes the straints considered here are economically-driven expec-
entropy functional tations, namely Eqs. (5) and (11). This key step allows
us to reconcile macroeconomic and network approaches
S[P]= P(W)lnP(W) (12) within a generalized framework, and represents an im-
− portant difference with respect to previous models. In
particular, we use Eqs. (6), (8) and (10) to express p , as
w and w a =1 in terms of x and y [48]:
(cid:104) ij (cid:105) (cid:104) ij | ij (cid:105) ij ij (cid:0) (cid:1)a∗ (cid:0) (cid:1)w∗ a∗
p ij =1 − q i∗j (0)= 1
y x ij ij + y ij x ij y ij , (16) L (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126))=lnP ∗ (W ∗ )= (cid:88) i,j ln G ψ(cid:126) (cid:0) 1+ ij G F ψ(cid:126) φ(cid:126) (cid:1) − (cid:0) F 1 φ(cid:126) (cid:1)w ij i ∗ j − ij
(cid:88) p ij
(cid:104) ij (cid:105) i∗j 1 y (where we have dropped the dependence of F and G on
w>0 − ij (cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) )andlookfortheparametervaluesφ(cid:126) ,ψ(cid:126) that
w 1 i j ij ∗ ∗
w a =1 = (cid:104) ij (cid:105) = . (18) maximize (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126)) by requiring that all the first deriva-
(cid:104) | (cid:105) p 1 y L
ij − ij tives with respect to φ(cid:126) and ψ(cid:126) vanish simultaneously:
The above expressions allow us to rewrite Eq. (15) as (cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:126) (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126))= (cid:88) w i∗j − a ∗ij w i∗j (cid:126) F =(cid:126)0(23)
q i∗j (w)= p i − j y i w i j j − 1(1 − y ij ) w >0. (19) (cid:126) (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126))= (cid:88) i,j (cid:34) a ∗ij φ(cid:126) − 1 (cid:35) φ(cid:126) (cid:126) G =(cid:126)0. (24)
Now, equating Eq. (16) to Eq. (5) and Eq. (17) to
G ψ(cid:126) − 1+G ψ(cid:126)
Eq. (11) (or, equivalently, Eq. (18) to Eq. (4)) allows
us to find the values of x and y solving the original For probability distributions belonging to the exponen-
problem: tial family, i.e. in the form given by Eq. (14) like the
oneweareconsidering, thesecondderivativesofthelog-
G ψ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij )
likelihoodcoincidewith(minus)thecovariancesbetween
ij F ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) 1 the constraints included in the Hamiltonian defined in
φ(cid:126) i j ij − Eq. (13) (see for instance [49, 50]). Since covariance
F ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) 1 matrices are positive-semidefinite (and actually positive-
φ(cid:126)
(cid:126)n ,
(cid:126)n ,
D(cid:126)
− ) . (21) definite if the chosen constraints are linearly indepen-
φ(cid:126) i j ij dent, i.e. non-redundant), (φ(cid:126) ,ψ(cid:126) ) is indeed a (global,
Inserting Eqs. (20) and (21) into Eq. (19), we finally get in the positive-definite case) maximum for (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126)), en-
the explicit probability q i∗j (w) of any two countries trad- suring that the solution (φ(cid:126) ∗ ,ψ(cid:126) ∗ ) to Eqs. (23) and (24)
ing a volume w, as a function of any choice of the fac- yields the optimal parameter values in our model. Se-
tors (cid:126)n and D(cid:126) . In terms of conditional probabilities, lecting these values into Eqs. (20) and (21) yields the
the model becomes extremely simple: establishing a link valuesx ∗ij andy i∗j that,wheninsertedintoEq.(15),fully
from country i to country j is a Bernoulli trial with suc- specify the model.
cess probability p given by Eq. (5); if realized, this link The above expressions, which are valid for any spec-
acquires a weight w with probability ification of the EGM, show that the estimation of the
parameter φ(cid:126) nicely separates from that of ψ(cid:126). This re-
0 w =0, sult solves, in a single step, two major problems encoun-
q i∗j (w | a ij =1)=  [F φ(cid:126) [F ((cid:126)n φ(cid:126) i ( , (cid:126)n (cid:126)n i j , , (cid:126)n D(cid:126) j i , j D(cid:126) ) i − j 1 )] ] w w−1 w >0, (22) t in er m ed os in t a p l r t e e v rn io a u t s iv e e c m on o o d m el e s tr t i h c e a e p s p t r im oa a c t h io e n s: o o f n th o e ne pa h r a a n m d - ,
eters determining the expected weights is badly affected
whichisageometricdistributionrepresentingthechance by the presence of the zeroes; on the other hand, the
ofw 1consecutivesuccesses, eachwithprobabilityy , expected number of zeroes may paradoxically depend on
followed by a failure with probability 1 y . The above the (arbitrary) units of measure for the weights. For
result provides an insightful interpretation of the real- instance, if q (w) is a Poisson distribution as in zero-
ized volumes in the model in terms of processes of link inflatedGMs[20–22],thenitsonlyparameter(themean)
establishment and link reinforcement (see Discussion). determines both the magnitude of link weights and the
connection probability p . As the monetary units in the
data are changed arbitrarily (e.g. from dollars to thou-
C. Maximum-Likelihood parameter estimation sands of dollars), so will the estimated mean and the
resulting expected number of zeroes. By contrast, in our
model the monetary units affect φ(cid:126) but not ψ(cid:126) (hence F
We now take an econometric perspective and discuss ∗ ∗
as they should, but not G).
how the model parameters can be chosen to optimally
fit a specific empirical instance of the network. To this
end, weusetheMaximumLikelihood(ML)principleap-
plied to network models [38]. If W denotes the weight D. Real-valued trade flows
matrix (with entries w ) of the empirical network, our
model generates this particular matrix with probability The above results can be adapted in a straightfor-
P (W ). We therefore define the log-likelihood function ward, although more technical, fashion to the case when
link weights are assumed to take non-negative real val- equal to the total trade in either direction) to facilitate
ues. TheentirederivationisreportedtheAppendix. For the definition of the topological properties characteriz-
brevity, here we only report the main results. ing the ITN. Previous work has shown that, given the
In the real-valued case, P (W) is a multivariate PDF highly symmetric structure of the ITN, the undirected
(rather than a PMF) and we look for its form by maxi- representation retains all the basic properties of the net-
mizingamodifiedversionoftheentropyfunctionalS[P], work [26, 27, 30].
under the same constraints on (cid:104) a ij (cid:105) and (cid:104) w ij (cid:105) (for all We choose F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij ) in such a way that the ex-
pairs i = j) used above and still given by Eqs. (5)
pected non-zero trade flow w a = 1 is the same as
(cid:54) ij ij
and(11). Theresultisagainofthefactorizedformgiven (cid:104) | (cid:105)
in the GM defined by Eq. (1) (now interpreted as a con-
by Eq. (14), where the Hamiltonian H(W) is still the
ditional expectation). This means choosing (cid:126)n = GDP ,
one defined in Eq. (14) while the partition function Z is D(cid:126) =R , φ(cid:126) =(c,α,γ) and
different and the resulting expression for q (w) is ij ij
e− w/F φ(cid:126)((cid:126)ni,(cid:126)nj,D(cid:126) ij) F φ(cid:126) ((cid:126)n i ,(cid:126)n j ,D(cid:126) ij )=c (GDP i GDP j )α R i−j γ, (27)
i∗j − ij ij F ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) where we have set β α due to undirectedness. Simi-
φ(cid:126) i j ij larly, we choose G ((cid:126)n ≡ ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) in such a way that the
where δ(w) is the Dirac delta function and p is still ψ(cid:126) i j ij
ij probability p is the same as in the model defined in
given by Eq. (5). ij
Eq. (3), i.e. ψ(cid:126) =δ and
The above expression shows that q (w) has now a
point mass of magnitude q (0) = 1 p at w = 0,
i∗j − ij G ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) )=δ GDP GDP . (28)
followed by a purely exponential probability density for ψ(cid:126) i j ij i j
w >0. By design, the above PDF still produces the de-
Withtheabovespecification,theexpectedtopologydoes
sired conditional expected trade volume w a = 1 ,
(cid:104) ij | ij (cid:105) not depend on any dyadic factor. This is the simplest
connection probability p and unconditional expected
ij choicethatisfoundtoreproducethetopologyoftheITN
trade volume w given by Eqs. (4), (5) and (11) re-
(cid:104) ij (cid:105) very well [25, 30, 32, 38] and is supported by empirical
spectively. Establishing a link from country i to country
evidencethatdyadicfactorslikegeographicdistances[51]
jisstillaBernoullitrialwithsuccessprobabilityp given
ij and trade agreements [47] have a much weaker effect on
by Eq. (5); if realized, this link acquires a weight w with
thepurelybinarytopologyoftheITNthanontradevol-
conditional probability density
umes. Ofcourseourformalismhasbeendesignedinsuch
0 w =0, a way that we can immediately add dyadic factors, and
q i∗j (w | a ij =1)=  e − F w φ(cid:126) /F ((cid:126)n φ(cid:126) i ( , (cid:126)n (cid:126)n i j , , (cid:126)n D(cid:126) j, i D(cid:126) j) ij) w >0, (26) i e s as t i h ly er a e d fo d re ‘h m id u d c e h n’ m m o e re tr g ic en d e is r t a a l. nc F e o s r in in fe s r t r a e n d ce v , ia w a e n m o i p g t h i t -
mal geometric embedding [47] (although they would not
which is now a purely exponential distribution with the
be identifiable with some empirically measurable, ‘exter-
desired (conditional) mean F ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ).
φ(cid:126) i j ij nal’ macroeconomic factors like those used elsewhere in
The estimation of the parameters φ(cid:126) and ψ(cid:126) can be car- our model).
ried out using the ML principle, via a straightforward Given the above model specification, for a given in-
recalculation of the log-likelihood (φ(cid:126),ψ(cid:126)) = lnP ∗ (W ∗ ) stance W ∗ of the empirical network we find the opti-
and a corresponding adaptation of L Eqs. (23) and (24). mal parameter values c ∗ , α ∗ , γ ∗ and δ ∗ through the ML
conditions given by Eqs. (23) and (24). Importantly,
Eq. (24) reads in this case ∂ /∂δ = 0 and yields a
IV. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS value δ that ensures that the expected number of links
(cid:80) (cid:80)
p = G /(1+G ) is exactly equal to the em-
i,j ij i,j ψ(cid:126) ψ(cid:126)
Wecanfinallytestthepredictionsofourmodelagainst piricalnumberL = a ,irrespectiveofthevolumes
empirical international trade data. The datasets are de- oftrade. Thisresult,whichisequivalenttowhatisfound
scribed in the Appendix. Here, it suffices to report that forthepurelybinarymodeldefinedbyEq.(3)[38],shows
tradevolumesarereportedinU.S.dollarsandarethere- that, unlike the standard GM, our model always gener-
foreinteger-valued. Forthisreason,throughoutouranal- ates the correct number of links and, unlike some more
ysis we will adopt the formulas we obtained assuming complicatedvariantsoftheGM,itdoessoindependently
integer weights. Clearly, the same analysis can be easily of the monetary units chosen for the volumes.
repeatedforreal-valuedvolumesbyusingthecorrespond-
ing formulas we have provided for real weights.
B. Testing the model against real data
A. Model specification We first test the performance of the EGM in repli-
cating the empirical trade volumes, i.e. the purely local
We adopt an undirected network description (where (dyadic) structure of the ITN. In Fig. 2, superimposed
the connection between two countries carries a weight to the previous results for the standard GM given by
10-2 100 102 104 106
10-4 10-2 100 102 104 106
10-2 100 102 104 106
10-2 100 102 104 106
FIG.2. Empiricalnon-zerotradeflowsvs. thecorrespondingexpectationsunderthetraditionalGravityModel
and the Enhanced Gravity Model. Log-log plot comparing the empirical volume (y-axis) of all non-zero bilateral trade
flows in the ITN with the corresponding (conditional) expected volume (x-axis) predicted by the Gravity Model defined in
Eq.(1)(green,parametersestimatedasreportedinTableI)andbytheEnhancedGravityModeldefinedinEqs.(4)and(27)
(blue,parametersestimatedasreportedinTableII).Topleft: year1970,topright: year1980,bottomleft: year1990,bottom
right: year 2000. The black line is the identity line corresponding to the ideal, perfect match that would be achieved if the
empirical weights were exactly equal to their (conditional) expected values, i.e. in complete absence of randomness.
Eq. (1) and already shown in Fig. 1, the empirical non- inTableIfortheGM,weseethattheGMyieldssystem-
zerolinkweightsw arealsocomparedwiththeircondi- atically larger parameter values (especially so for α,β).
tionalexpectedvalue w a =1 undertheEGMgiven Thismeansthat,withrespecttotheEGM,theGMover-
(cid:104) | (cid:105)
by Eq. (27). As mentioned above, for the EGM the pa- estimates the effects of both GDP and geographic dis-
rametersareobtainedviatheMLprincipleasprescribed tance,andthisisespeciallytruefortheGDP.Thisisdue
byEq.(23)andtheirresultingvaluesarereportedinTa- to the fact that the EGM is used to explain not only the
ble II. As expected, the sets of points generated by the
two models largely overlap, confirming that, in terms of
trade volumes, the EGM cannot do worse than the GM. Enhanced Gravity Model
Moreover, the EGM turns out to be more parsimonious
Year δ c α, β γ
than the GM as it achieves a narrower scatter of points
1970 4.7·105 1.0·108 0.67 0.78
while having no dedicated free parameter to tune the
1980 1.1·106 9.3·108 0.77 0.75
variance(asalreadymentioned,theGMusuallyassumes
1990 1.4·106 5.4·109 0.87 0.86
that each trade volume is drawn from a certain proba-
2000 3.3·106 1.7·1010 0.91 0.90
bility distribution, typically a normal or log-normal one,
with mean value given by Eq. (1) and variance specified TABLEII.ParametervaluesfortheEnhancedGravityModel
by an additional free parameter). calculated by considering integer link weights (equal to inte-
Importantly, comparing the values of the parameters ger multiples of the monetary unit used in the dataset) and
α,β,γ reported in Table II for the EGM with the corre- carrying out the corresponding ML estimation as prescribed
spondingvaluesofthesameparametersshownpreviously by Eqs. (23) and (24).
volume of realized trade flows, but also their existence,
andhasseparatefunctions(F andG)withpossiblyover-
lapping sets of explanatory factors (GDP is the common
element in this case) but in any case distinct sets of pa-
rameters (α,β,γ on one hand and δ on the other), to
take these two aspects into account. The effects of GDP
anddistancecapturedbytheparametersα,β,γ areonly
thoseconditionalonalinkbeingcreated,whilediscount-
ing the effects of link creation itself via the parameter δ.
Note that α,β,γ and δ are all found to be monotoni-
cally increasing over time by the EGM, highlighting a
steady increase of the effects of GDP and distance (even
100 101 102 103 104 105 106
if milder than observed in the GM) and of the density <w>
of connections. In fact, as the network density becomes
higher (larger δ in the EGM), we see a smaller discrep-
ancy between the fitted values of α,β in the two models,
consistently with the idea that, if all pairs of countries
were connected, then both the GM and the EGM would
estimatetheeffectsofGDPonlythroughthelensoftrade
volumes, because the GDP would no longer explain the
(fully connected) topology in such an extreme situation.
In order to better understand the differences between
thetradevolumespredictedbythetwomodels, inFig.3
we plot the cumulative distribution P (w) counting the
fraction of link weights larger than ≥or equal to w in
the empirical (red), GM-generated (green) and EGM-
generated (blue) networks. All distributions are normal-
izedasP (0)=1inordertoincludezeroweights,corre-
sponding≥to pairs of countries that are not connected, in
theirsupport. NotethatP (w)isnotsimplytheintegral
of q (w) because the latte≥r is a probability distribution
defined for a specific pair of countries, while the former
is defined for the entire network and hence determined
by the combination of all pair-specific probabilities. We
see that the empirical distribution has a discontinuous
jump at w = 1, as it drops from a value P (1 (cid:15)) = 1
to a value P (1+(cid:15)) 0.53, where (cid:15) > 0 ≥is ar − bitrarily
small. Recall≥ingthatl ≈ inkweightstakeonlynon-negative
integervaluesinouranalysis,thisdiscontinuityindicates
thatthereareroughly47%pairsofcountriesthatarenot
connected (w =0) in this particular snaphot of the ITN,
so that the distribution keeps the value P (w) = 1 for
w [0,1) and, as we cross the smallest allo≥wed non-zero
weight value (w = 1), it drops by a value 0.47 as it no
longer ‘sees’ those unconnected pairs. As bigger weights
(w >1) are considered, the distribution continues to de-
crease continuously all the way to P (+ )=0, indicat-
ingthattheonlydiscontinuitywesee≥atw ∞ =1isactually
due to the excess probability mass at zero weights pro-
duced by the link-generating process. Remarkably, the
empirical distribution is closely matched by the EGM.
Thefactthatthismodelreplicatesboththelocationand
size of the discontinuity indicates a correctly predicted
numberofmissingtradeconnectionsintheITNtopology.
By contrast, the GM predicts a fully connected network,
evidenced from the absence of the discontinuity. Pair of
countries that are unconnected in the real ITN are are
unavoidablygivenapositiveweightbytheGMandhence
FIG. 3. Empirical and model-generated cumulative
distributions of trade flows. Log-linear plot comparing
the empirical cumulative distribution of trade flows (normal-
ized in order to include zero flows) in the ITN for the year
2000 (red) with the corresponding distributions obtained us-
ing the Gravity Model defined in Eq. (1) (green, parameters
estimated as reported in Table I) and the Enhanced Gravity
Model defined in Eqs. (4) and (27) (blue, parameters esti-
mated as reported in Table II). Note the discontinuous jump
due to the ≈47% pairs of unconnected countries in both the
empiricalandtheEGM-generatedcurves,andtheabsenceof
such feature in the GM-generated curve (for which missing
links are incorrectly given a positive weight).
misplaced to the right in the distribution, which results
in exceedingly large values of the green curve with re-
specttotheothertwocurves. WeknowthatintheEGM
the discontinuity is indeed due to the extra point mass
at w = 0 in the expression of q (w) given by Eqs. (15)
or (19). Note that, technically, one can speak of a ‘dis-
continuity’ only if weights take continuous values. This
would be possible by replicating our analysis in the case
of real-valued weights using the results provided in the
Appendix and summarized in Eq. (25). Importantly, in
this case the jump in P (w) would be observed precisely
at the ‘true’ value w =≥0, consistently with the genuine
delta-likeformofq (w)givenbyEq.(25)(only,itwould
no longer be possible to show the discontinuity of P (w)
alongalogarithmicaxisandplotthefullcumulative≥dis-
tribution). The EGM would again correctly match both
locationandsizeoftheempiricaldiscontinuity(sincep ,
hence the expected number of positive weights, is identi-
calinthediscreteandcontinuousversionsofthemodel).
Forpositiveweights,thereal-valuedEGMwouldcontinu-
ouslyinterpolatethediscretepointsoftheinteger-valued
EGM,becausethisisagenericpropertyofgeometricand
exponential distributions with the same expected value.
Soineitherspecification,theEGMnicelyreplicatesboth
theempiricaldistributionofstrictlypositivelinkweights
and the sharp peak ‘jumping out’ from it, while the GM
does not.
We now want to check whether the trade links, be-
sidesbeingpredictedincorrectnumberbytheEGM,are
also placed between the correct pairs of countries by the
FIG. 4. Country-based network configurations for year 2011 in the real ITN (red), the GM (green) and the
EGM(blue). Forthreerepresentativecountries,weshowtheconnectionstoalltradepartnersintheworld. Thetotalnumber
of countries in the data (see Appendix) is N =208. The three countries are selected on the basis of their empirical degree k:
the country with maximum degree (USA, k = 203), the one with minimum degree (Western Sahara, k = 13) and one with
intermediate degree (Vanuatu, k =91). The GM produces always the maximum possible number (N −1) of connections. By
contrast, the EGM produces connections randomly with probability p , so links change from realization to realization. The
expected degree is however independent of the individual realizations and is close to the empirical one for all countries. We
have selected a typical realization that produces a degree equal to the expected degree for each of the three countries.
same model. This means moving the focus of our anal- We now consider higher-order topological properties
ysis towards the purely binary, global topology of the as a more stringent and quantitative test. In the top
ITN. As a first qualitative illustration setting the stage left panel of Fig. 5 we plot the average degree (knn) of
for this analysis, in Fig. 4 we show all the trade links of the trade partners of each country i versus the number
the country with maximum degree (USA), the one with of such partners, i.e. the degree (k ) of country i itself.
minimum degree (Western Sahara) and one with inter- Similarly, in the top right panel of Fig. 5 we plot the
mediatedegree(Vanuatu). Wealsoshowthecorrespond- clustering coefficient (c ), i.e. the fraction of trade part-
ing predictions under the standard GM (where Eq. (1) nersofcountryithattradewitheachother,againversus
is first fitted to the non-zero flows and then extended to the number (k ) of such partners. The empirical quanti-
allpairsofcountries)andtheEGM.ThetraditionalGM tiesarecomparedwiththeexpectedquantitiesunderthe
predicts a fully connected network, i.e. an expected de- GMandtheEGM.Theexactexpressionsforbothempir-
gree k = N 1 for all i. This prediction may be ical and expected quantities are provided in Appendix.
(cid:104) (cid:105) −
accidentallycorrectforoneorafewcountrieswithmaxi- The decreasing empirical trends observed in both plots
maldegree,ifsuchcountriesturnouttobepresentinthe show that the trade partners of poorly connected coun-
network (in this case, this does not even happen as the tries (small k ) are on average highly connected, both
maximumobserveddegreeisk =203forUSA),butdete- to the rest of the world (large knn) and among them-
rioratesunavoidablyanddramaticallyforothercountries selves (large c ). By contrast, countries that trade with
as their degree decreases. By contrast, the EGM gives a high-degree country (large k ) are on average poorly
an expected degree k = (cid:80) p (see Appendix) connected, both to the rest of the world (small knn) and
(cid:104) i (cid:105) EGM j=i ij i
which is in good agreement with t(cid:54) he empirical one for among themselves (small c ). For both properties, we
the entire range of connectivity. findthattheEGMisinexcellentagreementwiththeem-
pirical ITN, as opposed to the classical GM which sys- fectsofthesamefactorindeterminingthevolumeofthe
tematically generates nearly constant and much higher realized trade connections, the EGM produces different
values, as a result of predicting a complete network. parameter values with respect to the GM. By contrast,
Having checked that the EGM does very well in sep- thelatterlacksthispossibilityandtendstooverestimate
arately replicating both the local link weights and the the effects of GDP and distances on the measured trade
global topology of the ITN, we now perform a last volumes.
andmostseveretestmonitoringpropertiesthatcombine TheagreementbetweentheEGMandtradedatacalls
topological and weighted information together (all defi- for an interpretation of the process generating the net-
nitions are again given in the Appendix). In the bottom work in the model. In this respect, we notice that
left panel of Fig. 5 we plot the average strength (snn), Eqs.(15)and(22)allowustointerprettherealizedtrade
i.e. the average traded volume, of the trade partners of volumes in the EGM as the outcome of two equivalent
eachcountryiversusthestrength(s i )ofcountryiitself. processes (a serial and a parallel one) of link creation
In the bottom right panel, we plot a weighted version and link reinforcement. In the serial process, for a given
of the clustering coefficient (cw) of country i, again ver- pairofcountriesi,j wefirstestablishatradelinkofunit
sus the strength (s i ) of country i. The empirical trends weightwithsuccessprobabilityp ij andthenincrementits
are compared with the predictions of the GM and EGM volume in unit steps, each with success probability y .
(see Appendix for all definitions). These two plots are in After the first failure, we stop the process for the pair
some sense the weighted counterparts of the purely bi- of countries under consideration and start it again for a
nary plots considered above. We find that, on average, different pair, and so on until all pairs are considered.
countries connected to countries with a low trade activ- In the equivalent parallel process, all pairs of countries
ity(smalls i )tradealotwiththerestoftheworld(large simultaneously explore the mutual benefits of trade and
snn) but relatively less so among themselves (small cw). engageinafirstconnection,eachwithitsprobabilityp .
Countries connected to countries with a large volume of Then, all pairs of nodes for which the previous event has
trade (large s i ) have instead a small trade activity with been successful reinforce their existing connection by a
the rest of the world (small snn), but trade relatively unit weight, each with its probability y . The process
strongly with each other (large cw). Again, we find that stops as soon as there are no more successful events. In
both trends are replicated very well by the EGM, while either case, Eq. (15) gives the resulting probability that
the standard GM fails systematically. the realized volume is w.
Importantly, Eq. (19) shows that q (w) is a modified
geometric distribution with an extra point mass q (0)
V. DISCUSSION at zero volume, i.e. the first event has a probability p
which is in general different from the probability y of
In this paper we have introduced the EGM as a novel, each of the w 1 subsequent events required to produce
advanced model for the ITN and economic networks in a weight equal to w. This distinguishing property of the
general. Phenomenologically, the EGM allows us to rec- Bose-Fermi distribution [48] ensures a realistic network
oncile two very different approaches that have remained formationmechanismwheretheestablishmentofatrade
incompatible so far: on one hand, the traditional GM connectionforthefirsttimeisintrinsicallydifferent(and
that is well established in economics and successfully re- therefore associated to a different ‘cost’) from the rein-
produces non-zero trade volumes in terms of GDP and forcement of an already existing trade connection. This
distance but fails in predicting the correct topology [22]; desirable distinction, interpretable for instance in terms
on the other hand, network models that have appeared of profitability of trade, has been advocated in previous
more recently in the statistical physics literature and studies [9, 10, 21]. Here, it is implemented naturally
have been successful in replicating the topology [25, 44] within the maximum-entropy framework via Eq. (13),
but are more limited in predicting link weights [42]. To where the (expected) binary topology is enforced sepa-
our knowledge, the EGM is the first model that can re- rately from the (expected) link weights. Notice that the
liably reproduce the binary and the weighted empirical distinction disappears if the parameter α ij in Eq. (13) is
properties of the ITN simultaneously. Just like the stan- set to zero, i.e. if the constraint on the expected value
dard GM, the RM [11] or similar models, the EGM can of Θ(w ij ) (the expected topology) is removed as in the
accomodate additional economic factors in terms of ex- standard GM. In such a case, p ij becomes equal to y ij
tra dyadic and country-specific properties. Yet, it can (i.e. linkcreationandlinkreinforcementbecomeequally
attributeeachofthesefactorstwodifferentroles,bycon- likely) and therefore q i∗j (w), not only q i∗j (w
a ij = 1), be-
sideringitsmeasurableeffectsonthetopologyandonthe comes a geometric distribution. However, this operation
trade volumes separately from each other, although in a would lead to an unrealistically dense network because
combined fashion. For instance, already in the analysis the expected topology would no longer be controllable
presented here, we have noticed that the EGM uses the separately from the link weights.
GDP in two different ways when explaining the presence Consistently with the fact that trade volumes are typ-
and the intensity of links. By discounting the effects of ically reported as integer multiples of some indivisible
GDP in determining the existence of links from the ef- monetary unit (e.g. dollars), the above discussion and
FIG.5. Network properties in the real ITN (red), the GM (green) and the EGM (blue). Topleft: averagenearest
neighbordegreeknnversusdegreek forallnodes. Topright: clusteringcoefficientc versusdegreek forallnodes. Bottomleft:
average nearest neighbor strength snn versus strength s for all nodes. Bottom right: weighted clustering coefficient cw versus
strength s for all nodes. All results are for the shapshot of the ITN in the year 2000. For all the other years in the analysed
sample, we systematically obtained very similar results. See Appendix for information about the data and all definitions of
empirical and observed quantities.
most of our analysis has been assuming non-negative in- micro-foundedmodelspecifications[52–55]. Forinstance,
teger link weights. However we may also take the limit agravity-likerelationcanemergeastheequilibriumout-
of a vanishing monetary unit, in which case trade vol- come of models of trade specialization and monopolistic
umesbecomenon-negativerealnumbersand,aswehave competition with intra-industry trade [10, 56]. The em-
shown, q (w) becomes an exponential density with an piricalfailureofthestandardGMhighlightsapreviously
extra point mass at zero volume as reported in Eq. (25), unrecognized limitation of these micro-founded models,
while q (w a = 1) becomes a purely exponential den- at least in their current form, and indicates the need for
sityasshowninEq.(26). Crucially,theextrapointmass an appropriate reformulation that makes these models
q (0) ensures that, even in this continuous limit, p is consistent with the EGM, i.e. with a realistic topology
unchanged and the expected topology is still described of the ITN. How policy implications change as the result
by Eq. (5). In absence of topological constraints, i.e. if of such a reformulation of current micro-founded mod-
we imposed α = 0, in this real-valued case the net- els is an important point to add to the future research
work would degenerate to a fully connected graph as in agenda. Research in the field of interbank networks [45]
allspecificationsoftheGMwithcontinuousvolumes[39]. has shown that, if unrealistically dense networks are as-
Thiswouldhappenduetothedisappearanceofthepoint sumed,thentheoutcomesofstressteststypicallycarried
mass at zero volume, implying that ‘missing links’ be- out by central banks to study the propagation of stress
come events with zero measure in probability. among financial institutions are dangerously biased to-
wards a systematic underestimation of systemic risk. In-
Our results may have strong implications both for the
deed,runningthestresstestonanetworkwiththe‘right’
theoreticalfoundationsoftrademodelsandfortheresult-
density and topology turns out to be crucial in order to
ing policy implications. It is known that the traditional
achieveareliableestimateofriskpropagation[45]. These
GM is consistent with a number of (possibly conflicting)
results make us confident that, in the field of interna- function Z is now calculated as
tional economics where the propagation of trade risks is (cid:90)
determined by the ITN topology, the EGM may offer a Z = dW e − H(W)
novel benchmark supporting improved theories of trade A Θ(W)=A
and refined policy scenarios. (cid:88) (cid:89)
(cid:89) (cid:88)
i,j aij=0,1 Θ(wij)=aij
(cid:89) (cid:88)
i,j aij=0,1 Θ(wij)=aij
(cid:20) (cid:90) + (cid:21)
APPENDIX = (cid:89) 1+e − αij ∞ dw ij e − βijwij
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:89) x ij
From integer to real link weights β ij
where we have again used the definition x
while in this case we find more convenient not to intro-
If the link weights w take non-negative real values
instead of non-negative
integer values, the probability
duce the corresponding transformation y
reasons that will be clear below.
P(W) has to be interpreted as a PDF rather than a
InsertingEq.(30)intoEq.(14)yieldsthefollowingnew
PMF. We then look for its maximum-entropy functional
form of q (w), replacing the one appearing in Eq. (15):
form P (W) by maximizing the following modified ver- i∗j
sion of the entropy introduced in Eq. (12):
, w 0. (31)
(cid:90) UsingEqs.(6)and(8),wecannowcalculatetheconnec-
S[P]= dWP(W)lnP(W), (29) tion probability and the (conditional) expected weight
.
(cid:104) w
j (cid:105)
s (cid:104) w ij (cid:105) = w>0 dw w q i∗j (w)= β ij , (33)
(cid:54) w 1
assumingzero-diagonalmatrices(noself-loopsinthenet- w a =1 = (cid:104) ij (cid:105) = . (34)
work), i.e. a ii = w ii = 0 for all i. Note that, in going (cid:104) | (cid:105) p ij β ij
from Eq. (12) to Eq. (29), the summation over all
W Equations (32), (33) and (34) replace Eqs. (16), (17)
N N zero-diagonal matrices with non-negative integer
× (cid:82) and(18)inthecaseofreal-valuedlinkweights. Inserting
entries has been replaced by an integral dW
Θ(W)=A these expressions into Eq. (31), we get
over all N N zero-diagonal matrices with non-negative
× (cid:26)
realentriesandsuchthattheirbinaryprojectionΘ(W)is 1 p w =0,
a given adjacency matrix A (i.e. such t (cid:80) hat Θ(w ij )=a ij q i∗j (w)= p i − j β i i j j e − βijw w >0, (35)
for all i,j), followed by a discrete sum over all such
possible binary matrices. The resulting integral, written whichreplacesEq.(19)inthereal-valuedcaseandshows
in the combined form (cid:80) A (cid:82) Θ(W)=A dW rather than in thatq i∗j (w)isnowamixtureofadiscretepart,character-
(cid:82) ized by a probability mass of magnitude q (0)=1 p
theunconstrainedform W dW,allowsustotreatthebi- at w =0, and a continuous part character i∗ i j zed by a − n ex ij -
naryconstraint a morenaturallyandtorecovermore
(cid:104) (cid:105) ponential probability density for w > 0. If we want to
general ‘mixed’ (i.e. containing a mixture of a discrete
interpret q (w) uniquely as a PDF throughout its do-
andacontinuouspart)solutionsforP
(W)thatareoth- i∗j
main (or on the entire real axis), we may rewrite it via
erwise inaccessible, as we confirm later.
the Dirac delta function δ(x) as
(w)=δ(w)(1
βijw, (36)
P (W) given by (14), where the Hamiltonian H(W) is which allows for a fully continuous treatment. For in-
still given by Eq. (13) but, importantly, the partition stance, the normalization can be correctly stated as
dw q (w) = (1 p )+p = 1. Clearly, the above Observed network properties
solution would not be obviously retrieved if we used the
unconstrainedintegral W dWinEq.(29),unlessweim- Given a weighted undirected network with weight ma-
posed,apriorietadhoc,thepresenceofadelta-likespike trix W and adjacency matrix A, with entries related
at zero weight. through a =Θ(w ), the degree of node i is defined as
In terms of conditional probabilities, we still find
that establishing a link from country i to country j is k i = a ij , (40)
a Bernoulli trial with success probability p ij given by j (cid:54) =i
Eq. (5) as desired; if realized, this link acquires a weight
the average nearest-neighbor degree of node i is defined
w with probability density
(cid:80) (cid:80)
q i∗j (w | a ij =1)= (cid:26) 0 β ij e − βijw w w = >0 0 , , (37) k i nn = (cid:88) j (cid:54) =i a i k j i k j = j (cid:54) =i (cid:80) j (cid:54) = k (cid:54) = i a j i a j ij a jk , (41)
andthe(binary)clusteringcoefficient ofnodeiisdefined
whichisnowapurelyexponentialdistributionwith(con-
ditional) mean β i−j 1 as prescribed by Eq. (34). Now, (cid:80) (cid:80)
equatingEq.(32)toEq.(5)andEq.(34)toEq.(4)yields c i = (cid:80) j (cid:54) =i (cid:80) k (cid:54) =i,j ij jk ki . (42)
the values of x ij and β ij solving the original problem: j=i k=i,j a ij a ki
(cid:54) (cid:54)
Theaveragenearestneighborstrength ofnodeiisdefined
G ((cid:126)n ,(cid:126)n ,D(cid:126) ) as
x β i i j j = = F F φ(cid:126) φ ψ (cid:126) (cid:126) ( ( (cid:126)n (cid:126)n i i i , , 1 (cid:126)n (cid:126)n j j j , , D D (cid:126) (cid:126) i i i j j j ) ) . , ( ( 3 3 8 9 ) ) (where s s = n i n (cid:80) = (cid:88) j (cid:54) =i w a i k j i i s s j t = he (cid:80) str j e (cid:54) = n i (cid:80) g (cid:80) t j h (cid:54) = k (cid:54) = o i j f a i a n j i o j d w e jk i) and (4 th 3 e )
weighted clusteri(cid:54)ng coefficient of node i is defined as
Note that Eq. (11) holds in this case as well, as it should
b ta e k c e a n us t e o i b t e do in e t s eg n e o r t o d r ep re e a n l d . I o n n se w rt h i e n t g he E r q l s i . n ( k 38 w ) ei a g n h d ts (3 a 9 re ) cw i = (cid:80) j (cid:54) = (cid:80) i (cid:80) j= k i (cid:54) = (cid:80) i,j k ( = w i, i j j a w i j j k a w ki ki )1 3 . (44)
intoEqs.(36)and(37),wegettheexplicitformofq (w) (cid:54) (cid:54)
and q (w a = 1) as a function of the factors (cid:126)n and
D(cid:126) , as reported in the main text in Eqs. (25) and (26) Expected network properties
respectively.
The expected value (under the EGM) of each of the
networkpropertiesdefinedabovecanbecalculatedeither
numerically,byaveragingovermanynetworkrealizations
sampled independently from the probability P (W) in
Eq. (14), or analytically, using the following approach.
First of all, in this model the expected value of all ra-
We have used international trade and GDP data from tios can be approximated by the ratio of the expected
thedatabasecuratedbyGleditsch[57]fortheyears1950, values [40, 41]. Secondly, all numerators and denomina-
1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 and 2000. This database includes tors involve only products over distinct pairs of nodes,
yearly trade volumes w ij (which we have symmetrized which are statistically independent in the model. Us-
by taking the sum of w ij +w ji ), yearly GDP values, and ing Eq. (15), the expected values of such products can
the (time-independent) distance matrix R ij . The num- therefore be calculated exactly in terms of x ij and y ij as
ber N of countries increases over time from roughly 85 follows:
in 1950 to approximately 200 in 2000. Both GDP and (cid:42) (cid:43)
(cid:88) (cid:88)
trade data are reported in U.S. dollars and are there- a a ... = a a ... ,(45)
ij jk ij jk
fore integer-valued. To produce Fig. 4, we have used · · (cid:104) (cid:105)·(cid:104) (cid:105)·(cid:104) (cid:105)
i,j,k,... i,j,k,...
the BACI database [58], which reports imports and ex- (cid:42) (cid:43)
ports between N = 208 countries in 2011. The BACI (cid:88) wα wβ ... = (cid:88) wα wβ ... ,(46)
data were originally in disaggregated form, where total ij · jk· (cid:104) ij(cid:105)·(cid:104) jk(cid:105)·(cid:104) (cid:105)
i,j,k,... i,j,k,...
tradewasresolvedinto96differentnon-overlappingcom-
modity classes. We have aggregated all these commod- where a ij =p ij , as given by Eq. (16), and
(cid:104) (cid:105)
ity classes together, and again symmetrized, to obtain a
d ea a r t l a ie s r et ye c a o r n s s . istent with the Gleditsch data used for the (cid:104) w i γ j(cid:105)≡ w (cid:88)∞ =0 wγq ij (w)= x ij 1 (1 − − y y ij ij + )L x i − ij γ y ( ij y ij ) , (47)
Li n (z) = (cid:80) ∞ l=1 l z n l denoting the so-called n − th polyloga- proach, which requires no sampling of networks and is
rithmofz. Fromtheabovetwoconsiderations,itfollows therefore extremely efficient.
that the expected properties of all quantities of interest
canbeapproximatedwithentirelyanalyticalexpressions
obtained by simply replacing a with p and wγ with ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
wγ in Eqs. (40), (41), (42), (43) and (44). Via x and
(cid:104) ij(cid:105) ij
y , theexpectedvaluesareultimatelyafunctionofonly AA and DG acknowledge support from the Dutch
the GDPs and distances. In our analysis, after prelim- Econophysics Foundation (Stichting Econophysics, Lei-
inary checking that the analytical expressions matched den, the Netherlands). This work was also supported
extremely well with the numerical averages over realiza- by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
tions, we have systematically adopted the analytical ap- (NWO/OCW).
[1] F.Schweitzer,G.Fagiolo,D.Sornette,F.Vega-Redondo, (2013).
A. Vespignani, D.R. White. Economic networks: The [17] E.G.Ravenstein,TheLawsofMigration,Journalofthe
new challenges, Science 325(5939), 422 (2009). Royal Statistical Society 52(2), 241-305.
[2] R.KaliandJ.Reyes,The architecture of globalization: a [18] R. Glick and A.K. Rose Does a Currency Union affect
network approach to international economic integration, Trade? The Time Series Evidence, NBER Working Pa-
JournalofInternationalBusinessStudies38,595(2007). per No. 8396 (2001).
[3] R.KaliandJ.Reyes,Financialcontagionontheinterna- [19] A.K.Rose,M.M.SpiegelA Gravity Model of Sovereign
tional trade network,EconomicInquiry48,1072(2010). Lending: Trade, Default, and Credit IMF Staff Papers,
[4] S.Schiavo,J.Reyes,G.Fagiolo,International trade and Vol. 51, Special Issue, International Monetary Fund
financialintegration: aweightednetworkanalysis,Quan- (2004)
titative Finance 10(4), 389-399 (2010). [20] J. Silva and S.Tenreyro The Log of Gravity The Review
[5] J.Spitz,T.Kastelle,GainsfromTrade: theImpactofIn- of Economics and Statistics, 88, issue 4, pages 641-658
ternationalTradeonNationalEconomicConvergence;A (2006).
Complex Network Analysis Approach,EasternEconomic [21] G.J. Linders and H.L.F. de Groot Estimation of the
Association Annual Meeting, 2010. Gravity Equation in the Presence of Zero Flows Tinber-
[6] S. Battiston et al., Complexity theory and financial reg- gen Institute Discussion Paper No. 06-072/3 (2006).
ulation, Science 351:6275, 818-819 (2016). [22] M.Duenas,G.Fagiolo,ModelingtheInternational-Trade
[7] P. Klimek, M. Obersteiner and S. Thurner, Systemic Network: A Gravity Approach,JournalOfEconomicIn-
trade risk of critical resources, Science Advances, 1, teraction And Coordination 8 155-178 (2013).
e1500522 (2015). [23] G. Fagiolo, The international-trade network: gravity
[8] J. Tinbergen, Shaping the World Economy: Suggestions equationsandtopologicalproperties,JournalofEconomic
for an International Economic Policy, (The Twentieth Interaction and Coordination 5(1), 1-25 (2010).
Century Fund, New York, 1962). [24] T. Squartini and D. Garlaschelli, Jan Tinbergen’s legacy
[9] P.vanBergeijk,S.Brakman(eds.)The gravity model in for economic networks: from the gravity model to quan-
international trade (Cambridge University Press, Cam- tum statistics, in Econophysics of Agent-Based Models,
bridge, 2010). pp. 161-186 (Springer International Publishing, 2014).
[10] L.DeBenedictis,D.Taglioni,Thegravitymodelininter- [25] D. Garlaschelli, M.I. Loffredo, Fitness-Dependent Top-
national trade, in The Trade Impact of European Union logical Properties of the World Trade Web, Phys. Rev.
Preferential Policies, pp. 55-89 (Springer Berlin Heidel- Lett 93, 188701 (2004).
berg, 2011). [26] T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, Randomizing
[11] F. Simini, M.C. Gonza´lez, A. Maritan, A. Baraba´si A world trade. I. A binary network analysis, Phys. Rev. E
universal model for mobility and migration patterns Na- 84, 046117 (2011).
ture 484, 96100 (2012). [27] T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Garlaschelli, Randomizing
[12] G. K. Zipf, The P P /D hypothesis: on the intercity world trade. II. A weighted network analysis,Phys.Rev.
movement of persons, Am. Sociol. Rev. 11, 677-686 E 84, 046118 (2011).
(1946). [28] G. Fagiolo, T. Squartini, D. Garlaschelli, Null Models of
[13] D. Balcan, V. Colizza, B. Gonc¸alves, H. Hu, J. J. Ra- EconomicNetworks: TheCaseoftheWorldTradeWeb,
masco, A. Vespignani, Multiscale mobility networks and J. Econ. Interac. Coord. 8(1), 75-107 (2013).
the spatial spreading of infectious diseases, Proc. Natl. [29] A. Serrano and M. Boguna,Topology of the world trade
Acad. Sci. USA 106(51), 21484-21489 (2009). web, Phys. Rev. E 68,015101(R) (2003).
[14] W.-S. Jung, F. Wang, H. E. Stanley, Gravity model in [30] D.GarlaschelliandM.Loffredo,StructureandEvolution
the Korean highway, EPL 81, 48005 (2008). oftheWorldTradeNetwork,PhysicaA355,138(2005).
[15] G. Krings, F. Calabrese, C. Ratti, V. D. Blondel, Urban [31] A. Serrano, M. Boguna, and A. Vespignani, Patterns of
gravity: a model for inter-city telecommunication flows, dominantflowsintheworldtradeweb,J.Econ.Interact.
J. Stat. Mech. 2009, L07003 (2009). Coord.2, 111 (2007).
[16] G. Fagiolo, M. Mastrorillo, International migration net- [32] D.Garlaschelli,T.DiMatteo,T.Aste,G.Caldarelli,and
work: Topology and modeling, Phys. Rev. E 88, 012812 M.Loffredo,Interplay between topology and dynamics in
the World Trade Web, Eur. Phys. J. B 57, 1434 (2007). [46] T. Deguchi, H. Takayasu, M. Takayasu, Simulation of
[33] G.Fagiolo,J.Reyes,S.Schiavo,Onthetopologicalprop- Gross Domestic Product in International Trade Net-
erties of the world trade web: A weighted network anal- works: Linear Gravity Transportation Model, Proceed-
ysis, Physica A 387(15), 3868-3873 (2008). ings of the International Conference on Social Mod-
[34] G.Fagiolo,J.Reyes,S.Schiavo,World-tradeweb: Topo- elling and Simulation, plus Econophysics Colloquium
logical properties, dynamics, and evolution,PhysicalRe- 2014 (2015).
view E 79(3), 036115 (2009). [47] G.Garc´ıa-P´erez,M.Bogun˜a´,A.Allard,M.Serrano,The
[35] G. Fagiolo, J. Reyes, S. Schiavo, The evolution of the hiddenhyperbolicgeometryofinternationaltrade: World
worldtradeweb: aweighted-networkanalysis,Journalof Trade Atlas 18702013, Scientific Reports, 6, 33441,
Evolutionary Economics, 20(4), 479-514 (2010). (2016).
[36] V.Colizza,A.Flammini,M.A.Serrano,andA.Vespig- [48] D. Garlaschelli, M.I. Loffredo, Generalized Bose-Fermi
nani, Detecting rich-club ordering in complex networks, Statistics and Structural Correlations in Weighted Net-
Nature Physics 2, 110 - 115 (2006). works, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 038701 (2009)
[37] V. Zlatic, G. Bianconi, A. D. Guilera, D. Garlaschelli, [49] D. Garlaschelli, F. den Hollander, A. Roccaverde, Co-
F. Rao, and G. Caldarelli, On the rich-club effect in variance structure behind breaking of ensemble equiva-
dense and weighted networks Eur. Phys. J. B 67, 271- lence in random graphs, Journal of Statistical Physics
275 (2009). 173:3-4, 644-662 (2018).
[38] D.Garlaschelli,M.I.Loffredo,MaximumLikelihood: Ex- [50] T. Squartini, D. Garlaschelli, Reconnecting statistical
tracting Unbiased Information from Complex Networks, physics and combinatorics beyond ensemble equivalence,
[39] A.Fronczak,P.Fronczak,J.A.Holyst,(2012)‘Statistical [51] F. Picciolo, T. Squartini, F. Ruzzenenti, R. Basosi, D.
mechanicsoftheinternationaltradenetwork’,Phys.Rev. Garlaschelli, The role of distances in the World Trade
E, Vol. 85, pp.056113 Web,ProceedingsoftheEighthInternationalConference
[40] R. Mastrandrea, T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Gar- on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems
laschelli, Enhanced reconstruction of weighted networks (SITIS 2012), pp. 784-792 (edited by IEEE) (2013).
from strengths and degrees, New J. Phys. 16, 043022 [52] J.E.Anderson,ATheoreticalFoundationfortheGravity
(2014). Equation, American Economic Review, 69 (1), 106-16
[41] R. Mastrandrea, T. Squartini, G. Fagiolo, D. Gar- (1979).
laschelli, Reconstructing the world trade multiplex: the [53] J. Bergstrand, The Gravity Equation in International
role of intensive and extensive biases, Phys. Rev. E 90, Trade: Some Microeconomic Foundations and Empiri-
062804 (2014). cal Evidence, The Review of Economics and Statistics,
[42] A. Almog, T. Squartini, and D. Garlaschelli, A GDP- vol. 67, issue 3, pages 474-81 (1985).
drivenmodelforthebinaryandweightedstructureofthe [54] A.V. Deardorff, Determinants of Bilateral Trade:Does
International Trade Network, New J. Phys. 17, 013009 Gravity Work in a Neoclassical World? NBER Work-
(2015). ing Paper, No. 5377, (1995).
[43] T. Squartini, D. Garlaschelli, Maximum-Entropy Net- [55] J.E. Anderson, E. Wincoop, Gravity with Gravitas: A
works: pattern detection, network reconstruction, and Solution to the Border Puzzle, NBER Working Paper,
graph combinatorics (Springer International Publishing No. 8079, (2001).
AG, SpringerBriefs in Complexity, 2017). [56] M.Fratianni, Expanding RTAs, trade flows, and the
[44] G. Cimini, T. Squartini, F. Saracco, D. Garlaschelli, A. multinational enterprise, Journal of International Busi-
Gabrielli, G. Caldarelli, The statistical physics of real- ness Studies, Vol 40, 7, 1206-1227, (2009).
worldnetworks,NatureReviewsPhysics1,58-71(2019). [57] Gleditsch, K. S. (2002). Expanded trade and GDP data.
[45] T. Squartini, G. Caldarelli, G. Cimini, A. Gabrielli, D. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 46(5), 712-724.
Garlaschelli, Reconstruction methods for networks: the [58] G. Gaulier and S. Zignago, CEPII Working Paper 23
case of economic and financial systems,PhysicsReports (2010).
757, 1-47 (2018).