]EP.oib-q[
1v1583.5080:viXra
SantaFe InstituteWorkingPaper 08-05-XXX
arxiv.org/q-bio.PE/0805XXX
Entomogenic Climate Change
David Dunn1,∗ and James P. Crutchfield2,1,†
1Art and Science Laboratory, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501
2Complexity Sciences Center & Physics Department,
University of California Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616
(Dated: September7, 2021)
Rapidlyexpandinginsectpopulations,deforestation,andglobalclimatechangethreatentodesta-
bilize key planetary carbon pools, especially the Earth’s forests which link the micro-ecology of
insect infestation to climate. To the extent mean temperature increases, insect populations accel-
erate deforestation. This alters climate via the loss of active carbon sequestration by live trees
and increased carbon release from decomposing dead trees. A positive feedback loop can emerge
that is self-sustaining—no longer requiring independent climate-change drivers. Current research
regimes and insect control strategies are insufficient at present to cope with the present regional
scaleofinsect-causeddeforestation,letaloneitslikelyfutureglobalscale. Extensivefieldrecordings
demonstratethatbioacousticcommunicationplaysaroleininfestationdynamicsandislikelytobe
a critical link in the feedback loop. These results open the way to novel detection and monitoring
strategies and nontoxic control interventions.
PACSnumbers: 43.80.-n43.80.Ka43.80.Lb92.70.Mn
Contents whichcontrolsprecipitation. Droughtstressestrees,ren-
dering them vulnerable to insect predation. The net re-
sultisincreaseddeforestationdrivenbyinsectsandmod-
I. Introduction 1
ulated by climate.
II. Forest Health and Climate 2 For their part, many species of predating insects per-
sist only to the extent that they successfully reproduce
III. What Drives Infestations? 3 by consuming and living within trees. Drought-stressed
treesareeasiertoinfestcomparedtohealthytrees,which
have more robust defenses against attack. To find trees
IV. The Tree’s Perspective 4
suitable for reproduction, insects track relevant environ-
mental indicators, including chemical signals and, prob-
V. Pioneer Beetle: Infestation Linchpin 4
ably, bioacoustic ones emitted by stressed trees. At the
level of insect populations, infestation dynamics are sen-
VI. The Bioacoustic Ecology Hypothesis 5
sitive to climate via seasonal temperatures. Specifically,
insectpopulationsincreasemarkedlyeachyearwhenwin-
VII. Conclusion: Closing the Loop 6
ters are short and freezes less severe. The net result is
rapidly changing insect populations whose dynamics are
Acknowledgments 6
modulated by climate.
Thus, via temperature and precipitation, climate sets
References 7
the context for tree growth and insect reproduction and
alsoforthe interactionbetweentreesandinsects. Atthe
Biography: James P. Crutchfield 7
largest scale, climate is driven by absorbed solar energy
andcontrolledbyrelativefractionsofatmosphericgases.
Biography: David D. Dunn 7
The amount of absorbed solar energy is determined by
cloud and ground cover. Forests are a prime example,
asanimportantgroundcoverthatabsorbs,uses,andre-
I. INTRODUCTION radiates solarenergy in various forms. At the same time
forests are key moderators of atmospheric gases. Trees
exhaust oxygen and take up carbon dioxide in a pro-
Forest ecosystems result from a dynamic balance of
cess that sequesters in solid form carbon from the atmo-
soil, plants, insects, animals, and climate. The balance,
sphere. As plants andtrees evolved,in fact, they altered
though, can be destabilized by outbreaks of tree-eating
the atmosphere sufficiently that earth’s climate, once in-
insects. Theseoutbreaksinturnaresensitive toclimate,
hospitable, changed and now supports a wide diversity
of life.
Thereareatleastthree storieshere: the trees’,the in-
∗Electronicaddress: artscilab@comcast.net sects’, and the climate’s. They necessarily overlap since
†Electronicaddress: chaos@cse.ucdavis.edu thephenomenaandinteractionstheydescribeco-occurin
of interactions that are implicated in the feedback loop
andalsothecurrentlimitstohumanresponse. Although
they are not alone, bark beetles appear to be an exam-
ple of a novel player in climate change. Unlike the cli-
maticrolethatinanimategreenhousegasesarepredicted
to play in increasing global temperature over the next
century, bark beetles represent a biotic agent that ac-
tively adapts onthe time scale of yearsbut that, despite
theshorttime scale,stillcancauseeffects,suchasdefor-
estation, at large spatial scales. To emphasize the speci-
ficity and possible autonomy of this kind of biological,
non-human agent, we refer to the result as entomogenic
climate change.
A detailed analysis of the problem of entomogenic cli-
mate change leads us to make a number of constructive
suggestions for increased attention to relatively less fa-
miliar domains of study, including micro-ecologicalsym-
biosis and its nonlinear population dynamics, and insect
FIG. 1: Insect, tree, and climate interactions discussed here;
social organization. Here we emphasize in particular the
compare Net Primary Production [1].
role that bark beetle bioacoustic behavior must have in
theirevolvingmultiplesurvivaladaptationswhich,itap-
pears, fill in significantgaps in the explanatory model of
spaceandintime. Theiroverlaphintsatanastoundingly
infestation dynamics. One goal is to stimulate interdis-
complicated system, consisting of many cooperating and
ciplinary research that is appropriate to the complex of
competing components;the healthof any one depending
interactions implicated in deforestation and appropriate
onthe healthofothers. (Figure1 givesa schematicview
to discovering effective control strategies.
of the components and interactions that we consider in
the following; cf. Field et al. [1].) How are we to un-
derstand the individual views as part of a larger whole?
In particular, what can result from interactions between II. FOREST HEALTH AND CLIMATE
the different scales overwhich insects, trees, andclimate
adapt? The Earth’s three great forest ecosystems—tropical,
Taking the stories together, we have, in engineering temperate, and boreal—are of irreplaceable importance
parlance, a feedback loop: Going from small to large to its self-regulating balance. Their trees help to regu-
scale,oneseesthatinsectsreproducebyfeedingontrees; late its climate, provide essential timber resources, and
forests affect regional solar energy uptake and atmo- create a diversity of habitat and nutrients that support
sphericgasbalance;and,finally,energyandcarbonstor- other forms of life, including millions of people. Forests
age and atmospheric gases affect climate. Simultane- contribute to global climate dynamics through a carbon
ously, the large scale (climate) sets the context for dy- cycle in which atmospheric carbon dioxide is converted
namics on the small scale: temperature modulates in- into an immense carbon pool. At any one point in time,
sectreproductionandprecipitationcontrolstreegrowth. the Earth’s forest ecosystems together hold a majority
The feedback loop of insects, trees, and climate means of the terrestrial Earth’s carbon stocks with the boreal
that new kinds of behavior can appear—dynamics not forests comprising 49 percent of the total carbon pool
due to any single player, but to their interactions. Im- contained within these three types of forest ecosystems
portantly, such feedback loops can maintain ecosystem [2]. Thatcarbonisthenslowlyreleasedbackintothe at-
stability or lead to instability that amplifies even small mosphere through complicated decomposition processes.
effects to large scale. Allformsofdeforestation,humanandnatural,directly
Here we givea concrete example ofthe dynamic inter- impactclimaticconditionsbyattenuatingordelayingthe
action between insects, trees, and climate. We focus on carbon cycle. In concert with well documented green-
the role that bark beetles (Scolytidae or, more recently, house gas effects that drive global atmospheric change,
Curculionidae: Scolytinae) play in large-scale deforesta- thepotentiallossoflargeareasoftheseforests,combined
tion and consequently in climate change. Bark beetles with accelerating deforestation of tropical and temper-
areemblematic ofmanydifferentinsectspecies thatnow ate regions, may have significant future climate impacts
participate in rapid deforestation. Likewise, we primar- beyond already dire predictions. Ice core studies reveal
ily focus on the North American boreal forests for their that the Earth’s climate has varied cyclically over the
unique characteristics but also as representative of the past 450,000 years. Temperatures have been closely tied
vulnerability of all types of forest ecosystems. And so, to variations in atmospheric carbon dioxide in a cyclic
the picture we paint here is necessarily incomplete [28]. change that recurs on the time scale of millennia. Vege-
Nonetheless,theircasesservetoillustratethecomplex tation has been forced to adapt. The boreal forests are,
in fact, highly vulnerable to these climate shifts. Ex- the Canadian Rockies and expand into the great boreal
amination of fossil pollen and other fossil records shows forests of Canada. Historically, these forests have been
that, inresponseto temperaturevariationsoverthe past immune to mountain pine beetles due to predictably se-
millennia, North American boreal forests have radically vere winter conditions that decimate beetle populations.
changed many times [3]. The unique sensitivity of these SincemuchofCanadahasseenmeanwintertemperature
forests’treespeciestotemperaturesuggeststhatthepre- increases as high as 4◦C in the last century, and even
dicted warmer climate will cause their ecological niches fasterchangesrecently,the conditions forthe beetles are
to shift north faster than the forests can migrate. improving rapidly.
One major consequence of boreal deforestation is in- It is now well established that mountain pine beetles
creasingfirerisk. Overthenexthalf-century,theSiberian have slipped through mountain passes from the Peace
and Canadianborealforests will mostlikely see as much River country in northern British Columbia to Alberta,
as a 50 percent increase in burnt trees [4]. One of the the most direct corridor to the boreal forests [9]. If
major sources fueling these fires will be dead and dying the beetle is successful at adapting to and colonizing
trees killed by various opportunistic insect species and Canada’s jack pine, there will be little to stop it mov-
their associated microorganisms. ingthroughtheimmensecontiguousborealforest,allthe
Parallelingconcernsabouttheborealforests,inrecent way to Labrador and the North American east coast. It
years there has been a growing awareness of extensive then will have a path down into the forests of eastern
insect outbreaks in various regional forests throughout Texas. Entomologist Jesse Logan [8] describes this as
the western United States. As consecutive summers of “a potential geographic event of continental scale with
unprecedented forest fires consumed the dead and dying unknown, but potentially devastating, ecological conse-
treesanewconcernemerged: insect-drivendeforestation quences.”
is a threat connected to global climate change. In fact, Continental migration aside, if the beetles infest the
climate experts, forestry personnel, and biologists, have high-elevation conifers, the so-calledfive-needle pines, of
all observed that these outbreaks are an inevitable con- the western United States, this will reduce the snow-
sequence of a climatic shift to warmer temperatures [4]. fenceeffectthatthesealpineforestsprovide. Snowfences
hold windrows of captured snow that are crucial to the
Biologists now regularly voice concern that the prob-
seasonalconservationand distribution of water from the
lem exceeds any of the earlier projections [5]. Evi-
Rocky Mountains. This is one of the primary origins of
dencefromdiverseresearchsourcessuggestsweareenter-
water that sources several major river systems in North
ing an unprecedented planetary event: forest ecology is
rapidlychangingduetoexplodingplant-consuming(phy- America[8]. Everywesternstateiscontendingwithvari-
tophagous) insect populations. In 2004, NASA’s Global ous ratesof unprecedentedinsectinfestation notonly by
many different species of Scolytidae, but also by other
Disturbances project analyzed nineteen years of satellite
plant-eating insects.
data ending in 2000. It revealed rapid defoliation over
a brief period (1995 to 2000) of a vast region that ex- These and other rising populations of phytophagous
tends from the US-Canadian border in western Canada insectsarenowbecomingrecognizedasaglobalproblem
to Alaska. The conclusion was that the devastation re- and one of the most obvious and fast emerging conse-
sultedfromtwo differentinsects, the mountainpine bee- quences of global climate change. Over the past fifteen
tle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) and the western spruce years there have been reports of unusual and unprece-
budworm (Choristoneura occidentalis) [6]. dented outbreaks occurring on nearly every continent.
Now,fouryearslaterweknowofevenfurtherdamage.
InAlaska,sprucebarkbeetles(Dendroctonus rufipennis)
have killed 4.4 million acres of forest in just a decade III. WHAT DRIVES INFESTATIONS?
[7]. This damage results from only one such insect. Cli-
mate warminghasalsoallowedthe mountainpine beetle Several well-understood factors underlie how climate
to expand its range into formerly unsuitable habitats. change impacts insect populations. The two dominant
The recent range expansion of the mountain pine beetle environmental factors are changes in temperature and
in British Columbia has resulted in commercial timber moisture. Changing insect-host relationships and non-
losses of 435 million m3, with additional losses outside host species impacts, such as predationand disease,also
the commercial forests. The cumulative area of beetle play essential roles.
outbreakwas130,000km2 bytheendof2006. Thisisan Sinceinsectsarecold-blooded,theyareextremelysen-
outbreakofunprecedentedseverityatamagnitudelarger sitive to temperature, being more active at higher tem-
in area than all previous recorded outbreaks [5]. peratures. As winter temperatures increase, there are
Jesse Logan(USDA Forest Service) and James Powell fewer freezing conditions that keep insect populations in
(Utah State University, Logan)discussed the seriousim- check than in the past. Shortened winters, increasing
plications that a continuing warming trend will have on summertemperatures,andfewerlate-springfrostscorre-
therangeexpansionofthemountainpinebeetleintoboth late to increased insect feeding, faster growth rates, and
higher elevations and more northern latitudes [8]. At rapid reproduction [10].
the time, one concern was that the beetles would breach Moistureavailabilityandvariabilityarealsomajorde-
terminants of insect habitat—forest health and bound- tion, tissue necrosis, and wound formation—essentially
aries. Drought creates many conditions that are favor- a tree’s attempt to isolate and deprive nutrition to an
able to increased insect reproduction. Many drought- invadingorganism. Inspecieswithoutwell-definedresin-
induced plant characteristics are attractive to insects. ductsystemsitisoftenaprimarydefensemechanism. In
Higher plant surface temperatures, leaf yellowing, in- bothcasesthesedefensestrategiesareverysusceptibleto
creased infrared reflectance, biochemical changes, and variations in temperature and available moisture. Their
stress-induced cavitation acoustic emissions, may all be efficacy also varies with different beetle species [12].
positive signals to insects of host vulnerability. Drought Since winter survivability and the number of eggs laid
alsoleadstoincreasedfoodvalueinplanttissuesthrough by bark beetles is directly correlated to ambient tem-
nutrient concentration, while reducing defensive com- perature [10], it is no surprise that increases in yearly
pounds. These last factors may in turn increase the beetle population cycles have been observed through-
efficacy of insect immune systems and therefore en- out the western states and provinces as warming and
hance their ability to detoxify remaining plant defenses. local drought conditions have persisted [8]. The rela-
Higher temperatures and decreased moisture may also tive time scales for increased infestation rates, and sub-
decrease the activity of insect diseases and predator ac- sequent adaptive tree response, can put host trees at a
tivity while optimizing conditions for mutualistic mi- serious disadvantage with regard to even the short-term
croorganisms that benefit insect growth [11]. effects of climatic warming.
One of the most frequently noted impacts of global
climate change is the desynchronization of biotic devel-
opmental patterns—such as the inability of forests to V. PIONEER BEETLE: INFESTATION
migrate as quickly as their ecological niches—that have LINCHPIN
remained coherent for millennia. This decoupling be-
tweenvariouselementsofanecosystemisoneofthemost
An attack begins with the pioneer beetle that locates,
unpredictable and disruptive results of abrupt climate
bymeansnotyetelucidated,andlandsonasuitablehost.
change.
Othersjointhisbeetle,allsoonboringthroughtheouter
Unfortunately,insectsrespondtochangesintheirther-
bark into the phloem and cambium layers where eggs
mal environment much faster than their hosts, either
are laid after mating. Within the resulting galleries that
through migration(days), adaptation(seasonal),or evo-
house the adult beetles and their eggs, the larvae hatch,
lution (centuries). Under the stress of abrupt climate
pupate, and undergo metamorphosis into adulthood. In
changetheonlyshort-termlimitontheirincreasingpop-
thisway,theyspendthelargestfractionoftheirlife-cycle
ulations may be their near total elimination of suitable
(anywhere between 2 months to two years depending on
hosts. In short, trees only adapt slowly (centuries) to
species and geographic location) inside a tree. This new
changing conditions, while insects can disperse widely
generation emerges from the bark and flies away to seek
andadaptmuchfastertoabruptenvironmentalchanges.
new host trees.
Thewidelyheldviewisthatthepioneerattractsother
beetles to the host through a pheromone signal. Like
IV. THE TREE’S PERSPECTIVE many other insects, bark beetles manufacture commu-
nicative pheromones from molecular constituents that
While it is clear that under extreme conditions phy- they draw from host trees [13]. In some species the pi-
tophagous insects and their associated microorganisms oneer is male and, in others, female. Each new beetle
can quickly gain the advantage against host trees, it is that is attracted to the host subsequently contributes to
also true that trees have evolved effective defense mech- the general release of an aggregation pheromone. It is
anisms. For example, in their defense against bark bee- also theorized that the aggregation pheromone has an
tles there are tworecognizedcomponents: the preformed upper limit beyond which attracted beetles will land on
resin system and the induced hypersensitivity response. adjacenttreesratherthantheinitialhost,sincehighcon-
Once a beetle bores throughthe outer tree bark into the centrations would indicate over-use of the available host
inner tissues, resin ducts are severedand its flow begins. resources.
A beetle contends with the resin flow by removing resin One hope has been that understanding bark beetle
from its entrance hole. Trees that are sufficiently hy- chemical ecology would lead to its manipulation and
drated often manage to “pitch-out” the invader through eventually to a viable forestry management tool. Much
sufficient flow of resin. In some conifer species with well to our loss, nothing of the sort has been forthcoming.
defined resin-duct systems, resin is stored and available This largely derives from the sheer complexity of the
for beetle defense. The monoterpenes within the resin insect-treemicro-ecologyandhowfarawaywearefroma
also have antibiotic and repellent properties to defend sufficientunderstandingofmechanismsandinteractions.
against beetle-associated fungi [12]. Thetwomajorcontributionsofchemicalecologyresearch
Theinducedhypersensitivityresponseisusuallyasec- to control measures have been those of pesticides and
ondary defense system; it is also known as wound re- pheromone trapping. Most biologists appreciate that
sponse. It produces secondary resinosis, cellular dessica- pesticides have a very limited role in controlling insect
infestations at the scales in question. Pheromone traps behavior, and population density.
areone ofthe essentialtoolsoffieldresearchinentomol- While the dual behavioral mechanisms of scent and
ogy, but adapting them for large-scale control has been sound are largely inseparable, it is usually assumed that
controversialat best; see Borden [14] for an overview. bark beetles use chemical messages for communication
An underlying assumption of chemical ecology is that at a distance while reserving acoustic signals for close-
pheromones are the primary attractant for beetles seek- rangecommunication. However,this distinction remains
ing new hosts, but this remains a hypothesis. While hypothetical. We do not yet have a clear understand-
manyresearchersbelievethatattractionisolfactory,oth- ing of how far either their pheromones or sound signals
ersproposethatvisualcuesarekeyforsomespecies[15]. can travel, let alone a full appreciation of the diverse
Importantly,forestrymanagementpolicyisbasedlargely formsofacousticsignalingthattheymayemploy. Wedo
onthechemicalecologyhypothesisthatolfactionisdom- know that both communication mechanisms are used af-
inant. It has never been definitively proven, however, ter beetles have aggregatedon a host and that one form
and, for a number of reasons,it is unlikely to be. Stated of signaling can evoke the other.
simply, foraging insects most likely use whatever cues Anemphasisonpheromone-basedcommunicationmay
are the most accurate and easily assessed under varying very well have led to a lack of follow-up on the possi-
circumstances. To assume otherwise is to go against the bility that host trees themselves produce acoustic cues
commonlogicthatlivingsystemsevolvemultiplesurvival that attract pioneer beetles. Perhaps the earliest pro-
strategies to cope with environmental complexity. posal dates to 1987, when William Mattson and Robert
In short, key mechanisms in infestation dynamics re- Haack(USDA,ForestService)speculatedthatcavitation
mainunknown: thepioneerbeetle’sabilitytofindasuit- events in trees might produce acoustic signals audible to
able host and then to facilitate organizing others to at- plant-eatinginsects[11,19]. Cavitationoccursintreesby
tack. breaking of the water columns in the conducting xylem
tissue of leaves, stems, and trunks. The assumption has
beenthatthesoundsarevibrationscomingfromindivid-
VI. THE BIOACOUSTIC ECOLOGY ual cells collapsing, which is due to gradual dehydration
HYPOTHESIS and prolonged water stress. While cavitation produces
some acoustic emissions in the audible range (20 Hz -
One of the more under-appreciated research domains 20 kHz), most occur in the ultrasound range (20 - 200
regarding bark beetles concerns their remarkable bioa- kHz and above). In fact, counting ultrasonic acoustic
coustic abilities. The sound producing mechanism in emissions from cavitating xylem tissues is a widely ac-
manybarkbeetlesisapars stridens organthatfunctions ceptedmonitoringpracticeusedby botanists tomeasure
as a friction-based grating surface. In Ips confusus bee- drought stress in trees. Despite its common usage in
tlesitislocatedonthebackoftheheadandstrokedbya botany, there has been very little study as to the actual
plectrum on the under side of the dorsalanterior edge of generating mechanism. For the most part, it is merely a
the prothorax. In other species (Dendroctonus) the pars statisticalmeasuringtoolandthecorrelationbetweenthe
stridens is located on the surface under the elytra and incidence of cavitations and drought stress, an accepted
neartheapicesandsuturalmargins. Anotherisfoundin fact [20].
some species on the underside of the head. All three of Recent fieldwork by one of us (DDD) focused on
thesesoundgeneratingorgansproduceavarietyofchirps soundproductionbythepinionengraverbeetle(Ips con-
thatrangefromsimplesingle-impulseclickstoarangeof fuses). Sounds were recordedwithin the interior phloem
different multi-impulse chirps. These also differ between layer of the pinion trees, often adjacent to beetle nup-
gendersofthesamespeciesandbetweendifferentspecies tial chambers. A rich and varied acoustic ecology was
probably due to subtle differences in the sound produc- documented—an ecology that goes beyond the previ-
ing mechanisms. Collectively, allof the sounds andtheir ously held assumptions about the role of sound within
associatedmechanismsarereferredtoasstridulation,the this species [21]. Another important observation was
mostcommonformofsoundproductionmadebyvarious that much of the sound production by this species has
forms of beetle [16]. a very strong ultrasonic component. Since communica-
Past research suggested that sound making and per- tionsystemsseldomevolvethroughinvestingsubstantial
ception in bark beetles was secondary comparedto their resources into a portions of the frequency spectrum that
use of chemical-signaling mechanisms. Most studies ad- anorganismcannotbothgenerateandperceive[22],this
dressing acoustic behavior concentratedon sound gener- raised the question of whether or not bark beetles have
ation and only in its relationship to chemical signaling. a complementary ultrasonic auditory capability. Recent
These include the role stridulation sound-making has in laboratory investigations by Jayne Yack (Biology, Car-
controlling attack spacing between entry points in the leton University) have also revealed ultrasound compo-
host [17] or the triggering of pheromone release between nents in some bark beetle signals and indirect evidence
genders [18]. The resulting view is that bark beetles use that beetles possess sensory organs for hearing airborne
a combination of chemical and acoustic signals to regu- sounds [23].
late aggression, attack on host trees, courtship, mating One possible implication that arises from the combi-
nation of these laboratory and field observations is that [5].
variousbarkbeetlespeciesmaypossessorganscapableof Mostimmediately,though,asmillionsoftreesdie,they
hearing ultrasound for conspecific communication. If so, not only cease to participate in the global carbon cycle,
thesespecieswouldbepreadpatedforlisteningtodiverse but become potential fuel for more frequentand increas-
auditory cues from trees. ingly large-scale fire outbreaks. These fires will release
In turn, this raises an important issue not addressed further carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and do so
by previous bark beetle bioacoustic research. A very more rapidly than the natural cycle of biomass decay.
diverse range of sound signaling persists well after the The interactions between these various components and
putatively associated behaviors—host selection, coordi- theirneteffectarecomplicatedatbest—athemerunning
nation of attack, courtship, territorial competition, and throughout the entire feedback loop.
nuptial chamber excavations—have all taken place. In An example of this is how boreal forest fires affect cli-
fully colonized trees the stridulations, chirps, and clicks mate [26]. A constellationof substantially changedcom-
can go on continuously for days and weeks, long after ponents(lostforest,suddenreleaseofgases,andthelike)
most of these other behaviors will have apparently run leads, it is claimed, to no net climate impact. The re-
their course. These observations suggest that these in- peated lesson of complex, nonlinear dynamical systems,
sects have a more sophisticated social organization than though, is that the apparentstability of any part can be
previouslysuspected—onethatrequiresongoingcommu- destabilized by its place in a larger system. Thus, one
nication through sound and substrate vibration. needsto evaluatethe lackofborealfire-climateeffects in
The above acoustic fieldwork led us to conclude that the context of the entire feedback loop.
there must be a larger range of forms of insect sociality Takenalone, the potentialloss offorests is of substan-
and so means of organizational communication. More tial concern to humans. When viewing this system as
precise understanding of these forms of social organiza- a feedback loop, though, the concern is that the indi-
tionmayimproveourabilitytodesignbettercontrolsys- vidual components will become part of an accelerating
tems,whether these arechemical,acoustic,orbiological. positive feedback loop of sudden climatic change. Such
The results in both bioacoustics and chemical ecology entomogenic change, given the adaptive population dy-
strongly suggest bark beetle communication is largely namics of a key player (insects), may happen on a very
multimodal and that both pheromone and mechanical short time scale. This necessitates a shift in the cur-
signaling are interwoven. A growing appreciation in rent characterization of increasing insect populations as
many fields of biology has emerged that animal signals merely symptomatic of global climate change to a con-
often consist of multiple parts within or across sensory cern for insects as a significant generative agent.
modalities. Insects are not only an example of this ob- In addition to concerted research in bioacoustics,
servation, but they possess some of the most surprising micro-ecological symbiosis and dynamics, and insect so-
examples of multicomponent and multimodal communi- cial organizations, these areas, in conjunction with the
cation systems [24]. field of chemical ecology, must be integrated into a
broaderview of multiscale population, evolutionary,and
climate dynamics. In this sense, the birth of chemical
VII. CONCLUSION: CLOSING THE LOOP ecology serves as an inspiration. It grew out of an in-
terdisciplinary collaboration between biology and chem-
The eventual impact that insect-driven deforestation istry. It is precisely this kind of intentional coopera-
and global climate change will have on the Earth’s re- tion between disciplines—but now over a greater range
maining forests ultimately depends on the rate at which of scales—thatwill most likely lead to new strategies for
temperatures increase. The impacts will be minimized monitoringanddefenseagainstwhatseemstobeagrow-
if that rate is gradual, but increasingly disruptive if the ingthreattotheworld’sforestsandultimatelytohuman-
change is abrupt. Unfortunately, most climate projec- ity itself.
tionsnowshowthatarapidtemperatureincreaseismore
likely[25]. The currentsignsofincreasinginsectpopula-
tionsatthisearlystageofwarmingdoesnotportendwell Acknowledgments
for forest health in the near future. The concern is ex-
acerbated, since we have limited countermeasures under The authors thank Dawn Sumner, Jim Tolisano,
development. Richard Hofstetter, Jayne Yack, Reagan McGuire, and
One conclusion appears certain. Extensive deforesta- Bob Harrill for helpful discussions. This work was par-
tion by insects will convert the essential carbon pool tially supported by the Art and Science Laboratory via
provided by the Earth’s forests into atmospheric carbon a grant from the Delle Foundation and the Network Dy-
dioxide. Concomitantly, the generation of atmospheric namics Program, funded by Intel Corporation, at UCD
oxygenandsequestrationofcarbonbytreeswilldecrease and the Santa Fe Institute.
[1] C. B. Field, J. T. Randerson, and C. M. Malmstrom, 1643 (1996).
RemoteSens. Environ. 51, 74 (1995). [21] D. D. Dunn, The sound of light in trees (online),
and Environment 22, 715 (1999). (2006).
[3] R. Lindsey, The migrating boreal forest, [22] D. D. Dunn, The Sound of Light In Trees (CD) (The
(2002). Mexico, 2006).
[4] W.Smith andP.Lee,Canada’s Forests at a Crossroads: [23] J. Yack,Personal Communication (2006).
AnAssessment intheyear 2000 (WorldResourcesInsti- [24] N. Skals, P. Anderson, M. Kanneworff, C. Lofstedt, and
tute,Washington D.C., 2000). A. Surlykke,J. Experimental Biology 208, 595 (2005).
[5] W.A. Kurz,C. C. Dymond,G. Stinson,G. J. Rampley, [25] R. T. Watson, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
E.T.Neilson,A.L.Carroll, T.Ebata,andL.Safranyik, Change, Third Assessment Report, Climate Change
Nature452, 987 (2008). (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United King-
[6] C. Potter, P. N. Tan, V. Kumar, C. Kucharik, dom, 2001).
S. Klooster, V. Genovese, W. Cohen, and S. Healey, [26] J. T. Randerson, H. Liu, M. G. Flanner, S. D. Cham-
Ecosystems 8, 808 (2005). bers, Y. Jin, P. G. Hess, G. Pfister, M. C. Mack, K. K.
[7] E. E. Berg, J. D. Henry, C. L. Fastie, A. D. D. Volder, Treseder, L. R.Welp, et al., Science314, 1130 (2006).
andS.M.Matsuoka,For.Ecol.Manage227,219(2006). [27] D. D. Dunn and J. P. Crutchfield, Insects,
[8] J. A. Logan and J. A. Powell, American Entomologist trees, and climate: The bioacoustic ecology of
Fall,160 (2001). deforestation and entomogenic climate change,
B. Bentz, and J. A. Powell, Tech. Rep. 2006-14, Natu- santa FeInstituteWorking Paper 06-12-055.
ral Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Pacific [28] An expanded discussion can be found at Dunn and
Forestry Centre, Victoria, British Columbia (2006). Crutchfield [27].
[10] M. J. Lombardero, M. P. Ayres, B. D. Ayres, and
J. Reeve,Environmental Entomology 29, 421 (2000).
[11] W. J. Mattson and R. A. Haack, BioScience 37, 110
Biography: James P. Crutchfield
(1987).
[12] T. E. Nebeker, J. D. Hodges, and C. A. Blanche, in
Beetle-Pathogen Interactions in Conifer Forests, edited Jim Crutchfield teaches nonlinear physics at the Uni-
by T. D. Schowalter and G. M. Filip (Academic Press, versity of California, Davis, directs its Complexity Sci-
1993), pp.157–169. encesCenter,andpromotesscienceinterventionsinnon-
[13] W.C.Agosta, Chemical Communication: The Language
scientific settings. He’s mostly concerned with what
of Pheromones (Scientific American Library, New York,
patterns are, how they are created, and how intelligent
1992).
agents discover them; see cse.ucdavis.edu/~chaos.
[14] J.H.Borden,inInsectPheromoneResearch: NewDirec-
tions, edited by R. T. Carde and A. K. Minks (Plenum,
NewYork, 1997), pp.421–438.
[15] S. A. Campbell and J. Borden, Ecological Entomology Biography: David D. Dunn
31, 437 (2006).
[16] B.A.Barr,TheCanadianEntomologist101,636(1969).
DavidDunnisacomposerwhorarelypresentsconcerts
[17] J. A. Byers, Holarctic Ecology 3, 466 (1989).
or installations, preferring to lecture and engage in site-
[18] J.A.Rudinsky,L.C.Ryker,R.R.Michael,L.M.Libbey,
specificinteractionsorresearch-orientedactivities. Much
and M. E. Morgan, J. Insect Physiology 22, 167 (1976).
[19] R.A.Haack, R.W. Blank, F. T. Fink,and W. J. Matt- ofhis currentworkfocusesonthe developmentofstrate-
son, The Florida Entomologist 71, 427 (1988). giesandtechnologiesforenvironmentalsoundmonitoring
[20] G.E.JohnsonandJ.Grace,J.ExperimentalBiology47, in both aesthetic and scientific contexts.