Entropic control of particle sizes during viral self-assembly
M Castelnovo1, D Muriaux2, and C Faivre-Moskalenko1
1 Laboratoire de Physique, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Lyon,
Universit´e de Lyon and CNRS, 46 All´ee d’Italie, 69364 LYON Cedex 07, FRANCE and
2 Centre d’´etudes d’agents Pathog`enes et Biotechnologies pour la Sant´e,
UMR5236, 1919 Route de Mende, 34293 MONTPELLIER, FRANCE
Morphologicdiversityisobservedacrossallfamiliesofviruses. Yetthesesupra-molecularassem-
bliesareproducedmostofthetimeinaspontaneouswaythroughcomplexmolecularself-assembly
scenarios. The modeling of these phenomena remains a challenging problem within the emerging
field of Physical Virology. We present in this work a theoretical analysis aiming at highlighting the
particular role of configuration entropy in the control of viral particle size distribution. Specializ-
ing this model to retroviruses like HIV-1, we predict a new mechanism of entropic control of both
RNAuptakeintotheviralparticle,andoftheparticle’ssizedistribution. Evidenceofthispeculiar
behavior has been recently reported experimentally.
I. INTRODUCTION
Virusesrelymainlyonmolecularself-assemblytoperpetuatetheirlifecycle. Spontaneousself-assemblyofmolecules
isindeedapowerfulandyetpassivewayofstructuringsolutionsofmoleculesatanintermediatelengthscalebetween
thenanoscopicscaleofthemoleculeitselfandthemicroscopicscaleofcells. Virusesarecomposedofproteins,nucleic
acids, and eventually lipids in the case of enveloped viruses. All these components have to be orchestrated in order
to produce the regular morphologies observed across different viral families through self-assembly [1]. The precise
modelingofthesephenomenaisgenerallychallenging. Inparticularthequestionofthenecessaryregulationorcontrol
of self-assembly remains largely open for viruses with complex life cycles.
In the case of non-enveloped virus, the genome of the virus is protected by a protein shell called a capsid. The
proteins are arranged according to icosahedral symmetry [2]. As a consequence, this symmetry imposes some re-
strictions on the size distribution of viral particles to be self-assembled. Spontaneous curvature of protein layers has
been put forward recently as another plausible mechanism of the control of the size polydispersity using continuous
models of the capsid [3]. In the present work, we would like to emphasize the particular role of the genome in the
regulation of particle size distribution. This is especially important in the case of viruses which have multipartite
genomes. Indeed, for such viruses the configuration entropy of all the molecules constituting the virus is of utmost
relevanceanditsbalancewithenthalpiccontributiontotheself-assemblyleadstotheappearanceofspecificphenom-
ena like the entropic control of particle size distribution discussed in the present work. Zandi and Van der Schoot
discussedrecentlywithinasimilarformalismtheinterplaybetweenelectrostaticforcesdrivingco-assemblyofproteins
and RNA and their relative stoichiometry [4]. Following their work, we extend the modeling of viral self-assembly
in order to describe the competition between different particles sizes and different RNA content. Our analysis leads
to the following identification of several roles of entropic origin for the genome: (i) the genome facilitates the viral
self-assembly of proteins by lowering the onset of particle formation and by increasing the effective free energy gain
per protein upon particle formation; (ii) viral RNAs are preferentially co-packaged based on entropic considerations
within viral particles in the mixtures of viral and cellular RNAs; (iii) the uptake of viral genome produces a shift of
particle size distribution towards smaller particles and a reduced polydispersity.
This paper is organized as follows. In the first part, we present the classical thermodynamic framework to describe
micellization phenomena in the case of a monodisperse protein self-assembly. The entropic role of the genome on the
self-assembly is then investigated. The second part describes the influence of viral and cellular RNA uptake on the
self-assembly process. The entropic uptake of viral RNA and the entropic control of size polydispersity found using
the model is discussed with respect to recent experiments performed on HIV-1.
II. VIRAL SELF-ASSEMBLY AND THE ENTROPIC ROLE OF THE GENOME
A. Classical description of pure protein self-assembly using micellization thermodynamics
Weconsiderinthissectionidenticalproteinsthathaveaspontaneoustendencytoself-assembleintoasetofdifferent
aggregates. Knowing the input concentration of proteins φ , we investigate the equilibrium partitioning of proteins
into the different aggregates. Each aggregates is made of p proteins, and the equilibrium concentration of these
aggregates is written as c . The gain in free energy for the formation of one aggregate of size p is kTF , where k is
]MB.oib-q[
1v4274.2031:viXra
the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature of the system. The reference free energy of a single protein is kTF .
The Gibbs free energy of the solution of proteins is written as
G (cid:88)
VkT 1 1 0 1 p p 0 p
where V is the volume of the solution, and v is a reference volume, interpreted as the cell volume used to compute
the configuration entropy. For each aggregate type, there is a translational entropy term kTVc (ln(c v )−1) and
an energetic gain term for the formation of aggregate kTVc F . As it is described below, this is the balance between
these entropic and enthalpic contributions that sets the precise size distribution.
This Gibbs free energy assumes implicitly that long-range interactions between aggregates are negligible. At equi-
librium, the size distribution c minimizes the Gibbs free energy with the global constraint of mass conservation
This can be taken into account by the use of a Lagrange multiplier µ that is interpreted as the chemical potential of
individual proteins. The equilibrium conditions are written as
0 0 1 0 1 0
Thefirstequationissimplythelawofmassactionfortheaggregateofsizep. Usingthenotation∆G ≡F −pF ≡pg ,
one can find the equilibrium partition of proteins among the different aggregates by solving the following non-linear
equation in c
φ v =c v + p(c v )pe−pgp (5)
0 0 1 0 1 0
andbypluggingthesolutionintothelawofmassactionEq.3. Inordertoaddressthequestionofdominanceofagiven
population of particles with respect to another one, we restrict the model to a bimodal size distribution: the product
of the self-assembly is either a small particle with p proteins or a large particle with p proteins. The equilibrium
concentration of un-aggregated proteins c is now given by
φ v =c v +p (c v )p1e−p1g1 +p (c v )p2e−p2g2 (6)
0 0 1 0 1 1 0 2 1 0
The figure 1a shows the numerical resolution of the previous equation for a representative set of parameters mim-
icking a protein titration experiment. This set of parameters was chosen because the representation of the results are
in this case particularly clear. We checked however that the results described below are not strongly dependent on
the precise choise of the parameters. In the particular case where the free energy gains per protein for small particles
g and for large particles g are equal, any imbalance between population of small and large particles is directly
attributed to purely entropic effect. For the sake of convenience, this scenario is called the ”non-selective enthalpy”
(NSE) scenario.
For low initial concentration of proteins, the entropy of individual proteins cannot be balanced by free energy gain
per protein g , and no self-assembly occurs. Once the so-called critical micellar concentration (CMC) is reached,
protein association starts1. This threshold is roughly estimated by
(cid:18) ep1g1 (cid:19) p1 1 −1
Once the aggregation sets in, it is observed that there are more smaller particles than larger particles. This is
understood as a purely entropic effect, as it was already mentioned earlier: indeed, a larger number of smaller
particles can be formed at fixed concentration of proteins.
1 Beyondthisthreshold,bothisolatedproteins,smallandlargeparticlesconcentrationschangetheirbehaviorasmoreproteinsareadded
tothesolution
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Initial volume fraction of proteins
Small particles
LLLaaarrrgggeee pppaaarrrtttiiicccllleeesss 8
Isolated proteins
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Initial volume fraction of proteins
FIG. 1: Protein self-assembly into bimodal capsids. (a) Protein titration in the absence of enthalpic selection (g =g ). The
onsetofaggregation,knownasthecriticalmicellarconcentration(cmc)isshownbytheblackdashedline. Thesmallparticlesare
more numerous than large particles once the aggregation begins. Parameters are p =21,p =42,g =g =−2.5,vo=2nm3.
(b) Ratio c /c as function of initial concentration. The curves correspond to increasing difference g −g > 0 (favoring
larger particles) between enthalpic gain following the large black arrows. The orange dashed line represents the limit between
small particle dominance (blue rectangle) and large particle dominance (green rectangle). The entropic selection reduces as
the enthalpic gain is increased. Parameters are identical to (a), except for g = −2.5, g = −2.54 (green), g = −2.58 (red),
g =−2.62 (cyan), g =−2.66 (pink).
It is possible to relax the NSE model by choosing distinct free energy gains per protein2 g >g . In this case, the
enthalpycontributiontoself-assemblytendstofavorlargerparticles,andthereforeitwillcounterbalancetheentropic
selection mechanism illustrated in figure 1a. After little algebra, it is possible to find an exact relationship between
the concentration of initial protein φ and the ratio between the equilibrium value of the number of small and large
particles α=c /c
(cid:16) (cid:17) 1 p (cid:16) (cid:17) p1
φ v = αe(p1g1−p2g2) p1−p2 +(p + 2) αe(p1g1−p2g2) p1−p2 e−p1g1 (8)
The solution to this equation α = f(φ ) is shown in figure 1b for different values of g −g . A progressive loss of
entropic selection compared to the enthalpic selection is observed. As a consequence the entropic selection of small
particles is therefore subjected to an assumption of NSE scenario and might be observed only under weak enthalpic
size selectivity.
B. Entropic role of monodisperse RNA upon protein self-assembly
The previous calculation is useful at illustrating the role of entropy in the partitioning of proteins among different
particles. However, many viruses require the presence of their genome in order to initiate or complete their assembly.
Without specifying the precise structure of the capsid with its inner genome (single-stranded RNA in most cases),
it is possible to generalize the previous approach in order to predict the influence of a monodisperse genome on the
viral particle self-assembly. This generalization has been partly done in reference [4], and therefore the results of this
section are similar to those obtained earlier.
The first important feature to be incorporated into this generalized model is the stoichiometry of viral particles.
Indeed,severalworkshaverecentlypointedoutalinearrelationofelectrostaticoriginbetweenthenumberofproteins
in the capsid and the total number of nucleotides in the genome[4–7]. Following these works, we will assume that for
2 Inordertoobtainspontaneousself-assembly,freeenergygainperproteinmustbenegativeg1,g2<0
eachparticlemadeofp proteins, therearem RNAmoleculessuchthatp =Km , whereK isaconstantdepending
in particular on the length of RNA. Assuming that the initial concentrations of proteins and RNAs are respectively
φ and φ , the equilibrium equations for self-assembly are easily written as
c = cpicmie−pigivpi+mi−1 (11)
where c is the concentration of free RNAs. In order to highlight the role of genome in the self-assembly process, we
willrestricttheproductofself-assemblytotwodistinctsizesofcapsidmadeofp andp proteins. Furthermore, each
of these particles p have the possibility to contain either no RNA or m RNAs. Therefore there are four types
of particles within this model (two particle sizes and two RNA contents each), and this new feature goes beyond the
two particle treatment performed in reference [4]. This particular configuration allows to show two main features of
RNApresenceduringthe self-assembly. The firstoneistheenhancementoftheentropic selectionofsmallerparticles
containing RNA even if RNA uptake is done without extra free energy gain. The second one is the lowering of the
CMC for particle assembly.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Initial volume fraction of proteins
Small particles empty P
Large particles empty P
Small particles full P+R 2.5
Large particles full P+R
Small particles empty P+R Large particles empty P+R
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Initial volume fraction of proteins
Small particles full P+R
Large particles empty P
Large particles full P+R
Large particles empty P+R
FIG. 2: Enhancement of entropic selection by the presence of RNA. (a) Concentration of particles in the case of pure protein
self-assembly (P) and in the presence of RNA (P+R) during protein titration. In the latter case, four types are particles are
formed. No extra gain in free energy due to the presence of RNA was assumed. Parameters are: p = 21,p = 42,g(P) =
g(P+R) =g(P) =g(P+R) =−2.5,v0=2nm3,φ v =0.8. (b) Selection of previous graph showing that the full small particles
are more numerous than larger particles in all cases (full or empty in the assembly in the presence of RNA, and empty in the
pure protein assembly).
Thefirstfeatureisillustratedinfigure2. Forthesakeofnotationclarity,wedefinethefreeenergygainperprotein
in the presence or in the absence of RNA respectively by g(P+R) and g(P). In the case where RNA does not bring
extra gain in free energy upon their uptake in viral particle, we have g(P+R) =g(P), and the results of figure 2 shows
that small particles containing RNA are more numerous than larger particles regardless of their RNA content. This
shows that the presence of the genome in the solution is a key factor affecting the relative populations of particles.
Rewritingtheequilibriumequations, thiscanbeunderstoodasaneffectiveincreaseinfreeenergygainperprotein.
Indeed the equations 9,10 and 11 applied to the four types particles are written as:
1e−p1g1eff +p
2e−p2g2eff (13)
ln (cid:0) 1+cmie−piδgivmi (cid:1)
whereg(0) isthefreeenergygainperproteinforpureproteinself-assemblyintoparticleofsizep ,δg istheextrafree
energy gain per protein brought by the presence of RNA. This last term contains in particular both the contribution
of RNA entropy within the particle and the specificity of RNA-protein interactions. Their contributions to the size
selection phenomena discussed with our formalism are expected to produce similar effects. The relative contribution
fromRNAentropyandRNA-proteininteractionsishoweverexpectedtobemoremodel-dependent,andgoestherefore
beyond the scope of the present work. This last equation shows that even without intrinsic extra free energy gain
δg =0, the entropy of RNA allows to effectively increase the free energy gain, g becoming more negative.
The second important feature of protein self-assembly in the presence of the genome is a shift of the CMC for
particle assembly as compared to pure protein self-assembly. Indeed, the effective free energy gain per protein g
will contribute to the shift of CMC, according to the previous estimation of CMC in Eq. 7. This is clearly illustrated
in the figure 3 by comparing the two types of self-assembly. In this case, the self-assembly of proteins in the presence
of RNA starts at lower protein concentration when compared to the self-assembly of pure proteins (cf figure 3). Note
that for the parameters of figure 3, RNA uptake is assumed to reduce the free energy per protein (δg (cid:54)=0), thereby
reducing further g .
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Initial volume fraction of proteins
Small particles empty P
Large particles empty P
Small particles full P+R
Large particles full P+R
Small particles empty P+R
Large particles empty P+R
FIG.3: Comparisonofself-assemblyofpureproteinsandself-assemblyofproteinsinthepresenceofRNA.Ashiftoftheonset
of self-assembly by the presence of RNA is observed. This shift has been highlighted using a black arrow. Parameters are:
1 2 1 2 1 2 r 0
III. VIRAL SELF-ASSEMBLY IN THE PRESENCE OF VIRAL AND CELLULAR RNAS
A. Entropic selection of viral RNAs
Theuptakeofviralgenomeduringcapsidself-assemblyismadethroughbothelectrostaticandspecificinteractions.
Theformerinteractionislargelyresponsibleforthelinearrelationbetweenproteinnumbersandnucleotidesobserved
in viruses databases. On the other hand, virologists have identified for many viral genome some specific sequence
that have stronger affinities with viral proteins than electrostatic-based predictions[8–10]. This sequence is called a
packaging signal (PSI or ψ). As a consequence, many viruses may contain both viral RNA bearing the ψ sequence
and non-viral cellular RNAs. This has been indeed observed for several viruses, and in particular for retroviruses like
HIV-1 [11, 12]. We anticipate in this case that the entropy of viral and cellular RNA will be of utmost relevance in
determining the size distribution of particles and their RNA content. These phenomena can be described within the
framework of micellization thermodynamics similarly to the discussion of previous sections.
We consider in this section a mixture of proteins, monodisperse viral RNAs and cellular RNAs of respective initial
concentrations φ ,φ and φ . The main difference between two types of RNA within our simple model is their
length: viral RNAs are usually longer than cellular RNAs [13]. Since each particle has the ability to contain both
RNAs, we use for the particle with index i a generalized linear relation between protein numbers p , viral RNAs n
and cellular RNAs m such that
p =K n +K m (15)
Inparticular,theratioK /K scalesliketheratioofRNAlength. Theequilibriumequationsdescribingself-assembly
are generalized from previous sections into
φ = c + p c
φ = c + n c
rv rv i pi
φ = c + m c
rc rc i pi
c = cpicnicmie−pigi
pi 0 rv rc
wherec andc arerespectivelytheconcentrationoffreeviralandcellularRNAs. Thesenon-linearequationsdonot
have general analytical solutions and may lead to a large variety of molecule partitioning among particles. Rather, it
ispossibletoinfertheinfluenceofmultipleRNAinsidetheparticlesbyrestrictingthefinalproductsofself-assembly.
In particular, imposing particles of same size but with different RNA content as the final product of self-assembly
allowstoaddressthequestionofpreferentialuptakeofmultipleRNAsasfunctiontheRNApartitioning. Thereforewe
restricttheanalysisinthissectiontotwofinalproductsofself-assembly: particlesmadeofp proteinsandcontaining
n large viral RNAs and m small cellular RNAs, and particles made of p = p proteins and containing only m
small cellular RNAs and no large viral RNAs.
0.03 0.02 0.01 0
Particle / Viral RNA
Particle / No viral RNA 0,4
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1
Volume fraction of particles Initial volume fraction of cellular RNA
FIG. 4: Entropic selection of viral genome. (a) Titration of viral RNA at fixed initial protein volume fraction φ v = 0.8
and fixed cellular RNA volume fraction φ v =0.6. Above some threshold concentration shown by the black dashed line, the
particles containing the viral RNA are dominant. (b) Corresponding phase diagram φ /φ at fixed protein volume fraction.
ThelinewithcircularsymbolsistheboundarywherethevolumefractionofparticlescontainingviralandcellularRNAsequals
the volume fraction of particles containing only cellular RNAs. The dashed arrow shows the line along which the graph of (a)
has been extracted. Other common parameters to (a) and (b) are: p = p = 21,n = 2,m = 10,n = 0,m2 = 14,K =
1 2 1 1 2 v
3,K =1.5,g =g =−2,v =2nm3,φ v =0.8.
c 1 2 0 0 0
The typical results in this case of viral RNA titration at fixed concentration of proteins and cellular RNAs is
shown in figure 4a. In this case, there exists a threshold above which the uptake of viral RNA is systematically
favorable. Interestingly,duetothelengthdifferencebetweenRNAs,thethresholdconcentrationismuchsmallerthan
the actual cellular RNA concentration. This can be understood qualitatively by the following entropic argument.
The replacement of several small cellular RNAs by some longer viral RNAs in order to maintain the constant level of
nucleotidesrequiredforagivencapsidsizeallowstoreduceeffectivelythenumberofsmallcellularRNAsperparticle.
Therefore a larger number of particles with reduced number of cellular RNAs can be made at constant cellular RNA
concentration, and this entropically favorable.
Our results shows that the length difference between viral and cellular RNA is prone to favor viral RNA uptake
based solely on entropic considerations. This is remarkable than without any sequence specificity, the spontaneous
tendency of the viral self-assembly behavior is the uptake of longer genome. The packaging signal ψ adds another
contribution to the preference of viral RNA3, but it is not necessary to have a strong signal according to the previous
entropic argument. Not surprinsingly, this entropic preference of large RNAs into particles disappears as the length
difference between viral and cellular RNAs reduces (data not shown).
B. Entropic control of size distribution
By restricting the final product of self-assembly to a different set of particles, it is possible to go beyond simple
bimodal products of self-assembly, and to describe the influence of the mixture of viral and cellular RNAs on the size
distribution of viral particles. In order to investigate this case, we assume two families of particles: particles A which
have discrete sizes distributed evenly around a central value p with a width H ×δ, and particles B which have the
same discrete size distribution, but a different RNA content. A second index is introduced in order to label particles
within each family {A(i)} and {B(i)}. The particles A(i) contain n(i) viral RNAs and m(i) cellular RNAs, while the
particles B(i) contain m(i) cellular RNAs and no viral RNAs. Within this model, the number of particles of given
size p is now composed of particles A and B. This particular classification of particles allow to solve numerically the
equations for the size distributions while keeping informations on their identity (particles A or B). These equations
are now written as
0 0 i pA pB
rv rv A pA
rc rc A pA B pB
c( p i A ) = cp 0 ic m rc ( A i) c n rv ( A i) e−pigi
c( p i B ) = cp 0 ic m rc ( B i) e−pigi
A typical numerical solution for these equations is shown in figure 5a. The energetic parameters g of the calculation
were chosen in order to favor the central number of proteins p . As a consequence, the size distribution at low viral
RNA concentration has a peak around p of enthalpic origin. Interestingly, titration of viral RNA leads to a shift
of the most favorable size towards smaller size. This is attributed to the entropic effects associated to the difference
in RNA length between viral and cellular RNAs, similarly to the particular case of entropic selection discussed in
the previous section. Moreover, since these entropic effects tend to favor smaller particles, the size polydispersity of
this discrete set of particles is reduced. Notice that both effects of peak shift and polydispersity reduction reach a
saturation, as it is explicitly seen in figure 5b.
IV. DISCUSSION
Wepresentedintheprevioussectionsananalysisoftheinfluenceofviralgenomeintheself-assemblyofproteinsinto
capsidusingtheframeworkofmicellizationthermodynamics. Focusingonthespecificeffectsassociatedtotheentropy
ofpartitioningallmolecules(proteinsandRNAs)amongvariousparticles,weidentifiedseveralrelevantfeatures. The
first one is that within a self-assembly scenario without inherent strong size selection of enthalpic origin, entropy will
favor smaller particles. This is easily understood as more particles of smaller size can be made at constant number
3 Inthepresenceofaspecificpackagingsignal, thefreeenergyperproteingi isfurtherreduced, thereforepromotingparticleformation
incorporatingthisRNA,ascomparedtothecasewherenopackagingsignalispresent.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Volume fraction of viral RNA
0.008 A:19
0.006 A:22
0.004 B:20
19 20 21 22 23
Particle size in number of proteins
Φ v=0.602 rv 0
FIG. 5: Entropic control of size distribution. Five sizes of particles have been chosen for both A and B family. (a) Evolution
of viral particle size distribution (including A and B particles for each size) as the viral RNA concentration is increased. The
population of particles shifts towards smaller sizes and the size polydispersity is reduced. (b) Volume fraction of particles
as function of their identity of particles as the viral RNA concentration is increased. The vertical dashed lines indicate the
viral RNA volume fraction at which the size distribution of (a) was extracted. Parameters are: p ={19,20,21,22,23},n =
2,m(i) = pi−K+nA,m(i) = pi ,K =3,K =1.5,g ={−1.92,−1.98,−2,−1.98,−1.92},vo=2,φ v =0.8,φ v =0.4.
A K− B K− v c i 0 0 rc 0
of proteins, and this is entropically favorable. This observation is of central importance since the presence of viral
genome will essentially enhance this preference for smaller particles.
More precisely the presence of monodisperse RNAs during viral self-assembly has been shown to enhance the
preference for smaller particles, and to shift the CMC for viral self-assembly towards lower protein concentration. In
the case where both viral and cellular RNAs are uptaken by viral particles, viral RNAs, which have been shown to
be longer than most cellular RNAs [13], are preferentially chosen for the self-assembly. Moreover, we showed that the
size distribution of viral particles is shifted towards smaller sized particles and the size polydispersity is accordingly
reduced.
Most of the findings described previously rely on the assumption of weak size selection of enthalpic origin. This
assumption is certainly arguable in the case of most icosahedral virus, but it is likely to be realistic in the case
of retroviruses like HIV-1. Indeed, the size distribution of HIV-1 has been shown to be quite large, reflecting the
absence of a strong size-selection mechanism, whatever its precise origin [14]. As a consequence, we might expect
that some of the results of the present work are applicable to HIV-1. We were recently able to address this question
experimentallyusingviralparticlesproducedwithincells,andbyquantifyingtheirsizedistributionthankstoAtomic
Force Microscopy imaging [14]. Remarkably, we found that viral particles grown in the presence of viral genome
were statistically smaller than particles grown in its absence, and that the size polydispersity was also reduced, in
qualitative agreement with the prediction of our models. Similarly, evidence of the entropic selection of large genome
was observed in studies quantifying the RNA amount within HIV-1 particles [11, 12]: in the absence of viral genome,
a few number of large RNAs were observed within viruses (typically one or two).
Interestingly recent observations on members of the Paramyxoviruses family, like the Newcastle Disease Virus
(NDV) are also qualitatively explained by the entropic features highlighted in our work [15]: indeed, it was observed
in this case that a majority of infectious VLPsare small and contain a single genome, while a minority are large and
contain multiple genomes. The qualitative observation ofeffects predicted by the entropy of partitioningof molecules
during self-assembly shows therefore unambiguously that the entropy contributes to the control of viral particle size
distribution.
The authors would like to thank the Fondation Simone et Cino Del Duca from the Institut de France for initial
fundingthatallowedtolaunchthisproject. ThisworkwasalsopartiallysupportedthankstoCNRSprogramentitled
“PIR: Interface physique, biologie et chimie”.
[1] S. Lyonnais, R.J. Gorelick, F. Heniche-Boukhalfa, S. Bouaziz, V. Parissi, J.F. Mouscadet, T. Restle, J.M. Gatell, E. Le
Cam, and G. Mirambeau. A protein ballet around the viral genome orchestrated by hiv-1 reverse transcriptase leads to
an architectural switch: From nucleocapsid-condensed RNA to vpr-bridged DNA. Virus Res., 2012.
[2] R. Zandi, D. Reguera, R.F. Bruinsma, W.M. Gelbart, and J. Rudnick. Origin of the icosahedral symmetry in viruses.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 101:15556–15560, 2004.
[3] A. Sˇiber and A. Majdandzic. Spontaneous curvature as a regulator of the size of virus capsids. Phys. Rev. E, 80:021910,
2009.
[4] R. Zandi and P. Van der Schoot. Size regulation of ss-RNA viruses. Biophys. J., 96:9–20, 2009.
[5] V.A.BelyiandM.Muthukumar. Electrostaticsoriginofthegenomepackinginviruses. Proc.Nat.Acad.Sci.,103:17174–
17178, 2006.
[6] C.L.Ting,J.Wu,andZ.G.Wang.Thermodynamicbasisforthegenometocapsidchargerelationshipinviralencapsidation.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 108:16986–16991, 2011.
[7] Y.Hu,R.Zandi,A.Anavitarte,C.M.Knobler,andW.M.Gelbart. Packagingofapolymerbyaviralcapsid: theinterplay
between polymer length and capsid size. Biophys. J., 94:1428–1436, 2008.
[8] R. Aronoff and M. Linial. Specificity of retroviral RNA packaging. J. Virol., 65:71–80, 1991.
[9] F. Qu and T.J. Morris. Encapsidation of turnip crinkle virus is defined by a specific packaging signal and RNA size. J.
Virol., 71:1428–1435, 1997.
[10] M.Comas-Garcia,R.D.Cadena-Nava,A.L.N.Rao,C.M.Knobler,andW.M.Gelbart.Invitroquantificationoftherelative
packaging efficiencies of single-strandedRNA molecules by viral capsid protein. J. Virol., 86:12271–12282, 2012.
[11] D.Muriaux,J.Mirro,D.Harvin,andA.Rein. RNAisastructuralelementinretrovirusparticles. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
98:5246–5251, 2001.
[12] S. Rulli, C.S. Hibbert, J. Mirro, T. Pederson, S. Biswal, and A. Rein. Selective and nonselective packaging of cellular
RNAs in retrovirus particles. J. Virol., 81:6623–6631, 2007.
[13] A.M. Yoffe, P. Prinsen, A. Gopal, C.M. Knobler, W.M. Gelbart, and A. Ben-Shaul. Predicting the sizes of large RNA
molecules. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 105:16153–16158, 2008.
[14] C.Faivre-Moskalenko,A.Thomas,K.Tartour,J.Bernaud,M.Iazykov,Y.Beck,J.Danial,M.Lourdin,D.Muriaux,and
M. Castelnovo. RNA control of hiv-1 particle size polydispersity. submitted, 2012.
[15] P.H.Goff,Q.Gao,andP.Palese. Amajorityofinfectiousnewcastlediseasevirusparticlescontainasinglegenome,while
a minority contain multiple genomes. J. Virol., 86:10852–10856, 2012.