1v87980.2061:viXra
Epidemiological geographic profiling for a
meta-population network
Yoshiharu Maeno
Social Design Group
email: maeno.yoshiharu@socialdesigngroup.com
October 16, 2019
Epidemiological geographic profiling is a statistical method for mak-
ing inferences about likely areas of a source from the geographical distri-
bution of patients. Epidemiological geographic profiling algorithms are
developedtolocateasourcefromthedatasetonthenumberofnewcases
forameta-populationnetworkmodel. Itisfoundfrom theWHOdataset
on the SARS outbreak that Hong Kong remains the most likely source
throughout the period of observation. This reasoning is pertinent under
therestrictedcircumstancethatthenumberofreportedprobablecasesin
China was missing, unreliable, and incomprehensive. It may also imply
that globally connected Hong Kong was more influential as a spreader
than China. Singapore, Taiwan, Canada, and the United States follow
Hong Kong in the likeliness ranking list.
1 Introduction
The spreadingofaninfectious diseaseisa complexstochasticreaction-diffusion
processinaspatiallyheterogeneousmedium. Planningefficientlytargetedpub-
lic health intervention is a pressing task to public health authorities when the
authorities detect an outbreak of an infectious disease. The task is urgent par-
ticularlyiftheauthoritiessuspectthatthediseaseissuchanewairbornedisease
as SARS in 2003, which spreads without delay across regional borders by an
aviationtransportationnetwork. Forthispurpose,itisessentialtoestimateand
predictthe geographicaldistributionofpatients. Asourceisasignificantinitial
conditioninreproducingthetimeevolutionofthedistributioninamultiregional
epidemic. The source is the location of an index case patient.
Aquestionariseshere. Canthesourceofamultiregionalepidemicbelocated
retrospectively when a possible outbreak is detected after a long time?
In this study, epidemiological geographic profiling algorithms are developed
for a standard epidemiological SIR compartment model in a meta-population
network. Epidemiologicalgeographicprofilingisastatisticalmethodformaking
inferences about likely areas of a source from the geographical distribution of
patients. The model is a special case of a stochastic reaction-diffusion process.
The entire population is sub-divided into distinct sub-populations in multiple
geographical regions. The state of an individual person in the sub-population
changes from the susceptible state to the infectious and removed (recovered)
states. The performanceofthe algorithmsis investigatedwith computationally
synthesized datasets. The datasets are a snapshot geographical distribution of
new cases in a time interval. The algorithms are applied to the WHO dataset
on the SARS outbreak. Some findings on the dataset is presented.
2 Related works
Geographic profiling is a statistical method in criminology. It aids crime in-
vestigators in making inference about likely areas of such a home base as the
residence of a serial murderer, rapist, or arsonist from crime sites in a two di-
mensional topographic space. The possibility of a crime decays as a crime site
becomesmoredistantfromthehomebasebecausetheoffenderdoesnotwantto
consume much effort, time, and money for a long travel. The distance is either
the displacement between the crime site and the home base or the length along
the travel route. Criminologists proposed geographic profiling algorithms with
distinctive decay functions to associate the distance from the home base with
the possibility of a crime[Canter 2000], [Rossmo 1993]. The algorithm gener-
ates a likeliness map which indicates the possibility that the area includes the
offender’s home base.
Recently geographic profiling is applied to the investigationof an infectious
disease outbreak. It aids public health investigators in making inference about
likely areas of such a source as the residence of an index case patient from
the geographical distribution of patients. A similar likeliness map is gener-
ated either by the geographicprofiling algorithmin criminology[Thomas 2013],
[Le Comber 2012],[Le Comber 2011],orbyanalgorithmdevelopedforamath-
ematical model for the spread of an infectious disease[Buscema 2013].
Such mathematical models as dilation, diffusion, and contact processes de-
scribe human-to-human transmission of an infectious disease in a social net-
work. Geographic profiling for a social network is called a patient-zero prob-
lem. Large unbiased betweenness is an excellent indicator of a source in a
social network[Cesar Henrique 2011]. A dynamic message-passing algorithm
is developed to compute a source probability density function in mean-field
approximation[Lokhov2014]. An analytic method is invented to compute an
approximate source probability density function for a broad class of network
topologies[Antulov-Fantulin 2015]. A community partition method in a reverse
propagation model is proposed to locate multiple sources[Zanga2014]. A vari-
ant of a belief propagation algorithm works effectively when observations are
incomplete (partially missing) and erroneous with noise[Altarelli 2014].
But none of those studies address a meta-population network model.
The entire population is sub-divided into distinct sub-populations in multiple
geographicalregions. ThenumberofgeographicregionsisN. Thegeographical
regions are nodes n (i = 0,1,...,N −1). The transportation between geo-
graphicalregionsisalinkbetweennodes. The topologyofthetransportationis
representedby an N ×N adjacency matrix l. A link from n to n is present if
the i-th row and j-th column element l is 1, and absent if l is 0. The index
casepatientsappearatthesourcenoden ∈{n }att=0. Whenanoutbreak
is detected later, observations are made at the all nodes at t = t > 0. The
datasetisavectorquantityD whosei-thelementisthenumberofnewcasesat
n in a time interval ∆t. D =∆J (t )=J (t +∆t)−J (t ). J (t) is the
i i i obs i obs i obs i
cumulative number of new cases at n until t. An example of the dataset is a
bundle of the daily reports (∆t=1 day) on new cases from hospitals in nearby
cities.
The problem is to locate n among {n } only fromgiven adjacency matrix
l anddatasetD. NeitherJ(t )nort areknownbecausethe timewhenthe
index case patients appear is not known. Nothing is known about transmission
parameters, sub-populations, and relevant initial conditions.
Thelikelinessscoreasasourcenodeiscalculatedfortheallnodes. Thelikeliness
rankingofanodeisthedescendingorderofthelikelinessscoreofthenode. The
node at the top in the likeliness ranking list is the most probable source node.
The likeliness score s of n is defined by a scalar product of two vectors in
eq.(1). The quantityw is a decay vector of the distance between nodes.
The distance is an integer hop count, which is the smallestnumber of inter-
mediate links along a route between the nodes. The decay function is given by
eq.(2). The distance between n and n is d .
i i0 i1 i N−1
Thealgorithmischaracterizedbythefunctionalformsofthe decayfunction
in eq.(3) through(6). Four functional forms are investigatedin this study. The
firstfunctionis anaive function ineq.(3)where δ is a Kronecker’ssymbol. The
number of infectious persons at neighboring nodes (d≥1) is not significant. If
the number of infectious persons is larger, it is more probable that the node is
a source.
The second function is a power function in eq.(4). A network is a collection
of chains approximately if the network is non-disjoint but very sparse. The
mean number of a time-evolving variable in a similar Langevin equation for a
chain network includes a power function of the distance from the source node
to the node[Maeno 2013]. This dependence is represented concisely by eq.(4).
d!
Thethirdfunctionisapolynomialfunctionineq.(5). Thedelayisrelatively
slow. As ρ → ∞, the function converges to the naive function in eq.(3). A
similar function is applied to the Rossmo algorithm for two dimensional crimi-
nological geographic profiling[Rossmo 1993].
The fourth function is an exponential function in eq.(6). The decay is rela-
tively fast. As σ → ∞, the function converges to the naive function in eq.(3).
A similar function is employed by the Canter algorithm for two dimensional
criminologicalgeographic profiling[Canter 2000].
5.1 Synthesized dataset
In a standard epidemiological SIR compartment model, the state of a per-
son changes from a susceptible state, through an infectious state, to a re-
moved (recovered) state. The time dependent variables S (t), I (t), and R (t)
are the number of susceptible persons, infectious persons, and removed per-
sons at n at t. Their time evolution is described by a system of Langevin
equations[Hufnagel 2004], [Maeno 2011]. The time evolutionofI (t)isgivenby
eq.(7). The fluctuation terms ξ(t) represent Gaussian white noise.
i ji j ij i
(t)ξ[β](t)
ji j ji ij i ij
X j q X j q
The parameterα is the probabilityof aninfectious personcontactinga per-
sonandinfectingthepersonperaunittime,andβ istheprobabilityofaninfec-
tious personbeing removedper aunit time. The reproductiveratio[Riley 2003]
is defined by r =α/β. The parameterγ is the probability of a personmoving
fromn ton peraunittime. Itisknownempiricallythatγ isdeterminedfrom
theadjacencymatrixbyanempiricallawineq.(8)wherek isthenodaldegreeof
n . Thislawisknownvalidforanaviationtransportationnetwork[Barrat2004].
γ = γ. (8)
The time evolution of J (t) is given by eq.(9).
The algorithms in 4 are tested with synthesized datasets. Datasets are syn-
thesized by solving eq.(7) through eq.(9) numerically with a pseudo random
number generator and assembling ∆J at t under given experimental con-
ditions. The topology of a transportation network is an Erdos-Renyi random
networkwith N =100 nodes. Figure 1 (a) showsan example when the average
nodal degree is k¯ = N−1k /N = 2. Figure 1 (b) shows an example dataset
as a function of t when α = 0.16, β = 0.04 (r = 4), and γ = 0.2. The source
nodeis chosenrandomly. The numberofindexcasepatientsatthe sourcenode
is I (0)=20. There are not any patients at the rest of the nodes. The entire
population is 108.
A hit score[Le Comber 2011] quantifies the performance of an algorithm. It
isthecumulativesearchareaasafractionofthetotalarea,whichisinvestigated,
according to the likeliness ranking of nodes, to find the source node. The area
is the number of nodes for a meta-population network model. The hit score
rangesfrom0to1. Asmallervalueofthe hitscoremeansabetter performance
of the algorithm. The hit score is 0.5 for the random search. The hit score H
is defined by eq.(10). The likeliness score of the source node is s .
The values for π in eq.(4), ρ in eq.(5), and σ in eq.(6) are chosen so that
H can be the smallest and the performance ofindividual algorithms canbe the
most excellent. The optimal values are πˆ = 2, ρˆ= 0.5, and σˆ =0.05. Figure 2
shows H for the four algorithms as a function of t when k¯ = 2 and α = 0.11,
β = 0.09 (r = 1.2), and γ = 0.2. The hit scores in the graph are the average
valuesover1000differenttopologiesofatransportationnetwork. Thealgorithm
withapolynomialfunctionisthemostexcellentofthefouralgorithms. Thehit
scoreincreasesand the allalgorithmscome closerto the randomsearchas time
elapses.
Figure 3 shows H for the four algorithms as a function of the correlation
coefficient R under the same experimental conditions as those of Figure 2.
R is the Pearson’sproduct-momentcorrelationcoefficient betweenthe present
geographical distribution of patients I(t) at t and the initial distribution I(0).
Thehitscoreisamonotonicallydecreasingfunctionofthecorrelationcoefficient.
Figure 1: (a) Example of a transportation network with N = 100 when k¯ =2.
(b) Example dataset D = ∆J(t) as a function of t when α = 0.16, β = 0.04
(r =4), and γ =0.2 for the network shown in (a).
Figure 2: Hit score H for the four algorithms ((a) naive, (b) power,(c) polyno-
mial, (d) exponential) as a function of time t when k¯ = 2, α = 0.11, β = 0.09
(r =1.2), and γ =0.2.
Figure 3: Hit score H for the four algorithms ((a) naive, (b) power,(c) polyno-
mial,(d)exponential)asafunctionofthecorrelationcoefficientR whenk¯ =2,
α=0.11, β =0.09 (r =1.2), and γ =0.2.
The stochasticprocessdestroysthe traceofthe initialconditions inthe present
state of sub-populations. The trace cannot be restored any more after a long
time under this experimental condition.
Figure 4 shows H for the four algorithms as a function of t when k¯ = 2,
α=0.133, β =0.067 (r =2), and γ =0.2. The polynomial function is still the
most excellent. The performance converges to H ≈ 0.15 as time elapses. The
algorithms work excellently. The trace of the initial conditions is not destroyed
under this experimental condition because large reproductive ratio makes the
number of infectious persons keep on growing at the source node.
Figure 5 shows H for the polynomialfunction under the same experimental
conditions as those of Figure 4 when the datasetis I, J, ∆I, and∆J. J is the
most informative in locating the source while ∆I is not informative at all. If
eitherJ orI wereobservabledirectly,the hitscorewouldbeassmallasathird
Figure 4: Hit score H for the four algorithms ((a) naive, (b) power,(c) polyno-
mial, (d) exponential) as a function of time t when k¯=2, α=0.133, β =0.067
(r =2), and γ =0.2.
Figure5: HitscoreH forthepolynomialalgorithmasafunctionoftimetwhen
k¯ = 2, α = 0.133, β = 0.067 (r = 2), γ = 0.2, the dataset is (a) I, (b) J, (c)
of that for ∆J.
Figure 6 shows H for the four algorithms as a function of t when k¯ = 2,
α = 0.16, β = 0.04 (r = 4), and γ = 0.2. The algorithm with a polynomial
functionisstillthemostexcellent. Thehitscoredoesnotincreaseatallastime
elapses. It remains at a small value H ≈0.05.
Figure 7 shows H for the four algorithms as a function of t when k¯ = 4,
α = 0.16, β = 0.04 (r = 4), and γ = 0.2. The hit score increases more quickly
as time elapses. The infectious disease spreads to multiple geographicalregions
quickly because of the large nodal degree. Quick relaxation to the equilibrium
state ensues. Along with the stochasticprocess,this effect destroysthe trace of
the initial conditions.
Figure 6: Hit score H for the four algorithms ((a) naive, (b) power,(c) polyno-
mial, (d) exponential) as a function of time t when k¯ = 2, α = 0.16, β = 0.04
(r =4), and γ =0.2.
Figure 7: Hit score H for the four algorithms ((a) naive, (b) power,(c) polyno-
mial, (d) exponential) as a function of time t when k¯ = 4, α = 0.16, β = 0.04
(r =4), and γ =0.2.
5.2 Real dataset
SARS is a respiratory disease in humans caused by the SARS corona-virus.
TheepidemicofSARSappearstohavestartedinGuangdongofsouthChinain
November2002. SARSspreadfromtheGuangdongtoHongKonginearly2003,
and eventually nearly 40 countries around the world by July[Lipsitch 2003],
[Riley 2003]. The WHO archives the cumulative number of reported probable
cases1. The archive is transformed to the dataset D = ∆J. The cumula-
tivenumberofreportedcasesisnotthecumulativenumberofnewcasesuntilt.
Justtheincreaseinthecumulativenumberofreportedcasesissignificanttothis
study. The target geographical regions are those where five or more cases had
been reported in a month since March 17. They are Canada (CAN), France
(FRA), the United Kingdom (GBR), Germany (GER), Hong Kong (HKG),
Malaysia(MAS), Taiwan(ROC),Singapore(SIN), Thailand(THI), the United
States (USA), and Vietnam (VIE). China is not included in the target geo-
graphical regions because the the number of reported probable cases there was
missing, unreliable, and incomprehensive at the time of observation. The num-
ber of geographical regions is N = 11. The time interval between observations
is ∆t=1 day.
The effectively decisive topology of an avian transportation network is dis-
covered from the dataset [Maeno 2010]. This topology is represented by an
adjacency matrix l in Figure 8 (a). Thiland and Veitnam share a topologi-
cally equivalent position. Malaysia, the United Kingdom, and Germany are
also equivalent. Those may have the same likeliness ranking.
Figure 8 (b) shows the likeliness ranking of the all nodes as a function of t.
Thedecayfunctionineq.(1)isapolynomialfunctionineq.(5)withρˆ=0.5. The
first observation(on March 17)is made at t=0, that is, t =0,1,2,···. The
index case patient appears and the consequent spread starts at an unknown
earlier time. Hong Kong remains the most probable source node throughout
the month. Singapore, Taiwan, and Canada follow Hong Kong in the likeliness
ranking list. The United States, which is the largest hub node, is not so likely
to be a source node as those four nodes. Interestingly, the dataset implies that
such Southeast Asian regions as Malaysia, Thiland, Vietnam are less likely to
be a source node than such European regions as France, the United Kingdom,
Germany. Those results are consistent with the fact from an official report2
that SARS spreads from Hong Kong to Singapore and Taiwan.
6 Discussion
The epidemiological geographic profiling algorithm with a polynomial decay
function works most excellently for computationally synthesized datasets. The
hit score remains at a small value as far as the averagenodal degree is small or
1World Health Organization, Cumulative number of reported probable cases of SARS,
2SARSExpertCommittee(HongKong),SARSinHongKong: fromexperiencetoaction,
Figure 8: (a) Topology of the avian transportation network among Canada
(CAN), France (FRA), the United Kingdom (GBR), Germany (GER), Hong
Kong (HKG), Malaysia (MAS), Taiwan (ROC), Singapore (SIN), Thailand
(THI), the United States (USA), and Vietnam (VIE). (b) Likeliness ranking
of the all nodes as a function of t.
the reproductiveratiois large. It is found fromthe WHO dataseton the SARS
outbreakthatHongKongremainsthemostlikelysourcethroughouttheperiod
of observation. This reasoning is pertinent under the restricted circumstance
that the number of reported probable cases in China was missing, unreliable,
and incomprehensive. It may also imply that globally connected Hong Kong
was more influential as a spreader than China. Singapore, Taiwan, Canada,
and the United States follow Hong Kong in the likeliness ranking list.
The number of infectious persons I(s) at time s governs the time evolu-
tion of the epidemic for t ≥ s. Integrating a system of Langevin equations in
eq.(7)isaforwardproblem. The forwardproblemcouldbesolvedinastraight-
forward manner if the initial conditions and boundary conditions were known.
Acquiring these conditions from observation is an inverse problem. The in-
verse problem ranges from finding the initial values of time-evolving variables,
estimating the transmission parameters, and discovering the topology of trans-
portationnetworktodetectingchangepointsintheparametersorthetopology.
Once the initial conditions are acquired by the epidemiological geographic pro-
filing in this study, public health authorities can reproduce the time evolution
of a multiregional epidemic. The investigators can quantify the risk of infec-
tion at any future time in every geographical region. They may find that a
heavily populated urban center is on the verge of a pandemic. Protecting the
center from infection by immediate intensive border screening may be reason-
able public health intervention. They may also find that a city is a potential
super-spreader. Isolating the infectious city from the neighboring susceptible
cities may be first-aid public health intervention.
Theepidemiologicalgeographicprofilingalgorithmisacomputationallyeffi-
cientheuristic. AsystemofLangevinequationsisequivalentapproximatelytoa
Kolmogorovforwardequationinprobabilitytheory,oraFokker-Planckequation
instatisticalphysics,foramultivariateprobabilitydensityfunction[Maeno 2010].
Another problem formulation is solving a Kolmogorov backward equation sub-
jecttotheobservationasthefinalconditions. Thisapproachismoreexactthan
the heuristic, but often less tractable. Resolving such complexity is for future
studies.