Estimating the Potential Speedup of Computer
Vision Applications on Embedded Multiprocessors
V´ıtor Schwambach∗†, Se´bastien Cleyet-Merle†, Alain Issard†, Ste´phane Mancini∗
∗ Univ. Grenoble Alpes, TIMA, F-38031 Grenoble, France
CNRS, TIMA, F-38031 Grenoble, France
† STMicroelectronincs, Grenoble, France
Abstract—Computer vision applications constitute one of the Step1:PlatformCharacterization.Thefirststepistocharacter-
key drivers for embedded multicore architectures. Although the ize the target multiprocessor platform and its parallel programming
number of available cores is increasing in new architectures, de- frameworkinordertobuildacharacterizationdatabase.Thisdatabase
signinganapplicationtomaximizetheutilizationoftheplatform contains statistical information of the measured overheads for the
isstillachallenge.Inthissense,parallelperformanceprediction OpenMPdirectives,aswellasinherentcharacteristicsofthemultipro-
tools can aid developers in understanding the characteristics of cessor platform, such as memory latency and bandwidth parameters
an application and finding the most adequate parallelization foreachmemoryhierarchylevel.Forthis,anenrichedversionofthe
strategy. In this work, we present a method for early paral- EPCC OpenMP micro-benchmarks[2] is used. The traces generated
lel performance estimation on embedded multiprocessors from by a reference simulator or prototype are fed to a characterization
sequential application traces. We describe its implementation tool that generates this database. The characterization database only
in Parana, a fast trace-driven simulator targeting OpenMP needs to be generated once for a given multiprocessor platform and
applications on the STMicroelectronics’ STxP70 Application- can be reused in later steps.
SpecificMultiprocessor(ASMP).ResultsfortheFASTkeypoint Step 2: Application Trace Collection. In this phase we collect
detector application show an error margin of less than 10% execution traces from the sequential application. Tasks are created
compared to the reference cycle-approximate simulator, with from function calls in the application, which are annotated with
lower modeling effort and up to 20x faster execution time. their timestamps and hierarchical information. Summary memory
access statistics are also gathered for each task. This task trace
I. INTRODUCTION can be enriched by user inserted instrumentation macros that (i)
defineexplicittasksatlowergranularitylevelsand(ii)addadditional
In recent years, multiprocessor architectures have become ubiqui-
semantic information, such as if the tasks refer to loops, critical
tousinnewembeddedsystems.Nonetheless,thedevelopmentofeffi-
regions or array accesses, among others.
cientandscalableparallelapplications,stillrepresentsachallenge[1].
Step 3: Parallelization Directives Specification. This step con-
Numerous factors can impact the parallel performance such as load
sists in creating a file with the OpenMP parallelization directives
imbalance,synchronizationandcommunicationoverheads[3],that,if
the user wishes to evaluate, and a mapping of these directives onto
not accurately modeled, can lead to significant mismatches between
functions or user-defined code sections.
simulation results and physical device measurements[8].
Step4:ParallelizationAnalysis.Inthisfinalstep,Paranausesthe
Differentparallelizationstrategiescanbeusedtooptimizeparallel
platform characterization and application trace databases, as well as
performance.Inordertoevaluatethem,developersoftenrelyontime-
theparallelizationdirectives,topredicttheparallelperformanceofthe
consumingcycle-accuratesimulations,orprototypes.Fastinstruction
application.Itfirstbuildsadirectedacyclicgraphoftheapplication’s
set simulators or dynamic binary translation simulators trade some
tasks and generates multiple parallel schedules, according to the
accuracy loss for faster simulation speeds. However, they all require
parallelization directives. It acquires statistics from each parallel
a working parallel version of the application for each strategy,
schedule to produce a detailed parallelization report. The user can
which can limit the exploration space due to the effort required to
then refine the application and repeat the process to explore new
produce them in the first place. On the other hand, existing parallel
parallelization strategies.
performance prediction tools – Kismet[5], Parallel Prophet[6], and
IntelAdvisorXE[4]–focussolelyondesktop-classapplicationsand
do not address embedded multiprocessors. III. RESULTS
Our main idea is to acquire traces from a sequential application
run on a reference simulator, then use a trace-driven simulator to A. Target Platform
estimate the parallel performance of the application on the target
Our target platform is the STxP70 ASMP. This multiprocessor
multiprocessor.
is similar to a single cluster of the STHORM platform[7]. It has a
The contributions of this paper may be summarized as follows:
configurable SMP architecture with up to 16 STxP70 cores – 32-
(i) we propose a methodology for parallel application performance
bitdual-issueRISCCPUs.Heterogeneitycanbeachievedbyhaving
predictionfromsequentialcode;(ii)weimplementthismethodology
multiple instances with particular configurations and instruction set
inParana,andshowthatitcanpredicttheparallelperformanceupto
extensions or by attaching dedicated HW IPs to DMA queues. The
20xfasterthancycle-approximatesimulators,withamarginoferror
STxP70 ASMP architectural template is depicted in Figure 1(b).
in the order of 10% for the benchmarked application.
II. PARALLELPERFORMANCEESTIMATION B. Execution Vehicles
Our methodology consists in designing an abstract trace-driven GepopSimulator.Gepopisacycle-approximatesimulatorforthe
simulator to estimate the performance of an embedded application STxP70 ASMP platform and constitutes our reference platform for
foragivenparallelizationstrategy.Figure1(a)depictsthefoursteps the platform characterization.
of the parallelization prediction and analysis flow using our Parana FPGAPrototype.AprototypeoftheSTxP70ASMPontheXilinx
tool, which are detailed in the sequel. VC707 FPGA is used for comparison.
Copyrightisheldbytheauthor/owner(s).
DATEFridayWorkshoponHeterogeneousArchitecturesandDesignMethods 1
forEmbeddedImageSystems(HIS2015),Grenoble,France,March13,2015.
(a) Proposed parallel performance estimation flow (b) STxP70 ASMP
1 PLATFORMfCHARACTERIZATION 4 PARALLELIZATION STxP70 BankedUL1
ESTIMATIONfHfANALYSIS Cores SharedUMemory
C1A1fSimulator
μB PlatformfCharac1fDB Bank Parana #1
Characterization Application
Parallelization Bank
2 APPLICATIONfTRACEfCOLLECTION Report #2
I A ns p tr p u li m ca e t n io te n d C1A1fSimulator TracefDB TaskfGraph G G f f E Sp st e 1 e fr d u G n u f p time Ba .. n . k
TracefCollection 1 GfPar1fefficiency
n GfOverheads Bank GfOp1fIntensity #M
3 PARALLELIZATIONfDIRECTIVES 111
Par1fDirectives ParallelfSchedule DMA
tcennocretnI
CPU I$ #...
Fig. 1: (a) Overview of the four steps of the proposed flow for parallel application performance prediction with Parana. (b)
Architectural template of the STxP70 ASMP.
FAST Corner Detector Results
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
30.0R Parana
FPGA Gepop 20.0R
AmdahltsILaw 10.0R
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number of Cores
Parana 100R
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Number of Cores
LoadIImbalance
OpenMPIRuntime ParallelIProcessing
SequentialIProcessing
Number of Cores
Fig.2:ComparisonofspeedupestimateswithParanaandmeasurementswiththeGepopcycle-approximatesimulator(Parana’s
characterization reference) and an FPGA prototype for the FAST Corner Detection application. Left: speedup results from 1
to 8 cores. Center: speedup error wrt. Gepop. Right: Cycle stacks showing the impact of different overhead sources.
Parana. The proposed tool is a trace-diven simulator that can oftheapplicationontheGepopcycle-approximatesimulatorandon
estimatetheparallelperformanceofanapplicationfromitssequential an FPGA prototype of the STxP70 ASMP. We have demonstrated
execution traces and a set of OpenMP directives. the accuracy of the solution in estimating the parallel speedup,
within 10% of the reference simulator, as well as its interest in
C. Application identifying the sources of scalability issues via the cycle stacks.
FAST Corner Detection (FAST). We have ported a 9-16 FAST Future explorations will aim at improving design space exploration
corner detector (from OpenCV 2.4.6) commonly used in computer capabilities,aswellasmodelingDMAtransfersandsharedmemory
vision to select key points in a number of tracking and detection conflicts to increase the domain of addressable applications.
applications.