Ethics of using language editing services in an
era of digital communication and heavily multi-
authored papers
George A. Lozano
Estonian Centre of Evolutionary Ecology
15 Tähe Street, Tartu, Estonia, 50108
dr.george.lozano@gmail.com
Lozano, G. A. 2013. Ethics of using language editing services in an era of digital
communication and heavily multi-authored papers. Science and Engineering Ethics (in press)
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 2
Scientists of many countries in which English is not the primary language routinely use a
variety of manuscript preparation, correction or editing services, a practice that is openly
endorsed by many journals and scientific institutions. These services vary tremendously in
their scope; at one end there is simple proof-reading, and at the other extreme there is in-depth
and extensive peer-reviewing, proposal preparation, statistical analyses, re-writing and co-
writing. In this paper, the various types of service are reviewed, along with authorship
guidelines, and the question is raised of whether the high-end services surpass most
guidelines’ criteria for authorship. Three other factors are considered. First, the ease of
collaboration possible in the internet era allows multiple iterations between author(s) and the
“editing service”, so essentially, papers can be co-written. Second, “editing services” often
offer subject-specific experts who comment not only on the language, but interpret and
improve scientific content. Third, the trend towards heavily multi-authored papers implies that
the threshold necessary to earn authorship is declining. The inevitable conclusion is that at
some point the contributions by “editing services” should be deemed sufficient to warrant
authorship. Trying to enforce any guidelines would likely be futile, but nevertheless, it might
be time to revisit the ethics of using some of the high-end “editing services”. In an
increasingly international job market, recognizing this problem might prove progressively
more important in authorship disputes, the allocation of research grants, and hiring decisions.
Lozano, G. A. 2013. Ethics of using language editing services in an era of digital
communication and heavily multi-authored papers. Science and Engineering Ethics (in press)
Keywords multi-authorship, editing, English correction, authorship, conflict resolution,
hiring policies
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 3
English is the language of science. To get their papers ready for submission, scientists of
many countries in which English is not the primary language routinely use a variety of
manuscript preparation, correction and/or editing services. Journals often suggest that “non-
native English speakers” use these services, ignoring the fact that bad scientific writing is a
problem that transcends such arbitrary boundaries. For many decades now, the use of these
services has been considered standard practice, fully endorsed and often even insisted upon by
some national academies and universities in non-English speaking nations. These services
vary tremendously in their scope. At one end there is proof-reading and copy-editing, and at
the other extreme there is in-depth and extensive peer-reviewing, data analysis, re-writing and
co-writing. Proof-reading and copy-editing have long existed, but with the internet facilitating
extensive collaboration, high-end services conducted by experts have become increasingly
common. Over the past several decades multiauthorship has vastly increased, which in effect
has lowered the threshold required for authorship. Given these changes in the way we work,
in this paper I ask whether there is a point at which contributions by “editing services” should
be deemed sufficient to warrant co-authorship. I conclude that perhaps it is time to revisit the
ethics behind some of these long-standing practices.
Preparation, Correction and Editing Services
A wide spectrum of preparation, correction and/or editing services is available. The most
basic service is proof-reading. A proof-reader is the last line of defence against minor errors
that were not caught by the authors, reviewers, editors or copy-editors. A proof-reader
corrects unambiguous errors in punctuation, hyphenation, capitalization, word and line
spacing, word order, grammar and spelling, and makes queries to the authors about other
minor potential problems. In the publishing industry, a proof-reader also compares in
painstaking detail an approved version of the manuscript with the galley-proof, which is an
exact copy of what is about to be printed in large quantities. Many journals still have proof-
readers on staff, but they deal with papers after acceptance, in the final stages before
publication. This aspect of a proof-reader’s job is not provided by editing services. Their work
occurs before the paper is submitted to a journal.
A step up is “copy-editing”. A copy-editor corrects some of the same issues that will
be covered again later by the proof-reader, but in addition, a copy-editor examines and
corrects sentence structure, continuity, verb tense agreement, jargon and journal-specific
conventions. Although a copy-editor has more leeway than a proof-reader, the copy-editor's
job is to improve the text without making any unnecessary changes. Hence, sentences might
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 4
be rearranged to allow a better flow of ideas but the writing style will not change too much.
For anything more complex, a copy-editor makes queries to the author, for instance, if there
are segments that are ambiguous and need clarification. A copy-editor makes the text
technically correct, perhaps even structurally perfect, but does not make any significant
changes to the content. Most journals have copy-editors on staff, but they deal with papers
only after acceptance.
At a higher level, there is “content” or “substantive” editing. This is where the
meanings of these terms used by editing services start to diverge from the standard meanings
of these terms. Traditionally, the term “content editor” refers to someone does not really
address issues that might be covered later by the copy-editor and the proof-reader, but instead
focuses on more meaningful issues, hence “substantive”. Editors of edited books, for instance,
are content editors in the traditional use of the term; they just offer a variety of suggestions.
For example, a content editor might suggest that the introduction should be more focused, the
methods more detailed, the results rearranged differently and the discussion more closely
linked to the introduction and the results. They might get more specific, pointing out segments
that are not clear, paragraphs that should be moved or removed, related topics that should be
included, etc. However, content editors do not actually write or re-write the manuscript.
Among editing services however, substantive editing in this sense is relatively rare.
The “content editors” working for editing services not only make suggestions on what
is already there, but also correct, rearrange, expand or delete sentences, paragraphs and whole
sections. Functionally, the manuscript is not edited, but rather partially to completely re-
written. The extent of the re-writing depends on the service, the expectations, the original
state the paper, the willingness of the person working on the paper to delve deeper into it, and,
of course, the price. Several iterations between the editing service and the author(s) usually
occur, starting with extensive re-writes by both the “editor” and the author(s), and ending with
copy-editing and proof-reading. Most editing services, however, do not to use the term “re-
write” when describing and advertising their services, but nonetheless, their so-called
“substantive editing” services are actually “re-writing” services.
Other services do not worry about such minor points of semantics. For instance, at
their “premium” level one service provides “reorganization such that each section includes the
proper content (i.e., Results free of methods and interpretation; all general background in the
Introduction rather than in the Discussion, etc.)” (Write Science Right 2012). So, essentially,
they address the very basics of writing a scientific paper, similar to what a supervisor does
when teaching a student how to write his/her first paper(s). Furthermore, at their “superior”
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 5
level “the editor will spend the additional time needed for major rewriting, reorganization,
formatting … This is a good option for clients who want to send a relatively rough draft, who
need extensive help with organization, and/or who have multiple figures and tables that are
not up to publication quality.” (Write Science Right 2012). Quotations are being used in these
sections to reduce ambiguity. Note the wording: “clients who want to send a relatively rough
draft”. This already goes beyond what many supervisors do for their graduate students.
High-level “content editing” is sometimes called “developmental editing”. This
“service goes much further than a simple language edit – an expert, PhD-qualified, editor with
high-impact journal editing experience and proficiency in your field will work on your
manuscript in depth.” (Macmillan Science Communication 2012). The developmental editor
addresses “the question or objective that underpins the research, structural changes required in
the manuscript, the coherence and flow of the arguments in the paper, points of ambiguity that
require clarification, apparent logical inconsistencies in the stated hypotheses, potential
analytical or methodological weaknesses, how well the conclusions appear to be justified by
the results, etc.” (Macmillan Science Communication 2012). Hence, a developmental editor is
an expert in the field, essentially a colleague, whose contribution extends well beyond that of
language revisions and effectively re-writes and co-writes the paper with the author(s). Just
like in any other multi-authored collaboration, the suggestions that make it to the final version
are at the discretion of the primary and/or senior author(s).
Several services offer a rejection and resubmission service, for which, for example, “a
project manager will first assess the peer reviewer’s comments vis-à-vis the needs of your
manuscript, and then customize an editing service package to deliver a manuscript that is
consistent with the expectations of the journal. Journal manuscript resubmission involves
multiple rounds of editing and close correspondence between the editor and author.” (Enago
2012). So, they co-write the manuscript in accordance to the reviewers’ demands and produce
detailed responses to the reviewers’ comments.
Most of the high-level services also offer services called “peer review” and “journal
suggestion”. “Peer review” does not refer to the peer review that occurs after submission, but
rather to a pre-submission peer review, the type that is often conducted “in-house” before
submission with the help of colleagues. An expert in the field will review the paper and
produce a comprehensive report, pointing out strengths and weaknesses and making a variety
of other suggestions, but in this case, the paper will not be re-written. This work is similar to
that of a content editor or a pre- or post-submission peer review, in the traditional meanings of
the terms. “Journal suggestion” refers to a service whereby experts in the field examine the
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 6
paper and suggest the most appropriate journals for the paper, depending on the authors’
intents and preferences. The only reason to pay for either of these services is if one believes
their scientific knowledge of the journals and the field is greater than that of the author(s) and
that of nearby colleagues.
Other services start not with the paper, but with the research proposal. Literature
reviews can be produced that “carefully take your research objectives and the problem at hand
into consideration”, “synthesize results into a knowledge base clearly identifying present state
of the available knowledge and the unknown information”, “identify areas of controversy in
the literature” and “formulate questions that need further research.” They work “with the
inputs provided by the clients and those obtained by our writers after thorough study to
prepare a meticulous, persuasive, coherent, clear and compelling research proposal/grant
application”. They urge potential clients to “provide us with a rough theme of your research;
our writers and editors will write a compelling and persuasive research proposal for you”
(Manuscriptedit 2012b). There is no ambiguity here: provide “a rough theme” and the writers
and editors will do the rest.
The same company, under their “customized services” have three types of services:
“customized writing”, “data analysis and interpretation” and “specialized consulting”. In
“customized writing”, “the writing is done either from scratch or from a preliminary outline
suggested by the client. Our Editors [sic] and writers make a thorough literature search and
use the material and methods, and results/raw data provided by the client to write an
eloquently presented text.” In “data analysis and interpretation” they perform “statistical
analysis and interpretation of raw data provided by the clients”. This does not refer merely to
statistical tests requested by the client, but rather a complete analysis, starting with the raw
data and conducting all preliminary analyses, choosing and carrying out the appropriate
statistical tests and interpreting the outcome. Finally, the “specialized consulting” service “is
for clients who need help with concepts or conceptual content. Our editors can explain
scientific concepts and provide feedback about whether your ideas fit with the currently
established scientific body of knowledge” (Manuscriptedit 2012a). With these services, it is
evident that a deep understanding of the underlying science is not always a pre-requisite to
becoming a prolific scientist.
These are just examples of some of the most comprehensive “editing services”. As
they state themselves, some of these services go far beyond language corrections. They are
conducted by specialists within a narrow area of expertise, essentially anonymous colleagues,
who contribute extensively to: (1) the conception and design of studies at the proposal stage,
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 7
(2) the statistical analysis of the ensuing data, (3) the interpretation in the context of current
knowledge and (4) the writing and re-writing of the final product. The purpose here is not to
endorse or to criticize any of the services chosen as examples. Dozens and even hundreds of
similar services can easily be found online. They are just providing a service and they are not
the ones responsible for the papers. The point is that somewhere along this continuum, from
mere proof-reading to some of these high-end services, maybe a line is being crossed. It is
unclear where the line is, but some of these high end services are clearly conducting work that
traditionally has been deemed worthy of authorship.
What is authorship?
Authorship of scientific works used to be a relatively simple concept. Since the first scientific
journals were created and until early in the 20th century, most papers had a single author. It
was easy enough to determine who was responsible, and who should receive credit. That is no
longer the case. With the rise in the number of authors per paper, authorship in itself has
become a highly debated field of study (Lindsey 1980; Regalado 1995; Drenth 1996; Howard
and Walker 1996; Erlen et al. 1997; Quencer 1998; Cronin 2001; Hama and Kusano 2001;
Rahman and Muirhead-Allwood 2010).
Throughout all authorship guidelines, there is always the caveat that conditions for
authorship vary among disciplines. The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors
(ICMJE 2012) suggests that “authorship credit should be based on 1) substantial contributions
to conception and design, acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data; 2) drafting
the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and 3) final approval of
the version to be published. Authors should meet conditions 1, 2, and 3” (my emphasis). The
word “and” is a point of contention (Bennett and Taylor 2003) because if it were possible to
enforce these guidelines rigidly, many papers would end up having no authors. People
working for “editing services” seldom approve the final version (Logdberg 2011), and it has
been argued that the third requirement makes it possible to technically adhere to the
guidelines while excluding individuals who have otherwise contributed significantly to the
study and the manuscript (Matheson 2011). The word “or” would be more realistic, in which
case, some of the high-level work conducted by “editing services” would certainly qualify for
authorship under criteria 1 and 2.
The Council of Science Editors (CSE) offers similar guidelines, but instead first focus
on a set of general principles, indicating, for instance, that determining authorship is not the
responsibility of the editors, that all individuals who have “contributed sufficiently” should be
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 8
listed as authors, and that authors should approve the paper before publication (Council of
Science Editors 2012). To actually identify who qualifies as an author, however, they first fall
back on the ICMJE guidelines, and then offer their own: “Authors are individuals identified
by the research group to have made substantial contributions to the reported work and agree to
be accountable for these contributions. In addition to being accountable for the parts of the
work …, an author should be able to identify which of their co-authors are responsible for
specific other parts of the work. In addition, an author should have confidence in the integrity
of the contributions of their co-authors. All authors should review and approve the final
manuscript.” Other than the point about final approval, these guidelines are substantially
different than those of the ICMJE and put a different burden on each of the authors.
The CSE does add that authorship is not appropriate for “professional writers who
participated only in drafting of the manuscript and did not have a role in the design or conduct
of the study or the interpretation of results”. The likely intent here is to prevent people
working for “editing services” from being included as authors. However, given the actual
nature of the relationship between “editing services” and their clients, in some cases this
guideline would have the opposite effect. As described above, the “editing service”
sometimes not only writes the papers, but also has a critical role in designing the study and
interpreting the results. Finally, the CSE stipulates that authorship is not appropriate for
individuals who only provide advice, research space or financial support, which would
disqualify many thesis supervisors, lead researchers, group leaders and principal investigators.
These guidelines might be well-intentioned, but they do not match the reality of the situation.
The USA National Institutes of Health (NIH 2007) has broader and simpler
guidelines: “authorship should be based on a significant contribution to the conceptualization,
design, execution, and/or interpretation of the research study, as well as on drafting or
substantively reviewing or revising the research article, and a willingness to assume
responsibility for the study”. In this case, work by high-level editing services is explicitly
included, if they were willing to accept responsibility for the study. They are probably never
asked.
Many research institutions, national academies, professional societies and journals
also have their own authorship guidelines. Sixty percent of biomedical journals (Wager 2007),
53% of science journals, 32% of social sciences journals and 6% of Arts & Humanities
journals have authorship guidelines (Bošnjak and Marušić 2012). In contrast, only 11% of
professional societies have authorship guidelines in their professional ethics codes (Bošnjak
and Marušić 2012). Research and writing are the main requirements for authorship among
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 9
journals, but two thirds of all ethics codes include research as the sole criterion (Bošnjak and
Marušić 2012). Despite this variance, a review and meta-analysis of authorship issues
indicates that universally, conceiving the research and/or research design and writing of the
manuscript are the most important criteria for authorship (Marušić et al. 2011). Not only do
guidelines differ, but they only apply to the respective research institutions, national
academies, professional societies or journals, so even if they could be enforced, their
jurisdictions would be limited.
Other forms of authorship exist that are usually considered to be unethical but are
nonetheless fairly common. There are two sides to the coin; instances when individuals who
meet the criteria for authorship are not listed as authors, and instances when authorship is
given to individuals who do not meet the criteria (Rennie and Flanagin 1994; Bennett and
Taylor 2003; House and Seeman 2010; Seeman and House 2010; Wislar et al. 2011; E. Smith
and Williams-Jones 2012).
“Guest”, “honorary” or “gift” authorship refer to instances when someone who would
not normally meet the criteria for authorship is nevertheless included as an author. For
example, in a survey of USA chemists, about 20% reported having found they were authors of
a paper only after it had been printed (Seeman and House 2010). The reasons for inclusion
differ. Guest authorship refers to the inclusion of senior authors based on the expectation
that adding them will enhance the status of the paper during the review process and/or after
publication, akin to arriving to a party with a celebrity. Actually, this is a tacit but strong
criticism by the authors of the editors, reviewers and eventual readers, who are presumed to
be more impressed by the names of the authors than by the quality of the paper (auctoritas,
non veritas, facit legem – authority, not truth, makes the law). Gift authorship is given as
part of a gift-exchange arrangement (quid pro quo) whereby colleagues and minor
contributors who should at most be relegated to the acknowledgments, are elevated to co-
authors. Honorary authorship is given ex officio to senior professors or departmental chairs
(honoris causa). It is unclear whether the “honour” is genuine or coerced, and if the latter,
whether explicitly or tacitly. Thirty-two percent of radiologists report being “asked” to
include an “honorary” author in their papers (Eisenberg et al. 2011). From 1978 to 1998, the
number of authors of research papers in the British Journal of Medicine significantly
increased, mostly because of an increase in authorship claims by senior professors and
departmental chairs (Drenth 1998).
On the other hand, failure to include as authors individuals who have met the
authorship criteria is referred to as “ghost authorship”. Ghost authorship occurs when
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 10
individuals are willingly or unwillingly excluded as authors. Wilful exclusion might occur
when it is perceived that including certain authors might decrease the credibility of the paper.
For instance, medical studies might be conducted and papers be written by employees of
pharmaceutical or instrumentation companies, but authorship might be limited to individuals
without any apparent conflicts of interest. The problems and ethics associated with this form
of ghost authorship have been discussed at length elsewhere (e.g., Bennett and Taylor 2003;
Lacasse and Leo 2010; Matheson 2011; Wislar et al. 2011; Dance 2012; Lexchin 2012). A
second type of ghost authorship occurs when legitimate authors are unwillingly or unwittingly
excluded as authors. In a survey of chemists in the USA, 50% indicated that they had not
received a deserved authorship or had not been properly acknowledged (Seeman and House
2010). The problem of potential authors being unwillingly excluded endures because most
authorship dispute protocols require disputes to be referred back to the institution where the
research was conducted, the place where the senior author usually works, and where the
dispute is investigated by the senior author’s colleagues. Hence, might makes right. The high-
end work of some “editing services” probably falls somewhere in between these two forms of
ghost authorship. On one hand, admitting that “editing services” are so deeply involved in a
manuscript’s production might diminish the credibility of the paper and the reputation of the
other authors. On the other hand, offering authorship to the assigned scientist(s) working for
the “editing service” is seldom an option, but it has already been argued that people writing
for “editing services” should sometimes be included as authors (Jacobs and Wager 2005;
Matheson 2011).
To end this authorship quagmire, it has been suggested that journals should switch
from naming authors to naming contributors (Rennie et al. 1997; R. Smith 1997). This
contributorship model is similar to that of movie credits, whereby everyone who contributed
to the finished work is mentioned along with their specific role. Most journals ask authors to
qualify their contributions to a given paper upon submission, but this information is not
included in the paper itself upon publication. Other journals include this information in the
paper, but only in addition to the traditional authors’ list. So, contributorship has yet to
replace authorship. A problem with contributorship is that even assuming contributors are
being completely honest, they are not reliable; when asked a second time, only about 30% of
authors in a medical journal consistently reported the same contributions in their own papers
(Ilakovac et al. 2007). Nevertheless, even using a contributorship system, the high-end work
conducted by “editing services” would probably have to feature in several prominent roles.
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 11
The proliferation of heavily multi-authored papers
Despite the increase in the number and prominence of authorship guidelines, they just do not
work (Goodman 1994; R. Smith 1997; Eisenberg et al. 2011). This is because guidelines are
just that, guidelines, not regulations, and enforcement is not possible. One of the principles
endorsed by most authorship guidelines is that deciding authorship is not up to the editors,
journals or funding agencies, but rather up to the people doing the work. However, co-authors
agree only 30% of the time about each others' contributions (Ilakovac et al. 2007).
Furthermore, as mentioned above, the ICMJE requires that authors meet all three authorship
criteria, yet under the condition of anonymity, 60% of radiologists reported that some of the
authors of their own papers did not meet any of the ICMJE authorship criteria (Eisenberg et
al. 2011). Hence, other than their collective honesty, which has to be weighed against the
possibility of infighting and/or collusion among co-authors, there is little preventing all
authors from supporting each other’s claims of “sufficiently significant” contributions.
The problem is that there is usually no tangible cost to adding more authors,
gratuitously or deservedly. Being included as an author usually benefits the one being
included, but to the other authors the costs of including one more person are negligible. As
long as each author can claim each paper and each citation as his/her own, papers and
citations are not being shared by the authors, but rather magically multiplied by the number of
authors (Lindsey 1980; Harzing 2010; Põder 2010). A side benefit is that if a paper ever has
to be retracted, the more authors there are, the easier it becomes to avoid responsibility (Erlen
et al. 1997). Hence, as it currently stands, the system rewards increasingly heavily multi-
authored papers. As a consequence, over the past 50 years the number of authors per paper
has been increasing (Lindsey 1980; Regalado 1995; Drenth 1996; Howard and Walker 1996;
Quencer 1998; Cronin 2001). Fifty years ago single authorship was the norm, but these days it
is extremely uncommon. The increase in authors is not merely due to greater multi-
disciplinary work and research complexity (Papatheodorou et al. 2008).
The cost of adding more authors is minimal even when considering intangibles, such
as the desire to be referred by name. Papers with one or two authors, which are now rare, are
referred using both authors’ names, so far so good. Some authors might wish to be first, but it
really does not matter. We can think of the classics in any field (Watson and Crick 1953), and
usually neither author is considered to be the primary author, but rather the work is usually
perceived to be a genuine and equal collaboration. As in the traditional use of the term
“author” in literature, credit and responsibility are attributed equally and, more importantly,
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 12
both authors are mentioned by name. With 3 or more authors, only the first author is
mentioned by name, and the rest are just relegated to “et al.”. Some conflict might exist about
the exact order of authorship, but nevertheless, once the 3 author threshold is reached, adding
more authors does affect whether other authors are specifically mentioned by name.
When the “et. al.” threshold is moved from the third author to the seventh author, once
again, the ego effect becomes apparent. The Vancouver referencing style, adopted by the
ICMJE, requires all authors to be named in papers with 6 or fewer authors, but for papers with
more than 6 authors, only the first 6 are mentioned, and the rest are replaced with “et al.”. In
biomedical journals the frequency distribution of papers with respect to author number
increases sharply from one to six authors, but then it drops precipitously at seven and beyond
(Epstein 1993). The Vancouver guidelines made it seem like, suddenly, biomedical papers
had a new optimum number of authors: 6. The reality is that all authors want their names
listed when the paper is cited, so it is okay to have more authors, but in this case only up to a
maximum of six.
The trend towards more authors is not slowing down (Rahman and Muirhead-Allwood
2010; Bebeau and Monson 2011; E. Smith and Williams-Jones 2012), and it is not due to
greater multi-disciplinary work and research complexity (Papatheodorou et al. 2008). Van
Loon (1997) argues that there is no justifiable reason why any paper should contain more than
3 authors, and suggests the radical solution that journals should warn authors that papers with
more than 3 authors will be less likely to be accepted. This has not happened yet, and it is
unlikely to happen any time soon. A less extreme and more practical solution would be to
divide each paper and each citation by the number of authors, so credit and impact would be
divided among the authors, not multiplied by the number of authors (Engelder 2007; Harzing
2010; Põder 2010). For example, using this method, for the 2001 Nature paper on the initial
sequencing and analysis of the human genome, which had 244 authors and received 5968
citations by the end of 2007, instead of each author receiving all 5968 citations, each author
would receive his/her fair share of the credit, 5968/244, or about 24 citations (Ioannidis 2008).
The trend towards heavily authored papers is self-reinforcing; as the number of authors
increases, the relative contribution of each author and the threshold for authorship both
decrease. At some point the contribution of each author is so small that relatively, the
contribution of “editing services” might be deemed sufficient for authorship.
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 13
The internet
The authorship inflation was facilitated by technology that makes it easier to communicate,
and to collaborate. Before photocopiers became widely available in the 1960s, it was not even
feasible to conduct peer reviews (Spier 2002). Instead, editors just chose the best papers,
perhaps asked for some minor changes, but mostly accepted papers as submitted. Authors
were just not able to collaborate to the degree that is possible today. Even after photocopiers
began to be used, actual physical copies had to be made and sent to each co-author, who could
then make suggestions, add new paragraphs or re-write existing ones. For the most part, the
co-writer was limited to making hand-written notes that the primary author would then
incorporate into the next or final version of the manuscript. Times have changed. Now it is
even possible for a paper to be co-written simultaneously by several authors located at
different parts of the world. Hence, before word processing and email, “editing services” were
limited to language correcting, copy-editing and proof-reading; the high-end iterative services
of today were just not possible. It is not uncommon for perfectly suitable ethical guidelines to
be rendered obsolete by new technologies. In this case, ethical guidelines about the use of
“editing services” have just not kept up with the ease of communication and collaboration
brought about by the internet.
Where is the line?
Ethics differ among cultures. English is the current language of science, and scientists from
countries where English is not the primary language are naturally more likely to use “editing
services”. Originally these might have been strictly English correction services, but over time,
and with technology and the internet facilitating the process, these services have expanded to
the point it is now possible to use “editing services” to do everything except collect data.
The type of ghostwriting whereby ghostwriters are willingly and knowingly excluded
as authors is far more common in medicine than in other fields. In medicine, with lives more
directly evidently at stake, there is often more money available, and it might be more
important not only be impartial, but to maintain an appearance of impartiality. The availability
of funds also makes it possible to use the more expensive “editing services”, and to turn
ghostwriting into a lucrative and stable career, whereby writers might be satisfied with their
pay and not concerned with receiving authorship for their work (Logdberg 2011). These
“editing services” can be expensive. Even basic proof-reading and copy-editing can cost about
10 € per “page” (i.e., 250-300 words). The high-end services described above can cost several
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 14
thousand € per paper. Hence, just a few papers can add a significant burden to most research
budgets, a cost that can be prohibitive for all but the best funded research programs. The high
cost means that, outside of medicine, use of “editing services” has traditionally been limited
to Western and Northern Europe, and Japan. In the last few decades, scientists from other
emerging economies, such as China, South Korea and Brazil have begun to take advantage of
these “editing services”.
Linguistic, financial, and cultural differences notwithstanding, as science becomes
more international and inter-disciplinary, these differences are bound to clash. Hiring
committees and granting agencies might be interested in scientists with extensive publication
and citation records, but they might not consider that candidates might have different attitudes
towards “editing services”, and might have used them to different degrees. Funding agencies
in some jurisdictions might not even allow spending funds on “editing services”. Hence, in an
international job market, researchers who have relied on “editing services” might see their
productivity plummet if they relocate to jurisdictions where “editing services” are not used or
allowed. The added cost also means that the cost-effective productivity and impact (Lozano
2010; Zhao and Ye 2011) would be lower even if “editing services” are an allowable expense.
In any case, somewhere along the continuum from correcting to co-writing, a line is likely
being crossed. The exact location of that line might differ among cultures, but some factors to
consider are the number of authors, the degree of interaction between the author(s) and the
“editing service”, and the editor(s) level of expertise in the subject.
As the number of authors increases, the responsibility, credit and merit of authorship
are diluted (Cronin 2001; Bennett and Taylor 2003; Engelder 2007). As the relative
contribution of each author decreases, increasingly smaller contributions become worthy of
authorship. In some fields and cultures, despite all the guidelines, authorship is extended to
technicians, “in-house” editors and reviewers, senior scientists who contributed laboratory
space, statisticians, guest and “honorary” co-authors. This process can become self-
reinforcing; as more authors are added the threshold for authorship gets even lower, and it
becomes easier to justify adding one more author. Consider a paper with n authors ordered
according to their relative contributions. As n increases, at a certain point the type of
extensive research, analytical and writing work conducted by “editing services” qualitatively
and quantitatively might surpass the contribution of the nth author, and hence should be
considered sufficient for authorship.
A second factor to consider is the degree of interaction between the “editing service”
and the author(s). Before electronic communication was so widespread, repeated cycles of
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 15
writing, correcting and re-writing between authors and “editing services” were just not
feasible. Copy-editors and proof-readers, when used before submission, only corrected the
text; they did not add to it or made any substantive changes. Content editors were so in the
traditional sense, and offered general comments, without actually re-writing any major
sections of the manuscript. However, technology has made it easier to write papers by
iterations. It is difficult to define co-authorship, but any genuine collaboration is characterized
by repeated interactions between the co-authors as they work on the manuscript (Eggert 2011;
Bošnjak and Marušić 2012). As previously described, other than data gathering, “editing
services” can be deeply involved with all aspects of producing a paper, from the beginning to
the end, starting with a proposal, continuing with developmental editing and ending with
copy-editing and proof-reading. It is clear that at least in some cases, the “editing service” and
the author(s) essentially co-write the paper.
A third point of consideration is the degree of expertise of the people working for the
“editing service”. Oddly, a Ph.D., M.D. or someone with similar advanced training would
generally not be the best choice to proof-read or copy-edit a paper. This is so for two reasons.
First, it would be a waste of their training and expertise. Second, proof-reading in particular,
and copy-editing to a lesser degree, require an extreme attention to detail at the exclusion of
all else. They require being able to see the trees without being distracted by the forest. This is
not to say that proof-reading is not possible for someone with an advanced degree, but such a
person would be always tempted to suggest and make more substantive changes. Proof-
reading and copy-editing are skills and services that require an eye for detail and knowledge
of the language, but they do not require advanced degrees.
Furthermore, even for more comprehensive services such as “content editing”, there is
no need to use an expert in the particular sub-field. One does not need a deep understanding
of what is being said to know whether it is being said in proper English. If the purpose is to
correct only the language, one does not need someone who will comment on scientific
content. In fact, someone who only has general knowledge of the field would me more likely
to recognize unnecessary jargon, to identify sections that are not completely clear, and to
make the text more readable for a general audience. Even at the “content editing” level, the
work done by “editing services” is similar to that done by thesis supervisors when M.Sc. or
Ph.D. students are first learning to write scientific papers, and supervisors are routinely
included as co-authors, sometimes for far smaller contributions.
Some of the high end services described above actually guarantee the work will be
done by an expert in the particular sub-field, with experience not only publishing in the sub-
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 16
field, but publishing high impact work in elite journals. Using such a person is overkill to just
proof-read or copy-edit a paper, and as discussed above, is not really needed for basic content
editing. However, as some of these services clearly explain, such a person is better suited to
make other types of changes to the manuscript, such as addressing the literature, expounding
the study’s rationale, commenting on recently developed techniques, carrying out statistical
analyses, and discussing the implications of the study to the field. By most standards, these
types of contributions clearly meet and surpass most authorship criteria.
Conclusions
It would probably be pointless to endorse only certain companies, or to approve only certain
levels of service. As with the authorship or multi-authorship problem, there would be no way
of enforcing such guidelines. National funding agencies could prohibit the use of “editing
services”, which in the long term might improve writing skills, but in the short term would
only impede their own country’s researchers. Funding agencies could put limits on how much
can be budgeted per paper on “editing services”, but that would be difficult to regulate.
Hence, guidelines about the use of “editing services” would be as effective as general
authorship guidelines: completely dependent on people’s willingness to follow them.
Nevertheless, the first step is to recognize that a potential problem exists.
“Editing services” can substantially contribute to the intellectual content of a paper.
Policies allowing the use of “editing services” but disallowing them authorship are
incongruous with standard definitions of authorship. Such policies, are, in effect, endorsing
ghost authorship, both types of ghost authorship. In an era of increasingly international and
multi-authored science, cultural and ethical disputes are bound to arise. However, guidelines
just that, guidelines, not regulations, and not only are they unenforceable, but also limited in
their respective jurisdictions and scope. Furthermore, guidelines of journals, institutions,
professional societies and national academies are often different from and incompatible with
each other, so single resolutions to conflicts might not be possible. Should “editing service”
authorship disputes ever arise, they ought to be individually investigated taking into context
the backgrounds and ethical guidelines relevant to all concerned parties: the journal, the
respective institutional and national regulatory bodies, the funding agencies, the “editors”, and
the scientific cultures of the current and the eventual authors. Finally, hiring and funding
committees should be aware of the degree to which international candidates have relied and
might have to continue to rely on “editing services”. These days, an extensive publication
record is no longer predicated on the ability to write.
George A. Lozano – Ethics of Using Language Editing Services 17
Acknowledgements
I thank colleagues who were kind enough to discuss these issues with me. No proof-reading,
copy-editing, substantive editing or co-writing services were used in the production of this
manuscript. However, the help of the journal's reviewers, editors and copy-editors is
acknowledged and appreciated. I thank the University of Tartu library for giving me access to
their online collections. This is publication number 1305 of the ECEE (reg. 80355697).