Ethical Considerations when Employing Fake
Identities in OSN for Research
Yuval Elovici∗, Michael Fire∗, Amir Herzberg†‡, Haya Shulman§‡
Abstract—Online Social Networks (OSNs) have rapidly become a many ways in which OSNs may be abused, resulting in
prominent and widely used service, offering a wealth of personal and inappropriate or harmful actions.
sensitive information with significant security and privacy implications. The widespread use of OSNs, along with their po-
Hence,OSNsarealsoanimportant-andpopular-subjectforresearch. tential for beneficial as well as harmful applications,
Toperformresearchbasedonreal-lifeevidence,however,researchers promotes the study of OSNs and their users. Much
mayneedtoaccessOSNdata,suchastextsandfilesuploadedbyusers research clearly has legitimate motivation, such as the
andconnectionsamongusers.Thisraisessignificantethicalproblems. development of new products and services, followed
Currently,therearenoclearethicalguidelines,andresearchersmayend
by the evaluation of their acceptance and usage Other
up (unintentionally) performing ethically questionable research, some-
research focuses on counteracting harmful applications.
timesevenwhenmoreethicalresearchalternativesexist.Forexample,
In particular, it is important to perform high-quality,
several studies have employed “fake identities” to collect data from
experiment-based research to evaluate risks and the ef-
OSNs,butfakeidentitiesmaybeusedforattacksandareconsidered
fectiveness of different countermeasures ([1], [2], [3]).
asecurityissue.IsitlegitimatetousefakeidentitiesforstudyingOSNs
Online social network research often involves mea-
orforcollectingOSNdataforresearch?Wepresentataxonomyofthe
ethical challenges facing researchers of OSNs and compare different surements within deployed and operating OSNs, often
approaches. We demonstrate how ethical considerations have been focusing on the most popular, such as Facebook.1 Such
taken into account in previous studies that used fake identities. In operational research on deployed OSNs seems to be the
addition, several possible approaches are offered to reduce or avoid best - or even only - method to study important issues
ethicalmisconducts.Wehopethisworkwillstimulatethedevelopment which can help in the design and the improvement
anduseofethicalpracticesandmethodsintheresearchofonlinesocial of OSN products; in identifying threats on OSNs and
networks. their users, including the design of defenses; and in
understanding social and economic phenomena.
Much of the current OSN research focuses on the
1 INTRODUCTION following two issues: the OSN graph and the OSN user
behavior.ResearchonOSNgraphsanalyzestheproperties
Online Social Networks (OSNs), often referred to as social of the OSN relationships graph of connections among
media, have rapidly become an integral part of society. OSN users; this can be important for many goals, such
They are widely used by many and contain a wealth of as designing a new OSN product. Research on OSN user
information, much of it sensitive and personal. This vast behaviorfocusesontypicalbehaviorsofOSNusers,which
source of pertinent information allows for innovative can help design and improve products as well as study
applicationsofOSNs,andmanyoftheseinnovationsare security and privacy vulnerabilities and defenses.
designed to benefit both society at large and individuals The collection of data on an operational system, in-
in particular to identify possible threats to society or volving data related to real users, raises ethical and
individuals. For example, a study on OSNs can assist even legal concerns and dilemmas. [4] identify three
in the identification of individuals who are inclined to basic ethical concepts for research in humans in general,
commit suicide or initiate a terror attack, thus enabling and specifically in relation to the Internet: confidentiality,
a priori prevention. On the other hand, there are also anonymity, and informed consent. These concepts are at
the core of most institutional and professional research
∗elovici@bgu.ac.il governance.
∗michyfi@bgu.ac.il [5] consider a related topic through their study of
∗Telekom Innovation Laboratories and Department of Information Systems usability aspects of systems and ethical problems of
Engineering, Department of Information Systems Engineering, Ben Gurion
such research; they, however, do not consider research
UniversityoftheNegev
†amir.herzberg@gmail.com specifically on OSNs. Consider the ethical issues and
§haya.shulman@gmail.com approaches, for example, in the field of Internet mea-
‡DepartmentofComputerScience,BarIlanUniversity
1v1561.0131:viXra
surements,whichinvolvesrealoperationsystems,similar Fake identities are widely used. It is estimated that
to OSN research (especially with respect to the OSN more than 8.7% of the identities in Facebook are fake
graph). Most individuals performing Internet research ([9]). These identities were created for various purposes
take privacy and security concerns into consideration. withbothlegitimateandmaliciousintent.Fakeidentities
Specifically, studies that expose traffic, e.g., to allow may be completely fabricated, or they may be a clone
furtherresearchonit,normally“sanitize”itbyremoving of an actual identity that exists in the real world ([8],
any data considered sensitive; this is illustrated in the [10]). Recent studies ([7], [8]) show that users tend to
Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis ([6]). accept friendship requests from people that they do not
Similar sanitization of exposed data may be appropriate know both in the virtual and physical world; hence, it is
for OSN research as well. relativelyeasytoconnectfakeidentitiestorealidentities.
In this paper, we study the ethics of OSN research as Obviously,thecreationoffakeidentitiesraisesserious
well as potential conflicts between ethical compliance ethical, and even legal, concerns. Other techniques to
and attaining social benefits from research. Note that collectOSNdataalsoraiseethicalconcerns.Forexample,
OSNresearchtendstobemuchmoreactive,withpoten- suppose a researcher did not use a fake account, but
tial impact on both users and OSN providers, compared her own account; would it be ethical for her to publish
to other forms of research, such as Internet measure- informationthatotheruserssharedwithher?Isthiscase
ments. This prompts the consideration of an additional a personal issue between the specific researcher and the
ethical concept, which we call avoid disruption and waste. persons whodecided to connect toher, or is itan ethical
issue that should be a considered when accepting such
Online social networks raise additional ethical chal-
a paper for publication?
lenges since OSNs normally do not allow such informa-
In this paper, we investigate the dilemma between
tion to be freely available due to the privacy concerns of
two social goals: (1) the above-mentioned privacy and
its users and the OSN terms of use. In fact, the ability
security concerns, and (2) the desire to have reliable
to share selected information with only a selected set
experimental research on OSNs for socially beneficial
of peers (“friends”) is an important requirement from
or at least legitimate goals, such as to improve OSN
OSNs.
products, services, security, and privacy. We explore the
Asaresult,muchoftheresearchusingOSNsinvolves
need for OSN data for experimental research (Section
different techniques to collect information, circumvent-
2), we evaluate the ethical concerns (Section 3), and we
ing these OSN limitations. This includes “whitehat”
consider some possible solutions (Section 4).
research for legitimate academic and industrial goals,
as well as “blackhat/greyhat” research, whose goal is
to extract and exploit sensitive information as well as 1.1 RelatedWork
to actively connect to users, provide (fake) information
In recent years with the increasing number of online
for different goals, and perform similar malicious activ-
sources accessible to researchers, such as web blogs,
ities. Such “blackhat/greyhat” research is conducted by
discussionboards,andonlinesocialnetworks,therehave
criminals, hacktivists, and even organizations involved
been a growing number of studies on OSNs and users’
incyber-warfare(terrorists,armies,intelligenceandlaw-
behavior. Several studies have investigated the ethical
enforcement agencies).
aspects of acquiring and analyzing online users’ infor-
Indeed,oneofthegoalsofacademic(andsomeindus- mation. [11] and [12] examined the ethical issues which
trial) researchers is precisely to study vulnerabilities al- mayarisewhenstudyingonlineInternetcommunities.In
lowing such greyhat/blackhat research and then design theirresearch,Flickeretalpresentedpracticalguidelines
improved defenses for OSNs and their users. However, for resolving ethical dilemmas in these types of studies.
for such research to be realistic, researchers must base [13] investigated the ethical dilemmas that arise when
it on actual OSN data. This raises the type of ethical researchersusewebcrawlerstocollectinformationfrom
problems we study in this paper. For example, in order online sources. [14] explored ethical dilemmas, such as
to study information leakage by corporate employees thereuseofdatafrommultiplesources,whichmayoccur
in a particular OSN, researchers may want to employ when studying online virtual environments. [15] dis-
similar methods that industrial espionage attackers will cussed the ethical considerations of extracting personal
use. Similarly, studying the diffusion of information in information from public online sources for research pur-
a social network requires the monitoring of many OSN poses.AccordingtoWilkinsonandThelwall,researchers
members. do not need to ask permission from the text authors
An effective and widely used technique to obtain when collecting public information; however, steps for
information about an OSN and its users is to establish ensuring that the text authors are anonymized need to
OSN connections with many users, typically by creating be taken in academic studies. Subsequently, [16] investi-
a significant number of OSN accounts under fake, non- gatedwhatdatashouldbeperceivedasprivateandwhat
existing identities and using these to connect to other as public; this enables researchers to determine when
users. The creation of such accounts has been studied their study requires an informed consent. Recently, [17]
by several researchers ([7], [8]). demonstrated that ethics does not get enough serious
examination in the field of social eco-informatics. Lucas and private information. In this section we present the
recommended that social eco-informatics researchers in- different techniques by which researchers can acquire
clude more ethical deliberation in their research. OSN information. In addition, we also present ethical
Indeed, there is a rising awareness regarding the eth- issues which arise at the end of a study, after complet-
ical concerns related to OSN research, but it mainly ing the acquiring process when, the researchers want
focuses exposing a user’s private data. In this work, we to share their acquired information with the academic
discuss ethical problems related to the methods which community.
aredeployedwhenconductingresearchonanOSN,and
we also consider the potential risks and problems which
2.1 PublicInformation
may result, affecting the OSN and its users as well as
possible third parties. To acquire OSNs users’ public information, researchers
have primarily used online web crawlers. These web
crawlers can obtain the users’ information by using the
1.2 Contributions
OSN’s application programming interface (API) ([18],
This work presents the first taxonomy of ethical consid- [21]) or by analyzing the raw data obtained directly
erations and problems related to the range of techniques fromtheOSN’swebpages([19],[22]).However,insome
and approaches that are employed in studies of online OSNs like Facebook, it is not possible to collect users’
social networks. This significantly expands upon previ- public information without being logged onto the OSN.
ously published works on ethics in OSN research; for To overcome this limitation, researchers have created
example, we demonstrate that OSN research can have a passive fake profiles which are used to obtain access
detrimental impact not only on OSN users but also on to the OSN public information ([23], [24]). These fake
the OSN provider and even those indirectly associated. profiles do not initiate friend requests to other users in
the network and do not intervene in the OSN activity.
By using this method, researchers are able to collect the
1.3 Organization
OSN’s public information with minimal intervening in
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section the OSN activity and without accessing restricted users’
2 describes how information stored in OSNs can be private information. The results obtained from using
harvested for research purposes. Section 3 follows with these methods, however, do not give the researchers a
a discussion of the ethical and legal perspectives related wider picture of the OSN, which is crucial for certain
toresearchonOSNs.Section4discussesseveralpossible type of studies, such as security and privacy studies.
approaches to warrant the use of fake identities while Moreover,sometechniquesnotimplementedintheright
complying with ethical considerations. Section 5 illus- mannercanabusetheOSNinfrastructureandnegatively
trates how ethical considerations were taken in account affect the overall network performance. For example,
in previous research that involved fake identities. The using web crawlers, which initiate large amounts of
paper provides concluding comments in Section 6. rapidpagerequests,cancreateanoverloadontheOSN’s
servers, resulting in interference with OSN activity.
2 ACQUIRING ONLINE SOCIAL NETWORK IN-
FORMATION 2.2 PrivateInformation
With the exponential growth of online social networks To acquire OSN users’ private information, researchers
usage during the past several years, many researchers have developed several techniques. These techniques
have acquired OSN information for a range of purposes include requesting private information directly from the
(See Table 1), from studying the characteristics of large- users through applications and browser add-ons which
scale online social network graphs ([18]) to improving integrate with the OSN ([1], [3]); inferencing OSN users’
road safety ([19]). The OSN users’ information can be private information by analyzing information obtained
divided into two main categories: public and private from their friends ([24], [25]); and even activating dy-
(see Figure 1). The public user’s information is data namic fake profiles, also known as socialbots, which
that is available to all members of the OSN, while initiateaseriesoffriendrequestsinordertocollectusers’
in many cases the user’s private information is only private information ([7], [8]). By using these methods,
accessible to friends of the user. For example, Facebook researchers can obtain a fuller picture of the studied
users’personalinformationisaccessibletootherusersin OSN, including private users’ information. Moreover,
the network according to each Facebook user’s privacy these types of methods are extremely valuable when it
settings ([20]). In some cases the user’s information comestoanalyzingprivacyandsecurityissuesinOSNs.
can be accessed only by his or her Facebook friends, Forexample,byusingsocialbotsresearcherswereableto
while in other cases the information can be accessed estimate the amount of private information exposed in
by every member in the network. In order to acquire Facebook to malicious fake users ([7]). However, using
OSN information, researchers have developed various these methods can also influence the OSN behavior
techniques that aim to collect both OSN users’ public and expose personal sensitive user information, such
§2. Acquiring Online Social Networks
§2. Acquiring Online Social Networks
§2.1. Public §2.2. Private
§2.1. Public §2.2. Private
In In fo fo rm rm a a ti t o io n n In In fo fo rm rm a a ti t o io n n
C C W r W a ra e w e w b l b e le r r P P a a s P s s P r s i o r v i o v f e i f e l i e F l e s F a s a k k e e C C r A a r A P a w P w I l I e le r r In In P fe P f u e r u e b re b n li n l c c ic c e D e D f a r f a o t r a o t m a m A D A U D g a U g s r a t e s r a e t e a e e r f e s r m r f s m o r b e o m b e y n m y n t t ( A S ( A c S P o c t P o i c t r v i c o r i v e a o i f e a i l f F l b i l e F l b o a e s o a t k s s t k e s ) e ) A T A T p h p h p ir p i l d r i l c d i c P a P a t a i t a o r io t r n y t n s y s
Fig.1. VariousOSNacquisitiontechniques.
as the user’s sexual orientation ([24]). Moreover, fake dilemmas are introduced with respect to the involved
profiles created by one research group may influence entities. We consider the following as the entities that
theresearchresultsofanotherresearchgroupthatmight may be impacted by OSN research: (1) the users of the
treat them as real user profiles. Therefore, using these OSN, (2) the OSN operator, and (3) the advertiser/investor
types of methods should be done with great care and in OSN.
with consideration to both the users’ privacy and to the In this section we identify relevant ethical issues (see
OSN’s infrastructure. Figure2).WethenmapthetechniquesinSection2tothe
ethical problems that they pose (see Table 2).
2.3 SharingtheAcquiredInformation
After the networks’ acquisition processes are finished, 3.1 TheUsers
many researchers want to assist their peers by sharing
Rightfully, ethical research considerations mostly focus
theiracquireddatasetswiththerestoftheworld.Thisis
on potential harm to the end users, and this also holds
usually done by anonymizing the datasets and upload-
for OSNs. The main ethical issues concerning users
ing them into dedicated websites ([26], [27], [28], [29]).
involve their consent to participate in the experiment,
However, the sharing and anonymizing process must
and in particular, to allow any exposure of their private
be done with great care and consideration to the OSNs
information. Within online social networks, users share
users’privacy.Usingthewronganonymizationmethods
lots of information with their online connections, and
canresultinexposingtheOSNsusers’privateandsome-
may make decisions based upon connections of their
times sensitive information ([30], [31], [32]). Another
connections. This raises another ethical problem, that
ethical issue which needs to be taken into consideration
of indirect exposure, i.e., exposure of a user via a con-
is what to do with the acquired datasets after the study
nection. OSN research may also reveal common user
isover.Dotheresearchersneedtodeleteanddestroythe
weaknesses, which could then be exploited, and they
datasets, or can they store them in an encrypted manner
shouldbereportedcarefullytoavoidbeingusedagainst
for further use? Each action has its own positive and
the users. Finally, when users are unaware of an OSN
negativesides.Iftheresearchersdeletethedatasets,they
experiment, yet affected by it, there can be the ethical
fullyprotecttheOSNsusers’privacy.However,theycan
concern of potential loss of time. We next review each of
not use them for further studies, and other researchers
these concerns.
will not be able to compare their results to previous
studies using the same data. If the researchers keep the
datasets, they can jeopardize the OSNs users’ privacy,
but the datasets can be used for further studies without A basic ethical question is whether all users should be
the need to undertake the extensive acquisition process aware of being involved in an experiment, and if their
again. We present our recommendations in Section 4 for consent is required to participate in the experiment and
these issues. allow any resulting exposure of information. In many
types of research involving humans, it is considered
unethical to perform an experiment without consent.
3 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Indeed, many recent studies involve those who have
Online social networks offer a vast amount of data, explicitly volunteered, offering access to their personal
useful for research in various disciplines for both com- online information (e.g. [33]).
mercial and academic purposes. In researching online On the other hand, many of the experiments on OSNs
social networks, a number of ethical challenges and have not required the prior informing of users or the
Variousstudiesusingdifferentonlinesocialnetworkacquiringmethods.
Methods Studies
Web Crawling Fire et al (2011), Fire et al (2012b),
and Fire et al (2012c)
Passive Fake Profiles Jernigan and Mistree (2009),
and Fire et al (2013)
API Crawler Mislove et al (2007), Kwak et al (2010),
and Pontes et al (2012)
By Agreement Altshuler et al (2012)
Active Fake Profiles (Socialbots) Boshmaf et al (2011) and Elishar et al (2012)
Third Party Application Fire et al (2012a) and Rahman et al (2012a)
receiving o f their consent. In many such cases the re- the attacker does not have the required knowledge to
search has significantly contributed to society, such as perform such a study on its own
.
identifying risks to OSN users and allowing the devel- v s
o i r I A d
i c n e t d
.
o s h t n o e s o
i s g r v ’ u
s i i e e b r
d r . , n u .
e I t n a t n
?
e r u s o p x E t c
e r i d n I
t u t n u i
n a m u H f o e r u
s e s s e n
.
e m i T 's r e s U f o
s l E R f r c o b
e o n o i t a l o i V t n e m
e e r g A n
t y e e o a o
e d e t a n i d r
o h r o u a
s e c r u o s e R f o
e t s a W s
i p i a h t n S
n e N e c o
e a e n f a t r
e d . k s c i t s i t a t S n o t
c a p m I a
s n u c s o
e e i g , l n
s t t i s n e S N S O f o e r u
h t , t a c
l i n o i t a m
d r n e v i t c e f f E g n i s i t
user’s consWenetb, Csurcahwlaesr for a “ friend request ” or to thi
ee [7]). As a
participate in research, does not automatically imply the countermeasure, the OSN provider could, for instance,
consent of the user’s friends. When performing research display a warning message to a user when detecting
on an indivAiPdIu Calr’sawdlaetar, the rese archer also fre quently cerXta inproXfi leprope rtiestha tareknXo wntobe suspicious.
gains accessIntfoerpeenrscoen al informati on abo ut that individ-
ual’s friendfsr.om Public X WastingTime
CONNECDTIaNtGa 2ndLEVELFRIENDS.Acceptingafriend-
The process of luring a user into accepting friend re-
ship request implies becoming visible to new users. Two
Consent X que sts may be timX e-consu ming n ot only for the re-
users may not want to be connected via a third party;
searcher but also for the user.
they may Awcisthiveto Fahkidee the exis tence o f their virtual
profiles or Pwraonftilteos k eep the infoXr mationX that tXh ey posXt X X X
private.Du(riSnogcsiatulbdoietss,)r esearchersmayconnectindivid- 3.2 TheOSNOperator
uals profiles which would otherwise not be connected.
Third Party X X X X UsXin g theXp latformX that an OSN pXr ovidesXf or research
For example, consider a bot (attacker controlled profile)
Applications may stand in violation of the OSN’s terms of service.
that a researcher connects to, not realizing that it is a
This may further result in potential harm to the OSN or
malicious pSrtoofirlee Awchqousieregdo al isXt o consXt antly Xd iscover X X
to its users, e.g., due to wasted resources, exposure to
new usersDanadta to harvest information on these users.
competition, or a reduced customer base. Several ethical
This bot now has a second degree access to all of the
considerations relating to OSN operators are described
researcher’s OSN friends, exposing their privacy. Fur-
below.
thermore, such a connection may also assist the bot in
finding even broader connections, which it otherwise
AgreementViolation
would not have the knowledge or tools to perform. For
instance, often to glean users’ information, researchers Creating fake accounts often stands as a violation of
resort to studies from sociology or physiology in order conditions of an OSN, which forbids creating more than
toconstructtheirprofileinsuchawaythatincreasesthe one account or using fake accounts. Fake accounts may
chances of other users accepting their friend requests; expose the OSN to lawsuits or harm its reputation.
§§33. .E Eththicicaal lC Coonnssidideeraratitoionnss
§§33.1.1. .U Usseersrs §§33.2.2. .P Prorovvidideerr §§33.3.3. I n . I n A v A ve d e d s v s v t e ot er or tr r itsiseer/r/
CCoonnsseenntt E I E n x In xp d p d o ir o i s er s e u c u c r t er t e W E W Ex e H x e p a H p u a o k u o m k s n m s n u e a u e r a s n er s n s e se o e o s f s f WW T a Ti as mi s m ti e tni e ngg AAA vv gg v g ii rr ooi eer oll e aa ee la e tt mm iit m ooi ee onn enn n ntttCC E o E oo x o xp N r p d N r o o d o i s o n n i s n u n a u a r t er et e edd RRe W e W ss a o o a o o s u f s u f t r et cr e c e ess Im S Im St p at p a a t a it c si c s t t t it o c i o c n s n s o I o E n f I E n f f S x of S xp o e r p e o mr n o m n s s a su si at t u i r i i t t o v er i i o v e e n e n E A Ef A f d fef dv ec ve ct e i r tvi tr v i e tsi en sin n i e ng es g sss
Fig.2. Ethicalconsiderationswithrespecttotheuser,theOSN,andtheadvertiser/investorwhenperformingresearch
onanOSN.
Non-CoordinatedExposure ExposureofSensitiveInformation
OSN platforms may have vulnerabilities and can even While running a study, researchers may discover sensi-
be used as a vector in launching attacks, thus harm- tive information pertaining to the OSN, such as the way
ing users, hurting other networks and services on the its algorithms work. Exposure of this information may
Internet, and exhausting the resources of the OSN. For benefit the OSN’s competitors and consequently harm
instance, [34] discovered a new attack: the friend-in-the- the OSN and produce a negative commercial impact.
middle attack that can be used to harvest social data
in an automated fashion. When conducting a study on
3.3 TheAdvertiser/Investor
online social networks, researchers often discover such
Fake accounts, created during a research study, may
vulnerabilities. It is important, therefore, to establish
influence the perceived popularity of an online social
a procedure whereby the researchers can publish the
network; that is, the experiment may increase the OSN’s
OSN vulnerabilities and attacks and take the necessary
share value through impressing the shareholders, or it
precautions, e.g., contacting the OSN and allowing it to
may influence the effectiveness of advertising on the
patch the exploit to prevent abuse by malicious parties.
OSN, which may not translate into a profitable and
If a vulnerability is exposed without coordination with
sustainable business. According to the analytics service
the OSN, it may be subsequently exploited by attackers
of Limited Run, an online shopping platform provider,
to compromise the OSN and its users.
the ad system on Facebook is not reliable, and 80% of
As an example, recently [35] showed that malicious
the ad clicks come from fake accounts or bots, which
users can take control of the social network visitors
drive up the advertising costs ([37]). Furthermore, if
by remotely manipulating their browsers through legiti-
the investor (or the advertiser) pays per profile, fake
matewebcontrolfunctionality,e.g.,usingimage-loading
accounts artificially inflate the value of the OSN. For
HTMLtags.TheyalsodemonstratedthatFacebookusers
instance, in August 2012 Facebook was reported to have
can be exploited as a vector in launching a denial of
morethan83millionfakeprofiles,whichareabout8.7%
service attacks. Clickjack attacks can hijack users’ web
of the total number of profiles ([9]); this indicates a
sessions ([36]) if the OSN does not employ sufficient
notable growth of fake accounts from 6.0% in March
countermeasures.
2012.
It is important to emphasize that research on OSNs is
clearly valuable and should be encouraged since weak-
nessesasdescribedabovemaybeexploitedbymalicious 4 ETHICAL RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
attackers without the awareness of the OSN, the users,
In the previous section, we discussed a large set of
ortheresearchcommunity.Furthermore,researchallows
ethical issues with OSN research methodologies. In this
the development of patches and countermeasures to
section, we explore different solutions, balancing the
preventing the vulnerabilities from being exploited.
ethical principles of confidentiality, anonymity, informed
consent, and avoidance of disruption and waste, with the
WasteofResources benefits from experimental research on deployed OSNs.
Creating fake profiles consumes resources on the OSN, The ethical concerns presented in Section 3 can be
including storage, communication, and processing. divided among concerns related to the harvesting of data
from the OSN; concerns related to the exposure of data;
concerns about the impact on the structure, availability, and
ImpactonStatistics
securityoftheOSN;andfinallyconcernsabouttheconduct
Fakeaccountsbiasstatisticsandmayprovidemisleading of researchers. We discuss each of these sets in the follow-
information on trends, resulting in wide-ranging com- ing subsections; before that, in the next subsection, we
mercial implications. discuss the specific issue of consent.
Method Studies Method Studies
Web Crawling Fire et al. (2011), Fire et al. (2012b),
and Fire et al. (2012c)
Passive Fake Profiles Jernigan and Mistree (2009),
and Fire et al. (2013)
API Crawler Mislove et al. (2007), Kwak et al. (2010),
and Pontes et al. (2012)
By Agreement Altshuler et al. (2012)
Active Fake Profiles (Socialbots) TABLEB2oshmaf et al. (2011) and Elishar et al. (2012)
MappingbetweentheTehtirhdi cPaarltcy oAnpspildiceatriaonti onsandthereFsiree aetr acl.h (2m01e2ath) aondd sRadhempanlo eyt eald. (2fo01r2sa)t udiesonOSNs.
t n e s n o C e r u s o p x E t c e r id n I n a m u H fo e r u s o p x E s e s s e n k a e W e m iT 's r e s U fo e t s a W n o it a lo iV t n e m e e r g A d e t a n id r n o o o N C - o e p r x u E s s e c r u o s e R fo e t s a W s c it s it a t S n o t c a p m I
n e S N S O fo e r u s o p x E n o it a m r o fn I g
i e s i v t i r t e c v e d ff A E
Web Crawler X X X X X X
API Crawler X X X
from Public X
Consent X X
Active Fake
Profiles X X X X X X X
(Socialbots)
Third Party X X X X X X X X X
Applications
Store Acquired X X X X X
4.1 Consent some“real”purpose.Hence,theeffectofuserawareness
can be minimal in research that is long term. This was
We begin with some general recommendations, observa-
confirmed by [38] and used in experiments in secure
tions, and proposals.
usability.
We first discuss the informed consent concern and pos-
sible remedies. Obtaining user consent in OSN research
Post-ResearchInforming/Compensating.
has two main challenges: (1) researchers may be unable
to know the real age of the user in order to verify that Another option is to inform users of their involvement
theuserisofage(forinformedconsent),and(2)thevery inresearchafterthemeasurementshavebeencompleted,
awareness of having informed consent may influence a even though the users did not express their (informed)
user’s behavior, impacting the subsequent research on consent. It may be appropriate to also offer some token
user behavior itself. of compensation as well as an explanation of the need
We do not know of a truly reliable solution to the age to use this method (instead of informed consent) and to
problem since many OSNs only allow adult users, yet emphasize the social value of the research.
manyunderageusersregisteranyway,simplyproviding This is clearly not as ethical as proper informed con-
an incorrect age. We believe this issue is not specific to sent. However, this method may still have some advan-
research, as this problem relates to the actual provision tages, in particular: (1) users have the ability to provide
of OSN services; therefore it is reasonable to ignore this feedback, providing some indication of the amount of
concern and for researchers to use the stated age of the harm, if any, that they have experienced, and (2) this
user (usually available). provides a negative training function, helping users to
The user-awareness problem is much more severe become more savvy at detecting OSN fraud; see [38].
for research related to user behavior. We suggest two
solutions: 4.2 HarvestingProcess
As described in Section 3, the harvesting process can
Long-TermResearch.
affect OSN performance, influence an OSN’s reputation,
A user’s awareness of having been measured in some andthreatenusers’privacy.Theharvestingisperformed
experiment is quickly eroded after using a system for directly by crawlers or indirectly by fake identities. One
ofthefirstwaystoreducetheethicalconcernsrelatedto profiles,andtheoperators’algorithmswillneverbeable
harvesting is to improve the sharing of datasets among todetectallofthem.Therefore,theOSNoperatorshould
the researchers such that not every researcher will har- allow fake profiles to be created, but it should also offer
vest his own data. Currently, the information retrieval a specified procedure whereby a researcher can notify
community has created many datasets that are being the OSN and request approval (possibly anonymously)
shared by all the researchers in the community ([39]). for introducing profiles that are fake and dedicated to a
The social network research community should adopt specificstudy,indicatingrelevantinformationsuchasthe
this strategy in order to reduce harvesting as much as duration of the study and purpose of the research. The
possible.Alternatively,perhapsthesocialnetworkopera- OSN should have an approval (or alternately, rejection)
torsshouldcreatedatasetsspecificallyforresearchers(“if procedure for each profile, along with an appropriate
you cannot fight them, join them”) after informing their method to notify the researcher. The OSN may also
usersaboutthenewpolicy.Thesocialnetworkoperators request an approval or certificate from the researcher,
areinabetterpositiontoapplyadvancedanonymization stating that the study is “ethical.” It is important to note
techniques than any small research group. that the proposed procedure would allow researchers to
spendfewerresourcesonhavingtogeneratefakeprofiles
4.3 ResearchResults that cannot be detected by the OSN operator.
We recommend that generally the OSN should allow
Research results may influence both the users and op-
the requests since good research will help protect the
erators of OSNs as described previously. As with many
OSN platform and its users. However, it may be reason-
typesofresearch,vulnerabilitiesareroutinelydiscovered
able to limit the number of fake profiles to some pre-
and often disclosed before the operators have had the
determined threshold at any one time.
chancetopatchuptheproblem.Thisissueisexacerbated
with respect to OSN platforms and their users since
each weakness has the potential to affect an enormous 4.5 Researchers’Conduct
number of parties, with detrimental results. Due to the
We recommend that researchers use the online social
importance of the potential data exposure, we recom-
networks’ APIs when possible, and then resort to fake
mend setting up a Coordinated Emergency Response
passive profiles (instead of active) if needed. The identi-
Team(CERT)forvulnerabilitydisclosures.Suchanentity
fiers of the profile (e.g., a photo) should not expose the
will allow all of the involved parties to be quickly noti-
identity of the individual. When the study concludes,
fied, and it will give them an opportunity to patch the
the researcher should remove the fake profile and, if
problem before the exploit becomes public. Researchers
possible, inform users connected to that profile that it
should also suggests countermeasures to the attack and
was a fake profile for research purposes. When possible,
inform the operators accordingly.
theresearchershouldalsoprovideinformationandtoken
Experiments that involve human subjects should re-
compensation,andallowuserstoprovidefeedback.This
quire a lengthy approval process, whereby it is verified
has multiple benefits: (1) fairness to users; (2) better
thattheresearchcancausenoharm.SinceOSNresearch
awareness of the possible harm to users, allowing im-
involves human subjects, or more specifically their data,
proved ethical decisions in future research; (3) reduction
an approval process should be required for cases in
in harm to users; (4) potentially highly significant nega-
which new research methods are being implemented.
tive training to users, teaching them to be more cautious
A potential reaction of the OSN operator, e.g., due
and to be able to identify fake identities in the future
to concern for legal actions against it, may be to pre-
vent any kind of research on the OSN. However, we
Researchers should use cryptographic and other tech-
caution against this reaction, noting that such a security
niquesforanonymizationofthedataaswellasforconfi-
by obscurity is risky and can endanger both the users
dentiality.Theresearchersshouldhandlethestudydata,
of the OSN and the OSN platform (as well as other
as well as the findings, with great care. Following the
potential third parties). Vulnerabilities may be discov-
research, the data should be removed, or if it is required
ered and abused by malicious attackers, instead of used
for future research, it should be stored encrypted. When
beneficially by legitimate researchers. Attackers do not
sharing the data, we recommend applying appropriate
publish the vulnerabilities and attacks; researchers, on
anonymization techniques which remove all identifying
the other hand, create awareness and provide solutions
data that can leak information when combined with
to these vulnerabilities. Therefore, we recommend that
other sources. See ([32]) for further information on such
the OSN operators address these issues and recognize
deanonymisation attacks. When transferring the data
the legitimate need for research to provide appropriate,
over the network and when accessing the OSN, en-
beneficial contributions.
cryption should be used. When conducting the study,
the researchers should also consider the load on the
4.4 InfluenceontheNetwork
OSN and the overhead to users. Finally, the researchers
In general, OSN operators need to accept the fact that shouldmaintainpreciseandaccuraterecordsofthedata
researchers will undoubtedly continue to create fake collected, the profiles created, the people involved in
research,andanyotherpertinentinformation.Thismust 6 CONCLUSIONS
be preserved in a secure manner. Research involving the operation of widely-used online
social networks the behavior of OSN users, is vital to
thedesignofimprovedOSNs,OSNapplications,andes-
5 PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND ETHICAL CON- pecially OSN privacy and security mechanisms. Indeed,
research on online social networks and OSN data can be
SIDERATIONS
useful in various research disciplines, such as the study
of social behavior and the design of secure and usable
In this section, we will use previous studies that em-
social networks. It can also have value and applications
ployed fake identities to illustrate that it is possible to
in real life and; for example, it can facilitate detection
achieve similar research results, but with lower impact
and a priori prevention of terror attacks, theft, coercion,
to the OSN members’ privacy and to the OSN operator
and other critical situation.
resources.
Many commonly used research techniques, however,
[23] presented a method for mining an organization’s
raise ethical concerns, which are rarely even considered
topologythroughtheuseofpassivefakeidentitieswhich
by researchers or the community at large. For instance,
collectedemployees’publicinformationfromtheirFace-
such research can jeopardize users’ privacy as well as
book profiles. [8] employed active fake identities to
expose potential vulnerabilities of the OSN platform to
achieve the same goal of mining organizational topol-
abuse by malicious attackers. A trivial solution is to
ogy. [8] initiated friend requests to Facebook users who
limit such research to use on simulated environments.
workedinatargetedorganization.Uponacceptingthese
However,inorderforresearchonOSNstobeofpractical
friend requests, users unknowingly exposed informa-
relevanceandmaximumusefulnessitmustbeconducted
tion about themselves and about their workplace. This
under realistic conditions, using real users’ data. In par-
technique was tested on two real organizations and
ticular, in contrast to other research topics, studying a
successfully infiltrated both. Compared to the passive
simulated OSN may not yield realistic results, especially
fake identity method, the technique utilizing active fake
iftheentireresearchgoalistoanalyzeandtestrealusers’
identities, was able to discover up to 13.55% more em-
data and interactions.
ployees and up to 18.29% more informal organizational
With this paper, we strive to draw attention to this
links. However, similar results were achieved from both
importantissueandinitiateadiscussionwithintheOSN
studies when identifying leadership roles using differ-
research community to encourage the adoption of an
ent centrality measures. Hence, it is possible to infer
appropriate code of ethics, which can then be utilized
leadership roles without the need to employ active fake
in agreements and technical standards. This code would
profiles, which can compromise the OSN users’ privacy
be a means to facilitate good research, with acceptable
and impact the OSN operator resources.
trade-offs between ethical considerations and the social
[2] presented a novel method for the detection of benefits of precise, available, and timely research on
fake identities in OSNs by using only the social net- these important issues. As we point out in this work, an
work’s own topological features. Reliance on these fea- effort from both the research community and industry
tures alone ensures that the proposed method is generic is required to define and standardize mechanisms that
enough to be applied on a range of social networks. will enable this legitimate and significant research while
In order to train a machine learning classier, training ensuringprivacyofOSNusersandtheirdata.Anumber
had to be created and collected. The training set had ofsuchmechanismsthatcanfacilitateethicalresearchon
to include labeled fake identities. One way to create a OSNshavebeenoutlined.Asonlinesocialnetworkscon-
training set is to add fake identities to an OSN and then tinue to gain prominence, ethical considerations become
collect the modified network as a labeled training set. increasingly critical.
To avoid modifying the OSN itself, which will create
a negative impact on the OSN operator, a different REFERENCES
approach was taken. To create positive examples for the
classifiers, Fire et al developed a code which simulated [1] M. Fire, D. Kagan, A. Elishar, and Y. Elovici, “Social privacy
protector - protecting users’ privacy in social networks,” in
theinfiltrationofasinglefakeidentity(oragroupoffake
SOTICS 2012, The Second International Conference on Social Eco-
identities) to social networks. For each social network, Informatics,2012,pp.46–50.
thesimulatorloadedthetopologygraphandinserted100
[2] M. Fire, G. Katz, and Y. Elovici, “Strangers intrusion detection-
new nodes, which represented 100 fake identities. The detecting spammers and fake profiles in social networks based
insertionprocessofeachfakeidentityintothegraphwas ontopologyanomalies,”HumanJournal,vol.1,no.1,pp.26–39,
done by simulating a series of “follow” requests sent to 2012.
random users in the network. Each fake user had a limit [3] M.S.Rahman,T.-K.Huang,H.V.Madhyastha,andM.Faloutsos,
“Efficient and scalable socware detection in online social net-
onthenumberoffriendrequestsinordertocomplywith
works,” in Proceedings of the 21st USENIX conference on Security
arealityinwhichmanysocialnetworkslimitthenumber symposium. USENIXAssociation,2012,pp.32–32.
of user requests allowed for new members (exactly for
[4] R. Eynon, J. Fry, and R. Schroeder, “The ethics of internet
the purpose of blocking spammers and socialbots). research,”HandbookofOnlineResearchMethods,2008.
[5] R.MarguliesandA.Herzberg,“Conductingethicalyetrealistic [24] C. Jernigan and B. F. Mistree, “Gaydar: Facebook friendships
usable security studies,” in Cyber-security Research Ethics Dialog exposesexualorientation,”FirstMonday,vol.14,no.10,2009.
andStrategyWorkshop(CREDS),May2013. [25] A. Mislove, B. Viswanath, K. P. Gummadi, and P. Druschel,
www.caida.org/data/passive/passive 2012 dataset.xml,2012. networks,”inProceedingsofthethirdACMinternationalconference
onWebsearchanddatamining. ACM,2010,pp.251–260.
[7] Y. Boshmaf, I. Muslukhov, K. Beznosov, and M. Ripeanu, “The
socialbot network: when bots socialize for fame and money,” [26] BGU Social Networks Security Research Group, “BGU So-
Conference. ACM,2011,pp.93–102. datasets.html,2013.
intrusion: Organization mining using socialbots,” in Proceedings //konect.uni-koblenz.de,2013.
DC,USADecember,2012. snap.stanford.edu/data/,2013.
[9] Facebook Inc., “Quarterly report pursuant to section [29] R. Zafarani and H. Liu, “Social computing data repository at
000119312512325997/d371464d10q.htm,2012. Engineering.
[10] G. Kontaxis, I. Polakis, S. Ioannidis, and E. P. Markatos, “De- [30] A. Narayanan, E. Shi, and B. I. Rubinstein, “Link prediction
tecting social network profile cloning,” in IEEE International by de-anonymization: How we won the kaggle social network
ConferenceonPervasiveComputingandCommunicationsWorkshops challenge,” in The 2011 International Joint Conference on Neural
(PERCOMWorkshops). IEEE,2011,pp.295–300. Networks(IJCNN). IEEE,2011,pp.1825–1834.
[11] G.EysenbachandJ.E.Till,“Ethicalissuesinqualitativeresearch [31] A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, “How to break anonymity of
onInternetcommunities,”BMJ,vol.323,no.7321,pp.1103–1105, thenetflixprizedataset,”arXivpreprintcs/0610105,2006.
2001. [32] M. Zimmer, “But the data is already public: on the ethics of
[12] S. Flicker, D. Haans, and H. Skinner, “Ethical dilemmas in research in Facebook,” Ethics and information technology, vol. 12,
research on internet communities,” Qualitative Health Research, no.4,pp.313–325,2010.
vol.14,no.1,pp.124–134,2004. [33] M.Huber,M.Mulazzani,M.Leithner,S.Schrittwieser,G.Won-
[13] M.ThelwallandD.Stuart,“Webcrawlingethicsrevisited:Cost, dracek, and E. Weippl, “Social snapshots: digital forensics for
privacy,anddenialofservice,”JournaloftheAmericanSocietyfor onlinesocialnetworks,”inProceedingsofthe27thAnnualComputer
InformationScienceandTechnology,vol.57,no.13,pp.1771–1779, SecurityApplicationsConference. ACM,2011,pp.113–122.
2006. [34] M. Huber, M. Mulazzani, E. Weippl, G. Kitzler, and S. Goluch,
[14] R. Eynon, R. Schroeder, and J. Fry, “New techniques in online “Friend-in-the-middleattacks:Exploitingsocialnetworkingsites
research: Challenges for research ethics,” Twenty-First Century for spam,” Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 28–34,
Society,vol.4,no.2,pp.187–199,2009. 2011.
[15] D. Wilkinson and M. Thelwall, “Researching personal infor- [35] E.Athanasopoulos,A.Makridakis,S.Antonatos,D.Antoniades,
mation on the public web methods and ethics,” Social Science S. Ioannidis, K. Anagnostakis, and E. Markatos, “Antisocial
ComputerReview,vol.29,no.4,pp.387–401,2011. networks: Turning a social network into a botnet,” Information
Security,pp.146–160,2008.
[16] A. Rosenberg, “Virtual world research ethics and the pri-
vate/public distinction,” International journal of Internet research [36] G. Rydstedt, E. Bursztein, D. Boneh, and C. Jackson, “Busting
ethics,vol.3,no.12,pp.23–36,2010. framebusting:astudyofclickjackingvulnerabilitiesatpopular
sites,”IEEEOaklandWeb,vol.2,2010.
[17] R. Lucas, “Ethics and social eco-informatics,” in SOTICS 2012,
TheSecondInternationalConferenceonSocialEco-Informatics,2012, [37] C. Taylor, “Startup claims 80bots,”
startup-claims-80-of-its-facebook-ad-clicks-are-coming-from-bots/,
[18] A.Mislove,M.Marcon,K.P.Gummadi,P.Druschel,andB.Bhat-
2012.
tacharjee,“Measurementandanalysisofonlinesocialnetworks,”
2007. [38] A.HerzbergandR.Margulies,“Forcingjohnnytologinsafely-
long-termuserstudyofforcingandtrainingloginmechanisms,”
[19] M. Fire, D. Kagan, R. Puzis, L. Rokach, and Y. Elovici, “Data
in ESORICS, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, V. Atluri
mining opportunities in geosocial networks for improving road
andC.D´ıaz,Eds.,vol.6879. Springer,2011,pp.452–471.
safety,”inIEEE27thConventionofElectrical&ElectronicsEngineers
inIsrael(IEEEI),2012. IEEE,2012,pp.1–4. [39] Microsoft-Research, “LETOR: Learning to Rank for Informa-
[20] Y.Liu,K.P.Gummadi,B.Krishnamurthy,andA.Mislove,“An-
mslr/,2013.
alyzingfacebookprivacysettings:Userexpectationsvs.reality,”
in Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet
measurementconference. ACM,2011,pp.61–70.
[21] H.Kwak,C.Lee,H.Park,andS.Moon,“Whatistwitter,asocial
networkoranewsmedia?”inProceedingsofthe19thinternational
conferenceonworldwideweb. ACM,2010,pp.591–600.
[22] M. Fire, L. Tenenboim, O. Lesser, R. Puzis, L. Rokach, and
Y. Elovici, “Link prediction in social networks using computa-
tionallyefficienttopologicalfeatures,”inIEEEthirdinternational
conference on privacy, security, risk and trust (PASSAT) and IEEE
thirdinternationalconferenceonsocialcomputing(SocialCom). IEEE,
2011,pp.73–80.
[23] M. Fire, R. Puzis, and Y. Elovici, “Organization mining using
onlinesocialnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1303.3741,2013.