International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
HE THICAL ILEMMA OF THE
OVERNMENT IRETAPPING
Arwen Mullikin1 and Syed (Shawon) M. Rahman2
1Graduate Student, Capella University
225 South 6th Street, 9th Floor Minneapolis, MN 55402, USA
Email: amullikin@email.capella.edu
2Assistant Professor of Computer Science University of Hawaii-Hilo, Hilo, HI, USA
and Adjunct Faculty, Capella University, Minneapolis, MN 55402,USA
Email: SRahman@Hawaii.edu
USA Government wiretapping activities is a very controversial issue. Undoubtedly this technology can
assist law enforced authority to detect / identify unlawful or hostile activities; however, this task raises
severe privacy concerns. In this paper, we have discussed this complex information technology issue of
governmental wiretapping and how it effects both public and private liberties. Legislation has had a
major impact on the uses and the stigma of wiretapping for the war on terrorism. This paper also
analyzes the ethical and legal concerns inherent when discussing the benefits and concerns of
wiretapping. The analysis has concluded with the effects of wiretapping laws as they relate to future
government actions in their fight against terrorists.
Wiretapping, government invasion of rights, terrorist attacks, eavesdropping, privacy, ethics
1. INTRODUCTION
We believe the advances of technology allows for amazing advances which have kept our the
United States safe from terrorists for the last eight years. The ethical sides of our practices have
caught national attention and a firestorm of debates has risen on wiretapping and the ethical
concerns, as well as, the related laws. “Developments in technology have also had a profound
impact on privacy. To attempt to function in modern society without employing
telecommunications is to be eccentric”[1].
There is no doubt that wiretapping is very controversial and causes deep passions to arise from
those who are for wiretapping and for those who are against it. In 2009 we observed the United
States District Judge Vaughn Walker threaten to side in favor of the plaintiffs if the Obama
Administration did not produce documents showing communications intercepted without
warrants against Al-Haramain Islamic Foundation officials [2]. This wiretapping case has been
going on for three years and there does not seem to be a resolution in site.
Wiretapping is not new to presidents, in fact it has been going on since the 1800’s, just not as
high tech as it is today. The United States Constitution gives the president power to protect the
country from national attacks. And who would not want that? The ethical dilemma lies in not
just the legality of wiretapping, but in the question of whether our private and public freedoms
are being run over by a zealous government, all in the name of national security.
DOI : 10.5121/ijmit.2010.2403 32
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
The United States Constitution does not give citizens an inalienable right to privacy but the
Fourth Amendment does protect US Citizens from government illegal searches and seizures. It
is a balancing act between protecting US Citizens private and public freedoms, and protecting
their liberties from being trounced upon. Wiretapping has been around since the 1800s, and is
every bit as controversial as it was back then. The history of wiretapping will clearly show the
controversial pros and cons of this issue.
2.0 HISTORY OF WIRETAPPING
Technology such as wiretapping has enabled government to reach past borders to protect its
citizens like never imagined before. Rasch [3] stated, “Whenever a new technology is
developed, or a new threat that causes us to deploy these technologies, questions invariably
arise about their legality”. The government has participated in wiretapping during the 1960s
and 1970s when they implemented a widespread program of wiretapping and permeation of
dangerous groups thought to be an endangerment to the government. This program was fraught
with abuses and even spied on Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. The first step in analyzing
wiretapping is first to go back to the beginning and look at what the United States Constitution
says, since the Constitution is the law of the land in the United States of America.
"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures [Italics added for emphasis], shall not be violated, and no
Warrants shall issue, But upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized” (The
Fourth Amendment of the U.S. United States Constitution).
Warrantless wiretapping has been sanctioned by the Supreme Court and the full case (UNITED
STATES V. UNITED STATES DIST. CT., 407 U. S. 297 (1972) was posted on the U.S.
Supreme Court website, www.supreme.Justia.com [4], the law suit states that many presidents
and attorney generals since 1946 and the Executive branch of government have used warrantless
electronic surveillance to collect intelligence data since the 1800s. Wiretapping was instituted to
speed up the process and to avoid the red tape of bureaucracy. As with all things government,
the pace in which things are done is extremely slow. Wiretapping would circumvent the process
and allow quick actions to be taken to apprehend the enemy.
3.0 PRIVACY ISSUE
The meaning of privacy has changed throughout the years but has come to be understood as
freedom from having one’s personal life and information tampered with. Nowhere in the United
States Constitution or the Bill of Rights do we see privacy as an inalienable right. Some
scholars and law experts use the Fourth Amendment to infer that all citizens have this right due
to the search and seizure section. The case of Griswold v. Connecticut is often used as the
defining case where the Supreme Court ruled that we, as individuals, have a right to privacy.
In today’s technology age we see personal privacy compromised all the time through
unsolicited cell phone pictures and videos being taken without consent, identity theft, phishing,
spamming, spoofing, and even companies using our web browser cookies from Internet sites we
access to gain more information about how we shop. Citizens believe, for the most part, that
there are situations that limit their privacy in a high technology age; however, even then most
citizens believe they normally still have some control over the lack of privacy in our technology
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
age. Things like turning off cookies, prosecuting identity thieves, and using a number of
blocking tools and technologies to protect our actions. But there is one area where most citizens
feel they cannot turn off or even control cyber-technology and that is when it comes to
government surveillance.
Most of the people who live in the United States want to believe that our government will do no
harm and that they try there to stop terrorists through checks and balances, laws, and congress.
So the ethical dilemma then becomes did the government do harm by “sneak and peek” on
United States citizens through the use of wiretapping? Some people would shout a resounding
YES while others would say the government has the power to protect the citizens, as we will see
next section.
3.1 WHAT ARE THE SIDES OF THE ETHICAL DILEMMA
On one side of the argument we have a loss privacy of citizen’s, which is inevitable and
necessary, if we are to protect our country from terrorist attacks. On the other side, our civil
liberty groups and others will argue that giving up basic privacy right, which are the bedrock of
our government, is a mighty high price to pay for being protected.
The argument against government wiretapping is, if government wiretapping is allowed then the
government will push the boundaries and try to get as much power as possible. Taking control
over every aspect of our lives and implementing total rule, while doing away with the United
States Constitution and the America we know today. This group always says “This blatant
abuse of government power obviously cannot be permitted and must be stopped while we still
have rights”.
Opponents against wiretapping argue that government is too big and should be controlled and
limited in what they can do. This is achieved by due process of rights and prevents misuse and
abuse of governmental powers. These critics point out that during the 60s and 70s emancipated
power was misused and so it is by today’s government[5].
The main uneasiness behind wiretapping is that the government collects, and keeps forever, a
large amount of information about individuals in the U.S., including citizens. Are we moving to
a government that maintains our DNA and knows everything about us? This is ultimately the
under lying fear. Out of this fear comes the dilemma of how to keep American citizens safe,
while at the same time, not having government over step their boundaries of individual privacy,
as granted by the United States Constitution. The question remains, by those supporting this
argument, is can the government be trusted to not abuse or misuse power given to them? Can
the government be trusted to do the right thing when they have unrestrained power? If history is
any indication, the answer leans towards no.
John Yoo, former Justice Department [6] of the USA, stated “It was instantly clear after Sept.
11, 2001, that our security agencies knew little about al Qaeda's inner workings, could not
detect its operatives' entry into the country, nor predict where it might strike next”. Yoo went on
to further to say that wiretapping is the only way to detect follow-up attacks “and what president
-- of either political party -- wouldn't immediately order the National Security Agency (NSA) to
start, so as to find and stop the attackers”?
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) was created after the Cold War and was never
meant to squash or hinder military operations. FISA is an outdated law that cannot address
terrorist attacks. FISA proved unable to protect America from the 9/11 terrorist attacks, which
were carried out without any prevention from FISA. It is imperative to consistently monitor
terrorist communications and all of their communication channels. Through the use of
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
governmental wiretapping many terrorists have been caught since 9/11 and our country has been
protected from terrorists and any major attacks. On the other side, are the opponents in favor of
governmental wiretapping. These proponents believe the government should be able to use any
means necessary to protect America from terrorism.
They believe it is the president’s job and responsibility to protect the security and interest of the
people of this country. Congress is too numerous to act quickly to live threats, and in war, it is
imperative that the president be unhindered in carrying out his executive orders by allowing
wiretapping. With that said, those who favor wiretapping can look at the issue of privacy and be
at ease with loosing some of their privacy for the greater good of the country.
3.2 IN FAVOR OF WIRETAPPING
The United States laws, regarding wiretapping, appears to be on the side of the United States
government. The government relies on the following laws for support of wiretapping.
(i) The first law is the Authorization for Use of Military Force (AUMF) passed
September 18, 2001. In this law there is a line that gives the president power to use
all necessary and appropriate force against nations, organizations, or persons that he
deems as ones who have planned, authorized, committed, or aided in the September
11, 2001 terrorist attacks. In most cases warrants for wiretapping are issued under
the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (EC). We must have probable cause
that a crime has been or will be committed and that the wiretap will unveil evidence
of that crime. This act allowed for traceable devices to be added to phones of
suspects and also show Internet sites visited.
(ii) The next law to be passed in support of wiretapping was the USA-Patriot Act [7].
The Patriot Act authorized roving wiretaps which allowed more power to the FBI
and circumvent of the courts. The Patriot Act still upholds the EC and wiretapping
can only be done in regards to criminal activity. Since most terrorist commit
criminal activities the law then allows for wiretapping.
(iii) The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) which, Cornell University [8]
describes as the “procedures for requesting judicial authorization for electronic
surveillance and physical search of persons engaged in espionage or international
terrorism against the United States on behalf of a foreign power”. FISA allows for
the executive branch to obtain an interception or seizure order by proving to a secret
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance court that the surveillance will produce foreign
intelligence regarding terrorism. What is unique about FISA is that it is directed at
U.S. Citizens, permanent resident aliens, and corporations. In 1994 FISA was
amended by Congress to include covert physical entries as well as electronic
eavesdropping and wiretapping. In 1998 FISA was amended again by Congress to
permit pen/trap orders, which, record telephone numbers and business records. If a
US citizen is involved or suspected then probable cause of espionage must be
shown. Later through the Patriot Act the FISA court was bypassed altogether.
(iv) The Homeland Security Act 2002 gave increased powers to law enforcement
agencies to track down suspected terrorist and criminals. This act allowed an
increase in monitoring of e-mail and cell phone communications [9]. In 2005 the
Bush Administration argued that the Patriot Act did not overstep the Executive
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
Powers but that this was needed to protect America. In 2009 the Obama
Administration defended the Bush wiretapping against the Electronic Frontier
Foundation (EFF) in San Francisco[10].
(v) The Protect America Act is another law that would modernize FISA and protect
Americans from terrorist attacks. The Department of Justice [11] had this to say
about the Protect America Act:
The Protect America Act modernized the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act (FISA) to provide our intelligence community
essential tools to acquire important information about terrorists who
want to harm America. The Act, which passed with bipartisan
support in the House and Senate and was signed into law by
President Bush on August 5, 2007, restores FISA to its original focus
of protecting the rights of persons in the United States, while not
acting as an obstacle to gathering foreign intelligence on targets
located in foreign countries. By enabling our intelligence community
to close a critical intelligence gap that existed before the Act became
law, the Protect America Act has already made our Nation safer.
The bottom line, as believed by those in favor of wiretapping, is that the United States
Constitution has bestowed powers to the president to protect this country from any nation or
individual group from carrying out an attack on it. Gathering intelligence of all kinds is a key
part of war. The United States has declared war on terrorism, intelligence gathering should not
be different from any other time of war. Our military and intelligence agencies must know
where the target is, without wiretapping they would be shooting in the dark.
In 2009 the proponents of wiretapping won a step forward when a rare public ruling from a
secret federal appeals court said “telecommunications companies must cooperate with the
government to intercept international phone calls and e-mail of American citizens suspected of
being spies or terrorists [11].
People in favor of wiretapping believe that wiretapping is absolutely ethical and should be used
by intelligence agencies to protect the citizens of the United States from those who would do us
harm. The war on terror is far different than any other war America has ever fought, the rules
are fuzzy, the enemy is slippery and fast, and our very homeland has become the battle ground
and a place to hide and plan attacks. For this reason many people believe the Government needs
the power to wiretap. Now we will take a closer look at the argument for the other side that says
Government has overstepped their boundaries of privacy.
3.3 OPPOSITION TO WIRETAPPING
There are three laws that make it illegal to engage in wiretapping: 50 ISC 1809(a), 47 USC 605,
and 18 USC 2511. These laws make wiretapping legal only through consent of one or all
parties, or by consent of the telecommunications service provider, and finally by court order
(i) Due to the Nixon administration’s illegal use of wiretapping of subversive groups,
Congress passed the FISA. FISA scales back presidential abuse in conducting foreign
intelligence investigations. The FISA law states that FISA now “shall be the exclusive
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
means by which electronic surveillance and the interception of domestic wire, oral,
and electronic communications may be conducted (Section 201 of the FISA as
enacted in 1978)”.
(ii) With the passing of the Patriot Act many people saw the government overstepping
their powers particularly with section 215 (Patriot Act), which, gives the FBI authority
to obtain library, and bookstore receipts of individuals. This section also imposes a
gag order, which forbids those who provided the information to inform the party of
interest. Section 215 gives the FBI leeway to search any records it believes pertinent
to terrorism investigations, even though those people may not be suspected of criminal
conduct. More than 200 search orders have been issued, since 2003, by the
Department of Justice [13]. The American Library Association believes that the
Patriot Act violates people’s First Amendment rights to freedom of Speech by not
being able to notify the parties that the information pertains to.
In 2005 wiretapping really came to the forefront and became a major issue in America. During
President Bush’s Administration, the government was involved in domestic spying on citizens
through capturing emails and phone calls to those made outside of the United States. Congress
stated this was far beyond the boundaries of FISA and that domestic spying on citizens was not
allowed. Wiretapping was seen as such a violation of privacy for citizens that the Electronic
Frontier Foundation (EFF) sued the government and officials who implemented the program in
September 2009 in an effort to get the government to stop using wiretapping [14].
The ethical dilemma question then become “is it right for the government to use domestic
spying on its citizens”? Those who oppose wiretapping would say a resounding NO. Their
argument lies in the fact that there is never a time that the government should spy on its own
citizens without a search warrant. The search warrant and laws protect the citizens from a
government that has swelled with power and takes liberties they should not be taking.
Opponents against wiretapping would point to the government’s recent activities to show that
they have already taken excessive power and are looking for more. This can be seen in the
recently passed legislations regarding: Net Neutrality, the Fairness Doctrine, and S 773.3 Cyber
Security Act 2009 bill. All of these legislations aim at giving more control to the government.
The government has also shown, through President Nixon’s actions that absolute power
corrupts absolutely. Opponents against will also say that even the good get corrupted with no
restraints, therefore, warrants, monitors and laws keep the government from intruding into our
lives excessively.
4.0 THE EFFECTS OF WIRETAPPING LAWS FOR FUTURE
GOVERNMENT ENDEAVORS
In the ongoing debate we do know that each side wins a little every couple of years to keep the
battle going. Michael Hewitt [14] stated:
The role of wiretapping as given by the powers invested in the Patriot Act, particularly the
United States Constitutionality of this method, includes what criteria must be met to
preserve United States Constitutionally protected civil liberties. Wiretapping has had a
significant effect, as given by the powers of the Patriot Act, on both the personal security
and privacy of the American people. Current wiretapping policy lacks clear and
appropriate guidelines addressing the modern terrorist threat. Future policy should reflect
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
the need for new criteria to protect the national security and respect United States
Constitutionally imposed limits.
So the question then we need to ask as a nation is “Will the USA become like a science fiction
movie, where small metal objects are floating above us and recording our every move and
word”? As far as we can see today that is highly unlikely and left for Hollywood to create.
History has shown us that wiretapping is not going away anytime soon and does have a place in
government when it comes to protecting the citizens of the United States of America. In 2006
we saw that President Bush was successful at blocking a Justice Department Investigation on
the National Security Agency’s (NSA) wiretapping program. The president made the decision
based on what he felt was more important to protect, the secrecy and security of the wiretapping
program and limiting the number of persons involved in order to not compromise security [15].
In July 2009 we have observed that the Obama Administration has defended the practice of the
Bush Administration wiretapping program in San Francisco in a lawsuit with EFF [16]. Though
no details of this case were released to the public the Inspector General’s Office mentioned that
the wiretapping program was useful in defending America.
5.0 CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the fight for and against wiretapping will not be going away any time soon as
both sides battle for what they believe is right. The first side battles to protect American from
being attacked and believes the government has the right to use whatever means necessary to
accomplish that job. The second side believes that American freedoms are so important that the
government should only do what is in the United States Constitution and nothing more. This
side believes that it is a slippery slope to start allowing the government to take over any of those
rights, even if it is to protect a nation.
The truth lies somewhere in the middle. The government should have the power to protect the
citizen’s of this great land but they must balance that responsibility delicately and be ever
mindful of the rights of the citizens they are protecting.
How this debate will end know one can truly say. We can be assured more cases will be brought
before our judges to decide this matter. America also knows that the security of the United
States and all its freedoms do not come without a price, the war on terrorism has shown that
very clearly.
6.0 REFERENCES
1. Whitfield, D. (2007). Privacy on the Line (2 ed.). MIT Press: MA.
2. Savage, C. and Risen, J. (2010). Judge Finds NSA Wiretaps were illegal. Retrieved June 3, 2010
3. Rasch, M. (2006). Wiretapping, FISA, and the NSA. Retrieved October 31, 2009, from
4. Justia.com. United States v. United States Dist. CT., 407 U.S. 297 (1972). Retrieved April 22,
5. Pollock, J. (2008). Ethical Dilemmas and Decisions in Criminal justice (6 ed.). KY: Wadsworth
Publishing.
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT), Vol.2, No.4, November 2010
6. Yoo, J. (2009). Why we endorsed warrantless wiretaps. Retrieved November 16, 2009, from
7. Patriot Act. (2001). The USA Patriot Act - Full Text and Commentary: Page 3 of 11. Retrieved
8. Cornell University. (2009). Foreign Intelligence Surveillance. Retrieved April 22, 2010 from,
9. Tavani, H. T. (2007). Ethics & Technology: Ethical Issues in an Age of Information and
Communication Technology (2nd Ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
10. Risen. J. And Litchtblau, E. (2009). Court Affirms Wiretapping Without Warrants. Retrieved
11. Rasch, M. (2006). Wiretapping, FISA, and the NSA. Retrieved October 31, 2009, from
12. Department of Justice. (2008). FISA 101: Why FISA Modernization Amendments Must Be Made
13. Weekly News Digest. (2009). ALA and Book Groups Push for Patriot Act Revision. Retrieved
for-PATRIOT-Act-Revision-53426.asp.
14. Hewitt, M. (2008). Wiretapping: A Necessity for Effectively Combating Terrorism in the 21st
15. Eggen, D. (2006). Bush Thwarted Probe Into NSA Wiretapping (A04). Retrieved November 4,
AR2006071800601.html
16. Macmillan, R. (2009). Obama Administration Defends Bush Wiretapping. Retrieved November
obama_administration_defends_bush_wiretapping.html.
Arwen Mullikin
Ms. Arwen Mullikin is a graduate student in the Information and Assurance program at Capella
University. She has over 15 years in the technology field and has held positions as a Unix
System Administrator and Project Manager. She looks forward to graduating December 2010
and starting her doctorate degree next year.
Syed (Shawon) M. Rahman
Syed (Shawon) Rahman is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science &
Engineering at the University of Hawaii-Hilo and a adjunct faculty of Information Technology,
Information Assurance & Security at the Capella University. Dr. Rahman’s research interests
include Software Engineering Education, Data Visualization, Data Modelling, Information
Assurance & Security, Web Accessibility, and Software Testing & Quality Assurance. He has
published more than 50 peer-reviewed papers. He is an active member of many professional
organizations including ACM, ASEE, ASQ, IEEE, and UPE.