Ethical considerations in an online
community: the balancing act
Cécile Paris¹, Nathalie Colineau¹, Surya Nepal¹, Sanat Bista1 and Gina
Beschorner2
With the emergence and rapid growth of Social Media, a number of government
departments in several countries have embraced Social Media as a privilege
channel to interact with their constituency. We are exploring, in collaboration
with the Australian Department of Human Services, the possibility to exploit the
potential of social networks to support specific groups of citizens. To this end, we
have developed Next Step, an online community to help people currently
receiving welfare payments find a job and become financially self-sufficient. In
this paper, we explore some ethical issues that arise when governments engage
directly with citizens, in particular with communities in difficult situations, and
when researchers are involved. We describe some of the challenges we faced and
how we addressed them. Our work highlights the complexity of the problem,
when an online community involves a government department and a welfare
recipient group with a dependency relationship with that department. It becomes a
balancing act, with the need to ensure privacy of the community members whilst
still fulfilling the government's legal responsibilities. While difficult, these issues
must be addressed if governments are to engage with their citizens using Social
Media.
Introduction
Figures from recent surveys indicate that a growing number of people spend an
increasing amount of time online using social media (SM) technology. According
to a recent Sensis report on social media (Sensis, 2011), 62% of online
Australians have a presence on social networking sites, while a recent Pew
Internet survey (Madden and Zickuhr, 2011) reported that 65% of online
American adults use social networking sites. These figures are remarkable if we
consider that, during the period of 2005-2011, the percentage of online American
adults using social networking sites went from 8% to 65%.
Capitalising on the opportunities SM brings, businesses have started building
online consumer relationships, and a number of government departments in
1 CSIRO ICT Centre, Australia -- email: FirstName.LastName@csiro.au
2 Department of Human Services, Australia -- email: gina.beschorner@humanservices.gov.au
several countries have embraced social media as a new channel to interact with
their constituency. Governments at all levels (i.e., federal, state and local) are
taking a more collaborative approach in their dealing with citizens through
consultation and participation with the aim to improve the quality and
responsiveness of government policy making and service delivery (e.g., Colineau
et al., 2011b; Toland, 2011; Howard, 2012).
However, there is still a long way to go. For many government departments, SM
tools remain fairly new, and SM communication strategies still need to be put in
place. There is a need also to educate public servants on how to use these tools in
the context of their work and establish SM policies and guidelines to empower
them to engage meaningfully online (Hrdinova et al., 2010). These new policies
bring issues related to both employee and citizen conduct, security and legal
issues, and therefore must be framed within existing government guidelines,
including public servant values and code of conduct, privacy law, accessibility
guidelines, to name a few.
In this context, through a twelve month trial, we are exploring, in collaboration
with the Australian Department of Human Services (thereafter referred to as
Human Services), the possibility to exploit the potential of social networks to
support specific groups of citizens. To this end, we have developed Next Step, an
online community to help people currently receiving welfare payments find a job
and become financially self-sufficient. The purpose of this social networking site
is to complement existing welfare transition programmes, providing an additional
channel to deliver social services. For the researchers on the project, the site
provides real data to study the development of an online community and various
behavioural aspects at play in such environments.
While an instance of e-government, Next Step has a number of interesting and
challenging characteristics making it different from other e-government initiatives
and raising a number of ethical issues, from the perspectives of both the
government and online research. First, in Next Step, there is a power relationship,
as our community members are dependent on Human Services for their payments.
Assurance of anonymity in this context is paramount, if we want the community
members to feel free to express themselves without fear of retribution. Second,
Next Step does not exist solely to seek input from the public, but rather to attempt
to create a space where people can access tailored information and be linked in
with relevant support services. Finally, we know from our initial research with
the members of the target group that they have serious concerns about their
situation and that many felt anxious and overwhelmed (Colineau et al., 2011 a &
b). The intent of the community is also to give people in this target group a sense
of community, with opportunities to share experiences and support one another.
Ethical issues thus include anonymity, privacy and confidentiality of the
information shared, legal issues as proper guidelines need to be put in place for
people to be treated not only fairly and objectively, but also respectfully.
Furthermore, care must be taken to prohibit unlawful and offensive material.
In this paper, using the online community we developed as a case study, we
explore some ethical issues that arise when governments engage directly with
citizens, in particular with people on welfare payments, and when researchers are
involved. We examine some of the issues that have been raised by others in the
context of online research and discuss some of the challenges we faced and how
we addressed them.
The Next Step online community – The parties
We first need to describe our context in more detail. The Next Step online
community was developed to support welfare recipients, in particular parents
currently in receipt of parenting payments and who now are transitioning to a new
income support benefit, with the requirement to find a job. This transition happens
when their youngest child reaches school age.
As welfare programmes have changed over the years, financial assistance is now
provided in exchange of work (or some form of community participation) and
offered for a limited period of time. The transition back to work can be difficult
for some parents, in particular for single parents and people who have been out of
the work force for several years. Through the use of SM technology, Human
Services wants to reach these specific communities by providing them with a
channel to help them develop skills and a support network that can assist them
during this transition period.
In this context, our aim is to explore whether this medium can help this group in
several ways:
 To be better equipped to find a job, through a reflection journey designed
specifically for the community (Colineau et al., 2013).
 To feel more supported in their transition, emotionally, through
connections with others and the sharing of experiences, and with respect to
the information they can access, by receiving information tailored to their
needs (Bista et al., 2012b).
 To provide a channel through which they have access to experts.
This project includes three parties, as illustrated in Figure 1. Besides the
community members, the project brings together two organisations with different
roles and responsibilities, and differing ethical considerations.
Figure 1. Parties involved in Next Step
On the one hand, there is Human Services. The people we are targeting (i.e., the
community members) are amongst its ―customers‖. Human Services is
responsible for their payments and for informing them of the transition process
(i.e., what to do and what payments people can claim considering their specific
and individual circumstances). It is also worth mentioning that Human Services
has a ―duty of care‖ to its customers. This includes providing a service that takes
people‘s individual circumstances into account and providing intensive services to
people at a time when they need it. The Social Security Law with which Human
Services must comply states that its staff must take a reasonable degree of care
when providing advice and that carelessness or negligence can be a breach of this
duty of care.
Human Services‘ interest in this project is to explore new ways to support citizens
and deliver its services, and to gain insights into this specific group. Its specific
role in the community is to ensure accurate information is being disseminated,
answer questions that arise, provide experts when required, and, because of its
duty of care, moderate discussions in the community, ensuring there is no abuse,
no disclosure of sensitive information and any mentions of customers indicating
life danger are immediately given support. To carry out this project, Human
Services had to go through its internal processes of approval for privacy and legal
issues. The Privacy Act creates a set of legal obligations for agencies such as
Human Services in terms of their handling of records containing personal
information. There are also community expectations regarding the government‘s
handling of records containing such information. Human Services carried out a
comprehensive Privacy Impact Assessment to assist in identifying and properly
managing the ‗privacy issues‘ associated with the Next Step project and avoid a
breach of the Privacy Act. The assessment was undertaken by a third party
organisation and coordinated by Human Services‘ privacy team. The report
contained eleven recommendations to improve the handling of customer
information. These included: measures to remind community members that
information posted in the community was being collected; safeguards for
members‘ personal information; a requirement for a random audit at least every
three months to ensure that records containing personal information were being
securely kept; a feedback form to be provided in the community permitting
members to requests amendment or deletion of personal information contained in
posts; and the instruction to delete, at Human Services, all electronic material
related to Next Step in 2017. All recommendations were accepted and
implemented.
In addition, the Legal Services Branch developed Terms and Conditions to inform
customers of the community rules and adequately protect Human Services. They
also contributed to, and approved, the ‗Moderator Guidelines‘ which advise when
and how Human Services moderators should respond to customer comments.
These guidelines clearly state that ―The moderator‘s primary focus is to follow
discussions, promote conversation and moderate any breaches on the forum. The
role of the moderator is to assist in building the community, ensure the safety of
members, and ensure compliance with the site‘s Terms of Use. Moderators also
help keep members focussed on important issues by policing spam and irrelevant
discussion threads or posts. An example of a specific guideline calls for
moderators to ―watch for offensive words and for breaches of the Terms of Use‖.
On the other hand, IT and Human Computer Interaction (HCI) researchers are also
present. They are researchers at CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation), the national research institute in Australia. Their aim in
this project is, as researchers, to study a number of issues related to online
communities. This includes research questions on how to develop a sense of
community, foster interactions and create a sustainable community; on how to
create and develop social trust, and on how to encourage reflection to induce
behavioural and attitudinal changes (Nepal et al., 2011; Colineau et al., 2013).
The researchers designed the online community portal with the help of Human
Services. The site was developed and is hosted by CSIRO. The researchers are
responsible for the running of the community portal. They are also responsible for
studying the community activities, collecting and analysing data to research the
questions mentioned above. To do so, they developed and introduced a number of
mechanisms – e.g., gamification (Bista et al., 2012a), buddy matching programme
(Colineau, 2012); activities (Colineau et al., 2013), etc. – aimed at encouraging
interactions amongst community members.
Before the trial could start and for research to proceed, CSIRO researchers had to
follow an internal process of approvals, including the ethical clearance, following
the CSIRO‘s Human Research Ethics Policy which complies with the values and
principles specified in the National Statement on Ethical Conduct in Human
Research (2007). The ethics process ensured that the methodological and
analytical framework used to analyse and measure the utility of the social network
site was clear. Particular attention was given to providing explanations about the
technical steps put in place to protect the privacy of the personal information
collected throughout the trial. A clear and consistent approach to managing the
dual missions of Human Services was put in place, in particular, (a) with respect
to Human Services‘ role in providing informational and online moderation
support, and (b) with respect to the re-identification of data to ensure it will not be
sought by Human Services unless justified by potential risks of harm to
participants. Information provided to participants (including the terms and
conditions statement) had to be provided in plain English and included a clear
statement that any information provided will only be identifiable in specific
circumstances (described later in the article).
The third party in the equation is of course the invited participants, the community
members. They were recruited directly by Human Services through their secure
online mail service. Only people who fitted the target group, had signed up for the
online service and who had agreed to participate in research were contacted. We
followed a double-blind process to preserve the participants‘ anonymity. (This is
explained in more details below.)
The Ethics of Online Research
With the growth of the Internet, and, in particular, with the surge in usage of
social networking sites, people are increasingly interacting online, discussing and
sharing experiences, and, sometimes, very personal information. This has opened
the door to a new kind of research where data can be collected online, from a large
pool of people far from the constraints of a laboratory setting. This has also raised
a number of questions with respect to methodology and its associated ethical
issues. The main concerns usually raised are around the ―notions of privacy and
confidentiality, informed consent and narrative appropriation‖ (Brownlow and
O‘Dell, 2002; p.686). Should the data generated online and contributed by various
authors be considered private or as part of the public domain? If this kind of data
is to be collected and analysed for research purposes, what are the researcher‘s
responsibilities and obligations?
A number of researchers have discussed these issues more generally (e.g.,
Elgesem, 2002; Weeden, 2012) or in the context of their own work (e.g.,
Brownlow and O‘Dell, 2002). Others have proposed a set of guidelines: for
example, Sharf (1999) derived hers from her work with online breast cancer
discussion groups; Elgesem (2002) discussed the Norwegian ethical norms and its
relevance to Internet research, and McCleary (2007) provided a set of
recommendations based on the ethical principles of the Belmont Report (National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research, 1979) and the NASW Code of Ethics (NASW, 1996). However, as
noted by Weeden (2012), whereas the issues of Ethics arising from online
research have been given a great deal of attention, there is still a need for clear
standards and guidelines as legislations and requirements are not consistent across
boards and can change from one Institutional Review Board to another.
Coming from an IT perspective and looking at information as an individual‘s
intellectual capital, Mason (1986) focused on four particular ethical issues related
to the sharing, collection and distribution of information about individuals or
generated by individuals. He discussed in particular the ethics implications of
information privacy (i.e., the disclosure of one‘s personal information and/or
one‘s association), accuracy (i.e., the fidelity of the information being disclosed,
collected and kept as records), property (i.e., the protection of intellectual property
rights through various mechanisms) and accessibility (i.e., the understanding of
information and the means by which people gain access to it).
In line with these considerations, we now discuss the ethical issues for Next Step.
We argue that ethical issues should be of concern not only to researchers doing
online research but also to governments wanting to engage with their citizenry via
social media.
Ethical issues for Next Step
We first focus on Mason‘s (1986) four key ethical concerns. We then turn our
attention to some of issues raised by Sharf (1999) and discussed by Brownlow &
O‘Dell (2012), namely the responsibility of the researchers – in our case, both the
CSIRO researchers and staff from Human Services.
In the context of Next Step, we consider a specific set of questions for each of
privacy, accuracy, property and accessibility as follows:
 Privacy: What information about one's self must a person reveal to others,
under what conditions and with what safeguards (confidentiality issue)?
Can people keep things to themselves? If yes, what?
 Accuracy: Who is responsible for the accuracy of information
disseminated in the community?
 Property: Who owns what information? Who owns the channels through
which information is transmitted?
 Accessibility: We address here the issue of fairness of access and citizen
equality, which is important when dealing with welfare recipients.
We review below how these issues play out in our context.
Privacy (& Confidentiality)
Privacy is related to what information can be revealed or shared with whom.
There are a number of privacy issues in our community. This includes, for
example, the identity of the participants; how much information can a member
reveal to other community members, to the CSIRO, i.e., the researchers? Should it
be kept confidential, to whom in particular and under what circumstances?
This also includes the information shared with or about the community members.
For example, do we provide community members a summary of the data
collected? How much information can or should CSIRO reveal to Human
Services while reporting the results/outcomes?
We have addressed (and to some extent are still addressing) privacy and
confidentiality issues at different phases of the project, sometimes in different
ways to suit a particular context: for example, during the recruitment process,
while the community is running and when reporting about the community.
Confidentiality of members’ identities
Privacy and confidentiality issues had to be addressed during the recruitment
process. We use a double blind recruitment protocol, which is shown in Figure 2.
It works as follows: (a) CSIRO creates tokens which are provided to Human
Services; (b) Human Services uses these tokens to send an invitation letter to the
targeted group of participants, selecting them from their customer database; (c)
Participants register using their token, and select in the process a screen name to
represent themselves in the community. This information flow is indicated by the
thick green arrows between the three parties in the figure. With this process,
Human Services knows the relationship between the tokens and the customers‘
identity. CSIRO knows the relationship between the tokens and the screen names.
Neither CSIRO nor Human Services know the actual identity of the community
members. Once in the community, the screen name (the name members choose
for themselves in the community) and content posted on the forum is visible to
everyone. What is known (visible) to whom is illustrated with the blue circle and
the thin blue arrows at the bottom of the figures. This process guarantees the
anonymity of the community members. Similarly, the content generated by
members is associated with their screen name; therefore Human Services cannot
link any content with particular individuals. Without knowing the token-screen
name-customer relationship, members‘ data cannot be re-identified. In this
scenario, CSIRO acts as an impartial ―trusted third party‖, one with no
relationship with the community members, no access to members‘ customer
records within Human Services, and who guarantees that it will keep the
confidentiality of the information bestowed to it. We thus created a privacy
triangle, with CSIRO acting as the trusted third party, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Figure 2. Recruitment and Interaction Protocol
Human Trusted
Services Third Party
Figure 3. The Privacy Triangle. Ensuring anonymity: CSIRO sends token to Human Services, who
invite members; these sign into the CSIRO platform with their token
This process is important given the dependent relationship that exists between
community members and Human Services. If the CSIRO researchers were not in
this privacy triangle, we argue that a trusted third party would be required instead,
to ensure participants‘ anonymity with respect to Human Services. This trusted
third party would also be the owner of the platform. At the onset of the project,
prospective members were told their anonymity would be preserved, and that
Human Services would not be able to link them to their customer record, except in
special and extreme circumstances described below, to fulfil Human Services‘
responsibilities.
Respecting privacy and confidentiality while fulfilling ethical and legal
responsibilities
The ethical issue around privacy (and confidentiality) is not a simple one when it
comes to our community for two reasons. First, we have a responsibility of duty of
care towards community members. This is true both for the Human Services staff
(towards their customers) and for CSIRO researchers conducting research
involving human participants: In case someone shows signs of distress, we are
obliged to intervene to ensure the wellbeing of the concerned individual. This
required us (i.e., CSIRO and Human Services) to agree on a contingency plan in
case we needed to intervene. This included in particular discussing what to do and
clarifying who would intervene. The emergency response guidelines ask the
moderator who notices the situation to call their team leader to discuss the
comment; the team leader may in turn contact their National Manager to decide
whether they need approval to re-identify the customer.
Partially to address the duty of care, conversations in the community are
continuously monitored. When a distress scenario is identified, the level of
distress is assessed. If it is not deemed to be life threatening, the individual
member is invited to contact CSIRO, via a special Next Step email address
created for that purpose, the CSIRO Ethics Officer, or Human Services directly
(the phone number of a Human Services staff trained to handle such situation is
provided). It is then at the discretion of the individual member to make such
contact. If the distress is deemed life threatening, the CSIRO researchers need to
provide Human Services with the token of the participant in order for a trained
staff member to intervene. We developed, together with the ethics committee,
guidelines to decide when the situation warranted identity disclosure. In the past
six months, we have experienced only one case in which we felt that a person was
distressed. The person was invited to contact someone at Human Services
directly, or to let us know if he or she wanted his or her identity to be revealed to
Human Services for them to contact him or her. We have not had an instance in
which the CSIRO researchers had to reveal someone‘s identity to Human
Services. We believe guidelines akin to the ones we have established should also
be in place if governments were to run an online community with specific target
groups such as welfare recipients, without researchers like CSIRO staff involved
acting as a trusted third party.
Second, Human Services has the legal obligations and responsibilities of any
government agency to report instances of fraud if made aware of any (i.e., Human
Services‘ staff in our community do not actively look for fraudulent behaviour,
but, if illegal behaviour is explicitly mentioned or apparent, they are obliged to
report it). Duties of care and legal obligations thus have a direct impact on privacy
and confidentiality issues since they entail that Human Services has access to the
identity and/or contact details of the individual in question. This is against our
original guarantee of anonymity!
We address these issues as follows: first, community members are explicitly told
about the special conditions under which their contact details will need to be
given to Human Services (―Please note that, under some special circumstances,
Centrelink will have the ability to identify and contact participants if their welfare
is at risk or if they have disclosed some illegal activities.”)3. This is explained in
the participant information sheet accompanying the invitation letter, in the consent
statement participants have to agree to and again repeated in an information page
about the community, always present on the site. It is worth noting that, as in the
case of distress, the disclosure of information potentially related to illegal activity
is also assessed individually. For example, the following comment was made in
the community forum:
3 At the start of our project, the agency responsible for this target group was called Centrelink. It
has now been regrouped with other agencies such as Medicare to form the Department of Human
Services. Clients usually still refer to the agency as Centrelink.
―I'm not even telling centrelink that I am studying because then they will take me
of the jobseeker list and I will lose the help that i receive from my JSA4. I would
rather leave my options open than be forced to start from scratch again once my
course is finished‖.5
Although not related to an illegal activity, this is referring to the non-disclosure of
certain information to Human Services. Human Services moderators reviewed the
comment and determined that, as no illegal activity was taking place, they would
not re-identify the individual - instead, they drafted a response to remind the
person of the importance of having their details up to date with Centrelink to
ensure they receive all of the payments and services they are entitled to, and to
avoid receiving an overpayment and incurring a debt. We have not had so far any
instance of illegal activity requiring CSIRO to disclose a member‘s token to
Human Services.
It is therefore important to ensure members understand the implications of the
ethical and legal responsibilities Human Services have, as the disclosure of their
identity under special circumstances may have serious consequences.
Privacy and Confidentiality of information provided by members
As members of the community, people provide information: in their profile, in
their public discussions, as part of the activities that are offered in the community
as a reflection journey, and simply as participants (i.e., logging information, etc.).
One must then consider how much of this information is provided to whom for
which purpose. We examine each type of information in turn.
Members are asked to fill in a profile, in which they reveal as much or as little as
they wish. How much they reveal to others is thus totally under their control. The
profile is meant to enable members to present themselves to others in the
community. The profile includes several parts, which are treated differently with
respect to what information is disclosed to others:
4 Job Services Australia, JSA, is the Australian Government employment services system that
supports job seekers and employers.
5 All quotes from the forum are verbatim – punctuation, syntactic or spelling mistakes are original.
 Background: in this part of the profile, participants are asked for demographic
information. This is used by the researchers for their analysis. Only CSIRO
researchers see this information.
 General: here, we ask participants to present themselves to others in the
community, by indicating their mood and writing a few sentences about
themselves, their family, their local community, their hobbies, and their
dreams. The page clearly tells participants that everyone will be able to see it,
including Human Services staff.
 Skills and Attributes: in this part of the profile, we ask participants to think
about their skills (and weaknesses) and their qualities. Participants have the
choice to make that information private (i.e., no one can see it), general (i.e.,
everyone can see it), or visible by their friends only (i.e., people in the
community with whom they have become ―friends‖, or ―buddies‖). This is
illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4. Portion of the screen for the user profile: it indicates how the participant can choose who
sees the information
Discussions
All forum discussions are ―public‖, meaning they can be seen by the whole
community. Members know that what they write can be read by everyone. As
Human Services staff and CSIRO staff often start discussion topics and, in some
cases, answer questions, it is clear that they read what is in the forum. The
following posts provide two examples of posts from a Human Services staff
member (Gigi-from-human-services): one as a starting post for a new discussion,
the other as a reply to a member‘s post:
“Hi everyone,
Hope you're all having a safe and pleasant holiday season. Just thought I'd let you
all know we have added a new resource in the toolkit on setting goals in the new
year. You can check it out here. We'll be adding more resources soon, so make
sure to check out the toolkit section. Let us know if there is any info you want us to
share, whether it's payments and services related, or more related to lifestyle
and:
―Hi Lillypilli,
i have double checked this for you and found out that […]”
It is interesting to note, in fact, that, in the requirement analysis we performed
prior to the development of the community, through a number of group interviews
and an online survey (Colineau et al., 2011a and b), prospective participants
clearly indicated that they wanted the forum discussions to be monitored, both to
ensure the accuracy of the information and to avoid discussions turning into
―purely griping sessions‖.
It is also clear from member‘ posts that they are aware that Human Services staff
read the forum, as illustrated by posts such as: ―I was hoping to hear from Gigi, i
thought she may able to tell me”, or posts directly addressed to Human Services
staff (e.g., “[…]I really appreciate you finding all tis info for me Gigi so I can be
prepared next week"; ―Thank you, Marian! I can't tell you how much of a relief
that is to me!‖, ―Hi Gigi‖, or ―Thanks Gigi, your support is great‖.
Given the confidentiality we have guaranteed to members, we hoped people
would discuss issues freely. Our experience so far is that people have indeed
spoken their mind. For example, the forum has had comments such as “… not that
Centrelink cares” ; “I just wanted to let other members here know to maybe not
rely on Centrelink informing them of anything…”; “NO I DON’T FEEL
SUPPORTED !!”, even though participants know that Human Services staff are
reading the posts. We also feel that people are interacting naturally, given
comments such as “hi Kayte, would you like to have a chat, I understand your
frustration, I know a little about the changes, maybe two heads could work on
your situation with your health card.”
Activities
We provide activities to participants, taking them on a reflection journey to help
them make the transition to work (see Figure 5) (Colineau et al., 2013). This
journey is meant to guide parents through a series of steps to help them face
obstacles, regain confidence and plan their return to work. When someone
participates in an activity, he or she typically is asked to provide information. For
example, an activity might ask participants to think about their personal
achievements and then list them in a table provided to this effect, together with an
explanation as to why they consider it an achievement. The information provided
in the activity is private, when the activity is to be done individually, or shared
with friends when it is to be done in collaboration with others in the community.
The CSIRO researchers have access to the information, not Human Services.
Figure 5. A reflection journey through activities
Information from logging, browsing, etc.
CSIRO researchers monitor all activities in the community, including when
people visit the community, what discussion they read, which resources they
examine, etc. This is to enable the researchers to perform a number of analyses on
the community, and provide feedback to Human Services as to the popularity of
the resources or discussion topics. Based on their analysis, the researchers provide
regular reports to Human Services. No individual confidential information is
included in these reports (e.g., no information from the demographic part of the
profiles), and it will not be included in research reports that might be published.
Similarly, as activities are meant to be a personal reflection, individual
information contained in the activities is not provided to Human Services staff.
Based on behavioural information, we have introduced badges, which are
equivalent to loyalty points for various actions in the community: for example, the
reader badge is given to the community members who read and rate the most
number of resources/posts. Badges give us a quick overview of the state of the
community and peoples‘ behaviour (Bista et al., 2012a). Individual members see
their own badges. For privacy reasons, we currently do not make these badges
public to the rest of the community. We have asked community members whether
they would like to make this information public (i.e., know that member X is
reading a lot). We are waiting for answers on these questions to decide whether
we should change our current settings. CSIRO researchers see all the badges, and
make them available to Human Services as well. We do not feel that revealing
badge information to Human Services is problematic ethically, as they do not
reveal private information.
The Next Step community is hosted on a secure site at CSIRO, and all the data
collected is stored on secure computers also at CSIRO. Brownlow and O‘Dell
(2012; p 687) point out that ―researchers need to be careful about the assurance
they give to participants regarding confidentiality‖, given that it is hard to
guarantee the security of electronic communication. Recognising this problem, we
explicitly told our participants in our terms and conditions that ―No data
transmitted over the Internet can be guaranteed as totally secure‖, although ―we
strive to protect your communications‖. In agreement with Brownlow and O‘Dell,
we believe this should be made explicit to participants.
In terms of fidelity of the information provided by participants, all information is
saved verbatim in a secured data base. In our analysis, we will do our best to
ensure we represent the views and stories shared by community members
accurately, when aggregating the data.
Human Services is responsible for the accuracy of the information provided
within the community, for example in the resource section or in answer to
questions in the forum. The Human Services staff involved in the community are
from the communication division. They follow an established internal clearance
process when responding to customers in the forums to ensure information is
approved, typically consulting back with the specific business teams. The
clearance process ensures that all information that is not publically available is
approved by the appropriate business area, at the necessary level, before being
published. Generally responses are published the same day or within 24 hours.
These clearance processes also apply to other content such as resources, videos
and podcasts. Experts in the live chat sessions, such as social workers or policy
experts, have the authority to answer questions in their field of expertise in real
time. If they are uncertain of an answer during a live chat, moderators advise the
community member that their question will be followed up and an answer
provided in the forum. The response to the question then follows the clearance
process described above.
All Human Services moderators have been trained on the legal and privacy issues
that relate to social media moderation. To support them in their role, there are
‗Moderator Guidelines‘, already mentioned earlier in this article. These define the
role of Human Services moderators, the rules of the community, what constitute a
breach of the Terms of Use and the actions to take, other issues to monitor, and
escalation policy. The Human Services moderators work full time in online
community moderation and take quick action when there is a need. Moderators
are objective and impartial ─ they do not censor or delete negative comments,
only those that could threaten or disrespect other community members (there has
not been a need for moderators to delete or amend any comments thus far). We
assume that stories related by participants are true, at least from the participants‘
perspectives.
Human Services owns the information related to their processes, information
sheets, and the video and podcast resources they produce to publish in the
community.
Participants were informed in the Terms of Use of the community that they
assigned to the CSIRO all copyrights contained in their communication on the
site, and that CSIRO researchers could use it (essentially for research and
publication purposes). The CSIRO thus owns that information, as well as all the
data collected. Again, this was specified in the Terms of Use and consent form.
We have set out specific guidelines to deal with the data collected that are as
follows:
 At the end of the trial, a summary of the results will be sent to all participants
who chose to receive it. In addition, the work will be disseminated to the
public through publications to journals and conferences. However, privacy
and confidentially of members will be preserved in this process.
 CSIRO retains the data for five years for the purpose of research. After the
expiration of the retention period, all records will be destroyed by commercial
confidential services. This is the procedure that CSIRO has in place to ensure
the content is completely wiped out the computer disks.
If Next Step was not a research project as it currently is, the issue of property
might be a more delicate one. Would Human Services own all the information
provided by participants? For which purpose? What would happen to the data
collected? We believe that governments engaging with their citizens in online
communities would need to think about such questions, especially from an ethical
point of view.
Accessibility
There is a tension between the provision of IT related services and the fairness of
access and citizen equality. To start with, there is a potential issue with access to a
computer and the internet. In addition, Next Step, like many online communities,
requires people to have access to a broadband network in order to get a decent
response time. We have been made aware through our interactions with our
participants that some only have access to a computer (and broadband) by going
through a library or a training institution. Next Step is a research project, and, as
a result, we did not have to address all these issues. Accessibility is, however, an
issue that governments would need to address if they were to adopt SM-based
support services, at least recognising that it is not necessarily available to all and
might increase inequality through the digital divide.
For Next Step, we still had a number of accessibility constraints. For example,
developing content and services for government means there are restrictions in
terms of IT choices: accessibility guidelines apply, and web content has to be
made accessible not only to people with disabilities, but also to people with
limited internet bandwidths, with older versions of web browser, etc. All
Australian government website must comply with the W3C recommended Web
Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (WCAG10) by December 2013.
As Next Step is a research trial at this stage, we have not had to comply with all
the accessibility guidelines. (It is also worth reminding the reader that we have
only invited people who have already signed up to have an electronic account
with Human Services and thus already interact electronically with the agency.)
We did endeavour to support multiple and older versions of browsers. Conscious
of the fact that broadband access is expensive and that our target group has
restricted financial means, we had to be careful in the types of applications we
deployed, thus also putting constraints on the look-and-feel of the site (for
example, we do not use any Flash-based modules). Finally, we met the
accessibility guidelines for all videos and podcasts, ensuring for example that they
all had a transcript associated with them.
Another concern was to ensure that all information available to community
members would also be available for the public at large, as Human Services
cannot be seen to give an advantage to one subgroup. Related to this concern of
fairness is that of incentives: in online communities, in order to encourage people
to join or be active in the community, incentives are often offered (Burke et al.,
2009). For example, in a commercial site, people might be given a voucher or
loyalty points towards the purchase of a product. Providing such encouragement is
particularly useful when a community is new, as there is an immediate need to
attract participants to ensure the community is alive as soon as possible. This is
called the ―cold start‖ problem: at the start of the community, there are no
members, and the community developers have the challenge of bringing people to
the community, a process called ―bootstrapping the community‖, by, for example,
providing incentives, or making joining and participating in the community a
game, where people can ―win rewards‖ (through high participation). This is called
―gamification‖. In Next Step, we could not give any tangible benefits (whether
monetary, informational or in terms of treatment) for fairness reasons. This made
the bootstrapping of the community and the application of gamification
techniques to the site difficult. We can only encourage members to participate
and be active by telling them that they will learn from and support each other, thus
getting support and easing their transition.
Responsibility of the researchers and results of the
In their discussions of ethical issues for on-line research, Brownlow and O‘Dell
(2012) touch upon the behaviour of the researchers: are the researchers unseen
observers (―lurkers‖); are participants thus ignorant of the fact that they are being
observed?
In Next Step, we did not join an existing community or group as unseen
observers. We were the explicit creators of the community. The community was
clearly branded as government sponsored, as shown in Figure 6. The information
fact sheet about the community also clearly indicated that it was a research
project, in collaboration with CSIRO.
Figure 6. The Next Step Online Community, clearly branded Centrelink
As participants in the community, we are easily identifiable, as our screen names
include our organisations (e.g., ―Cecile-from-CSIRO‖, ―Gigi-from-Human-
Services‖, ―Gina-from-Human-Services‖). Human Services‘ staff are actively
involved and present in the community, answering questions and engaging with
community members on a daily basis. As already mentioned, community
members often address them explicitly (e.g., ―Thank you gigi, That is excellent
information.‖; ―Hi Gigi…‖; ―Thanks Marian , it's just so stressful […] Thanks for
listening and replying‖; ―Thank you for clarifying that for us Gigi. :-) The link
provided was very useful.‖). CSIRO researchers are less engaged in the forum
discussion (because of the requirement that all information posted on the forum
follow the Human Services approval process to ensure accuracy). They are still
present, though, as they post resources, and their profiles are featured (see Figure
7). Community members know they are there and observing the community, as
indicated both in the posts that clearly address one of them (e.g., ―Hi Nathalie…‖)
and in the following post: ―G’day fellow lab rats. […] it’s reassuring that when I
get the feeling that somebody is watching me, I know somebody actually is (I’m
looking at YOU, CSIRO and DHS) and it’s not just a case of delusional
paranoia.”). We are thus definitely not unseen observers. In this regard, we
followed the guidelines of Sharf (1999) for researchers of online research to
clearly introduce themselves as to identity, role, purpose and intention to the
community members. The fact that the community is a research project was also
made very clear to all prospective participants. It was good to see, though, that our
presence and the fact that we are observing and analysing the community does not
seem to inhibit community members from telling their stories or share their
discontent at the process, the legislation or even Centrelink (as illustrated
previously).
Figure 7. A featured profile from one of the CSIRO researchers
Another ethical issue that is often raised is that of the results of the research: how
are they going to be used, and to whose benefits? Will the finished piece be made
available to those who have participated in its creation? (e.g., Brownlow and
O‘Dell, 2012). In terms of research output, we told participants in the information
sheet that they could choose to receive a summary of the research findings (“How
can I find out more about the research? If, at the end, you would like to receive a
summary of the findings of the research, please indicate so when registering your
participation.”) As mentioned earlier, we will be sending to anyone who
requested it a short paper describing the results of the research, written in plain
English. We will also most likely include a link to it on the web site.
The purposes and benefits for the project are varied. The project tests the value of
an online community to support the target group and enables a study of online
communities and their potential in the government domain. An intended benefit
was to determine whether online communities could become a new effective and
efficient way to support Human Services‘ customers, capitalising on the potential
of people helping each other and with the one-to-many communication. Through
the life of the project, other benefits have emerged. Human Services gained
additional insights into a specific target group, including how they understand
their situation, the transition and its requirements, and obstacles they face.
For example, it became clear that participants did not have a full understanding of
legislation and how things work (e.g., Human Services is not responsible for the
policy relating to parents transitioning to a different payment once their youngest
child reaches school age). Human Services was able to uncover some issues in
existing processes and information.
For CSIRO, the benefits are around the research on a number of issues related to
online communities, including their applicability and potential in the government
domain. For the participants, the intended benefits included testing the possibility
that they might develop a support network with others in similar situations, and
get access to experts and resources to help them through the transition. We
believe this benefit has eventuated. Members‘ posts such as the ones shown in
Figure 8 (all posted by the community members, in response to other members‘
posts), illustrate the fact that members are giving each other support, and that this
support is welcome. Posts shown in Figure 9 provide evidence that participants
received information and support from Human Services that is helping them. As it
turns out, an unexpected benefit to participants has been to provide them with a
place to voice their views, and they have expressed satisfaction in being able to do
so, and feeling that they are being heard. The latter, however, is potentially
problematic. We have made it clear that, while Human Services can provide
support and point people in the right direction, it is not responsible for policy. So
we might end up with a mismatch of expectations among participants.
Hello greenvanessa,
I do empathise with your situation as I've been in a similar situation when I lived in a women's refuge.
Though I can look back to those days, I can see that it was tiny forward steps that got me out of that
situation. You have a cleaning job, which is a start - and some cleaning pays much better than it used to
when I was cleaning. Next, if you have access to the internet, see if there are any jobs that can be done
online - just beware of the shonky ones. Here is a freelance site which may be something to try: […]
But view any job you do as a step up the ladder, and don't be too downhearted at starting with cleaning -
they will always need us cleaners. In the meantime, see if you can do an online typing course to sharpen
your data entry and computer skills. There used to be free computer courses for the unemployed in the
days when "skill-share" was in operation - that's how I got out of cleaning and into office work. […]
I hope others can give some advice to you that will be of more help. It's very hard for you now, but keep
your chin up, and keep trying - we all hope that things will turn around for you soon.
All the best~
Well if I made you laugh it was worth posting!!
Good Luck Emm, most cases with getting work now is not what you know but WHO you know. I wish
you success in getting some temp work
What a wonderful story Bunniesmum. Thank you for sharing and how true to life this tale can be.
Best tip ever - find out what day your local supermarkets mark down meat and do the rounds buying it up.
2 pieces of steak for $3 is even cheaper than you can buy mince
Emm, I like your idea of paying the advance on your credit card, I might use some of mine to do that too
and then work on my low interest loan.
Good info Tox!
Please excuse me for interrupting your message here. I noticed that you are considering work for the dole
(that extra $20.80 is very tempting), and out of a sense of decency I want to give you a few pieces of
information that I hope will help you. […]
Figure 8. Members‘ posts illustrating that members are supporting each other
My employment pathway plan has expired and I need a new one and I dont have a job services provider
because I satrted working voluntarily before i had to so I naver got one. This is why I want a face to face
interview. It just seems to many things to organise in one phone call. Also who tells me if the course is
approved centrelink number you provided or tafe. I really appreciate you finding all tis info for me Gigi so I
can be prepared next week"
Thank you, Marian! I can't tell you how much of a relief that is to me!
Thanks Gigi, your support is great. I'd also like to thank you for your promptness in answering our queries
and for looking into more serious issues
Thank you for clarifying that for us Gigi. :-) The link provided was very useful.
Thanks Gigi - I have been reading through the posts and just want to say you are doing a great job under
what can only be very distressing circumstances, trying to help people when there are very few options for
most.
Thank you gigi,
That is excellent information.
Thanks Gigi, info very helpful.
Thanks Marian. It's good to get some positive reinforcement and encouragement. I am actually on the NEIS
program. I have completed the study and am now an official business owner. I just have to get some clients
now.
Figure 9. Members‘ posts indicating that they are obtaining useful information and support from
Human Services
Discussion
We have discussed some ethical issues in Next Step, following Mason‘s (1986)
four key ethical concerns (privacy, accuracy, property and accessibility).
We observe that a subset of these ethical issues arise at each point in the life cycle
of the Next Step community, from inception (naming and branding) to closing
(who owns the data; who sees the results), as illustrated in Figure 10.
The naming of the community (―Next Step‖) needed special attention due to (1)
the connotations it may convey to potential participants and (2) copyrights and
trademarks considerations. The branding of the community has implications to all
parties involved: community provider (Human Services), CSIRO (or a trusted
third party) and community members (Human Services customers). It clearly tells
members who is involved in running the community and provides the perception
of ownership. In addition, a given brand often carries the brand reputation and
social capital with it. It can thus play a significant role in the bootstrapping of the
community. In Next Step, the branding is that of the government (Human
Services). This can be both good and bad, depending on one‘s perspective. In any
case, though, it clearly tells participants that the government is involved.
Figure 10. Ethical considerations in the lifecycle of the community
The next phase is the development of the platform. In this phase, ethical questions
to be considered are: who can see what type of data, who will host the platform,
how to assure the accessibility of the platform, etc. These ethical questions are
addressed using the existing policies and guidelines from the two organisations:
CSIRO and Human Services. CSIRO being the developer and host of the
platform, its policies and guidelines play a prominent role in this phase.
Human Services is responsible for developing and publishing the content, and
thus existing policies and guidelines in Human Services are applied during this
phase.
The ongoing support and maintenance of the platform involves not only ethical
issues related to providing accurate information in answering questions raised in
forum and live chat, but also the duty of care by providing the emotional support
through continuous monitoring of the community.
There are two types of user generated content. One is private, and, as a result, not
visible to other community members or to Human Services. The public content is
visible to all: community members, CSIRO and Human Services. CSIRO owns
the user generated data.
Finally, the closing phase of the community should have explicit guidelines for
dealing with data collected during the lifetime of the community: how long the
data is retained, how the data is destroyed after the expiration of retention period,
etc.
Our work on Next Step has forced us to examine the ethical issues relevant at
each phase and to realise what a balancing act it could be to, on the one hand,
ensure the privacy of community members while, on the other hand, also
protecting them and ensuring their safety and fulfilling the government‘s legal
responsibilities. The work has highlighted the complexity of the problem,
especially when an online community involves a government department and
welfare recipients with a dependency relationship with that department. We
believe that special care must be taken in such cases and hope that governments
wishing to engage with their citizens using social media will pay attention to these
concerns.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been funded under the Human Services Delivery Research
Alliance (HSDRA) between the CSIRO and the Australian Department of Human
Services. We would like to thank Payam Aghaei Pour, Hon Hwang, Brian Jin,
Alex Sun and Bo Yan at CSIRO for their contribution to the implementation of
this work, the Digital Media team in the Communication Division at the
Australian Government‘s Department of Human Services for their contribution
and support, and all the participants in Next Step.