Ethical, Legal and Social aspects of Information
and Communication Technology
Minati Mishra
Dept of ICT, FM University, Balasore
Abstract: In this era of computers and communication technology where
computers and internet have made their ways to every sphere of life from
offices to residences, reservation counters to banks to post offices, small
retail shops to big organizations, health care units to entertainment
industries etc., there emerged numerous questions regarding the ethical and
legal uses of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Like any
other technological inventions ICT too has created both positive and
negative impacts on the society. This paper aims at exploring some of these
issues in brief.
Key Words: Ethics, Internet, privacy, security, cyber crimes, piracy,
phishing, identity theft, ICT.
1. Ethics and law
Ethics defines what is good for an individual as well as for the society and
establishes the nature of duties that people owe themselves and one another.
Human beings have the ability, partly innate and partly acquired, to judge
human actions as morally good or bad, right or wrong. Even though “good /
right” and “bad / wrong” do not mean the same thing for all still, everyone
possesses a notion of right and wrong. Early morning music practice or use
of insecticides/ repellents in her house, for example, though is very much
ethical to my next-door neighbor; they are certainly not so to me! These
differences again are not only individual but also cultural. Polygamy, for
example, is a normal behavior and well acceptable to Muslims whereas not
so for Hindus! Of course, in spite of all sorts of diversified opinions, ethics
have a universal component. Killing an innocent person, for example, is not
morally acceptable to anyone of us irrespective of our culture and belief.
Though law often embodies ethical principles, law and ethics are far from
co-extensive. In an ideal world, the moral and legal acts may mean the
same but they are not same in the real world. Many acts that would be
widely condemned as unethical are not prohibited by law and the reverse is
also equally true. Not helping one’s friend when he/she is in need, for
example, may not seems to be moral but not violation of any law too. Our
state forbids recruitment of a non-reserved category candidate against few
reserved category seats but, does not it contradict the overt moral
imperative that there should be no discrimination among people based on
cast, creed, religion and color?
Though it would be exaggerating and skeptical to infer that there is no
connection altogether between ethics and the law but at most what the law
will give us is a rough indication of practices, rather than an absolute
criterion, valid for a particular place at a particular time deemed socially
desirable, partly for moral reasons and partly for others. [1][2]
2. Ethical, Legal and Social aspects of ICT
Every technological invention has got both positive and negative impacts
on the society. Einstein while giving the nuclear power theory as has never
expected that his discovery shall ever be used for such a devastating
destruction at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, it too was not known during the
19ths that communication technology of late shall have so many alarming
direction associated with it.
For example, ICT provides easier and efficient means of storage and
retrieval of information but at the same time suffers from piracy of
copyrighted materials, software, data, music, video etc. at large scales.
Internet provides instant access to all sorts of useful information at finger
tip but at the same time suffers from plagiarism, illegal uploading,
downloading, copying, stealing and misuse of intellectual property. ICT has
created high-end job opportunities for the techies in one hand and on the
other hand has created sever unemployment among non-tech groups.
Communication Technology has made trade, investment, business simpler
and unruffled through e-commerce and on-line transactions but suffers
from cyber crimes, forgery, sabotage, hacking and loss. Internet has made
the whole world a small intellectual village but at the same time is polluted
with horrid contents like pornography, spam, worms and viruses.
Therefore, it is high time now for careful inspection of the legal and ethical
aspects of ICT as there are not enough guidelines available in this field as
compared to those available in conventional branches of science
and technology. More importantly, now ICT is not limited to the scientists
and software engineers alone rather it has become a widespread
phenomenon, affecting people at various stages in their role, as customers,
service provider, participants, middlemen etc. So it has become the moral
responsibility of the sociologist, business people and scientists to decide in
which way ICT can be best utilized [8].
2.1 Privacy, Integrity, Security and Protection of Information & the
Privacy means providing confidentiality to our personal data. One may not
like, for example, to make public one’s insurance details, medical history
etc.
Information Integrity means the information provided should be relevant,
complete, up-to-date, trustworthy and available in time. A job alert after the
recruitment is over or without the address of the employer or to a student
who is in his/her high school, for example, is hardly of any use.
Security and protection concerned with protection against accidental or
intentional destruction or disclosure of data and programs by unscrupulous
persons and in case data loss occurs how to recover it.
The Internet is a global technology network (WAN) made up of many
smaller contributing networks (LANs, MANs, CANs etc.) to support the
open exchange of information among many different kinds of institutions,
organizations and individuals all over the world. Internet, no doubt, is a
boon to the present society by providing answers to almost every problem
and need of mankind but at the same time, can be its greatest enemy as
well. We can be in touch with our friends thousands of miles away from us;
can pursue a course in MIT while sitting in a small village of India, Consult
with doctors of international repute sitting at our own home, reserve
air/rail/bus tickets, sale/purchase goods, transact money, refer
books/literatures/journals/newspapers and gather information with ease and
almost free of cost and instantly which otherwise would have cost a lot of
time, money and hectic travels. The above list is just indicative and the
detail list can include lot many other usage. But unfortunately, in this age of
Internet, it is very easy for scrupulous persons for attacking into one’s
privacy, to have access into one’s private information, corrupt and destroy
valuable data and assets though viruses and worms. And most importantly,
the way day by day we are becoming more and more dependant on data
processed by computers if, the input data is corrupted or there is some
undetectable bug in the program then the output information is bound to
lose integrity. Therefore utmost care should be taken maintain data
integrity and unfortunately, the bad boys in the cyber world too are well
aware of this fact and they work even harder to breach the security. And
more unfortunately, the cyber crimes today are again not limited to the
categories mentioned above but everyday there emerging some new forms
of crimes. According to Dayanidhi Maran, the union minister of ICT, “The
rapid increase of the computers and internet has given rise to new forms of
crimes like – phishing and identity theft”. “The banks are in a tough
position” says one FBI agent on context of the most brazen identity thief in
US who has stolen more than $260 million of other people’s money.
According to him, “The Banks are torn between customer service and
security. They want to make it easy for customers to access information, to
see/ handle their accounts online. But that also makes it easy for the
criminals”. Abraham Abdallah, the audacious criminal has just took
advantage of the loopholes in the most sophisticated on-line transaction
system of US to gather the whole lot of money from other accounts before
got caught by the New York Police Department (NYPD) in march
2001[3][4]. Though there is no official count of Indian victims of Identity
Theft, the crime is steadily growing and according to RW Chua of online
Fraud Asia which records and tries to eliminate online crime in Asian
region, out of 50 Asians who go online at least one becomes a victim of
identity crime. In US the estimated number of crimes in as large as 10
million per year and the crime is labeled by the Govt. authorities as the
white-collar crime since late 1990s. And seeing the elevating identity theft
rates in India, the IT Act of 2000 is being tightened. According to IT
amendment Bill 2006, identity theft is made an offence punishable with up
to five years of imprisonment and a fine. Another most common type of
cyber scam of today is phishing in which the crooks send bogus emails
tricking the user into giving up personal information at fake websites that
resemble those of legitimate financial institutions and other commercial
outfits. And the volume of these phishing emails is almost .7 billion
messages per day, according to Symantec. Most probably all most all of us,
who are using Internet for sometimes back, might have some experience of
phishing emails. One afternoon during This June when I got a call at my
residence from one of my colleague Dr. S Goswamy narrating how he is
not allowed to operate his own Yahoo ID following certain correspondence
with the Yahoo-group itself, I had experienced how crooked and clever
these phishermen are. Another common type of scam is “pharming”, in
which genuine websites are hit with malicious codes that takes those visit
them to look alike sites where every information given by the user is
recorded without the sliest knowledge of the naïve[5][6]. This list of cyber
crimes nowadays is just endless and therefore it is advisable first and fore
mostly, to think carefully about what to say and how to say while
communicating over the net as while communicating this way we don’t see
the physical persons we are communicating with, are not sure about their
age, sex etc and there is no way to be assured of fact that what they are
telling is true. Secondly, every user who goes on-line should have installed
with a licensed security software and should update the database regularly
so as to enable the software to recognize the new signatures. Thirdly,
unsolicited emails should always be deleted instantly without opening and
firewalls, filters, security options should be set properly so as to block such
unwanted and malicious traffic.
2.2 ICT in Medicine and Health care
ICT plays an increasingly important role in the field of medicines and
diagnosis. Today, ICT in medicine is not only used for storing, processing,
modeling and transmitting patient data rather has given rise to completely
new diagnostic tools such as CT(computer tomography), CAT scan,
ultrasound, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), functional MRI, PET
(positron emission tomography) etc that help inspection of the inner body
without dissection or invasion. The new medical imaging methodologies
where are opening enormous possibilities for diagnosis and scientific
investigation at the same time are posing new epistemological, ethical and
validity problems e.g., bodily properties that can be visualized in a one-to-
one scale are emphasized in favor of those which cannot be locally and
distinguishably represented within a picture, the pictures may contain
artifacts stemming from technology itself or from the interaction between
the technical depiction and the living body [7].
3. Summary
With the growth of ICT from its infantry of 19th centuries to today’s mighty
form there emerged numerous questions regarding the ethical and legal uses
of ICT from time to time. Ethics of ICT and indeed the ethical theory in
general has typically been concerned with the normative analysis of
individual intentional action. The standard topics of computer ethics such
as invasions of privacy, misuse of personal data and disputed ownership of
intellectual property appear to lend themselves well to such analysis, and
because organizations and states are intentional agents too issues of
regulation, legislation, corporate responsibility and other forms of
collective action have also been relatively amenable to this approach.
However, another set of normative issues exists of equal or arguably
perhaps greater importance is the role played by ICT in globalization and
eradication of poverty etc. Every technological developments and
inventions, after all, are for the need and betterment of the society and
should be helpful in the upliftment of the society.
Reference:
1. www.wikipedia.org
2. Bertrand Meyer, “Ethics of free Software”, Software Development,
March 2000
3. Mark Boal, “Being Bill Gates, Steven Spielberg”, RD-June2005
4. Santhosh Patel, “Virtual Information and Intellectual Freedom”
Authorspress, 2003.
5. ED Shanahan, “ID Thieves’ new tricks”, RD- July 2007, 168-173
6. Justine Johnstone, “Technology as empowerment: a capability
approach to computer ethics”, Ethics and Information Technology,
2007, 9:73-87
7. G. Marckmann, KW Goodman, “Ethics of IT in health care”, IRIE,
Vol.5, 2006
8. S. Patnaik, Information Technology, Dhanpat Rai & Co Pvt. Ltd,