Evolutionary genomics of transposable elements in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Martin Carr*1, Douda Bensasson2 and Casey M. Bergman2
1 School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield,
2 Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13
*Author for correspondence:
School of Applied Sciences
University of Huddersfield
Queensgate
Huddersfield
United Kingdom
Telephone: +44 484-471676
email: MartCarr74@gmail.com
Version: 31 August 2012
! 1!
!
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is one of the premier model systems for studying the
genomics and evolution of transposable elements. The availability of the S. cerevisiae
genome led to unprecedented insights into its five known transposable element
families (the LTR retrotransposons Ty1-Ty5) in the years shortly after its completion.
However, subsequent advances in bioinformatics tools for analysing transposable
elements and the recent availability of genome sequences for multiple strains and
species of yeast motivates new investigations into Ty evolution in S. cerevisiae.
Here we provide a comprehensive phylogenetic and population genetic analysis of all
Ty families in S. cerevisiae based on a systematic re-annotation of Ty elements in the
S288c reference genome. We show that previous annotation efforts have
underestimated the total copy number of Ty elements for all known families. In
addition, we identify a new family of Ty3-like elements related to the S. paradoxus
Ty3p which is composed entirely of degenerate solo LTRs. Phylogenetic analyses of
LTR sequences identified three families with short-branch, recently active clades
nested among long branch, inactive insertions (Ty1, Ty3, Ty4), one family with
essentially all recently active elements (Ty2) and two families with only inactive
elements (Ty3p and Ty5). Population genomic data from 38 additional strains of S.
cerevisiae show that elements present in active clades are predominantly
polymorphic, whereas most of the inactive elements are fixed. Finally, we use
comparative genomic data to provide evidence that the Ty2 and Ty3p families have
arisen in the S. cerevisiae genome by horizontal transfer.
Our results demonstrate that the genome of a single individual contains important
information about the state of TE population dynamics within a species and suggest
that horizontal transfer may play an important role in shaping the genomic diversity of
transposable elements in unicellular eukaryotes.
Key words: horizontal transfer, phylogenetics, population genetics, transposable
elements, yeast
! 2!
!
Introduction
Transposable elements (TEs) have been shown to be a component of most, although
not all, studied eukaryotic genomes [1]. Empirical and theoretical work from a broad
range of host organisms suggests that TE insertions are generally deleterious and that
natural selection acts to suppress proliferation in host populations [2,3,4,5,6,7].
Classically, it has been thought that a balance between increases in copy number by
transposition and selection against deleterious insertions govern the dynamics of TE
evolution [8]. However, more recent work has shown that some proportion of TE
insertions may also evolve under positive selection (e.g. [9,10,11,12,13]), and that TE
families undergo horizontal transfer at a higher rate than previously anticipated (e.g.
[14,15,16,17]). In the genomics era, many unresolved questions about the factors that
control TE evolution can now be addressed with the growing volumes of available
sequence data.
The first eukaryote to have its genome completely sequenced was the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae [18]. This landmark achievement allowed unprecedented
insights into the impact that TEs have on genome structure and evolution. The 12.2
Mb yeast genome is known to harbour five families of TEs, Ty1 through Ty5, all of
which are long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons [19]. Ty1 and Ty2 have been
studied intensively and are known to be active families [20] that together make up
~75% of the Ty insertions in the reference genome [21,22]. These two closely-related
families can be differentiated by sequence divergence in their gag open-reading frame
(ORF) and a hypervariable region of the pol ORF [22]. In contrast, the only fixed
difference between their LTR sequences is a one base pair deletion present in all
copies of Ty2 [22]. The high level of nucleotide identity between Ty1 and Ty2 LTRs
permits interfamily recombination, and elements with hybrid Ty1/2 LTRs are present
in the S. cerevisiae genome [23]. The smaller families Ty3-Ty5 have been
characterised to a more limited extent: Ty3 is thought to be an active family [24] with
full-length elements in the genome; full-length copies of Ty4 exist in the genome but
transposition of this family has not been observed [25]; and there are no longer any
functionally-intact copies of Ty5 in the yeast genome [19].
The abundance of Ty elements varies considerably between populations of S.
cerevisiae, with lab strains tending to possess greater abundance than wild
! 3!
!
populations [26,27]. The relatively low copy numbers observed in wild populations,
despite ongoing transposition, is consistent with the proliferation of elements being
held in check by natural selection. Work by Blanc et al. [28] has suggested that the
presence of a single Ty element insert results in a <2% loss of fitness. Not all Ty
element insertions result in deleterious mutations, however, with some Ty insertions
being proposed to play adaptive roles in the evolution of gene regulation [29]. As with
other eukaryotes, the evolutionary and genomic forces that control TE abundance and
variation in yeast remain a matter of debate, necessitating detailed investigation of the
copy number, allele frequency and sequence variation of Ty elements within and
among S. cerevisiae genomes.
Kim et al. [22] conducted the first systematic survey of Ty insertions in the S.
cerevisiae reference genome, determining both the copy number and genomic
distribution of all five known Ty families and performing a phylogenetic analysis of
Ty1 and Ty2 LTR sequences. Jordan and McDonald [30] used the element copies
identified by Kim et al. [22] to show that all five Ty families exhibit low levels of
sequence variation in their ORFs and appear to be evolving under purifying selection.
Comparative analysis involving other species of Saccharomyces sensu stricto clade
[31,32,33,34] provides evidence that Ty families have been inherited both vertically
and horizontally within the Saccharomyces genus, as well as undergoing occasional
loss from their host's genome. These insights into the evolution of Ty families in
Saccharomyces species have been based primarily on single reference genomes.
Genomic analysis of Ty elements in multiple individuals within species has, until very
recently, required sophisticated microarray techniques to be devised [35,36,37].
However, with the advent of high-throughput re-sequencing approaches, it is now
possible to add a population genomic perspective to the evolution of Ty elements in
yeast species [27,38,39,40,41,42].
Here we investigate the evolutionary genomics of all Ty families in S. cerevisiae
using a combination of bioinformatic, phylogenetic and population genomic
approaches. We first provide a re-annotation of the S. cerevisiae reference genome,
showing a considerably larger copy number than that originally reported by Kim et al.
[22]. The majority of newly discovered Ty insertions are small, degenerate fragments
that provide important data for inferring the evolutionary history of these families. In
addition to finding new insertions of all five known Ty families, we also find
! 4!
!
insertions for a previously unannotated family, Ty3p. We then conduct phylogenetic
and molecular evolutionary analyses on LTR sequences of all Ty families, which
provide insight into the transpositional activity and evolutionary history of these
families. For all Ty copies present in the reference genome, we also determine their
presence or absence in a large sample of genomes from the Saccharomyces Genome
Resequencing Project (SGRP) [27] and map this population genomic data onto Ty
element phylogenies. In general, we find strong concordance between inferences of
insertion history based on phylogenetic analysis with those based on population
genomic evidence, but also identify a small subset of young Ty insertions at high
frequency that may be under the influence of natural selection. Finally, we investigate
the origins of Ty2 and Ty3p in S. cerevisiae by phylogenetic analysis of the Ty1/Ty2
and Ty3/Ty3p super-families in the Saccharomyces sensu stricto clade, and provide
evidence that both Ty2 and Ty3p in S. cerevisiae arose by horizontal transfer at
different times in the past. Together our results demonstrate that the reference genome
of a single individual contains important information about the state of TE population
dynamics within a species, but that full insight into TE evolutionary genomics
requires complete genome sequences from multiple individuals and species.
! 5!
!
Materials and Methods
Re-annotation of Ty elements in S. cerevisiae
The June 2008 (sacCer2) version of the S. cerevisiae genome was downloaded from
the UCSC Genome database and screened for TE sequences using RepeatMasker
open-3.1.6 using a custom yeast TE library that includes Ty1-Ty5 from S. cerevisiae
as well as Ty3p from S. paradoxus (File S1). Our custom TE library was constructed
by exporting "saccharomyces" from the 20061006 RepeatMasker library, removing
the redundant TY sequence, replacing TY4 with the first LTR element (positions 262-
632) and internal sequence (positions 633-6116) from GenBank accession X67284
[43], adding the Ty3p LTR (Genbank: AY198187) and internal sequences (positions
306-4980 of Genbank: AY198186) [32], and renaming fasta headers for consistency.
The decision to include Ty3p in our library was based on preliminary analyses that
revealed additional Ty3-like sequences in the S. cerevisiae genome that were not fully
identified using the Ty3 element as a query.
RepeatMasker output was then processed with REANNOTATE version 26.11.2007
(options: -g -f -d 10000) [44] in order to join LTRs to internal sequences and
defragment nested and degenerate insertions (see Figure 1 for an example screenshot
of the REANNOTATE output). LTR sequences from Ty1 and Ty2 were treated as
equivalent in the defragmentation process. We then compared individual Ty copies
from the REANNOTATE output to Ty annotations in sacCer2 taken from SGD and a
small number were manually edited to correct any obvious errors. In total, 10 Ty
annotations from the REANNOTATE output were manually split or joined to correct
defragmentation problems, and coordinate spans of an additional 19 REannotate
fragments were updated to remove redundant overlaps among features.
LTR sequences of Ty1 and Ty2 are distinguished by a single base pair deletion in
Ty2 elements [22]. We labelled LTRs identified by REANNOTATE from either of these
families as Ty2 when this deletion could clearly be identified. We also re-evaluated
the identity of all Ty1 and Ty2 LTRs after a preliminary phylogenetic analysis of
LTRs from both families. All LTRs nested within the Ty2 clade, including those that
had secondary deletions spanning the diagnostic one bp Ty2 deletion, were then
relabelled as Ty2 inserts. In total, 85 LTR fragments were relabelled from Ty1 to Ty2
or vice versa. The final dataset of curated Ty annotations can be found in File S2 and
! 6!
!
the RepeatMasker/REANNOTATE fragments supporting these annotations can be found
in File S3.
Phylogenetic analysis of paralogous LTR sequences
Multiple alignments of paralogous LTRs were created individually for all five
families (Ty1, Ty2, Ty3+Ty3p, Ty4 and Ty5) using MUSCLE 3.7 [45]. Phylogenetic
trees were generated from each alignment using maximum likelihood and Bayesian
inference analyses. The maximum likelihood analyses were performed using RAxML
7.2.6 [46] on raxmlGUI 0.9.3. The analyses were initiated with 100 parsimony trees,
created using the recommended GTRCAT model incorporating 25 site-rate
categories, and bootstrapped with 1,000 replicates. Parameters for each analysis were
determined by RAxML. Bayesian phylogenies were created using MrBayes 3.1.2
[47]. MrBayes analyses were run using a GTR+I+! model and a four-category
gamma distribution. Searches consisted of two parallel chain sets run at default
temperatures, with a sample frequency of 10, until they had reached convergence (i.e.
average standard deviation of split frequencies equal to 0.01) or had ran for 5,000,000
generations. Runs consisted of a minimum of 500,000 generations. The first 25% of
sampled trees were discarded as burnin before calculating posterior probabilities.
Phylogenies of the Ty3/Ty3p and Ty1/Ty2 super-families were created using LTR
sequences from multiple Saccharomyces sensu stricto species. Sequence similarity
searches were performed on the genomes of S. bayanus, S. castellii, S. kluyveri, S.
kudriavzevii, S. mikatae, S. paradoxus, S. servazii and S. unisporus. LTR sequences
were extracted using WU-BLAST2 at SGD using the 3' LTRs of u11 (Ty3) and u23
(Ty2) as the query sequences. With the exception of the highly degenerate Ty3p LTR
sequences in S. cerevisiae, hits were filtered to a minimum length of 280 bp and an E-
value of 1x10-10 for inclusion in these alignments. For each super-family, LTR
sequences from each species were first aligned in MUSCLE and preliminary
phylogenies were created from the unedited alignments using RAxML with 100 rapid
bootstrap replicates using the GTRCAT model. These preliminary phylogenies were
used to identify short branch (presumably recently active) sequences that spanned the
diversity of active elements from each species for inclusion in the multi-species
alignment. The final multispecies datasets were aligned using MUSCLE and
! 7!
!
maximum likelihood phylogenies were created following the same protocol as used
for the individual S. cerevisiae Ty families. MrBayes analyses were also performed,
running for 5,000,000 generations, a sampling frequency of 100 and with a burnin of
12,500, using the same protocol as for the individual Ty families. Nexus files for the
Ty3/Ty3p and Ty1/Ty2 super-family alignments can be found in File S4 and S5,
respectively.
For the Ty1/Ty2 superfamily the total number of hits from S. mikatae was 145, of
which 44 were excluded on the basis of their long-branch length. LTR sequences of
full-length Ty1 elements from S. cerevisiae (excluding the recombinant Ty1/Ty2
hybrid elements) were added to the dataset, as were LTR sequences of Ty2 from S.
cerevisiae (excluding the long branch elements s304, st39, st3, st97, st98 and st107).
For the Ty3 super-family, the Ty3p LTRs from S. cerevisiae were restricted to the
seven longest sequences (which had a minimum length of 175 bp).
Molecular evolutionary analyses of paralogous LTR sequences
Phylogenetic trees were inspected and used to classify individual elements in the
reference genome manually as being derived from 'active' or 'inactive' clades. Short-
branch LTRs from clades with full-length elements were classified as active
irrespective of whether the insert was itself still capable of transposition (e.g. a short-
branch solo LTR from a recent intra-element recombination event would be classified
as being in an active clade). LTRs present on long branches were classified as being
in inactive clades. Separate alignments were created for all, inactive and active
paralogous LTR sequences using MUSCLE, with only the 5' LTR included from full-
length elements containing both LTRs. An archive of all the paralogous LTR
alignments used for molecular evolutionary analysis can be found in File S6.
Nucleotide diversity between paralogous LTRs in the three datasets (all, inactive
and active) for each family was determined in DnaSP 5.1 [48] using " [49] and # [50].
Tajima's D [51] was calculated from the alignments of active elements to detect
departures from expected patterns of nucleotide diversity under a standard neutral
model of sequence evolution with families that have a constant rate of insertion that
are at copy number and coalescent equilibrium [52,53,54].
Recombination events between recently active elements were identified with two
! 8!
!
datasets using Hudson and Kaplan's R [55]. First, the minimum number of
recombination events (R ) was determined for all full-length elements for Ty1, Ty2
and Ty4. Second, we determined R for all LTR sequences of active elements for Ty1,
Ty2, Ty3 and Ty4. This second dataset was constructed to increase the number of
paralogous elements included in this analysis, albeit at the expense of sequence
length. Because of limited data, Ty3, Ty3p and Ty5 were excluded from analyses of
recombination in full-length elements, and Ty3p and Ty5 were excluded from
analyses of recombination among recently active LTRs.
Population genomic analyses of orthologous Ty insertions
S. cerevisiae resequencing data was downloaded from the SGRP ftp site:
ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/dmc/yeast/latest/misc.tgz (last modified on 20/9/08).
Coordinates of re-annotated Ty elements in the sacCer2 reference genome were
transferred to the coordinate system of the SGRP reference genome from the by
extracting the entire insertion including ±200 bp of flanking sequence from the
sacCer2 genome and searching for an exact match in the SGRP reference genome.
SGRP based coordinates were then used to extract multiple alignments of sequenced
nucleotides prior to imputation using alicat.pl (option: q40). The S. cerevisiae strains
involved were: 273614N, 322134S, 378604X, BC187, DBVPG1106, DBVPG1373,
DBVPG1788, DBVPG1853, DBVPG6040, DBVPG6044, DBVPG6765, K11,
L_1374, L_1528, NCYC110, NCYC361, RM11_1A, S288c, SK1,
UWOPS03_461_4, UWOPS05_217_3, UWOPS05_227_2, UWOPS83_787_3,
UWOPS87_2421, W303, Y12, Y55, Y9, YIIc17_E5, YJM789, YJM975, YJM978,
YJM981, YPS128, YPS606, YS2, YS4, YS9. Resulting multiple alignments were
viewed in Seaview 3.2 [56] and each Ty insertion was manually classified as present,
absent or missing data for all 38 strains of S. cerevisiae. Insertion sites were then
classified as fixed (scored as present or missing data in all genomes), polymorphic
(scored as both present and absent in genomes with data), or S288c-only (found only
in the S288c reference genome). Alignments of population genomic data in the SGRP
strains for each Ty insertion can be found in File S7.
! 9!
!
Re-evaluation of TE content and copy number in the S288c reference genome
We reannotated Ty elements in the reference S. cerevisiae genome and found a total
of 483 Ty element insertions (Table 1; Files S2 and S3), which is ~46% higher than
the estimate of 331 by Kim et al. [22]. Increased copy number is observed for all five
previously annotated Ty families, but is greatest for the most abundant family Ty1
(Table 1). Our reannotation uncovered 406,829 bp of DNA (3.35%) in the S.
cerevisiae reference genome that was of recognisable Ty element origin. This value is
only ~30 kb greater than the estimate of Kim et al. [22], indicating that the majority
of previously unannotated Ty insertions we identify are small fragments. The majority
of the 152 new insertions identified here are degenerate solo LTRs, reinforcing the
findings of Kim et al. [22] that full-length elements only make up a small proportion
of Ty insertions in S. cerevisiae.
Fifteen of the newly annotated inserts were identified by including Ty3p (a Ty3
family from S. paradoxus [32]) as a query. Evidence for Ty3p sequences in the S.
cerevisiae genome has not previously been reported, although a solo LTR
(YNLWsigma2) previously annotated as a Ty3 insertion by Kim et al. [22] on
chromosome XIV corresponds to a copy of Ty3p, s349, found here. Ty3p insertions
are present only as solo LTRs in S. cerevisiae (Table 1 and Figure 5) and thus, like
Ty5, this lineage is comprised entirely of non-functional insertions in S. cerevisiae.
We do not believe that the Ty3p sequences we detect in S. cerevisiae are simply
ancient copies from the Ty3 lineage, since a phylogeny of the Ty3 super-family
(Figure 2) across the Saccharomyces genus showed that Ty3 and Ty3p are distinct
lineages that are separated by strongly supported branches (maximum likelihood
bootstrap percentage, mlBP !70%, Bayesian inference posterior probability,
biPP!0.95). The S. cerevisiae Ty3 elements form a sister-group with the Ty3
sequences of S. mikatae, while the highly degenerate S. cerevisiae Ty3p insertions a
found in a well-supported clade with the Ty3p sequences of S. paradoxus and S.
kudriavzevii. Furthermore, both Ty3 and Ty3p lineages are present and recently active
in S. kudriavzevii suggesting that these are indeed distinct lineages. These results are
consistent with the origin of the Ty3p family in S. cerevisiae by horizontal transfer
! 10!
!
(see below), and justify treatment of the S. cerevisiae Ty3p as a distinct family in the
following analyses.
We identified only one additional full-length element, a Ty1 element (u19, on
chromosome XII) relative to the SGD annotation of Ty elements on the sacCer2
genome. Examination of this region of Chromosome XII reveals a 5,926 bp element
that possesses 338 bp LTRs and encodes putative TYA (Gag) and TYB (Pol) proteins.
This insertion was erroneously annotated in the sacCer2 SGD annotation as two solo
LTRs (YLRCdelta2 and YLRCdelta3) [22].
Kim et al. [22] classified all Ty insertions either as full-length or solo LTRs. Our
re-annotation also identified a new class of five "truncated" elements generated
through deletions of genomic DNA rather than LTR-LTR recombination. Three of the
truncated elements (t41, t120 and t194) were identified previously as solo LTRs [22]
while the other two truncated elements (t219 and t220), which both lack any LTR
sequence, have not been identified previously.
Molecular evolution of paralogous Ty LTR sequences
Variation among paralogous sequences of Ty elements in the S. cerevisiae reference
genome allows indirect observations to be made of element activity using both
phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary approaches. Recently transposed elements
are unlikely to have accumulated a large number of mutations that differentiate them
from their parental element; therefore recently active TEs are expected to exhibit
short branches in phylogenetic trees generated from paralogous LTRs in a single
genome. Likewise, active TE families that have undergone a recent increase in copy
number will harbour an excess of sequence differences between paralogous copies
that are at low frequency in the sample, resulting in a negative value of the Tajima's D
statistic [53,54]. This pattern is analogous to the signature of recent population growth
in population genetic analyses of an orthologous loci [51]. Finally, patterns of
molecular variation that arise from genetic exchange can be used to detect gene
conversion or recombination between paralogous Ty sequences in the past. Results for
these three approaches are presented below to infer aspects of the evolutionary history
for each Ty family.
! 11!
!
Ty1 has a much higher copy number (n=313) than all other Ty families present in the
S. cerevisiae genome (Table 1; see also [22]). Long branch, presumably inactive,
insertions make up the majority (~87%, n=272; Table 2) of Ty1 insertions; these are
exclusively solo LTRs (Figure 3). Short branch, presumably active Ty1 elements
cluster together on the phylogeny, suggesting that all such elements have a recent
common ancestry. There are a total of 41 Ty1 elements that appear to have inserted
recently into the reference genome (Table 2, Figure 3). Eight of these young elements
have subsequently undergone intra-element LTR-LTR recombination to become solo
LTRs.
The phylogeny also supports subdivision of the active Ty1 lineages into three
previously proposed subfamilies [22,23] that we refer to as "canonical" Ty1, Ty1' and
Ty1/Ty2 (Figure 3). The majority of Ty1 insertions are from the canonical,
presumably ancestral, subfamily. In the clade containing the active canonical class,
there are fourteen full-length elements and one solo LTR. The Ty1' subfamily [22] is
characterised by its highly divergent gag ORF. In addition to the three full-length
elements described by Kim et al. [22], we identify a further five solo LTRs in the Ty1'
subfamily. The Ty1 phylogeny also supports a clade of 18 recombinant Ty1/2
elements [23], which fall into two distinct groups. The maximum likelihood tree
places five long-branch solo LTRs within the Ty1/2 clade (shown as collapsed red
clades in Figure 3), however their positions are not strongly supported and they are
not recovered in this position in the Bayesian tree (data not shown). Fourteen of the
Ty1/2 elements have previously been described and the approximate sites of
recombination mapped [23,57]. The newly identified hybrid elements appear to show
the same recombination breakpoints (File S8).
LTR sequences of the active Ty1 elements harbour greater nucleotide diversity in
comparison to the LTRs of active elements from other families (Table 2). Tajima's D
for the active Ty1 elements is positive, rather than negative (Table 2). It is unlikely
that this result is due to a recent contraction in the number of elements within the
genome; the phylogeny strongly suggests that Ty1 is currently transposing in S.
cerevisiae, a result confirmed in numerous studies (e.g. [58,59]). A more probable
explanation is the presence of multiple active Ty1 subfamilies (see above, Figure 3).
This phylogenetic sub-structure (like population subdivision) will result in
! 12!
!
intermediate frequency polymorphisms in the total population of active elements,
leading to a positive value of D among paralogous Ty1 elements within the reference
genome. Separate alignments of only canonical, Ty1', or Ty1/2 elements however all
exhibit a negative value for Tajima's D (data not shown), consistent with their recent
transposition.
Patterns of sequence diversity provide evidence for recombination between the
full-length Ty1 copies that have integrated into the genome, with a minimum of 41
recombination events occurring between the 32 full-length elements. These results are
consistent with recombination among paralogous sequences occurring at low
frequency [60].
The total copy number of Ty2 (n=46) is similar to those of Ty3 (n=45) and Ty4
(n=49), but substantially lower than Ty1 (Table 1). The Ty2 phylogeny is poorly
resolved under both maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference methods (Figure 4).
Unlike Ty1, Ty3 and Ty4 there is no clear separation of long-branch, inactive elements
and short branch, putatively active elements. There are nine long-branch solo LTRs in
the phylogeny, which are presumably older inserts, however they do not cluster
together. The remaining 35 inserts are present on short branches and appear to have
recently integrated. Intra-element LTR-LTR recombination or truncation has
converted 23 of the 35 recently integrated copies to solo LTRs.
Consistent with a poorly resolved phylogeny, Ty2 elements have diverged less in
comparison to all other families in the S. cerevisiae genome. Recent common ancestry
of most Ty2 copies seems to be the most likely explanation of the poorly resolved
phylogeny and relatively low nucleotide diversity in comparison to the other TE
families in the genome (see below). A negative value of Tajima's D is consistent with
the recent arrival of Ty2 elements in the S. cerevisiae genome (Table 2).
In spite of their recent origin, there is evidence that paralogous copies of Ty2 are
undergoing recombination, similar to Ty1. A minimum of 19 recombination events
can be detected between the 13 full-length copies of Ty2 and recently integrated Ty2
LTR sequences also show evidence for three recombination events among paralogous
copies.
! 13!
!
The 45 copies of Ty3 exhibit lower levels of nucleotide diversity than most other
families, with only copies of Ty2 showing less variation (Table 2). The Ty3 phylogeny
exhibits long-branch, older inserts as well as a single clade containing putatively
active elements (Figure 5). Nested among the short branch, younger inserts are two
clades of long branch LTRs. The placements of the two long branch clades have no
support (mlBP <50%, biPP<0.70), are not supported by the Bayesian phylogeny, and
their placement in the tree are most likely to be phylogenetic artefacts.
The active clade of Ty3 (excluding the long branch LTRs) is composed of 24
inserts and shows the lowest nucleotide diversity of all the active Ty lineages.
Tajima's D calculated from the alignment of LTRs from this clade is negative,
consistent with this group of elements having undergone a recent expansion (Table 2).
Although this clade has recently been active there are only two full-length, and
therefore potentially transpositionally competent, elements in the reference genome.
The remainder of the inserts within this clade are solo LTRs, suggesting a high rate of
intra-element LTR-LTR recombination for this family The proportion of solo LTRs
seen in the active Ty3 lineage is not significantly different to that seen in the active
lineage of Ty4 elements (Fisher's exact test; P=0.36), however it is significantly
higher than both Ty1 (P<0.0001) and Ty2 (P<0.0001).
As there are only two full-length copies of Ty3 in the reference genome, it was not
possible to detect any possible recombination events between full-length paralogues.
Nucleotide sequences of the recently inserted copies of Ty3 do not show any evidence
of recombination between the LTR sequences at paralogous sites.
The 15 copies of the new Ty3p family we report here are only present as highly
degenerate solo LTRs (Table 1). This family also harbours the highest level of
nucleotide diversity among paralogous copies in the reference genome (Table 2). In
addition, no copies of Ty3p are present on short branches in the combined Ty3 and
Ty3p phylogeny (Figure 5), highlighting a lack of recent transposition for this family.
Together, these features indicate that Ty3p is an ancient component of the genome
that lost the ability to transpose in S. cerevisiae long ago. Because there are no LTRs
from full-length elements for this family, we did not perform recombination analyses
for Ty3p.
! 14!
!
The phylogeny of the 49 Ty4 insertions shows a single, well-supported (72% mlBP,
0.77 biPP) recently active lineage of 16 insertions with the remainder of the 33 LTR
sequences being present on long, poorly supported branches (Figure 6). Only three of
the insertions from the recently active clade are present as full-length copies in the
reference genome, since the remainder have undergone LTR-LTR recombination.
Tajima's D is negative for the active clade of Ty4 (Table 2), consistent with recent
transposition for this group of elements. Hudson and Kaplan's R failed to find any
evidence of recombination between the full-length copies of Ty4 or between the
active LTR sequences of this family.
Phylogenetic analysis of the 15 Ty5 insertions revealed the absence of a putatively
active clade for this family, suggesting that there has been very little, if any,
transposition of this family in the recent evolutionary history of S. cerevisiae (Figure
7). This result supports previous findings [61] and is reinforced by the fact that the
only full-length copy of Ty5 in the reference genome harbours internal deletions and
the LTRs share 91% identity [19]. There are two identical Ty5 solo LTRs on
chromosomes IV and X (s49 and s261) that give rise to short branches in the
phylogeny; however examination of their flanking DNA shows that they have arisen
due to an inter-chromosomal segmental duplication rather than transposition, as has
been observed previously for Ty1 [22]. The same genomic duplication event also
generated additional copies of the Ty4 solo LTRs that flank the s49 and s261 Ty5
fragments, since the Ty4 inserts s50 and s260 are also present in the duplicated region.
Because there are no LTRs from full-length elements for this family, we did not
perform recombination analyses for Ty5.
Population genomic analyses of Ty elements in 38 S. cerevisiae strains
While important inferences about the history of Ty element activity such as those
above can be made from a single reference genome, it remains an open question
whether information in reference genomes accurately represent the state of TE
population dynamics within a species. To address this issue, all 483 Ty element
insertions present in the reference genome were screened in silico for their presence
! 15!
!
or absence in whole genome reference-based alignments of the 37 other S. cerevisiae
strains sequenced by the SGRP. Because we only use the actual, not imputed,
sequence data from the SGRP alignments, the relevant segment of an SGRP strain can
be missing due to the low-coverage nature of these shotgun sequences. The number of
genomes with data available to score presence/absence of an insertion ranged from 2-
37 per locus and, in total, 44% of alleles were classified as missing data across all
strains and loci (see File S2). Because of the substantial degree of missing data, we
did not attempt to analyze allele frequencies for each insertion and instead chose to
classify Ty insertions as fixed, polymorphic or S288c-only. Polymorphic Ty insertions
may be misclassified as S288c-only because of missing data in other strains, and thus
both classes can be considered polymorphic.
Based on presence/absence data in the SGRP alignments, we estimate that 73.7%
(356/483) of the Ty elements in the reference genome are fixed (scored as present in
all genomes with sequence data) in the S. cerevisiae population (Table 1). Ty2 shows
the lowest proportion of fixed elements (23.9%), consistent with most insertions from
this family having recently integrated into the S. cerevisiae genome. Nearly half of the
Ty3 insertions are fixed (48.9%), and the majority of elements in the other Ty families
are fixed. Fourteen of the fifteen Ty3p solo LTRs are fixed within the scored
genomes. Only one copy appears to be polymorphic, but this is due to a post-fixation
secondary deletion in the strain RM11_1A that covers the insertion site as well as the
flanking DNA. Fixation of all Ty3p insertions is consistent with lack of recent
transposition for this family in the S. cerevisiae genome. Previous studies have
reported a lack of Ty5 in some strains of S. cerevisiae [34,61]; our in silico screen of
the SGRP genomes however shows that Ty5 copies are predominantly fixed, with
only two segregating inserts present in the reference genome. The two polymorphic
inserts are both solo LTRs and are adjacent to each other, albeit on different strands,
on Chromosome V.
We mapped polymorphism or fixation states of each insert onto the LTR
phylogenies, which showed that most of the long-branch, inactive inserts are fixed
within the population. In contrast, almost all of the inserts in the putatively active
clades are polymorphic (Figures 3, 4, 5, 6, 7). This result demonstrates that both
terminal branch lengths estimated from phylogenies of paralogous LTRs and fixation
status of insertions estimated from population genomic data provide consistent
! 16!
!
inferences about the history of individual Ty insertions in S. cerevisiae. The mean
terminal branch lengths of fixed elements for Ty1, Ty2, Ty3 and Ty4 are an order of
magnitude or more greater than the mean terminal branch lengths of polymorphic
inserts (Table 2). The mean terminal branch length for fixed copies of Ty1, Ty3 and
Ty4 are of a similar scale, suggesting that they have been components of the S.
cerevisiae genome for a similar length of time. In contrast, fixed copies of Ty2 show
considerably shorter terminal branch lengths, which is consistent with a more recent
origin of Ty2 in S. cerevisiae.
Horizontal transfer explains the existence of closely related Ty families in S.
cerevisiae
Two contrasting models can be put forward to explain the existence of closely related
Ty families (like Ty1 and Ty2, or Ty3 and Ty3p) in the S. cerevisiae genome [22]. The
first model proposes that closely-related families are sub-lineages of an ancestral
super-family that evolved by vertical transmission and TE "speciation" within S.
cerevisiae or its ancestor. Evidence for distinct, active subfamilies of Ty1 in S.
cerevisiae support the plausibility of the TE speciation model (Figure 3).
The second model proposes that closely-related families are sub-lineages of the
same super-family that arose in different Saccharomyces species and subsequently
came together in S. cerevisiae or its ancestor by horizontal transfer [22,34]. In the
case of Ty1 and Ty2, support for the horizontal transfer model comes from the fact
that some Saccharomyces species (e.g. S. paradoxus and S. bayanus) appear to have
only Ty1 but not Ty2 elements [62], while S. mikatae appears to have only Ty2 but not
Ty1 elements [63]. Furthermore, Liti et al. [34] noted that Ty2 is present in S. mikatae
but not in species more closely related to S. cerevisiae, and that Ty2 from S.
cerevisiae and S. mikatae share a high level of nucleotide identity. These observations
led Liti et al. [34] to propose a horizontal transfer of Ty2 between S. cerevisiae and S.
mikatae, but based on available data these authors could not determine the direction
of any putative horizontal transfer event.
The low degree of nucleotide diversity observed here in Ty2 is consistent with a
recent invasion of the S. cerevisiae genome by this family. Furthermore Ty2 has a
significantly lower proportion of both long-branch and fixed copies in comparison to
! 17!
!
other families, and its fixed copies exhibit a considerably shorter mean terminal
branch length (Table 2). The recent origin of virtually all Ty2 copies in S. cerevisiae
and the absence of Ty2 in S. paradoxus – other than in hybrid strains [34] – point to
the direction of horizontal transfer being from S. mikatae to S. cerevisiae. To test this
model, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis of active Ty1 and Ty2 LTR sequences
from multiple Saccharomyces sensu stricto species (Figure 8). This analysis provides
direct evidence that Ty2 is not a subfamily of the S. cerevisiae Ty1 family, as the Ty2
families of S. cerevisiae and S. mikatae robustly cluster together (92% mlBP, 0.97
biPP). The phylogeny nests the monophyletic S. cerevisiae Ty2 elements within the S.
mikatae Ty2 elements, with strong support (74% mlBP, 0.97 biPP), providing clear
evidence that the direction of the horizontal transfer was from S. mikatae to S.
cerevisiae. The observed phylogeny is not simply the result of LTR swapping through
recombination, as protein phylogenies of Gag and a 300 amino acid residue region the
of Pol both show that the S. cerevisiae Ty2 is more closely related to Ty2 of S.
mikatae than S. cerevisiae Ty1 (data not shown).
Support for horizontal transfer as the primary explanation to understand the
existence of closely related Ty families within a yeast species is also found in our
Ty3/Ty3p superfamily analysis (Figure 2). However, the observation of distinct Ty3
and Ty3p lineages in S. cerevisiae and S. kudriavzevii is compatible with several
possible scenarios involving horizontal transfer. Under one scenario, a single Ty3
family would have arisen in the ancestral Saccharomyces species with vertical
transmission leading to a single Ty3-like family in most species except S. cerevisiae
and S. kudriavzevii, which have two Ty3-like families due to horizontal transfer
events: (i) one unsuccessful transfer of Ty3p from S. paradoxus to S. cerevisiae and
(ii) one successful transfer of Ty3p from S. paradoxus to S. kudriavzevii.
Alternatively, the presence of S. cerevisiae and S. kudriavzevii could be explained by
speciation of the Ty3-like ancestor into Ty3 and Ty3p along the lineage leading to S.
kudriavzevii, an ancient horizontal transfer of the S. kudriavzevii Ty3p family into the
ancestor of S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus, followed by inactivation of Ty3p in S.
cerevisiae and complete loss of Ty3 in S. paradoxus. Several other plausible
alternatives that require at least one horizontal transfer event can also be formulated.
Evaluation of which scenario can best explain the data will require further systematic
genomic analysis in multiple Saccharomyces species. We note however that, while at
! 18!
!
face value our conclusion that Ty3 has undergone horizontal transfer seems to
contradict previous claims [32], our results are in fact compatible with the data of
Fingerman et al. [32] which only support a long-term association of Ty3-like lineages
in the Saccharomyces genus, but do not actually preclude the possibility of horizontal
transfer events within the genus.
! 19!
!
Discussion
The transposable elements of S. cerevisiae represent the most comprehensively
investigated set of TEs studied at the genomic level within the eukaryotes. However
our current understanding of evolutionary trends within Ty elements is predominantly
based on research conducted at the end of the last century using data from a single
reference genome [22,23,30,64]. Furthermore, previous studies focussed almost
exclusively on a subset of families (namely Ty1 and Ty2), and essentially no
inferences have been drawn about the history of the smaller families (Ty3, Ty3p, Ty4
and Ty5) (but see [30]). With more sophisticated bioinformatic techniques now
available to study TEs in genome sequences [65], as well as population and
comparative genomic data from multiple Saccharomyces strains and species
[27,66,67], it is an opportune time to re-evaluate the evolution of Ty elements in S.
cerevisiae. The analyses performed here have shown that many of the ideas on TE
evolution in S. cerevisiae require substantial revision.
Our high-resolution re-annotation of Ty elements presented here reveals that the
original survey of Ty elements in the S. cerevisiae genome underestimated copy
number by almost 50% [22]. Kim et al. [22] used cutoffs that allowed the
identification of all full-length elements in the reference genome, but omitted a large
number of additional partial elements that we have detected with improved
bioinformatic methods and a refined library of Ty sequences. One of the more
surprising aspects of the re-analysis is the identification of a previously un-annotated
family of LTR retrotransposons, Ty3p. In addition to improving the S. cerevisiae
genome annotation and providing resources to shed light on the evolution of
transposable elements, the additional Ty sequences found here have practical
importance for efforts to engineer synthetic yeast chromosomes that lack destabilising
sequences like Ty elements and tRNA genes [68].
Our results also suggest that some conclusions about the long-term co-evolutionary
relationship of Ty elements with their host should be re-interpreted. Kim et al. [22]
proposed that Ty3 and Ty4 may be recent arrivals in the S. cerevisiae genome, due to
the low average nucleotide diversity that they observed in both families. In contrast,
our phylogenetic analysis reveals long-branch, ancient lineages in these families
indicating that both families are long-term inhabitants of the S. cerevisiae genome.
! 20!
!
Ty3 and Ty4 both also exhibit short-branch clades in their phylogenies providing
evidence for the recent, and probably current, activity of these families in the S.
cerevisiae population. This inference is supported by the negative value of Tajima's D
for the putatively active lineages of Ty3 and Ty4, which implies recent growth in the
number of elements for these families within the yeast genome.
Our work also resolves controversy about the origin of the Ty2 family, which has
been proposed to have evolved either from a Ty1-like ancestor or arisen by horizontal
transfer [22,34]. Both the lack of old copies of Ty2 in the S. cerevisiae genome and
the phylogenetic position within the Ty1/Ty2 super-family are consistent with the
recent horizontal transfer of this family, with S. mikatae the most probable donor
species. The ability of Saccharomyces sensu stricto species to form viable hybrids
naturally in the wild (reviewed in [69]) provides a simple mechanism for the
horizontal transfer of TEs between species without the requirement of an intermediate
vector. Interspecific hybrids typically show dramatically reduced fertility (reviewed in
[69]), but viable gametes can be produced by interspecific hybrids [70,71,72] that can
backcross with their parental species [72]. Moreover, several studies have reported
naturally-occurring introgressions between S. cerevisiae and S. paradoxus
[73,74,75,76] demonstrating the successful transfer of genetic information between
Saccharomyces species. If interspecific hybridisation is involved in the transfer of Ty
families between Saccharomyces species it must be rare, since Ty element sequences
are clearly not homogenized across yeast species [34].
The availability of genomic data from multiple S. cerevisiae strains means that
studies on the evolution of Ty elements in this species are no longer limited to studies
on a single reference genome. Population genomic analyses show that, despite the
assumed deleterious nature of most TE insertions, a surprisingly high percentage
(73.7%) of Ty copies are fixed in S. cerevisiae. These results support previous work
that has shown many Ty LTR sequences in S. paradoxus are fixed in natural
populations [32,77], permitting their use as putatively unconstrained sequences in
molecular evolutionary studies [77,78]. The vast majority (98%) of fixed Ty insertions
are partial elements. The dearth of fixed full-length elements may be due in part to
LTR-LTR recombination being a one-way process that occurs more rapidly than the
sojourn time to fixation. However it is also likely that solo LTRs are less deleterious
to their hosts [7], and are therefore more likely to go to fixation by drift. Regardless of
! 21!
!
the processes that lead to fixation, the fact that most Ty insertions are fixed suggests
that the catalogue of Ty insertion sites discovered using the S288c reference genome
describes the core state of most Ty element locations across strains in this species.
Moreover, since S288c has a high proportion of Ty sequences than other strains [27],
population genomic analysis based on discovery of Ty elements in this reference
strain are likely to survey a greater number of potential insertion sites than those
based on other S. cerevisiae strains.
While the majority of fixed elements are old Ty insertions, we have identified 33
young insertions that are segregating at high frequencies (!0.50, >15 scored genomes)
in sequenced S. cerevisiae strains (File S2), seven of which are full-length copies and
26 are solo LTRs. These insertions may be at high frequency due to drift or
hitchhiking along with advantageous host alleles, but it is also possible that a number
of these elements are positively selected. The LTRs of Ty elements contain multiple
modifiers of transcription [25,79,80], and TEs are known to be able to alter the
expression of neighbouring host genes [80,81]. However, none of the high frequency
Ty insertions identified here correspond to a Ty1 insertion previously reported to
confer an adaptive change in gene expression of the HAP1 gene [29,82].
Nevertheless, the high-frequency, young insertions identified here present a candidate
set for further investigation into potential advantageous Ty insertions in S. cerevisiae.
By combining phylogenetic inferences with population genomic data on the
presence or absence of Ty elements, our work provides important confirmation that
terminal branch lengths in phylogenetic trees provide information about the
population frequency of individual insertions. Long branch inserts tend to be fixed in
the S. cerevisiae genome, whereas short branch inserts mainly segregate at lower
frequencies. This observation supports many previous studies (e.g. [7,22,83,84]) that
rely on information from a single genome to make inferences about the dynamics of
TE evolution in a given species. As we enter the era of widespread population-
genomic resequencing, it will be of considerable interest to see how commonly this
trend holds for LTR elements and other classes of TEs in the genomes and
populations of other eukaryote species.
! 22!
!
Acknowledgements
We thank Jainy Shah for preliminary analysis of Ty re-annotation, Killian McSorley
for preliminary analysis of Ty4 and Ty5 phylogenies, Vini Periera for assistance
interpreting REannotate output, and Daniela Delneri for helpful discussion. We also
thank Daniela Delneri and Ben Blackburne for critical comments on the manuscript.
Author Contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: MC, DB, CMB. Performed the
experiments: MC, DB, CMB. Analyzed the data: MC, CMB. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: DB, CMB. Wrote the paper: MC, CMB.
! 23!
!