Journal of Advanced Bioinformatics Applications and Research ISSN 0976-2604
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN
GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
Khalid Raza*, Rafat Parveen
Department of Computer Science, Jamia Millia Islamia (Central University), New Delhi, India
*Corresponding author: Email: kraza@jmi.ac.in
ABSTRACT:
Genetic Regulatory Networks (GRNs) plays a vital role in the understanding of complex biological processes.
Modeling GRNs is significantly important in order to reveal fundamental cellular processes, examine gene functions
and understanding their complex relationships. Understanding the interactions between genes gives rise to develop
better method for drug discovery and diagnosis of the disease since many diseases are characterized by abnormal
behaviour of the genes. In this paper we have reviewed various evolutionary algorithms-based approach for
modeling GRNs and discussed various opportunities and challenges.
Keywords: Genetic regulatory network, reverse-engineering of genetic networks, network inference, evolutionary
algorithms, genetic programming
INTRODUCTION reconstruct and infer complex regulatory
With the advancement in DNA microarray interactions and provide hypothesis for
technologies, it has become possible to experimental verification. These models are
effectively and efficiently measure gene Boolean networks, differential equations,
expression levels of up to tens of thousands of Bayesian networks, Petri nets, machine learning
genes under various conditions simultaneously; approaches, evolutionary computing etc. Most of
which are playing successfully role in gene the interactions and parameters of these
function prediction, drug development, disease networks are still not well-known or poorly
diagnosis and patient survival analysis [4][5]. known, so accurately inferring such networks
Systems biology has grown up as new discipline remains a challenge for the researchers.
which combines the research efforts in biology,
The motivation behind the study of genetic
chemistry, physics, mathematics, computer
network is that it describes how genes or groups
science, and other disciplines to systematically
of genes interact with each other and to identify
study the surprisingly complex interactions in
the complex regulatory interaction between
biological systems. In the last decade, many
genes in a living organism. The genetic
efforts have been applied in order to develop
networks enable us to understand the intricate
computational methods for inferring underlying
interactions of multiple genes under various
genetic networks from time series gene
stimuli or environmental conditions [1].
expression data. Today inference of genetic
Inference of genetic network is important
networks (also called reverse-engineering of
because it presents a synthetic network view of
genetic networks) from time series gene
the current biological knowledge and allows
expression data has become rather important in
structuring in such a way that reveals relevant
order to understand the complex biological
properties that might remain hidden otherwise.
interactions and behaviour. Many theoretical
Genetic network also allows prediction of
models have been proposed to model, analyze,
dynamic behaviour of the network which is later
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
compared with experimental results and allows vertices of the directed graph represent genes
either confirmation of the model’s accuracy or and edges denote interactions among the genes.
recommend correction in the model. System A directed edge is defined as a tuple
Biology is a fast growing interdisciplinary (i, j, s), where i denotes the head, j tail of the
research area which tries to decipher the edge and s is equal to either + or – indicating
complex interactions between cell products [2]. whether i is activated or inhibited by j. The
graph representation of GRNs allows a number
A large number of mathematical modeling
of operations that can be carried out to make
techniques and inferential algorithm have been
prediction about biological processes [12].
devised. Basic steps for modeling genetic
Figure 1 shows a directed graph representation
regulatory networks (GRNs) consists of few
of GRNs.
main steps such as i) choosing an appropriate
model ii) inferring parameters from the data iii)
validating the model iv) conducting simulations
of the GRN to predict its behaviour under
various conditions [3]. For modeling GRN,
genes are treated as variables which change their
expression values with respect to time. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses some of the basic modeling
techniques, such as Boolean networks,
generalized Bayesian networks, linear and non-
Figure 1. Directed graph representing a GRN and its definition
linear differential equations, Petri net, fuzz logic,
artificial neural networks etc. Section III gives a Boolean networks are based on Boolean logic
brief concept of about evolutionary algorithms. where each gene is either fully expressed
Section IV discusses the role of evolutionary (represented as “1”) or not expressed at all
algorithms (EA) and its hybridization in gene (represented as “0”). The interactions between
regulatory networks modeling. Finally Section V elements can be represented by Boolean
concludes the paper by comparing various EA- functions which calculate the state of a gene
based approaches, their merits and flaws and from the activation of other genes. Hence,
highlighting some of the challenges and future network can transition from one state to another
trends. state. The advantages of Boolean network
models are its simplicity and finite state space
[II] MODELING TECHNIQUES but unfortunately these models are unable to
There are several approaches for modeling and capture the effect of genes at intermediate levels.
inferring GRNs from gene expression data It also unrealistically assumes that transitions
including directed graphs model, Boolean between activation states of the genes are
networks [6]–[8], generalized Bayesian synchronous. In Boolean networks, if there are
networks [9][10], linear and non-linear ordinary N genes in a GRN, the network can be in any of
differential equations (ODEs) [11]–[15], Petri the 2N possible states. This exponential state
net [16][17], fuzzy logic, artificial neural space makes the classification of attractors a
networks etc. computationally and memory intensive task.
Figure 2 shows a Boolean network of three
Directed graph is the most simple and
entities a, b and c. The state transitions follow
straightforward way to model a GRN. Here
the regulation functions shown on the right,
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 272
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
which describe the rules of the model. Thin Ordinary differential equations (ODEs) have
arrows indicate the regulators of each node and been most widely used techniques for modeling
time steps are represented by thick arrows [19]. dynamic biochemical systems [18] especially
Bayesian networks (BNs) models use directed genetic regulatory networks [12]. The ODEs
acyclic graph G = (V, E) to represent the allow more detailed descriptions of network
network where vertices (V) corresponds to genes dynamics, by explicitly modeling the
and the edges (E) presenting the conditionally concentration changes of molecules over time.
dependent interactions between genes. These The ODE formalism models the concentrations
models estimate the multivariate joint of RNAs, proteins, and other molecules by time-
probability distributions through local dependent variables. Regulatory interactions
probabilities [18]. The main advantages of these take the form of functional and differential
models are its capabilities to deal with the relations between the concentration variables.
stochastic aspects of gene expression, handling Although ODE approach provides detailed
noisy and incomplete data. However, these information about the network’s dynamics but it
models are unable to deal with the dynamic requires high-quality data on kinetic parameters
aspects of gene regulations. To overcome this and hence it is currently applicable to only a few
dynamicity problem Dynamic Bayesian systems. A detailed discussion and review about
networks (DBNs) were devised. various differential equation-based models can
be found in [12] and [19].
Petri net is a non-deterministic approach for
modeling the dynamics of regulatory networks.
Petri nets are an extension to graph models that
represents a well-established technique for
modeling regulatory systems. Following the
analogy of biological systems, Petri nets have
successfully been applied for simulating gene
regulatory network, allowing simple quantitative
representation of dynamic processes. The
drawback of Petri nets model is that it does not
support hierarchical structuring, which makes
them difficult to use for large-scale models.
Fuzzy logic is one of the constituents of soft
computing technique which has been drawn
from engineering and other applied sciences.
Fuzzy logic is suitable for modeling GRN
because i) fuzzy logic extracts trends not values
so fuzzy logic is inherently tolerant to noisy data
ii) it is computationally efficient and can be
extended to large number of components and iii)
it is implemented in a user-friendly language
(e.g. if-then rules). Fuzzy logic has been
Regulation Functions successfully used for modeling gene regulatory
networks due to its capability to represent non-
Figure 2. A Boolean network with regulation functions
linear systems, its friendly language to
of three elements a, b and c [19]
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 273
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
incorporate and edit domain knowledge in the squashing function then transfers the regulatory
form of fuzzy rules [20]–[24]. However, input r(t) into a normalized transcriptional
computational time is a major obstacle in response. Various types of ANNs have been
developing more complex fuzzy models. One successfully applied for modeling gene
solution to this problem can be preprocessing of regulatory interactions including perceptrons
data so that computation time can be reduced. [25]–[27], self-organizing maps [28]–[29] and
Most widely used method of data pre-processing recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [30][31].
is data clustering. A wide range of clustering
algorithms bas been proposed in the literature BASICS OF EVOLUTIONARY
including hierarchical clustering, adaptive ALGORITHMS
resonance theory (ART) [51], self-organizing Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are optimization
maps (SOM), k-means, and fuzzy c-means. algorithm based on Darwin’s theory of
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) have been evolution. The field of evolutionary algorithms
developed as generalization of mathematical has been growing rapidly over the last few years.
models of biological nervous systems. The It is basically a search algorithm that is modeled
capabilities of ANNs to learn from the data-rich on the mechanics of natural selection and natural
environment, approximate any multivariate genetics. It combines survival of the fittest
nonlinear function and its robustness to noisy among individuals with a structured yet
data make it a suitable choice for modeling randomized information exchange to form a
GRNs from gene expression data. Neural search algorithm. In EAs optimization
network architecture has a number of nodes and techniques searching from a population are done
wirings between them. Generally, the number of from a single point and for each iterations a
nodes is defined as the number of genes but it competitive selection is done. The solutions with
may also represent any other factors involved in high “fitness” are recombined with other
the regulatory network. Let a N-dimensional solutions. The solutions are then “mutated” by
vector u(t) be the expression state of a gene making a small change to a single element of the
network containing N genes and element u(t) is solution. The main purpose of recombination
the expression state of gene j at time t. The and mutation is to generate new solutions but it
wirings define regulatory interactions between is biased towards regions of the space for which
genes, which are represented by a weight matrix good solutions have already been identified.
w. A wiring from gene j to gene i means a non- Generally, three evolutionary techniques are
zero weight w . A positive weight implies a distinguished: genetic programming (GP),
stimulating effect (positive feedback) while a genetic algorithms (GA) and evolutionary
negative weight implies repression (negative programming (EP) (Goldberg, 1989,
feedback). A zero weight w; means no Michalewicz, 1996). Genetic programming
regulatory interaction. The control strength is the focuses on programs evolution, genetic
multiplication of weight w and state value u. algorithms focuses on optimizing general
The total regulatory input to gene i is the sum of combinatorial problems and evolutionary
regulatory strengths of all genes in the programming focuses on optimizing continuous
regulatory network [52], functions without recombination. EAs belong to
the class of probabilistic algorithms and they
r (t)w u (t), i1,2,...,N differ from random algorithms in that they
j1 combine elements of directed and stochastic
where α is a parameter to represent the
i search. Due to this reason EAs are more robust
influence of external inputs or reaction delay. A
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 274
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
than directed search methods. Another merit of model has been tested on artificial as well as
EAs is that they maintain a population of real-world data. The model has an average MSE
potential solutions while other search techniques of 4.21  10-3 over 10 runs, while standard GP
process a single point of the search space. The averaged MSE is 6.704  10-3 over 10 runs.
limitation of GP and GA-based modeling Genetic programming jointly with Kalman
techniques are that they do not take care of the filtering approach to infer GRNs from time
noise effect which is quite common in series data has been applied by Wang et.al. [36].
microarray data. Figure 3 shows a general In this method, nonlinear differential equation
scheme of EAs and detailed discussion on EAs model is adopted and an iterative algorithm has
can be found in [32][33]. Various constituents of been proposed to identify the model. Here GP is
EAs have been successfully applied for employed to identify the structure of the model
modeling GRNs [34]–[51]. and Kalman filtering is deployed to estimate the
parameters in each of the iterations. The
proposed model has been tested using synthetic
as well as time-series gene-expression data of
yeast protein synthesis. Due to availability of
noise in microarray data, the Kalman filtering
may not be appropriate for estimating
parameters.
Decoupled S-system formalism for inferring
effective kinetic parameters from time series
data and Trigonometric Differential Evolution
(TDE) as the optimization engine for capturing
the dynamics of gene expression data has been
applied by Noman et.al. [37]. Here fitness
Figure 3. A general scheme of evolutionary algorithm function used is a modified version of Kimaru
et.al. [38] for minimizing the number of false
ROLE OF EVOLUTIONARY positive predictions. Spare network structure has
ALGORITHMS IN GRN MODELING been identified with the help of hill-climbing
Several constituents of evolutionary algorithms local search (HCLS) method within the
such as genetic programming, genetic algorithm, framework of proposed EA. Experiments on
evolutionary programming and their small scale artificial network in noise-free as
hybridization have been successfully applied for well as noisy environment is done and found
efficient modeling genetic regulatory networks. that proposed model successfully identify the
A combination of Genetic Programming (GP) network structure and its parameter values. Real-
and Least Mean Square (LMS) method, called life data has also been used for reconstructing
LMS-GP, to identify a concise form of the SOS DNA repair network of E.coli. The
regulation between genes from time series data proposed model correctly identified the
has been applied by Ando et.al. [35]. The LMS regulations of gene lexA and some other known
methods are applied to determine the regulations. The doubled S-system model
coefficients of the GPs, which decreases the proposed by Chowdhury and Chetty [45]
Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the extended the work of Noman et.al. [37]. In this
observed and model time series without model, GA is used for scoring the networks’
complicating the GPs. The proposed LMS-GP several useful features for accurate inference of
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 275
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
network, such as a Prediction Initialization (PI) using simulated expression patterns with and
algorithm to initialize the individuals, a Flip without noise. Huang et.al. [49] extended the
Operation (FO) for matching the values, and a method iTEA proposed by [40] by generating
restricted execution of HCLS over few additional multiple data sets of gene expression
individuals. It also proposes a refinement profiles by perturbing the given data set and
technique for optimizing sensitivity and named it as iTEAP method. The iTEAP model
specificity of inferred networks [45]. copes up “multiplicity of solutions” by using
Maeshiro et.al. [34] proposed an EAs based noisy duplicates to obtain accurate and robust
approach to predict GRNs from gene expression GRNs. Shu et.al. [46] has introduced an
time course data which consists of two stage improved version of iTEA method named it as
loop each using following steps: i) generate M iTEA2 for establishing large-scale GRN by
initial fictitious networks ii) simulate each incorporating gene regulation domain
network with ultra high speed simulator knowledge in EA. The iTEA2 method uses
Starpack [47] (Signal Transduction Advanced hybridize encoding scheme that comprises of
Research Package) and find out the differences regulation strength, gene number regulated, and
from biological experimental data iii) finish, if binary control parameters in a chromosome
reaches maximum number of loops or the score where value of the strength parameter is the
of the top ranked network shows no kinetic order and control parameters indicate
improvement, iv) execute roulette selection, that the up- and down-regulated kinetic orders
mutate and execute crossover to generate a new are active or not. If I be the maximal number of
set of networks. Here simulation of the second genes that directly regulated each gene then total
stage has higher precision over first stage, number of parameters encoded in a chromosome
serving as local optimization process. The for one gene is 5I+2, which is independent of N.
proposed model was tested on five synthetic Hence, the number of parameters needed for the
networks and results were compared with construction of GRN reduced from O(N2) to
dynamic Bayesian network model and found O(N) [46].
that sensitivity is approximately 5% higher and Chan et.al. [41] extracted GRNs from time-
precision was approximately equal. The series gene expression data using a two-stage
prediction of four networks resulted in the methodology that was implemented in the
sensitivity of 70–80%, and precision of 70%. software tool “Gene Network Explorer
Ho et.al. [40] proposed an intelligent two-stage (GNetXP)”. At the first stage, GA has been
evolutionary algorithm (iTEA) to infer the S- applied in selecting the initial cluster centers for
system models of N-gene genetic networks from subsequent Expectation Maximization (EM)
time-series data of gene expression. The partitioning. At the second stage, Kalman Filter
problem is initially decomposed into N was deployed to identify a set of first-order
optimization subproblems having 2(N+1) differential equations which describes the
parameters each. In the first stage, each dynamics of the network and used these
subproblem is solved using EA and intelligent equations for determining important gene
crossover based on an orthogonal arrays and interactions and predicting gene expression
factor analysis. In the second stage, solutions of values at future time points. The proposed
the N subproblems are combined and refined methodology was tested on the human fibroblast
using an OED-based simulated annealing response gene expression data.
framework for handling noisy gene expression Tominaga and Horton [42] developed algorithm
data. The efficiency of iTEA was evaluated for inferring biological networks using only
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 276
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
time-series data restricted to a scale-free describe their regulation type. In this hybridized
networks. The S-System was adopted as network approach, recurrent network, self-organizing
model and distributed GA to optimize the structure and evolutionary training generate an
model. The inherent parallelism enhances the optimum pool of regulatory relationships and
performance of the model [18]. Ram and Chetty fuzzy systems tolerate noise-related issues.
[43] proposed a causal GA-based approach for One of the main objectives of understanding
learning GRNs which is guided by exploiting gene regulation is to reveal how combination of
certain characteristics of diversity and heuristic transcription factors (TFs) control sets of co-
in order to generate better networks. The expressed genes under specific experimental
proposed formalism is named as guided genetic conditions. Schroder et.al. [50] proposed multi-
algorithm (GGA) approach. objective genetic algorithms (MOGAs) for
inferring transcriptional regulators for sets of co-
Mitra et.al. [39] proposed multiobjective
expressed genes. In this work, three objective
evolutionary biclustering and correlation-based
functions have been designed for stimulus
approach to extract gene interaction networks
response and can be used to integrate a priori
from microarray data. Biclustering has been
knowledge into the detection of gene regulatory
applied to find a subset of similarly expressed
modules. The proposed method was tested and
genes under some specific experimental
evaluated on whole genome microarray
condition. To add/remove relevant/irrelevant
measurements of drug-response in human
genes for fine tuning, local search strategy has
hepatocytes [50].
been deployed. Preprocessing technique is
Adaptive Fuzzy Evolutionary GRN
applied to preserve strongly correlated gene
Reconstruction (AFEGRN) framework has been
interaction pairs.
developed by Shoaib et.al. [44] for modeling
A multilayer evolutionary trained neuro-fuzzy
GRNs. The AFEGRN framework is able to
recurrent network (ENFRN) approach was
automatically determine model parameters, for
proposed by Maraziotis et.al. [48] which
example, number of clusters for fuzzy c-means
captures potential regulators of target genes and
using fuzzy-PBM index and estimation of
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 277
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
Gaussian Distribution Algorithm. The proposed results. One of the important issues with the
model was tested using breast cancer data to inference of GRN from microarray data is both
demonstrate effectiveness of AFEGRN to model limited and noisy nature of these data. It shows
any GRN. The proposed framework composed the compelling need to look for time-series data
of six steps: i) data preprocessing ii) from various sources and some other types of
computation of number of clusters iii) clustering biological data such as ChIP, knockout
using fuzzy c-means iv) gene selection v) GRN microarray experiments, protein-protein
construction and vi) GRNs comparison. interactions and miRNA interference data. These
Table 1 shows a comparative view of various types of data can be included in EAs in a multi-
hybridized form of GA-based approach and their objective setting in order to speed up
results obtained. EA-based approaches are convergence.
generally hybridized, with several other
techniques such as clustering, least mean square, REFERENCES
Kalman filtering, Trigonometric Differential [1] Y. Sun, Gang Feng and Jinde Cao, “A New
Evolution, etc, for better results. Approach to Dynamic Fuzzy Modeling of Genetic
Regulatory Networks”, IEEE Transactions on
Nanobioscience, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 263-272, 2010.
CONCLUSIONS & CHALLENGES
[2] H. Kitano, Systems biology: a brief overview, Science
The models of gene regulatory networks are
2002; 295 (5560): 1662-1664.
developed to capture the behavior of the system [3] Alina Sîrbu, Heather J Ruskin and Martin Crane,
being modeled, and it is also able to produce “Comparison of evolutionary algorithms in gene
regulatory network model inference”, BMC
predictions corresponding with experimental
Bioinformatics, 11:59, 2010.
observations. Understanding GRNs is essential
[4] R. Xu, X. Cai and D. Wunsch II, “Gene Expression
because a) it offers a large-scale, coarse-grained Data for DLBCL Cancel Survival Prediction with a
view of an organism at the mRNA level b) gives Combination of Machine Learning Technologies”,
Proc. 27th Annual Int’l Conference, IEEE Eng. In
important indications for complex diseases c)
Medicine and Biology Soc., pp. 894-897, 2005.
assist in the development of target and
[5] G. McLachlam, K. Do and C. Ambroise, Analyzing
personalized medicines d) helps in Microarray Gene Expression Data, John Wiley &
understanding evolution by comparing genetic Songs, 2004.
[6] T. Akutsu, S. Miyano and S. Kuhara, Identification of
networks of various genomes and e) explains
genetic networks from a small number of gene
how different phenotypes emanate and which
expression patterns under the Boolean network
groups of genes are responsible for them. model, Pac Symp Biocomput, 17-28, 1999.
Pure EAs are useful tool to analyze only small [7] S. Martin, Z. Shang, A. Martino and J-L. Faulon,
Boolean Dynamics of Genetic Regulatory Networks
networks. However, it can be hybridized to
Inferred from Microarray Time Series Data,
enhance its efficiency for large networks. Bioinformatics, vol. 23, pp. 866-874, 2007.
Although hybridized methods are [8] I. Shmulevich, E.R. Dougherty, S. Kim, and W.
Zhang, Probabilistic Boolean Networks: A Rule-
computationally expensive and perform well
Based Uncertainty Model for Gene Regulatory
with small-size networks but they become less
Networks, Bioinformatics, vol. 18, pp. 261-274,
efficient when analyzing the large-size 2002.
networks. Scalability and parallelism can be [9] N. Friedman, M. Linial, I. Nachman, and D. Pe’er,
Using Bayesian Networks to Analyze Expression
achieved at several-level, from individual
Data, J. Computational Biology, vol. 7, pp. 601-620,
evaluation to iterative and breaking the entire
2000.
problem into sub-problems. Various methods [10] D. Husmeier, Sensitivity and Specificity of Inferring
such as PSOs, RNNs, FLs, ANNs, ODEs etc. Genetic Regulatory Interactions from Microarray
Experiments with Dynamic Bayesian Networks,
has been fused with EAs to get some good
Bioinformatics, vol. 19, pp. 2271-2282, 2003.
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 278
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
[11] E. Klipp, Systems Biology In Practice: Concepts, [26] J. Huang, H. Shimizu, and S. Shioya, Clustering
Implementation and Application, Wiley-VCH, Gene Expression Pattern and Extracting Relationship
Weinheim, 2005. in Gene Network Based on Artificial Neural
[12] H. de Jong, Modeling and Simulation of Genetic Networks, J. Bioscience and Bioeng., vol. 96, pp.
Regulatory Systems: A Literature Review, J. 421-428, 2003.
Computational Biology, vol. 9, pp. 67-103, 2002. [27] Xiaobo Zhou, et.al., A Bayesian connectivity-based
[13] H. de Jong and M. Page, Search for Steady States of approach to constructing probabilistic gene
Piecewise-Linear Differential Equation Models of regulatory networks, Bioinformatics, 20 (17): 2918-
Genetic Regulatory Networks, IEEE/ACM Trans. 292, 2004.
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, vol. 5, [28] J. Vohradsky, Neural Network Model of Gene
no. 2, pp. 208-222, Apr.-June 2008. Expression, FASEB J., vol. 15, pp. 846-854, 2001.
[14] T. Chen, H.L. He and G.M. Churck, Modeling gene [29] D.C. Weaver, C.T. Workman, and G.D. Stormo,
expression with differential equations, Pac. Symp. Modeling Regulatory Networks with Weight
Biocomput, pp. 29-40, 1999. Matrices, Proc. Pacific Symp. Biocomputing, pp.
[15] J.J. Tyson, A. Csikasz-Nagy and B. Novak, The 112-123, 1999.
dynamics of cell cycle regulation, Bioessays 2002, [30] Xiao Hu, Ann Maglia and Donald C. Wunsch II, A
24(12): 1095-1109. General Recurrent Neural Network Approach to
[16] I. Koch, M. Schueler and M. Heiner, STEPP – search Model Genetic Regulatory Networks, Proc. of IEEE
tool for exploration of Petri net paths: a new tool for Engineering in Medicine and Biology Annual
Petri net-based path analysis in biochemical Conference, pp. 4735-4738, 2005.
networks, In Silico Biol. 5, 129-137, 2005. [31] Debasish Datta, et.al., A Recurrent Fuzzy Neural
[17] Raed I. Hamed, Syed I. Ahson and Rafat Parveen, Model of a Gene Regulatory Network for Knowledge
Designing Genetic Regulatory Networks Using Fuzzy Extraction Using Differential Equation, Proc. of
Petri Nets Approach, International Journal of IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp.
Automation and Computing, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 403- 2900-2906, 2009.
412, 2010. [32] J.R. Koza, Gene Programming, MIT Press:
[18] Sushmita Mitra, Ranajit Das and Yoichi Hayashi, Cambridge, M.A., 1992.
Genetic Networks and Soft Computing, IEEE/ACM [33] T. Back, Evolutionary Algorithms in Theory and
Transactions on Computation Biology and Practice, Oxford University Press, New York, 1996.
Bioinformatics, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 94-107, 2011. [34] T. Maeshiro, et.al., An evolutionary system for
[19] Guy Karlebach and Ron Shamir, Modeling and prediction of gene regulatory networks in biological
analysis of gene regulatory networks, Nature cells, SICE Annual Conference 2007, pp. 1577-1581,
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, Vol. 9, pp. 770- 2007.
780, 2008. [35] S. Ando, E. Sakamoto and H. Iba, Modeling genetic
[20] P.J. Woolf and Y. Wang, A Fuzzy Logic Approach to network by hybrid GP, Proceedings of the 2002
Analyzing Gene Expression Data, Physiological Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2002. CEC
Genomics, vol. 3, pp. 9-15, 2000. '02., vol.1, no., pp.291-296, 2002.
[21] H. Ressom, D. Wang, R.S. Varghese and R. [36] Haixin Wang, Lijun Qian and E. Dougherty,
Reynolds, Fuzzy Logic-Based Gene Regulatory Inference of gene regulatory networks using genetic
Network, 12th IEEE International Conference on programming and Kalman filter, IEEE GENSIPS, pp.
Fuzzy System, vol. 2, pp. 1210-1215, 2003. 27-28, 2006.
[22] Pan Du, et. al., Modeling Gene Expression Networks [37] Nasimul Noman and Hitoshi Iba, Reverse
Using Fuzzy Logic, IEEE Transcation on Systems, engineering genetic networks using evolutionary
Man and Cybernetic – Part B: Cybernetics, vol. 35, computation, Genome Informatics 16(2): 205-214,
no. 6. pp. 1351-1359, 2005. 2005.
[23] Yonghui Sun, Gang Feng and Jinde Cao, A New [38] S. Kimura et.al., Inference of S-system models of
Approach to Dynamic Fuzzy Modeling of Genetic genetic networks using cooperative coevolutionary
Regulatory Networks, IEEE Transactions on algorithm, Bioinformatics, 21(7): 1154-1163, 2005.
Nanobioscience, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 263-272, 2010. [39] S. Mitra, R. Das, H. Banka, and S. Mukhopadhyay,
[24] R. Ram, Madhu Chetty and Trevor I. Dix, “Fuzzy “Gene Interaction – An Evolutionary Biclustering
Model for Gene Regulatory Network,” Proc. of IEEE Approach,” Information Fusion, Elsevier, vol. 10, pp.
Congress on Evolutionary Computation, pp. 1450- 242-249, 2009.
1455, 2006. [40] S.Y. Ho, et.al., An Intelligent Two-Stage
[25] S. Kim, et.al., Multivariate Measurement of Gene Evolutionary Algorithm for Dynamic Pathway
Expression Relationships, Genomics, vol. 67, pp. Identification from Gene Expression Profiles,
201-209, 2000.
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 279
EVOLUTIONARY ALGORITHMS IN GENETIC REGULATORY NETWORKS MODEL
IEEE/ACM Transaction on Comp. Bio. and [52] Tianhai Tian and Kevin Burrage. "Stochastic Neural
Bioinformatics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 648-704, 2007. Network Models for Gene Regulatory Networks",
[41] Z.S.H. Chan, N. Kasabov, and L. Collins, “A Two- IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation - CEC
Stage Methodology for Gene Regulatory Network , pp. 162-169, 2003.
Extraction from Time-Course Gene Expression
Data,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 30, pp.
59-63, 2006.
[42] D. Tominaga and P. Horton, “Inference of Scale-Free
Networks from Gene Expression Time Series,” J.
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, vol. 4,
pp. 503-514, 2006.
[43] Ramesh Ram and Madhu Chetty, "A Guided Genetic
Algorithm for Learning Gene Regulatory Networks,"
Proc. IEEE Congress on Evo. Comp., pp. 3862-3869,
2007.
[44] Muhammad Shoaib, B. Sehgal, Iqbal Gondal, and
Laurence Dooley, “AFEGRN: Adaptive Fuzzy
Evolutionary Gene Regulatory Network
Reconstruction Framework,” Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, pp.
1737-1741, 2006.
[45] Ahsan Raja Chowdhury and Madhu Chetty, “An
Improved Method to Infer Gene Regulatory Network
using S-System,” IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
Computation, pp. 1012-1019, 2011.
[46] Li-Sun Shu, Hui-Ling Huang, Shinn-Jang Ho and
Shinn-Ying Ho, “Establishing large-scale gene
regulatory networks using a gene-knowledge
embedded evolutionary computation method,” IEEE
Int’l Conf. on Computer Science and Automation
Engineering (CSAE), vol.4, no., pp.272-276, 2011.
[47] H. Hemmi, T. Maeshiro and K. Shimohara, “New
computing system architecture for scientific
simulations – Non CPU-oriented methodologies”,
Frontiers of Computational Science, pp. 177-180,
Springer, 2007.
[48] Ioannis A Maraziotis, Andrei Dragomir and Dimitris
Thanos, Gene regulatory networks modeling using a
dynamic evolutionary hybrid, BMC Bioinformatics,
11:140, 2010.
[49] Hui-Ling Huang, Kuan-Wei Chen, Shinn-Jang Ho,
and Shinn-Ying Ho, “Inferring S-system Models of
Genetic Networks from a Time-series Real Data Set
of Gene Expression Profiles”, IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 2788 – 2793,
2008.
[50] Adrian Schr¨oder et.al., “Inferring Transcriptional
Regulators for Sets of Co-expressed Genes by Multi-
Objective Evolutionary Optimization”, IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp.
2285–2292, 2011.
[51] D. Wang, H. Ressom, M.T. Musavi, and C.
Domnisoru. Double self-organizing maps to cluster
gene expression data, Proc. of the European
Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks
(ESANN,), Bruees. Beleium. - I I pp.25-50,2002.
Khalid Raza and Rafat Parveen 280