Gabora, L., & Kaufman, S. B. (2010). Evolutionary perspectives on creativity. In J. Kaufman & R.
Sternberg (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of creativity (pp. 279-300). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
Liane Gabora
University of British Columbia
Scott Barry Kaufman
Yale University
Note: There may be minor differences between this draft and the final version accepted
for publication.
Address for Correspondence:
L.Gabora <liane.gabora@ubc.ca>
Department of Psychology
University of British Columbia
Okanagan campus, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
1. INTRODUCTION
Many species engage in acts that could be called creative (Kaufman & Kaufman, 2004).
However, human creativity is unique in that it has completely transformed the planet we
live on. We build skyscrapers, play breathtaking cello sonatas, send ourselves into space,
and even decode our own DNA. Given that the anatomy of the human brain is not so
different from that of the great apes, what enables us to be so creative? Recent
collaborations at the frontier of anthropology, archaeology, psychology, and cognitive
science are culminating in speculative but increasingly sophisticated efforts to piece
together the answer to this question. Examining the skeletons of our ancestors gives cues
as to anatomical constraints that hindered or made possible various kinds of creative
expression. Relics of the past have much to tell us about the thoughts, beliefs, and
creative abilities of the people who invented and used them. How the spectacular
creativity of humans came about is the first topic addressed in this chapter.
Studies at the intersection of creativity and evolution are not limited to
investigations into the biological evolution of a highly creative species. Creative ideas
themselves might be said to evolve through culture. Human creativity is distinctive
because of the adaptive and open-ended manner in which change accumulates. Inventions
build on previous ones in ways that enhance their utility or aesthetic appeal, or make
them applicable in different situations. There is no a priori limit to how a creative idea
might unfold over time. A cartoon character can inspire the name and logo for a hockey
team (the Mighty Ducks), which might in turn inspire toys, cereal shapes, cigarette lighter
designs, or for that matter work its way into an academic book chapter. It is this
proclivity to take an idea and make it our own, or ‘put our own spin on it’, that makes
creative ideas appear to evolve. The next section of this chapter investigates in what
sense creative ideas evolve through culture.
Finally, we address the question of why creativity evolved. What forces supported
the evolution of creativity? Does being creative help us live longer, or attract mates?
Perhaps creative projects can sometimes interfere with survival and reproductive fitness;
are there non-biological factors that compel us to create? This is a third topic addressed in
this chapter.
2. THE BIRTH OF HUMAN CREATIVITY
Looking at an artifact that was fashioned thousands or millions of years ago is an awe-
inspiring experience because it gives us a glimpse into the lives and worldviews of our
earliest ancestors. To be sure, creative works disintegrate. The farther back in time we
look for signs of creativity, the fewer creative works of that time remain with us today.
But by corroborating theory and data from different fields, we are on our way toward
putting together a coherent picture of how and when the creative abilities of humans
arose.
We begin this section by examining the archaeological evidence for the earliest
indications of human creativity, and anthropological evidence for concurrent changes in
the size and shape of the cranial cavity. We then examine various hypotheses that have
been put forward to explain these data.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
2.1. The Earliest Evidence of Human Creativity: Homo habilis
It is generally agreed that ancestral humans started diverging from ancestral apes
approximately six million years ago. The first Homo lineage, Homo habilis, appeared
approximately 2.4 million years ago in the Lower Palaeolithic. The earliest known human
inventions, referred to as Oldowan artifacts (after Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, where they
were first found), are widely attributed to Homo habilis (Semaw et al., 1997), although it
is possible that they were also used by late australopithecenes (de Baune, 2004). They
were simple, mostly single faced stone tools, pointed at one end (Leakey, 1971). These
tools were most likely used to split fruits and nuts (de Baune, 2004), though some of the
more recent ones have sharp edges, and are found with cut-marked bones, suggesting that
they were used to sharpen wood implements and butcher small game (Leakey, 1971;
Bunn & Kroll, 1986).
These early tools were functional, but simple and unspecialized; by our standards
they were not very creative. Feist (2007) refers to the minds of these early hominds as
pre-representational, suggesting that hominids at this time were not capable of forming
representations that deviated from their concrete sensory perceptions; their experience
was tied to the present moment. Similarly, Mithen (1996) refers to minds at this time as
possessing generalized intelligence, reflecting his belief that domain general learning
mechanisms, such as Pavlovian conditioning and implicit learning (e.g., Reber, 1993),
predominated.
Nevertheless, the early tools of this period mark a momentous breakthrough for our
species. Today we are accustomed to seeing everywhere the outcomes of what began as a
spark of insight in someone’s mind, but when the world consisted solely of naturally-
formed objects, the capacity to imagine something and turn it into a reality may well have
seemed almost magical. As de Baune (2004) puts it, “the moment when a hominin
...produced a cutting tool by using a thrusting percussion ...marks a break between our
predecessors and the specifically human” (p. 142).
2.2. The Adaptive Larger-Brained Homo erectus
Homo habilis persisted from approximately 2.4 to 1.5 million years ago. Approximately
1.8 million years ago, Homo erectus appeared, followed by Homo ergaster, archaic
Homo sapiens, and Homo neanderthalensis. The size of the Homo erectus brain was
approximately 1,000 cc, about 25% larger than that of Homo habilis, and 75% the cranial
capacity of modern humans (Aiello, 1996; Ruff et al., 1997; Lewin, 1999). Homo erectus
exhibit many indications of enhanced ability to creatively adapt to the environment to
meet the demands of survival, including sophisticated, task-specific stone hand axes,
complex stable seasonal habitats, and long-distance hunting strategies involving large
game. By 1.6 Ma, Homo erectus had dispersed as far as Southeast Asia, indicating the
ability to adjust lifestyle to vastly different climates (Anton & Swisher, 2004; Cachel &
Harris, 1995; Swisher, Curtis, Jacob, Getty, & Widiasmoro, 1994; Walker & Leakey,
1993). In Africa, West Asia, and Europe, by 1.4 Ma Homo erectus developed the
Aschulean handaxe (Asfaw et al., 1992), a do-it-all tool that may even have had some
function as a social status symbol (Kohn & Mithen, 1999). These symmetrical biface
tools probably required several stages of production, bifacial knapping, and considerable
skill and spatial ability to achieve their final form.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
Though the anatomical capacity for language was present by this time (Wynn,
1998), verbal communication is thought to have been limited to (at best) pre-syntactical
proto-language (Dunbar, 1996). Additionally, while humans may have for the first time
been capable of representing an idea once the object was no longer being present, such
representations were more likely to be visual rather than verbal (Feist, 2006).
Also, thought during this time period was most likely only first-order; the capacity
for thinking about thinking (i.e., metacognition) had not yet developed. Some suggest that
this period witnessed the emergence of domains of knowledge associated with social,
physical, biological, and quantitative concepts (Feist, 2006), although Mithen (1996)
argues that such knowledge was at this time probably encapsulated.
2.3. Possible Explanations for the Onset of Human Creativity
It has been suggested that these early archaeological finds do not reflect any underlying
biological change, but were simply a response to climactic change (Richerson & Boyd,
2000). However given the above-mentioned significant increase in cranial capacity, it
seems parsimonious to posit that this dramatic encephalization allowed a more
sophisticated mode of cognitive functioning, and is thus at least partly responsible for the
appearance of cultural artifacts (and the beginnings of an archaeological record).
There are multiple versions of the hypothesis that the onset of the archaeological
record reflects an underlying cognitive transition. One suggestion is that the appearance
of archaeological novelty is due to the onset of the capacity to imitate (Dugatkin, 2001),
or onset of theory of mind—the capacity to reason about mental states of others (Premack
& Woodruff, 1978). Although these hypotheses may explain how new ideas, once in
place, spread from one individual to another, they are inadequate as an explanation of the
enhanced capacity for coming up with new ideas in the first place. Moreover, other
species possess theory of mind (Heyes, 1998), and imitate, (Byrne & Russon, 1998;
Darwin, 1871) yet do not compare to hominids with respect to creativity.
Yet another proposal is that Homo underwent a transition at this time from an
episodic mode of cognitive functioning to a mimetic mode (Donald, 1991). The episodic
mind of Homo habilis was sensitive to the significance of episodes, and could encode
them in memory and coordinate appropriate responses, but could not voluntarily access
them independent of cues. The enlarged cranial capacity of Homo erectus enabled it to
acquire a mimetic form of cognition, characterized by possession of what Donald (1991)
refers to as a ‘self-triggered recall and rehearsal loop’, or SRRL. The SRRL enabled
hominids to voluntarily access memories independent of cues, and thereby act out events
that occurred in the past, or that could occur in the future (indeed the term mimetic is
derived from the word ‘mime’). Thus not only could the mimetic mind temporarily
escape the here and now, but through gesture it could bring about a similar escape in
other minds. The SRRL also enabled hominids to engage in a stream of thought, such that
attention is directed away from the external world toward ones’ internal model of it, and
one thought or idea evokes another, revised version of it, which evokes yet another, and
so forth recursively. Finally, the SRRL enabled the capacity to evaluate and improve
motor acts through repetition or rehearsal, and adapt them to new situations, resulting in
more refined artifacts and survival tactics.
It seems reasonable that a larger brain might be more likely to engage in self-
triggered recall and rehearsal, but Donald’s scenario becomes even more plausible when
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
considered in light of the structure and dynamics of associative memory (Gabora, 1998,
2003, 2007). We know that neurons are sensitive to subsymbolic microfeatures—
primitive attributes of a stimulus, such as a sound of a particular pitch or a line of a
particular orientation. Episodes etched in memory are distributed across a bundle or cell
assembly of these neurons, and likewise, each neuron participates in the encoding of
many episodes. Finally, memory is content-addressable, such that similar stimuli activate
and get encoded in overlapping distributions of neurons. With a larger brain, episodes are
encoded in more detail, i.e. there is a transition from a more coarse-grained to a more
fine-grained memory. This means that there are more ways in which distributions can
overlap, and thus more routes by which one can evoke another, thus providing an
anatomical basis for self-triggered recall and rehearsal, and the forging of creative
connections. It also paved the way for a more integrated internal model of the world, or
worldview.
3. OVER A MILLION YEARS OF CREATIVE STASIS
The handaxe persisted as the almost exclusive tool of choice for over a million years,
spreading by 500,000 years ago into Europe, where was it used until about 200,000 years
ago. Indeed during this period not only is there almost no change in tool design, but little
evidence of creative insight of any kind, with the exception of the first solid evidence for
controlled use of fire, by 800,000 years ago in the Levant (Goren-Inbar, et al., 2004).
3.1. A Second Increase in Brain Size
Between 600,000 and 150,000 years ago there was a second spurt in brain enlargement
(Aiello 1996; Ruff et al. 1997). But although anatomically modern humans had arrived,
behavioral modernity had not. It would make our story simple if the increase in brain size
coincided with the burst of creativity in the Middle/Upper Paleolithic (Bickerton, 1990;
Mithen, 1998), to be discussed shortly. It does correspond with the revolutionary
advancement of the Levallois flake, which came into prominence approximately 250,000
years ago in the Neanderthal line. But although one sees in the artifacts of this time the
germ of modern day representational thought, it is clear that cognitive processes are still
primarily first-order—tied to concrete sensory experience—rather than second-order—
derivative, or abstract. Leakey (1984) writes of anatomically modern human populations
in the Middle East with little in the way of culture, and concludes “The link between
anatomy and behavior therefore seems to break” (p. 95).
It may be that this second spurt in brain size exerted an impact on expressions of
creativity that leave little trace in the archaeological record such as ways of coping with
increasing social complexity, for example, manipulating competitors for purposes of
survival and reproduction (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Byre & Whiten, 1988; Humphrey, 1976;
Whiten, 1991; Whiten & Byrne, 1997; Wilson et al., 1996, Dunbar, 1996). Another
possible reason for the rift between anatomical and behavioral modernity is that while
genetic mutations necessary for cognitive modernity arose at this time, the fine-tuning of
the nervous system to capitalize on these genetic changes took longer, or required certain
environmental conditions to be manifested. It is worth noting that other periods of
revolutionary innovation, such as the Holocene transition to agriculture and the modern
Industrial Revolution, occurred long after the biological changes that made them
cognitively possible. Yet another possibility (to be elaborated shortly) is that the
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
explosion of creativity in the Middle/Upper Paleolithic occurred earlier, or more
gradually, than originally believed.
4. THE SPECTACULARLY CREATIVE MIND OF MODERN HUMANS
The European archaeological record indicates that a truly unparalleled cultural transition
occurred between 60,000 and 30,000 years ago at the onset of the Upper Paleolithic (Bar-
Yosef, 1994; Klein, 1989a; Mellars, 1973, 1989a, 1989b; Soffer, 1994; Stringer &
Gamble, 1993). Considering it “evidence of the modern human mind at work,” Richard
Leakey (1984:93-94) describes the Upper Palaeolithic as follows: “unlike previous eras,
when stasis dominated, ... [with] change being measured in millennia rather than
hundreds of millennia.” Similarly, Mithen (1996) refers to the Upper Paleaolithic as the
‘big bang’ of human culture, exhibiting more innovation than in the previous six million
years of human evolution. At this time that we see the more or less simultaneous
appearance of traits considered diagnostic of behavioral modernity. It marks the
beginning of a more organized, strategic, season-specific style of hunting involving
specific animals at specific sites, elaborate burial sites indicative of ritual and religion,
evidence of dance, magic, and totemism, the colonization of Australia, and replacement
of Levallois tool technology by blade cores in the Near East. In Europe, complex hearths
and many forms of art appeared, including naturalistic cave paintings of animals,
decorated tools and pottery, bone and antler tools with engraved designs, ivory statues of
animals and sea shells, and personal decoration such as beads, pendants, and perforated
animal teeth, many of which may have indicated social status (White, 1989a, 1989b).
White (1982:176) also writes of a “total restructuring of social relations.” What is
perhaps most impressive about this period is not the novelty of any particular artifact but
that the overall pattern of cultural change is cumulative; more recent artifacts resemble
older ones but have modifications that enhance their appearance or functionality. This is
referred to as the ratchet effect (Tomasello, 1993), and it appears to be uniquely human
(Donald, 1998).
Whether this period was a genuine revolution culminating in behavioral modernity
is hotly debated because claims to this effect are based on the European Palaeolithic
record, and largely exclude the African record (McBrearty & Brooks, 2000);
Henshilwood & Marean, 2003). Indeed, most of the artifacts associated with a rapid
transition to behavioral modernity at 40–50,000 years ago in Europe are found in the
African Middle Stone Age tens of thousands of years earlier. These include blades and
microliths, bone tools, specialized hunting, long distance trade, art and decoration
(McBrearty & Brooks, 2000), the Berekhat Ram figurine from Israel (d’Errico & Nowell,
2000), and an anthropomorphic figurine of quartzite from the Middle Ascheulian (ca. 400
ka) site of Tan-tan in Morocco (Bednark, 2003). Moreover, gradualist models of the
evolution of cognitive modernity well before the Upper Palaeolithic find some support in
archaeological data (Bahn, 1991; Harrold, 1992; Henshilwood & Marean, 2003; White,
1993; White et al., 2003). If modern human behaviors were indeed gradually assembled
as early as 250–300,000 years ago, as McBrearty and Brooks (2000) argue, it pushes the
transition into alignment with the most recent spurt in human brain enlargement.
However the traditional and currently dominant view is that modern behavior appeared in
Africa between 50,000 and 40,000 years ago due to biologically evolved cognitive
advantages, and spread replacing existing species, including the Neanderthals in Europe
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
(e.g., Ambrose, 1998; Gamble, 1994; Klein, 2003; Stringer & Gamble, 1993). Thus from
this point onward there was only one hominid species: the modern Homo sapien.
Despite lack of overall increase in cranial capacity, the prefrontal cortex, and
particularly the orbitofrontal region, increased significantly in size (Deacon, 1997;
Dunbar, 1993; Jerison, 1973; Krasnegor, Lyon, and Goldman-Rakic, 1997; Rumbaugh,
1997) and it was likely a time of major neural reorganization (Klein, 1999; Henshilwood,
d’Errico, Vanhaeren, van Niekerk, and Jacobs, 2000; Pinker, 2002). These brain changes
most likely gave rise to what Feist (2006) refers to as “meta-representational thought” or
the ability to reflect on representations and think about thinking. Along similar lines,
Dennet (1976) argues that an important transition in the evolution of Homo sapiens is
from first-order intentionality to second-order intentionality. According to Dennet, a first-
order intentional system has beliefs and desires, but cannot reflect on those beliefs and
desires. A second-order intentional system by contrast has beliefs and desires about the
beliefs and desires of themselves and others.
At any rate, it is accepted that the Middle/Upper Palaeolithic was a period of
unprecedented creativity. How and why did it occur? What kind of cognitive processes
were involved?
4.1. Cognitive Explanations
Let us now review the most popular hypotheses for what kind of biologically evolved
cognitive advantages gave rise to behavioral modernity at this time.
4.1.1 Advent of Syntactic Language
It has been suggested that humans underwent at this time a transition from a
predominantly gestural to a vocal form of communication (Corballis, 2002). Although
due the ambiguity of the archaeological evidence we may never know exactly when
language began (Bednarik, 1992:30; Davidson & Noble, 1989), most scholars agree that
while earlier Homo and even Neanderthals may have been capable of primitive proto-
language, the grammatical and syntactic aspects emerged at the start of the Upper
Palaeolithic (Aiello & Dunbar, 1993; Bickerton, 1990, 1996; Dunbar, 1993, 1996;
Tomasello, 1999). Carstairs-McCarthy (1999) presents a modified version of this
proposal, suggesting that although some form of syntax was present in the earliest
languages, most of the later elaboration, including recursive embedding of syntactic
structure, emerged in the Upper Paleolithic. Syntax enabled language to become general-
purpose, and put to use in a variety of situations. It enhanced not just the ability to
communicate with others, spread ideas from one individual to the next, and collaborate
on creative projects (thereby speeding up cultural innovation), but also the ability to think
things through precisely for oneself and manipulate ideas in a controlled, deliberate
fashion (Reboul, 2007).
4.1.2 Cognitive Fluidity
Fauconnier & Turner (2002) propose that the exceptional creativity of the
Middle/Upper Paleolithic was due to onset of the capacity to blend concepts, which
facilitated the weaving of experiences into stories and parables. A similar explanation is
put forward by Mithen (1996), drawing on the evolutionary psychologist’s notion of
massive modularity (Buss, 1999, 2004; Buss et al., 1994; Cosmides & Tooby, 2002;
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
Dunbar et al., 1994; Rozin, 1976; for an extensive critique see Buller, 2005). Mithen
suggests that the creativity of the modern mind arose through the onset of cognitive
fluidity, resulting in the connecting of what were previously encapsulated (functionally
isolated) brain modules devoted to natural history, technology, social processes, and
language. This he claims gave us the ability to map, explore, and transform conceptual
spaces, referring to Boden’s (1990) definition of a conceptual space as a ‘style of
thinking—in music, sculpture, choreography, chemistry, etc.’ Sperber (1994) proposes
that the connecting of modules involved a special module, the ‘module of meta-
representation’ or MMR, which contains ‘concepts of concepts’, and enabled cross-
domain thinking, and particularly analogies and metaphors.
Note that the notion of modules amount to an explicit high-level
compartmentalization of the brain for different tasks. However this kind of division of
labor—and the ensuing creativity—would emerge unavoidably as the brain got larger
without explicit high-level compartmentalization, due to the sparse, distributed, content-
addressable manner in which neurons encode information (Gabora, 2003). Neurons are
tuned to respond to different subsymbolic microfeatures, and there is a systematic
relationship between the content of a stimulus and the distributed set of neurons that
respond to it, such that neurons that respond to similar microfeatures are near one another
(Churchland & Sejnowski, 1992; Smolensky, 1988). Thus, as the brain got larger and the
number of neurons increased, and the brain accordingly responded to a greater variety of
subsymbolic microfeatures, neighboring neurons tended to respond to microfeatures that
were more similar, and distant neurons tended to respond to microfeatures that were more
different. There were more ways in which distributed representations could overlap and
creative connections be made. Thus a weak modularity of sorts emerges naturally at the
level of the neuron without any explicit high-level compartmentalization going on, and it
need not necessarily correspond to how humans carve up the world, i.e. to categories
such as natural history, technology, and so forth. Moreover, explicit connecting of
modules is not necessary for creative connections to be made; all that is necessary is that
the relevant domains or modules be simultaneously accessable (Gabora, 2003).
4.1.3 Symbolic Reasoning
Another suggestion is that the creativity of the Middle/Upper Paleaolithic was due to the
emergence of an ability to internally represent complex, abstract, internally coherent
systems of meaning, including symbols and the causal relationships amongst them
(Deacon, 1997). Deacon believes this colored our existence by making us view objects
and people in terms of the roles they could play in stories, and the point or meaning they
could potentially have, or participate in.
Indeed, onset of the capacity for symbolic representation certainly plays a
fundamental role in the mental life of modern humans. On the other hand though, those
versed in the creativity literature tend to think that the intuitive, divergent, associative
processes with which we unearth relationships of correlation play at least as great a role.
4.1.4 Contextual focus
The above proposals for what kind of cognitive change could have led to the Upper
Paleolithic transition stress different aspects of cognitive modernity. Acknowledging a
possible seed of truth in each of them we begin to converge toward a common (if more
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
complex) view. Conceptual blending is characteristic of divergent thought, which tends
to be automatic, associative, intuitive, and diffuse. This is quite different from the
convergent thought stressed by Deacon, which tends to be logical, controlled, effortful,
and reflective. Converging evidence suggests that the modern mind engages in both
(Arieti, 1976; Ashby & Ell, 2002; Freud, 1949; Guilford, 1950; James, 1890/1950;
Johnson-Laird, 1983; Kris, 1952; Neisser, 1963; Piaget, 1926; Rips, 2001; Sloman, 1996;
Stanovich & West, 2000; Werner, 1948; Wundt, 1896). This is sometimes referred to as
the dual-process theory of human cognition (Chaiken & Trope, 1999; Evans & Frankish,
in press) and it is consistent with current theories of creative cognition (Finke, Ward, &
Smith, 1992; Gabora, 2000, 2002, 2003, under revision; Smith, Ward, & Finke, 1995;
Ward, Smith, & Finke, 1999). Divergent processes are hypothesized to occur during idea
generation, while convergent processes predominate during the refinement,
implementation, and testing of an idea. Hence it has been proposed that the Paleolithic
transition reflects a mutation to the genes involved in the fine-tuning of the biochemical
mechanisms underlying the capacity to subconsciously shift between these modes,
depending on the situation, by varying the specificity of the activated cognitive receptive
field (Gabora, 2003, 2007; for similar ideas see Howard-Jones & Murray, 2003;
Martindale, 1995). This is referred to as contextual focus1 because it requires the ability
to focus or defocus attention in response to the context or situation one is in. Defocused
attention, by diffusely activating a broad region of memory, is conducive to divergent
thought; it enables obscure (but potentially relevant) aspects of the situation thus come
into play. Focused attention is conducive to convergent thought; memory activation is
constrained enough to hone in and perform logical mental operations on the most clearly
relevant aspects. Thus in an analytic mode of thought the concept GIANT might only
activate the notion of large size, whereas in an associative mode the giants of fairytales
might come to mind. Once it was possible to shrink or expand the field of attention, and
thereby tailor one’s mode of thought to the demands of the current situation, tasks
requiring either convergent thought (e.g. mathematical derivation), divergent thought
(e.g. poetry) or both (e.g. technological invention) could be carried out more effectively.
When the individual is fixated or stuck, and progress is not forthcoming, defocusing
attention enables the individual to enter a more divergent mode of thought, and working
memory expands to include peripherally related elements of the situation. This continues
until a potential solution is glimpsed, at which point attention becomes more focused and
thought becomes more convergent, as befits the fine-tuning and manifestation of the
creative work.
Thus the onset of contextual focus would have enabled the hominid to adapt ideas
to new contexts or combine them in new ways through divergent thought, and fine-tune
these strange new combinations through convergent thought. In this way the fruits of one
mode of thought provide the ingredients for the other, culminating in a more fine-grained
internal model of the world.
4.1.1. Shifting Between Implicit and Explicit Thought
In a similar vein, Feist (2007) suggests that cognitive fluidity enabled hominids to move
not just horizontally between domains (as Mithen (1996) suggests), but also vertically
1 In neural net terms, contextual focus amounts to the capacity to spontaneously and subconsciously vary
the shape of the activation function, flat for divergent thought and spiky for analytical.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
between implicit and explicit modes of thought, allowing for the ability to make the
broad associations seen in high levels of creativity, and to arrive at novel and useful
solutions and ideas.
Indeed, while explicit cognition is often equated with our highest cognitive
abilities, the set of autonomous subsystems that underlie implicit cognition (e.g.,
Stanovich, 2004) also plays an important role in creative cognition. One particularly
important type of implicit processing is implicit learning, which encompasses the ability
to automatically and nonconsciously detect complex regularities, contingencies, and
covariances in our environment. Implicit learning is a fundamental aspect of our human-
ness, and shared by our most distant ancestors. Even among modern humans it plays a
significant role in structuring our skills, perceptions, and behavior (Berry & Broadbent,
1988; Cleeremans & Jiménez, 1997; Hassin, Uleman, & Bargh, 2004; Lewicki & Hill,
1987; Lewicki, Czyzewska, & Hoffman, 1987; Kaufman, 2007; McGeorge & Burton,
1990; A. Reber, 1967; 1993; P. Reber & Kotovsky, 1997; Squire & Frambach, 1990).
Indeed it is probably implicit not explicit cognition that is responsible for creative insight
(Bowers et al, 1995; Kaufman, 2008).
A contributing factor to the emergence of the ability to shift modes of thought may
have been the expansion of the prefrontal cortex, and the associated executive functions
and enhanced working memory2 capacity that came with the expansion. Enhanced
working memory allowed humans more control over their focus of attention so as to
maintain task goals in the presence of interference. Indeed, individual differences in
working memory capacity are strongly related to fluid intelligence among modern
humans (Conway, Jarrold, Kane, & Miyake, 2007; Engle, Tuholski, Laughlin, &
Conway, 1999; Kane, Hambrick, & Conway, 2005; Kaufman, DeYoung, Gray, Brown, &
Mackintosh, under revision).
Therefore, the fruits of implicit processes come to conscious awareness only once
they have been honed into a form in which we can mentally operate on them. Then
executive functions, associated with the growth of the prefrontal cortex, and aided by the
use of syntactical language, can reflectively and explicitly manipulate the once implicit
associations to achieve goals that may sometimes diverge from the rigid gene level goals
of our distant ancestors (Stanovich, 2005).
4.2. A Return to the Lag between Anatomical and Behavioral Modernity
Let us return briefly to the question of why the burst of creativity in the Upper Paleolithic
occurred well after the second rapid increase in brain size approximately 500,000 years
ago. A larger brain provided more room for episodes to be encoded, and particularly
more association cortex for connections between episodes to be made, but it doesn’t
follow that this increased brain mass could straightaway be optimally navigated. There is
no reason to expect that information from different domains (whether strongly modular or
weakly modular) would immediately be compatible enough to coexist in a stream of
thought, as in the production of a metaphor. It is reasonable that it took time for the
anatomically modern brain to fine-tune how its components ‘talk’ to each other such that
different items could be blended together or recursively revised and recoded in a
coordinated manner (Gabora, 2003). Only then could the full potential of the large brain
2 Working memory is the ability to maintain, update, and manipulate information in an active state.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
be realized. Thus the bottleneck may not have been sufficient brain size but sufficient
sophistication in the use of the memory already available, through contextual focus, or
shifting between implicit and explicit thought.
4.3. The Multi-Layered Mind and ‘Recent’ Creative Breakthroughs
Several researchers emphasize that the modern human mind consists of various ‘kinds of
minds’ layered on top of one another (Reber, 1989, 1993; Reber & Allen, 2000; Dennett,
1995, 1996). According to these accounts, these multiple minds are continuously
operative, giving rise to many internal and external conflicts amongst members of our
species, as well as contributing to our most distinctly human intellectual and creative
accomplishments.
According to Arthur Reber, implicit cognition is evolutionarily older than explicit
cognition. Reber speculates that the arrival of explicit cognition, which includes
processes of hypothesis-guided learning and deduction, have not modified the older
mechanisms of implicit learning that continue to function independently. Dennett (1996)
elaborates on this, arguing that the various kinds of minds that exist in modern Homo
sapiens differ to the extent to which each is rigidly tied to gene level goals (as opposed to
goals held by the individual, or ‘vehicle’). For instance, our earliest evolved minds
consist of behavioral patterns that are prewired and act like reflexes, and are more tied to
gene level goals, while our later evolving capacities for reflection and deliberate
reasoning gave humans the flexibility to override gene level goals in the service of
vehicle level goals (Stanovich, 2005).
Of course the story of how human creativity evolved does not end with the arrival
of anatomical and behavioral modernity. The end of the ice age around 10-12,000 years
ago witnessed the beginnings of agriculture and the invention of the wheel. Written
languages developed around 5-6,000 years ago, and approximately 4,000 years ago
astronomy and mathematics appear on the scene. We see the expression of philosophical
ideas around 2,500 years ago, invention of the printing press 1,000 years ago, and the
modern scientific method about 500 years ago. And the past 100 years have yielded a
technological explosion that has completely altered the daily routines of humans (as well
as other species), the consequences of which remain to be seen.
5. CREATIVITY AND CULTURAL EVOLUTION
We have examined how the capacity for creativity evolved over millions of years. In this
section we explore the possibility that creative ideas themselves evolve through culture,
in the sense that they exhibit ‘descent with modification’, or incremental adaptation to the
constraints of their environment. (A related idea is that the creative process not at the
cultural level but within the mind of one individual is Darwinian; this is discussed in the
chapter on theories, this volume.)
5.1. Creative Cultural Change as a Darwinian Process
It has been proposed that the process by which creative ideas change over time as they
pass from person to person can be described in Darwinian terms (Aunger, 2000;
Blackmore, 1999; Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981; Dawkins,
1975; Durham, 1991). This approach is sometimes referred to as ‘dual inheritance
theory’, the idea being that we inherit cultural as well as biological information, and the
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
units of cultural information are sometimes referred to as ‘memes’. The rationale is clear;
since natural selection is useful for explaining the astonishing creativity of nature,
perhaps it is also useful for explaining the astonishing creativity of human culture. There
are many parallels between the two. Clearly new inventions build on existing ones, but it
isn’t just the cumulative nature of human creativity that is reminiscent of biological
evolution. Cumulative change is after all rather easy to come by; in the days of taping
music, each time a tape was copied it became cumulatively more scratched. The
creativity of human cultures is reminiscent of biological evolution because of the
adaptive and open-ended manner in which change accumulates. New inventions don’t
just build on old ones, they do so in ways that meet our needs and appeal to our tastes,
and as in biological evolution there is no limit to how any particular invention or creative
work may inspire or influence other creative works. Moreover, culture generates
phenomena observed in biological evolution, such as drift3 and niches4 (Bentley et al.,
2004; Gabora, 1995, 1997). A theory that encompasses the two would put us on the road
to uniting the social sciences with the biological sciences.
In order to see how Darwinian theory might be applied to the evolution of
creativity ideas in culture, let us examine what kind of process natural selection can
describe, and how it works. The paradox faced by Darwin and his contemporaries was the
following: how does biological change accumulate when traits acquired over an
organism’s lifetime are obliterated? For example, a rat whose tail is cut off does not give
birth to rats with cut-off tails; the rat lineage loses this trait. Note that this kind of
continual ‘backtracking’ to an earlier state is unique to biology; if for example, an
asteroid crashes into a planet, the planet cannot revert to the state of having not had the
asteroid crash into it.5
Darwin’s genius was to explain how living things adapt over time despite that new
modifications keep getting discarded, by looking from the level of the individual to the
level of the population of interbreeding individuals. He realized that individuals who are
better equipped to survive in their given environment leave more offspring (are
‘selected’). Thus, although their acquired traits are discarded, their inherited traits
(loosely speaking, the traits they were born with) are more abundant in the next
generation. Over generations this can lead to substantial change in the distribution of
traits across the population as a whole. Natural selection was not put forth to explain how
biological novelty originates. It assumes random variation of heritable traits, and provides
an explanation for population-level change in the distribution of variants.
3 Drift refers to changes in the relative frequencies of variants through random sampling from a finite
population. It is the reason why variation is reduced in reproductively isolated populations such as those
living on a small island. Drift has been shown to occur in a culture context with respect to such things as
baby names and dog breed preferences (Neiman 1995; Madsen et al. 1999; Bentley et al. 2004). In a
computer model of cultural evolution, the smaller the society of artificial agents, the lower the cultural
diversity (Gabora, 1995).
4 Just as the biological evolution of rabbits created niches for species that eat them and parasitize their guts,
the cultural evolution of cars created niches for seat belts and gas stations (Gabora, 1997, 1998).
5 Although Darwin observed that this was the case, he did not know why. We now know that the reason
acquired traits are not inherited in biology is that organisms replicate using a template—a self-assembly
code that is both actively transcribed to produce a new individual, and passively copied to ensure that the
new individual can itself reproduce.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
We now ask: can natural selection similarly explain the process by which creative
ideas evolve through culture? A first thing that can be noted is that the problem for which
natural selection was put forward as a solution does not exist with respect to culture
(Gabora, 2008). That is, there is no sense in which the components of creative ideas
cyclically accumulate and then get discarded at the interface between one generation and
the next. For example, unlike the chopped off tail which does not get transmitted to
offspring, once someone invented the spout on a teapot, teapots could forever after have
spouts. One might ask if Darwin’s solution is nevertheless applicable; might processes
outside of biology evolve through selection even if selection was originally advanced as a
solution to a paradox that is unique to biology? The problem is that since acquired change
can accumulate orders of magnitude faster than inherited change, if it is not getting
regularly discarded, it quickly swamps the population-level mechanism of change
identified by Darwin. This is particularly the case with respect to creative ideas since they
do not originate through random processes—or even processes prone to canceling one
another out—but through strategic or implicit, intuitive processes, making use of the
associative structure of memory.
Darwinian approaches to culture posit that the basic units of this second Darwinian
process are discrete elements of culture that pass from one person to another intact except
for random change akin to mutation that arises through copying error or biased
transmission (preferential copying of high status individuals). Copying error and biased
transmission are sources of change that take place at the time an idea spreads from one
individual to another, which creativity researchers tend to view as a relatively minor
source of creative change compared with cognitive processes such as imagining,
planning, analogizing, concept combination, and so forth. The reason that Darwinian
theories of culture focus on sources of change that occur when an idea spreads from one
individual to another is not accidental; it stems from the fact that natural selection is only
of explanatory value to the extent that there is negligible inheritance or transmission of
acquired characteristics. This is the case in biology, as we saw with the cut-off tail
example; change acquired during an individual’s lifetime is not generally passed on to its
offspring. As another example, you didn’t inherit your mother’s tattoo—something she
acquired between the time she was born and the time she transmitted genetic material to
the next generation.
However, few scholars accept that there is negligible transmission of acquired
characteristics in culture. The cultural equivalent of the individual is the creative idea. A
new ‘generation’ begins when this idea is transmitted from person A to person B, and
lasts until the idea is transmitted from person B to person C. Any changes to an idea
between the time B learned it and the time B expressed it are ‘acquired characteristics’. If
B mulls the idea over or puts it into her own terms or adapts it to her own framework, the
process by which this idea changes cannot be explained by natural selection, because as
mentioned earlier, this kind of intra-generational change quickly drowns out the slower
inter-generational mechanism of change identified by Darwin; it ‘swamps the
phylogenetic signal’. The Darwinian perspective on culture therefore leads to a view of
the human condition as ‘meme hosts’, passive imitators and transmitters of prepackaged
units of culture, which evolve as separate lineages. To the extent that these lineages
‘contaminate one another’; that is, to the extent that we actively and creatively transform
elements of culture in ways that reflect our own internal models of the world, altering or
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
combining them to suit our needs, perspectives, or aesthetic sensibilities, natural selection
cannot explain cultural change. It has been argued that due to this ‘lack of inheritance of
acquired characteristics’ problem not just the evolution of creative ideas (Gabora, 2005),
and the evolution of culture (Gabora, 2004, 2008a), but the evolution of early life itself
(Gabora, 2006; Vetsigian et al., 2006), and even of many features of modern life (e.g.
Jablonka & Lamb, 2007; Kauffman, 1993; Newman & Müller, 1999; Schwartz, 1999)
cannot be described by Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
5.2. A Non-Darwinian Theory of How Creative Ideas Evolve
If creative ideas do not evolve through selection, how do they evolve? One possibility is
that the evolution of creative ideas through culture is more akin to the evolution of the
earliest biological life forms than to present-day DNA-based life (Gabora, 1998, 2000,
2004, 2008). Recent work suggests that early life emerged and replicated through a self-
organized process referred to as autocatalysis, in which a set of molecules catalyze
(speed up) the reactions that generate other molecules in the set, until as a whole they
self-replicate (Kauffman, 1993). Such a structure is said to be autopoietic, or self-
regenerating, because the whole is reconstituted through the interactions of the parts
(Maturana & Varela, 1980). These earliest precursors of life evolved not through natural
selection at the level of the population, like present-day life, but communal exchange of
innovation at the individual level (Gabora, 2006; Vetsigian et al. 2006). Since replication
of these pre-DNA life forms occurred through regeneration of catalytic molecules rather
than (as with present day life) by using a genetic self-assembly code, acquired traits were
inherited. In other words, their evolution was, like that of culture, Lamarckian.
This had led to the suggestion that it is worldviews that evolve through culture,
through the same non-Darwinian process as the earliest forms of life evolved, and
creative products such as tools and dances and architectural plans are external
manifestations of this process; they reflect the states of the particular worldviews that
generate them (Gabora, 1998, 2000, 2004, 2008). The idea is that like these early life
forms, worldviews evolve not through natural selection, but through self-organization and
communal exchange of innovations. One does not accumulate elements of culture
transmitted from others like items on a grocery list, but hones them into a unique tapestry
of understanding, a worldview, which like these early life forms is autopoietic in that the
whole emerges through interactions amongst the parts. It is self-mending in the sense that,
just as injury to the body spontaneously evokes physiological changes that bring about
healing, events that are problematic or surprising or evoke cognitive dissonance
spontaneously evokes streams of thought that attempt to solve the problem or reconcile
the dissonance (Gabora, 1999, under revision). Thus Gabora proposes that it is not
chance, mutation-like processes that propel creativity, but the self-organizing, self-
mending nature of a worldview.
6. WHY DID CREATIVITY EVOLVE?
We have discussed how human creativity evolved, and in what sense creative ideas can
be said to evolve. We now address a fundamental question: why did human creativity
evolve?
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
6.1. Creativity as Evolutionary Spandrels
Some forms of creativity enhance survival and thus reproductive fitness. For example, the
invention of weapons most likely evolved as a creative response to a need for protection
from enemies and predators. For other forms of creative expression however, such as art
and music, the link to survival and reproduction is not so clear-cut. Why do we bother?
Pinker (1997) argues that art, music, humor, fiction, religion, and philosophy are
not real adaptations, but evolutionary spandrels: side-effects of abilities that evolved for
other purposes. He likens these forms of creativity to cheesecake and pornography—
cultural inventions that stimulate our senses in novel ways, but do not improve our
biological fitness. Others similarly suggest that the cognitive abilities for planning and
remembering important ecological facts extended into our uniquely human capacities for
art, poetry, music, story-telling, and humor (Carroll, 1995; Gabora, 2003; Kaufman et al.,
2007; McBrearty & Brooks, 2000).
The ‘spandrels’ explanation assumes that what drives creativity is biological
selection forces operating at the individual level, and there is some empirical support for
this. Some forms of human creativity, such as art and music, indeed demonstrate the
features of a naturally selected adaptation (Dissanayake, 1988, 1992). For one, many
forms of creativity are ubiquitous. Although styles differ, every culture creates works of
art and music. Second, many forms of creativity are pleasurable for both the artist and the
audience, and evolutionarily adaptive behaviors are usually pleasurable. Third, many
forms of creativity in humans require effort to produce. Costly behaviors usually do not
evolve by accident.
6.2. Group Bonding
Even if creativity is at least in part driven by individual level biological selection forces,
other forces may also be at work. Natural selection is believed to operate at multiple
levels, including gene-level selection, individual-level survival selection, individual-level
sexual selection, kin selection, and group selection. Although there is evidence from
archaeology, anthropology, and ethnography that individual-level survival selection plays
a key role in human creativity, other levels may have an impact as well. For example,
some anthropologists view the function of forms of creativity such as art and music as
strengthening a group’s social cohesion. For music in particular, Mithen (2006) presents
evidence that the melodious vocalizations by our earliest ancestors played an important
role in creating and manipulating social relationships through their impact on emotional
states.
6.3. Sexual Selection
Miller (2000) argues that group bonding accounts of creativity ignore the possible role of
sexual selection in shaping creative behavior, and cannot account for the sexual
attractiveness of various forms of creativity. This idea has its roots in Darwin, who once
said, “It appears probable that the progenitors of man, either the males or females or both
sexes, before acquiring the power of expressing mutual love in articulate language,
endeavored to charm each other with musical notes and rhythm (Darwin, 1871, p. 880).
According to the sexual selection account, there is competition to mate with
individuals who exhibit creative traits that are (in theory) metabolically expensive, hard
to maintain, not easily counterfeited, and highly sensitive to genetic mutation because
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
they are the most reliable indicators of genetic fitness. In recent years, Miller (1998;
2000a; 2000b; 2000c; 2001; Kaufman et al., 2007) has developed and popularized the
most elaborated version of this theory. He argues that sexual selection has played a much
greater role than natural selection in shaping the most distinctively human aspects of our
minds, including storytelling, art, music, sports, dance, humor, kindness, and leadership.
He contends that these creative behaviors are the result of complex psychological
adaptations whose primary functions were to attract mates, yielding reproductive rather
than survival benefits. Miller notes that cultural displays of human creativity satisfy these
requirements. According to this account, cultural displays are the result of efforts to
broadcast courtship displays to recipients: “art evolved, at least originally, to attract
sexual partners by playing upon their senses and displaying one’s fitness” (Miller, 2000,
p. 267).
Along similar lines, Marek Kohn and Steven Mithen (Kohn, 1999; Kohn &
Mithen, 1999) propose what they refer to as the “sexy-hand axe hypothesis”. According
to this hypothesis, sexual selection pressures may have caused men to produce symmetric
hand axes as a reliable indicator of cognitive, behavioral, and physiological fitness. As
Mithen (1996) notes, symmetrical hand-axes are often attractive to the modern eye, but
require a huge investment in time and energy to make—a burden that makes it hard to
explain their evolution in terms of strictly practical, survival purposes. Since hand-axes
may be viewed as the first aesthetic artifacts in the archeological record, these products
may indeed be the first evidence of sexual selection shaping the emergence of art.
Various scholars have elaborated and clarified this theory. Feist (2001) notes that
Miller focuses on sexual selection so much that he excludes the evolution of scientific
creativity and technology, which Feist argues is much more likely to have been shaped by
natural selection pressures. Indeed, Feist (2001) argues that natural selection has driven
mainly the more applied or technological aspects of creativity that have clear survival
benefits, such as advances in science and engineering, whereas sexual selection has
driven more ornamental or aesthetic aspects of creativity, including art, music, dance, and
humor; forms of creativity that have come along more recently on the evolutionary scene.
Feist also argues that Miller is out of touch with the creativity literature in which
creativity is defined as both novel and adaptive behavior (Sternberg, 2000). Miller’s
focus is mostly on novel creative displays that attract the attention of potential mates.
Lastly, to make the argument convincing it would be necessary to show that creative
people are indeed considered more attractive, and have greater reproductive success.
While there is some evidence that intelligent and creative individuals are indeed
considered more attractive and have a higher number of sexual partners (Buss, 1989;
Griskevicius, Cialdini, & Kenrick, 2006; Nettle & Clegg, 2006; Prokosch et al., in press),
Feist notes that there is also evidence that creative people tend to be less likely to marry
and when they do, have fewer children (Harrison, Moore, & Rucker, 1995), a factor that
surely also impacts on reproductive success. Moreover time spent on creative projects
may be time taken away from mating and child-rearing.
Additionally, Mithen (2006) presents evidence that the musicality of our ancestors
and relatives did in fact have considerable survival value as a means of communicating
emotions, intentions, information, and facilitating cooperation, and thus sexual selection
may well not be the sole or primary selective pressure for musicality. Additionally, he
notes that while it may appear at first blush that creative men have more short-term
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
sexual partners because of their creativity, their attractiveness may be more the
combination of good looks, style, and an anti-establishment persona. Mithen also points
out that the finding that males produced at least ten times more music than females and
were most productive around the age of 30 (in which men are in their peak mating effort
and activity), could more parsimoniously be explained by the particular structure and
attitudes of twentieth-century Western society.
Perhaps the most reasonable conclusion is that sexual selection helped ramp up
the evolution of creativity, exaggerating certain forms, or making them not only
functional but also ornamental. In this way they went beyond the realm of practicality to
the realm of aesthetic functionality.
6.4. Non-biological Explanations for Creativity
If culture constitutes a second form of evolution it may also exert pressures on us that
differ from, or even counter, those exerted on us by our biology. The drive to create is
often compared with the drive to procreate, and evolutionary forces may be at the genesis
of both. In other words, we may be tinkered with by two evolutionary forces, one that
prompts us to act in ways that foster the proliferation of our biological lineage, and one
that prompts us to act in ways that foster the proliferation of our cultural lineage. For
example, it has been suggested that we exhibit a cultural form of altruism, such that we
are kind not only to those with whom we share genes but with whom we share ideas and
values (Gabora, 1997). By contributing to the wellbeing of those who share our cultural
makeup, we aid the proliferation of our ‘cultural selves’. Similarly, when we are in the
throes of creative obsession it may be that cultural forces are compelling us to give all we
have to our ideas, much as biological forces compel us to provide for our children.
Note that all of the theories discussed so far in this section attempt to explain why
humans are creative at all, but even with these same pressures operating we would not be
particularly creative if we did not live in a richly fascinating world that affords creativity.
Rosch (1975) provides evidence that we form concepts in such a way as to internally
mirror the correlational structure of the external world. Similarly, much creativity is
inspired by the goal of understanding, explaining, and/or mastering the world we live in.
Thus the beauty and intricacy of our ideas, and how they unfold over time, reflects in part
the beauty and intricacy of our world, not just the world we actually live in, but the
potential worlds suggested by the world we live in, and the fact that as our internal
models of the world—our worldviews—change, so does this halo of potential worlds.
Indeed one could say that human creativity evolves by compelling susceptible individuals
(those whose minds are poised to solve particular creatively challenging problems or
engage in creative tasks) to temporarily put aside concerns associated with survival of the
‘biological self’, and to reach into this ‘halo of possibility’, rework familiar narratives, or
juxtapose familiar objects and reconceptualize their inter-relationships, and thereby hone
a more nuanced ‘cultural self’. In sum, the creative process is compelling and our creative
achievements unfold with breathtaking speed and complexity in part because we are
fortunate enough to live in a world that offers infinite possibilities for exploring not just
the realm of ‘what is’, but the realm of ‘what could be’.
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
7. CONCLUSIONS
This chapter addressed a number of questions that lie at the foundation of who we are and
what makes human life meaningful. Why does no other species remotely approach the
degree of cultural complexity of humans? How did humans become so good at generating
ideas and adapting them to new situations? Why are humans driven to create? Do creative
ideas evolve in the same sense as biological life—through natural selection—or by some
other means?
We began with a brief tour of the history of Homo sapiens, starting six million
years ago when we began diverging from our ancestral apes. The earliest signs of
creativity are simple stone tools, thought to be made by Homo habilis, just over two
million years ago. Though primitive they marked a momentous breakthrough: the arrival
of a species that would eventually refashion to its liking an entire planet. With the arrival
of Homo erectus roughly 1.8 million years ago there was a dramatic enlargement in
cranial capacity coinciding with solid evidence of creative thinking: task-specific stone
hand axes, complex stable seasonal habitats, and signs of coordinated, long-distance
hunting. It has been proposed that the larger brain allowed items encoded in memory to
be more fine-grained, which facilitated the forging of creative connections between them,
and paved the way for self-triggered thought, and rehearsal and refinement of skills, and
thus the ability mentally go beyond ‘what is’ to ‘what could be’.
Another rapid increase in cranial capacity occurred between 600,000 and 150,000
years ago.It preceded by some hundreds of thousands of years the sudden flourishing of
creativity between 60,000 and 30,000 years ago in the Middle/Upper Paleolithic, which is
associated with the beginnings of art, science, politics, religion, and probably syntactical
language. The time lag suggests that behavioral modernity arose due not to new brain
parts or increased memory but a more sophisticated way of using memory. This may
have involved the onset of symbolic thinking, cognitive fluidity, and the capacity to shift
between convergent and divergent or explicit and implicit modes of thought. Also, the
emergence of meta-cognition enabled our ancestors to reflect on and even override their
own nature.
This chapter also reviewed efforts to understand the role of creativity in not just
biological but also cultural evolution. Some have investigated the intriguing possibility
that the cultural evolution of ideas and inventions occurs through a Darwinian process
akin to natural selection. A problem Darwinian approaches is that natural selection is
inapplicable to the extent that there is inheritance of acquired traits, and so are
inappropriate to the extent that individuals actively shape ideas and adapt them to their
own needs and aesthetic tastes. They can account for creative change that occurs during
transmission (e.g. due to biased transmission or copying error) but not change that occurs
due to thinking through how something could work. Nevertheless ideas clearly exhibit
phenomena observed in biological evolution such as adaptation, niches, and drift. If they
do not evolve through selection, how might they evolve? It was noted that the self-
organized, self-regenerating autocatalytic structures widely believed to be the earliest
forms of life did not evolve through natural selection either, but through a Lamarckian
process involving communal exchange of innovations. It has been proposed that what
evolves through culture is individuals’ internal models of the world, or worldviews, and
that like early life they are self-organized and self-regenerating. They evolve not through
survival of the fittest but through transformation, and they neither die nor survive intact
Evolutionary Approaches to Creativity
but transform over generations as elements get incorporated and are adapted to new
circumstances. Because no self-assembly code (such as the genetic code) is involved,
their evolution is Lamarckian; acquired characteristics are inherited.
Finally, this chapter addressed the question of why creativity evolved. Some
propose that creativity emerged as an evolutionary spandrel, that it promoted group
bonding, or that sexual selection played an important role in shaping aesthetic/ornamental
forms of creativity. Another possible answer derives from the theory that culture
constitutes a second form of evolution, and that our thought and behavior are shaped by
two distinct evolutionary forces. Just as the drive to procreate ensures that at least some
of us make a dent in our biological lineage, the drive to create may enable us to make a
dent in our cultural lineage. This second deeply embedded way of exerting a meaningful
impact on the world and thereby feeling part of something larger than oneself may well
come to be important as our planet becomes increasingly overpopulated. Thus by
understanding the evolutionary origins of human creativity we gain perspective on
pressing issues of today, and are in a better position to use our creativity to direct the
future course of our species and our planet.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by a grant to the first author from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada.