First principles studies of the Born effective charges and electronic dielectric tensors for the relaxor
PMN (PbMg Nb O )
Narayani Choudhury1, R. E. Cohen2 and Eric J. Walter3
1 Solid State Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Trombay, Mumbai 400 085, India
2Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington
5251 Broad Branch Road NW, Washington, DC 20015
3Department of Physics, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, VA 23187
We report first principles density functional calculations of the Born effective charges and electronic
dielectric tensors for the relaxor PMN (PbMg Nb O ). Visualization of the Born charge tensors as
“charge ellipsoids” have provided microscopic insights on the factors governing piezoelectric
enhancements with polarization rotation. Several 15 and 30-atom ferroelectric and antiferroelectric
supercells of PMN involving 1:2 and 1:1 chemical ordering have been studied. A cascading set of
ferroelectric phonon instabilities lead to several low symmetry monoclinic structures. We find a ground
state with a 15-atom unit cell with 1:2 chemical ordering along [111] with a monoclinic C2 structure.
1. Introduction
PMN(PbMg Nb O ) is the relaxor end member of the solid solution PMN-PT(PbMg Nb O -PbTiO )
1/3 2/3 3 1/3 2/3 3 3
which displays large electromechanical coupling [1] and finds application as transducers in medical
ultrasound, etc. The other end member PT (PbTiO ) is ferroelectric. PMN exhibits frequency dependent
dielectric dispersion characteristic of relaxors and has a large, broad peak at around room temperature [1].
Relaxors are disordered over various length scales, and a multiscale approach involving a combination of
various techniques including quantum mechanical, atomistic and continuum approaches [2-4] is required.
The disorder in PMN gives rise to anomalies in nearly all observed properties including diffuse
scattering, dynamical properties and the important applications coupled with their rich physics have
resulted in extensive theoretical and experimental studies.
We have studied various ordered ferroelectric and antiferroelectric supercells for PMN. These can be used
to derive interatomic potentials [2-4] and effective Hamiltonians which in turn can be employed to study
the disordered solid solution PMN-PT over larger length and time scales. Our calculations reveal that
ordered PMN supercells are ferroelectric.
From a materials design perspective, it is of interest to apply first principles techniques to compute the
dielectric and piezoelectric properties of ferroelectric materials. The goals are to provide a microscopic
understanding of the factors that can lead to enhanced performance. The key quantities that determine
the piezoelectric constants are (i) the atomic response to macroscopic strain and (ii) the Born effective
charge tensors. Studies of the variations of these quantities with polarization rotation are particularly of
interest to understand the large piezoelectric effects [5].
We earlier reported [6] linear response studies of the long wavelength phonon modes, LO-TO (longitudinal
optic-transverse optic) splittings and principal values of Born effective charges of PMN. Atomic
displacements consistent with the soft mode eigenvectors obtained from a cascading set of ferroelectric
zone center phonon instabilities yields various polarization rotated structures [6]. We now report the
complete dynamical Born effective charges and electronic dielectric tensors for these various supercells of
PMN.
2. Techniques
We have performed density functional LDA calculations using plane wave basis sets as implemented in
the code ABINIT [7] employing well tested norm conserving pseudopotentials [6] generated using the
code OPIUM [8-9]. Various ordered supercells involving 1:2 and 1:1 chemical ordering along [111] and
[001] have been studied. Density functional perturbation theory linear response [10] and Berry’s phase
computations [11,12] were used to derive the spontaneous polarization, Born effective charge tensors,
electronic dielectric tensors and phonon frequencies. The self-consistent calculations were performed with
a 4x4x4 k-point mesh and a kinetic energy cut off of 100 Ry.
3. Results
(A) Structure and energetics
PMN has a disordered perovskite based structure with an average cubic structure on a mesoscale. Although
pure PMN is a relaxor, theory predicts ordered supercells to be ferroelectric [6,13-14]. We studied several
1:2 ordered 15-atom supercells ordered along [111] and [001] and found a low symmetry, ferroelectric,
monoclinic C2 ground state [6]. Prosandeev et al.[14] studied several complex 30-atom and 15-atom
supercells, and found a 30-atom ordered, triclinic, ferroelectric, structure they denoted as [111]NT (Fig.1)
to be the most stable. We also relaxed the internal atomic coordinates for this structure, but found a lower
energy for a 15-atom cell with 1:2 chemical ordering and C2 symmetry (Fig. 1) (Table I). BMN
(BaMg Nb O ) and SMN (SrMg Nb O ) are known to be ordered 1:2 along [111]( Ref. 15) but this
1/3 2/3 3 1/3 2/3 3
has never been found experimentally for PMN.
The ideal positions (as in cubic perovskite) for 1:2 chemical ordering along [111] and [001] respectively
give hexagonal P3m1 and tetragonal P4/mmm space groups. Relaxation of the ideal hexagonal P3m1
structure results in an antiferroelectric (AFE) structure [6] with Pb, Mg and three oxygen atoms having
Wyckoff positions 1a, 1b and 3e, respectively, having no displacements while the remaining atoms reveal
antiferroelectric (AFE) displacements) (movie 1). Displacements consistent with the soft mode eigenvector
of the P3m1 structure , yields a ferroelectric P3m1 structure[6] (movie 2). The hexagonal [111] FE P3m1
structure (with spontaneous polarization along the hexagonal c-axis) has a doubly degenerate E symmetry
unstable phonon mode at the zone center. Movie 3, shows the atomic displacements of the E symmetry
unstable phonon eigenvector. Displacements consistent with the linear combination of this unstable
eigenvector yield triclinic or monoclinic Cm structures. Constrained symmetry preserving relaxation gives
a monoclinic Cm (R) structure [6] having a lower energy than the Cm (E) structure, obtained from the
unstable mode eigenvector. The structures denoted as Cm (R) and Cm (E) monoclinic ferroelectric
phases in Ref. [6] correspond to the M and M monoclinic structures, respectively predicted from higher
order Devonshire theory [16]. All these structures are ferroelectric with larger polarization in the lower
symmetry structures (Table I) and their spontaneous polarization makes an angle 0, 27 and 79 degrees with
the hexagonal c-axis for the hexagonal P3m1, and monoclinic Cm (M ) and Cm (M ) structures,
respectively. The Cm (M ) structure has a single unstable long wavelength phonon mode and the ground
state is found to have a monoclinic C2 structure. The rotation of polarization in going from ideal P3m1à
P3m1 àCm (M
) à C2 à ideal P3m1 is evident from movie 4.
(B). Born effective charges, electronic dielectric tensors and phonon frequencies
The computed Born effective charge tensors for the [111] ordered supercells are given in Tables II and III.
Although the principal values of the Born tensors for these structures (except the monoclinic Cm(M ) and
C2 structures) have been reported [6], the information about the principal axes directions necessary to
derive the complete tensors have not been reported. The anisotropy of the charge tensors has an important
bearing on their physical properties and the complete tensors and principal values are useful for
microscopic interpretation of piezoelectric data. The monoclinic FE structures studied in Table II, also
involve polarization rotation and their relative variations are of additional interest.
The Born tensors are not completely symmetric in the [111] ordered supercells, but symmetrization of the
charge tensors does not change their polar properties such as the LO-TO splittings significantly [6]. Thus
we symmetrized the effective charge tensors and visualized them as “charge ellipsoids”. The symmetrized
dynamic Born effective charge tensors for the P3m1 FE and the AFE P3m1 structures are displayed in Fig.
2. The effective charges of all the atoms in the [111] ordered structures are significantly larger than their
nominal ionic values, as typically obtained for other ferroelectric perovskites [18], due to the covalent
character of the B-O bonds and the large polarizability of the oxygen ions. The computed charge tensors
in the AFE P3m1 structure (Table II) are in good agreement with the reported values for the [111]NNM
supercells of Prosandeev et al. [14].
The charge tensors in the [111] AFE P3m1 and [111]FE P3m1 structures are quite similar. The magnitude
of the Born effective charges of the oxygen atoms are significantly larger along the Nb-O bonds as
compared to other directions, due to the covalency of the Nb-O bonds. The anisotropy of the charge tensors
have important consequences and play an important role in the piezoelectric enhancements which occur in
directions which maximize the charge contributions from various atoms along with ferroelectric
displacements. These can explain the enhancements involving polarization rotation and are discussed in
detail in Ref [6]. The Born effective charge tensors for the low symmetry [111] Cm (M ), Cm (M ), and C2
structure are displayed in Fig. 3. Although, the charge values in these different structures are similar, the
charge ellipsoids have different orientations. These have an important bearing on their their polarization
and piezoelectric response. The animation of the changes in orientations of the Born tensors involving
these various ferroelectric supercells involving polarization rotation is displayed in Movie 5.
The Born effective charge tensors in the [001] ordered tetragonal P4/mmm structure is completely
symmetric and the vanishing non-diagonal elements for all the atoms result in the ellipsoids having
principal axes, which are along the tetragonal a, b, and c directions (Fig. 2). The Born charge tensors [6]
for the tetragonal P4/mmm structure have average value of 3.73, 2.14, 8.16, -2.2, -5.4 for the Pb, Mg, Nb
and O^ and O , respectively. The charge tensors and principal values particularly, for the Mg, Nb and O
are significantly different for the [111] and [001] ordered supercells (Figs2-3). These lead to differences in
their vibrational spectra (Fig. 4) and polar response [6].
The computed electronic dielectric tensors for the [111] ordered supercells are given in Table IV.
Significant variations are seen for the [111] ordered structures involving polarization rotation. The
computed electronic dielectric constants using the LDA approximation are overestimated as compared with
the experimental results [13-14] of about 5.83 for all these supercells.
The computed long wavelength phonon frequencies for these various 1:2 chemically ordered supercells
are compared with observed Raman [14,19] and infrared data [14] in Fig. 4. All these supercells ordered
along [111] except the C2 have a ferroelectric instability around 45i which is stabilized in the C2 structure.
The calculated phonon frequencies are in overall good agreement with experiments[14,19], especially as
these are idealized supercells. The ground state C2 phonon frequencies have been evaluated both at the
experimental volume (V=1343 Bohr3) and at a constant volume V=1304 Bohr3 used to study the various
other supercells [6]. The volume variations of the phonon frequencies for the C2 structure for these
volumes are small. The phonon instabilities in PMN have an important bearing on their dielectric and
piezoelectric properties. The computed phonon spectra of the ground state C2 structure are overall similar
to the spectra obtained for the various low symmetry [111] ordered structures. Several polar phonon modes
show large LO-TO splittings and have been analyzed in detail in Ref. 6. These results will be useful to
derive interatomic potentials required for studying relaxors on larger length scales.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research under contract number N000149710052. We
thank Z.Wu for helpful discussions. Computations were performed at the Center for Piezoelectrics by
Design (CPD), College of William and Mary.