First principles phonon calculations in materials science
Atsushi Togoa,b, Isao Tanakaa,b,c,∗
aCenter for Elements Strategy Initiative for Structure Materials (ESISM), Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
cNanostructures Research Laboratory, Japan Fine Ceramics Center, Atsuta, Nagoya 456-8587, Japan
Phonon plays essential roles in dynamical behaviors and thermal properties, which are central topics in fundamental
issuesofmaterialsscience. Theimportanceoffirstprinciplesphononcalculationscannotbeoverlyemphasized. Phonopy
isanopensourcecodeforsuchcalculationslaunchedbythepresentauthors,whichhasbeenworld-widelyused. Herewe
demonstratephononpropertieswithfundamentalequationsandshowexampleshowthephononcalculationsareapplied
in materials science.
1. Introduction frameworkofDFTwithinthegeneralizedgradientapprox-
imation in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof form [18] as im-
Applicationoffirstprinciplescalculationsincondensed plemented in the VASP code [19, 20, 21]. A plane-wave
matterphysicsandmaterialssciencehasgreatlyexpanded
energycutoffof300eVandanenergyconvergencecriteria
whenphononcalculationsbecameroutineinthelastdecade.
of 10−8 eV were used. A 30×30×30 k-point sampling
Thankstotheprogressofhighperformancecomputersand
mesh was used for the unit cell and the equivalent density
development of accurate and efficient density functional
mesh was used for the supercells together with a 0.2 eV
theory (DFT) codes, a large set of first principles calcu-
smearingwidthoftheMethfessel-Paxtonscheme[22]. For
lations are now practical with the accuracy comparable
the phonon calculations, supercell and finite displacement
to experiments using ordinary PC clusters. In addition
approacheswereusedwith3×3×3supercelloftheconven-
to electronic structure information, a DFT calculation for
tional unit cell (108 atoms) and the atomic displacement
solids provides energy and stress of the system as well as distance of 0.01 ˚A.
theforceoneachatom. Equilibriumcrystalstructurescan
be obtained by minimizing residual forces and optimizing
stress tensors. When an atom in a crystal is displaced 2. Harmonic approximation
from its equilibrium position, the forces on all atoms in
In crystals, it is presumed that atoms move around
the crystal raise. Analysis of the forces associated with a
theirequilibriumpositionsr(lκ)withdisplacementsu(lκ),
systematicsetofdisplacementsprovidesaseriesofphonon
where l and κ are the labels of unit cells and atoms in
frequencies. Firstprinciplesphononcalculationswithafi-
each unit cell, respectively. Crystal potential energy Φ is
nite displacement method can be made in this way. The
presumed to be an analytic function of the displacements
present authors have launched a robust and easy-to-use
of the atoms, and Φ is expanded as
open-source code for first principles phonon calculations,
phonopy [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. (cid:88)(cid:88)
The number of users is rapidly growing world-wide, since 0 α α
the information of phonon is very useful for accounting lκ α
1 (cid:88) (cid:88)
varietyof properties and behavior of crystallinematerials, + Φ (lκ,l(cid:48)κ(cid:48))u (lκ)u (l(cid:48)κ(cid:48))
such as thermal properties, mechanical properties, phase
transition, and superconductivity. In this article, we show 1 (cid:88) (cid:88)
examplesofapplicationsofthefirstprinciplesphononcal-
3!
culations. ll(cid:48)l(cid:48)(cid:48)κκ(cid:48)κ(cid:48)(cid:48)αβγ
In Sections 2-4, we take FCC-Al as examples of ap- Φ (lκ,l(cid:48)κ(cid:48),l(cid:48)(cid:48)κ(cid:48)(cid:48))u (lκ)u (l(cid:48)κ(cid:48))u (l(cid:48)(cid:48)κ(cid:48)(cid:48))+··· (1)
plications of first principles phonon calculations. For the
electronic structure calculations, we employed the plane- where α, β, ··· are the Cartesian indices. The coeffi-
wave basis projector augmented wave method [17] in the cients of the series expansion, Φ 0 , Φ α (lκ), Φ αβ (lκ,l(cid:48)κ(cid:48)),
and,Φ (lκ,l(cid:48)κ(cid:48),l(cid:48)(cid:48)κ(cid:48)(cid:48)),arethezero-th,first,second,and
third order force constants, respectively. With small dis-
∗Correspondingauthor
placements at constant volume, the problem of atomic
Email addresses: togo.atsushi@gmail.com(AtsushiTogo),
tanaka@cms.mtl.kyoto-u.ac.jp(IsaoTanaka) vibrations is solved with the second-order terms as the
Preprint submitted to Elsevier June 30, 2015
]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v89480.6051:viXra
harmonic approximation, and the higher order terms are 10
treated by the perturbation theory.
WithaforceF (lκ)=− ∂Φ , anelementofsecond- 8
order force constants Φ (lκ,l(cid:48)κ(cid:48)) is obtained by
Crystal symmetry is utilized to improve the numerial ac-
curacy of the force constants and to reduce the computa-
tional cost. The more details on the calculation of force Wavevector
constants are found in Ref. [4, 5].
Asfoundintextbooks[23,24,25,26],dynamicalprop-
erty of atoms in the harmonic approximation is obtained
by solving eigenvalue problem of dynamical matrix D(q),
qj qj qj κκ(cid:48) qj qj qj
βκ(cid:48)
κκ(cid:48) m m
where m is the mass of the atom κ, q is the wave vector, κ
and j is the band index. ω and e give the phonon fre- qj qj
quencyandpolarizationvectorofthephononmodelabeled
by a set {q,j}, respectively. Since D(q) is an Hermitian
matrix, its eigenvalues, ω2 , are real. Usually D(q) is ar-
ranged to be a 3n ×3n matrix [26], where 3 comes from a a
the freedom of the Cartesian indices for crystal and n is
the nubmer of atoms in a unit cell. Then e becomes a
complexcolumnvectorwith3n elements,andusuallye
is normalized to be 1, i.e., (cid:80) |eακ|2 = 1. e contains ακ qj qj
information of collective motion of atoms. This may be
understood as a set of atomic displacement vectors,
(cid:26) (cid:27)
√ e1 eiq·r(l1),...,√ enaeiq·r(lκ) , (5) m qj m qj
whereAisthecomplexconstantundeterminedbyEq.(3),
and eκ T =(exκ,eyκ,ezκ). qj qj qj qj
As a typical example, the phonon band structure and
phonon density of states (DOS) of Al are shown in Fig. 1.
The phonon DOS is defined as
1 (cid:88)
whereN isthenumberofunitcellsincrystal. Dividedby
N, g(ω) is normalized so that the integral over frequency
becomes 3n . The phonon band structure can be directly
comparable with experimental data by neutron or X-ray
inelastic scattering. They often show reasonable agree-
ments[16,27,28]. FrequencydatabyRamanandinfrared
(IR) spectroscopy can also be well reproduced [8, 29]. Ir-
reducible representations of phonon modes, which can be
)zHT(ycneuqerF
(states/THz∙atom)
Figure1: (coloronline)PhononbandstructureandDOSofAl.
used to assign Raman or IR active modes, are calculated
from polarization vectors [8, 30]. Atom specific phonon
DOS projected along a unit direction vector nˆ is defined
1 (cid:88)
This g (ω,nˆ) can be directly compared with that mea-
suredbymeansofnuclear-resonantinelasticscatteringus-
ing synchrotron radiation. In Ref. [13], phonon calcula-
tionsofL1 -typeFePtprojectedalongthec-axisandbasal
plane are well comparable to experimental 57Fe nuclear-
resonant inelastic scattering spectra measured at 10 K in
the parallel and perpendicular geometries, respectively.
Entropy (J/K∙mol)
40 C (J/K∙mol)
20 C (J/K∙mol)
-20 Free energy (kJ/mol)
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Temperature (K)
seitreporp
Figure2: (coloronline)ThermalpropertiesofAl. Entropy,CV,and
Helmholtzfreeenergywerecalculatedwithharmonicapproximation
(Sec. 2). QHA was employed to obtain CP (Sec. 4). Physical units
areshownwithlabelsofthephysicalproperties,andthevalueofthe
verticalaxisissharedbythem. Dottedcurvedepictstheexperiment
ofCP [31].
OncephononfrequenciesoverBrillouinzoneareknown,
fromthecanonicaldistributioninstatisticalmechanicsfor
phononsundertheharmonicapproximation,theenergyE
of phonon system is given as
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:88) 1 1
where T, k , and ¯h are the temperature, the Boltzmann 4. Quasi-harmonic approximation
constant, and the reduced Planck constant, respectively.
By changing volume, phonon properties vary since the
Using the thermodynamic relations, a number of ther-
crystal potential is an anharmonic function of volume.
malproperties,suchasconstantvolumeheatcapacityC ,
In this article, the term “quasi-harmonic approximation
HelmholtzfreeenergyF,andentropyS,canbecomputed
(QHA)“meansthisvolumedependenceofphononproper-
as functions of temperature [26]:
ties, but the harmonic approximation is simply applied at
C = (cid:88) C = (cid:88) k
exp(h¯ω qj /k B T) , each volume. Figure 3a shows calculated phonon frequen-
V qj B k T [exp(¯hω /k T)−1]2 cies of Al at X and L points with respect to ten different
unit-cell volumes. Typically phonon frequency decreases
by increasing volume, and the slope of each phonon mode
1(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:2) (cid:3) is nearly constant in the wide volume range. The nor-
F = 2 ¯hω qj +k B T ln 1−exp(−¯hω qj /k B T) , malized slope is called mode-Gru¨neisen parameter that is
qj qj defined as
1 (cid:88)
2T qj qj B Once dynamical matrix is known, γ is easily calculated
from the volume derivative of the dynamical matrix[25],
The calculated F, C V , and S for Al are shown in Fig. 2. qj 2(ω qj )2 αβκκ(cid:48) qj ∂V qj
ThequantitycanberelatedtomacroscopicGru¨neisenpa-
3. Mean square atomic displacements
rameter γ using mode contributions to the heat capacity
Withthephasefactorconventionofthedynamicalma- C found in Eq. (9), γ = (cid:80) γ C /C [24, 26].
qj qj qj qj V
trix used in Eq. (4), an atomic displacement operator is Silicon is known as a famous exception to have large
written as, negativemode-Gru¨neisenparameters. Mode-Gru¨neisenpa-
uˆ α (lκ)= (cid:114) 2N ¯h m (cid:88)aˆ qj √ + ω aˆ† −qjeα qj κeiq·r(lκ), (12) r a a n m d e i t s er re i l s at a ed m t e o as t u h r ir e d o -o f r a d n e h r a f r o m rc o e n c ic o i n ty sta o n f t p s h d o i n re o c n tl m y o [2 d 5 e ] s .
κ qj qj Therefore crystals that possess large anharmonic terms
beyond third-order terms in Eq. (1) can show non-linear
where aˆ† and aˆ are the creation and annihilation oper-
change of phonon frequency with respect to volume. This
ators, respectively. Distributions of atoms around their
isoftenobservedincrystalsthatexhibitsecond-orhigher-
equilibriumpositionsarethenobtainedastheexpectation
order structural phase transitions [2].
values of Eq. (12). The mean square atomic displacement
The phonon frequency influences the phonon energy
projected along nˆ is obtained as
through Eq. (8). The thermal properties are thereby af-
(cid:10) |uˆ (κ)|2(cid:11) = ¯h (cid:88)1+2n qj|nˆ·eκ |2. (13) fected. Using thermodynamics definition, thermodynamic
nˆ 2Nm κ ω qj qj variables at constant volume is transformed to those at
constant pressure that is often more easily measurable in
Eq. (13) is lattice-point (l) independent since the phase
experiments. Gibbs free energy G(T,p) at given temper-
factor disappears. Anisotropic atomic displacement pa-
ature T and pressure p is obtained from Helmholtz free
rameters (ADPs) to estimate the atom positions during
energy F(T; V) through the transformation,
thermal motion can also be computed and compared with
experimental neutron diffraction data. Thermal ellipsoids G(T,p)=min[F(T; V)+pV], (17)
may be discussed using mean square displacement matrix V
B(κ) defined by wheretherighthandsideofthisequationmeansfindinga
¯h (cid:88)1+2n
minimum value in the square bracket by changing volume
2Nm ω qj qj V. WemayapproximateF(T; V)bythesumofelectronic
qj internal energy U (V) and phonon Helmholtz free energy
The shape and orientation of an ellipsoid is obtained solv- F (T; V), i.e., F(T; V)(cid:39)U (V)+F (T; V). U (V) is
ph el ph el
ing eigenvalue problem of this matrix. The method has obtained as total energy of electronic structure from the
been applied to show the ORTEP (Oak Ridge Thermal first principles calculation, and the first principles phonon
Ellipsoid Plot)-style drawing of ADPs [14]. Ref. [7] shows calculation at T and V gives F (T; V). The calculated
anexampleforaternarycarbideTi SiC havingalayered U (V)+F (T; V) are depicted by the filled circle sym-
structureknownasMAXphases,inwhichwecanseegood bols in Fig. 3b, where the ten volume points chosen are
agreement between calculated and experimental ADPs. the same as those in Fig. 3a. The nine curves are the
0 200 400 600 800
tneiciffeoc
Temperature (K)
60 65 70 75
Volume (Å3) Volume (Å3)
(a) (b) (c) ×10-6 5. Stability condition and imaginary mode 0K
At equilibrium, ∂Φ = 0, a crystal is dynamically ∂rα(lκ)
(mechanically)stableifitspotentialenergyalwaysincreases
against any combinations of atomic displacements. In the
X harmonic approximation, this is equivalent to the condi-
tionthatallphononshaverealandpositivefrequencies[25].
However under virtual thermodynamic conditions, imag-
inary frequency or negative eigenvalue can appear in the
solutionofEq.(3). Thisindicatesdynamicalinstabilityof
L the system, which means that the corrective atomic dis-
80 60 65 70 75 80
placements of Eq. (5) reduce the potential energy in the
vicinity of the equilibrium atomic positions.
Figure 3: (color online) (a) Phonon frequencies of Al at X and L
pointswithrespecttounitcellvolumeareshownbyfilledandopen
circles,respectively. Thesolidanddottedlinesareguidestotheeye.
(b) U +F of Al with respect to volume at temperatures from 10
0 to 800 K with 100 K step are depicted by filled circles and the 8
values are fit by the solid curves. Cross symbols show the energy
bottomsoftherespectivecurvesandsimultaneouslytheequilibrium
volumes. Lines connecting the cross symbols are guides to the eye. 4
(c) Volumetric thermal expansion coefficient of Al. Calculation is
shownwithsolidcurveandexperimentsaredepictedbyfilledcircle
symbols[32]anddottedcurve[33]. 0
fits to equation of states (EOS) at temperatures from 0
to 800 K with 100 K step. Here the Vinet EOS [34] was
usedtofitthepointstothecurvesthoughanyotherfunc-
tions can be used for the fitting. The minimum values
at the temperatures are depicted by the cross symbols in
Fig. 3b and are the Gibbs free energies at the tempera-
tures and the respective equilibrium volumes are simulta-
neously given. Volumetric thermal expansion coefficient,
β(T) = 1 ∂V(T), is obtained from the calculated equi-
librium volumes V(T) at dense temperature points. β(T)
forAlisshowninFig.3c,wherewecanseethatthecalcu-
lation shows reasonable agreements with the experiments.
Inthermodynamics,heatcapacityatconstantpressureC
is given by
C (T,p)=−T
=C V (T,V(T,p))+T ∂T ∂V (cid:12) (cid:12) . (18)
In Eq. (18), the second term of the second equation is un-
derstoodasthecontributiontoheatcapacityfromthermal
expansion. C for Al is shown in Fig. 2. The agreement
of the calculation with the experiment is excellent. At
high temperatures, the difference between C and C is
not negligible in Al. Therefore it is essential to consider
thermal expansion for heat capacity.
QHAisknownasareasonableapproximationinawide
temperaturerangebelowmeltingpointexceptfortemper-
aturesveryclosetomeltingpointwherehigher-orderterms
in Eq. (1) become evident [35].
)zHT(ycneuqerF 8
)zHT(ycneuqerF
)zHT(ycneuqerF
(d) ω-phase structure (P6/mmm)
Figure4: (coloronline)Phononbandstructuresof(a)α-Ti(HCP),
(b) β-Ti (BCC), and (c) ω-Ti. The figure (d) shows the hexagonal
crystalstructureofω-Ti.
Imaginary mode provides useful information to study
displacive phase transition. A typical example is shown
in Figs. 4a to 4c [12]. Imaginary modes can be found
only for β-Ti, that has BCC structure, at both P and N
points. This indicates that β-Ti is unstable at low tem-
perature. Suchimaginarymodescannotbeseenforeither
ω-Ti whose crystal structure is shown in Fig. 4d or α-
Ti (HCP). Experimentally β-Ti is known to occur above
1155K. At such high temperatures, large atomic displace-
ments can stabilize the BCC structure. In such a case,
the perturbation approach is invalid. Phonons with large
atomic displacements may be treated by self-consistent
phonon method[25, 36] or by a combination of molecu-
lar dynamics and lattice dynamics calculation[37, 38, 39],
which is not discussed in this article.
Agivenstructurehavingimaginaryphononmodescan
beledtoalternativestructuresthroughcontinuousatomic
displacements and lattice deformations. The present au-
thors systematically investigated the evolution of crystal
structures from the simple cubic (SC) structure [6]. The
inset of Fig. 5 shows the phonon band structure of SC-Cu
(Pm¯3m). ImaginarymodescanbefoundatM(1/2,1/2,0)
and X(1/2,0,0) points. Then the SC structure is de-
formed along these directions. In order to accommodate
the deformation in the calculation model with the peri-
odic boundary condition, the unit cells are expanded by
2×2×1fortheM pointand2×1×1fortheX point. The
M point deformation breaks the crystal symmetry of SC
(Pm¯3m) to P4/nmm. The doubly degenerated instabil-
ity at the X point leads to Pmma and Cmcm as highest
possible symmetries. The deformed crystal structures are
relaxed by first principles calculations imposing the corre-
sponding space-group operations. After these procedures,
body-centered tetragonal (BCT), simple hexagonal (SH),
and FCC are respectively formed. The whole procedure
finishes when all crystal structures at the end-points are
found to be dynamically stable. Finally a treelike struc-
tureofcrystalstructurerelationshipswasdrawnasshown
in Fig. 5, where thick lines indicate phase transition path-
ways (PTPs). The space-group type written near a line
is a common subgroup of initial and final structures. The
presence of the line indicates that the energy decreases
monotonically with the phase transition. In other words,
the transition can take place spontaneously without any
energybarrier. Thelineisterminatedwhenthefinalstruc-
ture is dynamically stable.
−4iΓ X M R
)zHT(ycneuqerF
geometryoptimization. Bothω-andBCC-Cuaredynam-
ically unstable, which can be formed only under crystal
symmetry constraints. FCC-Cu is, of course, dynamically
stable. Several PTPs between BCC and FCC have been
proposed in literature. However, they are mostly based
only upon investigation of continuous lattice deformation.
For example in the classical Bain path, formation of BCT
in between BCC and FCC is considered. Formation of SC
is taken into account in the “trigonal Bain path.” Normal
modes of phonon, which should be most adequate to de-
scribe the collective atomic displacements, have not been
considered. Thepresenceofω asthelowestenergybarrier
in the BCC-FCC pathway had not been reported before
Ref.[6]. ThesituationisthesamefortheBCC-HCPtran-
sition, known as the Burgers path. The Burgers path was
thoughttobequitecomplicatedfromtheviewpointofthe
lattice continuity. On the basis of the present study, it
can be easily pointed out that the BCC-HCP transition
pathway is along the space-group type of Cmcm.
Evolutiondiagramwasconstructedinthesamewayfor
NaRTiO (R: rare-earth metal) with Ruddlesden-Popper
typestructure[9]. Inversionsymmetrybreakingbyoxygen
octahedralrotationswasunambiguouslydemonstrated. The
mechanism is expected to lead to many more families of
acentric oxides.
M X 6. Interactionsamongphononsandlatticethermal
X conductivity
Using the harmonic phonon coordinates, anharmonic
terms in Eq. (1) are transformed to a picture of phonon-
phonon interactions [4, 24]. Lattice thermal conductivity
can be accurately calculated by solving linearized Boltz-
manntransportequationwiththephonon-phononinterac-
tion strength obtained using first principles calculation[5,
40,41]. Althoughthecomputationalcostforsuchcalcula-
tions is many orders of magnitudes higher than the ordi-
naryDFTcalculationsofprimitivecells,suchcalculations
havealreadybeenappliedformanysimplecompoundsand
computed lattice thermal conductivities show good agree-
ments with experimental data [5, 41]. Calculations with
Figure 5: (color online) Line diagram of structural transition path-
special focus on searching thermoelectric materials have
waysinCu. Theinsetshowsphononbandstructureofsimplecubic
also been made [10, 16, 41].
(SC) Cu. Open and filled symbols represent dynamically unstable
and stable crystal structures, respectively. Lines connecting these
symbols are the phase transition pathways for which space-group
typesareshownnearthelines. Acknowledgements
Theresearchleadingtotheseresultswassupportedby
Inthelinediagram, ω islocatedatthejunctionoftwo Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas
pathways, i.e., ω → BCC → HCP and ω → FCC. The in- “Nano Informatics” (Grant No. 25106005) and for Young
stabilityofωattheΓpointleadstoBCC,whichisstilldy- Scientists(B)(GrantNo. 26820284)bothfromJSPS.Sup-
namically unstable and eventually leads to HCP. Another port from MEXT through ESISM is also acknowledged.
instability at the M point leads to FCC. The other insta-
bilityattheK point, whichisdoublydegenerate, leadsto