Flows in inkjet-printed aqueous rivulets
Vadim Bromberg, Timothy J. Singler
Mechanical Engineering Department,
State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
December 12, 2021
Weusedopticalmicroscopytoinvestigateflowsinsidewaterrivulets
thatwereinkjet-printedontodifferentsurfacesandunderdifferentam-
bient conditions. The acquired fluid dynamics videos were submitted
to the 2013 Gallery of Fluid Motion.
1 Introduction
Understanding the flow inside sessile liquid structures of different shapes is
important in a variety of solution-based material deposition and patterning
processes. Solvent evaporation inherent in these processes is already known
to lead to a rich variety of flows [1]. The small length scale and general lack
of shape symmetry implies the potential for capillary pressure gradients and
corresponding flow phenomena. Finally, the non-instantaneous nature of
the formation of these liquid structures adds another element to the flow
complexity.
In the linked videos, we investigated the internal flow of inkjet-printed
water rivulets of finite length using optical microscopy. Six millimeter-
long rivulets were formed by printing a pre-determined number of drops
(D = 52µm) at controlled frequency (f = 20Hz) and spatial overlap
(∆x = 20µm). Microscope cover slips made of borosilicate glass were sur-
face coated and used as substrates. Two surface coatings were investigated
- S1805 photoresist with and without KOH etching. Rivulets were printed
inside a controlled humidity chamber at two relative humidity levels - 45%
and 25%. The ambient, ink, and substrate were kept at room tempera-
ture (T = 25C). For fluorescent microscopy videos, the water was seeded
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v3933.0131:viXra
with Nile Red polystyrene spheres (1.1µm) at 0.1% volume fraction. We
report the experimental details and results of a wider range of both printing
parameters, ink properties, and substrate surfaces elsewhere [2].
The two surface coatings resulted in different values of the static ad-
vancing and receding contact angles (θ and θ ) for water and in the rivulet
formationprocessduringprinting. Waterdropletsonthephotoresist-coated
surface exhibited θ = 80◦ and θ = 35◦while those on the etched surface
θ = 45◦ and θ = 0. Complete rivulet formation was inhibited on the first
surface type due to a non-zero θ , which allowed capillary-driven contact
line recession and rivulet breakup into individual droplets [3]. The zero θ
on the second surface type prevented rivulet breakup [3] but resulted in the
formation of a distinctive bulge at the starting end of the water rivulet. The
bulge grows immediately after the coalescence of the first few drops during
rivulet formation.
We investigated the flow that causes bulge growth by using optical flu-
orescent microscopy. During rivulet formation, a distinctly pulsatile axial
flow drives fluid away from the terminal end of the growing rivulet where
printed drops are landing. The frequency of the flow is the same as the drop
frequency. It has been hypothesized that the large local mean curvature in
the region where drops land causes a capillary pressure gradient along the
length of the rivulet [4]. Using µPIV, the height- and width-averaged axial
velocity was measured and showed that the amplitude of the pulsatile flow
decreaseswithreducedrelativehumidityintheambient,allotherconditions
being fixed. The decreased flow magnitude results in the inhibition of bulge
formation.
The video entry to the 2013 Gallery of Fluid motion is shown in
• Video 1 - Low resolution
• Video 2 - High resolution
In the video, the following subjects are shown:
• A schematic of the flow observation approach
• Visualization of rivulet break up during printing onto a substrate with
non-zero receding contact angle (surface type 1)
• Visualization of successful rivulet formation on surface type 2 and
concequent bulge growth
• Fluorescence microscopy video showing pulsatile axial flow and corre-
sponding mean axial speed
• The effect of liquid evaporation on axial flow and bulge growth inhi-