Fluid Mixing from Viscous Fingering
Birendra Jha
Luis Cueto-Felgueroso
Ruben Juanes
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
October 25, 2018
Viscous fingering is a well-known hydrodynamic instability that
sets in when a less viscous fluid displaces a more viscous fluid [1].
Whenthetwofluidsaremiscible,viscousfingeringintroducesdisorder
in the velocity field and exerts a fundamental control on the rate at
which the fluids mix. We present a fluid dynamics video of the mixing
process in a viscously unstable flow, generated from a high-resolution
numerical simulation using a computational strategy that is stable for
arbitraryviscosityratios. Wedevelopatwo-equationdynamicmodelof
concentrationvarianceandmeandissipationratetoquantifythedegree
of mixing in such a displacement process [2]. The model reproduces
accurately the evolution of these two quantities as observed in high-
resolution numerical simulations and captures the nontrivial interplay
betweenchannelingandcreationofinterfacialareaasaresultofviscous
fingering.
1 Introduction
Mixing efficiency at low Reynolds numbers can be enhanced by exploit-
ing hydrodynamic instabilities that induce heterogeneity and disorder in
the flow. The unstable displacement of fluids with different viscosities, or
viscous fingering [1], provides a powerful mechanism to increase fluid-fluid
interfacial area and enhance mixing. We numerically simulate the process
of viscous fingering in a two-dimensional porous medium for two perfectly
miscible, incompressible, neutrally buoyant fluids. The physical model de-
scribes flow in a porous medium or Hele-Shaw cell—a thin gap between two
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
3v0873.0101:viXra
parallelplates. Thegoalofthesimulationistodemonstrateandunderstand
mixing between the two fluids due to viscous fingering. The mathematical
model is comprised of the advection-dispersion equation, Darcy’s law, and
the divergence-free velocity condition. There are two governing parameters
in the non-dimensionalized set of equations–viscosity contrast between the
two fluids and the P´eclet number of the flow (ratio of advection to diffu-
sion). The fluid dynamics video accompanying this document is created
from a simulation where the viscosity ratio is 33 and the P´eclet number is
10000.
We will describe the first simulation movie in the accompanying video
file. This simulation is generated using snapshots of the concentration field
at successive time steps. Light yellow color indicates the less viscous fluid
and dark color indicates the more viscous fluid. Intermediate colors denote
a mixture of the two pure fluids. We have used an exponential viscosity-
concentration relationship for the mixture, i.e., viscosity of the mixture is
proportional to the exponential of concentration of the more viscous fluid
in the mixture. The displacement is from left to right and the reference
frame is moving with the average speed of the flow. A slightly perturbed
flat interface separates the two fluids initially. Periodic boundary conditions
are applied in the transverse direction. Fresh less viscous fluid enters the
domain continuously from the left boundary and the right edge is a natural
flow boundary.
The less viscous fluid tries to move faster than the more viscous fluid
because of its higher mobility. The displacement front becomes unstable
leading to the formation of viscous fingers. With time, these fingers grow
longitudinally much faster than they can diffuse transversely. This leads to
stretchingoftheinitialinterfacebetweenthetwofluids. Tipsofthesefingers
split and smaller fingers emerge from them continuously, leading to further
stretchingoftheinterfaceandoverallhighermixingrateacrosstheinterface.
Other interesting nonlinear mechanisms visible during the fingering process
are shielding of one finger by another, merging of fingers, fading of fingers
and also channeling of a dominant finger through the more viscous domain.
These events result from the non-local coupling between the concentration
and the pressure fields due to a concentration-dependent viscosity.
We show that viscous fingering leads to two competing effects. On one
hand, it enhances mixing by inducing disorder in the velocity field, and
increasing the interfacial area between the fluids. On the other, it causes
channeling of the low viscosity fluid, which bypasses large areas of the flow
domain–these regions remain unswept thereby reducing the overall mixing
efficiency. This competition between creation of fluid-fluid interfacial area
and channeling results in nontrivial mixing behavior. We develop a two-
equation dynamic model for evolution of the concentration variance and
mean scalar dissipation rate to quantify the degree of mixing in a viscously
unstable displacement [2]. We use our analysis to predict the range of vis-
cosity contrast that maximizes mixing.
of mixing induced by viscous fingering.