]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v1155.0131:viXra
Fluid fragmentation from hospital toilets
G. Traverso1,2, S. Laken3, C.-C. Lu4, R. Maa5, R. Langer2,5, and L. Bourouiba∗6,7
MGH Division of Gastroenterology and Harvard Medical School
2Koch Institutefor Integrative Cancer Research, MIT
3Pavoda, Inc.
4ENSTA ParisTech
5Department of Chemical Engineering, MIT
6Department of Mathematics, MIT
7Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, MIT
Hospital-acquired infections represent significant health and financial burdens to society. Hospital-
acquired Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is a particularly challenging bacteria with the potential to cause
severediarrheaanddeath. Inthe US alone,C. difficile is estimatedtoleadto morethan14,500deaths,and
result in more than $1.1 billion in costs per year [10, 6, 9].
One mode of transmission for C. difficile, as well as other pathogens, which has received little attention
is the potential air contamination by pathogen-bearing droplets emanating from toilets. So far, modern
mitigation strategies focused on cleaning hospital surfaces with products such as bleach, ignoring air con-
tamination. Though toilets have been in use for over a century, little is known about the fluid dynamics
governing their potential for pathogen-bearing droplet generation. Best et al (2012) [2] reported finding
spores in the air an hour after flushing. This is a major concerngiventhat modernhospital toilets in North
America do not have lids and are cleared using high flow rate flushes.
Fluid dynamics is playing an increasingly important role in understanding the transmission of a variety
ofdiseases[3]. Inthis approach,thefirststepreliesoncharacterizingthe flowscontributingto the pathogen
transferwithinoroutsidetheinfectedhost. High-speedvisualizationsareusedtocapturethefast-timescale
dynamics of fluid fragmentationsuch as that occurringduring realsneezes andcoughs [4, 5] or rainimpacts
on contaminated plant leaves [8]. Relying on the insight gained in this first step, complemented by clinical
data, joint physical analog experiments and mathematical models can be developed to elucidate the fluid
mechanisms contributing or shaping disease transmission [5, 8].
In the fluid dynamics video submitted to the APS DFD Gallery of Fluid Motion, we present the first
step ofcharacterizationof the problemofindoor contaminationfromhospitaltoilets. Flow visualizationvia
high-speed recordings show the capture of the product of the fluid fragmentation occurring during hospital
high-pressureflushingevents. The recordingswereperformedat1000to2000framesper secondanddisplay
asideviewofthesectionjustabovethetoiletbowl. Thevisualizationscapturelargequantitiesofbothlarge
and small droplets. The former are defined as those that would settle quickly and contaminate surfaces;
while the latter could remain suspended in the air carrying C. difficile spores among other pathogens [7].
In the video, we illustrate how high-pressureflushes and cleaning products currently used in hospital toilets
result in a dramatic increase of small droplet ejections without killing spores; thus aggravating,rather than
alleviating, the suspension and recirculation of tenacious potential pathogens. Our full results on the fluid
fragmentation dynamics of flush-induced droplet ejecta will be published elsewhere.
∗ correspondingauthor: lbouro@mit.edu
Copyright Notice
ThisarticlehasbeenpublishedontheArXiv underaperpetual, non-exclusivelicense. Copyrightis retained
by the authors. The attached video files are Copyright (c) 2013 by the authors and may not be copied,
publicly presented or incorporated into any other derivative work without a clear attribution and written
consent.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank H. Flexman and B. Vijaykumar for their help with some facets of the project.
References Cited
[1] ACS. Cancerfacts&figures. American Cancer Society,2012.
[2] E.L.Best,J.A.Sandoe,andM.HWilcox. Potentialforaerosolizationofclostridiumdifficileafterflushingtoilets: therole
oftoiletlidsinreducingenvironmental contamination risk. J. hosp. infection,80:1–5,2012.
[3] L.BourouibaandJ.W.M.Bush. DropsandBubbles.Chapter32inHandbook ofEnvironmentalFluidDynamicsVolume
one: Overviewand Fundamentals. Taylor&FrancisBookInc.,2013.
[4] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and John. W. M. Bush. The fluid dynamics of coughing and sneezing. Refereed
proceedings oftheInternationalSocietyofIndoorAirQualityandClimate.10thHealthyBuildingsConference.Brisbane,
AU.,2012.
[5] L. Bourouiba, E. Dehandschoewercker, and John. W. M.Bush. Violent expiratory events: on coughing and sneezing. J.
Fluid Mech.,2013. underreview.
[7] H.M.DarlowandW.R.Bale. Infectivehazardsofwater-closets. Lancet,273:1196–1200, 1959.
[8] T.GiletandL.Bourouiba. Rain-inducedfoliardiseasetransmission. 2013. underreview.
[9] C.P. Johnston, Ha. Qiu, J.R. Ticehurst, P. Dickson, C.and Rosenbaum, P. Lawson, A.B. Stokes, C.J. Lowenstein,
M. Kaminsky, S.E. Cosgrove, K.Y. Green, and T.M. Perl. Outbreak management and implications of a nosocomial
norovirusoutbreak. Clin. Infect. Dis,45:534–540, 2007.
[10] L.Kyne,H.B.Hamel,R.Polavaram,andC.P.Kelly. Healthcarecostsandmortalityassociatedwithnosocomialdiarrhea
duetoclostridiumdifficile. Clin. Infect. Dis,42:346–53, 2002.