2v5236.9031:viXra
Prepared for submission to JHEP
Forced Fluid Dynamics from Gravity in
Arbitrary Dimensions
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB3 0WA, England
E-mail: A.Thillaisundaram@damtp.cam.ac.uk
Abstract: We consider long wavelength solutions to the Einstein-dilaton system
with negative cosmological constant which are dual, under the AdS/CFT corre-
spondence, to solutions of the conformal relativistic Navier-Stokes equations with
a dilaton-dependent forcing term. Certain forced fluid flows are known to exhibit
turbulence; holographic duals of forced fluid dynamics are therefore of particular in-
terest as they may aid efforts towards an explicit model of holographic steady state
turbulence. In recent work, Bhattacharyya et al have constructed long wavelength
asymptotically locally AdS bulk spacetimes with a slowly varying boundary dila-
ton field which are dual to forced fluid flows on the 4 dimensional boundary. In
this paper, we generalise their work to arbitrary spacetime dimensions; we explicitly
compute the dual bulk metric, the fluid dynamical stress tensor and Lagrangian to
second order in a boundary derivative expansion.
1 Introduction 1
2 Overview of the fluid/gravity correspondence 5
2.1 A perturbative construction 5
2.2 Slow variation of bulk tubes and the zeroth order ansatz 6
2.3 Equations at each order in the boundary derivative expansion 8
2.4 Extension to the Einstein-dilaton system 9
3 Manifest Weyl covariance 11
3.1 Regulation and Weyl symmetry 11
3.2 Weyl covariant derivative 13
3.3 Independent Weyl invariant tensors 14
3.4 Weyl covariant form of the fluid dynamical metric 15
4 Explicit results up to second order 17
4.1 The metric and dilaton 17
4.2 Stress tensor and Lagrangian of the dual fluid 20
5 Discussion 20
A First order calculation 22
A.1 Constraint equations 22
A.2 Dynamical equations and source terms 22
B Second order calculation 23
B.1 Constraint equations 23
B.2 Dynamical equations and source terms 23
1 Introduction
The AdS/CFT correspondence [1, 2] offers a novel perspective on quantum field the-
ories. This duality enables us to translate a problem in field theory into a gravita-
tional/string theoretic language. The hope of course is that, where conventional field
theoretic methods have failed, the dual description may prove to be more intuitive
and theproblem thereforemore tractable. This is especially trueforstrongly coupled
field theories and there is significant interest in obtaining holographic descriptions of
certain strongly coupled phenomena [3, 4].
Considerable progress has already been made in obtaining the holographic duals
of equilibrium field theory configurations. Two canonical examples in the AdS/CFT
dictionary are the Schwarzschild-AdS black brane which corresponds to a thermal
state in the field theory and the Reissner-Nordstrom-AdS black brane which corre-
sponds to a thermal state at finite density. Now, while an understanding of equi-
librium states is useful to describe certain physical phenomena (the study of phase
transitions, for example, need not include any explicit time-dependence), many in-
teresting strongly coupled phenomena are dynamical. Hence, there is considerable
physical motivation for the holographic study of non-equilibrium behaviour [5].
Unfortunately, while the holographic study of non-equilibrium dynamics is of
much greater interest, it is also correspondingly much more difficult. Some headway
can be made by focusing on small deviations away from equilibrium. The study
of these small amplitude perturbations is known as linear response theory and the
holographic methodology involved is part of the standard AdS/CFT toolkit [6–11].
However, the regime of validity of linear response theory does not cover large ampli-
tude, violent perturbations away from equilibrium and, in such cases, often progress
can only be made using numerical methods [12–14].
If we are motivated by the desire to obtain analytically the holographic dual of a
certainclass ofinteresting, non-trivialnon-equilibrium phenomena (beyondthereach
of linear response theory), a natural starting point would be fluid dynamics. We will
now provide some intuition for this statement. For the sake of having a concrete
example, we consider the most familiar case of the AdS/CFT correspondence: the
duality between SU(N) = 4 Super Yang-Mills theory and Type IIB string theory
on AdS S5. For generic values of N and coupling λ, both sides of this duality
are fairly complicated theories. If we are interested in obtaining analytic, time-
dependent solutions with the aim of studying non-equilibrium phenomena, it is well
worth considering a limit in which the dynamics will simplify. A natural way forward
would be to take N in the ’t Hooft limit; the bulk theory now becomes
classical Type IIB string theory. If we further take the strong coupling limit (λ
), the massive string states decouple and the bulk theory simplifies to Type IIB
supergravity. Now, while progressing from Type IIB string theory on AdS S5
to Type IIB supergravity certainly is a step in the right direction, more can still
be done. Type IIB supergravity on AdS S5 has several consistent truncations to
reduced, decoupled subsectors of dynamics; we focus on the simplest of these which
is pure Einstein gravity with negative cosmological constant1,
E R Rg +Λg = 0, Λ − . (1.1)
AB AB AB AB
It is worth emphasising here that this result applies with much greater univer-
sality than implied above. There are an infinite number of field theories possessing
1The bulk spacetime has d+1 dimensions. Also,we havesetthe AdScurvature radiusto unity.
gravitational duals; all of which admit large N and strong coupling limits. And in
these limits, the bulk theories will generically simplify to two derivative Einstein
gravity interacting with other fields. Regardless of the specific nature of these inter-
actions, these bulk theories of gravity will certainly admit AdS M as a solution
(M is some internal manifold). Bulk dynamics with these characteristics all possess
consistent truncations to pure Einstein gravity with negative cosmological constant.
In this sense, the dynamics described by equation (1.1) is the universal subsector of
dynamics for an infinite class of bulk theories. And from the field theory perspective,
bearing in mind that the bulk graviton is dual to the boundary field theory stress
tensor, we see that pure Einstein gravity with negative cosmological constant is the
universal dual bulk description of the stress tensor dynamics of an infinite class of
strongly coupled field theories.
Let us now pause to summarise our current position. Motivated by our desire to
obtain analytic, time-dependent holographic solutions, we were led to the universal
subsector of dynamics (1.1) which is thedual dynamics ofthe boundarystress tensor.
Yet even now, attempting to classify all time-dependent solutions to the Einstein
equations is far from an easy task. And on the field theory side as well, the full
behaviour of the stress tensor is still very nontrivial. To achieve further progress it is
again worth limiting our attention to a simpler case. A promising path that we could
take would be to focus only on stress tensor dynamics for field theory configurations
which are locally equilibriated. Such configurations are governed by fluid dynamics
[15]; andthekeyfluiddynamical equationsofmotionsimply followfromconservation
of the stress tensor2,
Perhaps constructing bulk time-dependent solutions of (1.1) dual to boundary fluid
dynamics is a more realistic aim?
Thisgoalwasconcretely achieved in[16]wheretheauthorsexplicitly constructed
asymptotically AdS long wavelength solutions to the Einstein equations with nega-
tive cosmological constant which are dual to solutions of the four-dimensional con-
formal relativistic Navier-Stokes equations. It should be stressed here that this work
constitutes a derivation of nonlinear fluid dynamics from gravity and thus is valid for
fluid dynamical solutions with arbitrarily large velocity amplitudes. This is distinct
from previous work on holographic linearised hydrodynamics [17–20] which is only
valid for small amplitude perturbations about equilibrium configurations. Work on
obtaining the holographic dual of nonlinear fluid dynamics was in some sense pio-
neered by [21–23]; here, the authors considered nonlinear solutions dual to Bjorken
flow, a particular boost invariant flow.
2Greek indices label boundary coordinates.
This duality between long wavelength solutions of the Einstein equations and so-
lutions of nonlinear boundary fluid dynamics has become known as the fluid/gravity
correspondence [24, 25]. Subsequent work soon after the seminal paper [16] gen-
eralised this map to arbitrary spacetime dimensions [26, 27]. Many new lines of
research have also developed to consider further interesting generalisations. In [28],
Bhattacharyya et al extended this result to nonrelativistic fluids and holographically
obtained the incompressible nonrelativistic Navier-Stokes equations. Work has also
been done on constructing the bulk duals of non-conformal fluids [29], of charged
fluids [30, 31], of superfluids [32–34], and of anomalous fluids [35].
A particularly interesting direction that will be the focus of this paper is the
construction of bulk duals for forced fluid flows [36, 37]. Solutions of fluid dynamics
withparticularforcingtermsareknowntoexhibitturbulence, whichisaphenomenon
that is not well understood. A holographic understanding of turbulence may well
provide new insights on this topic. Research along these lines has already begun;
some examples in the literature relating to holographic turbulence are [38–41].
In this paper, we consider long wavelength solutions to the Einstein-dilaton sys-
tem in arbitrary spacetime dimensions,
These bulk metrics are dual to the forced fluid dynamical motions of boundary field
theories with actions of the form,
The boundary fluid obeys the following equations of motion,
whicheffectivelyaretherelativisticfluiddynamicalequationswithanexplicitdilaton-
dependent forcing term. Stating our results more explicitly, we construct long wave-
length, asymptotically locally AdS bulk solutions with a slowly-varying boundary
dilaton field and a weakly curved boundary metric to second order in a boundary
derivative expansion. We also explicitly compute the fluid dynamical stress tensor
and Lagrangian to second order in the derivative expansion thus generalising to ar-
bitrary dimensions previous work by Bhattacharyya et al [36] which was specific to
a five-dimensional bulk spacetime.
This paper is organised as follows. In section 2 we present a conceptual overview
of the fluid/gravity correspondence highlighting the key steps in the construction of
the bulk metric. Section 3 then contains a review of the Weyl covariant notation for
conformal fluid dynamics developed in [42] which we will be using throughout the
rest of the paper. Our main results are contained in section 4; we present explicit
solutions to the Einstein-dilaton equations valid for arbitrary spacetime dimensions
to second order in a boundary derivative expansion, as well as expressions for the
boundary stress tensor and Lagrangian accurate to the same order. Section 5 has a
discussion of our results and we end with two appendices giving more details of our
calculations.
2 Overview of the fluid/gravity correspondence
The aim of this section is to give a conceptual overview of the fluid/gravity corre-
spondence. As we are primarily interested in conveying just the key ideas involved,
we will focus on unforced fluid dynamics initially for simplicity. In the last subsec-
tion, we will explain how this methodology can be extended to holographic forced
fluid dynamics by considering the Einstein-dilaton system.
2.1 A perturbative construction
Up till this point, we have established that the Einstein equations with negative
cosmological constant provide the dual dynamics of the stress tensor for an infinite
classofstronglycoupledfieldtheories; andthatifweareaimingtoconstructanalytic,
time-dependent holographic bulk solutions describing interesting, non-trivial, non-
equilibrium phenomena, then fluid dynamics may well be a promising place to start.
This intuition was spectacularly confirmed in [16]. Yet, given an arbitrary fluid
dynamical configuration, how exactly would we go about explicitly constructing the
dual bulk metric?
To probe this question further, it is useful to first examine the properties of
fluid dynamics. These properties should be reflected in some analogous manner in
the bulk solution. A deeper understanding of fluid dynamics therefore may well
suggest an appropriate method of constructing the bulk dual. As presented thus
far, fluid dynamics is a description of field theories at near-equilibrium subject to
the constraint that the field theory must be locally equilibriated. But what does
the condition of local equilibrium imply? Suppose we have a field theory that is
locally equilibriated: within patches of a certain size, say λ (which would be
determined by the physics of the system3), the system would have equilibriated, and
it would be possible to assign meaningful values to thermodynamic quantities; a
temperature, T, and a velocity, uµ, for instance. A temperature field, T(x), and a
velocity field, uµ(x), can then be constructed by patching together these local values
insomecontinuoussense. However, ifapatchofsizeλ isrequiredforameaningful
3For example, for a dilute gas of weakly interacting particles, one would expect λ to be of
order the length of the mean free path.
notion of equilibrium to be established (and for equilibrium variables to be assigned)
then the temperature field, T(x), and the velocity field, uµ(x), necessarily can only
vary on scales larger than λ . They must be slowly-varying with respect to the
λ lengthscale4. We call this the long wavelength limit. Now, given that the fluid
dynamical parameters must be slowly-varying, it is natural to therefore express the
fluid dynamical stress tensor asan expansion inincreasing order of derivatives, where
higherorderderivativetermsarerelativelysuppressedcomparedtolowerorderterms.
This factshould beemphasised. Theconditionoflocalequilibrium aloneimplies that
fluid dynamics should naturally be expressed as an effective long wavelength theory,
specified to some order in the derivative expansion.
Now, given thatthefluiddynamical stress tensor shouldbeexpressed inaderiva-
tive expansion, we must conclude that the bulk metric, which is dual to the bound-
ary stress tensor, should correspondingly admit an expansion in boundary spacetime
derivatives,
AB AB AB AB AB ···
organised in increasing order of derivatives. In this sense, the bulk duals of fluid
dynamics are approximate long wavelength solutions to the Einstein equations with
negative cosmological constant. With this in mind, we therefore see that to obtain
the bulk metric dual to fluid dynamics, we should be aiming to solve the Einstein
equations perturbatively to some specified accuracy in the boundary derivative ex-
pansion.
2.2 Slow variation of bulk tubes and the zeroth order ansatz
For the simplest case of holographic unforced fluid dynamics, we have to solve the
following equations perturbatively,
E R Rg +Λg = 0, Λ − . (2.2)
AB AB AB AB
However, we are now confronted with the question: what should we choose as our
zeroth order ansatz,
?
We know that the AdS-Schwarzschild metric5,
ds2 = +r2( f(br)u u dxµdxν +P dxµdxν),
f(br) = 1 , η uµuν = 1, P = η +u u , b = ,
is dual to a field theory state in global equilibrium with temperature T and velocity
uµ. Given that fluid dynamics describes field theory configurations which are locally
4Thisappliesinatemporalsenseaswell. Thephysicsofthesystemconcernedwillalsodetermine
a characteristic timescale for equilibriation; the temporal variation of T(x) and u(x) must be slow
relative to this.
5Here, r represents the bulk radial coordinate while xµ labels the boundary coordinates.
Singularity
Finkelste i n Tube
Future Horizon
Bifurcation Schwarzschild tube
Past Horizon Boundary of
Past Singularity
Figure 1. This shows the Penrose diagram of a uniform black brane; tubes of constant xµ
are shown in both the Eddington-Finkelstein and Schwarzschild coordinates. This figure
is taken from [26].
equilibriated, it is not unreasonable to propose that the dual bulk solution should
approximately be given by patching together tubes of AdSblack branesolutions with
different values for T and uµ. A natural first guess for the zeroth order ansatz could
therefore be:
where g (x), b(x), and uµ(x) are all slowly-varying functions of the boundary coor-
dinates. Locally (in the field theory directions), this metric is indistinguishable from
a uniform black brane metric, but the values for T and uµ change as we move along
the boundary.
It turns out that this guess is actually incorrect, and the reason for this is quite
subtle. The problem lies in how the tubes of uniform black brane solutions (which
follow lines of constant xµ) extend from the boundary into the bulk. We will now
elaborate on this issue.
For any arbitrary fluid dynamical configuration, if a sudden forcing were applied
at some coordinate yµ, then only a certain region (within the future boundary light
cone of yµ) will be affected by this forcing. We refer to this region as C(yµ). Now, let
us consider the bulk region (which we refer to as B(yµ)) that consists of the union of
all tubes which stem from C(yµ). The region B(yµ) will certainly feel the effects of
the forcing at yµ. And therefore, by causality, B(yµ) must be completely contained
within the future bulk light cone of yµ. This condition is not satisfied if we use
the metric (2.4) which is written in Schwarzschild coordinates (see figure 1). If we
instead rewrite our black brane solutions in Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates,
allowing the temperature T(x) (or equivalently b(x)), the velocity u(x), and the
boundary metric g (x) to be slowly-varying boundary functions, we find that these
tubes will run along ingoing null geodesics and that there will no longer be any issue
with causality. It therefore seems appropriate to input the metric (2.5) as our zeroth
order ansatz as we perturbatively solve the Einstein equations.
2.3 Equations at each order in the boundary derivative expansion
In this subsection, we examine the structure of the equations that result as we at-
tempt to solve the Einstein equations perturbatively. The remarkable simplification
which occurs in the long wavelength limit is what enables us to obtain analytic
solutions to the Einstein equations without sacrificing nonlinearity.
Rewriting the metric as an expansion in boundary derivatives (2.1) and plugging
this into the gravitational equations (2.2), we arrive at the following schematic form
of equations6:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
We have focused only on terms of order n in boundary derivatives. The assumption
is that all g(m) for m n 1 have already been determined by the perturbation
theory at lower orders; g(n) is the only unknown function at this order. We now
highlight several important properties of the differential operator (which acts on
g(n)) and the source terms s .
Observe that because g(n) is already of order n in boundary derivatives, the
differential operator is necessarily linear. Further, it must be a differential operator
only in r and all coefficients must be zeroth order functions. In this sense, H is
ultralocal in the field theory directions; it cannot have any boundary derivatives. We
alsonotethat isasecondorderdifferential operatorwhichisthesameateachorder
in the perturbation theory. It is second order because it inherits the structure of the
Einstein equations, and it is independent of n because the exact same combinations
6We have suppressed the spacetime indices in the metric, g, for notational convenience.
of zeroth order functions and partial derivatives in r which act on g(n) will also act
on g(m) for all m 1, and hence we must have the same homogeneous operator at
all orders in the perturbation theory. The source terms, however, which consist of
boundary derivatives acting on lower order functions, will be different at each order.
It is now certainly worth pausing to emphasise what has been achieved. In this
long wavelength limit, the Einstein equations have reduced to a system of inhomo-
geneous second order linear differential equations in the variable r alone. Here we
again stress that we have not sacrificed the nonlinearity of the Einstein equations;
the fact that the differential operator is linear is an advantage that we obtain by
working perturbatively order by order in boundary derivatives. This deceptive lin-
earity, coupled with the ultralocality in the boundary directions, is what makes the
Einstein equations so much more tractable in this long wavelength limit.
We now comment further on the nature of these equations. As we are working in
d+1 spacetime dimensions, the system (2.6) will provide us with (d+1)(d+2) equations.
Only d2+d+2 of these equations will explicitly involve the unknown function g(n);
and of these, one will prove to be redundant. We refer to these equations as the
‘dynamical’ equations. The remaining d will only involve boundary derivatives of
lower order terms, g(m) for m n 1. We refer to these as the ‘constraint’ equations.
The dynamical equations can always be solved by direct integration for an arbi-
trary source s ; and subject to imposing regularity at r > 0 and normalisability at
infinity, a unique7 solution can be obtained. The constraint equations, on the other
hand, impose relations between boundary derivatives of g(m) for m n 1. And
since these g(m) are themselves constructed from appropriate derivatives of the ve-
locity (uµ(x)) and temperature (T(x)) fields, the constraint equations are ultimately
relations constraining the allowed forms of uµ(x) and T(x). These constraint equa-
tions have an especially simple boundary interpretation; they are the equations of
conservation of the boundary stress tensor at one order lower,
And in this particular long wavelength limit, these equations are found to be equiv-
alent to the equations of conformal relativistic fluid dynamics for the distinguished
fluid dual to Einstein gravity. This concretely shows that the perturbative procedure
outlined above correctly produces the class of bulk solutions dual to fluid dynamics.
It should thus be emphasised that the fluid/gravity correspondence constitutes an
explicit proof of the gauge/gravity duality in this long wavelength limit.
2.4 Extension to the Einstein-dilaton system
In this final subsection, we explain how the methodology previously described can
be extended to the Einstein-dilaton system to produce bulk solutions dual to forced
7Thereisafurtherambiguityassociatedwithredefinitionsofthevelocityandtemperaturefields,
but this can be fixed by a choice of convention. This is explained in detail in [16].
fluid dynamics.
The Einstein-dilaton system is governed by the following equations:
AB ≡ AB − 2 AB AB − 2 A B 4 AB (2.8)
2Φ = 0.
And upon resubstituting for the Ricci scalar R and the cosmological constant Λ, this
then simplifies to:
AB ≡ AB AB − 2 A B (2.9)
2Φ = 0.
By using standard holographic formulae for the stress tensor T and the Lagrangian
and by analysing appropriate projections of the bulk equations near the boundary
(see Appendix A of [36]), it can be shown directly that the boundary dynamics dual
to the Einstein-dilaton system are given by:
where φ is the projection of Φ onto the boundary. In the long wavelength limit, we
can therefore view the Einstein-dilaton system as being the dual bulk dynamics for
conformal relativistic fluid dynamics with a dilaton-dependent forcing term.
We now proceed in an analogous manner to what was done previously. Field
theory intuition again tells us that the metric should be a slowly-varying function in
the boundary coordinates and that we should thus be aiming to solve the equations
(2.9) perturbatively to a certain accuracy in boundary derivatives. However, for the
Einstein-dilaton system, the metric couples to the dilaton, and so we must further
require that the dilaton be slowly-varying in the boundary directions as well. Hence,
it must also admit an expansion in boundary derivatives:
We must again address the issue of choosing the zeroth order ansatz, but this
is just a straightforward generalisation of the unforced case. The Einstein-dilaton
system admits uniform black brane solutions of the following form,
ds2 = 2u dxµdr r2f(br)u u dxµdxν +r2P dxµdxν,
− − (2.12)
where φ is a constant. Patching together tubes of uniform black brane solutions
with different parameter values gives us our zeroth order ansatz8:
− − (2.13)
Φ = φ(x).
8We will actually be using a Weyl-covariant form of this ansatz; we will elaborate on this in
section 3.
With all of this in hand, we can now substitute the expansions for the metric
and the dilaton into the equations (2.9) and examine the structure of the resulting
equations. The equations at order n in the derivative expansion can be schematically
represented as:
(cid:2) (cid:3)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
where HΦ and sΦ are the differential operator and source terms for Φ respectively.
The dynamical equations of (2.14) together with the equation for the dilaton (2.15)
aresufficient todetermineg(n) andΦ(n). Theremainingdconstraintequationsreduce
to the equations of forced fluid dynamics (2.10).
3 Manifest Weyl covariance
In this section, we review the Weyl covariant formalism introduced in [42] for con-
formal relativistic fluid dynamics. This formalism allows for more compact notation.
Also, as we shall see in the final subsection, the components of the bulk metric
can be classified according to how they transform under Weyl rescaling; thus, it is
convenient to adopt a formalism which makes their Weyl transformation properties
manifest.
3.1 Regulation and Weyl symmetry
The aim of this subsection is to elaborate on a well-known subtlety in the AdS/CFT
correspondence relating to the interpretation of the boundary field theory. This
subtlety in interpretation leads to the Weyl covariant nature of the boundary fluid
dynamics.
We begin by noting that to obtain the dual field theory interpretation of a bulk
solution, one needs to regulate the solution near the boundary on slices of constant
r, the radial coordinate. More concretely, the bulk solution will be interpreted as a
state of the dual field theory on a background whose metric is related to the induced
metric on the regulated boundary. However, there is a well-known ambiguity in
the choice of the radial coordinate. To illustrate this further, consider the following
parametrisation of AdS:
ds2 = 2u dxµdr+r2g dxµdxν. (3.1)
With this choice of coordinates, the dual field theory is considered to live on a
background whose metric is given precisely by g . If we instead choose a different
radial coordinate r˜, given by a constant rescaling of r, and replace g and u as
follows:
for constant λ, the bulk metric takes the following (invariant) form:
Regulating on surfaces of constant r˜ gives us a field theory vacuum state on a back-
ground g˜ = λ−2g . This equivalence between boundary metrics related by a
constant rescaling arises from the dilatational symmetry of AdS, SO(1,1). The full
symmetry group of AdS, however, is the conformal group, SO(d,2), and although
this symmetry isn’t explicitly manifest in the choice of coordinates (3.1), the bulk
AdS spacetime must therefore be dual to a field theory state defined on a space with
any of the infinite number of metrics Weyl equivalent to g ; this reflects the Weyl
symmetry of the dual field theory.
Now, bulk spacetimes dual to fluid dynamics are asymptotically locally AdS. As
such, the boundary fluid dynamics should correspondingly be Weyl invariant. How-
ever, in contrast to AdS spacetime (3.1), this boundary Weyl symmetry is explicitly
manifest in the bulk metric. By this we mean that if we choose to regulate the fluid
dynamical bulk spacetime using a locally rescaled radial coordinate, r = e−χ(xµ)r˜,
and perform the following simultaneous replacements:
r = e −χr˜, u = eχu˜ , b = eχ˜b, g = e2χg˜ , (3.4)
the form of the bulk metric will remain invariant. We will now proceed to prove
this. As previously established, bulk spacetimes dual to fluid dynamics admit an
expansion in boundary derivatives of the form,
AB AB AB AB AB ···
where the zeroth order contribution,
, is given by:
ds2 = 2u dxµdr r2f(br)u u dxµdxν +r2P dxµdxν. (3.6)
Now, if we perform the simultaneous replacements (3.4), the bulk metric will take
the form:
AB AB AB AB AB ···
where the terms are functions of the new rescaled variables:
AB ≡ AB µ ∀
But notethat theformofthezeroth ordercontribution, g˜ (0) , remains invariant under
(3.4), i.e.:
However, we equally could have directly used the expression (3.9) as our zeroth order
ansatz to perturbatively construct a bulk spacetime with (3.9) as the fluid dynamical
initial data. In doing so, we would have obtained a bulk spacetime identical to
(3.5) at each order except with the variables r,u , and b replaced by r˜,u˜ , and
˜b.
Now, recall that our perturbative procedure constructs a unique bulk spacetime
for a specified zeroth order ansatz. Hence we are forced to conclude that the bulk
spacetime obtained from (3.5) by performing the simultaneous replacements (3.4)
must be the same as the bulk spacetime obtained directly from the zeroth order
ansatz (3.9); this would be identical to (3.5) at all orders except with r,u , and b
replaced by r˜,u˜ , and ˜b. This concludes our proof; the bulk spacetime dual to fluid
dynamics is therefore invariant under the simultaneous replacements (3.4).
Observe that, from the perspective of the boundary, (3.4) is nothing more than a
boundary Weyl transformation with u and b transforming as Weyl tensors of weight
1. It is thus convenient to adopt a Weyl covariant formalism; we develop this
further in the next subsection.
3.2 Weyl covariant derivative
A Weyl covariant tensor is a quantity that transforms homogeneously under a Weyl
transformation. More specifically, a tensor of weight w transforms as follows:
under aWeylrescaling, g = e2χ(x)g˜ . Themainobstructiontomaintaining explicit
Weyl covariance is that ordinary covariant derivatives of Weyl covariant tensors are
not themselves Weyl covariant. This problem can be circumvented by introducing
a ‘Weyl covariant derivative’; this was the main technical innovation of [42]. The
action of the Weyl covariant derivative on an arbitrary tensor µ··· of weight w is
defined by:
The Weyl connection, , is constructed from the fluid velocity field, u , as follows:
A ≡ ∇ − d 1 A
As we can see from the last equality, this expression for transforms in a similar
manner to a metric connection under a Weyl transformation. This is what enables
us to construct a derivative that is Weyl covariant, as done in (3.11); the parts of
which do not transform homogeneously are cancelled by the terms involving
. It can further be shown that the Weyl covariant derivative of a tensor of weight
w is itself a tensor of weight w.
We will now introduce several Weyl covariant tensors that will be used through-
out the rest of the paper. The following tensors are naturally constructed from the
Weyl covariant derivative:
[ , ]V w V + αV with
R + g δαg δβ + A g .
We will also make use of the following two contractions obtained from the Weyl
covariant Riemann tensor, :
R ≡ R − ∇ A A A −A ∇ A F (3.14)
And finally we define the shear strain rate, σ , and vorticity, ω , of the boundary
fluid:
≡ D (3.15)
ω u .
3.3 Independent Weyl invariant tensors
Here, we classify all Weyl invariant scalars, transverse9 vectors, and symmetric trace-
less transverse tensors up till second order inderivatives; thiswill be ofimportance in
the following subsection. There are two subtleties involved in this classification that
we should first highlight. Note that the equations of motion, Tµν = e−φ νφ,
impose relations between various Weyl covariant quantities; thus, in our counting,
we only list Weyl tensors which are independent on-shell. And also, since the dilaton
is Weyl invariant, any Weyl invariant tensor can be multiplied by a function of φ to
get another independent Weyl invariant quantity; we will neglect this complication
in our classification as well.
We begin with the zeroth order Weyl invariant tensors. We aim to construct
Weyl invariants using the boundary dilaton field, φ, the boundary metric, g , and
the fluid dynamical quantities, b and u . The boundary dilaton φ is a Weyl invariant
scalar while b and u transform homogeneously under Weyl rescalings with weight
1. It thus follows that there are no nontrivial Weyl invariant scalars, transverse
vectors, or symmetric traceless transverse tensors at zeroth order in derivatives.
To obtain the Weyl invariants at first order, we must consider the first order
relations imposed by the equations of motion, Tµν = e−φ νφ. It is easy to
see that these relations arise from the zeroth order contributions to the stress ten-
sor, Tµν, and Lagrangian, . For the stress tensor, the zeroth order contribution
is simply that of a perfect fluid, b−d(gµν +duµuν). And for the Lagrangian, there
9By transverse we mean orthogonal to uµ.
can be no zeroth order contribution. The reason for this is as follows: if we set φ
to be a constant, the Einstein-dilaton system must consistently truncate to the Ein-
stein equations with negative cosmological constant. Correspondingly, the boundary
fluid dynamics must reduce to that of the unforced case. Thus, the lowest order
contribution to the Lagrangian must be proportional to a derivative of φ; there can
be no zeroth order terms. Analysing the resulting first order relations, it can be
shown that first order partial derivatives of b can be expressed as derivatives of u 10.
It follows that there is only one independent Weyl invariant scalar at first order
(which can be taken to be buµ φ), one Weyl invariant transverse vector Pν φ ,
and one Weyl invariant symmetric traceless transverse tensor (b−1σ ). (cid:0) (cid:1)
For the second order Weyl invariant tensors, we must similarly consider the
relationsimposedatsecondorderbytheequationsofmotion; theseoriginatefromthe
first ordercontributionstoTµν and . Thestresstensor, Tµν, transformswithweight
d+2; and thus, using our previous classification of first order Weyl invariants, we can
deduce that the first order contribution to Tµν must be proportional to b1−dσµν. And
for the Lagrangian, which transforms with weight d, we can similarly conclude that
the first order term must be of the form b1−duµ φ. The two derivative relations
which result can be used to express the partial derivatives of b to second order in
terms of derivatives of u and φ. With all of this in hand, it is not too difficult to
show that there are seven independent Weyl invariant scalars:
D D D D D D D D
six Weyl invariant transverse vectors:
and eight Weyl invariant symmetric traceless transverse tensors:
2 (cid:20) µ ν ν µ − d 1 µν (cid:21)D α D β (cid:20) µ ν − d 1 µν (cid:21)D α D β
− − (3.18)
3.4 Weyl covariant form of the fluid dynamical metric
In this final subsection, we demonstrate that it is possible to use boundary Weyl
invariance to constrain the form of the bulk metric. In more detail, we show that
10Please see Appendix C of [26] for a more detailed explanation of this.
because the bulk metric is invariant under the simultaneous replacements (3.4), the
components of the bulk metric can be classified according to how they transform
under boundary Weyl rescalings.
Before we proceed further, we must first choose a gauge for the bulk metric. We
use the same gauge11 as [26], which is specified by:
g = 0, g = u . (3.20)
This gauge has the nice geometric interpretation that lines of constant xµ are ingoing
nullgeodesicswithr beinganaffineparameteralongthem. Also, notethatthisgauge
choice is invariant under the transformation (3.4).
Now, observe that, consistent with our gauge choice (3.20), we can parametrise
our bulk metric as follows:
ds2 = 2u dxµ(dr+ (r,u ,b)dxν)+ (r,u ,b)dxµdxν with transverse.
We aim to determine how the functions and transform under (3.4) which
effectively is a boundary Weyl transformation. Recall that the fluid dynamical bulk
metric is invariant under the simultaneous replacements (3.4), thus, under this trans-
formation, the bulk metric (3.21) becomes:
ds2 = 2u˜ dxµ dr˜+ r˜,u˜ ,˜b dxν + r˜,u˜ ,˜b dxµdxν
µ ν α µν α
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
By comparing the two equivalent metrics (3.21) and (3.22), we can deduce the trans-
formation properties of and :
h (cid:16) (cid:17) i (cid:16) (cid:17)
It follows that r must be a linear sum of Weyl covariant vectors (both trans-
verse and non-transverse) of weight +1 with coefficients that are arbitrary functions
of br. Similarly, must be a linear sum of Weyl invariant tensors. These Weyl
covariant vectors of weight +1 and the Weyl invariant tensors can easily be obtained
from our classification in the previous subsection. The functions of br, however, must
be determined by direct calculation.
11Some early work on the fluid/gravity correspondence [16, 36] used a different gauge, given by:
g =0, g u , Tr g(0) g(m) =0 (m>0). (3.19)
∝ (cid:18)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:19)
All of our results can be recast in this gauge by making an appropriate change of variables.
In keeping with explicit Weyl covariance, we now choose a slightly different
starting ansatz,
:
ds2 = 2u dxµ dr+ r + u dxν +r2P dxµdxν. (3.24)
− (cid:18) (cid:18) A 2 (cid:19) (cid:19)
Using this ansatz, we can perturbatively solve the Einstein equations and determine
thefunctions and to anyorderinboundaryderivatives. Wepresent theresults
of such a calculation to second order in the next section.
4 Explicit results up to second order
Here, we present our results for the fluid dynamical bulk metric g and the dilaton
Φ, as well as the corresponding boundary stress tensor T and Lagrangian , all to
second order in boundary derivatives. These are the main results of this paper.
4.1 The metric and dilaton
This subsection contains our results for the metric and dilaton field. These expres-
sions were obtained using a Weyl covariant form of the procedure outlined in detail
in [16] (see also [26, 36] for similar calculations).
ds2 = 2u dxµ dr+ rA + u dxν + r2P +2(br)2F(br) σ dxµdxν
− (cid:20) (cid:18) 2 (cid:19) (cid:21) (cid:20) b (cid:21)
1 2L(br) 1
2(d 2)(d 1) D D
(br)d−2 (cid:20)2(d 1)(d 2) 3 (cid:21) D α D β µ ν
(br)2(cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1) 1 (cid:3)
(d 2) 1 (cid:20) µ ν D α D β − d 1 µν D α D β (cid:21)
1 − 1 d 1 µν − d 1 1 D α D β µν
The various functions which appeared in the metric above are defined as follows:
F(br) − dy
≡ Z y(yd 1)
+ + +...
H (br) − dy
1 ≡ Z y(yd 1)
+ + +...
br − 1 (cid:2) (cid:3)
1 ∞ dξ ξ yd−2 1
≈ 2(br)2 − d(br)d Z y(yd 1)
+ + +...
K (br) dy y2F ′ (y)2
1 ≡ Z ξ2 Z
+ + +...
br (cid:2)
+ 2(d 1)ξd (d 2) dy y2F ′ (y)2
(cid:0) (cid:1) ξ
3 ≡ 2(d 1) 1 − d 1 2(d 1) 1
Z (cid:18) − Z (cid:19)
d 2 d 3 1 #
≡ Z Z y3(yd 1)
+ +...
Their asymptoticformsatlarger arealsoprovided; thesewillberequiredtocalculate
the corresponding boundary stress tensor and Lagrangian.
Note that, as concluded in our discussion of manifest Weyl covariance in section
3, the bulk metric can be written in the following Weyl covariant form:
ds2 = 2u dxµ(dr+ dxν)+ dxµdxν,
where the functions and are given by:
(br)d−2 (cid:20)2(d 2) (cid:21) D α µD λ
− 4(d 2)(d 1) D D
= r2P ω λω
µν µν µ λν
(br)2 (cid:2) 1 (cid:3)
(d 2) 1 (cid:20) µ ν D α D β − d 1 µν D α D β (cid:21)
And finally, we present our result for the dilaton to second order:
D µ d 2 1 D 2 D µ D ν
The expressions listed here have been compared against existing results in the
literature [16, 26, 27, 36] and wherever there is an overlap, we find complete agree-
ment. Certain papers have performed similar calculations but in a different gauge
[16, 36]; and so, when comparing our results with these papers, we have utilised the
appropriate gauge transformation.
4.2 Stress tensor and Lagrangian of the dual fluid
We now calculate the boundary stress tensor and Lagrangian using the standard
AdS/CFT formulae:
d 2∇ (cid:19)
Here, h is the induced metric on the constant r hypersurface; from this, we obtain
the covariant derivative ¯ and the corresponding Einstein tensor G¯µ. We define nA
to be the outward pointing unit normal of the constant r hypersurface; the extrinsic
curvature of the constant r hypersurface is then defined by the Lie derivative of the
induced metric, K 1L h , and ∂ is the partial derivative along nA. In the
formulae above, all the indices are raised using the induced metric.
We find that the boundary stress tensor is given by:
16πG T = b
(cid:20) D − d 1 (cid:21)
− d 2 (cid:20) µ ν D α D β − d 1 µν D α D β (cid:21)
d ∞ yd−2 1
b = and τ = − dy. (4.6)
4πT ω Z y(yd 1)
We further obtain the following expression for the Lagrangian:
And again, these results are all consistent with the existing literature [16, 26, 27, 36].
5 Discussion
In this paper, we have constructed asymptotically locally AdS bulk spacetimes
with a slowly varying dilaton field which are dual, under the AdS/CFT correspon-
dence, to forced fluid flows on the weakly curved boundary metric. These forced
fluid flows satisfy the conformal relativistic Navier-Stokes equations with a dilaton-
dependent forcing term. We have also obtained the formof the dual stress tensor and
Lagrangian, all to second order in the boundary derivative expansion. Our results
further generalise previous work on the fluid/gravity correspondence [16, 26, 27, 36];
in particular, we have generalised the results of [26] to arbitrary spacetime dimen-
sions.
There are several interesting applications of our paper which merit further con-
sideration. It would be useful to study in detail holographic models of novel forced
fluid flows. One avenue which is worth exploring would be to consider holographic
duals of forced fluid flows which exhibit turbulence. A holographic model of turbu-
lence would certainly offer a new perspective onthis poorly understood phenomenon,
and hopefully new and fruitful insights could then be derived from this. By carefully
choosing the form of the forcing term (which is fixed by our choice of φ(x)), it could
be possible to stir the boundary fluid into turbulent configurations12. A noteworthy
point that should be raised here is that unforced fluid flows can exhibit turbulence as
well; however, these turbulent phases will be transient. And, in fact, a holographic
model of transient turbulence has already been constructed [41]. The key advantage
of considering holographic models of forced fluid flows, on the other hand, is the
possibility of realising holographic models of steady state turbulence; such configu-
rations can only exist with a forcing term as the fluid would otherwise eventually
settle down into a non-dissipative configuration.
Also, observe that the expressions that we have obtained are valid for arbitrary
spacetime dimensions; this is particularly relevant for the study of turbulence. It
is a well-known fact that turbulent phases for relativistic fluids in 2+1 dimensions
display remarkably different behaviour to relativistic fluids in higher dimensions.
In 2 + 1 dimensions, relativistic fluids display an ‘inverse energy cascade’; energy
cascadesfromshorttolongwavelengths[38]. Thisisinsharpcontrasttothestandard
cascade observed in higher dimensions which is from long to short wavelengths. The
results of this paper could in principle be used to construct holographic models of
turbulence in different dimensions which would then shed light on the source of the
discrepancy between the nature of the energy cascades in two spatial dimensions and
greater. Suchholographicmodelswouldalsobeofinterestpurelyfromagravitational
perspective. The construction of such models would suggest that AdS displays
qualitatively different instabilities to AdS for d > 3. Further, these models may
have interesting connections to the weakly turbulent instability of AdS discovered in
[43]. We will be investigating several different approaches to holographic turbulence
in future work.
12Another possibility of realising turbulence which is potentially more straightforward would be
to consider a boundary spacetime which consists of small time-dependent fluctuations away from
flat space. These linearised time-dependent fluctuations can effectively act as a forcing term for a
fluid on a flat backgroundmetric; this is discussed in more detail in the introduction of [36].
Acknowledgments
It is a pleasure to thank Malcolm Perry for proofreading this paper. We further
thank Rajesh Gopakumar, Veronika Hubeny, Shiraz Minwalla, and Mukund Ranga-
mani for comments on a draft of this paper. Ashok is supported by the Cambridge
Commonwealth, European, and International Trust, DAMTP, and Trinity College,
Cambridge.
A First order calculation
In these appendices, we present further details of our calculations. As explained
in section 2, the equations involved can be classified either as constraint equations
which impose relations between the fluid dynamical variables at one order lower, or
as dynamical equations which enable us to solve for the metric at the order at which
we are working. In this first appendix, we present these equations at first order; the
following appendix contains the analogous equations at second order.
A.1 Constraint equations
The constraint equations are obtained by contracting the Einstein equations (2.9)
with nA, the normal to the constant r hypersurface: EΦ nB = 0. The boundary
components of this equation give us the following relation:
∂ b = b. (A.1)
It is not difficult to show that this relation is equivalent to the equations of forced
fluid dynamics Tµν = e−φ νφ. This explicitly confirms our expectation that
our perturbative procedure constructs bulk spacetimes dual to solutions of forced
fluid dynamics. At first order, the relevant terms in this equation stem from the
zeroth order contributions to the stress tensor Tµν and Lagrangian ; and since the
Lagrangian only consists of first and higher orders terms, the equations at this order
are the same as the unforced case.
A.2 Dynamical equations and source terms
We now present the dynamical equations at first order. Solving these equations
subject to regularity away from r > 0 and normalisability on the boundary will
allow us to obtain the first order contributions to the bulk metric (4.1). In the
equations that follow (in both this appendix and the subsequent one), we will use
(i) and (i) to refer to the ith order contributions to and respectively.
It turns out that at first order, there is only one equation with nonzero source
terms, and this is given by the transverse traceless part of EΦ = 0:
Here, we have used ˜ 1 αP ; further, the ′ refers to a derivative with
respect to br.
B Second order calculation
B.1 Constraint equations
If we now consider the boundary components of EΦ nB = 0 at second order, we find
that the relation (A.1) acquires a second order correction:
A (cid:20) d 1 − d (cid:21) d (cid:20) d 1 D D (cid:21)
This can again be shown to be equivalent to Tµν = e−φ νφ; the additional
second order terms arise from the first order contributions to Tµν and .
B.2 Dynamical equations and source terms
At second order, there are several dynamical equations which need to be considered.
To obtain the trace part of (2) , we use the equation EΦ = 0:
while the traceless part
is obtained by considering the transverse traceless part
of EΦ = 0:
1 1 (3 d) 3
(cid:18)−2 2 (cid:19)Gµν (cid:18) 2 − 2 (cid:19)Gµν − Gµν
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:2)1 (cid:3) 1
− 2 (cid:18) µ ν D α D β − d 1 µν D α D β (cid:19)
Further, the transverse part of the equation EΦ = 0 gives us Pν (2) :
while uα (2) is obtained from the trace of the transverse part of EΦ = 0:
2 d d 4 2d 3 d 3
(cid:18)d 1 2(d 1) (cid:19)G α (cid:18) d 1 − d 1 (cid:19)G α
− D λ α D λ α − d 1 2(d 1) D α D β
2(d 2) 2d 3
(cid:20) d 1 − d 1 (cid:21)
(cid:20)d 1 d 1 − d 1 − (cid:21)
(cid:20)d 1 − d 1 − d 1 − − (cid:21)
(cid:20)2(d 1) − d 1 − 2(d 1) (br)d 1 (cid:21) D D
(cid:20)2(d 1) − (cid:21) D D
− (cid:0) (cid:1)