Review ARticle
published: 06 July 2010
Fractals in the nervous system: conceptual implications for
theoretical neuroscience
Gerhard Werner*
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA
Edited by: This essay is presented with two principal objectives in mind: first, to document the prevalence
Dante R. Chialvo, Northwestern of fractals at all levels of the nervous system, giving credence to the notion of their functional
University, USA
relevance; and second, to draw attention to the as yet still unresolved issues of the detailed
Reviewed by:
relationships among power-law scaling, self-similarity, and self-organized criticality. As regards
Henrik J. Jensen, Imperial College
London, UK criticality, I will document that it has become a pivotal reference point in Neurodynamics.
Matias Palva, University of Helsinki, Furthermore, I will emphasize the not yet fully appreciated significance of allometric control
Finland processes. For dynamic fractals, I will assemble reasons for attributing to them the capacity to
*Correspondence: adapt task execution to contextual changes across a range of scales. The final Section consists
Gerhard Werner, Department of
of general reflections on the implications of the reviewed data, and identifies what appear to
Biomedical Engineering, University of
Texas at Austin, TX, USA. be issues of fundamental importance for future research in the rapidly evolving topic of this
e-mail: gwer1@mail.utexas.edu review.
Keywords: criticality, phase transitions, self-organization, self-similarity, metastability, coordination dynamics
IntroductIon a regime of criticality, as understood in statistical physics (Chialvo,
Fractals, introduced by Mandelbrot in 1977, are signals which 2004; Chialvo et al., 2008; Kitzbichler et al., 2009; Fraiman et al.,
display scale-invariant, self-similar behavior. Their signature is 2009; Werner, 2007b, 2009a,b). Like in other physiological systems
power-law scaling. In the spatial domain, fractals are self-similar manifesting fractal patterns (see for instance: Bassingthwaighte
geometric objects with features on an infinite number of scales. et al., 1994; West and Deering, 1995; Iannacone and Khokha, 1995;
In the analysis of time series, they can constitute a hierarchy of West, 2006) the question of ubiquity of power-law scaling needs
temporal and spatial scales that may cover the wide range between to be addressed in relation to other features of brain organiza-
coarse-scale long-term and high-frequency fine-scale fluctuations. tion. Similarly, is there a relation between fractal organization and
The statistical analysis of Dynamical Fractals can provide access to the propensity for phase transitions of critical systems? Is there a
understanding the dynamics of complex systems. Random Fractals bridge between coarse graining (including renormalization group
refer to the participation of a stochastic process in their generation. transformation) and fractality? And, most importantly, can fractal
If the relationship of the property under consideration is simple properties be viewed as playing a role for the functional integration
with respect to change of scale, the process is considered monof- among different levels of neuronal organization as Andersen (2000)
ractal. The process can then be characterized by a single scaling suggests in an article entitled “From Molecules to Mindfulness”.
exponent which is related to the fractal dimension or the spectral Generalizing from a comprehensive theory of organization and
exponent of the process. It can be expressed as the Hurst exponent interactions at the molecular level, Agnati et al. (2004, 2009) view
of the process (Mandelbrot and van Ness, 1968; Koutsoyiannis, the Central Nervous System as a nested network at all levels of
2002). However, in some instances the scaling behavior may not organization, in the image of the Russian Matryoshka dolls: self-
be adequately characterized by a single, stationary scaling expo- similar structures being embedded within one another. The authors
nent. In such cases, several scaling exponents may be required, each elaborated this theory in great detail, with a “Fractal (self-similarity)
exponent locally pertaining to some portion of the data stream. Logic” operating on a set of identical rules which would govern the
Such multifractal signals are represented by the histogram of the relation between successive levels of the nested system.
Hoelder exponents, also known as the singularity spectrum (Muzy Although primarily concerned with chaotic dynamics in the
et al., 1993). Nervous System, King (1991) foresaw in an extensive review that
Power-law scaling and other manifestations of fractal and “….fractal dynamics may be of functional utility in central nerv-
self-similar patterns in space and/or time can be identified at all ous system cognitive processes”. Gisiger’s (2001) comprehensive
levels of neural organization. With few exceptions, these observa- overview of scale invariance in Biology provides the background
tions remained largely islands in the otherwise rapidly advancing of this review, as do the insights gained in Physics through the
theoretical Neuroscience with different priorities. However, recent work of Wilson (1979) and Kadanoff (1990), among many others.
advances in methodology of measurement of fractal connectivity In addition, Turcotte (1999) discussed at great length the relation
at higher levels of brain organization have led to a proliferation between aspects of self-organized criticality and fractal scaling from
of new data. This now calls for integrating fractality with other the points of view of “avalanche” behavior and systematic proper-
insights into brain organization and complexity, notably in the light ties of correlation length, specifically directing attention to inverse
of the substantial evidence for the brain being a complex system in cascade and site-percolation models of the well-known forest fire
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 1
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
paradigm. While none of the issues discussed in the following will illustrated with examples by Thurner et al. (1997). Note also that the
receive a definitive answer, I will aim at an explicit formulation of distinction between mono- and multifractal scaling is sometimes
the network of interrelated factors that constitute the territory in difficult to draw (Kadanoff et al., 1989).
which new perspectives and potential solutions may lie. Conceivably, some of the variations among the reports reviewed
With the agenda set forth in the foregoing, the organization in subsequent sections may be attributable to procedural differences
of the presentation is as follows: I will first briefly review the among studies; other reports may not meet the rigorous statistical
neuroscience literature on fractals, organized by level of neuro- criteria of Clauset et al. Nevertheless, I submit that the majority of
nal organization, from ion channels to cortical networks, and to experimental data on fractals in neural structures give collectively
psychological and behavioral functions. Criticality of brain states, adequate reason for ascribing to them widespread functional signif-
Allometric control, and the origin of fractals by phase transitions icance. At least the results based on wavelet analysis appear immune
of complex systems will be addressed in more detail. This will be to methodological criticism (see The macroscopic level).
followed by a brief overview of the essentials features of the theory
of fractal generators, including random walk theory and fractional neuronal morphology
differential operators. Having laid out the background in this man- In the foundational work “The fractal geometry of Nature”,
ner, I will consider relations between renormalization group trans- Mandelbrot (1977) wrote “it would be nice if neurons – he men-
formation and fractals as having some potential bearing on the tioned specifically Purkinje cells in the cerebellum – turned out to
apparent ubiquity and universality of power-law scaling in neural be fractal”: Nature obliged abundantly as the following sample of
structures and processes, and its relation to criticality. Finally, I findings with dendrites, neuron cell bodies and glia cells indicates.
will direct attention to the amazing consequence of self-similarity Studying the branching pattern of dendritic trees of retina neurons,
which assures the telescoping of different levels of structural and Caserta et al. (1990) identify by box-counting fractal shapes with
functional organization to constitute a fractal object or time series. a fractal dimension of approximately 1.7, which can be explained
This will lead me to posing the ultimate question: is there a process by a diffusion-limited aggregation model (Witten and Sander,
for unpacking interactions between different levels of the fractal 1981); but fractal dimension measured by different methods (for
object, responsive to circumstances and conditions, which eludes us instance comparing box counting with cumulative mass method)
entirely? If it existed, fractals would surely be a most extraordinary gives appreciably different values (Caserta et al., 1995). A fractal
design principle for operational economy in complex systems. structure was observed by Kniffki et al. (1994) for the branching
dendrite patterns of thalamic neurons in Golgi impregnated speci-
power-law scalIng In neuronal structures and mens. In a separate series, a scaling relation for bifurcations within
processes the dendrite trees was ascertained (Kniffki et al., 1993). Significant
This section is intended to summarize essential aspects of fractal species differences in fractal dimensions of dendrite arborizations
properties at each of the conventionally designated organizational in dorsal horn spinal cord neurons (Milosevic et al., 2007) may be
levels, as the basis for conceptual consideration of relations across attributable to species differences in peripheral somesthetic sensi-
these levels. However, a word of caution is in order: the sketches bility (the dorsal horn neurons being the first receiving station of
of observational data in this section encompass a vast variety of this type of afferent input). Fractal analysis also reveals a distinct
biological substrates, conditions of observation, and methods of differentiation of neuron types in the different laminae of the dorsal
measurement. This heterogeneity imposes limits on generaliza- horn (Milosevic et al., 2005). Differences in regional connectivity
tions, as do the differences of criteria for identifying fractal or and functional capacity among different regions in visual cortex
self-similar features in the data. Potential pitfalls were discussed pyramidal neurons are also associated with marked variation in
and illustrated in LaBarbera’s (1989) useful (largely pedagogic) the fractal dendrite branching structure (Zietsch and Elston, 2005).
publication. More recently, Eke et al. (2002), Delignieres et al. Fractal analyses provide a measure of space filling of dendrite arbors
(2006), and Clauset et al. (2009) set forth stringent criteria for which, in a study by Jelinek and Elston (2001), differentiates in the
design, collection, and interpretation of data for identifying and macaque visual cortex the two known processing streams between
categorizing fractal properties. The latter authors are very spe- primary and secondary visual area by differences in fractal proper-
cific in formulating a principled statistical framework, combining ties. These investigators had undertaken a meticulous examination
maximum likelihood fitting methods with goodness of fit tests; of criteria for ‘quality control’ in studies of this nature, from the stage
they demonstrate examples of data that had been conjectured to of pre-processing of tissue specimens to comparative evaluation of
represent power-law fits, but did not withstand the rigor of their methods for determining fractal dimension (Jelinek et al., 1995).
tests. The statistical properties of fractal time series as solutions Examining the connectivity repertoire of basal dendrite arbors
of differential equations of fractal order or as responses of a frac- of pyramidal neurons, Wen et al. (2009) determined a universal
tional system are reviewed by Li (2010). Touboul and Destexhe power-law scaling for dendrite length and radius, suggesting that
(2009) also suggest that apparent power-law scaling may in some the dendrite arbors are constructed by statistically similar proc-
instances not be supported by more stringent statistical criteria. esses; moreover, fragments of an arbor are statistically similar to the
Of particular relevance to the topic of Section “The mesoscopic entire arbor, thus displaying self-similarity. These design features are
level” is their claim that experimentally observed power-law scaling thought to maximize functionality for a fixed dendrite cost.
must not considered proof of self-organized criticality, lest there Additional evidence comes from digital image analysis which
be other supporting evidence available. The analysis, synthesis and enabled Smith et al. (1989) to determine the fractal dimension of
estimation of fractal-rate stochastic point processes is reviewed and neuron contours. Results obtained with conventional methods of
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 2
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
scaling analysis are corroborated by Wavelet Packet fractal analysis algorithms. On the same self-similarity principle, Pellionisz (1989)
(Jones and Jelinek, 2001). Multifractals were identified for cortical envisages a fractal growth model of dendritic arbors by iterated
pyramidal cells while, in comparison, neurons of synRas trans- code repetition as process for global construction of fractals (see
genic mice display less complex arborization patterns (Schierwagen, for instance: Barnsley and Demko, 1985): the essential underlying
2008.). Shape complexity of neurons and elements of microglia in theme is to both reduce complexity of generating, and at the same
human brain can be classified over a range for fractal dimensions time conserving the full richness of the dendrite arbor. I will expand
which is different for normal and pathological brains (Karperien on this principle in later section of this essay. Among the not yet
and Jelinek, 2008). The sequence of developmental stages of oli- explored implications of dendrite fractal arborizations are the effect
godendrocytes, tracked the basis of their immunoreactivity, par- they may induce on the dynamics of processes and critical phenom-
allels changes in fractal dimension (Bernard et al., 2001). Fractal ena in dendrite spines for which they are a supporting platform:
analysis of cell ramification and space filling patterns differentiate In Statistical Physics, such effects obtain when the neighborhood
microglia cells into two categories, depending on whether their relations among interacting elements [for instance: Ising spins or
fractal dimension did, or did not increase after brain injury (Soltys coupled maps (Cosenza and Kapral, 1992)] are themselves provided
et al., 2001). by a self-similar fractal lattices, such as the Sierpinski Gasket (Gefen
The scaling law for the cortical magnification factor in primate et al., 1980), rather than an Euclidean geometric base.
visual cortex is an illustrative example with functional significance: In an extension of fractal analysis to features of complex neu-
as is well known, the part of the visual scene corresponding to the ral structures, Zhang (2006) determined the Magnetic Resonance
eye center is represented densely at the cortex, becoming progres- image-based fractal dimension of white matter of the human brain.
sively sparser towards the periphery. It turns out that the scaling This method was shown to accurately quantify white matter struc-
law for the sampling density away from area centralis is a power- tural complexity in three dimensions, and detect age-related degen-
function which assures locating a peripheral target in the shortest erative changes. Tractography based on Diffusion Tensor Imaging
time (Koulakov, 2010). As brain size increases, the cortex thick- enabled Katsaloulis and Verganelakis (2009) to determine fractal
ens only slightly, but the degree of sulcal convolution increases dimension, self-similarity, and lacunarity of neuron tracts in the
dramatically, indicating that human cortices are not simply scaled human brain. The lacunarity analysis is understood to indicate
versions of one another (Im et al., 2008). Changizi (2003) infers the distribution of fractal neuron tracts of different length scales,
several organizing principles of Neocortex from scaling relations as evidence of connections between different neuron ensembles.
among its components: e.g. scaling of diameters of neural structures Another extraordinary technical advance made it possible to deter-
would predispose for efficient transport through neuron arboriza- mine the fractal properties of receptor density and distribution
tions; economical wiring reflects well-connectedness within given in human brain, using Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
volumes of neural tissue. These relations are viewed to represent and Single-photon Emission Tomography (SPET) (Kuikka and
a universal law for scaling that applies to hierarchical complexity Tiihonen, 1998).
and combinatorial systems, generally (Changizi, 2001b; see also:
West et al., 1997b; West and Brown, 2004). the perIpheral nervous system: Ion channels, poInt process
As one among several instances of scaling in the cerebral cor- analysIs of actIvIty In perIpheral nerves and
tex, Changizi (2001a) also shows that axon cross sectional area IndIvIdual neurons
increases in Phylogeny with brain size, presumably compensating Ion channels
increase of conduction distances with increase of conduction veloc- Turning to primarily functional aspects of fractality in neural sys-
ity (see Symbol processing and fractals). A synthesis of compara- tems, attention focuses in this section on temporal aspects of ion
tive Neuroanatomy with biophysics leads Harrison et al. (2002) to channel gating and its relation to time series of neuronal discharge
conclude that scaling trends in morphological specializations at patterns. The following collage of data obtained with different
the cellular level may constitute functional adaptations. One of the experimental conditions as well as modeling studies consistently
examples in support of their thesis is the role of component scaling supports the dominant presence of fractal features in the functional
for managing the conflicting developmental trends of increasing manifestations at the levels under consideration. The kinetics of
brain size and surface folding on the one hand, and the require- Ion transport across neuronal membranes occurs, in part, via ion
ment for optimizing energy requirements and processing speed, on channels. Application of the Patch Clamp Technique made it pos-
the other. The role of scaling relations for brain growth becomes sible to follow the time course of channel opening and closing
evident when its scaling relation is disrupted by preterm birth in a precisely. Typically, the rate of channel opening and closing open-
dose-dependent, sexually dimorphic fashion; it directly parallels the ing fluctuates, changing at times suddenly from periods of great
incidence of neuro-developmental impairments in preterm infants to periods of slow activity. This pattern served as clue to surmise
(Kapellou et al., 2006). an underlying fractal process with infinite variance. On this basis
Taken together, the observations surveyed in the foregoing two Liebovitch et al. (1987, 2001) asked how the switching probabilities
paragraphs suggest that fractal dimension of neuronal and glia ele- at one time scale of observation are related to those at another
ments bear some relations to developmental, functional, and patho- time scale. It turned out that these probabilities (defined as effec-
logical conditions of neural tissue. This warrants a few conceptual tive kinetic rate) at a given time scale are characterized by fractal
considerations: Bieberich (2002) attaches neural- computational scaling, and that effective kinetic rates for different time scales of
significance to the self-similarity of dendritic branching as a observation display self-similarity: there are bursts within bursts
platform for economical information compression and recursive of openings and closings. The suggestion is that energy barriers
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 3
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
in stochastically switching protein conformational states are the structures serves to extend their dynamic range. The significance
underlying mechanism (for a detailed account, see Chapter 8 in of this function is discussed in Section “Linking across many scales
Bassingthwaighte et al., 1994). A different version that also accounts of space and time”.
for the power-law relationship of ion channel gating kinetics The statistics of action potential trains recorded from single neu-
assumes that ion channel proteins have a very large number of rons in the cochlear nucleus of anaesthetized cats formed the basis
states, all of similar energy, making the gating process more akin of a mathematical analysis by Gerstein and Mandelbrot (1964). The
to a diffusion (Millhauser et al., 1988). Recent theoretical modeling principal result was that a random walk model towards an absorb-
defined more precisely the conditions that give rise to the power- ing and a reflecting barrier can account for a wide range of frac-
law distributions in relation to the activation barriers, compatible tal neuronal activity patterns, assuming no more than the known
with the known Physics of proteins (Goychuk and Hanggi, 2002). physiological mechanisms of a threshold for membrane depolariza-
Roncaglia et al. (1994) developed on theoretical grounds a strin- tion, and the summation of excitatory and inhibitory postsynap-
gent criterion for ascertaining the validity of the fractal theory by tic potentials. Except for a Thesis by Johannesma in 1969, it took
evaluating the experimental distribution of channel closing times almost 20 years of hegemony of Poisson and Gaussian distributions
in terms of the Hurst phenomenon. A few years thereafter, Varanda until fractal approaches to spike train statistics were resumed: this
et al. (2000) delivered the evidence for Ca-activated K channels in time by Wise (1981) in a study of spike interval distributions of
the form of long-term correlations of open and closed dwell times, data that had been recorded primarily by Bloom (1969) in the
expressed as Hurst coefficients of the order of 0.6, which alternative cerebral cortex, and in respiratory neurons recorded by Smolders
Markovian models failed to satisfy. and Folgering (1977). Wise found that plots of the spike interval
Before proceeding to discuss the implication of channel kinet- histograms on log–log scales showed negative powers on time with
ics for the patterning of trains of neuron spikes, a brief remark long tails, which he attributed to the neuron membrane potential
on the fractal activity at the site of neural impulse transmission undergoing a random walk while the firing threshold fluctuates.
at the neuromuscular junction. As is well known from the work Re-working some of Wise’s data, West and Deering (1994) iden-
of DelCastillo and Katz (1954), the neural transmitter substance tified fractal (hyperbolic) spike interval distributions. Taking an
acetylcholine is released from the nerve terminal in small packages: entirely different approach to conceptualizing irregular behavior
the miniature end potentials (MEPP) are considered manifestations in neuron spike trains led Shahverdian and Apkarian (1999) to
of the exocytosis of humoral transmitters. In departure from initial discuss self-affinity, power-Law dependence, and computational
textbook accounts of the MEPP release reflecting a set of homo- complexity of spike trains in terms of a multidimensional Cantor
geneous stationary Bernoulli trials, Perkel and Feldman (1979) space with zero Lebesgue measure as attractor.
categorically reject a purely binomial model of (quantal) trans- The turning point in the history of identifying fractal neuronal
mitter release. For the frog neuromuscular junction, Rotshenker firing is associated with the work of Teich and Lowen, beginning
and Rahamimoff (1970) could show that excocytosis can exhibit in the early 1980s (Chapter 22, in McKenna, 1992) with invalidat-
correlations (memory) extending over periods of seconds, sug- ing the then prevalent notion of Poisson point processes. More
gesting self-similar characteristics. When sampled over prolonged recently, the shortcoming of Poisson spike interval statistics was
periods, Lowen et al. (1997) collected conclusive data at the neu- also pointed out by Kass and Ventura (2001) and by van Vreeswijk
romuscular junction and synapses in hippocampal tissue culture (2001) who criticized experimental (Richmond et al., 1990) and
that frequency and amplitudes of MEPP’s display fractal scaling. theoretical (Ohlshausen and Field, 1997) reports for unwarrant-
Takeda et al. (1999) also reported comparable findings for the ver- edly assuming either Poisson neurons or rate based neurons with
tebral neuromuscular junction. The detailed analysis of quantitative rate independent Gaussian noise; instead he considered a renewal
features of the recorded data led Lowen et al. (1997) to conclude that model as biologically more plausible.
traditional renewal models of vesicular exocytosis as a memoryless Teich and Lowen’s essential realization was that determining
stochastic process are entirely inadequate for representing many long-time correlations in spike trains requires sample sizes to be
of its salient features. Instead, their recommendation is that a new appreciably larger than conventionally used. On this basis, Teich
class of models should be considered that relies on fractal-rate et al. (1990) identified the following essential features of the time
stochastic point processes: fractal-rate activity represents a kind series of neural spikes recorded from cat auditory nerve fibers and
of memory in that occurrence of an event at a given point in time the lateral superior olivary nucleus: discharge rates determined with
increases the likelihood of another event to occur at a later point different averaging times can exhibit self-similarity; the variance-
in time, with that likelihood persisting for some time. to-mean ratio of spike number increases with sufficiently large
counting time in a fractional power-law fashion, with the expo-
Point process analysis in peripheral nerves and neurons nent in the power-law varying with the stimulus level. With these
In this section, neuron discharge trains are viewed as mathematical data in hand, Lowen and Teich (1993) suggested that the fractal
objects, belonging to the class of point processes (Thurner et al., action potential patterning in auditory nerve may be related to
1997; Lowen and Teich, 2005): events occurring at a point in time or fractal activity in the ion channels of the sensory organs feeding
space. Werner and Mountcastle (1963, 1964) determined scaling of into the auditory nerve: that is, the hair cells in the cochlea. This
neural responses in primary cutaneous afferent nerve fibers with the idea required to show that ion channel gating and neuronal spiking
magnitude of mechanical stimuli applied to receptors. The implica- patterns are indeed causally related. Lowen et al. (1999) succeeded
tions of their findings in Psychophysics will be taken up in Section with demonstrating this causal dependence in computational mod-
“Psychological and behavioral processes”. Adaptation in neural els, thus adding for the special case of the cochlear hair cells some
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 4
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
credence to their proposal that gating patterns in sensory organ ion a study of retina ganglion cells, Teich and Saleh (1981) suggest a
channels can affect discharge patterns in the sensory nerve tracts shot-noise driven self-exciting point process; in a later study of
they feed. In an elegant experimental design, Teich et al. (1997) the same experimental object, Teich found a modulated gamma-
not only ascertained a power-function for the activity in retina renewal process satisfactory, while Grüneis et al. (1993) favored
ganglion cells and neurons in the lateral geniculate body when a clustering Poisson process. Electronic shot-noise was recently
studied independently, but also succeeded with recording from re-introduced by Milstein et al. (2009) for modeling power-law scal-
synaptically connected pairs of retina ganglion cells and geniculate ing within the power spectrum of LFPs. Mandelbrot and van Ness
neurons. In this situation, fractal exponents for retina and target (1968) considered Fractal Brownian motion as candidate. Clearly,
neurons in the lateral geniculate body were nearly identical. This the goal of determining whether a common principle governing
was interpreted to mean that fractal behavior is either transmitted spike train variability could be identified, and if not then for what
across synapses, or has a common origin for the synaptically con- reason, eluded this group of investigators.
nected pre- and postsynaptic structure. On the other hand, fractal Without examining specifically for manifestations of fractality,
activity of medullary sympathetic premotor and the synaptically a number of investigators attempted statistical characterization of
connected pregangionic sympathetic neurons is apparently gener- neural point processes, primarily motivated to reconcile irregu-
ated independently (Orer et al., 2003). larity of spike trains with their presumptive function as “code” of
More support for the notion that ion channel properties play an neural signals. But recall that Harris (2005) attributes irregularity
important role for determining neuron performance comes from of spike train discharges to cell assembly organization. In various
demonstrating a kind of memory mechanism for traces of prior modifications, the general approach chosen by Sakai et al. (1999),
activity in voltage-gated Na channels (Toib et al., 1998): time con- Cateau and Reyes (2006), and Feng and Zhang (2001) consisted in
stants of channel recovery stand in a power-function relation to designing model neurons to generate spike trains whose statistics
duration of prior activation. The question of primary interest is of would match that of “real” neurons recorded in animal experiments.
course how the dynamics of ion channels relates to the functional Shinomoto et al. (2003) recorded spike sequences from different
characteristics of a whole neuron. Gilboa et al. (2005) addressed cortical areas in awake macaques which they classified phenomeno-
this question in a computational model of an ensemble of ion logically into different groups. Salinas and Sejnowski (2002) and
channels. In analogy to a “real” neuron, this model neuron exhibits Stevens and Zador (1998) assigned the principal source of discharge
various dynamics at different time scales: a power-law recovery time variability to correlations in the input feeding the examined neu-
scale after stimulation, temporal modulation of discharge pattern ron. None of these results warranted the allocation of observed or
during maintained stimulation, and the dependence of adaptation simulated spike train data to one of the probability distributions
to a stimulus step on the duration of the priming stimulus. The in the conventional repertoire of statistics, but Maimon and Assad
suggestive implication is that the ensemble of ion channels can (2009) at least excluded Poisson – like randomness from being a
exhibit properties on many scales, comparable to “real” neurons, universal feature of spike time distributions in primate parietal
thus supporting the notion that the “macroscopic behavior” of the cortex. In an exquisitely elegant experiment, Evarts (1967) followed
“real” neuron is, in fact, the result of cooperative fractal channel the changes of inter-spike interval (ISI) histograms in premotor
kinetics. cortex pyramidal neurons in wakefulness, sleep, and the phase of
In addition to the studies cited in foregoing paragraphs, there are sleep associated with low-voltage fast EEG. Regrettably, his charac-
numerous reports documenting fractal-rate behavior in single neu- terization of the ISI histograms is only limited to rejecting Poisson
ronal point processes. However, these data were generally obtained distributions, but inspecting the histograms displayed in Figure 12
for examining spike trains for encoding stimulus properties, and of his publication arouses one’s suspicion of a long-tail distribution
they are quite heterogeneous as regards species, neural structure for sleep activity.
examined, use of anesthetics and experimental conditions. Although In a notable and very extended comparison of cortical neu-
this imposes serious limitations on drawing inferences on general ron discharges in alert macaques, Shadlen and Newsome (1998)
principles, I select here a few studies which applied several of the attributed to single neurons the ability to perform simple algebraic
commonly agreed upon and typical indicators of fractal properties, operations resembling averaging by combining inputs from several
such as self similarity of firing rate with different averaging time, sources, but they cautiously concluded that irregularity of the ISI
increase of spike number variance-to-mean ratio with counting distribution precludes them from reflecting information about the
time, and power-law scaling relating the variable of interest to the actual temporal structure of the synaptic input. They rejected ran-
resolution of measurement. In a series of publications, Grüneis dom walk models of the kind applied by Gerstein and Mandelbrot
et al. (1993) reported fractal properties in spike trains recorded as inadequate for capturing the statistical features of spike interval
under various conditions including REM sleep of cats. In visual distributions, and found Poisson and various renewal processes
cortical areas of cats and macaques, Baddeley et al. (1997) observed likewise failing to yield satisfactory and consistent correspondence
consistently non-Poisson spike train statistics, with some displaying with recorded data.
self-similarity. Other neural structures examined included medul- If there is one conclusion that can be drawn from the extant
lary sympathetic neurons (Lewis et al., 2001) and dorsal horn of data on the statistics of spike interval distributions, then it is that
the spinal cord (Salvadori and Biella, 1994). A common feature demonstrating fractal properties in spike trains requires care-
of these and other reports not cited here, was the lack of agree- fully selected conditions. Multiple convergences from incoming
ment on a consistent mathematical model that would satisfactorily pathways appears to obscure characteristic statistical properties
describe the fractal process underlying the experimental data. In of discharges in the recipient neurons. Thus, a neuron’s intrinsic
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 5
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
connection pattern carries the burden of discharge variability. This negative local field potentials (NLFP), apparently occurring prefer-
view is reminiscent of Harris’s (2005) view that spike discharge entially in cortical layers 2/3 (Gireesh and Plenz, 2008). The peaks
variability may be a signature of cell assembly organization. This of NLFP were considered indicative of synchronized population
is perhaps also the source of futility of assigning any information discharges occurring near the recording electrode tip (Plenz and
bearing capacity to discharge patterns of individual neurons in Aertsen, 1996), on the rational that bursts of multiunit activity are
labeled-line information transmission (see for instance: Werner, more likely to generate large NLFP’s than are single neuron discharges
2007a). On the other hand, the more direct a neuron’s connection (Plenz and Thiagarajan, 2007). Accordingly, brief bursts of synchro-
pattern to peripheral sensors is, the more distinctly are fractal dis- nized action potentials were the units of analysis in their experiments.
charge properties demonstrable. But the opposite also seems to be Intracranially recorded LFP in human brain show ubiquitous power-
the case when neurons are embedded in a network, as the observa- law scaling within the power spectrum (Milstein et al., 2009).
tions of El Boustani et al. (2009) in Section “The mesoscopic level” With the alternation between brief burst of NLFP activity and
show. The place to look for consistent fractal properties is appar- quiescent periods remaining stable with a high degree of temporal
ently the macroscopic, global level of brain organization (see The precision over periods of many hours, Beggs and Plenz set out to
mesoscopic level). Whether and how the mesoscopic level of the examine the idea that these cascades of neural activity may constitute
next Section bridges the gap is the subject of the next section. a special mode of network activity, possibly of the character of “ava-
lanches”, indicative of SOC (Bak et al., 1987). They had specifically
the mesoscopIc level of organIzatIon in mind the kind of self-organizing branching process discussed
Despite their relative simplicity, in vitro cultured neuronal networks by Zapperi et al. (1995) and de Carvalho and Prado (2000). To
are here viewed as mesoscopic in the sense of representing neuron examine this idea required determining the statistical properties of
ensembles which exhibit rich spontaneous dynamical activity in the observed activity patterns. For carrying out this analysis, they
the form of periodic bursting (Robinson et al., 1993; Nakanishi defined the spatial pattern of signal-carrying electrodes during one
and Kukita, 1998; van Pelt et al., 2004; earlier references are cited in: time bin as a frame; a sequence of consecutively active frames, pre-
Beggs and Plenz, 2003, 2004). At superficial inspection, brief bursts ceded and ended by a blank period was called an avalanche. The
of activity lasting tens of milliseconds are separated by quiescence NLFP did not propagate in the network in a spatially contiguous
lasting up to several seconds (Corner et al., 2002; Tateno et al., 2002). manner, thus excluding wave-like propagation. With these defini-
The spontaneous emergence of patterns in the discharge trains was tions and precautions in place, distributions of avalanche size and
also noted by Giugliano et al. (2004) and replicated in computational lifetimes were found to scale in cultures and acute cortex slices with a
models. In extension of earlier work that led to identification of scale power-law exponent −3/2, this value being resilient to various choices
invariant Levy distributions and long-range correlations in cultured of scales (Plenz and Thiagarajan, 2007). The branching parameter
neuronal networks (Segev et al., 2002; see Processes that generate was determined as sigma = 1.04. Being statistically indistinguish-
power-law distributions), Segev et al. (2004) attributed the activity able from the ideal value of 1.0, it signifies a critical state in the
bursts to be associated with the formation of statistically distinguish- sense that activity starting at one electrode would initiate activity in
able subgroups of neurons, each with its own distinct pattern of one other electrode, on the average, keeping the network at the edge
interneuronal spatiotemporal correlations. Wagenaar et al. (2006a) of criticality (Harris, 1989). Critical branching also maximizes the
emphasized the extremely rich repertoire of bursting patterns during number of metastable states in living neural networks (Haldeman
the development of cortical cultures. The cultured cortical networks and Beggs, 2005). This complements the evidence for fractal prop-
spontaneously generated a hierarchical structure of periodic activity erties and supports the validity of the working hypothesis Beggs
with a stereotyped population-wide spatiotemporal structure. These and Plenz started out with: to view avalanches as manifestations
recurring patterns (called by the authors ‘superburst’) converged of the collective critical dynamics of SOC. More recently, fractal
periodically to a dynamic attractor orbit, and were taken to imply scaling of patterned neural activity was reported to also occur in
large-scale self-organization of neurons in vitro, refuting the com- cultivated neurons of leech ganglia and rat hippocampus (Mazzoni
monly held view of having random connectivity (Wagenaar et al., et al., 2007); and Pasquale et al. (2008) describe avalanches in dis-
2006b). The recorded data of these authors are available for distri- sociated neuronal cultures of cortex from embryonic rats.
bution to interested investigators. Departing from the practice of Avalanches were subsequently also studied in superficial layers
focusing on spontaneous activity, Breskin et al. (2006) explored the of rat prefrontal cortex (Stewart and Plenz, 2006) and during devel-
propagation of stimulus evoked activity in neuron cultures. A graph opment of cortical layer 2/3 where they display nested theta- and
theoretic analysis of their data attributed the dynamic evolution of beta/gamma oscillations (Gireesh and Plenz, 2008). The theory of
the network connectivity to a percolation transition with power-law critical states predicts (see Significance of Brain Criticality) and
characteristics, while the degree distribution of the grown network experiments confirm that neuronal avalanches display a maxi-
failed to meet power-law criteria. mized dynamic range of responses to stimuli (Shew et al., 2009).
Working with mature organotypical cultures and acute slices of Functional architecture of avalanches conformed to Small World
rat cortex, Beggs and Plenz (2003, 2004) concluded that the cascades Topology (Pajevic and Plenz, 2009). Comparing NLFP activity in
of propagating neuron discharges they observed were indicative of vitro cortex preparations with in vivo activity of awake macaque
the neural culture being in a state of self-organized criticality. The monkey cortex, Petermann et al. (2009) established that high
importance of this claim, and a recent disputes of its validity (see fidelity propagation of local synchronized scale-invariant activity
below), warrant close attention to methodological details: Beggs and patterns is a robust and universal feature of cortex in awake mon-
Plenz based their analysis on recording spontaneously appearing keys. Furthermore, large amplitude negative field potentials (like
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 6
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
those constituting the avalanches) spread in a cascade-like fashion at criticality. Critical avalanche networks can be computation-
through the cortical network without distortion, much like action ally constructed by simple network growth models (Abbott and
potentials: Thiagarajan et al. (2010) described these stereotypical Rohrkemper, 2007). An exponent of the experimentally determined
waveforms as “coherence potentials”. They occur often in rapid suc- value −1.5 of avalanche size and lifetime scaling is predicted by the
cession as a stream of dynamical associations, suggesting the switch- neural field theory of Buice and Cowan (2007).
ing of the cortical network from one dynamical state to another. A field-theoretic approach was also investigated by Freeman
The reason for viewing neuronal avalanches as manifestation of (2005): analysis of high-resolution electroencephalograms of rab-
self-organized criticality was based on their fractal scaling proper- bits revealed neural fields in the form of spatial patterns in ampli-
ties for size and duration. Here just a brief reminder of the amply tude and phase modulation of gamma and beta carrier waves which
documented ‘family resemblance’ of fractality and SOC, to which distinguished positive and negative conditioning stimuli. The goal
the publications of Grinstein (1995), Chen et al. (1995), Paczuki of applying field theory was in these experiments to model states
et al. (1996), Tebbens and Burroughs (2003), and Cessac (2004) and state transitions as large-scale spatial patterns of neural activity
speak, as do the model computations of Papa and da Silva (1997), for quick changes in adjustment to different behavioral situations.
da Silva et al. (1998), de Arcangelis et al. (2006), and Levina et al. The cortical states were viewed as “wave packets”, resembling frames
(2007). However, despite the ‘avalanche’ of research on mechanisms in motion picture, stabilized in a scale-free state of self-organized
leading to scale invariance, there exist questions about the necessary criticality. Recall, however, the reservations raised by Touboul and
conditions for establishing the self-organized critical state (Kinouchi Destexhe (2009) that substantiating interdependence of fractality
and Prado, 1999). A non-conserving critical branching model was and self-organization requires additional evidence. In an entirely
proposed by Juanico et al. (2007) to demonstrate that SOC can occur different context (namely fossil extinction), Newman (1996) shows
in mean-field sand piles, provided the branching process is coupled that fractality need not be a unique indicator of SOC and criticality
to a background activity of spontaneous switching between refracto- since an alternative simple model can account for the empirical
riness and quiescence among system components; in the stationary power-law relation (for an extended discussion of this, see Processes
state, this system can undergo a transition from a subcritical to a that generate power-law distributions and Fractals in Action).
critical state. In an elaborate recent study, Bonachela and Munoz Seeking to strengthen the conjecture of self-organized criticality
(2009) claim that non-conserving (dissipative) dynamics does not of avalanches, Plenz and Chialvo (2010) acquired experimental
lead to bona fide criticality. Accordingly, non-conserving systems evidence that the neural avalanches in superficial layers of cortex
are in their view not truly critical models. Instead, non-conserving exhibit five additional quantitative aspects of their dynamics which
systems (such as the brain) would just hover around a critical point are consistent with critical dynamics. These were: separation of
(presumably after some form of fine-tuning) with broadly distrib- time scales between triggering and the avalanching event itself;
uted fluctuations which do not disappear at the thermodynamic stationarity of size distribution; temporal clustering prior to and
limit. Such systems could be fluctuating in the vicinity of the critical following large avalanches, resembling Omori’s law; power-law
point, but not at it. The authors call this condition “self-organized decay for avalanche size in the wake of preceding large avalanches;
quasi-criticality”. Whether this is the last word in the long stand- and a fractal dimension for scaling spatial spread. The importance
ing debate of conditions for criticality in SOC remains yet to be of these results lies first, in affirming evidence for avalanches dis-
seen. The earlier work of Kinouchi and Prado (l.c.) seems to offer playing robust critical behavior; and second, in suggesting that
a compromise in the form of a distinction between “true” criticality their scale-invariant (fractal) properties do in fact reflect cortical
occurring at a special point, and a region of almost critical behavior. networks being in a state of criticality. This is also supported by
A novel aspect is presented by the neural model of Levina et al. the observation that the exponents of simulated branching proc-
(2009): it attains criticality in an Extended region of the parameter esses at near-critical branching are similar to scaling exponents
space, where, it can display Classical first- and second-order phase characterizing oscillations in the MEG recorded alpha frequency
transitions as well as an SOC phase, depending on regulatory mecha- band of humans at rest (Poli et al., 2008).
nisms at the level of synaptic connections. In any case, however, the It may be revealing to contrast the failure of consistently finding
dynamic regime leading to avalanche behavior may be considered fractal activity patterns in individually sampled neurons (other than
a manifestation of a generic and persistent critical state, similar to those receiving relatively direct input, see Point process analysis
that postulated by Coordination Dynamics: this will be pursued in in peripheral nerves and neurons) with the abundance of fractal
Section “Fractals and Criticality of Brain States”. patterns of (mesoscopic) neuron ensembles. It raises the ques-
Conditions for universality of 1/f scaling in dissipative self- tion whether the origin of the latter may be a matter of assembly
organized criticality models were established by De Los Rios and organization: note that in the records of neuron cultures, it is the
Zhang (1999). Models predicting avalanches of neural activity concurrent activity of interconnected neurons sampled by differ-
include the work of Herz and Hopfield (1995) and were noted ent electrodes that forms the fractal pattern; this is of course quite
by Eurich et al. (2002) in a network of globally coupled nonlin- different from the sampling of neurons in point process analysis,
ear threshold elements. Models of neural networks of non-leaky guided by chance encounters of a microelectrode with one active
integrate-and-fire neurons exhibit over a wide range of connectivity neuron at the time. The puzzle posed at the end of Section “Point
patterns power-law avalanches with an exponent closely approxi- process analysis in peripheral nerves and neurons” thus finds per-
mating that reported by Beggs and Plenz for tissue cultures (Levina haps its resolution in network architecture: Teramae and Fukai
et al., 2007). In a comment to this paper, Beggs (2007) gives a lucid (2007) describe a model that shows how the fractal property of a few
account of how neural networks could self-organize to operate individual neurons can turn into an organized communal property
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 7
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
of an ensemble. This lesson can also be learned from models of at high detection thresholds. But, positive NLFP and surrogate
dynamic pattern formation in neuron populations, forming frac- data (randomly shuffled peak times – essentially equivalent to a
tal power-spectra and power-law pulse distribution (Usher and threshold stochastic process – can also show power-law distributed
Stemmler, 1995). Similarly, network amplification of local fluctua- amplitude distributions. The conclusion of this study, then, was
tions causes fractal firing patterns and oscillatory field potentials that apparent power-law scaling cannot be considered as proof of
in two-dimensional models of leaky Integrate-and-Fire neurons; self-organized criticality.
feedback connectivity of local excitation and surround inhibition At this point, a comment seems in order: the publication of
being the essential prerequisites (Usher et al., 1994). Gireesh and Plenz (2008) seems to suggest that cortical layers 2/3
Bedard et al. (2006b) accept existing claims for 1/f scaling are the preferential site of avalanche occurrence. The data analyzed
of global variables of neural activity (e.g. EEG: Freeman et al. in the Touboul and Destexhe study were obtained in earlier work
(2003); EMG: Novikov et al. (1997); see The mesoscopic level), of Destexhe et al. (1999) in parietal cortex of awake cats; there is
and acknowledge them as evidence for self-organized critical states no indication that a possible role of cortical layer was considered.
with power-law distributions, much as the models of de Arcangelis Whether layer specific patterns of neuronal arborization (Callaway,
et al. (2006) and Levina et al. (2007) suggest. They also accept the 2002) could be a source of the discrepancy can at this point not
validity of claims for fractality discussed in Section “Point process be determined.
analysis in peripheral nerves and neurons” for various point process The discrepancy between presence of 1/f scaling in ensemble
analyses. But they contest the legitimacy of generalizing from these neural activity (EEG and LFP) and, yet, 1/f scaling not being an
disparate sources of data. The connection between 1/f frequency intrinsic property of the individual neuron itself, that Bedard and
scaling of global variables and critical states of neural activity is, in El Boustani et al. claimed to have identified, motivated El Boustani
their mind, far from firmly established. Moreover, they emphasize et al. (2009) to adopt yet another experimental approach: to this end,
that the association of 1/f spectra with criticality may not be obliga- they measured the scaling properties of the power-spectrum of the
tory (for a review: see Newman, 1996; Giesinger, 2001). intracellularly recorded membrane potential of individual neurons.
Having raised this warning flag, Bedard et al. (2006a) not only The experiments were conducted in cat primary visual cortex in
confirmed in their own investigations the presence of 1/f frequency vivo, the animals being anesthetized and paralyzed. Full-field visual
scaling in EEG of cat parietal cortex (in absence of anesthesia), but stimuli of varying characteristics were presented to the dominant
showed in addition 1/f frequency scaling in bipolar records of local eye to drive the cortical region under study to states with different
field potentials (LFP). That bipolar LFP recordings sample rela- firing characteristics. The remarkable result was that the frequency
tively localized populations of neurons was shown by Destexhe et al. scaling of individual cells was largely determined by the visual stimu-
(1999). They then turned their attention to investigating whether lus statistics. There was no consistent relation between individual
this 1/f scaling reflects self-organized critical states with the result neurons’ scaling exponent and the visual stimuli, neither was there
that avalanche size distributions in their experiments did not fol- any correlation between membrane potential and the spiking scaling
low power-law scaling, nor did inter-spike interval distributions exponents. Various control tests and a computer model corroborate
of concurrently recorded single neuron activity show 1/f scaling; the authors’ conclusion that statistical correlations in a neuron’s input
rather, the distributions were consistent with a Poisson process. (i.e. its presynaptic activity) can modify the power-law exponent of
Accordingly, Bedard et al. reject the evidence for critical state its spiking activity. Hence, it appears that modulation in a neuron’s
dynamics. Instead, they proposed a model that would account for power-law exponent may reflect changes in the correlation state of
1/f frequency scaling without being associated with critical states. the network activity. According to these findings, intrinsic cellular
Their model shows that the observed 1/f scaling can indeed be properties do not seem to play a major role for its scaling which
produced by a band pass filtering effect of extracellular media. This reflects in the authors’ s view primarily the network context.
means that extracellular field potentials (such as LFP) can show Regarding self-organization, El Boustani and Destexhe (2009)
power-law scaling while the underlying neuronal activity per se follow the lead taken in Destexhe’s Doctoral Thesis of 1992 and
need not be critical. El Boustani et al. (2007) found in experimen- observations of Korn and Faure (2003), and present new evidence in
tal data and models of cortical “activated” states also evidence for support of chaotic dynamics in EEG: sensitivity to initial conditions
Poisson spike distributions, and absence of avalanche dynamics. is of course prominent; it is also associated with broadband power-
The irregular states of cortical networks are thought to stem from a spectra and a fractal attractor dimension. The authors confront
very high-dimensional deterministic chaos. However, as alternative, at length the puzzle that coherence and low dimensionality at the
it is worth recalling that Harris (2005) views spike train irregularity macroscopic level of EEG is associated with stochastic neuronal
as one of the signatures of cell assembly organization. dynamics at the microscopic level. Is this comparable to conditions
Investigating further the discrepancy between the Beggs–Plenz obtaining in thermodynamics?
and the Bedard et al. observations, Touboul and Destexhe (2009) Whence criticality? In peripheral neurons, it seems to be favored
recorded avalanches in cortex of (awake) cats, paying careful atten- by closeness to input from peripheral receptors (see Point process
tion to the conditions of data collection: avalanche statistics of analysis in peripheral nerves and neurons). At the mesoscopic level,
negative peaks LFP (linked to neuronal firing), positive peaks (unre- Plenz and Chialvo’s (2009) analysis of avalanches in primate cortex
lated to neuron firing) and surrogate data (obtained by random seem to assure legitimate criticality at the mesoscopic level; yet, the
shuffling experimental data) were analyzed; avalanche criteria were work of Bedard et al. (2006a,b) and El Boustani et al. (2009) raises
those of the Beggs–Plenz studies. Essentially, time and amplitude the possibility that scaling properties of neuron activity may not be
distributions of NLFP showed power-law distributions, preferably of intrinsic neuronal origin, but a consequence of network activity.
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 8
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
Section “Fractals and criticality of brain states” will resume asking: if In the absence of deliberate external stimulation, neuronal
and where in the nervous system, and under what conditions, does cortical dynamics displays complex spatial and temporal patterns
fractality and criticality in the brain originate? What is the nature of activity. In simulations of networks that mimic the large-scale
of their relation? And, how to conceptualize critical behavior? inter-areal connection patterns of cortex, activity takes place
spontaneously at multiple time scales, punctuated by episodes of
the macroscopIc level of neural organIzatIon inter-regional phase locking of oscillations (Honey et al., 2007).
Fractals in brain networks Significantly, the connections link neural populations of multiple
Fractality at the macroscopic brain level should be viewed in the levels of scale, from whole brain regions to local cell columns: this
context of, and in reference to, the two major conceptual and obser- suggests that cortical connections may be arranged in fractal, pos-
vational frameworks that have come to guide neuroscience research: sibly self-similar patterns. Statistical measures of a computational
the network structure of cortical connectivity, and the brain’s state model of a fractal connection pattern did in fact resemble those of
of criticality resulting from the complexity of nonlinear dynamic a real neuroanatomical data set (Sporns 2006). The computational
interactions among its constituents. Advances in network theory models also show that varying fractal patterns induce strongly cor-
(Albert and Barabasi, 2002; Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2001; Park related changes in several structural and functional measures of
and Newman, 2004) influenced the application of computational network properties, as evidence of their interdependence.
and graph-theoretical methods for characterizing structural brain In general, scale-free complex networks display self-similarity
connectivity in accord with statistical and topological criteria under length-scale transformations (Song et al., 2005) but not
(Hilgetag et al., 2002). Examining the columnar organization of necessarily with regard to degree distribution (Kim et al., 2007),
neocortical cortex in detail, Roerig and Chen (2002) found that but models of scale-free networks need not necessarily be fractal.
the number of connections to a central neuron has the shape of a How, then, can the fractality of many naturally occurring networks
long-tailed histogram, fitting a power-law. On the basis of this “bio- come into being? Song et al. (2006) account for the simultaneous
power-law connection probability function”, Stoop and Wagner emergence of fractality, modularity and small-world effect, as well
(2007) tested a range of network types for spread of synchroni- as the scale-free property of real world networks by a multiplicative
zation among cortical columns: the superiority of the power-law growth process: the network growth dynamics is conceived as the
connection was evident. In general, interaction among neurons and inverse of a renormalization procedure, whereby the network hubs
neuron ensembles by synchronization is constrained by network accrete connections by linking with less connected nodes, which
topology (Arenas et al., 2008), hence the relevance of network archi- leads to a robust fractal topology.
tecture for Neurodynamics. The potential role of neural synchrony Within the small-world network clusters, functional magnetic
for perceptual organization and conscious experience is a subject imaging (fMRI) identifies a scale-free connection pattern inasmuch
of a recent review by Uhlhaas et al. (2009). There is considerable as the number of links per network node (the node degree) satisfies
evidence that anatomical and functional connections between dif- a power-law relationship (Eguiluz et al., 2005). Likewise, van den
ferent cortical areas possess an intricate organization in the form Heuvel et al. (2008) find in an imaging study of the resting brain,
of “small world networks” (Watts and Strogatz, 1998), forming that inter-voxel connections follow power-law scaling as evidence
clusters of nearby cortical areas with short links, which in turn have for scale-free network topology, possibly associated with a small-
long-range connections to other clusters (Hilgetag and Kaiser, 2004; world organization. This form of organization is associated with
Sporns and Zwi, 2004; Sporns et al., 2004; Stam, 2004; Stam and conserved wiring length and conducive to synchronization of activ-
Reijneveld, 2007). Neuroanatomical data sets permit identifying ity across the network (Zhou et al., 2007; see also Changizi, 2003;
a repertoire of characteristic structural building blocks (motifs) see Neuronal morphology).
(Sporns and Koetter, 2004). Although citing merely a small fraction of the numerous pub-
A hierarchical cluster architecture is thought to provide the lications concerned with relations between network topology and
structural basis for stability and diversity of functional patterns in dynamics, this section underscores two points of relevance for the
cortical networks (Kaiser et al., 2007; Kaiser, 2007). Moreover, hier- objective of this review: first, the presence of, and effect on network
archical modular topologies assure sustained activation in neural dynamics of hierarchic network organization (itself being of sev-
networks, intermediate between rapid fading and generalized activ- eral types); and, second, effects of network fractality on network
ity spread. This can be considered a prerequisite for the occurrence dynamics; but the functional implications of the latter, notably for
of criticality (Kaiser and Hilgetag, 2010). Hierarchical graphs can criticality, require further investigation, as does the possibility of
switch between different dynamic activity patterns, depending on self-similar modularity in brain networks. In the case of metabolic
the level of ongoing (spontaneous) background activity (Müller- networks, the latter is shown to affect path connections for diffusion
Linow et al., 2008; Hütt and Lesne, 2009). In terms of hierarchy the- and resistance of flows (Gallos et al., 2007).
ory, these investigations do not specifically address the implications
of nested hierarchies which, however, are suggested by the find- Fractals and criticality of brain states
ing of inter- and intra-cluster network hubs (Sporns et al., 2007). Critical activity patterns in brain were cited earlier as the second
Moreover, fMRI data obtained from subjects in resting state identify notable feature in current thinking about global brain function.
strong functional connections between regions for which no direct Brain criticality has a distinguished history. As early as 1950, Turing
structural connections are known (Honey et al., 2009). This finding (1950) postulated that the brain as a dynamical system would
may be an indicator of nested clustering (see Significance of brain operate near a critical state as the prerequisite for instantaneous
criticality and Summary and final thoughts). reaction to novelty. Sudden transitions between stable states of
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 9
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
motor behavior are well known since the pioneering observations unresolved) question to what extent, if any, they can be shown to
of Haken et al., 1985; Kelso, 1995). The transitions were interpreted be shared with, or differ from those that would be implicit in the
as manifestations of metastability in the self-organizing nonlinear generic brain state view of criticality.
dynamic system of the brain, along the theoretical lines formulated Measuring the fractal dimension of EEG records, Babloyantz
in Synergetics (Haken, 1983). Criticality in brain and behavior was (1986) related different values with differences in sleep states. With
first mentioned by Kelso (1984) in a brief note. Using a super- subjects acting as their own controls, inhalation anesthesia causes a
conducting quantum interference device (SQUID) sensor array, noticeable increase in EEG dimensionality (Mayer-Kress and Layne,
Kelso et al. (1992) reported a few years later their observations 1987). Multichannel MEG records, obtained with a SQUID show
of spontaneous transitions in neuromagnetic field patterns which scaling with varying degrees of scale similarity, decreasing with
occur at a critical value of a behavioral parameter: coherent states the distance between recording channel locations (Novikov et al.,
of both brain and behavior were captured by the spatiotemporal 1997). Studying dynamical synchronization in the brain, Gong et al.
pattern of phase relations among participating components. This (2002) find scale invariant fluctuations of dynamical synchroni-
was considered evidence for the brain being a pattern forming zation in human EEG. Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. (2001) report
system that can switch flexibly from one coherent state to another. long-range temporal correlations and scaling with 10–20 Hz brain
Chialvo credits also Varela et al. (2001) with the vision of brain oscillations. Pursuing this observation in more detail, Linkenkaer-
large-scale dynamical properties. This is also discussed by Le Van Hansen (2003) and Linkenkaer-Hansen et al. (2004a) suggest that
Quyen (2003). Locating cortical regions associated with such phase the long-term spatial-temporal structure of the complex ongo-
transitions of motor behavior, Meyer-Lindenberg et al. (2002) ing EEG activity may reflect a memory of the system’s dynamics
showed that TMS can induce switches between two clearly defined extending beyond just a few seconds, possibly by a continuous
and distinct motor behavior patterns. Additional new evidence of modification of functional brain networks in the sense of SOC. In
aspects of critical brain behavior accrued in rapid sequence in the these tests, somatosensory stimuli attenuate temporal correlations
following years in several forms: as the scale-free connection pattern and power-law scaling behavior, suggesting that stimuli degrade
of cortical networks (Chialvo, 2004; Eguiluz et al., 2005; Chialvo the network memory of its past. The relationship to SOC was also
et al., 2008); as result of the avalanche analysis of Beggs and Plenz the subject of the work of Freeman et al. (2003) in measurements
(2003, 2004) at the mesoscopic level; as coordination dynamics of temporal and spatial power-spectral densities that identify EEG
of large-scale neural circuits subserving rhythmic sensorimotor phenomena as fractal. Moreover, Freeman (2005) proposed a field-
behavior (Jantzen et al., 2008); and finally from two fMRI studies theoretic approach to account for scale-free neocortical dynamics.
at the macroscopic level, which will be reviewed near the end of The Power Spectral Density of background Electrocorticogram
this Section. was found to follow a power-law with exponents between 2 and
At this point, it seems appropriate to clarify the distinction 4, reflecting variations in the level of background activity which is
between the notion of a generic critical cortical state underlying thought to be homeostatically regulated by the refractory periods
avalanche behavior on the one hand (see The mesoscopic level), of excitatory neurons (Freeman and Zhai, 2009). In five frequency
and the view of criticality in Critical Theory of Statistical Physics, ranges (extending from 0.5 to 48 Hz), detrended fluctuation analy-
on the other: both versions of ‘criticality’ occur in the current sis of EEG show global synchronization time series with scale-free
Neuroscience discourse. The former is generally viewed as persist- features (Stam and de Bruin, 2004); the scaling exponent differs for
ent cortical state subject to dynamic transitions associated with the conditions of eye open and eye closed. Stam (2005) also reviewed
formation and dissolution of attractors (see for instance: Tognoli the nonlinear dynamical analysis of EEG and EMG at great length.
and Kelso, 2009), related to the notions of Coordination Dynamics. Positive and negative feedback affect the scaling exponent of EEG
In contrast, critical dynamics in the framework of Critical Theory differentially; this was determined in a detrended fluctuation anal-
of Statistical Physics stipulates that the brain is poised to undergo ysis (Buiatti et al., 2007). Performance in Stimulus detection of
sudden second order phase transitions to new macroscopic configu- weak stimuli is best accounted for by modulation of the power-law
rations with distinctly novel properties. This dynamics is considered component in the power-spectrum of MEG record: Shimono et al.
universal in its independence of details at the microscopic level (2007) attribute this phenomenon to the brain operating in a state
(Stanley, 1987; Sornette, 2000). Early-stage activity in the develop- of self-organized criticality which modulates the power-spectral
ing retinal network can be cited as an illustrative example (Hennig exponent to optimize responsiveness to external stimuli.
et al., 2009) of this concept of critical dynamics: rhythmic bursts of Transients in EEG records can be detected as differences in
action potential in retina ganglion cells, propagating as wave-like fractal dimension of EEG (Arle and Simon, 1990), as can be neu-
events across the retina surface, arise at a very specific network ropathological conditions (Paramanathan and Uthayakumar,
state which meets the criteria of the classical percolation model 2008), and differences in age and gender (Nikulin and Brismar,
of Statistical Physics (Essam, 1980). A phase transition consists 2005). Nonlinear spectral analysis enabled Kulish et al. (2006) to
then in transforming states of purely local into global functional determine in EEG a set of generalized fractal dimensions and fractal
connectedness, the latter displaying long-range correlations and spectra which reveal differences in subjects when replying to ques-
conspicuous fractal properties (Stauffer and Aharony, 1991/1994). tions with either YES or NO. In a study of human development
Criticality in the framework of Statistical Physics is generally associ- from infancy to 16 years of age, Thatcher et al. (2009) measured
ated with a particular set of ontological implications. Their discus- phase shift duration and phase locking intervals of the EEG for
sion in Sections “Significance of brain criticality” and “Summary computing instantaneous phase differences between pairs of elec-
and final thoughts” will leave us with the intriguing (and as yet trodes; the log–log spectral plots showed 1/f distributions. The
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 10
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
data revealed increased phase stability in local systems, paralleled Long-range temporal correlations in spontaneous discharge
by lengthened periods of unstable phase relation between distant patterns of hippocampal–amygdala complex neurons show a
connections. These results were taken to reflect progression towards power-law relation in epileptic patients (Bhattacharya et al., 2005):
self-organized criticality, accompanying the growth spurts from activity of individual neurons was in this study recorded by means
infancy to adolescence. When Listening to music Bhattacharya and of micro-wire electrodes that had been implanted for localization of
Petsche (2001) find homogeneous scaling in the gamma band EEG epileptic foci, and records were taken in inter-ictal periods, with the
over distributed brain areas, whereas the homogeneity is reduce subjects being awake. Neuronal activity in substantia nigra exhibits
at rest, or when reading text or during spatial imagination. As is fractal activity in anaesthetized rats, but was strikingly absent in
well known, music has been under scrutiny for fractal properties the dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons with relatively constant
for quite some time, see for instance: Voss and Clarke (1975), Hsu discharge rate (Rodriguez et al., 2003). The authors consider the
and Hsu (1991), Boon and Decroly (1995); see also below: Bianco possibility that pathological rhythmic discharges and tremor onset
et al. (2007). may be associated with loss of the fractal pattern of nigrostriatal
The important observations of Lakatos et al. (2005) and their neurons. During paradoxical sleep and in the attentive state, neu-
theoretical implications for optimizing the processing of rhythmic rons in the mesencephalic reticular formation of unanesthetized
stimulus input are of relevance in this context. The laminar analysis cats exhibit firing patterns with 1/f spectral profile (Yamamoto
of oscillatory field potentials and neuron cluster activity in audi- et al., 1986). Kodama et al. (1989) extended this observation to
tory cortex is the basis for identifying a hierarchical structure in discharge properties of neurons in Hippocamus and ventrobasal
the EEG, with the amplitude at each oscillatory frequency being thalamic neurons, and suggest that 1/f structured patterns in dis-
modulated by the phase of a lower frequency oscillation, whereby charge trains are indicative of spatial and temporal summation of
higher frequency oscillations reflect excitability variations in neu- convergence. Variations in 1/f spectra in cortical and subcortical
ron clusters. Entrainment of neuronal oscillations is then identified brain structures of monkeys are apparently related to differences
as a mechanism for auditory attention selection, associated with in emotional states (Andersen et al., 2006).
the rhythmic shifting of excitability in local neuronal ensembles In a very detailed and thorough study, Bianco et al. (2007) iden-
(Lakatos et al., 2008). tify the EEG time series as a (non-ergodic) renewal non-Poisson
Two aspects of EEG activity have remained essentially “blind process, reflecting strong deviation from exponential decay. This
spots” as victims of artificial filtering of brain activity records: startling claim is based on two premises: one, the comparison
Logothetis (2002) and Freeman and Zhai (2009) pointed out that with the statistics of an entirely different physical process, namely
arrhythmic brain activity constitutes a major part of EEG and LFP, the fluorescence intermittency in blinking quantum dots (Bianco
about which little is known. For arrhythmic brain activity, this gap et al., 2005); and, second, on the conjecture of the brain operating
is now being remedied by the work of He et al. (2010), demon- at or near a self-organized critical state. The implication is that
strating a power-law relationship in the temporal power spectrum. neuron synchronization can be viewed as a kind of phase transi-
Moreover, this study reveals extensive nesting of frequencies, with tion involving the close cooperation among many constituents of
the phase of lower frequencies modulating the amplitude of higher a neuron set, each individual neuron in essence losing its identity.
frequencies, in a progression across the frequency spectrum. The Furthermore, the absence of exponential truncation would violate
power-law exponent varies with brain region and activity. The other the ergodic condition (Bel and Barkai, 2005). The authors then
neglected dimension of EEG also harbors its surprises: Monto et al. proceed to show that compositional music belongs to the same
(2008) report that very slow EEG fluctuations in the frequency category of processes. They finally claim that the effect of music
range of 0.01–0.1 Hz affect the trial-to-trial behavioral perform- on the human brain is in fact based on the essential identity of
ance and oscillation dynamics, reflecting the excitability dynamics their respective fractal dynamics, ensuing a kind of complexity
of cortical networks. Cross-frequency synchrony observed by Palva matching of the interacting brain–music systems. This aspect will
et al. (2005) in Human MEG extends to these very low frequency be further pursued in Section “Complexity matching effect” Equally
ranges, as does the scale-free characteristics of cycle length. The consequential are the inferences drawn by Allegrini et al. (2008)
phase of ongoing oscillatory EEG activity affects visual perception from their EEG data. The thrust of their analysis is on measuring
(Busch et al., 2009), not unlike the enhancement of psychophysi- the time distribution of recorded events occurring simultaneously
cal performance by pre-stimulus oscillatory (Linkenkaer-Hansen at two or more electrodes (in their terminology: coincidences); they
et al., 2004). Taken together, these observations and those of Lakatos find that the time interval between two consecutive coincidences
et al. (l.c) show that psychophysical performance or states are sen- has a waiting time distribution corresponding to perfect 1/f noise.
sitively dependent on features of cortical oscillations across a much The theoretical analysis of this finding leads these authors to infer
wider range of frequency and amplitudes than commonly consid- that the coincidences are driven by a renewal process.
ered. What is of immense interest is that the dynamics of cortical The electroencephalographic findings in support of 1/f scaling
oscillations appears to entail a nested hierarchy of frequency and are supplemented by observations with brain imaging: In 1997,
amplitude interdependencies. Could this relation be a reflection of Zarahn et al. (1997) reported BOLD time series data obtained from
a cascading functionality, comparable to the principles of linking normal subjects at rest that exhibited a fractal power-spectrum and
actions across many scales, discussed in Section “Linking across self-similar signal contributions, with disproportionate contribu-
many scales of space and time”? It would afford the capacity for tion of power in the spectrum for low frequencies. The temporal
swiftly shifting between different scales of stimuli on demand and variability of brain activity in time series of fMRI data in com-
with economy of processing. bination with a voxel-wise analysis of scaling exponents enabled
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 11
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
Thurner et al. (2003) to distinguish different physiological states of exponents. Following expenditure of cognitive effort, the brain’s
the brain. In non-active brain regions, the voxel-profile activity is fractal oscillations require several minutes for returning to baseline
described by a random walk model; in contrast, stimulus activated activity, this time depending on the task’s cognitive load; this is taken
brain activity is characterized as correlated fractional Brownian to signify the relevance of fractal scaling for adaptive task processes,
noise. The same group of investigators (Shimizu et al., 2004) exam- in addition to the role it plays for the “resting” brain (Barnes et al.,
ined fMRI time series with a multifractal method to extract local 2009). The substantial evidence for modular organization of brain
singularity (fractal) exponents: the range of Hoelder exponents networks is reviewed by Bullmore and Sporns (2009), and was
in voxels with brain activation is close to 1, whereas exponents subsequently further refined by Meunier et al. (2009), applying a
in white matter and voxels in the absence of brain activation are method for rapid, high-resolution modular decomposition of brain
close to 0.5. functional networks (Blondel et al., 2008). Differences between low
Without further discussing at this point the far reaching impli- frequency BOLD signal spectral power in task and rest periods
cations of the non-ergodicity claim (Tsallis et al., 1995; Tsallis, also support the notion of fMRI reflecting meaningful brain states
2009), I merely alert to two publications which interpret human (Duff et al., 2008), as do the emotional task-dependent fractal fluc-
EEG signals in terms of a Tsallis Entropy measure (Capurro et al., tuations in fMRI of the cerebellar vermis (Andersen et al., 2006).
1998, 1999). Brain imaging in Neuropathology has revealed significant differ-
The common theme of studies surveyed in the following is ences between patients suffering from unawareness of ownership
wavelet-based representations of functional magnetic imaging of one arm (Asomatognosia) and those with additional confabula-
(fMRI) time series. Among others, Wornell (1993) explicated in tions (Somatoparaphrenia): the latter patients display lesions in the
detail the role of wavelet-based representations for the power-law medial and orbitofrontal regions, in addition to the multiple large
family of processes. The remarkable feature of wavelet analysis is lesions including temporo-parietal sectors which are common to
that it can be viewed as matching self-similar processes since the both groups of patients (Feinberg et al., 2010). For the distinction
wavelet coefficients exactly reproduce, from scale to scale, the self- of stimuli related to the self (i.e. self-referential stimuli) from those
replicating statistical structure of such processes (Abry, 2003). not so related, Northoff et al. (2006) identify processes mediated
Publishing with various associates since 1994, Bullmore gath- by cortical midline structures.
ered extensive experience with fractal analysis of human brain Two virtually simultaneously published recent studies, using
activity which led eventually to the suggesting that wavelet-based different experimental strategies, deliver seemingly firm evidence
fMRI time series estimates (Bullmore et al., 2001) can be viewed for brain criticality. Kitzbichler et al. (2009) based their approach on
as realizations of Fractional Brownian Motion, i.e., a class of frac- the widely accepted view that many behavioral and cognitive states
tals described by Mandelbrot and van Ness (1986), characterized are related to coherent or phase-locked oscillations in transient neu-
by zero-mean, and non-stationary and non-differentiable time ronal assemblies (for a recent summary: Womelsdorf et al., 2007).
functions (see Power-law scaling in neuronal structures and proc- The measures for determining phase synchronization between
esses). Extolling further the virtues of wavelet techniques for the component processes were in their study the phase lock intervals
purposes on hand, Bullmore et al. (2004) and Maxim et al. (2005) (estimating the length of time a pair of bandpass filtered oscilla-
give a meticulous account of their use of the “discrete wavelet tions remain in phase synchronization), and the lability of global
transform” approach to fMRI time series evaluation. In normal synchronization (informally analogous to the previously discussed
subjects at rest, the time series is most parsimoniously described avalanches). Applying these measures to functional MRI and MEG
as Fractional Gaussian Noise, signifying a persistent long-memory data recorded from normal volunteers at resting state demonstrated
fractal processes of which the Hurst Exponent is a defining param- power-law scaling of both pair wise and global synchronization.
eter. Interestingly, the value of this parameter in Alzheimer subjects They then evaluated the performance of two models, both typically
differs from the norm (Maxim et al., 2005). Several results from the being used in nonlinear dynamics: the Ising and the Kuramoto
same laboratory contribute additional facets to the notion of the (1984) model. Observed and model generated data were identical,
active brain displaying fractal properties: Achard et al. (2006, 2008) provided the model system was in a critical state. Hence, the authors
applied discrete wavelet transform analysis to fMRI time series conclude that the brain must be in a critical state. Moreover, the
to estimate the frequency dependence of functional connectivity critical brain dynamics obtained at frequency intervals ranging
between some ninety cortical and subcortical brain regions; the from 0.05–0.11 to 62.5–125 Hz, confirming criticality of the human
functional networks is dominated by a neocortical core of highly brain network organization across its functional bandwidth. They
connected hubs with an exponentially truncated power-law degree consider therefore “Broadband Criticality” as a characteristic prop-
distribution. Dynamical analysis of brain at wavelet scales from 2 to erty of the resting brain network functional organization.
37 Hz show the emergence of long-range connections with execu- Although also using the Ising model as reference point for
tion of motor tasks (Bassett et al., 2006). Under certain conditions determining brain criticality, Fraiman et al. (2009) followed an
(e.g., age, cognitive performance, certain pharmacologic interven- entirely different approach: the issue at stake in their study was
tions) brain dynamics requires a more comprehensive description to determine whether and to what extent the dynamics of the
than is captured by the monofractal analysis applied in the studies paradigmatic two-dimensional Ising model at criticality displays
cited thus far (Suckling et al., 2008). In such cases, a more com- features that correspond to patterns encountered in the imaging
prehensive description must make allowance for scaling behavior of (resting) brain networks. However, unlike most prior studies of
that is governed by several local scaling exponents. Multifractal brain dynamics cited in this Section, no prior assumptions on struc-
analysis can then be characterized by the histogram of the Holder tural connectivity of brain regions were made. Instead, network
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 12
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
connectivity was extracted from voxel correlations: thus, networks phase transitions in the framework of Critical Theory of Statistical
were here defined in terms of correlations among the activity at Physics. When Kitzbichler et al. (l.c.) and Fraiman et al. (l.c.) con-
each location (voxel in the case of the brain, and lattice site in the sider the Ising dynamics as reference points for identifying brain
Ising model). Prior investigations showed that the so called “resting criticality, they invoke the framework of equilibrium phase transi-
state” (absence of overt external stimulation) is subject to a Default tions in Statistical Physics; on the other hand, and in line with a
Network Dynamics, reflecting balanced positive and negative cor- related comments in Section “The mesoscopic level”, “critical corti-
relations between activity in component brain regions (Fox and cal state” may be more closely related to Kelso’s evocative notion of
Raichle, 2007; Baliki et al., 2008); this is not the case under certain ‘exploring the space of possibilities’ among competing (conflicting)
abnormal conditions (Baliki et al., 2008). The result was that the dynamic regimes (Kelso, 2010; see also: Kelso and Engstrøm, 2006)
dynamics of the Ising model at criticality, as captured by the cor- than to “critical phase transitions” of Statistical Physics. I raise this
relation networks, exhibits average statistical properties which are issue to alert to the need for making the distinction between two
identical to those observed in the brain networks at resting con- kinds of dynamical regimes under discussion: one, conceptually
dition. Among several other network characteristics that match related to the theory of ‘Coordination Dynamics’ (see Kelso and
critical Ising dynamics with brain dynamics was also the equality Tognoli, l.c), the other aligned with Critical Theory of Statistical
of the fraction of sites with positive and negative correlations, cor- Physics. The latter implies a distinct ontological commitment, com-
roborating that the dynamics of the normally functioning brain at monly associated with the Renormalization Group Framework.
rest being near a critical point. In any case, the unequivocal answer The next section will develop a view of Brain Criticality in terms
to the question the investigators set out to answer was that networks of the Critical Theory. It then remains an important question to
derived from correlations of fMRI signals in human brains are what extent, if any, the ontological implications of Critical Theory
indistinguishable from networks extracted from Ising models at would also apply to critical brain states as persistent and generic
critical temperature. brain features, or what their intrinsic nature is.
In an important next step, Expert et al. (2010) investigated the
large-scale dynamical properties of resting brain by examining Significance of brain criticality
more closely the character of the spatio-temporal correlations: In statistical Physics, systems operating at the critical point of tran-
considering three successive steps in spatial coarse graining, two- sition between ordered and random behavior are metastable with
point correlation functions exhibit self-similarity; self-similarity in respect to a set of control parameters, and are capable of rapid
time was revealed by 1/f frequency behavior of the power-spectrum. qualitative change in response to fluctuations of external input. For
The condition of long-range correlations in space and time pre- systems far from equilibrium most of the analytical and numerical
supposes a dynamical system at criticality; the strong correlations methods of the ‘classical’ (equilibrium) theory appear to remain
across large distances are indicators of highly integrated cortical valid (Sornette, 2000). Moreover, dissipative (open) Hamiltonian
states, with nearby clusters functioning in synchrony. System, such as the brain, have the capacity to form “strange” attrac-
Apart from this principal conclusion of this study, the authors tors whose boundaries and bases have fractal properties (Aguirre
also alert to a significant property of the brain networks which, et al., 2009; see Processes that generate power-law distributions). At
as noted before, are extracted from the site-to-site temporal voxel or near the point of phase transition, the systems exhibit complex
correlations: obviously, equally oriented spins in the Ising model patterns of fluctuations on all scales of space and time, this being
coalesce in large domains near the critical temperature where also one of the indicators of an impending phase transition; another
nontrivial collective states emerge in the Ising model’s otherwise indicator is the slowing down of relaxation processes, associated
regular lattice. Similarly, large regions of brain activate concur- with forming long-range correlations for efficient functional cou-
rently with deactivation of other regions. How does the brain self- pling among system components: both events are anticipatory
organize to negotiate the dynamic balance between the extreme signals of impending critical transitions (Scheffer et al., 2009).
possibilities of total quiescence and explosive massive excitation? Fractal clusters formed by phase transitions can be characterized
The authors refer to a discussion of this stability problem which in terms of correlation length (Antoniou et al., 2000) which is
was already noted by Abeles (1991). It motivates their question: is associated with fractal scaling of clusters of correlated elements
it necessary to confine brain activation to structural connections on all scales; as a result, any intrinsic scale before phase transition
linking brain regions, as is customary in most current research? is de facto ‘forgotten’ (Stinchcombe, 1989). As a corollary, the sys-
(e.g.: Hagmann et al., 2008). Take the Ising model as example: there, tem presents at the critical transition qualitatively new properties,
a change of temperature can lead to the emergence of functional requiring new macroscopic descriptors. The important feature of
collectives, in the absence of preexisting structural connections. the organization following the phase transition is to form new
This leads Fraiman et al. to ask: might the brain, likewise, have objects with distinct properties. In physics, this is manifest as, for
this capacity, as basis of a kind of adaptive coordination analogous instance, the phase transition from ferro- to para-magnetism, or
to that envisioned by Kelso and Tognoli (2007) and Tognoli and from water to ice (Stanley, 1999). Typically, one deals with a large
Kelso (2009)? collection of ‘microscopic’ constituents which, at phase transitions,
Apparently, SOC, metastability and critical phase transitions arrange to a macrostate which displays qualitatively novel features
constitute a nexus of intimately interrelated dynamic processes and properties. The macrostate’s new properties have no referent
of which fractals and self-similarity are pivotal aspects (Bak and at the microscopic level, and require new descriptors: by way of
Paczuski, 1995). I already alerted in earlier Sections to the distinc- illustration, think of hardness or liquidity in the ice-water exam-
tion between critical cortical states as generic brain feature and ple as descriptors of new physical properties, originating de novo
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 13
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
upon phase transition. The properties described in the foregoing fibers to mechanical indentation of peripheral receptors. Neurons
are universal in the sense that the apply irrespective of the system’s of primary visual cortex (V1) exhibit a higher coding efficiency and
constituents at the microscopic level. information transmission rate for input signals with natural long-
One of the amazing features of phase transitions is that material term (1/f) correlations (Yu et al., 2005). Copelli et al. (2002) and
systems of diverse physical properties at their microscopic level Kinouchi and Copelli (2006) claim that Stevens (1957) law for inten-
form on phase transition but a small number of Universality Classes sity of subjective sensory experiences can be attributed to dynamics in
which share identical macroscopic properties (for a discussion in a network of excitable elements constituting the peripheral receptors,
relation to brain function: see Werner, 2009c). Based on a stochas- set at the edge of a phase transition, i.e.: of being in a state of critical-
tic theory of neural activity, Buice and Cowan (2007) developed ity. For a discussion of this view, see Chialvo (2006).
field-theoretic methods for non-equilibrium statistical processes; Unlike dismissing the fluctuations in the performance of many
their model exhibits a dynamical phase transition of the univer- psychophysical task as “noise”, Gilden (1997, 2001) attributes them
sality class of directed percolation (see Fractals and criticality of to a memory process associated with active choice and discrimina-
brain states). tion. This memory process is suggested to express itself as 1/f ‘noise’
Critical Theory (Stanley, 1987; Yeomans, 1992; Marro and in the three major measurement paradigms in Psychophysics:
Dickman, 1999) considers reality as a hierarchy of levels, each hav- speeded judgment, accuracy of discrimination and production.
ing its own scale, its own description and a theory that accounts The 1/f fluctuations are attributed to an intrinsic dynamics, associ-
for that description. The scale on each level emerges from the ated with the formation of representations, comparable to the kind
scale on the next finer level by ignoring some of the lower level of memory that arises in dynamical systems as they flow forward
details which become invisible at the higher level scale (Sokal and in time, along principles outlined by Beran (1994). According to
Bricmont, 2004; Laughlin, 2005). The result is a drastic reduction this interpretations of the psychophysical observations, cognition
of dimensionality. Coarse graining (specifically Renormalization would generate its dynamical signature as a consequence of its
Group Transformation) (Fisher, 1998) unveils self-similarity at the own activity: this would entail a fundamental revision of what is
point of phase transition. The intimate relations between scaling, signal and what is noise in psychophysical data. Gilden points out
renormalization group, and long-range correlations are addressed that the conventional experimental design and data analysis using
by Perez-Mercader (2004) and Penrose (1986), the latter pointing ANOVA does in fact bury “one of the most important signatures
out that the definition of fractal dimension depends primarily on of what happens when the mind is working”.
the distribution of widely separated sites, telling little on sites that Timing fluctuations in tasks requiring sensorimotor coordina-
are close together. tion display cycle-to-cycle fluctuations which, analyzed as time
What is the significance of criticality? Excitable systems at criti- series, show fractal scaling of power-spectra (Chen et al., 1997).
cality exhibit an optimal dynamical range for information process- Ding et al. (2001) suggest that the reason for this lies in the multiple
ing (Kinouchi and Copelli, 2006; Beggs, 2008; see Shew et al., 2009, time scale activities of distributed neural areas that contribute to
in The mesoscopic level). Furthermore, a model that reproduces the task performance. If asked to produce random series of num-
the typical features of systems at a critical point learns and remem- bers from a given set, series with short and long-range correlations
bers complex logical rules: learning occurs by plastic adaptation of are produced which in most cases exhibit a power-law spectrum
synaptic strengths, and exhibits universal features in being inde- (Morariu et al., 2001). Van Orden et al. (2003) interpret serial cor-
pendent of the specific task assigned to the system (de Arcangelis relations in human cognition as evidence of self-organization. In
and Herrmann, 2010). Finally, phase transition in critical systems their view, self-organization coordinates the activities of the organ-
are a universal mechanism for rapid switching between different ism across a hierarchy of time scales, producing correlated variation
cooperative neuron collectives. These three attributes of criticality across time: variations in response times would then appear as a
are the reason for its rapidly moving into center stage of current natural fractal in which larger scale deviations nest within them-
brain theory. A remarkable consequence of phase transitions is the selves smaller (self-similar) scale deviations. Accordingly, 1/f noise
generation of qualitative novelty in the form of macrostates with is in this view not sufficient evidence for self-organized criticality,
new properties: Section “Summary and final thoughts” will discuss but rather its necessary consequence. Similarly, Kello et al. (2007)
this aspect in relation to brain theory. assembled reaction time and response data which lead them to
considering the 1/f scaling of their data as expression of a coordina-
psychologIcal and BehavIoral processes tive, metastable basis of cognitive functions. This view is in effect
The following overview of psychological functions with power-law an extension of Van Orden’s et al. (2003), shifting the genesis of 1/f
scaling is predicated on the notion that mental states may be viewed scaling from self-organization to metastability: the 1/f pervasive-
as macrostates emerging from EEG dynamics (Allefeld et al., 2009), ness in the brain would be the signature of metastability associated
and neurophysiological processes generally. Classical Psychophysics with cognitive functions. However, these claims are challenged by
of Helmholtz, Fechner and Weber sought to establish dependencies of Wagenmakers et al. (2005) and contrasted with the alternative that
perceptual experience on properties of physical stimuli impinging on long-term serial dependence in data can be explained in a number
sensory organs. In 1975, Stevens reported the summary of the exten- of ways, for instance by mixtures of a small number of short-range
sive work that led him to propose that this dependency is in many processes) (Wagenmakers et al., 2004).
sensory modalities a power-function. In neurophysiological experi- Applied to problem solving and insight, reasoning was viewed
ments, Werner and Mountcastle (1963, 1964) identified the power- by Stephen and Dixon (2009) as the self-organization of novel
function scaling of responses in primary afferent cutaneous nerve structures: taking a particular problem solving task as example, the
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 14
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
authors suggest that the problem solution can be viewed as a phase possibly fractal nature of the learning process. Tsuda and Kuroda
transition in a self-organizing system whose dynamics would be (2004) recently elaborated this idea and developed a mathematical
reflected in power-law behavior. Implications for social psychology model of Cantor Coding for the formation of episodic memory
are reviewed by Correll (2008): cognitive effort to avoid bias in in the hippocampus.
judgments reduces the scaling exponents of response times relative The intent is here merely to draw attention to a large segment of
to less challenging tasks. Grigolini et al. (2009) interpret Correll’s literature, of which the foregoing citations are but a small sample
data to suggest that increasing the difficulty of cognitive tasks would that implicates interrelations between state space dynamics of RNN
accelerate the transition from observed 1/f noise to white noise in and IFS in the processing of symbolic information. For clarification
decision making time series. of this relationship, Kolen (1994, 2006) proposed that the RNN’s
The temporal structure of many human-initiated activities state dynamics itself is an IFS, as a paradigmatic case of the syn-
can display a striking regularity. Barabasi (2005) showed that a ergism of fractal and complex system dynamics. Levy and Pollack
decision-based queuing process can account for the dynamics of (2002) obtained supportive evidence in that every point in the
some human patterns of activity: when individuals execute tasks hidden layer of the RNN is either itself part of the fractal attractor
based on some perceived priority, the timing of the tasks will indi- of the IFS, or has an orbit that “ends on” the attractor in a finite
cate the signatures of fractal dynamics: heavy-tailed distributions number of steps. Two tantalizing questions arise: one, wherein does
with initial fast bursts. the “computational” power of a Fractal System lie? How does the
If patterns of expression in spoken language reflect in some way self-similar structures of fractals unpack layers of “information” for
the organization of brain processes, then Zipf’s law is of course the guiding actions across many scales still eludes our comprehension.
notable landmark that presages more recent fascinating reports of And, second, what exactly is the nature of that apparent synergism
fractal patterns and scale-invariant word transition probabilities between complex system and fractal dynamics? (see Linking across
in spoken and written texts (Alvarez-Lacalle et al., 2006; Altmann many scales of space and time).
et al., 2009; Costa et al., 2009), and their extension to music (Zanette,
2008). On the basis of EMG data, it appears that some common motor BehavIor and allometrIc control processes
features of patterning in language, music and syntax (Patel, 2003) During quiet standing, the human body sways in a seemingly
can be attributed to neural activity in Broca’s area and its right erratic fashion. Collins and De Luca (1994) determined that the
hemisphere homolog (Maess et al., 2001). pattern of this postural sway is exhibits intrinsic correlations
which can be modeled as a system of bounded correlated ran-
symBol processIng and fractals dom walks. This result suggested to the authors that the postural
The classical book “Language of Thought” (Fodor, 1975) epitomizes control system incorporates both open and closed loop control
the framework of computation-representation of the Computational mechanisms. The statistics of temporal patterns in spontaneous
Theory of Mind. However, with adopting a dynamical perspective, it motor activity of laboratory rodents can be replicated by the sto-
became appropriate to view “representation” in terms of regions of chastic mechanism of Davidsen and Schuster (2002, see Processes
state space, and “computational rules” as attractors (Elman, 1995); that generate power-law distributions) which generates power-
the dynamics is supplied by recurrent neural networks (RNN). law distributions and 1 1/f power-spectrum over several decades
Systems of this kind learn to recognize and generate languages (Anteneodo and Chialvo, 2009). The presence of long-time cor-
after being trained on suitable examples. Surprisingly, it turned relations in the stride-interval time of normal humans suggested
out that the induction of this ability occurs when small network to Hausdorff et al. (1995) that the activity of walking may be a
parameter adjustments bring about a phase transition in the neural self-similar fractal. Acknowledging the complexity of locomotor
network’s state space. Once in a certain state, machine states for activity, the authors referred to its prerequisite of coordinating
correct recognitions scale with an exponent of 1.4 (Pollack, 1991). inputs from motor cortex, basal ganglia, and cerebellum, as well
Considering the RNN as a dynamical system, it appears that its as feedback from vestibular, visual, and proprioceptive sources.
trajectories can locate regions in phase space which support frac- In the Hausdorff et al. study, the gait cycle (synonymous with
tal dynamics: putting it in a graphical way, the phase space would stride interval) was defined as the time between consecutive heel
seem “peppered” with regions for fractal dynamics (i.e. attractors), strikes of the same foot.
which can be reached by the trajectories of the complex system’s West and Griffin (1999) and Griffin et al. (2000) took a dif-
dynamics. Numerous additional sources point to a close, though ferent and novel approach to the analysis of gait patterns: using
often not readily transparent relation between the dynamics of the time between consecutive maximal positive extensions of the
RNN and IFS: the principle is consistent with the observations of same knee for measuring the stride interval, their data analysis
Pollack (1991) inasmuch as fractal sets provide a method for organ- was based on determining the long-time correlation properties
izing recursive computation in a bounded state space (Tabor, 2000). of the stride-interval time series. The Relative Dispersion (given
Furthermore, context-free grammar computation by connectionist as the ratio of standard deviation to the mean) for different lev-
networks using fractal sets can generate spatial representations of els of data aggregation captures the inter-relatedness of the data
symbolic sequences (Jeffrey, 1990; Tino, 1999) via IFS (Barnsley across multiple time scales. The method is described in detail by
and Demko, 1985; Barnsley et al., 1989). A class of associative rein- Bassingthwaighte et al. (1994) and is designed to answer whether
forcement learning algorithms was constructed by Bressloff and the correlations are self-similar upon scaling (i.e.: identical between
Stark (1992) as an extension of non-associative schemes in sto- groups of neighbors at different time scales). The result of the data
chastic automata theory; within the IFS framework, it suggested a analysis was that the fluctuations of the gait cycle were self-similar
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 15
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
with a fractal dimension of 1.25. In addition, stride-interval time processes that generate power-law dIstrIButIons
series itself was in this study a random fractal, consistent with the Mitzenmacher (2003) reviewed some aspects of the rich and long
data of Hausdorff et al. history of generative models for power law and log normal distribu-
The importance of the West–Griffin results lies in showing tions, and their relations. Antedating the modern theory of stochastic
that the correlation in their data was an inverse power-law of a processes, Yule (1925) proposed a model of speciation to explain
form similar to the allometric scaling laws found in many areas the highly skewed distributions of abundances of biological genera.
of Biology: typically, allometry establishes a relation between Thirty years later, Simon (1955) derived several related stochastic
two properties of an organism. Historically, the idea is based on processes from relatively general probability assumptions that lead
Huxley’s (1932) definition of allometric growth, describing that to Yule-type distributions. Their characteristic properties distinguish
the different growth rates of two parts of an organism are propor- them from the negative binomial and Fisher’s logarithmic series.
tional to one another. In the West–Griffin studies, the allometric Leaving open the possibility of still other generative mechanisms for
principle is reflected in the constancy of the Relative Dispersion power-law distributions, Simon suggests that the frequency of occur-
over the length of the stride-interval time series which, in the rence of this empirical distribution should not come as surprise. The
present case, has the non-integer fractal dimension of 1.25. Their preferential attachment scheme for network growth (Barabasi and
data raise the issue of systematic control of variability, which is Albert, 1999) has stimulated the recent interest in the Yule-Simon
generic of complex physiological processes. Unlike the familiar approach in as much as Bornholdt and Ebel (2001) could show that
homeostatic control that regulates system variables by negative they are closely related. The important step of introducing the notion
feedback, an allometric control system is conceived as regulating of aging of network nodes was taken by Dorogovtsev and Mendes
variability of a process involving multiple interactions among (2000): the probability of being linked to a newly added node is
sensors and effectors with intricate feedback arrangements, each taken to be proportional to its current connectivity weighted by a
with its own characteristic set of frequencies and time scales. power-law function of its age. This motivated Cattuto et al. (2006) to
Their functions are reflected by the allometric relation which propose a modified Yule-Simon process that takes the full history of
captures the process’s long-term memory with power-law correla- the system into account, applying a hyperbolic memory kernel.
tions, and by the power-law distributions of the system variable Simon’s conclusion that power-law distributions can be derived
(West, 1999, 2009). from relatively general assumption seems to be born out by the
The significance of this principle is documented by West (1999, number of mathematical models that have been proposed. A shot-
2006) for the numerous physiological processes which are identi- noise process, reviewed by Milotti (2002) is an example, as is the
fied as fractal, on the basis of their time series behavior. Notable Reversible Markov Chain Models (Erland and Greenwood, 2007),
examples of fractal Physiology are heart rate, bronchial air ways and the Clustering Poisson Point Process (Grüneis, 2001), the latter
and body temperature variability, and integrated neural control already introduced in the Section “Power-Law Scaling in Neuronal
networks. In these situations, the regulatory mechanisms constitute Structures and Processes.” The simple stochastic mechanism of
coupled cascades of feedback loops in systems far from equilib- Davidsen and Schuster (2002) generates pulse trains with power-law
rium. Therapeutic interventions, commonly based on the homeo- distributions of pulse intervals, and 1/f power-spectra over several
static principle which assumes the significant system variable to decades at low frequencies with an exponent close to 1. Iterated
be normally distributed fails to take the regulatory complexity function systems (IFSs) are a unified approach for generating and
into account and may be counterproductive. Instead, Allometric classifying a broad class of fractals with self-similarity (Barnsley
(fractional) Control based on Fractional Calculus (Podlubny, 1999) and Demko, 1985). The Chaos Game is a generalized form of this,
provides the appropriate approach. Applications of Fractional designating a method for generating the attractor (fixed point) of
Calculus to modeling the interdependence and organization of any IFS. Other Recurrence Models (Kaulakys and Meskauskas, 1998;
complex system, such as for instance the vestibulo-oculomotor Kaulakys et al., 2006) derive from a more specific frame of reference
system, are illustrated by Magin (2006). insofar as they consider random walks in complex systems that dis-
Changing walking speed, using metronomically controlled walk- play self-organization. As alternative, Ruseckas and Kaulakys (2010)
ing, or aging and pathological conditions introduce stress condi- generate 1/f noise with nonlinear stochastic differential equations.
tions to the neural control system which requires expanding the Touboul and Destexhe (2009) followed a similar route when devel-
theoretical framework. Based on the notion of a stochastic model oping their case against power-law scaling of neural avalanches (see
of human gait dynamics (Ashkenazy et al., 2002), West and Scafetta The mesoscopic level). Physical systems whose observable properties
(2003) tested the model of a neural pattern generator on the data set exhibit values which randomly exceed certain critical values are
obtained by Hausdorff et al. (1995) which they showed to exhibit candidates for applying Extreme Value Theory: the aim of the clas-
slightly multifractal fluctuations. Metronome timing breaks the sical form of this theory is to quantify the properties of the extremes
long-time correlations of the natural pace and generates a large (large or small) occurring in random sequences of independent
fractal variability of the gait regime. The two essential features of numbers. Extremal dynamics may be applied to generate objects
the model required for capturing the phenomenology of the data with fractal structure (Miller et al., 1993); as Extremal Optimization,
set were that the dynamics of the system unfolds on an attractor it successively eliminates undesirable components of suboptimal
in phase space, and that the natural frequency of the attractor is problem solutions (Boettcher and Percus, 2000).
replaced by a random walk over a restricted set of frequencies which The various approaches discussed in the foregoing can essentially
leads to the multifractal output for the dynamical model (Scafetta be viewed as ad hoc (Milotti, 2002). In contrast, however, there are
et al., 2009). two types of conceptual anchors that ground power-law relations
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 16
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
explicitly in larger foundational contexts. For one of the conceptual ence of distant samples. The conceptual connections to scaling
roots, I turn to the theory of Random Walks and fractional difference invariance and to the theory of renormalization are discussed by
equations. The continuum limit of simple random walks is diffusion Quian (2003). Fractional reaction–diffusion in inhomogenous
and, correspondingly, expressed in the mathematics of differential media stabilizes steady state solutions of Turing patterns (Henry
equations. The simple random walk aggregates the random steps from and Wearne, 2000).
a large number of identically distributed random variables with finite Shlesinger et al. (1987) introduced the Levy walk as a ran-
variance. However, an extensive range of investigations has made it dom walk with non-local memory, coupling space and time in
abundantly clear that simple random walks with this statistics do not a scaling fashion. For the alpha-stable Levy Walks, the transition
capture the richness of biological data, and for that matter other fields probability varies with the size of the step (Montroll and West,
of investigation as well (for reviews see: Bassingthwaighte et al., 1994; 1979). Anomalous diffusion results from a Levy Flight which is
West and Deering, 1995; West 1999). A decisive step beyond simple a process where the time taken to complete a transition depends
random walks was the introduction of the concept of continuous- on the length of the step (West et al., 1997). West et al. (1994) also
time-random walk (CTRW) by Montroll and Weiss (1965). Some identified dynamical generators of Levy Statistics. In an elegant
forms of CTRW are fundamentally different from the classical dif- step towards unifying various classes of random walks, Zumofen
fusion model by drawing the timing of steps from waiting time dis- and Klafter (1993) applied the framework of CTRW’s to derive
tributions, or by taking steps of randomly varying length. This is for Levy stable processes. The interesting properties of Levy processes
instance the case when the waiting time distribution does not possess include their satisfying a scaling law, self-similarity and possessing
a characteristic time scale (for instance, has a power-law distribution): memory (Allegrini et al., 2002). Levy (1954) also generalized the
in this situation, the mean square displacement and the distribution Central Limit Theorem to include those phenomena for which the
of transition rates become fractal. Processes corresponding to these second moment diverges. West and Deering (1995) and West (2006)
and related random walk models are then referred to as fractal ran- assembled a large number of data obtained from various biological
dom walks, corresponding to anomalous diffusion which occupies systems that satisfy Levy walk statistics. In a motor skill acquisition
an important place for studying physical processes such as transport task, Cluff and Balasubramaniam (2009) report that probability
in disordered media or non-exponential (anomalous) relaxation of, distributions for changes of fingertip speed in pole balancing are
for instance, glassy media. Along these lines, Montroll and West, Levy distributed. In vitro recorded spontaneous electrical activity
1979), Hughes et al. (1982) and others examined a large repertoire of neuronal networks exhibits scale – invariant Levy distributions
of stochastic processes with unusual probability distributions for the and long-range correlations (Segev et al., 2002). This is thought to
displacement per step. For certain parameters, these walks have infi- enable different size networks to self-organize for adjusting their
nite spatial moments, generate fractal self-similar trajectories, have activities over many time scales. Among animal movement patterns
characteristic functions with non-analytic behavior, and lead to an associated with random search behavior, Levy walks outperform
analog of RNG transformations. In the continuum limit, the fractal fractional Brownian motion (Reynolds, 2009), presumably evolved
random walk leads to the Fractional Langevin Equation of motion under section pressure (Bartumeus, 2007). Situating the power-law
describing trajectories, and their ensemble densities, in phase space formalism in the larger framework of Maximum Entropy, Frank
(West, 2006). Such processes are viewed as fractional kinetics, and (2009) develops the view of the power-law as the outcome of one
mathematically addressed in fractional calculus (Kleinz and Osler, particular form of aggregation of processes, namely aggregation
2000; West and Nonnenmacher, 2001; Sokolov et al., 2002) and by that preserves information only about the geometric mean. More
Fractal Operators (West et al., 2003). generally, this important study places the power-law alongside other
In an application to Neuroscience, Lundstrom et al. (2008) generative, each placing its distinct constraints on information for
showed that neocortical pyramidal neurons’ firing rate is a frac- describing patterns of nature.
tional derivative of slowly varying stimulus parameters: neuronal Physical process models to account for fractal heavy-tailed dis-
fractional differentiation effectively results in adaptation with many tributions of traffic pattern of (information) packages in local area
time scales (see Linking across many scales of space and time). networks (LANs) are based on renewal reward processes, originally
Fractional-order dynamics of brainstem vestibulo-oculomotor applied to commodity pricing. Applied to network package traffic,
neurons was demonstrated by Anastasio (1994) who also suggested the model takes into account the presence of long packet trains
that simulation of fractional-order differentiators and integrators (“on periods”, with packages arriving at regular intervals) and long
can be approximated by integer-order high- and low-pass filters, inter-train pauses (“off periods”). The superposition of many such
respectively. Thus, fractional dynamics may possibly be applicable packet trains displays on large time scales the self-similar behavior
to motor control systems, generally. This is also suggested by the LANs if the “on–off” distribution has infinite variance (Willinger
stride-interval time series of human gait being a random fractal, et al., 1995; Willinger, 2000).
indicating the role of long-time correlations in walking (West and The second conceptual framework was already introduced in
Griffin, 1999; see Symbol processing and Fractals). Mandelbrot Section 2.3.3: power-law distributions are among the novelties that
and van Ness (1968) defined Fractional Brownian Motions as a arise in the vicinity of or at the critical point of a continuous phase
family of Gaussian random functions, parametrized according to transition, including criticality. This should not come as surprise
the interdependence of successive increments, with the param- since scaling reflects long-time correlations in the underlying proc-
eter ranging from zero (Gaussian Fractional Random Walk) to ess, analogous to the comparable re-ordering process at critical
infinite in Fractional Brownian motion: the latter to account for phase transitions (Wilson, 1979): both cases address a class of phe-
the empirical studies of random phenomena with interdepend- nomena where events at many scales make contributions of equal
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 17
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
importance. Significantly, the comprehensive review on Fractal system” and “The mesoscopic level”. However, Section “Processes
structures in nonlinear dynamics by Aguirre et al. (2009) begins that generate power-law distributions” lists a large number of alter-
with the sentence “Fractal structures appear naturally in nonlinear natives for generating fractals, some of which obviously qualify-
dynamics, in such a way that the two concepts are deeply related”. ing as “natural”, as, for instance Levy flights. Thus, the burden of
Their review draws particular attention to numerous instances in proof of attributing observed fractals to nonlinear dynamics lies
nature where attractor basin boundaries in dissipative (open) sys- on identifying the fractal boundaries or the critical phase transition
tems display fractal behavior. Gisiger’s (2001) comment is a propos: that gave rise to them. This subset of natural fractal must then be
“at one point, Bak (1996) considered SOC as universal, with scaling viewed as manifestation of, and a consequence of, the particular
as consequence; it appears, however, that the balance of evidence dynamic regime from which they originated.
shifted the question: why is there scale invariance in Nature? to the
question: is Nature critical?” the complexIty matchIng effect (cme)
For constructing theories that deal with problems that have The issue under consideration is the communication among com-
multiple scales, the renormalization group (RNG) offers a general plex systems generating fractal signatures. The starting point is the
method. In Physics, the most frequently studied situation is “percola- evidence presented in Section 1.4 that the EEG time series can be
tion transition” for which Newman (2005) offers a detailed account identified as a (non-ergodic) non-Poisson renewal (NPR) process,
of the origin of power-law scaling: the cumulative distribution of reflecting strong deviation from exponential decay. A brief account
cluster sizes forms at the critical point a power-law distribution. of CME will suffice at this point since a comprehensive overview of
Percolation transition is a special case under the closely intercon- the underlying principle of CME is available in West et al. (2008).
nected family of RNG and coarse graining that entails power-law dis- CME is concerned with the conditions under which one complex
tributions as a source of natural fractals (see Fractals and Criticality network responds to a perturbation by a second complex network:
of Brain States). Coarse graining allows one to determine whether Consider a NPR network with a power-law index < 2 as measure
the phenomenon under investigation has universality, apart from of its complexity, and apply a random signal as perturbation: this
scaling: Universality implies that macroscopic properties of a system is in essence comparable to the condition of aperiodic Statistic
are independent of the system’s particular microscopic configura- Resonance (Gammaitoni et al., 1998). Allegrini et al. (2006a,b) then
tion. The particular values determined for a given instantiation of generalized the conditions by applying as perturbation another
the system are then not significant, apart from showing that the complex network which also satisfies the NPR condition with
system scales: the theoretical foundations are extensively discussed power-I law index < 2. Under these conditions, it can be shown
by Essam (1980) and by Stauffer and Aharony (1991/1994). that the effect of the perturbation is maximal if the power-law
For Neuroscience, Kozma et al. (2005) illustrated the potential indices of the interacting systems are equal. The claim is that CME,
relevance of percolation for phase transitions in models of neural as illustrated in the foregoing, applies to a large class of NPRs such
populations with mixed local and global interactions, and (Werner, as, for instance, return times for random walks, either in regular
2009b,c) proposed Renormalization Group Transformation as a lattices or in complex networks.
general principle to account for functional relations between levels
of neural organization. Since fractals will in both situations natu- lInkIng actIons across many scales?
rally arise, it is pertinent to ask what their role could be. West et al. Even if Nature’s conservative adherence to fractals is a valid argu-
(2008) and Allegrini et al. (2006a,b) attribute to them a complexity ment in support of their functional significance, we are still in the
matching function which will be the subject of review and com- dark as to what that function may be. Emphasizing the feature of
ments in the Section “Complexity matching effect”. self-similarity, we can turn to types of functions which could ben-
efit from stacking extended ranges of space and/or time scales into
fractals In actIon one compact format; moreover, there is no privileged time scale in
Having reached the end of the largely phenomenological surveys power-law dynamics. Sensory adaptation as a change over time in
of fractal scaling and associated manifestations of fractality at the the responsiveness of the sensory system to a constant stimulus is
conventionally distinguished levels of organization and function a situation of this kind (Wark et al., 2008). Adaptation with power-
of nervous systems, it appears inescapable to recall the title of law dependence and multiple time scales has been demonstrated
Barnsley’s (1993) book “Fractals everywhere”. The apparent preva- in nervous systems under many different conditions. Examples
lence in the nervous system is matched by the numerous manifesta- come from such diverse sources as electrosensory afferent nerve
tion in physiological systems generally (West and Deering, 1995). Is fibers in weakly electric fish (Xu et al., 1996), spider mechanore-
the ubiquity a sign of triviality, or the result of a generic and fun- ceptor neurons (French and Torkkeli, 2008). The auditory sensory
damental principle of Nature? If that is the case in Biology at least, memory which is thought to encode stimuli on multiple time scales
then Nature seems to adhere to it with remarkable conservatism (Ulanovsky et al., 2004). Fairhall et al. (2001a,b) direct attention
as, for instance, the monographs of Dewey (1999) for Molecular to the speed with which the dynamics of a neural code is opti-
Biophysics and of Seuront (2010) in Ecology attest. mized, even when the statistical properties of the stimuli themselves
As documented by Aguirre et al. (2009), and is referenced in evolve dynamically over a wide range of timescales, from tens of
several sections of this review: the intimate relation between fractals milliseconds to minutes. The source of 1/f fluctuations in human
and nonlinear dynamics in dissipative systems is apparent and well sensorimotor coordination tasks is presumably attributable to the
substantiated. Hence the seemingly disproportionate attention paid multiple time scale activities of neural centers (Ding et al., 2001).
to phase transitions and criticality in Sections “Peripheral nervous In visual psychophysics, adaptation to contrast follows power-law
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 18
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
dynamics (Rose and Lowe, 1982) as does the tilt aftereffect (Greenlee Fusi et al. (2005) applied the principle of power-law forgetting
and Mangussen, 1987). For fractional-order dynamics in adapta- of adaptation to a cascade model for regulating the plasticity
tion, see: Lundstrom et al. (2008) and Anastasio (1994) in Section of synapses as the basis of stored memories. Note that memory
“Processes that generate power-law distributions”. strength is here represented as synaptic plasticity, not as synaptic
This fragmentary compilation of diverse observations is intended strength, as is commonly the case. Each synapse model has two
to illustrate the propensity of various neural structures to respond levels of synaptic strength, weak and strong. Associated with each
swiftly to a range of temporal and/or spatial parameters: the image strength is a cascade of states (in one of their models, five). The
of a set of strings resonating to specific frequencies comes to mind. cascades introduce a range of probabilities for transition between
Could self-similar fractal structures, having stored a repertoire of weak and strong levels of synaptic plasticity. A complicated heu-
responses, each specific for a particular range of temporal and/ ristics is built into the model design that enables combinations
or spatial stimulus parameters, fulfill this function? On formal of states of plasticity, for instance: states with low probability are
grounds, Thorson and Biederman-Thorson (1974) attributed paired up with labile states, and conversely, etc. The important
sensory adaptation to distributed relaxation processes, based on point is that a high level of memory storage with long retention
non-uniformities of local “efficacy” in the transduction process times significantly outperforms other model designs. In a model of
at peripheral receptors. Might this “local non-uniformity” be the learning visuomotor associations that are reversed unpredictably
expression of a self-similar functionality of receptors? from time to time, synaptic modification occurring on multiple
Generically, models of adaptation integrate the response of a sys- time scales along the same principles can be the basis for flexible
tem and feed the integrated signal back to curtail that response. The behavior; the model predictions were validated with experimental
type of adaptation is determined by the properties of the integrator. data (Fusi et al., 2007). For the possibility of cascading structures
Applying this principle, Drew and Abbott (2006) examined a form for EEG phase and amplitude, see Section “Fractals and criticality
of power-law integration with the result that the suppressive effect of brain states”, and references to Lakatos et al. (l.c.), He et al. (l.c.),
of repeated stimuli on successive responses are accumulated with and Mono et al. (l.c.).
power-law decline. In distinction from other forms of integration It appears then, that the principle of shifting between different
(e.g.: exponential), power-law integration has the notable feature of scales on demand manifests itself in many different forms, and on
scale-invariance and, in their simulations, replicated the published different levels of neural organization. Under natural conditions,
data of Xu et al. (1996), cited in the previous paragraph. On the same are the required exponential functions for power-law integration
principle, these investigators also implemented power-law adaption models of self-similar structures?
within a standard spiking neuron model, except for approximat-
ing the time dependence of the power-law adaptation integral for summary and fInal thoughts
computational efficiency by a series exponentials. This principle The assembly of largely phenomenological data was presented to
has been successfully applied by Hausdorff and Peng (1996) and support the claim that fractal processes and properties occur at
is the basis of Anderson’s (2001) assertion of the power-law being many and diverse levels of neural organizations and performance,
an emergent function: it amounts to linking the non-interacting and are functionally relevant. Several issues that must not glossed
exponential processes to a cascade which reproduces the power-law over lightly needed discussion in several places: e.g. fractality as such
forgetting in power-law integration. The adaptation obtained of is not an obligatory indicator of SOC; whether non-conservative
the integrate-and-fire model with adaptation current obtained by systems may be limited to a state of quasi-criticality instead of being
a cascade of exponential processes matched perfectly that obtained candidates for full criticality (see Peripheral nervous system); and
by injecting adaptation currents to the model neurons. what the origin of natural fractals may be, including their standing
The implications of this successful approach are considerable: in a Maximum Entropy framework (Frank, 2009; see “Processes
the Dell and Abbott results suggest that power-law adaptation can that generate power-law distributions”). In Sections “Fractals and
be instantiated by a cascade of a large number of processes with criticality of brain states” and “Significance of brain criticality”, the
ordinary exponential dynamics, covering a wide range of time tantalizing question was addressed that discourse on criticality may
constants. The cascaded model design lets the temporal stimulus in different contexts refer to different dynamical regimes. However,
dynamics set the appropriate adaptation dynamics, in virtue of the whichever stance is taken, the close relation of fractals with critical
numerous exponential processes with different time scales. They dynamics is beyond dispute. Despite the evidence secured by Plenz
present a telling argument in support of the biological significance and Chialvo (l.c.) in specially targeted experiments, critical dynam-
of this mechanism of adaptation: natural stimuli vary unpredict- ics is still by some investigators called in question at the mesoscopic
ably over a wide of time scales; instead keeping the recovery time level, but the evidence for its importance and essential role at the
after excitation constant, power-law adaptation allows the temporal macroscopic domain is uncontroversial and solid.
statistics of the stimuli themselves to determine the dynamics of Among the virtues of brain criticality in the sense discussed
adaptation. The work of Toib et al. (1998) and Gilboa et al. (2005) in Section “Significance of brain criticality”, there is one that has
referred to in Section “Ion channels” are additional examples of attracted attention for the longest time: it is the ability for rapid
“multiscale computing” involving fractals. changes of state. Note that the following considerations pertain
Are we prepared to envision a general principle of self-organizing to the Phase transition in the framework of Critical Theory, as
control structures for multiscale behavior, extracting the statistics a universal mechanism for rapid switching between different
of an unpredictable environment by way of power-law integration? cooperative neuron collectives. Less attention received the fact,
The papers cited in the next paragraph speak to this question. well established in Physics, that the system presents at the critical
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 19
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
transition qualitatively new properties, requiring new macroscopic collection is closest to the natural brain networks? Suggestions
descriptors (for more details: Werner, 2009c). The important fea- abound, but tantalizing questions remain still open to further
ture of the organization following the phase transition is to form inquiry. An architecture that does justice to self-similarity under
new objects with distinct properties: a new Ontology. In Physics, renormalization appears attractive as it might unite the dynamics
transitions between ferro- and para-magnetism are the prototypical of network topology in one common mechanism, as I suggest in
example. We need to ask: What, if any, is the manifestation of onto- that Section.
logical novelty in this form of brain phase transition? Customarily, Commenting on the wealth of existing data on anatomical and
one tends to think in terms of integration and differentiation, functional cortical networks organization may seem like “carrying
brought about by the change in correlation patterns of the sys- coals to Newcastle”, notably in view of the comprehensive review
tem components, with nearby clusters functioning in synchrony. prepared by Bullmore and Sporns (2009). Nevertheless, a few gen-
However, this way of looking at the nature of the state change fails eral considerations may be of some relevance. It is a commonplace
to meet the requirement for qualitative (ontological) novelty, as observation that Nature loves Hierarchies: in the influential article
the analogy with Physics would require. In the paradigmatic cases “Architecture of Complexity”, Simon (1962) gave plausible reasons
in Physics, new aggregations are being formed on phase transition for this apparent love affair. A few years later, in a discussion of
which display novel properties at a macroscopic level of descrip- complex systems, Simon (1973) observed that the term “hierar-
tion. What can we assume to happen in brain on phase transition? chy” has taken a somewhat generalized meaning, divorced from its
The obvious answer is: partitioning into neural assemblies with original denotation in human organizations of a vertical author-
fractal properties. This is of course merely analogous to the fractal ity structure. He there contended that in application to complex
patterns formed at phase transition in physical systems. But here is systems, “Hierarchy” has come to denote a set of Chinese Boxes of
an essential difference between the systems studied in Physics and a particular kind, usually consisting of their recursion. But then,
the brain: Take the ferro-paramagnetic phase transition again as these Chinese Box hierarchies come in variants of one form or
example, it consist merely in a change of spin orientation of the another of ordering, e.g. in the partial ordering of trees. Finally,
elementary components. But in the case of brain, the elementary in the 3rd edition of “The Sciences of the Artifical”, Simon (1996)
components are reactive neurons which have the potential of enter- settled on applying the term “Hierarchy” in a much broader sense,
ing into aggregations with functional interactions. Model studies of referring to all complex systems that are analyzable into successive
de Arcangelis and Herrmann (2010) with self-organizing neuronal sets of subsystems: this entails partitioning in conjunction with
networks show that avalanches formed at phase transition can learn the relations that hold among the subsets (l.c., p. 197). For this
complex rules on the basis of a collective process. Under appropriate historical and a variety of other reasons, there are now diverse
conditions, the learning dynamics is universal inasmuch as even (and sometimes ambiguous) senses in current use by investiga-
complex rules can be acquired. Recalling Section “Symbol process- tors reporting their finding in anatomical, fMRI and model studies
ing and fractals”, the relation of the state dynamics of these neural when speaking of hierarchical order. A precise definition for fitting
networks to IFSs and fractal attractors would constitute a notable a hierarchical structure to the topology of a graph is proposed by
case of the synergism of fractal and complex system dynamics. Clauset et al. (2006).
Returning now to the “other” of critical brain dynamics which The network and graph-theoretical community has developed
views brain criticality as generic and persistent state: do any of its own criteria: modularity has been introduced a measure of a
these or other implications of ontological import pertain to state networks decomposability, for instance into community structures
transitions in this dynamic regime? (Newman and Girvan, 2004), possibly at different hierarchical lev-
Re-visiting the work of Beggs and Plenz (see The mesoscopic els, allowing one to “zoom in and out” for finding communities
level) and putting it bluntly: phase transition (viewed in the frame- on different levels; this was discussed in detail by Meunier et al.
work of Critical Theory) would endow avalanches with novel (l.c.). Mucha et al. (2009) seek to address this same objective in a
capacities that are not analytically predictable from the original new framework that encompasses coupling of individual networks
state of the system. Generalizing from this, it is evident that pursu- via links connecting nodes of one with nodes of another network
ing these and related directions in targeted studies of the aftermath at multiple scales, thus allowing for some nesting which escapes
of brain phase transitions is imperative for seeking to gain a full the Newman–Girvan method, but is accessible by the approach of
appreciation of the functional novelties it may create. Whether Sales-Pardo et al. (2007). Keeping these issues in mind is, I sug-
such studies will show a way of bridging the ultimate barrier of the gest, of importance in the definitive evaluation of many of the
epistemic cut (Pattee, 2001) that separates the domain of integrable reports of fMRI data on cortical functional organization: while
Physics from the domain of symbolic structures remains to be seen: describing modularity, they may not be able to capture nesting
but this issue is, I submit, at the core of the apparent object–subject among modules, due to methodological limitations. Yet, it is the
(brain–mind) duality. nesting of the kind that Simon refers to as “Russian doll” (see also
The limited sample of recent publication on network models the Russian Matryoshka dolls of Agnati, l.c.), where the pressing
cited in Section “Fractals in brain networks” is but a fraction of question of self-similarity arises: It has some plausibility in view of
the large number of combinations and permutations of network Sporns’s (2006) suggestive evidence for cortical connection patterns
design parameters that are conceivable: on the one hand, ranging of fractal and self-similar nature. In different contexts, self-similar
from the of small-world to scale-free works with various degree community structures were noted by Guimera et al. (2003) in a net-
distributions, on other hand each type being hierarchical, modular work of human interactions, and nesting of theta- and beta gamma
with and without hubs, and fractal. Which one from among this oscillations was noted by Gireesh and Plenz (2008) in neuronal
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 20
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
avalanches of developing cortical layers 2/3. Efforts continue to seek Notwithstanding this disappointing state of affairs, one more
consensus on criteria for modules, communities, and subgraphs speculations may perhaps be permitted: recall the amazing discov-
in networks, and the methodology for their delineation (see for ery from Section “Linking across many scales of space and time”:
instance: Shalizi et al., 2006; Lambiotte et al., 2009, 2010). there, power-law forgetting of adaptation and synaptic modifica-
The foregoing discussion was merely intended to draw atten- tion on multiple time scales were discussed as principles for flexible
tion to some of the problems involved in attempts to characterize behavior. Recall also the evidence from Section “Ion channels” for
dynamic hierarchies of a system that consists of multiple levels multiscale computing as basis cooperative fractal channel kinetics.
of organization, having dynamics within and between the enti- The essential principle in these cases is the capacity of having avail-
ties described at each of the different levels (Lenaerts et al., 2005). able the responsiveness, on demand, to a large range of unpredict-
Hierarchical nesting would presumably qualify brain dynamics able external contingencies of a certain category, varying in one
as a dynamic hierarchy. This is consonant with the recent find- parameter: e.g., the capacity for selecting the level of adaptation
ings of Honey et al. (2009) of indirect functional connectivity, appropriate to a wide range of temporal patterns and stimulus
not accounted for by structural connections, and the variability intensity. In the cases referred to, it amounted to scale shifting as
of resting-state functional connectivity across scanning sessions required, involving fractality and self-similarity of control struc-
and model runs. As regards Criticality, it would then be impera- tures. If Sporns’s evidence for cortical fractality and self-similarity
tive to examine the properties of phase transitions in dynamically holds up, I can now re-visit the claim I made in the Introduction: “is
hierarchic systems. In one recent study of a kinetic Ising model, there a natural capacity for unpacking interactions between differ-
it turned out that the universality class is consistent with the two- ent levels of a fractal object or process, responsive to circumstances
dimensional equilibrium Ising model (Rikvold et al., 1999). and conditions, which eludes us entirely? If it existed, fractals would
Sadly, despite the resourceful and imaginative studies undertaken surely be a most extraordinary design principle for operational
by many investigators during the past decade, we are still some dis- economy in complex systems.”
tance away from understanding the structural and functional basis To which I now add: if this natural capacity embodies principles
of cortical dynamics; let alone the cortical–subcortical dynamics of power-law integration and cascading, similar to those identified
that, according to the Global Workspace Hypothesis (Baars, 1988) for adaptation and fractal kinetics, we may come to comprehend at
is now generally considered decisive for cognitive functions. least some aspects of the extraordinary functionality of the cortex.
references Aguirre, J., Viana, R. L., and Sanjuan, Alvarez-Lacalle, E., Dorow, B., Eckmann, detection of transients in the electro-
Abbott, L. F., and Rohrkemper, R. (2007). M. A. F. (2009). Fractal structures in J.-P., and Moses, E. (2006). Hierarchical encephalogram. Electroencephalogr.
A simple growth model constructs nonlinear dynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys. structures induce long-range dynami- Clin. Neurophysiol. 75, 296–305.
critical avalanche networks. Prog. 81, 333–386. cal correlations in written texts. Proc. Ashkenazy, Y., Hausdorff, J. M., Ivanov,
Brain Res. 165, 13–19. Albert, R., and Barabasi, A. (2002). Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 103, 7956–7961. P. Ch., and Stanley, E. (2002). A sto-
Abeles, M. (1991). Corticonics: Neural Statistical mechanics of complex net- Anastasio, T. J. (1994). The fraction- chastic model of human gait dynam-
Circuits of the Cerebral Cortex. works. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47–97. al-order dynamics of brainstem ics. Physica A 316, 662–670.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Allefeld, C., Atmanspacher, H., and vestiblo-oculomotor neurons. Biol. Baars, B. J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of
Press. Wackermann, J. (2009). Mental Cybern. 72, 69–79. Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge
Abry, P. (2003). Scaling and Wavelets: an states as macrostates emerging from Andersen, C. M. (2000). From molecules University Press.
introductory Walk. Lect. Notes Phys. brain electrical dynamics. Chaos 19, to mind: how vertically convergent Babloyantz, A. (1986). “Evidence of cha-
621, 34–60. 015102. fractal time fluctuations unify cogni- otic dynamics of brain activity dur-
Achard, S., Bassett, D. S., Meyer- Allegrini, P., Bellazzini, J., Bramanti, G., tion and emotion. Conscious. Emot. 1, ing the sleep cycle,” in Dimensions
Lindenberg, A., and Bullmore, E. Ignaccolo, M., Grigolini, P., and Yang, J. 193–226. and Entropies in Chaotic Systems –
(2008). Fractal connectivity of long- (2002). Scaling breakdown: a signature Andersen, C. M., Lowen, S. B., and quantification of complex behavior,
memory networks. Phys. Rev. E 77, of aging. Phys. Rev. E 66, 015101. Renshaw, P. F. (2006). Emotional task- ed. G. Mayer-Kress (Berlin: Springer),
036104. Allegrini, P., Bologna, M., Grigolini, P., dependent low-frequency fluctuations 114–122.
Achard, S., Salvador, R., Whicher, B., and West, B. J. (2006a). Response of and methylphenidate: wavelet scal- Baddeley, R., Abbott, L. F., Booth, M. C. A.,
Suckling, J., and Bullmore, E. (2006). A complex systems to complex pertur- ing analysis of 1/f-type fluctuations Sengpiel, F., Freeman, T., Wakeman, E.
resilient, low-frequency, small-world bations: the complexity matching in fMRI of the cerebellar vermis. J. A., and Rolls, E. T. (1997). Responses
human brain functional network with effect. arXiv:cond-mat/0612303v1. Neurosci. Methods 151, 52–61. of neurons in primary and inferior
highly connected association cortical Allegrini, P., Bologna, M., Grigolini, P., Anderson, R. B. (2001). The power-law as temporal visual cortices to natural
hubs. J. Neurosci. 26, 63–72. and Lukovic, M. (2006b). Response an emergent property. Mem. Cognit. scenes. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B, 264,
Agnati, L. F., Baluska, F., Barlow, P. W., of complex systems to complex per- 29, 1061–1068. 1775–1783.
and Guidolin, D. (2009). Mosaic, turbations: complexity matching. Anteneodo, C., and Chialvo, D. R. (2009). Bak, P. (1996). How Nature works: the
self-similarity logic, and biological arXiv:cond-mat/0008341v1. Unraveling the fluctuations of animal Science of self-organized criticality. New
attraction. Commun. Integr. Biol. 2, Allegrini, P., Menicucci, D., Bedini, R., motor activity. Chaos 19, 1 York: Springer.
552–563. Fronzoni, L., Gemignani, A., Grigolini, Antoniou, N. G., Contoyiannis, Y. F., and Bak, P., and Paczuski, M. (1995).
Agnati, L. F., Santarossa, L., Genedani, P., West, B. J., and Paradisi, P. (2008). Diakonos, F. K. (2000). Fractal geom- Complexity, contingency, and criti-
S., Canela, E. I., Leo, G., Franco, R., Spontaneous brain activity as a etry of critical systems. Phys. Rev. E, cality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92,
Woofs, A., Lluis, C., Ferre, S., Fuxe, source of perfect 1/f noise. PNAS 98, 62, 3. 6689–6696.
K. (2004) “On the nested hierarchical 694–699. Arenas, A., Diaz-Guilera, A., Kurths, J., Bak, P., Tang, C., and Wiesenfeld, K.
organization of CNS: basic character- Altmann, E. G., Pierrehumbert, J. B., and Moreno, Y., and Zhou, C. (2008). (1987). Self-organized criticality: an
istics of neuronal molecular organi- Motter, A. E. (2009). Beyond word Synchronization in complex networks. explanation of 1/f noise. Phys. Rev.
zation,” in Cortical Dynamics LNCS frequency: bursts, lulls, and scaling in Phys. Rep. 469, 93–153. Lett. 59, 381–384.
3146 (ed. P. Erdi), 24–54, Springer, the temporal distributions of words. Arle, J. E., and Simon, R. H. (1990). An Baliki, M. N., Geha, P. Y., Apkarian, A.
Berlin. arXiv:0901.2349v1. application of fractal dimension to the V., and Chialvo, D. R. (2008). Beyond
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 21
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
feeling: chronic pain hurts the brain, fractal analysis of cell morphology. J. tion effects in neural networks. Phys. Changizi, M. A. (2001a). Principles under-
disrupting the default-mode network Neurosci. Res. 65, 439–445. Rev. E 75, 051919. lying mammalian neocortical scaling.
dynamics. J. Neurosci. 28, 1398–1403. Bhattacharya, J., Edwards, J., Mamelak, Bullmore, E., Fadili, J., Maxim, V., Sendur, Biol. Cybern. 84, 207–215.
Barabasi, A-L. (2005), The origin of bursts A. N., and Schuman, E. M. (2005). L., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., Brammer, Changizi, M. A. (2001b) Universal scal-
and heavy tails in human dynamics. Long-range temporal correlations in M., and Breakspear, M. (2004). ing laws for hierarchical complexity
Nature 435, 207–211. the spontaneous spiking of neurons Wavelets and functional magnetic in languages, organisms, behaviors
Barabási, A. L., and Albert, R. (1999). in the hippocampal-amygdala com- resonance imaging of the human and other combinatorial systems. J.
Emergence of scaling in random net- plex of humans. Neuroscience 131, brain. Neuroimage 23, S234–S249. Theoret. Biol. 211, 277–295.
works. Science 286, 509–512. 547–555. Bullmore, E., Long, C., Suckling, J., Fadili, Changizi, M. A. (2003). The Brain from
Barnes, A., Bullmore, E. T., and Suckling, Bhattacharya, J., and Petsche, H. (2001). J., Calvert, G., Zelaya, F., Carpenter, T. 25,000 Feet. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
J. (2009). Endogenous human brain Universality in the brain while listen- A., and Brammer, M. (2001). Colored Chen, D., Wu, S., Guo, A., and Yang, Z.
dynamics recover slowly following ing to music. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B, 268, noise and computational inference in R. (1995). Self-organized criticality
cognitive effort. PLoS One 4, e6626. 2423–2433. neurophysiological (fMRI) time series in a cellular automaton model of
Barnsley, M. F. (1993). Fractals Everywhere. (2005). Fluorescence intermittency and wavelet domains. Hum. Brain rons. J. Physics A 28, 5177–5182.
New York: Academic Press. in blinking quantum dots: renewal Mapp. 12, 61–78. Chen, Y., Ding, M., and Kelso, J. A. S.
Barnsley, M. F., and Demko, S. (1985). or slow modulation? J. Chem. Phys. Bullmore, E., and Sporns, O. (2009). (1997). Long memory processes (1/
Iterated function systems and the 123, 174704. Complex brain networks: graph fα type) in human coordination. Phys.
global construction of fractals. Proc. Bianco, S., Ignaccolo, M., Rider, M. S., theoretical analysis of structural and Rev. Lett. 79, 4501–4504.
R. Soc. Lond. A, 399, 243–275. Ross, M. J., Winsor, P., and Grigolini, functional systems. Nature Reviews Chialvo, D. R. (2004). Critical brain net-
Barnsley, M. F., Elton, J. H., and Hardin, D. P. (2007). Brain, music, and non- Neurosci. 10, 186–198. works. Physica A 340, 756–765.
P. (1989). Recurrent iterated function Poisson renewal process. Phys. Rev. E, Busch, N. A., Dubois, J., and Van Rullen, Chialvo, D. R. (2006). Are our senses criti-
systems. Constr. Approx. 5, 3–31. 75, 061911. R. (2009). The phase of ongoing EEG cal? Nat. Phys. 2, 301–302.
Bartumeus, F. (2007). Levy processes in Bieberich, E. (2002). Recurrent fractal oscillations predicts visual perception. Chialvo, D. R., Balenzuela, P., and Fraiman,
animal movement: an evolutionary neural networks: a strategy for the J. Neurosci. 29, 7869–7876. D. (2008). The brain: what is critical
hypothesis. Fractals 15, 151–162. exchange of local and global infor- Callaway, E. M. (2002). Cell type specifi- about it? Conf. Proc. Am. Inst. Phys.
Bassett, D. S., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Achard, mation processing in the brain. city of local cortical connections. J. 1028, 28–45.
S., Duke, T., and Bullmore, E. (2006). BioSystems 66, 145–164. Neurocytol. 31, 231–237. Clauset, A., Moore, C., and Newman, M.
Adaptive reconfiguration of fractal Blondel, V. D., Guillame, J-L., Lambiotte, Capurro, A., Diambra, L., Lorenzo, D., (2006). “Structural inference of hier-
small-world human brain functional R., and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast Macadar, O., Martin, M. T., Mostaccio, archies in networks,” in Proc. 23rd Int.
networks. PNAS, 103, 19518–19523. unfolding of communities in large C., Plastino, A., Perez, J., Rofman, E., Conf. Mach. Learn. Pittsburgh, PA.
Bassingthwaighte, J. B., Liebovitch, L. networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theory E Torres, M. E., and Velluti, J. (1999). Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R., and Newman, M.
S., and West, B. J. (1994). Fractal 1P10008. Human brain dynamics: the analysis E. J. (2009). Power-law distributions in
Physiology. New York: Oxford Bloom, J. L. (1969). Quantitative Aspects of of EEG signals with Tsallis information empirical data. arXiv:0706.1062v2.
University Press. Neural Activity in the Cerebral Cortex measure. Physica A 265, 235–254. Cluff, T., and Balasubramaniam, R.
Bedard, C., Kroeger, H., and Destexhe, A. of the Rabbit. Ph.D. thesis, Amsterdam Capurro, A., Diambra, L., Lorenzo, D., (2009). Motor learning characterized
(2006a). Model of low-pass filter of University, Netherlands. Macadar, O., Martin, M. T., Mostaccio, by changing levy distributions. PLoS
Phys. Rev. E 73, 051911. Nature’s way of optimizing. Artif. M. E., and Velluti, J. (1998). Tsallis pone.0005998.
Bedard, C., Kroeger, H., and Destexhe, Intell. 119, 275–286. entropy and cortical dynamics: the Collins, J. J., and De Luca, C. J. (1994).
A. (2006b). Does the 1/f frequency Bonachela, J. A., and Munoz, M. A. (2009). analysis of EEG signals. Physica A Random walking during quiet stand-
scaling of brain signals reflect self- Self-organization without conserva- 257, 149–155. ing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 764–767.
organized critical states? Phys. Rev. tion: true or just apparent scale invari- Caserta, F., Eldred, W. D., Fernandez, Copelli, M., Roque, A. C., Oliviera, R. F.,
Lett. 97, 118102. ance? J. Stat. Mech. 9, 1–37. E., Hausman, R. E., Stanford, L. R., and Kinouchi, O. (2002). Physics of
Beggs, J. M. (2007). How to build a critical Boon, J. P., and Decroly, O. (1995). Bulderev, S. V., Schwarzer, S., and psychophysics: Stevens and Weber-
mind. Nat. Phys. 3, 834–835. Dynamical systems theory for music Stanley, H. E. (1995). Determination Fechner laws and transfer functions
Beggs, J. M. (2008). The criticality hypoth- dynamics. Chaos 5, 501–508. of fractal dimension of physiologi- of excitable media. Phys. Rev. E, 65,
esis: how local cortical networks might Bornholdt, S., and Ebel, H. (2001). World cally characterized neurons in two and 060901.
optimize information processing. Phil. wide web scaling exponent from three dimensions. J. Neurosci. Methods Corner, M. A., van Pelt, J., Wolters, P.
Trans. R. Soc. A 366, 329–343. Simon’s 1955 model. Phys. Rev. E, 64, 56, 133–144. S., Baker, R. E., and Nuytinck, R.
Beggs, J. M., and Plenz, D. (2003). Neuronal 0351004. Caserta, F., Stanley, H. E., Eldred, W. D., H. (2002). Physiological effects of
avalanches in neocortical circuits. J. Breskin, I., Soriano, J., Moses, E., and Daccord, G., Hausman, R. E., and sustained blockade of excitatory
Neurosci. 23, 11167–11177. Tlusty, T. (2006). Percolation in liv- Nittman, J. (1990). Physical mecha- tynsotic transmission on sponta-
Beggs, J. M., and Plenz, D. (2004). ing neural networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. nisms underlying neurite outgrowth: neously active developing neuro-
Neuronal avalanches are diverse and 97, 188102. a quantitative analysis of neuronal nal networks – an inquiry into the
precise activity patterns that are stable Bressloff, P. C., and Stark, J. (1992). shape. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 95–98. reciprocal linkage between intrinsic
for many hours in cortical slice cul- Analysis of associative reinforcement Cateau, H., and Reyes, A. D. (2006). biorhythms and neuroplasticity in
tures. J. Neurosci. 24, 5216–5229. learning in neural networks using Relation between single neuron and early ontogeny. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Bel, G., and Barkai, E. (2005). Weak ergo- iterated function systems. IEEE Trans. population spiking statistics and Rev. 26, 127–185.
dicity breaking in the continuous- Man Cybern. 22, 1348–1360. effects on network activity. Phys. Rev. Correll, J. (2008). 1/f Noise and effort on
time random walk. Phys. Rev. Lett. Buiatti, M., Papo, D., Baudonniere, P.-M., Lett. 96, 058101. implicit measures of bias. J. Pers. Soc.
94, 240602. and Vreeswijk, C. V. (2007). Feedback Cattuto, C., Loreto, V., and Servedio, Psychol. 94, 48–59.
Beran, J. (1994). Statistics for Long-Memory modulates the temporal scale-free V. D. P. (2006). A Yule-Simon proc- Cosenza, M. G., and Kapral, R. (1992).
Processes. New York: Chapman & dynamics of brain electrical activity in ess with memory. arXiv:cond- Coupled maps on fractal lattices. Phys.
Hall. a hypothesis testing task. Neuroscience mat/0608672v1. Rev. A. 46, 1850–1858.
Bernard, F., Bossu, J-L., and Gaillard, S. 146, 1400–1412. Cessac, B. (2004). Some fractal aspects Costa, M. E., Sigman, M., and Bonomo,
(2001). Identification of living oli- Buice, M. A., and Cowan, J. D. (2007). of self-organized criticality. F. (2009). Scale-invariant transition
godendrocyte developmental stages by Field-theoretic approach to fluctua- arXiv:nlin/0409004v1. probabilities in free word association
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 22
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
trajectories. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 3, Eguiluz, V. M., Chialvo, D. R., Cecchi, G. A, Feng, J., and Zhang, P. (2001). Behavior Gilboa, G., Chen, R., and Brenner, N.
da Silva, L., Papa, A. R. R., and de Souza, Scale-free brain functional networks. Huxley models with correlated inputs. time-scale dynamics in a single-neuron
A. M. C. (1998). Criticality in a sim- Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 018102. Phys.Rev. E, 63, 051902. model. J. Neurosci. 25, 6479–6489.
ple model for brain functioning. Phys. Eke, A., Herman, P., Kocsis, L., and Kozak, Fisher, M. E. (1998). Renormalization Gilden, D. J. (1997). Fluctuations in the
Lett. A, 242, 343–348. L. R. (2002). Fractal characterization of group theory: its basis and formula- time required for elementary deci-
Davidsen, L., and Schuster, H. G. (2002). complexity in temporal physiological tion in statistical physics. Rev. Mod. sions. Psychol. Sci. 8, 296–301.
Simple model for 1/f noise. Phys. Rev. signals. Physiol. Meas. 23, R1–R38. Phys. 70, 653–681. Gilden, D. L. (2001). Cognitive emissions
E. 65, 026120. El Boustani, S., and Destexhe, A. (2009). Fodor, J. (1975). Language of Thought. of 1/f noise. Psychol. Rev. 108, 33–56.
de Arcangelis, L., and Herrmann, H. Does brain activity tem from high- Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Gireesh, E. D., and Plenz, D. (2008).
J. (2010). Learning as a phenom- dimensional chaotic dynamics? Press. Neuronal avalanches organize as
enon occurring in a critical state. Evidence from the human electro- Fox, M. D., and Raichle, M. E. (2007). nested theta- and beta/gamma oscil-
arXiv:1003.1200v1 [q-biol.NC]. encephalogram, cat cerebral cortex Spontaneous fluctuations in brain lations during development of cortical
de Arcangelis, L., Perrone-Capano, C., and and artificial neuronal networks. activity observed with functional layer 2/3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
Herrmann, H. J. (2006). Self-organized arXiv:0904:4217v1 [nlin.CD]. magnetic imaging. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 105, 7576–7581.
criticality for brain plasticity. Phys. Rev. El Boustani, S. E., Marre, O., Behuret, S., 8, 701–711. Gisiger, T. (2001). Scale invariance in
Lett. 96, 028107. Baudot, P., Yger, P., Bal, T., Destexhe, A., Fraiman, D., Balenzuela, P., Foss, J., biology: coincidence or footprint of
de Carvalho, J. X., and Prado, C. P. C. and Fregnac, Y. (2009). Network-state and Chialvo, D. R. (2009). Ising-like a universal mechanism? Biol. Rev. 76,
(2000). Self-organized criticality in modulation of power-law frequency- dynamics in large-scale functional 161–209.
the Olami-Feder-Christensen model. scaling in visual cortical neurons. brain networks. Phys. Rev. E, 79, Giugliano, M., Darbon, P., Arsiero, M.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4006–4009. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000519. 061922. Luescher, H. R., and Streit, J. (2004).
Quantal components of the end El Boustani, S., Pospischil, M., Rudolph- terns of Nature. J. Evol. Biol. 22, and network activity in dissociated
plate potential. J. Physiol. (Lond.) Lilith, M., and Destexhe, A. (2007). 1563–1585. cultures of neocortex. J. Neurophysiol.
124, 560–573. Activated cortical states: experiments, Freeman, W. J. (2005). A field-theoretic 92, 977–996.
Delignieres, D., Ramdani, S., Lemoine, analyses and models. J. Physiol. (Paris) approach to understanding scale-free Gong, P., Nikolaev, A. R., and Leeuwen,
L., Torre, K., Fortes, M., and Ninot, 101, 99–109. neocortical dynamics. Biol. Cybern. C. V. (2002). Scale-invariant fluctua-
G. (2006). Fractal analyses for ‘short’ Elman, J. L. (1995). “Language as a dynam- 92, 350–359. tions of the dynamical synchroniza-
time series: a re-assessment of clas- ical system,” in Mind as Motion, eds R. Freeman, W. J., Holmes, M. D., Burke, B. tion in human brain electrical activity.
sical methods. J Math. Psychol. 50, F. Port and T. Gelder (Cambridge, MA: C., and Vanhatalo, S. (2003). Spatial Neurosci. Lett. 336, 33–36.
525–544. MIT Press), 192–225. spectra of scalp EEG and EMG from Goychuk, I., and Hanggi, P. (2002).
De Los Rios, P., and Zhang, Y.-C. (1999). Erland, S., and Greenwood, P. E. (2007). awake humans. Clin. Neurophys. 114, Ion channel gating: a first-passage
Universal 1/f noise from dissipative Constructing 1/ωα noise from revers- 1053–1068. time analysis of the Kramers type.
self-organized criticality models. Phys. ible Markov chains. Phys. Rev. E, 76, Freeman, W. J., and Zhai, J. (2009). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99,
Rev. Lett. 82, 472–475. 031114. Simulated power spectrum density 3552–3556.
Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., and Steriade, Essam, J. W. (1980). Percolation theory. (PSD) of background electrocorti- Greenlee, M. W., and Magnussen, S.
M. (1999). Spatiotemporal analysis Rep. Progr. Phys. 43, 834–912. cogram (ECoG). Cogn. Neurodyn. 3, (1987). Saturation of the tilt after
of local field potentials and unit dis- Eurich, C. W., Herrmann, J. M., and 97–103. effect. Vision res. 27, 1041–1043.
charges in cat cerebral cortex natural Ernst, U. A. (2002). Finite size effects French, A. S., and Torkkeli, P. H. (2008). Griffin, L., West, D. J., and West, B. J.
wake and sleep states. J. Neurosci. 19, of avalanche dynamics. Phys. Rev. E The power-law of sensory adaptation: (2000). Random stride intervals with
4595–4608. 66:066137. simulation by a model of excitability memory. J. Biol. Phys. 26, 185–2000.
Dewey, T. G. (1999). Fractals in Molecular Evarts, E. V. (1967). “Unit activity in sleep in spider mechanoreceptor neurons. Grigolini, P., Aquino, G., Bologna, M.,
Biophysics. New York: Oxford and wakefulness,” in Neurosciences, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 36, 153–161. Lukovic, M., and West, B. J. (2009). A
University Press. Neurosciences Research Program, eds Fusi, S., Asaad, W. F., Miller, E. K., and theory of 1/f noise in human cogni-
Ding, M., Chen, Y., and Kelso, J. A. S. G. C. Quarton, T. Melnechuk, and F. Wang, X-J. (2007). A neural circuit tion. Physics A 388, 4192–4204.
(2001). Statistical Analysis of timing O. Schmitt (New York: Rockfeller model of flexible sensori-motor learn- Grinstein, G. (1995). “Generic scale invar-
errors. Brain Cogn. 48, 98–106. University Press), 545–556. ing and forgetting on multiple time iance and self-organized criticality,” in
Dorogovtsev, S. N., and Mendes, J. F. Expert, P., Lambiotte, R., Chialvo, D. R., scales. Neuron 54, 319–333. Scale Invariance, Interfaces and Non-
F. (2000). Evolution of networks Christensen, K., Jensen, H. J., Sharp, Fusi, S., Drew, P. J., and Abbott, L. F. (2005). Equilibrium Dynamics, eds A. McKane,
with aging of sites. Phys. Rev. E 62, D. J., and Turkheimer, F. (2010). Self- Cascade models of synaptically stored M. Droz, J. Vannimenus, and D. Wolf
1842–1845. similar correlation function in brain memories. Neuron 45, 599–611. (New York: Plenum Press), 261–293.
Dorogovtsev, S. N., and Mendes, J. F. F. resting state fMRI. arXiv:1003.3682v1 Gallos, L. K., Song, C., Havlin, S., and Grüneis, F. (2001). 1/f Noise, Intermittency
(2001). Evolution of networks. Adv. [q-biol.NC]. Makse, H. A. (2007), Scaling theory and Clustering Poisson Process. Fluct.
Phys. 51, 1079–1187. Fairhall, A. L., Lewen, G. D., Bialek, W., and of transport in complex biological Noise Lett. 1, R119–R130.
Dorogovtsev, S., and Mendes, J. (2003). van Steveninck, R. R. (2001a). Multiple networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. Grüneis, F., Nakao, M., Mizutani, Y., and
Evolution of Networks: From Biological timescales of adaptation in a neural 104, 7746–7751. Yamamoto, M, Meesmann, M., and
Nets to the Internet and WWW. New code. Adv. Neural Inform. Proc. Syst. Gammaitoni, L., Hanggi, P., Jung, P., and Musha, T. (1993). Further study on
York: Cambridge University Press. 13, 124–130. Marchesoni, F. (1998). Stochastic 1/f fluctuations observed in central
Drew, P. J., and Abbott, L. F. (2006). Models Fairhall, A. L., Lewen, G. D., Bialek, W., resonance. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, single neurons during REM sleep.
and properties of power-law adapta- and de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. R. 223–287. Biol. Cybern. 68, 193–198.
tion in neural systems. J. Neurophysiol. (2001b) Efficiency and ambiguity in Gefen, Y., Mandelbrot, B. B., and Aharony, Guimera, R., Danon, L., Diaz-Guilera,
96, 826–833. an adaptive neural code. Nature 412, A. (1980). Critical phenomena on F., Giralt, F., and Arenas, A. (2003).
Duff, E. P., Johnston, L. A., Xiong, J., Fox, 776–777. fractal lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, Self-similar community structures
P. T., Mareels, I., and Egan, G. F. (2008). Feinberg, T. E., Venneri, A., Simone, A. 855–858. in a network of Human interactions.
The power of spectral density analysis M., Fan, Y., and Northoff, G. (2010). Gerstein, G. L., and Mandelbrot, B. (1964). Phys.Rev. E 68, 065103R.
for mapping endogenous BOLD sig- The neuroanatomy of asomatogno- Random walk models for the spike Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet,
nal fluctuations. Hum. Brain Mapp. sia and somatoparaphrenia. J. Neurol. activity of a single neuron. Biophys. X., Meuli, R., Honey, C., Van Wedeen,
29, 778–790. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 81, 276–281. J. 4, 41–68. J., and Spornsd, O. (2008). Mapping
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 23
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
the structural core of human cerebral Honey, C. J., Kotter, R., Breakspear, M., Kaiser, M. (2007). Brain architecture: a dynamics of the brain,” in
journal.pbio.0060159. ture of the cerebral cortex shapes func- Trans. R. Soc. 365, 3033–3045. Consciousness, eds R. Kozma and L.
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics: An tional connectivity on multiple time Kaiser, M., Goerner, M., and Hilgetag, Perlovsky (Berlin: Springer), 39–59.
Introduction: Nonequilibrium Phase scales. PNAS, 104, 10240–10245. C. C. (2007). Criticality and spread- Kim, J. S., Goh, K. I., Kahng, B., and Kim,
Transitions and Self-organization in Honey, C. J., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., ing dynamics in hierarchical cluster D. (2007). Fractality and self-similarity
Physics, Chemistry and Biology. New Thiran, J. P., Meuli, R., and Hagmann, networks without inhibition. New J. in scale-free networks. New J. Phys.
York: Springer. P. (2009). Predicting human resting Physics 9, 110–123. 9, 177.
Haken, H., Kelso, J. A., and Bunz, H. state functional connectivity from Kaiser, M., and Hilgetag, C. C. (2010). King, C. C. (1991). Fractal and chaotic
(1985). A theoretical model of phase structural connectivity. Proc. Natl. Optimal hierarchical modular topolo- dynamics in the nervous system. Progr.
transitions in human hand move- Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 2035–2040. gies for producing limited sustained Neurobiol. 36, 279–308.
ments. Biol. Cybern. 51, 347–356. Hsu, K. J., and Hsu, A. (1991). Self- activation of neural networks. Front. Kinouchi, O., and Copelli, C. (2006).
Critical branching captures activity in music. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. fninf.2010.00008. able networks at criticality. Nat. Phys.
living neural networks and maximizes 88, 3507–3509. Kapellou, O., Counsell, S. J., and Kennea, 2, 348–352.
the number of metastable states. Phys. Hughes, B. D., Montroll, E. W., and N. (2006). Abnormal cortical devel- Kinouchi, O., and Prado, C. P. C. (1999).
Rev. Lett. 94, 058101. Shlesinger, M. F. (1982). Fractal opment after premature birth shown Robustness of scale invariance in
Harris, K. D. (2005). Neural signatures of random walks. J. Stat. Phys. 28, by altered allometric scaling of brain models with self-organized critical-
Neurosci. 6, 399–407. Hütt, M-T., and Lesne, A. (2009). Interplay 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030265. Kitzbichler, M. G., Smith, M. L.,
Harris, T. E. (1989). The Theory of between topology and dynamics in Karperien, A. L., and Jelinek, H. F. (2008). Christensen, S. R., and Bullmore,
Branching Processes. New York: excitation patterns on hierarchical Box-counting analysis of microglia E. (2009). Broadband criticality of
Dover. graphs. Neuroinformatics 3, 1–10. form in schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s human brain network synchroniza-
Harrison, K. H., Hof, P. R., and Wang, S. Huxley, J. S. (1932). Problems of Relative disease, and affective disorder. Fractals tion. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000314.
malian neocortex: does form provide Iannacone, P. M., and Khokha, M. (1995). Kass, R. E., and Ventura, V. (2001). A Kleinz, M., and Osler, T. J. (2000). A child’s
clues to function? J. Neurocytol. 31, Fractal Geometry in Biological Systems. spike-train probability model. Neural. garden of fractional derivatives. College
289–298. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. Comput. 13, 1713–1720. Math. J. 31, 82–88.
Hausdorff, J. M., and Peng, C. K. (1996). Im, K., Lee, J. M., Kim, S. H., Lyttelton, Katsaloulis, P., and Verganelakis, D. A. Kniffki, K.-D., Pawlak, M., and Vahle-
Multiscaled randomness: a possible K. S. H., Evans, A. C., and Kim, S. L. (2009). Fractal dimension and lacu- Hinz, C. (1993). Scaling behavior of
source of 1/f noise in biology. Phys. (2008). Brain size and cortical struc- narity of tractography images of the the dendritic branches of thalamic
Rev. E 54, 2154–2157. ture. Cereb. Cortex 18, 2181–2191. human brain. Fractals 17, 181–189. neurons. Fractals 1, 171–178.
Hausdorff, J. M., Peng, C. K., Ladin, Z., Jantzen, K. J., Steinberg, F. L., and Kelso, J. Kaulakys, B., and Meskauskas, T. (1998). Kniffki, K.-D., Pawlak, M., Vahle-Hinz,
Wei, J. Y., and Goldberger, A. L. (1995). A. S. (2008). Coordination dynamics Modeling 1/f noise. Phys. Rev. E, 58, C. (1994). “Fractal dimension and
Is walking a random event? Evidence of large scale neural circuitry underly- 7013–7019. dendritic branching of neurons in
for long-range correlations in stride ing rhythmic sensorimotor behavior. J. Kaulakys, B., Ruscekas, J., Gontis, V., the soimatosensory thalamus,” in
interval of human gait. J. Appl. Physiol. Cogn. Neurosci. 21, 2420–2433. and Alaburda, M. (2006). Nonlinear Fractals in Biology and Medicine, eds
78, 349–358. Jeffrey, H. J. (1990). Chaos game represen- stochastic models of 1/f noise and T. F. Nonnenmacher, G. Losa, and E.
He, B. J., Zempel, J. M., Snyder, A. Z., and tation of gene structure. Nucleic Acid power-law distributions. Physica A R. Weibel (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag),
Raichle, M. E. (2010). The temporal Res. 18, 2163–2170. 365, 217–221. 221–229.
structures and functional significance Jelinek, H. F., and Elston, G. N. (2001). Kello, C. T., Beltz, B. C., Holden, J. G., Kodama, T., Mushiake, H., Shima, K.,
of scale 0-free brain activity. Neuron Pyramidal neurones in macaque visual and Van Orden, G. C. (2007). The Nakahama, H., and Yamamoto, M.
66, 353–369. cortex: interareal phenotypic varia- emergent coordination of cogni- (1989). Slow fluctuations of single
Hennig, M. H., Adams, Ch., Willshaw, D., tion of dendritic branching patterns. tive function. J. Exp. Psychol. 136, unit activities of hippocampal and
and Sernagor, E. (2009). Early-stage Fractals 9, 287–295. 551–568. thalamic neurons in cats. I. relation
waves in the retinal network emerge Jelinek, H. F., Elston, N., and Zietsch, B. Kelso, J. A. S. (1984). Phase transitions and to natural sleep and alert states. Brain
close to a critical phase transition (1995). Fractal analysis: pitfalls and critical behavior in human bimanual Res. 487, 26–34.
between local and global func- revelations in neuroscience,” in Fractals coordination. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Kolen, J. F. (1994). Fool’s gold: extracting
tional connectivity. J. Neurosci. 29, in Biology and Medicine, eds G. A. Losa, Integr. Comp. 15, R1000–R1004. finite state machines from recurrent
1077–1086. D. Merlini, T. F. Nonnenmacher, and Kelso, J. A. S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: network dynamics. Adv. Neur. Inform.
Henry, B. I., and Wearne, S. L. (2000). E. R. Weibel (Basel: Birkhauser) The Self Organization of Brain and Proc. Syst. 6, 501–508.
Fractional reaction-diffusion. Physica 169–187. Behavior. Cambridge, MA: MIT Kolen, J. F. (2006). “Dynamical systems
A 276, 448–455. Jones, C. L., and Jelinek, H. F. (2001). Press. and iterated function systems,” in A
Herz, A. V., and Hopfield, J. J. (1995). Wavelet packet fractal analysis of neu- Kelso, J. A. S. (2010). Instabilities and Field Guide to Dynamical Recurrent
Earthquake cycles and neural reverber- ronal morphology. Methods 24, 347– phase transitions in human brain and Networks, ed. J. F. Kolen and S. C.
tors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 1222–1225. Saloma, C. (2007). Self-organized Kelso, J. A. S., Bressler, S. L., Buchanan, Korn, H., and Faure, P. (2003). Is there
Hilgetag, C. C., and Kaiser, M. (2004). critical branching in systems that S., DeGuzman, G. C., Ding, M., and chaos in the brain? II. Experimental
Clustered organization of cortical violate conservation laws. New J. Fuchs, A. (1992). A phase transition evidence and related models. CR Biol.
connectivity. Neuroinformatics 2, Phys. 9, 1–17. in human brain and behavior. Phys. 326, 787–840.
353–360. Kadanoff, L. P. (1990). Scaling and uni- Lett. A 169, 134–144. Koulakov, A. A. (2010). On the scaling
Hilgetag, C. C., Koetter, R., Stephan, K. E., versality in statistical Physics. Physica Kelso, J. A. S., and Engstrøm, D. (2006). The law for cortial magnification factor.
and Sporns, O. (2002). “Computational A 163, 1–14. Complementary Nature. Cambridge, arXiv:1002.4368v1[q-biol.NC].
methods for the analysis of brain con- Kadanoff, L. P., Nagel, S. R., Wu, L., and MA: MIT Press. Koutsoyiannis, D. (2002). The Hurst
nectivity,” in Computational Anatomy, Zhou, S. (1989). Scaling and universal- Kelso, J. A. S., and Tognoli, E. (2007). phenomenon and fractional Gaussian
ed. G. A. Ascoli (Totowa, NJ: Humana ity on avalanches. Physical Review A “Toward a complementary neuro- noise made easy. Hydrol. Sci. 47,
Press), 295–335. 39, 6524–6537. science: metastable coordination 573–595.
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 24
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
Bollobas, B., and Freeman, W. J. D., and Barman, S. M. (2001). Long- 10.1038/nn.2212. review. arXiv:physics/0204033v1.
(2005). Phase transitions in the term correlations in the spike trains Maess, B., Koelsch, S., Gunter, T. C., and Milosevic, N. T., Ristanovic, D., and
neuropercolation model of neural of Medullary sympathetic neurons. J. Friederici, A. D. (2001). Musical syntax Stankovic, J. B. (2005). Fractal
populations with mixed local and Neurophysiol. 85, 1614–1622. is processed in Broca’s area: an MEG analysis of laminar organization
non-local interactions. Biol. Cybern. Li, M. (2010). Fractal time series – a tuto- study. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 540–545. in spinal cord. J. Neurosci. Methods
Kuikka, J., and Tiihonen, J. (1998). Fractal ID 157264. in Bioengineering. Redding, CT: Begell neumeth.2005.02.009.
analysis – a new approach to receptor Liebovitch, L. S., Fischbarg, J., Koniarek, House Publishers, Co. Milosevic, N. T., Ristanovic, D., Stankovic,
imaging. Ann. Med. 30, 242–248. J. P., Todorova, I., and Wang, M. Magnussen, S., and Greenlee, M. W. J. B., and Gudovic, R. (2007). Fractal
Kulish, V., Sourin, A., and Sourina, O. (1987). Fractal model of ion-channel (1985). Marathon adaptation to spa- analysis of dendritic arborisation pat-
(2006). Human electroencephalo- kinetics. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 896, tial contrast: saturation in sight. Vision terns of stalked and islet neurons in
grams seen as fractal time series: math- 173–180. Res. 25, 1409–1411. substantia gelatinosa of different spe-
ematical analysis and visualization. Liebovitch, L. S., Scheurle, D., Rusek, M., Maimon, G., and Assad, J. A. (2009). cies. Fractals 15, 1–6.
Comput. Biol. Med. 36, 291–302. and Zochowski, M. (2001). Fractal Beyond Poisson: increased spike-time Milstein, J., Mormann, F., Fried, I., and
Kuramoto, Y. (1984). Chemical methods to analyze ion channel kinet- regularity across primate parietal cor- Koch, C. (2009). Neural shot noise
Oscillations, Waves and Turbulence. ics. Methods 24, 359–275. tex. Neuron 62, 426–440. and Brownian 1/f behavior in the local
Berlin: Springer. Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. (2003). Scaling Mandelbrot, B. B. (1977). The Fractal field potential. PLoS ONE 4, e4338.
as a factor in ecology and evolution. nal activity. Lect. Notes Phys. 621, Freeman and Co. Mitzenmacher, M. (2003). A brief history
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 20, 97–117. 324–338. Mandelbrot, B. B., and van Ness, J. W. of generative models for power-law
Lakatos, P., Karmos, G., Mehta, A. D., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikouline, V. (1968). Fractional Brownian motions, and lognormal distributions. Internet
Ulbert, I., and Schroeder, C. E. (2008). V., Palva, J. M., and Ilmoniemi, R. J. fractional noises and applications. Math. 1, 226–251.
Entrainment of neuronal oscillations (2001). Long-range temporal correla- SIAM Rev. 10, 422–437. Monto, S., Palva, S., Voipio, J., and Palva,
as a mechanism of attentional selec- tions and scaling behavior in human Marro, J., and Dickman, R. (1999). J. M. (2008). Very slow EEG fluctua-
tion. Science 320, 110–113. brain oscillations. J. Neurosci. 21, Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions tions predict the dynamics of stimulus
Lakatos, P., Shah, A. S., Knuth, K. H., 1370–1377. in Lattice Models. Cambridge, UK: detection and oscillation amplitudes in
Ulbert, I., Karmos, G., and Schroeder, Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., Nikulin, V. V., Cambridge University Press. Humans. J. Neurosci. 28, 8268–8272.
C. E. (2005). An oscillatory hierar- Palva, J. M., Kaila, K., and Ilmoniemi, Maxim, V., Sendur, L., Fadili, J., Suckling, J., Montroll, E. W., and West, B. J. (1979).
chy controlling neuronal excitabil- R. J. (2004a). Stimulus-induces change Gould, R., Howard, R., and Bullmore, “An enriched collection of stochastic
ity and stimulus processing in the in long-range temporal correlations E. (2005). Fractional Gaussian noise, processes,” in Fluctuation Phenomena,
auditory cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 94, and scaling behaviour of sensorimo- functional MRI and Alzheimer’s dis- eds E. W. Montroll and J. Lebowitz
1904–1911. tor oscillations. Eur. J. Neurosci. 19, ease. Neuroimage 25, 141–158. (Amsterdam, NY: North Holland),
Lambiotte, R. (2010). Multi-scale 203–211. Mazzoni, A., Broccard, F. D., Garcia-Perez, 61–175.
modularity in complex networks. Linkenkaer-Hansen, K. Nikuli, V. V., E., Bonifazi, P., Ruaro, M. E., and Torre, Montroll, E. W., and Weiss, G. (1965).
arXiv:1004.4268v1 [physics.soc-ph]. Palva, S., Ilmoniemi, R. J., and Palva, V. (2007). On the dynamics of the Random walks on lattices II. J. Math.
Lambiotte, R., Delvenne, J-C., and J. M. (2004b). Prestimulus oscilla- spontaneous activity in neuronal net- Phys. 6, 167–182.
ics and multiscale modular structure formance in Humans. J. Neurosci. 24, journal.pone.0000439. A., and Morariu, L.-C. (2001). Scaling
in networks. arXiv:0812.1770v3 [phys- 10186–10190. McKenna, T. M. (1992). Single Neuron in cognition. Fractals 9, 379–391.
ics.soc-ph]. Logothetis, N. K. (2002). The neural basis Computation. New York: Elsevier. Mucha, P. J., Richardson, T., Macon, K.,
Laughlin, R. B. (2005). A Different of the blood-oxygen-level-dependent Mayer-Kress, G., and Layne, S. P. (1987). and Porter, M. A. (2009). Community
Universe: Reinventing Physics from functional magnetic resonance imag- Dimensionality of the Human structure in time-dependent, mul-
the Bottom Down. New York: Basic ing signals. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Electroencephalogram. Ann. N.Y. tiscale and multiplex networks.
Books. B Biol. Sci. 357, 1003–1037. Acad. Sci. 504, 62–87. arXiv:0911.1824v1 [physics.data-an].
Lenaerts, T., Chu, D., and Watson, R. Lowen, S. B., Cash, S. S., Poo, M.-M., and Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., Fornito, A., Müller-Linow, M., Hilgetag, C. C., and
(2005). Dynamical hierarchies. Artif. Teich, M. C. (1997). Quantal neu- Ersche, K. D., and Bullmote, E. T. Huett, M-T. (2008). Organization of
Life 11, 403–405. rotransmitter secretion rate exhib- (2009). Hierarchical modularity in excitable dynamics in hierarchical
Le Van Quyen, M. (2003). Disentangling its fractal behavior. J. Neurosci. 17, human brain functional networks. biological networks. PLoS Comput.
Biol. Res. 36, 67–88. A. (1999). Fractal ion-channel behav- Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Ziemann, U., Muzy, J. F., Bacry, E., and Arneodo, A.
Levina, A., Herrmann, J. M., and Geisel, ior generates fractal firing patterns in Hajak, G., Cohen, L., and Berman, K. (1993). Multifractal formalism for
T. (2007). Dynamical synapses caus- neuronal models. Phys. Rev. E, 59, F. (2002). Transition between dynami- fractal signals: the structure-function
ing self-organized criticality in neural 5970–5980. cal states of differing stability in the approach versus wavelet transform
networks. Nat. Phys. 3, 857–860. Lowen, S. B., and Teich, M. C. (1993). human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. modulus maxima methods. Phys. Rev.
Levina, A., Herrmann, J. M., and Geisel, Fractal auditory nerve firing pat- U.S.A. 99, 10948–10953. E 47, 875–884.
T. (2009). Phase transition towards terns may derive from fractal switch- Miller, S. L., Miller, W. M., and McWhorter, Nakanishi, K., and Kukita, F. (1998).
criticality in a neural system with ing in sensory hair cell ion channels. P. J. (1993). Extremal dynamics: a uni- Functional synapses in synchronized
adaptive interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett. AIP Conf. Proceedings 285, eds P. fying physical explanation of fractals, bursting of neocortical neurons in
102, 118110. H. Handel, A. L. Chung, American 1/f noise and activated processes. J. culture. Brain Res. 795, 137–146.
Levy, P. (1954). Theorie de L’addition des Institute of Physics. pp. 745–748. Appl. Phys. 73, 2617–2628. Newman, M. E. L. (1996). Self-organized
Variables Aleatoires. Paris: Gauthier- Lowen, S. B., and Teich, M. C. (2005). Millhauser, G. L., Salpeter, E. E., and criticality, evolution and the fossil
Villars. Fractal based Point Processes. Oswald, R. E. (1988). Diffusion models extinction record. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.,
Levy, S. D., and Pollack, J. B. (2002). Logical New York: Wiley. of ion-channel gating and the origin of B, Biol. Sci. 263, 785–792.
computation on a fractal neural sub- Lundstrom, B. N., Higgs, M. H., Spain, W. power-law distributions from single- Newman, M. E. J. (2005). Power-laws,
edu/papers/raam-ijcnn01.ps.gz. differentiation by neoircortical Sci. U.S.A. 85, 1503–1507. Contemp. Phys. 46, 323–351.
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 25
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
Newman, M. E. J., and Girvan, M. (2004). in Models of Brain Function, ed. R. M. Robinson, H. P. C., Kawahara, M., Schierwagen, A. (2008). Neuronal
Finding sand evaluating community L. Cotterill (Cambridge: Cambridge Jimbo, Y., Torimitsu, K., Kuroda, morphology: shape characteristics
structure in networks. Phys. Rev. E. University Press) 1–9. Y., and Kawana, A. (1993). Periodic and models. Neurophysiology 40,
69, 026113. Penrose, O. (1986). Phase transitions on synchronized bursting and intracel- 310–315.
Nikulin, V. V., and Brismar, T. (2005). Long- fractal lattices with long-range interac- lular calcium transients elicited by Segev, R., Baruchi, I., Hulata, E., and Ben-
range temporal correlations in electro- tions. J. Stat. Phys. 45, 69–88. low magnesium in cultured corti- Jacob, E. (2004). Hidden neuronal cor-
encephalographic oscillations: relation Perez-Mercader, J. (2004). “Coarse- cal neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 70, relations in cultured networks. Phys.
to topography, frequency band, age and graining, scaling and hierarchies,” in 1606–1616. Rev. Lett. 92, 118102.
gender. Neuroscience 130, 549–558. Nonextensive Entropy-interdisciplinary Rodriguez, M., Pereda, E., Gonzalez, J., Segev, R., Benveniste, M., Hulata, E.,
Northoff, G., Heinzel, A., de Greck, M., Applications, eds M. Gell-Mann and Abdala, P., and Obeso, J. A. (2003). Cohen, N., Palevski, A., Kapon, E.,
Bermpohl, F., Dobrowolny, H., and C. Tsallis (Oxford University Press), Neuronal activity in the substantia Shapira, Y., and Ben-Jacob, E. (2002).
Panksepp, J. (2006). Self-referential 357–376. nigra in the anesthetized rat has frac- Long behavior of lithographically
processing in our brain – a meta- Perkel, D. H., and Feldman, M. W. (1979). tal characteristics: evidence for firing prepared in vitro neuronal networks.
analysis of imaging studies on the self. Neurotransmitter release statistics: code patterns in the basal ganglia. Exp. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 118102.
Neuroimage 31, 440–457, moment estimates for inhomogene- Brain Res. 151, 167–172. Seuront, L. (2010). Fractals and
Novikov, E., Novikov, A., Shannahoff- ous Bernoulli trials. J. Math. Biol. 7, Roerig, B., Chen, B. (2002). Relationships Multifractals in Ecology and Aquatic
Khalsa, D., Schwartz, B., and Wright, 31–40. of local inhibitory and excitatory cir- Science. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
J. (1997). Scale-similar activity in the Petermann, T., Thiagarajan, T. C., cuits to orientation preference maps Shadlen, M. N., and Newsome, W. T.
brain. Phys. Rev. E, 56, R2387. Lebedev, M. A., Nicolelis, M. A. L., in Ferret visual cortex. Cereb. Cortex (1998). The variable discharge of
Ohlshausen, B. A., and Field, D. J. (1997). Chialvo, D. R., and Plenz, D. (2009). 12, 187–198. cortical neurons: implications for
Sparse coding with an over complete Spontaneous cortical activity in awake Roncaglia, R., Mannella, R., and Grigolini, connectivity, computation, and
basic set: a strategy employed by V1? monkeys composed of neuronal ava- P. (1994). Fractal properties of ion information coding. J. Neurosci. 18,
Vision Res. 37, 3311–3325. lanches. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. channels and diffusion. Math. Biosci. 3870–3896.
Orer, H. S., Das, M., Barman, S. M., and 106, 15921–15926. 123, 77–101. Shahverdian, A. Y., and Apkarian, A. V.
Gebber, G. L. (2003). Fractal activity Plenz, D., and Aertsen, A. (1996). Neuronal Rose, D., and Lowe, I. (1982). Dynamics (1999). On irregular behavior of neu-
generated independently by medul- dynamics in cortex-striatum cultures of adaptation to contrast. Perception ron spike trains. Fractals 7, 93–103.
lary sympathetic premotor and pre- II. Spatio-temporal characteristics of 11, 505–528. Shalizi, C. R., Camperi, M. F., and
anglionic sympathetic neurons. J. neuronal activity. Neuroscience 70, Rotshenker, S., and Rahamimoff, R. Klinkner, K. L. (2006). Discovering
Neurophysiol. 90, 47–54. 893–924. (1970). Neuromuscular synapse: functional communities in dynami-
Paczuki, M., Maslov, S., and Bak, P. (1996). Plenz, D., and Chialvo, D. R. (2010). stochastic properties of spontaneous cal networks. arXiv:q-biol/0609008v2
Avalanche dynamics in evolution, Scaling properties of neuronal ava- release of transmitter. Science 170, [q-bio.NC].
growth and depinning models. Phys. lanches are consistent with critical 648–649. Shew, W. L., Yang, H., Petermann, T., Roy,
Rev. E 53, 414–443. dynamics. arXiv:0912.5369v1 [q-bio. Ruseckas, J., and Kaulakys, B. (2010). 1/f R., and Plenz, D. (2009). Neuronal
Pajevic, S., and Plenz, D. (2009). NC]. noise from nonlinear stochastic dif- avalanches imply maximum dynamic
Efficient network reconstruction Plenz, D., and Thiagarajan, T. C. (2007). ferential equations. arXiv:1002.4316v1 range in cortical networks at criticality.
from dynamical cascades identifies The organizing principles of neuronal [nlin.AO]. J. Neurosci. 29, 15600–15595.
small world topology of neuronal avalanches: cell assemblies in the cor- Sakai, Y., Funahashi, S., and Shinomoto, S. Shimizu, Y., Barth, M., Windischberger,
avalanches. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, tex? Trends Neurosci. 30, 101–110. (1999). Temporally correlated inputs C., Moser, E., and Thurner, S. (2004).
pcbi.1000271. Equations. San Diego, Academic can reproduce spiking statistics of of fMRI time series. Neuroimage 22,
Palva, J. M., Palva, S., and Kaila, K. (2005). Press. cortical neurons. Neural Networks, 1195–1202.
Phase synchrony among neuron Poli, S.-S., Ooyen, A. V., and Linkenkaer- 12, 1181–1190. Shimono, M., Owaki, T., Aman, K., Kitajo,
oscillations in the human cortex. J. Hansen, K. (2008). Avalanche dynam- Salinas, E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2002). K., and Takeda, T. (2007). Functional
Neurosci. 25, 3962–3972. ics of human brain oscillations: Integrate-and-fire neurons driven by modulation of power-law distribution
Papa, A. R. R., and da Silva, L. (1997). relation to critical branching processes correlated stochastic input. Neural. in visual perception. Phys. Rev. E, 75,
Earthquakes in the brain. Theory and temporal correlations. Hum. Brain Comput. 14, 2111–2155. 051902.
Biosci. 116, 321–327. Mapp. 29, 770–777. Sales-Pardo, M., Guimera, R., Moreira, Shinomoto, S., Shima, K., and Tanji, J.
Paramanathan, P., and Uthayakumar, R. Pollack, J. B. (1991). Induction of A. A., and Amaral, L. M. A. (2007). (2003). Differences in spiking pat-
(2008). Application of fractal theory dynamical recognizers. Mach. Learn. Extracting the hierarchical organiza- terns among cortical neurons. Neural.
in analysis of human electroencepha- 7, 227–252. tion of complex systems. Proc. Natl. Comput. 15, 2823–2842.
lographic signals. Comput. Biol. Med. Press, W. H. (1978). Flicker noises in Acad. Sci. USA 104, 15224–15229. Shlesinger, M. F., West, B. J., and Klafter,
38, 372–378. astronomy and elsewhere. Comments Salvadori, G., and Biella, G. (1994). J. (1987). Levy dynamics of enhanced
Patel, A. D. (2003). Language, music, Astrophys. 7, 103–119. “Discriminating properties of wide diffusion: application to turbulence.
syntax, and the brain. Nat. Neurosci. Reynolds, A. M. (2009). Scale-free animal dynamic range neurons my means of Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1100–1103.
6, 674–681. movement patterns: Levy walks out- universal multifractals,” in Fractals in Simon, H. A. (1955). On a class of skew
Pattee, H. H. (2001). The physics of perform fractional Brownian motions Biology and Medicine II, eds G. A. Losa, distribution functions. Biometrika 42,
symbols: bridging the epistemic cut. and fractional Levy motions in ran- D. Merlini, T. F. Nonnenmacher, and E. 425–440.
BioSystems 60, 5–21. dom search scenarios. J. Phys. A 42, R. Weibel (Basel: Birkhauser-Verlag), Simon, H. A. (1962). The architecture of
Park, J. P., and Newman, M. E. J. (2004). 434006. 314–325. complexity. Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. 106,
Statistical mechanics of networks. Richmond, B. J., Optican, L. M., and Scafetta, N., Marchi, D., and West, B. J. 467–482.
Phys. Rev. E, 70, 066117. Spitzer, H. (1990). Temporal encod- (2009). Understanding the complex- Simon, H. A. (1973). “The organization of
Pasquale, V. P., Massobrio, P., Bologna, L. ing of two-dimensional patterns by ity of human gait dynamics. Chaos complex systems,” in Hierarchy Theory,
L., Chiappalone, M., and Martinoia, S. single units in primary visual cortex 19, 026108. ed. H. H. Pattee (NY: Brazillier),
(2008). Self-organization and neuronal I. Stimulus-Response relations. J. Scheffer, M., Bascompte, J., Brock, W. A., 3–27.
avalanches in networks of dissociated Neurophysiol. 64, 351. Brovkin, V., Carpenter, S. R., Dakos, Simon, H. A. (1996). The Sciences of the
cortical neurons. Neuroscience 153, Rikvold, P. A., Kornoiss, G., White, C. V., Held, H., van Nes, E. H., Rietkerk, Artificial, 3rd Edn. Cambridge, MA:
1354–1369. J., Novotny, M. A., and Sides, S. W. M. D., and Sugihara, G. (2009). Early- MIT Press.
Pellionisz, A. J. (1989). “Neural geometry: (1999). arXiv:cond-mat/9904028v2 warning signals for critical conditions. Smith, T. G., Jr., Marks, W. B., Lange,
towards a fractal model of neurons,” [cond-mat.stat.mech]. Nature 461, 53–59. G. D., Sheriff, W. H., Jr., and Neale,
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 26
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
E. A. (1989). A fractal analysis of Stanley, H. E. (1987). Introduction to Phase noise recorded from cells in the lower Tsallis, C. (2009). Introduction to Non-
cell images. J. Neurosci. Methods 27, Transitions and Critical Phenomena. auditory pathway of the cat. Hear. Res. Extensive Statistical Mechanics:
173–180. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 46, 41–52. Approaching a Complex World. New
Smolders, F. D. J., and Folgering, H. Th. Press. Teich, M. C., Heneghan, C., Lowen, S. York: Springer.
M. (1977). Actions and Interactions of Stanley, H. E. (1999). Scaling, universality B., Ozaki, T., and Kaplan, E. (1997). Tsallis, C., Levy, S. V. F., Souza, A. M. C.,
CO and O on the Controlling System and renormalization: the three pillars Fractal character of the neural spike and Maynard, R. (1995). Statistical-
of the Lung Ventilation. Ph.D. thesis, of modern critical Phenomena. Rev. train in the visual system of the cat. J. mechanical foundation of the ubiquity
Nijmegen University, Netherlands. Mod. Phys. 71, S358–S366. Opt. Soc. Am. 14, 529–546. of levy distributions in nature. Phys.
Sokal, A., and Bricmont, J. (2004). “Defense Stauffer, D., and Aharony, A. (1991/1994). Teramae, J.-N., and Fukai, T. (2007). Rev. Lett. 75, 3589–3593.
of a modest scientific realism,” in Introduction to Percolation Theory. Local cortical circuit model inferred Uhlhaas, P. J., Pipa, G., Lima, B., Melloni,
Knowledge and the World: Beyond Boca Raton: CRC Press. from power-law distributed neuro- L., Neuenschwander, S., Nikolic, D.,
the Science Wars. eds M. Carroer, J. Stephen, D. G., and Dixon, J. A. (2009). nal avalanches. J. Comput. Neurosci. and Singer, W. (2009). Neural syn-
Roggenhofer, G. Kueppers, and P. The self-organization of insight: 22, 301–312. chrony in cortical networks: history,
Banchard (New York: Springer). entropy and power-laws in prob- Thatcher, R. W., North, D. M., and Biver, concept and current status. Front.
A. (2002). Fractional Kinetics. Phys. 72–101. ity and the development of EEG neuro.07.017.2009.
Today 48–54. Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysi- phase reset. Hum. Brain Mapp. 30, Ulanovsky, N., Las, L., Farkas, D., and
Soltys, Z., Ziaja, M., Pawlinski, R., cal law. Psychol. Rev. 64, 153–181. 553–574. Nelken, I. (2004). Multiple time scales
Setkowicz, Z., and Janeczko, K. (2001). Stevens, C. F., and Zador, A. M. (1998). Thiagarajan, T. C., Lebedev, M. A., of adaptation in auditory cortex neu-
Morphology of reactive microglia in Input synchrony and the irregular fir- Nicolelis, M. A., and Plenz, D. (2010). rons. J. Neurosci. 17, 10440–10453.
the injured cerebral cortex. Fractal ing of cortical neurons. Nat. Neurosci. Coherence potentials: loss-less, all-or- Usher, M., and Stemmler, M. (1995).
analysis and complementary quan- 1, 210–217. none network events in the cortex. Dynamic pattern formation leads to
90–97. Inverted U profile of dopamine- journal.pbio.1000278. Rev. Lett. 74, 326–329.
Song, C., Havlin, S., and Makse, H. A. NMDA mediated spontaneous ava- Thorson, J., and Biederman-Thorson, M. Usher, M., Stemmler, M., Koch, C., and
(2005). Self-similarity of complex lanche recurrence in superficial layers (1974). Distributed relaxation proc- Olami, Z. (1994). Network amplifica-
networks. Nature 433, 392–395. o rat prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 23, esses in sensory adaptation. Science tion of local fluctuations causes high
Song, C., Havlin, S., and Makse, H. A. 8148–8159. 183, 161–183. spike rate variability, fractal firing pat-
(2006). Origins of fractality in the Stinchcombe, R. B. (1989). Fractals, phase Thurner, S., Lowen, S. B., Feurstein, M. terns and oscillatory local field poten-
growth of complex networks. Nat. transitions, and criticality. Proc. R. Soc. C., Heneghan, C., Feichtinger, H. G., tials. Neural. Comput. 6, 795–836.
Phys. 2, 275–281. Lond. A, 423, 17–33. and Teich, M. C. (1997). Analysis, syn- van den Heuvel, M. P., Stam, C. J., Boersma,
Sornette, D. (2000). Critical Phenomena in Stoop, R., and Wagner, C. (2007). thesis, and estimation of fractal-rate M., and Pol, H. E. H. (2008). Small-
Natural Sciences. Berlin: Springer. Neocortex’s architecture optimizes stochastic point processes. Fractals 5, world and scale-free organization of
Sporns, O. (2006). Small-world connectiv- computation, information transfer 565–595. voxel-based resting-state functional
ity, motif composition, and complex- and synchronizability, at given total Thurner, S., Windischberger, C., Moser, E., connectivity in the human brain.
ity of fractal neuronal composition. connection length. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos Walla, P., and Barth, M. (2003). Scaling Neuroimage 43, 528–539.
BioSystems 85, 55–64. 17, 2257–2279. laws and persistence in human brain Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., and
Sporns, O., Chialvo, D. R., Kaiser, M., and Suckling, J., Wink, A. M., Bernard, F. A., activity. Physica A 326, 511–521. Turvey, M. T. (2003). Self-organization
Hilgetag, C. C. (2004). Organization, Barnes, A., and Bullmore, E. (2008). Tino, P. (1999). Spatial representation of of cognitive performance. J. Exp. Psych:
development and function of com- Endogenous multifractal brain symbolic sequences through iterative Gen. 132, 331–350.
plex brain networks. Trends Cog. Sci. dynamics are modulated by age, function systems. IEEE Trans. Systems, van Pelt, J., Coner, M. A., Wolters, P. S.,
8, 418–425. cholinergic blockade and cognitive Man Cybernet. 29, 386–393. Rutten, W. L. C., and Ramakers, G.
Sporns, O., Honey, C. J., and Koetter, R. performance. J. Neurosci. Methods Tognoli, E., and Kelso, J. A. S. (2009). Brain J. A. (2004). Long-term stability and
(2007). Identification and classifica- 174, 292–300. coordination dynamics: true and false developmental changes in spontane-
tion of hubs in brain networks. PLoS Tabor, W. (2000). Fractal encoding of con- faces of phase synchrony and metast- ous network burst firing patterns in
pone.0001049. networks. Expert Syst. 17, 41–56. Toib, A., Lyakhov, V., and Marom, S. cultures on microelectrode arrays.
Sporns, O., and Koetter, R. (2004). Motifs Takeda, T., Sakata, A., and Matsuoka, (1998). Interaction between duration Neurosci. Lett. 361, 86–89.
in brain networks. PLoS Biol. 2, e369. T. (1999). Fractal dimensions in the of activity and time course of recovery van Vreeswijk, C. (2001). Information
Sporns, O., and Zwi, J. D. (2004). The potential in a vertebrate neuromuscular brain Na2+ channels. J. Neurosci. 18, Neurocomputing 38–40, 417–422.
small world of the cerebral cortex. junction. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. 1893–1903. Varanda, W. A., Liebovitch, L. S.,
Neuroinformatics 2, 145–162. Biol. Psychiatr. 23, 1157–1169. Touboul, J., and Destexhe, A. (2009). Can Figueiroa, J. N., and Nogueira, R. A.
Stam, C. J. (2004). Functional connectivity Tateno, T., Kawana, A., and Jimbo, Y. power-law scaling and neuronal ava- (2000). Hurst analysis applies to the
patterns of human magnetoencepha- (2002). Analytical characterization lanches arise from stochastic dynam- study of single calcium-activated
lographic recordings: a ‘small-world’ of spontaneous firing in networks of ics? arXiv: 0910.0805v1. potassium channel kinetics. J. Theor.
network? Neurosci. Lett. 355, 25–28. developing rat cultured cortical neu- Tsuda, I., and Kuroda, S. (2004). “A com- Biol. 206, 343–353.
Stam, C. J. (2005). Nonlinear dynamical rons. Phys. Rev. E 65, 051924. plex system approach to an inter- Varela, F., Lachaux, J.-P., Rodriguez,
analysis of EE and MEG: review of an Tebbens, S. F., and Burroughs, S. M. pretation of dynamic brain activity E., and Martinerie, J. (2001). The
emerging field. Clin. Neurophys. 116, (2003). Self-similar criticality. Fractals II. does Cantor coding provide a Brainweb: phase synchronization
2266–2301. 11, 221–231. dynamical model for the formation and large scale integration. Nat. Rev.
Stam, C. J., and de Bruin, E. A. (2004). Teich, M. C., and Saleh, B. E. A. (1981). of episodic memory?,” in Cortical Neurosci. 2, 229–239.
Scale-free dynamics of global func- Interevent-time statistics for shot- Dynamics, LNCS 3146, ed. P. Erdi Voss, R. F., and Clarke, J. (1975). ‘1/f
tional connectivity in the human noise-driven self-exciting point proc- (Berlin: Springer), 129–139. noise’ in music and speech. Nature
brain. Hum. Brain Mapp. 22, 97–109. esses in photon detection. J. Opt. Soc. Turcotte, D. L. (1999). Self-organized criti- 258, 317–318.
Stam, C. J., and Reijneveld, J. C. (2007). Am. 71, 771–776. cality. Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, 1377–1429. Wagenaar, D. A., Pine, J., and Potter, S.
Graph theoretical analysis of com- Teich, M. C., Johnson, D. H., Kumar, A. Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing M. (2006a). An extremely rich reper-
plex network in the brain. Nonlinear R., and Turcott, R. G. (1990). Rate machinery and intelligence. Mind 59, toire of bursting patterns of bursting
Biomed. Phys, 1, 3. fluctuations and fractional power-law 433–460. patterns during the development of
www.frontiersin.org July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 27
Werner Fractals in the nervous system
cortical cultures. BMC Neuroscience ral systems. New Math. Nat. Comput. Willinger, W., Taquu, M. S., Sherman, Zapperi, S., Lauritsen, K. B., and Stanley,
7, 7–11. 5, 185–196. R., and Wilson, D. V. (1995). Self- H. E. (1995). Self-organized branch-
Wagenaar, D. A., Nadasky, Z., and Potter, West, B. J. (1999). Physiology, promiscu- similarity through high variability: ing process: mean-field theory
S. M. (2006b). Persistent dynamic ity and prophecy at the millenium: statistical analysis of Ethernet LAN for avalanches. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
attractors in activity patterns of cul- a tale of tails. Studies of Nonlinear traffic at the source level. ACM 4071–4074.
tured neuronal networks. Phys. Rev. Phenomena in the Life Sciences, Vol. SIGCOMM Comp. Commun. Rev. Zarahn, E., Aguirre, G. K., and D’Esposito,
E 73, 051907. 7. Singapore: World Scientific. 25, 100–113. M. (1997). Empirical analyses of
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Farrell, S., and Ratcliff, West, B. J. (2006). Where medicine went Wilson, K. G. (1979). Problems in Physics BOLD fMRI statistics. Neuroimage 5,
R. (2004). Estimation and interpreta- wrong: rediscovering the path to com- with many scales of length. Sci. Am. 179–197.
tion of 1/fα noise in human cognition. plexity. Singapore: World Scientific. 241, 158–179. Zhang, L. (2006). Quantifying Brain
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 11, 579–615. West, B. J. (2009). Control from an allom- Wise, M. E. (1981). Spike Interval White Matter Structural Changes
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Farrell, S., and Ratcliff, etric perspective. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. Distributions for Neurons and Random in Normal Aging Using Fractal
R. (2005). Human cognition and a pile 629, 57–82. Walks with Drift to a Fluctuating Dimension. Doctoral Thesis,
of sand: a discussion on serial correla- West, B. J., Allegrini, P., and Grigolini, Threshold. Statistical Distributions in Case Western Reserve University.
Exp. Psychol. Gen. 134, 108–116. levy statistics in biology,” in Fractals in (Dordrecht: Reidel Publ. Comp.), pdf.cgi/Zhang%20Luduan.
Wark, B., Lundstrom, B. N., and Fairhall, Biology and Medicine, Vol. II, eds G. A. 211–231. pdf?acc_num=case1126213038.
A. (2008). Sensory adaptation. Curr. Losa, D. Merlini, T. F. Nonnenmacher, Witten, Jr., T. A., and Sander, L. M. (1981). Zhou, C., Zemanova, L., Zamora-Lopez,
Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 423–429. and E. R. Weibel (Basel: Birkhauser), Diffusion-limited aggregation, a G., C. C., and Kurths, J. (2007).
Watts, D., and Strogatz, S. (1998). 169–187. kinetic critical phenomenon. Phys. Structure-function relationship in
Collective dynamics of small world West, B. J., Bologna, M., and Grigolini, P. Rev. Lett. 47, 1400–1403. complex brain networks expressed
networks. Nature 393, 440–442. (2003). Physics of Fractal Operators. Womelsdorf, T., Schoffelen, J. M., by hierarchical synchronization. New
Wen, Q., Stepanyants, A., Elston, G. N., New York: Springer. Oostenveld, R., Singer, W., Desimone, J. Phys. 9, 178.
Grosberg, A. Y., and Chklovskii, D. B. West, B.J., and Deering, W. (1994). Fractal R., and Engel, A. K., and Fries, P. (2007). Zietsch, B., and Elston, G. N. (2005).
(2009). Maximization of the connec- physiology for physicists: levy statis- Modulation of neuronal interactions Fractal analysis of pyramidal cells
tivity repertoire as a statistical princi- tics. Physics Reports 246, 1–100. through neuronal synchronization. in the visual cortex of the Galago
ple governing the shapes of dendritic West, B. J., and Deering, B. (1995). The Science 316, 1609–1612. (Otolemur Garnetti): regional varia-
arbors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 106, Lure of Modern Science. Studies in Wornell, G. W. (1993). Wavelet-based tion in dendritic branching patterns
12536–12541. Nonlinear Phenomena in Life Sciences, representations for the 1/f family between visual areas. Fractals 13,
Werner, G., and Mountcastle, V. B. (1963). Vol. 3. Singapore: World Scientific. of fractal processes. Proc. IEEE, 81, 83–90.
The variability of central neural activ- West, B. J., Geneston, E. L., and Grigolini, 1428–1450. Zumofen, G., and Klafter, J. (1993).
ity in a sensory system, and its impli- P. (2008). Maximizing information Xu, Z., Payne, J. R., and Nelson, M. E. Scale-invariant motion in intermit-
cations for the central reflection of exchange between complex networks. (1996). Logarithmic time course of tent chaotic systems. Phys. Rev. E, 47,
sensory events. J. Neurophysiol. 26, Phys. Rep. 468, 1–99. sensory adaptation in electrosensory 851–863.
958–977. West, B. J., and Griffin, L. (1999). afferent nerve fibers in a weakly
Werner, G., and Mountcastle, V. B. (1964). Allometric control, inverse power- electric fish. J. Neurophysiol. 76, Conflict of Interest Statement: The
Neural activity in mechanoreceptive laws and human gait. Chaos Solitons 2020–2032. author declare that the research was
cutaneous afferents; stimulus-response Fractals 10, 1519–1527. Yamamoto, M., Nakahama, H., Shima, K., conducted in the absence of any com-
relations, Weber functions, and infor- West, B. J., and Nonnenmacher, T. (2001). Kodama, T., and Mushiake, H. (1986). mercial or financial relationships that
mation transmission. J. Neurophysiol. An ant in a gurge. Phys. Lett. A, 278, Markov dependency and spectral could be construed as a potential con-
28, 359–394. 255–259. analyses on spike counts in mesen- flict of interest.
Werner, G. (2007a). Perspectives on the West, B. J., and Scafetta, N. (2003). cephalic reticular neurons during
neuroscience of cognitions and con- Nonlinear dynamical model of human sleep and attentive states. Brain Res. Received: 18 April 2010; paper pending
sciousness. BioSystems 87, 82–95. gait. Phys. Rev. E 67, 051917. 366, 279–289. published: 26 May 2010; accepted: 05 June
Werner, G. (2007b). Metastability, critical- West, G. B., and Brown, J. H. (2004). Life’s Yeomans, J. M. (1992). Statistical 2010; published online: 06 July 2010.
ity, and phase transitions in brain and universal scaling laws. Phys. Today, 57, Mechanics of Phase Transitions. Oxford, Citation: Werner G (2010) Fractals in the
its models. BioSystems 90, 496–508. 36–42. UK: Oxford Science Publications, nervous system: conceptual implications
Werner, G. (2009a). Viewing brain proc- West, G. B., Grigolini, P., Metzler, R., Clarendon Press. for theoretical neuroscience. Front. Physio.
across levels of organization: neural Fractional diffusion and Levy stable Preference of sensory neural coding This article was submitted to Frontiers in
events in cognition and consciousness, processes. Phys. Rev. E, 55, 99–106. for 1/f signals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, Fractal Physiology, a specialty of Frontiers
and general principles. BioSystems 96, West, G. B., Brown, J. H., and Enquist, B. 108103. in Physiology.
114–119. J. (1997b). A general model for the Yule, G. U. (1925). A mathematical theory Copyright © 2010 Werner. This is an
Werner, G. (2009b). Consciousness related origin of allometric scaling laws in of evolution, based on the conclusions open-access article subject to an exclusive
neural events viewed as brain state biology. Science 276, 122–126. of Dr. J. C. Willis. F. R. S. Phil. Trans. license agreement between the authors and
space transitions. Cogn. Neurodyn. 3, Willinger, W. (2000). The Discovery of R. Soc. Lond. B, 213, 21–87. the Frontiers Research Foundation, which
83–95. Self-Similar Traffic. Lecture Notes in Zanette, D. H. (2008). Zipf’s law and permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
Werner, G. (2009c). On critical state tran- Computer Science 1769. Springer. pp the creation of musical context. reproduction in any medium, provided the
sitions between different levels in neu- 513–527. arXiv:cs/0406015v1. original authors and source are credited.
Frontiers in Physiology | Fractal Physiology July 2010 | Volume 1 | Article 15 | 28