Page 1 of 9 Original Research
From dependence to interdependence: Towards a
practical theology of disability
Author: Disability has remained on the fringes of research in Africa in general and Southern Africa
Paul Leshota1 in particular, especially in the field of theology. Its glaring absence constitutes an indictment
against both church and society, revealing in the process both the church’s and society’s
Affiliation:
1Department of Theology penchant for a dependence paradigm which has been the paradigm with respect to issues of
and Religious Studies, disabilities and people with disabilities. Using the participatory method with its proclivity
National University of
for bringing to the fore the voice of the ‘other’ and the marginalised, both the dependence
Lesotho, Lesotho
and independence paradigms within the context of disability are put under scrutiny. In the
Note: process and through the voice of people with disabilities, the practical theological paradigm
This article is based on Paul of interdependence emerges as the most appropriate and friendliest one, as it resonates with
Leshota’s PhD thesis that
both the New Testament notion of koinonia through love and the African notion of botho
he wrote in 2011 at the
through interconnection. The practical theology of holding each other in arms resonates with
University of South Africa. His
supervisor was Dr D.J. Kotze the theology of embrace that has been popularised by Volf within the context of much hatred
and co-supervisor was Dr M. and alienation. All these different dimensions of the theology of interdependence become
Naidoo.
the bedrock for inclusive and respectful treatment of each other irrespective of race, gender,
religion, ability and social class.
This article is published in the
section Practical Theology
of the Society for Practical
Introduction
Theology in South Africa.
Correspondence to: The voice of Denise Ackermann (1994, 1998), embodied in her feminist version of practical
Paul Leshota theology, breathed some fresh air into what had become the male, white, middle-class, clerical
and able-bodied dominated field of practical theology within the Southern African context. At
Email:
the same time, she challenged the lethargy with which the issues of gender disparities, disablism,
pleshota@yahoo.com
racism, clericalism and classism were addressed. Although she addressed herself mainly to
Postal address: painful experiences that resulted from the many years of alienation and suppression of the female
National University of
voice in practical theology, she also had her eye on other sections of society that were previously
Lesotho, PO Roma 180,
Roma, Lesotho marginalised and in need of healing (Ackermann 1998:83). One such group are people with
disabilities. Disability is a subject that has been, and still is, on the fringes of research in Africa
Dates:
in general and Southern Africa in particular, especially in the field of (practical) theology. The
Received: 09 Apr. 2015
dearth of literature on the subject does not match the seriousness and prevalence of the issue.
Accepted: 06 May 2015
Published: 14 July 2015 Anderson and Blair (2003:70), writing from a Western perspective, bemoan the omission of such
a prominent issue from theological consideration, despite Jesus’s proclivity for it. As such, its
How to cite this article:
glaring absence in theological discourse constitutes exclusion1 (Anderson & Blair 2003:1) and
Leshota, P., 2015,
an indictment against the church, which as the body of Christ, the koinonia, is called to serve
‘From dependence to
interdependence: Towards (diakonia) everyone through love.
a practical theology of
disability’, HTS Teologiese
The perception that has up to now been created in both church and society about people with
Studies/Theological Studies
71(2), Art. #2680, 9 pages. disabilities is one in which they are seen as ‘misfits’, ‘sinners’, ‘abnormal’ and objects of pity who
hts.v71i2.2680 sinfulness. In the process, some have reduced them to dependents who are only able to survive
through reliance on others (Oliver 1993:54). In an effort to improve their situation, others have
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. shoved them to another extreme, that of interdependence (Ntlatlapa 2007). In this study these
Licensee: AOSIS two contrasting paradigms, that of dependence and that of interdependence are interrogated,
OpenJournals. This work is
whether or not they represent the experiences of people with disabilities. With the latter’s
licensed under the Creative
participation, a friendlier and more fitting paradigm that is reflective of the nature of the church
Commons Attribution
License. as the body of Christ is proposed and argued for, which is the paradigm of interdependence.
Within such a paradigm there cannot be any misfits and abnormal people as all belong together
and are members of the same body.
Read online:
Scan this QR
code with your 1.The implied notion of inclusion, though pertinent in the discussions around issues of disabilities, will not feature prominently as
smart phone or a stand-alone concept in this article, firstly, because the main ideas raised and followed in this article were those raised by the
mobile device participants in the research and, secondly, because the idea does not fit well in the dependence, independence and interdependence
to read online. continuum adopted by the article. However, the notion of church as koinonia and its cognates has an implied nuance of inclusion. Faith
in Jesus is the only condition for inclusion into the fellowship that is the church.
Page 2 of 9 Original Research
Contextual practical theology of disability comes to each according to stereotypes and
of disability prejudices created in society through interaction, its effect
cannot merely be reduced to a simple group feeling. This
The reflection done in this article is situated within the context experience has an impact that will differ from one individual
of practical theology. If practical theology is to remain true to to the other and that should not be taken for granted. This
its qualification as theology, it has to fuse two horizons: that view is articulated by Schutz (quoted in Eiesland 1994:31)
of the text and that of the person to whom the text speaks as, ‘The place which my body occupies within the world,
(context) (Gadamer 1975:358). Müller (2003:296) concurs that my actual “Here” is the starting point from which I take my
practical theology is only possible as contextual theology, bearings in space. It is, so to speak, the centre in my system
for it operates within local, concrete and specific contexts. of coordinates.’
I therefore position myself within a practical theology that
takes context seriously. The context, in this case, is disability, It is my contention that although disability is found in all
characterised by marginalisation and ostracisation by both cultures, its expression and interpretation are determined
church and society. While I will be addressing disability by the context within which it is experienced. Contextual
in general, the concrete and specific experiences of people theology, therefore, with its critique of the universal and
with disabilities in Lesotho, who are participants in this its propensity towards the insurrection of the marginalised
article, will be given special attention. My contention is that knowledge systems, would be apt in facilitating healing on
while disability may be a universal phenomenon, it finds its both sides of the disability divide, at both social and personal
most tangible and concrete expression in the context within levels. Each participant’s voice was listened to from within
which people with disability live. Such a phenomenon is its own experiential context. Although several common
embedded within a specific social and cultural context which disability concerns were always detected, the unique situation
is neither global nor universal. The matrix of values, beliefs, of every individual with disability was acknowledged and
life assumptions and language which we call ‘culture’ shape taken seriously.
people’s experiences of disability as conceptualised and
lived in that context. These experiences, values, beliefs, life Since the research was carried out in Lesotho, the experiences
assumptions and language taken together provide the lenses, of participants were shaped within the context of that country.
through which the experiences of disability are mediated. Their foregrounding is demanded, not only by our adoption
of a participatory method but also by the theological stance
There is no denying, however, that some of the experiences
adopted, that is, contextual theology.
articulated here may resonate with experiences from
elsewhere. This article, therefore, goes beyond examination Doing practical theology as
and analysis of ideologies and structures, to working
participation
together in the discovery of an alternative pastoral disability
paradigm. The oft-missing voice of people living with
Our choice of a participatory method of research actually
disabilities in social and theological discourses is recognised
facilitates the doing of theology from below, as it allows
and given space to articulate the hurts, concerns and
the genuine reflections of people with disabilities to come
aspirations of people with disabilities from their social and
to the fore. Theology from below is a form of contextual
faith perspectives. This restoration of voice has enabled
theology that is rooted in human experiences, particularly the
the appropriation of experiences of people with disability
experiences of those who have been labelled ‘the least, last and
in theological discourse, to restore theology to where it
the lost’ (Rocke & Van Dyke 2012:17). Its penchant for taking
belongs, as a reflexive endeavour founded on people’s faith
seriously the experiences of such people, as well as drawing
experiences that cannot be divorced from their context. The
from their stories, symbols and reflections, situates it where it
paradigm developed in this research is not only contextually
belongs. That is, as Rocke and Van Dyke (2012:18) put it, ‘at the
situated, but it also gives voice to the local knowledge
lowest places where God’s grace pools up.’ Without people’s
systems of people that have hitherto been silenced. Within the
experiences such a theology would remain a hollow enterprise
context of disability, this means acknowledging the cultural
offering no sustainable benefit to those it seeks to serve.
specificity and individual uniqueness of every experience of
disability. As Eiesland (1994) notes:
Theology from below logically leads to participation by those
The corporeal is for people with disabilities the most real.
who reflect on their faith experience and who seek to act on
Unwilling and unable to take our bodies for granted, we attend
its demands. It is, therefore, a theology that takes the voice of
to the kinesis of knowledge. That is, we become keenly aware
the ‘other’ seriously. The ‘other’ represent those who, under
that our physical selves determine our perceptions of the social
normal circumstances, ‘are disempowered and marginalised;
and physical. These perceptions, like our bodies, are often
nonconforming and disclose new categories and models of those who seldom benefit from the ethics of discourses
thinking and being. These new embodied categories arise from created and entertained by the powerful or knowledgeable’
the concrete experiences of people with disabilities. (p. 31) (Kotzé 2002:18). Doing theology, no longer the sole preserve
of the educated elite, entails engaging in theological reflection
Even as Eiesland writes in terms of ‘we’, there is always the that is rooted in real-life experience. Taking a cue from what
‘I’ that is hidden in that ‘we’. For although the experience Bosch (1991:425) calls the ‘hermeneutic of the deed’, doing
Page 3 of 9 Original Research
counts more than knowing: only knowledge achieved impairment as a physical problem and disability as a social
through action is capable of transforming the world. problem. He opted for a ‘both/and’ position, suggesting
that disability has both physical and social dimensions and,
Within the postmodern context, where participation is a therefore, a comprehensive definition would include both of
defining feature, there is very little room for dealing out these dimensions. Grönvik (2007), meanwhile, dedicated his
theological prescriptions. Instead, immersion in the process doctoral research to the examination of definitions of disability
of knowledge creation becomes a conditio sine qua non. It is by different researchers, hypothesising that disability is too
this way of doing theology that is preferred in this article. complex and contentious to merit a standard definition and
My engagement, therefore, with people with disabilities that context and purpose determine the content.
and the significant others is a doing theology with. Their
experiences of marginalisation, ostracisation, of being denied Nevertheless, it is useful here to identify four brief
a voice and of being the last, the least and the lost is teased definitions of disability as they relate to different models:
out and engaged – not without them but with them. This the first focuses on a person’s functional limitations (Grönvik
engagement promotes positive and empowering research 2007:11); the second on environmental factors to which the
relationships (Salmon 2007:986), as was later confirmed by individual cannot easily adapt; the third, which is the social
the participants. It does not wield a creed with ready-made model, points to the physical and social environment, not the
answers to questions that have not been asked or problems person himself or herself, as creating barriers to participation
posed by none of those who are participating in this research in society; the fourth is largely administrative, assessing
journey. If it did, it would rightly invite resistance against disability in terms of applicability for aid.
its shaping of unethical practices (Kotzé 2002:17). But before
we engage the concepts of dependence and independence, Despite, or perhaps because of these definitions, Grönvik
it would be in order to attempt a definition of disability and (2007:38) suggests that it is difficult not to conclude that
perhaps the social and environmental issues that render disability is a fascinating, volatile and elusive concept that
people with disabilities dependent. continues to baffle and puzzle researchers. In dealing with
it, efforts should not be expended on finding a universal and
Defining disability in context ‘correct’ definition; rather, the focus should be placed on
describing how disability has been defined (Grönvik 2007:40).
Although it is beyond the scope of this article to give a
In this way there is room for more subjective definitions that
detailed exposition and evaluation of the various definitions
pay attention to individual as well as contextual experiences
of disability, views around some as well as their evolution are
that have been a missing link in disability studies. Such
pertinent. Any attempt at standardisation of the definition
individual experiences not only form an important
of disability would be to prioritise fixity over the fluidity of
component of this article, but also subvert meanings of
meaning, and thus runs counter to the perspective adopted
disability that strive for fixity and universality.
in this article.
Dependence and disability
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and
Health (ICF) encapsulates a supposedly inclusive definition In both society and the church, dependency and disability
of disability adopted by the 191 member countries in defining have for a long time remained synonymous, perhaps more in
disability in terms of impairment, activity limitations or practice than in principle. The book by Stiker (1999), A history
restrictive participation (World Health Organization [WHO] of disability, provides a compendium of the harsh conditions
2001:3). Although this definition was intended to be an under which people with disabilities lived throughout history,
improved version of an earlier one, it has been adversely from biblical times to the birth of rehabilitation. Barnes (1997)
criticised, especially by researchers within disability studies. refers to this condition as a ‘legacy of oppression’ by Western
The incorporation of social and economic considerations did culture. Throughout this time the constant feature that
not see the definition lose its association with the medical characterised the life of a person with disability was to be at
models (Scotch 2002:25.29). the beck and call of others, particularly those who allegedly
had a claim to normalcy. The latter’s call was to determine,
Pfeiffer (2002:4–7) also challenged attempts at defining declare and dismiss people with disabilities to the doldrums
disability, asserting that ‘disability has no scientific or even of society. This era has further been associated with what
a commonly agreed upon definition’, and rejecting the Stiker (1999:105) calls the ‘great confinement’ or ‘massive
possibility that it can be identified or measured. The attempts internment’, during which all those who were considered
by the World Bank and the WHO (ICF), therefore, can only to pose a medical threat to society were placed in secluded
‘further the agenda of eugenics which eliminate people places.
with disabilities’ (Pfeiffer 2002:8). Scotch (2002) echoes the
sentiments of Pfeiffer, claiming that disability cannot be The ancient world of Greece and Rome left us a legacy
defined except with reference to public policy, as ‘whatever and culture devoid of dignity and respect for people with
public laws and programs say it is’ (Scotch 2002:24). In disability. Their economy was founded on the principle of
a slightly nuanced position, French (1993:17) disputed competitiveness, both intellectually and physically. There
an either/or definition, and opposed those who describe was therefore very little room, if any, in such societies
Page 4 of 9 Original Research
for people who were considered, by standards of the The heroic act of Ed Roberts in the early 1950s set in motion
time, disabled (Barnes 1997). Because of their perceived what was to become a landmark project, that of Independent
dependence they were seen as a burden and a reminder of Living (White et al. 2010:235). Developed, run and controlled
an imperfection which was highly abhorred and dreaded by persons with disabilities themselves, ‘Centres for
at the time (Dutton 1996:25). This attitude was inherited by Independent Living’ represented both a desire for self-
the subsequent industrialised, rationalised and medicalised determination and resistance to long-term abuse at the hands
society and church of the 18th century. of non-disabled people. Central to the Independent Living
Movement is maximization of ‘leadership, empowerment,
The 19th century marked the upsurge of the exclusion of independence, and productivity of individuals with
people with disability from mainstream Western society or disabilities’ (White et al. 2010:235).
what was to be known as the ‘Eugenics Movement’. During
this time and its aftermath, the common attitude was to view There is no doubt that the Independent Living Movement
people with physical and intellectual disabilities as posing a made strides not only in subverting the slanted assumptions
threat to Western society (Barnes 1997). In the religious realm of the medical paradigm, but also in helping people with
Christian charity works, though well meant, perpetuated disabilities to adopt a lifestyle amenable to their needs (Barnes
the dependence of people with disabilities. The church, too, 2004:7). It has, however, not been able to shed its association
was caught up in the labels and categories constructed and with neo-liberal jargon such as self-determination, autonomy,
espoused by the larger society on people with disabilities. The privacy and freedom. Independence, autonomy and freedom
centrality of the written and spoken word as well as physical all have an implied ‘from’. These concepts continue to occupy
perfection, in many churches, left people with disabilities a central place in neo-liberal culture and discourse which
feeling unwanted and unwelcome (Webb-Mitchell 1996:39). holds its firm grip on politics and policy on a global scale. The
Two-Thirds World countries have gotten used to the term
independence, particularly in its political sense, but they
Although a major shift from the language of dependence
have not given thought to what it meant and what it means
is currently taking place in the policies and action plans of
in concrete terms. Dube (2000) opines thus on this matter:
countries, the actual practice points to a serious nostalgia for
the dependence paradigm. Educational, medical and justice The postindependence experience of many Two-Thirds World
sectors in different countries have displayed propensity for countries has also rudely shown that ‘independence’ from other
the dependence paradigm, at least in practice. Almost all nations and cultures, even from those that oppressed them, is
neither practical nor the best means for survival. (p. 185)
these sectors place people with disabilities at the mercy of
professionals who continue to construct them as institutional
The point which Dube ably demonstrates is that within the
subjects whose lives depend on the policies, laws and
economy of human interaction the concept of independence
protocols made by the powerful (Leshota 2011:135). Lesotho
is impracticable, as humans cannot afford to untangle
is no exception to these attitudes and practices regarding
themselves from other humans. Its application is even more
people with disabilities. Despite their presence in every sphere
difficult in contexts where interconnectedness, kinship and
of human life (Anderson 2003:2), the absence, alienation and
relationality are the defining features of what it means to
discrimination that characterise their life experiences are
be human (Mbiti 1969:91–92; Ogbonnaya 1994:10; Tutu
unashamedly glaring. Jack, one of the participants in this
1999:35). Africa in general and Lesotho in particular, despite
study had this to say: ‘We have no eyes, ears, voice, mobility
long years of colonial and neo-colonial onslaught, still show
and everybody feels entitled to do and say things on our
proclivity for their culture and worldview, particularly the
behalf without even asking us.’
ubuntu aspect with its feature of interdependence.
Evacuating the dependence and
Embracing the interdependent
independence paradigms of disability
paradigm in disability issues
The 17th-century ’great confinement’, which revolved
There is an acknowledged shift of paradigms from being
around segregation aimed at maintaining social order,
dependent on others, to being independent from them and
gave way to a new paradigm with respect to people with
to being interdependent with them, particularly within the
disabilities. This was the paradigm of medical power
context of disability. The following conversation with Jack,
sustained by the ideas of the Enlightenment. Characterised
one of the participants in this research article, reflects this shift:
by sharper scientific focus and improved medical treatment
Paul: ‘Could we say, as people with disabilities, that we are
of diseases, it marked the emergence of new power which
dependent on others for our survival?’
continues to dominate to the present day (Stiker 1999:104).
It was during this time that people with disabilities became Jack: ‘That assertion suggests a one-way street, that is, we [people
dependent on the authority of the medical practitioner with disabilities] depend on others and not vice versa.’
who only could decide on their needs and desires (Dejong Paul: ‘Could we then say we are independent from them?’
1979). Persons with disabilities could not continue to rely on
Jack: ‘That would be another extreme … Eh … I think it is
others as this degraded their value as human beings and was becoming clear that we need each other and so we better
unsustainable in the long term. call ourselves interdependent.’
Page 5 of 9 Original Research
Paul: ‘So you mean non-disabled people depend on you in some been fully appreciated: ‘selfhood within the context of Africa
instances!’ emerges dialogically, through participation in a community of
Jack: ‘Absolutely. Yes they do. When there is no light in the other human beings’ (my emphasis).
house my wife and my children, for example, rely on me to
navigate the room. You also see that the whole University As seen by Tutu (1999), botho is a way of being in the world
staff relies on Reg’s memory to connect them to people and finds its truest expression in different facets of people’s
they want to talk to through phone without having to lives. It is in this context that the rites of passage can be
make them wait as he flips through the telephone directly.
called components of the liturgy of life in Africa. Their
Can you imagine how much time, perhaps money as well,
celebration and the rituals associated with them always have
are saved in not having to flip through the telephone
a communal component of the ‘we’ as opposed to the ‘I’.
directory with every call that goes out? Clearly you need
Their social function is rooted not only in their involvement
us in some instances and we need you sometimes to
of the living but also in the involvement of the living dead,
navigate these ungodly surrounding with steps and holes
all over. So I think we do not entirely depend on you and the ancestors and the spirits (Bourdillon 1990:18–48).
you do not entirely depend on us. It is not correct to say Because people (batho) are called and ordered towards
you are entirely independent from us. And to want to live unity, rituals and rites of passage function to cement that
independently from each other would be a travesty of our unity and communion (Bourdillon 1990:24). Botho, therefore,
sociability as humans. But we should not forget that we recognises that no person can exist in isolation and that as
also interdependently, depend on God.’ interdependent beings people exist in a complex network
of relationships. In a botho worldview, solidarity is key
Interdependence derives from people’s nature as social beings. (LenkaBula 2008:381), so an injury to one member is bound to
This is even more pronounced in the African worldview where affect the entire web of relationships, whether suprahuman,
the self is inconceivable outside the community. Mbiti (1969) human or ecological. This view is further buttressed by the
and Ogbonnaya (1994) are among several African scholars strong tendency towards unity that is found in the Sesotho2
who have spared no effort in underscoring the significance proverbs. The proverbs are not only reflective of the wisdom
of the notion of communalism and its attendant attributes of society, but are also yearnings for what the society should
of interconnectedness and interdependence in an African continue to be (Mokitimi 1997:23).
worldview. In their view, communality is foundational to the
African worldview (Mbiti 1969:91–92), and interdependence Gade (2012) in his interesting article, ‘What is Ubuntu?’,
is the basis of relations within the community (Ogbonnaya discovers two different clusters among South Africans of
1994:10). The reality of interdependence is further confirmed African descent, namely, those who view ubuntu as (1)
in the Bible. moral quality of a person or (2) a philosophy or worldview
according to which persons are interconnected (my emphasis).
Below we discuss in a more expanded way the practical I do not think we have to pit one against the other as both can
theologies with resonance from the already existing coexist. Botho, as it were, is a way of being which expresses
theological nomenclature that emerged out of our itself in concrete actions and personal casts of generosity,
conversations with people with disabilities. hospitality, friendliness, caring and compassion which all
point to a virtuous life. Botho is further seen and anchored in
Practical theology of ‘botho’
an African life (Bhengu 1996:10). Life is what we live, in word
(‘ubuntu’) and deed. This life of word and deed is not only grounded
in communion and relationships, but it is also an expression
In conversation, Jack said, ‘We all need to display “botho” in
and manifestation of that communion; hence, the practical
order to live peacefully and harmoniously with everybody
theology of botho.
for as we say “motho ke motho ka batho”’, evoking what
has come to be known as authentic Africanness embodied Practical theology of koinonia
in a much celebrated notion of botho or ubuntu. ‘Botho’ is
a Sesotho word that captures the essence of what it means Jack’s words above, that we interdependently depend on God,
to be human (Murithi 2009:226). The concept is found in brought a Christian theological touch, evoking, as it were, a
many forms in a number of societies throughout Africa, in link with a theology of communion, expressed and captured
almost all of which it represents personhood or humaneness aptly, through different metaphors, in the New Testament
(LenkaBula 2008:378). writings. In fact this idea of church as koinonia stood out
in conversations with Reg, another participant, who when
Botho touches on all aspects of life because in the African quizzed on the meaning of church as people of God spoke
worldview everything is interconnected, without compart- of the nuance of fellowship, communion, belonging, sharing
ments. The personal, political, economic, psychological, and participation. Gleeson (2006:2) states that the church in its
religious and relational are all intertwined, while personhood origin, nature and mission is held together in a fundamental
is defined relationally (Mkhize 2004:4–24). Although
the adage of motho ke motho ka batho is often cited in the 2.Sesotho is a word used to refer to the way of life of the Basotho people. Several of
their proverbs emphasise unity and working together. Proverbs are appreciated not
discussions around African notions of personhood, Mkhize only for their linguistic and aesthetic value, they are also valued for their importance
in shaping how people should see the world, how they should relate with others
(2004:5–24) believes that its dialogical implications have not and how they should feel the atmosphere in the society in which they live.
Page 6 of 9 Original Research
unity and communion of faith and life which is made up in the ‘other’ and the ‘different’, which incidentally became part
and by Jesus Christ. The metaphors of a building with Jesus of Volf’s experience in Croatia. His metaphor of embrace
as the foundation stone, a vine with Jesus as the stem, a revolved around four structural elements, namely, opening
flock with Jesus as the shepherd, a body with Jesus as head, arms, waiting for response, closing arms and opening arms
point to a life of communion and unity all held together by again. They are adopted here with some ideas from De Saint
attachment to Jesus (Gleeson 2006:2). These metaphors find a Exupéry’s work titled The little prince; hence, starting with
new expression in John and in the Acts of the Apostles which closed arms:
is that of koinonia, especially as articulated in Acts (2:4–14),
John (15:1–17) and in 1 Corinthians 12. Closed arms
According to De Saint Exupéry (1943:58), closed arms would
In the above contexts the central idea is that of sharing,
be the best place from which to begin. The embrace of Volf
participation and impartation deriving from unity and
would resemble the taming of De Saint Exupéry, and to tame
communion of life. Communion of the Father, Son and
is to establish ties. To establish ties derives from the need for
Holy Spirit are foundational to the communion between
each other, but it is not automatic. It takes patience, sitting
and within members of the church. The bonding attributes
down a little distance and looking at one from the corner of
and manifestations of this unity and communion are
the eye, saying nothing. This would be the guarded closed
love, compassion, tolerance, care, understanding, mutual
arms and the patient looking at each other. It would invite
responsibility and concern for others’ welfare. Communion or
the meeting of hearts and an unpresumptuous trust that
koinonia is not some kind of Orwellian Sugar-Candy Mountain
is necessary for embrace to take place – an embrace that
expressed only in lofty words with no corresponding
expresses itself through caring with as opposed to caring for.
concretisation of those ideals. It is held together by a bond of
love which derives its strength from the Trinitarian intimacy
(Navone 1989:26). Opening arms
Opening the arms is a bodily gesture of reaching out to
Relationship with God and with one another is a defining
another. It underlines the inadequacy of the self and its need
feature of a church as communion or koinonia. This
for the ‘other’ for its relational survival. It further signals a
relationship derives from the Trinitarian relationship and it
creation of a space in oneself for the other (Volf 1996:141).
should be seen as a participation in that eternal conversation
The gesture says that ‘others are seen as potentially
of the Trinity (Navone 1989:25). Humans are, as Navone
enriching friends’ (Volf 2002:16). It is within the context of
(1989:24) suggests, ‘communitarian by nature, conceived
what Wolgemuth and Donohue (2006:1033) call an ethic of
and born in and through human community. We are
friendship that one’s own vulnerabilities and weaknesses
interdependent.’ In communion, and where participation
create space for a deeper and more articulated understanding
and sharing are features, differences are not assimilated but
of care. Opened arms represent the comfort that creates space
appreciated and celebrated.
for ambiguity and transformation (Wolgemuth & Donohue
2006:1033). This ambiguity conspires with the kenotic self-
Practical theology of embrace:
weakening to open possibilities for the discovery of the
Embracing each other
silenced and marginalised other. This is an exercise in self-
emptying without which the Trinitarian love cannot be fully
Jack and Reg expressed a common sentiment regarding
experienced. While self-emptying may sound good enough,
making the world more humane: Re lokela ho ts’oaranang ka
it has, however, been a source of pain for people who became
matsoho, translated as ‘We need to hold each other in arms’,
too trusting and went into the caring for which masqueraded
although in Sesotho it is more than this and carries the
as caring with. The opening of arms is an invitation for the
nuance of equality: accepting each other with one’s strength
other to participate in the creation of fellowship (koinonia).
or contribution. I have found the metaphor of embrace
Fellowship implies admission of the need to be enriched by
or what Volf (1992, 1995,1996, 2002, 2004) calls a ’catholic
others as well as one’s potential to be enriched by the other.
personality’, more akin to what ts’oaranang ka matsoho stands
The opening of arms, therefore, signifies the need to love
for. Such an embrace comes out clearly within the context of
as well as the need to be loved. It is openness for mutual
the botho worldview and koinonia.
enrichment.
Although the metaphor of embrace has been explored by
a number of scholars from a wide range of disciplines, it Waiting for response
was Volf (1996) who offered a comprehensive theological
This phase points to the reciprocal nature of the movement
exploration of the metaphor, exploiting this metaphor
of embrace. The waiting arms are actions of allowing the
to confront the reality of exclusion which has reigned
‘other’ to have the power to respond or not to respond to
unfettered throughout the history of the church.3
the invitation (Jacobs 2004:258). It is a reminder that there
The object of exclusion at best and hatred at worst has been
is no coercion involved in embrace, and reciprocity is at the
3.We need to acknowledge, though, that the framework within which Volf developed core of this movement. It loathes manipulation, violence and
his ideas has ‘identity’ as its starting point, ‘others’ as its catalyst and ‘reconciliation’
as its end result. coercion, and, as Volf (1996:142) argues, the power of the
Page 7 of 9 Original Research
waiting self is the power of the self, which does not break the and made possible inclusiveness as hospitality (Stookey
boundaries and force itself into the other but rather operates 2003:95–100). Through his cross, he made it possible to go
through respect, gentleness and hope to achieve what one beyond the exclusion versus inclusion binary to a deeper
would call a reciprocal dance of embrace. This waiting allows reflection on interdependence (Newell 2007:326).
for the other to say, ‘I am ready, and now I can trust enough
Theology of interdependence:
to flung myself into the arms of the other.’
When we need each other
Closing arms
The theology of interdependence as visualised by
This marks the end for which the opening of arms was
participants in this research is founded on the two pillars of
carried out. It is realised in the active holding of the other
koinonia and botho, which are further marked out and held
and the passivity of being held by the other (Volf 1996:143). It
together by a feature of embrace (see Figure 1). Although
points to the occupation of the space created by both parties
they derive from and represent two different worldviews,
on both sides of the embrace continuum. Elsewhere Volf
a natural synergy between Christian spirituality (koinonia)
(1995) describes it thus:
and botho cannot be missed. The Christian notion of koinonia
Closed arms are a sign that I want the other to become a part expresses itself in the values of communion, belonging,
of me while I at the same time maintain my own identity. By
sharing and participation which are founded on what Falcao
becoming part of me, the other enriches me. In a mutual embrace,
(1988) would call ‘Trinitarian co-operation’. The Trinitarian
none remains the same because each enriches the other, yet both
intimate relationship is paradigmatic of how Christians
remain true to their genuine selves. (p. 203)
should behave towards each other (Ac 2–4). In a way, the
Trinity has both vertical and horizontal dimensions.
For the closing of arms to be accomplished without the other
being crushed or annihilated requires gentleness and respect.
Within the Lucan worldview, Christians did not regard what
Both respect and appreciate the other’s need to maintain that
they had as belonging to the individual, as all was common
otherness and difference, because it leads to possibilities of
property, stemming from a sense of mutual belonging and
transformation for both parties to grow in ways that would
mutual need for each other. Read in the light of Pauline
not have been imagined before. This is what Volf (1995:199)
metaphor of the body, this meant that the starving of one
calls a ‘catholic personality’, and points to susceptibility to
member was tantamount to starving of self and, consequently,
enrichment by otherness and difference. It is a personality
the starving of the group. This sense of fellowship suggests
that becomes what it is because ‘multiple others have been
that all who have faith in Jesus belong and have the right of
reflected in it in a particular way’. This is the holding each
participation.
other in arms (re ts’oaraneng ka matsoho) implied by Reg. In
the closing of arms, space for the other and the different is
The notion of botho, too, implies communalism,
created within one’s own sense of identity. One’s identity
interconnectedness, relationality and participation which
and the other’s identity, in the process of making space for
cannot be fully appreciated outside its religious context.
the other, are both reconfigured (Volf 1996:91).
Anyone who lives according to the ancestral dictates can
hardly fail to manifest the above values, embodied in botho,
Opening arms again
as the life of the ancestors is prolonged in the life of the living
This an invitation for the other to return, a gesture that (Pula 1990:13). It, therefore, has both vertical and horizontal
acknowledges that embrace was not total identification with dimensions. This sense of mutual belonging within the botho
the other but a relationship which allows for both becoming worldview is expressed in concrete actions of generosity,
part of another while at the same time maintaining their hospitality, friendliness and compassion to others (Mkhize
own otherness. Opening arms is letting the other go, so that 2004:4–24). The underlying proposition for both koinonia
boundary-making does not preclude the embrace of yet and botho is that we belong together and we are inextricably
others (Volf 1996:145). bound. It is in this sense that Tutu speaks of a natural synergy
between the Christian values and ubuntu. Ultimately both of
Within the context of disability, the metaphor of embrace them originate from God through the mind of God’s creation.
underlines the importance of regard for oneself which is
linked to regard for the other. Even though dehumanisation It, therefore, goes without saying that we share in the same
of people with disabilities has fed on their ‘otherness’ humanity with people with disabilities. We are through
(Weingarten 2003:160), without that otherness there is them and they are through us. We share with them in the
no reason to reach out or to love. According to Levinas same botho and are members of the same body through faith
(1984:166), love consists of the acceptance of the difference in Jesus. We are better seen as interdependent. However,
of the other. According to the Bible, this is the love of Christ that interdependence does not take away the fact that
to humanity who, despite his innocence, loved unrepentant we are distinct identities and to be different is divinely
humanity with the love that surpasses all knowledge (Lk ordained as we are such because God willed it to be. Being
15:11–32; Eph 3:19). Through his death and resurrection God different does not necessarily imply competitiveness,
became accessible, healed believers, developed relationships hostility and exclusion. Given our vulnerability and our
Page 8 of 9 Original Research
feature even the so-called non-disabled people begin to
Theology of interdependence realise that people with disabilities are better able than them
on certain issues and vice versa hence their need for each
other. Figure 1 summarises the foundational tenets of the
theology of interdependence and their attributes.
Koinonia Embrace Botho
Conclusion
The paradigm of interdependence, founded on botho and
Communion Communalism koinonia, finds support from ideas that emerged out of
Belonging Metanoia Interconnec(cid:16)on our interaction with people with disabilities. It, therefore,
Sharing Rela(cid:16)onality represents the local voice, the voice from below and is,
Par(cid:16)cipa(cid:16)on Par(cid:16)cipa(cid:16)on therefore, a theology from below, whose main interlocutor
are the marginalised other (Bosch 1991:423). In our case,
Trinity Supernatural
the ‘marginalised other’ are people with disabilities whose
destinies and fates have been at the beck and call of others.
FIGURE 1: Theology of interdependence as visualised by participants.
The notion of ubuntu/botho out of which emerges the practical
proneness to dehumanisation, we need to submit ourselves theology of ubuntu/botho and that of koinonia which share a
to the process of metanoia and constant change of heart. common feature of embrace, evolved out of our discussion
Metanoia, read in the light of botho and koinonia consists in with participants in this research article. There is no
the undoing of and turning away from attitudes that seek intention to suggest that the ideas of botho/ubuntu, koinonia
to relate to other humans in ways that are exploitative and or embrace originate with people with disabilities. What this
dehumanising (LenkaBula 2008:387). Within the context article is suggesting is that when given voice, people with
of the theology of interdependence, founded on botho disabilities are able to articulate their thoughts which have
and koinonia, dehumanisation of the other, though real, is to be used to develop theologies that are amenable to their
untenable. As Tutu (1999:35) observes, ‘in the process of own experiences. Some of these voices resonate with notions
dehumanising another, the perpetrators are inexorably that are well established and in circulation within the fields
being dehumanised as well’. Indeed we cannot afford of philosophy, politics, social sciences and theology.
to keep on dehumanising ourselves in others for that is
theoretically and practically unsustainable. Botho is a local Welcoming and accepting people with disabilities in the
representation of koinonia – with differing emphases - church, therefore, is not only demanded by human nature,
underpinning the need for people to engage in what it is also conditio sine qua non for the church’s existence.
Ogbonnaya (1994:77) calls a ‘dance of harmony’. If a church is by definition a communion, then mutual
dependence, and therefore interdependence, is its defining
Kwon (2001:43) too, views interdependence through a matrix feature. The notion of dependence that is presumed in the
of relational self (communion). Kwon’s point is buttressed by medical model of disability is transcended and rendered
an Interim Statement by the World Council of Churches, A untenable by the interdependent nature of the communion-
Church of All and for All (2003), which defines the church as bound church. On the other hand, the model of independent
‘a place and process of communion … a place of hospitality living that has been publicised by certain schools of thoughts
and welcome’. It is essentially viewed as a true community within disability studies (Ntlatlapa 2007) would run counter
of people founded and nurtured by God who, though to the ideas of a theology of interdependence. Within the
different, complement each other in their gifts and talents context of the theology of interdependence the sustainability
(WCC 2003:#85). One can therefore talk about the theology of ‘independence’ as a disability paradigm would be dubious.
of interdependence, with people not interdependent simply The theology of botho with its feature of interconnectedness,
because some have disabilities, but because they are by expressed through acts of hospitality and love, becomes the
nature inadequate and insufficient. They are, as the Interim local expression of the theology of koinonia. They both provide
Statement asserts, incomplete without talents and gifts of innovative lenses through which people with disabilities
other people (WCC 2003:#87). should be allowed to occupy their rightful places within human
society and within the church. Theology of interdependence,
All people belong to the same human race, to the same
with botho and koinonia as their pillars and embrace as their
creation of God and are created in God’s image. Believers
common denominator, should be allowed to shape attitudes
are all members of the body of Christ and should have
towards disability and people with disabilities.
equal share and participation in the life of the church, each
according to his or her call and unique gifts. We are neither Acknowledgements
fully independent nor entirely dependent on others, but
are better seen as interdependent. In a community where I would like to thank the participants, in particular people
interdependence is a defining feature our differences do not with disabilities, who willingly agreed to participate in this
constitute a reason for exclusion but a reason for the need of study and who freely shared their experiences and thus
others. In a community where interdependence is a defining made their voices heard.
Page 9 of 9 Original Research
Competing interests Mkhize, N., 2004, ‘Sociocultural approaches to psychology: Dialogism and African
conceptions of the self’, in D. Hook, N. Mkhize, P. Kiguwa & A. Collins (eds.), Critical
psychology, pp. 53–83, UCT Press, Cape Town.
The author declares that he has no financial or personal
Mokitimi, M.I., 1997, The voice of the people, Unisa Press, Pretoria.
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced
Müller, J., 2003, ‘HIV/AIDS, narrative practical theology, and postfoundationalism: The
him in writing this article. emergence of a new story’, HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies 60(1/2),
References Murithi, T., 2009, ‘An African perspective on peace education: Ubuntu lessons in
org/10.1007/s11159-009-9129-0
Ackermann, D.M., 1994, ‘Faith and feminism: Women doing theology’, in J.W. De Navone, J., 1989, Self-giving and sharing: The Trinity and human fulfillment, Liturgical
Gruchy & C. Villa-Vicencio (eds.), Doing theology in context: South African Press, Collegeville, MN.
perspectives, pp. 197–211, Orbis Books, Maryknoll, NY.
Newell, C., 2007, ‘Disabled theologies and the journeys of liberation to
for healing in South Africa’, in D.J. Ackermann & R. Bons-Storm, Liberating faith org/10.1177/0966735006076170
practices: Feminist practical theologies in context, pp. 75–102, Peeters, Leuven.
Ntlatlapa, M., 2007, ‘Lesotho-traditional & socio-political disability paradigms’, in
Anderson, D.W., 2003, ‘Special education as reconciliation’, Journal of Education and Rolling Rains Report: Precipitating Dialogue on Travel, Disability, and Universal
Anderson, R.C. & Blair, W.D., 2003, Survey of theological education and people with Ogbonnaya, A.O., 1994, ‘Person as community: An African understanding of the
disabilities, The Centre for Religion & Disability, Inc., Birmingham, AL. person as an intrapsychic community’, Journal of Black Psychology 20, 75–87.
Barnes, C., 1997, ‘A legacy of oppression: A history of disability in Western culture’, in
C. Barnes & M. Oliver, Disability studies: Past, present and future, pp. 3–25, The Oliver, M., 1993, ‘What’s so wonderful about walking?’, inaugural professorial lecture,
Disability Press, Leeds. University of Greenwich, London.
Barnes, C., 2004, Independent living, politics and implications, Centre for Disability Pfeiffer, D., 2002, ‘The philosophical foundations of disability studies’, Disability
Studies, Leeds. Studies Quarterly 22(2), 3–23.
Bhengu, M.J., 1996, Ubuntu: The essence of democracy, Novalis Press, Cape Town. Pula, A.L., 1990, Jesu Tseleng ea Balimo: Bolumeli ba ho phela thabong ea Molimo,
Mazenod Printing Works, Mazenod.
Bosch, D.J., 1991, Transforming mission. Paradigm shifts in theology of mission, Orbis,
New York, NY. Rocke, K. & Van Dyke, J., 2012, Geography of grace: Doing theology from below, Street
Psalms Press, Washington, DC.
Bourdillon, M., 1990, Religion and society: A text for Africa, Mambo Press, Gweru.
Salmon, A., 2007, ‘Walking the talk: How participatory interview methods can
Archives of Physical Medicine Rehabilitation 60, 435–446. org/10.1177/1049732307305250
De Saint Exupéry, A., 1943, The little prince, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, New York, NY. Scotch, R.K., 2002, ‘Paradigms of American social research on disability: What’s new?’
Dube, M., 2000, Postcolonial feminist interpretation of the Bible, Chalice Press, Disability Studies Quarterly 22(2), 23–24.
St. Louis, MO. Stiker, H., 1999, A history of disability, University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.
Dutton, K., 1996, The perfectable body, Cassell, London. Stookey, L.H., 2003, ‘Inclusiveness as hospitality in worship settings’, Journal of Religion,
Abingdon, Nashville, TN. Tutu, D., 1999, No future without forgiveness, Rider, Johannesburg.
Falcao, N., 1988, Theology of co-operation: Christ the liberator and man the co- Volf, M., 1992, ‘Catholicity of “two or three”: A Free Church reflection on
French, S., 1993, ‘Disability impairment or something in between’, in J. Swain, org/10.1111/j.1758-6623.1995.tb03698.x
V. Finkelstein, S. French & M. Oliver (eds.), Disabling barriers – Enabling Volf, M., 1995, ‘A vision of embrace: Theological perspectives on cultural identity and
environments, pp. 17–25, Sage, London. conflict’, The Ecumenical Review 48(2), 195–205.
Gadamer, H., 1975, Truth and method, Crossroads, New York, NY. Volf, M., 1996, Exclusion and embrace: A theological exploration of identity, otherness,
Gade, C.B.N., 2012, ‘What is Ubuntu? Different interpretations among South Africans and reconciliation, Abingdon, Nashville, TN.
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02580136.2012.10751789 & L.G. Peachey (eds.), Where was God on Sept. 11, pp. 85–90, Herald Press,
Gleeson, B., 2006, ‘Images and understandings of the church in the New Testament: Scottdale, PA.
An overview’, Australian Journal of Theology 8, 1–12. Volf, M., 2004, After our likeness: The church as the image of the Trinity, Eerdmans,
Grönvik, L., 2007, Definitions of disability in social sciences: Methodological Grand Rapids, MI.
perspectives, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis, Uppsala. Webb-Mitchell, B., 1996, Dancing with disabilities: Opening the church to all God’s
Jacobs, A.I., 2004, ‘Disabled identities: Pastoral work with people who are mobility children, United Church Press, Cleveland, O.H.
impaired’, DTh thesis, Department of Practical Theology, University of South Africa. Weingarten, K., 2003, Common shock: Witnessing violence every day – How we are
Kotzé, D., 2002, ‘Doing participatory ethics’, in D. Kotzé, J. Myburg, J. Roux & Associates harmed, how we can heal, Dutton, New York, NY.
(eds.), Ethical ways of being, pp. 1–34, Ethics Alive, Pretoria. White, G., Simpson, J.L., Gonda, C., Ravesloot, C. & Coble, Z., 2010, ‘Moving
Kwon, S., 2001, ‘Codependence and interdependence: Cross-cultural reappraisal of from independence to interdependence: A conceptual model for better
org/10.1177/1044207309350561
LenkaBula, L., 2008, ‘Beyond anthropocentricity: Botho/Ubuntu and the quest for
economic and ecological justice in Africa’, Religion and Theology 15(3/4), 375–394. Wolgemuth, J.R. & Donohue, R., 2006, ‘Toward an inquiry of discomfort: Guiding
transformation in “emancipatory” narrative research’, Qualitative Inquiry 12(5),
Lesotho’, DTh thesis, Department of Practical Theology, University of South Africa.
World Council of Churches, 2003, A church of all and for all – An interim statement,
Levinas basic philosophical writings, pp. 161–170, Indiana University Press, documents/commissions/
Bloomington, IN.
World Health Organisation [WHO], 2001, International classification of impairments,
Mbiti, J., 1969, African religions and philosophy, Heinemann, London. disabilities, and handicaps, WHO, Geneva.