]hp-oib.scisyhp[
1v5604010/scisyhp:viXra
From Discrete Protein Kinetics to Continuous Brownian
Dynamics: A New Perspective
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2420
qian@amath.washington.edu
November 20, 2018
Conformationalfluctuationisafundamentalcharacteristicofproteinsinaqueoussolution,which
differentiates the macromolecules from small molecules. The intrinsic beauty and the remarkable
details of the protein structures from crystallography often resulted in the view that proteins
are static. However, it is the conformational flexibility along with the well-defined structures
which give rise to the versatile, almost magic, functionalities of proteins and enzymes (Karplus and
McCammon,1983). Eversincetheconceptionofallostericenzyme(Koshlandetal.,1966, Monodet
al., 1966), themultiplestatenotionofproteinshasbeenwidelyappreciated. Twoparticularnotable
examples arethemodels for folding kineticsof solubleglobular proteins andthegating kinetics
of membrane channel proteins. Both these models introduce discrete conformational states which
are macroscopic and operationally defined by kinetic experiments (Tsong et al., 1972, Ehrenstein
et. al., 1974). These models are usually expressed as
where U and N are unfolded and native states of a soluble protein, with k 1 and k 2 as folding and
unfolding rate constants. Similarly, O and C are open and closed states of a membrane channel
protein, with k and k as closing and openning rate constants. When such simple models can not
explain specific experiments, usually more intermediate states are added (Bezanilla et al., 1994,
Baldwin, 1995).
The discrete state description of proteins, however, neglects conformational fluctuations within
each state. Theenergy landscapetheory, treating thepolypeptidesaspolymers, isan morerealistic
viewoftheproteindynamics(Frauenfelderetal.,1991,Wolynesetal.,1995,Zwanzig,1995,Doyleet
al., 1997). More importantly, recent experimental studies on several proteins indicate that it is also
necessary to invoke continuous energy landscapesinorder toprovidecomprehensiveinterpretations
for the experiments (Sigg et al., 1999, Qian and Chan, 1999). There are now a host of laboratory
observations which call attentions to interpretations based on continuous energy. Most notably
are (i) rapid early conformational changes in relaxation kinetics and (ii) nonactivated transitions
induced by strong external forces. From a conceptual standpoint, as we shall show, these two types
of observations are intimately related to the hysteresis and “bond rupturing” phenomena recently
observedinthereceptor-ligand dissociation underatomic forcemicroscopy (Florin etal., 1994; Moy
et al., 1994; Evans and Ritchie, 1997, Shapiro and Qian, 1997, 1998, Merkel et al., 1999).
In thecontinuous approach, the kinetics of amolecule isviewed as aBrownian motion onan en-
ergy surface. The theoretical basis of this approach has been extensively studied by Smoluchowski,
Kramers, and others and is summarized in a review article on the fifty years after Kramers theory
(H¨anggi et al., 1990). It is interesting to see that the merging of discrete with continuous kinetic
models has been a long process in chemistry, and it is now the turn for proteins. The following is
a quotation from the article, which gives us a historical perspective.
... For unimolecular gas phase reactions, a description of the rate in terms of discrete
energy exchange was more suitable than the continuous energy-exchange mechanism
underlying energy diffusion in Kramers’ model (1941). Work on chemical reactions in
condensed phase, for which the Kramers theory is most appropriate, had to await the
experimental progress achieved in the late seventies and eighties.
It is important to point out that every kinetic relaxation experiment has to involve two con-
ditions for the protein under study. For protein folding they are usually the solvent condition or
temperature, and for ion-channel gating it is membrane electrical potential. Recent experiments
also apply external mechanical forces on proteins. At time zero, the protein under condition 1 is
subjected to condition 2, which initiates the relaxation kinetics of the molecule. In terms of the
energy function (potential of mean force), there are two different energy functions corresponding
to the two conditions (Karplus and Shakhnovich, 1992, Qian and Chan, 1999). For the two-state
kinetics show in Eq. 1, the corresponding energy landscapes are shown in Fig. 1A. Each discrete
state is associated with an energy well. The continuous model, however, also points out that the
shape of an energy well, as well as their relative heights, change with the condition. Immediately
after the initiation, not only the thermal equilibrium between the two wells are perturbed, the
equilibrium within each of the wells too is perturbed. Therefore the response of a protein to the
perturbation is to readjust its equilibrium distributions within each energy wells, as well as to
redistribute between the two wells. Since the latter process is thermally activated while the for-
mer process is energetically down-hill, the readjustment contributes a rapid early conformational
change in any relaxation kinetics of proteins. One uniquefeature of this process, however, is that it
is not thermally activated, hence non-exponential. Experimentally, from such non-exponential dif-
fusionprocessoneisexpected toobservefaster relaxation timewithfaster measurementaltemporal
resolution, reminiscent of a fractal behavior.
Since the down-hill readjustment within each energy well is usually much faster than the two-
state barrier crossing, and since the magnitude of the readjustament is usually small relative to
that of the two-state transition, such early kinetic events are difficult to observe experimentally.
However, recent experiments on gating of voltage-dependent membrane ion channel proteins have
observed suchfastkineticphase(StefaniandBezanilla, 1996), andaBrowniandiffusionmechanism
has been proposed for the early fast (∼ µs) components in the movement of gating-charge of the
channel responding to a sudden change in membrane voltage (Sigg et al., 1999). In the kinetics
of protein folding, such a fast energetically down-hill event is also observed (Sosnick et al., 1996,
Hagen et al., 1996, Qi et al., 1998). In addition, a large amount of experimental observation of
various intermediate states in the early time of protein folding kinetics (known as molten globular
states) can be interpreted by a readjustment step responding to a sudden change in denaturant
concentration in solvent (Karplus and Shakhnovich, 1992, Qian and Chan, 1999).
A second situation under which discrete kinetics fail to provide a cogent interpretation is when
the perturbationis so large that it completely eliminates the activation barrier, as shown in Fig 1B.
Under such conditions, the traditional rate process with thermal activation loses its meaning all
together and the relaxation is a very fast energetically down-hill diffusion. This phenomenon has
not been observed in monomeric protein folding (unfolding) kinetics. However, such a mechanism
lies behind streptavidin-biotin bond rupturing with atomic force microscopy (Shapiro and Qian,
1997, 1998), aswell assuccessive unfoldingofgiant muscleproteintitin by force(Qian andShapiro,
1999). A similar behaviour also has been observed in the gating kinetics of K+ channel with an
extreme holding potential (Sigg et al., 1999).
The introduction of continuous energy landscape does not invalidate the discrete transition
between two energy wells, rather it generalizes the discrete model with an increasing molecular
details. It is well known that with a sufficient large activation barrier separating two energy wells,
there is a rapid equilibrium within each well. Furthermore, the transition from one well to another
is essentially exponential, i.e., Arrhenius (also known as discrete-state Markovian). This is the
theoretical basis for the practice of discrete-state kinetics. One should recognize, however, that
the “molecular structures” of the discrete states, which usually are defined experimentally through
spectroscopy, change withtheenvironmentalcondition fortheprotein. Thesechanges alsoreflected
in the baselines when fitting discrete multi-state models to equilibrium measurements (Qian, 1997,
Qian and Chan, 1999).
Another important reason for introducing the continuous energy function to augement the
discrete-state kinetics is the inability of relating energy to force in the latter framework. Force is
the change of energy in response to a change in distance. As we can see the concept of distance
is completely missing in the discrete-kinetics. In the continuous energy landscape, no matter
how ill-defined the reaction coordinates are, they provides a conceptual framework. Therefore,
the continuous energy landscape provides a bridge between the experimental studies on kinetic
of proteins and more direct measurements of force and displacement on single protein molecules
(Kellermayer et al., 1997, Reif et al., 1997, Tskhovrebova et al., 1997, Qian and Shapiro, 1999).
In summary, one important consequence of the energy landscape concept is that within each
discrete kinetic state, there could be significant conformational readjustmentduea changing condi-
tion(perturbation)fortheprotein,suchaschangesintemperature,solvent, ormembranepotential.
Therefore, following a sudden change in one of these conditions, a protein has two characteristic
kinetic steps: an energetically down-hill readjustment into the new equilibrium position within the
same discrete state, and then an thermally activated rate process which jumps from one discrete
state into another with lower energy. When the perturbation is sufficiently larger, it is also pos-
sible that the activation barrier is completely eliminated. Then the kinetics becomes a down-hill
diffusion, and relaxation kinetics is no longer exponential. The continuous energy perspective on
protein kinetics provides a comprehensive theoretical framework for a host of experimental obser-
vations, ranging from protein folding, to membrane channel gating, to protein-ligand dissociation
and protein unfolding under external force.
The conceptual thrust of the continuous energy landscape approach to proteins is that it pro-
vides a theoretical language for discussing a wide range of dynamical behavior of proteins. It has
laid a foundation for developing a macromolecular mechanics at a mesoscopic level between the
discrete models and the atomic-level molecular dynamics (Qian and Shapiro, 1999). It allows im-
portant concepts such as force and movement to be discussed on an equal footing as energy and
thermodynamic states. With the recent significant progress in biophysical measurements of forces
and movements in single protein molecules, models based on continuous Brownian dynamics will
becomeanindispensablepartoftheproteinscience. Inasimilarspirit,Eisenbergandhiscolleagues
have developed a diffusion theory for ion movement (not to be confused with protein movement in
the gating kinetics) in open channels to augement traditional discrete-state models. For a review
see Cooper et al. (1988) and Eisenberg (1996).
Here is an example to show how the continuous energy function serves as a unifying theoretical
edifice in molecular biophysics. One interesting phenomenon observed from protein-ligand interac-
tion under external force is hysteresis: the association process under a force and the dissociation
process under a force are significantly different. This can be quantitatively interpreted as in Fig.
2. Compare this model with the well-known protein folding-unfolding kinetics scheme below, one
immediately sees that the main feature of the two molecular processes are indeed identical.
unfolded state folded state
native condition wet molten globule =⇒ native structure
denaturing condition random coil ⇐= dry molten globule
where we introduce the term “wet molten globule” referring the collapsed intermediate state com-
monly observed in the protein refolding kinetics (cf. Baldwin, 1993). It has been interpreted as the
unfolded state under a native condition (Dill and Shortle, 1991, Qian and Chan, 1999). The dry
molten globule (Kiefhaber et al., 1995), on the other hand, has been interpreted as the folded state
under a denaturing condition (Qian and Chan, 1999). Both these two states are kinetic interme-
diates which appear in the transient folding and unfolding processes, respectively. The wet molten
globule is a kinetically metastable state before the major activation barrier in the folding process,
while the dry molten globule is again a kinetically metastable state before the major activation
barrier but in the unfolding process. This difference is the same as the hyseresis.