Fundamental defect of the macroeconomic thinking as one of the main
causes of the crisis endured
Eugen Perchik
Northeastern scientific center of NAS and MES of Ukraine (Kharkov, Ukraine)
Corporation “Scientific and technological institute of transcription, translation and
replication” (Kharkov, Ukraine)
E-mail address: eperchik@bk.ru
Abstract. The main points of the first section of the article written by S.I. Chernyshov,
A.V. Voronin and S.A. Razumovsky arXiv:1003.4382), which deals with the
fundamental bases of the macroeconomic theory, have been analyzed. An incorrectness
of the Harrod’s model of the economical growth in its generally accepted interpretation
was specifically considered. The inevitability of the economic crisis has been shown to
follow directly from the premises of this model. At the same time there is an
opportunity to realize the damping strategies.
In 2009 the Section the Social Science and Humanities of the NAS of Ukraine
prepared a national report “Socio-economic condition of Ukraine: consequences for the
people and state”, 687 p., edited by V.M. Geits, A.I. Danilenko, M.G. Julinsky, E.M.
Libanova, O.S. Onischenko. The range of macroeconomic problems is represented in
chapter 3 “Influence of the world crisis on Ukraine and anti-crisis strategy of its socio-
economic condition”.
Referring to the international experts, the one of the causes of the world crisis was
qualified: “an inconsistent macroeconomic policy which was mainly limited to the
non-effective regulation of the financial markets, but wasn’t aimed at the structural
reforms”. “An inclination of the economic agents to the excessive risk, which was
provoked by the long period of the economic growth and macroeconomic stability”
was also noticed.
It is worth emphasizing that the analysis of economical evolution, as well as the
elaboration of regulatory decisions, is fundamentally based on the use of mathematical
models. They are widely presented in the editions of various formats and to a
considerable extent have shaped the current macroeconomic thinking. The conclusions
and recommendations which follow from the mentioned models penetrated into the
social mind and, reaching the level of mentality, became a driving force of its activity.
First of all, this concerns the well-known Harrod’s model which is illusively very
simple.
Really, the yearly income Y , 1, 2, ... is divided into the volumes of
consumption C and investment I :
Y C I ; (1)
t =m t m < <
I Y , 0 1. (2)
The following relationships are also used:
d K I , (3)
where K – is the capital; d d /d , – the dimensionless time, and
where is the number of years during which the income, as it is used to say,
“counterpoise” the capital.
Relationships (2) – (4) lead to a differential equation
t - s t = s mn=
d K K 0, / , (5)
which solution is
K K e , K K 0 (6)
and accordingly
t = ts t = ts = =
Y Y e ; I I e , Y Y 0 ; I I 0 , (7)
where Y K / ; I K .
Expressions (6), (7) argues that the capital, income and investment interactively
(in other words, their diagrams are not crossed) growth exponentially during the
unlimited period of time. This kind of economics has no serious problems because:
can be forecasted and is stable with respect to perturbations of its growth which
are synchronically compensated balancing the system, in fact due to peculiarities of the
solution of the differential equation with the constant coefficient (5);
acceleration or, on the contrary, deceleration of this growth is determined by the
parameters and , which possess definite meaning and in these terms the
economics is manageable;
realization of the relationship (4) is a guaranty of so favorable dynamics, in
other words, in the year j the received income must be K / , j;
j 0,1, 2, ... .
The deep analysis of the Harrod’s model (1) – (4) was presented in the first
section of the article written by S.I. Chernyshov, A.V. Voronin and S.A. Rasumovkky
“The problem of modelling of economic dynamics” (arXiv:1003.4382;
Proceeding from the difficult-to-forecast consequences of the differentiation in
the relationship (3), connected with the appearance of -functions:
n ( )  0, t „ 0; ¥
d K t = ∑I d t t - d t , =  dh h∫ d = 1, (8)
t j j ¥ , t= 0,
the authors used the law of the capital forming [chvr]
where K K n ; I I j . This sum, strictly speaking, is a base for getting (3).
Since relationships (1), (2), and (4) are discrete they can be presented in the form
similar to the (9):
Y C I ; I Y ; (10)
K Y , (11)
where Y Y n ; C C n .
The relationships (9) – (11) embodies the Harrod’s model in the difference (or
discrete) interpretation. It flows that
K = K enln ( 1+s ) ; Y = Y enln ( 1s+ ) ; I = I enln (s1+ ) , (12)
n 0 n 0 n 0
and since the quantity is actually rather small (we can admit ~ 0,5; ~10) and
accordingly
ln 1 , (13)
then using this replacement we get solution
K = K e s n; Y = Y e s n; I = I s e n, (14)
n 0 n 0 n 0
which is identical to the expressions (6), (7) when n 0,1, 2, ... .
So, it seems possible to conclude that the paradigm of the stable growth of the
economy for the unlimited perspective according to (6), (7) is undoubted. This
paradigm was deeply rooted during many decades and is supported by the authority of
classic. In practical respect it means that economic crisises are casual; they can be
prevented by strictly following exponential dependencies (6), (7), and accordingly,
relationship (4). In any case, “an ideal” is exist and is reachable in essence.
Within this logic the situation when an income Y , composes a part of the
capital K , was received less then due in the year n (in other words, the relationship
(11) was violated), is just the cause of the poor economic situation. Accordingly, to
eliminate the lagging, an income Y in the year n 1 must be greater then part of
the capital K . It is possible to simultaneously manipulate the level of consumption
Ñ .
At the same time, a peculiar point is emphasised in [chvr]. For the exact solution
(12) when the value of n in (9) is close to s - 1, the capital which was formed during
the period starting from the first year, namely
∑ n I =s K eln ( 1+s ) enln ( 1+s ) - 1
j 0 eln ( 1+s ) - 1
(formula for the sum of geometric progression was used), appears to be equal to the
whole capital K . This only possible when K 0, and so we face a contradiction.
If “an approximate” (because of using (13)) solution (14) is substituted into
expression for K (9) instead of (12) the, the contradiction is eliminated immediately.
Note that the peculiarity of the solution when n is close to s - 1 doesn’t follow directly
from expression (12).
It follows that the premise (13) is far from being inoffensive. Analogously the
correctness of using the derivative of the capital K , understood in its usual
meaning (3) instead of generalized function (8), becomes questionable. The essence is
that the relationship (3) is inherent in deriving the differential equation (5), which has a
solution (6), (7), coinciding with (14). In other words, in deducing this equation the
discrete function is treated as the continuous one.
The above considerations brought [chvr] to the conclusion that categories of the
continuous analysis need to be used consistently (in contrast to the symbiosis (1) –
(4)). Dimensionless time is linked to the same unit – 1 year, but unlike the discrete
case it can be subdivided into arbitrary small intervals. In this way the question about
the correctness of the relationship (3) is removed. Relationships (1) and (2) are also
directly extended to the case of continuous argument .
From (3) it follows that
K t = ∫ I h h d = K + K , (15)
where T is the period of the accumulation of the initial capital K ;
K t = ∫I h h d (16)
is the capital realized over the period 0.
Generally speaking, a continuous analog of the sum (9) have been obtained, but
now I is the intensity of flow of investments measured in the money equivalent
normalized to the dimensionless time. In virtue of (1) and (2), Y and C are
also intensities of flow of income and consumption accordingly.
Along with this, the remaining relationship (4), or (11), is essentially discrete
because for the continuous argument :
the discrepancy of the dimensionalities takes place, namely, the capital in the
money equivalent is compared through the dimensionless coefficient with the
income measured in the money equivalent normalised to the dimensionless time;
when is close to 0, the value of tends to and accordingly an uncertainty
appears (really, to counterbalance the capital with an income received, for example, in
1 minute we need a crowd of such minutes).
The authors of [chvr] cogently demonstrated that the analog of (4) in the case of
dimensionless time is the relationship
K t = ∫Y h h d ; (17)
its peculiarity at 0 is eliminated according to the L’Hospital rule reshaping into
initial identity K Y . This relationship is essentially based on the premise that the
capital must be compared with the income for some period of time (accordingly an
integral of its intensity emerges, which is measured in the money equivalent).
So the continuous Harrod’s model, which is the subject of the further part of the
investigation, is defined by relationships (17) and (1) – (3), namely
t = t +t t m =t t t =
Y C I ; I Y ; d K I . (18)
where Y ; C and I are the intensities of the financial flows with the
dimension money equivalent/unit of the dimensionless time.
This model generates solution
K t = 0 ; I t = 0 ; Y t = t I t ; C =m 1 -t Y , (19)
1 - ts ( 1 - ts )2 m
which corresponds with a Cauchy problem:
d K K 0, K 0 K ;
t 1 - ts 0
t - t = =s
d I I 0, I 0 K (20)
t 1 - ts 0
and, obviously, at t =s - 1 there is a peculiarity, which is in agreement with the result
obtained for the discrete time in the statement (9) – (11).
Note the following aspects:
unlike the discrete case (12), the solution (19) represents the mentioned
peculiarity explicitly;
this reflects essential distinctions between differential and difference models
(which are not properly investigated yet);
equations (20) possess variable coefficients and thus fundamentally differ from
(5).
It is noticed [chvr] that at the very beginning when an income realized over
the period of time 0 to
Y t = ∫Y h h d ,
according to (17) becomes equal to the capital K n . Later, when time t =s - 1 is
reached relationship (17), with the account of Y I / , gets the form
K s - 1 = ∫ I h h d
and from the comparison with (15), (16) it follows that
K s - 1 = K s - 1 ; K = 0.
Meanwhile an initial capital K instantly overflows into an income Y s - 1 and
expressions (19) transform into uncertainty. Accordingly, Cauchy problem (20) loses
its sense when K 0. This situation can be interpreted from the standpoint of the
economic chaos and collapse origin and also from the standpoint of the limitedness of
the look-ahead period (mentioned phenomena could become a subject of a separate
investigation).
Note that to define functions which represent the continuous Harrod’s model (17),
(18), we need only three equations which interconnect the capital K , income Y
and investments I . There are equations (17) and (2), (3), included in (18). From
the remaining equation (1) the intensity of the consumption flow C can be found
according to the calculation of an income Y and investments I . Therefore,
from the mathematical point of view an increment of the function C has no direct
influence on the economics.
It follows that starting from some time t <s - 1, it is reasonable to transfer
(passing an intermediate chain Y ) the initial capital K into consumption
C t = ∫C h h d
and this seems to be economically logical. Really, the economic development must be
mainly innovative and outdated capital must be taken out of the industrial and
technological sphere in proper time.
In practice the beginning of this process can be presented at the level , when
in virtue of (15) – (17)
n = n = + n
and since I K , where
I t = ∫I h h d
is the volume of the investments realized over a period of time 0 to , with the
account of (1), we get C K .
This seems to have a conceptual interpretation. Really, when the consumption
reaches the value of the initial capital it is quite a reasonable criterion for the re-
formatting the economics, including the structural innovations, with the transition to
the next level of development. In other words, the initial capital has been “wasted” and
it is time to do something.
Further it is noticed in [chvr] that parameter is less defined in prognostic and
managerial sense then because it depends on industrial factors, subject to the
influence of conjuncture within particular time interval and so on. Therefore it is
interesting to define it more exactly on the sign boundary of the instant of time
using conditions
K K / 1 ; I I / 1 ; Y Y / 1 ,
which are obtained if we substitute in (19).
In other words, if, for example, Y t coincides with the value of Y / 1 - m 2 , we
can judge about the value of . Thus there is the possibility to represent realities of the
situation under analysis and to correct economic strategies.
The generalization of the relationship (17) is presented for the same purpose:
K t = ∫Y h h d , (21)
where the function f satisfies the condition of elimination of the peculiarity in
zero d f 0 1. In particular, this may be the polynomial of the form
f t =t +∑t a n .
Using (18), (21), we get
and it is obvious that the crisis corresponding to the solution of the equation
f t =s - 1, can only be postponed by decelerating the capital accumulation. The
function f determined proceeding from the growth of K within representative
enough time interval, say 0, , can be extrapolated to the critical value of .
Thus “the crisis” is inherent not only in the Harrod’d model in the statement (17),
(18), and this is the very important conclusion. It emerges as a consequence of
practically any dependence between the capital K and income over the period of
time Y .
It is worth emphasizing that conceptual premises of the Harrod’s model, correctly
interpreted, bring us to the solution, according to which economic crisises are
inevitable. The illusion of the exponential growth (6), (7) and (14) is a consequence of
the inadequacy of the mathematic model (1) – (4). It is likely because discoverers
made a fetish from the final result, prompted by their investigations in the categories of
economics (ignoring the fact of inaccurate treatment of infinitesimals). But this
mistake results in the enormous strata of biased economic regulations, conclusions and
recommendation which still be using in managerial decisions.
To develop the Harrod’s model, the Cauchy problem has been formulated in
[chvr] for the cases of time dependent parameter in (18):
d K K 0, K 0 K
t n -mtt ( ) 0
and for the accounting of the amortization by means of substitution of the expression
- at t t a >
1 K instead of K in (17), (18), where 0 is a constant:
d K K 0, K 0 K .
t 1 - ( a+s t ) ats+ 2 0
The final step of the first section of the considered work by S.Y. Chernyshov and
so-authors is the development of the Harrod’s model for the case of the cumulative
effect when investments flowing into the capital, which implies the scientific and
technical progress, market price and other factors. It is represented by using the
presentation
K t = ∫ 1 +hr h I h d ,
instead of (15), where 0 is a constant. In other words, with time the value of the
investment is transforming into the capital growth faster then the simple addition.
The problem is reduced to the differential equation
t 1 - ts -trs 2
whose solution
( )  1 - 2 ts -s - rs s 4 + 2  2 4rss+ 2 
0  - trs ts2- + 1 ts - s  2 - rs+s + 4 2   
becomes (to be more exact, there is an uncertainty similar to (19)) when
and, obviously, the increase of hasten the crisis.
From our point of view, results of the work by S.Y. Chernyshov and so-authors
may be qualified from the standpoint of the newly formed paradigm of the world
macroeconomic thought. Really, it was pronouncedly demonstrated for the first time
that apparently spontaneous crisises in fact are not anomalies. In opposite, they are
organically inherent in the development of the economic system.
The long-term stable growth of the economic does not confirmed by the practice,
but nevertheless the belief that this “ideal” is attainable have firmly seized the social
mind. Most likely this is the result of natural hopes of any human being for the better
life and prosperity. These hopes were scientifically supported by the theory of
exponential growth, which require just a reasonable balance between the capital and
income.
The external convincingness of the arguments of this theory was reinforced by
using the differential equation (framed with the macroeconomic rhetoric) which was
demonstrated to be incorrect by S.I. Chernyshov, A.V. Voronin and S.A. Razumovsky.
At the same time it must be stated that the above proportion is the only instrument
suggested to the society for regulating the economics.
From this point of view the methodology of S.I. Chernyshov and co-authors
seems to be rather optimistic. Really, crisis is inevitable and is hastened by the
activization of the economics that includes the scientific and technical progress, but
there are effective means to prevent the extreme situation. The following are among
them:
the possibility a priori estimate pre-crisis processes for identification of the
instant of its origin and undertaking preventive measures;
the use of the initial capital as the instrument for the smooth ending of the phase
of economic development by means of its adaptive amortization and transfer into the
sphere of consumption.
Note in conclusion that in second section of the work by S.I. Chernyshov and so-
authors “The problem of modeling of economic dynamics” a more general Phillips
model is examined. The defect of the symbiosis of the continuous and discrete
analysis, which is analogous to the Harrod’s model, has been also eliminated. The
problem is reduced to the solution of the ordinary differential equation of the second
order with variable coefficients. As a result of the inadequate use of the notion of
infinitesimal quantity, the other models of macroeconomic dynamics in the differential
form (Harrod-Domar’s, Gudvin’s, Kaletsky’s) appeared to be mistaken.