1v0416030/hp-peh:viXra
GAMMA-RAY BURSTS AND THE SOCIOLOGY OF SCIENCE
ALVARO DE RU´JULA
1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
E-mail: alvaro.derujula@cern.ch
I discuss what we have learned about Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) by studying
their afterglows, and how these are interpreted in the generally-acceptedfireball
model of GRBs, as well as in the generally-unaccepted cannonball model of the
same phenomena. The interpretation of GRBs is a good example around which
to frame a discussion of the different approaches to science found in various
fields, such as high-energyphysics (HEP), high-energyastrophysics,or even the
deciphering of ancient languages. I use this example to draw conclusions on
post-academic science, and on the current status of European HEP.
1. Motivation
Why would one give a talk on the sociology of science at a meeting on Un altro
modo di guardare il cielo, ormoregenerallyonneutrinophysics, themeetingdefinitely
not being centred on sociology? My excuse is that, when talking about GRBs, I have
always detected a very considerable interest on their sociology: an extremely negative
reaction to my views onthe subject in meetings on GRBs, and anextremely surprised
and curiosity-driven interest from HEP or general audiences.
A talk or article such as this one may seem rather unusual, but it is not. A
precedent with quite similar content and conclusions has been written by Charles
1).
2. Introduction
Some three times a day, on average, gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) reach the upper
atmosphere from isotropically distributed sky locations. Much of their energy is in
photons of a few hundred keV, with a total fluence of 10
give or take a
couple of orders of magnitude. GRB durations range from tens of milliseconds to
hundreds of seconds, with varied time structures generally consisting of fast rising
and declining, isolated or partially-superimposed pulses. The distribution of GRB
durations is bimodal, with a trough at ∼ 2 s, separating “short” from “long” GRBs.
The example of the γ-ray counting rate of GRB 030329 is given in Fig. 1. This
burst, originating at z = 0.1685, is the second-closest GRB of known distance. It is
“long” and it has a relatively simple structure, with just two similar “pulses”.
It has become a custom to refer to Gamma-Ray Bursts as the biggest explosions
since the big bang. I contend that this is bad propaganda: the big bang was not an
Figure1: Theγ-raycountingrateofGRB030329,observedwiththe HETEsatellitebyVanderspek
explosion in any conventional sense, and GRBs are a highly-beamed but relatively-
small fraction of the energetic budget of a supernova (SN) explosion. For not-very
updated reviews of these views, and to trace the many references I cannot include,
and De Ru´jula
and... references therein.
We call our unconventional theory of GRBs “the CannonBall (CB)” model. The
conventional models are collectively dubbed the “fireball” modela. In the available
space, I cannot give justice to either model, so I will describe them rather superficially
and compare them in detail only in one particular but not unusual case, concerning
the analysis of the “radio afterglow” of GRB 991208.
3. Science
3.1. GRB afterglows
Our information about the once totally mysterious gamma-ray bursts increased
spectacularly in the past few years. The rapid directional localization of GRBs by the
satellites BeppoSAX, Rossi and by the Inter-Planetary Network of spacecrafts led to
a flurry of progress. The crucial discovery
was the existence of “afterglows” (AGs)
aThese models are “standard” in that the analysis of observations is invariably phrased in their
language. They are not “standard” in the same sense as the standard model of particle physics.
Time After Burst (days)
GRB 991208
SN1998bw-like
-1 10 Supernova
10-1 1 10 102
DAYS AFTER BURST
GRB 021211
10 -3 -2 -1 2
10 10 10 1 10 10
Figure2: Left: theR-BandAGofGRB990128,showingthevariouscontributionsofaCB-modelfit.
Right: The R-Band AG of GRB 021211, in this case the galaxy’s fitted contribution is subtracted.
A µ-Jansky is a fluence of 10 −29 erg s −1 cm −2 Hz −1.
of long-duration GRBs: not surprisingly, a GRB “event” does not end as the γ-ray
flux becomes undetectably small. The source continues to emit light at all smaller
observable frequencies, ranging from X-rays to radio waves, and to be observable for
months, or even years. The fact that these remaining emissions can be very well
localized in the sky has led to the discovery of the GRBs’ host galaxies
surement of their redshifts
that verified their cosmological origin; the identification
of their birthplaces —mainly star formation regions in normal galaxies— and the
first evidence for a possible association (in time and location) between GRBs and
supernova explosions
7):
that of GRB 980425 and the supernova SN1998bw.
Two examples of optical “R-band” AGs and their CB-model fits are given in
Fig. 2, showing the time evolution of their fluence (measured energy per unit time,
surface and frequency interval). In the case of GRB 991208, three contributions to
the observations are shown and added: the unresolved host galaxy, the “true” GRBs
AG, and a supernova identical to SN1998bw, but “transported” to the redshift of this
particular GRBb. In the case of GRB 021211, the fitted host galaxy’s contribution is
subtracted, and the SN contribution to the AG is also observable.
3.2. The afterglows of fireballs and firecones
In the fireball model, reviewed, for instance, by Piran
and Meszaros
the γ-rays and the AG of a GRB are made by synchrotron radiation in backward-
bThe fact that the progenitors of long GRBs are core-collapse SNe, long advocated in the CB
model, has received spectacular support after this talk was delivered
8,9).
and forward-moving shocks, which are produced as relativistically expanding shells
collide with each other and with the interstellar medium (ISM). These shells aremade
of e+e − pairs, with a small admixture of protons (a “baryon-load”) fine-tuned not to
quench the observed radiation.
The possibility that the fire-“ball” ejecta may not be spherically distributed has
been repeatedly studied in the literature. In the fireball model this was not done
in detail prior to the influential papers by Rhoads
who predicted abrupt breaks
in the power-law temporal behaviour of the AG light curves. So did fireballs evolve
into “collimated fireballs”, “firecones” or “conical fireball jets”, while maintaining the
“fire” lineage.
As in the cases of Fig. 2, abrupt breaks are not observed. Yet, observers fit AG
light curves to extract a break time t from “phenomenological” formulae, such as:
which interpolate between two power laws with a tunable “abruptness” s, often set
to s = 1. The values of t extracted from such arbitrary expressions have no clear
meaning. Even when applied to the same GRB’s AG, a fit of the above form may
be problematic. In the case of GRB 020813, for instance, Covino et al. extract
t = 0.59±0.03 days from data in the interval between 3 hours and 4 days 13), while
Li et al. find t = 0.13±0.03 days, for data in the 1.7 hours to 1.2 day period 14).
Various groups
15,16,17,18)
have modelled the light emitted by firecones without
some of the approximations originally introduced by Rhoads. The evolution of the
ejecta, for instance, is treated continuously, not as a process with a break-time. Not
having an abrupt break put in by hand, no abrupt break is predicted. The fair
conclusion
is that the AG light curves, even in firecone models, are too smooth to
allow for a determination of a hypothetical break time t . There is no reason to fit
them with underived expressions such as Eq. (1), nor to extract any conclusions from
such fits.
To me, the most surprising aspect of all detailed theoretical analyses of GRB AG
data published so far is that the firecone advocates place the observer precisely on the
jet’s axis, for no stated reason. It is obvious that the viewing angle is a relevant pa-
rameter that cannot be unceremoniously dismissed, if only because dcosθ = sinθdθ:
the probability of being away from the axis increases with θ. Moreover, a distribution
of viewing angles would completely erase a possible meaning of the distribution
of specific t values extracted from expressions such as Eq. (1). To say the least, the
anthropo-axial view that the ejecta of the observed AGs always point to the observer
has not been shown to be a fair approximation. To air this kind of critique at GRB
conferences is not without danger, as made evident by Fig. 3.
Figure 3: The author trying to exit from a GRB conference.
3.3. The AG of GRB 991208 in fireball language
The summary of this detailed section is: the SM —in its many variations and
with lots of parameters— fails in its fits and predictions and, to face this fact, only
unsupported excuses are given.
Early radio measurements of the AG of this GRB, from day ∼3 to day ∼14 after
burst, were reported by Galama et al.
(hereafter G1), who discussed them, along
with the optical data, in the “standard” fireball model (hereafter SM). Follow-up
radio measurements up to day 293 after burst and a SM reanalysis of the broad-band
AG of GRB 991208 were reported by Galama et al.
(hereafter G2).
In G1 the authors use the radio and optical AG of this GRB to extract the power-
law index of the synchrotron-radiating electron distribution p, and the values at three
different times of the SM quantities needed to describe the AG: the self-absorption
and peak frequencies ν and ν , and the peak flux density F . With p = 2.52 fixed
and power-law fits to the temporal evolution of the other quantities, they fit the AG
of GRB 991208. They find that various spherical models (“ISM” with a constant-
density medium, and “WIND” with a circumburst ISM density decreasing as 1/r2)
andaconical (“JET”)model areall inadequate. Inconclusion, theyadvocatea model
with a transition from a quasi-spherical to a jet evolution, but they do not offer any
analysis in its support: the conclusion is what the French would call paroles verbales.
The predictions of G1 are that ν ∝ t −14/13 at t>10 days and F ∝ t −(2.2to2.5) for
ν = 8.46 GHz at t > 12 days, as well as for ν = 4.86 GHz at t > 17 days. These
predictions are in stark contrast with the findings of G2.
In G2 the authors introduce an extra cooling frequency ν , and a “FREE” fit with
9 parameters (p and 2 parameters for F and each transition frequency, all assumed
to behave as Ct
−b).
The more constrained ISM and WIND models turn out to be
inadequate, as in G1. The JET model is an improvement over that of G1, but it
fails to reconcile the late-time decay F ∼ t −1.1 at 8.46 GHz with the much steeper
optical decay 22) F ∝ t −2.2±0.1, which should be similar. The FREE model provides
a satisfactory fit to the data, but it implies that the combination γB3 of the bulk
Lorentz factor of the flow and the post-shock magnetic field ought to be roughly
constant, while both are expected to decline with time. In G2, the predictions
a model with two electron energy distributions are also found to fail.
Faced with so much unsuccess, the authors of G2 conclude “the simplest expla-
nation which is consistent with the data and requires no significant modifications is
that the blast wave of GRB 991208 entered a non-relativistic expansion phase several
months after the burst”. As in G1, no support is given to this verbal conclusion.
3.4. A refreshing interlude: Jets in Astrophysics
A look at the sky, or a more modest one at the web, results in the realization that
jetsareemitted byvery manyastrophysical systems (stars, quasars, microquasars,...).
One of the most impressive cases
is that of the quasar Pictor A, shown in Fig. 4.
Somehow, the active galactic nucleus of this object is spitting something that does
not appear to expand sideways before it stops and blows up, having by then travelled
for a distance of several times the visible radius of a galaxy such as ours. Acloser look
at another such object is provided in Fig. 5: the central region of M87, wherein what
appears to be a succession of blobs of matter has been jetted
25).
Many such systems
have been observed. They are very relativistic: the Lorentz factors γ ≡ E/(mc2) of
their ejecta are typically of O(10), and there is one case with a claimed 26) γ ∼ 103.
The mechanisms responsible for these mighty ejections —suspected to be due to
episodes of violent accretion into a very massive black hole— is not understood.
In our galaxy there are “micro-quasars”, in which the central black hole is only a
fewtimesmoremassive thantheSun. Thebeststudiedexample
istheγ-raysource
GRS1915+105. Ina non-periodic manner, about once a month, this object emits two
oppositely directed cannonballs, travelling at v ∼ 0.92c. As the emission takes place,
and as illustrated in Fig. 6, the X-ray emission —attributed to an unstable accretion
disk— temporarily decreases. How part of the accreting material ends up ejected
along the system’s axis is not understood. The process reminds one of the blobs
emitted upwards as the water closes into the “hole” made by a stone dropped onto its
Figure 4: A Chandra X-Ray image of Pictor A.
D 10 arcsec
Figure 5: A Chandra X-Ray image of the M87 jet.
Figure 6: X-ray, infrared and radio fluence of GRS 1915+105, as it emits two oppositely flying
cannonballs.
surface. It is only the relativistic, general-relativistic magneto-hydro-dynamic details
that remain to be filled in! Atomic lines from many elements have been observed
in the CBs of µ-quasar SS 433. Thus, at least in this case, the ejecta are made
of ordinary matter, and not of some fancier substance such as e+e − pairs. In the
analysis of quasar and microquasar ejecta, the relevant parameters are the Lorentz
factor and the angle between the jet direction and the observer (and not, as in the
firecone models, the opening angle of the jetted material).
3.5. The Cannonball model
The CB model is not based on hypothetical fireballs, firecones or hypernovae, but
on close analogies with the observed astrophysical jets. The long-duration GRBs and
their AGs are produced in ordinary core-collapse supernovae by jets of CBs, made
of ordinary atomic matter, and travelling with high Lorentz factors, γ ∼ 103. A CB
is emitted, as observed in µ-quasars, when part of an accretion disk falls abruptly
onto the newly-born compact object. As it crosses the circumburst material (the
shell of the SN and the “wind” of the parent star) the surface of a CB is collisionally
heated to keV temperatures and the quasi-thermal radiation it emits as it reaches
the transparent outskirts of the circumburst matter —boosted and collimated by the
CB’s motion— is a single γ-ray pulse in a GRB. A competing mechanism
the γ-ray production is inverse Compton scattering of the SN light by the electrons
in the emerging CBsc. For both mechanisms, the timing sequence of emission of the
successive individual pulses (or CBs) in a GRB reflects the chaotic accretion process;
its properties are not predictable, but those of the single pulses are.
After a few observer minutes, the CBs’ emissivity –the afterglow– is dominated
by synchrotron emission from the electrons that impinge and penetrate in them from
31).
These electrons are Fermi-accelerated in the CB’s magnetic maze to a
broken power-law energy distribution with a “bend” energy E = γ(t)m c2, with
γ(t) diminishing as the CBs decelerate. Let θ be the angle between the CBs’ viewing
and travelling directions, δ(t) ≈ 2γ/(1 + γ2θ2) be the emitted radiation’s Doppler
energy-boost factor, and n ≈ n the electron and proton ISM number densities. The
observer sees an energy flux:
with α steepening from ≈ 0.5 to ≈ p/2 ≈ 1.1 at the “injection bend” frequency 32)
corresponding to E :
b 1+z 10−3cm−3
(cid:20) (cid:21)
We assume the SNe associated with GRBs to occur mainly in super-bubbles of
approximately constant n , except in the immediate vicinity of the progenitor. For a
constant-density ISM, γ(t) is the real root of the cubic:
1 1 1 1 6ct
= γ(0), and x∞ characterizes the CB’s slow-down (it takes a distance x∞/γ
for a CB to decelerate to half its original Lorentz factor).
In the CB-model fits 31) we fix the electron index to its theoretical value p ≈ 2.2.
The optical AGs then depend on 4 parameters: overall normalization, γ
, x∞ and θ.
In the radio domain, where self-absorption is important, only one extra parameter
is needed. The dominant absorption mechanism is free–free attenuation (inverse
bremsstrahlung epγ → ep), characterized by a parameter ν in the opacity, which
behaves as τ = (ν /ν)2(γ(t)/γ )2. Self-absorption produces a turn-around of the
spectra from F ∼ ν1.5 to F ∼ ν −0.5 as ν increases.
To date, the CB model provides a very good, simple and unified description of
cThis process produces a highly polarized beam of γ-rays,except right at the jet’s axis.
the light curves and spectra of the AGs of all GRBs of known redshift.
3.6. GRB 991208 in the CB model
This section is to the CB model what section 3.3 is to the standard model. Its
summary is: the CB model —simple and parameter-thrifty as it is— succeeds in its
fits and predictions.
The AG of GRB 991208 has been analysed thrice in the realm of the CB model.
In Dado et al.
(hereafter DDD1) we fitted the available R-band data on all the
then-measured GRBs of known redshift, including this one, which is shown in the
left panel of Fig. 2. In DDD2
these results were extended to wide-band fits of
all the available optical and radio data, which included at the time the early radio
data of G1
20).
Finally, in DDD3
we compared our predictions in DDD2 with the
observations in G2
of the later-time radio data.
In the CB model, the AG of a GRB has three contributions: the CB, the host
galaxy and a “standard candle” supernova akin to SN1998bw, transported to the
GRB’s redshiftd. In Fig. 2 the presence of the SN is shown in two cases, one of which
is GRB 991208. In a CB-model analysis, in all instances wherein such a SN could
be seen, it was seen. This is so for all AGs with z<1.2 (DDD1), including the cases
where the presence of a 1998bw-like SN was a prediction, based on the optical data
preceding the observable SN contribution
34,35,36,8).
Results for multifrequency fits to GRB AGs cannot be shown in a limited space.
In comparing the SM results of G1 and G2 with the CB-model results of DDD2 and
DDD3, I concentrate on the radio data at 8.46 GHz, for which the measurements
of G1 and G2 are particularly abundant and precise. Shown in Fig. 7 are, on the
left, the G1 early data and its SM extrapolated prediction for later times, quoted
in section 3.3. Shown on the right are the CB model fit of DDD2 and its predicted
extrapolation in time.
Referring once again to an observed 8.46 GHz frequency, I show in Fig. 8, on the
left, the comparison of the late G2 radio data with the SM prediction in G1. The
later data are labelled by asterisks. In the same figure, on its right, two CB-model fits
are shown. One of these wide-band fits is the DDD2 fit shown in Fig. 7, the other is
a new fit, along identical lines, including the new radio data of G2. The figure shows
that the predictions of DDD2 were very satisfactory: the a-priori and a-posteriori fits
are very similar and they both provide a good description of the observations, their
difference not being larger than the scintillating ups and downs of the data.
In Table 1 I report the parameters for the R-band fit of DDD1, the broad-band fit
of DDD2 and the DDD3 fit to all data. They are quite stable. Even the DDD1 fit to
only the R-band data determines γ
, θ and x∞ to within a few per-cent of the results
dIn the CB model, GRB 980425 —associated to SN1998bw— is in no way exceptional 30,31,32).
Unlike in the SM, it makes sense to use this SN as a putative standard candle.
TIME AFTER BURST (DAYS)
t -(2.2 to 2.5)
after 12 d
10-1 1 10 102 103
TIME AFTER BURST (DAYS)
CB-model fit to the early data
(and prediction for t > 12 d)
10-1 1 10 102 103
Figure 7: The radio fluence of GRB 991208 at 8.46 GHz (G1). The ups and downs of the data are
due to scintillations. The bestfits shownarethe subensemble ofthe wide-bandfits by G1(left) and
DDD2 (right) that refer to this particular radio-frequency. The (red) thick lines in the left panel
bracket the predictions of G1.
TIME AFTER BURST (DAYS)
10-1 1 10 102 103
Figure8: ComparisonsofthepredictionsofG1(left)andDDD2(right)withthelatermeasurements
in G2, labelled by asterisks. The red-point line on the right is the CB-model prediction of DDD2
and Fig. 7. The black-point line is a fit including the G2 data.
of the DDD2 fit (117 data points in total), even though the former fit is based on the
mere dozen of early data points that are not dominated by the SN, see Fig. 2. For
fits that are so similar, their single parameters describing the overall normalization
are also necessarily similar: they are not reported in Table 1.
Table 1: Parameters of the successive CB-model fits to the AG of GRB 991208. DDD1 is a fit to
only R-band optical frequencies. DDD2 is a wide-band fit with only the early radio-data of G1.
DDD2 is the fit to all data, including the G2 late radio data.
Parameter DDD1 DDD2 DDD3
θ [mrad] 0.100 0.111 0.103
γ 1034 1034 1089
x∞ [Mpc] 1.357 1.014 1.382
Table 1 shows how robust and predictive the CB model is. Its parameters are few,
andconsistently determined asnew data areaddedto successive fits. This, aswe have
seen, isinstarkcontrast withthesituationintheSM, withitsmanymoreparameters,
its predictive failures, and the verbal excuses for its successive inadequacies. In my
opinion Occam would have no trouble choosing between these models; he may not
even need his proverbial sharp razor, a dull spoon would suffice. Notice that, the way
I put it, the defenders of the standard model would also agree!
4. Sociology
In what follows, I try to place the avatars of the CB model in a more general
context.
4.1. Things that happen to us
So far, the CB model has encountered no problems in its confrontation with
data. It is in its confrontation with humans that the model fares the worst. Just
as an example, let me comment on the result of having sent for publication in the
Astrophysical Journal Letters our paper DDD3, entitled “Fireballs and Cannonballs
confront GRB 991208”, where we compare the SM analysis by G1 and G2 to our
CB-model analysis of the same data, as I did here.
The first referee asserts: “There is nothing new in this manuscript”. Then, com-
menting on the fact that Galama et al. do not refer to our successful predictions
of their G2 data, hee continues, somewhat contradicting himself: “If Dado et al. are
right, then surely the referee of Galama et al. will catch this gross oversight and have it
fixed in the revised submission”. This is pulling our legs under the cover of anonymity.
We ask for a second referee, who reports: “The claim that the CB model works
better than the standard fireball models is not made in a way that would convince
any objective reader”. He does not bother to say why. To me this sounds as being
impermeable to facts. Finally, we complain to the editor, who responds: “I have no
claim to infallibility”.
My colleagues and I have written some 18 papers on GRBs in the CB model, the
first four of which were rejected on grounds very similar to the above. That is, not
once on the basis of scientific critique. This is very discouraging. One is tempted to
entitle all of one’s papers on the subject “Mission Impossible”.
4.2. Things that happen
Scientists generally adhere to the Popperian
view that every genuine test of
a theory is an attempt to falsify it. Reading the current astrophysical literature,
one very often sees this opinion challenged. As we have seen, and to quote Popper
again: Some genuinely testable theories, when found to be false, are still upheld by
their admirers —for example by introducing ad hoc some auxiliary assumption, or
by reinterpreting the theory ad hoc in such a way that it escapes refutation. Such a
procedure is always possible, but it rescues the theory from refutation only at the price
of destroying, or at least lowering, its scientific status. But it can be even worse, as
I shall illustrate with a few examples.
GRBs occur in star-formation regions and are no doubt associated with processes
in aged very large stars. One expects the matter density around the progenitor to be
characteristic of the environment of such stars, which shed matter for a few thousand
years at the end of their lives, at a roughly constant mass-loss rate. This results in
a circumstellar density profile ρ∼1/r2. In an article 38) on GRB 011121, its authors
state: “Unfortunately, until now there has been no clear evidence for a wind-fed
circumburst medium... in the afterglow of any cosmologically located GRB”. At the
time there were a score of such AGs, meaning that unfortunately the SM expectation
was not corroborated for these many cases. The article continues: “We undertake
afterglow modeling of this important event and to our delight have found a good case
for a wind-fed circumburst medium”. This kind of misfortune and delight may be
eI am not being sexist in my language, I am sure that no woman would have said such things.
whatPopper referstowhen saying: It is easy to obtain confirmations, or verifications,
for nearly every theory —if we look for confirmations. Fortunately, this attitude is
the opposite to that of most researchers in most areas of science, who are motivated
by challenging their respective “standard models”.
Placing belief in prejudices ahead of facts that contradict them is not as unusual
in science as one may hope. Cosmic-ray physics is another area in which the cor-
responding “standard model” is in dire straights. Cosmic rays are supposed to be
accelerated in the shocks produced by the collisions of the moving shells resulting
from SN explosions with the ambient matter. Synchrotron radiation from accelerated
electrons in such sites has been observed, but the limits on γ rays from π0 decay are
well below the expectation from collisions of the assumed accelerated protons and
nuclei. I looked for a recent review on the subject and, in the first one I found
it says: “Frustratingly, the accelerated “cosmic-ray” ions, which should produce γ
rays by nuclear interactions with the ambient gas, have evaded detection so far. So,
we are still unable to prove the origin of cosmic rays nearly a century after their
discovery!”. The emphasis is mine, the style, by now, is familiar.
More often than not, astrophysical phenomena involve very complex physics. De-
ciphering them is not unlike deciphering the script of an ancient language. It may not
be surprising that there are similarities between the sociologies of these two fields.
The jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher pretended to have deciphered the ancient-
Egyptian hieroglyphic language. His “translations” of the writings in the Egyptian
obelisks in Rome were entirely forged. But Kircher’s influence was so enormous that
he managed to stall progress in the field for a full century. Alas, even in the XXth
century, similar things did happen. Sir John Eric Sidney Thompson had an entirely
incorrect view of Mayan scriptures, which he thought were “anagogical” (having a
mystical meaning beyond the text) and ideographic, as opposed to phonetic. Given
his great stature in the field, his views delayed the deciphering of the Mayan language
by some 30 years. Perhaps he was knighted for that feat.
Nothing ofwhat Ihave reportedisthatsurprising for, after all, science isahuman
endeavour, not a divine activity. Yet, by now, if I am being effective, my audience or
my hypothetical readers ought to be indignant. Nothing of this sort could happen in
my university or my lab!... should they be screaming to themselves. I cannot fully
scream in the same way for, in my lab (though it is the “best and biggest” of its kind)
one can also find all sorts of humans. Which brings me to my next subject.
4.3. High Energy Physics
Two things that high-energy physicists cannot be accused of are excessive belief
in their standard model (in spite of its brutal and continued success) and lack of re-
ceptiveness to new ideas. A result lying three or even fewer standard deviations away
from the standard expectation is enough to send a good fraction of the community
bananas. Theories that have very little contact with current experiments are widely
venerated. Models that would require an extraordinary piece of luck to be relevant
in the near future (such as extra dimensions at accessible high energies or short dis-
tances) create a flurry of activity. None of this is particularly unhealthy, for science
is exploration by the open-minded.
Yet, the fact that HEP experimental research now requires very large groups
and a complex organization inevitably brings into the fore considerations that are
not as “pure” as “pure science” ought to be, according to “the book”. Thus, we
announce with great to-do “discoveries” that are not all that convincing. We embark
in programs that are patently useless. When giving the talks on which this article is
based to HEP audiences, I did not say explicitly to what discoveries or programs I
was referring to. And yet... everybody knew. Exactly.
In my opinion, the most worrisome current aspect of HEP in not that we are
moving so fast from science to management, or from science to “post-academic”
science. What really bothers me is how little we are doing to revitalize our field by
fighting for more diversified scientific programs, for larger long-term investments in
R&D, and for new resources, even though the field is as challenging as it ever was!
5. Conclusions
It goes without saying that my critique of the standard model of GRBs does not
imply that I am convinced that the cannonball model is entirely “right”. It is an
extreme simplification of a very complicated phenomenon; it will either require re-
finements or even turn out to be completely wrong. The latter is improbable for,
unlike the SM, the CB model explains well and in an extremely simple fashion prac-
tically all aspects of the data on long-duration GRBs. There seems to be something
right about it. But the assumptions and predictions of the CB model, or any other,
should be tested against observations, or challenged for consistency. In other realms
of science the existence of a sensible model challenging the standard lore would be
very welcome, as opposed to olympically ignored.
Relative to my more general “sociological” considerations, I have nothing to add.
6. Acknowledgements
Viki Weisskopf used to say “Physics is best done in a hostile environment”. Surely
my coauthors and I are, in this sense, obliged to quite a few ominous and anonymous
colleagues. But we would not have been able to survive the environment for long,
had we not held prior tenured positions.
7. References
1) C. D. Dermer, astro-ph/0204037.
2) A. Dar, Invited review at the meetings Frontier Objects in Astrophysics, May
2002, Vulcano, Italy, astro-ph/0301389, and Gamma Ray Bursts in the after-
glow era, September 1998, Rome, Italy, astro-ph/9902017.
3) A. De Ru´jula, to appear in the Proceedings of the 4th Microquasar Workshop,
2002, eds. Durouchoux, Fuchs & Rodriguez, published by the Center for Space
Physics: Kolkata; astro-ph/0207033.
4) E. Costa et al., Nature 387 (1997) 783.
5) K. C. Sahu et al., Nature 387 (1997) 476.
6) M. R. Metzger et al., Nature 387 (1997) 878.
7) T. G. Galama et al., Nature 395 (1998) 670.
8) S. Dado et al., astro-ph/0304106
9) K. Z. Stanek et al., astro-ph/0304173, Astroph. Lett. in press.
10) T. Piran, Phys. Rep. 314 (1999) 575; 333 (2000) 529.
11) P. Meszaros, Science 291 (2001) 79.
12) J. E. Rhoads, Astroph. J. 488 (1997) 579; 525 (1999) 737.
13) S. Covino et al., Astron. & Astroph. 404 (2003) L5.
14) W. Li et al., astro-ph/0305207.
15) R. Moderski et al., Astroph. J. 529 (2000) 151.
16) Y. F. Huang et al., Monthly Not. Royal Astron. Soc. 316 (2000) 943.
17) P. Kumar & A. Panaitescu, Astroph. J. 541 (2000) 9L.
18) A. Panaitescu & P. Kumar, astro-ph/0010257.
19) D.A. Frail et al., Astroph. J. 562 (2001) L55.
20) T.J. Galama et al., Astroph. J. 541 (2000) L45.
21) T.J. Galama, et al. Astrophys. J. 585 (2003) 899.
22) R. Sagar et al., Bull. Astron. Soc. India 28 (2000) 15.
23) Z. Li & R. A. Chevalier, Astroph. J. 55 (2001) 940.
24) A. S. Wilson, A. J. Young & P. L. Shopbell, Astroph. J. 546 (2001) Jan 10.
25) D. E. Harris et al., Astrophys. J. 586 (2003) L41.
26) L. Kedziora-Chudcer et al., astro-ph/9710057.
27) I.F.Mirabel&L.F.Rodriguez, Annu.Rev.Astron.&Astroph.37(1999)409.
28) T. Kotani et al., Pub. Astronom. Soc. Japan 48 (1996) 619.
29) N. J. Shaviv & A. Dar, Astroph. J. 447 (1995) 863.
30) A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, astro-ph/0008474.
31) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, Astron. & Astrophys. 388 (2002) 1079.
32) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, Astron. Astrophys. 401 (2003) 243.
33) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, Phys. Lett 562 (2003) 161.
34) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, Astroph. J 572 (2002) L143.
35) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, Astron. & Astrophys. 393 (2002) L25.
36) S. Dado, A. Dar & A. De Ru´jula, astro-ph/0302429.
37) K. Popper, Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Keagan
Paul, 1963, pp. 33–39; from Theodore Schick, ed., Readings in the Philosophy
of Science, Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Pub. Co., 2000, pp. 9–13.
38) P.A. Price et al., astro-ph/0203467.
39) I. A. Grenier & P. Laurent, Europhys. News 32 (2001) 218.