Genuinely multi-point temporal quantum correlations
and universal measurement-based quantum computing
Marcin Markiewicz1, Anna Przysiężna1, Stephen Brierley2 and Tomasz Paterek3,4
1Institute of Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics, University of Gdańsk, 80-952 Gdańsk, Poland
2Heilbronn Institute for Mathematical Research, Department of Mathematics, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TW, UK
3School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore
We introduce a constructive procedure that maps all spatial correlations of a broad class of
statesintotemporalcorrelationsbetweengeneralquantummeasurements. Thisallowsustopresent
temporalphenomenaanalogoustogenuinelymultipartitenonlocalphenomena,suchasGreenberger-
Horne-Zeilinger correlations, which do not exist if only projective measurements on qubits are con-
sidered. Themapisappliedtocertainlatticesystemsinordertoreplaceonespatialdimensionwith
a temporal one, without affecting measured correlations. We use this map to show how repeated
applicationofa1d-cluster-gateleadstouniversalone-wayquantumcomputingwhensupplemented
with the general measurements.
Introduction. Quantum mechanics treats space and tum states, that cannot be generated sequentially in one
time very differently. Whereas spatial coordinates are dimension but can be represented as higher dimensional
representedbyoperators,usuallytimeentersasanumber quantumlatticesystems. Spatialcorrelationsinsuchsys-
parameterising sequences of events. One might expect tems are mapped into spatio-temporal ones reducing the
that quantum predictions in a purely spatial domain are lattice dimension by one.
very different from those in a purely temporal domain. Asanimportantexampleweconsidertwodimensional
To the contrary, here we show that for a broad class of (2D) cluster states, which are a universal resource for
states quantum expectation values measured on several one-way quantum computing [13, 14]. The spatial pro-
particles in different spatial locations can be mapped to cessofone-waycomputingona2Dclusterstateistrans-
those measured on a single system at different instances formed into a temporal process involving the sequential
of time. application of a gate preparing only 1D-cluster states.
The universality of this case is shown to follow from the
Temporalcorrelationshavebeenwidelystudied,begin-
use of POVMs; allowing only projective measurements
ningwiththeseminalworkofLeggettandGargwhocon-
results in correlations that can be simulated classically.
sideredtheminthecontextofmacroscopicrealism[1,2].
Temporal quantum correlations. The temporal corre-
Brukner et al. rephrased the scenario to include more
lation function for a sequence of N generalized quantum
observables at a single instant of time and showed a
measurements is defined as follows:
task that is solved more efficiently by non-macrorealistic
system [3]. Both approaches were further generalised (cid:88)
E = i ...i P(i ,...,i |m ,...,m ),
to involve many instances of time [4–7] and a semidef- m1,...,mN 1 N 1 N 1 N
inite program is known which decides whether a prob- i1,...,iN
ability distribution can be realised in a sequential man-
ner [8]. All these works considered projective measure-
mentsandshowthattemporalmeasurementstatisticsare
P(i ,...,i |m ,...,m )=P(i |m )P(i |i ,m ,m )×
1 N 1 N 1 1 2 1 1 2
indeed different from the spatial ones: for qubits there is
...P(i |i ,...,i ,m ,...,m ), (1)
no temporal analog of genuinely multipartite entangle- N 1 N−1 1 N
ment [9], no monogamy of entanglement [10], and tem-
is the probability to observe a particular sequence
poral Tsirelson bounds can be higher [11].
of outcomes {i ,...,i } conditioned on the settings
Here we show that some of these differences disappear {m ,...,m }.
as soon as one considers general (POVM) measurements Let us first briefly discuss the case of sequential pro-
in place of the projective ones. Our approach is based jective measurements on a qubit prepared in an initial
on the fact that every pure quantum state of finite di- state described by a Bloch vector (cid:126)s. The qubit is mea-
mension can be expressed in the form of a Matrix Prod- suredattimeinstancest ,...,t withthecorresponding
uct State (MPS) and therefore, under some constraints dichotomic observables parameterised by Bloch vectors
on the entanglement structure, can be generated in a se- m(cid:126) ,...,m(cid:126) . Sequential projective measurements on a
quentialmanner[12]. Weutilizethesequentialprocedure single qubit form a Markov chain [3, 7], so that the con-
to construct a series of POVM measurements on a single ditional probabilities in (1) fulfil the Markov property:
particle giving rise to temporal correlations identical to
thespatialcorrelationsofthecorrespondingMPS,evenif P(i |i ,...,i ,m(cid:126) ,...,m(cid:126) )=P(i |i ,m(cid:126) ,m(cid:126) ).
k 1 k−1 1 k k k−1 k−1 k
the latter is genuinely multiparty entangled. Moreover, (2)
we generalize the procedure to a broad class of quan- Straightforward calculation of the temporal correlations
]hp-tnauq[
3v0567.9031:viXra
reveals that for odd and even N we have respectively: from a chain of N initially uncorrelated d-level particles
weapplyunitaryoperationsonmneighbouringparticles
E =(m(cid:126) ·(cid:126)s)(m(cid:126) ·m(cid:126) )...(m(cid:126) ·m(cid:126) ),
m(cid:126)1,...,m(cid:126)N 1 2 3 N−1 N in a sequential manner. As a result we obtain a state
E =(m(cid:126) ·m(cid:126) )(m(cid:126) ·m(cid:126) )...(m(cid:126) ·m(cid:126) ),(3) with bond dimension at most D = dm−1. Given the
m(cid:126)1,...,m(cid:126)N 1 2 3 4 N−1 N
MPS form of a state (6), the required unitaries can be
demonstrating that temporal correlations between out-
computed using the singular value decomposition [12].
comes of multiple projective measurements on a qubit
Within this paper we restrict our attention to the case
always factorize into correlations between at most two
of bipartite unitaries, i.e. m = 2, which is depicted in
measurements. In this sense a qubit never gives rise to
Fig. 1a.
genuine multi-point correlations in time.
Mapping from spatial to temporal correlations. As de-
For generalized measurements, defined by measure-
scribed, any MPS of qudits with bond dimension D ≤d
ment operators {M }, the probabilities in (1) read:
k can be generated by a sequential application of bipar-
(cid:16) (cid:17) tite unitary gates. Now we utilize this scheme to find a
P(i k |i 1 ,...,i k−1 ,m 1 ,...,m k )=Tr ρ k M k †M k , (4) sequence of measurements performed on a single parti-
cle such that the correlations between outcomes of these
where the post-measurement state is defined by a recur- measurementsareexactlythesameasspatialcorrelations
sive formula measuredontheMPS.Notethecrucialrequirementthat
a single particle evolving in time is measured. If higher-
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
ρ k+1 = M k ρ k M k † /Tr M k ρ k M k † . (5) dimensional systems are allowed the task becomes sim-
pler and trivialises for systems with dimension equal to
The correlations of a sequence of POVM measurements the total dimension of the MPS, as then one can sim-
depend directly on the measurement operators M via plymeasureintimeincompleteprojectivemeasurements
the post-measurement states (5). Different sets of {M } given by the local measurements on the MPS.
correspondtodifferentpossiblephysicalimplementations Thetransitionfromthespatialtothetemporaldomain
of given POVM elements E = M†M . This is in con- is depicted in Fig. 1. At the k-th step of the preparation
trast to the spatially-separated scenario where all neces- procedure one of the particles prepared in the previous
sary information is given by E k . step interacts via the gate U k with the particle that has
Sequential generation of quantum states. A vital part not been used up to now. The latter particle is next
ofourmapbetweenspatialandtemporalcorrelationsre- subject to the gate U k+1 , whereas the former particle is
lies on the knowledge of sequential generation of a quan- left untouched during the rest of the procedure. This
tum state. We say that a state can be generated sequen- importantcharacteristicofthesequentialpreparational-
tially, if it can be prepared from a product state by a lows one to perform a projective measurement on the
sequential application of unitary operations on blocks of first particle right after the gate U k is applied without
parties of a given size. Let us first consider a one dimen- disturbing the later process of preparing the state (see
sional lattice system, in which at each node there is a Fig. 1b). Theentireprotocolcanequivalentlybeseenas
d-level quantum particle. It was demonstrated by Schön a sequence of quantum channels (Fig. 1c) with a single
et al. [12]thatsequentiallygeneratedstatescanbewrit- particle input and output that realise d-outcome POVM
tenasMatrixProductStates(MPS)and,conversely,any measurements (Fig. 1d). Let us parametrize by α k the
MPS can be generated sequentially. rank one projective measurement on the k-th particle.
TheMPSrepresentation[15–18]isanefficientmethod The corresponding measurement operators {M(k)} can
of describing multipartite quantum states, most often be determined from the equation [21]:
usedinthecontextofone-dimensionalspinsystemswith
localinteractions. Hereweuseopenboundaryconditions S(U (|ψ(cid:105)⊗|λ (cid:105)))=
(cid:88)(cid:16)
for which the MPS form of a state is given by:
where S is a swap operator, V(α ) is a unitary rotation
|Ψ(cid:105)= (cid:88) A[1]...A[N]|i ...i (cid:105). (6) from the standard basis to the measurement basis of the
i1 iN 1 N k-th observer, M(k) is the measurement operator cor-
i1...in=1 i
responding to the outcome i, |λ (cid:105) is the initial state
The first and the last matrices are vectors and each ma- of the (k + 1)-st particle before the preparation takes
trix A[n] has a maximum dimension D×D. The param- place, and |ψ(cid:105) is an arbitrary state. Note that in the
eter D, called the bond dimension, is the largest rank of presented mapping, the (k +1)-st particle of the MPS
the reduced density matrix with respect to every cut. It is mapped into an ancilla of the k-th POVM, the k-th
was shown in Ref. [19] that the rank of the reduced den- projective measurement is mapped into the k-th POVM
sitymatrixisameasureofentanglementandthereforeD fork =1,...,N−1andthelastprojectivemeasurement
containsinformationabouttheentanglementstructureof is mapped into itself (Fig. 1d).
the state. Finally, ifwerecyclethequdits, wecanimplementthe
To sequentially generate an MPS of a bond dimension construction with only two of them (Fig. 1e). A simi-
D we use the method proposed in Ref. [20]. Starting lar process of recycling of qubits has already been used
FIG. 1. Sequential generation of a multipartite MPS and its temporal counterpart. a) Two-particle unitary gates U (grey
rectangles) are sequentially performed on particles (red circles) giving the state Ψ (big red shape). In the end, projective
measurements (blue shapes) are conducted on the particles. Dashed lines indicate how unitary gates are related to MPS
matrices of Eq. (6). b) Measurements can be shifted in time. c) Every gate followed by a measurement can equivalently be
representedasaPOVM.d)ThecircuitcanberearrangedintoasequenceofquantumchannelsperformingPOVMmeasurements.
e) We can reduce the required resources to two particles. After each measurement, one of them is reset and recycled into the
remaining protocol.
in an experimental realization of Shor’s algorithm [22] whereas for a cluster state they read:
.
1 (cid:18) eiφksin(θ
/2) −cos(θ
Fig. 1, all quantum predictions of arbitrary pure MPS −1 2 eiφksin(θ k /2) cos(θ k /2)
of N qudits, with bond dimension D ≤ d, can be re-
1 (cid:18) cos(θ
constructed by temporal consecutive d-outcome POVM 1 2 cos(θ k /2) −e−iφksin(θ k /2)
measurements followed by a projective measurement in
Interestingly, both of them give rise to the same POVM
the final step.
elements:
con G t e e n x u t in o e f ly qu m a u n l t t u i- m poin in t fo t r e m m a p t o i r o a n l c a o n r d rel q a u ti a o n n t s u . m In fou th n e - E(k) = (cid:18) sin2(θ k /2) 0 (cid:19) ,
dations many important multi-qubit states such as k
GHZ [23], W [24] and 1D cluster [25] states, have bond E(k) = (cid:18) cos2(θ k /2) 0 (cid:19) . (10)
dimension D = 2, hence they can be generated sequen- 1 0 sin2(θ k /2)
tially with bipartite unitaries. To create GHZ state we
The mapping from spatial to temporal correlations al-
applyC-notgatesonachainofqubitspreparedinastate
lows us to obtain the correlation functions for local mea-
|+(cid:105)|0(cid:105)...|0(cid:105), whereas in the case of a 1D cluster we use
surements on both the GHZ and 1D cluster states by
C-phasegatesonastate|+(cid:105)...|+(cid:105). Bothofthesestates
performing sequential POVM measurements (8) and (9)
are genuinely N-partite entangled, however their entan-
on a single qubit followed by a projective one at the last
glement properties are very different [26].
step. Note that in the above construction, the POVM
We show explicitly a set of measurements producing elements(10)donotdependonthephaseφ,whereasthe
multi-pointtemporalcorrelations. Considerlocalprojec- measurement operators (8) and (9) directly depend on
tivemeasurementsperformedonGHZandclusterstates. this parameter. This shows that the information about
Denote the angles (on the Bloch sphere) parametrizing thephaseissolelyencodedinthewaythestatecollapses
the measurement on the k-th particle by {φ ,θ }. Solv- at each stage of the sequence of measurements, and il-
ing equation (7) it is easy to obtain the corresponding lustrates that knowledge about POVM elements alone is
k-th POVM measurement operators entering the tempo- not sufficient to determine temporal correlations.
ral scenario. In the case of a GHZ state we find: Mapping from spatial to spatio-temporal correlations.
In case the bond dimension exceeds the dimension of
a single quantum system under consideration, multipar-
(cid:18) (cid:19) tite unitaries are necessary for the sequential generation,
M(k) = eiφksin(θ k /2) 0 , whereas our mapping works for bipartite unitaries only.
k This difficulty can be overcome to some extent by ar-
(cid:18) (cid:19)
cos(θ /2) 0 ranging single systems into an r-dimensional hypercubic
1 0 e−iφksin(θ
/2) latticewithad-levelquantumsystemateachnode, such
that sequential generation is possible along at least one
spatial dimension. This dimension can be mapped to
time as follows. We first generate the quantum state
of the particles placed in the (r − 1)-dimensional slice
perpendicular to the distinguished dimension. Now, all
theconsecutive measurementsalongthedistinguisheddi-
mensionaremappedintosingle-particlePOVMsincom-
plete analogy to the 1D case. The details are presented
in Appendix A.
Measurement-based quantum computing. Universal FIG. 2. One-way quantum computing in time. In a stan-
one-way quantum computing is a processing of quan- dard spatial implementation measurements are performed in
tum information based on single-qubit projective mea- a sequence along one dimension of a 2D cluster. This can be
surements performed on a resource state such as a 2D mappedintospatio-temporalscenarioasfollows. Firstaver-
cluster state [25]. Each elementary gate from the circuit tical1Dclusterstate(ablue-shadedrectangle)ispreparedin
model can be implemented by a sequence of such mea- theusualway. Next,thesequbitsundergolocalPOVMmea-
surements,whicheffectivelyentanglesecondcolumnofqubits
surements, although the sequence may depend on pre-
with the prepared 1D cluster, and measure the qubits of the
vious measurement outcomes. What is important, the
1D cluster (that would never again take part in the compu-
classical information about outcomes has to be sent in a
tation, and therefore can be recycled). Since the contents of
single direction [14]. Therefore, we can adapt our proce-
thegreyrectanglearerepeatedthroughoutthecomputation,
dure of transforming spatial correlations of a 2D cluster universalone-wayquantumcomputingrequiresasingle‘gate’
state into spatio-temporal ones, where the temporal di- preparing 1D cluster state that after each preparation is fol-
rectionisdefinedbythedirectionofclassicalinformation lowed by generalized measurements. In the last stage local
transfer. In effect, the computing can be performed by projective measurements need to be performed.
repeatedly preparing a 1D cluster state followed by local
POVMs.
Theideaofclusterstaterecyclinghasalreadyappeared correlations arising from 2D cluster states.
in the works of Raussendorf and Briegel [14, 25] and in, Conclusions. We obtain genuinely multi-point tempo-
for example, proposals for cluster states built from opti- ral quantum correlations in a scenario of sequential gen-
cal lattices [27]. The entire 2D cluster state is not pro- eralized quantum measurements on a single particle. In
duced at the start of the computation but rather pre- this way we recover in a temporal experiment the statis-
pared just in time. Our scheme is similar in spirit, but ticsofresultsarisingfromlocalprojectivemeasurements
only requires a 1D array of qubits in comparison to the ofanymultipartitequantumstateofquditsthathasMPS
2D sub-cluster required to implement entangling gates representation with bond dimension D ≤ d. Our ap-
via measurements. proachcanalsobeappliedtoabroadclassofgeneralized
The universality of the scheme given in Fig. 2 relies graph states, subject to the restriction that they can be
on the use of POVMs. To see this, first note that any generated in a sequential way with respect to one spa-
computation arising by directly measuring a 1D cluster tial dimension. Spatial correlations of such graph states
state, either with projective or POVM measurements, are then mapped into spatio-temporal ones reducing the
can be efficiently simulated classically [28]. Now con- space dimension by one.
sider a single 1D-cluster-gate, i.e. a sequence of c-phase We show that repeatedly preparing a 1D cluster state
gates preparing a 1D cluster state, and allow for projec- followed by (non-trivial) local POVMs is universal for
tiveorPOVMmeasurementsaftereachusageofthisgate quantumcomputing. Ourmodelallowsforaresourcere-
plus feed forward of classical information. The scheme ductionfromN2 qubitsofa2Dclusterto2N qubitsofa
withprojectivemeasurementscanstillbeefficientlysim- 1D cluster with local POVMs, whereas the total number
ulated classically because these measurements uncorre- of entangling operations used for the computation is the
late future results from the previous ones, see Eq. (3), sameinbotharchitectures. Ourconstructionprovesthat
and therefore one can repeatedly use the simulation of genuinelymulti-pointtemporalquantumcorrelationsare
Ref. [28]. POVMs do not destroy the temporal correla- a resource for quantum computing.
tionsandasFig.2showsallowforuniversalcomputation. Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Dan
AverysimpleexampleofentanglinggatesplusPOVMs Browne, Alastair Kay, Adrian Kosowski, Marcin
corresponds to the circuit model. In the trivial case of Pawłowski, Marek Żukowski, and anonymous referees
a single POVM element that is simply a one-qubit uni- for helpful remarks. MM and AP are supported by the
tary rotation E =U we clearly have universal quantum International PhD Project “Physics of future quantum-
computation. Our results demonstrate that non-trivial based information technologies” grant MPD/2009-3/4
POVMs,whereparticlesarereallymeasured,canbeused fromFoundationforPolishScienceandbytheUniversity
topromotethe1Dlatticeofqubitstouniversalquantum of Gdańsk grant 538-5400-B169-13. This work is sup-
computation. Thesenon-trivialPOVMsgiverisetotem- ported by the National Research Foundation, the Min-
poral quantum correlations that replace part of spatial istry of Education of Singapore grant no. RG98/13,
start-up grant of the Nanyang Technological University, The difference is that the initial input state for the local
and NCN Grant No. 2012/05/E/ST2/02352. POVMsateachstageistheentirestateoftheparticlesof
the (r−1)-dimensional hypercube. An important exam-
pleofastatewithcorrelationsthatcanbemappedinthis
way is a 2D cluster state [25], which is created by apply-
Appendix A ingC-phasegatesbetweeneverytwoneighbouringqubits
on a square lattice. Therefore a sequence of projective
measurements on a 2D cluster state can be mapped into
Mapping from spatial to spatio-temporal
a sequence of POVMs performed on repeatedly created
correlations for multidimensional lattices
1D cluster (Fig. 1b).
Inthesecondprocedure(Fig. 1a,order2ofoperations
Although every finite-dimensional multipartite quan- on the hypercube), one first creates arbitrary quantum
tum state can be expressed as an MPS, the mapping states of the two neighbouring (r−1)-dimensional slices
from spatial to temporal correlations is not always pos- perpendicular to the distinguished dimension, then the
sible. Whenever the bond dimension of an MPS exceeds unitariesinbetweenthemareperformed. Inthiscasethe
the dimension of a single quantum system under consid- correlations of measurements performed along temporal
eration, multipartite unitaries are necessary for the se- direction can also be mapped into correlations arising
quential generation. Our mapping, however, works for from sequence of POVMs. The important difference is
bipartite unitaries only. To broaden the class of states that in this case at each stage one firstly has to pre-
for which the map can be applied we consider an r- pare the state of the (r −1)-dimensional slice, and use
dimensional hypercubic lattice, with a d-level quantum its particles as ancillas of the POVMs (Fig. 1c). Note
systemateachnode. Wedefinetwoproceduresmapping that in this case one need not perform any entangling
all spatial correlations in such state to spatio-temporal operations on output states of the consecutive POVMs.
ones (see Fig. 1). In both cases one of the spatial di- An interesting example of this class of states are the so
mensions is distinguished, and the sequential generation called Sequentially Generated States (SGS) [20], which
is performed with respect to it. The initial state of the areasubclassofPEPS(ProjectedEntangledPairStates
entire system is a product state. [29]. PEPS provide a complete representation of arbi-
In the first case (see Fig. 1a, order 1 of operations trary quantum state of finite dimension in terms of a 2D
on the hypercube), at each stage i we: 1) generate an tensornetwork. SGS’sarecharacterizedbytheproperty,
arbitrary quantum state of the particles placed in an i- that, in contrast to arbitrary PEPS, they have exponen-
th (r−1)-dimensional slice perpendicular to the distin- tially vanishing long-range correlations [20].
guishedtemporal dimensionofthehypercube;2)movein Notethatwegeneralizethestandardnotionofagraph
temporaldirectionandperformalltheunitariesbetween state [30] to the case of non-commuting gates, which to
i-th and i+1-st slice that is next in time; 3) perform thebestofourknowledgewasfirstlysuggestedin[31]. In
projective measurements. We consecutively repeat steps thecasetheunitariesinthetemporaldirectioncommute
1-3. All the measurements can be mapped into a sin- withtheunitariesneededtocreatethestateofthe(r−1)-
gle particle POVMs in complete analogy to the 1D case. dimensional slice, both mappings can be used.
[1] A. J. Leggett and A. Garg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 857 [11] B. S. Tsirelson, Lett. Math. Phys. 4, 93 (1980).
(1985). [12] C.Schön,E.Solano,F.Verstraete,J.I.Cirac, andM.M.
[2] C. Emary, N. Lambert, and F. Nori, Rep. Prog. Phys. Wolf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 110503 (2005).
77, 016001 (2014). [13] R.RaussendorfandH.Briegel,Phys.Rev.Lett.86,5188
[3] Č. Brukner, S. Taylor, S. Cheung, and V. Vedral, (2001).
arXiv:quant-ph/0402127 (2004). [14] R. Raussendorf, D. Browne, and H. Briegel, Phys. Rev.
[4] M. Barbieri, Phys. Rev. A 80, 034102 (2009). A 68, 022312 (2003).
[5] D.Avis,P.Hayden, andM.M.Wilde,Phys.Rev.A82, [15] A.Klümper,A.Schadschneider, andJ.Zittartz,Z.Phys.
030102(R) (2010). B 87, 281 (1992).
[6] M. Markiewicz, P. Kurzynski, J. Thompson, S.-Y. [16] A. Klümper, A. Schadschneider, and J. Zittartz, Euro-
Lee, A. Soeda, T. Paterek, and D. Kaszlikowski, phys. Lett. 24, 293 (1993).
arXiv:1302.3502 (2013). [17] M. Fannes, B. Nachtergaele, and R. F. Werner, Comm.
[7] M. Żukowski, arXiv:1009.1749 [quant-ph] (2010). Math. Phys. 144, 443 (1992).
[8] C.Budroni,T.Moroder,M.Kleinmann, andO.Gühne, [18] S. Ostlund and S. Rommer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 3537
Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 020903 (2013). (1995).
[9] W.Dür,J.I.Cirac, andR.Tarrach,PhysRev.Lett.83, [19] G. Vidal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 147902 (2003).
3562 (1999). [20] M.-C. Bañuls, D. Perez-Garcia, M. M. Wolf, F. Ver-
[10] V.Coffman,J.Kundu, andW.K.Wootters,Phys.Rev. straete, andJ.I.Cirac,Phys.Rev.A77,052306(2008).
A 61, 052306 (2000). [21] M. A. Nielsen and I. Chuang, Quantum Computation
FIG.3. 2Dexamplesofmappingsfromspatialtospatio-temporalcorrelations. a)‘Order1’meansthatthestateofthelattice
is generated by applying the timelike (horizontal) gates before the respective next column of spacelike (vertical) gates. ‘Order
2’ means that the spacelike gates are performed before the timelike gates connecting them. b) Result of applying the map to
‘Order 1’ case. The spatial correlations of measurement outcomes of local projective measurements performed on each node
of the lattice are mapped into temporal correlations of outcomes of local POVM measurements performed on 1D lattice. c)
Result of applying the map to ‘Order 2’ case. The spatial correlations are mapped into temporal correlations of outcomes of
POVMs on 1D lattice, however in this case the POVM’s have entangled ancillas. In both cases at the last stage projective
measurements have to be performed.
andQuantumInformation (CambridgeUniversityPress, [27] S. Devitt, A. Fowler, A. Stephens, A. Greentree, L. Hol-
Cambridge, 2000). lenberg, W. Munro, and K. Nemoto, New. J. Phys. 11,
[22] E.Martin-Lopez,A.Laing,T.Lawson,R.Alvarez,X.-Q. 083032 (2009).
Zhou, and J. L. O’Brien, Nat. Photonics 6, 773 (2012). [28] M. A. Nielsen, arXiv:quant-ph/0504097 (2005).
[23] D.Greenberger,M.Horne,A.Shimony, andA.Zeilinger, [29] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, arXiv:cond-mat/0407066
Am. J. Phys. 58, 1131 (1990). (2004).
[24] W. Dür, G. Vidal, and J. I. Cirac, Phys. Rev. A 62, [30] M. Hein, J. Eisert, and H. J. Briegel, Phys. Rev. A 69,
062314 (2000). 062311 (2004).
[25] H.BriegelandR.Raussendorf,Phys.Rev.Lett.86,910 [31] D. Gross and J. Eisert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 220503
(2001). (2007).
[26] M. Hajdusek and V. Vedral, New J. Phys. 12, 053015
(2010).