]MB.oib-q[
2v09040.9051:viXra
GEOMETRIC COMBINATORICS AND COMPUTATIONAL
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY: BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA
ELIZABETHDRELLICH,ANDREWGAINER-DEWAR,HEATHERA.HARRINGTON,
QIJUNHE,CHRISTINEHEITSCH,ANDSVETLANAPOZNANOVIĆ
Abstract. Questions in computational molecular biology generate various
discrete optimization problems, such as DNA sequence alignment and RNA
secondarystructureprediction. However,theoptimalsolutionsarefundamen-
tally dependent on the parameters used in the objective functions. The goal
of a parametric analysis is to elucidate such dependencies, especially as they
pertain to the accuracy and robustness of the optimal solutions. Techniques
fromgeometriccombinatorics,includingpolytopesandtheirnormalfans,have
beenusedpreviouslytogiveparametricanalysesofsimplemodelsforDNAse-
quencealignmentandRNAbranchingconfigurations. Here,wepresentanew
computational framework, and proof-of-principleresults, which give the first
complete parametric analysis of the branching portion of the nearest neigh-
bor thermodynamic model for secondary structure prediction for real RNA
sequences.
1. Motivation
Overthe pastfour decades,improvementsin biotechnologyhavegreatlyacceler-
atedtheamountofbiologicalsequencedataavailable. Yet,afundamentalchallenge
incomputationalmolecularbiologyremainstoreliablyinferfunctionalinformation
from the linear encoding of DNA, RNA, and protein molecules.
As articulated in the central dogma of molecular biology, genetic information is
stored in DNA from which it is transcribed into messenger RNA, and then trans-
lated into proteins by ribosomal and transfer RNA. However, as always in biology,
a wealth of complexity lurks below the surface of this basic principle. Historically,
most interest was focused on DNA sequences (as the cellular genome) and protein
structures(asthecellularmachinery). Sincetheearly2000’s,though,attentionhas
increasinglyturnedto RNAasmanymorecriticalfunctions havebeenrevealed,in-
cluding gene splicing, editing, and regulation.
LikeDNA,RNAisasequenceofnucleicacids,abbreviatedA,C,G,andU(instead
of T), which form the familiar Watson-Crickpairings. Unlike the canonicaldouble-
stranded DNA helix, most RNA molecules are naturally single-stranded and the
intra-sequence base pairings are an integral component of the three-dimensional
structure. This is in contrast to the more subtle amino acid interactions which
govern the formation of protein structures. However, knowing the structure of a
Theauthors’collaborationwasfundedbytheMathematicsResearchCommunitiesprogramof
theAMS.S.PoznanovićwasalsosupportedinpartbyNSFgrantDMS-1312817. HAHgratefully
acknowledgesthesupportofEPSRCFellowshipEP/K041096/1. C.Heitschwassupportedinpart
byaCareerAwardattheScientificInterfacefromtheBurroughsWellcomeFund.
2 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
protein or RNA molecule is critical to understanding and manipulating its cellular
functions.
The structure of an RNA molecule is understood hierarchically, from the lin-
ear biochemical chain through the planar set of canonical base pairings to the 3D
molecule,whosestructureincludesmorecomplicatedtertiaryinteractionslikepseu-
doknots and base triples. Given the prevalence of RNA sequence data and the dif-
ficulties, both experimental and computational, of determining 3D structures, the
majority of attention has focused on the set of base pairs, known as the secondary
structure. In particular, one seeks to answer: What are the native base pairs for a
given RNA sequence? As explained below, it is possible to efficiently compute an
optimal secondary structure under the current Nearest Neighbor Thermodynamic
Model (NNTM). However, when these minimum free energy (MFE) predictions
are compared to structures derived from information-theoretic means, the current
gold-standard, the average accuracy for longer ribosomal RNA sequences is only
40%. Hence, it is criticalto understandwhich aspects ofRNA base pairingare not
captured well by the NNTM.
One known weakness of the current model is the energy function which governs
the branching of an RNA secondary structure. For computational reasons, the
entropic cost is modeled as an affine function with three parameters. A very nat-
ural question to ask is: How does the optimal secondary structure depend on the
branching loop parameters?
Such a question is an example of a parametric analysis, which illuminates the
dependencies of the solution on the underlying optimization parameters. As we
illustrate here, methods from geometric combinatorics, specifically polytopes and
their normal fans, can be used to answer this question, and others including accu-
racy and stability. The outline of this paper is as follows. Section 2 contains the
basicRNAterminologyandabriefoverviewofthegeometrictoolsneededforpara-
metric analysis. In Section 3 we first give background on the NNTM, specifically
the way the multibranch loops are scored. Then we introduce branching polytopes
and explain how to compute them using the software pmfe which we have made
available online. Finally, we present a few biological questions and discuss math-
ematical problems related to the branching polytopes they raise. The paper ends
with a summary in Section 4.
2. Background
2.1. Computational molecular biology. Nucleotide sequences can be modeled
as strings over a finite alphabet. The questions related to DNA and RNA are
amenable to analysis using discrete mathematical techniques from algebra, combi-
natorics,andtopology. Wereferthereadertothefollowingreferencesformathemat-
ical approaches for studying computational molecular biology [8, 36, 25, 12, 24, 2].
Ofparticularinteresthere aretechniques fromgeometriccombinatorics,whichcan
inform parametric analysis of models arising from optimization questions, such as
DNA sequence alignment and RNA secondary structure prediction.
Previous parametric analyses in molecular biology have primarily focused on
DNA. Given sequences of DNA, an important problem is to find regions that have
been evolutionary conserved. The first step requires aligning the sequences by
adding spaces to the sequences until they are the same length. The DNA se-
quence alignment problem is to find the best alignment between sequences given
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 3
some scoring function [35]. The optimal solution can be determined via dynamic
programmingoptimization which scores various features and provides globalalign-
ment. The optimization fundamentally depends on parameters, and the notion of
‘bestmatching’sequencesmaydependonthevalueoftheseparameters. Techniques
from geometric combinatoricscan be used [35, 5] to analyze systematically how se-
quencealignmentdependsontheseparameters. Themathematicalbackgroundwill
be presented in Section 2.2.
The problem we focus on here is prediction of the secondary structure of a
singlegivenRNA sequence. Unlike DNA, whichtypically formsa fully base-paired
double helix, RNA typically exists as a single strand whose bases can pair with
one another to form diverse and complex secondary structures. The secondary
structure of a given RNA molecule serves as a scaffold for the 3D structure [32].
As shown in Fig. 1, an RNA secondary structure consists of stacked base pairs
(helices) and single-strandedregions (loops). The degree of a loop is the number of
helices emerging from it (or, equivalently, the number of base pairings in the loop).
Hairpin loops have degree 1, internal loops have degree 2, and multibranch loops
havedegreegreaterthan2;eachRNAmoleculealsohasa(possiblyempty)exterior
loop,whichincludestheunpairedbasesnotcontainedinotherloops. Figure1shows
a secondary structure with all of these substructures labeled.
Internal loop Helix
U C C A AU A
G A C G U C G C A A C A
C UC U G C A G C G UU G U C
Exterior loop Multibranch loop Hairpin loop
Figure 1. Secondary structure of RNA with substructures.
Thebasepairingsinthesecondarystructurearedifficulttodetermineexperimen-
tally, necessitating mathematical models to predict the structure [40]. Indeed sec-
ondary structure prediction has been an active area of researchfor severaldecades
(see survey in [19]). One approach for predicting secondary structure is calculat-
ing the free thermodynamic energy ofthe RNA molecule accordingto the standard
NNTM[17,33]. Inthismodel,basesthatbondaregenerallyenergeticallyfavorable
and stabilize the RNA with a negative free energy, whereas unpaired bases are en-
ergetically disfavorable and destabilize the RNA with a positive free energy. Each
substructure is assigned an energy value, and the total energy of the secondary
structure is determined by summing over its substructures [17, 33].
If we further assume that secondary structure has no crossing base pairs, we
could then generate secondary structure of an RNA sequence recursively over its
subsequences. This allows us to compute the minimum energy structure efficiently
4 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
using a dynamic programming algorithm. This approach is widely studied, and
several software packages are available to perform the appropriate computations;
widely-used implementations include RNAfold from the Vienna RNA package [13],
mfold[41],andRNAstructure[26]. However,theoptimalstructurefoundusingthe
thermodynamic model is often not the correctone. The prediction depends on the
thousands of parametervalues in the objective function, affecting the substructure
prediction.
Current versions of the scoring model [17, 33] have over eight thousand param-
eters, but we focus our attention on three related to multibranch loops such as
that at the center of Fig. 1. (We will discuss some details of the model and its
parameters in Section 3.1.) We perform parametric analysis using geometric com-
binatorics, which has previously been applied to a simplified tree model of RNA
basepairingthatfocusesonbranchingconfigurations[14],andextendthistostudy
the branchingof realRNA sequences under theTurner99 NNTM parameters. In
the next section we introduce the required combinatorial and geometric notions to
carry out this parametric analysis.
2.2. Polytopesand geometriccombinatorics. TheoptimizationoftheNNTM
objective function, with an emphasis on branching loop calculations, can be pre-
sented as a simple linear programming (LP) problem, and thus well-established
mathematical tools can be used to tackle the optimization problem parametrically.
To analyze optimization problems with large sets of feasible solutions, such as all
possiblesecondarystructuresthatcouldformfromaparticularsequenceofRNA,a
(relatively)concisedescriptionof the possibilities is required. This canbe achieved
by constructing the convex polytope associated with the LP problem at hand.
The theory of convex polytopes and normal fans is well-developed, so we will
not reproduce it here. Rather we present just the definitions needed for a rigorous
description of the results in Section 3. More information on these applications of
polytopes is given in [24, 31, 4]; readers wishing to gain a thorough understanding
of the theory can see [11, 39, 3].
The theory of linear programming starts from the following question: Given a
set of feasible solutions X in Rn and a vector A ∈ Rn , for which x ∈ X is the
objective function Ax minimized?
For a fixed A, this is a straightforward question; however as A varies, different
vectors in the set X will minimize Ax. If X is a large or infinite set it may be
simpler to deal with a geometric region containing X, than with the original set
of feasible solutions itself. A convex polytope is a bounded region in Rn which can
be described by a finite number of linear inequalities aix ≤ ci. A hyperplane is a
supportinghyperplane forapolytopeP ifitintersectsP non-triviallybutnointerior
point ofP is onthe hyperplane. A k-face ofP is a k-dimensionalintersectionof P
with a supporting hyperplane. A 0-face is a vertex of P, a 1-faceis anedge, andso
on, with the n−1 dimensional faces called facets. The (unique) n-face is defined
to be the entire polytope.
The convex hull of a set X is the smallest convex set containing X. If X is a
finite set, its convex hull P is the set
(1) P = bxx: each bx ≥0 and bx =1 .
(x∈X x∈X )
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 5
Equivalently, Eq. (1) can be used as a definition of a convex polytope—that is, a
convex polytope is the convex hull of a finite set. It is a fundamental theorem in
the field that these two definitions of convex polytopes are equivalent. Figure 2
shows the convex hull of a finite set in R2.
Figure 2. The convex hull of the set X: a polytope with four
0-faces, four 1-faces, and one 2-face.
Theboundaryofapolytopeistheunionofitsfacetsandcontainsallfacesexcept
then-face. IfthepolytopeP istheconvexhullofasetX offeasiblesolutions,then
the boundary of P contains all optimal solutions (i.e. all vectors that minimize
Ax for non-zero A). Thus, studying the polytope rather than the original set X
simplifies the optimization problem.
Inpractice,however,computingthe convexhullofthe feasiblesetX istypically
a hard problem. We usually know too little about the set of feasible solutions
to construct the convex hull directly. In computational biology, it is usually the
case that the feasible set is defined implicitly by some intrinsic rules of the linear
programming problem. The real challenge, then, is to extract information about
the feasible setfromthese intrinsic rules. Inthis chapter,we consider two different
methods for constructing the convex hull: polytope propagation and incremental
convex hull. We will discuss these methods further in Section 3.2.
Thedualobjecttothe polytopeisitsnormal fan. Thenormalfanisacollection
ofregionsofRn calledcones. IfF is afaceofthe polytope,the conecorresponding
to F, denoted CF, is the set of all vectors B such that any point y∈F minimizes
the product Bx—that is,
:By≤Bx for all x∈P,y∈F}.
Thenormalfanisrepresentedvisually,asinFig.3,bydrawingthevectorsB∈CF
with their heads at the face F.
The normal fan of a polytope of dimension d is a partition of the
d-vector lies in some cone, and the cones are preserved by positive scalar multipli-
cation. The cones from Fig. 3, for example, if drawn so that their heads are the
origin, clearly fill the entire space R2, as shown in Fig. 4.
Once we have constructed the convex hull of feasible solutions for a particular
LP problem, the normal fan provides ways to discuss the stability of a parameter
6 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
Figure 3. The cones corresponding to the vertices of polytope
P, drawn “pointing into” their vertices. Also shown: the normal
vectors to each 1-face of the polytope.
vector A. If A is near the boundary of a cone of the normal fan, then a small
change in A will result in a different point of the polytope optimizing the function.
However if A is far from any boundaries of its cone, then small changes will not
change which point of the polytope optimizes Ax.
In Section 3 we use the NNTM free energy calculation as our objective function
andthespaceofallfeasiblesecondarystructuresoveragivenRNAsequenceasthe
point set. Treating this objective function as a linear functional and applyling the
machinery of linear programming produces what we term the branching polytope,
which we use to analyze the parameters in the model related to multibranch loops.
Figure 4. The normal fan of the polytope fills R2.
3. RNA branching polytope
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 7
3.1. NNTM. In Sections 1 and 2.1, we introduced the discrete optimization par-
adigm for RNA secondary structure prediction. Before we consider applications
of geometric combinatorics for parametric analysis of this method, we review it in
greater detail.
Discrete optimization methods for RNA secondary structure prediction derive
their objective function from the NNTM. If we make the standard simplifying as-
sumption to forbid pseudoknots, we can formulate the free-energy minimization
problemrecursively;dynamic programmingcan then be used to find the minimum
energy and a traceback algorithm can determine a corresponding structure.
ThespecificobjectivefunctionusedforNNTManalysishasevolvedsubstantially
overtheyears(cf.[22,34,42]),withasignificantincreaseinthenumberofparame-
ters. The Turner99 versionconsideredhere, obtained from the NearestNeighbor
Database [33], has over eight thousand parameters representing the energy contri-
butions of various small substructures—some (∼ 300) measured directly through
experiments,others(∼7000inferredindirectly fromexperimentaldata,andfinally
a handful through machine learning techniques to tune the model. Among those
inferred through machine learning are three connected to multibranch loops, such
as the one at the center of Fig. 1.
In particular, the Turner99 version of the model we study assigns to a given
multibranch loop the energy
(2) ∆G =a+b·(# unpaired nucleotides)+c·(# branching helices)
initiation
where a, b, and c are three of the learned parameters. The free energy changes
associatedwith multibranch loops have in fact been studied experimentally [6, 18].
However, these results do not map neatly onto the linear function from Eq. (2),
which is a computational simplification—a logarithmic dependence on loop size
would be more biophysically accurate, but the dynamic programming approach
requiresa recursivedecompositionthat wouldnotbe possiblewith sucha function.
Recentworkhasledtothedevelopmentofnewapproachestoloopenergyestimation
[38, 1], which rank structures more accurately but do not translate neatly into the
discrete optimization setting.
Rather than focus on specific values of parameters, we investigate the behavior
of the model as a function of the parameters, hoping to gain some insight into
(for example) how sensitive the model is to each one and whether certain families
of sequences exhibit increased or reduced sensitivity. If we could compute the
collection of all secondary structures T for a given sequence S, we could attack
this question directly. Unfortunately, this collection is far too large to compute
explicitly—the total number of secondary structures on n bases is known to grow
exponentially with n [28], and specific sequences of biologically-relevant lengths
may have 1050 or more possible structures—so we need to trim the problem down
in scope.
To do this, we mathematically reformulate the NNTM as a simple linear func-
tional focusing on the branching loop energy calculations. For a given RNA se-
quence, let T be a secondary structure with x multibranch loops, y unpaired nu-
cleotidesinthosemultibranchloops,andzhelicesbranchingfromthosemultibranch
loops. Let a = 3.4, b = 0, and c = 0.4 be the values of the parameters a,
b, and c in the Turner99 assignment. Then the energy ∆G associated to the
8 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
secondary structure T is given by
(3) ∆GT =a
for a “leftover” energy value w which can be computed using the model. We call
the vector hx,y,z,wi the (branching) energy signature of the secondary structure
T. Crucially, this energy signature does not actually depend on the Turner99
values of a, b, and c; the numbers x, y, and z are simply the integer counts of
certain substructures, while the leftover energy w represents the non-multibranch-
loop components of the energy calculation including the energy of the helices that
meet the multibranch loops. Treating all other energy components as a single
variable w allows us to focus on the multibranch parameters exclusively while also
linearizing the optimization problem.
Let a, b, c, and d be four arbitraryrationals. For a given secondary structure T
on a given RNA sequence, we can compute an associated parameterized energy:
for the energy signature hx,y,z,wi of T.
Givenaparticularparametervectorha,b,c,diandRNAsequenceS,wecanfind
the secondary structure T which minimizes Eq. (4) using existing software; the
details of this computation are discussed in Section 3.3. However, to understand
how the model behaves for all possible values of the parameters a, b, and c, we
will need to bring the powerful machinery of linear programming and polyhedral
geometry to bear on the problem.
3.2. Polyhedral methods and convex hulls. Although the collection of sec-
ondarystructures fora givensequence is enormous,itis neverthelessfinite, andits
correspondingenergy signaturesoccupy a bounded regionof R4. We thus shift our
attention to this region—specifically, to the convex hull of the collection of signa-
ture vectors for the sequence which we refer to as the branching polytope. Unlike a
classical LP problem, in which the feasible region is explicitly defined by inequal-
ities, the collection of all branching signatures is implicitly defined by the NNTM
andtheRNAsequence. Asaresult,wehavelittleinformationaboutthebranching
polytope. Onthe otherhand, we havea dynamic programmingalgorithmthatcan
find an energy-minimizing RNA configurationfor any particular set of parameters.
Henceitisnaturaltotrytoconstructtheconvexhullofthesignaturevectorsusing
this dynamic programming algorithm.
The first approach we consider is polytope propagation [23]. Polytope prop-
agation has been used in parametric analysis of various problems, such as DNA
sequence alignment and hidden Markov model for gene annotation [24]. This al-
gorithm computes the convex hull by recursive convex hull and Minkowski sum
computations on unions of polytopes. The recursions are related to the dynamic
programmingalgorithmfor calculatingMFE structures. Namely, the dynamic pro-
gramming algorithms we use involve decomposing a problem into a sum of smaller
problems, each of which is a minimization problem involving only addition. The
minimization operations can be translated into taking convex hulls of unions of
polytopes, while the sums can be translated into polytope Minkowski sums, trans-
porting the algorithm directly into the geometric domain.
However,whilethetranslationfromdynamicprogrammingtopolytopealgebrais
mathematically very elegant, polytope propagationmight not be the most efficient
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 9
way to compute the RNA branching polytope. The intermediate polytope compu-
tations required in this approach(convex hulls and Minkowski sum) are expensive
forcomplicatedpolytopes,andthesecostsquicklyaddup. Infact,empiricalresults
show that polytope propagation is often outperformed by incremental convex hull
approaches, especially for high-dimensional models [5]. In addition, applying the
polytope propagationapproachwouldrequirere-implementing the optimizational-
gorithm from scratch without taking advantage of the existing fast, peer-reviewed
software for NNTM prediction.
As a result, we instead use a variant of the Beneath-and-Beyond approach. The
coreideaofBeneath-and-BeyondwasintroducedbyGrünbaumin[11]asamethod
to find the facets of the convex hull of a given point set. Huggins [15] developed
his iB4e algorithm, which applies this idea to specialized LP problems such as
ours. The basic idea of iB4e method is to build the convex hull incrementally—
that is, to add one vertex at a time to an already constructed convex hull, by
systematically solving LP problems to either expand the hull or confirm that some
partofitmatchesthefinalhull. Theobjectivevectorsarechosensothataftereach
iteration, either a new vertex of the convex hull is found or a facet of the convex
hull is confirmed. This ensures that the method requires running the LP solver for
no more than O(V +F) objective vectors, if the convex hull has V vertices and F
facets. The algorithmiB4eapplies to abstractconvex-hull-findingproblems inany
dimension, so we describe it here in full generality.
Before the main loop of the algorithm can be applied, we must perform an
initializationstep whichfinds a collectionofpoints whoseaffine hull is the same as
the affine hull of the branching polytope we aim to construct. (Several approaches
to this step are possible; for example in
one might run the LP solver with the
2nbasisvectorsh±1,0,...,0i,h0,±1,...,0i,...,h0,...,0,±1i.) Wethencompute
the convex hull of these points and label all facets of the convex hull as ‘tentative,’
as illustrated in Fig. 5a.
We then beginthe mainloopofthe algorithm. Ateachstep, wepick atentative
facet,useitsouternormalvectorasobjectivefunction,andapplytheLPsolverwith
thisobjective. IfthesignatureoftheoptimalRNAstructurefortheseparametersis
notoutsidethe knownhull,asillustratedinFig.5b, thatfacetbecomes‘confirmed’
and the process is restarted with another tentative facet. However,if the resulting
signatureisoutsidetheknownhull,asillustratedinFig.5c,weaddittothevertex
set, compute the new convex hull, and label the newly added facets as tentative.
The processis repeateduntil allfacets areconfirmed. In the case ofaparticular
RNA sequence, the set of all possible secondary structures is finite and thus set of
signaturesisalsofinite. Theprocessmustterminateanditsendresultistheconvex
hull of the set of all solutions to the LP solver. This is the branching polytope,
andoncewehavecomputeditwecaneasilycomputeitsnormalfanusingstandard
methods and proceed to study the model.
3.3. Computing the branching polytope with pmfe. It is conceptually natu-
raltoapplytheBeneath-and-Beyondalgorithmtocomputethebranchingpolytope
of a particular RNA sequence by treating the parametrized NNTM minimization
problem as a linear program. However, coupling the two algorithms to perform
the computation requires some care. We introduce the software pmfe, available
10 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
(a) Initialization (b) Confirming a tentative facet
(c) Extendinga tentativefacet
Figure 5. The Beneath-and-Beyondalgorithm for polytope construction
build and install the software are provided in the file README.md of that reposi-
tory. Alternatively, a ready-to-use version of the software is available in a Docker
container, posted publicly on the Docker hub as agdphd/pmfe.
The pmfe package has three components (see Fig. 6): iB4e, findmfe, and
scorer.
• iB4eisanimplementationofHuggins’algorithmasaheader-onlytemplate
library in C++, taking advantage of the CGAL computational geometry
library [30] to handle the geometric computations.
• findmfe takes a parameter vector P = ha,b,c,di and an RNA sequence
S as input and returns as output a secondary structure on S which has
minimal energy with respect to P. From the available software packages
whichimplementNNTMoptimization,wechosetobasefindmfeonGTfold
[20] because it is parallelized and thus able to take advantage of modern
multi-core desktop computers. Some modifications were required to adapt
it to our use. For computational efficiency, GTfoldperforms all arithmetic
with fixed precisionoftwo decimal places;we convertedit to use arbitrary-
precisionrationalarithmeticbasedontheGMPlibrary[10],whichincreases
running time by an order of magnitude but ensures that the results are
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 11
exact even when parameters are not multiples of 1/100. We also added
aninterfaceto modify the multibranchparametersha,b,ciandthe dummy
scaling parameter d programmatically, allowing the Beneath-and-Beyond
algorithm to treat GTfold as a function of these four variables and call it
repeatedly.
• scorertakesanRNAsequenceS andasecondarystructureT andreturns
the signature vector hx,y,z,wi of T according to Eq. (3). (In particular,
it computes the value of w by computing the energy decomposition of T
under the Turner99 parameters.)
We combine these three components with the control flow illustrated in Fig. 6
to create the pmfe software package. Given an RNA sequence S, the iB4e module
repeatedly generates parameter vectors according to Huggins’ algorithm. Each of
thesevectorsissenttothefindmfemoduleasaquery,whichgeneratesasecondary
structurewithminimalenergy. Eachsuchsecondarystructureissenttothescorer
moduletofinditssignaturevector,whichisthensentbacktoiB4easthe response
to the query. After some number of iterations of this loop, the convexhull ofthese
signaturepointssisfoundtobeequaltothebranchingpolytope,whichisreturned
to the user. (For convenience, we in fact provide the user with a file containing
both the signatures s and their associated structures T in condensed dot-bracket
notation.)
iB4e Polytope
findmfe scorer
Figure 6. Control flow of the pmfe software
Since the softwarepmfewhich we introduce is complex andextensively modifies
the peer-reviewed codebase of GTfold, we provide a testing framework to ensure
correctness. Testsareavailabletoensurethatpmfereturnsthesamestructuresand
scores as GTfold, using both the classical Turner99 parameters [17] and various
modified parameter sets for a variety of natural and synthetic RNA sequences.
Details for running these tests are available in the pmfe repository.
We also provide a module rna_poly in the SageMath computer algebra system
[29] which can be used to study the branching polytopes produced by pmfe. This
canbeusedtogenerateavarietyofvisualizationsofthenormalfanofthebranching
polytope. Inparticular,itprovidesasimpleinterfacefortakingthed=1sliceofthe
12 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
fan,givinga polyhedralpartitionofR3 whoseregionsarecollectionsofparameters
ha,b,ciwhichyieldthesamesecondarystructureforthesequenceunderstudy. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 7, which shows the b = 0,d = 1 slice of the normal
fan of the branching polytope for a H.sapiens tRNA sequence. The Turner99
parametervalues a =3.4,c =0.4aremarkedwith a circlejust northeastofthe
origin.
0 10 20 30
multibranch loop initiation penalty (a)
H.sapiens tRNA
b=0: 36 slices visible
Figure 7. Theintersectionoftheparameterspacedecomposition
for a H.sapiens tRNA sequence with b=0.
3.4. Biologicalquestionsleadingtomathematicalproblems. TheRNAbranch-
ingpolytopeandthe associatedpolyhedraldecompositionofthe three-dimensional
multibranch parameter space obtained by intersecting its normal fan with d = 1
encapsulate the dependency of the optimization on the parameters a,b,c. Various
questions related to accuracy and stability can be addressed through the analy-
sis of the polytope and the polyhedral decomposition. However, answering such
questions in a manner that is biologically relevantrequires considerationof certain
subtleties and this leads to interesting mathematical problems. Here we discuss a
few biological questions that could be addressed through the parametric analysis
and related mathematical problems that arise.
Question 1: How robust is the optimization for a given RNA sequence?
In the strictest sense, the prediction is sensitive if a variation of the parameters
within an allowed margin of error produces different optimal secondary structures.
This occurs if the distance of the Turner99 parameters (a ,b ,c ) from the
boundary of the polyhedron that contains this point is smaller than the allowed
marginof error. For example, Fig. 7 shows the position of (a ,b ,c ) within the
polyhedral decomposition of a H.sapiens tRNA (only the b = 0 slice is depicted,
which is the baseline value in Turner99). Its distance to the boundary is 0.13699
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 13
and, for instance, optimization using a=3.39130,b=−0.14786,c=0.37391yields
structures with a different signature.
However, this by itself does not mean that the optimization is very sensitive;
analysis of the structure space is required so that one can quantify the sensitivity.
Namely, two structures with different signatures may still have a lot of structural
similarities(forexample,verysimilarlonghelicesandbranchingpattern),inwhich
case one would not necessarily say that the prediction is very sensitive. Moreover,
since the structure-to-signaturemap is not one-to-one,when quantifying the struc-
turaldifferencesintheoptimalstructuresoneactuallyneedstocomparetwosetsof
structures,eachonecorrespondingtoagivensignature. Inshort,intheassessment
of robustness we face the following problem.
Problem 1: Defineagood representativeof theset of structuresthatcorrespond
to the same signature.
The problem of representing a whole set of structures by a single one has ap-
peared before, for example in the context of compact representation of a sample
of structures. However, the methods developed for this (e.g. sfold clustering [7]
and profiling [27]) usually assume structural similarities of the elements in the set.
Here, though, we are presented with a different set-up: the structures mapping
to the same signature do not a priori have any common motifs. Therefore, choos-
ing one consensus structure as the other methods do may not yield a reasonable
representative of the whole set.
Question 2: How much can the prediction of secondary structure be improved
for a given sequence?
For sequences for which the native structure has been obtained experimentally
or via comparative sequence analysis, one could assess the accuracy of the NNTM
by comparing it to the MFE structure. In fact, since the structures corresponding
to all signatures on the boundary of the branching polytope can in practice be
obtained fairly efficiently [37], one can precisely determine branching parameters
that would yield a signature corresponding to a structure that is closest to the
native one. However, here we again face the problem that besides the most accu-
rate one, that signature corresponds to a whole set of MFE structures that might
be very different from the native structure. In such a case, the almost accurate
structure might be unrecognizable. Therefore, in assessing accuracy, the problem
offinding agoodrepresentativestructureforagivensignatureis stillveryrelevant.
Furthermore, even if we can solve this problem, the most accurate prediction ob-
tainedthiswaymayrequireatripleofparameters(a,b,c)thatisverydifferentfrom
(a ,b ,c ), which may not be very desirable. Namely, even though (a ,b ,c )
99 99 99 99 99 99
were not obtained experimentally, they still might have some biological relevance
sincetheinitiationpointforthegeneticalgorithmusedwassuggestedbystabilities
determined by optical melting for an RNA multibranch loop with three branching
helices [17]. This suggests the following natural problem.
Problem2: Maximizetheimprovementinaccuracywhileminimizingparameter
change.
One mathematical subproblem here is to formulate an objective function which
appropriatelymeasuresthedifferencebetweentwoRNAsecondarystructures. While
there are simple structure metrics that can be very efficiently computed (e.g. the
base pair metric based on symmetric set difference), other metrics may be more
appropriate to quantify the structural differences [21].
14 DRELLICH,GAINER-DEWAR,HARRINGTON,HE,HEITSCH,ANDPOZNANOVIĆ
Another importantsubproblemis formulatinganappropriatemetric to measure
changes in parameter values. Standard metrics such as the p-metrics can be ap-
plied, since the parameter vectors are taken from R4, but it is not clear which is
most appropriate. Furthermore, careful consideration should be given to how each
component of the parameter vector is weighted: a unit change in each coordinate
may have significantly different impacts on the secondary structure. For example,
since a given multibranch loop in a structure has several unpaired nucleotides, a
small change (e.g. by 0.1) in b in general has bigger effects on the prediction than
the same change in a.
Question 3: Is there a choice of branching parameters that would improve the
prediction accuracy for a family of sequences?
Homologous sequences perform the same function in different species and they
fold into essentially the same structure. However,their MFE prediction accuracies
can vary significantly. For instance, within the tRNA family, the accuracy calcu-
lated as the F-measure (the harmonic mean of the MFE sensitivity and positive
predictive value against true positive base pairs) ranges from the minimal 0 to
the maximal 1 [27]. Hence, it is natural to try to find a set of parameters which
yieldsthehighestaccuracyforafamilyofsequences. Forthis,oneneedstoaddress
the question: Are there any patterns in the dependency of the prediction on the
parameters across a family of homologous sequences? Mathematically, one could
phrasethis asaproblemoffinding similaritiesbetweenpolytopesin R4 orbetween
polyhedral decompositions of R3. For example, Fig. 8 shows the b = 0 slice of
the polyhedral decompositions for a tRNA sequence of L.delbrueckii. By visually
comparing this figure to Fig. 7 one can notice similarities in the directions of the
splitting hyperplanes. The challenge of course is to quantify such similarities. So,
we face the following problem.
Problem 3: Find a way to compare branching polytopes.
Comparison of polytopes is a problem that has appeared before, for instance in
relation to the traveling salesman problem in optimization [9]. Even in optimiza-
tion problems when one works with relaxation polytopes that are, loosely speak-
ing,“close,”comparingrelaxationsisnotwellunderstoodanddifferentcomparison
methods havebeen suggested(e.g.[16]). In ourcase,anadditionalchallengeis the
fact that the polytopes to be compared do not a priori satisfy any mathematically
tractable assumptions for closeness.
4. Conclusions
The affine energy function which governs the branching of an RNA secondary
structureundertheNNTMoptimizationisaknownweaknessofthethermodynamic
model, and the methods from geometric combinatorics outlined here offer signifi-
cant potential to assess its accuracy and stability through a parametric analysis.
While simplified models are certainly more tractable, the new pmfe computational
framework makes possible the analysis of branching polytopes for real RNA se-
quences for the first time. As illustrated by the qualitative similarities between
Fig.7 and Fig.8, this approachis capturing some interesting characteristicswhich
are preserved between two different sequences. Moreover,as discussed, moving be-
yondthequalitativecomparisonofpolytopeslicestoquantifytheirsimilaritiesand
differences presents some interesting mathematical challenges. Consequently, it re-
mains to be seen whether the observed patterns in these proof-of-principle results
BRANCHING POLYTOPES FOR RNA SEQUENCES 15
0 10 20 30
multibranch loop initiation penalty (a)
L.delbrueckii tRNA
b=0: 38 slices visible
Figure 8. The b = 0 slice of the parameter space decomposition
for a L.delbrueckii tRNA sequence.
areresultingfromthestructureofthethermodynamicoptimizationand/orthecod-
ing ofstructuralmotifs in the basepairing ofthese RNA sequences. Resolvingthis
dichotomy will reveal much about the interplay between mathematics and biology
in the prediction of RNA secondary structures.