]hp-oeg.scisyhp[
1v4946.2041:viXra
Geophysical implications of a decentered inner core
C˘alin Vamo¸s∗
“T. Popoviciu” Institute of Numerical Analysis, Romanian Academy, P.O. Box 68, 400110 Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Nicolae Suciu†
Department of Mathematics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Cauerstr. 11, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
Inafirstapproximation,theEarth’sinteriorhasanisotropicstructurewithasphericalsymmetry.
Over the last decades the geophysical observations have revealed, at different spatial scales, the
existenceofseveralperturbationsfromthisbasicstructure. Inthispaperwediscussthehemispheric
perturbations induced to this basic structure if the inner core is displaced from the center of mass
of the Earth. Using numerical simulations of the observed hemispheric asymmetry of the seismic
waves traveling through the upper inner core, with faster arrival times and higher attenuation in
theEasternHemisphere,weestimatethatthepresentpositionoftheinnercoreisshiftedbytensof
kilometersfromtheEarth’scentereastwardintheequatorialplane. Iftheonlyforcesactingonthe
innercorewerethegravitationalforces,thenitsequilibriumpositionwouldbeattheEarth’scenter
andtheestimateddisplacementwouldnotbepossible. Weconjecturethat,duetointeractionswith
theflowandthemagneticfieldinsidetheoutercore,theinnercoreisinapermanentchaoticmotion.
To support this hypothesis we analyze more than ten different geophysical phenomena consistent
with an inner core motion dominated by time scales from hundredstothousands of years.
I. INTRODUCTION aboutthestaticequilibriumposition(theSlichtermode).
Inconclusion,weconjecturethattheICparticipatesand
SituatedattheEarth’scenter,surroundedbythefluid interacts with the turbulent convective flow in the OC
outer core (OC), the inner core (IC) is primarily com- being driven into a chaotic motion with time scales sim-
posedofasolidironandnickelalloy. Foralongtimeafter ilar to those of the secular variations of the geomagnetic
its discoverybyLehmannin1936[51],itwasmodeledas field near the equator.
anideal mathematicalobject: a rotationalellipsoidwith In the next three sections we leave aside the dynamic
asmoothsurfaceandahomogeneousandisotropicinter- considerations and using recent seismic observations we
nal structure. But over the last decades the quality and obtainanestimationofthe presentpositionofthe IC.In
theamountofgeophysicalobservationshaveincreasedso Sect.IIIweresumetheresultspresentedin[89]wherewe
that the IC image has become more complex and even analyzedtheisotropichemisphericasymmetryatthetop
contradictory [21, 81]. In this paper we show that many of the IC (ATIC) of the travel times of the PKIKP seis-
of the disputed issues and unresolved difficulties related mic waves which propagate through the layer of 100 km
totheICcanbesimultaneouslysimplifiedorevensolved thick below the inner core boundary (ICB). Using ray
by the hypothesis of an eastwarddisplacement of the IC theorywenumericallycomputedthePKIKPtraveltimes
bytensofkilometersfromtheEarth’scenterintheequa- for an eccentric position of the IC (Appendix B) and we
torial plane. showed that the displacement of the IC toward 110◦ E
If the fluid in the OC is at rest, then the equilibrium in the equatorial plane by tens of kilometers from the
positionoftheICattheEarth’scenterofmassisimposed Earth’s center can explain both the values and the ge-
byitsgravitationalinteractionwiththerestoftheEarth. ographical distribution of the differential travel times of
A permanent shift from this static equilibrium position the PKiKP-PKIKP phases. By means of the same nu-
ispossibleonlyifotherforcesactontheIC.InSect.IIA, merical model, in Sect. IV we show that the decentering
using the recent results of numerical simulations of the oftheICalsoexplainsthehemisphericasymmetryofthe
geomagneticdynamo [6], we tentatively identify the per- attenuation within the same region of the IC. So both
turbing forces with those describing the electromagnetic hemisphericseismicasymmetriesatthe topoftheICare
andhydrodynamic interactionsof the IC with the asym- simultaneously explained by geometrical considerations
metric convective flow in the OC. Then in Sect. IIB we relatedtothedisplacementoftheIC,withoutdisturbing
proposethe globalforcing ofa decenteredIC as a source the symmetry of the internal structure of the IC.
of the nonhydrostaticity of the Earth’s shape. Finally, The differentialtraveltimes usedto analyzethe ATIC
in Sect. IIC we show that our hypothesis is supported are not affected by the large perturbations due mainly
by the longstandingobservationaldifficulties inmeasur- to mantle heterogeneity. In Sect. V we use the absolute
ing the effects of the translational oscillations of the IC travel times of the seismic waves reflected at the ICB
under small angles and we document for the first time
the likely existence of an hemispheric asymmetry which
could be related to a decentered position of the IC. The
∗ cvamos@ictp.acad.ro resultisnotasrigorousasthoseobtainedintheprevious
† suciu@math.fau.de two sections because we do not eliminate the perturba-
tions due to mantle heterogeneity, positioning errors of are quite different. The most prominent features in the
theearthquakeepicenters,ormisidentificationofthepre- mapsofthe verticalfieldatthe CMB arethe highinten-
critical PKiKP phase. sity flux lobes under Arctic Canada, Siberia, and under
An eccentric IC should influence many geophysical the eastern and western edges of Antarctica [45]. These
phenomena which can be used as additional means to lobes give the predominantly dipole field structure ob-
substantiate our hypothesis. Section VI contains quali- served at the surface which has remained approximately
tative analyses of some of these geophysical phenomena: stationaryoverthepastfourcenturies. Theflownearthe
the anomalouslayerabovethe ICB;thedifferentialrota- top of OC derived from the magnetic field at the CMB
tion of the IC with respectto the mantle; the large-scale usingakinematicmodelalsocontainspolarvortices[37].
anomalies of the geoid; the hemispherical pattern in the There are many numerical dynamo models which can
anisotropy level of the seismic waves velocity inside the explainthemainpropertiesofthegeomagneticfield[16].
IC. Forexample,numericalsimulationsgenerateweakerfield
The hypothesisofanIC displacedby100kmfromthe inside the tangent cylinder, strong normal polarity flux
Earth’s center was formulated by Barta since the 1970’s lobes close to the tangent cylinder, and pairwise inverse
basedonthe distributions ofthe large-scaleanomaliesof field patches around the equator. An outstanding diffi-
thegeoid[7–9]. Othertwomorequalitativejustifications cultyforstandardmodelshasbeenhowtoreproducethe
ofthishypothesiswereformulatedinthesameperiodand westward drift of low-latitude magnetic flux patches at
are briefly presented in Appendix A. The decentering of the CMB. At Earth’s surface they correspond to field
the IC has also recently been derived as a consequence variations with timescales shorter than 400 years, be-
of the theory of translational convection inside the IC tween 20◦ N and 20◦ S with speed of approximately 17
[1, 2], but the supposed displacement is of only 100 m, km/yr westward [45].
so that the IC remains in mechanical equilibrium (see A simple geometrical reasoning shows that the IC
Appendix A). could be the cause of this phenomenon. If the IC is
displaced in the equatorial plane, then its mechanical
and thermal forcing on the OC is concentrated between
II. DYNAMICS OF A DECENTERED IC two planes parallel with the equator and tangent to
the IC, i.e., within a spherical segment with the height
The main obstacle to accept the possibility that the equal with the IC diameter of 2442 km. This height
IC could be decenteredby tens of kilometers is the iden- differs only by a few percents from the width at the
tification of forces large enough to displace the IC from CMB of the westward-moving wave-like patterns equal
its static equilibrium position. Inthis sectionwe explore to 2ROCsin20◦ =2380km, where ROC =3480kmis the
some of the evidences supporting the existence of such OC radius.
forcesandoftheir dynamicaleffects onthe IC.The abil- A more elaborate justification is provided by the first
ity of the IC to be driven by the flow inside the OC has successful numerical simulation of the westward drift of
to be tested through direct numerical simulations. themagneticfield,obtainedbymeansofaheterogeneous
thermodynamical boundary condition at both the ICB
andCMBandagravitationalcouplingoftheICwiththe
A. Flow and geomagnetic field inside the OC mantle [6]. This dynamo model produces magnetic vari-
ations dominated by intense, westward-drifting, equato-
Mechanical and electromagnetic interactions between rial flux patches under the Atlantic hemisphere. The
the IC and OC, together with the very presence of the maximum of the magnetic power moving in the longitu-
IC, affect the geometry of the flow inside the fluid OC dinal direction is reached at the Equator, with a maxi-
and the geomagnetic field. The decentering of the IC is mum speed of14 km/yr,comparableto that observedof
an additional geometrical and mechanical forcing which 17 km/yr.
influences the structure of the magnetic field. In the fol- ThenumericalsimulatedconvectionintheOCisdom-
lowingwe try to identify the features ofthe geomagnetic inatedbythemassfluxattheICBmodeledbyalongitu-
field which support the existence of such an asymmetric dinal hemispherical heterogeneity, maximal at the longi-
forcinginsidetheEarth. Firstwebrieflypresentthebasic tude of 90◦E. This asymmetric forcing could be caused
structureofthegeomagneticfieldwhichcanbeexplained bythedisplacementoftheICinthedirectionofthemax-
by symmetric numerical geodynamo models. imummassflux. Becauseofthesmallerdistancebetween
The radial components of the geomagnetic field at the ICB andthe CMB, inthis directionthe temperature
thecore-mantleboundary(CMB)canbecomputedfrom gradientshouldbelargerandthemassfluxshouldbein-
the magnetic field at Earth’s surface assuming that no creased. The gravitational coupling between the IC and
sources exist between the Earths surface and the CMB the mantle could be a secondary effect of the displace-
[64]. The imaginary cylinder coaxial with Earth’s rota- ment of the IC.
tion axis and tangent to the IC at the equator, known An important result obtained by this numerical simu-
as the tangent cylinder, separates two regions of the OC lationrelatedtotheICdynamicsisthestronglarge-scale
in which the fluid flow and the resulting magnetic field asymmetry of the flow and of the magnetic field inside
the OC. The rotational turbulent hydrodynamic flow in and polar radii of the CMB.
theOCcanbecomeasymmetricatplanetaryscale,firstly This nonhydrostaticity has been attributed to the
by interaction with the IC and secondly by the hetero- mantle convection [23]. Another cause could be that the
geneous forcing at the CMB. The asymmetry of the flow IC displacement perturbs not only the OC, but also the
and of the magnetic field at the CMB is also supported mantle,mainlyintheequatorialregion. Ourestimations
by the observation data [29, 38]. Such a complex flow indicateadisplacementoftheICfromtheEarth’scenter
couldgeneratesignificantviscousandmagneticforceson in the equatorial plane of tens of kilometers (Sects. III,
the IC [3, 13, 14] and could maintain it in a permanent IV, and V). This is almost two orders of magnitude
chaotic motion. These forces should increase when the larger than the displacement deduced from mechanical
nondimensionalparameterscharacterizingthe numerical and thermal equilibrium conditions [1]. Such a large dif-
simulations will further approach the real values for the ferenceimpliesanonhydrostaticevolutionoftheICand,
deepEarth. The time scalescharacteristicto the IC mo- implicitly, of the rest of the Earth.
tion have to be larger than several decades which is the Another phenomenon possibly influenced by the IC
time scale associated to the westward drift of the geo- displacement is the Makowitz wobble, which is the mo-
magnetic field. tion of the pole with respect to the Earth’s crust and
Therelationbetweenthedirectionofthehighestlight- mantle including a quasiperiodic component with a pe-
element mass flux at the ICB and the offset of the mag- riod of approximately 24 years superimposed on a linear
neticdipolefromtheEarth’scenter[65]alsosupportsour drift [32]. The cause of the decadal-scale polar motion
hypothesis ofa decentered IC. The drastic change in the variations is currently unknown. It was found that the
dipole position from the Western to the Eastern Hemi- main excitation source of the variations cannot be the
sphere during the last 10000 years could be explained redistributionofmasswithinthe atmosphereandoceans
by a complete reversal of the direction of the faster IC or the core-mantle coupling. The most probable source
growth, which in turn could result from intermittent IC is the IC, but the suggestion that irregular motion of
rotation [65]. A simpler explanation might be the move- a tilted oblate IC may excite the Makowitz wobble was
mentoftheICfromtheWesterntoEasternHemisphere, provedtobeunlikely. AneccentricICcouldhavethead-
which reverses the direction of the maximum mass flux ditional independent parameters needed to explain this
associated with the hemispheric asymmetry of the mag- wobble.
netic field [6]. This provides an upper limit of several The rotation period of the Earth is not uniform, but
thousands of years for the time scales of the IC motion. varies on time scales from days to millennia [32]. The
In addition, the intricate trajectory of the dipole is an tidal drag of the Moon and Sun on the rotating Earth
indication that the motion of the IC is likely chaotic. produces a secular slowing down of the rotation. The
angular momentum variations of the atmospheric and
oceanic global circulation explain most of the observed
B. The variation of the Earth’s rotation LOD variation at yearly and subyearly timescales. In
addition, there are variations over several decades re-
lated to the angular momentum in the core which are
The dynamic forcing of a decentered IC should be
well modeled for the past century [44]. Prior to this pe-
transmitted to the entire Earth. Here we briefly discuss
riod the results are poorer, especially because of a phase
itsinfluenceontherotationalmotionoftheEarthandon
shift, but the general pattern is still remarkable. The
thenonhydrostaticityoftheEarth’sshape. Variationsof
supposed displacement of the IC would affect the global
the Earth rotation manifest as variations in direction of
angular momentum of the Earth and could be an expla-
Earth’s rotation axis as well as variations in the angular
nationofthephaseshift. Thenthe dominanttimescales
speed, i.e., variations in the length of day (LOD). Pre-
oftheICmovementcouldbe atleastseveralhundredsof
cession of an axis is the mean, smoothly varying part of
years.
the motion of the axis relative to the direction of fixed
starswhile nutationis the oscillatorypartofthis motion
[23]. The motion of the instantaneous rotationaxis with
respect to the figure of the Earth is known as the Earth C. Translational oscillations of the IC
wobble.
The influence of the IC on the wobble and nutation of An equilibrium position of the IC at the Earth’s cen-
the Earth can be determined from a three-layer model ter of mass is primarily determined by the gravitational
of a deformable Earth [23]. The results of the numerical field. The gravitational restoring force is proportional
modelareasetofoptimizedvaluesfortheEarthparam- with the displacement of the IC from the Earth’s cen-
etersderivedfromthe“bestfit”withobservationaldata. ter and with the density difference between the IC and
We are first interested in the inference that the elliptic- the surrounding OC. A large earthquake or a large me-
ity of the core has to be about 5% higher than its value teorite impact could initiate harmonic oscillations about
for the hydrostatic equilibrium Earth model [35]. The this equilibrium position. If ω0 is the angular frequency
nonhydrostatic excess of the ellipticity corresponds to a for oscillations parallelto the Earth’s rotationaxis, then
differenceofapproximately400mbetweentheequatorial the oscillations in the equatorial plane have two eigen-
values ω0 ±Ω, where Ω is the Earth’s angular velocity. and negative in the Western Hemisphere [61, 92, 94–96].
The three modes of translational oscillations are known An important constraint for the models proposed to ex-
asSlichtermodesaftertheresearcherwhofirstpredicted plain this hemispheric dichotomy is the sharpness of the
them [77]. boundariesseparatingthe regionswithpositive andneg-
ThefrequenciesoftheSlichtermodesareinfluencedby ative residuals [92, 93].
many factors: the stratification of the fluid in the OC, All existing explanations assume the center of the IC
the elastic properties of the IC and OC, the viscosity of fixedatthecenteroftheEarthandinterprettheobserved
the fluid inthe OC,the magnetic perturbationsnearthe anomaly of the travel time residuals in terms of a longi-
ICB, the mushy structure of the ICB, etc. [74]. Depend- tudinal anomaly of the seismic wave velocity (e.g. [93]).
ing on the approximations used to model these factors, Greater (smaller) seismic wave velocity at the top of the
the theoretically computed periods vary from 4 to 8 h IC in the Eastern (Western) Hemisphere, with respect
according to different authors. But this mode has never to 1D reference models, are explained by a hemispheric
been clearly identified from observational data and it is variation of the material properties at the top of the IC
still a subject of interest and debate. The Slichter mode [1, 18, 61, 92–96]. There are two competing approaches
was not observed even in the records obtained after the to explain such an IC velocity asymmetry. The first one
huge Sumatra-Andaman earthquake of December 2004 assumes different cooling rates in the Eastern and West-
[63, 75]. ern Hemispheres due to thermochemical coupling with
It is obvious that the inability to detect the Slichter the mantle [3, 84, 85], causing a faster solidification rate
mode could be due to the insufficient sensitivity of the of the Eastern Hemisphere. Different textures of the IC
currently available superconducting gravimeters. How- materialresultedfromthisprocessmayexplainthehemi-
ever,takingintoaccountthatalltheothernormalmodes spherical pattern of the seismic velocity [17]. Alterna-
of the Earth have been identified from the seismic data, tively, another approach proposes a self-sustained east-
itis possiblethatthe translationaloscillationssimply do ward translation of the IC as a result of crystallization
not take place because the gravitational restoring force in the Western Hemisphere and melting in the Eastern
is not the only force acting on the IC. If, as we have Hemisphere,followedbythewest-eastincreaseoftheiron
conjectured in Sect. IIA, the IC is in a chaotic motion grain-size which could produce the velocity anomaly ex-
correlatedto the turbulentflow inOC,then the momen- plaining the ATIC [1, 58]. Even whether these models
tum transferred by an earthquake would not cause the explain the travel time anomaly, neither of them is fully
oscillation of the IC, but it would determine only an ad- consistentwiththeobservedsharpnessofthehemispheric
ditional displacement. Hence the difficulty to determine boundaries [2, 93].
the Slichter mode could be an indication that the IC is Using the numerical simulation presented in Ap-
not in an equilibrium position at the Earth’s center. pendix B we show that the ATIC can be explained by
the displacement of the IC in the equatorial plane to-
ward east by tens of kilometers from the Earth’s center,
III. RESIDUALS OF THE PKiKP-PKIKP without modifying the spherical symmetry in the upper
DIFFERENTIAL TRAVEL TIME IC. We denote by PKIKPdec and PKiKPdec the paths
modified by the decentered IC. Unlike the paths for the
In this section we begin to determine the present po- centeredIC,theirpropagationplanechangesatreflection
sition of the IC using seismic data. One of the best doc- or refraction on ICB. Only when the seismic ray propa-
umented seismic hemispheric asymmetry is the isotropic gatesinaplanecontainingboththecenterofthe ICand
asymmetryatthetopoftheinnercore(ATIC)character- of the Earth, the propagation plane does not change. A
ized by an Eastern Hemisphere with faster arrival times clear east-west asymmetry is obvious in Fig. 1 for such
oftheP-wavesandaWesternHemispherewithslowerar- seismic rays having the same initial incidence angle, i.e.,
rivals[15,30,61,67,94–96]. ATIC hasbeenmainlydoc- being identical until the incidence with the ICB.
umentedbytheresidualsofthedifferentialtraveltimeof From the differential times computed in Appendix B
thePKIKPandPKiKPseismicphases[61,92–96]. They we determine the residuals shown in Fig. 2 for the seis-
bothtravelthroughalmostthesameregionsofthecrust, mic rays in the Eastern Hemisphere plotted in Fig. 1.
mantle,andOC.Afterthat,thePKiKPphasereflectsoff They are quantitatively comparable with those observed
the ICB, while the PKIKP phase refracts twice on ICB [61, 92, 94–96] showing that displacements of the IC
propagating inside the IC. over distances up to 100 km can explain the travel time
We denote by ∆t the observed differential travel time anomaly. With the increase of the turning point depth
obtained by subtracting the travel time of the PKIKP (epicentral distance) the positive residuals in the East-
phase from the traveltime ofthe PKiKPphase with the ern Hemisphere increase because the length of the path
same focus and exit point. It differs from the differen- inside the IC increases (Fig. 9a).
tialtraveltime ∆t0 computedfor a centeredIC with the In order to ascertain if a decentered IC can explain
velocityprofilegivenbyaone-dimensionalreferenceseis- ATIC, we compare the longitudinal repartition of the
mic model. The observational data show that the resid- residuals obtained by numerical simulations with those
uals ∆t − ∆t0 are positive in the Eastern Hemisphere reported in [92, Fig. 3a] and in [93, Fig. 3b], the most
FIG.1. ThepathsofthePKIKPdecandPKiKPdecrays(thick
continuouslines)whentheIC(thesmallcircle)isdisplacedby
100kmfromtheEarth’scenterintheequatorialplanetoward
east. The epicenter is at the North Pole, the propagation
plane of the seismic rays contains the centers of both Earth
and decentered IC and, in this case, they are not modified
byrefractionorreflectiononICB.Thedashedlinesrepresent
thepaths of the same phases for thecentered IC.
135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143
Epicentral distance (°)
extensive and accurate PKiKP-PKIKP studies to date.
For a given position of the IC, we compute the residuals
forearthquakesevenlydistributedontheEarth’ssurface
and seismic rays uniformly distributed around the focus
(see Appendix B). For each seismic ray we choose the
incidence angle so that the corresponding turning point
is at 39 km below ICB, the minimum depth below ICB
of the available observationaldata (see [92, Fig. 3a]).
Figure 3 shows the longitudinal distribution of the
residuals when the IC is displaced by 100 km toward
90◦ E longitude. If the displacement is in the equato-
rialplane,thenthepositiveresidualsareconfinedwithin
theEasternHemisphereandthenegativeoneswithinthe
WesternHemisphere(Fig.3a). IftheICisdisplacedout-
side the equatorial plane, the separation of the positive
andnegative residualsis not so definite (Fig. 3b). In the
observational data, the positive and negative residuals
are sharply separated [92, 93] indicating that the dis-
placement of the IC is in the equatorial plane (Fig. 3a).
The observed boundary between the positive and neg-
ative residuals is shifted toward east by approximately
20◦ with respect to the boundary between the Eastern
and Western Hemispheres. The numerically simulated
boundary rotates with the angle equal with the differ-
encebetweenthelongitudeoftheICcenterandthe90◦E
longitude. All theseindicate adisplacementofthe ICby
tens ofkilometersinequatorialplane toward110◦ E lon-
gitude.
The theoretical residuals generated by a decentred IC
have a cylindrical symmetry about the direction of the
ICdisplacement. Thisdistributionisconsistentwiththe
eyeball-shapedpositiveanomalyatlow-andmid-latitude
of the compressional velocity derived for a centered IC
∆t model from seismical observations [87]. The anomaly is
dec centered on 90◦ E longitude on the equator, i.e., very
dec 0 close to the direction of the IC displacement estimated
above. The theoretical distribution of the residuals also
agreeswiththelackofthehemisphericasymmetryatthe
south pole of the IC [62].
Whentheresultsofthenumericalsimulationsarecom-
pared with observational data we have to take into ac-
count the simplifying hypotheses of the numerical simu-
lation as well as the observational errors. For instance,
we have used the velocities of the ak135 model obtained
underthehypothesisthattheICiscentered. Buttheob-
servational differential travel times PKiKP-PKIKP are
spread around the mean values of the ak135 model by
about 0.5 s [49], which is comparable with the values
associated with ATIC [92]. That is why the exact longi-
tudeseparatingthepositiveandnegativeobservedresid-
ualsanditsvariationwiththeturningpointdepthofthe
FIG. 2. Numerically computed residuals for a decentered seismic rays cannot be determined precisely. The obser-
IC. The differential travel times ∆tdec are computed for the vation data suggest an eastward shift of the hemisphere
PKIKPdec seismic rays in theEastern Hemisphere plotted in boundary with increasing depth [92], while our numeri-
Fig. 1. calsimulationshaveshownthatitdoesnotvarywiththe
depth.
−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150 −150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
Longitude (°E) Longitude (°E)
FIG. 3. Longitudinal distribution of the ATIC residuals obtained by numerical simulation. The IC is displaced by 100 km
toward 90◦ Elongitudeintheequatorial plane(a)andalong adirection makinganangle of30◦ with theequatorial plane(b).
The abscissa represents thelongitude of theturningpoint of the PKIKPdec ray.
IV. HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY OF THE by
ATTENUATION IN THE UPPER IC
Ai (cid:26) Q (cid:27)
There are other seismic phenomena with east-west
asymmetry, although without a complete observational where AI and Ai are the amplitudes of the PKIKP and
descriptionof their longitudinal variation,which may be PKiKP phases at the common emerging point, f is the
explainedbyadecenteredIC.Forinstance,ATICisasso- frequencyandtisthe traveltimeofPKIKPphaseinside
ciated to a hemispheric asymmetry of the seismic waves theIC[15]. ThequantitiesAI,Ai,andtarederivedfrom
attenuation[15, 40, 53,66, 81, 94,96] whichseems to be measurementsandthe aboverelationisusedtocompute
confined to the uppermost IC [53, 81]. Existing expla- the quality factor Q.
nations ofthe attenuationasymmetryrequire atrade-off The seismical observations show that the ratio AI/Ai
betweenattenuationandvelocitystructuresintheICand depends not only on the epicentral distance ∆, but also
velocity structure at the bottom of OC [94, 96]. Expla- on the geographic location. If one considers that the IC
nations of the hemispheric asymmetric attenuation are is centered, then the travel time inside the IC depends
currently based on the specific texture of the uppermost only on the epicentral distance tcen(∆). In this case,
IC [17]oronthe assumptionthatamushyzoneexists at the geographical variations of AI/Ai are possible only if
ICB [15]. the material properties vary inside the IC and the qual-
ity factor depends, besides the epicentral distance, also
If the IC is decentered, the PKIKPdec phase propa-
on the longitude and latitude of the turning point H,
gates in the Eastern Hemisphere over a longer distance
Qcen(∆;λH,φH). The quality factor Qcen computed for
inside the IC (segment CD in Fig. 9a) than in the West-
a centered IC takes larger values in the Western Hemi-
ernHemisphere. Since the quality factor Q is two orders
sphere than in the Eastern Hemisphere, the difference
ofmagnitudelargerintheOCthanintheIC[49],theat-
tenuation Q−1 in the Eastern Hemisphere is larger than being larger at smaller epicentral distances [15, Fig. 5b].
In the following, we show how a displacement over
in the Western Hemisphere. Hence the different lengths
100 km of the IC in the equatorialplane can explain the
of the PKIKPdec paths in Eastern and Western Hemi-
seismical observations, without the need to modify the
spheres of the decentered IC explain not only the hemi-
quality factor inside the IC. Using the numerical model
sphericalasymmetrytraveltimeresiduals(Sect.III),but
presented in Appendix B, we compute the traveltime of
also the hemispheric asymmetry of the attenuation.
the PKIKP phase in a decentered IC, tdec(∆;λH,φH),
ThequalityfactorQatthetopoftheICisdetermined which is a function of the longitude and latitude of the
135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143
The largest changes of the arrival times induced by the
position of the ICB occur for the seismic rays reflected
under small angles (near-normal PKiKP phase). Iden-
tification of such perturbations in seismic observations
encounters two major difficulties.
First, in accordancewith recentstudies, the surface of
the ICB has a rough topography [50] with height varia-
tions largerthan10 km whichproduce localfluctuations
ofseveralsecondsofthenear-normalPKiKPtraveltimes
[20]. ThusadisplacementoftheentireICoveradistance
ofthesameorderofmagnitudeishiddenbythelocalfluc-
tuations and a large enough sample of data is needed to
assureasignificantstatisticalanalysis. Thesecondprob-
lemisrelatedtothedifficultytoidentifythenear-normal
PKiKP phase from seismic observations [50, 76]. If the
ICisdecentered,thentheidentificationisevenharderbe-
cause the arrival times can become quite different from
those computed by a reference Earthmodel with spheri-
FIG. 4. Attenuation for a decentered IC. Average and stan- calsymmetry,whichareusedinphaseidentificationpro-
darddeviationovertheEastern(circlemarkers)andWestern cedures [28, 69, 76]. For instance, a 10 km displacement
(squaremarkers)Hemispheresofthesimulatedqualityfactor of the IC, which is comparable to the height of the ICB
Qcen as a function of theepicentral distance. irregularities, causes a variation up to 2 s of the arrival
timesofthenear-normalPKiKPwaves. Thereforeweex-
pect that the near-normal PKiKP rays with the largest
turning point H. We describe the attenuation at the top residuals are most probably misidentified.
of the IC by means of a constant quality factor Q=247
Rather than relying on particular events with well
[15]. Then the two models of attenuation are related by
identified and analyzed PKiKP phases, as for instance
the relation
in [46, 47, 50, 71], we consider global data and follow
tcen(∆) tdec(∆;λH,φH) a statistical approach. We use validated ISC data [39]
= . to assemble a large enough sample which allows us to
draw significant statistical conclusions. We downloaded
If our hypothesis is correct,then the quantity Qcen com- informationforallphasesidentifiedbyISCasPKiKP,ir-
puted from this formula should be identical with that respectiveofhow they wereinitially reported. While be-
derived directly from observational data. fore 2006the reportedPKiKPphases were generallynot
We have computed the mean and the standard devia- confirmedbytheISC analysts,since2006they identified
tion of Qcen over all possible geographicalpositions (an- the PKiKP phase and computed arrival times residuals
glesλH andφH),separatelyforeastlongitudes(λH >0) withrespecttotheak135velocitymodel(D.A.Storchak,
and west longitudes (λH < 0). The numerical results private communication, 2013). For our purpose, we se-
presented in Fig. 4 show a good resemblance with the lect data with ∆ < 90◦, which cover the whole range
observational results (see [15, Fig. 5b]). The distance of precritical PKiKP and most of the transparent zone
between the two branches of the graph decreases when [47, 50].
the epicentral distance increases in the same way as for From the validated data set 2006-2010 we have ob-
the observeddata, althoughthey do notintersectat epi- tained a sample of 2042 residuals of the precritical
central distances greater than 140◦. Also the observed PKiKP phase, plotted in Fig. 5 as function of the lon-
differences for epicentral distances smaller than 140◦ are gitude of the bouncing points on the ICB. The residuals
several times greater than those numerically computed. showlargefluctuationssimilartothosereportedinother
recent studies on PKiKP phase [20, 50]. They have a
negative mean of -0.745 s, with a standard deviation of
V. HEMISPHERIC ASYMMETRY OF THE 1.446s andastandarderrorofthe meanof0.032s (esti-
PRECRITICAL PKiKP TRAVEL TIME mated by standard deviation divided by the square root
of number of observations), in agreement with previous
A displacement of the IC should give rise to other results obtained from smaller data sets [50]. Removal of
hemisphericasymmetriesoftheseismicphasespropagat- the outliers from the data sample has insignificant influ-
ing through the IC. Unfortunately, due to the inhomo- ence on the statistical results derived in the following.
geneitiesoftheEarth’sinterior,theabsolutetraveltimes The sample of 2042 residuals contains 1669 observa-
for such seismic rays reaching the ICB are difficult to be tionswiththebouncingpointintheEasternHemisphere
determined and then the geographical repartition of the and only 373 observations in the Western Hemisphere.
characteristics of the seismic waves is highly uncertain. In the Eastern Hemisphere the mean of the residuals is
−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
bouncing point longitude (°E)
FIG.5. Arrivaltimeresiduals withrespect tothereference modelak135 ofthePKiKPphase, recordedat epicentraldistances
smaller than 90◦, as a function of thelongitude of the bouncingpoints at theICB.
-0.838 s, with standard deviation of 1.361 s and stan-
dard error of the mean of 0.033 s, while in the Western
Hemisphere the mean residual is -0.328 s, with standard −0.2
deviation of 1.720 s and standard error of the mean of −0.3
0.089 s. Thus, the data set shows a difference of 0.510
s between the mean precritical PKiKP residuals in the
−0.5 Western and Eastern Hemispheres, with a standard er-
ror of 0.095 s (computed considering that the two sub- −0.6
sets of seismic events are independent). The west-est −0.7
discrepancyofthe meanresiduals,with faster precritical
PKiKP arrivals in the Eastern Hemisphere, indicates a
global asymmetry not yet reported in the literature. −0.9
Weassumethatthemaximumhemisphericasymmetry 0 50 100 150
lies in the equatorial plane, as we already found in the E
previous sections. We searchfor a partitionof the Earth
into twodisjointhemisphereswhichyieldsthe maximum
difference of the hemispheric averages of the precriti-
cal PKiKP residuals. We denote by λE ∈ [0◦,180◦]
the eastern longitude of the middle of the hemisphere
HE containing the greater part of the geographic East-
ern Hemisphere. (We adopt the usual convention that
eastern longitudes are positive, while western ones are
negative.) Hence, the hemisphere HE is defined by the
longitudes λ ∈ [λE − 90◦,λE + 90◦] if λE ≤ 90◦ and
We denote by HW the complement of HE containing
mostly western longitudes centered on the longitude
λW =λE −180◦<0. Figure 6 showsthe meanresiduals
andthestandarderrorsofthemeanforPKiKPrayswith
bouncing points in the two hemispheres as a function of
λE. For 70◦ ≤ λE ≤170◦ the mean residuals in the HE
hemisphere are smaller than in the HW hemisphere by
a quantity several times larger than the standard errors
of the mean. The largest difference, equal to 0.55 s, is
obtained for λE = 140◦. For a wave velocity of about
10km/s,thisdifferencecorrespondstoameandifference
of5.5kmbetweenthepathsofthePKiKPraysinthetwo
hemispheres. Hence, the HE hemisphereofthe ICB cen-
cirehpsimeh
FIG. 6. Residuals averaged over the HE hemisphere (aster-
isks) and over the HW hemisphere (circles) as a function of
longitudeλE ofthemiddleofHE. Errorbarsrepresentstan-
dard errors of themean.
teredonλE =140◦ is onaveragecloserby 2.7km to the
Earth’s surface than the corresponding HW hemisphere.
In Fig. 6 our attention is drawn by the sudden rever-
sal of the sign of the mean residuals when passing from
λE =60◦ to λE =70◦. The jump occurs whenthe plane
separating the two hemispheres rotates by 10◦ and the
residuals with bouncing point longitude between 150◦E
and 160◦E move from the HW hemisphere to the HE
hemisphere. There are 589 such observations, i.e., 29%
from the total number of observations (see Fig. 5). The
sign reversal shows that these data are responsible for
two thirds of the maximum difference of the mean resid-
ual obtained for λE = 140◦. The remaining one third is
due to the other residuals in the HE hemisphere.
In order to confirm the existence of this new hemi-
spherical seismic asymmetry, additional work is needed.
The influence of the site effects, the near source hetero-
geneity, and the long wavelength mantle heterogeneities ing with light fluid [21, 81]. Melting may occur through
shouldbe computedandsubtractedforeachtraveltime. the formation of a positive topography at the ICB by
Also the PKiKP phases reported by ISC should be indi- translationalICconvection[1,58],providedthatthe OC
vidually verified and validated. However, all these per- convection supplies the necessary latent heat, or by OC
turbing effects are likely uncorrelated with the seismic convectionitself, when the temperature in the surround-
events and they might have been significantly reduced ing OC fluid is locally largerthan at the ICB [34]. How-
by the statistical processing of the 2042 observations. If ever, both mechanisms suffer of limitations and there is
confirmed,thisasymmetryisanindicationthatthevalue no definitive proof that they are self-sustaining [21].
of 2.7 km should be an inferior limit for the IC displace- The hypothesis of an eccentric IC could contribute to
ment. more appropriate explanation of this anomalous layer
from a new perspective. The IC displacement over ap-
proximately 100 km should produce noticeable effects at
VI. OTHER GEOPHYSICAL IMPLICATIONS the bottom of the OC. If rc is the radius of the IC, then
OF A DECENTERED IC thedistancesfromtheEarth’scentertotheICBvarybe-
tweenrc −100andrc+100. Hence the observedanoma-
There are many geophysical phenomena containing lous layer contains this spherical shell with an inhomo-
qualitative and quantitative information regarding the geneous material structure which should be taken into
position and the motion of the IC which could support account to explain the seismical data. For example, the
thehypothesisofadecenteredIC.Forexample,thebifur- observedPKPbc-PKIKPandPKiKP-PKIKPdifferential
cationofthe PKPphasesoccurringatsmallerepicentral travel time anomalies, which can be simultaneously ex-
distance in the Easternthan in the Western Hemisphere plained by different radial velocity gradients at the bot-
[95, 96]. Also, the observation that travel time residu- tom of the OC in the two hemispheres [95, 96], could be
als of the PKiKP with respect to the PKPBdiff phase, relatedtothedifferentlengthsofthe PKIKPpathinside
diffracted through the middle of the OC, are smaller by a decentered IC.
about0.9sin the EasternHemisphere thaninthe West- Theremaybeotherseismicobservationsrelatedtothis
ern Hemisphere [95] is consistent with the PKiKP travel region of the OC. For instance, if the IC is decentered,
time hemispheric asymmetry presented in Sect. V and whilethe seismic modelassumesthatitiscentered,then
can be explained as well by the eccentric position of the theinterpretationoftheseismicobservationswouldhave
IC. larger errors in the spherical layer of 200 km containing
Many of these geophysical phenomena with different theICBthaninotherregionsoftheOC.Indeed,the ref-
typesofasymmetriesarerelatedtothestructureandevo- erenceone-dimensionalseismicmodels aredifferentfrom
lution of the geomagnetic field. Among them the hemi- eachotheroverathicknessofroughly200kmaboveICB
spheric asymmetry of the magnetic field [38] which is re- [81, 95, 96].
sponsible for a more intense radial field at the longitude
of about 150◦ E [29], the same as the current longitude
of the eccentric dipole [65] and close to that of the hy- B. Differential rotation of the IC and the
pothesizedIC displacement. Movementsofthe IC in the hemispheric seismic asymmetry
equatorialplanecouldalsoberelatedtothegravityvari-
ationsinducedbycoreflows[25]andthecorrelationsbe-
The flow in the fluid OC and the angular momen-
tweenmagneticandgravityanomaliesatlowandmiddle
tum conservation induce changes in the angular velocity
latitudes recently reported by Mandea et al. [56].
and rotation axis of the IC [3, 27, 83]. The differential
In the following we discuss in more detail four such rotation of the IC, first predicted from theoretical con-
geophysicalphenomenaandweshowthatthehypothesis siderations [33], was obtained by geodynamo numerical
ofa decenteredIC couldcontribute to their explanation. simulations in the mid-nineties [31]. But the differential
rotation of the IC is hardly compatible with the current
explanationsofthehemisphericdichotomy(seeSects.III
A. The anomalous layer at the bottom of the OC andIV).IftheATICandtheobservedhemisphericatten-
uation anomaly are explained by solidification texturing
At the bottom of the OC seismological data reveal an controlledby the mantle [3], a differentialrotationfaster
anomaly consisting of PKPbc-PKIKP residuals smaller than a full revolution in a few hundreds of millions of
thanpredictedbyreferenceone-dimensionalmodels[95]. years would erase any longitudinal signature in the tex-
This anomaly has been interpreted as a layer of low ve- turing [21, 26].
locity gradient in the lowermost 150-200 km of the OC In order to avoid this contradiction, the recent dy-
[81, 95], which could delay the PKIKP travel time and namo models adjust the viscous, magnetic, or gravita-
produce smaller PKPbc-PKIKP residuals [95]. The fa- tional torques such that the present day mean rotation
vored explanation of this anomaly is the existence of a rateappearsasatemporalfluctuationsuperposedovera
stably stratifiedregionresulting froma dynamic equilib- veryslow steady super rotationofa few degrees per mil-
riumbetweentheproductionofironreachmeltandmix- lion years [5, 26] or even without offset of steady super
rotation over long timescales [27]. However, this is yet ObservationsoftemporaltrendsofPKPbc-PKIKPresid-
not a satisfactory solution, since the longitudinal varia- uals, similar to previous studies [79] but using earth-
tions of the solidification rates interacting with mantle quakes produced in four different source regions, were
heterogeneities can result in a gravitationally driven dif- foundto be consistentwithboth eastwardandwestward
ferentialrotationoftheICinthewestwarddirection[26], differential IC rotation in different regions, suggesting
opposite to that of the rotationsuggestedby seismic ob- thatdifferentialICrotationsoftenthsofdegreesperyear
servations,whichcouldbe toofast to preservelongitudi- are incompatible with global data [57]. On the other
nal differences in texturing [21]. hand,aninverseanalysisofdoubletsobservedatCollege
Another tentative explanation for ATIC and the at- station over more than forty years [88] found an aver-
tenuation anomaly is a convective west-east translation age differential rotation of 0.25−0.48◦/yr and decadal
oftheIC[1,58],withminimalinfluenceofthemantleon fluctuations of the order of 1◦/yr. These results are con-
the core dynamics [21, 88] (see Appendix A). This the- sistentwiththeobserveddecadalchangesinthelengthof
ory considers that the IC is shifted by 100 m from the the day[88],whichinturnindicate the presenceofzonal
Earth’s center. But then, the viscous momentum due to flows in the fluid core, as required by the currently ac-
theOCflowneartheasymmetricICBshouldmodifythe ceptedmechanismofthe IC differentialrotation[21,31],
rate and the axis of the differential rotation, hindering as well as with decadal changes in the magnetic field
the onset of the internally driven convective translation. which may be responsible for the observed fluctuations
An additional difficulty of this approach is the fact that in the IC rotation [54].
flowsderivedfromgeomagneticobservationsanddynamo
simulations reproducing patterns of geomagnetic secular
variation predict opposite IC translations from east to
C. Large-scale anomalies of the geoid
west [4, 6].
The decentered IC hypothesis avoids these contradic-
tions because both the ATIC andthe hemispheric asym- AdisplacementoftheICovertensofkilometersshould
metry of the attenuation are explained by the displace- produce a measurable effect on the gravitationalfield at
ment of the IC, without any constrains on its internal the Earth’s surface. A simple calculation shows that for
structure(Sects.IIIandIV).ThentheICcanrotatewith an IC displacement of 1 km, the surface of the geoid
respect to the mantle with any angular velocity around (the gravity equipotential that coincides with sea level)
anyaxis. Thereforeourhypothesisdoesnotruleoutany changesby 1 m. The largestnegativegeoidanomaly has
ofthe different existing estimations of the angularveloc- -103 m and lies south of India while the largest positive
ity of the differential rotation which are listed below. one has 80 m and occurs near New Guinea. Hence the
Earlygeodynamopredictionsofasuper-rotationofthe magnitude of the observed anomalies corresponds to a
IC by 2−3◦ per year induced by magnetic and viscous displacementofabout100km,buttheirdistributionhas
torques exerted by the eastward zonal flow near the IC no explicit correlation with the theoretical gravitational
[31] were found in reasonable agreement with seismic fieldofadisplacedIC.Atfirstsight,theobservedanoma-
data. Travel time anomalies of the PKIKP phase in- lies lack the necessary rotational symmetry around the
dicated a differential rotation rate of ∼ 3◦/yr [83] while displacement direction of the IC determined in the pre-
travel time residuals of the PKIKP rays with respect to vious sections.
seismic rays turning at the base of the OC (PKPbc) in- However, Barta [7] showed that the geoid anomalies
dicated a rate of ∼1◦/yr[79]. Subsequent studies, using can be well approximated at large-scale by a superposi-
earthquake doublets, normal modes, and refined meth- tion of two globalanomalies with cylindrical symmetries
ods favor much smaller rotation rates between 0.0◦/yr aroundaxisdirectedtowardthecentersofthe twogreat-
and0.3◦/yrorevenaretrograde,westward,rotation[81]. est geoid anomalies
where Pi are the Legendre polynomials of order i. The Barta ascribed Σ2 to an eastward shift of the IC over
angles θ1 and θ2 are the angles between the radius with 100 km [9]. But the gravitational anomaly generated by
the geographicalcoordinates(θ,φ) andthe axis pointing theshiftedICaloneisdominatedbythetermcontaining
to the directions of 58◦E and 156.5◦E in the equato- P1(θ1)=cosθ1 which is absent in the formula for Σ2.
rial plane, respectively. In this way, instead of several
anomalies, we have to explain only two global anomalies The explanation of the geoid anomalies Σ1 and Σ2
which already have the necessary cylindrical symmetry. could be obtained by the mechanism of the dynamic to-
pography. Thisisthe usualmethodtoderivethe longest
wavelength components of the residual geoid [36]. The sive data set of PKIKP traveltimes, Lythgoe et al. con-
seismically-inferreddensitycontrastsinthelowermantle clude that there is no clear evidence of an innermost IC
arenegativelycorrelatedwiththeobservedgeoid. There- andthehemisphericalvariationoftheanisotropyextends
fore one needs a counteracting effect, called dynamic to- through the entire IC [55].
pography: the thermally driven convective flow in the Thereexistseveraltheoriesregardingthegenerationof
mantleinducesdeformationsofEarth’ssurfaceandofthe the IC anisotropy with hemispherical variations [86]. If
CMB which count as negative masses [68]. The strength it results from hemispheric variations in the IC growth,
of such a mechanism generating large-scale density vari- then a mechanism is needed to produce different solidifi-
ations inside the OC is however disputed [11]. cationratesandcrystallinestructuresinsidetheIC.This
Theoreticalestimationsindicatethatdynamicalforces mechanism could be controlled by interactions of the IC
originatinginsidetheOCcannotsupportanyappreciable with the rest of the Earth, for instance, by the OC flow
internalstructure[82]. Butthisisnottrueifthereexists caused by thermal inhomogeneities in the mantle [86].
a non-hydrostatic forcing due to gravitational interac- Toensureaconstantinfluenceonthe ICgrowththrough
tionswiththeexteriormassdistributionsortoboundary such mechanisms, the IC should be lockedto the mantle
effects [91]. As we pointed out in Sect. IIB, such a non- for at least 200 million years [41], at variance with the
hydrostaticforcingcouldbe generatedbythe decentered currently accepted theories on differential rotation (see
IC.Theresultsofseismologicalinvestigationsarecontra- Sect. VIB).
dictory. Some studies exclude any large-scale aspherical The hemispherical asymmetry in anisotropy of the IC
structureinsidetheOC[10,43,52,80],whileothershave is the mostly used explanation for the complexity of the
foundsignificantcylindricalstructuresrelatedtothetan- seismological observations, but not the only one avail-
gentcylinder(seeSect.IIA)[72,73]ornon-homogeneous able. For example,Romanowiczand Br´egershowedthat
structures inside the OC [19, 70, 78]. anomalous splitting of most of the normal modes sensi-
Hence,theeastwarddisplacementoftheICcouldcause tivetotheinteriorstructureoftheIC,exceptingasingle
a temperature increase in the Eastern Hemisphere and one,canbe explainedeither byconsideringanasymmet-
implicitlyadensitydecrease. Inaddition,itcouldinduce ricICanisotropyoraninhomogeneousOCstructure[72].
large-scale inhomogeneities in the mantle structure and Indeed, polar regions of the OC with seismic velocities
variations of the CMB depth. These hemispheric asym- larger than the velocities near the equatorial plane gen-
metriescouldcompensatetheICdisplacementexplaining erateananisotropyofPKIKPtraveltimessimilartothat
theabsenceofthetermP1(θ1)inΣ2. Thisinterpretation generatedby an anisotropic structure of the IC. Such an
isinaccordancewithBowin’sestimationthatthesecond inhomogeneousOC is consistent with the simulated flow
order term, which dominates the expression of Σ2, has inside the OC (Sect.IIA),whichhas differentcharacter-
the origin at depths of 6000 km, i.e., inside the IC [11, istics outside the tangent cylinder and near the rotation
Fig. 8]). The third degree term, dominating the expres- axis, as well as with the density inhomogeneities in the
sionofΣ1,originatesat3000kmdepth, inthe neighbor- OC discussed in Sect. VIC. Hence a decentred IC could
hood of CMB. In this way the large-scale anomalies of be a part of a complete explanationof the hemispherical
the geoid are explained by two globaldensity anomalies, asymmetry of the IC anisotropy.
one determined by an eccentric IC, the other related to
the topography of the CMB and corresponding to the
boundary conditions used in the numerical simulationof VII. CONCLUSIONS
the geodynamo [6], discussed in Sect IIA.
AnICdisplacedbytensofkilometersfromtheEarth’s
center should influence many mechanical, thermal, and
D. Hemispherical asymmetry of the IC anisotropy magnetic phenomena in the Earth’s interior. In this pa-
per we have analyzed severalof them:
The elastic anisotropyof the IC is characterizedby P-
• secular westward drift of the geomagnetic field at
wavestraveltimes about3%fasterinthe polardirection
low latitudes (Sect. IIA);
thanparalleltotheequatorialplane. Accordingtomany
seismic studies, the first 150 km beneath the ICB have
• global asymmetries of the flow and magnetic field
low levels of anisotropy (smaller than 1%) and the up-
inside the OC (Sect. IIA);
permost 50-90 km form an isotropic layer [41, 81] (see
Sect. III). Anisotropy has been clearly documented only
• nonhydrostatic shape of the Earth (Sect. IIB);
at depths of several hundreds of kilometers [41, 60, 81].
While the anisotropy in the innermost IC presented no • Markowitz wobble of the Earth’s pole (Sect. IIB);
significant longitudinal dependence [42, 60], hemispheri-
cal patterns were observed at depths above 600-700 km, • decadalvariations of the length ofday (Sect. IIB);
with an anisotropic Western Hemisphere and a nearly
isotropic eastern one [24], with anisotropy levels of 4.4% • translational oscillations of the IC (Slichter mode)
and 1%, respectively [41]. Recently, based on an exten- (Sect. IIC);
• isotropichemisphericasymmetryofthetraveltimes axis is of the order of 100 km. He discussed the impli-
at the top of the IC (Sect. III); cations of such a configuration on the magnetic secular
variation, on the connection between the magnetic and
• hemispheric asymmetry of the attenuation at the
gravity fields, and on the deviation of the geoid figure
top of the IC (Sect. IV);
from the hydrostatic equilibrium.
• hemispheric asymmetry of the precritical PKiKP Frompaleomagneticdata,Zidarovreachedtheconclu-
travel times (Sect. V); sionthat“theoptimalmagneticdipolewaslocatedaway
from the Earth’s center during the geologicalpast” and,
• anomalous layer at the bottom of the OC in consequence, “the core itself was located in the ge-
(Sect. VIA); ological past away from the Earth’s center, toward the
middleofthePacificOceanandgraduallyshiftedtoward
• differential rotation of the IC (Sect. VIB);
its center” [97]. Using the difference between the equa-
• large-scale anomalies of the geoid (Sect. VIC); torial moments of inertia of the Earth, he computed a
displacement of the IC of 35 km. He also discussed sev-
• density heterogeneities inside the OC (Sect. VIC); eralothereffectsofaneccentricIConthepiriformshape
of the Earth, the opening rate of the oceans, the geo-
• anisotropy of the IC (Sect. VID).
graphic pole wandering, the contemporary geotectonic
activity, and the continental drift.
We have approachedmost of the above issues qualita-
tivelyandexplainedtwoofthem(ATICandtheattenua- Vesanen and Teisseyre analyzed the deviations from
tionasymmetry)throughrigorousnumericalsimulations symmetry of the earthquake zones and interpreted them
of differentialtraveltimes sampling the top ofthe IC. In as an indication for the existence of some deep asymme-
conclusion, we estimate that the displacement of the IC try inside the Earth [90]. They also applied Barta and
couldbelargerthan3kmandsmallerthan100km,most Zidarov’s approaches to assess the influence of an eccen-
likely equal to several tens of kilometers. The estimated tric IC on the pattern of convection cells in the Earth’s
direction of the displacement varies between 110◦E and interior.
160◦E. The time scaleofthe translationalmotionofthe A recently proposed mechanism which explains the
ICcouldbelargerthanseveralhundredsofyears. There- hemispheric ATIC (see Sect. III) assumes an eastward
sultingpictureisthatofaperturbationgeneratedbythe translation of the IC as a result of crystallization in the
decentered IC which enhances the nonequilibrium and Western Hemisphere and melting in the Eastern Hemi-
the nonhydrostaticityofthe well-establishedbasic struc- sphere in a superadiabatic regime [1, 2, 58, 59]. In this
tureoftheEarth. Weconsiderthatmoreflexibledynam- process,theICcenterofmassisshiftedtowarditscolder
ical models of the Earth’s interior could be obtained by and denser Western Hemisphere [58]. In an attempt to
simply letting the IC to participate in the movement of restorethemechanicalequilibrium,theICasawholewill
the OC. thenbeshiftedtowardeast. TheeastwardshiftoftheIC
It is tempting to adopt such a simple solution for a wasestimatedatabout100mintheequatorialplane[1].
wide variety of disputed geophysical problems. But for ThisshiftproducesapositivetopographyontheEastern
each individual phenomenon there are many other per- Hemisphere of the ICB which melts by exchange of la-
turbationsmakingitdifficulttoobtainaclearseparation tentheatwiththeOCfluidand,atthesametime,forces
oftheeffectsofadecenteredIC.Nevertheless,webelieve crystallizationonthewesternIChemisphere. Acontinu-
that the numerous implications discussed in this article oustranslationmechanismcouldresultfromthe interac-
are convincing enough and that this hypothesis deserves tion of superadiabaticity, gravitational equilibrium, and
further exploration. latent heat exchange with the OC [2]. The increase of
the irongrain-sizeduringthe west-eastconvectivetrans-
lation of the IC could explain the observed hemispheric
Appendix A: History of the eccentric IC hypothesis asymmetry of travel times and attenuation.
Currently accepted parameters of the Earth’s interior
The hypothesis of an eccentric IC with respect to the (e.g. viscosity,ICage)imposeconstraintsontheonsetof
mass center of the Earth has been launched for the first this mechanism [21] and it is currently difficult to reach
time in 1970s. At that time the seismical observations firm conclusions on the possibility of convection in the
were not providing enough information on the Earth’s actual IC [22]. Nevertheless, it is possible that condi-
structure near the ICB. Therefore indirect observations tions for convection were met at early stages generating
regarding the gravity and geomagnetic fields or the dis- the seismical asymmetry and anisotropy observed in the
tribution of the crust inhomogeneities were used. deeperpartsoftheIC[12,17]. Inaddition,theresultsof
Bartainterpretedthedisplacementofthedipoleofthe recent geodynamo modeling of the geomagnetic secular
geomagnetic field toward Australia as an indication for variation are rather consistent with a translation of the
an eccentric IC [7–9]. Assuming that the density of the IC in the opposite, east-west direction [4, 6]. Another
OCislargerinthedisplacementdirection,he foundthat difficulty encountered by the proposed continuous con-
the distance between the IC and the Earth’s rotation vection mechanism is the assumption that the IC is in
mechanical equilibrium with the surrounding fluid OC.
The interaction of the flow at the bottom of the OC
with the positive topography of the ICB would induce γ
a supplementary rotationof the IC, at variancewith the E E
static equilibrium and the fixed direction of the convec- δ
tive translation predicted by the theory.
Appendix B: Numerical model R C
Since we focus only on the effect of a decentered inner H
core on the propagation of the seismic rays, we consider
a numerical model as simple as possible so that other C
perturbing effects are disregarded. Therefore, we keep
most ofthe sphericalsymmetry of the Earth’s structure,
evenincaseofadisplacedinnercore. Thesurfacesofthe
Earth and of the inner core are spheres and the velocity C
profile inside them is that of the one-dimensional model
ak135[49]. Outside thedecenteredinnercore,the model
ak135 is linearly extrapolated to the points of the outer S
coresituatedatdistancesfromtheEarth’scentersmaller
than the inner core radius. In this way we alter as little
as possible the model with spherical symmetry of the
Earth’sinterior,maintainingthesymmetryseparatelyfor FIG.7. Doubleprojection(ontheEarth’ssurfaceandonthe
meridian plane containing the center of the decentered inner
the inner core and the rest of the Earth.
TheinnercoreinteriorandtherestoftheEartharedi-
core) of the PKiKPdec seismic ray. The dashed line is the
doubleprojection ofthePKIKPraywiththesamefocusand
videdintosphericallayerswithconstantvelocityofmax-
exit points in case of the centered inner core. The meaning
imum 1 km thickness. The reference levels of the ak135
of the pointsand angles notations are given in text.
model are all included among the boundaries of spheri-
callayers. Thereforethenumericalseismicraysaremade
of straight segments satisfying the refraction and reflec-
tion laws at the boundaries of the spherical layers. The
propagationplane of the seismic ray changes only at the
incidence with the inner core boundary, which separates
the two volumes with spherical symmetry into the inte-
rior and exterior of the inner core. The numerical errors
ofthe traveltime foracenteredinnercoreobtainedwith
thisnumericalalgorithmwithrespecttothevaluesgiven 141 dec
in seismologicaltables [48]are ofthe order of0.01s, i.e., ∆t
one order of magnitude smaller than the residuals char- 140 0
acterizing the ATIC (Sect. III).
In order to construct the seismic ray we have to spec- ∆ 139
ify the position of the earthquake focus and the initial
propagationdirectionofthe ray. We firstfixthe latitude KI
φC and the longitude λC of the point C defined by the 137
intersection with the Earth’s surface of the straight line P Ki
through the center O of the Earth and the center OC 136
of the displaced inner core intersects the Earth’s surface
(Fig. 7). To avoid an intricate three-dimensional graph-
18.9 18.95 19 19.05 19.1 19.15 19.2
ical representation we use a double projection: first a
central projection on the Earth’s surface from its cen-
terOandthenanorthogonalprojectiononthe meridian FIG.8. Seismicdiagramforadisplacedinnercore. Epicentral
planecontainingtheaxisOCdefinedbythedisplacement distance versus travel time for the PKIKPdec and PKiKPdec
of the inner core. raysin theEastern Hemisphereplotted in Fig. 1(continuous
The epicenter E is the projection of the earthquake lines) and for the PKIKP and PKiKP rays corresponding to
focus on the Earth’s surface and EC in Fig. 7 is the pro- a centered inner core (dashed lines).
jection of E on the meridian plane. The position of the
epicenter E in the plane OEC is given by the angle δE
PKIKP PKiKP
PKIKP PKiKP
FIG. 9. Seismic rays in the neighborhood of the inner core boundary. The seismic rays have the same focus and exit point
and propagate in the meridian plane containing the center of the inner core displaced in the Eastern Hemisphere as in Fig. 1.
Therefracted rays(a)andthereflectedones(b)areplottedwith thickcontinuouslinesforthedecenteredinnercoreandwith
thick dashed lines for the centered inner core. The circular arcs represent boundaries of the decentered (continuous line) and
centered (dashed line) innercore.
between the radii OE and OC. The angle between the A special situation occurs when the seismic ray prop-
OEC plane and the meridian plane NCS is denoted by agates in the OEC plane (α = 0 or α = π). Then, the
γE. The propagation of the seismic ray has a cylindrical normal to the inner core boundary at R ′ belongs to the
symmetry with respect to the OC axis, its shape being propagation plane, which does not change by reflection
independent of the angle γE. or refraction at the inner core boundary. The seismic
raysfor the same initial incident angle clearlyexhibit an
Because of the spherical symmetry of the Earth’s in-
east-westasymmetry,as shownin Fig. 1 for an eastward
terior above the inner core boundary, the seismic ray
displacement of the inner core in the equatorial plane
keeps its propagation plane until it reaches the inner
core boundary at the point R
. The propagation plane
(λC = π/2 and φC = 0) and for epicenter at the North
changes under reflection and refraction at the inner core
boundary. The PKIKPdec phase propagatesthroughthe
When the inner core is decentered, the epicentral dis-
displaced inner core with spherically symmetric internal
′ ′′ ′′ tanceandthetraveltimeofthePKIKPdecandPKiKPdec
structure in the plane OR R where R is the exit point
phasesdependontheinitialpropagationplaneoftheseis-
on the inner core boundary. After the second refraction
micrayandonthelocationoftheearthquakefocus. First
ontheinnercoreboundary,outsidetheinnercoreitprop-
′′ we analyzethe simple situationpresentedinFig.1 when
agates in the plane OMR , where M is the exit point on
theseismicrayiscontainedintheplaneOCEandthein-
the Earth’s surface. The PKiKPdec seismic ray changes nercoreisshiftedby100kmtoward90◦E(λC =π/2and
itspropagationplaneonce,atreflectionontheinnercore
′ φC =0). Forafocusdepthof200km,wehavegenerated
boundary at the point R .
seismic rays with epicentral distance in the same inter-
In Fig. 7 the double projection ECR
MC of val as that investigated in [92, 93]. The corresponding
PKIKPdec seismic ray is composed by three parts sep- seismic diagram is presented in Fig. 8. We have chosen
arated by the deflection points where the seismic ray is the PKIKPrayspropagatingin the regiontowardwhich
refracted by the inner core boundary. The initial prop- the inner core is shifted (α = 0), so that their path into
agation plane OER of the seismic ray is specified by the inner core is longer than for a centered inner core.
the angle α with the plane OEC. The initial direction of The diagrams for both PKIKPdec and PKiKPdec phases
propagationin this plane is given by the incidence angle are shifted toward smaller travel times with a different
betweentherayandthenormaltotheEarth’ssurfacein amount, so that the distance between diagrams changes
E (not shown in the figure). and the residuals ∆tdec −∆t0 are non-vanishing.
To explain the changes in seismic diagrams caused by corethedistanceCDissmallerthanABandtheresidual
the displacement of the inner core, we plot in Fig. 9 the isnegative,resultinginahemisphericasymmetry. Hence,
paths in the neighborhood of the inner core boundary the asymmetry of the residuals of the differential travel
of the seismic rays which emerge at the same point on time can be explained by the variation of the PKIKPdec
the Earth’s surface at ∆ = 140◦. Because of the shifted raypathsinthedecenteredinnercorewithoutmodifying
position of the inner core, the total lengths, from the the seismic velocities.
focus to the common exit point, of the PKIKPdec and In order to obtain the geographicaldistribution of the
PKiKPdecraysaresmallerthanthoseforacenteredinner ATIC residuals plotted in Fig. 3 we compute them for
core(dashedlines)withapproximatelythesameamount. earthquakes evenly distributed on the Earth’s surface
These shorter paths explain the smaller travel times of andseismic raysuniformly distributed aroundthe focus.
the seismic phases for a decentered inner core, but not More precisely, we specify the position of the inner core
the non-vanishing residuals ∆tdec −∆t0. byfixingthe anglesλC andφC andthe distancebetween
There is another geometric effect which modifies the thecenteroftheinnercoreandthecenteroftheEarthto
differential travel time ∆tdec. The segment CD of the d=100km. TheanglesγE, δE,andαarethenvariedby
seismic ray within the decentered inner core is longer steps of 10◦. For given values of δE and α, we construct
thanthesegmentABforthecenteredinnercore(Fig.9a). the seismic raywith turning point atthe depthof 39km
Because the velocity in the inner core is larger than in and we calculate the corresponding residual. Because of
the outer core, the travel time of the PKIKPdec phase the cylindrical symmetry the shape of the seismic ray
has an additional decrease, the differential travel time does not depend on γE. For each seismic ray we deter-
∆tdec increases, and the residual ∆tdec −∆t0 becomes minethegeographicalcoordinatesoftheturningpointH
positive. Inthediametricallyoppositeregionoftheinner (HC in Fig. 7 is its double projection).
[1] T. Alboussiere, R. Deguen,M. Melzani, Melting-induced [14] B.A.Buffett,G.A.Glatzmaier,Gravitational brakingof
stratification above the Earth’s inner core due to convec- inner core rotation in geodynamo simulations, Geophys.
tive translation, Nature 466, 744-747 (2010). Res. Lett. 27, 3125-3128 (2000).
[2] T.Alboussiere, R.Deguen,Asymmetric dynamics of the [15] A.Cao,B.Romanowicz,Hemisphericaltransitionofseis-
inner core and impact on the outer core, J. Geodyn. 61, mic attenuation at the top of the Earth’s inner core,
172-182 (2012). Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 228, 243-253 (2004).
[3] J. Aubert, H. Amit, G. Hulot, P. Olson, Thermochemi- [16] U.R. Christensen, J. Wiht, Numerical Dynamo Simula-
cal flows couple the Earth’s inner core growth to mantle tions, in Treatise on Geophysics, Vol.8, Core Dynamics,
heterogeneity, Nature454, 758-761 (2008). edited by G. Schubert,P. Olson, 245-282, Elsevier, Am-
[4] J.Aubert,Flowthroughout theEarthscoreinvertedfrom sterdam (2007).
geomagneticobservations andnumericaldynamomodels, [17] V.F.Cormier, Texture of the uppermost inner core from
Geophys.J. Int.192, 537-556 (2013). forward- andback-scattered seismicwaves,EarthPlanet.
[5] J. Aubert, D. Dumberry, Steady and fluctuating inner Sci. Lett.258, 442-453 (2007).
core rotation in numerical geodynamo models, Geophys. [18] V.F.Cormier, J.Attanayake,K.He,Inner core freezing
J. Int.184, 162-170 (2011). andmelting: Constraints fromseismicbodywaves,Phys.
[6] J.Aubert,C.C.Finlay,A.Fournier,Bottom-upcontrolof Earth Planet. Int.188, 163-172 (2011).
geomagnetic secular variation by the Earths inner core, [19] W. Dai, X. Song, Detection of motion and heterogene-
Nature502, 219-223 (2013). ity in Earth’s liquid outer core, Geophys. Res. Lett. 35,
[7] G. Barta, Physical background of the geoidal figure, Na- L16311 (2008).
ture243, 156 (1973). [20] Z. Dai, W. Wanga, L. Wen, Irregular topography at
[8] G. Barta, Satellite geodesy and the internal structure of the Earths inner core boundary, PNAS 109, 7654-7658
the earth, in Space research XIV, Eds. M.J. Rycroft and (2012).
R.D.Reasenberg, Akademie-Verlag, Berlin (1974). [21] R.Deguen,Structure anddynamicsofEarthsinnercore,
[9] G. Barta, Recent results of the study of physical back- Earth Planet Sci. Lett.333-334, 211-225 (2012).
ground of the geoidal figure, Adv. Space Res. 1, 195 [22] R. Deguen, P. Cardin, Thermochemical convection in
(1981). Earths inner core, Geophys. J. Int. 187, 1101-1118
[10] L. Boschi, A.M. Dziewonski, Whole earth tomography (2011).
from delay times of P, PcP, and PKP phases: Lateral [23] V. Dehant, P.M. Mathews, Earth rotation variations, in
heterogeneities in the outer core or radial anisotropy in Treatise on Geophysics, Vol. 3, Geodesy, edited by G.
the mantle?, J. Geophys. Res. 105, 13675-13696 (2000). Schubert, T.A. Herring, 239-294, Elsevier, Amsterdam
[11] C. Bowin, Mass anomaly structure of the earth, Review (2007).
of Geophysics 38, 355-387 (2000). [24] A.Deuss,J.C.E.Irving,J.H.Woodhouse,Regionalvari-
[12] B.A. Buffett, Onset and orientation of convection in the ationofinnercoreanisotropy fromseismicnormal mode
inner core, Geophys.J. Int.179, 711-719 (2009). observations, Science 328, 1018-1020 (2010).
[13] B.A.Buffett,J.Bloxham,Deformationof Earth’s inner [25] M. Dumberry, Gravity variations induced by core flows,
core by electromagnetic forces, Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, Geophys. J. Int.180, 635–650 (2010).
4001-4004 (2000). [26] M.Dumberry,Gravitationallydriveninnercoredifferen-
tialrotation,EarthPlanet.Sci.Lett.297,387-394(2010). core boundary region revealed by an entire network ob-
[27] D.Dumberry,J.Mound,Inner core-mantle gravitational servation of near-vertical PKiKP, Earth Planets Space
lockingandthesuper-rotationoftheinnercore,Geophys. 58, 855-863 (2006).
J. Int.181, 806-817 (2010). [48] B.L.N. Kennett, Seismological Tables: ak135, The Aus-
[28] E.R. Engdahl, R. van der Hilst, R. Buland, Global tele- tralian National University Canberra ACT 0200 Aus-
seismic earthquake relocation with improved travel times tralia (2005).
and procedures for depth determination, Bull. Seismol. [49] B. Kennett, E. Engdahl, and R. Buland, Constraints on
Soc. Am.88, 722-743 (1998). seismic velocities in the Earth from travel times, Geo-
[29] Y. Gallet, G. Hulot, A. Chulliat, A. Genevey, Geomag- phys.J. Int.122, 108-124 (1995).
netic field hemispheric asymmetry and archeomagnetic [50] K.D. Koper, M.L. Pyle, J.M. Franks, Constraints on
jerks, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 284, 179-186 (2009). aspherical core structure from PKiKP-PcP differential
[30] R.Garcia, A.Souriau,Inner core anisotropy and hetero- travel times, J. Geophys. Res. 108, 2168 (2003).
geneity level, Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, 3121-3124 (2000). [51] I. Lehman, P’, Publications du Bureau Central
[31] G.A.Glatzmaier,P.H.Roberts,Rotationandmagnetism S´eismologique International A 14, 87-115 (1936).
of Earth’s inner core, Science 274, 1887-1891 (1996). [52] D. Leykam, H. Tkal˘ci´c, and A.M. Reading, Core struc-
[32] R.S. Gross, Earth rotation variations - long period, in ture re-examined using new teleseismic data recorded in
Treatise on Geophysics, Vol. 3, Geodesy, edited by G. Antarctica: evidence for, at most, weak cylindrical seis-
Schubert, T.A. Herring, 239-294, Elsevier, Amsterdam mic anisotropy in the inner core, Geophys. J. Int. 180,
(2007). 1329-1343 (2010).
[33] D.Gubbins,Rotation ofthe innercore,J.Geophys.Res. [53] X.Li,V.F.Cormier, Frequency-dependent seismicatten-
86, 11695-11699 (1981). uation in the inner core 1. A viscoelastic interpretation,
[34] D. Gubbins,B. Sreenivasan, J. Mound, S. Rost, Melting J. Geophys. Res. 107, 2361 (2002).
of the Earths inner core, Nature 473, 361-363 (2011). [54] P.W.Livermore,R.Hollerbach,A.Jackson,Electromag-
[35] C.R. Gwinn, T.A. Herring, I.I. Shapiro, Geodesy by ra- netically driven westward drift and inner-core superrota-
diointerferometry: Studies of the forced nutations of the tion in Earths core, PNAS110.40, 15914-15918 (2013).
Earth, 2. Interpretation, J. Geophys. Res. 91, 4755-4765 [55] K.H.Lythgoe, A. Deuss, J.F. Rudgea, J.A. Neufeld,
(1986). Earthsinnercore: Innermostinnercoreorhemispherical
[36] B.H. Hager, R.W.Clayton, M.A. Richards, R.P.Comer, variations?,EarthPlanet.Sci.Lett.385,181-189(2014).
A.M. Dziewonski, Lower mantle heterogeneity, dynamic [56] M.Mandea,I.Panet,V.Lesur,O.deViron,M.Diament,
topography and the geoid, Nature313, 541 (1985). J-L.LeMou¨el,RecentchangesoftheEarth’scorederived
[37] R. Holme, Large-scale flow in the core, in Treatise on fromsatelliteobservations ofmagneticandgravityfields,
Geophysics, Vol. 8, Core Dynamics, edited by G. Schu- PNAS 109.47, 19129-19133 (2012).
bert,P. Olson, 107-130, Elsevier, Amsterdam (2007). [57] A. M. M¨akinen, A. Deuss, Global seismic body-wave ob-
[38] G. Hulot, c. Eymin, B. Langlais, M. Mandea, N. Olsen, servations of temporal variations in the Earths inner
Small scale structure of the geodynamo inferred from core, and implications for its differential rotation, Geo-
Oersted and Magsat satellite data, Nature 416, 620-623, phys.J. Int.187, 355-370 (2011).
(2002). [58] M.Monnereau,M.Calvet,L.Margerin,A.Souriau,Lop-
[39] International Seismological Centre, On-line Bulletin, sidedgrowthofEarth’sinnercore,Science328,1014-1017
United Kingdom (2013). [59] H. Mizzon, M. Monnereau, Implication of the lopsided
[40] R. Iritani, N. Takeuchi, H. Kawakatsu, Seismic attenu- growth for the viscosity of Earths inner core, Earth
ation structure of the top half of the inner core beneath Planet. Sci. Lett. 361, 391-401 (2013).
the northeastern Pacific,Geophys.Res.Lett.37,L19303 [60] F.Niu,Q.Chen,Seismicevidencefordistinctanisotropy
(2010). in the innermost inner core, Nature Geoscience 1, 692-
[41] J.C.E. Irving, A. Deuss, A Hemispherical structure in 696 (2008).
inner core velocity anisotropy, J. Geophys. Res. 116, [61] F. Niu, L. Wen, Hemispherical variations in seismic ve-
B04307 (2011). locity at the top of the Earth’s inner core, Nature 410,
[42] M.Ishii,A.M.Dziewon´ski, The innermost inner core of 1081-1084 (2001).
the earth: Evidence for a change in anisotropic behavior [62] T. Ohtaki, S. Kaneshima, K. Kanjo, Seismic structure
at the radius of about 300 km, PNAS 99, 14026-14030 neartheinnercore boundaryinthesouthpolarregion,J.
(2002). Geophys. Res. 117, B03312 (2012).
[43] M.Ishii,A.M.Dziewonski,Constraints ontheouter-core [63] E.A. Okal, S. Stein, Observations of ultra-long period
tangent cylinder using normal-mode splitting measure- normal modes from the 2004 SumatraAndaman earth-
ments, Geophys.J. Int.162, 787-792 (2005). quake, Phys.Earth Planet. In.175, 5362 (2009).
[44] A. Jackson, Intense equatorial flux splots on the surface [64] N. Olsen, G. Hulot, T.J. Sabaka, The Present Field, in
of the earths core, Nature424, 760763 (2003). Treatise on Geophysics, Vol.5,Geomagnetism,editedby
[45] A. Jackson, C.C. Finlay, Geomagnetic secular variation G. Schubert, M. Kono, 147-193, Elsevier, Amsterdam
anditsapplicationtothecore,inTreatiseonGeophysics, (2007).
Vol. 5, Geomagnetism, edited by G. Schubert,M. Kono, [65] P. Olson, R. Deguen, Eccentricity of the geomagnetic
147-193, Elsevier, Amsterdam (2007). dipole caused by lopsided inner core growth, NatureGeo-
[46] G.Jiang,D.DapengZhao,Observationofhigh-frequency science 5, 565-569 (2012).
PKiKPinJapan: Insightintofinestructureofinnercore [66] S.I. Oreshin, L.P. Vinnik, Heterogeneity and anisotropy
boundary, J. Asian Earth Sci. 59, 167-184 (2012). of seismic attenuation in the inner core, Geophys. Res.
[47] H. Kawakatsu, Sharp and seismically transparent inner Lett. 31, L02613 (2004).
[67] A. Ouzounis, K. Creager, Isotropy overlying anisotropy [82] D.J. Stevenson, Limits on lateral density and velocity
atthetopoftheinnercore,Geophys.Res.Lett.28,4331- variations in the earth’s outer core, Geophys. J. Roy.
4334 (2001). Astr. S. 88, 311-319 (1987).
[68] C.L. Pekeris, Thermal convection in the interior of the [83] W. Su, A. M. Dziewonski, R. Jeanloz, Planet within a
Earth, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., suppl. 3, 343-367 planet: Rotation oftheInnerCoreofEarth,Science274,
(1935). 1883-1887 (1996).
[69] Z. Peng, K.D. Koper, J.E. Vidale, F. Leyton, P. [84] I.Sumita,P.Olson,Alaboratory modelforconvection in
Shearer, Inner-core fine-scale structure from scattered Earths core driven by a thermally heterogeneous mantle,
waves recorded by LASA, J. Geophys. Res. 113, B09312 Science, 286, 1547-1549 (1999).
(2008). [85] I. Sumita, P. Olson, Rotating thermal convection experi-
[70] A.Piersanti,L.Boschi,A.M.Dziewonski,Estimatinglat- ments inahemisphericalshell withheterogeneous bound-
eral structure in the earth’s outer core, Geophys. Res. ary heat flux: implications for the Earth’s core, J. Geo-
Lett., 28, 1659-1662 (2001). phys.Res. 107, 2169 (2002).
[71] G.Poupinet,B.L.N.Kennett,Ontheobservation ofhigh [86] I.Sumita,M.I.Bergman,Inner-Core Dynamics,inTrea-
frequency PKiKP and its coda in Australia, Phys. Earth tise on Geophysics, Vol. 8, Core Dynamics, edited by
Planet. Int.146, 497511 (2004). G. Schubert, P. Olson, 299-318, Elsevier, Amsterdam
[72] B. Romanowicz, L. Br´eger, Anomalous splitting of free (2007).
oscillations: A reevaluation of possible interpretations, [87] S. Tanaka and H. Hamaguchi, Degree one heterogeneity
J. Geophys. Res. 105, 21559-21578 (2000). and hemispherical variation of anisotropy in the inner
[73] B. Romanowicz, H. Tkal˘ci´c, L. Br´eger, On the origin of core from PKP(BC)-PKP(DF) times, J. Geophys. Res.
complexity in PKP travel time data, in Core Dynamics, 102, 2925-2938 (1997).
Structure andRotation, DehantVetal.(eds.),pp.3144, [88] H. Tkal˘ci´c, M. Young, T. Bodin, S. Ngo, M. Sambridge,
American Geophysical Union, Washington (2003). The shuffling rotation of the Earths inner core revealed
[74] S. Rosat, Time varying gravity in relation with the by earthquake doublets, Nature Geoscience 6, 497-502
Earths intern dynamics: Contribution of superconduct- (2013).
ing gravimeters, Doctoral Thesis, Strasbourg University, [89] C. Vamo¸s, N. Suciu, Seismic hemispheric asym-
2004. metry induced by Earth’s inner core decentering,
[75] G.Roult,J.Roch,E.Clevede,Observationofsplitmodes arXiv:1111.1121v1 [physics.geo-ph] (2011).
from the 26th December 2004 Sumatra-Andaman mega- [90] E. Vesanen, R. Teisseyre, Symmetry and asymmetry in
event, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 179, geodynamics, Geophysica 15, 147-170 (1978).
4559 (2010). [91] J. Wahr, D. de Vries, The possibility of lateral structure
[76] P. Shearer, G. Masters, The density and shear velocity insidethecoreanditsimplicationsfornutationandearth
contrastattheinnercoreboundary,Geophys.J.Int.102, tide observations, Geophys. J. Int.99, 511-519 (1989).
491-498 (1990). [92] L. Waszek, J. Irving, A. Deuss, Reconciling the hemi-
[77] L.B. Slichter, The fundamental free mode of the Earths spherical structure of Earth’s inner core with its super-
inner core, PNAS47, 186190 (1961). rotation, NatureGeoscience 4, 264-267 (2011).
[78] G. Soldati, L. Boschi, A. Piersanti, Outer core density [93] L.Waszek,A.Deuss,Distinct layeringinthe hemispher-
heterogeneity andthe discrepancy between PKPandPcP icalseismicvelocitystructure ofEarths upperinnercore,
travel timeobservations, Geophysicalresearchletters30, J. Geophys. Res. 116, B12313 (2011).
1190 (2003). [94] L. Wen, F. Niu, Seismic velocity and attenuation struc-
[79] X. Song, P. G. Richards, Seismological evidence for dif- tures in the top of the Earth’s inner core, J. Geophys.
ferential rotation of the Earthsinner core, Nature 382, Res. 107(B11), 2273 (2002).
221-224 (1996). [95] W.Yu,L.Wen,F.Niu,Seismic velocity structure in the
[80] A. Souriau, A. Teste, S. Chevrot, Is there any structure Earth’s outer core,J.Geophys.Res.110,B02302(2005).
insidetheliquidoutercore?,Geophys.Res.Lett.30,1567 [96] W. Yu, L. Wen, Seismic velocity and attenuation struc-
(2003). tures in the top 400 km of the Earth’s inner core along
[81] A. Souriau, Deep Earth structure - the Earths cores, in equatorial paths, J. Geophys. Res. 111, B07308 (2006).
Treatise on Geophysics, Vol.1, Seismology and structure [97] D. Zidarov, Theory of the evolution of the Earth and
of the Earth, edited by G. Schubert,B. Romanowicz, A. the Earth’s crust based onthe mobileEarth core concept,
Dziewonski, 655-693, Elsevier, Amsterdam (2007). Geol. Balcanica 7, 3-26 (1977).