2v1908040/cq-rg:viXra
Geophysical studies with laser-beam detectors of
gravitational waves
L.Grishchuk†‡ , V.Kulagin‡ , V.Rudenko‡ , A.Serdobolski‡
School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF24 3YB,
United Kingdom
Sternberg Astronomical Institute, Moscow State University, Moscow, 119899,
E-mail: grishchuk@astro.cf.ac.uk
Abstract. The existing high technology laser-beamdetectors of gravitationalwaves
may find very useful applications in an unexpected area - geophysics. To make
possible the detection of weak gravitational waves in the region of high frequencies
of astrophysicalinterest, 30 10 3 Hz,controlsystems of laser interferometersmust
permanently monitor, record and compensate much larger external interventions that
takeplaceintheregionoflowfrequenciesofgeophysicalinterest, 10
−3Hz.
Suchphenomenaastidalperturbationsoflandandgravity,normalmodeoscillationsof
Earth,oscillationsoftheinnercoreofEarth,etc. willinevitablyaffecttheperformance
of the interferometers and, therefore, the information about them will be stored in
the data of control systems. We specifically identify the low-frequency information
contained in distances between the interferometer mirrors (deformation of Earth)
and angles between the mirrors’ suspensions (deviations of local gravity vectors and
plumb lines). We show that the access to the angular information may require some
modest amendments to the optical scheme of the interferometers, and we suggest
the ways of doing that. The detailed evaluation of environmental and instrumental
noises indicates that they will not prevent, even if only marginally, the detection
of interesting geophysical phenomena. Gravitational-wave instruments seem to be
capable of reaching, as a by-product of their continuous operation, very ambitious
geophysicalgoals, such as observation of the Earth’s inner core oscillations.
PACS numbers: 0480N, 0710F, 0150P, 0340K
Submitted to: Class. Quantum Grav.
1. Introduction
Laser-beam detectors of gravitational waves are designed to explore the Universe in
a new type of radiation and from a new perspective. With the already operating
instruments, and coming soon online, we are expecting to witness the discovery of
fascinating physics involved in powerful sources of cosmic gravitational radiation.
The astrophysical aims of the gravitational wave (g.w.) science are well understood
Geophysical studies... 2
and comprehensively described in the literature (for recent reviews, see for example
[1, 2, 3, 4]). Naturally, g.w. community is focused on the ambitious target of
‘reaching for the black holes’. But what about a more modest goal of looking inside
our own planet ? No doubt, black holes are fascinating and scientifically important
objects. But it is also necessary to remember that, say, the still poorly understood and
unpredictable earthquakes are claiming thousands of human lives per year. Is it possible
that the cutting-edge technology of g.w. interferometers [5, 6, 7, 8] may help us with
accurate geophysical studies, as a by-product of the continuous search for astrophysical
gravitational waves ?
This is the major question of the present work, and the answer is positive.
We shall show in this paper that a laser-beam detector of gravitational waves is in
fact automatically a valuable geophysical device. Without collecting, recording and
processing environmental information of geophysical origin, a g.w. laser interferometer
would simply be incapable of working as a sensitive astrophysical instrument. Certainly,
wehavetomakesurethattheextractionofgeophysicalinformationdoesnotcompromise
the astrophysical aims of the instrument.
A laser-beam detector of gravitational waves is a conceptually simple installation.
Each arm of the interferometer, typically of the length L = 3 km, consists of two
mirrors, and the distance variation between the mirrors is monitored by the laser beam.
The mirrors are hanging on wires in supporting towers. Each mirror is essentially a
mass element of the pendulum placed in the local gravitational field of the Earth. The
eigen-frequency of the pendulum is normally in the range of 0.1 1 Hz. The multi-
stage pendulum system shields the mirrors from large uncontrollable displacements of
the tops of the supporting towers. This makes the interferometer capable of measuring,
in the region of relatively high frequencies of astrophysical interest 30 10 Hz, the
incredibly small variations of distance between the mirrors, at the level of 10 cm.
The expected cause of these variations is the incoming astrophysical gravitational wave.
The isolation from noises in the region of relatively high frequencies is only a part
of the story. To ensure successful performance of the interferometer as an astrophysical
instrument, control systems of the interferometer should also register and compensate
for large external interventions of geophysical origin that take place in the region of
relativelylowfrequencies. Forexample, thetidalhalf-dailyvariationsofdistancebeween
towers separated by 3 km are typically at the level of 10 cm. This change of distance
is 14 orders of magnitude larger than the anticipated astrophysical signal. If this sort of
variations were allowed to affect distance between the mirrors, the interferometer would
not be in the ‘locked’ state, and hence it would not be able to operate as astrophysical
instrument. The ‘locking’ of the interferometer requires that the distance between the
mirrors is maintained unchanged with accuracy of approximately one hundredth of the
laser light wavelength, which amounts to 10 cm and less. This means that the low-
frequency variations of distance between the mirrors should be monitored and largely
removed by a control system called the adjustment system. A similar monitoring and
compensation should be done with respect to low-frequency variations of the angle
Geophysical studies... 3
between the interferometer mirrors. This is being done by a control system called
the alighnment system. Ideally, in order to reach the astrophysical goals, control
systems should keep the interferometer in the working condition for the duration of
time exceeding many months.
Thus, the collected and recorded low-frequency information, which is vital for
maintaining the operational state of the laser-beam detector of gravitational waves,
inevitably makes the g.w. detector also a geophysical instrument. The time-scales of
geophysical processes, some of which are believed to be crucial for global geodynamics,
lie in the range from several minutes to several hours. In other words, we will be
interested in frequencies, which we call geophysical frequencies, somewhere in the
interval 10 3 10 Hz.
In Sec.2 we consider a simple model of g.w. interferometer as a geophysical
instrument. It is assumed that the mirrors’ suspension points can move and the plumb
lines of hanging mirrors can vary. These changes arise as a result of the Earth surface
deformations and variations of local gravitational field caused, for example, by the
internal Earth dynamics. We derive general formulas for the distance between the
mirrorsandtheanglesbetweenthelocalplumblines. Ideally, thesearetwovariablesthat
are supposed to be monitored by, respectively, the adjustment and alignment systems
of the interferometer.
In Sec.3 we consider a number of interesting geophysical phenomena which
inevitably affect the performance of a g.w. interferometer. The signatures of these
phenomena are contained in the outcomes of the adjustment and alignment control
systems. Thegeophysical effectstobestudiedincludetidalperturbations, normalmodes
of Earth oscillations, movements of the inner solid core of Earth, etc. We place the main
emphasis on the fascinating phenomenon of the inner core oscillations. We estimate the
useful geophysical signal accompanying this phenomenon, which will manifest itself in
the variation of distance between the mirrors and in the variation of angle between
the plumb lines of the hanging mirrors. The guidance for the expected amplitude
of the signal is provided by the reported in the literature indications that the inner
core oscillations have been actually detected by other, traditional, methods. From the
requirement that the signal to noise ratio should be larger than 1, we define the level
of tolerable noise in the proposed measurements. Specifically, the tolerable noise allows
the detection of the useful signal, if the observation time exceeds 70, or so, inner core
oscillation periods.
A useful signal can be detected if the environmental and instrumental noises are
smaller than the calculated level of tolerable noise. In Sec.4 we consider noises which we
find most dangerous. We explicitely show that seismic, atmospheric and instrumental
noises should not be capable of preventing the detection of inner core oscillations, even
if only marginally. This refers both to distance and angle measurements. There exists,
however, a specific problem with the angle measurements, related to the fact that the
presently operating alignment systems are subject to a certain degeneracy. They cannot
tell apart a tilt of the mirror, which we are mostly interested in, and a latteral shift of
Geophysical studies... 4
Figure 1. A pendulum with a moving suspension point placed in a variable
gravitationalfield.
the mirror, which canbe caused by a dull deformational noise. We analyze this difficulty
in great detail in Sec.5.
Since the angular measurements provide an important additional channel of
geophysical information, we adress the problem of degeneracy in Sec.6 and suggest the
ways of its circumvention. The desire to keep the angular channel useful for geophysical
applications may require some modest and harmless modifications of the optical scheme
of g.w. interferometers. We discuss at some length a few ideas with regard to such
modifications. It appears that, without interfering with the astrophysical program of
the instrument, certain geophysical modifications are feasible.
In Sec.7 we emphasize some conclusions of the paper.
2. Laser-beam detector of gravitational waves as a geophysical instrument
To see better how a g.w. interferometer can work as a geophysical instrument, we
will have to consider idealized, but representative, models. We start with a model of
a pendulum, whose suspension point oscillates [9], and which is placed in a variable
gravitational field.
A pendulum of mass m and length l can oscillate in the x,y plane, see Fig.1.
Its suspension point has time-dependent coordinates x0(t), y0(t), and the local gravity
acceleration vector g(t) is also a function of time: g(t) = [g
(t), g0 +g
(t)]. The local
gravity fieldisspatially homogeneous onthescale ofsmall oscillationsof themass, but it
is not homogeneous on larger scales. Later, we will take into account its inhomogeneity
(spherical symmetry) on the scale of two widely separated pendula and even on the
scale of displacements of the suspension point of an individual pendulum.
The only dynamical variable in this problem is the angle α(t) between the
suspension wire and the axis y. The coordinates of the mass are given by
Geophysical studies... 5
The Lagrangian of the system can be written as
Using expressions (1) and ignoring non-dynamical terms and total derivatives, one
transforms the Lagrangian to the final form:
)lcosα.(3)
Now one can write down the equation of motion of the pendulum:
cosα (g0 +g
)sinα. (4)
We assume that the time-dependent components of the gravity vector are very small,
(t) g0, and the acceleration of the suspension point y¨0 is much smaller
than the unperturbed gravity acceleration g0. We also assume that α 1, sinα α,
cosα 1. Then, Eq. (4) simplifies:
where ω = g0/l is the square of oscillation frequency of the unperturbed pendulum.
The angular variation of the local gravity vector g, that is, the angular deviation of the
local plumb line, is denoted α0(t) = g
(t)/g0. We see that, in the linear approximation
in terms of α, the pendulum behaviour is affected only by changes in the gravity force
direction, namely, by the component g of the gravity acceleration. The variations of
the absolute value g and the component g of the acceleration produce smaller effects,
which we neglect.
Equation (5) is an inhomogeneous linear differential equation with constant
coefficients. In the frequency domain, the relevant solution can be written
ω l(ω2 ω2)
, x0ω , α0ω are complex Fourier amplitudes of the corresponding variables
at frequency ω. The divergent amplitude at the resonance frequency ω = ω will
be tempered by friction, which we have ignored. The regions of our interest are
relatively high frequencies ω ω for astrophysical applications and relatively low
frequencies ω ω for geophysical applications. For orientation, one can think of
ω /2π = f (0.1 1) Hz. This is true for the existing instruments.
a) High frequencies ω ω – astrophysical applications.
The pendulum angular amplitude is given by
≃ "(cid:18) ω (cid:19) − # l − (cid:18) ω (cid:19) ≃ − l − (cid:18) ω (cid:19)
The horizontal position of the pendulum mass is given by
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
Geophysical studies... 6
Eq.(8) illustrates the well known method of vibrational isolation of interferometer’s
test masses-mirrors. The residual displacement x of the pendulum mass is a factor
/ω) smaller than the displacement x0ω of the suspension point. The N stages
of isolation reduce the external x0ω by a factor (ω
2N.
This makes the mirror
shielded from large deformational shifts of the suspension point, and therefore the
interferometer becomes capable ofdetecting increadibly small distance variationscaused
by astrophysical signals. However, the displacement caused by the local gravitational
environment (the last term in Eq.(8)), cannot be shielded. If this gravitational noise is
present, it creates certain problems for the astrophysical program, which we will return
to later.
b) Low frequencies ω ω – geophysical applications .
The pendulum angular amplitude is given by
+α0ω . (9)
The contribution to α provided by movements of the suspension point (first term in
Eq.(9)) is suppressed by a factor (ω/ω ) . At sufficiently low frequencies, this term can
become smaller than the second term in Eq.(9). One can say that, in this regime, the
equilibrium position of the pendulum follows a new plumb line α0ω determined by the
slow variation g (t) of the local gravity force vector g.
The horizontal position of the pendulum mass, in the low-frequency approximation,
is given by
≃ ≃ ω p! ≃
It follows from Eq.(10) that the movements of the suspension point transmit practically
without change into the movements of the pendulum mass. In other words, the
low-frequency deformations cannot be shielded, so they should be monitored and
compensated by the control systems.
The interferometer arm includes two separated pendula, and it is the difference of
displacements and difference of mirrors’ inclinations that are actually being monitored.
Weassumethatthependulaareidentical, buttheirenvironments aredifferent, seeFig.2.
We denote by symbol δ the variations at each site and by symbol ∆ the difference of
variations at two sites. It is important to know how different conditions are at two
sites. If the characteristic spatial scale λ of perturbations is shorter than L, then the
conditions at two sites are not correlated, and ∆-variations are typically of the same
order of magnitude as the largest of individual δ-variations. However, if both sites are
covered by a long-wavelength perturbation λ L, then the ∆-variations are much
smaller than the δ-variations. Symbolically, we can write
∆ δ, if L λ. (11)
Let the unperturbed coordinates of the suspension points be x01, x02. Each point
is subject to time-dependent deformational shifts δx01, δx02. Of course, they are much
Geophysical studies... 7
Figure 2. Relativevariationsofplumblinesandmass‘positionsinaninterferometer.
smaller than the unperturbed distance L, L = x02 x01. We will also use the difference
of the deformational shifts, ∆x0(t) = ∆L = δx02(t) δx01(t). The difference of
angular variables of the two pendula is ∆α(t) = α2(t) α1(t). The difference of
local values of g and, hence, the angle between the local plumb lines at two sites
is ∆α0(t) = α02(t) α01(t). [Here we ignore the fact that the Earth’s gravitational field
is centrally-symmetric, which leads to slightly different orientations of the unperturbed
gravity force vectors at two cites, but later we will take this fact into account.] Writing
equations (5) at two sites, and taking their difference, we arrive at the equation
Certainly, the relevant solution to this equation is given by the formula similar to (6),
with obvious substitutions:
ω ∆x0ω +lω
ω l(ω2 ω2)
The variation of distance between the masses is
Thehigh-frequencyandlow-frequencyapproximationstoequations(13), (14)follow
the lines of equations (7), (8), (9), (10). In particular, in the low-frequency region,
ω ω , we have
It is seen from Eq.(16) that the large deformational contribution ∆x0ω leaks into the
system. This is why the interferometer’s adjustment system records and largely removes
∆x0ω from ∆d
by applying force to the mirrors and mechanically adjusting their
Geophysical studies... 8
positions. (The adjustment system also tunes the frequency of the laser light). The
circuits of adjustment system is one of the sources of geophysical information.
Theangle∆α between thesuspension wires, Eq.(15), ismostlythereflectionofthe
angle between local plumb lines, first term in Eq.(15). For sufficiently low frequencies,
the second term in Eq.(15) is smaller than the first one. We assume that the angle
between the wires is at the same time the angle between surfaces of the mirrors. Under
the condition that other contributions to Eq.(15) can be identified and separated (one
complication, related to the centrally-symmetric character of the Earth’s gravitational
field, is treated in detail in Sec.4c), the alighnment system, whose purpose is to monitor
the angle between the mirrors, will be monitoring the angle ∆α0ω between the plumb
lines. This control system is another source of geophysical information.
Variables of geophysical interest, ∆x0ω and ∆α0ω , consist of two parts. One part is
a useful geophysical signal, another part is environmental noise. In general, temporarily
ignoring noises and other complications, the knowledge of the output signals ∆α and
allows one to solve equations (15), (16) with respect to ∆x0ω and ∆α0ω :
Ideally, this would be a reconstruction, ascomplete as possible, of the acting geophysical
perturbation. However, complications do exist, and we will perform more detailed
analysis in the rest of the paper.
In the end of this section we shall briefly discuss the distance variations and plumb
line deflections in terms of the Newtonian gravitational potential U(x,t) of the Earth.
The potential U is the sum of the unperturbed potential U0 = GM/r and perturbations
caused by external and internal gravitational fields. The external fields are mostly the
tidal effects of the Moon, Sun and planets. The internal fields include such effects
as normal oscillation modes of Earth and oscillations of the inner core of Earth. At
the surface of an idealized rigid body, the local gravitational acceleration would be
given by g = ∂U/∂x. The true value of g at the surface of real elastic Earth is
somewhat different from this quantity. This happens because the gravitational field
perturbations, originating from either external or internal sources, displace elements of
the Earth’s surface in its own gravitational field and also give rise to a redistribution of
the Earth’s matter density. In the point of observations, these changes create additional
variations of the gravitational potential. In conventional geophysics these effects are
taken into account by some numerical factors called the Love numbers [10]. For a
perfectly rigid body the Love numbers are zeros, while for a fluid body they are ones.
On real deformable Earth, the Love numbers are roughly of the order of 1.
The difference of variations of g at two sites separated by L is causing a change of
distance between the sites, and it also determines a relative deflection of local plumb
lines. Let the common unperturbed g 0 point out in the y direction, and the sites be
located on the x axis. Then, if L is small in comparison with the characteristic length
Geophysical studies... 9
λ at which the perturbation of the gravitational potential changes, one can derive:
L ∂g ∂g L ∂2U ∂2U
g0 v u ∂x !
∂x !
g0 v u ∂x2 !
∂z∂x!
It is clear that we are dealing with gradients of gravity variations δg. A projection of
this formula on the x,y plane returns us to the results discussed above (compare with
Eq.(11)):
L ∂g δgL L
3. Geophysical phenomena to be studied
A number of interesting geophysical phenomena are in fact geophysical signals that can
be studied with the help of laser-beam detectors of gravitational waves. The division of
geophysical phenomena into signals and noises is not clear-cut. For example, the low-
frequency seismic perturbations can be assigned to either category. Likewise, periodic
thermal deformations of land are probably the largest ones numerically, but they are
not of gravitational origin, and we treat them as a predictable and removable hindrance
rather than an interesting geophysical signal. In general, we shall regard signals some
quasi-periodic processes with strong participation of gravity in them, whereas more
random processes we regard noises, hampering detection of the signals. Noises are
considered in the next section, while here we focus on some quasi-periodic phenomena
which are believed to be important for global geodynamics. They are accompanied by
variations of local gravity vector and land deformations. Both of these perturbations
influence the performance of laser interferometric detectors of gravitational waves, and
should be monitored and removed by the control systems.
a). The Earth tides.
Large perturbations of gravity g and deformations of land u are induced by the
gravitational fields of the Moonand, to a smaller extent, Sun. The maintidal harmonics
are well described and measured [10]. The values and directions of the perturbed
quantities depend on the position of the observation point on the Earth surface, but we
will be mostly interested in their typical (not exceptionally small and not exceptionally
large) numerical amplitudes. The dominant contributor to the tidal effects is the lunar
M2 harmonic which has a period of τ 12 hours and which is quadrupolar in terms
of its angular dependence. The typical M2 amplitude of the variations of the absolute
value of g is δg 45 µGal (Gal = cm/sec 2 , µGal = 10 −6 Gal, nGal = 10 −9 Gal).
The unperturbed gravity field is g 980 Gal, so that for the M2 harmonic we have
δg/g 5 10 . The main solar harmonic is S2 with τ = 12 hours and δg 20 µGal.
The higher frequency tidal harmonics are considerably weaker. For example: M3 with
τ 8 hours, δg 0.8 µGal and M4 with τ 6 hours, δg = 0.03 µGal.
Geophysical studies... 10
On the Earth surface, variations of gravity g and displacements u of land elements
are linked by the Love numbers. If W2 is the quadrupole component of the tidal
potential, one can write for the radial components δg and u [10]:
= W2, (21)
where R is the Earth radius (R 6400 km) and h,k are the Love numbers
(h 0.6, k 0.3). Since the radial and angular components of the displacement
vector u are approximately equal, we will be using for all of them the approximate
relationship
u 0.3 R . (22)
This relationship is valid for any gravitational perturbation, not necessarily a tidal one.
Specifically for the M2 tidal component, a typical displacement amounts to u 10 cm.
The observed maximal displacements are a factor 3 5 larger than this evaluation.
Thecharacteristicspatialscaleoftheconsideredquadrupoleperturbationisλ R .
Therefore, assuming that the armlength of the interferometer is L = 3 km, the ∆-
variation is smaller than the δ-variation (see Eq.(11)) in proportion to L/λ, which
reduces to
5 10 . (23)
Combining the numbers, we arrive at
∆x0 = u = 0.3 L 5 10 cm, and
∆α0 = 3 10 rad. (24)
As was already mentioned, tidal perturbations of this level of magnitude should be
easily seen by the interferometer control systems. A successful performance of the
interferometer requires a much better precision in monitoring the distance between
mirrors, at the level not less than (10 10 ) cm. The danger of tidal effects for
the LIGO interferometers and the necessity of their removal have been long recognised
[11]. We focus on the positive side of this necessary procedure: the existing network of
interferometers, located in different parts of the globe, will allow one to obtain useful
information on amplitudes, spatial patterns and temporal phases of tidal perturbations.
This collected and analyzed low-frequency information will help refine numerical values
of Earth’s parameters, such, for example, as its Love numbers.
b). Free oscillations of Earth.
As every elastic body, our planet is capable of free oscillations (see, for example,
[12]). In the approximation of a non-rotating, uniform, spherically-symmetric Earth, it
Geophysical studies... 11
is convenient to expand perturbations in terms of spherical harmonics Y (θ,φ), where
φ is longitude and θ is co-latitude:
The discrete values of the wave number k, k = πα /R , are determined by the radial
boundary conditions and the n-th root, α , of the corresponding boundary equation
(see, for example, [13]). The eigen-frequencies ω do not depend on m and are given by
ω = πα c /R , where c is the appropriate speed of sound. If the multipole order
ln ln s e s
l is much smaller than a (nonzero) n, the deformations have maximal amplitudes in
the central region of the sphere. In the opposite case of l being much larger than
n, the deformations are mostly concentrated near the surface of the sphere, and it
also holds that πα l. In the extreme regime l n, the deformations look more
like seismic perturbations rather than free oscillations of Earth. The short-wavelength
seismic perturbations can propagate deep to the central regions of Earth, refract and
reflect back. This is an important diagnostic of the central regions.
There aretwo basic types of elastic deformations. Oneis accompanied by variations
of volume, matter density and gravity g, and is called spheroidal modes S . Another
is not accompanied by these variations; it represents purely twisting motions, and is
called toroidal (shear) modes T . Some of the shear perturbations cannot propagate
in liquids, and their observed attenuation in the central regions of Earth helped discover
the liquid (outer) core. Many hundreds of Earth’s normal modes are now identified
from the study of ground motions and gravimeter records. The longest period normal
mode is 0S2 with period T = 53.8 min. This period is of course consistent with our
evaluations given above. Taking c
4 km/sec and α20 1, we arrive at the right value
for T. The frequency of the 0S2 mode is f 3 10 Hz, whereas the frequencies of
higher order S and T modes extend to the milli Hz region. For example, the 0S20 0S40
modes (l = 20 40) have equally spaced frequencies in the interval of approximately
(1 5) mHz, again in agreement with the evaluations given above.
Free oscillations of Earth are best observed after large earthquakes. In contrast
to tidal harmonics, the amplitudes of free Earth oscillations cannot be predicted in
advance. However, it is known that typical observed values of gravity variations in the
fundamental 0S2 mode are at the level of about 1 µGal [14, 15, 16]. The amplitudes of
higher frequency registered modes are smaller, but they can reach δg 0.1 µGal. The
amplitudes of modestly excited modes between 0S20 and 0S40 were detected in the long
series of observations on seismically quiet days. The acceleration amplitudes are at the
level of 2 nGal, and higher [17]. There exists the permanently present noise in these
modes with the amplitudes corresponding to 0.4 nGal. Interestingly, this background
level of land deformations and gravity variations cannot be explained by cumulative
effect of small earthquakes, despite the fact that there occur thousands of them per
year. It is suggested [17] to seek the source of these continuous oscillations of Earth in
the action of atmospheric pressure variations on the Earth surface. We will return to
this discussion in our analysis of atmospheric noises in Sec.4b.
Geophysical studies... 12
The modestly excited higher frequency S and T modes seem to be within the reach
of adjustment and alighnment systems of the gravity-wave detectors. The T modes do
not affect the plumb line directions, but they are present in the distance variations. Let
ustake arepresentative normal modewithf = 4 10 Hz andtheamplitude ofgravity
variations δg = 2 nGal, i.e. δg/g = 2 10 . The wavelength λ is λ = c /f 10 cm,
that is, the spatial scale of perturbations λ is smaller than R , but still much longer
than the armlength L = 3 km of the interferometer.
We shall first generalise Eqs. (22), (24) to the case, where the spatial scale of δg is
λ, not R . Then, we will have to write
and ∆α0 . (26)
Note that, on the surface of deformable Earth, there exists a universal relationship
between the distance and angle variations, which directly follows from Eq.(26):
∆α0 . (27)
Substituting the numbers in Eq.(26), we obtain the following evaluations for the
considered normal mode of oscillations at f = 4 10 Hz:
∆x0 10 cm, and ∆α0 6 10 rad. (28)
Obviously, if the amplitude of the excited mode is larger than 2 nGal, this will
increase the expected amplitudes of ∆x0 and ∆α0. In addition, normal modes, as any
other oscillations, are characterised by certain quality factor Q. The mode can execute
Q cycles before its amplitude degrades by a factor of 3, or so. If the observation of the
mode lasts for at least as long as its relaxation time τ, τ = Q/ω, the signal to noise
ratio increases in proportion to √Q. This makes the prospects of detection of the Earth
normal modes much better. The quality factor of individual modes is uncertain, but
the literature often quotes the numbers well in excess of 100 (see, for example, [18]).
c). The Earth inner core oscillations
The oscillations of the real Earth are complicated by Earth’s aspherical shape,
its rotation, the presence of gravitational restoring forces in addition to elastic forces,
the stratification and variation of material properties with depth, etc. Very important
modifications are caused by the existence of the Earth core (see, for example, [18]).
It is believed that the inner core is solid and has radius r 1220 km and density
ρ 13 g/cm . The outer core is liquid and has radius r 3470 km and density
ρ 12.6 g/cm . [The current geophysical models claim a much higher precision of the
Earth parameters than is actually needed for our evaluations.]
The solid core is held in its equilibrium position within the liquid core mainly by
gravitational forces. It is reasonable to expect that an earthquake, or some other cause,
can occasionally excite oscillations of the inner core, predominantly along the Earth
rotation axis (the polar mode) [16, 19]. A displacement of a solid sphere within a liquid
sphere is equivalent to a displacement of the effective mass m = (4π/3)(ρ ρ )r . If
Geophysical studies... 13
the amplitude of the displacement is A, then the associated variation of gravity at the
Earth surface is
2Gm 8π r 3
R3 3 s − l R
e (cid:18) e(cid:19)
The evaluation of this expression using the parameters mentioned above gives
δg 2 nGal .
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Period T of polar oscillations of the inner core mass m is mainly determined by
the gravitational restoring force:
m A¨ = G 3 l ,
which leads to T = 3πρ /Gρ (ρ ρ ). Corrections to this expression are taken into
p s l s − l
account by a small numerical factor α [19], so that
TheevaluationofT leadstoaperiodofabout4hours. TheCoriolisforceoftherotating
Earth splits this period inito a triplet of periods, with the size of splitting determined
by the Earth angular velocity.
The fascinating phenomenon of the inner core oscillations will be in the center of
our further discussion. There exist indications that the inner core translational triplet
has been actually detected [20, 21]. The analysis of long records from superconducting
gravimeters has shown three resonances with the central period T 3.8 hours and
the side periods separated from the central one by 10 min. The amplitudes of each
of the three oscillations are at the level of (5 6) nGal. The quality factor Q of each
resonance is somewhat higher than 100.
Using evaluations similar to those that have been done in previous subsections, we
can estimate the effect of the Earth inner core oscillations on the laser-beam detectors
of gravitational waves. We take the amplitude of gravity variations δg/g = 6 10 ,
the charecteristic spatial scale of gravity variations and land deformations λ 2 R ,
and the length of the interferometer arm L = 3 km. Then, the distance and angular
signal amplitudes amount to
∆x0 3 10 cm, and ∆α0 2 10 rad. (30)
The detectability condition requires that the signal to noise ratio S/N should be
better than 1. The resonance bandwidth of the core oscillations is ∆f = f /Q, where
the central resonance frequency is f = 7.3 10 Hz. We assume that the observation
time of the signal is at least as long as Q cycles of the signal. This means that the
tolerable spectral noise N˜ per √Hz is related to the signal amplitude S according to
Geophysical studies... 14
Figure 3. Gravity vectors describing tides and oscillations of the Earth inner core.
Two distributions shown on the panels are separated by a half of the tidal period.
Although the quality factor Q for the Earth inner core oscilllations is somewhat
larger than 100, we take it as Q = 73 in order to operate with the round number:
f /Q = 10 .
q Thus, we derive the allowed broadband noises in the region of resonances:
∆x 3 10 , ∆α 2 10 ,
noise noise
δg 6 . (32)
noise ≈ √Hz
The relationship between the noise variables in Eq.(32) is of course the same as the
relationship between the signal variables, Eq.(26) with λ R .
Obviously, if for some reason the inner core gets excited to the level much higher
than 5 6 nGal, the requirements on the tolerable noise could be significantly relaxed.
Alternatively, if the noise remains at the level of Eq.(32), the S/N gets much higher
than 1. For example, there exists evidence [16] that the amplitude of the inner core
oscillations can be as large as 0.64 µGal, which would make the signal easily detectable.
And, in any case, one can further improve S/N by observing for longer time than the
assumed 73 cycles.
Variations of gravity on the Earth surface within a patch of the size L = 3 km
can be numerically simulated [22]. Fig.3 is the illustration of the gravity field vectors
disturbed by the inner core polar motion and by semidiurnal tides. To make the core
contribution distinguishable on the graph, it was artificially enhanced by a factor 1000.
4. Environmental and instrumental noises
The important geophysical phenomena listed in the previous section will certainly affect
the laser-beam detectors of gravitational waves. However, they can only be measured
if the signals are not swamped by various noises. In principle, any random fluctuations
of the Earth surface and any random redistributions of the surrounding masses of soil,
air and water can alter the distances and plumb line directions, which we are interested
in. In addition to these environmental noises, there always exist imperfections in the
measuring devices themselves, that is, instrumental noises. Here, we will analyse the
Geophysical studies... 15
noises which we consider most dangerous for the proposed measurements.
a) Seismic perturbations
It has been long recognized that seismic waves propagating in the vicinity of a laser
interferometercanlimititsperformanceasagravitationalwavedetector[25,26,27]. The
usual region of concern are frequencies around 10 Hz, where the expected noise can be
dangerous for the planned advanced g.w. interferometers. In contrast, we are concerned
with perturbations at much lower frequencies, 10 Hz, and with their effect on
the control systems of the already operating initial interferometers. Some families of
seismic perturbations are not accompanied by variations of matter density and, hence,
they are not accompanied by variations of local gravity. This sort of perturbations
cannot directly affect the plumb lines. However, all seismic perturbations can change
the distance between the points on the Earth surface.
We will extrapolate the often used spectra of the seismic (displacement) noise to
the frequencies of geophysical interest. For a discussion of seismic noises, including
those that were measured at the interferometer cites, see, for example, [25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31]. The displacement noise is normally presented in terms of spectral density
u written in units of cm/√Hz: u = Af −γ. The mean-square value of the random
quantity u within a bandwidth from f to f is defined by
u = (u ) df. (33)
The spectral index γ vary from one spectral interval to another, but there exist
indications that γ 1 at frequencies below 0.1 Hz, so we will adopt γ = 1. The
coefficient A is also uncertain. It varies from site to site, and there exist a broad range
of estimates. We will adopt some averaged value A = 10 −4 cm/√Hz at f < 0.1 Hz.
So, we shall be working with the spectrum
u = 10 . (34)
Surely, at very low frequencies, the concept of seismic perturbations overlaps with the
concept of the Earth free oscillations, so the estimates should be consistent with each
other and with the gravimeter records.
To find the differential noise spectral density ∆x , we have to multiply Eq.(34)
with L/λ = Lf/c . Assuming that c does not significantly depend on f, the frequency
dependence cancels outintheproduct, andtheamount ofseismic noiseisexpected tobe
approximately equal at all geophysical frequencies. We want to use one simple formula
in the broad interval of frequencies, so we put c = 1 km/sec for this calculation. Then,
using L = 3 km, we arrive at
∆x 3 10 . (35)
This estimate is a factor of 10 lower than the level of tolerable noise in Eq.(32). It
shows that this source of noise cannot prevent the observation of the Earth inner core
oscillations by the adjustment system of laser interferometers.
Geophysical studies... 16
To check the consistency of our evaluations, it is instructive to estimate the upper
bound of gravity variations caused by seismic perturbations. This evaluation of seismic
δg will also be helpful in the next subsection where we are considering atmospheric
fluctuations. We will have to compare our estimations with the actually measured
(total) values of the acceleration noise δg at the core oscillation frequencies around f
and normal mode mHz frequencies (compare, for example, with [32, 21, 20, 17]):
10 Hz µGal
δg 0.5 . (36)
A matter density wave, with the amplitude of density variations δρ/ρ and
wavelength λ, producesalocalvariationofgravitywiththeamplitudeδg/g(λ) δρ/ρ
u/λ, where g(λ)/g λ/R . We take into account the finite rigidity of Earth, expressed
by the Love numbers, and write 0.3 δg/g(λ) u/λ, that is,
0.3 . (37)
Surely, this formula is consistent with Eq.(22). Using Eq.(34) in this formula, we arrive
at the estimate for seismic δg , which turns out to be at the level of the observed
variations, Eq.(36).
The estimate (36) can now be translated into the spectral noise contribution to
∆α0 caused by seismic perturbations. It is seen from Eq.(26) that the f-dependence
cancels out, so we derive
This noise is lower that the tolerable level of noise in Eq.(32). Therefore, the alighnment
system of laser interferometers can also be used, barring some complications discussed
below, for observation of the inner core oscillations.
b) Atmospheric noises
It is somewhat surprising that the movement of light air in the Earth atmosphere
can bea moreserious source of noise for the proposed measurements than the movement
of heavy soil in seismic perturbations. We will illustrate this statement with a simple
theory of gravity variations and land deformations caused by atmospheric motions.
Consider an air density inhomegeneity with the amplitude δρ/ρ and a characteristic
spatial scale λ. Let this scale be shorter than the characteristic height of the Earth
atmosphere H. In a point of observation at the Earth surface, the variation of g is
mostly determined by the variation of mass δm in a volume λ with the center located
at a distance λ from the observer. More distant volumes give smaller contributions to
δg and can be ignored. So, we could write:
δg G δρ λ.
This expression is adequate for λ < H. However, we are mostly interested
in the opposite case λ > H. As will be clear from discussion below, it is time-
dependent atmospheric variations at these longer scales that fall in the frequency range
Geophysical studies... 17
of geophysical interest. Therefore, we have to consider variations of mass in a volume
Hλ , rather than λ . The center of this flattened volume is located at a distance λ
from the observer. The expression for δg, appropriate for scales and frequencies of our
interest, should be written as
Variationsofairdensity δρaremoredifficult tomeasure thanvariationsofpressure,
so one usually operates with the (spectral) pressure variations δp = c δρ , where the
square of the air sound speed is c 10 cm /sec . Then, equation (39) takes the form
δg G H. (40)
The question arises which δp should be used in this equation in order to estimate δg .
The observations indicate [33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 17] that, during relatively quiet
times, the spectral pressure variations behave, roughly, as δp f . This frequency
dependence is close to the Kolmgorov-Obukhov law for atmospheric turbulence [38, 37]
. In the frequency interval (10
) Hz, observational data can be
approximately fitted by the formula
δp = 200 , (41)
f 10−4Hz! √Hz
where the unit of pressure Pa is Pa = 10 g/cm sec . The replacement of the spectral
index ( 1) by the genuine Kolmogorov-Obukhov index ( 7/6) leaves the fit equally
good.
A purely turbulent δp raises certain concerns, as it is not obvious that turbulence
can directly contribute to δg. Turbulence describes chaotic velocities in a medium and
variations of the medium’s kinetic pressure, but these variations are not necessarily
accompanied by variations of the medium’s mass density δρ and gravity δg. [There
exists, however, an indirect influence of air turbulence on g through the land
deformations excited by the variable pressure. We will discuss this issue separately, at
the end of this subsection.] On the other hand, transportation and mixing of cold and
hot air, caused by the turbulence, does contribute to δρ and, hence, directly contributes
to δg. Without analysing the true nature of the observed δp , we will be using the
observed spectrum (41) in the expression (40).
Combining Eq.(41) and Eq.(40), and using numerical values of the participating
quantities, including the effective height of the atmosphere H 10 km, we arrive at
10 Hz µGal
δg 0.2 . (42)
f ≈ f ! √Hz
This evaluatedδg issmaller than, andisconsistent with, theobserved (total)variations
δg approximated by Eq.(36).
To evaluate the contribution of the atmospheric δg to the noises in distance
and angular measurements (see Eq.(26)), we first need to find out the characteristic
correlation length λ, as a function of frequency f. To do this, we have used experimental
Geophysical studies... 18
datawhich werekindly provided tousbytheJapaneseWeather Association. These data
werecollected bytheMeteorological NationalGeographicalInstituteatthesetofmeteo-
stations near Tsukubo Scientific Center. The total area of 20 20 km is covered by 10
stations. The average distance between nearby stations is 10 km. The pressure data
were recorded at each station with a sample time 1 min. The length of the analysed
record was 1 month.
Using the experimental data, we have built temporal spectra of pressure S (f)
measured at each station, and also temporal spectra of difference of pressure S∆p (f) at
each pair of neighbouring stations. Because of the spatial correlation of the data, the
spectral components of the difference of pressure S∆p (f) prove to be smaller than the
approximately equal spectral components of pressure S (f) measured at each station.
For each pair of stations, the spatial correlation scale λ(f) was estimated from the
relationship
λ(f) = r .
Then, the found quantities λ(f) were avaraged over all pairs of stations. As a result,
we have arrived at the mean value of λ(f):
f !
It also follows from the data that this number depends on overall meteorological
conditions and can change by a factor 2 3.
The evaluations (43), (42) should now be used in general formulas (26). We arrive
at the expected atmospheric noise contribution:
∆x 2 10 , and ∆α 10 . (44)
These estimates are marginally consistent with the level of allowed noise defined by
Eq.(32).
It is satisfying that the differential displacement noise (44) is consistent with the
direct estimate of land deformations, supposedly excited by atmospheric turbulence
[17]. The permanently present amplitudes of acceleration a at mHz frequencies of the
Earth’s eigen-modes are all approximately at the level of 0.4 nGal [17]. Taking 3 mHz
as the central frequency, the discrete set of these observed modal amplitudes a can be
translated into an interval of a continuous acceleration spectrum
1 nGal nGal
a 0.4 7 . (45)
f ≈ √3 10−3 √Hz ≈ √Hz
The observed accelerations a are associated with the periodic displacements u of the
land elements:
u 10 . (46)
f ≈ (2π)2f2 ≈ f2 √Hz
Geophysical studies... 19
The corresponding spectral noise amplitude of the distance variation between the
interferometer’s mirrors, separated by L = 3 km, will amount to
∆x u 3 10 . (47)
We extrapolate this formula to lower frequencies, including the interval around f .
Then, at f = f , we obtain
∆x 5 10 . (48)
This estimate is perfectly consistent with the independent evaluation that we have
derived in Eq.(44).
To conclude this subsection, we can say that the expected atmospheric noise
is marginally acceptable for the proposed geophysical measurements with laser-beam
detectors of gravitational waves. It is likely that some rare events, such as passing
cyclones and atmospheric fronts, can produce larger disturbances than the estimates
(44), but these atmospheric events can be anticipated and excluded from the data.
c) Coupling of noises in distance and angle measurements
As was already discussed above, variations of the Earth’s gravitational field, caused
either by external or internal sources, produce changes in, both, distance between the
sites and angle between the plumb line directions on the Earth surface. It is only
on the surface of an idealized perfectly rigid body that the change of angle between
the plumb lines is not accompanied by distance variations. And it is only in an
idealizedhomogeneousgravitationalfield, orduringspherically-symmetric oscillationsof
a homogeneous sphere, that the change of distance between the sites is not accompanied
by the change of angle between the plumb lines. While describing geophysical signals,
we have already noticed this important link between ∆x0 and ∆α0, see Eq.(27). For
example, as we know, the Earth inner core oscillations can lead to distance variations
with the amplitude ∆x0 = 3 10 cm, and they will necessarily be accompanied by the
angle variations with the amplitude ∆α0 = 2 10 rad. However, even in the absence
of any geophysical signal, a similar link exists between the random (noisy) parts of ∆x0
and ∆α0.
Fig.4 illustrates the appearance of noise in the channel of angle measurements, if
there exists noise in the channel of distance measurements. The fluctuating part ∆L of
distancebetween thesites(independently ofthereasonswhythisfluctuating partexists)
translates into the fluctuating part α of angle between the plumb lines, α ∆L/R .
This coupling takes place simply because of the centrally-symmetric character of the
Earth’s gravitational field. [We ignored this fact in derivation of Eq.(15), but otherwise
a term proportional to ∆x0ω /R
should have been added to the right-hand-side of that
equation.] Therefore, signals and noises in the two channels are linked by essentially
one and the same relationship:
Geophysical studies... 20
Figure 4. Coupling of signals and noises in distances and angles
This equation gives the minimal and unavoidable level of noise in angles, which
arises because of the noise in distances. Other reasons (for example, related to
local inhomogeneities on two sites) can only make this relationship more complicated.
However, even the simplified link represented by Eq.(49) leads to an important
conclusion: there is no special advantage in measuring angles through the alignment
control system, rather than measuring distances through theadjustment control system;
the signal-to-noise ratios are practically equal in these channels. On the other hand, the
use of both channels, instead of only one of them, would certainly increase the reliability
of geophysical detection. In particular, the combined information will help identify and
remove the distance variations caused by quasi-periodic thermal deformations of the
Earth surface. Moreover, if both the distance and angles between mirrors are accurately
measured (including their noisy contributions), then the use of Eq.(49) for noises (or,
preferably, theuseofamoreprecise version ofthisequation) wouldallowonetosubtract
from the measured angle that part of the angle which arises purely due to the coupling.
This procedure would help identify that part of the measured angle which is caused
specifically by the variation of plumb lines.
It turns out, however, that the angle measurements by the actually existing
alignment systems have their own difficulties and ambiguities. We will fully address
them in Sec.5.
d) Instrumental noises
It appears that instrumental noises will not be a major problem for the proposed
geophysical studies. This is not surprising, as the gravitational-wave detectors
implement the best currently available technology aimed at measuring much weaker
gravitational signals. Obviously, geophysical signals have different origin and are
concentratedinasubstantiallydifferent frequency band, butinbothcaseswearedealing
with manifestations of the same force - gravitation.
The tolerable noise of Eq.(32) implies that the accuracy of the adjustment system
is better than 3 10 cm at frequencies around 10 Hz. Adjustment systems of the
presently operating interferometers satisfy this requirement, but, in order to ensure a
Geophysical studies... 21
successful performance of the interferometer as a g.w. detector, they may not need the
low-frequency precision higher than 10 cm. Certainly, the advanced interferometers
will require an enhanced precision of the adjustment systems in the ‘control band’ of
frequencies. This is necessary in order to assure that only very small forces are applied
to the mirrors themselves [39]. In any case, from the instrumental point of view, the
accuracy of the adjustment system can be made much better than presently achieved.
Even smaller variations, at the level of 10 cm, can be detected by the interferometer
adjustment system, if the dominant noise is reduced to the photon shot noise [40, 41].
The photon noise limited spectral sensitivity is basically determined by the relationship
where λ is the wavelength of the laser light and ω = 2πc/λ is its frequency, F is the
cavity finesse, P is the optical power available at the photodector and η is its efficiency.
Taking reasonable parameters λ = 10 cm, F = 100, P = 100 mW, η = 0.9 we arrive
∆x 1.5 10 . (51)
This number can be improved by the increase of P. Therefore, we do not expect
instrumental noisesintheadjustmentsystem tobealimitingfactorforthemeasurement
of geophysical signals described by Eqs. (28), (30). Obviously, we assume that the extra
noises (above purely photon noise) are not excessively large.
The purpose of the alignment system is to monitor and remove possible
misalignments between the laser beam and the axis of optical resonator formed by the
corner mirror and the end mirror. One reason for this misalignment to arise is precisely
the deviation of plumb lines caused by a geophysical signal and, hence, the change of
angle between mirrors. In principle, the existing alignment systems are very sensitive
to a possible change of angle between mirrors. If the dominant noise is the photon shot
noise, the angular spectral precision of the alignment system can reach [42, 43, 22, 44]:
where w0 is the diameter of the laser beam ‘waist’. Taking the same parameters as
before and w0 = 0.1 cm, we arrive at
∆α 1.5 10 . (53)
This accuracy is at the level of the tolerable noise of Eq.(32), but it can be improved
by the increase of P. We cautiously conclude that the instrumental noise of alignment
systems will not swamp the expected geophysical signal.
A more fundamental problem with the existing alignment systems lies, however, in
a different place. The error signal of the system cannot tell us whether the misalignment
arose because of the change of angle between the mirrors or because of the change of
lateral position of the end spherical mirror. The first cause is what we are interested
Geophysical studies... 22
in, while the second cause could be simply an unrelated noise. Without solving this
problem, one would not be able to use angular measurements as an additional source of
geophysical information. This is why we address this problem in next sections.
5. Measurement of mirrors’ tilts
Here, we will consider in more detail the response of a g.w. interferometer to the
deformations of Earth’s surface and variations of local gravity. To be specific, we will
do this on the example of the VIRGO observatory [7].
Each arm of the VIRGO interferometer consists of an asymmetric Fabry-Perot
optical resonator, which is formed by a flat front mirror and a spherical end mirror.
The length of each arm is L = 3 km. The laser beam enters the resonator through the
partially transparent front mirror. Each mirror is hanging on a multi-stage support,
which behaves as a single wire pendulum at frequencies below 1 Hz. The source of light
itself is located very close (at a distance less than 20 m) to the front mirror, so one can
neglect the gradients of local gravity and deformations of land at such short distances.
Therefore, we shall accept, for simplicity, that in the chosen coordinate system the front
flat mirror does not move, the laser beam is always orthogonal to the front mirror, and
the beam enters the resonator from one and the same point on the flat mirror. The
problem is still sufficiently general, as the main trouble arises when one considers the
relative position and orientation of the remote spherical mirror with respect to the front
mirror and laser beam.
The optical axis of the resonator is orthogonal to the flat mirror and goes through
the center of curvature of the spherical mirror. The curvature radius r of the spherical
mirror is approximately equal to the distance between the mirrors, so we take r = 3 km.
In the tuned working condition, the laser beam is aligned with the optical axis. In this
configuration, all light participates in interference, and the sensitivity is maximal. A
misalignment between the beam and optical axis is sensed by the changing spatial
distribution of the electromagnetic field in the Fabry-Perot cavity [42, 45]. Since we
have assumed that the beam is always orthogonal to the flat mirror, the misalignment
can only arise if the spherical mirror inclines with respect to the beam, or changes its
position in the plane orthogonal to the beam. These possible motions of the end mirror,
in the (x,y)-plane containing the beam, are shown in Fig.5.
A technical advantage of this alignment control system (which turns out to be a
big disadvantage for geophysical applications) is in that the system does not need to
know whether the misalignment arose because of the tilt of the end mirror or because
of its lateral shift. They both lead to similar displacements of the optical axis, which
will be corrected by the control system without ever distinguishing the true origin of the
displacement. In other words, there exists a degeneracy between tilts (configuration b)
inFig.5)and shifts(configurationc) inFig.5). They bothcanresult in oneandthesame
parallel displacement of the optical axis (shown by a dashed line in Fig.5). The error
signal automatically arises when a misalignment develops, but it will be the same signal
Geophysical studies... 23
Figure 5. Misalignment of the optical axis in the Fabry-Perot interferometer:
a)alignedconfiguration,b)tiltofthesphericalmirror,c)verticalshiftofthespherical
for both configurations. In both cases, the feedback mechanical system compensates the
misalignment by tilting the spherical mirror and returning the optical axis back to its
original position aligned with the laser beam.
Let the x-axis go along the beam and the y-axis be a vertical direction. Suppose
that the plumb line tilts by an angle θ (see Fig.5). Then the curvature center of the
hanging spherical mirror moves a distance rθ . This means that the optical axis will
take a new position displaced fromthe original one by s = rθ . Now let the suspension
point of the spherical mirror shift by a distance d (see Fig.5). Then the optical axis
does also shift by this distance, s = d . The parallel displacements of the optical axis
will be numerically the same, if d = rθ .
The expected geophysical signal in angle variations is ∆α = 2 10 rad, see
Eq.(30). The displacement of the optical axis caused by this useful signal will be
s = 6 10 cm. This is a measurable signal. However, such a displacement of the
axis can also be produced by a lateral shift of the suspension point d = 6 10 cm.
These lateral shifts of the suspension point are likely to happen - they are well below
the displacement noise of Eq.(32). All spatial components of the displacement noise
have approximately equal amplitudes, so one can be sure that there is also a vertical
component of this level of magnitude. In other words, a displacement noise, which
is tolerable for longitudinal distance measurements, turns out to be intolerable for
angular measurements by the existing alignment systems. Although the control system
will generate an error signal and will correct the misalignment, it is impossible to
distinguish whether it was produced by a useful geophysical effect or by the ever-present
displacement noise.
Since the channel of angular measurements is important for geophysical
applications, we have to find a way of breaking the degeneracy, specific for spherical
mirrors, between tilts and shifts. This will require modest amendments to the existing
optical configurations. Some possible ideas are described in the next section. It is also
important to note that the advanced interferometers may not need these amendments
at all. There exist strong arguments in favor of using non-spherical mirrors [46] in which
case the problem of degeneracy will be automatically alleviated.
Geophysical studies... 24
6. Modifications of the optical scheme
It was shown above that the useful geophysical information on ∆x0 is routinely stored
in circuits of the adjustment system. The extracton of this part of geophysical
information does not require any hardware modifications, and it can be found at the
level of data analysis. In contrast, to receive appropriate information on ∆α0 one
will first need to make certain modifications of g.w. detectors with spherical mirrors,
specially for the purpose of geophysical applications. In principle, the necessary angular
information could be obtained by methods unrelated to g.w. observations, but the
modifications proposed here make use of the existing exceptional infrastructure of g.w.
observatories, suchaslongarmsincorporatinghigh-qualityvacuumtubes, somecommon
forastrophysical andgeophysical applicationselementsofshielding andcontrol, sensitive
detection techniques, etc. Surely, we keep in mind that any geophysical modifications
should not jeopardize the functioning of interferometers as astrophysical instruments.
6.1. Auxiliary interferometer for distance measurements
One way of receiving information on ∆α0 is based on Eq.(16). The adjustment system
responds to the low-frequency part of the distance variation ∆d between mirrors. As
we know, the major contribution to ∆d is provided by ∆x0, and this is why we intend
to extract information on ∆x0 from the data of the adjustment system. However, the
accuracy of this measurement can be so high that it can reach the level of a much
smaller contribution to ∆d: l∆α0, second term in Eq.(16). Taking l = 10 cm for the
suspension length and ∆α0 = 2 10 rad, Eq.(30), for the expected useful signal, we
get the estimate: l∆α0 2 10 cm. If one could measure the difference between
∆d and ∆x0 with this sort of precision, and since the suspension length l is known, the
result would have provided the necessary information on ∆α0. In principle, a direct
measurement of this difference is possible with the help of an additional interferometer
system, which we will now describe. This proposal is similar to the one first suggested
by R. Drever in the context of an interferometer on magnetically suspended mirrors
[47, 48].
The auxiliary interferometer is shown in Fig.6. One arm is formed by mirrors of the
g.w. interferometer itself. Another arm is formed by mirrors attached to the suspension
points, or, more practical, to the last stage of the anti-seismic filters. Such configuration
with two parallel arms is known as Mach-Zender interferometer. Each arm of the Mach-
Zender interferometer can include a Fabry-Perot resonator. It is supposed that a small
fraction of light is deviated from the main beam to the additional interferometer. As the
frequencies of geophysical interest are relatively low, 10 Hz, the relaxation time of
the Mach-Zender interferometer should be sufficiently long. If the reflectivity of mirrors
M1r and M2r is sufficiently high, a small portion of light can resonate in the cavity for
long time, increasing the sensitivity of observation. The added interferometer is capable
of measuring the difference of its arm-lengths with high precision. It is interesting to
notethat thisconfigurationhasbeen actuallyrealised [49], even thoughthe modification
Geophysical studies... 25
Figure 6. Auxiliary interferometer. M1 and M2 are mirrors of g.w. interferometer,
M1r and M2r are additional mirrors forming the extra resonator, BS and M0 are
beamsplitters and mirrors changing the beam direction.
is motivated by the struggle with noises rather than by geophysical applications.
The proposed scheme is differential, and therefore it has certain advantages:
- seismic and other common for both arms noises cancel out due to differential
character of measurements;
- sudden changes of laser beam position and direction (beam ‘walks’ and ‘jitter’)
are not dangerous, as they are common for both arms and cancel out;
- the scheme is universal and can be used at any g.w. interferometer regardless of
the actual construction of suspension.
Two other possible modifications, discussed next, are aimed at direct breaking of
degeneracy between shifts and tilts in the alignment system. These modificatons do not
imply a deviation of light from the main beam of interferometers and, therefore, they
are even less likely to compromise the g.w. performance of the instruments.
6.2. Flat mirror behind spherical end mirror.
The desired goal of telling the difference between shifts and tilts of spherical end mirror
can be achieved by installation of a flat beamsplitter behind the end mirror. The
beamsplitter can be attached to the last stage of the anti-seismic filter. A scheme of
this proposal is shown in Fig.7. It is supposed that the beamsplitter (2) intercepts
part of light traveling toward the photodetector (3), normally used as an element of
the alignment system. The intercepted light is directed through the focusing lens (5)
toward the additional photodetector (7). This photodetector should be sensitive to the
position of a spot of light focused on the photodetector. For example, the photodetector
(7) could consist of two or four pieces, so that a slight movement of the focal spot would
produce a differential signal. Since the spherical mirror (1) and the beamsplitter (2)
are hanging very close to each other, they participate together in possible shifts of the
suspension point and in possible tilts caused by varying local gravity.
Imagine that the mirror (1) and beamsplitter (2) are shifted together in vertical
Geophysical studies... 26
Figure 7. A flat mirror (beamsplitter) (2) behind the spherical end mirror (1). A
photodetectorofthemainalignmentsystemisdenoted(3),the focusinglens -(5),the
last stage of anti-seismic filter - (6), the additional photodetector - (7).
direction (configuration c) in Fig.5). This would lead to no change at the photodetector
(7). In contrast, if the mirror (1) and beamsplitter (2) are tilted together (configuration
b) in Fig.5), the focal spot will change its position on the photodetector (7) leading to
a measurable signal. In this way, the previously indistinguishable configurations b) and
c) become distinguishable. If the evaluation (53) of the angular precision remains valid
for the proposed scheme, one will be able to extract geophysical information on ∆α0
from this measurement.
6.3. Additional laser behind the end mirror.
The most natural solution to the formulated problem is, perhaps, the installation of an
additional source oflight (for some extra details onthis proposal, see [50]). Imagine that
the additional laser is suspended (possibly, from the same anti-seismic filter) behind the
spherical end mirror and shines inside the main cavity, see Fig.8. In order to avoid any
mixing of the new light with the already present light in the cavity, the frequency of the
auxiliary laser should differ from the frequency of the main laser. However, inside the
cavity, the added light satisfies all the usual requirements on mode matching, alignment
of the light beam with the optical axis, etc. A possible misalignment of the new beam
with the optical axis of the Fabry-Perot resonator will be sensed by the same alignment
system and in exactly the same manner as it takes place for the main beam. The
only difference is that the detected misalignment of a new beam will be recorded for
geophysical studies rather than used for correcting the inclination of the end mirror.
One will also need a new photodetector for the output light.
The auxiliary laser and the end mirror are hanging very close to each other, so they
react in the same way to shifts of the suspension point or tilts of the plumb line. If
the laser itself and the end mirror are both subject to a shift of the suspension point
Geophysical studies... 27
Figure 8. Additional laser behind the end mirror: (1) and (2) - the front and the
end mirrors of the main interferometer; (3) - beamsplitter; (4) - additional laser; (5) -
additional photodetector.
(configuration c) in Fig.5) the alignment of the additional beam with the optical axis of
the Fabry-Perot resonator remains intact. The system does not generate an error signal.
Incontrast, atiltoftheplumbline(configurationb)inFig.5)willcauseatiltofdirection
of the incoming beam of the auxiliary laser. This tilt will be detected by the alignment
system, thus distinguishing the configurations b) andc). The arising error signal is what
we are after. Assuming that the angular sensitivity is still determined by Eq.(53), one
will get access to the information on ∆α0. In fact, the installation of an extra laser with
properties similar to the ones described above was originally discussed in a different
context, with the aim of facilitating the initial tuning of the main interferometer.
7. Conclusions
The need for successful functioning of laser-beam detectors of gravitational waves
inevitably makes them valuable geophysical instruments. The most immediate
application of g.w. detectors is accurate measurement of low-frequency distance
variations between the central mirror and the end mirrors. Essentially, the adjustment
control system makes the interferometer a low-frequency 3-point meter of deformations.
The principal advantage of the existing g.w. detectors in comparison with traditional
geophysical techniques is exceptionally long arms of interferometers (a few kilometers
in comparison with typical hundred-meter long geophysical interferometers) and high
sensitivity of measurements. This advantage leads to a much better strain sensitivity.
The extraction of deformational part of the geophysical signal does not imply any
hardware modifications, and it can be found in records of the adjustment system right
at the level of data analysis.
The alignment system of g.w. laser interferometers on suspended mirrors
can potentially provide even more interesting geophysical information - the relative
variation of local gravity vectors (plumb lines). This sort of information cannot be
Geophysical studies... 28
obtained from geophysical interferometers which normally use mirrors attached to
the ground. It appears, however, that the extraction of this information from the
existing g.w. laser interferometers will require certain modest modifications of their
optical scheme. Without compromising the astrophysical program of the instruments,
these modifications seem to be possible, and we suggested several ways of doing this.
Their realization will allow one to use angular measurements in addition to distance
measurements. In future advanced g.w. interferometers based on non-spherical mirrors
these modifications may be avoided.
The evaluation of interesting geophysical signals and comparison with environ-
mental and instrumental noises shows that the g.w. instruments can reach the most
ambitious geophysical goals, such for example as detection of oscillations of the inner
core of Earth.
It seems that further progress in this area can be achieved, if a closer collaboration
is established between geophysicists and representatives of g.w. community.
Acknowledgments
At various stages of this research we have benefited from discussions with P. Bender,
R. Drever, J. Hough, A. Kopaev, K. Strain, K. Tsubono, H. Ward and, especially,
A. Giazotto. This work was partially supported by a grant from the Royal Society
(UK) for international collaboration, RCPX331.
Note added: In the very last days of preparation of this paper for publication we
have tragically lost our young talanted colleague and friend - Andrej Serdobolski.