Geophysical Tomography
Geophysical tomography in engineering geology: an overview
Domenico Patella
Department of Physical Sciences, University Federico II, Naples, Italy (E-mail: patella@na.infn.it)
An overview of the tomographic interpretation method in engineering geophysics is presented, considering the
two approaches of the deterministic tomography inversion, developed for rock elasticity analysis, and the
probability tomography imaging developed in the domain of potential fields methods. The theoretical basis of
both approaches is shortly outlined before showing a laboratory and a field application.
INTRODUCTION
t =∫ s(x,y,z)dl, (i=1,2,..,M). (1)
Geophysical prospecting is widely applied to help resolve
many problems in civil and environmental engineering.
The probability of a successful application at a given site
rapidly increases if different methods are used, basing the 7 8 9
selection on the principles of complementarity and cohe-
rency of information. Such a strategy is mainly advisable
in delicate environments, where absolutely non-intrusive
geophysics is the only possibility for target identification, 4 5 6 R
prior to direct exploration works [1]. r
The interpretation of geophysical datasets to elaborate
accurate images of the investigated structures has always i5
been a difficult task, due to the mathematical difficulties T 1 2 3
and heavy calculations involved in modeling approaches.
Favourably, the newest hardware and software generation
has raised to such a high level of sophistication to allow, Figure 1 A transmitter-receiver array for the application
at last, a routine application of the complex imaging tools of the deterministic tomography inversion.
so far developed.
In the following sections an outline of the tomography
By defining the delay time as the difference between
imaging in engineering geophysics is reported, focussed
the measured travel time and the travel time in an a priori
on the two approaches of the deterministic tomography
assigned reference uniform medium and subdividing the
(DT), developed in rock elasticity, and the probabilistic
medium into N elementary cells, with the application of a
tomography (PT), proposed for potential field methods.
perturbation technique it is possible to deduce from eq.1
a system of linear equations in matrix form as
DETERMINISTIC TOMOGRAPHY INVERSION δt=R⋅δs, (2)
The DT inversion in seismic prospecting was developed where δt is a column matrix, whose element δt i (i=1,..,M)
to derive a detailed geometrical model of the elastic wave is the delay time along the i-th path, R is a rectangular
velocity pattern in a medium, starting from the measured sparse matrix, whose element r ij (i=1,..,M; j=1,..,N) is the
wave travel times from sources to receivers [2] (fig.1). path length of the i-th ray in the j-th cell, and δs is a line
The relationship relying the wave travel time t to the matrix, whose element δs (j=1,..,N) is the slowness de-
unknown slowness function s(x,y,z) for a ray along the i- parture from the reference model in the j-th elementary
th path l of a set of M paths, is given by Fermat integral cell.
D. Patella
If the space of the experimental data has dimensions Λ=∫∫[A(r)]2dS, (7)
much greater than those of the space of the unknowns
(M»N), the system (2) becomes overdetermined. A least- S
squares procedure can thus be applied, by minimizing the
which using eq.6 can be made explicit in the form
Euclidean norm ║R·δs−δt║. The solution for the vector
δs is then given as Q
In solving eq.3 one may encounter serious difficulties,
essentially related to the presence of small values in the A(r) map
matrix to invert. Thus, it is preferable to constrain matrix A [x,y, z(x,y)]
A by introducing a damping factor β and use as solution
for δs the equation
where I is the identity matrix.
To increase the resolution power of the DT method an
Topografia
iterative procedure can be applied, consisting in using the
slowness model drawn from an inversion as the reference (x, y, z)
model for a new inversion. Iterations will be stopped as r
soon as the mean departure between the slowness values
got from the k-th and (k-1)-th iterations is in modulus not
Topography S
greater than a pre-fixed discrepancy factor ∆, i.e.
1 ∑ N ( sk −sk−1 ) ≤∆. (5) (x q ,y q ,z q )
Figure 2 The conceptual assumptions for the application of
the probabilistic tomography imaging.
PROBABILISTIC TOMOGRAPHY IMAGING
Consider a generic q-th addendum in eq.8 and apply
Schwarz’s inequality, thus obtaining
The purpose of the PT procedure is to retrieve an image
of the spatial distribution of the occurrence probabilities
of the sources of the observed anomalies [3,4].  
Consider a reference coordinate system with the (x,y)- ∫∫A(r)⋅s(r−r q )dS ≤
plane at sea level and the z-axis positive upwards, and a  S 
survey surface S with uneven topography (see fig.2). Let ≤∫∫A2(r)dS⋅∫∫s2(r−r )dS . (9)
A(r) be the anomaly value at a station located at r≡(x,y,z), q
with r∈S, and assume that it can be discretized as a sum
of partial effects due to Q elementary sources, viz.
Using the inequality (9), a source element occurrence
probability (SEOP) function is at last defined as
The q-th elementary source, located at r ≡(x ,y ,z ), is
given a strength a and its effect at the station at r≡(x,y,z)
is analytically described by the kernel s(r-r ).  
The information power Λ over S associated with A(r) q q
is defined as S S 
Geophysical Tomography
The SEOP function meets the condition −1≤η(r )≤+1, Panametrics X1021 p-wave transducers with a resonance
and is interpreted as a measure of the probability, which a central frequency at 50 Hz, and a Tektronix TDS430A
source element with strength a placed at r obtains as digital oscilloscope.
responsible of the whole observed anomaly field A(r). The block was ideally subdivided in 64 equal cells of
The PT procedure for a dataset collected on a non-flat volume (4×4×6) cm3. The measuring procedure consisted
topography S consists in a scanning procedure based on each time in fixing the pair of transmitter and receiver at
the knowledge of the s(r-r ) function that is called space the centre of the vertical facelets of area (4×6) cm2, lying
domain scanner. It is a function depending on the method along the opposite faces of the block, and moving one or
used for sensing the earth and is generally well defined, both transducers at the constant step of 4 cm, as shown in
since it represents the physical behaviour of the field due fig.3. In order to improve resolution, the transmitter and
to a source element (e.g. resistivity element [5], electrical receiver roles were interchanged, thus obtaining a total of
current filament [6], gravitational mass [7], etc.). M=256 ray paths
In practice, as the true source distribution responsible
of an observed anomaly field A(r) is unknown, a positive
source element of unitary strength can be used to scan the 30
exploration volume (the tomospace) to search where the
sources are most probably located. For any tern x ,y ,z in 26
the tomospace, the integral (10) gives the probability that
a positive (η>0) or negative source (η<0) located in that 22
point is responsible for the A(r) field detected on surface.
By scanning the tomospace along a sequence of slices, a
3D image reconstruction of the sources distribution can
be finally drawn in a probabilistic sense.
APPLICATIONS
A DT laboratory experiment
Fig.3 depicts a schematic planar section of a (32×32×6) 2 6 10 14 18 22 26 30
cm3 composite block, consisting of a roughly (11×16×5)
cm3 piece of marble (v p =4.6 km/s) buried within a chalky 1700 2125 2550 2975 3400
matrix (v =1.6 km/s). The measurements were done using
Velocity in m/s
a Panametrics 5058PR ultrasonic impulse generator, two
Figure 4 Example of a laboratory application of the DT
inversion. Results of the iterated DT algorithm.
The results obtained from the application of the DT
algorithm are shown in the 2D map of fig.4. A damping
factor β=0.1 and a discrepancy factor ∆=1 were assumed.
A clear conformity appears between the irregular form of
the piece of marble and its reconstructed physical image.
This picture, jointly with the reasonable estimate of the
velocity profile, demonstrates how high is the resolution
this DT technique can reach, at least in laboratory.
A PT field experiment
Geoelectrics is often utilised to get resistivity information
near and over waste disposal sites. It helps mapping both
Figure 3 A laboratory application of the DT inversion.
Sample trace and transducers layout. the vertical and horizontal distribution of contamination
D. Patella
caused by increase of solutes in groundwater relative to central part of the section shows, instead, very low values
background levels, which is reflected in some increase of of about 1 Ωm along the whole depth scale with presence
the electrical conductivity of the water bearing rock [8]. of small nuclei enclosing even lower values.
Dipole-dipole profiling is the most adopted technique, Fig.6 shows the results of the PT algorithm applied to
as it provides high vertical and lateral sensitivity. The so the pseudo-section of fig.5. The most remarkable feature
called pseudo-section representation allows a preliminary is the presence of the lowest negative values of the SEOP
inspection to be made in terms of apparent resistivity. function at the left-hand border of the central part of the
Figs.5 and 6 refer to a field case performed on a waste section. In particular, the largest negative SEOP nucleus,
disposal site, consisting of a waterproofed basin dug out located between 40 and 70 m along the horizontal profile,
in a sandy-clayey layer down to 17 m of depth b.g.l.. The appears to propagate well beyond the impermeable sheet.
basin was wholly filled with wastes and leaks of pollutant The conclusion is thus that the pollutant solutes may have
were suspected across tears in the impermeable sheets of overstepped the barrier, though limited to a short distance
5 mm of thickness. thanks to the low permeability nature of the sandy-clayey
hosting deposit.
CONCLUSION
An overview of the tomographic interpretation method in
engineering geophysics has been given. Two approaches
have been outlined, namely the deterministic tomography
(DT) inversion, developed for acoustic velocity analysis
in rocks, and the probability tomography (PT) imaging
developed for electrical resistivity analysis in the subsoil.
The theoretical principles of both approaches have been
briefly reported and two case-studies have been analysed
in order to demonstrate the highest resolution power that
tomography provides in geophysics.
Figure 5 Example of a field application of the PT
imaging. A dipole-dipole pseudo-section.