Getting into shape: how do rod-like bacteria control their geometry?
Ariel Amir∗
Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
Sven van Teeffelen†
Groupe Croissance et Morphog´en`ese microbienne, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
(Dated: September 17, 2018)
Rod-likebacteriamaintaintheircylindricalshapeswithremarkableprecisionduringgrowth. How-
ever, they are also capable to adapt their shapes to external forces and constraints, for example by
growingintonarroworcurvedconfinements. Despitebeingoneofthesimplestmorphologies,weare
stillfarfromafullunderstandingofhowshapeisrobustlyregulated,andhowbacteriaobtaintheir
near-perfectcylindricalshapeswithexcellentprecision. However,recentexperimentalandtheoreti-
calfindingssuggestthatcell-wallgeometryandmechanicalstressplayimportantrolesinregulating
cell shape in rod-like bacteria. We review our current understanding of the cell wall architecture
and the growth dynamics, and discuss possible candidates for regulatory cues of shape regulation
in the absence or presence of external constraints. Finally, we suggest further future experimental
and theoretical directions, which may help to shed light on this fundamental problem.
INTRODUCTION
Cells of all organisms and kingdoms face a common
challenge of regulating their own shapes to facilitate via-
bilityandgrowth,butalsobeingabletoreacttoexternal
spatialconstraintsandmechanicalforcesthateventually
requireadaptivechangesincell-shapeorcellulargrowth,
see [1] for an excellent review of the diverse strategies
used by organisms with cell walls. In single-celled bac-
teria, cell shape is often very precisely controlled, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 1. Bacteria come in a broad range of
shapesandsizes(seeFig. 1of[2]forastrikinggraphical
representation), yet despite decades of research, our un-
derstandingofhowtheseshapesarecontrolledandregu- FIG. 1: Electron microscopy images of B. subtilis, taken by
latedatamolecularlevelisfarfromcomplete. Giventhe Thierry Meylheuc. In a given growth medium, the different
bacterial cells have a smooth, highly reproducible cylindrical
large difference in length scales between the macroscopic
shape,withrelativelysmallfluctuationsinlengthandradius.
cell shape (µm) and the microscopic proteins, enzymes,
The image is reproduced from Ref. [3], courtesy of A. Chas-
and molecules responsible for cell shape (nm) – how is
tanet.
such precise control over shape achieved?
Inagivengrowthmedium,variousrod-shapedbacteria
such as the canonical Gram-negative Escherichia coli or lation of shape. One important cellular component for
the well studied Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis elongate shape regulation we will highlight is the bacterial cy-
while maintaining a constant diameter. Strikingly, many toskeleton.
rod-like bacteria elongate by expanding their cell enve- Bacterial cell shape is not only under auto-regulation
lope all along the cell envelope, as compared to growing but is also subject to external mechanical perturbations
from the tip only. These cells maintain their diameter (suchasgeometricconfinementorexternalforces). Cells
even if cell division is inhibited and cell length reaches are known to adapt their growing shapes to these forces
dozens of microns [4]. [5, 6]. Learning about the cellular response to external
Here,wefocusonthisexampleofrod-likegrowth,and forcesmaybeimportanttounderstandtheintra-cellular
discuss our current understanding of cell-shape regula- regulation of shape in unconstrained environments. The
tion. The discussion will mainly consist of a physicist studyofauto-regulationandexternalperturbationofcell
point-of-view,wherethemolecularmachineryofcell-wall shape thus requires an interdisciplinary effort of biolo-
insertion has been “coarse-grained”. We will not dis- gists, physicists and materials scientists, as it requires
cuss in detail the particular action of specific enzymes anunderstandingofthenon-trivialmechanicalproblems
orthebiochemicalpropertiesofthepeptidoglycan(PG). associated with thin, elastic media: while in many cases
Rather, we shall focus on the mechanics of the cell wall in biology a qualitative understanding of a phenomenon
and the sensory cues, which might enable the tight regu- is sufficient to understand the crux-of-the-matter, shape
]CS.oib-q[
1v5100.4041:viXra
regulationmayinvolvethesensingofgeometriccuesand
of mechanical stresses and strains, which, in turn, are
integral parts of regulatory feedbacks.
There are additional, fascinating questions associated
with the intersection of mechanics and bacterial growth,
that we shall not discuss here, such as the forces exerted
by the Z-ring in the bacterial division process [7–10], the
role of crescentin in shaping curved cells [11], and the
growth of curved and helical bacteria [12, 13], to name
but a few.
FIG.2: Detailsofpeptidoglycanorganizationasobtainedby
NECESSITY FOR REGULATION cryo-electron tomography; reproduced from Gan et al. [18];
courtsey of Grant J. Jensen. Computational reconstructions
of the three-dimensional electron density of a cell-wall sac-
Even for the seemingly straightforward mode of elon-
culus of the Gram-negative bacterium C. crescentus reveal
gationofrod-shapedcells,maintainingtherodshapeisa
a circumferential orientation of the cell-wall glycan strands:
non-trivialtask–simple“templating”mechanismswhere Shown are two overlapping cell-wall sacculi (A), outlined by
glycan strands are placed in parallel to the existing ones green or violet dotted lines. The boxed region in (A) is mag-
wouldnotbestabletotherandomfluctuationsofgrowth, nifiedinpanels(B-D).Panel(D)isaniso-densityplot,which
especially in light of the disorder in the mesh, which we showslongcircumferentiallyorientedstructuresthatarepre-
sumablyindividualglycanstrands. Theinsetin(D)displaysa
shall elaborate on further down. To gain intuition, con-
superpositionoftheblue-boxedglycanstrandandanatomic
sideradifferentregulatoryproblem–howdoesagrowing
model of a 9-subunit-long glycan strand, for comparison of
leaf stay flat? It turns out that it is a non-trivial task to
scale.
beflat. Itwasshownthatanegativefeedbackregulatory
circuitisrequiredtoavoidabumpyleafstructure,which
is distinctively different from the smooth, flat leaves we MICROSCOPIC CELL-WALL STRUCTURE AND
are used to and take for granted [14]. MOLECULAR MODE OF CELL-WALL GROWTH
For the cylindrical growth, previous works started to
tackle this problem by comparing the robustness of var- The bacterial cell shape is physically determined by
ious growth mechanisms [15], and found that uniformly the PG cell wall, a covalently bonded network of sugar
distributed, helical insertions are quite robust. Yet in strands cross-linked by short peptide bridges. The rigid
their study no strategy was proven to be robust in the PG meshwork counteracts the high turgor pressure set
true sense, i.e., were we to start from a spherical cell, by the difference in osmotic potentials between the cell
it is unlikely that the cell would adapt to its rod-shape and its environment [17]. In Gram-negative bacteria
when using any of the proposed strategies, nor would a cryo-electrontomographyimagesofisolatedcell-wallsac-
rod-shaped cell maintain its diameter over many rounds culi suggest that the PG forms a monolayer with gly-
of division. Bacterial cells do precisely that – as was can strands running in a near-circumferential direction
shown for E. coli: after the cells were significantly dis- around the long axis of the cell [18] (see Fig. 2). This
torted when grown in a chamber thinner than their di- observationisinagreementwithatomicforcemicroscopy
ameter, they recovered their native shape after several (AFM) measurements on isolated cell-wall sacculi [19],
rounds of division [6]. A recent study by Ursell et al. which have revealed that the elastic constants of the cell
suggests that cytoskeletal MreB in E. coli could play an wallareanisotropic. Thisanisotropyisexpectedbecause
importantpartinregulatingcellshape. Theyfoundthat of the difference in stiffness between rather rigid circum-
MreB filaments serve as a local sensor of bacterial enve- ferentiallyorientedglycanstrandsandthecomparatively
lopecurvatureandthusdirectcell-wallinsertiontothese floppy peptide bonds. Interestingly, there is also a two-
sites. The authors show that this mechanism could help fold difference of cell-wall mechanical stresses between
maintain a cylindrical cell straight [16]. Potentially, this thecircumferentialandaxialdirectionsthatcomesabout
samecurvature-sensingmechanismcouldalsoplayanim- due to the cylindrical geometry of the cell. Theoretical
portant role in maintaining cell diameter. We will come modelling suggests that the large turgor pressure drives
back to this further down. In the following we summa- the cell wall elasticity to the non-linear regime [20, 21].
rize what is known about cell-wall synthesis, the major InGram-positivebacteriathecellwallismuchthicker
stress-bearing component of the cell envelope, and how than in Gram-negatives (e.g., in B. subtilis the cell wall
it might lead to stable cell shape. We will then discuss is approximately 30 nm thick [22, 23]). The thickness
how auto-regulation and cell-shape response to external of the cell wall has prevented molecular-resolution imag-
forces could come about. ing of the glycan strands. However, recent cryo-electron
microscopy and surface atomic force microscopy experi- since been supported by experiments of combined mi-
ments have revealed circumferential furrows in the cell- croscopyandopticaltrapping[39]: Wanget al. attached
wallsurface[22,24,25]withaspacingofroughly50nm. fluorescent beads to the envelope of elongated E. coli
Whilethisobservationisinagreementwiththemodelof or B. subtilis cells using optical tweezers. They then
circumferential glycan strands it also suggests a higher- tracked the bead position before and after osmotically
order three-dimensional structure, which is not under- up-shocking the cells in a flow cell. First, they find
stood yet. For both Gram-positive and Gram-negative that the cells shrink much more along the long axis than
bacteria biological text books often depict the architec- alongtheradialdirection–inaccordancewiththeafore-
ture of the PG cell wall as a regular lattice. However, mentioned anisotropy of elastic constants. Furthermore,
the short length of the glycan strands of several nm [26] they also find that the beads follow helical trajectories
suggests that the structure is much more disordered. during the shape transition, which suggests a slight he-
The structure of the newly synthesized cell wall has lical anisotropy and, thus, a helical orientation of the
been revealed in a different, indirect manner: Proper PG meshwork – in agreement with the helical trajecto-
cell-wallsynthesisdependsonthebacterialcytoskeleton, ries of MreB motion. With combined fluorescence mi-
particularlyononeormultipleisoformsofthewidelycon- croscopy on MreB filaments and computational elastic-
servedactin-homologueMreB[27]. MreBformsfilaments network simulations (coarse-grained molecular-dynamics
in the cytoplasm that are attached to the cytoplasmic simulations), the authors argue that the helicity might
membraneinbothGram-negative[28]andGram-positive be caused by the orientation of MreB filaments below
bacteria [29–31]. The length of the MreB filaments is thecylindricalsurfaceofthecellwall. Theorientationof
currently under debate, in particular because native- the MreB filaments with respect to the cell envelope, in
expression-level MreB filaments have not been detected turn, could be caused by the filament-intrinsic curvature
inwholecellsbyelectronmicroscopy[32]. Irrespectiveof and twist in combination with a curved surface of the
theirexactlength, ithasbeenshownby fluorescencemi- cylindrical cell envelope[40, 41].
croscopythatMreBfilamentsrotatearoundthelongcell Linking cell-wall synthesis to MreB filaments is very
axis in a processive manner in Gram-negative [33] and interestingfromaphysicsperspective: Multipleindepen-
Gram-positive bacteria [30, 31, 34, 35]. This rotation dent studies have suggested that MreB filaments assume
depends on PG synthesis and proceeds at a speed com- on average macroscopic lengths of few hundred nanome-
patible with processive insertion of single glycan strands ters [29–31, 42]. The mechanical stiffness of these fila-
intothePGmeshwork[33],asalreadysuggestedbyBur- ments[4]couldfacilitatethemacroscopicorganizationof
mann and Park in the 1980s [36]. It is thus plausible thecell-wallsynthesismachineryandmightthusprovide
thatMreBfilamentsarephysicallylinkedtotheenzymes a key ingredient for a robust cell-shape feedback mecha-
responsible for cell-wall insertion. In fact, some of the nism (see discussion below). Computational simulations
cell-wall-synthesis enzymes have been seen to move in a byFurchtgottetal. havealreadyshownthatthestiffness
similar manner as MreB filaments in the Gram-positive ofMreBcouldprovidethecellwithamechanismtoavoid
B. subtilis [34,35], supportingthehypothesisofphysical anunfavorablepositivefeedbackofmacroscopiccell-wall
interaction. In Gram-negative E. coli, at least one im- bulges, i.e., local departures from the intended perfectly
portant synthesising enzyme, the transpeptidase PBP2, cylindrical geometry [15]. Their argument goes as fol-
movesrapidlyanddiffusively,showingnoprocessivityon lows: If cell-wall insertion was only dependent on the
the sub-second time scale [37], thus suggesting a more availability of PG substrate, i.e., if new PG was inserted
transient interaction of the cell-wall synthesis proteins. with equal probability at any potential site of insertion,
Ref. [38] finds that the timescales, at which disrupting localcell-wallbulgeswouldgrow,astheycontainahigher
MreBaffectscellwallelasticityaresimilartothegrowth numberofpotentialinsertionsites. Conversely,siteswith
time, in consistence with this interpretation. Further- lowercell-walldensitywouldbedepletedofcell-wallma-
more,filamentshaverecentlybeenreportedtomovewith terial, while the surrounding meshwork would expand.
afilament-lengthdependentspeed[30]. Thespeed-length The cytoskeleton could render insertion independent of
relationship observed is compatible with a simple model the local density of PG, simply by bridging small devia-
of synthesis complexes effectively consituting motor pro- tions from the cylindrical envelope due to polymer stiff-
teins that randomly attach to MreB filaments and exert ness. Related ideas regarding the role of MreB in stabi-
a force in either of the two circumferential directions. lizing cylindrical growth are provided in Refs. [10, 43],
Accordingly, the speed as a function of length displays which also illustrate theoretically and experimentally a
a maximum at finite filament length of a few hundered mechanical instability which can occur in the absence of
nanometers [30]. MreB. However, while this mechanism could prevent lo-
Interestingly, the trajectories of cytoskeletal filaments cal deviations from a flat cylinder surface regulation of
observed in E. coli are slightly helical on average [33], cellshaperequiresamechanismthatmeasureslarge-scale
suggesting an average helical organization of the cell deformationsofthecellenvelope–eitherdirectlyinform
wall as a whole. This helicity of the cell wall has ofcell-envelopecurvature(suggestedbyUrselletal. [16])
orindirectly,e.g.,viaamodifiedmechanicalstressinthe
cell wall (see discussion below).
UNDERSTANDING CELL-SHAPE REGULATION
BY CELL-SHAPE PERTURBATIONS
Lookingatsub-cellularcomponentssuchasthePGcell
wall and the MreB cytoskeleton have fundamentally im-
proved our understanding of the organizing principles of
thecellwallinthesteadystateofrod-likegrowth. Adif-
ferentapproachtounderstandingcell-shaperegulationis
toperturbcylindricalcellshapeandobservehowthecell
reacts to the perturbation – both during and after the
perturbation [5, 6, 44, 45]. Such an approach is particu- FIG. 3: Microscopy image of E. coli, reproduced from Ref.
[5], courtsey of G. M. Whitesides. (a) The cell was grown in
larlyappealingfromaphysicsperspective,asthecellwall
a narrow circular channel. (b) The cell length grows expo-
is a partially ordered elastic sheet that undergoes elas-
nentially in time with the physiological growth rate, showing
tic and plastic deformations upon mechanical forces and
that the cell is at least locally close to its normal growth
during growth, respectively [44]. We note that by “plas- conditions, yet the cell adapts to the shape of the channel.
tic” we mean irreversible due to a change of the covalent (c) When taken out of the channel the cell maintained a de-
peptide and glycan bonds. This change comes about formed shape, illustrating that the cell is able to adapt its
due to the cleaving of existing bonds through enzymes shapetotheconfinementduringgrowth,withoutbuildingup
large one-sided stress that would relax by straightening after
(as opposed to ripping) and possibly through the inser-
release from the chamber.
tion of new PG material. Thanks to the non-uniform,
possibly adaptive growth process the residual stresses in
the cell wall can be much smaller than in plastic de-
formations happening in non-living materials (e.g: met- croscopy. Careful analysis of the mechanics involved led
als). This allows for the controlled test of molecular and the authors to rule out several models for the observed
physicalmodelsofcell-wallinsertionandcell-wallelastic straightening, and to conclude that processive, circum-
properties. Besides helping us to understand cell-shape ferential insertions of glycan strands into the cell wall at
auto-regulation during normal growth, cell-shape defor- random locations explain their measurements – consis-
mation experiments also allow us to study how the cell tent with the more recent and more direct evidence of
reacts to mechanical and geometric constraints, such as circumferential insertion as described in Sec. . The dif-
confining spaces (see Fig. 3). Ultimately, the molecu- ferentialgeometryandmechanicsusedinthisworkisfar
lar mechanisms underlying cellular response to pertur- from the standard toolbox of a biologist, yet the conclu-
bations and the mechanisms underlying cell-shape auto- sions reached are intuitive and understandable – as well
regulation might be the same; however there might also as highly relevant – to any biologist interested in bacte-
be components of adaptation and auto-regulation, re- rial morphology.
spectively, that compete against each other, a possibility In a recent study, a large bending torque was applied
that we shall later elaborate on. to growing filamentous E. coli and B. subtilis cells [44],
In a first such experiment, Takeuchi et al. found that using a viscous drag, in order to study the elastic and
filamentous E. coli cells grown in small, cylindrical con- plastic deformations of the cell wall during growth. The
fining chambers maintain their shapes after release from authors concluded that mechanical stresses are involved
the chamber (see Fig. 3). Thus, E. coli is able to adapt in the regulation of shape in E. coli: the cell grew more
its shape instead of growing as a rod-like cylindrical cell cell wall on the side of the flow, where a tensile stress
whengrowninconfinedenvironments. Inanotherexper- stretched the cell wall, and grew less on the opposite
iment M¨annik et al. observed that E. coli cells can grow side where the external stress was compressive (see Fig.
and even divide in shallow confining slits. In both cases 4). Thus, the cell reacts to an external force by adapt-
cellsreverttheirshapesaftersufficientadditionalgrowth ing its shape. The observed plastic shape deformations
outside the confining geometry [6]. during growth were consistently interpreted in terms of
For another beautiful example of a biophysical ap- the dislocation-mediated growth theory [46, 47]. In this
proach, consider the work of Ref. [45]: in this work formalism the circumferential insertions are interpreted
the naturally curved gram-negative bacterium Caulobac- in terms of edge dislocations in the PG mesh, building
ter crescentus is manipulated genetically to be straight. on concepts developed in the context of the physics of
Thedynamicsofthestraighteningprocess,whenstarting defects in metals. This mechanism of plastic deforma-
fromacurvedcell,wasmeasuredintimeusingopticalmi- tionsmightalsoberesponsibletothecircularcellshapes
observed in cells grown in confinement (Fig. 3), and is POSSIBLE FEEDBACK MECHANISMS
reminiscentoftheroleof“smartautolysins”proposedby
Koch [48].
All experiments and computational simulations de-
Interestingly,whentheexternalstress(duetotheflow) scribed above leave us with two questions: How – mech-
is switched off, the cell straightens. While this seems anistically–doesthecelladaptitsshapetotheinfluence
in accord with the previously described experiment on of external forces, and secondly, how does it restore and
C. crescentus straightening, there is a crucial difference auto-regulate cylindrical shape during normal growth?
between the two: in the previous experiment the curva-
Theplasticdeformationofthebacterialcellshapedur-
ture of the cell centerline was measured to decay expo-
ing long-term application of a torque suggests that the
nentially during the straightening process, however, at a
bacterium preferentially inserts new PG material on the
ratelowerthantherateofexponentialcellelongationdue
side of the cell facing the flow (where it experiences a
to growth. Thus, the filamentous cells never reached a
higher stress in its cell envelope). Alternatively, the cell
straight configuration. According to the authors’ model
could grow a less dense PG meshwork on the flow-facing
ofrandomprocessiveinsertionthedecayofthecenterline
side. Ineithercasethelocalcell-wallsynthesismachinery
curvature is a monotonically increasing function of the
must react to the mechanical stresses applied.
length of newly inserted glycan strands (the amount of
How do cells maintain their cylindrical shape or re-
processivity). Yet, even for glycan strands much longer
acquire it after perturbation? Recent work by Ursell et
than the cell circumference (infinitely processive inser-
al. [16] suggests that cells are able to sense the local
tions) the decay rate would saturate at a finite value
cell-envelope curvature through cytoskeletal MreB fila-
(which happens to be the growth rate). The shape of
ments. As discussed above, membrane-associated MreB
the bacteria (were it not to divide) would be self-similar
filaments are stiff and could thus favor their own local-
[49],i.e.,acurvedcell,whichdoesnotdividewouldmain-
izationatsitesofparticularcell-envelopecurvature,thus
tainacurvedshape. Onthecontrary,filamentousE. coli
effectively constituting a curvature sensor. Ursell et al.
cells in the flow-cell experiment straighten more than by
find that MreB localizes at positions of cell-wall inden-
themaximumstraighteningrateintherandom-insertion
tations, i.e., at negative Gaussian curvature of the en-
process. This result suggests the presence of an addi-
velope. Monitoring the local expansion of the cell wall
tional straightening mechanism. Further work is needed
(using a cell-wall stain as fiducial marker) and imaging
in order to establish whether this is an “active” mech-
bothcellshapeandthelocalizationofMreBatthesame
anism, through which E. coli attempts to “correct” for
time,Ursellet al. proposethatMreBfilamentsarephys-
cell shape deformation, or a result of the coupling to the
ically linked to sites of PG insertion. Thus, MreB may
residualmechanicalstressesinthecellwall,whichpersist
guide the PG insertion machinery to sites of preferred
even after the external force is switched off. The emerg-
curvature. Furthermore,theyfoundthattheseregionsof
ing picture of cell bending and straightening in E. coli is
the cell envelope flipped curvature sign after PG inser-
illustrated in Fig. 4, showing the way a cell responds to
tion. The curvature-based insertion scheme could thus
curvature and external forces.
provideawaytohelpmaintaincellshapeduringrod-like
growthbyprovidinganinherentfeedbackmechanismbe-
tweenthePG-insertionmachinery,whichdeterminescell
shape, andthecellshape, which, inturn, determinesthe
locationofthePG-insertionmachinery. Indeed,acoarse-
grainedcomputationalsimulationsuggeststhatcoupling
processive cell-wall insertion to cell-envelope curvature
helps keeping a cell straight [16].
However,thecurvature-basedgrowthmechanismalone
cannot account for the aforementioned bending exper-
iments [44]: if only curvature sensing is present, upon
beingelasticallydeformedtotheright,thecellwouldat-
tempttoaddmore materialonitsright side, sinceit has
a negative curvature. This implies that when the exter-
FIG. 4: Experiments suggest that cell wall growth depends nal force which led to the bending is switched off, the
onthesituation: typically,cellswouldgrowinamannerthat cell should be deformed to the left since more material
wouldstraightenthem,asshownin(a). However,whenunder
wasinsertedontherighthandside. However,theexperi-
externalmechanicalstress(arearesultofaconfiningenviron-
mentsshowthatthecellisdeformedtotheright. There-
ment [5] or an applied bending torque [44]), the cells would
fore the sign of the differential growth expected from a
plastically deform to adapt to the new environment.
curvature-based mechanism is opposite of what is exper-
imentally observed. Further work is needed in order to
establishtheconnectionbetweenthesetwoobservations, while following the dynamics of MreB would provide
and the relative importance of mechanical stress and ge- moreinformationregardingthedifferentialgrowth. With
ometric curvature. new possibilities to track the metric of the cell wall di-
rectly in live cells [16] we can now quantitatively under-
stand where new material is being deposited and corre-
FUTURE PROSPECTS lateitwiththestressdistributiononthecellwall. Similar
approachesintheverydifferentcontextoftissuemorpho-
The previous examples of cell-shape experiments and genesis have proven useful; remarkably, also in this case,
modeling illustrate the effectiveness of combining theo- mechanical stress have been shown to play an important
retical modelling and novel experimental techniques to regulatory role [55]. Making even larger perturbations is
improve our understanding of cell wall regulation and another experimental route, which may lead to new in-
the dynamics of growth. There is lots of room to further sights: bothingram-positiveandgram-negativebacteria
explore both of these avenues. the production of cell wall can be damaged such that in
On the theoretical side, the attempts to study the ro- alowosmolaritymediumthecellisstillviableinspiteof
bustnessofgrowthhavebeenprimarilynumerical. Com- lack of cell wall, leading to spherical cells [56]. Recently,
putationalsimulationsfromKCHuang’slabhavedemon- recoveries from such spherical cells into the native rod-
strated how global helical cell-wall structure and local shapedformshavebeenobservedinB. subtilis [57]. How
cell-wallintegritycanemergefrommesoscopiccytoskele- does a sphere grow to be a cylinder? The observed path
tal filaments [4]. However, the computational resources, of recovery shows a distinct morphology, which provides
which are at our disposal at the moment do not allow important constraints for theoretical models – not only
for the modelling of the full number of interacting units do they have to predict a robust cylindrical growth, but
in the peptidoglycan mesh, and can only provide intu- the form of recovery must also agree with these experi-
ition as to the true robustness of a particular model. Al- mental findings.
ternative more “coarse-grained” approaches have been A complete theory of bacterial cell shape should also
recently introduced [46, 47, 50], in which the relatively accountforthemagnitudesofbothradiusandlength;the
small number of active growth sites correspond to mov- regulation of these two is, however, of very different na-
ing dislocations in the peptidoglycan mesh, yet in these ture: References [58–60] suggest a robust mechanism of
previous studies a perfectly cylindrical geometry was as- maintaining cell length in bacteria, consistent with the
sumed. In general, the theory describing thin inter- experimentally observed correlations and distributions,
faces such as the bacterial cell wall, shallow shell theory, invoking a simple biophysical mechanism that does not
involves highly non-linear partial differential equations, coupletomechanicsorcurvature. Thismechanismisob-
making analytic progress challenging. One possible di- viously decoupled from that of radius maintenance, as
rection would be to adapt the existing equations, which is proven by the possibility of having extremely long fil-
arecommonlyusedbyengineerstostudythinshells(the amentuous cells, which nevertheless maintain their con-
Donnell-Mushtari-Vlasov equation, which generalize the stant radius [44]. Various approaches have been used to
F¨oppl-vonK´arm´anequations)toincorporategrowth,and explain the origin of the micron-scale diameter of E. coli
test the stability of the equations to perturbations using andB. subtilis,includinganenergyminimizationscheme
linearstabilityanalysis. Asecondtheoreticaltool,which [61] and the natural curvature of MreB filaments [16].
wasrecentlyintroducedistheuseofametrictodescribe In contrast to E. coli and B. subtilis various bacte-
curved surfaces [51]. The non-uniform growth can be ria such as Mycobacteria, Streptomyces, are tip-growers
cast in terms of its effect on the “target metric”, and for [62]. How is rod-shape maintained for tip-growers? It is
a thin interface the shape is determined by the Gaussian plausible that a different mechanism will be necessary in
curvature of that metric. This tool has proven useful this scenario. In this case drawing an analogy with the
in calculating the metric necessary to achieve a desired growth of plants and fungi could be helpful, since they
shape,whichcanthenbeprescribedontoathinpolymer organisms are also tip-growers [63]. Extensive work has
sheet,leadingtoremarkablecontrolofthree-dimensional been done on modelling tip-growth and the role of me-
objects [52, 53]. The deformations of bacterial cells in chanics [64, 65], and it is intriguing to see whether these
the microfluidic experiment described above [44] can, in concepts could apply for bacteria as well.
fact, also be described using the effect on the Gaussian We are still far from unravelling the fundamental “en-
curvature of a metric [54], and this could be a power- gineering” challenges that biology has to overcome in
ful theoretical tool to handle the problem of cylindrical shaping single cells as well as multi-cellular tissues. Yet
stability. therapiddevelopmentofnewtheoretical,computational
On the experimental side, it seems that further re- and experimental techniques in these fields, combined
search is needed in order to establish the relative role of withtherecentfruitfulcollaborationsbetweenbiologists,
bothcurvature-relatedandstress-relatedregulation. Re- physicists and engineers, suggest a promising and excit-
peating both microfluidic experiments described in Sec. ing future.
AA was supported by the Harvard Society of Fellows physical Journal 104(11), 2342 (2013)
and the Milton Fund. SvT was supported by a Hu- [24] G. Andre, S. Kulakauskas, M.P. Chapot-Chartier,
man Frontier Science Program Postdoctoral Fellowship. B. Navet, M. Deghorain, E. Bernard, P. Hols, Y.F.
Dufrˆene, Nature communications 1, 27 (2010)
Theauthorsacknowledgeusefuldiscussionsandfeedback
[25] E.J. Hayhurst, L. Kailas, J.K. Hobbs, S.J. Foster, Pro-
regarding the manuscript from E. Efrati, O. Amster-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105(38),
Choder, Y. Eun, K. C. Huang, D. R. Nelson, J. Paulose
14603 (2008)
and T. Ursell. [26] H. Harz, K. Burgdorf, J.V. Hltje, Analytical Biochem-
istry 190(1), 120 (1990)
[27] J.W.Shaevitz,Z.Gitai,ColdSpringHarborperspectives
in biology 2(9) (2010)
[28] T.Kruse,J.Møller-Jensen,A.Løbner-Olesen,K.Gerdes,
∗ arielamir@physics.harvard.edu EMBO Journal 22(19), 5283 (2003)
† sven@pasteur.fr [29] L.J. Jones, R. Carballido-Lopez, J. Errington, Cell
[1] J.Dumais,JournalofExperimentalBotany(2013). DOI 104(6), 913 (2001)
10.1093/jxb/ert268 [30] P.v.Olshausen,H.J.DefeuSoufo,K.Wicker,R.Heintz-
[2] K.D. Young, Microbiology and Molecular Biology Re- mann, P.L. Graumann, A. Rohrbach, Biophysical Jour-
views 70(3), 660 (2006) nal 105(5), 1171 (2013)
[3] A. Chastanet, R. Carballido-Lopez, Front Biosci (Schol [31] C.Reimold,H.J.DefeuSoufo,F.Dempwolff,P.L.Grau-
Ed) 4, 1582 (2012) mann, Molecular biology of the cell (2013)
[4] S. Wang, H. Arellano-Santoyo, P.A. Combs, J.W. Shae- [32] M.T. Swulius, G.J. Jensen, Journal of bacteriology
vitz, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 194(23), 6382 (2012)
107, 91829185 (2010) [33] S. van Teeffelen, S. Wang, L. Furchtgott, K.C. Huang,
[5] S. Takeuchi, W.R. DiLuzio, D.B. Weibel, G.M. White- N.S. Wingreen, J.W. Shaevitz, Z. Gitai, Proceedings of
sides, Nano Letters 5(9), 1819 (2005) the National Academy of Sciences 108, 15822 (2011)
[6] J. Mnnik, R. Driessen, P. Galajda, J.E. Keymer, [34] E.C. Garner, R. Bernard, W. Wang, X. Zhuang, D.Z.
C. Dekker, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Rudner, T. Mitchison, Science 333(6039), 222 (2011)
ences 106(35), 14861 (2009) [35] J. Dom´ınguez-Escobar, A. Chastanet, A.H. Crevenna,
[7] A.J. Egan, W. Vollmer, Annals of the New York V.Fromion,R.Wedlich-Sldner,R.Carballido-Lpez,Sci-
Academy of Sciences 1277(1), 8 (2013) ence 333(6039), 225 (2011)
[8] Y. Li, J. Hsin, L. Zhao, Y. Cheng, W. Shang, K.C. [36] L.G. Burman, J.T. Park, Proceedings of the National
Huang,H.W.Wang,S.Ye,Science341(6144),392(2013) Academy of Sciences 81(6), 1844 (1984)
[9] O. Piro, G. Carmon, M. Feingold, I. Fishov, Environ- [37] T.K. Lee, C. Tropini, J. Hsin, S.M. Desmarais, T.S.
mental Microbiology (2013) Ursell, E. Gong, Z. Gitai, R.D. Monds, K.C. Huang,
[10] S.X.Sun, H.Jiang, MicrobiologyandMolecularBiology Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences p.
Reviews 75(4), 543 (2011) 201313826 (2014)
[11] M.T.Cabeen,G.Charbon,W.Vollmer,P.Born,N.Aus- [38] H.H. Tuson, G.K. Auer, L.D. Renner, M. Hasebe,
mees,D.B.Weibel,C.Jacobs-Wagner,TheEMBOJour- C.Tropini,M.Salick,W.C.Crone,A.Gopinathan,K.C.
nal 28(9), 1208 (2009) Huang, D.B. Weibel, Molecular Microbiology 84(5), 874
[12] L.K. Sycuro, Z. Pincus, K.D. Gutierrez, J. Biboy, C.A. (2012)
Stern,W.Vollmer,N.R.Salama,Cell141(5),822(2010) [39] S.Wang,L.Furchtgott,K.C.Huang,J.W.Shaevitz,Pro-
[13] A. Typas, M. Banzhaf, C.A. Gross, W. Vollmer, Nature ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(10),
Reviews Microbiology 10(2), 123 (2011) E595 (2012)
[14] E. Sharon, private communications. [40] S. Wang, N.S. Wingreen, Biophysical Journal 104(3),
[15] L. Furchtgott, N.S. Wingreen, K.C. Huang, Molecular 541 (2013)
Microbiology 81(2), 340 (2011) [41] S.S. Andrews, A.P. Arkin, Biophysical journal 93(6),
[16] T.S. Ursell, J. Nguyen, R.D. Monds, A. Colavin, 1872 (2007)
G. Billings, N. Ouzounov, Z. Gitai, J.W. Shaevitz, K.C. [42] T. Kruse, J. Bork-Jensen, K. Gerdes, Molecular Micro-
Huang,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences biology 55(1), 78 (2004)
p. 201317174 (2014) [43] H.Jiang,F.Si,W.Margolin,S.X.Sun,Biophysicaljour-
[17] Y.Deng,M.Sun,J.W.Shaevitz,PhysicalReviewLetters nal 101(2), 327 (2011)
107(15), 158101 (2011) [44] A. Amir, F. Babaeipour, D. R. Nelson and S. Jun,
[18] L. Gan, S. Chen, G.J. Jensen, Proceedings of the Na- arXiv:1305.5843 (2013), to appear in PNAS.
tional Academy of Sciences 105(48), 18953 (2008) [45] O. Sliusarenko, M.T. Cabeen, C.W. Wolgemuth,
[19] X. Yao, M. Jericho, D. Pink, T. Beveridge, J Bacteriol. C. Jacobs-Wagner, T. Emonet, Proceedings of the Na-
181(22), 6865 (1999) tional Academy of Sciences 107, 10086 (2010)
[20] A. Boulbitch, B. Quinn, D. Pink, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, [46] D.R. Nelson, Annual Review of Biophysics 41(1), 371
5246 (2000) (2012)
[21] Y. Deng, M. Sun, J.W. Shaevitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, [47] A. Amir, D.R. Nelson, Proceedings of the National
158101 (2011) Academy of Sciences 109(25), 9833 (2012)
[22] M. Beeby, J.C. Gumbart, B. Roux, G.J. Jensen, Molec- [48] A.L.Koch,Bacterial growth and form (Springer,Berlin,
ular Microbiology 88(4), 664 (2013) 2001)
[23] G.Misra,E.R.Rojas,A.Gopinathan,K.C.Huang,Bio- [49] R. Mukhopadhyay, N.S. Wingreen, Phys. Rev. E 80(6),
062901 (2009)
[50] A. Amir, J. Paulose, D.R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. E 87, [60] Cell size regulation in microorganisms, A. Amir, arXiv:
042314 (2013) 1312.6562 (2014).
[51] E.S.E.Efrati,R.Kupferman,SoftMatter9,8187(2013) [61] H.Jiang,S.X.Sun,Phys.Rev.Lett.105,028101(2010)
[52] Y. Klein, E. Efrati, E. Sharon, Science 315(5815), 1116 [62] K. Fla¨rdh, D.M. Richards, A.M. Hempel, M. Howard,
(2007) M.J.Buttner,Currentopinioninmicrobiology15(6),737
[53] J. Kim, J.A. Hanna, M. Byun, C.D. Santangelo, R.C. (2012)
Hayward, Science 335(6073), 1201 (2012) [63] A.Geitmann,M.Cresti,I.B.Heath,Cellbiologyofplant
[54] J. Paulose and A. Amir, to be published. and fungal tip growth, vol. 328 (IOS Press, 2001)
[55] C. Guillot, T. Lecuit, Science 340(6137), 1185 (2013) [64] M. Keijzer, A. Emons, B. Mulder, in Root Hairs, Plant
[56] P.A. de Boer, R.E. Crossley, L.I. Rothfield, Proceedings Cell Monographs, vol. 12, ed. by A. Emons, T. Ketelaar
of the National Academy of Sciences 87(3), 1129 (1990) (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009), pp. 103–122
[57] E. Garner, private communications. [65] A. Goriely, M. Robertson-Tessi, M. Tabor, R. Vandiver,
[58] M.Osella,E.Nugent,M.C.Lagomarsino,Proceedingsof in Mathematical Modelling of Biosystems (Springer,
the National Academy of Sciences 111(9), 3431 (2014) 2008), pp. 1–44
[59] L. Robert, M. Hoffmann, N. Krell, S. Aymerich,
J. Robert, M. Doumic, BMC biology 12(1), 17 (2014)