]hp-pop.scisyhp[
1v2096.3021:viXra
GODS AS TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS
DANIELSCHOCH
Abstract. We show that the number of gods in a universe must equal the
Euler characteristics of its underlying manifold. By incorporating the clas-
sical cosmological argument for creation, this result builds a bridge between
theology and physics and makes theism a testable hypothesis. Theological
implicationsareprofoundsincethetheoremgivesusnewinsightsinthetopo-
logical structure of heavens and hells. Recent astronomical observations can
notrejecttheism,butdataareslightlyinfavourofatheism.
1. Motivation
Conventional theology builds on faith and metaphysical assumptions. While
faithisunquestionable,metaphysicsisgenerallyconsidereduntestable. Thisleadto
thewidespreadassumptionthattheologyandnaturalscienceformnon-overlapping
magistrates. However, nothing could be further away from the religious tradition.
BothArabic andChristianmedival thinker were intending a synthesis betweenthe
Aristotelic scientific view and their specific religion, in particular the Abrahamitic
monotheism. Up to the early modern times, Galileis processes and the rejection of
atomismbythe Catholicchurchhaverevealedpossibleconflictzonesbetweenboth
fields.
Althoughmetaphysicalspeculationsalwayslinkedtheologicalandmathematical
concepts, the introduction of distinctive mathematical methods to support the-
ism has long been attributed to Euler. In his famous alledged encounter with
Diderot, Euler presented a mock algebraic proof to embarrass the atheist philoso-
pherDiderot,whichisprobablya19thcenturylegend. Thetruecoreofthelegend,
however,might be that the possibility of an algebraicproof of the existence of god
was discussed among 18th century intellectuals [Struik1967, p. 129].
The first successful step in mathematization of theology was taken by Goedel
[Sobel 1987]. His formalization of the ontological argument, originally formulated
intermsofmodallogic,hasbeenreconstructedinset-theoreticalform[Essler 1993].
It was noticed that the set structure was identical to the topological concept of an
ultrafilter, which led to speculations about the specific relations between theology
and topology [Calude et al. 1995].
It is the aim of this paper to advance these a priori speculations and convert
them to a testable theory, linking theology and cosmology very much in the spirit
of the medival Christain tradition. Although current data is not deceisive in this
matter and is slightly supporting a zero-goduniverse, the path has been paved for
a fruitful interdisciplinary collaboration of physics, mathematics, philosophy and
theology.
Date:April1st,2012.
Key words and phrases. Topology, Euler characteristics, manifolds, invariants, mathematical
theology,mathematical joke.
GODS AS TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS 2
2. The Cosmological Argument
The cosmological argument (Platon, Philoponos, Aquinas etc.) states that a
First Cause of the universe must exist, since no causalchains are finite and do not
contain loops. Insofar it is based on the simple fact that any component of an
ordered and circle-free finite graph is a tree and thus must have a first vertex. To
apply this to a pre-Einstein universe one must add the assumptions that matter
does not by itself emerge out of the vacuum, that no motion can occur out of rest,
and that initial or primordial matter is at rest. It follows that a First Mover must
have initiated all cosmic motion at the moment the universe comes into existence.
Since it is not by itself a natural phenomenon, such a mighty cause can only be a
god.
However, this argument does not remain valid if the universe has origined from
a Big Bang. If the universe expands out of a zero-volume point at t = 0, there no
causalrelationcan connectan event at some time t>0 of the existing universe by
an event t < 0 before the Big Bang. In the watchmaker analogy, the watch could
not have been wound up.
We nevertheless embrace the result of the argument, as far as it is restricted
to the types of steady-state universes for which it was originally intended. It goes
without saying that anything beyond the three-dimensional Euclidean space was
out of imagination for the medieval scholar. Before Einstein, time was considered
absoluteandindependentofspaceandmatter. Aphysicalexplanationforauniverse
emerging out of nothing was unthinkable and incompatible with the mechanics of
their time, may it be Aristotelian, Galileianor Newtonian. The initial singualarity
of an Einstein-Friedman universe is, however, a distinctive topological feature of
the manifold itself. We assume therefore, in accordance with the cosmological
argument, that a finite Aristotelian universe, which manifold can be desribed by a
compactsubsetofR3 homeomorphicto a ball(a 3-cell), hasone andonly one god.
3. The Main Theorem
Let U be a unviverse with underlying manifold MU. By Θ(U) we denote the
number of gods in the universe. We postulate the following axioms.
From the cosmologicalargument we obtain
Axiom 1. The number of gods in a 3-cell is one.
Gods are eternal, invariable and do not depend on the evolution of the cosmos
under the laws of physics. Changing the latter would have had no influence on the
existence of gods. Since the laws of physics are continuous, if M0 and M1 are the
underlying manifolds of the spatial universe at some time t0 and t1 (in comoving
coordinates),respectively,they mustbe homotopyequivalent. We therefore obtain
Axiom 2. The number of gods is a homotopy invariance.
Clearly, each god only belongs to only one universe. In a multiverse consisting
ofdisjointunionsofuniverses,thenumberofgodsmustthereforesatisfyadditivity.
Axiom 3. Let U and U′ be separateduniverses with compact manifolds. Then
the number of gods in the disjoint union is the sum of the numbers of gods of the
GODS AS TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS 3
Theorem 1. The number of gods in a universe equals the Euler characteristics of
the underlying manifold,
Proof. By the second axiom, the number of gods only depend on the underlying
manifold. Thus we can write w.l.o.g. Θ(U) = Θ(MU). Since the n−cell is null
homotope, by axiom 1 and 2 we obtain
LetfurtherM andN beanycompactsets. Weconstructahomotopytransforming
M ∪N into separatedcopies A,B,C of the closure of M \N, M ∩N, and M \N,
respectively. Equation (3.1) together with axiom 2 implies
We obtain the inclusion-exclusion principle,
By a well-known characterization, the latter together with (3.2) implies Θ(M) =
χ(M) for all compact manifolds M. (cid:3)
The product theorem for the Euler characteristicsimplies that for manifolds M
In particular, if time is itself an interval T ⊂ R, we find that the number of gods
are independent of time,
This is compatible with the scholastic view introduced by Boetius in his Conso-
lations that god is above time. However, the same formula spells trouble for all
theologies which are based on a cyclic conception of time, which is widespread in
India (Veda) and among native American religions. Since χ(cid:0)S1 (cid:1)=0 there are no
gods in such a universe,
4. Universes, Heavens and Hells
The number of gods has come out to be an integral number. This rules out
any demi-gods or lower devas, as they are known from Greek or Indian mythology.
However, the divine cardinal can get negative; with the obvious interpretation of
these gods being devils. By the additivity theorem, components of positive and
negative Euler characteristics could cancel each other out. We can safely assume,
however,(and there is plenty of support from religious texts) that gods and devils
can not have stable coexistence in the same part of the universe. Thus each com-
ponent contains only gods or devils, but not both. The absolute value of the Euler
characteristics of the universe therefore equals the number of supreme and most
inferior beings in it, dependent on the sign.
A lot of types of universes are godless. These are all spaces which contain the
1-sphere (circle) as a factor, such as the tori and all products of them with an
GODS AS TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS 4
arbitrary manifold. This also applies if the universe is infinite Euclidean, but has
additional warped dimensions, as suggested in string theory. Also, a spherical
three-dimensionaluniversewouldhavenogods. Theonlynon-exotictopologywith
a positive number of gods are Euclidean spaces, which all contain exactly one god,
which is well in accordance with the Jewish-Christian and Islamic tradition.
An interesting theoreticalquestionconcerns the topologicalstructure of heaven.
The3-dimensionalEucledianspaceis suitable,butsince soulsareimmaterial,they
are not confined to three-dimensionality. It is unlikely, however, that heaven is a
boundedmanifold,sincethereshouldbenolimitinheaven. Onepossiblestructure
of a monotheistic heaven is the real projective plane. Another is the 2-sphere,
but it requires a pair of gods. The 2-spehere would have been a preferred choice
of Greek philosophers, since its imbedding in the R3 is in perfect alignment with
the Pythagorean-Platonicidea of a perfect body, which was influential in the early
Scholastics. A suitable pair of gods entrenched in the Abrahamitic tradition is
Jahwe and Asherah, but apparently the couple broke up some time after the late
Bronze age [Finkelstein and Silberman 2001].
Constraints by traditional religion are more relaxed insofar there is no dogma
imposing an upper boundary for the number of devils. As in the case of heavens,
souls are not restrictedto exist only in spaceswith dimesion atleast three. If hells
are two-dimensional closed surfaces with topological genus g > 1, then the Euler
characteristics is 2−2g, which would correspond to a hell with an even number
of 2(g−1) devils. Such hells can best be envisioned as multiple tori. The double
torus in the form of the figure 8 has Euler characteristics -2. Each torus attached
decrease the Euler characteristics by a further -2. This suggest that the rings of
hell are not concentric, as Dante speculated, but that they are lined up such that
the soul transgresses through a complete half ring of hell before entering the next
level. This is a more hellish scenariothan Dante’s concentric model andthus more
realistic.
5. Evidences
The topology of the universe could in principle be observed if it is finite and
small (respectively old) enough to have light travelled through it. In this case one
would observe multiple images of the same constellations of a matter, which for
each point source of light takes the form of a circle. However, this method is not
discriminative for a large or young universe, where it only yields a lower bound
for the size of the univese [Bielewicz and Banday 2011]. A test for infinity of the
universe in one or several dimensions can be based on statistical analysis of the
temperature fluctiations of the background radiation, which is a remainder of the
Big Bang. If one or more dimensions of the space are topologica circles, space
remains homogenuous, but isotropy is violated.
Unfortunately, topology is just constrained, but not determined by local curva-
ture. Data from the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe suggest that the uni-
verseisflatwithonly0.5%marginoferror[Cornish et al. 2004]. Aflatuniversecan
havevanishingtotalenergyconsistentwithanoriginfromnothing. Aninfinite Eu-
clidean space fits the data. Some exotic topologies such as the Poincaré homology
sphereand the Picardhornhavebeen claimedconsistentwith the findings, but for
the former this has been challenged [Key et al. 2007]. A recent statistical analysis
onthenumberofinfinite
dimensionscomparedtheEuclideanspaceR3
,the3-torus
GODS AS TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS 5
T3 and the manifolds T2 ⊗R and S1 ⊗R2 [Aslanyan and Manohar 2011]. Only
the Euclidean space has a non-vanishing Euler characteristics. The most probable
topology of the universe was found to be T2⊗R, which would support the atheist
view brought forward by many leading cosmologists.