Granular Impact Dynamics: Acoustics and
Fluctuations
Abram H. Clark, R. P. Behringer
Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
June 28, 2021
In the corresponding fluid dynamics video, created for the APS
DFD 2012 Gallery of Fluid Motion, we show high-speed videos of 2D
granular impact experiments, where an intruder strikes a collection
of bidisperse photoelastic disks from above. We discuss the force be-
neath the intruder, which is strongly fluctuating in space and time.
These fluctuations correspond to acoustic pulses which propagate into
the medium. Analysis shows that this process, in our experiments, is
dominated by collisions with grain clusters. The energy from these
collisionsiscarriedintothegranularmediumalongnetworksofgrains,
where is it dissipated.
Much previous work in granular impact dynamics has been macroscopic, fo-
cusing on empirical force laws and scaling behavior. This is in part a result
of difficulty of obtaining experimental data at sufficiently small space and
time scales. The goal of our work is to attempt to connect macroscopic dy-
namics to grain-scale mechanisms. We do this with high-speed video of 2D
impact experiments, where an intruder strikes a collection of approximately
25,000 bidisperse hard photoelastic disks from above. Photoelastic parti-
cles allow us to observe the local granular force response, and our typical
frame rates (40,000 frames per second) allow us to resolve time scales faster
than the typical time for an acoustic pulse to traverse single particle. These
videos reveal rich acoustic behavior emanating from the leading edge of the
intruder. We also track the intruder to determine the trajectory (depth,
velocity, and acceleration), which agrees well with previous macroscopic ap-
proaches mentioned previously. By comparing the acceleration with the
photoelastic activity, we show that the intruder deceleration is dominated
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v9363.0121:viXra
by large force fluctuations observed in photoelastic analysis. This demon-
strates a new picture for the microscale dynamics, dominated by collisions
between the intruder and clusters of grains, creating acoustic pulses which
carry energy away along networks of grains.
In the corresponding video, we show a sample photoelastic video, where
a circular bronze intruder (diameter D = 20.32 cm, bulk density which is
seventimesgreaterthantheparticles)strikesthegranularbedfromaboveat
about 5 m/s. As the intruder moves through the granular bed, it generates
substantial acoustic activity, where pulses are generated from the leading
edge of the intruder, and travel away at approximately 300 m/s. We then
showaside-by-sidemovie,wheretheleftsideisatime-averagedphotoelastic
movie,andtherightsideshowstheinstantaneousphotoelasticresponsewith
the time-averaged frame subtracted off. The left (time-averaged) frames
reveal a slowly evolving force network which is used repeatedly for many
pulses. Intheright(instantaneousminusaverage)frames,thetime-averaged
force network is dark, and the instantaneous granular forces manifest as
bright pulses traveling along the latent grain networks.
Analysis which is not shown in the video demonstrates that it is these
acoustic pulses which control the intruder deceleration. For a full analy-
sis, please see our arXiv paper here (submitted to PRL), or our talk at
DFD 2012, titled “What is the granular response to a high-speed impact?”
(M32.00001).