1v26960.6051:viXra
Graphs in machine learning: an introduction
Pierre Latouche and Fabrice Rossi
Universit´eParis 1 Panth´eon-Sorbonne- Laboratoire SAMM EA 4543
90 ruede Tolbiac, F-75634 Paris Cedex 13 - France
Abstract. Graphs are commonly used to characterise interactions be-
tween objects of interest. Because they are based on a straightforward
formalism, they are used in many scientific fields from computer science
to historical sciences. In this paper, we give an introduction to some
methods relying on graphs for learning. This includes both unsupervised
and supervised methods. Unsupervised learning algorithms usually aim
at visualising graphs in latent spaces and/or clustering the nodes. Both
focus on extracting knowledge from graph topologies. While most exist-
ing techniques are only applicable to static graphs, where edges do not
evolve through time, recent developments have shown that they could be
extended to deal with evolving networks. In a supervised context, one
generally aims at inferring labels or numerical values attached to nodes
using both the graph and, when they are available, node characteristics.
Balancing thetwosourcesofinformation canbechallenging, especially as
theycandisagreelocallyorglobally. Inbothcontexts,supervisedandun-
supervised, data can be relational (augmented with one or several global
graphs) as described above, or graph valued. In this latter case, each
object of interest is given as a full graph (possibly completed by other
characteristics). Inthiscontext,naturaltasksincludegraphclustering(as
in producing clusters of graphs rather than clusters of nodes in a single
graph), graph classification, etc.
1 Real networks
One of the first practical studies on graphs can be dated back to the original
work of Moreno [51] in the 30s. Since then, there has been a growing interest
in graph analysis associated with strong developments in the modelling and
the processing of these data. Graphs are now used in many scientific fields.
In Biology [54, 2, 7], for instance, metabolic networks can describe pathways of
biochemicalreactions[41],whileinsocialsciencesnetworksareusedtorepresent
relation ties between actors [66, 56, 36, 34]. Other examples include powergrids
[71] and the web [75]. Recently, networks have also been considered in other
areassuchas geography[22]andhistory[59,39]. Inmachine learning,networks
are seen as powerful tools to model problems in order to extract information
from data and for prediction purposes. This is the object of this paper. For
more complete surveys, we refer to [28, 62, 49, 45].
In this section, we introduce notations and highlight properties shared by
mostrealnetworks. InSection2,wethenconsidermethodsaimingatextracting
information from a unique network. We will particularly focus on clustering
methods where the goal is to find clusters of vertices. Finally, in Section 3,
techniques that take a series of networks into account, where each network is
seenasanobject,areinvestigated. Inparticular,distancesandkernelsforgraphs
are discussed.
1.1 Notations
A graph is first characterised by a set V of N vertices and a set E of edges
between pairs of vertices. The graph is said to be directed if the pairs (i,j)
in E are ordered, undirected otherwise. A graph with self loops is made of
vertices which can be connected to themselves. The degree of a vertex i is the
total number of edges connected to i, with self loops counted twice. In most
applications, only the presence or absence of an edge is characterised. However,
edgescanalsobeweightedbyafunctionh:E →FforanysetF. Moregenerally
arbitrary labelling functions can be defined on both the vertices and the edges,
leading to labelled graphs.
AgraphisusuallydescribedbyanN×N adjacencymatrix(X) whereX
is the value associated to the edge between the (i,j) pair. It is equal to zero in
the absence ofrelationshipbetweenthe nodes. Inthe case ofbinary graphs,the
matrix X is binary and X = 1 indicates that the two vertices are connected.
If the graph is directed then X is symmetric that is X =X for all (i,j).
We use interchangeably the vocabularyfrom graph theory introduced above
and a less formal vocabulary in with a graph is called a network and a vertex
a node. In general, the network is the real world object while the graph is its
mathematical representation, but we have a more relaxed use of the terms.
1.2 Properties
A remarkable characteristic of most real networks is that they share common
properties[20,3,67,54]. First,mostofthemaresparsei.e. thenumberofedges
present in not quadratic in the number of vertices, but linear. Thus, the mean
degree remains bounded when N increases and the network density, defined as
the ratio between the number of existing edges over the number of potential
edges,tends to zero. Second,while someverticesof arealnetworkcanhavefew
connections orno connectionatallwith the othervertices,mostverticesbelong
to a single component, so called giant component, where it is always possible to
findapath, i.e. asetofadjacentconnectededges,connectinganypairofnodes.
Nodes can be disconnected from this component, forming significantly smaller
components. Finally, we would like to highlight the degree heterogeneity and
small world properties. The first property states that few vertices have a lot
of links, while most of the vertices have few connections. Therefore, scale free
distributions are often considered to model the degrees [6, 15]. The second one
indicates that the shortest path from one vertex to another is generally rather
small, typically of size O(log(N)).
2 Graph clustering
In order to extract information from a unique graph, unsupervised methods
usuallylookforclusterofverticessharingsimilarconnectionprofiles,aparticular
case of general vertices clustering [63]. They differ in the way they define the
topology on top of which clusters are built.
2.1 Community structure
Most graph clustering algorithms aim at uncovering specific types of clusters,
so calledcommunities, where there are more edges between vertices of the same
community than between vertices of different communities. Thus, communities
appear in the form of densely connected clusters of vertices, with sparser con-
nections between groups. They are characterised by the friend of my friend
is my friend effect, i.e. a transitivity property, also called assortative mixing
effect. Two families of methods for community discovering can be singled out
among a vast set of methods [24], depending on wether they maximize a score
derived from the modularity score of Girvan and Newman [27] or rely on the
latent position cluster model (LPCM) of Handcock, Raftery and Tantrum [34].
2.1.1 Modularity score
Aseriesofcommunitydetectionalgorithmshavebeenproposed(seeforinstance
[27, 52, 53] and the survey [24]). They involve iterative removal of edges from
thenetworktodetectcommunitieswherecandidateedgesforremovalarechosen
accordingtobetweennessmeasures. Allmeasuresrelyonthesameideathattwo
communities, by definition, are joined by a few edges and therefore, all paths
from vertices in one community to vertices in the other are likely to path along
thesefewedges. Therefore,thenumberofpathsthatgoalonganedgeisexpected
tobelargerforintercommunityedges. Forinstance,theedgebetweennessofan
edge does account for the number of shortestpaths between all pairs of vertices
that run along that edge. Moreover, the random walk betweenness evaluates
the expected number of times a random walk wouldpath along the edge, for all
pairs of vertices.
The iterative removal of edges produces a dendrogram, describing a hierar-
chicalstructure,fromasituationwhereeachvertexbelongstoadifferentcluster
to the inverse scenario where all vertices are clustered within the same commu-
nity. The modularity score [27] is then consideredto select a particular division
ofthenetworkintoK clusters. Denotinge thefractionofedgesinthenetwork
connecting vertices of communities k and l, as well as a = K a , the frac-
tion of edges that connect with vertices of community k, the modularity score
is given by:
).
Such a criterion is computed for the different levels in the hierarchy and K is
chosen such that K is maximised.
Rather that building the complete dendrogram, other algorithms have fo-
cused on optimising the modularity score directly, as it is beneficial both in
computational terms and in the perceived quality of the obtained partitions. A
very popular algorithm, the so-called Louvain method [10], proceeds by a se-
ries of greedy exchanges and merging that turns a fully refined partition into
a coarser one that provides a (local) maximum of the modularity. Better solu-
tions can be obtained using more sophisticated heuristics [55] but maximising
the modularity is a NP-hard problem [12].
Note that modularity approaches have been shown to be asymptotically bi-
ased[9]. Totacklethisissue,degreecorrectedmethodswereintroducedinorder
to take the degrees of nodes into account.
2.1.2 Latent position cluster model
Alternative approaches, looking for clusters of vertices with assortative mixing,
usually rely on the LPCM model [34] which is a generalisation of the latent
position model (LPM) [36]. In the original LPM model, each vertex i is first
assumed to be associated with a position Z in a Euclidean latent space Rd.
Eachedgebetweenapair(i,j)ofverticesisthendrawndependingonZ andZ .
Both maximum likelihood and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques
wereconsideredtoestimatethemodelparametersandthelatentpositions. The
corresponding mapping of the vertices into the Euclidean latent space produces
arepresentationofthenetworksuchthatnodeswhicharelikelytobeconnected
havesimilarpositions. Notethatifthelatentspaceislowdimensional,typically
of dimension d = 1,2,3, then the representation can be visualised which is
feature appreciated by practitioners.
The LPM model was extended in order to look for both a representation of
the network and a clustering of the vertices. Thus, the corresponding LPCM
model assumes that the positions are drawn from a Gaussian mixture model in
thelatentspacesuchthateachGaussiandistributioncorrespondstoacluster. A
two stage maximum likelihood approach along with a Bayesian MCMC scheme
were proposed for inference purposes. Moreover,conditional Bayes factors were
consideredto estimate the number ofclustersfromthe data. Finally variational
bayesian inference is also possible [61].
2.2 Heterogeneous structures
So far, we have discussed methods looking exclusively for communities in net-
works. Other approachesusually derive fromthe stochastic block model (SBM)
of Nowicki and Snijders [56]. They can also look for communities, but not only.
The SBM models assumes that nodes are spread in unknown clusters and
that the probability of a connection between two nodes i and j depends on
their corresponding clusters. In practice, a latent vector Z is drawn from a
multinomial distribution with parameters (1,α = {α ,...,α }), where α is
the proportion of cluster k. Therefore, Z is a binary vector of size K with a
single1,suchthatZ =1indicatesthatibelongstoclusterk,0otherwise. Ifiis
in cluster k and j in l, then the SBM model assumes that there is a probability
π of a connection between the two nodes. All connection probabilities are
characterised by a K ×K matrix Π. Note that a community structure can be
definedbysettingvaluesforthediagonaltermsofΠtohighervaluesthanextra
diagonalterms[37]. Inpractice,becausenoassumptionsaremaderegardingΠ,
the SBM model can take heterogeneous structures into account [18, 42, 44].
While generatinga networkwith such a sampling scheme is straightforward,
estimating the model parameters α and Π as well as the set (Z) of all latent
vectors is challenging. One of the key issue is that the posterior distribution
of Z given the adjacency matrix X and the model parameters (α,Π) cannot
be factorised due to conditional dependency. Therefore, standard optimisation
algorithms, such as the expectation maximisation (EM) algorithm, cannot be
derived. To tackle this issue variational and stochastic approximations have
been proposed. Thus,[18]reliedonavariationalEM(VEM) algorithmwhereas
[44] used a variational Bayes EM (VBEM) approach. Alternatively, [56] esti-
mated the posterior distribution of the model parameters and Z, given X, by
considering Gibbs sampling.
Aevenmorefondamentalquestionconcernsthe estimationofthe numberof
clusters present in the data. Unfortunately, since the likelihood is not tractable
either, standard model selection criteria, like the Akaike information criterion
(AIC) or the Bayesian IC (BIC) cannot be computed. Again, variational along
with asymptotic Laplace approximations were derived to obtain approximate
model selection criteria [18, 44].
In some cases, the clustering of the nodes and the estimation of the number
of clusters are performed at the same time using allocationsampler [50], greedy
search [16], or non parametric schemes [40].
2.3 Extensions
Since the original development of the SBM model, many extensions have been
proposed to deal for instance with valued edges [48] or to take into account
covariate information [76, 49]. The random subgraph model (RSM) [39] for
instance assumes that a partition of the nodes into subgraphs is observed and
thatthesubgraphsaremadeof(unknown)latentclusters,asintheSBMmodel,
with various mixing proportions. The edges are typed. In parallel, strategies
lookingforoverlappingclusters,whereeachnodecanbelongtomultipleclusters,
havebeenderived. In[1],avertexibelongsaclusterinits relationwithagiven
vertex j. Because i is involved in multiple relations in the network, it can
belong to more than one cluster. In [43], the multinomial distribution of the
SBM model is replaced with a product of Bernoulli distribution, allowing each
vertex to belong to no, one, or severalclusters.
In the last few years, a lot of attention has been paid on extending the ap-
proaches mentioned previously in order to deal with dynamic networks where
nodes and/or edges can evolve through time. The main idea consists in in-
troducing temporal processes, such as hidden Markov model (HMM) or linear
dynamic systems [72, 74, 73]. While models usually focus on modelling the dy-
namic of networks through the evolution of their latent structures, Heaukulani
and Gharamani [35] chose to define how observed social interactions can affect
future unobserved latent structures. We would also like to highlight the work
of Dubois, Butts, and P. Smyth [21]. Contrary to most dynamic clustering ap-
proaches, they considered a non homogeneous Poisson process allowing to deal
with a continuous time periods where events, i.e. the creation or removal of
an edge, can occur one at a time. Another approach for graph clustering in the
continuoustimecontextisprovidedby[29]whichbuildsacoclusteringstructure
on the vertices of the graph and on the time stamps of the edges.
3 Multiple graphs
Whilealargepartofthegraphrelatedliteratureinmachinelearningtargetsthe
case of a single graph, numerous applications lead naturally to data sets made
of graphs, that is situations in which each data point is a graph (or consists in
several components including at least one graph). This is the case for instance
in chemistry where molecules can be represented by undirected labelled graphs
(seee.g. [57])andinbiologywherethestructureofaproteincanbe represented
by a graphthat encodes neighborhoods between it fragments as in [11]. In fact,
the use of graphs as structured representations of complex data follows a long
tradition with early examples appearing in the late seventies [60] and with a
tendency to become pervasive in the last decade.
It shouldbe notedthat eveninthe caseofa single globalgraphdescribedin
the first part of this paper, it is quite natural to study multiple graphs derived
from the global one, in particular via the ego-centered approach which is very
common in social sciences (see e.g. [26]). The main idea is to extract from
a large social network a set of small networks centered on each of the vertices
under study. For real world social networks, it is in general the only possible
courseofaction,thewholenetworkbeingimpossibletoobserve(seee.g. [19]for
an example).
When dealing with multiple graphs, one tackles the traditional tasks of ma-
chine learning, from unsupervised problems (clustering, frequent patterns anal-
ysis, etc.) to supervised ones (classification, regression, etc.). There are two
maintendenciesinthe literature: thedesignofspecializedmethods obtainedby
adapting classical ones to graphs and the use of distances and kernels coupled
with generic methods.
3.1 Specialized methods
As graphs are not vector data, classical machine learning techniques do not
apply directly. Numerous methods have been adapted in rather specific ways
to handle graphs and other non vector data, especially in the neural network
community [32, 17], for instance via recursive neural networks as in [33, 30]. In
those approaches, each graph is processed vertex by vertex, by leveraging the
structure to build a form of abstract time. The recursive model maintains an
implicit knowledge of the vertices already processed by means of its space state
neurons.
3.2 Distances and kernels
A somewhat more generic solution consists in building distances (or dissimi-
larities) between graphs and then in using distances based methods (such as
methods based on the so-called relational approach [31]). One difficulty is that
graphisomorphismshouldbeaccountedforwhentwographsarecompared: two
graphs are isomorphic if they are equal up to a relabeling of their vertices. Any
sound dissimilarity/distance between graphs should detect isomorphic graphs.
This is however far more complex than expected [23] up to a point that the
actual complexity class of the graphisomorphismproblemremains unknown (it
belongs to the NP class but not to the NP-complete class, for instance). While
exactalgorithmsappear fastonrealworldgraphs,their worstcase complexities
are exponential, with a best bound in O(2√nlogn) [47]. In addition, subgraph
isomorphism, i.e. determining whether a given graph contains a subgraph that
is isomorphic to another graph is NP-complete.
Nevertheless,numerousexactorapproximatealgorithmshavebeendefinedto
try andsolvethe (sub)graphisomorphismproblem(see e.g. [14]). Inparticular,
it has been shown that those problems (and related ones) are special cases of
the computation of the graph edit distance [13], a generalization of the string
editdistance[46]. Thegrapheditdistanceisdefinedbyfirstintroducingedition
operations on graph, such as insertion, deletion and substitution of edges and
vertices (labels and weights included). Each operation is assigned a numeric
cost. The total cost of a series of operations is simply the sum of the individual
costs. Then the graph edit distance between two graphs is the cost of the least
costly sequence of operations that transforms one of the graph into the other
one (see [25] for a survey).
A rather different line of research has provided a set of tools to compare
graphs by means of kernels (as in reproducing kernels [4]). Those symmetric
positive definite similarity functions allow one to generalize any classical vector
space method to non vector data in a straightforward way [64]. Numerous of
such kernels have been defined to compare two graphs [69]. Most of them are
based on random walks that take place on the product of the two graphs under
comparison.
Oncea kerneloradistance hasbeen chosen,one canapply anyofthe kernel
methods [65] or of the relational methods [31], which gives access to support
vector machine, kernel ridge regression and kernel k-means to cite only a few.
4 Conclusion
This paper has only scraped the surface of the vast literature about graphs in
machinelearning. Completeareaofgraphapplicationsinmachinelearningwere
ignored.
For instance, it is well know that extracting a neighborhood graph from a
classical vector data set is an efficient way to get insights on the topology of
the data set. This has led to numerous interesting applications ranging from
visualization (as in isomap [68] and its successors) to semi-supervised learning
[8], going through spectral clustering [70] and exploratory analysis of labelled
data sets [5].
Another interesting area concerns the so-called relational data framework
when a classical data set is augmented with a graph structure: the vertices of
the graphare elements of a standardvector space and are thus traditional data
points, but they are interconnected via a graph structure (or several ones in
complex settings). The challenge consists here in taking into account the graph
structure while processingthe classicaldata orvice-versain takinginto account
the data point descriptions when processing the graph. Among other issues,
those two different sources of information can be contradictoryfor a given task.
Atypicalapplicationofsuchaframeworkconsistsinannotatingnodesonsocial
media [38].
While wehavepresentedsometemporalextensionsofclassicalgraphrelated
problems, we have ignored most of them. For instance, the issue of informa-
tion propagation on graphs has received a lot of attention [58]. Among other
tasks, machine learning can be used e.g. to predict the probability of passing
information from one actor to another as in [19].
More generally, the massive spread in the last decade of online social net-
workinghastheobviousconsequenceofgeneratingverylargerelationaldatasets.
While non vector data have been studied for quite a long time, those new data
sets push the complexity one step further by mixing severaltypes of non vector
data. Objects under study are now described by complex mixed data (texts,
images, etc.) and are related by several networks (friendship, online discussion,
etc.). In addition, the temporal dynamic of those data cannot be easily ignored
or summarized. It seems therefore that the next set of problems faced by the
machine learning community will include graphs in numerous forms, including
dynamic ones.