1v3460.1101:viXra
Graphene: from materials science to particle
physics.
JoaquínE.Drut∗†
DepartmentofPhysics,TheOhioStateUniversity,Columbus,OH43210–1117,USA
E-mail: jdrut@mps.ohio-state.edu
Timo A.Lähde
HelsinkiInstituteofPhysicsandDepartmentofAppliedPhysics,P.O.Box14100,
AaltoUniversity,FI-00076Aalto,Espoo,Finland
E-mail: timo.lahde@tkk.fi
DepartmentofAppliedPhysics,P.O.Box14100,AaltoUniversity,
FI-00076Aalto,Espoo,Finland
E-mail: eero.tolo@tkk.fi
Since its discoveryin 2004, graphene, a two-dimensionalhexagonalcarbonallotrope, has gen-
eratedgreatinterestandspurredresearchactivityfrommaterialssciencetoparticlephysicsand
viceversa. Inparticular,graphenehasbeenfoundtoexhibitoutstandingelectronicandmechan-
icalproperties,aswellasanunusuallow-energyspectrumofDiracquasiparticlesgivingriseto
a fractionalquantumHalleffectwhenfreelysuspendedandimmersedina magneticfield. One
ofthemostintriguingpuzzlesofgrapheneinvolvesthelow-temperatureconductivityatzeroden-
sity,acentralissueinthedesignofgraphene-basednanoelectroniccomponents.Whilesuspended
grapheneexperimentshaveshownatrendreminiscentofsemiconductors,withrisingresistivityat
lowtemperatures,mosttheoriespredictaconstantorevendecreasingresistivity.However,lattice
fieldtheorycalculationshaverevealedthatsuspendedgrapheneisatornearthecriticalcoupling
for excitonic gap formation due to strong Coulomb interactions, which suggests a simple and
straightforwardexplanationfortheexperimentaldata. Inthiscontributionwereviewthecurrent
status ofthe field with emphasisonthe issue ofgapformation,and outlinerecentprogressand
futurepointsofcontactbetweencondensedmatterphysicsandLatticeQCD.
TheXXVIIIInternationalSymposiumonLatticeFieldTheory
June14-19,2010
Villasimius,Sardinia,Italy
∗Speaker.
†Presentaddress:TheoreticalDivision,LosAlamosNationalLaboratory,LosAlamos,NM,87545,USA.
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
1. Introduction
Therecent experimental isolation ofsingleatomiclayersofgraphite, knownasgraphene, has
provided physicists with a novel opportunity to study a system with remarkable electronic and
many-body properties, which is easy to manipulate experimentally [1, 2]. Even more recently,
the advent of experiments utilizing samples of suspended graphene, free from the interference of
an underlying substrate [3], has provided unprecedented insight into the intrinsic properties of
graphene. Among other remarkable discoveries, suspended graphene has been found to exhibit
a carrier mobility which exceeds that of silicon by an order of magnitude, a fractional quantum
Hall effect which isindicative of strong electron-electron interactions, as wellas amarkedly non-
metallicbehavior oftheDCconductivity atlowtemperatures.
A central property of graphene is that the low-energy electronic spectrum can be described
in terms of two flavors of massless, four-component fermionic quasiparticles with linear disper-
sion[4]. Indeed,duetothehexagonalhoneycombarrangementofthecarbonatomsinthegraphene
lattice, the band structure of graphene exhibits two inequivalent (but degenerate) “Dirac cones”
where the conduction and valence bands touch. Since the energy-momentum relation around a
Dirac point islinear asin relativistic theories, thelow-energy description ofgraphene bears acer-
tainresemblancetomasslessQuantumElectrodynamics(QED).Nevertheless,animportantdiffer-
ence isthat the Fermivelocity ofthequasiparticles ingraphene isaslow asv ≃c/300, whereby
theelectromagneticinteractionisrenderedessentiallyinstantaneous. However,itshouldbepointed
outthatsuchavalueofv isactuallyunusually largefromacondensed matterpointofview.
Such an unusual band structure (often referred to as semimetallic) accounts fairly well for
the observed properties of graphene sheets deposited on a dielectric substrate. While suspended
graphene has recently come under intense experimental investigation [3], its spectrum is yet to
be computed in a controlled fashion. From a theoretical perspective, the challenging feature of
suspended graphene lies in the smallness of the dieletric constant e = e which, in conjunction
withthesmallvalueofv ,resultsinagraphene analogue ofthefine-structure constant a &1. At
suchstrongcoupling,adynamicaltransitionintoaphasefundamentallydifferentfromtheweakly-
coupled semimetallic phase of graphene is a strong possibility. In graphene sheets deposited on a
substrate, suchatransition iseffectively inhibited duetothesuppression ofa bythedielectric.
2. Low-energy effective theory
Theelectronic bandstructure ofgraphene close totheFermilevelformsthebasis ofthelow-
energy effective theory of graphene. This band structure is a reflection of the hexagonal arrange-
mentofthecarbon atoms, whichcanbedecomposed intotwotriangular sublattices AandB. This
leadstothetight-binding model
H = −t (cid:229) a† s ,i b s ,j +h.c. −t′ (cid:229) a s † ,i a s ,j +b s † ,i b s ,j +h.c. , (2.1)
hi,ji,s =↑,↓ hhi,jii,s =↑,↓
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
wheretheoperatorsa† (a )andb† (b )create(annihilate)anelectronofspins atlocationion
s ,i s ,i s ,i s ,i
sublattices A and B, respectively. The first term (involving t) takes into account nearest-neighbor
interactions (as first done by Wallace in Ref. [5]), and the second term (involving t′) the next-
to-nearest neighbor ones. The hopping parameters that give an optimal fit to the experimentally
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
determinedbandstructureofgraphenearet≃2.8eVandt′≃0.1eV[6]. Thetight-binding model
with nearest-neighbor hopping can be generalized to a hexagonal Hubbard model by addition of
an on-site Coulomb repulsion term, which has been recently studied [7]within aQuantum Monte
Carloapproach.
WeshallfollowasomewhatdifferentroutebasedonanEffectiveFieldTheory(EFT)treatment
ofgraphene[8,9],whichhastheadvantageofdescribingthephysicsofgraphenedirectlyinterms
oftherelevant low-energy degrees offreedom, namely charged masslessfermionic quasiparticles.
The EFT description of graphene has an additional advantage as it allows for the direct study of
effects due to the unscreened, long-range Coulomb interactions between the quasiparticles. In
whatfollows,weshallformulateacontinuumLagrangianfieldtheoryvalidatlowmomenta,much
smallerthantheinverseoftheinteratomic distance ∼1.42Å.
2.1 Continuumformulation
The low-energy EFT of graphene may be derived from a tight-binding or Hubbard model
description augmented by a long-range Coulomb interaction [9], yielding a theory of N Dirac
flavors interacting viaaninstantaneous Coulomb interaction. Theaction (in Euclidean spacetime)
ofthistheoryis
S =− (cid:229) f d2xdty¯ D[A ]y + 1 d3xdt(¶ A )2, (2.2)
E a 0 a 2g2 i 0
whereN =2forgraphenemonolayers,g2=e2/e forgrapheneinvacuum(suspendedgraphene),
y isafour-componentDiracfieldin(2+1)dimensions,A isaCoulombfieldin(3+1)dimensions,
0 0 0 0 F i i
where the Dirac matrices g m satisfy the Euclidean Clifford algebra {g m ,g n } = 2d mn . The four-
component spinor structure accounts for quasiparticle excitations of sublattices A and B around
the two Dirac points in the band structure [4, 9]. The two Dirac points are identified with the
twoinequivalent representations (withopposite parity) ofthe Diracmatrices in(2+1) dimensions.
In graphene monolayers, N =2 owing to electronic spin, while N =4 is related to the case of
two decoupled graphene layers, interacting solely via the Coulomb interaction. Consideration of
arbitrary N isalsouseful, giventhatananalytic treatment[10]ispossibleinthelimitN →¥ .
The strength of the Coulomb interaction is controlled by a = e2/(4p v e ), which is the
graphene analogue ofthefine-structure constant a ≃1/137 ofQED.Itisstraightforward toshow
thata istheonlyparameter, byrescaling according to
t′=v t, A′ =A /v . (2.4)
The action (2.2) is invariant under spatially uniform gauge transformations (see Sec. 3.1). Notice
thatsincetheA fieldis(3+1)-dimensional, afour-fermion Coulombinteraction oftheform
a 0 a b 0 b (2.5)
is recovered by integrating out A . Nevertheless, for our purposes the original form of the action
(quadratic inthefermions)asgiveninEq.(2.2)ispreferable.
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
A central property of the low-energy EFT is that Eq. (2.2) respects a global U(2N ) chiral
symmetryunderthetransformations
y →exp(iG a )y (2.6)
where the matrices G are the (2N )2 hermitian generators of U(2N ), such that for the case of
graphene monolayers, the group is U(4). It should be noted that the choice of any particular
representation fortheG iscompletelyarbitraryandisnotnecessaryforanycalculational purpose,
as all relevant information is provided by the Clifford algebra. However, the identification of the
spinor degreesoffreedom withanyparticular Diracpointandgraphene sublattice isdependent on
thechosenrepresentation. ThisU(4)chiralsymmetry,whichstrictlyspeakingisaflavorsymmetry,
can be spontaneously broken down to U(2)×U(2), in which case the excitonic condensate hyy¯ i
acquires a non-vanishing value, signaling the formation of quasiparticle-hole bound states. The
samegroupstructure isobtained byadding toEq.(2.2)aparityinvariant (Dirac)massterm
d2xdtm y¯ y , (2.7)
which breaks the symmetry explicitly. For the extended theory with N flavors, the symmetry
breaking pattern is U(2N )→U(N )×U(N ). Other symmetry breaking patterns, involving the
possibilites of magnetic as well as Cooper-like pairing instabilities, have been investigated in
Refs.[9,11].
2.2 Effectiveactionandprobabilitymeasure
Thepartition functioncorresponding toEq.(2.2)isgivenby
Z = DA Dy Dy¯ exp(−S [y¯ ,y ,A ]), (2.8)
whereitispossible tointegrate outthefermionic degrees offreedom, asS isquadratic inthey .
Wethusobtain
S g = d3xdt(¶ A )2 (2.10)
is the pure gauge part of the action. It is of central importance for the convergence of the Monte
Carlo algorithm that the above determinant has a definite sign, independently of any particular
configuration of the gauge field A . One way to establish this property is to proceed by writing
D[A ]intheform
M[A ] 0 M[A ] 0
D[A ]= 0 = 0 , (2.11)
0 ! 0 !
0 0 0 0 F i i
which entails aspecific choice of Dirac g -matrices. Furthermore, we note that A is real, and that
the Pauli matrices and the momentum operator are hermitian. The latter implies ¶ m † =−¶ m , and
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
While this property is not affected by the introduction of a parity invariant mass term such as
Eq.(2.7),thepositivity ofdet(D)breaksdowninthepresenceofachemicalpotential.
The fact that det(D) is positive definite allows for the definition of an effective action that is
purelyreal,givenby
eff 0 f 0 E 0
sothatthepartition functionbecomes
whereP[A ]=exp(−S [A ])>0canbeinterpreted asapositive definiteprobability measurefor
aMonteCarlocalculation, asoutlined inSection3.
2.3 Operatorexpectation values
The expectation value of a given operator O[y¯,y ] dependent on the fermion fields can be
calculated bytakingfunctional derivativesofthegenerating functional
Z[h¯,h ]= DA Dy Dy¯ exp(−S [A ,y¯,y ,h¯,h ]), (2.16)
wheresourcetermshavebeenaddedtotheoriginalactionaccording to
S [A ,y¯,y ,h¯,h ]=S [A ,y¯,y ]+ d2xdt(yh¯ +h.c.), (2.17)
suchthatthemodifiedeffectivegaugeactionisafunctional ofA aswellasofthesourcesh ,h¯. It
is again possible to integrate out the fermionic degrees offreedom and take functional derivatives
withrespecttothesources intheresulting expression
Z[h¯,h ](cid:181) DA exp(−S [A ])exp − d2xdth¯D−1[A ]h , (2.18)
Z (cid:18) Z (cid:19)
whichmakesitpossibletoobtainexpectationvaluesintermsofapathintegraloverA only. While
thisprocedure iscompletely general, itispossible toemployaslightly different approach inorder
tofacilitate thecomputation ofthechiralcondensate andsusceptibility.
Thechiral condensate s , which is the order parameter of the semimetal-insulator phase tran-
sitioningraphene, isdefinedby
s ≡hy¯ y i, (2.19)
where the fermion fields are evaluated at the same space-time point. It is useful to note that the
mass m plays the rôle of a source, coupled to y¯ y . The expectation value of this operator can
therefore be obtained by firstdifferentiating thepartition function with respect tom and dividing
bythevolume,giving
s = DA Dy Dy¯ d2xdty¯ (x,t)y (x,t)exp(−S )= , (2.20)
VZ 0 b b E V ¶ m
where s hasbeen defined asanaverage overthe lattice volume occupied bythe fermions. Onthe
otherhand,oncethefermionshavebeenintegrated out,thederivativewithrespecttom yields
VZ 0 0 eff 0 V 0
(cid:10) (cid:11)
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
wheretheidentities
(cid:18) (cid:19)
have been used. The chiral susceptibility c may be found by taking one more derivative with
respect tom ,giving
(cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11)
which is expected to diverge at a second-order phase transition, and may also yield constraining
information ontheuniversalcriticalexponents ofthetransition.
3. Graphene onthe lattice
Inthissection weformulatethelatticeversion ofEq.(2.2)followingRefs.[12,13]. Itshould
benotedinthiscontextthatacloselyrelatedlatticemodelofthestrong-coupling limitofgraphene
hasbeenconsideredinRef.[14]. Webeginbydiscretizingthepuregaugesector,wheretherequire-
mentofgaugeinvariance impliestheuseof“linkvariables”torepresentthegaugedegreesoffree-
dom. The “staggered” discretization of the fermionic sector is then outlined, as it is the preferred
choice to represent fermions with chiral symmetry at finite lattice spacing [15, 16]. Throughout
this paper, the lattice spacing is set equal to unity, and thus all dimensionful quantities should be
regardedasexpressed inunitsofthelatticespacing.
3.1 Gaugeinvariance andlinkvariables
ThepuregaugepartoftheEuclideanaction,Eq.(2.10),canbethoughtofasthenon-relativistic
limitoftheLorentz-invariant form 1
F mn whereF
wherewehaveusedF =0(nomagneticfield)and¶ A =0(noelectricfieldinductionbyamag-
netic field), validinthenon-relativistic limit(v ≪c). Thus, forgraphene theonlynon-vanishing
contribution istheelectricfieldE =−¶ A ,whichrepresents theinstantaneous Coulombinterac-
tionbetweenthequasiparticles.
Thegauge action (2.10) isinvariant under thetime-dependent, spatially uniform gauge trans-
formations
A →A +a (t), y →exp i dt′a (t′) y , (3.2)
(cid:26) Z (cid:27)
wherea (t)isafunctionoftimeonly. Thus,inspiteofitsapparentsimplicity,theeffectivetheoryof
graphene possesses atrulylocalgaugeinvariance, whichshouldberespected bythelatticeaction.
Tothisend,oneintroduces temporallinkvariables
U =U ≡exp(iq ), (3.3)
where q is the dimensionless lattice gauge field evaluated at the lattice point n=(n ,n ,n ,n ).
Thespatiallinkvariables
U =1 (3.4)
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
aresettounity. ItisconvenienttoexpressthediscretizedversionofEq.(2.10)intermsof“plaque-
tte”variables, definedby
U mn ,n =U m ,n U n ,n+em U m † ,n+en U n † ,n , (3.5)
where, in the present case of apure Coulomb interaction, the only non-trivial components areU
andU . Thoseplaquettecomponentsthencorrespond tothediscretizedformulationoftheelectric
field. The remaining components corresponding to the magnetic field are equal to unity. These
statements canbesummarized intheexpression
U mn ,n =d m 0 d n i U n U n † +e +d n 0 d m i U n †U n+e +d m 0 d n 0 +d m i d n j . (3.6)
Intermsofthegaugelinkvariablesandplaquettes,thediscretizedgaugeactioncorresponding
toEq.(2.10)isgivenby[17]
S E g =b (cid:229) (cid:229) 1− 2 1 U mn ,n +U mn † ,n , (3.7)
n m >n (cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where b =1/g2,such that b →v /g2 whentherescaling ofEq.(2.4)isapplied. InEq.(3.7), the
onlynon-vanishingcontributionsarisefromthetermswith(m ,n )=(1,0);(2,0);(3,0);(2,1);(3,1)
and(3,2). Eq.(3.7)maybesimplifiedto
S g =b (cid:229) 3− (cid:229) ´ U U† , (3.8)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where ´ (x) denotes the real part of x. Eq. (3.8) is referred to as the compact formulation, which
has been found to pose problems related to spurious monopole condensation in QED and related
theories [18]. On the other hand, the non-compact formulation, which is obtained from Eq. (3.8)
byexpanding ´ (U U† )tosecondorderinq ,
n n+e i 2 n+e i n
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
S g = b (cid:229) (cid:229) 3 q −q 2 , (3.10)
E,N 2 n+e i n
(cid:16) (cid:17)
isfreefromsuchproblems[16,19]andallowsforarealisticcontinuum limit.
3.2 Staggered fermions
While the discretization of the gauge sector is relatively straightforward, the inclusion of dy-
namical fermions on the lattice is a notoriously difficult problem. One of the main issues when
simulatingfermionsonthelatticeistheso-calleddoublingproblem(foranoverview,seeRef.[17],
Chapter4). Thisproblemisrelatedtothechiralinvarianceofthefermionicsector,andarisesdueto
theappearanceofmultiple(unwanted)zerosintheinversepropagator. Inotherwords,oneissimu-
latingmorefermionflavorsthanexpected,theexactnumberbeingdependentonthedimensionality
ofthe theory. There exists anumber ofwaystoavoid thedoubling problem, butallofthem break
chiral invariance in one way or the other, a fact encoded in the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem [20].
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
The solution we have chosen for our simulations of graphene is the “staggered” discretization of
Ref. [21]. This choice is advantageous for the study of spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in
graphene, as ityields thecorrect number of degrees of freedom while (partially) preserving chiral
symmetry. The major drawback of staggered fermions is that the full chiral symmetry is restored
onlyinthecontinuum limit,afactreferred toas“tastesymmetrybreaking”.
In order to discretize the fermionic sector of Eq. (2.2) in a way amenable to computer simu-
lations, a number of choices need tobe made. Asafirst step, fermions are integrated out, and the
partition function is written purely in terms of the gauge field, Eq. (2.15). The fermions are then
represented exclusively through det(D). Onecanthenattempt tocompute thedeterminant exactly
foragivenq configuration, whichisfeasible duetothelowdimensionality oftheproblem, Alter-
natively, one may rewrite det(D) in terms of a path integral over complex scalar fields referred to
aspseudofermions, asiscommoninLatticeQCD.
It has been shown in Ref. [22] that for each staggered flavor one recovers, in the continuum
limit, two four-component Dirac flavors. Thus, by retaining one staggered flavor, it is possible
to have exactly eight continuum fermionic degrees of freedom, which is the correct number for
graphene. Theactionofasinglestaggered flavorisgivenby
S f [c¯,c ,q ]=− (cid:229) c¯ K [q ]c , (3.11)
wherethestaggered Diracoperatoris
K [q ]= 1 (d U −d U†)+ v F (cid:229) h i(d −d )+m d , (3.12)
n,m 2 n+e 0 ,m n n−e 0 ,m m 2 n n+e i ,m n−e i ,m 0 n,m
where the phase factors h arise from the spin-diagonalization of the Dirac matrices [23]. The op-
erator K thusreplaces Dinallexpressions fortheprobability, chiral condensate andsusceptibility
that were derived in the previous sections. As expected from the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem, the
staggered lattice action does not retain the full U(4) chiral symmetry of the original graphene ac-
tion at finite lattice spacing. As shown in Ref. [22], only a subgroup U(1)×U(1) remains upon
discretization. Spontaneouscondensationofcc¯ ,orequivalentlytheintroductionofaparityinvari-
antmassterm,reducesthissymmetrytoU(1).
Finally,itshouldbepointedoutthatthesituationconcerning grapheneisunusually favorable,
in the sense that the staggered formalism fortuitously provides the correct number of fermionic
degrees of freedom, as N =2 for graphene monolayers. In general, staggered fermions provide
only a compromise solution in the sense that some degree of chiral symmetry is preserved, at the
priceofretainingsomeofthedoublingoriginallypresentinthediscretizedfermionaction. Indeed,
if the case of N = 1 were to be simulated, it would be necessary to resort to the controversial
“rooting” trick [24], whereby the desired number of continuum flavors is restored by taking the
appropriate rootoftheDiracoperator.
4. Results forb
The results presented in this work for the non-compact gauge action are partly based on the
reanalysis of extant data from Ref. [12] and partly on new data on larger lattices. These datasets
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
m = 0, extrapolation l N f = 2, m = 0.0025 7.0 9.0 11.0
0.0025 0.0030 8.0 10.0 12.0
0.12 0.0030 9 0.0040
0.0040 0.0050 1
0.0050 8 0.0075
0.0075 0.0080
0.1 0.0080 0.0100
0.0100 7 0.0125
0.0125 0.0150 0.8
0.08 0.0150 0.0200
0.06 5 0.6
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.005 0.015
Figure1: Resultofasimultaneousfittos (leftpanel),c (middlepanel)andR(rightpanel). Redsymbols
indicatedataforN =28,theremainingonesareforN =32. ThedatapointsforRaregroupedaccording
tob −1. Thefitrangehasbeenrestrictedsuchthatdatawithm >0.005andb <0.1areexcluded,asdataat
largem andsmallb havesubstantialfinitevolumeeffects.Theoptimalparametersareb =0.0774(2)and
d =2.93(2),withb=1.0fixed.Thedatasatisfyb=1veryaccurately.Theerrorbarsonthedatapointsare
obtainedviatheJackknifemethod[25].
correspond toN =N =28and32,withtheextentofthebulkdimensionN setateither12or32.
Wefindthatfinite-sizeeffectsaremostpronounced asfunctions ofN andN atsmallb ,whilethe
effect ofN ontheresults isnegligible. Ouranalysis proceeds byfirstdetermining thecondensate
s , susceptibility c and R≡c m /s as a function of b and m . The second step of the analysis
consists offittinganequation ofstate(EOS)tos and c inordertoobtainestimatesofthecritical
coupling b andthecritical exponents. OurEOSisoftheform
m X(b )=Y(b )s b+s d , (4.1)
where the exponent b≡b¯ −1/d . This form has been used previously in the context of Lattice
QEDin(3+1)dimensions[26].
Here,wehavereferredtothecriticalexponentusingthenotationb¯
toavoid confusion withtheinverse coupling b . Thedependence onthecritical coupling b enters
through theexpansions
(cid:18) c(cid:19) (cid:18) c(cid:19)
where terms up to X and Y have been retained. Higher-order terms were found to have a very
smalleffectontheanalysis, andhavethusbeendiscarded.
We find that a simultaneous fit to all data for s , c and R yields the most stable results. It
is also necessary to carefully consider finite-volume effects and the impact they have on the fit
parameters. Wehave therefore excluded datapoints withm >0.005 andb <0.1. Inthis way,we
findconsistency withmean-fieldexponents, d =3andb=1. Including dataatlowerb andlarger
m suggests d ∼2.2, however such fitshave amuch higher c 2 and compare unfavorably with the
dataonR. WefindthatN =28andN =32giveconsistent resultsusingtherestricted dataset.
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
5. Experimental situation
Wenowturntothequestion whetherexperiments whichmeasuretheDCconductivity ofsus-
pendedgraphene provideanyevidenceforsemiconducting behavior whichwouldfollownaturally
from theexcitonic gapscenario. WhileafullLMCcalculation oftheconductivity isnotyetavail-
able, a simplified analysis in terms of a Kubo description of gapped quasiparticles has recently
beengiveninRef.[27],wherethedataofRef.[28]onthesuspended graphenedevices“S1”,“S2”
and “S3” were analyzed in terms of the expression s ≡ s +s . Here s is the quasiparticle
contribution intrinsic tographene, whilethe“background” component s isdevice-dependent.
TheHamiltoniandescribing Diracquasiparticles withagapD andFermivelocityv ≃c/300
isgivenbyH ≡s v k +s v k +s D /2,wherethes arePaulimatrices. Thecontribution s of
1 F 1 2 F 2 3 i q
theDiracquasiparticles totheDCconductivity ofagraphene monolayer isthen
4e2p ¥ ¥ f(be − bw −bm )− f(be + bw −bm )
s q ≡ h 2 −¥ de D /2 dxx T w (x ,e ) 2 w 2 , (5.1)
where b ≡1/k T, the Fermifunction is given by f(x)=1/(1+exp(x)), m denotes the chemical
potential andthefactorof4accountsforthespinandvalleydegreesoffreedom. Then
x 2+D 2/4 w w w w
T w (x ,e ) = x 2 d h x +e + 2 d h x −e + 2 +d h x +e − 2 d h x −e − 2
h (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)i
x 2−D 2/4 w w w w
+ x 2 d h x −e − 2 d h x −e + 2 +d h x +e + 2 d h x +e − 2 ,
h (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)i
whereh isthescattering rateofthequasiparticles, whichcanbeaccounted for[29]bybroadening
the delta functions according to pd h (x) ≡ h /(x2+h 2). In the DC limit, the integral over x in
Eq.(5.1)yields
dxx T (x ,e )= − arg D 2−4z2 , (5.3)
0 2p 16peh
wherez≡e +ih . (cid:0) (cid:1)
The inclusion of the background component s is motivated by the fact that the minimal
conductivity ingraphenesamplesisnon-universal. Insuspendedgraphene, itismuchsmallerthan
in graphene samples on a substrate and furthermore strongly sample-dependent. There is also a
clear tendency of the minimal conductivity to decrease with increasing sample purity [30]. It is
likely that the minimal conductivity in graphene is formed of several components, including the
effectsofimpurities[31],inhomogeneity [32]andeffectsduetoinvasivemetalliccontacts[33]. In
ouranalysis, wehaveusedthephenomenological form
whichallowsfortheslightempiricalT-dependenceofs . TheempiricaldataofRef.[28]isshown
in Fig.2, together withfitsin termsofs and s . Itisnoteworthy thatthe data display adistinct
“knee”at∼30K,whichintermsofthepresentdescriptionisinterpretedasthetemperaturebelow
which thermal activation isnegligible. Thus, inorder todetermine s inanunbiased fashion, we
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
S1 data S2 data
0.8 S1 data, QP only 0.8 S2 data, QP only
QP + BG fit QP + BG fit
0.7 QP only 0.7 QP only
BG only BG only
0.5 0.5 s [e2/h] S1, T = 40K rr[[kkWW ]]
0.4 0.4 180 2.5
0.3 0.3 160 N S S G G 2 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0.2 0.2 SG
140 NSG 1.5
0.01 0.1 0.01 0.1 100 0.5
0.8 S3 data, Q S3 P d o a n t l a y 60
QP + BG fit
0.7 Q BG P o o n n l l y y 10-1 S3, QP only 40 0
0.6 BG only 20 50 -2e+11
.
. .
4 5 10-2 0 -2.E11 0
.
E11 T[K] 150 200 250
0.01 0.1 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1
Figure2:Leftpanel:quasiparticle(QP)andbackground(BG)componentsofs (n=0,T)forthesuspended
graphene devices S1–S3, as determined in Ref. [27]. The empirical data is reproduced from Ref. [28].
All devices show a “knee" separating thermally activated and background regions. Right panel: s (n,T)
determinedfromafittos (n=0,T)andtheresistivityr (n,T),reproducedfromRef.[27].
first fix s and T using data in the extreme low-T region. One may then subtract s at all T,
and determine bh and D by fitting s to the resulting dataset. A simultaneous fit of s and s
confirmsthevalidityofthisprocedure. Whileh (T)isaprioriunknown,ascenarioofconstantbh
isstrongly favoredbytheavailable dataintherange35K≤T ≤150K.
Our findings in Ref. [27] suggest that the suspended graphene devices of Ref. [28] exhibit a
thermallyactivatedconductivity s ,whichiswelldescribed byEq.(5.1)fromT ∼150Kdownto
T ∼35K,wherethesignalislostduetolimitedmeasurementaccuracy. Thedeterminedbandgaps
are in the range D ∼ 25−40 meV, whereas all samples were found to favor bh ≃ 0.1 indicat-
ing a scattering rate which increases linearly with T. A natural scattering mechanism with such
properties is provided by the long-range Coulomb interaction [34] up to logarithmic corrections.
Furthermore, this value of bh is consistent with the high carrier mobilities and long mean free
pathsreported inRef.[28],aswellaswiththeoretical estimatesofthemeanfreepathduetolong-
range Coulomb scattering [34]. Specifically, for T =35−150 K we find h =3.5−15 K, with
corresponding meanfreepathsofh¯v /h ∼0.5−2.0 m m. Fitswithnogap(D =0),constant h ,or
zerobackground werefoundtobeincompatible withdata.
As shown in Fig. 2, these conclusions are consistent with the observed s (n), which depends
sensitively on the value of bh determined from data at n = 0. Furthermore, the interpretation
of the observed s (n,T) as due to thermal activation accounts, in a natural way, for the observed
transitional density n∗ above which s (T) reverts from insulating to metallic. The determined
scattering rateh (T)isalso suggestive oflong-range Coulombscattering, whichisconsistent with
theultrapure character ofthesuspended graphene samplesofRef.[28].
Graphene:frommaterialssciencetoparticlephysics. JoaquínE.Drut
6. Conclusions
We have reviewed the Lattice Gauge Theory approach to the low-energy EFT of graphene,
with the aim of introducing this technique to a wider audience and motivate the application of
this approach to systems beyond monolayer graphene. Our calculations within this the graphene
EFTindicatethatitdisplays achiralphasetransition atacriticalcoupling ofb =0.0774(2), with
critical exponents that appear consistent with mean-field theory. Spontaneous chiral symmetry
breaking inthegrapheneEFTwouldleadtotheappearance ofagapinthequasiparticle spectrum,
directly linked tothe formation ofquasiparticle-hole pairs (excitons). Itisconceivable that such a
transition occurs insuspended graphene, where thestrength of theCoulomb interaction attains its
maximumvalue.
In an effort to clarify whether currently available experimental data on suspended graphene
provide any evidence for the excitonic scenario, we have reviewed the status of such measure-
ments, which show a definite (though relatively mild) insulating trend at low T in the vicinity
of the neutral point. We have presented an interpretation of the observed anomalous temperature
dependence in terms of the excitonic gap scenario, and tentatively found that the data may be
consistently explained in terms of gapped Dirac quasiparticles (D ∼30 meV)with the long-range
Coulombinteractionasanaturalcandidateforthedominantscatteringmechanism. Furtherexperi-
mentalstudiesoftheconductivityatlowT insuspendedgrapheneareclearlycalledfor,preferably
minimizingtheeffectsofinvasive metalliccontacts.
Further investigations using the Lattice Gauge Theory approach are in progress, including
the renormalization of v due to the Coulomb interaction, the magnetic catalysis of a semimetal-
insulator transition atlarge external magnetic fields[35,36], andthe critical temperature forexci-
ton condensation in graphene bilayers [37]. The computation of transport properties involves the
extraction of spectral functions in Minkowski spacetime from Euclidean time lattice data. Such
calculations arealsofeasible nowadays, asBayesian analysis coupled withtheMaximumEntropy
Method has been successfully applied to QCD [38]. Areas of interest include the electrical con-
ductivity and viscosity [39] of the quasiparticles in graphene. Due to the flexibility of the Lattice
Monte Carlo and Quantum Monte Carlo methods, further applications are likely to arise in the
closely related fields of graphene nanowires, high-T superconductors and hexagonal optical lat-
tices, to name a few. In summary, the application of Lattice Gauge Theory to condensed matter
problems appearspoisedtodevelopintoahighlyfruitfulfieldofstudy.