]llah-sem.tam-dnoc[
2v4733070/tam-dnoc:viXra
Graphene: new bridge between condensed matter physics and
quantum electrodynamics
M. I. Katsnelson1 and K. S. Novoselov2
Institute for Molecules and Materials,
Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Manchester Centre for Mesoscience and Nanotechnology,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
Graphene is the first example of truly two-dimensional crystals - it’s just one layer of carbon
atoms. It turns out to be a gapless semiconductor with unique electronic properties resulting from
the fact that charge carriers in graphene demonstrate charge-conjugation symmetry between elec-
trons and holes and possess an internal degree of freedom similar to “chirality” for ultrarelativistic
elementary particles. It provides unexpected bridge between condensed matter physics and quan-
tum electrodynamics (QED). In particular, the relativistic Zitterbewegung leads to the minimum
conductivity of order of conductance quantum e2/h in the limit of zero doping; the concept of
Klein paradox (tunneling of relativistic particles) provides an essential insight into electron prop-
agation through potential barriers; vacuum polarization around charge impurities is essential for
understanding of high electron mobility in graphene; index theorem explains anomalous quantum
Hall effect.
Keywords: Graphene;TransportProperties;ElectronMobility; ScatteringProcesses;Quantum
Hall Effect; Index Theorem; Minimal Conductivity; Tunneling; Klein Paradox; Zitterbewegung.
Introduction
The variety of crystallographic forms of carbon places this element into the focus of
attention both in terms of basic research as well as applications. The tree-dimensional
crystallographic forms - graphite and diamond - are known from the ancient times, and
are widely used in industrial applications. Recently discovered zero-dimensional (fullerenes
or cage molecules1,2,3) and one-dimensional (carbon nanotubes4) forms are now extensively
studied due to its’ remarkable and, often, unique mechanical and electronic properties. At
the same time, despite very intensive research in the area, no any two-dimensional form of
carbon has been known until very recently.
Ironically, this elusive two-dimensional form (dubbed graphene), is, probably, the best
theoretically studied carbon allotrope. Graphene - planar, hexagonal arrangements of car-
bon atoms has been the starting point in all calculations on graphite, carbon nanotubes
and fullerenes since late 40s5. However, its’ experimental discovery has been postponed till
2004 when a technique called micromechanical cleavage has been employed to obtain first
graphene crystals6,7. The observation of a peculiar spectrum of charge carriers and anoma-
lous quantum Hall effect (QHE) in graphene8,9 has initiated enormously growing interest to
this field (for review, see Refs.10,11).
One of the most interesting aspects of the physics of graphene is that it provides a novel
example of a “feedback” of condensed matter and material science on the fundamental
physics. Of course, this is not an unique case; archetypical examples are the concept of
spontaneously broken symmetry playing a crucial role in modern high energy physics and
quantum field theory12 and the use of M¨ossbauer effect to check the general relativity the-
ory13. At the same time, such relations are rather rare and always turn out to be very
fruitful. Actually, discovery of graphene has opened new ways to study some basic quantum
relativistic phenomena which have always been considered asvery exotic. Probably themost
clear example is the Klein paradox14,15, that is, a property of relativistic quantum particles
to penetrate with a probability of the order of unity through very high and broad potential
barriers. Previously it was discussed only for experimentally unattainable (or very hard to
reach) situations such as particle-antiparticle pair creation at the black hole evaporation,
or vacuum breakdown at collisions of super-heavy nuclei. At the same time, it appeared
to be relevant for graphene-based electronics16. Here we discuss similarities and differences
FIG. 1: Left: Crystallographic structure of graphene. Atoms from different sublattices (A and B)
are marked by different shades of gray. Right: Band structure of graphene in the vicinity of the
Fermi level. Conductance band touches valence band at K and K′ points.
between physics of charge carriers in graphene and quantum electrodynamics (QED).
I. ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE OF GRAPHENE
Fromthepoint ofview ofitselectronic properties, graphene isatwo-dimensional zero-gap
semiconductor with the energy spectrum shown schematically in Fig. 1 and its low-energy
quasiparticles formally described by the Dirac-like Hamiltonian17,18,19
where v 106 ms−1 is the Fermi veloc b ity, and σ =(σ ,σ ) are the Pauli matrices. Neglect-
ing many-body effects, this description is accurate theoretically17,18,19 and has also been
proven experimentally8,9 by measuring the energy-dependent cyclotron mass in graphene
(which yields its linear energy spectrum) and, most clearly, by the observation of a relativis-
tic analogue of the integer QHE which will be discussed below.
The fact that charge carriers in graphene are described by the Dirac-like equation (1)
rather than the usual Schr¨odinger equation can be seen as a consequence of graphene’s
crystal structure, which consists of two equivalent carbon sublattices A and B17,18,19 (see
Fig. 1). Quantum mechanical hopping between the sublattices leads to the formation of two
energy bands, and their intersection near the edges of the Brillouin zone yields the conical
energy spectrum near the “Dirac” points K and K′. As a result, quasiparticles in graphene
exhibit thelinear dispersion relation E = ~kv , asif they were massless relativistic particles,
with the role of the speed of light played by the Fermi velocity v c/300. Due to the
linear spectrum, one can expect that graphene’s quasiparticles behave differently from those
in conventional metals and semiconductors where the energy spectrum can be approximated
by a parabolic (free-electron-like) dispersion relation.
Although the linear spectrum is important, it is not the only essential feature that under-
pins the description of quantum transport in graphene by the Dirac equation. Above zero
energy, the current carrying states in graphene are, as usual, electron-like and negatively
charged. At negative energies, if the valence band is not completely filled, its unoccupied
electronic states behave as positively charged quasiparticles (holes), which are often viewed
asa condensed-matter equivalent ofpositrons. Notehowever that electrons andholes in con-
densed matter physics are normally described by separate Schr¨odinger equations, which are
not in any way connected (as a consequence of the Seitz sum rule20, the equations should
also involve different effective masses). In contrast, electron and hole states in graphene
are interconnected, exhibiting properties analogous to the charge-conjugation symmetry in
QED18,19. For the case of graphene, the latter symmetry is a consequence of its crystal
symmetry because graphene’s quasiparticles have to be described by two-component wave-
functions, which is needed to define relative contributions of sublattices A and B in the
quasiparticles’ make-up. The two-component description for graphene is very similar to the
one by spinor wavefunctions in QED but the “spin” index for graphene indicates sublattices
rather than the real spin of electrons and is usually referred to as pseudospin σ.
There are further analogies with QED. The conical spectrum of graphene is the result
of intersection of the energy bands originating from sublattices A and B (see Fig. 1) and,
accordingly, an electron with energy E propagating in the positive direction originates from
the same branch of the electronic spectrum as the hole with energy E propagating in
the opposite direction. This yields that electrons and holes belonging to the same branch
have pseudospin σ pointing in the same direction, which is parallel to the momentum for
electrons and antiparallel for holes. This allows one to introduce chirality19, that is formally
a projection of pseudospin on the direction of motion, which is positive and negative for
electrons and holes, respectively. The term “chirality” is often used to refer to the additional
built-in symmetry between electron and hole parts of graphene’s spectrum and is analogous
(although not completely identical18,21) to the chirality in three-dimensional QED.
An alternative view on the origin of the chirality in graphene is based on the concept
of “Berry phase”22. Since the electron wave function is a two-component spinor, it has to
change sign when the electron moves along the close contour. Thus the wave function gains
an additional phase φ = π.
The analogy with the field theory takes a very interesting twist, should we take into
account thata sheet ofgraphene must always becorrugated. The fact thatgraphene crystals
always exhibit some finite localcurvature can be considered asa consequence of the Mermin-
Wagner theorem, and has been confirmed experimentally both for graphene samples resting
on a substrate23, as well as for free-hanging graphene films24.
It is well known that harmonic approximation in the two-dimensional case doesn’t pro-
duce a solution with long-range order 25,26,27,28. One can see this as bending instabilities,
due to soft long-wavelength phonons, lead to membrane crumpling29. Anharmonic coupling
between bending and stretching modes changes the situation drastically and prevents the
crumpling29,30,31. However, the membrane should be rippled in a sense that typical fluctua-
tionsinthedirectionperpendicular tothesurfaceh(x,y)hasascaleoforderofa(L/a)ζ a
where a is the lattice constant, L is the size of the sample and ζ is the roughness exponent.
The latter can be estimated as ζ 0.629,31. For a typical sample size L 1µm, the typical
amplitude of the corrugationfor free-hanging membrane at roomtemperature was estimated
as 0.5 nm, with their characteristic size being about 5nm 24.
These ripples lead to important consequences for the electronic structure of graphene.
The nearest-neighbor hopping integral γ turns out to be fluctuating due to its dependence
on the deformation tensor29
(cid:18) j i i j i j(cid:19)
where x = (x,y) are coordinates in the plane and u are corresponding components of the
displacement vector:
(cid:18) ij(cid:19)0
Taking into account this inhomogeneity in a standard tight-binding description of the elec-
tronic structure of graphene5 one can obtain. instead of Eq.(1) an effective Dirac-like Hamil-
tonian describing electron states near the K-point:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where v = √3γ a/2~ and is the “vector potential” connected with the deviations of the
hopping parameters γ from their unperturbed value γ :
where the nearest neighbors with vectors a/√3,0 ; a/2√3, a/2 ; a/2√3,a/2 are la-
belled 1,2, and 3, correspondingly. This m(cid:0)eans that(cid:1)th(cid:0)e roughness fl(cid:1)uc(cid:0)tuations acts(cid:1) on the
electronic structure near the K-point as an Abelian gauge field32 which is equivalent to the
action of random magnetic field. This means that the bending of graphene violates the
time-reversal symmetry for a given valley; of course, the Umklapp processes between K and
K′ points will restore this symmetry. As was suggested in Ref.23 these effective magnetic
fields are responsible for suppression of the weak localization effects in graphene.
Whereas smooth deformation of the graphene sheets produces gauge field similar to elec-
tromagnetic one, different topological defects in graphene inducing inter-valley (Umklapp)
processes can be considered as sources of a non-Abelian gauge field; corresponding analogy
with gravitation was discussed in Refs.33,34.
In relativistic quantum mechanics, chirality is a consequence of particle-antiparticle sym-
metry, which also guarantees linear energy spectrum for massless particles. The discovery
of graphene opens a unique opportunity, to investigate chiral particles with parabolic (non-
relativistic) energy spectrum. Quasiparticle with such unusual properties can be found in
bilayer graphene35. For two graphene layers, the nearest-neighbor tight-binding approxi-
mation predicts a gapless state with parabolic touching in K and K′ points35,36 (instead
of conical band crossing in graphene). The electronic spectrum in this approximation is
described by a single-particle Hamiltonian35,36
0 (p ip )2/2m
where p = i~∂/∂x are electron momenta operators and m is the effective mass. Here
we neglected higher-order hopping processes which are important only for very low Fermi
energies. More accurate consideration37 gives a very small band overlap (about 1.6 meV)
but at larger energies bilayer graphene can be treated as a gapless semiconductor. At the
sametime, electronic statesarestillcharacterized bychirality andbynon-trivialBerryphase
2π35,36 (in contrast to the case of graphene, where the Berry phase was found to be π8,9).
II. CHIRAL TUNNELING AND THE KLEIN PARADOX
The term Klein paradox14,15,16 usually refers to a counterintuitive relativistic process in
which an incoming electron starts penetrating through a potential barrier if its height V
exceeds twice the electron’s rest energy mc2 (where m is the electron mass and c the speed
of light). In this case, the transmission probability T depends only weakly on the barrier
height, approaching the perfect transparency for very high barriers, in stark contrast to
the conventional, nonrelativistic tunneling where T exponentially decays with increasing
V . This relativistic effect can be attributed to the fact that a sufficiently strong potential,
being repulsive for electrons, is attractive for positrons and results in positron states inside
the barrier, which align in energy with the electron continuum outside. Matching between
electronandpositronwavefunctions acrossthebarrierleadstothehigh-probabilitytunneling
described by the Klein paradox.
One can think about non-relativistic quantum mechanical tunneling though a potential
barrier in terms of indeterminacy principle. Since momentum and coordinates of a particle
can not be measured simultaneously a particle can propagate through a classically forbidden
region where the momentum is formally imaginary, and only coordinates are well defined.
In relativistic quantum mechanics even coordinate itself cannot be measured with arbitrary
accuracy, due to pair creation at this measurement. In another words, the Klein paradox
illustrates that the relativistic quantum mechanics can be consistently formulated only in
terms of fields rather than individual particles38.
Although Klein’s gedanken experiment is now well understood, the notion of paradox is
still used widely, perhaps because the effect has never been observed experimentally. Indeed,
its observation requires a potential drop mc2 over the Compton length ~/mc, which yields
enormouselectricfields39,40( > 1016V/cm)andmakestheeffect relevantonlyforsuchexotic
situations as, for example, positron production around super-heavy nuclei39,40 with charge
Z 170 or evaporation of black holes through generation of particle-antiparticle pairs near
the event horizon41. At the same time, electronic structure of graphene provides us an
unique opportunity for easy experimental realization of the Klein ultrarelativistic tunneling
in p n junctions16,42,43.
Let us consider for simplicity the potential barrier that has a rectangular shape and is
infinite along the y-axis:
V , 0 < x < D,
0 otherwise.
This local potential barrier inverts charge carriers underneath it, creating holes playing the
role of positrons. For simplicity, we assume in Eq.(7) infinitely sharp edges, which allows
a direct link to the case usually considered in QED14,15. The sharp-edge assumption is
justified if the Fermi wavelength λ of quasiparticles is much larger than the characteristic
width of the edge smearing, which in turn should be larger than the lattice constant (to
disallow Umklapp scattering between different valleys in graphene). Such a barrier can be
created by the electric field effect using a thin insulator or by local chemical doping7,8,9.
Importantly, Dirac fermions in graphene are massless and, therefore, there is no formal
theoretical requirement for the minimal electric field to form positron-like states under
the barrier. To create a well-defined barrier in realistic graphene samples with a disorder,
fields 105V/cm routinely used in experiments7,9 should be sufficient, which is eleven
orders of magnitude lower than the fields necessary for the observation of the Klein paradox
for elementary particles.
It is straightforward to solve the tunneling problem for Dirac electrons16. We assume
that the incident electron wave propagates at an angle φ with respect to the x axis and then
try the components of the Dirac spinor ψ and ψ for the Hamiltonian H = H +V (x) in
the following form:
eikxx +re−ikxx eikyy, x < 0,
(x,y) =  ((cid:0)aeiqxx +be−iqxx (cid:1))eikyy, 0 < x < D,
 teikxx+ikyy, x > D,
  s eikxx+iφ re−ikxx−iφ eikyy, x < 0,
ψ 2 (x,y) =  s′ (cid:0)aeiqxx+iθ be−iqxx−iθ (cid:1) eikyy, 0 < x < D, (8)
 (cid:0) steikxx+ikyy+iφ, (cid:1) x > D,
where k = 2π/λ is the Fermi wavevector, k = k cosφ and k = k sinφ are the wavevec-
tor components outside the barrier, q = (E V )2/~2v2 k2, θ = tan−1(k /q ) is the
x − 0 F − y y x
refraction angle, s = signE, s′ = sign(Eq V ). Requiring the continuity of the wave-
1 60o 1 60o
0.6 30o 0.6 30o
FIG. 2: Transmission probability T through a 100-nm-wide barrier as a function of the incident
angle for single- (a) and bi-layer (b) graphene. The electron concentration n outside the barrier is
chosen as 0.5 1012 cm−2 for all cases. Inside the barrier, hole concentrations p are 1 1012 and
3 1012 cm−2 for solid and dashed curves, respectively (such concentrations are most typical in
experiments with graphene). This corresponds to the Fermi energy E of incident electrons 80
and 17 meV for single- and bi-layer graphene, respectively, and λ 50 nm. The barrier heights
are (a) 200 and (b) 50 meV (solid curves) and (a) 285 and (b) 100 meV (dashed curves).
function by matching up coefficients a,b,t,r, we can find the the reflection coefficient r.
Fig. 2a shows examples of the angular dependence of transmission probability T = t 2 =
1 r 2 calculated using the above expression. The barrier remains always perfectly trans-
parent for angles close to the normal incidence φ = 0. The latter is the feature unique to
massless Dirac fermions and directly related to the Klein paradox in QED. One can un-
derstand this perfect tunneling in terms of the conservation of pseudospin. Indeed, in the
absence of pseudospin-flip processes (such processes are rare as they require a short-range
potential, which would act differently on A and B sites of the graphene lattice), an electron
moving to the right can be scattered only to a right-moving electron state or left-moving
hole state. The matching between directions of pseudospin σ for quasiparticles inside and
outside the barrier results in perfect tunneling. In the strictly one-dimensional case, such
perfect transmission of Dirac fermions has been discussed in the context of electron trans-
port in carbon nanotubes44,45. This is also the case for the two-dimensional (2D) problem of
graphenewhichcanbedirectlyprovenbyconsiderationoftheLippmann-Schwinger equation
for scattering of arbitrary scalar potential (see Ref.16, supplementary information).
To elucidate which features of the anomalous tunneling in graphene are related to the
linear dispersion and which to the pseudospin and chirality of the Dirac spectrum, it is
instructive to consider the same problem for bilayer graphene16. Although “massive chiral
fermions” with parabolic spectrum near the touching point and Berry phase 2π do not exist
in the field theory their existence in the condensed matter physics (confirmed experimen-
tally35) offers a unique opportunity to clarify the importance of chirality in the relativistic
tunneling problem described by the Klein paradox.
Charge carriers in bilayer graphene are described by an off-diagonal Hamiltonian (6)
which yields a gapless semiconductor with chiral electrons and holes having a finite mass
m. An important formal difference between the tunneling problems for single- and bi-
layer graphene is that in the latter case there are four possible solutions for a given energy
E = ~2k2/2m. Two of them correspond to propagating waves and the other two to
evanescent ones. Accordingly, for constant potential V , eigenstates of Hamiltonian (6)
should be written as
ψ (x,y) = a eikixx +b e−ikixx +c eκixx +d e−κixx eikyx
ψ (x,y) = s(cid:0) a eikixx+2iφi +b e−ikixx−2iφi c h eκ(cid:1) ixx i e−κixx eikyy (9)
2 i i i i i
(cid:18) i (cid:19)
s = sign(V E); ~k = 2m E V cosφ ; ~k = 2m E V sinφ
i i ix i i iy i i
κ = k2 +2k2 ; h = 1+sin2φ sinφ .
ix ix iy i i − i
(cid:18)q (cid:19)
To find the transmission coefficient through barrier (7), one should set d = 0 for x < 0,
b = c = 0 for x > D and satisfy the continuity conditions for both components of
the wavefunction and their derivatives. For the case of an electron beam that is incident
normally (φ = 0) and low barriers V < E (over-barrier transmission), we obtain ψ = ψ
both outside and inside the barrier, and the chirality of fermions in bilayer graphene does
not manifest itself. In this case, scattering at the barrier (7) is the same as for electrons
described by the Schr¨odinger equation. However, for any finite φ (even in the case V < E),
waves localized at the barrier interfaces are essential to satisfy the boundary conditions.
The most intriguing behavior is found for V > E, where electrons outside the barrier
transform into holes inside it, or vice versa. Examples of the angular dependence of T in
bilayer graphene are plotted in Fig. 2b. They show a dramatic difference as compared with
the case of massless Dirac fermions. There are again pronounced transmission resonances at
someincidentangles,whereT approachesunity. However, insteadoftheperfecttransmission
found for normally-incident Dirac fermions (see Fig. 2a), our numerical analysis has yielded
the opposite effect: Massive chiral fermions are always perfectly reflected for angles close to
φ = 0. At the same time, there is always a “magic angle” when the transmission probability
is equal to one.
The fact that a barrier (or even a single p n junction) incorporated in a bilayer graphene
device should lead to exponentially small tunneling current can be exploited in developing
graphene-based field effect transistors (FET)16. Such transistors are particularly tempting
because of their high mobility and ballistic transport at submicron distances7,8,9. However,
the fundamental problem along this route is that the conducting channel in single-layer
graphene cannot be pinched off due to the Klein paradox (alternative view on this fact
based on the concept of the minimal conductivity will be discussed in the next section).
This severely limits achievable on-off ratios for such FETs7 and, therefore, the scope for
their applications. A bilayer FET with a local gate inverting the sign of charge carriers
should yield much higher on-off ratios.
III. PROBLEM OF MINIMUM CONDUCTIVITY
One of amazing properties of graphene is its finite minimal conductivity which is of the
order of the conductance quantum e2/h per valley per spin; it is important to stress that
this is the “quantization” of conductivity rather than of conductance8. This is not only very
interesting conceptually but also important in the view of potential applications of graphene
for ballistic field-effect transistors7,16. At the same time, this phenomenon is intimately
related with specifically quantum-relativistic phenomenon known as Zitterbewegung38,46.
Numerous considerations of the conductivity of a two-dimensional massless Dirac fermion
gasdogivethisvalueoftheminimalconductivity withaccuracyofsomefactoroftheorderof
unity46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55. Itisreallysurprisingthatinthiscasethereisafinalconductivity
for an ideal crystal, that is, without any scattering processes46,49,54,55.
The Dirac Hamiltonian (1) in the secondary-quantization representation takes the form
and the corresponding expression for the current operator
where p is the momentum and Ψ† = ψ† ,ψ† are pseudospinor electron operators. Here
we omit spin and valley indices (so, k(cid:16)eeping in(cid:17)mind applications to graphene, the results
for the conductivity should be multiplied by 4 due to two spin projections and two valleys).
Straightforwardcalculationsresultinthefollowingtimeevolutionoftheelectronannihilation
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:21)
and for the current operator
ev p(pσ) i
1 2 p − p2 p × p
p (cid:20) (cid:21)
where ǫ = vp/~ is the particle frequency. The last term in Eq.(13) corresponds to the “Zit-
terbewegung”, a phenomenon connected with the uncertainty of the position of relativistic
quantum particles due to the inevitable creation of particle-antiparticle pairs at the position
measurement38.
To calculate the conductivity σ(ω) following Ref.46 we will try first to use the Kubo
formula56 which reads for two-dimensional isotropic case:
where β = T−1 is the inverse temperature, A is the sample area. In the static limit ω = 0
taking into account the Onsager relations and analyticity of the correlators j(z)j for
β < Imz 0 one has56
Usually, foridealcrystals, thecurrentoperatorcommuteswiththeHamiltonianandthusj(t)
does not depend on time. In that case, due to Eq.(14) the frequency-dependent conductivity
contains only the Drude peak
Either the spectral weight of the Drude peak is finite and, thus, the static conductivity is
infinite, or it is equal to zero. It is easy to check that for the system under consideration the
spectral weight of the Drude peak is proportional to the modulus of the chemical potential
µ (cf. Eq.(44) of Ref.53) andthus vanishes atzero doping (µ = 0). It isthe Zitterbewegung,
i.e. the oscillating term j (t) which is responsible for nontrivial behavior of the conductivity
for zero temperature and zero chemical potential (that is, the case of no charge carriers). A
straightforward calculation gives a formal result
where one delta-function originates from the integration over t in Eq.(15) and the second
one - from the derivative of the Fermi distribution function appearing at the calculation of
the average over product of Fermi-operators. Of course, the square of the delta function
is not a well-defined object and thus Eq.(17) is meaningless before specification of the way
how one should regularize the delta-functions. After regularization the integral in Eq.(17)
is finite, but its value depends on the regularization procedure (see Refs.49,55).
To circumvent the problem of ambiguity in the expression for σ in Eq.(17) it is instructive
tofollowthe alternative Landauer approachtocalculate theconductivity57,58. Let us assume
that our sample is the ring of length L in y direction; we will use the Landauer formula to
calculate the conductance in the x direction (see Fig. 3). There is still an uncertainty in
the sense that the conductivity turns out to be dependent on the shape of the sample. To
have a final transparency we should keep L finite. On the other hand, periodic boundary
conditions in y direction are nonphysical and we have to choose L as large as possible to
weaken their effects. Thus, for two-dimensional situation one should choose L L .
In the coordinate representation the Dirac equation at zero energy takes the form
ψ t (x) L y
FIG. 3: Geometry of the sample. The thick arrow shows the direction of current. ψ (solid line)
and ψ (dashed line) are wave functions of the edge states localized near the top and the bottom
of the sample, correspondingly.
where K = i ∂ . General solutions of these equations are just arbitrary analytical (or
complex conjugated analytical) functions:
Duetoperiodicityinthey directionbothwavefunctionsshouldbeproportionaltoexp(ik y)
wherek = 2πn/L ,n = 0, 1, 2,....Thismeansthatthedependence onxisalso fixed: the
wave functions are proportional to exp( 2πnx/L ). They correspond to the states localized
near the bottom and the top of the sample (see Fig. 3).
To use the Landauer formula, we should introduce boundary conditions at the sample
edges (x = 0 and x = L ). To be specific, let us assume that the leads are made of doped
graphene with the potential V < 0 and the Fermi energy E = vk = V . The wave
functions in the leads are supposed to have the same y-dependence, that is, ψ (x,y) =
ψ (x)exp(ik y). Thus, one can try the solution of the Dirac equation in the following
form:
eikxx +re−ikxx, x < 0
aekyx, 0 < x < L
 teikxx, x > L
eikxx+iφ re−ikxx−iφ, x < 0
be−kyx, 0 < x < L
 teikxx+iφ, x > L
where sinφ = k /k ,k = k2 k2. ¿From the conditions of the continuity of the wave
y F x F − y
functions, one can find the tqransmission coefficient
T = t(k ) 2 = . (21)
n | y | cosh2(k L ) sin2φ
Furthermore, one should assume that k L 1 and put φ 0 in Eq.(21). Thus, the trace
of the transparency which is just the conductance (in units of e2/h) is
TrT = . (22)
cosh2(k L ) ≃ πL
n=−∞ y x x
Assuming thattheconductanceisequaltoσLy onefindsthecontributiontotheconductivity
equal to e2/(πh). Experimentally8, it is close to e2/h, that is, roughly, three times larger
than this estimation. This discrepancy known as a “missed pi(e) problem” is still not solved.
One should stress that this is the gapless character of the spectrum and the chirality
rather than the linear dispersion relation which lead to the minimal conductivity. Different
estimations for the bilayer graphene give the same order of magnitude for the conductiv-
ity46,59,60,61,62,63, in agreement with experimenatl observations35.
Another approach to qualitative understanding of the minimal conductivity is based
on the Klein paradox16. In conventional 2D systems, strong enough disorder results in
electronic states that are separated by barriers with exponentially small transparency64,65.
This is known to lead to the Anderson localization. In contrast, in both graphene materials
all potential barriers are relatively transparent (T 1 at least for some angles) which does
not allow charge carriers to be confined by potential barriers that are smooth on an atomic
scale. Therefore, different electron and hole “puddles” induced by disorder are not isolated
but effectively percolate, thereby suppressing localization. In the absence of the localization,
a standard Mott estimation of the minimal conductivity assuming that the mean-free path
cannot be smaller that electron wave-length66 immediately gives the minimal conductivity
e2/h67.
IV. INDEX THEOREM AND ANOMALOUS QUANTUM HALL EFFECT
The anomalous QHE in graphene8,9 is probably the most striking demonstration of the
massless character of the charge carrier spectrum in graphene. In two-dimensional systems
with a constant magnetic field B perpendicular to the system plane the energy spectrum is
discrete (Landauquantization). For the case of massless Diracfermions the energy spectrum
takes the form68,69
νσ | | F ±
where v is the electron velocity, ν = 0,1,2... is the quantum number and the term with
1/2 is connected to the chirality. Just to remind that in the usual case of the parabolic
dispersion relation the Landau level sequence is E = ~ω (ν+1/2) where ω is the frequency
of electron rotation in magnetic field (cyclotron frequency)20,70.
An important peculiarity of Landau levels for massless Dirac fermions is the existence of
zero-energy states (with ν = 0 and the minus sign in equation (23)). This situation differs
fundamentally from usual semiconductors with parabolic bands where the first Landau level
is shifted by ~ω /2. The existence of the zero-energy Landau level leads to an anomalous
QHE with half-integer quantization of the Hall conductivity, instead of the integer one (for
a review of the QHE, see, e.g., Ref.71). Usually, all Landau levels have the same degeneracy
(a number of electron states with a given energy) which is just proportional to a magnetic
flux through the system. As a result, plateaus in the Hall conductivity corresponding to the
filling of the first ν levels are just integer (in units of the conductance quant e2/h). For the
case of massless Dirac electrons, the zero-energy Landau level has twice smaller degeneracy
than any other level (it corresponds to the minus sign in the equation (1) whereas the energy
level proportional to √p with integer p 1 are obtained twice, for ν = p and minus sign,
and for ν = p 1 and plus sign). A discovery of this “half-integer QHE”8,9 was the most
direct evidence of the Dirac fermions in graphene.
A deeper view on the origin of the zero-energy Landau level and thus the anomalous
QHE is provided by the famous Atiyah-Singer index theorem which plays an important role
in the modern quantum field theory and theory of superstrings72. The Dirac equation has a
charge-conjugation symmetry between electrons and holes. This means that for any electron
state with a positive energy E a corresponding conjugated hole state with the energy E
should exist. However, the states with zero energy can be, in general, anomalous. For
curved space (e.g., for a deformed graphene sheet with some defects of crystal structure)
and/or in the presence of so called “gauge fields” (the usual electromagnetic field provides
just the simplest example of these fields) sometimes an existence of states with zero energy
is guaranteed by topological reasons, this states being chiral (in our case this means that
depending on the sign of the magnetic field there is only sublattice A or sublattice B states
which contribute to the zero-energy Landau level). This means, in particular, that the
number of these states expressed in terms of total magnetic flux is a topological invariant
and remains the same even if the magnetic field is inhomogeneous8. This is an important
conclusion since, as discussed in section 1, the ripples on graphene create strong effective
inhomogeneous magnetic fields leading, in particular, to suppression of weak localization23.
However, due to these topological arguments they cannot destroy the anomalous QHE in
graphene. About applications of the index theorem to two-dimensional systems, and, in
particular, to graphene see also Refs.73,74.
An alternative view on the origin of the anomalous QHE in graphene is based on the con-
cept of the “Berry phase” which was discussed above in connection with the Klein paradox.
When chiral electron moves along the close contour its wave function gains an additional
phase φ = π. In quasiclassical terms (see, e.g., Refs.20,75), stationary states are nothing but
electron standing waves and they can exist if the electron orbit contains, at least, half of the
wavelength. Due to the additional phase shift by the Berry phase, this condition is satisfied
already for the zeroth length of the orbit, that is, for zero energy. Other aspects of the QHE
in graphene are considered in papers76,77,78,79.
In the previous section we have discussed an absence of localization in graphene as one
of the main consequences of relativistic quantum effects such as the Klein paradox. At the
same time, the localization is of crucial importance for the QHE providing a well-defined
Hall plateau71. Here we demonstrate that the localization by a scalar potential V in the
magnetic field is possible. For simplicity, let us assume the case of a weak one-dimensional
inhomogeneity with the potential V = V(y) much smaller than the cyclotron quantum of
the order of ~v /l where l = (~c/ e B)1/2 is the magnetic length.
Using a standard gauge for the vector potential A = A = 0,A = Bx one can write the
Dirac Hamiltonian for the problem as
H = − F ∂x − l2 , (25)
 i~v ∂ + x (cid:0)0 (cid:1) 
(cid:0) (cid:1)
V (y) ~v ∂
Let us try eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian (24) with the energy E as an expansion in the
basis of appropriate harmonic oscillator problem:
i 2π ν y ν y
√2(x l2k )
!
where i = 1,2 is the pseudospinor index and D (z) exp( z2/4)H z/√2 the We-
ber functions80. After straightforward calculations one obtains a set of e(cid:0)quatio(cid:1)ns for the
expansion coefficients c (k ):
√2 iE i ∞ dq
− l − ν,0 ν y ~v ν y − ~v 2π y − y ν′ y h y | y i
√2 iE i ∞ dq
l ν y ~v ν y − ~v 2π y − y ν′ y h y | y i
v(q) is a Fourier component of V(y). For the case of a weak ( V (y) ~v /l) and smooth
potential one can neglect a mixing of different Landau bands, similar to the case of QHE
for conventional electron gas71. As a result of direct calculations one can demonstrate that
in this case the solution of Eq.(28) describes the Landau wave functions of nonperturbed
problem with the orbit center y satisfying the equation
Thus, the Landau levels in the case under consideration are just smeared into the bands of
localized states with the localization radius of order of the magnetic length, similar to the
case of the usual QHE71.
V. NONLINEAR SCREENING OF CHARGE IMPURITIES
In QED, vacuum polarization effects due to creation of virtual electron-positron pairs
by an external potential are of a crucial importance81,82. Due to the smallness of the fine
structure constant α = e2/~c 1/137 these effects leading to logarithmic corrections
to the Coulomb potential are rather small, except the case of very small distances. In
graphene, the effective fine structure constant α = e2/~v ǫ is of the order of unity (ǫ is the
dielectric constant due to substrate; for the case of graphene on quartz one should choose83
ǫ 2.4 2.5) and the corresponding effects can be of crucial importance for transport
properties84. Duetotheabsence ofexplicitely smallparameters describing correlationeffects
in graphene it is very difficult to consider this problem rigorously and the situation still is
controversial. Nevertheless, the vacuum polarization effects are in our opinion important
and should be taken into account in any future theory.
A general nonlinear theory of screening in the system of interacting particles can be
formulated in a framework of the density functional approach85. In this theory a total
potential V (r) acting on electrons is equal
where V (r) is an external potential and V (r) is a potential induced by a redistribution
of electron density:
e2 n(r′) n
ind ǫ r r′ xc
where the first term is the Hartree potential and the second one is the exchange-correlation
potential. We consider here only a redistribution of charge carriers in the external impurity
taking into account contributions of the crystal lattice potential and of electrons in com-
pletely filled bands via a dielectric constant ǫ and compensated homogeneous charge density
en. Here Z is the dimensionless impurity charge (to be specific, we will assume Z > 0; it
can be easily demonstrated that, actually, in our final expressions Z should be just replaced
by Z ). This kind of approach is valid at a spacial scale much larger than a lattice constant;
in all other aspects, it is formally exact until we specify the expressions for V and n[V (r)].
The Thomas-Fermi theory86 which is, actually, the simplest approximation in the density
functional approach, was used in Ref.84. It is based on the two assumptions: (i) we neglect
the exchange-correlation potential in comparison with the Hartree potential in Eq.(31) and
(ii) we put n(r′) = n[µ V (r′)], where n(µ) is a density of a homogeneous electron gas
with chemical potential µ. The former assumption means that we are interested in the
long-wavelength response of the electron system and thus the long-range Coulomb forces
dominate over the local exchange-correlation effects. The latter one holds provided that the
external potential is smooth enough. A rigorous statement is that an addition of a constant
potentialisequivalent totheshiftofthechemicalpotential. Inparticular, theThomas-Fermi
theory gives an exact expression for a static inhomogeneous dielectric function ǫ(q) in the
limit of small wavevectors q 020. The Thomas-Fermi theory of atoms is asymptotically
exact in the limit of infinite nuclear charge86.
In the Thomas-Fermi theory Eq.(31) reads
ind ǫ r r′
The function n(µ) is expressed via the density of states N (E):
where f (E) is the Fermi function, and the last equality is valid for zero temperature (we
will restrict ourselves here only to this case). For the case of graphene with the linear energy
spectrum near the crossing points K and K′ one has
where we have taken into account a factor 4 due to two valleys and two spin projections.
Let us start first with the case of zero doping (µ = 0) where, according to the linear
response theory, there is no screening at all. Substituting Eqs.(33), (32), and (35) into
Eq.(30), introducing the notation
and integrating over the polar angle of vector r′, we obtain a nonlinear integral equation for
the function F (r) :
2Q dr′ r 2√rr′
!
is the complete elliptic integral, p
Q = 2 ; (39)
(cid:18) F(cid:19)
for the case of graphene on SiO Q 2.
Anapproximate solutionoftheintegralequation(37)atr agivesthefollowing result84
F (r) (40)
≃ 1+ZQln r
which is formally similar to that in QED82 but with a much larger value of the interaction
constant. Note that logarithmically divergent corrections to the electron effective mass in
undoped graphene due to the vacuum polarization effects have been considered in Ref.87.
For the case of doped graphene the main result of Ref.84 is the replacement of the bare
charge impurity Z by
≃ 1+ZQln 1
is the inverse screening radius. This weakens essentially this scattering mechanism since
Qln 1 is of order of ten for typical charge carrier concentrations. Perturbative estimations
of the electron mobility88 should be thus multiplied by this factor squared. As a result, the
mobility for the same parameters turns out to be two order of magnitude larger. Instead of
a concentration-independent mobility, we obtain a mobility proportional to ln2(k a). More
accurately, one should use an expression for the mobility obtained by Ando83 (see Eq.(3.27)
and Fig. 5 of that paper) but with the replacement of Z by Z∗ when calculating the strength
of the Coulomb interaction.
VI. SCATTERING OF DIRAC FERMIONS BY SHORT-RANGE IMPURITY PO-
Here we will discuss quantum relativistic effects in the electrons scattering by a short-
range potential. It appears that in the case of graphene the contribution of such defects to
the resistivity is essentially smaller thanfor the conventional nonrelativistic two-dimensional
electron gas. We argue that this conclusion should help our understanding of remarkably
high charge carrier mobilities observed in graphene7,8,9.
Let us consider the case of a small concentration of point defects (to be specific, we
will call them impurities) with the concentration n and the angle-dependent scattering
cross-section σ(φ). Then the defect contribution to the resistivity ρ reads51
where N (E ) = 2k /π~v is the density of states at the Fermi level (taking into account
the double spin degeneracy and two valleys), τ is the mean-free path. Note that the product
v N (E ) is proportional to k = √πn (n is the electron concentration) for both ultrarela-
tivistic and nonrelativistic two-dimensional electron gas and thus any essential difference in
their transport properties can be related only to the scattering cross-section.
To determine the scattering cross section one has to solve the two-dimensional Dirac
equation which, for the case of massless particles andradially symmetric scattering potential
V (r) takes the from (cf. Ref.38 for three-dimensional case):
dg (r) l i
dr − r l − ~v − l
df (r) l+1 i
dr r l − ~v − l
where l = 0, 1,... is the angular-momentum quantum number, g (r)eilφ and f (r)ei(l+1)φ
arecomponentsoftheDiracpseudospinor; tobespecific wewillconsider thecaseofelectrons
E = ~v k > 0.
Modifying a standard scattering theory89 for the two-dimensional case one should try the
solutions of Eq.(44) outside the region of action of the potential in the form
g (r) = A J (kr)+t H (kr) ,
l l+1 l l+1
where the terms proportional to Bessel (Hankel) functions describe incident (scattering)
= t eilφ . (46)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)l= X −∞ (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
The Dirac equation for ultrarelativstic pa(cid:12)rticles (44)(cid:12) has as important symmetry with
(cid:12) (cid:12)
respect to replacement f g,l l 1 which means t = t . Thus, Eq.(46) can be
rewritten in the form
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)X l=0 (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
The back scattering (φ = π) is absent ri(cid:12)gorously, as was discu(cid:12)ssed in the section 2.
(cid:12) (cid:12)
For the simplest case of the potential V (r) = V at r < R and V (r) = 0 at r > R, using
boundary conditions of continuity of the wave functions at r = R one finds
l l+1 l l+1
l l+1 − l l+1
where q = (E V )/~v . For the case of small energy, E V ,kR 1 which is typical
for graphene one has
πi J (qR) kR
t (k) (49)
l ≃ (l!)2 J (qR) 2
l (cid:18) (cid:19)
and thus the s-scattering (l = 0) dominates. Substituting Eq.(49) into Eqs.(47) and (43),
one finds the estimation for the impurity contribution to the resistivity ρ (h/4e2)n R2.
This means that scattering centers with the radius of potential R of order of interatomic
distances andsmall concentration areirrelevant forthe electron transport ingraphene giving
negligible contribution to the resistivity.
Ifwewouldrepeatthesamecalculationsfornonrelativisticelectrongas90 wewouldobtain,
instead of Eq.(48)
l l+1 l l+1
l l+1 − l l+1
where k and q are, again, wavevectors outside and inside the potential region. In this case
the s-scattering phase vanishes for small energies not linearly but only logarithmically and
one obtains much larger resistivity
≃ 4e2nln2(k R)
(note that the same estimation holds for the case of massless Dirac electrons in a particular
case of the resonant scattering when J (qR) = 0).
So, the basic conclusion is that whenever any potential works as a resonant scatterer in
the case of massive particles, the scattering is non-resonant in the case of massless Dirac
fermions in graphene, except some special values of parameters.
Conclusions
The examples considered demonstrate that graphene provides an unexpected bridge be-
tween the condensed matter physics and quantum field theory. The impact of the ex-
perimental discovery of this material on different areas of physics and industry can’t be
overestimated. First of all, graphene is the first example of truly two-dimensional crystals,
in contrast with numerous quasi-two-dimensional crystals known before. This opens many
interesting questions concerning thermodynamics, lattice dynamics and structural proper-
ties of such systems which are, however, beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore,
single-layer graphene provides first experimental realization of a two-dimensional massless
Dirac fermion system. The analogy with the quantum field theory proved crucial for under-
standing of graphene unusual electronic properties, such as anomalous QHE, absence of the
Anderson localization, inefficiency of scattering by point defects, etc. The bilayer graphene
has a very unusual gapless parabolic spectrum providing an example of the system with
electron wave equation different from both Dirac and Schr¨odinger ones.
Acknowledgements. We are thankful to Andre Geim, Maria Vozmediano, and Leonid
Levitovforhelpfuldiscussions. ThisworkwassupportedbytheStichting voorFundamenteel
Onderzoek der Materie (FOM), the Netherlands and by the Royal Society, UK.
1 R.F. Curl, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 (1997) 691.
2 H. Kroto, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 (1997) 703.
3 R.E. Smalley, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69 (1997) 723.
4 S. Iijima, Nature 354 (1991) 56.
5 P.R. Wallace, Phys. Rev. 71 (1947) 622.
6 K.S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T.J. Booth, V.V. Khotkevich, S.M. Morozov, and A.K.
Geim, PNAS 102 (2005) 10451.
7 K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva,
and A.A. Firsov, Science 306 (2004) 666.
8 K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M.I. Katsnelson, I.V. Grigorieva, S.V.
Dubonos, and A.A. Firsov, Nature 438 (2005) 197.
9 Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H.L. Stormer, and P. Kim, Nature 438 (2005) 201.
10 A.K. Geim and K.S. Novoselov, Nature Mater. 6 (2007) 183.
11 M.I. Katsnelson, Mater. Today 10, Issue 1&2 (2007) 20.
12 D.H. Perkins, Introduction to High Energy Physics, Cambridge Unive. Press, Cambridge, 2000.
13 R.V. Pound and G.A. Rebka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 4 (1960) 337.
14 O. Klein, Z. Phys. 53 (1929) 157.
15 N. Dombey and A. Calogeracos, Phys. Rep. 315 (1999) 41.
16 M.I. Katsnelson, K.S. Novoselov, and A.K. Geim, Nature Phys. 2 (2006) 620.
17 J.C. Slonczewski and P.R. Weiss, Phys. Rev. 109 (1958) 272.
18 G.W. Semenoff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53 (1984) 2449.
19 F.D.M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (1988) 2015.
20 S.V. Vonsovsky and M.I. Katsnelson, Quantum Solid State Physics, Springer, N.Y., 1989.
21 D. Boyanovsky, R. Blankenbecler, and R. Yahalom, Nucl. Phys. B 270 (1986) 483.
22 A. Shapere and F. Wilczek (Editors), Geometrical Phases in Physics, World Scientific, Singa-
pore, 1989.
23 S.V. Morozov, K.S. Novoselov, M.I.Katsnelson, F. Schedin, L.A. Ponomarenko, D. Jiang, and
A.K.Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 016801.
24 J.C. Meyer, A.K. Geim, M.I. Katsnelson, K.S. Novoselov, T.J. Booth, and S. Roth, Nature 445
(2007).
25 R.E. Peierls, Helv. Phys. Acta 7 (1934) 81.
26 R.E. Peierls, Ann. Inst. H. Poincare 5 (1935) 177.
27 L.D. Landau, Phys. Z. Sowjet Union 11 (1937) 26.
28 L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Part I, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1980.
29 D.R. Nelson, T. Piran, and S. Weinberg (Editors), Statistical Mechanics of Membranes and
Surfaces, World Scientific, Singapore, 2004).
30 D.R. Nelson and L. Peliti, J. Physique 48 (1987) 1085.
31 L. Radzihovsky and P. Le Doussal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 (1992) 1209.
32 S.V. Iordanskii and A.E. Koshelev, JETP Lett. 41 (1985) 574.
33 P.E. Lammert and V.H. Crespi, Phys. Rev. B 61 (2000) 7308.
34 A. Cortijo and M.A.H. Vozmediano, cond-mat/0603717.
35 K.S. Novoselov, E. McCann, S.V. Morozov, V.I. Falko, M.I. Katsnelson, U. Zeitler, D. Jiang,
F. Schedin, and A.K. Geim, Nature Phys. 2 (2006) 177.
36 E. McCann and V.I. Falko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 086805.
37 B. Partoens and F.M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B 74 (2006) 075404.
38 V. B. Berestetskii, E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, Relativistic Quantum Theory, vol. 1,
Pergamon, Oxford, 1971.
39 W. Greiner, B. Mueller, and J. Rafelski, Quantum Electrodynamics of Strong Fields, Springer,
Berlin, 1985.
40 A.A. Grib, S.G. Mamayev, and V.M. Mostepanenko, Vacuum Effects in Strong Fields, Fried-
mann, St.-Petersburg, 1994.
41 D.N. Page, New J. Phys. 7 (2005) 203.
42 V.V. Cheianov and V.I. Falko, Phys. Rev. B 74 (2006) 041403(R).
43 J.M. Pereira, V. Mlinar, F.M. Peeters, and P. Vasiloupulos, Phys. Rev. B 74 (2006) 045424.
44 T. Ando, T. Nakanishi, and R. Saito, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 67 (1998) 2857.
45 P.L. McEuen, M. Bockrath, D.H. Cobden, Y.G. Yoon, and S.G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83
(1999) 5098.
46 M.I. Katsnelson, Eur. Phys. J. B 51 (2006) 157.
47 E. Fradkin, Phys. Rev. B 33 (1986) 3263.
48 P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 (1993) 1887.
49 A.W.W. Ludwig, M.P.A. Fisher, R. Shankar, and G. Grinstein, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 7526.
50 A. A. Nersesyan, A. M. Tsvelik, and F. Wenger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 2628.
51 N. H. Shon and T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 67 (1998) 2421.
52 E. V. Gorbar, V. P. Gusynin, V. A. Miransky, and I. A. Shovkovy, Phys. Rev. B 66 (2002)
045108.
53 X. Yang and C. Nayak, Phys. Rev. B 65 (2002) 064523.
54 J. Tworzydlo, B. Trauzettel, M. Titov, A. Rycerz, and C.W.J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96
(2006) 246802.
55 K. Ziegler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 266802.
56 D.N. Zubarev, Nonequilibrium Statistical Thermodynamics, Consultants Bureau, New York,
1974.
57 C.W.J. Beenakker and H. van Houten, Solid State Phys. 44 (1991) 1.
58 Ya.M. Blanter and M. Bu¨ttiker, Phys. Rep. 336 (2000) 1.
59 M. I. Katsnelson, Eur. Phys. J. B 52 (2006) 151.
60 M. Koshino and T. Ando, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006) 245403.
61 J. Nilsson, A.H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, and N.M.R. Peres, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 266801.
62 J. Cserti, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007) 033405.
63 I. Snyman and C.W.J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. B 75 (2007) 045322.
64 J.M. Ziman, Models of Disorder, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1979.
65 I.M. Lifshitz, S.A. Gredeskul, and L.A. Pastur, Introduction to the Theory of Disordered Sys-
tems, Wiley, New York, 1988.
66 N.F. Mott, Metal-Insulator Transitions, Taylor and Francis, London, 1974.
67 TheMott argument to explain theobserved minimalmetallic conductivity of graphenewas first
invoked by A. Geim (private communication).
68 J.W. McClure, Phys. Rev. 104 (1956) 666.
69 V.P. Gusynin and S.G. Sharapov, Phys. Rev. B 71 (2005) 125124.
70 N.W. Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Holt, Rinehartand Winston, N.Y., 1976.
71 R.E. Prange and S.M. Girvin (Editors), The Quantum Hall Effect, Springer, N.Y., 1987.
72 M. Kaku, Introduction to Superstrings, Springer, N.Y., 1988.
73 T. Tenjinbayashi, H. Igarashi, and T. Fujiwara, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 322 (2007) 460.
74 J.K. Pachs and M. Stone, cond-mat/0607394.
75 G.P. Mikitik and Yu.V. Sharlai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 2147.
76 D.A. Abanin, P.A. Lee, and L.S. Levitov, Phys. Rev. Lett. (2006) 96, 176803.
77 V.P. Gusynin and S.G. Sharapov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 146801.
78 N.M.R. Peres, F. Guinea, and A.H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006) 125411.
79 A.H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, and N.M.R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B 73 (2006) 205408.
80 E.T. Whittaker and G.N. Watson, A Course of Modern Calculus, Cambrudge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, 1996.
81 E.M. Lifshitz and L.P. Pitaevskii, Relativistic Quantum Theory, Part 2, Pergamon, Oxford,
1977.
82 A.B. Migdal, Qualitative Methods in Quantum Theory, Benjamin, Reading, Mass., 1977.
83 T. Ando, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 75 (2006) 074716.
84 M.I. Katsnelson, Phys. Rev. B 74 (2006) 201401(R).
85 P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136 (1964) B884.
86 E.H. Lieb, Rev. Mod. Phys. 53 (1981) 603.
87 J. Gonzales, F. Guinea, and M.A.H. Vozmediano, Nucl. Phys. B 424 (1994) 595.
88 K. Nomura and A.H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (2006) 256602.
89 R.G. Newton, Scattering Theory of Waves and Particles, McGraw Hill, N.Y., 1966.
90 S.K. Adhikari, Amer. J. Phys. 54 (1986) 362.