]NG.nif-q[
1v7327.7041:viXra
Grid Integration Costs of
Fluctuating Renewable Energy Sources
Jonas Mu¨ller, Marcus Hildmann, Andreas Ulbig and Go¨ran Andersson
Power Systems Laboratory, ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
muellejo@ethz.ch hildmann | ulbig | andersson@eeh.ee.ethz.ch
The grid integration of intermittent renewable energy sources (RES) causes costs for grid operators due to
forecast uncertainty and the resulting production schedule mismatches. These so-called profile service costs are
marginalcost componentsand can be understoodas an insurancefee againstRES productionschedule uncertainty
thatthesystemoperatorincursdueto theobligationtoalwaysprovidesufficientcontrolreservecapacityforpower
imbalance mitigation. This paper studies the situation for the German power system and the existing German RES
supportschemes.TheprofileservicecostsincurredbyGermantransmissionsystemoperators(TSOs)arequantified
and means for cost reduction are discussed. In general, profile service costs are dependent on the RES prediction
error and the specific workingsof the power markets via which the predictionerror is balanced. This paper shows
bothhowthepredictionerrorcan bereducedindailyoperationaswellashowprofileservicecostscan bereduced
via optimization against power markets and/or active curtailment of RES generation.
Index Terms
Cost Structure of Renewable Energy Sources (RES), Power Markets, Forecast Error, RES Grid Integration
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the early 1980s, government support schemes with the specific goal of promoting large-scale
deploymentofrenewableenergysources(RES)wereintroducedinmanycountriesworldwide.TheGerman
Renewable Energy Act, ”Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz” (EEG), a well-known support scheme, provides a
favorable feed-in tariff (FIT) for a variety of RES since the year 2000 and builds on the good experience
with its predecessor, the Stromeinspeisungsgesetz from 1991. It gives priority to electric power in-feed
from RES over power in-feed from conventional power plants, i.e., fossil-fueled and nuclear and large,
hydro-based power plants. This favorable investment environment has led to a massive build-up notably
of wind & photovoltaic (PV) generation in Germany [1], [2]. By year-end 2013, the installed wind and
PV power capacities were around 33 GW and 39 GW respectively [3]. The original goal of the FIT, i.e.
inciting large-scale RES deployment has thus been achieved.
With a combined installed power capacity of RES units of more than 70 GW, somewhat more than the
average load demand in the German power system, of 63-68 GW, and significant annual RES energy
shares, about 15% combined, wind & PV units can no longer be treated as exotic, marginal electricity
sources. The current RES production already has significant effects on the power market, notably in the
form of the so-called merit-order effect. Especially the decoupling of spot market prices and RES in-feed
due to FIT regulations, results in lower average spot price levels and also in negative spot prices for
several hours each month. One effect of this is that flexible power plants such as gas-fired units cannot be
operated profitably because peak spot prices are too often below their marginal operation costs. Another
effect is that due to the also associated spread between peak and base base day-ahead prices, energy
J. Mu¨ller is currently a master student at ETH Zurich. His related master thesis was conducted at the ETH Power Systems Laboratory,
supervised by the co-authors.
storage facilities, primarily pumped storage hydro plants (PSHPs) cannot be operated profitably either [4].
As a consequence, the production structure is about to be transformed from mainly centralized large power
plants to a decentralized structure of small RES plants. This has effects on the operation of the grid and
of the electricity markets including significant costs for RES grid integration; in addition to the in-feed
tariffs.
The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows: Section II gives an overview of the relevant power
market structures and cost drivers for RES grid integration. Section III briefly discusses the employed
data, which is further on analyzed in Section IV. Finally, Section V presents the key results.
II. COST STRUCTURE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES
A. Power Market Structures and Cost Drivers
In Germany, the power market is organized as an area pricing market. Thus, the price model operates
on the assumption of zero congestion. This results in a full decoupling of power price and production
region, which brings the need for re-dispatch measures to compensate for transmission grid congestions.
The support scheme for most of RES in Germany is two-fold (since Jan. 2012): A producer can choose
between FIT and a premium for direct sales. The constant FIT for RES production pays the producer a
fixed amount of money. Furthermore the FIT regulations guarantees an in-feed priority over conventional
generation [5]. The powergenerated under FIT support is sold via the transmissionsystemoperator (TSO),
which also covers the RES forecast error. On the other hand, the direct sale is organized via third party
[6]. It does not include guaranteed sell of the power and the forecast error must be handled by the third
party. The EEG states that the producers can freely switch between support schemes every month. Fig
1 and 2 show the participation over time in the two support schemes. In 2012 the direct sales support
scheme became preferable for wind plant operators. This is a result of the better forecast quality for wind
production based on the strong auto-correlation of the wind in-feed.
The support schemes for RES and the decoupling of the electricity market from the underlying grid
structures both result in costs for the energy consumer.
01.04.2011 01.10.2011 01.04.2012 01.10.2012 01.04.2013 01.10.2013
Fig. 1. Wind & PV volumes sold via the FIT scheme [3].
01.04.2011 01.10.2011 01.04.2012 01.10.2012 01.04.2013 01.10.2013
Fig. 2. Wind & PV volumes sold via direct marketing [3].
1) Costs at Energy Only Markets: In Germany, two energy only markets exist, the day-ahead market
andtheintra-daymarket.Bothmarketsareaffected bythedeploymentofRESandservedifferentpurposes.
While the day-ahead market is the main procurement market, the intra-day market is used to settle the
majority of the day-ahead forecast error before the use of ancillary services. For FIT supported RES,
the direct cost at the day-ahead market is the gap between the guaranteed FIT and the achieved market
prices plus the respective variable profile service costs for the FIT production. For the direct sales the cost
are the market premium including a management premium for the direct marketing participants. These
direct costs are directly transferred to the electricity customer via a RES allocation charge the so called
”EEG-Umlage”. As a result of excess supply, priority of RES in-feed and the lack of competitive market
clearing for direct marketing the so-called merit-order effect lowered the market prices significantly in
recent times. To ensure the settlement of RES in the auction, the price-independent FIT supported power
enters the market with the allowed minimum bid of −3000 . The direct sales RES can technically
enter the market with minus the market premium plus a small balancing error premium. Both effects shift
the merit-order-curve to the right and lower the achieved day-ahead market price. The merit-order-effect
is discussed in detail in [7]. The total paid ”EEG-Umlage” in Germany alone was almost 17 billion euros
in 2012 and 2013 and estimated almost 20 billion in 2014 as shown in Fig. 3.
The intra-day market provide continues trading until 45 minutes before delivery. Compared to the pay-as-
settled day-ahead market, the intra-day market is a pay-as-bid market. Since the market closing is only
45 minutes before delivery, the majority of the prediction errors can be settled on the intra-day market.
Compared to the day-ahead market, the costs for balancing actions at the intra-day market are not part of
the RES allocation charge but a component in the grid tariff.
2011 2012 2013 2014
DM (incl. P )
Profile service costs
Further costs
Fig. 3. EEG difference costs 2010-2013 and the estimation for 2014 [8].
2) Costs on Ancillary Services Markets, Structural Changes & Effects: The transformation from cen-
tralized productionto adecentralized productionbysmallunitshasconsiderableramification,on thepower
grid. The location mismatch of production and demand, the uncertain character of wind and PV and the
shutdown off old, non-profitable, powerplants make ancillary services and re-dispatch more complex and
therefore more expensive.
Fig. 4 shows that the costs of ancillary services over the years 2010, 2011 and 2012 were almost
constant at 1 billion euros per year [9]. Anyhow, the composition of ancillary services changed over the
years. The cost for secondary control (red) has decreased significantly as a result of the settlement of the
forecast error (load and RES forecast) at the intra-day market. On the other hand, the major cost increase
over the last three years is the compensation of power loss (cyan) in the grid and the re-dispatch measures.
In the past, the majority of production was fed into the transmission grid, with low power loss, the areas
of large demand close to the production location and proper grid design. With decentralized production
the power flow goes from the low voltage levels via the transmission grid, to other low voltage distribution
grid areas. More over, large RES production sources like offshore wind parks, are typically far away from
the major location of power consumption. Power loss compensation and re-dispatch are performed by the
TSOs and are billed to the customers via grid tariffs. While most of the standard prediction errors, such
2010 2011 2012
Secondary balancing
Primary balancing
Tertiary balancing
Power Loss
Power Factor Correction
Black start
Redispatch
Countertrading
Fig. 4. Change cost for different uses of ancillary services [9].
as load prediction errors stay approximately constant, the wind and PV generated in-feed has increased
significantly over time [7].
III. DATA SECTION
As a result of several transparency acts, the data for power markets, energy-only as well as ancillary
services, has in recent years become available in good quality. As required by the EEG, the prediction of
wind and PV in-feed, as well as the realized in-feed have to be published. Recently Merit-Order Curve
(MOC) data became available not only for the energy-only markets but also for the ancillary services
markets.
SUMMARYOFMARKETDATA
Data Time-Series Available since Source
Wind power in-feed W(t) 2011/04 [8]
Solar power in-feed R(t) 2011/04 [8]
Wind in-feed pred W(t) 2011/04 [8]
Solar in-feed pred R(t) ′ 2011/04 [8]
EPEX Day-ahead prices S(t) 2002/01 [10]
EPEX Intra-day prices I(t) 2006/10 [10]
Balancing Energy Price P 2001/02 [11]
Secondary Control MOC 2007/12 [12]
Tertiary Control MOC 2007/12 [12]
Management premium P 01/2012 [6]
Other on EEG costs 01/2011 [8]
The used data, the denomination of the variable and the source are given in Table I. All data referring
to load has 15 minute resolution, while price data is provided with hourly resolution. Since Germany is
divided in four TSO areas, all data is TSO specific. If the data is TSO specific, the symbol carries the
subscript .
In general, the market design, availability and transparency and RES support schemes differ from country
to country. By all means Germany is a good study case for a market with a high RES in-feed with good
data availability.
IV. ANALYSIS OF PROFILE SERVICE COSTS
In this section we derive and analyse the profile service costs based on the available data. The day
ahead forecast (08:00 AM [13]) of intermittent RES generates an error ǫ(t) given by
where W(t) ′ and R(t) ′ are the day ahead generation forecasts for wind and PV and W(t) and R(t) the
effective generation. The prediction error per TSO, ǫ , is defined analog as
TSO TSO TSO TSO TSO
Because demand and supply must always match, ǫ (t) has to be leveled by the TSO. The prediction
error known 45 minutes ahead is settled on the intra-day market. The remaining difference will be covered
by secondary or tertiary control reserve. Therefore ǫ (t) can also be written as
TSO intraday bal
where V (t) is the volume traded at the intra-day market and V t) is the volume balanced via
intraday bal
secondary or tertiary control. The time index t refers to the delivery period which, in the case of the
intra-day market, corresponds with the delivery time on the ancillary services market.
A. Cost Structure
Because only the intra-day market and balancing reserve is allowed to be used to cover the forecast
errors in the TSO RES balancing area, the profile service cost C(t) for time t can be stated as the cost
for intra-day market and balancing energy cost as
intraday bal
1) Intra-Day Market Balancing Costs: The intra-day market costs C (t) are the difference between
the revenue, or costs, on the intra-day market minus the foregone, or achieved, revenue at the European
Power Exchange (EPEX) day-ahead market and is given as
intraday intraday
where I(t) are the intra-day prices and S(t) the day-ahead prices. The costs at the intra-day market
C (t) are positive for the buyer side if V (t) is positive and I(t) is bigger than S(t). For the
intraday intraday
seller side the costs are positive, if V (t) is negative and I(t) is smaller than S(t). Fig. 5 shows the
dependencybetweenV (t)andI(t)−S(t)ofEPEXmarketdata.Thepositivecostshowanexponential
dependency between I(t)−S(t) and positive intra-day volume V (t) and a linear correlation between
I(t)−S(t) and negative intra-day V (t).
Two conclusions can be drawn from the analysis and modelling of data. First, purchase on the EPEX
intra-day market is more expensive than sales of excessive energy as a result of the exponential function
shape shown in Fig. 5. Second, modelling of purchase costs may underestimate the extreme costs arising
in situations of market supply scarcity as indicated by the positive outliers shown in Fig. 5.
2) Costs for Balancing energy: Accordingly to the costs of the intra-day energy, the cost for balancing
energy C (t) is defined as the product of balanced volume and difference of the price for balancing
energy P (t) and the EPEX day-ahead market S(t). This gives
bal bal bal
The price of balancing energy P (t) is defined as the costs of activation of balancing reserve C (t)
over the balancing saldo RZ (t) for all balancing regions in Germany [14] as
−6000 −4000 −2000 0 2000 4000 6000
Intraday volume TSOs [MWh]
2011 effective data
2012 effective data
2013 effective data
2011 model data
2012 model data
2013 model data
Fig. 5. Modelled hourly intra-day market costs for the German TSOs in comparison to real data.
To avoid extreme prices for very low RZ (t) and other price anomalies, P (t) is restricted in certain
cases. For more information please refer to [14]. The balancing energy saldo RZ is defined as the
sum of all activated secondary- and tertiary control reserves V (t) and V (t) as
sec,i ter,k
saldo X sec,i X ter,k
wherepandmaretheindexofthelastconsideredbidofsecondaryandtertiarycontrolreserverespectively.
The RZ (t) consist of the following variables:
• V (residual prediction error of the TSOs)
• residual prediction error from direct marketing
• residual demand prediction error
• demand fluctuations
• unexpected power plant shutdowns
0 1500 3000
0 1500 3000 0 1500 3000
Power reserve [MW]
Positive Balancing Negative Balancing
Fig. 6. Secondary control reserve merit-order of activation energy price [12].
0 1500 3000
0 1500 3000 0 1500 3000
Power reserve [MW]
Positive Balancing Negative Balancing
Fig. 7. Secondary control reserve merit-order of activation energy price [12].
The costs C (t) can be defined as the sum of the costs of the activation of secondary and tertiary
control as
saldo X sec,i sec,i X ter,k ter,k
where i is the index of a balancing capacity which offers secondary control reserve V (t) for an
activation price P (t), and k is the index of a balancing capacity which offers tertiary control V (t)
sec,i ter,k
for an activation price P (t). Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the 15 minutes MOC for the years 2011 to 2013
for secondary and tertiary control [12]. We train a model based on a quadratic function to model P
as a function of V (t). The modelling is performed on aggregated data of all products corresponding to
either of the four groups, negative secondary control reserve, positive secondary control reserve, negative
tertiary control reserve and positive tertiary control reserve. Fig. 8 shows the fit of the quadratic function
(red) to the aggregated MOCs data from the years 2011 to 2013.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Negative secondary control [MWh]
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
Positive secondary control [MWh]
Fig. 8. The four modelled costs of activation of secondary and tertiary control reserve.
The total balancing need RZ (t) can be derived as a function of V (t). Using the four cost functions
for the activation of control reserve to shown in Fig. 8 the total costs of activation C (t) can be
calculated. Using (7) the price P can then be calculated based on C (t) and RZ (t). Fig. 9 shows
bal saldo saldo
the results of the simulation in comparison to the effective data over the last three years. Compared to the
intra-day results, where the cost of negative and positive power is significantly different, the cost structure
of balancing energy is almost symmetric and rises similar for negative and positive balancing. The cost
uncertainty is larger than the uncertainty as a result of a more complex and harder to train model.
−1000 −500 0 500 1000
Balancing power [MWh]
Realized balancing energy costs
Modelled balancing energy costs
Fig. 9. Modelled balancing costs in comparison to effective balancing costs.
V. RESULTS
In the following section, we will discuss the results of our analysis. Profile service costs are additional
costs for system operation and thus, for the end consumer, the overall goal must be the reduction of those.
Based on our analysis, the following measures may be used to reduce the profile service costs:
1) the reduction of the forecast error ǫ(t)
2) selection between available markets
3) the shut down of intermittent supply
A. Reduction of the Forecast Error
The forecast error ǫ(t) depends mainly on three parameters: First, the prediction horizon, second, the
quality of the prediction model and third, the spatial distribution of intermittent supply. Because of the
market environment in Germany, the prediction horizon is fixed to 16h to 40h [13]. To prove the influence
of the parameters on ǫ(t), the root mean square error (RMSE) of ǫ(t) for the years 2010 till 2013 has
been normalized by the generation capacity C SO to RMSE and is given by
T TSO,norm
where C is the average installed wind & PV generation capacity in the TSO area for the given year
[15], [16]. The resulting RMSE are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11.
The figures confirm that the latter two parameters do have a significant impact on ǫ(t). First, the
introduction of more accurate prediction models for wind generation reduces the relative error for wind
generation over time. The blue stars in Fig. 10, representing the prediction error for 2010 per TSO are
significantly higher than the prediction in later years. This result is not significant for PV as shown in
Fig. 11. Second, the aggregation of larger installed capacities reduces the relative prediction error ǫ(t) as
shown in Fig. 10. This result is also not significant for PV.
The two measures decrease relative profile service costs for big market actors or big balancing groups.
Expensive forecast models can be covered by many installations, improving the prediction quality in
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Installed capacity C [GW]
Fig. 10. RMSE of ǫ(t) for wind generated power in Germany normalized by the installed capacity C TSO per TSO.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Installed capacity C [GW]
Fig. 11. RMSE of ǫ(t) for PV generated power in Germany normalized by the installed capacity C TSO.
combination with the reduced RMSE due to the big balance group size. Independent of the
support schemes, big single actors are able to dispatch RES generated power more efficiently than small
ones and save costs for the end consumer. This is a result of, first, the general larger number of production
facilities and therefore better statistical properties and second local disturbances affect the system less.
B. Selection Between Available Markets
For big balancing areas like the RES balancing area from the German TSOs, it could be shown that
there is a correlation between trading volumes and costs. Therefore portions of V (t) and V (t) in
intraday bal
(3) can be selected to reduce C(t) in (4).
Fig. 12 shows the modelled price curves for a 15 minute product on the intra-day market in comparison
to the expected costs for balancing energy. Fig. 13 shows the theoretical optimum of balancing cost versus
the achieved optimum. The theoretical optimum is significantly lower than the TSO procurement of profile
service costs for the RES balancing.
The results show, that for market actors it is possible to optimize themselves against the market, even
though it is prohibited by law for balancing areas to stay long or short by choice before the activation of
balancing reserve.
C. Shut down of intermittent supply
Profile service costs of the RES balancing area can be normalized by the dispatched energy given by
−2000 −1500 −1000 −500 0 500 1000 1500 2000
Balancing power [MWh]
Balancing market costs
Intraday market costs
Fig. 12. Simulated intra-day market costs versus simulated costs of balancing energy.
01.01.2011 01.08.2011 01.03.2012 01.10.2012 01.05.2013 01.12.2013
Effective total balancing costs
Optimal total balancing costs
Fig. 13. Monthly optimized profile service costs for TSO balancing area compared to effective results.
where C (t) is the marginal cost of market actors per sold kWh. If marginal costs of generation are
higher than the expected revenues from the market, generation capacity has to be shut down to avoid short
term losses for the operator. Because of the support schemes structure in Germany, RES installations still
generate profits due to premium payments, even for hours when marginal costs are higher than the EPEX
day-ahead market prices. Fig. 14 shows the effective monthly average profile cost for the TSOs. The sale
of RES generation on the EPEX day-ahead market under its marginal costs is therefore for certain hours,
where the EPEX day-ahead market price is lower than C (t), economically inefficient.
01.01.2011 01.08.2011 01.03.2012 01.10.2012 01.05.2013 01.12.2013
]hWk/RUEc[
Balancing costs
Intraday costs
Tot profile service costs
Fig. 14. Normalized profile service costs for the German TSOs.
RES installation owners are free to choose every month between direct marketing or fixed FIT. Market
actors using direct sale for their RES generated power have to pay a premium compared to FIT to get
the assignment. Fig. 15 shows the development of management premium payments P for wind & PV
installations for 2012 to 2015. P is paid to controllable installations and P is paid to non-
m,high m,low
controllable installations. P payments are decreasing for the future whereas the realized profile service
costs of the TSO RES balance group are already rising for certain months above the P payments. It
therefore can be expected, that operators profile service costs rise above the P payments and wind
installation owner move back to the FIT support scheme.
2012 2013 2014 2015
Fig. 15. Management premium payments for direct marketing of RES [6].
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presented an analysis of the profile service cost as additional marginal costs for RES
deployment. We presented a model to approximate the profile service costs for the TSOs and provide
recommendations how to lower the profile service cost via better predictions especially in the case of
wind production.