Group-Based Trajectory Modeling of Citations in Scholarly Literature:
Dynamic Qualities of “Transient” and “Sticky Knowledge Claims”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology (in press)
Susanne Baumgartner a and Loet Leydesdorff b*
Group-based Trajectory Modeling (GBTM) is applied to the citation curves of articles in six
journals and to all citable items in a single field of science (Virology, 24 journals), in order to
distinguish among the developmental trajectories in subpopulations. Can highly-cited citation
patterns be distinguished in an early phase as “fast-breaking” papers? Can “late bloomers” or
“sleeping beauties” be identified? Most interesting, we find differences between “sticky
knowledge claims” that continue to be cited more than ten years after publication, and “transient
knowledge claims” that show a decay pattern after reaching a peak within a few years. Only
papers following the trajectory of a “sticky knowledge claim” can be expected to have a
sustained impact. These findings raise questions about indicators of “excellence” that use
aggregated citation rates after two or three years (e.g., impact factors). Because aggregated
citation curves can also be composites of the two patterns, 5th-order polynomials (with four
bending points) are needed to capture citation curves precisely. For the journals under study, the
most frequently cited groups were furthermore much smaller than ten percent. Although GBTM
has proved a useful method for investigating differences among citation trajectories, the
methodology does not enable us to define a percentage of highly-cited papers inductively across
different fields and journals. Using multinomial logistic regression, we conclude that predictor
variables such as journal names, number of authors, etc., do not affect the stickiness of
knowledge claims in terms of citations, but only the levels of aggregated citations (that are field-
specific).
Keywords: citation, excellence, trajectory, GBTM, prediction, highly-cited, excellence
a Amsterdam School of Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam, Kloveniersburgwal 48, 1012
CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands; s.e.baumgartner@uva.nl .
b Amsterdam School of Communication Research (ASCoR), University of Amsterdam, Kloveniersburgwal 48, 1012
CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands; loet@leydesdorff.net ; * Corresponding author.
Introduction
Group-based Trajectory Modeling (GBTM; Nagin, 2005) provides a non-parametric statistics for
distinguishing the developmental trajectories of subpopulations in sets. GBTM is based on using
mixed models for the prediction of different trajectories in the data. This technique was first
developed in fields such as criminology and clinical research in order to distinguish in an early
stage, for example, youngsters who would be inclined to criminal behavior in a later stage of
development (Nagin & Odgers, 2010a), or to predict the further development of symptoms and
interventions in the clinic over time (Nagin & Odgers, 2010b). As against standard growth curve
modeling, the group-based approach provides statistics for distinguishing among clusters of
trajectories within a population (Andruff et al., 2009; Nagin, 2005).
In this study, we explore GBTM by applying it to citation patterns in scientific literature.
Citation patterns and citation windows can be expected to vary among fields of science (Price,
1972), among journals, and given co-variates such as document types or numbers of authors and
pages (Garfield, 1979; Bornmann, Schier, et al., 2012). In addition to the well-known impact
factor, the Science Citation Index (SCI)1 provides a number of journal indicators such as the
immediacy factor, the cited half-life, etc., to trace such differences in development at the journal
level over time. Furthermore, Thomson Reuters, the current owner of the Science Citation Index,
provides ScienceWatch as an additional service: ScienceWatch lists fast-breaking papers at
considered as highly relevant and potentially ground-breaking (Ponomarev et al., in press).
1 We use “SCI” as a shorthand for the comparable databases for the social sciences (SSCI) and the arts & humanities
(A&HCI). In this study, we use data from the SCI-Expanded version at the Web-of-Science (WoS).
Citation patterns tend to be heavily skewed, and are therefore far from normally distributed
(Seglen, 1992). In recent years, the use of arithmetic averages (such as implied in the impact
factors of journals) has been abandoned in favor of non-parametric statistics (Bornmann & Mutz,
2010; Leydesdorff et al., 2011; Waltman et al., 2012). Percentile distributions of citations can be
used for calculating an “integrated impact indicator” (Leydesdorff & Bornmann, 2012); and
increasingly consensus has emerged for considering the top-10% as an “excellence indicator”
(Bornmann, de Moya-Anegón, and Leydesdorff, 2012; Waltman et al., 2012; cf. NSB, 2012).
However, the delineation of this top-10% is again dependent on the citation time-window, which
may vary across journals, fields, and document types. The cut-off at the 90th percentile is
inspired by administrative standards (Bornmann & Mutz, 2010; NSB, 2012) rather than based on
empirical evidence. The NSF, for example, distinguishes six classes (top-1%, 5%, 10%, 25%,
50%, and the remainder). However, it may also be that three (low, medium, high) or four classes
(including a top group of most-highly cited outliers, or a never-cited group) are sufficient. In this
paper we explore whether GBTM can provide an empirical solution to this problem. Is GBTM
able to delineate empirically specific excellence and quality classes among citations in different
journals and fields?
In a recent study, Ponomarev et al. (in press) focused on another indicator of ground-breaking
research, “breakthrough papers”. Breakthrough papers are identified by these authors at a high
citation threshold (0.1% of the most frequently cited articles; cf. Ponomarev, in preparation) and
thus as having a strong impact on the field. The citation trajectories of breakthrough papers as
well as “excellent” papers are expected to show high levels of citations from the beginning; that
is, they are immediately recognized as major contributions to the field. Citation rates of
“excellent” papers are expected to remain high for a few years and then decline (Aversa, 1985;
Price, 1976).
In contrast to these breakthrough papers, it has also been argued that the citations to “late-
bloomers” (Merton, 1988) or “sleeping beauties” (Van Raan, 2004) emerge only gradually or
after some years. These papers would follow a citation trajectory of no or few citations in the
first years after publication, with a strong increase in citations after a few years. However, it is
still unclear whether such “late-bloomers” are only exceptional cases that can be recollected
from narratives, but are perhaps indicated idiosyncratically (Burrell, 2005). Is it possible to
empirically identify a meaningful group of these “late bloomers”? GBTM may be a useful
method to identify typical citation trajectories, as well as to detect more unique patterns such as
“breakthrough papers” and “late bloomers.”
In summary, GBTM may be of importance for the study of citation trajectories in the following
ways:
1. Using GBTM, one is able to identify the typical shape of the development of citations
over time. (After how many years do citations peak? When is the typical decline in
citations? Is there a strong fluctuation or stability over time?).
2. GBTM makes it possible to identify subgroups of papers that follow specific citation
trajectories (e.g., breakthrough papers or sleeping beauties).
3. GBTM can perhaps be used to identify excellent and breakthrough papers at an early
stage.
4. GBTM allows us to compare citation trajectories across journals, disciplines, and
scientific fields.
5. Using the statistical distinction between sub-populations, one can further ask whether
external variables or co-variates (such as document and/or author characteristics)
determine the likelihood that papers will follow a specific citation trajectory.
We explored GBTM by applying the technique to the citation curves of six journals in different
research fields, as well as to citations in one entire research field (Virology) over a period of 16
years (1996-2011). We chose our samples to generate an overlap with three (of the eleven)
papers studied as breakthrough papers by Ponomarev et al. (in press); these papers were
published in 1996 in Cell, Nature, and Science, respectively. The other journals were chosen to
explore potential differences across fields and/or conjectured similarities.
We focus on six journals in different fields, using only articles published in 1996: the Journal of
the American Society for Information Science (JASIS), the Journal of the American Chemical
Society (JACS), Cell, Gene, Science, and Nature. Moreover, we chose one research field,
Virology, including 24 journals. The choice of these six journals from among the 6,120 journals
contained in the Journal Citation Reports for 1996, and the choice of Virology as a field, may
seem somewhat arbitrary. As noted, the inclusion of Cell, Science, and Nature was motivated by
the possibility to compare our findings with Ponomarev et al. (in press).
We chose additionally JASIST, JACS, and Gene as journals. JASIST is a leading journal in library
and information science and provides us with familiar ground so that we can interpret aggregated
patterns in terms of the underlying articles. The routine will first be explicated using JASIST as
our lead example for the explanation. In 1996, JASIST was still named the Journal of the
American Society for Information Science (JASIS) without the additional “and Technology”
which was added only in 2001. The 1996-volume (vol. 47) contained 169 papers, of which we
use only the 79 that are indicated as “research articles.”
One of us compared JASIST and JACS (Journal of the American Chemical Society) in previous
studies (Leydesdorff, 2001; Leydesdorff & Bensman, 2006). JACS provides us with a leading
journal in one of the natural sciences, whereas Cell and Gene are typically biomedical. To
broaden the focus of the study, we further investigated citation trajectories for the
multidisciplinary journals Nature and Science, which also have a slight focus on the biomedical
sciences.2 Citation trajectories for multidisciplinary journals can be expected to differ from those
for journals that focus on one specific research field.
Thirdly, we extend the study to a research field (i.e., Virology) operationalized as a WoS Subject
Category. Virology was chosen for pragmatic reasons: we expected this field to be highly cited,
sufficiently diverse, and relatively small. We retrieved the citable items in the 24 journals
2 Using 13 categories, the journal list compiled for the US Science and Engineering Indicators series (NSB, 2012)
by PatentBoards™, classifies Science, Nature, and PNAS as biomedical journals.
subsumed under this category in 1996: 110 review articles and 161 letters in addition to the
3,958 articles. One might expect reviews to be (significantly?) more frequently cited than
research articles,3 and letters in specialist journals less frequently than the average article
(Leydesdorff, 2008, Figure 3 at p. 280).
In the final step of the analysis, using mutinominal regression analysis, we investigate whether
the type of publication as well as other co-variates (i.e., number of authors, number of references,
page numbers and the journal name) can predict specific citation trajectories.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics of the sets under study.
1996 sets Articles
JASIST 169 79
JACS 2263 2142
Cell 466 346
Gene 760 747
Nature 3104 873
Science 2791 1064
3958 articles;
110 reviews;
Virology 161 letters
(24 journals) 4569 4229
In sum, the selected journals allow us to compare similarities and differences in citation
trajectories from different fields. At this stage, such an explorative approach seemed more
informative than drawing a random sample from the journal domain. Table 1 provides an
overview of the journals and numbers of articles in each journal. Of course, GBTM can be
3 ‘In the JCR system any article containing more than 100 references is coded as a review. Articles in “review”
sections of research or clinical journals are also coded as reviews, as are articles whose titles contain the word
on February 14, 2013).
applied to all other journals and fields. This study is meant both as an explorative example of
applying GBTM to citation curves and as a critical assessment of the usefulness of GBTM in
citation analysis.
Data was downloaded from the WoS interface in the second week of January 2013. Because
citations to the 2012 volumes can be added until much later in 2013, we use citation data for the
period 1996-2011, that is, 16 years. As noted, 1996 was chosen to facilitate comparison with
Ponomarev et al.’s (in press) study of breakthrough articles, while at the same time keeping
similar time lines across the sets in order to maximize the possibilities for comparisons among
the cases.
GBTM has been developed as a subroutine in both SAS and Stata (Jones et al., 2001). In this
study, we use SAS 9.2 and the corresponding implementation PROC TRAJ, freely available at
Poisson (ZIP) model is most appropriate for citation count data, since one can expect more zeros
than under the Poisson assumption (Lambert, 1992; cf. Hausman, Hall, & Grilliches, 1984).4 The
SAS syntax of the model is discussed in technical details in the Appendix.
Model selection is pursued in three steps. First, we stepwise increase the number of groups in the
model specification. The Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) is used as a test statistic for
4 Rotolo, D., & Messeni Petruzzelli (in press) provide arguments why the negative binomial estimation is more
appropriate for modeling citation data than assuming a Poisson distribution.
selecting the number of groups that best represent the heterogeneity among the trajectories. The
BIC is known for penalizing over-fitting by introducing additional parameters. The selection of
the model with the largest BIC is recommended,5 but model selection should eventually be based
also on domain knowledge and reasonable judgment (Nagin, 2005: 74-77). Furthermore, group
sizes should be reasonably large (above 5%). In the first round, models with progressively more
groups are tested until the model fit can no longer be improved.
After identifying the number of groups, different shapes for the trajectories (linear, quadratic,
cubic, etc.) can be tested in a second step. As the default, we assume that a citation curve can be
expected to bend twice over a longer period of time, namely first rising to an apex of citations
after two or three years (depending on the field of science) and then back again in the decline
phase to an asymptotic approach to zero citations in the long run. We therefore defined all
groups as following a cubic shape in the first step of the model fitting process. The shapes of the
curves, however, can be adapted subsequently to alternatives that best fit the respective groups.
Once the ideal number of groups and shapes has been identified, in the third step, model
adequacy can be tested using the average posterior probabilities (APP) of group membership.
The posterior probabilities of group membership measure the likelihood for each scientific article
to belong to its assigned group. Nagin (2005) recommends that the average posterior
probabilities should exceed a minimum of .70 for each group. An average posterior probability
5 BIC is calculated as: BIC = log(L) – 0.5k log(N). L is the value of the model’s maximum likelihood, N is the
sample size, and k refers to the number of parameters in the model. In order to compare two models with different
numbers of groups, the following estimate of the log Bayes Factor is used: 2log (B ) ≈ 2(∆BIC) (Andruff, 2009;
Jones et al., 2001; Nagin, 2005). In order to compute ∆BIC, the BIC value of the simpler model is subtracted from
the more complex model, and this value is thereafter multiplied by two. In accordance with recommendations of
Jones et al. (2001), an estimated Log Bayes factor larger than five is considered as strong evidence for the more
complex model.
of above .70 indicates that, on average, research articles are well assigned to their groups. In the
graphs, 95% confidence intervals can be provided to show that confidence intervals of the
identified groups do not overlap at specific time points.
a. Citation trajectories of JASIS articles published in 1996
For the 79 articles published in JASIS in 1996, we tested models from one to seven groups: the
BIC values of these models were -2318.69, -1773.22, -1638.90, -1619.49, -1608.57, -1605.32,
and -1619.20, respectively. The six-group solution with all shapes defined as cubic therefore
provided us with the best fit (BIC = -1605.32, log Bayes factor = 6.68). Since the six-group
solution differs from the five-group solution only by distinguishing more subsets among the
infrequently cited papers, we chose the five-group solution for presentation. The APPs for the
five groups range from .92 to1.00, indicating that the research articles match excellently with
their assigned groups.
Figure 1: Five groups distinguished in terms of average citation rates among 1,517 citations to
79 articles from JASIS 1996, during the period 1996-2011. Smooth lines provide estimates; 95%
confidence intervals are indicated with dotted lines.
Figure 1 shows the citation trajectories for these five groups during the 16 year time period. The
five groups can be interpreted as follows:
1. A first (and largest) group consists of 35.5% of the papers (n = 28) which are almost
never cited, that is, with an average citation rate below unity. Over time, these papers
approach zero citations.
2. A second group of 30.4% of the papers (n = 24) is cited infrequently (approximately.
once per year).
3. The third group comprising 23.0% of the papers (n = 18.2) is cited moderately (< 4). The
citations in this group also seem to decline more slowly over time.
4. The fourth group (6.0%, n = 4.7) consists of papers that one could perhaps call “sleeping
beauties.” These papers are only infrequently cited in the first years after publication but
their citation rates increase to an average of almost six citations in 2011.
5. Four papers (5.1%) are most frequently cited in this model; not surprisingly, these were
also the most highly cited papers in the set of 79, with cumulative citation rates ranging
from 78 to 132.
Note that the percentages provided in the legends are weighted in terms of the APPs of group
membership and therefore the numbers per group do not have to add up to whole counts. Some
cases cannot be attributed unambiguously to one group or another.
Interestingly, the five-group solution shows a “sleeping-beauty” pattern for Group 4. This
pattern, however, was found only in the five-group model. In comparison, in the three- or four-
group solution, a top group of five papers (6.3%) emerges, and the other papers previously
attributed to the sleeping-beauty group are assigned to the moderately-cited group.
Figure 2. Three trajectories distinguished in terms of average citation rates among 1,517
citations to 79 articles from JASIS 1996, during the period 1996-2011.
Figure 2 provides the three-group solution in terms of most-highly-cited, medium-, and rarely
cited papers. These three groups obviously need to be distinguished, in our opinion, since they
are different already at the intercept and non-overlapping in terms of confidence intervals from
the first year after publication.
In summary, the five-group solution plotted in Figure 1 is more precise, but Figure 2 provides an
unambiguous separation into three groups. The highly-cited group in this (relatively small) set
contained four or five out of 79 papers (5.1 or 6.3%, respectively). The five-group model also
distinguished a sleeping-beauty trajectory. Given the small sample size, however, it seems
premature to infer to the existence of this class of sleeping beauties. The percentage of most-
frequently cited papers was considerably lower than 10% in all models.
Journal of the American Chemical Society (JACS)
In the following section, we present the models for JACS, Cell, Gene, Nature, and Science.
Because the ZIP method of GBTM is sensitive to outliers, we found convergence failures in
some of the cases. Citation distributions are extreme at both ends. The “zero-inflated” Poisson
model (ZIP) accounts for the large numbers of zeros (non-citations) in the tails, but extreme
values can also be expected at the high end. In the case of JACS, for example, the three most
frequently cited papers (of 2142) were cited 2969, 2277, and 1594 times, respectively, with
numbers four and five following at much lower levels, with only 783 and 670 aggregated
citations. Under such conditions, GBTM fails to converge; we decided to consider these (three)
outliers as another group to be excluded from GBTM.
The remaining 2,139 papers were included in the GBTM analysis. The BIC values in this case
continued to increase when more groups were added until, with ten or more groups, the program
failed to converge. Thus, the BIC value could not be used as a criterion for distinguishing the
number of groups in this case. In such cases, Nagin (2005:74 ff.) recommends using domain
knowledge to determine the number of groups.
Comparing the different models with one another, we found that when more groups are added,
the model distinguishes mainly among the least cited papers. However, in the case of citation
trajectories, one is most interested in the more frequently cited papers. Therefore, in the model
selection process, we stepwise added more groups until no further meaningful distinction among
the more frequently cited papers could be found.
Figure 3: Seven trajectories of 2,139 articles published in JACS with publication year 1996.
After inspection of the possible models, we considered the seven-group solution as most
informative (Figure 3). This model allows us to show that—from the top to the bottom—the first
two groups (Group 7 with 1.3% of the papers and Group 6 containing 4.1%, respectively) are
different in terms of continuing an initially similar (steep) increase in the number of citations.
The curve of Group 6 reaches a peak level after a few years and declines thereafter. The topmost
group, however, reaches a high level of citations and remains there. Although perhaps
overcharging the terminology, one could say that these papers have become “citation classics”
within this domain (and over a quite long period of 16 years).
The next two groups (Groups 4: 7.5%, and 5: 7.2%) differ similarly in terms of whether the
citation curve bends back to asymptotically approaching zero or remains at a plateau through the
entire period. Thus, we find this distinction both among the most-frequently cited papers and the
moderately-cited papers. Perhaps, the absolute level of citedness can be considered as indicative
of the intellectual fine-structure in this field in terms of respective specialties—e.g., organic,
inorganic, and physical chemistry (Leydesdorff & Bensman, 2006; cf. Leydesdorff, 1991)—with
different average citation rates (Garfield, 1979). Both in the highly-cited and the moderately-
cited groups, however, a further distinction can be made between citation patterns that last for
more than ten years and citation patterns that decay. We propose to name this difference in
citation patterns as “sticky” versus “transient” knowledge claims.
For reasons of presentation, we did not add the confidence intervals for all groups in Figure 3.
Inspection of the model depicted in Figure 3 made us aware that citation curves cannot properly
be considered as following third-order polynomials, but that fifth-order polynomials would be
more appropriate. Using fifth-order polynomials, the curves fit almost perfectly, with an
explained variance of R2 > .95 for all seven trajectories. This is shown in Figure 4. Using fifth-
order polynomials in GBTM increases the BIC further to -72,323 as against -74,546 for third-
order ones. The APPs range in this model between .93 and 1.00, indicating that the papers can be
matched almost precisely into these seven groups.
Figure 4: Seven trajectories of JACS using 5th-order polynomials.
Note that the size of the groups changed slightly when using fifth-order polynomials compared to
the third-order polynomial groups. For example, the virtually non-cited group of papers is
26.31% in the case of using fifth-order polynomials and 26.22% using third-order polynomials.
Further increases in the number of groups improved the BIC values in this case, but again this
mainly affects the grouping of less-cited articles. In other words, it seems not possible to derive
an optimal number of groups without making a qualitative judgment.
In summary, we found:
1. a number of subpopulations with different average levels of citations.
2. within the highly-cited and medium-cited groups, a further distinction between articles
that have longer-term value (“sticky knowledge claims”) and articles that typically
function as references at the research front for only a few years (“transient knowledge
claims”; Price, 1970). Further study of the less-cited groups also reveals this distinction at
lower absolute levels.
3. a differentiated structure in the lower three subgroups that cover 80.0% of the articles:
26.3% remain almost uncited; 32.5% are cited incidentally; and 21.2% tend to remain at
the level of four citations per year, and therefore can be expected also to contain “sticky”
knowledge claims”, but at a much lower level.
Cell and Gene
Of the 346 articles published in Cell in 1996, the two most frequently cited papers belong to the
group of outliers with 3,204 and 2,389 total citations, respectively; the third and fourth most
highly cited papers had 1,848 and 1,830 total citations during this same period. For Cell, a three-
group model fitted the data best (BIC = - 27,372.01). The BICs for the 4- and 5-group model
were -27,392.45 and BIC = -27,412.90, respectively. Figure 5 shows these three groups;6 the
papers were perfectly assigned to the groups with all APPs being 1.00.
6 The default starting values provided by SAS failed to find an adequate model. Therefore, starting values were
procedure).
Figure 5: Three different trajectories on the basis of 344 articles published in Cell in 1996; 5th-
order polynomials. The fast-breaking paper studied by Ponomarev et al. (in preparation) is added
as a dashed line.
As noted, we chose the journal Cell because Ponomarev et al. (in press) included Hicke &
Riezman (1996) as one of their set of “fast-breaking papers” in this year. However, this article is
not part of the most highly cited group, but as shown in Figure 5 bends back in the second year
after publication (1998) to a lower citation level, so that it becomes unambiguously (with a
posterior probability of 1.00) part of the intermediate group.
Not surprisingly, the 5th-order polynomials again fit with a very high level of precision (R2 > .95)
for all three groups. (Note that the fit is even R2 > 0.81 for the single case of the fast-breaking
paper.).
In contrast to JACS, we did not find a group of papers following a sticky citation pattern for Cell.
Because Cell is a biomedical journal, it may be argued that the research front in the biomedical
sciences moves faster than in other natural sciences. Perhaps citations decline faster in
biomedical science than in the natural sciences, making a sticky citation pattern less likely.
To test this assumption we included an additional journal from the biomedical sciences in the
analysis: Gene. Gene is in many respects comparable to Cell but is somewhat more specialized.
Although citation rates were lower on average in this journal than in Cell, the most frequently
cited group of papers (2.61%) convincingly shows a high degree of “stickiness” in their citation
patterns (Figure 6). This indicates that also in the biomedical sciences, sticky citation patterns
can occur.
Figure 6: Citation trajectories of 746 cited articles, published in Gene during 1996. Only a single
outlier had to be removed among the 747 articles published in Gene in 1996. GBTM with 5th-
order polynomials failed to converge, but the 4th-order ones did. We added the trend lines with
5th-order polynomials to this figure using Excel.
Among the 873 articles published in Nature with publication year 1996, nine had to be removed
as outliers in order to find a converging solution with GBTM. Four groups with 4th order
polynomials fitted the data best.7 The BIC for this model is -60,734.15, all APPs are 1.00.
7 Starting values had to be specified in order to find this optimal solution.
Figure 7: Four citation trajectories of 864 articles published in Nature during 1996; fourth-order
polynomials.
In this case, the “fast-breaking paper” of Nussenzweig et al. (1996; see Ponomarev et al., in
press) is attributed unambiguously (APP = 1.00) to the medium-range group (Group 2); it peaks
at 52 citations in 1999. Although this paper was fast-breaking immediately following its
publication, GBTM shows that it does not belong to the most highly cited papers in Nature of
this publication year. Furthermore, the decline in citations of this paper is rather striking, in
contrast to papers that remain cited on a higher level throughout these years. In terms of
cumulative total citations, it ranks only 174th among the set of 873 articles in the same journal
(Nature) and with the same publication year (1996).
Comparison between Figures 5 and 7 (and also Figure 1) shows us the differences among fits
when using different orders of polynomials. Polynomials with an order lower than five are not
able to fit to the citation distributions because of the specific shape of the peak in the first few
years. The fit with 4th-order polynomials in Figure 7 is improved when compared to the fit with
3rd-order polynomials in Figure 1, but the fit with 5th-order polynomials (in Figure 5) is precise.
We discuss this issue in more detail in the discussion below..
Among the 1,064 articles published in Science in 1996, 17 outliers had to be removed before we
were able to find a converging solution. We used 5th-order polynomials to fit the remaining 1,047
articles. A five-group model emerged as the best fitting model. The groups are shown in Figure
8.
In this case, the “fast-breaking paper” included in the set of Ponomarev et al. (in press) belongs
to the group of outliers among the reference set. (We included this group in Figure 8; as noted, it
cannot be included into GBTM.) At its peak in 2002, this fast-breaking paper (Altman et al.,
1996) was the most frequently cited one in the set with 292 citations, but it exhibited the
expected decline in citation rates in the years thereafter. Four other outliers obtained much higher
citation rates in subsequent years (with approximately 600 citations per year for the highest
ranking one). These four can be considered as “sticky knowledge claims” whereas the fast-
breaking one followed a “transient” pattern.
Figure 8: Citation trajectories of 1,064 articles published in Science with publication year 1996.
Figure 8 shows the excellent fits to the 5th-order polynomials including a fit of R2 > .95 for the
single case of the “fast-breaking” paper. Interestingly, the overall decline in the tails of the
distributions is less steep than in the case of Nature. Although Nature and Science are typically
considered similar journals, these citation patterns may indicate that there are also differences.
One reason for this difference in citation trajectories for the most highly cited papers may be that
Science is less oriented towards the biomedical sciences than Nature.
Can GBTM also be applied to citation trajectories for a whole research field? We expanded the
analysis to the research field Virology represented by 24 journals. In addition to articles, we
included also reviews and letters as document types.
Figure 9: Six citation trajectories of 4,229 articles, reviews, and letters published in the WoS
Subject Category of Virology with publication year 1996 (BIC = -107,949).
The choice of the number of groups remained a bit arbitrary also in this case, but the two top
groups stabilize after six groups are distinguished. The six-group solution is depicted in Figure 9.
The two top groups consist of 1.18% (n = 35.8) and 4.33% (n = 183.1) of the papers, and—as
before—these sets are much smaller than the “top 10%” of the Excellence Indicator. However,
one can also reason that the top 10% would at least include all these excellent papers (Waltman
et al., 2012).
The six-group solution provided us also with an opportunity to compare these empirical results
with the normative framework of the NSF (e.g., Bornmann & Mutz, 2010; NSB, 2012) that uses
a scheme of top-1%, 5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, and bottom-50% in the rankings. The group sizes
found using GBTM do not differ much from this distinction (as shown in Figure 9). Using the
discrete classes defined by Bornmann & Mutz (2010), a strong overlap between our groups was
found: r = 0.87 (p<.05); ρ = 1.00 (p<.01). If the top-5% of the NSF includes the top-1%, etc.,
using aggregation (NSB, 2012), our aggregated classes would be: 1.2%, 5.5%, 17.7%, 41.5%,
66.8%, 100.0%. The normative and empirical distributions of the classes are then virtually
identical, with r = 0.98 (p<.01); ρ = 1.00 (p<.01).
Figure 10: Ten citation trajectories among 4,229 articles, reviews, and letters published in the
WoS Subject Category of Virology with publication year 1996 (BIC = -104,793).
If further groups are added to the model, we again find “sticky” and “transient knowledge
claims.” Figure 10 shows the model with ten groups. This fine-structure makes clear that both
among the top-level papers 0.38% (n = 16 papers, Group 10) and among the fifth group in the
middle range (3.01% or n = 334.2), articles with “sticky knowledge claims” can be distinguished
from “transient knowledge claims.” Similarly but at a lower level, Group 7 can be considered as
exemplifying “sticky knowledge claims” whereas Group 8 shows “transient” ones.
When compared with Groups 8 and 9, the “transient” trajectories of Groups 7 and 10,
respectively, peak earlier than the “sticky” knowledge claims. Whereas the “sticky” trajectories
peaked only after four years, the “transient” groups peaked already after two years. This suggests
that typical indicators of excellence which take only the first two years after publication into
account fail to distinguish between these two potential pathways. In contrast to papers that
follow a “transient” pattern, papers following “sticky” trajectories may have a more sustained
influence on the research field and may therefore be better indicators of excellence
independently of the absolute levels of the citations within each category.
Co-variates
The previous sections have shown that GBTM enables us to distinguish between different
citation patterns over time. Most importantly, we saw that there are not only different levels of
citations (in terms of total numbers of citations) but that one can distinguish also between
“sticky” and “transient knowledge claims” within each level. In this section, we address the
question of whether specific co-variates can predict which trajectories specific papers can be
expected to follow. We show this by using the six groups distinguished for the Virology papers
in the previous section (see Figure 9) as well as using the ten groups as presented in Figure 10.
As predictor variables we used document type (article vs. review vs. letter), number of authors,
number of references, number of pages, and journal name (Virology is represented by 24
different journals). The variables at the interval scale (number of authors [NAU], number of
references [NREF], and number of pages [NPG]; cf. Bornmann et al., 2012) were used as
independent variables in a multinominal logistic regression with group membership as the
dependent variable. In the first regression, group membership was based on the six-group model
shown in Figure 9; the sixth group was defined as the reference group in the multinominal
logistic regression8. The results are provided in Table 2.
The number of authors significantly predicted whether a document belongs to the 6th-group in
comparison with almost all other groups (p < .05; only the difference between Group 5 and
Group 6 was not significant at p = .06). The more authors an article had, the more likely the
article belonged to the highest cited group. Furthermore, the number of references significantly
differentiated the groups with lower levels of citations (Groups 1, 2, and 3) from the highest
group. The more references an article had, the more likely it was to belong to the highest-cited
group in comparison to the three lowest cited groups. However, the numbers of references did
not significantly differentiate among the more frequently cited Groups 4, 5, and 6. The number
of pages of a document did not significantly predict group membership.
The equation for multinominal logistic regression is:
log = a + b X + b X + b X
1 1 2 2 3 3
Pr(group6)
Table 2. Parameter estimates of the multinominal logistic regression.
Estimate Std. p-value Odds 95% Conf. Interval
B Error ratio for Exp(B)
Groups Exp(B)
Lower Upper
Bound Bound
Group 1 Intercept 4.68 0.25 0.00
NPG 0.03 0.03 0.40 1.03 0.97 1.09
NREF -0.03 0.01 0.00 0.98 0.97 0.99
NAU -0.08 0.02 0.00 0.92 0.89 0.96
Group 2 Intercept 6.07 0.27 0.00
NPG 0.00 0.03 0.95 1.00 0.94 1.06
NREF -0.06 0.01 0.00 0.95 0.94 0.96
NAU -0.19 0.02 0.00 0.83 0.79 0.86
Group 3 Intercept 3.95 0.25 0.00
NPG -0.01 0.03 0.76 0.99 0.94 1.05
NREF -0.01 0.01 0.03 0.99 0.98 1.00
NAU -0.05 0.02 0.00 0.95 0.92 0.98
Group 4 Intercept 2.94 0.24 0.00
NPG -0.02 0.03 0.53 0.98 0.93 1.04
NREF 0.00 0.01 0.41 1.00 0.99 1.01
NAU -0.03 0.02 0.04 0.97 0.94 1.00
Group 5 Intercept 1.90 0.27 0.00
NPG -0.03 0.03 0.39 0.97 0.91 1.04
NREF 0.00 0.01 0.82 1.00 0.99 1.01
NAU -0.04 0.02 0.06 0.96 0.93 1.00
Note. The reference category is: Group 6. B is the regression coefficient. Exp(B) is the odds ratio
of the predictor variable. Exp(B) indicates how the likelihood of an article belonging to the
comparison group compared to the referent group (= Group 6) changes depending on the
predictor variable. The model fit was adequate with Cox and Snell R2 = .12 and Nagelkerke R2 =
.13. Model χ2(15) = 552.61, p < .001.
In a second multinominal logistic regression, the differentiation between ten groups was used as
dependent variable, with Group 10 as reference group (see Figure 10). In this case, the co-
variates no longer significantly predicted group membership, except that the number of
references (NREF) among the lower-cited papers is significantly different from that of the most
frequently cited group. In summary, these analyses show that the co-variates were not relevant
for the distinction between transient and sticky knowledge claims as presented in Figure 10, but
they are predictors for the levels and aggregates of citations (Bornmann et al., 2012) as is the
case in the six-group model.
For the two categorical variables “journal name” and “document type”, we conducted additional
Chi-Square tests. These tests show that group membership to the six or ten trajectory groups
significantly depended on the journal in which an article was published, χ2 = 1,384.93, p < .001
for the case of six groups, and χ2 = 1715.49, p < .001 for ten groups. For example, forty of the
fifty papers in the top (sixth) group were published in the Journal of Virology. However,
Voprosy Virusologii contributes with 78 papers and a total of 98 citations to the least-cited group
and with two papers to the second lowest group (15 and 11 citations, respectively). Other non-
English journals (Bulletin de l’Institut Pasteur and Zentralblatt für Bakteriologie) remain in the
lower three groups, but journals like Acta Virologica and Clinical and Diagnostic Virology are
also not cited above these levels. These journals thus seem to serve niche-markets.
The Chi-Square test for “document type ” showed that significantly more reviews belonged to
the most highly cited groups in comparison to letters and research articles, χ2 = 231.20, p < .001
for the six groups, and χ2 = 242.54, p < .001 for the ten groups. Letters were more likely to be
attributed to the lower cited groups than the most-frequently cited ones. These results are in line
with expectations.
Comparable to discriminant analysis, but in this case including not-normally distributed and
categorical distributions, multinomial regression analysis also enables us to generate
classification tables which cross-table predicted and observed group membership. Table 3 shows
how well the respective co-variates predict group membership for the 6-group as well as for the
10-group model (Table 3).
% correctly predicted % correctly predicted
group membership group membership
Predictor variable (6 groups) (10 groups)
Journal name 41.0 32.4
Document types 35.0 29.8
Nr of references 37.1 32.5
Nr of co-authors 34.4 30.1
Nr of pages 35.5 30.6
Times cited 95.4 77.2
Table 3: Co-variates as independent predictors of group membership in the Virology set
(n = 4,229; 24 journals; articles, reviews, and letters).
Not surprisingly, total “times cited” provides an almost perfect prediction of 95.4% in the case of
six groups, but this is much less the case when ten groups are distinguished because—as shown
above—in this case similar citation rates can indicate very different (sticky versus transient)
citation patterns. The predictive value of journal name is rather strong with 41.0% for the six
group solution and 32.4% for the 10-group model. The additional predictive value of the other
co-variates is rather low. Adding these co-variates (document types, numbers of references and
coauthors) to the journal names as predictors only improves the quality of the prediction from
41.0% to 44.2% in the case of six groups or from 32.4 to 34.5% in the case of ten groups.
In summary, this analysis teaches us that some of the co-variates can predict the number of
citations in the aggregate, but do not allow us to distinguish between transient and sticky
knowledge claims. Since the aggregated citation rates are often taken over the last few years for
assessment purposes, the indicators tend to focus on transient knowledge claims.
Discussion
Before we turn to our conclusions, let us first critically discuss the usefulness of GBTM as a
routine for identifying citation trajectories. The findings presented in this study show that GBTM
can be applied successfully to citation trajectories. Although GBTM has previously only been
used to measure the development of individual behavior over time, the present paper shows that
it may also be applied very well to the citation trajectories of documents. The analysis advanced
our knowledge of citation behavior by allowing us to describe different subgroups of articles that
follow specific citation pathways over time. Instead of looking only at cumulative citations,
GBTM enables us to delineate specific citation pathways.
However, the method also has limitations. One major problem remains the empirical
specification of the number of relevant groups. In addition to using statistical parameters, it was
also necessary to use more subjective assessments to select the best models. Another problem
with GBTM is that the program sometimes fails to converge for complex models. Only by
omitting outliers or by defining starting values could this problem be solved. Thus, the main use
of GBTM remains its heuristic value: one can explore the data and become informed about the
number of groups that should at least be specified. Therefore, GBTM can at present not yet be
routinized instrumentally to classify large sets of data (e.g., for automatic application to the
thousands of different journals in the database).
Although we had expected that a 3rd-order polynomial would fit the trajectories of citations,
these polynomials showed a poor fit. Therefore, we exploratively tested higher-order
polynomials. The analysis showed that 5th-order polynomials provided an excellent fit to the
data. It seemed that these shapes adequately described the citation curves over the 16 year
period. Surprisingly, the 5th-order polynomials fitted to curves on all levels, indicating that the
shapes of the trajectories are in this respect similar for low and highly-cited papers.
Although higher-order polynomials will always lead to a better fit than lower-order ones, and 5th-
order polynomials are extremely flexible so that the fit will easily be good, we were able to
specify this effect in terms of the extremely rapid increase of citation curves in the first few years
that leads to a sharp peak that cannot similarly be fitted otherwise. The fit of the 3rd-order
polynomial misses this specific characteristic of the citation curve. The (analytical) difference
between a plateau and a declining phase, and their possible mixtures in empirical cases makes it
meaningful to account for more bending points in the curve than two.
One disadvantage of the excellent fits with 5th-order polynomials (four bending points) is that
significance vanishes as a relevant criterion because the 95% confidence intervals become
extremely narrow almost independently of the choice of the number of groups distinguished.
Future research may also investigate whether the 5th-order polynomials also fit the data well for
shorter or longer time periods. For example, fewer bending points may be needed when using
shorter time periods. Fitting the data to polynomials as is pursued when using GBTM, however,
makes this method inappropriate for the prediction beyond the time-interval under study: the
order of the polynomials is likely to determine whether the curves extrapolate to either zero or
infinity in a relatively limited number of time steps (cf. Ponomarev, in preparation).
Conclusions
We explored the use of GBTM for distinguishing among the citation curves of differently cited
documents. This study advanced our knowledge about citation curves in several respects. Most
importantly, the analysis revealed two different citation pathways, which we named “sticky” and
“transient knowledge claims”. Papers that follow a sticky-knowledge citation trajectory continue
to be cited throughout the years. These papers show a citation peak after three to four years after
publication but the subsequent decline is less steep and these papers can still be highly cited after
more than ten years.
Papers that follow a transient knowledge trajectory show a typical early peak in citations
followed by a steep decline. After a couple of years, these papers are no longer frequently cited.
These papers can be expected to fulfill a short-term function at the research front. The distinction
between sticky and transient knowledge pathways was most apparent in the case of JASIST,
JACS, and Gene (see Figures 1, 3, 4, and 6) and in the case of Virology (see Figure 10). Sticky
and transient knowledge claims can be distinguished using GBTM only if sufficient groups are
distinguished. Within the Virology set, for example, the two (analytically different) mechanisms
remained entangled when six groups were distinguished, but became apparent when ten groups
were declared.
Although one would expect “stickiness” to lead cumulatively to high citation rates in the long
run, the focus on highly-citedness in the first two or three years induced by policy and
management incentives has increasingly led to definitions of excellence in terms of “transient”
knowledge claims. The sciences are different in terms of the extent to which a research front sets
the agenda (Price, 1970), and some journals may function differently from others. It seems to us
that this raises a number of follow-up questions for further research, such as whether dynamic
features of citation curves should be introduced in performance and excellence measures. The
failure of early prediction in terms of “fast-breaking papers” that was shown in the case of the
papers in Nature and Cell shows that the quality of a paper in terms of citation impact cannot be
concluded in the years shortly after its publication even in the case of a prevailing short-term
research front.
In line with expectations, the identified citation groups differed not only in their citation patterns
over time but also in a few other characteristics. In the case of Virology, multinominal logistic
regressions as well as Chi-Square tests showed that the most highly cited group also differs from
the lower cited groups in terms of the number of references cited within these papers, and the
number of (co-)authors. Furthermore, citation patterns were also dependent on document types
(letters vs. research articles vs. reviews) and the journals in which the documents were published
(within the same field). However, these co-variates did not differentiate between papers
following a “sticky” and “transient knowledge” trajectory. This indicates that these specific
predictors can differentiate only between different levels of citations, but not different citation
pathways. Future research is needed to investigate whether other indicators—e.g., institutional
addresses—may enable us to predict these differences.
In a few cases, GBTM analysis also indicated a “sleeping-beauty” pattern. This was most
apparent in the case of JASIST (see Figure 1, Group 4). To a lesser degree, this pattern was also
found for JACS (see Figure 3, Group 5). This latter group showed a sticky pattern and at least
some characteristics of “sleeping beauties”. Why these sleeping beauties could be shown in the
case of these two journals cannot be conclusively argued here due to the limited set of journals in
this study.
Another finding of this study is that the citation curves over time seem to be more complex than
expected. GBTM showed that 5th-order polynomials precisely matched the citation curves. The
5th-order polynomial provides this excellent fit to citation curves because in addition to the two
bending points that we expected—convex at the apex and concave when bounding back in the
decline phase—two more bending points can be expected in a potential plateau phase after
reaching the top. In other words, the citation curve is not an exponential decay curve. The 5th-
order polynomial also fits to the potentially steep increases of the citations in the first years.
Finally, this paper showed that the most frequently cited groups were in most cases much smaller
than typical excellence indicators would predict. The most highly cited group consisted of 1% to
6% of the papers for the journals under study. This indicates that there might be fewer papers
that should be defined as excellent than the previously discussed top-10%. GBTM is able to
specify empirically the most frequently cited groups for each journal, but it is not possible with
GBTM to define empirically an excellent group that holds across journals or fields. Journals and
fields—and journals within fields—vary strongly in aggregated citation behavior, both in
absolute terms—that is, as aggregates at each moment of time—and over time.
In sum, this paper introduced GBTM to citation trajectories. Despite some limitations of the
method, GBTM provided us with new insights into the trajectories of citations over a longer time
period. Most importantly, GBTM showed that citation curves are more complex and diverse than
previously expected. By differentiating between sticky and transient citation patterns, the
findings question typical “excellence” indicators that identify these papers in the first few years
after publication.
Acknowledgements
We thank Daniel Nagin, Lutz Bornmann, Ilya Ponomarev, and two anonymous referees for
helpful comments on previous versions of this manuscript.