]NM.oib-q[
2v0421.0121:viXra
Growth-rate-dependent dynamics of a bacterial genetic oscillator
Matteo Osella1,2,∗ and Marco Cosentino Lagomarsino1,2,3
1Genomic Physics Group, UMR7238 CNRS “Microorganism Genomics”
2University Pierre et Marie Curie, 15, rue de l’E´cole de M´edecine, Paris, France
3Dipartimento di Fisica, University of Torino, Via P. Giuria 1, Torino, Italy
(Dated: November8, 2018)
Genenetworksexhibitingoscillatorydynamicsarewidespreadinbiology. Theminimalregulatory
designsgivingrisetooscillationshavebeenimplementedsyntheticallyandstudiedbymathematical
modeling. However, most of the available analyses generally neglect the coupling of regulatory
circuitswiththecellular“chassis”inwhichthecircuitsareembedded. Forexample,theintracellular
macromolecular composition of fast-growing bacteria changes with growth rate. As a consequence,
importantparametersofgeneexpression,suchasribosomeconcentrationorcellvolume,aregrowth-
ratedependent,ultimatelycouplingthedynamicsofgeneticcircuitswithcellphysiology. Thiswork
addressestheeffectsofgrowthrateonthedynamicsofaparadigmaticexampleofgeneticoscillator,
the repressilator. Making use of empirical growth-rate dependences of parameters in bacteria, we
showthattherepressilatordynamicscanswitchbetweenoscillationsandconvergencetoafixedpoint
dependingon thecellular stateof growth, andthuson thenutrientsit isfed. Thephysicalsupport
ofthecircuit(typeofplasmidorgenepositionsonthechromosome)alsoplaysanimportantrolein
determiningtheoscillation stabilityandthegrowth-ratedependenceofperiodandamplitude. This
analysis has potential application in the field of synthetic biology, and suggests that the coupling
between endogenous genetic oscillators and cell physiology can have substantial consequences for
theirfunctionality.
PACSnumbers: 87.17.Aa,87.18.Vf,87.16.Yc,82.40.Bj
I. INTRODUCTION tive and possibly quantitative predictive power for ex-
periments. To this end, dealing with controlled, well-
characterized, and isolated systems is necessary. Unfor-
Oscillatory behavior is widespread and fundamentally
tunately, every genetic circuit, endogenous or syntheti-
importantin biologicalsystems,fromcircadianclocks to
cally implemented in a living cell, cannot be truly con-
cell-cycle control [1]. At the level of a single cell, oscil-
sidered isolated from cellular processes. These processes
lations can be sustained by regulatory circuits, the ba-
are strongly affected by the physiological state of the
sic components of which are nucleic acids, proteins, and
cell [15], and thus by the environmental conditions and
biochemical interactions [2, 3]. However, naturally oc-
type/availability of nutrients. For example, the macro-
curring regulatory systems are complex. Thus, our path
molecular composition of bacterial cells in “steady ex-
to rationalize their behavior has to pass through simpli-
ponential” growth (i.e. constantly dividing at the same
fications and basic underlying principles [4]. The study
rate[50])changessubstantiallywithgrowthrate(therate
of minimal circuits, by mathematical modeling and ex-
of cell proliferation) [16–18]. Importantly, in this case,
perimental synthetic engineering, allows a quantitative
growth rate appears to encapsulate most of the physio-
approach to the study of gene expression [5–8].
logical changes. In other words, cells growing on differ-
This simplifying approachis notonlyuseful for study- ent nutrients but at similar growth rates are in many
ingtheextantregulatorycircuits. Understandingtheba- ways equivalent, considering important global cell pa-
sicprinciplesanddynamicalpropertiesofregulatorynet- rameters such as concentrations of ribosomes and RNA
works makes it possible to design and produce synthetic polymerases (the molecular machines effecting transla-
circuits that can perform specific functions in a pre- tion and transcription respectively). Such growth-rate
dictable manner [9–12], with potentially relevant future dependentparametersaffectgeneexpression,couplingits
biotechnological and biomedical applications [11, 13]. A dynamics withthecellstate,withrelevantconsequences
paradigmatic example of a synthetic genetic oscillator, for genetic circuit functioning [15, 19, 20].
andone ofthe earliestin vivo realizations[14], is the so- Theemergentquantitative“laws”ofbacterialphysiol-
called “repressilator”, a three-gene cyclic circuit where ogy, linking cell composition and growth rate, are remi-
each gene protein-product represses the synthesis of its niscentofthoseofthermodynamics,andwerethesubject
successor (Fig. 1A). ofrecentadvances using physicalmodeling [17,18]. Pre-
Fromaphysicsstandpointit is desirableto buildmin- viously, they were in part captured by early studies in
imal, but effective and testable models, with qualita- the 1950’s and 60’s [16]. However, to date, they are not
completely characterized. For E. coli, the best studied
bacterialspecies,the growthratedependences ofvarious
cellular parameters were evaluated phenomenologically
∗correspondence to: matteo.osella@upmc.fr in a study by Klumpp and coworkers [15], compiling re-
sultsfrommultipleexperiments. Leveragingontheseem- mosomal position on the circuit behavior. Finally, the
pirical data, they analyzed the growth-rate dependence lastsectiondiscusses the implications ofthe results from
of the steady state protein concentration of a constitu- both a biological and a physical modeling standpoint.
tively expressed (i.e. unregulated) gene and few other
simple geneticcircuits,suchasthe self-regulatorandthe
toggle switch. Their modeling strategy will be briefly II. MODEL
reviewed in section IIA. Beyond steady state, knowing
the empiricalgrowth-ratedependence of gene expression
A. Growth-rate dependence of gene expression
parameters allows in principle to revisit the dynamical
properties of genetic circuits, introducing the physiolog-
This section reviews the approach of Klumpp and
ical cell state as a new player.
coworkers [15], and the necessary assumptions in order
This work addresses the growth-rate dependence of a to extend it to the analysis of circuit dynamics. This
biological oscillator dynamics, and considers the effect modeling strategy constitutes the basis for our descrip-
of cell state on a repressilator, integrated on either a tion of the repressilator,introduced in section IIB.
plasmid or the E. coli chromosome. From the physi-
In absence of regulation, the dynamics of messenger
cal modeling viewpoint, this entails understanding the
RNA(mRNA)levelsandproteinconcentrations,denoted
models and phenomenological laws that relate the cir-
with m and p respectively,is described by two equations
cuit parameters to the cell physiological state. Incorpo-
rating these features in otherwise fairly standard mod- g α m
els leads to predictions that are experimentally relevant. V
After reviewing the conditions for oscillations and the p˙ = α m−β p , (1)
repressilatordynamics atfixed-growthrate (and extend-
ing some known results), we will show how the physiol- where α m and α p are the transcription and translation
ogy of the cell can alter qualitatively and quantitatively rates respectively, β m and β p the degradation rates of
the dynamicalproperties ofthe system. The mainresult mRNAs and proteins, and V the cell volume. The pa-
is that the conditions for stable oscillations, as well as rameterg isthegenecopynumber. Ifthegenesupportis
their amplitude and period are growth-rate dependent. aplasmid,grepresentsthe(mean)plasmidcopynumber.
This implies thatagenetic oscillatorcandisplaydistinct For genes integrated on the chromosome,the copy num-
dynamical behaviors in different environments and nu- ber can vary because of DNA replication, especially at
trient conditions. Additionally, the circuit support, e.g. fastgrowthrates,whenmultiplecopiesofthegenomeare
type of plasmid or chromosomal position of the genes, replicated at the same time. This phenomenon whereby
also contributes to its dynamics, through gene dosage. gene dosage is modified by DNA replication is described
Specifically, the range of growth rates in which oscilla- by the Cooper-Helmstetter model [22], and reviewed in
tions are observable will vary with support, in a manner Appendix A1. Note that for fast E. coli growth, g in-
that could be exploited both biologically and technolog- creases with decreasing distance ℓ from the replication
ically. Our predictions, although based on a simplified origin(illustratedinFig.1B),sincethecellengagesover-
model, are experimentally testable in a straightforward lapping rounds of DNA replication in order to allow fast
way on synthetically realized repressillator circuits, and growth [23].
more in general set a framework for the more complex In bacteria, proteins are typically stable, with a life-
case of endogenous oscillators in bacteria, prominently time longer than the cell cycle, while mRNAs have a
the cell cycle and circadian clocks [21]. lifetime of just a few minutes [24]. Therefore, the loss
of protein is mainly due to dilution through growth
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews
and cell division, so that an effective degradation rate
themodelingstrategyadoptedtoincludethegrowthrate
β = µ ln2 (where µ is the growth rate) can be safely
as a variable in gene expression (Subsection IIA) and p
used in most cases. On the other hand, the fast time-
explains how this strategy can be applied to a mathe-
scale of mRNA dynamics allows a quasi-equilibrium ap-
maticaldescriptionoftherepressilator(SubsectionIIB).
proximation. Thus, Eq. 1 can be reduced to
Appendix A reviews the Cooper-Helmstetter model [22],
an empirical model of DNA replication in fast-growing
bacteriathatisanessentialpartofourapproach,andjus- p˙ = −β p p. (2)
tifies in more detail some of the model assumptions pre- m
sentedinSectionII.SectionIIIcontainsthequantitative Rescaling time with the dilution rate β , all the growth-
analysisofthecircuit,andinparticularoftheroleplayed rate dependence canbe factorizedin a single term F(µ),
by the cellular state of growth on the dynamics. More
specifically, Subsection IIIA analyzes the symmetric re- g α m α p ∗
pressilator,showingthe possibility ofa growth-mediated β β V
switch between oscillations and convergence to a stable
fixed point. Subsection IIIB focuses on the asymmetric Normalizing the growth-rate dependence F(µ) such
case, with particular emphasis on the role of gene chro- that F(µ) = 1 for µ = 1 db/hr (i.e. doublings per
hour), the parameter p ∗ represents the steady-state con- A
centration of the constitutive (unregulated) gene at µ =
1 db/hr. Thus, it is a measure of the degree of basal ex-
pression. Klumpp and coworkers[15], refer to this quan-
tity as the “promoterstrength”. However,this terminol-
ogymightbeslightlymisleading,asthetermactuallyin-
cludesnon-transcriptionalparameters,suchasthetrans-
lationefficiencyorthegenecopynumberatµ=1db/hr.
Thus,wewillrefertoitas“basalexpression”levelinthe
following.
In principle, all the cellular parameters in F(µ) may
display a growth-rate dependence. The volume V is
known experimentally to change with growth rate [16,
replication (Ori) ℓ=0
25], with faster-growing bacteria being larger than
slower-growingones. The protein degradation rate β is e
adirectconsequenceofdilutionduetocellgrowthand
vision,atleastforstableproteins,andtherefore,asprevi- dio
ouslydiscussed,itisalinearfunctionofthe growthrate.
By contrast, the empirical growth-rate independence of og
the mRNA degradation rate β m has a less obvious in-
terpretation [15]. In order to sustain fast growth and a ℓ
large cell mass, the cellular abundance of the transcrip-
tionalandtranslationalmachineryisexpectedtoincrease terminus of
at fast growth, and indeed this is what can be observed replication (Ter) ℓ=1
experimentally [16]. However, the rates of transcription
FIG. 1: (Color online) A. Scheme of the repressilator.
and translation (α and α ) of a gene only reflect the
Each node represents the expression level of one gene, links
availability of “free” (active but not already engaged in
represent repressive regulatory interactions, as described by
anyprocess)RNApolymerasesandribosomes. Thisfrac-
Eq. (4). B. Scheme of the E. coli chromosome, illus-
tion can be quite hard to estimate [26], requiring several
trating the coordinate ℓ, used for the positions where a gene
empirical measurements, and is in general not merely
can beinserted.
proportional to the total abundance. In fact, while the
cellular ribosome content increases strongly with growth
rate,thetranslationrateisapparentlyconstantindiffer-
ent nutrient conditions [15]. The gene dosage g is prob-
ably the best-characterized parameter, since it is cap-
turedbytheCooper-Helmstettermodel[22]. Itsincrease
with growth rate is a consequence of the coupling be- The empirical growth-rate dependences that define
tween DNA replication and growth. To sum up, while F(µ) are based on experimental measurements of the
it is possible to try to rationalize at least some of the average cellular properties in a growing cell population.
growth-rate dependences of the basic parameters, there Thus,theyareinprinciplealsodependentontheagedis-
is in general no a priori quantitative expectation (and tribution (where “age” stands for stage of the cell cycle)
sometimesnotevenabasic intuition)for them, andthus ofthepopulation. However,thedifferencesbetweenaver-
for F(µ). Hence, F(µ) can be fully defined only through agescalculatedoveracellcycleandoveracellpopulation
the empirical knowledge of the growth-rate dependences with the age distribution determined by the exponential
of the different parameters. growthare not quantitatively significant, as discussed in
detail in Appendix A. Therefore, the available empirical
For E. coli, the numerical values of these parameters
measurementsofallthekeyparameters,whicharebased
were collected for five growth rates µ between 0.6 db/hr
onpopulation averages,will be used throughoutthis pa-
and 2.5 db/hr [15]. These values are reported in the
per as an approximationof their cell-cycle averages.
supplementarymaterialofKlumppet al. (Cell2009,ref-
erence [15]), more specifically in Table S1. The growth-
rate dependences of the various parameters are plotted Moreover,we will not consider explicitly the cell-cycle
inFigure1ofthesamepaper. Asacombinationofthese dynamics of cellular parameters, which, for sufficiently
parameters, F(µ) decreases in a weakly nonlinear fash- long time scales, can be averaged out using for example
ion in the available range of growth rates (interpolation effectivegenedosageoreffectiveproteindilutionrate. As
will be used in the following when needed). The growth- aconsequence,Eq.3canaccuratelydescribethe dynam-
rate dependence of F(µ), and thus of the concentration ics of protein concentration on time scales longer than
of the protein product of a constitutive gene, is reported the generation time [27], as it will always be the case in
in Figure 2D and in Figure 3 of the same reference [15]. the following.
B. The repressilator III. RESULTS
A. Growth rate affects qualitatively and
The repressilator is a genetic network consisting of
quantitatively the dynamics of a symmetric
three genes, each of which encodes for a “transcription
repressilator
factor” (i.e. a protein able to control the transcription
level of one or a set of target genes by binding to their
We start the analysis from the simplified case of a
upstream genomic region) that represses the expression
symmetric repressilator, i.e. the three genes have ap-
ofitstargetinacycleofregulations(Fig.1A).Theeffect
proximately the same production/degradation rates for
of this negative regulation can be modeled phenomeno-
mRNA and proteins, as well as the same growth-rate
logically as a multiplicative factor rescaling the target
dependence of parameters (this is attained for example
productionrate(thepositivetermontheright-handside
when all genes are integratedon a single plasmid or at a
ofEq.3)with a non-linearfunction ofthe repressorcon-
similar distance from the origin of replication on a chro-
centration (called “Hill function”) [5, 6]:
mosome). This is the most studied case, and was ap-
proachedwithdifferentmathematicaldescriptions[4,28–
1 30]. The symmetric approximation was originally pro-
1+(x/k)n posedtoexplainthebehaviorofthesyntheticrealization
in vivo [14].
In the symmetric case, the functions encoding the
where the Hill coefficient n defines the degree of co- growth-rate dependence F(µ) and the basal expression
operativity (determining the steepness of R), while the levelsx ∗ areexactlythesameforeachofthethreegenes,
dissociationconstantk specifies the repressorconcentra- simplifying Eq. 6 to
tion at which the production rate is half of its consti-
tutive value. With this mathematical representation of x˙ = x ∗ F(µ)R(x )−x , (7)
transcriptional regulation, the repressilator circuit can
bedescribedbythreeequations,oneforeachgene,based where i∈[1,3] and x ≡x .
on the gene expression model discussed in the previous
section:
1. At fixed growth rate, the dynamics is determined by
∗ basal expression and cooperativity
1 1 1 2 1 1
2 2 2 3 2 2 Beforeaddressingtheeffectsofthegrowth-ratedepen-
3 3 3 1 3 3 denceofparameters,wecharacterizethecircuitdynamics
at fixed growth conditions, for simplicity at µ=1 db/hr
∗ where F(µ)=1. In general, the symmetric repressilator
where the terms x arethe basalexpressionlevels. They
can display stable oscillations, arising through a Hopf
represent the steady-state concentration of protein i in
bifurcation [28]. More specifically, Eqs. 7 have an oscil-
absence of repression at µ = 1 db/hr. Therefore, the
latory solution if the condition for cooperativity n > 2
“basal expression level”, as defined here for a negatively
is satisfied, as can be shown in a straightforward way
regulated gene, is the maximal expression level that can
considering the symmetry of the system [31].
be achievedin a fixed growthcondition(µ=1 db/hr) in
absence of regulation [51]. Foragivensteepnessoftherepressionfunctionsatisfy-
ing the condition n>2, the stability of the limit cycle is
The growth rate functions F i (µ) can be gene-specific solelydeterminedbythebasalexpressionx ∗ . Thevalues
due to the dependence of gene dosage g i on the chromo- of x ∗ that ensure stability of the oscillatory state can be
somal gene position.
calculatedusinglinearstabilityanalysisandtheresulting
Assuming similar dissociation constants for the three stability diagram is shown in Fig. 2. Essentially, an in-
promoters k ≃ k ≃ k = k, the protein concentrations creaseofeithercooperativityorbasalexpressioncanhelp
can be rescaled with k thestabilizationofoscillations. Thisresultiscommonto
allthedifferentrepressilatordescriptionsproposedinthe
∗ literature [4].
x˙ 1 = x 1 F 1 (µ)R(x 2 )−x 1 Furthermore, the two parameters n and x ∗ determine
x˙ 2 = x 2 F 2 (µ)R(x 3 )−x 2 the amplitude andperiodofoscillation(Fig.3). The ap-
x˙ = x F (µ)R(x )−x . (6) proximatelylinearandlogarithmicdependencesofampli-
tudeandperiodrespectivelythatemergefromnumerical
integration of Eqs. 7 can be rationalized by the follow-
With these notations, the basal expression levels x ing rough but conceptually simple argument. Each gene
have dimensionless units, as they are protein concentra- in the repressilator tends to oscillate between two states
tions rescaled with the dissociation constant k. corresponding to its maximally repressed state and its
n x * 12 Oscillations x , x 2 3 s of k] 2 3
190 192 194 196 198 200
x p r nit s 6
time [units of βp]
2.
4.0 4.5 5.0 x
.
. . .
.
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
cooperativity n time [units of βp]
FIG.2: (Coloronline)Stabilitydiagramofthesymmetricrepressilator. Theleftpanelshowstheparameterspacegiving
rise to oscillations. The basal expression x∗ is dimensionless, measured as protein concentration at µ = 1 db/hr in absence
of repression in units of the dissociation constant k. High repression cooperativity and high basal expression levels (“strong
promoters”) can ensure stable oscillation. The right panel plots are illustrative examples of the dynamics in correspondence
with two sets of parameter values ({n = 4,x = 1.8} and {n = 4,x = 5}), showing the time evolution of the three protein
concentrationsx1,x2,x3 (inunitsofk). Theredcontinuouscurvedescribesthedynamicsofx1,thebluedashedcurvex2,and
theorange dot-dashed curvex3.
maximally activated state. In a simplified situation of a expressions that can be explored changing the growth
step repression function (n ≫ 1) that switches the tar- rate, and thus the upper and lower bound of the path.
get gene on and off after its equilibration, the protein Therefore,both factors contribute to establish the range
concentration would go from x ≃ 0 (fully repressed) to of growthrates in which oscillations are expected exper-
x ≃x (fully activated), thus leading to a linear depen- imentally.
dence on basal expression of the oscillation amplitude. Remarkably, the circuit can show qualitatively differ-
Ontheotherhand,theoscillationperioddependsonthe ent dynamics depending on growth rate, and hence on
timescales of gene activation and deactivation. For ex- nutrient conditions. Fig. 4 shows this for the case of co-
ample,the time τ requiredtogofromthe fully activated operativityn=3. Sustainedoscillationscanbeobserved
state x i (t)≃x to x i (t)≃1, when, assuming a step-like at slow growth, while in fast-growth conditions the dy-
repression function, it releases the repression of its tar- namicscanconvergetoastablefixedpoint. Theparame-
get,isgivenbyx
=1→τ =ln(x
). Thisexpression ter range where oscillations are stable depends on where
suggeststhatthebasalexpressioncontributeslogarithmi- the repressilator is integrated through the gene dosage
cally to the deactivation timescale, which is compatible factor g appearing in F(µ) (see Eq. 3).
with the dependence of the period on x measured by
If the repressilator is integrated on a plasmid, as the
numerical integration shown in Fig. 3B. original in vivo experimental realization [14], the gene
dosage g is simply given by the plasmid copy num-
ber,whichhasaplasmid-specificgrowth-ratedependence
2. Increasing the growth rate can destabilize oscillations that can be quite strong [15, 32]. Fig. 4 compares the
parameter regions corresponding to convergence to sta-
Letusnowconsideraspecificexperimentalrealization ble oscillation or to a fixed point for a repressilator in-
of the repressillator, which uses a set of genetic compo- tegrated on the two plasmids R1 and pBR322 for which
nents with some intrinsic parameters. Given the basal the copy number has been measured in different growth
expression level and the cooperativity of repression, de- media [15].
fined by the specific properties of the actual genes and The dosage of a chromosomal gene, instead, is deter-
promoters implementing the repressilator, the growth- mined by its genomic position as set by the Cooper-
rate dependence of parameters defines a vertical path in Helmstettermodel(seeAppendixAandFig.1B).There-
thestabilitydiagramofFig.2,sincethe“effective”basal fore, for a repressilator integrated on the chromosome,
expression F(µ) x decreases nonlinearly with growth thenormalizedcircuitdistanceℓfromthereplicationori-
rate. This path can cross the border of stability of the gin (Ori) defines the growth-rate dependence of the dy-
limit cycle, defining a maximum growth rate at which namics (where ℓ = 0 represents Ori and ℓ = 1 the repli-
stable oscillations can be sustained. More precisely, the cation terminus, Ter, Fig 1B). It should be noticed that
basal expressionlevel x defines the position of the path the three genes composing the repressilator are assumed
at µ = 1 db/hr, while the function F(µ) is related to here to be inserted approximately in a single chromoso-
its length. In fact, given the experimentally accessible mal location (or equivalently in different replichores,the
growth rates, F(µ) identifies the span of effective basal oppositelyreplicatedchromosomehalves,butatthesame
o Oscillations
u tilp [ 5
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Stable fixed point
basal expression x* [units of k]
B 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
9 growth rate μ [db/hr]
7 n = 4 n=
0 10 20 30 40
basal expression x* [units of k]
FIG. 3: (Color online) Amplitude and period of oscilla-
tion of a symmetric repressilator. The plots show oscil-
lationamplitude(A)andperiod(B)asafunctionofthebasal
expression level for three different values of cooperativity n.
Both quantities areplotted in rescaled (dimensionless) units.
Theamplitude(concentration)isrescaled bythedissociation
constant k,while theperiod hasunitsofprotein degradation
rate βp. For each value of n, Eqs. 7 were integrated numer-
ically with values of x in the range 0.1−40 and step-size
0.1. For each numerical solution, the oscillation amplitude
andperiod wereevaluatedafter convergencetoastablelimit
cycle.
distanceℓfromOri,seeFig.1B).Theeffectsoftheimbal-
anceingenedosagegeneratedbydifferentgenelocations
on the chromosome are explored in section IIIB2.
3. Period and amplitude of oscillation are growth rate
∗ Fig. 4 shows that increasing the basal expression x
(which we recall also includes parameters not based on
transcription) and the steepness of the repression func-
tion n can make the limit cycle solution stable in a wide
range of conditions. However, even if a repressilator is
designed to exhibit oscillations in the experimentally ac-
cessible conditions, the growth rate is still expected to
influence the oscillation amplitude and period in a mea-
surableway(i.e. byafactorthatcanexceedfive,Fig.5).
Indeed, the effective basal expression F(µ) x decreases
with increasing growth rate, because of the functional
formofF(µ), leadingtoareducedamplitudeandperiod
ofoscillation. IntegratingEqs.7numericallyforparame-
ter values corresponding to different growth rates allows
noisserpxe
stinu[ ℓ=0.5
FIG. 4: (Color online) The repressilator has different dynamics in different growth conditions. At fixed re-
pression cooperativity (n = 3 in this plot), the repressilator can show stable oscillation or convergence to a steady state
depending on the cell growth rate µ and the basal expres-
sionx (inunitsofk). Thecircuitphysicalsupport(plasmid,
chromosome) defines the range of growth rates at which a
limit cycle can be observed. The cases of circuit integration
on plasmids (R1 and pBR322) and on chromosome near the
origin of replication (ℓ = 0) and between the origin and the
terminus(ℓ=0.5) are represented in theplot.
topredicttheoscillationperiodandamplitudeforachro-
mosomally integrated repressilator or for a plasmid im-
plementation, if the scaling of the plasmid copy number
withgrowthrateisknown,Thepresenceofnonlinearities
in the system makes the dependence on growth rate of
these two variables nontrivial, as represented in Fig. 5.
B. The effect of intrinsic and position-induced
asymmetry on the repressilator dynamics
Differencesinintrinsicpropertiesofthegenescompos-
ing the circuit, such as affinity for RNA polymerase or
ribosome binding, or gene dosage imbalances due to the
specificgenelocationonthechromosome,leadtounequal
parametervaluesintheequationsforthedynamicsofx .
This situation is generally referred to as “asymmetric”.
A certain degree of asymmetry is expected for generic
synthetic realizationsofthe repressilator. However,with
theexceptionofafewstudies[29,33],itsconsequenceson
the dynamics have not been fully characterizedtheoreti-
cally[4]. Inthemodelingframeworkadoptedhere,intrin-
sic gene properties are summarized by the basal expres-
sion level. Additionally, using the Cooper-Helmstetter
model (see Appendix A) it is possible to account for the
position-dependent scaling of gene dosage with growth
rate.
The two possible contributions to repressilator asym-
metry, intrinsic gene properties and gene dosage, and
theireffects onthe dynamicscanbe analyzedseparately.
Wefirstaddressthedynamicsatfixedgrowthrateofare-
pressilatorcomposedofgeneswithdifferentbasalexpres-
At fixed growth rate (for simplicity we take the case
of growth rate µ = 1db/hr, where F(µ)= 1), linear sta-
bility analysis can be applied to study the fixed point
stability. As in the symmetric case described above, a
Hopf bifurcationstands betweenthe system convergence
to a stable fixed point and the oscillatory solution. For
each repression cooperativity level n, the stability dia-
gram can be drawn as a function of the basal expression
x and the asymmetry level A, as shown in Fig. 6 for
n=3. Thisdiagramessentiallyshowsthatahighdegree
of asymmetry destabilizes the oscillations. Therefore, if
the goalis to engineer astable oscillator,a roughlysym-
metric design is generally preferable.
However, the minimum of the boundary curve be-
tween the two asymptotic dynamical behaviors (contin-
uous purple curve in Fig. 6) does not correspond to the
symmetriccase(log (A)=0). Thisresultindicatesthat
a symmetric system showing damped oscillations (as it
is generally the case for parameter values just below the
boundary in Fig. 6) can be pushed towarda stable oscil-
lation regime by slightly increasing the basal expression
level of just one gene, if the resulting asymmetry is not
too strong.
Moreover,the presenceofagenewithadifferentbasal
FIG.5: (Coloronline)Theoscillationamplitudeandpe-
expression breaks the symmetry in the dynamics of pro-
riod of a symmetric repressilator vary significantly
with growth rate. The plots show the scaling with growth teinconcentrations,makingtheoscillationamplitude(or
rateofoscillation amplitude(concentrationinunitsofk)and the stable fixed point) gene-specific, as shown in Fig. 6
period(timeinunitsofproteindegradationrate)fora“strong fortwoparametersets. Thus,apossibletestoftheeffec-
promoter” (basal expression x =70 in k units) and cooper- tive symmetry of experimental repressilator realizations
ativity n = 3. The three curves correspond to integration would entail measuring the oscillation amplitude of two
of the repressilator on plasmid R1, plasmid pBR322, and to fluorescently-taggedproteinproducts of genes in the cir-
chromosomal integration ofthethreegenesneartheorigin of
cuit. More specifically, the level of asymmetry, intro-
replication (ℓ = 0). A repressilator located near the replica-
duced by the presence of a gene with different intrinsic
tionterminus(ℓ=1,notshown)followsagrowth-ratedepen-
properties,affectstheoscillationperiodandamplitudein
denceof amplitude and period similar to thecase of plasmid
a predictable way and with a gene-specific signature on
pBR322.
the oscillation amplitude (Fig. 7). Therefore, the global
dynamical properties of the repressilator can be tuned
simply by changing the parameters relative to a single
sionlevels,andsubsequentlyexploretheconsequencesof gene.
position-inducedasymmetryatdifferentgrowthratesfor
a repressilator made of genes with equal intrinsic prop-
erties, but different chromosomallocation.
2. The chromosomal position of genes affects the circuit
dynamical properties at varying growth rates
1. Effects of asymmetry at fixed growth rate
To isolate the effect of genomic position of genes on
the dynamics of a chromosomally integrated repressila-
We consider the simplified situation in which only one
tor, we consider the case of a circuit that is symmetric
of the genes of the repressilator differs from the others
in terms of intrinsic gene properties, but where a gene
in its basalexpressionby a factor A, but the three genes
is placed at a varying distance from the replication ori-
share the same growthrate dependence F(µ). Thus, the
gin. This situation is illustrated in Fig. 8A, where the
single additional parameter A introduced in the model
genes with proteinproduct concentrationsx and x are
measures the level of circuit asymmetry. The system of
placedincontiguouspositions,thusatapproximatelythe
equations describing the dynamics of a repressilator de-
samedistanceℓ fromOri,whilethegenecorresponding
signed this way is
to x is in position ℓ . In modeling terms, the equiva-
∗ lence of intrinsic gene properties corresponds to the as-
1 2 1 sumption of identical effective basal expression x F (µ)
x˙ 2 = x F(µ)R(x 3 )−x 2 at extremely slow growth, where the growth-dependence
x˙ = A x F(µ)R(x )−x . (8) ofgenedosageg foreachgeneiisirrelevant,sinceg ≃1
15 Oscillations
x p r nit s 10 [ 150 160 ti 1 m 70 e [uni 1 ts 8 0 of βp] 190 200
-1 Sta -0 b . l 5 e fix 0 ed p 0. o 5 int 1 1.5 2 x , x ,
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
asymmetry level log (A) time [units of βp]
FIG.6: (Color online) Stability diagram of the asymmetric repressilatorTheparameterspace isdividedin theregions
corresponding to convergence of thedynamics to a limit cycle and to a stable fixed point. The two parameters considered are
the basal expression x∗ (in units of k) and the level of asymmetry A (the factor by which the basal expression of one of the
genes differs from the two others). The cooperativity is fixed to n = 3 but the qualitative shape of the phase diagram holds
for cooperativity values n > 2. While a high degree of asymmetry reduces the robustness of the oscillatory state, a slight
asymmetry can stabilize the damped oscillations showed by the symmetric system. The right panel shows an example of the
dynamics of the three protein concentrations for two sets of parameter values ({x = 12,A = 10} and {x = 4.5,A = 10}).
The red continuous curvedescribes thedynamics of x1, thebluedashed curverefers to x2, and theorange dot-dashed tox3.
ita llic s o fo
]p β fo s tin
x*= x 1 * 0
x fo e d u tilp
fo s tin u [ n o
8 2 4 6 0 0 0 0
x x x * * * = = = 7 5 1 5
.
f .
.
p asymmetry level log 10 (A) s o asymmetry level log 10 (A) tio between the gene copy numbers, g 3 /g 1(2) as given
k] by the Cooper- Helmstetter model (Appendix A), and
a m plit u d e of x 2
cill ati o n [ u nit s of 8 2 4 6 0 0 0 0 0
x fo e d u tilp m
3 ]k fo s tin u [ n o ita
1 2 8 6 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
n i e a r d
u o e u r c s d
e t e l n . d
a t N a b h r
e c t t e h g
e g . e e r
t n o F h r e w e o a
p t r t p h l
i o e t - c
s x r h a i a a e t
t i m i o e o
l n e e o in , p
i o e t g a f h n i
n n e d th e
fi e l e e r
l t g v a w
i r i l s v a
m s s y w i n
o e a m h t n
r a y o e ℓ
10 o 10 dynamicswithrespecttotheoppositeconfigurationwith
∆ℓ=1. The repressilator dynamics can be analyzed for
FIG. 7: (Color online) Influence of asymmetry on pe-
different values of ∆ℓ to explore the effects of gene posi-
riod and amplitude of oscillation. The figure shows the
tion.
nonlinear effects of the asymmetry induced by the presence
of gene x3 with a basal expression level that differs by a fac- Fig.8Bshowsastabilitydiagramobtainedmovingone
tor A from the other genes’ basal expression x ∗ . The period genealongthechromosomewhiletheothertwogenesare
(upper left plot) and the gene specific oscillation amplitudes nearthereplicationorigin(ℓ =0),fordifferentlevelsof
(other plots) are shown as a function of the asymmetry level basal expression x ∗ . Analogously, the stability diagram
log10(A)forthreebasal expression valuesthatensureoscilla- in Fig. 8C is obtained keeping ℓ =0.5 and varying the
tions in the whole range of asymmetry explored. The curves third gene position ℓ . Interestingly, this analysis shows
areobtainedbymeasuringperiodandamplitudeofnumerical
thatatfixedgrowthratetherepressilatorcanconvergeto
solutionsofEq.8forvaluesoflog10(A)spacedby0.01inthe
a limit cycle or to oscillations depending on where genes
range {−1,3}.
are integreted on the chromosome, highlighting the im-
portance of including the chromosomalgene coordinates
as variables in genetic circuit models. The positional ef-
fect is evenmore evidentif two gene positions are varied
foreverygenomicposition. Inotherwords,thefollowing (data not shown).
relationissatisfied: x F(µ≃0) = x F (µ≃0),where As discussed in the previous section, the oscillation
x and F(µ) are the basal expression level and growth- stability can be reinforced by increasing the basal ex-
dependence function of genes 1 and 2, and F (µ) differs pression of one gene. A simple way to increase the basal
fromF(µ)onlybecauseoftheposition-dependentscaling expression of one gene for a chromosomally integrated
X3 hr] 2.0
Δℓ=ℓ 12 - ℓ 3 = 0. 5 ℓ 3 h r at e
2 wt1.0 x*=4
-0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4
relative position Δℓ
dezilamron noitallicso edutilpma μ=2.5 db/hr X3
relative position Δℓ
μ=0.6 db/hr X3
relative position Δℓ
dezilamron
dezilamron
noitallicso
noitallicso
e at1.5 x*=8
0.5 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0
relative position Δℓ
dezilamron noitallicso edutilpma
Stable fixed 1.2
1.0 point 0.8 X2 X1
0.4 0.2 X3 μ=2.5 db/hr
-1-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.20
relative position Δℓ
Oscillations 0.4 μ=0.6 db/hr
-1-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.20
relative position Δℓ
1.6 Stable fixed 1.4
-0.4-0.2 0 0.2 0.4
Oscillations 0.8
-0.4-0.2 0 0.2 0.4
FIG.8: (Coloronline)Effectofgene-dosageinducedasymmetryonoscillationstability(A)Schemeoftherepressilator
chromosomal configuration analyzed here. Two genes are placed at approximately the same distance ℓ12 from the origin of
replication(possiblyonoppositearms),whilethethirdisinadifferentpositionℓ3. Thisgenomicconfigurationinducesagrowth-
rate dependent copy-number imbalance between genes, as a consequence of DNA replication. The difference ∆ℓ = ℓ12−ℓ3
measures the effective asymmetry level (∆ℓ=0 corresponds to the symmetric case) since the ratio between the gene dosages
(thefactor A in Eq.8) is 2µC∆ℓ, whereC is theDNAreplication time. (B,C) Theregion of oscillation stability is plotted as a
function of growth rate µ and relative position ∆ℓ for different values of the basal expression x∗. The genomic configurations
analyzed, and thus the values of ∆ℓ, are obtained moving one gene along the chromosome while keeping the others near the
replication origin (ℓ12 = 0) in plot B, or in a mid position (ℓ12 = 0.5) in plot C (see the corresponding schemes on the left).
The plots show how gene positions influence the range of growth rates in which stable oscillations take place. (D,E) Effect of
the relative position ∆ℓ on the oscillation amplitude, normalized with its value in thesymmetric case, of the three proteins is
plottedfor twodifferentgrowth rates (thebasalexpression is x∗=75 inunitsofk). Thesetsof positions considered inDand
Earethoseshowninplot BandCrespectively. Thechangein oscillation amplitudethatcan beobtainedbyplacingthesame
genes in different configurations dependson thegrowth conditions.
circuit is moving its position toward Ori, since this in- anexperimentalguidelineforthebestgeneinsertionsites
creases its average gene copy number. Indeed, gene po- inordertoobtainthe desireddynamics. Finally,Fig.8D
sition has been used to modulate the oscillation features and E show the oscillationamplitude dependence on the
in an experimental synthetic implementation of another relative gene positions for the configurations described
genetic circuit [35]. However, as we show for our case, in Fig. 8B and C respectively. This dependence changes
the effect of the displacement of a gene is growth-rate significantly at different growth rates, showing that the
dependent. In fact, while moving a gene from Ter to Ori effectofgenepositionisstronglyinfluencedbythe cellu-
allows an increment of its gene dosage of a factor 4 for a lar environment, and thus by growth rate. This feature
µ=3 db/hr,this factordecreaseswithdoubling time up is also relevant for synthetic biology, since identical ex-
to 1 for slow growth. The consequence of this observa- periments carriedoutwith differentnutrientlevelscould
tion on the repressilator dynamics is evident looking at in principle lead to different results.
Fig.8BandC.Thesamechangeinconfiguration(change
in∆ℓ)hasdifferenteffectsdependingonthegrowthrate.
The modeling framework adopted here gives a quantita- IV. DISCUSSION
tivepredictionofthegaininoscillationstabilitythatcan
be achieved by moving the genes along the chromosome To sum up, this work addresses the dynamics of a
dependingontheexperimentalgrowthconditions,giving paradigmatic bacterial oscillatory gene circuit, the re-
pressilator, using for the first time a modeling frame- plasmid, and the unavoidable plasmid-specific growth-
work that accounts for relevant physiological parame- rate dependence (and cell-to-cell variability) of the copy
ters, through their growth-rate dependence [15]. From number [38].
the modeling viewpoint, this framework entails assum- On the other hand, for chromosomally integrated re-
ing that the parameters of the dynamical system are pressilators, the dynamics depends nontrivially on gene
in fact dependent on a hidden “super-parameter”, the position. Recently, it has been shown that the spatial
growth rate, which encapsulates cell physiology. Addi- ordering of a set of “important” genes along the chro-
tional models or experiments are required in order to mosome is strongly conserved between different bacte-
obtain the dependence of each relevant parameter from rial species and largely corresponds to their expression
the super-parameter. For the case of E. coli, all this pattern during growth [39], pointing to a functional role
information is available. The parameters change their for gene chromosomal position. The example of a puta-
valuefollowingthehiddenvariable,whichmakesthephe- tive chromosome-integrated repressilator analyzed here
nomenologyofthe dynamicalsystemwith respectto the suggests that the dynamics of genetic networks, in fast-
standard parameters less informative. Specifically, igno- growing bacteria, should be influenced by the genomic
ranceofthe roleofthe super-parameterandits behavior position of its components. For example, for the repres-
preventsfromobtainingthephysicallyrelevantphasedi- silator case (Fig. 8), a variation in the relative position
agram. of genes involved in a regulatory circuit can have dif-
Agrowth-rateinduced“dynamicalswitch”. Ourresults ferent consequences depending on the growth rate. In
show thatthe dynamics is dependent onthe growthrate this perspective, the analysis of the phenotypic conse-
in a fashion that is both qualitative and quantitative. quences of chromosomal rearrangements, such as large
Specifically, a symmetric repressilator will lose its oscil- inversions [40], should be revisited taking into account
latory state with increasing growth rate unless its basal the growth conditions. More generally, it is tempting
expressionissufficientlyhigh,andthisphenomenologyis to speculate that the evolutionary pressure for keeping
expected to be observable in a wide range of experimen- a certain gene order with respect to genome replication
tally accessible conditions. Indeed, the growth-mediated may be partially due to natural selection of specific net-
switchbetweendifferentdynamicsshowninFig.4should work dynamics defined by the combination of gene posi-
be simple to observe experimentally, given the typical tions and cell growth state.
values of the parameters involved. The average protein Role of noise. Some relevant considerations can be
copynumberspercellspandifferentordersofmagnitude, madeaboutthe possibleroleofnoiseinthe resultsgiven
from 10 −1 to 104 [24], while the values for the dissocia- here within a purely deterministic framework. In gen-
tion constants have been reported to range between a eral, noise can strongly affect the dynamics of a repres-
few molecules [36] and a few thousands [37]. With these silator. For example, in the in vivo realization of the
numbers, the basal expression values (i.e. protein con- repressilator [14] only about 40% of the cells displayed
centration at µ = 1 in units of k) analyzed here, such oscillations, with high cell-to-cell variability in oscilla-
as x ∈ (0,20) in the example in Fig. 4, are well in the tionperiodandamplitude. Severalstudieshaveanalyzed
physiological range. This suggests that a repressilator thepossibleimpactofnoise,focusingonthestochasticity
dynamics characterized by loss of the oscillatory behav- thatarisesfromthediscretenatureofthemolecularplay-
iorata criticalgrowthrateshouldnotbe too difficult to ers and from the inherent randomness of their interac-
observe in the laboratory, and that changes in both os- tions(togetherreferredtoasintrinsic noise)[14,29,41].
cillationperiodandamplitudeshouldalsobequitelikely The main result is that intrinsic noise can both play a
to be measurable experimentally. [52] constructive role in oscillation robustness and a destruc-
Dependence of the dynamics on the physical support. tive one. The constructive phenomenon can enlarge the
Furthermore, the growth-ratedependent behavior of the parameter space of oscillations through a resonance ef-
circuit is affected by the support it is embedded in, a fect [41]. The destructive one causes strong cell-to-cell
plasmid or a chromosome, and for a chromosome on the variability in oscillation amplitude and period [14].
detailedcoordinatesofthethreepromoters. Fig.4and5 Whileintrinsicnoisecanbearelevantfactorandcould
suggest that the stability of oscillatory behavior is more partiallyexplainthe experimentallyobservedvariability,
sensitive to variations in growth rate for a repressilator the dominant source of noise might be due to fluctua-
integratedonplasmidsthanonthechromosome,asplas- tionsinglobalcellularparameters(extrinsic noise), such
midcopynumbercanbestronglygrowth-ratedependent asribosomeorpolymerasesconcentration. Thishasbeen
(as well as variable from cell to cell). However, integra- showntobethecaseinE.coli,forrelativelyhighexpres-
tion on a high copy-number plasmid can naturally in- sion(morethanapproximately10proteinspercell) [24].
crease the protein concentration (hence the “promoter Since oscillations in the repressilator generally require
strength”parameterdefinedby Klumppandcoworkers), strongpromoters(highbasalexpressions),thevariability
thus leading to more robust oscillations. Therefore, if inthe circuitdynamics is expectedto be highly sensitive
the goalis engineeringastablesyntheticoscillator,there to the extrinsic noise level, which adds up, for plasmids,
is probably a trade-off between the advantage of an in- totheaforementionedcell-to-cellcopy-numbervariation.
creased basal expression typical of a high copy number These considerations point to an interest in considering
thestochasticaspectsofthecircuit. However,inorderto torisnaturallystronglyconnectedtothecellulargrowth
extend the mean-field model introduced here to analyze rate. Therefore, specific regulatory mechanisms are re-
the growth rate dependence of the cell-to-cell variabil- quiredinordertocompensatefortheseeffectsandrender
ity of the repressilator dynamics, it would be necessary acircadianoscillatorinsulatedfromthegrowthstate. Al-
to know how the extrinsic noise scales with growth rate. though circadian clocks appear to be primarily based on
Unfortunately, there are no experimental data concern- post-translational circuits in bacteria [21], the proteins
ingthis scaling,makingthe extensionofthisworktothe involved are the result of a gene expression process, and
stochastic case premature. thus inprinciple coupled with growthrate [15]. It would
Nevertheless, the possibility of a switch between dif- beinterestingtoevaluateexperimentallyifthepromoters
ferent dynamical regimes in response to the physiologi- regulatingthese proteins are morebuffered as a function
cal cell state opens interesting considerations about the of growth rate compared to others. Quantitative models
robustness of this oscillatory genetic circuit. Fluctua- takingintoaccounttheparameterdependenceongrowth
tionsinphysiologicalparameterssuchasthegrowthrate rate, such as the one presented here, may be important
fall in the broadly-defined category of extrinsic noise. It to posethe questionofthe growth-raterobustnessofthe
has been suggested that fluctuations in the growth rate, circadian cycle. For example, the circuit architectures
mainly through its influence on protein dilution, can ac- andthe typeofregulationsselectedbyevolutiontocom-
count for a considerable part of the measured extrinsic pose circadianoscillatorsmight be, at least in part, con-
noise [27, 42]. Our analysis suggests that fluctuations in strained by the implementation of the observed growth-
cellparameterslinkedtogrowthcanintroducecell-to-cell rate independence.
variability in the circuit dynamics (convergence to oscil- Finally, from a synthetic biology standpoint, changing
lation or to a stable fixed point) as well as in oscillation the conditionsinwhichthe cellsaregrownaltersquanti-
periodandamplitude. Therefore,thereasonsbehindthe tatively the characteristics of the repressilator dynamics
lackofrobustnessoftherepressilatorrealizedinvivo [14] in a predictable manner. This offers the possibility of
shouldbe alsosearchedinthe variabilityofphysiological external control of the circuit behavior by simply oper-
parameters rather than focusing exclusively on intrinsic ating onmacroscopic variable relatedto physiology such
noise effects. as the type of nutrient supply or the temperature. This
way, the engineering and control of the dynamics can
Biological outlook. Finally, we believe these findings
be performed by tuning environmental conditions in a
couldberelevantfrombothasystemsbiologyandasyn-
model-guided way, rather then by modifying the genetic
thetic biologyperspective. Thereisalonglistofendoge-
components, which can be technically complex.
nousoscillatorsinbacteria[21]thatareinterestingforthe
former discipline, and need to be understood within the
framework adopted here. The most important examples
Acknowledgements
are circadian clocks and the cell cycle itself. We previ-
ously studied the dynamics of the DnaA[53] oscillatory
circuit, which is determinant in this last process [23]. In WeacknowledgeusefuldiscussionswithVittoreF.Sco-
thiscase,thetimescaleofoscillationsmatches(bydefini- lari, Mina Zarei and Bianca Sclavi. We thank Matthew
tion)thecellcycletime,thustheapproximationsdefined AA Grant and Carla Bosia for critical reading of the
in section IIA are not valid. More complex models are manuscript. This work was supported by the the Inter-
required, and there is no commonly accepted theoretical national Human Frontier Science ProgramOrganization
frameworktodescribethiscase. However,itisinteresting (Grant RGY0069/2009-C).
to note that in the simple modeling framework adopted
here,the periodofoscillationdecreaseswith growthrate
withoutthe needofspecific additionalregulation. Inab- Appendix A: Population averages vs cell-cycle
sence of overlapping replication rounds, this is exactly averages
the kind of behavior desired for an oscillator regulating
the triggeringof DNA replication, suchas the DnaA cir- A common assumption in genetic circuit modeling is
cuit: a shorteningof the initiation time is requiredwhen that the contribution of the cell-cycle dynamics can be
the cell volume grows faster to synchronize DNA repli- neglected, at least when one is interested in time scales
cationandvolumedoubling(thesituationbecomesmore longer than the doubling time, which is often the case
complex at fast growth [23]). given the typical high protein stability. This approxi-
In contrast, circadian clocks need to be resilient to mation allows the use of effective parameters obtained
changesinthecelldoublingtime,andthusinthegrowth averagingoverthecellcycle. Thecontributionofprotein
rate, in order to keep a steady 24-hour period in vari- dilution due to growth and division is incorporated as
able environmental conditions, and thus can not mea- an effective degradationrate [27]. However,as discussed
sure time using the cell cycle. The consequent decou- in the text, the growth-rate dependences of gene expres-
pling between the cell cycle and the circadian rhythm sion parameters are derived from experimental observa-
has indeed been verified in cyanobacteria [43–45]. Our tions of average cellular properties in a population [16],
results suggest that the dynamics of a genetic oscilla- which are also affected by the cell age distribution. A
quantitativeestimateoftheage-structureeffectsonmea-
surements performed on an exponentially growing pop-
ulation is especially important when their growth-rate
dependence is in analysis. In fact, the fraction of cells
found at a certain cell-cycle stage is itself a function of
the growth rate.
ThisAppendixdiscussesthequantitativedifferencebe-
tween population and cell-cycle averagesfor two quanti-
ties that are well characterized, the gene dosage due to
DNA replication and the cellular volume. We will show
that in these two cases population averages can be used
in dynamic models of genetic circuits without introduc-
ing significant errors. The assumption that this result
can be generalized to other quantities justifies, although
not rigorously, the use of available experimentally esti-
FIG.9: (Coloronline)Cellcycleandpopulationaverage
mated population averages in dynamic models for those of gene dosage. The gene dosage g averaged over the cell
quantities whose time dependence (or even cell-cycle av- cycle (dashed blue lines) and averaged over a population in
erages)arenotknown[15]. This is the caseforribosome balancedexponentialgrowth(continuousredlines)areshown
or polymerase concentrations at different growth rates, asafunctionofthegrowthratefordifferentchromosomalpo-
which are crucial to determine the growth-rate depen- sitionsℓ(normalized distancefrom Ori). Inthephysiological
dence of transcription and translation rates in Eq. 3. range of growth rates, the two quantities do not present a
Thus, in our case, given the small quantitative dif- substantial quantitativedifference.
ference between the two type of averages, the empirical
growthrate dependences (basedonpopulationaverages)
have been used in the analysis (and thus for all the pa- shown that the number of origins present at initiation is
rameters quoted in the main text). The alternative use exactly 2n [16, 22]. More generally, we can consider a
of cell-cycle averagesis possible only for the gene dosage geneatachromosomalpositiondefinedbyitsnormalized
and volume, and does not alter significantly the results. distance ℓ from Ori, i.e. ℓ = 0 represents a gene in Ori
Indeed, as reported in [27], for a constitutive gene the and ℓ = 1 in Ter. The copy number of this gene, g,
averageproteinconcentrationscalculatedwithrespectto changes during the cell cycle following
an age-structured population or with respect to the cell
cycle differ by only a few percent. 2n′ if 0<t<(n ′ +1)τ −(C(1−ℓ)+D)
1. Cooper-Helmstetter model and gene dosage
Therefore, the gene dosage
averaged over the cell cycle (which could be measured
DNA replication in fast-growing bacteria such as following a single cell lineage and averaging over time),
E. coli typically starts from a single replication ori- is given by
gin (Ori) and proceeds bidirectionally along the circu-
lar chromosome until it reaches the replication terminus
cell cycle
(Ter). The Cooper-Helmstetter model [22] establishes τ Z
the relation between growth rate and replication timing =2n′
suchthatDNAcopiesareproducedontimeforeachnew-
born cell. The model is based on the empirical observa- On the other hand, the populationage structure must
tion that the time necessary for chromosome replication be taken into account when evaluating the average gene
(called “C period”) and the time period between com- dosage in a cell population. For ideal “balanced expo-
pletion of chromosome replication and the following cell nential” growth with rate µ this distribution is given
division (D period) are approximately constant (at least by [27, 46]
for fast-dividing cells [34], with doubling times less than
1hr). Since at time C+D the cell divides, a time lag X a(t,µ)=2 ln2 µ 2
−µt.
before initiation is necessary to make the total replica-
Thus, the population averageis
tion time X+C+D an integer multiple of the doubling
time τ, “synchronizing” DNA replication and cell divi- τ
sion. Thus, the following relation has to be satisfied hg(t)i population = a(t,µ)g(t)dt=
wheren=Int[C+D]istheintegernumberoftimesthatτ Thisisthe expressiontypicallyusedtoevaluatethe gene
dividesC+D. Startingfromthisrelation,itcanbeeasily dosage [15, 16]. As shown in Fig. 9, the difference be-
tweencell-cycleaverages(dashedbluelines)andpopula- suggestanexponentialgrowth[49], andweassumedthis
tion averages (red continuous lines) in the physiological functional form (note that the same reasoning could be
range of growth rates is negligible for all gene positions. applied to linear growthstraightforwardly,so this choice
has no consequences on any of the results). With a vol-
ume growth of the form V(t)=V 2µt, the mean volume
2. Cell volume growth overa cell cycle is hV(t)i =V /ln2,while the in-
cell cycle 0
tegration over the population leads to hV(t)i =
population
Similar considerations can be carried out in the case 2 ln2 V 0 . All the volume growth-rate dependence is hid-
of the average cell volume. The functional form of the deninV 0 ,andexperimentalresultsindicatethatthisde-
volume increase in time during a cell cycle has long pendence is approximately exponential [25]. For all the
been debated [47], with two prevailing hypotheses of lin- situations considered in our study, we verified that the
ear growth (constant rate) or exponential growth (size- different numerical factors introduced by averaging over
dependent rate), although more complex dependences the cell cycle or over the population do not affect signif-
have been proposed [48]. Recent experiments strongly icantly the growth-ratedependence of the mean volume.
[1] A. Goldbeter, Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular and T. Hwa, Science 330, 1099 (2010).
Rhythms (Cambridge University Press, 1997). [18] M. Scott and T. Hwa, Curr Opin Biotechnol 22, 559
[2] A. Goldbeter, Nature 420, 238 (2002), URL (2011).
[3] J. J. Tyson, R. Albert, A. Goldbeter, P. Ruoff, and Nat Chem Biol 5, 842 (2009), URL
Bernardo, J R Soc Interface 7, 1503 (2010), URL [21] P. Lenz and L. Søgaard-Andersen, Nat
land, T. Hwa, J. Kondev, and R. Phillips, [22] S. Cooper and C. Helmstetter, Journal of Molecular Bi-
Curr Opin Genet Dev 15, 116 (2005), URL ology 31, 519 (1968).
[6] U. Alon, An Introduction to Systems Biology: Design B. Bassetti, B. Sclavi, and M. C. Lago-
Principlesof Biological Circuits (Chapman&Hall/CRC marsino, BMC Syst Biol 5, 201 (2011), URL
[7] M. E. Wall, W. S. Hlavacek, and M. A. Sav- [24] Y. Taniguchi, P. J. Choi, G.-W. Li,
ageau, Nat Rev Genet 5, 34 (2004), URL H. Chen, M. Babu, J. Hearn, A. Emili, and
[9] E. Andrianantoandro, S. Basu, D. K. Karig, and Microbiol 19, 592 (1958).
R. Weiss, Mol Syst Biol 2, 2006.0028 (2006), URL [26] S. Klumpp and T. Hwa, PNAS105, 20245 (2008).
[10] N. J. Guido, X. Wang, D. Adalsteinsson, D. McMillen, J Stat Phys 148, 607 (2012), ISSN 0022-4715,
J. Hasty, C. R. Cantor, T. C. Elston, and 10.1007/s10955-012-0459-0.
J. J. Collins, Nature 439, 856 (2006), URL [28] S. Mu¨ller, J. Hofbauer, L. Endler, C. Flamm, S. Wid-
terface 6 Suppl 4, S389 (2009), URL [29] N. Strelkowa and M. Barahona, J R
Science 333, 1244 (2011), URL [30] O. Buse, R. Prez, and A. Kuznetsov, Phys Rev E Stat
[13] W. Weber and M. Fussenegger, Nat Rev Genet 13, 21 [31] R.BlosseyandC.V.Giuraniuc,PhysRevEStatNonlin
[14] M. B. Elowitz and S. Leibler, Nature 403, 335 (2000), [32] S. Klumpp, PLoS One 6, e20403 (2011), URL
[15] S.Klumpp,Z.Zhang,andT.Hwa,Cell139,1366(2009). [33] H. El Samad, D. Del Vecchio, and M. Khammash, in
[16] H. Bremer and P. Dennis, In: F.C. Neidhardt, Editor, Proceedings of the 2005 American Control Conference
Escherichia coli and Salmonella, ASM Press, Washing- (ieeeCat.No.05ch37668)(AmericanAutomaticControl
ton, D.C. pp.1553–1569. (1996). Council, 2005).
[17] M. Scott, C. W. Gunderson, E. M. Mateescu, Z. Zhang, [34] O.Michelsen,M.J.T.deMattos,P.R.Jensen,andF.G.
Hansen,Microbiology 149, 1001 (2003). [45] I. Mihalcescu, W. Hsing, and
[35] M.R.Atkinson,M. A.Savageau, J.T. Myers,and A.J. S. Leibler, Nature 430, 81 (2004), URL
[36] L. Bintu, N. E. Buchler, H. G. Garcia, U. Ger- [46] E. O.Powell, J Gen Microbiol 15, 492 (1956).
land, T. Hwa, J. Kondev, T. Kuhlman, and [47] A. L. Koch, Crit Rev Microbiol 19, 17 (1993), URL
[37] Y. Setty, A. E. Mayo, M. G. Surette, and U. Alon, M. Feingold, Biophys J 94, 251 (2008), URL
[38] S. Tal and J. Paulsson, Plasmid 67, 167 (2012), URL Bryan,A.Tzur,P.Jorgensen,K.Payer,A.D.Grossman,
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, E42 (2012), URL [50] This state is conventionally referred to as “steady” be-
[40] E. Esnault, M. Valens, O. Esp´eli, and F. Boc- cells) is constantly replenished with a source.
card, PLoS Genet 3, e226 (2007), URL [51] Notethattheterm“basalexpression”issometimesfound
[41] M. Yoda, T. Ushikubo, W. Inoue, and M. Sa- detectablelevelofexpressionthatanegativelyregulated
sai, J Chem Phys 126, 115101 (2007), URL gene maintains in conditions of strong repression (also
[42] S. Tsuru, J. Ichinose, A. Kashiwagi, B.- [52] Notehoweverthatsomeofthedissociation constantval-
W. Ying, K. Kaneko, and T. Yomo, uesreportedintheliteratureweremeasuredinvitro and
Phys Biol 6, 036015 (2009), URL thuscouldbeunderestimatedwithrespecttoinvivo val-
[43] T.Kondo,T.Mori,N.V.Lebedeva,S.Aoki,M.Ishiura, [53] DnaA is a protein responsible for the initiation of DNA
and S. S.Golden, Science275, 224 (1997). replication inseveralbacteria.Essentially,ifpresentina
[44] T. Mori and C. H. Johnson, J sufficiently high concentration, it can promote the melt-
Bacteriol 183, 2439 (2001), URL ing of DNAstrands at thereplication origin.