GUBS, a Behavior-based Language for Open System
Dedicated to Synthetic Biology
AdrienBasso-Blandin FranckDelaplace
IBISClab. IBISClab.
EvryUniversity EvryUniversity
abasso@ibisc.univ-evry.fr franck.delaplace@ibisc.univ-evry.fr
Inthisarticle, weproposeadomainspecificlanguage, GUBS(GenomicUnifiedBehaviorSpecifi-
cation),dedicatedtothebehaviouralspecificationofsyntheticbiologicaldevices,viewedasdiscrete
opendynamicalsystems. GUBSisarule-baseddeclarativelanguage.Bycontrasttoaclosedsystem,a
programisalwaysapartialdescriptionofthebehaviourofthesystem.Thesemanticsofthelanguage
accountstheexistenceofsomehiddennon-specifiedactionsthatpossiblyalterthebehaviourofthe
programmed devices. The compilation framework follows a scheme similar to automatic theorem
proving,aimingatimprovingsyntheticbiologicaldesignsafety.
1 Introduction
Synthetic biology is an emerging scientific field combining the investigative nature of biology with the
constructive nature of engineering [22] to design synthetic biological systems. The issue is to devise
newfunctionality/behaviourthatdoesnotexistinnature. Then,thefieldofsyntheticbiologyislooking
forwardprinciplesandtoolstomakethebiologicaldevicesinter-operableandprogrammable[19]. Syn-
thetic biology projects were first focusing on the design and the improvement of small genetic devices
comparabletologicalgatesforelectroniccircuits[23,11]. Recently,projectshaveattemptedtodevelop
largebio-systemsintegratingdifferentdeviceswithasalong-termgoal,thedesignofde-novosynthetic
genome [16]. In this endeavour, the computer-aided-design (CAD) environments play a central role by
providing the required features to engineer systems: specification, analysis, and tuning [4, 20, 25, 12].
PioneerapplicationsshowthevaluablepotentialofsuchenvironmentsinIGEMcompetition.
Currently, the design specifies the structural assembly of DNA sequences (biobrick) as in GENO-
CAD [7]. Although this description is indispensable to provide a finalized specification of devices, the
abstraction level seems inappropriate for tackling large bio-systems. The required size of programs for
sequence description likely makes the task error-prone and un-come-at-able. In the same way as large
softwares cannot be programmed in binary, large biological systems cannot be described as aDNA se-
quenceassembly. Then,scalingupthecomplexityofthesyntheticbiologicalsystemsneedstocomplete
the structural description by an additional abstract programming layout based on a high-level program-
ming language and harness the automatic conversion of the design specification into a DNA sequence,
like compilers. High level programming language for synthetic biology is announced as a key mile-
stone for the second wave of synthetic biology to overcome the complexity of large synthetic system
design[22]. Nonetheless,inthisdomain,languagetechnologyisstillinitsinfancyandtransformingthis
visionintoaconcreterealityremainsadauntingchallenge.
Such high-level language should describe the devices in term of functionalities, offering the ability
to program the behaviour directly instead of the structure supporting this behaviour. Indeed, behaviour
specification contributes to accurately document the device by adding its behavioural description, to
GabrielCiobanu(Ed.):MembraneComputingand
BiologicallyInspiredProcessCalculi(MeCBIC2012)
30 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
assess its functionality automatically and formally, notably by generating test-benches from this spec-
ification, and to get a relative independence to technology because different biological structures can
carryoutthesamefunctionality. Inthisframework,thecomponentsareselectedandorganizedautomat-
ically or semi-automatically to generate a structural description of the device at compile phase whose
behaviourcomplieswiththespecifiedfunction. Asuchapproachhasbeenalreadyachievedinhardware
by using languages as VHDL [1] or VERILOG [24] to overcome the growing complexity of electronic
circuits. However, the major difference in synthetic biology relates to the openness of biological sys-
tem. Thereby,theissueistoproposeabehaviourallanguageforopensystems. Moreprecisely, GUBS is
a rule-based declarative language dedicated to the behavioural specification of discrete open dynamical
systemsforsyntheticbiologyinteractingwithitsenvironment. GUBSsymbolicallydefinesthebehaviours
to provide a relative independence from structures by postponing the biological component selection at
compile phase. Within this framework, the compiler translates the behavioural specification to a struc-
turaldescriptionofadevicewhosebehaviourcarriesthefunctionalfeaturesdefinedbyaprogram. The
proposedcompilationmethodisinspiredbyautomatedtheoremproving.
Afterintroducingthemainfeaturesof GUBS language(Section2),wedefinethesemanticsof GUBS
basedonhybridlogic. Then,wedetailtheproof-basedprinciplesgoverningthecompilation(Section3)
illustrated with a complete example (Section 4). After a survey of the related works, Section 5, we
conclude(Section6).
2 GUBS language
Inthissection,wedescribethemainfeaturesofGUBS.
Constantandvariables. In GUBS,twokindsofobjectsaredistinguished: theconstantsandthevari-
ables. Theconstantsdesignatethepre-definedobjectsinacorpusofknowledge. Inbiology,theconstants
may refer to proteins or genes of interest. For example, the agent LacZ refers to LacZ protein or gene.
By convention, their name starts with a capital letter. The variables refer to an abstraction of these pre-
definedobjectsandcanbepotentiallyreplaced(substituted)byanyconstant. Byconvention,thevariable
namesstartwithaminusculeletter.
Agents,attributesandstates. Theagentsrepresentthebiologicalobjects. Theirdifferentobservable
states characterize their different behaviours. The behaviours actually define the different capacities
for actions on the state of the other agents. They are characterized symbolically by a set of attributes
categorizingthesedifferentcapacities. Therealsignificanceoftheattributesisamatterofconventionde-
pendingonthetargetedrealization(e.g.,proteinpathways,genenetwork)andwillbeaddressedthrough
examples. Forinstance, theregulatoryactivityofageneisobservationallyrelatedtothresholdsof RNA
transcriptsconcentration. Atagiventhreshold,ageneregulatesagivensetofgeneswhereasatanother
one the regulation applies to another set of genes (See Figure 1). The different thresholds define the
levels of gene activities leading to different regulatory activities. For a gene G, if we identify three dif-
ferent kinds of regulatory activities, the state of this gene will be defined by three different attributes
{Low,Mid,High} that characterize symbolically three possible behaviours. For example, G(Low) ex-
pressesthefactthatagentGisinstateLowandthenreadyfortheactioncorrespondingtothisattribute.
In some cases, a single state is sufficient to qualify the capacity for the action of the agent. Hence, the
agentisidentifiedtoitscapacity. Then,GmeansthatagentGisavailable.
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 31
By contrast, G(Low) signifies that the state of the agent differs from Low (G when an agent has
a single capacity). It is worth to point out that, not being in a state defined by an attribute, does not
necessarily means that the agent state is in another attribute. Indeed, for open systems the state of the
agentscouldbeofanysortthatdoesnotnecessarilybelongtothepre-definedattributes.
Two kinds of relations on attributes are defined: an order, ≺, meaning “less capacity than” and an
inequality,≉,meaning“differentcapacitythan”. ThenLow≺Midimpliesthatthecapacityfortheaction
of Mid includes the capacity related to Low. Usually, in gene regulatory model [14], the set of genes
regulated at a given level will also be regulated at a higher level. By contrast, in signalling pathways,
the phosphorylation of a protein induces a conformational change of the structure leading to a specific
signalling potentiality not occurring in the unphosphosrylated conformation. Assuming that Phos and
UnPhos respectively represents the phosphorylated and the unphosphorylated conformations of protein
P,wehavePhos≉UnPhos. Then,P(Phos)impliesP(UnPhos)implicitly. Theattributesandtherelation
between attributes will be declared as follows: G∶∶{Low≺Mid,Mid≺High},P∶∶{Phos≉UnPhos}. A
simplesetofattributesreplacestherelationsifunknownandnospecificrelationissetbetweenattributes.
Finally, the description of the agent state is extended to a collection of agent states as follows: g +
...+g ,meaningthatalltheagentstates,g,areobservedconcomitantly.
Trace, event, and history. A GUBS program describes a behaviour, its interpretation is based on the
observations of designed systems. Then, the issue is to formalize the notion of behaviour observa-
tion. To this end, we focus on the notion of trace that symbolically represents the evolution of some
quantities related to the agents of interest by the evolution of these agent states. A trace can be ob-
tained from experiments by establishing a correspondence between measurements of some quantities
(e.g., RNA transcript concentration) and attributes of agents. Formally, a trace, (T t ) 1≤t≤m , is a finite se-
quence of agent state sets where each set contains the agent states at a given instant. For instance, the
evolution of a concentration evolving from Low to High for G may be described by the following trace
of 6 instants: ({G(Low)},{G(Low)},{G(Mid)},{G(Mid)},{G(Mid)},{G(High)}), . However, all the events in a
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
trace are not necessarily relevant with regards to the behaviour description. For example, if we focus
on the evolution from Low to High for G , only three events are relevant for the behaviour description:
G(Low),G(Mid),G(High); without accounting the intermediary evolution stages occurring between.
Then, thebehaviourrecognitionalwaysemphasizesthekeyeventsinatraceentailingitscontractionto
showtheirsuccession. Suchacontractedseriesiscalledaconsistenthistoryoftheexpectedbehaviour.
Generally speaking, an history is related to a chronological division of a trace into periods where the
eventsofaperiodrepresentalltheagentstatesoccurringateachinstant. Then,anhistoryisasequence
of these event sets. Given a trace (T) , and a chronological division, (d) , corresponding to a
t 0≤t≤m i 1≤i≤n
sequenceofthestartingdatesforeachperiod,thehistoryisasequenceofagentstatesoccurringineach
period,(H) ,suchthateachH =⋃ T. Hence,aconsistenthistoryispurposelymadetopoint
i 1≤i<n i di ≤t<di+1 t
thecharacteristiceventstepsofabehaviourdescriptionout.
In the previous example, a chronological division1 of the trace leading to an history consistent with
the expected evolution from Low to High for G is (1,3,6,7) which corresponds to following discrete
time-intervals ([1,2],[3,5],[6,6]). The resulting history is: ({G(Low)},{G(Mid)},{G(High)}). Notice that
(1,2,4,7)alsofits. However,thechronologicaldivision(1,3,7)leadstoaninconsistenthistorybecause
the level Mid is not seen as an intermediary event in the history (See also Figure 1 depicting the trace
and consistent history of the dependences). The formal definition of the consistency in the scope of the
semanticswillbegiveninSection2.1.
1Step7isinsertedasanextrasteptocomplywiththedefinitionofthechronologicaldivision.
32 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
q. c⊙→e q. c⊕→e
Figure 1: The curves represent the typical behaviours of the causal dependences based on the time
evolution of a quantity (q) related to agents c and e (e.g., RNA transcript for gene regulation). The
symbolic agent states c and e are here both associated to the maximal threshold of the quantity. The
symbolic trace (T) is issued from a periodic sampling of the evolution by identifying whether c or e
occur. A consistent history (H) complying to a causal dependence definition is represented below the
trace. Thefirstgraphicillustratesthenormalcausality: c◯→e,thesecondthepersistent: c⊙→eandthe
thirdtheremanentone: c⊕→e.
Behavioral dependence and observation spot. A behavioural dependence identifies a relation be-
tweenbehavioursasacausalrelationonevents. Basically,thedependencesshoulddefinethecontrolof
agentsonanother. However,thedefinitionofthecausalityalsoneedstotackletheopennessofasystem
by adapting it to this context. A seminal definition of the causality, proposed by Hume [17], is formu-
lated in terms of regularity on events: “[we may define] a cause to be an object, followed by another,
and where all the objects similar to the first are followed by objects similar to the second”. Although
this definition appropriately characterizes the notion of control, the openness of the system implies to
account the environment actions that possibly alter the causal dependence chain. For example, a pro-
grammed activation G —→G may be contradicted by an existing inhibition G —→G addressing the
sametargetgeneG . Hence,whileG isactive,itmayappearthatG willnotbeactivebecausethereg-
ulatorystrengthofG isgreaterthantheregulatorystrengthofG ,contradictingtheexpectedactivation
byahiddeninhibition. Hence,pushedtothelimit,thisconsiderationpreventstheabilitytodescribeany
behaviourcausallybecauseanyprogrammedactioncanbeunexpectedlypreemptedbyanexternalone.
However, by assuming that the design always describes a new functionality which is not observed
naturally, the effect becomes the event indicating the effectiveness of a causal relation. As no cause
externaltothedescriptioncantriggertheeffect,theover-determinationbyunknowncausesisprevented,
then insuring that the program is the sole device entailing the expected effect in the biological system.
Hence, the definition of the causal dependence will be governed by the effect leading to the following
definitionofthedependence: “ifeffectewouldoccurthencoccurs”. Moreover,thescopeoffuture(resp.
past) is narrowed to a closest future (resp. past) period, representing the fact that a response is always
expectedinagivendelay. Noticethat,theproposeddefinitioncircumventstheaforementionedproblem
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 33
illustratedbythehiddeninhibitionbecauseiftheeffectdoesnotoccurthequestionoftheexistenceofa
causeismeaningless. ThisdefinitionissomehowequivalenttothecausalclaimsproposedbyLewis[18]
intermsofcounter-factualconditionals,i.e.,“Ifchadnotoccurred,ewouldnothaveoccurred”.
Threebehaviouraldependencesaredefinedin GUBS: thenormaldenotedby◯→,persistent by⊙→,
and remanent by ⊕→. Informally, for normal dependence the cause precedes the effect providing the
effectisobserved;forpersistentdependencethecausestillprecedestheeffectbutitismaintainedwhile
the effect is observed; and for remanent dependence, the effect is maintained despite the cause has dis-
appeared. Thesedependencessymbolizecommonbiologicalinteractions. Forinstance,ingeneticengi-
neering,therecombinationenablestheemergenceofaregulatedgeneoranhereditarytraitpermanently.
Asuchmechanismtypifiestheremanentdependenceinbiology. Therelationsbetweengeneexpression
at steady state are symbolized by persistent dependence. The behavioural dependences are defined as
follows(seeSection2.1fortheirformalization):
• c◯→e: ifeoccursthencoccursintheclosestpast.
• c⊙→e: ifeoccursthencoccursintheclosestpastandalsocurrently.
• c⊕→e: if e occurs then, either e occurs in the closest past or the dependence complies to the
propertyofthenormaldependence.
Figure1exemplifiesthecorrespondencebetweenexperimentaltraces,symbolictracesandthehistoryfor
thecausaldependences. Allthedependencesareextendedtoasetofcausesandasetofconsequences,
i.e., c +...+c ◯→e +...+e . For example, let us define the activation and the inhibition as follows:
g —→g ≡g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g and g —→g ≡g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g , the program depicting a negative
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
regulatorycircuitwithtwogenes,i.e.,g —→g ,g —→g ,is: {g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g ,g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g }.
1 2 2 1 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 1
The observation spots describe the set of observations expected in a trace. For instance, observ-
ing that gene G is at level high is written Obs::G(High). As the activation of a dependence lies on
the observation of the effect, the observation spot is used to determine which effects must be necessar-
ily observed. For example, in the negative regulatory circuit, the characteristic observation spots are:
obs ::g +g ,obs ::g +g .
1 1 2 2 1 2
Compartment & Context. A compartment encloses a set of dependences making them local to the
compartment. For instance,C{g ◯→g } describes a normal dependence occurring in compartmentC.
The compartments are hierarchically organized and all the compartments are included in another ex-
ceptfortheoutermostone. Althoughthecompartmentsdirectlyrefertothecompartmentalizedcellular
organization (e.g., nucleus, mitochondria), they are also used to emphasize the isolation of some inter-
actions by syntactically enclosing the dependences into a compartment. C.s refers to an agent state in
compartmentC.
A context refers to a stimulus acting on the system, as environmental conditions or external sig-
nalling. The application of a context c to a set of dependences b is written [c]b where c is either a
variableoraconstant. Thismeansthatdependencesofbaretriggeredwhenthecontextcispresent. For
instance, recently Ye et al. [26] explore the opto-genetics signalling to control the expression of target
transgenes. The blue-light induces the expression of transgene (tg) via a signalling cascade leading to
thebindingof NFAT transcriptionfactortoaspecificpromoter(PNFAT). Thefollowingprogramusinga
context summarizes the process: [BlueLight]{NFAT⊙→tg}. A context can be decomposed to several
contexts,[k ,...,k ]b,meaningthatalltheconditionsmustbemettotriggerthedependencesofb. The
interpretationisequivalenttoacontextcascading,[k ][k ]...[k ]b. Moreover,theobservationspotsand
theattributedefinitionarecontextinsensitive.
34 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
2.1 Semanticsof GUBS
The interpretation of GUBS is a formula such that the set of all the models validating it defines all the
possible histories complying to the programmed behaviour. The interpretation is based on multi-modal
hybridlogicwiththe“Always”operator,H(A,@).
Hybridlogic. Inwhatfollows,werecalltheformalsyntaxandsemanticsofhybridlogic. Thehybdrid
logic [5, 6] offers the possibility to denominate worlds by new symbols called nominals. They will be
used in satisfaction modal operators @ ; the formula @ φ asserts that φ is satisfied at the unique point
named by the nominal a identifying a particular truth values of a formula at this point. Given a set of
propositional symbol, PROP, a set of relational symbol REL, and a set of nominal NOM disjoint to
PROP,asetofwellformedformulainthesignatureof⟨PROP,NOM,REL⟩isdefinedasfollows:
with p∈PROP,a∈NOM and k ∈REL. Moreover, the syntax is extended to other logical operators
classically2: (cid:150),∨,→,[k],E.
TheinterpretationiscarriedoutusingtheKripkemodelsatisfactiondefinition(Table2.1). M,w⊩φ
is interpreted as the satisfaction of a formula φ by a model M at world w where ⊩ stands for the
realizabilityrelation(i.e.,“isamodelof”). Amodelvalidatesaformula,denotedbyM⊩φ,ifandonly
ifitissatisfiedforalltheworldsofthemodel(i.e.,∀w∈DomM∶M,w⊩φ).
Definition1(Kripkemodel). AKripkemodelisastructureM=⟨W,(R ) ,V⟩whereW =DomMisa
non-emptysetof worlds,τ⊆RELasubsetofrelationalsymbolsdenotingthemodalities,R ⊆W×W,k∈τ
a relation of accessibility,V ∶(PROP∪NOM)→2W an interpretation attributing to each nominal and
propositional variable a set of worlds such that any nominal addresses one world at most (i.e., ∀a∈
Byconvention,Rstandsfortheunionoftheaccessibilityrelation,R=(⋃ R ).
AmodaltheoryofamodelMregardingtoasetofformulasF,TH (M),isthesetofformulasof
F validatedbyM,i.e.,TH (M)={φ ∈F ∣M⊩φ}. KS(φ)denotesthesetofallmodelsvalidatingφ,
M,w⊩a iff w∈V(a),a∈NOM∪PROP M,w⊩⟨k⟩φ iff ∃w′∈W ∶M,w′⊩φ andwR w′
Table1: Hybridlogicinterpretation.
Semantics. A GUBS program is interpreted by a hybrid logic formula where the modal operators
characterize here the temporal observations on an history: [] means “observed in all the closest fu-
tures” and ⟨⟩ means “observed in a possible closest future at least” (resp. ⟨⟩−,[]− for the closest
past). Moreover, we assume that the accessibility relations, (R ) , are indexed by the non empty
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 35
parts of the set of all the contexts of a program P, denoted by K (i.e., τ =2KP∖{∅}). Then, a non-
empty set of contexts ,∅ ⊂ K ⊆ K , is a modality, i.e., ⟨K⟩,[K] with ⟨⟩ = ⟨∅⟩ by convention. Let
⟨W,●,Λ⟩ be the set of words W with the concatenation operation and the neutral element, the empty
wordΛandF thesetofwell-formedformulasofH(A,@),thesemanticsisdefinedbyfourfunctions:
⟦.⟧∶P→F ,⟦.⟧ ∶P→W→2W→F ,⟦.⟧ ∶B→W→F ,⟦.⟧ ∶R→W→F ,whereP,B,Rrespectively
H P H B H R H
stand for the set of GUBS programs, the set of agent state set and the set of relations on attributes. ⟦.⟧
initiates the interpretation. Table 2.1 defines these functions. For instance, the program of the negative
⟦a⟧R(g) =⊺
Table2: SemanticsofGUBS. Inthedefinition,arepresentsanattribute,babehaviour,ganagent,saset
ofagentstatesoranagentstate, r arelationonattributes,C acompartment, K asetofcontextsandba
setofbehaviours(i.e.,contexts,compartments,dependences,attributes,observationspots).
regulatorynetwork,{g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g ,g ⊙→g ,g ◯→g ,obs ∶∶g +g ,obs ∶∶g +g },istranslated
1 2 1 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2
intothefollowingformula:
2 1 1 2 1 1 2 2 1 2
obs1 1 2 obs2 1 2
Consistent history. Now, we formally define the consistency of the history with regards to models.
Anhistoryisassimilatedtoapathinamodelendingbyaworldlabelledwithanobservationspotlabel.
The set of Kripke-models validating the interpretation of a program P, KS(⟦P⟧), not only contains all
the consistent histories, but also the possible histories corresponding to behavioural alterations due to
external perturbations. Thus, the compilation generates a device such that all the models validating
its interpretation integrate all the observations related to the program, including the consistent and the
inconsistentones.
More precisely, the consistency lies on the identification of the largest number of “relevant” events
characterizingacompletecausalchaindescribedinaprogram. Asanhistoryisalsoamodel,aconsistent
36 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
history should validate the interpretation of the complete causal chain. The dependence formula set F
ofaprogramPcorrespondstoasetofformulaswhereeachformulaistheinterpretationofadependence
taken separately with the attributes related to the involved agents. By definition of the semantics, any
modelvalidatingtheinterpretationofaprogramalsovalidateseachformulaofthisset. Theconsistency
of an history is then based on the validated formulas of this set by this history. An history M is
consistent for P if and only if no other modal theory of histories based on F (i.e., TH (M) with
M as an history), ending with the same labelled world includes the modal theory of this history (i.e.,
3 Compilation
At compile phase, a program is transformed to a structure (e.g., a DNA sequence) while inserted in a
vector cell, should behave according to the programmed specification. The structure will result to an
assemblyofseveraldevicesstoredinalibraryofcomponents(e.g.,partsregistry). Asthedesignrelates
heretoabehavioural/functionaldescription,weneedtobridgethegapbetweenstructuralandfunctional
description. Thisstageiscalledthefunctionalsynthesis. Theissueistoselectasetofcomponentswhose
assemblypreservesthebehaviouroftheprogram. Toachievethisgoal,aGUBSprogramisassociatedto
each component to describe its behaviour. Thereby, the component assembly corresponds to a program
assemblypreservingthebehaviourofthecompiledprogram. Preservingabehaviourislaidonaproperty
called the behavioural inclusion formalizing the fact that the characteristic observational traits of the
specified function must be recognized in traces related to the device experiments. In other words, we
canexhibithistoriesconsistentwiththeprogrammedbehaviourfromhistoriesconsistentwiththedevice
behaviourdescription. Thebehaviouralinclusionisdefinedfromtheinterpretationoftheprograms,asa
logicalconsequence(Definition2).
Definition2(Behavioralinclusion). AprogramQbehaviourallyincludesanotherprogramP,ifandonly
iftheinterpretationofthelatterisalogicalconsequenceoftheinterpretationoftheformer:
Thebehaviouralinclusionisapre-order3 suchthattheemptyprogram,denotedbyε,isaminimum,
meaning that a program with no behaviour can be observed in all traces. And a program whose inter-
pretation equals (cid:150), is a maximum. Figure 2 illustrates the behavioural inclusion on a particular model.
Observability. It may arise that no history will be consistent with a programmed behaviour. For ex-
ample,theprogram{Obs∶∶g,g⊙→g}isnotobservableinatrace. Indeed,itsinterpretationyieldstothe
following formula: A((@ g)∧(g→((⟨⟩−¬g)∧¬g))), false in all models because world Obs must
both satisfies g and ¬g by definition of the persistent dependence. A GUBS program is said observable
ifandonlyiftheformularesultingfromitsinterpretationisvalidatedbyonemodelatleast. Hence,the
interpretationofanunobservableprogramisanantilogy. Anunobservableprogramcanbeassimilatedto
aprogrammingerror. Thedetectionofsucherrorscanbecarriedoutatcompile-phasebyusingtableaux
method[9]thatautomaticallydetermineswhetheraformulaissatisfiableinamodel. Indeed GUBS uses
fragment of HL(@) logic which is decidable. Notice that an observable program always behaviourally
includesanobservableprogram(Proposition1).
3Areflexiveandtransitiverelation.
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 37
g 9◯→g 11 , [k 4]{g 3◯→g 5}, g 2 k 6 k 7
a∶∶g 4} [k 5]{g 6◯→g 7}, 3 9 10
[k 7]{g 8◯→g 10}, k 3 k 4
g 10◯→g 11 , a: g 4 b: g 5 c: g 11
a∶∶g 4 ,b∶∶g 5 ,c∶g 11}
Figure2: Behavioralinclusionexample. ConsistenthistoriesofPnecessarycontainsworldscolouredin
gray.
Proposition 1. A program behaviourally included in an observable program is observable: ∀P,Q∈P∶
obsQ∧P^Q (cid:212)⇒ obsP.
3.1 Functionalsynthesis
The functional synthesis is the operation whereby biological components of a library are selected and
assembled to generate a device behaviourally including the designed function. The behaviour of each
componentisdescribedbyaGUBSprogram. Atitssimplest,thefunctionalsynthesiscouldbeconsidered
asapropersubstitutionofvariablesbyconstants. Forexample,inthefollowingactivation{G —→g },
g will be substituted by gene G , providing that component Q describes the activation {G —→G }.
However,morecomplexsituationsmayariseduringcomponentselection. Forexample,iftheactivation
G —→G occurswithanotherregulationonlyi.e.,Q={G —→G ,G —→G }thentheselectionofQ
1 2 1 2 3 4
addsasupplementaryregulation.
Formally,afinitesubstitutionisasetofmappings,σ ={v/b},onvariablesandconstantssuchthat
a variable can be substituted by a variable or a constant, and a constant can only substituted by itself4.
For instance, we have: {Obs::G(l)+b ,b ◯→G(l)}[{b ↦B ,b ↦B ,l↦Low}]={Obs::G(Low)+
2 1 1 1 2 2
Functionalsynthesisrules. Thefunctionalsynthesisisdefinedbyrules(Table3)governingthecom-
ponentassembly. Onlythedependencesandtheattributeswillbefunctionallysynthesize. Theobserva-
tionspotsareconsideredasannotationsusedforthecompilationprocess. Toinsurethecorrectness,each
transform must preserved the seminal behaviour. Hence, each program resulting from the application
of a rule must behaviourally includes the previous one. Formally, the functional synthesis is modelled
by a relation on programs denoted by (cid:130), i.e., Q(cid:130) P where P is the initial program and Q the trans-
formed one, such that each rule insures that: Q(cid:130) P is correct with regards to a substitution σ, that
is P[σ]^Q[σ] and Q[σ] is observable. Also notice that the behavioural inclusion is preserved by
substitution(Proposition2).
Proposition2. Forallsubstitutionsσ,wehave: P^Q (cid:212)⇒ P[σ]^Q[σ].
4Pσ orP[σ]representsitsapplicationonprogramPandidentitysubstitutionsareomitted.
38 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
Table 3 describes the functional synthesis rules5. Γ is a set of components representing the library.
P⊆ Q denotes the fact that program Q corresponds to an assembly including P i.e., Q=(Q ,P,Q )
whereQ orQ maybeanemptyprogram. Rule(Inst.) describesthefactthatanobservableinstanceofa
-INSTANTIATION-
Q(cid:130)σ P
-COMMUTATIVITY,CONTRACTION-
Q(cid:130)σ P,P′ Q(cid:130)σ P
(Com.) (Cont.)
Q(cid:130)σ P′,P Q(cid:130)σ P,P
-ASSEMBLY-
Table3: Functionalsynthesisrules
partofacomponentinthelibraryisfunctionallysynthesized. Rule(Com.) expressesthecommutativity
of the assembly. Rule (Cont.) contracts the redundant formulation of programs. Finally, Rule (Asm.)
detailstheconditions foranassemblyoftwo components, eachrepresentingafunctional synthesisofa
partofthedesignedfunction. AdetailedexampleoftheiruseonarealcaseisgiveninSection4.
Theorem1. Thefunctionalsynthesisrules(Table3)arecorrect.
-DEPENDENCES-
Q(cid:130)σ S 1⊙→S
Q(cid:130)σ S 1⊙→S
Q(cid:130)σ S 1◯→S
Q(cid:130)σ S 1⊙→S
,∆ Q(cid:130)σ S 1◯→S
,∆ Q(cid:130)σ S 1⊕→S
-AGENTSTATES-
S 1+S 2 (SCom.) S+s (SCont.) S+s (Incl.)
Table4: Rulesforthe dependences andtheagentstates. S standsforacollection, s +...+s , ofagent
states,includingnegation,and∆standsfortherestoftheprogram.
Another set of rules, more specifically devoted to dependences (Table 4), defines the alternate pos-
sibilities to express similar behaviours. The table also includes the rules for agent sets. Rule (Trans.)
expandsthechainofthepersistentdependencesbyaddingintermediarydependencetorefineapathway.
Rule(N2P.)transformsanormaldependencetoapersistentonesincethelatterisanormaldependence
with an additional property. And Rule (R2N.) transforms a remanent dependence to a normal depen-
dence, since normal dependence is also remanent dependence with a repetition of the effect restricted
to one step. According to these rules, all the dependence chains can be implemented with persistent
dependences.
A possible algorithm for the assembly could be based on a combinatorial application of the rules.
However, suchalgorithmmayrevealinefficientinpractice. Theconditionsforanefficientalgorithmof
compilation should be based on an internal representation of a program, as a set of contextualized de-
pendenceswithattributes,{{A,[K]S ⍟→S }},suchthatA,K,S ,S arerespectively: asetofattributes
hypothesis
5Rulesareoftheform: .
conclusion
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 39
specification related to the agent involved in the dependency, a set of contexts and sets of agent states.
Any program can be encoded under this representation from a normal form of the program (not de-
tailed here). Accordingly, the problem solved by the compilation algorithm can be defined as follows
(Definition3):
Definition3(FunctionalSynthesisProblem). LetΓ={Q} besetwhereeachQ isasetofcontex-
tualized dependences with attributes and P a set of contextualized dependences with attribute, can we
find the smallest observable subset of componentsC⊆Γ, such that there exists a substitution σ so that
itsapplicationonthecomponentsofCformacoverofP[σ],i.e.,∃σ ∶P[σ]⊆⋃ Q [σ]∧obsC.
As the set cover problem is reducible to this problem, the problem is NP-complete. Then, the reso-
lutionisorientedtowardsaheuristicalgorithm.
Tetr LuxR + + LuxR LaclM1 GFP
Figure3: Thebanddetectorregulatorycircuit.
The compilation process is here exemplified in a real case by the design of the Band Detector pro-
posedin[2]. Thisexampleexplainshowfromasimpleabstractdefinitionofthefunctionalityacomplex
designcanbesynthesized. Accordingly, GUBS maybeusedtodescribeabehaviourwithahigh-levelof
programmingwellasalow-level,detailingthecomponentsinvolvedintheprocess. Although,thefunc-
tionalsynthesisisnotyetperformedautomatically,itisworthtopointoutthatthedifferenttransformsof
thehigh-levelprogramtoobtainthefinaldesigncompliestorulesofTables3,4,insuringitscorrectness
andso,itsfunctionalsafetyinthecontextofopensystem.
The design aims at forming patterns of different colours in a population of bacteria exploiting the
quorum sensing phenomenon by staining with fluorescent protein (GFP). The amount of molecules of
interest that receives a cell depends on its relative position to the cell diffusing the molecule of interest
controlledbyanexternalevent: morethecellisfarfromthesource,thefeweristheamountofmolecules
received. Theactivationorinhibitionofthefluorescentproteinduetotheconcentrationwilldistinguish
thebandssurroundingthesource. Intheoriginaldesign,theproteindoesnotfluoresceinanintermediary
band.
From a computing standpoint, we can assimilate the design to a message transmission coupled to a
sensor/actuator responsible for fluorescence, then leading to a concise GUBS program presented below:
thediffusivemoleculeisAHLwhichproductioniscontrolledbyacontextandtheobservationisapplied
onGFP.Twocategoriesofcellsaredefined: theSenderandtheReceiver. Therefore,twoGUBSprograms
identifythetwocelltypes.
Sender ={ AHL:{low≉mid≉high},[Light]{detect◯→AHL(low),detect◯→AHL(mid),detect◯→AHL(high)}}
Receiver={ AHL(low)◯→GFP,AHL(mid)◯→GFP,AHL(high)◯→GFP,obs 1::GFP,obs 2::GFP}
40 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
Figure 3 describes the original genetic circuit used in the article. The diffusible molecule is the
constant AHL. The gene LuxR has three activation thresholds: at Level 2, it activates both LaclM1 and
Cl,atlevel1,theamountofAHLonlyallowsactivationofCl,andfinally,atlevel0,noneareactivated.
We show that from the sender-receiver program, we obtain the original design by applying the afore
Q 3={AHL:{low≉mid≉high},Luxl—→AHL(low),Luxl—→AHL(mid),Luxl—→AHL(high)}
Q 4={AHL:{low≉mid≉high},LuxR:{low≉{mid≺high}},AHL(mid)◯→LuxR(mid),AHL(high)◯→LuxR(high)}
Q 5={LuxR:{low≉{mid≺high}},LuxR(mid)—→Cl,LuxR(high)—→Cl+LaclM1}
Q 7={LaclM1—→GFP}
Table5: PartofthedatabasededicatedtotheBandDetector.
mentionedruleswithanappropriateselectionofcomponents. TheregulationsofFigure3aredescribed
in GUBS program (Table 5) translating in term of dependences and relations on their attributes their
regulatory action. We focus here on some illustrative steps of the sender program compilation. The
completefunctionalsynthesisisgiveninAppendix. Thecompilationconsistsinfindingtheappropriate
components whose assembly behaviourally includes the sender-receiver program, with the particularity
thatthediffusivemoleculemustbethesameinbothprograms. Toeasecompilationfollow-up,welabel
each dependency of the sender-receiver program (Table 6). Let us consider P whose compilation is
closedtoP andP . NoticethatP cannotbedirectlyinstantiatedwithanycomponentbecause,inthe
onehand,thecomponentQ containsacontextlikeP butappliedongeneTetrinsteadofAHL,andon
theotherhandQ hastheAHLmoleculebutnocontextisdefined. So,tofitP withthecomponentsQ ,
Q andQ ,first,thenormaldependenceisconvertedtopersistentone(Rule(N2P.)).
Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σ {[light]{detect⊙→AHL(low)}}
(cid:130) σP
Thereby, the resulting dependence can be separated to match the assembly Q ,Q ,Q by applying
(Trans.) ruletwice. v andv arefreshvariables.
(cid:130) σP
Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σ [light]{detect⊙→v 1 ,v 1 ⊙→AHL(low)}
Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σ [light]{detect⊙→AHL(low)}
Finally, we obtain a new program program P′ compatible with Q ,Q ,Q , and each variable is substi-
tutedbyaconstant(biologicalelement)withtheapplicationofRule(Inst.). ForP′ wehave:
[σ={light/Light,v
Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σ [light]{detect⊙→v 1 ,v 1 ⊙→v 2 ,v 2 ⊙→AHL(low)}
ByfollowingthisschemeforP andP ,werespectivelyobtainP′ andP′ . Thefinalassemblycorre-
12 13 12 13
spondstothefunctionalsynthesisofSenderprogram.
Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σP 1 ′ 1 Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σP 1 ′ 2 Q 1 ,Q 2 ,Q 3 (cid:130) σP 1 ′ 3
(cid:130) σP
A.Basso-BlandinandF.Delaplace 41
Sender Receiver
with{AHL:{low≉mid≉high}}asattributesofAHL.
Table6: Separationofthedependences.
In conclusion, the functional synthesis generates the original genetic circuit (Figure 3) from the sender
program. Asimilarapproachcanbealsoappliedtoobtainthereceiverprogram(seethecompleteproof
inAppendix6).
Sender = {AHL:{low≉mid≉high},[Light]{detect◯→Tetr},
Tetr—→Luxl,Luxl—→AHL(low),Luxl—→AHL(mid),Luxl—→AHL(high)}
5 Related works
Several domain specific languages have been developped to model and simulate biological systems.
Based on process-calculus, seminally used to model process concurrency, several rule-based languages
model protein interactions [21, 13, 10]. Another approach is based on logic, such as BIOCHAM [8] that
formalizesthetemporalpropertiesofabiologicalsystem. Astheselanguagesarededicatedtosimulation,
the objective is to close the systems because the simulations need to integrate all the characteristics of
the analysed systems. By comparison, the purpose of GUBS is different since the issue is to represent
the behaviour of a synthetic device in an organism, leading to translate the notion of the openness of
biologicalsystemsbythesemanticsofthelanguage.
In synthetic biology, the structural description languages [12, 20, 4] allow to specify well-formed
genome sequences by grammars modularly and hierarchically. Although the sequence description is
necessary,theprogrammermustpreviouslyanticipatethebehaviourofthedevicetoconceive. Besides,
thebehaviouraldesignisnotincludedintheprogramwhileitinitiallymotivatesit. In GUBS,thedesign
is driven by a behaviour description and sequence selection is postponed at compile phase. Moreover,
thesizeofthestructuraldescriptionisalsosubjecttoacombinatorialexplosionwhenthecomplexityof
programmedsystemsincreases.
Amorphousprogramminglanguagehasbeenalsoinvestigatedtospecifythebiologicaldevicesatthe
scaleofcellcolony,hereconsideredasapossiblecomputingmediumforamorphousprogram. J.Beal[3]
demonstrates the proof of concept of this approach in PROTO, showing the feasibility of an automatic
compile chain. In GUBS, the compile chain is based on rewriting rules whose correctness have been
formallyprovedwithregardstoasemanticsdescribingtheconstraintsofanopensystem.
Developing a language for biological systems actually involves to consider several unknown due to
their openness: lack of knowledge on all the interactions in biological circuits and imprecise definition
of initial conditions. We only know the result of a chain of effects. Then, the major constraint for
programmingopensystemseemstobe: howtoprovideanexpressivelanguagetodescribethedynamics
ofsuchsystems,butsimpleenoughtocapturetheessenceofthebiologicalquestionsinasmallprogram
inordertoallowprogrammingoflargebiologicalsystemswithaprogramhumanlyachievable.
In the future, the design in synthetic biology will certainly require different programming layouts
based on different paradigms addressing the integration levels of biological systems. In a tower of lan-
guages,startingfromalanguagewithcollectiveoperationsoncellcolony,usinganamorphousprogram-
42 GUBS,aBehavioralLanguageforSyntheticBiology
minglanguageasProto[3]oralanguagefordynamicalsystemswithdynamicalstructuresasMGS[15],
andendingbyastructuraldescriptionprogrammedinagrammarbasedlanguage, GUBSlanguageoccu-
piestheintermediaryleveldedicatedtocellentitybehaviouralprogramming.
6 Conclusion
InGUBSlanguage,weproposetocharacterizeaprogrammingparadigmabstractingthemolecularinter-
actionsinthecontextofopensystem, thatdifferstoanapproachdedicatedtobiologicalsystemmodel-
ing. Accordingly, the interactions aresymbolized bycausal dependenceswhose interpretationis driven
by effect. We have demonstrated the proof-of-concept of the compilation based on rewriting rules, and
illustrated it on a realistic example. The perspective of this work is to find an efficient compilation al-
gorithm. Identifyingthebiologicalparametersguidingthecomponentselectionshouldbeakeyissuein
thisundertaking.
Acknowledgements. ThefundingformostofthisworkisgrantedbytheANRSYNBIOTIC(ANRBLAN
030701)andwewouldliketothankthecolleaguesofthisprojectfortheirfruitfuldiscussions.