Heterogeneous Enterprises in a Macroeconomic Agent-Based
Cornelia Metzig† and Mirta B. Gordon†,∗
†Universit´e Joseph Fourier Grenoble 1 / ∗CNRS
Laboratoire LIG
cornelia.metzig@imag.fr, mirta.gordon@imag.fr
Wepresentamacroeconomicagent-basedmodelthatcombinesseveralmechanismsoperat-
ingatthesametimescale,whileremainingmathematicallytractable. Itcomprisesenterprises
and workers who compete in a job market and a commodity goods market. The model is
stock-flowconsistent;abanklendsmoneycharginginterestrates,andkeepstrackofequities.
Important features of the model are heterogeneity of enterprises, existence of bankruptcies
andcreationofnewenterprises,aswellasproductivityincrease. Themodel’sevolutionrepro-
duces empirically found regularities for firm size and growth rate distributions. It combines
probabilistic elements and deterministic dynamics, with relative weights that may be modi-
fied according to the considered problem or the belief of the modeler. We discuss statistical
regularities on enterprises, the origin and the amplitude of endogeneous fluctuations of the
system’s steady state, as well as the role of the interest rate and the credit volume. We also
summarize obtained results which are not discussed in detail in this paper.
1 Introduction
Macroeconomic agent-based models are a relatively young strand of research [9], [7], [3], [8]. They
allow to propose microscopic underlying mechanisms that lead to empirically observed statistical
regularities of a macroeconomy, which models starting directly on the aggregate level cannot pro-
vide. They avoid the so-called “fallacy of composition“, since they allow to study interactions.
Macroeconomic agent-based models are often conserving the flow of funds, i.e. they can serve as
a tool to study the role of debt levels, interest flows, or availability of credit on economic activity.
The most important implication of this stock-flow consistency is that the financial condition of
agents plays a central role determining their actions. In that sense, stock-flow consistent models
provideanalternativetoefficientmarketsasaguidingprincipleofaneconomicmodel, where“the
impactoftheflowoffundsandthestocksofcreditanddebtarefullyreflectedinreturnsandrisks
at the individual level”[2]. If, in contrast, agents base their decisions only on their balance sheet,
and do not know the financial condition of others, systemic risk can be present.
Stock-flow consistent models use as main principle the conservation of money. They can be
agent-based, such as [3],[7] and this model, or analytical. Several analytical stock-flow consistent
models describe the money flows between sectors [6], [4]. They exhibit steady state scenarios
where the money flows to and from each sector add to zero. This implies that, if the model is
discrete in time, in one iteration every actor needs to re-inject in the system the money he has
received, be it wages, profits or interest payments. If this does not happen, economic activity will
eventually cease. Regarding enterprises, this phenomenon has become known as the ‘paradox of
]NG.nif-q[
1v5755.1121:viXra
monetary profits’ [1], originally formulated by Marx, stating that enterprises can at most earn
what they have paid in wages. To circumvent this, other models introduce as money flows interest
payments of enterprises to the bank, which is a joint stock company and distributes a dividend
[3], consumption of the bank [6], or dividends of enterprises who are joint-stock companies [7].
The stock-flow consistent model proposed here avoids the paradox of monetary profits because
enterprises spend a part of their gross profits to pay interests on debts to the bank, and the rest
in the goods market. The bank who is the recipient of the interest payments will bear losses from
loans that are not reimbursed whenever an enterprise goes bankrupt. As the simulations show,
in the latter case, money flows do not equal within one iteration, since the accumulation of debts
goes over many iterations. On the long term, each sector will re-inject what he has received, but
this steady state exhibits fluctuations whose strength depends on the parameters of the system.
Amajordifferencetoanalyticalstock-flowconsistentmodelsisthatagent-basedmacroeconomic
models allow for the description of competition all markets. [9] and [3] use a price mechanism in
the goods market, the job market and the credit market. In the model proposed in this paper,
competition of enterprises does not happen via prices but due to limited quantities. Enterprises
compete for the available amount of workers in the job market, and for aggregate demand in the
goods market respectively. These market allocations introduce a stochastic term in the dynamics
of the system. In order to be able describe the arising stochastic model theoretically, it needs to
be simpler than the scenario presented in this paper.
Inhispaperonthehistoryofgrowthmodels,J.Suttonrevealedtwoaspectslimitingtheuseof
such simple models [11]: In the past many purely stochastic models had been presented, which do
not attribute any importance to the purposeful behaviour of agents. This has been seen as a flaw
by many economists, who turned towards game-theoretic approaches. Secondly, it can be difficult
to interpret models with very general assumptions. This paper takes a different approach: it
combinesthewell-understoodstochasticmodelwitheconomicallyrelevantfeaturessuchasmargin
heterogeneity of enterprises, credit constraints, exit of enterprises through bankruptcy, creation of
newenterprises,andproductivityincrease. Thesefeaturesareinfactcomplementaryandcounter-
acting mechanisms, implying that a steady state of the system can be found in which the system
exhibitsstatisticalregularities. Alongwiththeintroductionofthesefeaturescomesthedifficulty–
omnipresent in macroeconomic agent-based models – to weight the dominance of the mechanisms
viathechoiceoftheparameters. Notonlydifferentempiricaldatasets,butalsodifferentviewpoints
might lead to different choices.
Themodelstudiesthecoexistenceoftwomechanisms: ontheonehand,amechanismintroduc-
ing a random growth term due to the competition for limited quantities, which on its own yields
anexplanationforsizedistributionandgrowthratedistribution. Ontheotherhand,amechanism
comprisinggrowthviathecreationofnewmoreprofitableenterprises,aswellasinterestpayments
and bankruptcies. We analyze parameter dependencies of the behaviour both on firm level and
on aggregate level. The results of the model are consistent with a number of empirical studies,
but validity of this model could be verified with a multivariate database on firms, and possibly
extended.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we introduce the model. In section 3 we show
and discuss numerical results, in section 4 we compare the obtained to existing empirical studies.
Finally, in section 5, we conclude and point at possible extensions and applications.
2 The model
Wepresentherethemainelementsofthemodel,whoseworkingswillbeintroducedsuccessivelyin
the following sections. We consider three kinds of agents, namely enterprises, workers and a bank.
Each enterprise is characterized by its margin µ . They all produce the same type of good that is
put in the market at the same price, p. This commodity good is an abstraction of purchases in
the real sector. It is a useful concept to ensure that via limited aggregate demand all enterprises
are in competition, since the decisions of enterprises are governed by their profits. Enterprises
compete only in two quantities, for sales (i.e. the aggregate demand) and for workforce. The
number of hired workers, that depends on the enterprise profits and workforce availability, allows
us to characterize the enterprise size. All workers receive the same wage w per period when hired,
whileunemployedworkersdonotgetanything. Enterprisesandworkersspendtheirearningsinthe
goodsmarket. The bankmay lendmoney to the enterprises, mainly topay wages, and determines
the corresponding interest rate. Enterprises with large liabilities may go bankrupt, and a constant
flow of young enterprises more or less compensates for these disappearances.
2.1 Main elements
More precisely the system is composed of N enterprises (whose number may fluctuate along the
iterations, according to the corresponding setting), N workers and the bank:
enterprises i (1 ≤ i ≤ N ) are characterized by an expected gross margin µ ≡ (expected sales
- wage expenses)/expected sales, that we call just margin hereafter. They produce q non-
durable goods per period, that are put on the market at a price p. The margin writes as
follows:
wheren isthenumberofhiredworkers. Inthispaperwedonotallowenterprisesmodifytheir
margins: µ are intrinsic parameters drawn at random with a uniform probability density in
therange[µ ≤µ ≤µ ]with0<µ <µ <1. Noticethattheseexpectedgrossmargins
are distinct from the net margin actually earned by enterprises, detailed in equation (20),
which may be negative. The margin (1) reflects the productivity and the technological level
of the enterprise: the higher the margin, the lower the production cost per unit or the lower
the number of workers needed to produce a given quantity.
workers j (1 ≤ j ≤ N ) may be employed or unemployed. When employed they earn a wage
w per period. Workers do not save, unless they cannot satisfy their demand for goods: like
Godley and Lavoie [4] in their ‘simplest model’, and M. Kalecki [5] in his profit equation,
we assume that workers try to spend all their earnings in the consumption market.
the bank lendsmoneytoenterprisesataconstantinterestrater,andkeepstrackoftheirequities,
which cannot be less than alowerbound u ≤0 thatdepends on the enterprises’wage bills:
whereγ issomepositiveconstant. Enterprisesthatdonotsatisfythisconstraintaredeclared
bankrupt.
2.2 Dynamics
The dynamics of the model, visualized in figure 1, is detailed below. We use upper case letters
for aggregate quantities, lower case letters for individual quantities, both for firms i or workers j.
Quantities with a hat (qˆ, nˆ ) are initially planned quantities intended by firms before checking
constraints.
at each time step t:
enterprises
1 production decision
hiring decision 2 job market
ay interest
workers available workers jo b
4 production
salaries w
5a consumption
5b consumption decision
d e m 6 goods market m a n
aggregate demand
o n s aggregate supply a ila b
leftovers g
7a calculate profit consumption 6aconsumption
7b repay loan
bankruptcy
8b start new
enterprises
Figure 1: Scheme of the model. The arrows denote interactions, dotted lines denote money flows.
The numeration corresponds to the numeration in the description.
1. production decision of enterprises: enterprises calculate their expected production vol-
ume qˆ according to their previous iteration sales qs and net profits πn (from which
i,t i,t−1 i,t−1
interestpaymentsarealreadysubtracted,seeequation(18)). Ifprofitsarepositive(negative)
they plan to produce more (less) goods proportionally to their net profit ratio per sold unit:
(cid:32) (cid:33)
qˆ =qs 1+ i,t−1 . (3)
i,t i,t−1 pqs
The number of workers necessary to produce the qˆ goods is determined by the intrinsic
margin defined in equation (1)
i,t i,t i w
2. job market: the aggregate job offers of enterprises
may exceed or fall behind the available number of workers N . In our simple job market,
workers do not stay at their employer. They are placed anew at each iteration through a
processwherejoboffersanddemandsarematchedatrandom. IfNˆ ≤N everyworkerhas
the same chance of being hired by some firm, but N −Nˆ workers are left unemployed ; if
Nˆ >N ,eachjobopeninghasthesameprobabilityofbeingfilled,thereisfullemployment
and Nˆ −N positions remain vacant. Depending on availability each firm i will hire a
number of workers
i,t i,t w,t w
(cid:104)n (cid:105)=nˆ w if Nˆ >N . (7)
i,t i,t Nˆ w,t w
Itisusefultodefineaneffective µofthesystem,whichistheaverageµatwhichtheworkers
are hired:
1 (cid:88)
eff,t N i,t i
Its time evolution will allow us to characterize the dynamics of the system.
3. credit market: once the number of hired workers n is known, each enterprise calculates
whether its owned equities e are sufficient to pay the corresponding wages. If necessary,
it takes out a loan of amount l from the bank. The latter determines the interest rate r,
whichinthefollowingisassumedtobetimeindependentandthesameforalltheenterprises.
The borrowed amount takes into account the interests to be included upon repayment of the
debt:
i,t i,t i,t
4. production: the amount of goods q actually produced by the n workers hired by firm i
(and put in the market) is given by equation:
q = i,t , (10)
so firms with a higher µ produce more goods per worker. The aggregate output Q is
Q = q . (11)
5. consumption decision: workers j intend to spend their wages, which allow them to buy a
quantity given by:
w if employed
d = p (12)
0 otherwise
Firms i intend to spend their expected profits:
d = i,t (13)
The bank does not act as a consumer (as is done e.g. in [6]), it can merely lose money when
enterprises go bankrupt, which compensates for its interest revenues. Thus, the aggregate
demand is:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
D = d + d . (14)
6. commodity goods market: in the case of excess production, the overall offer (11) exceeds
aggregate demand (14), i.e. Q > D . We assume that each commodity good has the same
chanceofbeingsold. Thisisthesituationmainlyconsideredinthepresentpaper. IfD >Q ,
alltheproductionissoldleavingsomedemandsunsatisfied. Eachdemand–whethercoming
from enterprises or workers – has the same chance of being fulfilled and the agents (workers
or enterprises) may save and eventually spend their savings in the next iteration. (However,
in the simulations presented in this paper holds Q >D ). Notice that Q and D need not
beknowntotheenterprisesorworkers;theyexperienceiftheirofferanddemandaresatisfied
by a matching algorithm. Sales of enterprise i are
qs =q if Q <D (15)
i,t i,t t t
(cid:10) qs (cid:11) =q D t if Q >D , (16)
i,t i,t Q t t
In the second case where enterprises face a random constraint due to limited aggregate
demand, unsold goods are lost. In that case the realized gross margin (see eq. (17) may
be lower than the intrinsic margin µ , and even be negative, as is the case in the examples
shown in this paper in figure 3. (Sales in monetary units are pqs .)
7. enterprises balance sheet accounting: firms must pay interests on the whole amount of
their loans, i.e. current lending and accumulated old debts. If they have enough assets, they
repay the loans at the end of the iteration; if the liabilities exceed the assets, they start the
next iteration with a negative net equity.
In order to prepare the production decision of the next period, firms calculate their gross
and net realized profit πg and πn (which are identical if r=0), defined respectively by
πg =qs p−n w, (17)
i,t i,t i,t
πn =qs p−n w−l r. (18)
i,t i,t i,t i,t
Notice that the normalized gross profit πg /(qs p) is not necessarily identical to the margin
µ , which is only reached if all the produced goods are sold. The gross and net realized
margins of an enterprise
i,t i,t i,t
i,t i,t i,t
are ≤µ and can both take negative values.
8. bankruptcy and new enterprises: enterprises whose equities after repayment of loans
(as far as repayment is possible) fall below the threshold defined by eq. (2) are declared
bankrupt,andareremovedfromthesystem. Their(negative)equitiesarelossestothebank.
In order to avoid a decline in the number of enterprises due to bankruptcies, we introduce a
smallnumberofnewenterprisesateachiteration. Noticethatthisdiffersfromtheapproach
by Bruun [7] and DelliGatti et al. [9], who both replace systematically each bankrupt enter-
prise by a new one, keeping thus the total number of enterprises constant. In our model new
enterprises are started at a constant rate ν per iteration, with an initial number of workers
(n ) drawn at random between 1 and 3, and a margin µ drawn at random within the
same range of margins as the initial enterprises. With this procedure the total number of
enterprises fluctuates upon time.
In order to endow new enterprises with the possibility to grow faster than existing enter-
prises and thus slowly displace them, the margin of existing enterprises is recentered at each
iteration before new firms are started, such that the new enterprises enter a system with the
same µ throughout the simulation:
i,t i,t−1 eff,t eff,t−1
µ has a tendency to grow, since according to equation 4 workers tend to move towards
enterprises with a higher margin. The recentering is thus a subtraction and its effect is
that the µ of existing enterprises slowly decline, like an ageing effect; new enterprises may
grow fast because they may have larger margins than the older ones. This recentering is
important for the dynamics of the system: without it, new enterprises would need to start
with a higher and higher margin in order to be able to influence the dynamics of the system
and displace old enterprises. Then, µ would continue to rise, which is undesired, since
µ should remain in a (more or less) constant relation to the interest rate, such that the
interest payments represent the same burden for enterprises throughout the simulation.
2.3 The role of heterogeneity and financial constraints in the model
Heterogeneityofµ impliesthatduetoequation(4)enterpriseswithahigherµ willoffermoreposts
and therefore grow faster than enterprises with low µ . On its own, this dynamics would at first
formapowerlawforenterprisesizes,butonthelongtermconvergetoamonopolyoftheenterprise
with the highest margin. Therefore, µ-heterogeneity needs a counterbalance, constisting in this
model of the renormalization of the margin, interest payments, bankruptcies and the creation of
new enterprises. These mechanisms allow to describe statistical regularities rather than monopoly
formation.
Inthissectionwediscussresultsofsimulationscorrespondingtodifferentsetsofparametersofthe
model:
− [µ ,µ ], the range of expected margins,
− r, the interest rate,
− γ, the bankruptcy threshold,
− ν, the number of new enterprises entering per iteration.
In all presented settings enterprises compete for demand, whenever unemployment drops to zero,
theycompeteinadditionforworkforce(whichisnotalwaysthecase). Thewagesarefixedw =30p
in units of the price of the goods, that are the monetary unit in our simulations. Given N , a
number of initially active enterprises N is chosen, and their margins µ are drawn at random
within a given interval [µ ,µ ]. The number of their employees is chosen respecting some level
of initial unemployment, and the desired initial size distribution. The sum of money in the system
is zero. Enterprises start with e ≈ 0 (except a small random value for debts such that the
bankruptcies of initial enterprises do not occur in a very small timespan). This initialisation does
impactthetrajectoryofthesystem,butfortheanalysisthetimelongafterthestartisinteresting,
where the system found its steady state and is dominated by the choice of [µ ,µ ], r, γ and ν.
3.1 Steady states and parameter dependence
Figure 2 presents results corresponding to a typical time evolution of the system. Even after 2000
iterations there are fluctuations due to the randomness in the system. Job losses do not occur at
a constant rate but fluctuate around a certain rate (here 1% of the existing jobs in one iteration.
In subfigure (c) of figure 2 job losses are averaged over 50 iterations in order to see slower trends,
the actual fluctuations are larger).
The system eventually reaches a steady state, characterized by a number of active enterprises
and a level of unemployment, which depends on the interest rate r of the system, the bankruptcy
thresholdγ,thenumberν ofenteringenterprisesperiterationandtherannge[µ ,µ ]. Thehigher
the interest rate, the faster the bankruptcy threshold is reached by indebted enterprises, and the
higher needs to be the number of new entries per iteration in order to maintain the same level of
employment. The steady state is noisy since the dynamics has two stochastic elements, but for a
given setof parametersthe systemconvergesto sucha statefor any initial level ofunemployment,
any initial size distribution of enterprises, and (almost) any number of initially active enterprises.
Thesystemfluctuatesinthesteadystateforthefollowingtworeasons: firstly,sinceenterprises
spend a part of their profits for interest payments, they cannot spend all their gross profit in the
goods market. Thus, their contribution to the aggregate demand falls short of the one required to
absorb the offer. As a result enterprises are not able to sell their entire production. The profits of
enterprises fluctuate due to the random allocations of demand to every offered good, and so does
their production decision in the next iteration. Notice that in the case of full employment, the
same random allocation holds additionally for the allocation of workers in the job market. The
second reason for fluctuations is due to the random initialization of new enterprises’ margins µ :
depending on its value they grow, decline and incur debts at different speeds, so the job losses due
to bankruptcies fluctuate over time. The system evolution keeps memory of the past trajectory
through the debt distribution among enterprises. Large job losses due to bankruptcies occur in
waves,causinglowerdemandandthereforeonaveragelowernetrealizedprofitsforfirms. Thisalso
impacts the chances and speed of growth of a new enterprise endowed with a higher net margin.
Fluctuations are discussed more in detail in section 3.3.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
tnemyolpmenu
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
number of iterations
sesirpretne
Number of Iterations
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Number of Iterations
Figure 2: N = 10000, bankruptcy threshold γ = 2, interest rate r=0.011, new enterprises
per iteration ν = 8, [µ ,µ ] = [0,0.1]. Time evolution of (a) unemployment, (b) number of
active enterprises, (c) job losses due to firm bankruptcies (first 1000 iterations, averaged over 50
iterations).
3.2 Lifetime of enterprises
The lifetime of enterprises is limited by the centering of margins (which always decreases the
margins of existing firms) and by the interest payments, which both may lead to bankruptcies.
Figure(3)illustratesthetimeevolutionoftwoparticularenterprisesofonesimulatedsystem. The
left hand side figures (a) and (c) correspond to an enterprise with large initial µ : µ = 0.078.
Created at iteration t = 490, with n = 1, it grows during about 100 iterations (figure a) before
starting to decline. It goes bankrupt after 134 periods. The bottom figure shows the evolution of
its margins: centered expected gross margin µ , actual gross margin (19) and actual net margin
(20). All the three margins decrease over time, but the net margin decreases faster, reflecting the
interest burden due to interests owed for cumulated loans, which the firm has to pay, up to its
eventualbankruptcy. Thefluctuationsinthegrossandnetrealizedmarginsreflecttherandomness
in the goods market. For a given bankruptcy threshold γ, the higher the interest rate, the shorter
the typical lifetime of enterprises. This has implications on the size and growth rate distribution,
which we trace at every iteration.
480 500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640
520 530 540 550 560 570 580 590 600 610
Age of enterprise i [Iterations]
Age of enterprise i [Iterations]
480 500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640
expected µ
net µ 0.04
520 530 540 550 560 570 580 590 600 610
Age of enterprise [iterations]
expected µ
Age of enterprise [iterations]
Figure 3: Two examples of enterprises. Their sizes (upper line) and their margin and net margin (lower
line) are plotted over their lifetime. Both arise from the same simulation with the same parameters as in
figure2(interestrater=0.075,ν =8,450activeenterprises,100000workers,uniformmargindistribution
between 0 and 0.1, bankruptcy threshold γ= 2). The enterprise shown in figures (a) and (c) starts with a
higher µ and grows much bigger, and exits for more iterations than the one shown in (b) and (d).
Size distribution of enterprises. Even though every single enterprise size varies over time as
the typical cases shown in figure 3, the size distribution of enterprises forms a fat tail distribution
that can be approximated by a power law which remains stable (unlike the case without new
enterprisesandbankruptcieswherethesteadystateisamonopoly). Thestochasticprocessleading
to this is a superposition of two effects: a stochastic process due to competition for demand (on
itsowndescribedin[15]), andthedynamicsthateachenterprisegrows(andlatershrinks)overits
lifetime. Depending on r and the number of new enterprises per iteration, the numerically found
exponentoftheapproximatepowerlawvariesbetween0.8and2. Thehighertheinterestrateand
the number of entries per iteration, the shorter the average lifetime of an enterprise. Only for low
interest rates, this ‘turnover’ is slow enough that certain enterprises have enough time to reach
large sizes, before their renormalized margin makes them less competitive compared to younger
enterprises. Forhighinterestratesthedistributionissteeper,i.e. thepowerlawexponentislarger.
An example with a relatively low interest rate is given in figure 4.
Growth rate distribution of enterprises. Forasimplerscenariowithoutmarginheterogene-
ity,themodelprovidesanexplanationforthestylizedfactofatent-shapedgrowthratedistribution,
both analytically and in simulations [15]. The necessary ingredient is that enterprises are in com-
petitionforalimitedquantity(workforceoraggregatedemand). Bigenterprisesaddtothepeakof
thetent-shapedgrowthratedistribution,andthesmallcontributemoretothetails. Inthesetting
of this paper, the growth rate of an enterprise depends (in addition to the randomly attributed
limited sales opportunities) on its expected gross margin via equation (3). Margin heterogeneity
on its own can distort the tent-shaped growth rate distribution. If however the combination of (i)
interest payments, (ii) entry and exit of enterprises, and (iii) recentering of the margin produces a
situation where the big enterprises have a realized net margin that is in the middle of the distri-
bution, we find a tent-shape growth rate distribution. To that aim it is necessary that the growth
dynamics produces a correlation between the average growth rate and size of an enterprise. The
elements (i) – (iii) provide this, as is illustrated in figure 4. The correlation is the following: the
big enterprises cumulate in the middle of the distribution of the net realized margin. They rarely
haveveryhighnetrealizedmargins,sinceittakesthemtimetogrow,andovertimetheirexpected
gross margin µ declines. The biggest enterprises are also less represented among the enterprises
with the lowest net realized margins, since these have already lowered their production (according
to equation 3).
The small enterprises are spread all over the distribution of the net margin, so they contribute
to the fat tails of the tent-shaped distribution. Subfigure (d) in figure 4 shows that it must be
indeed small enterprises who have a net realized margin far from the center of the distribution. It
may be noisy due to the randomness in the system.
Acasewherethetent-shapedgrowthratedistributionisextremelynoisyornonexistentiswhen
big enterprises exist with net margins far from the center of the distribution. This can arise from
fluctuations in the initialisation of new enterprises, or from bankruptcy waves. If the competition
among enterprises is removed, e.g. by deficit spending of the bank in combination with temporal
unemployment,theprobabilisticdynamicsthatgeneratedthetent-shapedgrowthratedistribution
is also removed. In that case, the growth rate distribution adopts, as expected, the same shape as
thenumberofenterprisespernetmargin(subfigure(c)infigure4). Thedistributionsinsubfigure
(c) and (d) are centered around a positive value, whereas the growth rate distribution in (a) is
centered around zero, because unemployment is zero, and enterprises face a constraints both in
aggregatedemandandintheavailableworkforce. Despitehavingrealizedpositivenetprofitsthey
do not grow on average, because not enough workforce is available.
-0.2 -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1
sesirpretne
growth rate [∆ni/ni] 10 100 1000
sesirpretne
slope = -1.1
size of enterprise (bin width: 10 workers)
-0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15
sesirpretne
-0.12-0.1-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.02 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
net margin
esirpretne
net realized µ of enterprises
Figure4: Interestrate0.075,ν =4,γ =2,100000workers,≈450activeenterprises,unemployment
is0. Snapshotsafter750iterations. (a)growthratedistributionofenterprises,(b)sizedistribution
of enterprises, (c) number of enterprises per net realized margin, (d) size of enterprises vs. net
realized margin (every point represents one enterprise). If enterprises did not face a random
constraint due to limited aggregate demand, every enterprise would grow according to its net
realizedmargin,andthegrowthratedistribution(a)wouldhavepreciselytheshapeofthenumber
ofenterprisespernetrealizedmargin(c),whichisclearlynotthecase. (d)showsthatthedynamics
of interest payments, retstarts, bankruptcies and recentering of the margin causes big enterprises
to appear towards the middle of the net margin distribution, although it is noisy.
3.3 Fluctuations
Stability has been verified by simulating 10 times the system with same parameters and different
randomization, as well as by simulating the same system with different initial conditions. With
respecttothat,thesystemisstable,thoughatypicalcasesmayinprinciplearise. Fortheobserved
simulations, after some time fluctuations occur always around the same mean, which is character-
ized by the parameters ν, γ, r and the range of µ . The higher the interest rate and the rate of
new entries per iteration, the faster the system loses the memory of the initial conditions, and the
fluctuations due to the randomness in the system become dominant quickly. Depending on the
width of the distribution of µ, the observed fluctuations can be strong. A rise in unemployment
is caused by some big enterprise going bankrupt. This can be seen in figures 2 and 5 wherever
unemployment rises very fast. Successively, it may rise even further, because other enterprises
lower their production due to a big lack of demand. Once unemployment starts to decline, this
happens slower than it rose, because it takes time for other enterprises to grow and absorb the
workforce.
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
tnemyolpmenu
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
number of iterations
tnemyolpmenu
number of iterations
Figure5: Interestrater =0.011,ν =8,γ =2,N =100000. Timeevolutionofunemploymentfor
twodifferentwidthsoftheµ-distribution. Infigure(a),µ fornewenterprisesaredrawnrandomly
between0and0.1(asintherestofthepaper), infigure(b), between0.025and0.075. Twoeffects
are visible: (i) Unemployment clearly fluctuates more in the system with a larger width of the
µ-distribution. In figure (b), all entering enterprises have more similar growth behaviour and a
more similar lifetime, so unemployment fluctuates less. (ii) Unemployment is higher in (b), since
thehighestmarginisonly0.075,socomparedtothescenarioin(a)asmallerfractionofenterprises
has a net realized margin bigger than zero, meaning that only few enterprises will grow and offer
more posts.
Roughly, this is the type of fluctuations that DelliGatti et al. [9] interpret as business fluc-
tuations in their similar model. Since the evolution of the job losses due to bankruptcy is not
explicitely given in their book, we estimate its impact on unemployment to be at least twice as
strong as in the case presented here, based on their bankruptcy frequency and the relation of
enterprises to workers.
Role of Bankruptcy threshold on fluctuations. The lower γ, (i.e. the less debts per hired
worker enterprises can incur before going bankrupt), the less the system fluctuates. For low γ,
enterprises go bankrupt while still growing, at a point of time when their average age and size
are still small. The job losses due to bankruptcy are more evenly spread, and fluctuations have
a lower amplitude and a higher frequency. Workers can be employed by other enterprises faster,
resulting in lower unemployment. Not surprisingly, the lower the bankruptcy threshold, the lower
the aggregate debt of enterprises.
4 Validation of the model
Thestrengthofthismodelisthatitcanbecomparedbothtoatheoryofafirm,aswellasgiverise
to macroeconomicquantities. On themacroeconomic level, it ispossible toanalyze distributionof
the size, growth rate, age and debt, as well as aggregate quantities: unemployment, bankruptcy
frequency, productivity increase (via the part by which µ is recentered). The tent-shaped
growth rate distribution has been widely acknowledged as a stylized fact [17], [10]. For firm size
distribution, several authors equally propose a Zipf law [16], [18], [8], and the fat-tailed nature of
the distribution is generally accepted. The statistics about debt and age at failure (not presented
inthispaper)arequalitativelyinagreementwithdatafromtheGermanStatisticalOffice,andthe
conclusions by [12].
Themodeloffersalsothepossibilitytocomparetendencieswithempiricalsurveys. Forinstance,
asA.Coadstatesinhissurveyoftheliteratureonfirmgrowth[13]p.12,“thereisalotofevidence
thataslightnegativedependenceofthegrowthrateonsizeispresentatvariouslevelsofindustrial
aggregation.” Thiseffectalsooccursinourmodel: Toreachalargesize,enterprisesneedtoattain
a certain age. During that time, their margin diminishes due to the recentering of µ , and
the level of debt will increase, so it is not possible for the net margin of big enterprises to range
among the higher end of the distribution. Small enterprises, in turn, are more likely to have a net
margin above average: Of the enterprises with negative net margin, a part goes bankrupt, and
evidently cannot enter the statistics on average growth rates, so the average growth rate is shifted
towards a positive value of growth. A second tendency produced by the model has empirically
been found by [17]: The width of the tent-shape of the growth rate distribution depends on the
enterprise sizes that are considered. If only the big enterprises are considered, the distribution is
muchnarrowerthanifitiscomputedforasampleofsmallenterprises. However,acertainrangeof
sizesisnecessary. Ifonlyenterprisesofpreciselythesamesizeaddtothegrowthratedistribution,
our model would produce its shape to be Gaussian.
The parameters in the model are all relative, i.e. there is no specific meaning what timespan
is described by one iteration. Roughly one month could be the order of magnitude. The type
of analysis in this paper is rather suited to understand dependencies, and to tackle the question
how much randomness a system has or should have, with respect to the deterministic part of the
dynamics. The relative weight of these two elements is visualized in trajectories of the expected
and net µ shown in figure 3.
5 Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper we proposed an agent-based model linking statistical regularities of macroeconomic
systems to characteristics of single firms. This is done by combining a well understood simpler
model in a forthcoming paper [15] with new features, in a way that preserves the mechanisms
and thus the arising statistical regularities. The new elements are heterogeneous margins, interest
payments, bankruptcies and recentering of the margin of firms, reflecting an ‘ageing process’.
Altogether, the system exhibits a fat tail size distribution (which can be approximated by a power
law), a tent-shape growth rate distribution as well as fluctuations in unemployment, in aggregate
debtlevelandinthenumberofactiveenterprises. Thesefluctuationscanbeinterpretedasbusiness
fluctuations. Other possible ways to describe business fluctuations with this model would be to
vary some parameters that are currently fixed, such as the effective margin (reflecting the profit
margins), the interest rate or the frequency of new entries of enterprises, in order to reproduce a
specific situation observed in the real world.
Finallywewouldliketopointoutsomeinterestingproblemsforwhichthismodelcanbeuseful:
(1) More extended comparisons to data are in progress for growth rates and bankruptcies, but are
possibleforotherquantitiessuchascreditconstraints. (2)Inthemodelpresentedhere,themargin
of one enterprise is cannot be influenced by its own behaviour throughout an enterprise’s lifetime.
Productivity increase happens thus only via the creation of new enterprises. A possible extension
of the model would be to let the margin of an enterprise depend on its investments, as is done
in [9], or by purchasing production goods that depreciate over time as [7]. This would allow for
enterprises to take strategic choices and to have more variable lifecycles. (3) The financial sector
is very simplified in the model. Decisions of the bank depending on its own balance sheet are
not present, as well as variable interest rates or more than one bank, which seems a promising
extension in order to study more in detail the role of credit.