Hidden Breakpoints in Genome Alignments
Birte Kehr1,2, Knut Reinert1, Aaron E. Darling3
1 Department of Computer Science, Freie Universita¨t Berlin,
Takustr.9, 14195 Berlin, Germany
2 Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr.63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany
3 Genome Center, University of California-Davis, Davis, CA 95616
Abstract. During the course of evolution, an organism’s genome can
undergochangesthataffectthelarge-scalestructureofthegenome. These
changes include gene gain, loss, duplication, chromosome fusion, fission,
and rearrangement. When gene gain and loss occurs in addition to other
types of rearrangement, breakpoints of rearrangement can exist that are
only detectable by comparison of three or more genomes. An arbitrarily
largenumberofthese“hidden”breakpointscanexistamonggenomesthat
exhibit no rearrangements in pairwise comparisons.
Wepresentanextensionofthemultichromosomalbreakpointmedianprob-
lem to genomes that have undergone gene gain and loss. We then demon-
strate that the median distance among three genomes can be used to cal-
culate a lower bound on the number of hidden breakpoints present. We
provide an implementation of this calculation including the median dis-
tance, along with some practical improvements on the time complexity of
the underlying algorithm.
We apply our approach to measure the abundance of hidden breakpoints
in simulated data sets under a wide range of evolutionary scenarios. We
demonstrate that in simulations the hidden breakpoint counts depend
stronglyonrelativeratesofinversionandgenegain/loss. Finallyweapply
currentmultiplegenomealignerstothesimulatedgenomes,andshowthat
all aligners introduce a high degree of error in hidden breakpoint counts,
andthatthiserrorgrowswithevolutionarydistanceinthesimulation. Our
results suggest that hidden breakpoint error may be pervasive in genome
alignments.
1 Introduction
Genome rearrangement plays a fundamental role in biological processes includ-
ing cancer [8], gene regulation, and development [11] and a better understand-
ing of genome rearrangement is expected to lend insight into these biological
processes. The primary evidence for genome rearrangement in modern genomes
comes from identifying rearrangement breakpoints in alignments of two or more
genomes. Genome alignments and the rearrangement breakpoints they encode
provide a basis for reconstructing genome rearrangement histories. The accurate
reconstruction of rearrangement history depends intimately on whether genome
alignments can accurately identify breakpoints.
]NG.oib-q[
1v4696.7021:viXra
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 2
When genomes have undergone gene loss in addition to rearrangement some
breakpoints may only be detectable by comparison of three or more genomes.
This class of breakpoints has received limited attention to date. We refer to
such breakpoints as “hidden” breakpoints, since usage of these rearrangement
breakpoints in an organism’s evolutionary history is not apparent from pairwise
comparison of available genomes. Hidden breakpoints occur in regions of the
genome conserved in some, but not all of the genomes under comparison. A
simplest possible example of hidden breakpoints involves the three genomes A,
B, C, with blocks 1, 2, 3 (see Fig.1).
By extending a recent solution to the breakpoint median problem [14], we
demonstrate that it is possible to calculate a hidden breakpoint count in three
genomeswhenthereisgain andloss. Ourmethodisfounded onthepremise that
a parsimonious reconstruction of the median genome would contain any sequence
content present in at least two of the three genomes, while sequence content
unique to a single genome would not be in the median. By comparing pairwise
distances to the median distance, our method reveals some of the hidden break-
points. Having implemented the method to calculate hidden breakpoint counts,
we then conduct a simulation study to measure the abundance of hidden break-
pointsunderarangeof differentgenomeevolutionparameters. Weapplycurrent
multiple genome alignment systems to calculate alignments of the simulated se-
quences. Finally, we count hidden breakpoints in the calculated alignments and
compare with the true number of hidden breakpoints in the simulated sequences.
We show that all tested genome alignment algorithms introduce error in hidden
breakpoint estimation and characterize their error rates under a range of evolu-
tionary parameters in simulation.
2 Pairwise and Hidden Breakpoints
Genome alignments consist of sequence regions that are aligned in two or more
genomes. Each aligned sequence region, often called a synteny block or locally
collinear block, is internally free from any rearrangement but may contain gaps.
Herewesimplycalltheseregionsblocks. Weassignaninteger-valuedidentifierto
each block of an alignment, using the sign of the integer to represent whether the
blockoccursinagenomeintheforwardorinreverseorientation. Inthisway,the
arrangement of a single genome g in a genome alignment can be represented as a
sequence of signed integers: g =b b ... b , b ∈Z. Note that this sequence of
integers does not necessarily represent all parts of the genome, i.e. there may be
unaligned, unique segments in-between blocks. Genomes themselves may consist
of one or multiple chromosomes with either linear or circular topology. When a
genome contains multiple chromosomes, it cannot be represented as a single se-
quenceofintegers,butratherasasetofsequences: g ={b ...b ,b ...b ,...}.
1 i i+1 i+j
Followingpreviousliteraturewedefinelinearchromosomestobeboundedbyzero
length telomeres, acknowledging the discrepancy between this definition and its
use in the biological literature to describe a string of nucleotides of length > 0
near the ends of a linear chromosome. We use • to denote telomeres in a linear
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 3
A Rearrange
Insert 3 2
Fig. 1. Multiplealignment(left)andpossibleevolutionaryscenario(right)ofgenomes
A, B, and C containing a rearrangement not detectable in pairwise comparison. In
all three pairwise projections two of the blocks become unique leading to a breakpoint
distance of 0.
chromosome: • b ... b •.
In the present work we investigate rearrangement breakpoints in groups of
two or three genomes, although an alignment might contain many more genomes
g ,...,g . Thisrequiresustodefineaprojection ofanalignmenttothoseblocks
present in the current set of genomes. For three genomes g , g , and g with
x,y,z ∈ {1,...,m} we denote the projection of the alignment as π , and a
genome in the projected alignment by π (g). We define the projected genome
π (g ) as the subsequence of g containing those blocks present in at least two
of the genomes used for projection. We thus remove blocks that are unique to
g , g , or g from consideration in the three-way comparison since they can not
reveal direct evidence of rearrangement breakpoints.
Two blocks b ,b that are consecutive within a genome (possibly with unique
segments in-between) define an adjacency. In a pairwise projection of a genome
alignment, apairwise breakpoint isanadjacencyfromonegenomethatismissing
in the other. By counting breakpoints in one genome g relative to another
g we can calculate the breakpoint distance d(g ,g ). Breakpoints at telomeres
count only 1 in d(g ,g ), as only breakage and no fusion to another loose end
has happened. When g and g have equal content d(g ,g ) is equivalent to the
classicbreakpointdistance. Ifdifferentsetsofblocksarepresenting andg ,the
breakpoint distance may be asymmetric, i.e. d(g ,g ) (cid:54)= d(g ,g ). For brevity
we define d (g ,g ):=d(π (g ),π (g )).
xyz x y xyz x xyz y
Previousworkhasappliedpairwisebreakpointdistanceinasum-of-pairsscore
for multiple genome alignment [4]. However, multiple alignments may reveal
rearrangementsthatarenotvisibleinpairwiseprojections(seeexampleinFig.1),
informationthatsum-of-pairsscoresdonotcapture. Thebreakageeventsofthese
rearrangements are hidden by gain or loss of rearranged blocks or by breakpoint
re-use. Wethususethetermhiddenbreakpoint torefertothisclassofbreakpoints.
3 The Median Approach for Counting Breakpoints
We now describe a method to compute a hidden breakpoint count H for three
genomes. For alignments with m > 3 genomes, H can be calculated for all
projections to three genomes.
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 4
A median genome:
Fig. 2. Alignmentofthreegenomesandacorrespondingmediangenome. Thepairwise
distances to the median M are d(g ,M)=1.5, d(g ,M)=0, and d(g ,M)=0.5.
AmedianM forthreegenomesg ,g ,g withx,y,z ∈{1,...,m}isagenome
formed on all blocks in π . The blocks in M are arranged such that the sum
d := d (g ,M)
is minimized (see Fig.2 for an example). This represents a generalization of
previous definitions of a median genome, e.g. [14], to include all blocks in at
least two out of three genomes g ,g ,g . Previous breakpoint median methods
requiredblockstobeconservedamongall genomes. AswedescribeinSection3.3,
removing the portion of d attributed to pairwise breakpoints yields a hidden
breakpoint count. We note that our method only requires computation of d
and does not depend on accurate reconstruction of the actual median genome,
for which many possibilities with minimal d may exist. We also note that
duplications are forbidden; each block may occur at most once per genome.
We compute the median distance d by applying a recent polynomial time
solution [14] to our generalization of the median definition. Following the proof
of Theorem 1 in [14], we construct a graph from the genomes (see Sect.3.1 for
details), and compute a maximum weight perfect matching which corresponds to
a median genome [14]. Because counting hidden breakpoints requires only the
median distance d and not the actual median, we are able to improve the time
complexity of the solution from [14] by reducing the number of graph edges (see
Sect.3.2)inputtotheperfectmatching. Notethatthisreductioneliminatessome
valid medians, but the median distance d is unchanged.
3.1 Graph Construction.
Wefirstdescribethegraphasusedin[14]tocomputeamediangenome. Figure3
(left) shows an example graph for the alignment from Fig.2. Given a genome
alignment, the graph G=(V ∪T,E ∪E ∪E ) contains four vertices from two
different vertex sets V and T for each block b of the alignment: A head vertex
vh ∈ V representing the start of the block, a tail vertex vt ∈ V representing the
endoftheblock,ahead telomere vertexth ∈T,andatail telomere vertextt ∈T.
Thetelomereverticesth andtt representthepossibilitiesthatchromosomesstart
or end with block b . It is necessary to have separate telomere vertices for each
block to be able to find all (possibly multichromosomal) medians by the perfect
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 5
v 1 h v 1 t v 2 h v 2 t v 3 h v 3 t head and tail vertices v 1 h v 1 t v 2 h v 2 t v 3 h v 3 t
1 2 3 E 1 2 3
t 1 h t 1 t t 2 h t 2 t t 3 h t 3 t telomere vertices t 1 h t 1 t t 2 h t 2 t t 3 h t 3 t
Fig. 3. Fullgraph(left)andasimplifiedgraph(right)fortheexamplealignmentfrom
Fig.2. Thesimplifiedgraphissufficienttocalculatethemediandistanced . Linewidth
indicates edge weights. Dotted edges have a weight of 0. Red edges form a maximum
weight perfect matching that corresponds to the median genome shown in Fig.2.
matching computation. All vertices from V are connected among each other by
edges e ∈E , and all vertices from T are connected among each other by edges
e ∈ E , i.e. the two subgraphs are complete. In addition, each head vertex vh
is connected to its corresponding head telomere vertex th, and each tail vertex
vt to its corresponding tail telomere vertex tt by edges e ∈ E . Initially, all
edges have a weight of 0. We increase edge weights according to adjacencies in
the genomes. For telomere adjacencies, we increase weights of edges in E by 1
following [14]. For all other adjacencies we increase weights of edges from E by
1. Depending on the orientation (sign) of the adjacent blocks, we increase the
weight of the edge between a tail and head vertex, tail and tail, head and tail, or
head and head vertex by 1. All edges in E keep a weight of 0.
3.2 Reducing the Number of Edges.
Having constructed the graph, we compute a maximum weight perfect matching.
The running time of the most efficient maximum weight perfect matching algo-
rithms (e.g. [9]) depends on the number of edges in the graph, which in our case
is quadratic in the number of blocks. In the following we show how it is possible
to reduce the number of edges by a linear factor.
A perfect matching is a subset of the graph’s edges E ⊆E ∪E ∪E such
that each vertex of the graph is incident to exactly one edge in the matching. A
maximum weight perfect matching is the perfect matching that maximizes the
sumofweightsofalledgese∈E . Figure3(left)demonstratesthatmanyofthe
edgesinagraphconstructedasdescribedin3.1haveaweightof0,andhence,will
not contribute to the weight of a maximum weight perfect matching. Still, some
of those edges are necessary to allow a perfect matching of maximum weight, but
notallofthem. Inthefollowingparagraphweexplainwhyedgeswithaweightof
0inE betweenverticesvp andvq,withp,q ∈{h,t}andwithb ,b beingblocks,
can be removed from the graph as well as corresponding edges in E between
vertices tp and tq without affecting the weight of the resulting maximum weight
perfect matching.
Agraphthatwasconstructedasdescribedabovecanhavemultiplemaximum
weightperfectmatchings. Givenanyofthesematchings,wecanreplacethesetof
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 6
edgesE ∩E bythoseedgesbetweenverticestp,tq ∈T,forwhichthematching
contains an edge between vp,vq ∈ V. This replacement does not violate the
matching property and does not affect the weight of the matching since all edges
in E have a weight of 0. The matching may then contain some pairs of 0-weight
edges from E and E connecting vertices vp,vq ∈ V and connecting vertices
tp,tq ∈T. We can replace such pairs of edges by edges from E between vp and
tp and between vq and tq, again without violating the matching property and
affecting the weight of the matching. After this replacement none of the 0-weight
edges from E and the corresponding edges from E are part of the matching.
Therefore, a maximum weight perfect matching exists that does not use these
pairs of edges, and we can remove them from the initial graph without affecting
the weight of the resulting maximum weight perfect matching.
3.3 Hidden Breakpoint Counts.
A maximum weight perfect matching on the above described graph assigns each
head or tail vertex to its telomere vertex or to another head or tail vertex by
edges. Theseedgescorrespondtotheadjacenciesofamediangenome. Theedges
that are not part of the matching but have a weight greater than 0, correspond
to breakpoints among the median and one or more other genomes. Thus, by
calculatingtheweightdifferenceoftheoriginalgraphandthematching,weobtain
the total number of breakpoints d between the three original genomes g , g ,
andg andthemediangenomeM. However,d overestimatestheactualnumber
ofbreakpointsamongthethreegenomes. Themediangenomemaycontainblocks
thatarenotpresentinoneofthegenomes,whichdisruptadjacenciesofblocksthat
occur in the same order without rearrangement. These disrupted adjacencies are
neither pairwise nor hidden rearrangement breakpoints. Therefore, we calculate
a separate hidden breakpoint count
H=d −f .
Thesecondtermf removesthefractionofd whichisduetobreakpointsobserv-
able in pairs of genomes including those disrupted adjacencies caused by unequal
block content. f is defined as:
1 (cid:88)
f = d (g ,M )+d (g ,M ) .
2 xyz a ab xyz b ab
For the computation of f we use a median M of two genomes g , g , which is
formedonallblocksofthetripletprojectionπ . WecancomputeM usingthe
same approach as for a median of three genomes, i.e. construction of the graph
andcomputationofamaximumweightperfectmatching. Themultiplicationby 1
isrequiredbecausethedistancefromeachgenometoamedianiscountedexactly
twice (to different medians).
In the results section we discuss hidden breakpoints in alignments contain-
ing arbitrarily many genomes. In alignments with more than three genomes, we
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 7
calculate H for all projections to three genomes and report the sum over all pro-
jections. Likewise,forpairwisebreakpointswereportthesumoverallbreakpoints
in pairwise projections.
4 Simulating Evolution
Wesimulatedgenomeevolutiontogeneratesetsofevolvedsequencesandgenome
alignments relating them using the previously described method sgEvolver [3].
Briefly, sgEvolver applies the standard Markov process model of evolution (spe-
cificallyamarkedPoissonprocess),withmutationeventsincludingsubstitutions,
insertions and deletions of three different size distributions, and inversions. In
our simulation each of the mutation types has the following properties:
Nucleotide substitutions follow an HKY process with a transition/transver-
sionratioof4andbackgroundnucleotidefrequenciesA=0.265,C=0.235,
T=0.265,G=0.235,asimplementedintheprogramseq-gen[12]. Gamma-
distributed heterogeneity in substitution rates across sites was simulated
with the shape parameter k =1.
Indels comprise the first class of insertions and deletions. Indel lengths follow
a Poisson distribution with λ=3.
Small gain/loss events comprise the second insertion/deletion class and have
lengths geometrically distributed with p=200.
Large gain/loss events comprise the final size class of insertions and deletions
and have lengths uniformly distributed between 10000 and 50000.
Inversions follow a geometric length distribution with p=50000.
These events were simulated on a phylogeny containing nine extant taxa. All
insertion/deletioneventsaresimulatedtohaveuniformlyrandomdistributedpo-
sitions in the genome. The rate of each event type is specified by a relative rate
parameter;theexpectedeventcountpersiteonaparticularbranchofaphylogeny
is the product of branch length and relative rate. The ancestral genome in our
simulations is 1Mbp in size, and since insertions and deletions occur with equal
probability,theexpectedgenomesizeremainsconstantthroughoutthesimulation
process (though the variance grows).
The approach used by sgEvolver to simulate insertions can also introduce
duplications even though they are not directly modeled. In order to simulate
insertions, sgEvolver maintains a finite pool of “donor” genomic material. When
an insertion occurs, the sequence to insert is sampled uniformly at random from
thedonormaterialpool. Thisapproachisintendedtomodelthetotalpoolofgene
contentavailableinapopulation, sometimescalledapan-genome[10]. Whenthe
simulation includes a large enough number of insertion events, especially “large
gain/loss”, it becomes likely that the same material from the donor pool will
be inserted more than once, effectively creating a duplication in the simulated
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 8
genome. sgEvolver does not keep track of the donor pool positions for insertion,
and therefore the simulated genome alignments ignore possible duplications.
Whensimulating1Mbpgenomes,thesimulationandsubsequentgenomealign-
ment process is fast enough that we can analyze a large range of parameters in
parallel on a compute cluster. We report results on various parameter ranges
below.
5 Hidden Breakpoints in Simulated Data
In this section we examine the effect of inversion, gain/loss, and nucleotide sub-
stitutionrateonpairwiseandhiddenbreakpoints. Weexpecthiddenbreakpoints
to be driven by inversion and gain/loss, while nucleotide substitution may affect
breakpointcountsincalculatedalignmentsbyincreasingthedifficultyofaccurate
alignment.
Wedescribetwosimulateddatasetsbelow,InvNt andInvGL,consistingof400
and 200 genome alignments respectively. On each alignment of the datasets we
computedthetruenumberofpairwisebreakpointsandhiddentripletbreakpoints
(seeSect.5.1). TheninSect.5.3,wepresentcalculatedalignmentsofthesimulated
sequences done with three different genome alignment systems. We discuss how
calculated alignments generally overestimate breakpoint counts and relate this
error to evolutionary rates and other measures of alignment accuracy.
5.1 True Breakpoint Counts in Simulated Genome Alignments.
The InvNt data set enables examination of the influence of the inversion and
nucleotide substitution rate on the breakpoint counts. We expect nucleotide
substitutions to have no effect on breakpoint counts in simulated alignments,
although as we discuss later in calculated alignments a high substitution rate af-
fects estimated breakpoint counts by making alignment difficult. We simulated
400 alignments with inversion rates between 0 and 2×10−4 in steps of 1×10−5
and nucleotide substitution rates between 0 and 1 in steps of 0.05. All three in-
sertion/deletion rates were fixed: indels at 1×10−3, small gain/loss at 5×10−4,
and large gain/loss at 2×10−5. Previous work has demonstrated that alignment
algorithms can reconstruct highly accurate genome alignments at these relatively
low insertion/deletion rates [4]. In the alignments we observe 0 to 3100 pairwise
breakpoints and 0 to 1150 hidden triplet breakpoints (see Fig.4A). Despite these
large ranges, the ratio between pairwise and hidden breakpoints stays constant.
The coloring in Fig.4A (top) shows that with growing inversion rates, we obtain
more breakpoints, both pairwise and hidden triplet breakpoints. As one would
expect, the nucleotide substitution rate has no direct effect on the number of
breakpoints (Fig.4A, bottom).
IntheInvGLdatasetweexaminebreakpointcountsfordifferentlargegain/loss
anddifferentinversionrates. InvGLconsistsof200alignmentswithlargegain/loss
ratesbetween0and1×10−4 stepsize1×10−5 andagaininversionratesbetween
0 and 2×10−4 in steps of 1×10−5. The other two insertion/deletion rates were
fixedatthesamevaluesasabove,andthenucleotidesubstitutionrateat0.01. As
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 9
with InvNt, we observe more pairwise and hidden triplet breakpoints for grow-
ing inversion rates (Fig.4D, top), but in contrast to InvNt, the ratio between
pairwise and hidden breakpoint counts varies. The coloring in Fig.4D (bottom)
demonstrates that this variation is due to different gain/loss rates: With growing
gain/loss rate, we observe more hidden triplet breakpoints whereas the number
of pairwise breakpoints goes down slightly. This result is consistent with our
definition of hidden breakpoints. The slight decrease in pairwise breakpoints at
higher gain/loss rates is due to removal of breakpoints by gene loss. The hidden
breakpoint count is also affected by gene loss in the InvGL simulation, reaching
a maximum at a gain/loss rate of about 0.8.
5.2 Tested Alignment Programs and Evaluation Metrics.
Having established the true counts of hidden triplet breakpoints under a range
of evolutionary scenarios, we continue by evaluating whether some current algo-
rithms can infer genome alignments with the correct number of hidden break-
points. The algorithm to calculate hidden triplet breakpoints requires positional
homology alignments, the method cannot be applied to genome alignments con-
taining paralog alignments. For this reason we selected and applied three current
programs that generate positional homology genome alignments: TBA, progres-
siveMauve, and Mugsy.
The Threaded Blockset Aligner (TBA) [2] constructs multiple genome
alignments by a process of merging and filtering pairwise alignments generated
by BLASTZ [13]. TBA requires specification of a phylogenetic guide tree, and
for this we gave it the same topology used for simulation. We used TBA version
2009-Jan-21, the most recent version publicly available at the time of this work.
The progressiveMauve genome alignment algorithm [4] begins by identifying
approximate multi-matches among input genomes, then progressively grouping
these into locally collinear blocks and aligning nucleotides within these blocks.
For grouping matches progressiveMauve applies a sum-of-pairs breakpoint scor-
ing scheme, which penalizes pairwise breakpoints. In the present work we used
progressiveMauve version 2011-02-02 with default options. Mugsy is a newer
aligner [1] that also uses three steps as progressiveMauve, but differs in the de-
tails of each step. For example, it uses a min-cut max-flow algorithm to partition
themulti-matchesintoblocksunderasyntenyscore. WeusedMugsyv1r2.2with
default options.
For each alignment from the three aligners we computed the sum of hidden
triplet breakpoint counts H. To assess the error that aligners introduce to align-
ments in terms of breakpoints, we calculated the difference between the number
ofbreakpointsincalculatedalignmentsandthenumberofbreakpointsinthetrue
alignments. We also calculated a score that measures nucleotide alignment accu-
racy independently of genome arrangement: We compared each pair of aligned
nucleotides in the calculated alignments with the true alignment to obtain pre-
cision and recall of nucleotide positional homology prediction, and combined the
two values to an F score.
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 10
stniopkaerb
A inversion rate:
0 1·10-4 2·10-4
pairwise breakpoints
stniopkaerb
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
nt substitution rate:
stniopkaerb
D inversion rate:
0 1·10-4 2·10-4
pairwise breakpoints
stniopkaerb
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
gain/loss rate:
0 0.5·10-4 1·10-4
inversion rate
stniopkaerb
0 0.5· 10-4 1· 10-4 1.5· 10-4 2· 10-4
true count B
progressiveMauve
gain/loss rate
stniopkaerb
0 0.25· 10-4 0.5· 10-4 0.75· 10-4 1· 10-4
true count E
progressiveMauve
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
tniopkaerb
progressiveMauve
0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
tniopkaerb
progressiveMauve
Fig.4. Hiddentripletbreakpointcountsinsimulatedalignmentswithdifferentinversion
and nucleotide substitution rates (InvNt, A–C), and 200 simulated alignments with
different inversion and large gain/loss rates (InvGL, D–F).
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 11
5.3 Breakpoint Counts in Calculated Genome Alignments.
WecomputedalignmentswithTBA,progressiveMauve,andMugsyonall600sets
ofnineevolvedgenomesinthetwodatasetsInvNt andInvGL.Figures4Band4C
show hidden triplet breakpoint counts of the alignments from InvNt, and Fig.4E
and 4F for InvGL. In Fig.4B and 4E, we display the median of the hidden triplet
breakpointcountsperprogramforalignmentssimulatedwithequalinversion(4B)
or gain/loss rate (4E) as lines.
In alignments calculated on InvNt we found that all three programs over-
estimate the hidden breakpoint counts by a constant value independent of the
inversion rate, suggesting a relationship with the constant gain/loss rate in this
dataset. The two aligners that use an algorithm designed to minimize pairwise
breakpointsintroducefeweradditionalhiddentripletbreakpointsthanTBA.The
F score of most alignments is very good (> 0.95) except for some Mugsy align-
ments. We recognize a trend that alignments with F scores closer to 1 have
lower hidden triplet breakpoint errors. An exception are Mugsy alignments on
sequences simulated with nucleotide substitution rates greater than 0.4. These
Mugsy alignments have a very low recall suggesting the simulated genomes were
too divergent to be aligned by Mugsy with its default settings.
Calculated alignments of InvGL data show that the amount of gene gain/loss
hasastrongeffectonthehiddentripletbreakpointerror. Theerrorissmallatlow
rates of gain/loss, but grows quickly with the gain/loss rate. In Figure4F we see
thataccuratealignmentsasmeasuredbyF havelowerhiddentripletbreakpoint
error. We find that the F score drops with increasing gain/loss rates (data not
shown), suggesting that genomes with high rates of simulated gain/loss may be
generally difficult to align.
6 Conclusions
We have introduced the concept of hidden breakpoints in genome alignments
and presented a method to calculate hidden triplet breakpoint counts. We have
examined hidden breakpoint counts in simulated alignments evolved over a wide
range of evolutionary parameters, and in alignments calculated by three different
genome alignment algorithms on the same simulated datasets. We find that all
tested genome aligners introduce a high degree of error in hidden breakpoint
counts compared to the true count, and that this error grows with evolutionary
distance in the simulation. Our results suggest that hidden breakpoint error may
be pervasive in genome alignments. The error may in turn lead to erroneous
inference of ancestral genomes and rearrangement history. Therefore, studies of
the relationship between genome rearrangement history and biological processes
could be improved by considering this error during the computation of genome
alignments.
Overall, the error in triplet breakpoint counts is of the same order of magni-
tude as the pairwise breakpoint error. Methods such as the sum-of-pairs break-
point score in progressiveMauve reduce the pairwise breakpoint error, but may
not effectively reduce hidden breakpoint error. The max-flow min-cut algorithm
B. Kehr, K. Reinert, A.E. Darling 12
employed by Mugsy appears to yield the most precise block and breakpoint esti-
mates,butonlywhensubstitutionratesarelowenough. Itispossiblethattheuse
of a more sensitive matching method such as promer [6] or another approximate
matching approach would enable Mugsy to produce high accuracy results also
at higher levels of sequence divergence. Future alignment systems would benefit
from approaches that either explicitly or implicitly consider hidden breakpoints.
Limitations. The presented concept of hidden breakpoints has some limita-
tions. First, the pairwise breakpoint distance is a lower bound for the number of
breakage events that happened during evolution because several rearrangement
events may use the same breakpoint. The hidden breakpoint count described
here improves the estimate of breakage events, but it remains a lower bound to
the actual number of breakage events that happened during evolution. A further
limitationisthatthecurrentapproachdoesnotdirectlygiverisetoamethodfor
phylogenetic inference on genome arrangement. Others have demonstrated prac-
tical algorithms for phylogenetic inference on genome arrangement using DCJ
medians with gene gain and loss [16]. Although our median algorithm could be
used in such a context, there is no constraint on the number or topology of chro-
mosomesinmediangenomesandthismightyieldinferredancestralgenomesthat
are extremely biologically unlikely. Another limitation is the perfect-matching
based median approaches cannot handle duplicated blocks in the alignments. Fi-
nally,wehaveonlyderivedaformulatocalculatehiddenbreakpointsamongthree
genomes but some hidden breakpoints may be identifiable only among 4 or more
genomes. We leave identification of hidden breakpoints in 4 or more genomes,
and analysis of genomes with duplications as future work.
Acknowledgements.
This work was enabled by funding from the DFG through the Dahlem Research
School. We have implemented the calculation of breakpoint counts using the