Preface: High Energy Astrophysics
Bing Zhang1,∗ and Peter M´esz´aros2,†
1Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics and Department of Astronomy, Peking University,
China; Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, USA
2Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Department of Physics,
and Center for Particle and Gravitational Astrophysics, Pennsylvania State University, USA
(Dated: October 8, 2018)
Highenergyastrophysicsisoneofthemostactivebranchesinthecontemporaryastrophysics. It
studies astrophysical objects that emit X-ray and γ-ray photons, such as accreting super-massive
and stellar-size black holes, and various species of neutron stars. With the operations of many
space-borne and ground-based observational facilities, high energy astrophysics has enjoyed rapid
developmentinthepastdecades. Itisforeseenthatthefieldwillcontinuetoadvancerapidlyinthe
comingdecade,withpossibleground-breakingdiscoveriesofastrophysicalsourcesinthehigh-energy
neutrinoandgravitationalwavechannels. ThisSpecialIssueofFrontiersofPhysicsisdedicatedto
a systematic survey of the field of high energy astrophysics as it stands in 2013.
PACSnumbers:
High energy astrophysics is the branch of astrophysics cosmicraydetectorsPierreAugerObservatory,Telescope
that studies astrophysical objects that emit high en- Array and Astrophysical Radiation with Ground-based
ergy photons (X-rays and γ-rays), and more generally, Observatory at YangBaJing (ARGO-YBJ); high energy
emit non-thermal photons outside the traditional opti- neutrino detectors the IceCube Neutrino Telescope, As-
cal wavelengths. By studying non-thermal emission in tronomy with a Neutrino Telescope and Abyss environ-
the universe, one can unveil the part of universe that is ment RESearch (ANTARES) and Cubic Kilometre Neu-
not in a steady state, usually originating in violent en- trinoTelescope(KM3NeT);aswellasgravitationalwave
vironments near compact objects, such as neutron stars detectors Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Ob-
and black holes of different scales. These objects, be- servatory (LIGO) and Virgo interferometer.
sides emitting the broad-band non-thermal electromag- These observational facilities have greatly advanced
netic radiation, are also believed to be emitters of other ourunderstandingofvarioushigh-energyphenomena,in-
signalsoutsidetheelectromagneticchannel. Thesemulti- cludingstellar-scaleblackholesinbinarysystems,super-
messenger signals include cosmic rays, neutrinos, and massive black holes in Active Galactic Nuclei (AGNs),
gravitational waves. The field of high energy astro- gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), a rich list of objects in a
physics, along with cosmology and planetary sciences, is neutron star zoo, as well as supernovae and their rem-
one of the three most active branches in the contempo- nants. The next 10 years will see a continued growth of
rary astrophysics. thefield,astechnologyhasallowedseveralmostchalleng-
ingdetectorstomeetthesensitivitytopotentiallydetect
During the past decades, the field of high energy as-
signals hitherto only speculated about. These include
trophysics has enjoyed a rapid development, thanks to
high-energy (above 10 TeV) neutrinos and gravitational
an impressive list of space-borne and ground-based ob-
waves. It is foreseen that the field of high energy astro-
servational facilities. The currently operating space mis-
physics will fully embrace its “multi-messenger” nature
sions dedicated to high energy astrophysics include the
as commonly envisioned.
ChandraX-rayObservatory,theX-rayMulti-MirrorMis-
ThisSpecialIssueofFrontiersofPhysicsisintendedto
sion (XMM)-Newton, Suzaku, and the Nuclear Spectro-
provide a comprehensive overview of this exciting field.
scopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR) in the X-ray band;
Reviews of various individual topics are available from
SwiftandIntegralinthehardX-ray/softγ-rayband;the
many sources. However, there is no single source where
FermiGamma-RaySpaceTelescopeandAstro-rivelatore
interested readers can find an overview of all the direc-
Gamma a Immagini LEggero (AGILE) in the hard γ-
tions in this field. This issue is aimed at filling this gap.
ray band; as well as Cosmic Ray Energetics and Mass
Theoriginalplanwastopublish12articlesin3parts. It
(CREAM) and Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer Experi-
turned out that one review article (supernovae and their
ment (AMS-02) cosmic ray detectors. On the ground,
remnants) could not be finished in time, so the current
highenergyfacilitiesincludetheTeVtelescopesHighEn-
issue only includes 11 articles.
ergy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S.) and Very Energetic
ThefirstpartoftheSpecialIssueisdesignedtosurvey
RadiationImagingTelescopeArraySystem(VERITAS);
thefieldaccordingtohighenergyobjectsorphenomena.
It includes active galactic nuclei (AGNs, H. Krawczyn-
ski & E. Treister) [1] that host super-massive black
∗Electronicaddress: zhang@physics.unlv.edu holes, stellar-size black hole X-ray binaries (BHXBs, S.-
†Electronicaddress: nnp@astro.psu.edu N. Zhang) [2], gamma-ray bursts (GRBs, N. Gehrels &
]EH.hp-ortsa[
2v3166.1041:viXra
S. Razzaque) [3], and various species in the neutron star astronomy examplified by Fermi (S. Ritz) [5]; ∼ TeV γ-
(NS) zoo (A. K. Harding). The 5th planned article on rayastronomy(F.M.Rieger,E.deOna-Wilhelmi,andF.
supernovae and their remnants did not materialize. A.Aharonian)[6];highenergycosmicrayastronomy(T.
In[1],KrawzynskiandTreisterreviewtheastrophysics K.Gaisser,T.Stanev,andS.Tilav)[7];highenergyneu-
of AGNs, the nuclei of galaxies that host super-massive trino astronomy (F. Halzen) [8]; and gravitational wave
blackholesinthemassrange106−1010M ,whichaccrete astronomy (G. Gonzalez, A. Vicer´e, and L. Wen) [9].
material from the environment. In some cases, these ac- The Fermi satellite has been extremely successful in
creting BHs launch a pair of powerful jets. Depending unveilingthehighenergyuniversefrom30MeVto>300
on the viewing angle to these systems and to a lesser GeV. In [5], Ritz summarizes the achievements of Fermi
degree on the intrinsic properties as well, AGNs display in various disciplines of astrophysics, including pulsars
themselves in a rich trove of phenomenology. These are and nebulae, AGNs, GRBs, the “Fermi bubbles, and the
reviewed along with the underlying physics of jets and γ-ray background. The endeavors of usingFermi datato
central engine, as well as evolution of AGNs within the shedlightonfundamentalphysicsproblems,suchasindi-
cosmological context. rect search for dark matter signals as well as constraints
In[2],S.-N.Zhangsurveyedourcurrentunderstanding on Lorentz Invariance Violation, are also highlighted.
of black hole X-ray binaries (BHXBs). These systems The TeV astronomy domain was recently rapidly ad-
include a stellar-mass black hole, typically with a mass vanced thanks to the successful completion of several
greater than (3 − 20)M , and a companion star from ground-baseddetectors,suchasH.E.S.S.andVERITAS.
which matter is accreted towards the black hole (BH) The exciting discoveries at TeV energies are reviewed by
and form an accretion disk which is hot enough to emit Rieger et al. [6] along with their astrophysical implica-
X-rays. Jets are often associated with these systems, tions.
so these objects are also termed as “micro-quasars” by Compared with other branches, cosmic ray astronomy
analogywithAGNs. Thephenomenologyandunderlying may be the earliest branch in high energy astrophysics.
physicsarereviewed,withthefocusonseveralimportant Yet, the energy spectra of all particles and different
subjects, such as BH spin measurements, hot accretion species are still not measured precisely, and their physi-
flows and corona physics, as well as transition between cal origins remain elusive. In [7], Gaisser et al. critically
two accretion states. review this field, paying special attention to the energy
In the extreme of stellar-scale high-energy events, spectrum in the PeV range and above. They present a
GRBs distinguish themselves as the most luminous ex- baselinespectrumfrom1014 to1020 eVobtainedbycom-
plosionsintheuniverse, whichsignalthebirthofstellar- bining the measurements published in various sources,
mass black holes or rapidly spinning highly-magnetized andtheydiscusstheastrophysicalimplicationsofthere-
neutronstars(NSs). ThissubjectisreviewedbyGehrels sults.
and Razzaque [3], with the focus on the recent observa- High energy neutrinos are believed to be produced
tionalbreakthroughsledbytheNASAmissionsSwiftand through hadronic interaction processes from astronom-
Fermi. These observations have greatly ‘advanced our ical sources that accelerate high energy cosmic rays. De-
understandingofthephysicsoftheGRBphenomenology, tecting them is extremely challenging. In [8], Halzen re-
including the origin of the prompt gamma-ray emission viewsthejourneyofconstructingthefirstkilometer-scale
andafterglow,aswellasthephysicsofthecentralengine neutrino detector IceCube in Antarctica, discussing the
and the progenitor star of GRBs. astrophysical motivations to construct such a detector,
Besides BHs, another type of objects that high energy as well as the prospects to detect high energy neutrinos
astrophysicsstudiesextensivelyareneutronstars. These from astrophysical sources in the near future.
objects are believed to be composed of matter whose In another direction, Gonzalez et al. [9] show that
density is close to the nuclear density but whose inte- gravitational wave astronomy is entering a new era in
rior composition remains unknown. There is a diverse which the very first direct detection of gravitational
population of NSs. In [4], Harding presents a compre- waves becomes possible. They review various astrophys-
hensive review of the observational and physical proper- ical sources that are likely gravitational wave emitters,
ties of the different species in the NS zoo, as well as the and show how the current technology is getting close to
physicaloriginsofthediversity. Theobjectssurveyedin- reaching the sensitivity to detect these faint signals.
cluderotation-poweredpulsars,magnetars,compactcen- The Special Issue ends with the third part that in-
tralobjects,isolatedneutronstars,andaccretingneutron cludes two reviews on two important subjects of the
stars. contemporary astrophysics, namely, dark matter (X.-J.
The second part of the Special Issue surveys the field Bi, P.-F. Chen and Q. Yuan) [10] and dark energy (M.
of high energy astrophysics by means of the detection Li, X.-D. Li, S. Wang, Y. Wang) [11]. These two sub-
methods. There are many detectors that cover different jects are not limited to high energy astrophysics, having
observational channels (as summarized in the 2nd para- a large impact on astrophysics as whole (especially cos-
graph). It is impossible to review here all of them. With mology),aswellasbeingmajorproblemsoffundamental
the focus on the highest energy and non-electromagnetic physics. Nonetheless, they are closely connected to high
channels,weselectedthefollowing5topics: ∼GeVγ-ray energy astrophysics. For example, observations of elec-
tron/positroncosmicrays,γ-raylines,andneutrinosmay extended our horizon to understand the universe, from
lead to indirect detection of dark matter. The existence the brightest (e.g. GRBs, AGN blazars) to the darkest
of dark energy was first revealed by observing the space (e.g. dark matter and dark energy). More excitingly, we
distribution of explosions of high-energy events Type Ia are on the technological brink of observing the universe
supernovae, and the nature of dark energy may be re- using brand new observational channels, such as high
vealed by combining measurements of different standard energy neutrinos and gravitational waves. For the first
candles, including those in high energy phenomena such timeinhistory,thenextdecadewillprobablywitnessthe
as GRBs. first truly multi-messenger observational campaign of a
In[10],Bietal. reviewthestatusandprogressindark high energy phenomenon. Theoretical modeling will be
matter(DM)searches,includingdirectsearchesofrecoils advanced to address these new discoveries, with many
and ionization from DM-kicks to standard model (SM) open questions answered or partially addressed. Numer-
particles in underground experiments, collider searches ical simulations will continue to ripen by combining gen-
of missing energy carried by DM particles, as well as eralrelativityandresistiveMHDatthemacroscopiclevel
indirect searches of γ-rays and leptonic cosmic rays due and particle-in-cell simulations at the microscopic level.
to DM-DM interactions in astrophysical environments. Moreadvancedcomputersandalgorithmswillallowsim-
Even though no robust detection is available yet, they ulations to unprecedented levels of accuracy to address
show several interesting observations that may suggest fundamentalquestionssuchasmagnetosphericstructure,
evidenceofDM,andtheydiscussthepromisesandissues jet launching, energy dissipation, particle acceleration
of these observations. and radiation in high energy astronomical systems. If
Finally,Lietal. [11]reviewvariousastrophysicallines history is any guide, it is foreseen that new observations
ofevidencefortheexistenceofdarkenergy(DE),andan will raise more questions and challenges, which will give
impressivelistoftheoreticalparticlephysicsmodelsthat continuous impetus for the further development of new
interpret the DE phenomenon. They also discuss how technologies and theoretical ideas to better understand
the theoretical models are constrained by the available the exciting and mysterious universe we are living in.
and future astrophysical data.
We are lucky to live in a special epoch in the hu- Finally, we’d like to thank all the invited reviewers of
man history. Observations have allowed us to measure this Special Issue, without whose dedication and great
the parameters of our universe with increasing precision, effortsthisvolumewouldnotbepossible. Wealsothank
and to infer the composition of universe we are living Mr. Hong-Guang Dong for restlessly providing editorial
in. Ground-breaking discoveries over the decades have support to the authors.
[1] H.Krawczynski,E.Treister,FrontierofPhys.2013,8(6): [7] Gaisser, T. K., Stanev, T., Tilav, S. Frontier of Phys.
609, arXiv:1301.4179 2013, 8(6): 748, arXiv:1303.3565
[2] S.-N. Zhang, Frontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 630, [8] Halzen, F. Frontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 759
arXiv:1302.5485 [9] Gonzalez,G.,Vicer´e,A.,Wen,L.FrontierofPhys.2013,
[3] N. Gehrels, S. Razzaque, Frontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 8(6): 771
661, arXiv:1301.0840 [10] Bi, X.-J., Yin, P.-F., Yuan, Q. Frontier of Phys. 2013,
[4] A. K. Harding, Frontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 679, 8(6): 794
arXiv:1302.0869 [11] Li, M., Li, X.-D., Wang, S., Wang, Y. Frontier of Phys.
[5] S. Ritz, Frontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 693 2013, 8(6): 828, arXiv:1209.0922
[6] Rieger, F. M., de Ona-Wilhelmi, E., Aharonian, F. A.
rontier of Phys. 2013, 8(6): 714, arXiv:1302.5603