]NG.oib-q[
1v9611.4070:viXra
Holographic bound and protein linguistics
Dirson Jian Li and Shengli Zhang
Department of Applied Physics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, PR China
(Dated: November16, 2018)
Theholographicboundinphysicsconstrainsthecomplexityoflife. Thefinitestoragecapabilityof
informationintheobservableuniverserequirestheproteinlinguisticsintheevolutionoflife. Wefind
that the evolution of genetic code determines the variance of amino acid frequencies and genomic
GC content among species. The elegant linguistic mechanism is confirmed by the experimental
observations based on all known entire proteomes.
PACSnumbers: 87.10.+e,87.15.Aa,87.14.-g,04.70.Dy
Thephenomenonoflifeisgovernedbythegeneralprin- amino acid frequencies are routinely assumed to be con-
ciples in physics, so the progress in understanding the stant. Allofthesebasicproblemsinbiologyaresolvedin
physical world may provide new insight into the origin ourtheoreticalframeworkbasedontheformallinguistics
and evolution of life. The analogy between biology and and the evolution of genetic code.
linguistics at the level of sequences hints that the bio- In this paper, firstly we explain the existence of pro-
information is processed by underlying linguistic rules. tein linguistics and the limited complexity of life in the
Several attempts have been made to combine linguistic universe in terms of the holographic bound. Secondly, a
theory with biology [1]. But the existence of linguistics linguistic model is proposed to reveal the mechanism of
in the biomacromolecularsequences needs a physical ex- the evolutionof amino acid frequencies and genomic GC
planation. The holographic bound, intimately related to contentaswellastheproteinlengthdistribution. Theex-
the holographic principle, came from the deep insights cellent fit between our simulations and the experimental
of Bekenstein and Hawking in 70’s [2][3]. Its validity observationsstronglysupports the linguistic mechanism,
is insured by the second law of thermodynamics. In- where the experimental observations are based on the
terestingly, the problem on the existence of linguistics data of 106 entire proteomes (85 eubacteria, 12 archae-
in the biomacromolecularsequences can be explained by bacteria, 7 eukaryotes and 2 viruses) in database PEP
the holographic bound. In the past decades, the biology [10] and the data of GC content in database Genome
hasbeen changedgreatly. Wada advocated“... to deter- Properties system [11]. The “information” is the thread
mine the ‘first principles’ of bio-sciences and link them ofthepaper,whichconnectstraditionallyirrelativeprob-
with the first principles of non-bio-sciences in order to lems in physics and biology with each other.
understand the complex systems.” and Gilbert also em- Accordingtotheholographicbound,whichstatesthat
phasized the importance of the theoretical methods in the information storagecapacity of a spatially finite sys-
biology[4]. Nowadays,theintimacybetweenbiologyand temislimitedbyaquarterofitsboundaryareameasured
physicsisunprecedented. Consideringthesignificantrole in Plank area unless the second law of thermodynamics
of information either in physics or in biology [5][6], the is untrue, the entropy S ina volume ofradius R satisfies
gap between physics and biology may be bridged from
the viewpoint of information. S 6S ≈( ) 2 , (1)
In the post-genomic era, the number of entire pro-
teomes increases rapidly. We can take all known entire where l is the Plank length. There is much astronom-
proteomesassamplestostudytheglobalpropertiesoflife ical evidence that our universe may be headed for an
onourplanet. The varianceofGC content[7]isa global infinite deSitter space. The holographic bound can be
property, which varies greatly among species. We also applied to the observable universe with finite eventhori-
found another global property of the evolution of amino zon. Therefore we can estimate the upper limit of the
acid frequencies though they vary slightly. The mecha- informationstoragecapability ofthe observableuniverse
nism of the variance of genomic GC content and amino as I ≈10122 bits [3]. In the point of view in physics,
acid frequencies was a long-standing and far-reaching theentropyinouruniverseisgivenprimarilybythenum-
problem [8]. The genetic code evolved in the context of ber of black body cosmic background photons, ∼ 1090,
four-letter alphabetwhenthe 20 aminoacids joined pro- which is definitely less than I .
tein sequences chronologically [9]. The nature of prime However, the upper limit of information I is not
biased AT/GC pressure and the reason for the correla- so large when considering the informationof a system of
tion of GC content between total genomic DNA and the life. Firstly, let us give a reasonable definition of a “liv-
1st, 2nd and 3rd codon positions were unknown. The ing” system from the viewpoint of information. Many
profound mechanism behind the variance of amino acid restless functional proteins, composed of 20 amino acids
frequencies has not been studied; it is worse that the (a.a.), distinguish the life fromthe lifeless matter. Thus,
agenerallivingsystemL(n)isdefinedasasetofallpos-
sible proteins with length no more than n a.a., each of
which is in either the folded state or the unfolded state. 0.1
The maximum length n indicates the complexity of the
system. Then, let’s calculate the information of the sys-
tem. The numberofstates ofL(n)is Ω(n)=Pn 220k ,
hence its information is 0
G A D V P S E L T R Q I N H K C F Y M W
The exquisite single-chain structure of proteins can pro-
vide much more information storage capacity than life-
lessmatter. The upperlimit ofinformationI forbids
L(n), n>n0 toexistinouruniverse,wheren0 =94a.a.
suchthatI(n0)∼I univ . Interestingly,the mostfrequent
protein length for the life on our planet is about n0.
The actual system of life on the planet is not one of
L(n), because the average protein length for different
species, ranging from 250 a.a. to 500 a.a., are greater
than n0. Let the actual living system L
set of all possible proteins on the planet, and suppose
n (> n0) be the maximum protein length. L earth must
be a proper subset of L(n ) because the information of
L is bounded by I . According to the linguis-
earth univ
tic theory, L is a language over the alphabet of 20
amino acids. So we have demonstrated the existence of
proteinlinguisticsintermsoftheholographicboundthat
can be derived from the second law of thermodynamics.
In early evolution when delivering the genetic informa-
tionfromthe RNA worldto the DNA-proteinworld,the
holographicboundrequiredthegrammarstoallowavery
smallpartofproteinsequencesandto forbidallthe oth-
ers. There is a easy way to implement the forbiddance:
theobservableuniversecannotaccommodateallthepro-
∗ teins in L(n ). In fact, our conclusion is based on the
generalprinciple, freedomof the subtleties of the hierar-
chy.
If L(n) have an additional property, e.g., chirality,
Lr(n) (Ll(n)) become the set of proteins composed of
right-handed(left-handed)aminoacids. LetC(n)bethe
set of all possible chiral L(n). Only up to n = 2 a.a.,
the information of C(2), i.e., IC(2) = Ω(2) ≈ 10120 bits
is near I . Chirality might have brought too much
redundant information; broken symmetry was the solu-
tion. So entropy bound is a strong law which constrains
the forms of possible life in general. Let us imagine the
mostcomplexcreaturewiththe sameheightofusbe the
one whose genetic information is stored in Plank scale.
The information stored in its body can be estimated as
1/l3 ∼10105 bits, which violates the holographic bound.
So such complex creature can not exist.
So far, we are aware that the linguistics must play a
significant role in generating proteins in the primordial
time. In the following, a linguistic model is proposed to
simulate the variance of the amino acid frequencies and
the genomic GC contents as well as the protein length
distributions.
)noitavresbo(
0 G A D V P S E L T R Q I N H K C F Y M W
)noitalumis(
(for each a.a.)
(for each a.a.)
FIG. 1: Evolution of amino acid frequencies. The 20
aminoacidsarealignedchronologically. Thevarianceforeach
amino acid in simulation fits the experimental observation.
(a)Experimentalobservationbaseonthedataof106species.
For each amino acid, the 106 species are aligned from left to
right byR 10/10. (b) Simulation by thelinguistic model. The
30simulatedproteomesarealignedbyt,whichincreasesfrom
0.02 to 0.40 by equal steps. (The simulations in Fig. 1, Fig.
2 and Fig. 4 are obtains together by thelinguistic model.)
Themodelconsistsofthree parts: (i) generateprotein
sequence by tree adjoining grammar [12]; (ii) set amino
acidfortheleavesofgrammarsin(i)accordingtothetree
of genetic code multiplicity (can be obtained from sym-
metry analysis,see [13]) with considerationof the amino
acid chronology [14]; and (iii) translate the protein se-
quencesto the DNA sequencesaccordingto geneticcode
chronology[15]. Theevolutionofgeneticcodeisthecore
of the model. There is a variant t in the model, which
representsthetimeinevolution. Aproteomeforaspecies
isdefinedasmanyaproteingeneratedbythemodelwith
fixedt,sotalsoidentifiesspeciesinthemodel. Thus,the
amino acid frequencies and the average protein length
for a species can be calculated. The evolutionary trends
of the amino acid frequencies can be determined when
proteomes are generatedat different time t. We canalso
simulatetheevolutionofgenomicGCcontentaftertrans-
lating the protein sequences to DNA sequences.
The evolution of amino acid frequencies can be ex-
plained by the model. According to the consensus
chronologyofaminoacidstorecruitintothegeneticcode
from the earliest to the latest [14]: G, A, D, V, P, S, E,
L, T, R, Q, I, N, H, K, C, F, Y, M, W, we sort the
106 species by the ratio R10/10 of average frequency for
10 later amino acids to average frequency for 10 earlier
amino acids. Then we obtain the evolutionary trends of
amino acid frequencies: the frequencies of G, A, D, V,
P, T, R, H, W decrease, while the frequencies of S, E, I,
N, K, F, Y increase and the frequencies of L, Q, C, M
do not vary obviously (Fig. 1a). The variance of amino
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Genomic GC content
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Genomic GC content
250 350 450 550
Average protein length
FIG.2: Evolutionof genomicGC content. (a)Relation-
ship between genomic GC content and R 10/10 for thespecies
in database PEP (dots) and its simulation by the linguistic
model(solid line,alsodecreasing). (b)Simulationofthecor-
relation of the GC content between total genomic DNA and
the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd codon positions, which agrees with the
experimental observation in detail (see fig. 5 in [17], fig. 2in
[7] and fig. 9-1in [5]).
acid frequencies are amazingly monotonic by and large.
Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that a mechanism
underlies the evolution of amino acid frequencies.
The simulationofourlinguisticmodel[Fig. 1b]agrees
withthedataof106species[Fig. 1a]notonlyintheevo-
lutionary trends but also in the variance magnitudes for
mostoftheaminoacids. Notethatnoparameterisadded
on purpose in the model to alter the trend for a certain
amino acid. The evolution of amino acid frequency are
sensitivetotheaminoacidmultiplicities[13],anydisobe-
dience of which would spoil the results. Therefore, it is
the evolution of genetic code that determines the evolu-
tionofaminoacidfrequencies. Animportantpropertyof
the model is that the parameters of amino acid frequen-
cies are constant, which indicates that the variance of
amino acid frequencies developed during a short period.
Itagreesthatthegeneticcodehadaccomplishedquickly.
Recently,Jordanetalobservedthe contemporaryamino
acid gain and loss, about which there were different ex-
planations [16]. We believe that the evolution of genetic
code drives the amino acid gain and loss.
ThegenomicGCcontentdecreaseslinearlywithR10/10
for the species in database PEP. The simulation of our
model agrees qualitatively with this experimental obser-
vation [Fig. 2a]. In our model, the evolution of amino
acid frequency and the evolution of genomic GC content
are driven by a common variant t. A protein sequence
generated at later time t corresponds to the DNA se-
quence translated using the later codons [15], which re-
sults in the relationship between genomic GC content
Eubacteria
Mycoplasma Eukaryote
Archaebateria
FIG. 3: Rainbow distribution. Relationship between the
average protein length and the highest frequency of the dis-
cretefouriertransformationofproteinlengthdistribution(the
cutoff is 3000) for each of the 106 species. The distribution
of the species from three domains likes a rainbow. Even for
thegroupofcloselyrelatedspeciessuchasmycoplasmas(be-
longing toeubacteria),theirdistribution also form an“arch”
of the rainbow.
and R10/10.
And the simulation of the correlation of GC content
between total genomic DNA and the first, second, and
third codon positions [Fig. 2b] also agrees with the re-
sults based on the data of completed genomes [7][5][17],
where the correlation slope of the third codon position
is much greater than that of the first and the second
positions. There is a characteristic convex in the mid-
dle of the line of the simulated GC content for the first
codon position, which agrees dramatically with the ex-
perimental observations [7][5][17]. In the table of codon
chronology[15], G andC (A andU) occupy allthe third
positions of earliest (latest) codons for 20 amino acids,
while the bases appear about equally for the first and
secondpositions. Therefore,the correlationslope forthe
first and second positions vary slightly while the slope
for the third position varies greatly. And the lower limit
l∼0.3andupperlimitu∼0.7oftheGCcontentamong
species can be explained similarly; l+u = 1 is required
in theory.
Thelinguisticmechanismcanalsobesupportedbythe
distribution of protein length. When observing the dis-
tributionofspeciesinthespaceofaverageproteinlength
and the highest frequency of discrete fourier transfor-
mation of protein length distribution, we unexpectedly
found that the species for the three domains gathered in
three parallel arches respectively, which likes a rainbow
[Fig 3]. This indicates that the fluctuations in protein
length distributions can not be products of a stochastic
process. The characters of the protein length distribu-
tion (bell-shape profile, periodic-like fluctuations) have
250 350 450 550
Average Protein Length
Average mini−protein length
theparticularvarianceofaminoacidfrequenciesandGC
contentforthe contemporaryspecies arethe products of
certaingeneticcodemultiplicityandaminoacidchronol-
ogy evolved in primordial time. The linguistic model
succeedsnotonlyinthesimulationsofrespectiveaspects
(amino acid frequencies [Fig. 1], GC content [Fig. 2b], Eubacteria
protein length distribution [Fig. 3]) but also in their re-
Virus lationships(aminoacidfrequenciesandGCcontent[Fig.
2a], amino acid frequencies and protein length distribu-
tion [Fig. 4]). So the thorough and detailed fit between
simulations and experimental observations confirms the
validityofthelinguisticframework,whichisgroundedin
general principles in physics.
increasing t
We thank Hefeng Wang, Liu Zhao, Donald R. Fors-
dyke, Zhenwei Yao for valuable discussions. Supported
Archaebateria by NSF of China Grant No. of 10374075.
FIG. 4: The evolutionary flow. Relationship between av- ∗ dirson@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
erageproteinlengthsandR HQW/GV forthe106species. The [1] M.Gimona,NatureRev.Mol.CellBoil.7,68-73(2006).
species of three domains (Archaebacteria: blue square, Eu- [2] J. D. Benkenstein, Lett. Nuovo. Cim. 4, 737 (1972); S.
bacteria: dot, Eukaryotes: red circle) gather together in re- Hawking, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 199 (1975); G. ’t
spectiveregionsandallthespeciesformanevolutionaryflow. Hooft, in Salam-festschrifft, eds A. Aly et al., (World
The proteome size is represented proportionally by the tail Scientific, Singapore, 1993); L. Susskind,J. Math. Phys.
undereach species (big: red, middle: green and small: blue); 36, 6377 (1995).
species with big genome sizes locate in the midstream of the [3] L. Susskind and J. Lindesay, An Introduction to Black
evolutionaryflow. (Embedded)Simulationoftheevolution- Holes, Information, and the String Theory Revolution:
ary flow, whose (upward) bending direction agrees with the the Holographic Universe (World Scientific, Singapore,
direction of theexperimental observation. 2005).
[4] W. Gilber, Nature 349, 99 (1991); A. Wada, Bioinfor-
matics 16, 663-664 (2000).
been simulated by the linguistic model, which should be [5] D. R. Forsdyke, Evolutionary Bioinformatics (Springer,
intrinsic properties related to underlying grammars [18]. New York,2006).
We alsofind the relationshipbetweenthe averagepro- [6] B.-O. Ku¨ppers, Information and the origin of life (MIT
Press, Cambridge Mass., 1990).
tein length and the ratio of amino acid frequencies. The
[7] A. Muto and S. Osawa, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84,
species of three domains gather in different regions in
166-169 (1987).
the space of the average protein length and the ratio [8] N. Sueoka, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 47, 1141-1149
R HQW/GV of average frequency for several later amino (1961); X.Gu et al., Genetica 103, 383-391 (1998).
acids (H, Q, W) to average frequency for several earlier [9] R. D. Knight and L. F. Landweber, Cell 101, 569-572
ones (G, V) [Fig. 4]. The points of all species form a (2000); E.Szathma´ry,NatureRev.Genetics4, 995-1001
bending line [Fig. 4], which can be explained as an evo- (2003); S. Osawa. et al., Microbiol. Rev. 56, 229-264
lutionary flow in that (i) the species with large (small) (1992).
[10] The database with Predictions for Entire Proteomes on
genomelocateinthemidstream(margin)oftheflow[Fig.
4] and (ii) the (rightward) evolutionary direction paral- [11] D. H. Haft et al., Bioinformatics 21, 293-306 (2005).
lels the directions of decreasing correlations of protein [12] A.K.JoshiandY.Schabes,inHandbook ofFormal Lan-
length distributions among groups of the closely related guages, eds G. Rozenberg and A. Salomma (Springer,
species. The evolutionary flow can be simulated by our Heidelberg, 1997), pp.69-214.
model [Fig. 4, Embedded]. The evolutionary direction [13] JoseEduardoM.HornosandY.M.M.Hornos,Phy.Rev.
Lett. 71, 4401-4404 (1993).
and the bending direction in the simulation agree with
[14] E. N.Trifonov, J. Biomol. Struct.Dyn.22, 1-11 (2004).
the evolutionary flow of the 106 species.
[15] E. N.Trifonov et al., J. Mol. Evol. 53, 394-401 (2001).
Inconclusion,theholographicboundimprovesourun- [16] I. K. Jordan et al., Nature 433, 633-638 (2005); L. D.
derstanding of life, which supervises the maximum com- Hurst et al., Nature442, E11-E12 (2006).
plexity of life. Linguistics is necessary in storage of in- [17] A. Gorban et al., Physica A 353, 365-387 (2005).
formation in the protein/DNA sequences. We show that [18] In preparation.