Rev.Med. Virol.2016; 25:2–23.
Published online inWiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)
R E V I E W
Human papillomavirus molecular biology and
disease association
John Doorbar*, Nagayasu Egawa, Heather Grif fi n, Christian Kranjec
and Isao Murakami
DepartmentofPathology,UniversityofCambridge,Cambridge,UK
Humanpapillomaviruses(HPVs)haveevolvedovermillionsofyearstopropagatethemselvesinarangeofdifferentanimal
speciesincludinghumans.Virusesthathaveco-evolvedslowlyinthiswaytypicallycausechronicinapparentinfections,with
virionproductionintheabsenceofapparentdisease.ThisisthecaseformanyBetaandGammaHPVtypes.TheAlphapap-
illomavirustypeshavehoweverevolvedimmunoevasionstrategiesthatallowthemtocausepersistentvisiblepapillomas.
Thesevirusesactivatethecellcycleastheinfectedepithelialcelldifferentiatesinordertocreateareplicationcompetentenvi-
ronmentthatallowsviralgenomeamplificationandpackagingintoinfectiousparticles.ThisismediatedbytheviralE6,E7,
andE5proteins.High-riskE6andE7proteinsdifferfromtheirlow-riskcounterpartshoweverinbeingabletodrivecellcycle
entryin theupperepithelial layers and also to stimulatecell proliferation in the basal and parabasal layers. Deregulated
expressionofthesecellcycleregulatorsunderliesneoplasiaandtheeventualprogressiontocancerinindividualswhocannot
resolvehigh-riskHPVinfection.Mostworktodatehasfocusedonthestudyofhigh-riskHPVtypessuchasHPV16and18,
whichhasledtoanunderstandingofthemolecularpathwayssubvertedbytheseviruses.Suchapproacheswillleadtothe
developmentofbetterstrategiesfordiseasetreatment,includingtargetedantiviralsandimmunotherapeutics.Prioritiesare
nowfocusedtowardunderstandingHPVneoplasiasatsitesotherthanthecervix(e.g.tonsils,othertransformationzones)
andtowardunderstandingthemechanismsbywhichlow-riskHPVtypescansometimesgiverisetopapillomatosisand
undercertainsituationsevencancers.©2015TheAuthors.ReviewsinMedicalVirologyPublishedbyJohnWiley&Sons,Ltd.
Received:25March2014;Revised:12June2014;Accepted:25June2014
INTRODUCTION not in amphibians or lower phylogenetic orders
Papillomaviruses comprise a diverse group of vi- (Figure 1A) [1]. Viruses that slowly evolve with
ruses that infect both humans and animals. Their theirhostsinthiswaytypicallycausechronicinap-
origin appears linked to changes in the epithelium parent infections, rather than serious disease [2].
of their ancestral host as the first reptiles emerged This is the case for many if not most papillomavi-
around350millionyearsago.Sincethen,theyhave ruses, and indeed, HPVs can be isolated from skin
co-evolved with their respective hosts, with little swabs and plucked hairs from normal immuno-
cross-transfer between species, and are now found competent individuals in the general population
in birds, reptiles, marsupials, and mammals, but [3,4].Asaresultofsuchobservations,itisthought
that many HPVs may in fact persist in the popula-
*Correspondenceto:J.Doorbar,DepartmentofPathology,University tion as commensals rather than being associated
ofCambridge,TennisCourtRoad,Cambridge,CB21QP,UK.
with obvious disease pathology [4,5].
E-mail:jd121@cam.ac.uk
All authorscontributed equallytothe contentofthereviewandare ThestudyofHPVshasbeendrivennotbythese
listedalphabetically. widespread inapparent infections, but by the
Thecopyrightlineforthisarticlewaschangedon23June2016,after
severity to which some HPV-associated diseases
originalonlinepublication.
can progress. Most significant of these is cervical
Abbreviationsused
cancer, which can result from persistent infection
BCC,basalcellcarcinoma;BD,Bowen’sdisease;cAMP,cyclicAMP;
with a group of “high-risk” HPVs [6–8]. The low-
CIN,cervicalintraepithelialneoplasia;CR1,conservedregion1;CR2,
conservedregion2;E,early(viralgenome);HN,headandneck;HPV, risk HPV types, although not usually associated
humanpapillomavirus;L,late(viralgenome);LCR,longcontrolregion; with cancer development, can cause problematic
LSIL,low-gradesquamousintraepitheliallesion;PAE,polyadenylation
and debilitating disease in some individuals. The
early; PAL, polyadenylation late; PBM, PDZ binding motif; RRP,
recurrentrespiratorypapillomatosis;SCC,squamouscellcarcinomas. association of HPV type 11 with RRP is a key
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical VirologyPublished by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
ThisisanopenaccessarticleunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense,whichpermits
use, distributionand reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properlycited.
Human papillomavirus 3
Figure1. (A)Evolutionarytreeshowingtheproposedappearanceofanancestral“papillomavirus”betweenthebranchpointleadingto
amphibiansandreptiles.Itisthoughtthatvirus/hostco-evolutionhasoccurredduringspeciation,andthatthishasledtothewidespread
distributionofpapillomavirusesinorganismsasdiverseassnakes,birds,andmammals,(B)Thehumanpapillomavirusestypesfoundin
humansfallintofivegenera,withtheAlphaandtheBeta/Gammagenerarepresentingthelargestgroups.Humanpapillomavirusestypes
fromtheAlphagenusareoftenclassifiedaslow-riskcutaneous(gray),low-riskmucosal(orange),orhigh-risk(pink).Thehigh-risktypes
identifiedusingredtextareconfirmedas“humancarcinogens”onthebasisofepidemiologicaldata.Theremaininghigh-risktypesare
“probable”or“possible”carcinogens.TheevolutionarytreeisbasedonalignmentoftheE1,E2,L1,andL2genes[6],(C)Percentageof
cervicalcancersthatarecausallyattributedtoinfectionwithmembersoftheAlphagenus.MembersoftheAlpha9and7specieshave
beenstudiedmostthoroughly
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
4 J.Doorbaretal.
example of such a disease [8]. Although rare, chil- related types can show distinct pathologies. HPV 6
drenwithRRPareunabletoresolvetheirinfection and 11 share 85% sequence identity, but the former
andneed tobe treatedbyrepeatsurgerytoreduce is found more commonly in anogenital warts than
papilloma size and to maintain a clear airway [8]. HPV 11, which is the primary cause of laryngeal
At present, there is no reliable treatment for HPV papillomas.Similarly,HPV13,whichshares78%se-
infections, except by complete surgical removal quence identity with HPV 6 and HPV 11, does not
of the disease site. In the case of RRP, papillomas cause either anogenital warts or laryngeal papillo-
can persist for years or decades with regular re- mas[12,13],whereasHPV7,whichis87%homolo-
currence after treatment, and in some individuals, gous to the mucosal type HPV 40, causes
it can eventually give rise to metastatic lesions in “butchers” warts at cutaneous sites. Tropisms are
the lower airway and lung [9]. thoughttobecontrolledprimarilyatthelevelofvi-
This review aims to provide an update of ralgeneexpression,withregulatoryelementswithin
current thinking regarding the mechanisms under- thelongcontrolregion(LCR)beinganimportantde-
lying lesion formation by papillomaviruses, focus- terminant [12]. Regulation at the level of infectivity
ing in particular on the diversity of epithelial sites may also influence site of infection, with markedly
that these viruses infect and the diseases that they different charge distributions being reported be-
cause. As well as outlining the basic biology of tweencutaneousandmucosalvirions[14].Success-
these viruses, the review aims to clarify the key fulinfectionrequiresconformationalchangesinthe
differences between high-risk Alpha papillomavi- capsid, followed by furin cleavage of the minor
ruses and low-risk papillomavirus types from Al- L2 capsid protein [15–17], which may also influ-
pha and other genera, which we hope will ence the tropisms of individual HPV types
explain why such viruses are associated with can- [15,16,18–22]. Although the diseases caused by
cers less frequently. As part of this, the different specific HPV types sometimes occur at non-typical
mechanisms by which Beta papillomaviruses can sites, this is uncommon, with lesions often
sometimes cause cancer are discussed. exhibiting non-typical morphology and pathology
[23]. The evolutionary relationship between HPV
types and the cancer associations of the important
PAPILLOMAVIRUS DIVERSITYAND Alpha genus are shown in Figure 1B and C.
EPITHELIAL TROPISMS
Over200papillomaviruseshavebeenidentifiedand VIRUS STRUCTURE AND GENOME
have been completely sequenced, including more ORGANIZATION
than150HPV(see[10]andPapillomavirusEpisteme
types are divided into five genera based on differ- Despite the different disease associations, papillo-
encesintheirDNAsequence,withindividualtypes mavirus particles share a common non-enveloped
havinganucleotidesequence(sampledfromtheL1 icosahedral structure (50–60nm diameter). Their
gene)thatisatleast10%dissimilarfromthatofother genomes comprise double-stranded circles (epi-
papillomaviruses [10]. The terms “serotype” and somes) of approximately 8000 base pairs, which
“strain”arenotusedtodistinguishbetweenpapillo- containeightornineORFs.Althoughgenenumber
maviruses, and indeed, many papillomaviruses is limited by the small size of the papillomavirus
havenotbeencharacterizedbeyondtheleveloftheir genome (Figure 2A), the number of encoded pro-
DNA sequence. In recent years, sensitive detection teins is much greater, as gene expression involves
methods have allowed the identification of a large the use of multiple promoters and complex pat-
Gamma types) from swabs taken from cutaneous #home[24]).Thefinestructuremapping[25]shows
niaid.nih.gov/#home. Beta types have almost dou- tein arranged into 72 capsomeres, each made up
bled in number (from 25 to 45), whereas Gamma of 5L1 molecules, which have a beta-jellyroll core
types have increased almost eightfold (from 7 to reminiscentofother icosahedralviruses (Figure2B
54) over the last decade [11]. Although phylogeny [26]). Interactions between capsomeres require the
provides insight into disease associations, closely C-terminal tail of the L1 protein, which extends
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 5
Figure2. (A)Typicalgenomeorganizationofthehigh-riskAlpha,Mu,andBetaHPVgenomes.Althoughallshareacommongeneticor-
ganization,thesizeandpositionofthemajorORFscanvary,withBetaHPVtypeslackinganE5ORF.Thepositionsofthemajorpromoters
aremarkedwitharrowsonthehigh-riskAlphaHPVgenomemap,withearlyandlatepolyadenylationsitesmarkedaspolyadenylation
lateand polyadenylation early, (B) Electron micrograph of negatively stainedpapillomavirus particles. Individual capsomeres within
thecapsidstructurecanjustbevisualized.Papillomavirusparticlesareapproximately55nmdiameterandarenon-enveloped.
out toward neighboring capsomeres and links replication, virus assembly, and probably, also ef-
them at their base via disulfide bonds [26–29]. fective virus release and transmission. Although
Human papillomavirus particles also contain a manyofthesegenesarecontainedwithintheearly
variable number of L2 molecules, which are not region of the virus, the L2 gene product also has
fully exposed on the surface of the virion, apart key immediate-early functions in viral genome de-
from their N-terminal 120 or so amino acids livery within the cell and also a role (along with
[30,31]. During infection, L2 becomes available for E2)inorchestratingpropergenomepackaging[32].
binding to the extracellular matrix and is cleaved
by furin during the infection [16]. The major Genome organization
surface-exposed regions of L1 comprise a series of IndividualORFswithintheviralgenomearedesig-
hypervariableaminoacidloopsthathavediverged nated early or late [11], with the lack of an E3 ORF
between different papillomavirus types, in re- reflectinganinitialsequencingerrorintheBPV1ge-
sponsetohostimmuneselectionpressure,withan- nome. Despite variation in the size and number of
tibodies raised to one HPV type binding to ORFs, all papillomaviruses contain well-conserved
distantlyrelatedtypesonlypoorly.Thishaspracti- core genes involved in replication (i.e. E1 and E2)
cal consequences for the current prophylactic vac- andpackaging(i.e.L1andL2)withgreaterdiversity
cines, which offer limited cross-protection. The intheremaininggenes(i.e.E6,E7,E5,andE4),which
virusgenomealsoencodesregulatoryproteinsthat have roles in driving cell cycle entry, immune eva-
stimulate cell cycle entry and cell proliferation, as sion,andvirusrelease[6].E1encodesavirus-specific
well as proteins that mediate virus genome DNAhelicasenecessaryforviralgenomereplication
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
6 J.Doorbaretal.
andamplification,andlikeL1(themajorcapsidpro- ((and men) 50–80% [36]) and declines in older age
tein),ishighlyconserved.E2,whichcanbindtosites groups [37]. Such inapparent infections and low-
in both the viral and cellular genome, is conserved grade disease are typically characterized by multi-
betweenHPVtypesinitsN-terminalandC-terminal ple HPV types, including HPV 16 (3.2%), 18
domainsandfunctionsinviraltranscription,replica- (1.4%), 31 (0.8%), and 58 (0.7%). HPV detection in-
tion, and genome partitioning. As with most HPV creases with disease severity [37], with percentage
gene products, the functions of E2 are dependent positivity in CIN1/LSIL (i.e. low-grade neoplasia)
onitsinteractionwithcellulargeneproductsandin ofbetween50–70%.InCIN2,thereis85%positivity
modifyingtheirnormalrolestothebenefitofthevi- for HPVand in CIN3 and invasive cervical cancer;
rus.Theremaininggenesencodeproteinsthatmod- the positivity rises to between 90% and 100% [38].
ify the cellular environment or perform other The detection of high-risk HPV types at other sites
functionsduringthelifecycleofdifferentpapilloma- variesandintheoralcavityisestimatedataround
viruses.E6andE7canberegulatedatthetranscrip- 5% in apparently asymptomatically infected indi-
tionallevelbyE2,andplayacriticalroleindriving viduals[39],risingto50%orsoinindividualswith
cellcycleentryinallHPVtypestoallowgenomeam- oropharyngealcancers[40].Althoughgenitalwarts
plificationinthemid-layersoftheepithelium,andto are typically benign lesions, the incidence of new
inhibitaspectsofinnateimmunity.Interestingly,Beta cases per year in UK is 0.16%, with an incidence
papillomaviruseslackarecognizableE5ORF,which of recurrent cases of 0.13% [41]. These figures un-
in the Alpha genera is located downstream of E2, derlietheprevalenceoflow-riskgenitalHPVinfec-
andwhichalongwithE6andE7,isinvolvedinim- tions and the difficulties in reliably eliminating
muneevasionandinoptimizinggenomeamplifica- themwithcurrenttreatment.HPVsproducedfrom
tionefficiency.TheE4protein(whichplaysarolein genital warts are associated with a transmission
virus escape from the epithelial surface), like E5, rate of 60%, and like high-risk infections, are most
showsconsiderablesequenceheterogeneitybetween prominent in the late teens and early 20s [42]. Pa-
types,whichisthoughttoreflectthedifferenttropisms thology and HPV-type associations of important
andtransmissionroutesofdifferentpapillomaviruses mucosal lesionsaredescribed in box 1.
[33,34].Perhapsmoresurprisingly,givenitsimportance
ingenomeamplification,theHPVE6proteinisabsent Box 1
in HPV 101, 103, and 108 (Gamma genera [11,35]).
KEY FACTS—Mucosal Papillomavirus Infec-
The papillomavirus LCR is located between the end
tions in Humans
of L1 and the start of the early region and contains
promoter elements, transcription factor binding sites
Condylomaacuminatumisoneofthemostcommon
(including palindromic sequences recognized by E2),
manifestations of HPV in the genital area [43].
and the viral origin of replication (to which E1 can
Theypresentaspapules,nodulesorsoft,filiform,
bind),withsomeanimalpapillomaviruses(e.g.canine
pinkish, sessile or pedunculated growths. In
oral papillomavirus) containing an additional non-
men, genital condylomas more commonly in-
codingregionbetweentheendoftheearlyregionand
volve the coronal sulcus, the glands penis, and
the start of L2. Considerable heterogeneity exists be-
thepenileshaft.Inwomen,lesionscommonlyaf-
tweenthepositionsofpromotersandofsplicedonor
andacceptorsites,whichreflectsthedistinctevolution- fecttheexternalgenitaliaandthecervix[44].The
disease is usually sexually transmitted and is most
arypathofeachHPVtype[24,34].
frequently caused by low-risk HPVs, such as HPV
6 and 11, although many other genotypes can also
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUSES INFECTION
be found, including HPV 2, 16, 18, 30–33, 35, 39,
AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONSOF
41–45,51–56,and59[45–47].Asdescribedinthetext,
the HPV types that cause benign genital warts can
Mucosal human papillomaviruses infections alsocauseproblematicpapillomasatoralsites,which
canbedifficulttotreatbecauseoftheirlocation.
The association of HPV with cervical disease has
been extensively studied. HPV detection in the ab-
sence of apparent disease is found in 11–12% of Focal epithelial hyperplasia is a rare HPV-related
disease of the oralmucosathat is morecommon
all women. Detection is higher in young women
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 7
in children and women. Lesions are mainly lo- prevalence in HNSCC increased significantly
cated in the lower lip, but less frequently may af- from 41% in 2000 to 72% in 2004 [57]. HPV
fect the upper lip, tongue, oral mucosa, prevalence is significantly higher in oropharynx
oropharynx, palate, and floor of mouth. HPV 13 SCC than in the oral cavity with the tonsil hav-
and32arethemostcommoncause[48]. ing higher prevalence than other anatomic sites
[58]. These HPV-associated cancers display clin-
Cervical neoplasia and cervical cancer. Precancerous ical and molecular features distinct from other
cervicallesionsareclassifiedascervicalCINofdif- HNSCCs. The patients with HPV-positive can-
ferent grades (1, 2, or 3). CIN1 pathology is cer have at least a 50% improvement in overall
broadly equivalent to the LSIL designation used survival at 5years, which is equivalent to an
in the Bethesda classification system, with CIN2 approximate 30% difference in absolute sur-
and 3 being equivalent to high-grade squamous vival. HPV association is now part of routine
intraepitheliallesion.Theseverityofneoplasiare- diagnosticprocedurewhenassessingtheprognosis
flects the extent to which basal-like cells (i.e. of HNSCC. HPV 16 is the most common type
poorly differentiated cells with a high found in HNSCC, but other HPV types such as
nuclear/cytoplasmicratio)extendtowardtheepi- 18,31,33,and35canalsobedetected[57].
thelialsurfaceandtheextentofsuprabasalcelldi-
vision.Low-gradelesionstypicallyshow evidence
of productive viral infection with the presence of Cutaneous human papillomaviruses
koilocytes in the suprabasal cell layers being infections
regarded as a key manifestation of CIN1/LSIL. Among the HPV types associated with cutaneous
HPV is detectable in 90–100% of cervical abnor- disease are HPV types 2, 3, 10, 27, and 57 from
malities, ranging from incipient cytological ab- the Alpha Genus, HPV types 4, 60, and 65 from
normalities and dysplasia [49] to cervical cancer the Gamma Genus, and HPV types 1 and 63 from
[50–52]. the Mu Genus. Such benign lesions are relatively
common in the general population, particularly in
Other anogenital cancers including those of the children (33% positive) who may be encountering
vulva, vagina, penis, and anus. Most vulvar can- HPV types for the first time and in immunosup-
cers (92%) are solitary, keratinizing SCC. HPV pressedindividuals(45%positive)[59].Anincuba-
prevalenceis90%invulvarintraepithelialneopla- tionperiodof3weeksto8monthscanoccurbefore
siaandbasaloidorwartycancers,but isfoundin lesionsbecomeapparent,dependingoninoculation
only 6% of keratinizing SCC [53,54]. HPV 16 is titre [60]. The Alpha types (2, 27, and 57) are most
the most prominent type in vulvar cancer, with prevalentincommonwarts(>65%ofcases),along
HPV 18, 21, 31, 33, and 34 detected at lower fre- with HPV 1 (Mu HPV type; approx. 30% of cases)
quencies. In addition, HPVis responsiblefor 85% [59]. In most cases, such lesions are an inconve-
of vaginal cancer, with HPV 16 being detected in nience with spontaneous immune regression of
60% of invasive tumors. HPV is also detected in 80%within2years[61].Benignwartssuchasthese
basaloid and warty cancers of the penis, but only can be highly productive and contain as many as
rarely in keratinizing SCC and verrucous cancers 1012 particles [62] and typically show general hy-
ofthepenis.Ininvasivepenile cancer, HPV 16 is pertrophy (cell enlargement) leading to acanthosis
the most prevalent type (40–70%), followed by or thickening of the epithelium, as well as promi-
HPV 6 (22%), 52 (15%), and 11 (4%) [55]. HPV nent folding of the epithelial basal layer
is present in 80–96% of anal cancer with HPV (papillomatosis). Such lesions have thicker
16 being the most prevalent type [56]. Anal can- cornifiedlayers(hyperkeratosis)andcontainabun-
cer is more common in men who have sex with dant cytoplasmic inclusion granules ofcharacteris-
men, individuals with a history of anal warts, tic appearance in the spinous and granular layers,
and in immunosuppressed populations. whichcomprisespredominantlyoftheviralE4pro-
tein [34]. Virions released from the epithelial sur-
Head and neck cancer HPV is recognized as a ma- face may be transmitted indirectly (e.g. on innate
jor risk factor for the development of HNSCC. A objects) or directly from person to person [63].
recent meta-analysis showed that HPV The pathology features and type associations of
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
8 J.Doorbaretal.
the most prevalent benign cutaneous lesions are or lateral surfaces of the hands, feet, fingers,
described in box 2. and toes. HPV 4, 60, and 65 are most prevalent
in such lesions [74].
Epidermoid cysts can be caused by HPV types
KEY FACTS—Cutaneous Papillomavirus Infec-
57 and 60, with these types being detected in
tions in Humans
plantar epidermoid cysts [75, 76]. An un-
known HPV type was reported in epidermoid
Common warts can be single or multiple and of
cysts of the trunk and scalp [77, 78]. Immuno-
varyingsizes.Theyoccuratmanysites,butoften
staining suggests that such lesions are distinct
onthebackofhands[64],withthekneealsobe-
from the associated dermal eccrine duct, but
ing a common site of infection in children. A
have similarities with the suprabasal cells of
prevalence of 3.5% [65] in adults to over 30% in
the epidermis. It has been suggested that
schoolchildren has been reported [66]. Incidence
palmoplantar epidermoid cysts may in some
increases in immunosuppressed patients, with
instances arise as a result of epidermoid meta-
lesions being more numerous and more recalci-
plasia of eccrine ducts following HPV infection
trant.HPV1,2,4,27,and57arethemostpreva-
[79].
lent types [67–69]. HPV 7 is found in the
common warts of individuals whose hands are Skin cancer. Bowen’sdisease(BD)isaSCCinsitu
chronically exposed to moisture and cold be- oftheskin. In3–5%ofcases,itprogressestoin-
cause of theiroccupation [70].
vasivecarcinomawiththecapabilitytodevelop
metastasis. The mucosal HPV types are com-
Plantarwartsoccuronthesolesofthefeet,partic-
monlydetectedinlesionsofextra-genitalBD,es-
ularlyinchildren.HPV1and4arefrequentlythe
pecially in the periungual region. Other HPV
cause, although HPV 57, 60, 63, 65, and 66 can
typeshaveoccasionallybeendetectedinBD,in-
also be involved [71]. HPV 1 commonly induces
cluding HPV 2, 6, 11, 54, 58, 61, 62, and 73 [80].
lesions that manifest as a keratotic plug
The link between HPVand non-melanoma skin
surrounded by a hyperkeratotic rim that are of-
cancer, SCC and BCC, is not clear except in im-
ten painful. HPV 4 can be the cause of mosaic
munosuppressed individuals and in certain ge-
warts, which are more superficial lesions that
netic backgrounds. Mucosal HPV types,
occur in a confluent cobblestone pattern and
especially HPV 16 can sometimes be detected
are usually painless. Persistent plantar lesions
in the SCC and BCC of the skin, but also more
can be very rarely associated with the develop-
rarely HPV 2, 31, 34, 35, 58, 61, and 73 [81, 82].
ment of verrucous carcinoma [72].
MolecularanalysisofBetaHPVproteinfunction
andserologysuggestsaroleofcertainBetaHPV
Flat warts are slightly raised lesions of skin
types(e.g.HPV8,20,38)inthedevelopmentof
color or pigmented, with flat, smooth or,
SCC in immunosuppressed individuals. A role
slightly rough surface. The face and back of
in the early stages of cancer development is
hands are the most common sites of disease
suspected (but not conclusively proven) in a
with HPV 3 and 10 most commonly detected
fraction of keratinocyte cancers in the general
in such lesions [64, 73].
population, with Beta HPV genomes from the
cellbeinglostfromthecellasthediseasesever-
Filiform warts are pedunculated lesions grow-
ityincreases[83].
ing in a perpendicular or oblique way in rela-
tion to the skin surface. The face and neck
are the most frequent sites of disease. The de-
tected HPV types are the same as common
PAPILLOMAVIRUSLIFECYCLE
warts, especially HPV 2 [73].
ORGANIZATION IN THE INFECTED
EPITHELIUM
Pigmented warts range from gray to blackish The ability of specific HPVs to undergo a produc-
brown and are located on the palmoplantar
tive life cycle depends on the site of infection as
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 9
well as the local microenvironment [84]. Although particularly for the low-risk HPV types (such as
HPV life cycle organization is best understood for HPV6or11)thatarenotgenerallyassociatedwith
Alpha papillomavirus, the broad principles are neoplasia, and which may require infection of a
likely to be common to HPVs in general. In many basal stem cell at the site of a wound or
cases, lesion formation is thought to begin with a microwound. In these HPV types, the role of the
wound or other epithelial trauma followed by the woundhealingresponseindrivingtheinitialprolifer-
infection of an epithelial basal stem cell, with the ation of the infected cell(s) is thought to be critical
longevity of these cells underlying lesion persis- [111],withsignalingfromthelocalmicroenvironment
tence [85–88]. For low-risk HPV types, which do influencingviralgeneexpression[112]and/orprotein
not stimulate cell proliferation, this is a reasonable functions.Inthecaseofthehigh-risktypesthatcause
hypothesis [89–93]. For the high-risk types, which neoplasia, a clear role exists for the viral E6 and E7
can drive cell proliferation, it is less clear. Active proteinsindrivingcellproliferationinthebasaland
cell division (as it occurs during wound healing) parabasal cell layers, especially at sites (such as the
is necessary for viral genome entry into the nucleus cervix) where neoplasia can occur [85]. Functional
and episomal maintenance [94]. The particular sus- differencesinE6andE7thatarethoughttounderlie
ceptibilityofthecervicaltransformationzonetocan- high-risk and low-risk disease pathology are listed
cer progression may be linked to increased inFigure3A[113,114,50].
likelihood of infection, particularly at puberty when
metaplasticcellsarepresentatthissite[95–97].Recent
studieshavesuggestedthepresenceofcuboidalstem- Cell cycle entry and genome amplification in
like cells at the squamo-columnar junction, which the suprabasal layers
may be prone to cancer progression following infec- TheE6/E7-mediatedproliferationofbasal/parabasal
tionbyhigh-riskHPVtypes[98]. cells following infection by the high-risk HPV types
allowsanexpansioninlesionsize.Animportantdif-
ference between high-risk and low-risk E7 proteins
Infection and genome maintenance in the istheirdifferentialabilitytoassociatewiththeretino-
epithelial basal layer blastoma protein (pRb) and more specifically, the
Infection is thought to be followed by an initial ability of the high-risk E7 to bind and degrade p105
phase of genome amplification, prior to mainte- and p107, which control cell cycle entry in the basal
nance of the viral episome at low copy number layer,aswellasp130,whichisinvolvedincellcycle
[94,99].Episomalcopynumberintheinfectedbasal re-entry in the upper epithelial layers [115–117]
cellisoftenquotedas200copiespercell,basedona [113,117] (Figure 3B). These key differences between
study of cell lines. Using laser capture methods, high-risk and low-risk E7 proteins reside in their N-
50–100 copies per cell [100] have been found in terminal half, a region that shares homology with
thebasallayerofproductivewarts.Theviralrepli- CR1 and CR2 of the adenovirus E1A and Simian
cationproteinsE1andE2areimportantforthisini- vacuolating virus 40T-antigen proteins [118]. The
tialamplificationphase,butmaybedispensablefor biological activities of adenovirus E1a, including
episomal maintenance–replication once the copy pRb binding and the ability to cooperate with ras to
numberhasstabilized[101–103]despiteestablished transform primary rat cells map to this region [119],
roles for E2 in genome partitioning, replication, with the pRb-binding motif (LXCXE) being located
and transcription [85,104,105]. In BPV, genome in the CR2 region of both high-risk and low-risk
partitioning upon cell division involves the cellu- mucosalE7proteins.Theexpressionofthehigh-risk
lar bromodomain containing protein 4(Brd4), but E7 protein leads also to an extensive epigenetic
inHPVs,otherE2bindingproteinsmayalsobein- reprogramming of the cell, which is also considered
volvedinthetetheringofviralepisomestothecel- important for stimulation of cell-cycle entry and
lular chromatin during cell division [106–109]. progressionbyE7.HPV16E7interactswithMi2β,a
Interestingly, Brd4 has been implicated as a key component of the nucleosome remodeling and
protein involved in HPV 16 genome replication deacetylasecomplex(NuRDcomplex),anassociation
[110]. The E6 and E7 proteins are key regulators that is thought to block the activity of histone
of cell cycle progression, but their precise role in deacetylases 1 and 2 [120]. Interaction requires the
infected basal cells is somewhat uncertain, C-terminalzinc-fingerdomainofE7andcontributes
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
10 J.Doorbaretal.
Figure3. (A)TheE6andE7proteinsofthehigh-riskandlow-riskHPVtypeshavedifferentfunctions,whichreflecttheirdifferentbiologies.The
abilityofthehigh-riskHPVtypestodrivecelldivisioninneoplasiaisthoughttoreflecttheabilityoftheirE7proteintobindanddegrademultiple
membersofthepRbproteinfamily,aswellastheabilityofE6toefficientlydegradep53andtocompromisethefunctionofPDZ-domainproteins
thatregulatecellcontactandsignalingpathways,(B)High-riskHPVinfectioncanleadtoa“silent”orasymptomaticinfectioninwhichviralge-
nomespersistinthebasallayerwithoutthedevelopmentofdisease,oralternativelytothedevelopmentofaproductivelesionsuchasCIN1inwhich
viralgeneexpressionisregulatedastheinfectedcellsdifferentiate.Insomeinstances,infectioncanleadtohigher-gradeneoplasia,withderegulated
viralgeneexpressionleadingtosecondarygeneticchangesinthehostcellandpossibleintegrationoftheviralgenomeintothecellularchromosome.
ThederegulatedgeneexpressionseeninCIN2and3,whichareconsideredtobeprecancerouslesions,predisposetothedevelopmentofcancer
to the transcription of E2F-responsive genes and the of the high-risk E6 proteins, represents another
repression of pRb-induced quiescence [120,121]. In keydifferencebetweenhigh-riskandlow-riskpap-
addition, E7 expression stimulates the activation of illomavirus types [126,127]. The E6 PBM facilitates
EZH2, a histone methyl transferase, and also the interactionwithapanelofPDZdomain-containing
histone demethylases KDM6A and KDM6B proteins, and in many cases leads to their
[122,123]throughdifferentmechanisms.Interestingly, proteasome-mediated degradation in an E6AP-
theactivationofKDMsappearstobeinvolvedinthe dependent manner [128,129]. So far, 14 E6 PDZ
inductionofp16INK4A,asurrogatebiomarkerofHPV domain-containing substrates have been identified
infection,aswellashomeoticgenesoftheHOXfamily, [130,131], with many of these (i.e. Dlg1, Scribble,
whichhavebeenshowntonegativelyregulateepider- MAGI-1, -2, -3) being involved in the assembly of
mal differentiation [124,125]. Interestingly, the effects signalingcomplexesassociatedwiththeregulation
on EZH2 are conserved between high-risk and low- of cell polarity, cell adhesion, and differentiation
riskE7proteinsandprovidealinkbetweenviralgene (reviewed in [132]). Although the importance of
expression and the modulation of events during the E6-PDZ associations has primarily been studied in
virallifecycle. the context of HPV-related carcinogenesis, the
The PDZ (PSD95/Dlg/ZO-1) binding motif PDZ-bindingactivityofE6appearsalsotoregulate
(PBM), which is located at the extreme C-terminus multipleaspectsofthevirallifecycle.Theintegrity
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 11
oftheE6PBMisrequiredfortheepisomalmainte- increase in abundance following “late” promoter
nance ofHPV 31 andHPV16 genomes in primary upregulation(p670inHPV16;[150])incells,which
human keratinocytes [133–135] and disruption of continue to express E6 and E7 from the early
the E6 PBM correlated with defective HPV 18 ge- promoter (p97 in HPV 16). In the case of low-risk
nome amplification and S-phase re-entry in differ- HPV types, genome amplification requires cell
entiating epithelium [136]. Such studies have also cycle re-entry in the mid to upper epithelial layers
suggested a role for E6 PDZ-binding activity in ratherthanoccurringincellsthathaveremainedin
the expression of cyclin B1, which is required for cycle after leaving the basal layer. For both high-
normal G2-M transition [137,138]. Interestingly, risk and low-risk HPVs, genome amplification
several high-risk E6 proteins contain canonical cy- persists as the infected cell moves from an S-phase
clic AMP-dependent protein kinase A recognition to a G2- like phase before committing to full
motifs (R-R/K-X-T/S) within their PBM that can differentiation [151,152].
regulate E6 function during the high-risk HPV life Experimentalsystemsshowatwo-logincreasein
cycle [136,139]. Mechanistically, it is thought that viralcopynumberpercellduringgenomeamplifi-
phosphorylation regulates E6 binding to PDZ- cation[100].InadditiontoE1andE2,theE4andE5
domain proteins and creates an alternative proteins also contribute to genome amplification
binding-site, which allows E6 to associate with indirectly. E5 is involved in koilocyte formation
members of the cellular 14-3-3 protein family [153] and is a three-pass transmembrane protein
[139,140].Thehigh-riskE6proteinsarealsocharac- with a cytoplasmic C-terminus [154]. The E5 pro-
terized by an ability to upregulate telomerase teinhasapore-formingcapabilityandcaninterfere
activity [141–143] and to maintain telomere integ- with apoptosis [155] and the intracellular traffick-
rity during repeated cell divisions, as well as by ing of endocytotic vesicles [156,157]. It is thought
their ability to mediate p53 degradation within that E5 contributes to genome amplification
the cell. Both high-risk and low-risk E6 proteins through its ability to stabilize epidermal growth
inactivate p53 function, which suggests an im- factorreceptor,toenhanceepidermalgrowthfactor
portant role in the virus life cycle, but only signaling and mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
high-risk types stimulate its ubiquitination and kinase activity [158–161], and also to modulate
proteosome-dependent degradation (see section on both extracellular-signal-regulatedkinase1/2(ERK
cancer progression below) [144–146]. The high-risk 1/2) and p38 independently of epidermal growth
types use degradatory pathways to target several of factor receptor [162,163]. The cellular MAP kinases
theirsubstrates.ForE7,thisismediatedviathecullin ERK1/2regulatenuclearE1accumulationthrough
2ubiquitinligasecomplex,whereasforE6,itinvolves the phosphorylation and activation of a nuclear
the E6AP cellular ubiquitin ligase [147]. It is now localisation signal within the E1 protein, with their
clear that both E6 and E7 have a very large number activity being dependent on upstream MAP kinase
of cellular substrates, and that the identity of these kinase1/2(MEK,MAPKK)andp38.Theaccumula-
substrates differs between HPV types of the same tion of cyclin E and A and their associated cyclin-
high-risk species, as well as between the broader dependent kinase 2 in S-phase further contributes
high-risk and low-risk groupings [148]. The diffi- by phosphorylation and inhibition of the nuclear
culty in linking defined protein functions to HPV export sequence of E1 [164,165]. Other post-
cancer risk and indeed life cycle events is translational modifications in E1 (e.g. cleavage by
exemplified by the shared ability of high-risk E6 caspases) may also facilitate differentiation-
proteins to degrade p53 and PDZ substrates and to dependentgenomeamplification,withtheaccumu-
induce keratinocyte immortalisation. For E6, recent lation of E1 in the nucleus enhancing viral DNA
structural studies have suggested a complex replication at the expense of cellular replication
multimeric protein that has potential to associate through induction of a DNA damage response
with multiple protein partners at any given time [166]. The E4 protein, which accumulates at very
point [145,149]. high levels in cells supporting virus synthesis
In the virus life cycle, the E6 and E7 play an [167,168] may in fact have a primary function in
essentialroleindrivingS-phasere-entryintheupper virus release or transmission [169,170], with the
epitheliallayerstoallowviralgenomeamplification. optimization of genome amplification occurring as
This also requires the E1 and E2 proteins, which anindirectconsequenceofitsexpression[34,171–175].
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
12 J.Doorbaretal.
Virus assembly and virus release from the phosphorylation and convert from a reducing to
epithelial surface anoxidizingenvironmentbeforevirusrelease.This
Completion of the HPV life cycle ultimately in- enables the progressive accumulation of disulfide
volves expression of the minor coat protein (L2), bondsbetweentheL1proteins,leadingtotheproduc-
cell cycleexit, andthe expression ofthemajorcoat tion of stable infectious virions [182,183]. The abun-
protein L1 to allow genome packaging. This re- dant E4 protein assembles into amyloid fibrils that
quires a change in splice site usage rather than the disruptkeratinstructureandcompromisethenormal
activation of new promoters, leading to an eleva- assembly of the cornified envelope [168,170,184].
tion in transcripts that initiate at the late promoter
Althoughnotpreciselydefined,itisthoughtthatE4
(p670 in HPV 16) and which terminate at the late amyloid fibers may contribute to virion release and
(rather than the early) polyadenylation site [85], infectivityintheupperepitheliallayers.
an event that is facilitated by the higher levels of
E2 expression that down-regulate p97 [176,177]. HIGH-RISK AND LOW-RISK HUMAN
These changes result in a switch from the produc- PAPILLOMAVIRUSTYPES AND THE
tion of an E1^E4, E5 mRNA to an E1^E4, L1 tran- DEVELOPMENT OF CANCER
script as genome amplification gives way to
genome packaging [177–179]. Encapsidation ofthe The ordered expression of viral gene productsthat
viral genome ultimately involves the recruitment leads to virus particle production is disturbed in
of L2 (by E2) to regions of replication prior to the HPV-associated neoplasias (Figure 3B). In cervical
expressionofL1andtheassemblyoftheinfectious disease,itisthoughtthatthelevelsofE6andE7ex-
virions in the nucleus [180,181]. Virus maturation pression rise from CIN1 to CIN3, and that these
eventually takes place in the superficial dying changes in gene expression underlie the different
keratinocytes, which lose mitochondrial oxidative neoplastic phenotypes,withCIN1lesionstypically
Figure4. High-riskhumanpapillomaviruses(HPV)infectiondisruptsthemolecularpathwaysthatregulateepithelialdifferentiationand
cellproliferation.CellcycleprogressionisregulatedinthedifferentepitheliallayersbymembersofthepRb(retinoblastoma)familyof
proteins.TheE7proteinsofhigh-riskHPVtypescantargetmembersofthisproteinfamilyfordegradation(showninB).Thisreleasesmem-
bersoftheE2Ftranscriptionfactorfamily,whichallowsbasalandparabasalcellstoenterS-phase.Inuninfectedepithelium(showninA),the
releaseofE2Fisdependentonexternalgrowthfactors,whichstimulatecyclinD/cdkactivitytoallowpRbphosphorylationandE2Frelease.The
expressionofcellularproteinsinvolvedincellcycleprogressionisregulatedbyp16INK4A,whichisinvolvedinanegativefeedbackloopbysup-
pressingtheactivityofthecyclinD/cdk.Theinabilityoflow-riskHPVtypestodriverobustbasalcellproliferationisthoughttobebecausethese
typescanonlyefficientlytargetthep130retinoblastomafamilymember,whichcontrolssuprabasal,butnotbasalcellcycleentry.Thehigh-risk
E7proteinsarethoughttotargetallmembersofthepRbfamily.InadditiontoE7,high-riskHPVsencodeasecondproteininvolvedincellcycle
entry.ThisistheE6protein,whichactstosuppresstheriseinp53thatwouldotherwiseoccurfollowingE7-mediatedelevationinp14levels.
(showninB)Elevatedp14leadstoinactivationoftheMDMproteinthatisnormallyinvolvedindegradingp53.High-riskE6proteinsdirectly
regulatep53levelsinthecellbymediatingitsubiquitinationanddegradationviatheproteasomepathway.Inuninfectedcells(showninA),p53
levelsaremaintainedatalowlevel,partlyasaresultofthenormalactivityofMDM
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 13
supporting the complete HPV life cycle [185]. The organotypicraftculturesystemsshowthattheloss
increaseinE6andE7activitythatisthoughttooc- of E6and the accumulation of p53 lead to asevere
curinhigh-riskHPVinfectionunderliestheCIN2+ impairmentoftheproductivestage ofthevirallife
phenotypeandpredisposesthecelltotheaccumu- cycle [152,192]. A similardependency on p53 inac-
lation of genetic errors that eventually lead to can- tivationisalsoexpectedinthelow-riskHPVlifecy-
cer progression [114]. In this model, the lower clegiventheabilityofthesevirusestopromotecell
E6/E7 activity in CIN1 is not expected to compro- cycle re-entry in the parabasal layers of the epithe-
mise the functions of the cellular targets of E6 and lium. Interestingly, high-risk and low-risk mutant
E7 sufficiently to facilitate cancer progression. The HPV genomes encoding E6 proteins defective in
deregulated expression of high-risk E7 proteins p53 binding cannot maintain episomal genomes
can stimulate host genome instability through de- [192,193], suggesting that the inactivation of p53
regulation of the centrosome cycle [186–191], plays important and pleiotropic roles within the
whereas deregulated expression of E6 contributes HPVlifecycle.Bothhigh-riskandlow-riskmucosal
totheaccumulationofmutationsbycompromising HPV types inhibit the p300/CBP (CREB-binding
theroleofp53inDNA repair.p53is important for protein) mediated acetylation of p53 that is re-
the induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis quired for promoter activation [194,195] via a
uponaberrantcellcycleprogressionandisatarget mechanism that involves the formation of a com-
of both high-risk and low-risk E6 proteins, which plex between the histone acetyltransferase, p53,
act to counter the rise in p53 that results from the andE6,butwhichdoesnotdependontheE6asso-
unscheduled DNA synthesis mediated by E7 ciatedprotein[194].Low-riskHPVsmayalsointer-
(Figure 4). Indeed, recent studies using HPV 18 ferewithp53functionbymediatingitscytoplasmic
Figure5. Lesionformationisthoughttobefacilitatedbythepresenceofmicrowounds,whichallowsthevirustoinfectepithelialbasal
cells(e.g.anepithelialstemcell(1)).Atparticularsites,suchasthesquamocolumnarjunctionofthecervicaltransformationzone,basal
cells,reservecells,andstem-like/stemcellsareclosetotheepithelialsurfaceandmaybemorepronetoinfection.Atothersites,thede-
velopmentofalesionmaybefacilitatedbyawoundrepair(2).Oncealesionhasbecomeestablished,basalandparabasalepithelialcells
canbedrivenintothecellcycle,eithertomediatebasalcelldivision(i.e.cellproliferation)ortodrivecellcyclere-entry(butnotmitosis)in
theupperepitheliallayersinordertosupportviralgenomeamplification(3).Clearanceofdiseaseinvolvesactivationofacell-mediated
immuneresponseandasuppressionofviralgeneexpressionasactivatedT-cellsaccumulateinthevicinityofthelesion.Itisthoughtthat
viralgenomescanpersistinthebasalepithelialcellswithverylimitedgeneexpression,allowingpossiblereactivationundersomecir-
cumstances,suchasitcanoccurfollowingimmunosuppression[245]
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
14 J.Doorbaretal.
sequestration [196]. Unlike low-risk HPV types, containing exclusive episomes, and for HPV 16,
however, the high-risk E6 protein can promote the around 30% (between 26 and 76% depending on
E6 associated protein-mediated degradation of study) of cervical cancers develop in this way
p53andalsoofhAda3(humanhomologueofyeast [217–219].Approximately70%ofHPV16-associated
alteration/deficiency in activation 3), which is a cervicalcancerscontainintegratedHPV16sequences,
p53 coactivator and a component of the histone whereasforHPV18,theviralgenomeisnearlyalways
acetyltransferase complex [197,198]. These func- integrated[220–224].
tions of E6 and the other characterized functions
of E6 and E7 described in the context of the virus HOST IMMUNE RESPONSESIN LESION
lifecycleearlier,underlietheabilityofthehigh-risk REGRESSION AND CLEARANCE
HPV types to cause cancers. Deregulation of viral Althoughhigh-riskHPVinfectioniscommon,with
gene expression in CIN2/3+ facilitate integration over 80% of women becoming infected at some
oftheviralepisomeintothehostcellchromosome, stage in their life, cervical cancer arises rarely as a
which can act to further deregulate the expression result of infection. Most infections are cleared by a
of E6 and E7. Although it is unclear how gene ex- cell-mediated immune response, although HPV 16
pression from the viral episome becomes and 18 persist longer than other high-risk types,
deregulatedinearlyCIN,datafromthevaccinetri- which may contribute to their higher cancer risk
als indicate that CIN2+ can sometimes occur in at stratified and glandular sites [225–227]. In gen-
young women soon after infection [199–202]. The eral however, genital tract infections by HPV are
deregulated viral gene expression that is thought commoninyoungsexuallyactiveindividuals,with
to underlie the CIN2 phenotype may be driven by the majority (80–90%) clearing the infection with-
hormonal changes, which affect the proliferative out clinical symptoms. Regression of anogenital
capacity of the infected cell [84] and/or by epige- warts is accompanied by a CD4+ Tcell-dominated
netic modifications, which may depend on the na- Th1 response, which is also seen in animal models
ture of the infected epithelial cell [203]. of papillomavirus disease [228–231], with a failure
Interestingly, the HPV 16 LCR contains hormone to develop an effective cell-mediated immune
response elements that can be stimulated by estro- response correlating with persistent infection, and
gen,andthereisconsiderableevidenceofcoopera- for high-risk HPVs, an increased probability of
tion between estrogen and HPV in the progression towardinvasive carcinoma.
development of cervical cancer in humans and in In addition, manyHPVinfectionscounterdetec-
model systems [84,204–206]. Several studies have tion by the innate immune response. The life cycle
recently reported that the LCR is differentially is intra-epithelial, produces no viraemia, cell lysis,
methylatedaccordingtodiseasegrade,whichsug- orcelldeath,andreplicationisnotassociatedwith
gests that epigenetic changes may also regulate inflammation [232]. Pro-inflammatory cytokines
promoter usage [207] (and thus disease [114]) and such as Type I interferons are not released, and
indeedbeexacerbatedbytheexpressionoftheviral the signals for Langerhans cell/dendritic cell acti-
oncogenes[122,208,209].Althoughcommonfragile vation, migration, and recruitment are largely ab-
sites in the host genome are considered to be hot sent [233]. Productively infected cells expressing
spotswhereintegrationislikelytooccur[210],inte- abundant viral proteins are shed from the surface
grationisachanceevent, whichcansometimesre- of the epithelium, away from circulating immune
sultindisruptionoftheviralE2genethatnormally cells. For high-risk Alpha types, several mecha-
suppresses transcription of E6 and E7. Most cervi- nisms of immune evasion have been established.
calcancerscontainoneormorecopiesofHPVinte- The E6 protein of high-risk HPV types is known
grated into the host chromosome, with the viral to interfere with Tyk2 function, and as a result of
integration site frequently lying either within the this is thought to affect STAT signaling
E1 or E2 open reading frame [211,212]. Integration [85,234,235]. Similarly, E7 is able to interfere with
andthelossofnormalE6/E7regulationbyE2facil- the induction of interferon response factor 1, with
itates long-term/ high-level expression of these both E6 and E7 being reported to reduce surface
genes [213–215], and generally occurs in high- levels of E-cadherin, which is thought to underlie
grade lesions such as CIN2 and CIN3 [86] [216] the lower abundance of Langerhans cells (the epi-
(Figure 3B). Cervical cancer can arise from cells thelial dendritic cells) in lesional tissue [236–239].
© 2015 The Authors.Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
Human papillomavirus 15
E7 reduces the total MHC abundance at the cell have co-evolved with their hosts in this way is the
surface,andthroughitseffectsonSTAT1signaling production of chronic inapparent infections, with
and the suppression of IRF-1, also reduces the virion production from the surface of infected epi-
levels of MHC 1 antigen presentation, which is ex- thelium in the absence apparent disease. This is
pectedtocontributetoimmuneescapeinhigh-risk the case for many Beta and Gamma HPV types.
HPV driven cancers [240–242]. Interestingly, the However, not all HPV types use this approach,
high-risk E5 protein also interferes with classical and it appears that several Alpha papillomavirus
MHCclass1processingandisthoughttocompro- types have evolved immunoevasion strategiesthat
mise the display of viral peptides at the surface of allow them to cause persistent visible papillomas.
the infected epithelial cell during the normal pro- As part of the papillomavirus life cycle in the epi-
ductive life cycle [243]. The low level presentation thelium,thesevirusesneedtoactivatethecellcycle
of viral antigens, in conjunction with active im- astheinfectedcelldifferentiatesinordertocreatea
muneevasionstrategiesandtheabsenceofinflam- replication competent environment, which allows
mation, is thought to favor immune tolerance genome amplification and packaging into infec-
rather than an effector Tcell response able to clear tious particles. To do this, they have evolved pro-
disease. Resolution of infection is thought to re- teins (E6, E7, and E5) that can interfere with the
quire cross-priming of dendritic cells with viral normal cell cycle regulation and can prevent apo-
antigens, followed by T-cell infiltration into the ptosis as a result of unscheduled DNA replication.
site of infection and shut-off of viral gene expres- In contrast tolow-risk HPVtypes,high-risk Alpha
sion.Human Langerhanscellsareknowntoprime papillomaviruses not only drive cell cycle entry in
and cross prime naive CD8+ cells [244] although theupperepitheliallayers,buthaveE6andE7pro-
recent data from the mouse [49] suggest that in teinsthatcanstimulatetheproliferationofinfected
the skin, the important cross presenting antigen basal cells and also cause neoplasia. These addi-
presenting cells are Langerin-positive and CD103- tional characteristics reflect differences in the viral
positive dendritic cells, which may be of dermal proteinsbutalsodifferencesinthewaythatthevi-
origin. When lesion regression does occur, it is ral proteins are expressed within the lesion. It is
not associated with significant apoptosis or cell generally accepted that deregulated expression of
death, and it appears from animal model studies these cell cycle regulators underlies neoplasia
that lesions are cleared by the replacement of ac- and the eventual progression to cancer in individ-
tivelyinfected cellswith“apparentlynormalcells” uals who cannot resolve infection. Most work to
as the basal cells continue to divide [100,230,245]. date has focused on the study of high-risk HPV
These “normal” cells can still contain viral ge- types such as HPV 16 and 18, but in the future,
nomes but without obvious viral gene expression, there will be a need to understand the different
with the virus life cycle becoming “re-activated” risks associated with other members of the high-
subsequentlyfollowingimmunesuppressionorpos- risk group and to more fully understand the mo-
siblyalsouponchangesinhormonelevels(Figure5, lecular pathways that they subvert. Such ap-
[245]). For cancer to develop, the virus has to evade proaches will, with some certainty, lead us
immune detection over a prolonged period of time. eventually to the development of better strategies
Cervical cancer patients have a reduced or non- fordiseasetreatment(i.e.targetedantiviralsorim-
existent T-cell response to antigens of the causal munotherapeutics), which are a necessary comple-
HPV type [246,247], which suggests that persistence ment to current methods of disease management
may be linked to a failure of the immune response (i.e. prophylactic vaccination, screening, surgical
oraninabilitytorecognizeviralantigens.Noobvious ablation, or local immune modulation). In the
linkbetweenHLAtypeorothersusceptibilityindica- coming years, it will also be important to consider
torshashoweveryetbeenmade[248–250]. high-risk HPV-associated diseases at sites other
than the cervix (e.g. tonsils, other transformation
CONCLUSIONS zones) and to understand the mechanisms by
Humanpapillomaviruseshaveevolvedovermany which low-risk HPV types can give rise to
millions of years to propagate themselves in a papillomatosis and under certain situations even
range of different animal species including cancers. An important part of these future studies
humans. A typical characteristic of viruses that will be to develop our understanding of the
©2015 The Authors. Reviews in Medical Virology Rev.Med. Virol.2015; 25:2–23.
16 J.Doorbaretal.
Gamma and Beta HPV types at the level of their helping in preparing the comparative analysis of
natural history and to consider the different low-risks and high-risk HPV protein functions.
mechanisms by which this group of viruses cause Our understanding of HPVimmunology has been
disease and, in some situations also, cancer. significantly enhanced through discussion with
Margaret Stanley (University of Cambridge, UK)
CONFLICTOF INTEREST and Dr Merilyn Hibma (University of Otago, New
The authors have nocompetinginterest. Zealand). The support and encouragement of Pro-
fessor Geoffrey Smith, Head of Department (De-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS partment of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Thanks to Dr Ignacio Bravo (Catalan Institute of UK) are greatly acknowledged. The Human Papil-
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain) for the evolutionary lomavirus Research Group at the University of
tree, which is modified from [6] and to Dr Law- Cambridge is funded by the UK Medical Research
rence Banks (ICGEB, Padriciano, Trieste, Italy) for Council.