Identification and Characterisation of Technological Topics
in the Field of Molecular Biology
Ivana Roche*
INIST-CNRS, 2 allée du Parc de Brabois, CS 10310, 54519 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy,
France, Tel.: +33 (0) 383504600, Fax: +33 (0) 383504650, ivana.roche@inist.fr
Dominique Besagni, Claire François
INIST-CNRS, 2 allée du Parc de Brabois, CS 10310, 54519 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy,
France, Tel.: +33 (0) 383504600, Fax: +33 (0) 383504650,
dominique.besagni@inist.fr, claire.francois@inist.fr
Marianne Hörlesberger, Edgar Schiebel
Austrian Research Centers GmbH, Tech Gate Vienna, Donau-City-Straße 1, 1220 Wien,
Austria, Tel.: +43 (0) 50 550-4524, Fax : +43 (0) 50 550-4500,
marianne.hoerlesberger@arcs.ac.at, edgar.schiebel@arcs.ac.at
* Corresponding author
Theme: Primary: S&T indicators for the identification of emerging fields (Theme 2); Secondary:
Visualisation and Science Mapping: tools, methods and applications (Theme 5).
Keywords: emerging technologies, bibliometric indicators, terminology evolution, diffusion
model, diachronic clustering.
1 Background
This paper focuses on methodological approaches for characterising the specific
topics within a technological field based on scientific literature data. We
introduce a diachronic clustering analysis approach and some bibliometric
indicators. The results are visualised with the software-tool Stanalyst® [1]. We
are applying our methods to the field “Molecular Biology”. This field has grown
a great deal in the last decade.
2 Problem / application
How can we identify and characterise important topics in a set of several thousand
articles? Which technological aspects can be detected? Which of them are already
established and which of them are new? How are the topics linked to each other? We are
trying to answer these questions by applying our bibliometric analysis methods to a set of
scientific literature data recorded in the bibliographic database PASCAL.
3 Methodology
The data for our study were extracted from PASCAL database in function of
their classification categories and keywords.
The diffusion model identifies three categories of terms: the established terms,
terms unusual in this topic, and cross section terms. We apply the indicator
TFIDF (text frequency inverse document frequency) adapted to our research
question and the GINI coefficient, a measure of statistical dispersion most
prominently used as a measure of inequality of income distribution or inequality
of wealth distribution.
The diachronic cluster analysis is realized with the help of a clustering tool
applying first the axial K-means method to produce a non-hierarchical clustering
algorithm based on the neuronal formalism of Kohonen’s self-organizing maps
and then a principal component analysis to map the obtained clusters. This tool is
implemented in the information analysis platform Stanalyst®. Considering two
successive time periods, our diachronic approach enables us to follow the field
time evolution by analysing the two obtained cluster sets and maps.
The applied methods are linked together as the following table shows.
Diffusion Model
Unusual Terms Established Terms Cross Section Terms
Clusters in
Diachronic Period
Cluster Clusters in
terms with roots in the first terms with roots in the first
Analysis the Second new terms
period period
4 Outcome/findings/results
The diachronic cluster analysis is made for two periods and shows which topics
of the second period have roots in the first one and which topics are new in the
second period.
2nd period cluster map
1st period cluster map
On the map of both periods, as we can see in the above figure, it is possible to
singularize an interesting dichotomous configuration represented by two very
strongly connected cluster networks associating about two thirds of the clusters.
However, these networks have quite different characteristics. On the one hand,
the themes present in the biggest one are related to the modelling and simulation
of biological phenomena. In the other hand, the little network is very
homogeneous and deals essentially with instrumentation topics. The remaining
clusters are scattered in the map with no significant links with the two above
described networks.
Concerning the biggest network, located in the left side of the first period map
and in the right side of the second period map, we can observe that structurally it
remains the same with two sub-networks brought together by the cluster
“Computerized simulation”. But its content analysis allows us to find some
interesting thematic evolutions. In the first period, its content is focused on both
the description of physical characteristics of biological structures and the
theoretical aspects related to the physiological process modelling using, for
example, neural networks. In the second period, we can detect a refocusing of the
couple formed by the clusters “Neural networks” and “Stochastic processes” and
an impressive densification of the resulting sub-network with the new associated
cluster “Brownian motion“.
The smallest network, located in the right side of the first period map, deals with
instrumentation techniques applied to measure and therapeutic issues. On the
second period map, the network is located in the left side and shows a significant
stability despite a reorganization of cluster contents.
5 Conclusion
“Molecular Biology” is a broad field. By applying the complementary methods
presented here, it can be characterised and described presenting different views
of the features of the field. On the other hand, the two methods point out the
relationship of the different topics in our investigated field and their evolution.
6 References:
FERBER, R. (2003). Information Retrieval, Suchmodelle und Data-Mining-Verfahren für
Textsammlungen und das Web, Heidelberg: dpunkt.
POLANCO, X.; FRNAÇOIS, C.; ROYAUTE, J.; BESAGNI, D.; ROCHE, I. (2001). Stanalyst®:
An Integrated Environment for Clustering and Mapping Analysis on Science and Technology, In:
Proceedings of the 8th ISSI, Sydney, July 16-20, 2001.
ROBERTSON, S. (2004). Understanding Inverse Document Frequency: On theoretical arguments
for IDF, Journal of Documentation 60 no. 5, 503-520.
SCHIEBEL, E.; HÖRLESBERGER, M. (2007). About the Identification of Technology
Specific Keywords in Emerging Technologies: The Case of "Magnetoelec-tronic".
Torres-Salinas, D., Moed, H. F. (Eds), Proceedings of ISSI 2007, 11th International
Conference of the Inter-national Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics, June 25th-
27th, Madrid, 691-69.
SPÄRCK, J. K.; ROBERTSON, S. (2006). Inverse Document Frequency - The IDF page.
VAN RIJSBERGEN, C.J. (1979). Information Retrieval, London: Butterworths.