Geophysical tomography. Theory and examples
Imaging polar and dipolar sources of geophysical anomalies by probability
tomography. Part I: theory and synthetic examples
Paolo Mauriello 1 and Domenico Patella 2
1 Department of Science and Technology for Environment and Territory, University of Molise, Campobasso, Italy
(E-mail: mauriello@unimol.it)
2 Department of Physical Sciences, University Federico II, Naples, Italy
(E-mail: patella@na.infn.it)
We develop the theory of a generalized probability tomography method to image source poles and dipoles of a
geophysical vector or scalar field dataset. The purpose of the new generalized method is to improve the resolution
power of buried geophysical targets, using probability as a suitable paradigm allowing all possible equivalent
solution to be included into a unique 3D tomography image. The new method is described by first assuming that
any geophysical field dataset can be hypothesized to be caused by a discrete number of source poles and dipoles.
Then, the theoretical derivation of the source pole occurrence probability (SPOP) tomography, previously
published in detail for single geophysical methods, is symbolically restated in the most general way. Finally, the
theoretical derivation of the source dipole occurrence probability (SDOP) tomography is given following a formal
development similar to that of the SPOP tomography. The discussion of a few examples allows us to demonstrate
that the combined application of the SPOP and SDOP tomographies can provide the best core-and-boundary
resolution of the most probable buried sources of the anomalies detected within a datum domain.
INTRODUCTION any standard deterministic interpretation approach, has
been included in the probability tomography approach,
Probability tomography has recently been proposed in thus avoiding any subjectivity during the interpretation
applied geophysics as a method to virtually explore the process. The polar source probability tomography has
subsoil in the search of the most probable emplacement shown its full capacity to single out the most probable
of the sources of anomalies appearing in a field dataset location of the core of the source bodies.
collected on the ground surface. It has originally been In the forthcoming formulation, dipolar sources are
formulated for the self-potential method (Patella, 1997 also postulated and are assumed as the most elementary
a, b). Afterward, it has been extended to the geoelectric physical sources that may explain, with proper spatial
(Mauriello et al., 1998; Mauriello and Patella, 1999 a, combinations, the response due to sharp macroscopic
2005 b), em induction (Mauriello and Patella, 1999 b, discontinuities. Dipolar source probability tomography
2000), gravity (Mauriello and Patella, 2001 a, b) and is expected to give insight into the spatial extent of a
magnetic methods (Mauriello and Patella, 2005 a). source body by evidencing the most probable location
In this paper we generalize the theory of probability of its boundaries. The joint analysis of pole and dipole
tomography to any geophysical anomalous field, under tomographies appears to be a goal of great importance
the assumption that the dataset, collected in a generic for a better definition of the sources of anomalies.
datum domain (volume, surface or line), can be viewed
as the response of a double set of hidden sources, say
poles and dipoles, requiring to be identified. THE PROBABILITY TOMOGRAPHY
The poles have been the only sources postulated in GENERALIZED APPROACH
the original treatment. They have been assumed as the
most elementary sources of physical nature, capable of Consider a reference coordinate system with the (x,y)-
reproducing, with appropriate spatial combinations, the plane placed at sea level and the z-axis positive down-
responses due to macroscopic entities. No recourse to wards, and a 3D datum domain V as drawn in figure 1.
an a priori choice of a class of models, able to generate In particular, the top surface S can represent a non-flat
synthetic responses compatible with the field ones as in ground survey area defined by a topographic function
P.Mauriello and D.Patella
z(x,y) and the bottom surface z (x,y) can correspond to The source pole occurrence probability
the maximum depths at which datum points are placed.
Let A(r) be a vector anomaly field at a set of datum We consider a generic m-th integral of the first sum in
eq.3 and apply Schwarz’s inequality, obtaining
points r≡(x,y,z), with r∈V.
where A(r) and s(r,r ) are the modulus of A(r) and
s(r,r ), respectively.
From inequality 4 we can readily deduce a source
pole occurrence probability (SPOP) function as
The 3D SPOP function satisfies the condition
Figure 1 The 3D datum domain, characterized by
irregular boundary surfaces. The (x,y)-plane is placed
at sea level and the z-axis points into the earth. and is assumed to give a measure of the probability
which a source pole of strength p placed at r obtain
as responsible of the observed anomaly field A(r).
Assume that A(r) can be discretized as
In some geophysical applications, the anomaly field
and kernel functions can directly be described by scalar
A(r)= ∑p m s(r,r m )+∑(d n⋅∇n )s(r,r n ), (1) functions. In this case, it is very easy to show that η m (P)
can be calculated using the expression
i.e. a sum of effects due to a group of M source poles, η (P) =C ∫A(r)s(r,r )dV , (5a)
whose m-th element is located at r ≡(x ,y ,z ) and has
strength p , and a group of N source dipoles, whose n-
th element is located at r n ≡(x n ,y n ,z n ) and has as strength using again eq.6 to obtain C m .
the operator d ⋅∇ , where d is the dipole moment. The concept of probability ascribed to the function
The effect of both the M and N source elements at a η m (P) is motivated as follows. In general, a probability
datum point r∈V is analytically described by the same measure Ψ is defined as a function assigning to every
vector kernel s(r). subset E of a space of states U a real number Ψ(E) such
We define the information power Λ, associated with that (Gnedenko 1979)
A(r), within the volume V as
Ψ(E)≥0, for every E, (8a)
Considering that the presence of a source pole p at
which, using eq.1, is expanded as m
r is independent from the presence of another source
pole at another point, the function
∫ η m (P) dV m
n=1ν=x,y,z V
Geophysical tomography. Theory and examples
can be defined as a probability density, since it allows a Assuming the projection of S onto the (x,y)-plane
measure of the probability to find p at r to be got in can be fitted to a rectangle R of sides 2X and 2Y along
agreement with axioms 8a, 8b and 8c. the x- and y-axis, respectively, as in figure 1, using a
Practically, η(P) is different from Ψ only for an topography surface regularization factor g(z) given by
unknown constant factor and has also the advantage to
give the sign of the source. Thus we can conventionally g(z)=
assume η(P) as the probability measure of source pole
occurrence at r .
m eq.10 and eq.11 can be regularized as
The η(P) function, specified in eq.5, can readily be
calculated knowing the mathematical expression of the
function s(r,r ), which is given the role of source pole m m m
elementary scanner (SPES) in the SPOP tomographic R
procedure we are going to explain.
The SPOP 3D tomography of a geophysical dataset
consists in a scanning procedure operated by the SPES
function. In practice, as the distribution of the source   2
poles responsible of an anomaly field A(r) is unknown, C m =  ∫A 2 (r)g(z)dxdy∫s 2 (r,r m )g(z)dxdy   (14)
we place a virtual source pole of unitary strength at the R R 
nodes of a grid filling a supposed target space beneath
where the integration intervals on the x-axis and y-axis
the ground surface. Since the elementary kernel s(r) is
are [-X,X] and [-Y,Y], respectively.
a known function, although assuming different forms
according to the geophysical method that is considered,
we can compute the SPOP value at each node of the
grid, using a digitized form of the integral in eq.5. A
positive SPOP value gives the probability with which a
positive pole, located where the SPOP value has been
computed, can be considered responsible of the A(r)
field. Conversely, a negative value gives the occurrence
probability of a negative source pole.
We show now a very simple example in order to let
the main qualitative aspects of the SPOP tomography
be soon clarified. Figure 2 shows two uniform spheres
immersed in a homogeneous half-space at a depth and
horizontal distance as displayed in the top section. The
contrasts between the constitutive physical parameter
of the two spheres and that of the hosting medium are
of opposite sign. The anomaly field is supposed to be
depicted by a scalar quantity, e.g. the z-component of
the gravitational field, and the corresponding dataset to
consist of measures taken on the ground. The anomaly
field map is shown, qualitatively, in the mid horizontal
slice in figure 2.
As the 3D V-domain, previously introduced, in this
case collapses to a 2D S-domain, the volume integrals
appearing in the previous equations reduce to surface
integrals extended over S, which in general is a non-flat
portion of the ground surface. The SPOP η
(P) function
Figure 2 A qualitative example of the SPOP tomo-
is now written as graphy. The two-sphere model generating anomalies of
opposite sign.
ηm =C m ∫A(r)s(r,r m )dS , (10)
S For the example of figure 2, S has been taken a flat
horizontal surface, hence from eq.12 it follows g(z)=1.
The SPOP tomography algorithm is applied with
the aim of designing a probability space of occurrence
  2 of elementary source poles, responsible of the detected
C m =∫A 2 (r)dS∫s 2 (r,r m )dS . (11) anomalies on the ground surface. Therefore, in order to
S S  enhance the filtering property of the scanner procedure,
P.Mauriello and D.Patella
in making the integrations in eq.13 and eq.14 it can be Therefore, at each point r three values of η (D) can
advisable to select different integration surfaces, letting be calculated. They give a measure of the probability,
X and Y vary from sufficiently small values up to the with which the three components of the source dipole
size of the survey area. The smallest values for X and Y located at r can be considered responsible of the A(r)
can be chosen such that the anomaly generated by a field. We expect that maxima of |η (D)| should reveal
source element located at a node of the grid is entirely structural discontinuity surfaces.
contained in the surface domain [-X,X]×[-Y,Y] centered Also the SDOP function can be calculated knowing
over the source pole. At each node, the computations the mathematical expression of the derivatives of the
must be carried out for all sizes of the (X,Y)-domain. base function s(r,r ). Each derivative is now assigned
The highest calculated value will be assumed with its the role of source dipole elementary scanner (SDES)
sign as the most correct SPOP value for that point. function.
The result of the SPOP tomography applied to the The SDOP 3D tomography of a geophysical dataset
two-sphere example is depicted in the lower section of consists again in a scanner procedure operated this time
figure 2. A diffuse picture of the most probable source by the SDES function. In practice, as we do not know
poles location is the peculiar feature of this new type of the distribution of the dipoles contributing to generate
target detection approach. The vertical and horizontal the anomaly field A(r), we adopt now a virtual source
positions of the barycentres of the spheres is exactly dipole of unitary strength and put it at the same nodes
reconstructed, since they correspond with the points of the grid, as previously. We can compute the SDOP
where the highest absolute values of the SPOP function value at each node by a digitized form of the integral in
have been got. As expected, no evidence can, however, eq.16. A non-vanishing value of any of the three SDOP
be deducted as it concerns the size of the spheres. functions gives the probability with which the relative
component of a source dipole moment, localized at the
point where the SDOP value has been computed, can
The source dipole occurrence probability be considered responsible of the given A(r) field. The
algebraic sign indicates now the direction of the dipole
We now consider a generic n-th integral of the second component along the axis to which the SDOP function
double sum in eq.3, apply again Schwarz’s inequality under examination refers.
and obtain for ν=x,y,z We show now another synthetic example in order to
illustrate the joint peculiarities of the SPOP and SDOP
  2 2 imaging. Figure 3a shows two infinitely extended half-
dV , (15) plates in contact, characterized by opposite contrasts of
 ∂ν n  ∂ν n their constitutive parameter with respect to the hosting
half-space. The graph of a scalar function, simulating
from which we deduce a 3D source dipole occurrence e.g. the Bouguer gravity anomaly along a profile L, is
probability (SDOP) function as reported. Since the 3D V-domain collapses to a 1D L-
domain, the volume integrals in all previous SPOP and
ηn ( ν D) =C nν ∫A(r)⋅ ∂s ∂ (r ν ,r n ) dV , (16) S L, D w O h P i c e h q , u in at i g o e n n s e r r a e l d , u c c a e n t b o e l a in n e o i n n - t s e t g ra ra ig ls h t e x li t n e e n . d ed over
Assuming that the L-domain lies completely on a
plane normal to the (x,y)-plane as the red line in figure
1, and its projection onto this plane, parallel to x-axis,
−1 is a straight segment of length 2X, using a topographic
l ine regularization factor h(x) expressed by
Again, for scalar anomaly field and kernel function,
η nν (D) can be easily derived as the SPOP η m (P) is expressed by
with C given by where
 2  2  X X  2
Geophysical tomography. Theory and examples
Accordingly, as only the x-derivative of s(r,r ) can Figure 3b shows the result of the SPOP tomography
provide useful results from this 1D simulated curve, the along a vertical section through the profile, normal to
η (D) regularized integral can be written as the strike direction of the 2D target. Two pairs of SPOP
nucleuses with opposite sign can be recognized at two
X different depth levels. The top pair is located inside the
η (D) =C ∫ A(r) ∂s(r,r n ) h(x)dx, (23) half-plates, while the bottom pair is placed well beyond
−X n the half-plates with a larger separation than that of the
top pair. In each pair the sign of each nucleus conforms
where to the sign of the constitutive parameter contrast of the
corresponding half-plate. The highest SPOP values in
−1 modulus belong to the deeper pair, which thus provides
. (24) a w n i th eq t u h i e v a g l i e v n e t n d a i n st o ri m b a u l t y io p n r s o o fi f l e s . o T u h rc e e to p p o l p es a i c r, o t m o p w at h ib ic l h e
−X −X  smaller SPOP values correspond in modulus, appears
to correctly outline the top level of the two half-plates.
For the example in figure 3, L has been assumed a The top pair of poles thus appears to be a geometrically
horizontal straight-line segment, therefore, from eq.20, correct equivalent representation of the semi-infinite
it follows h(z)=1. plates. The comparison between the two pairs of source
poles shows that the top poles marking the existence of
the true 2D model have less probability to occur than
the deeper equivalent source poles, which actually do
not correspond to any structure in the starting model.
The SDOP tomography can now be used to try to
solve this clear case of equivalence. As previously said,
due to the 1D nature of the dataset, from eq.23 only the
horizontal x-derivative has been calculated. The result
of the SDOP tomography is illustrated in figure 3c,
wherein only a nucleus very neatly appears astride the
top portion of the lateral discontinuity between the two
half-plates. It extends down to the bottom wedge of the
contact with still appreciable SDOP values. Its positive
sign indicates the direction of the horizontal component
of the dipole moment, which in full agreement with the
assumed model lies along the positive direction of the
x-axis from left to right. This is a very important result,
which confirms our basic assumption of the joint SPOP
and SDOP tomography as an efficient approach to the
analysis of the most probable equivalent solutions of a
given inversion problem.
CONCLUSION
Adhering to the propensity interpretative approach of
modern science (Marshall and Zohar, 1997) a proba-
bility tomography method has been developed in order
to analyze geophysical vector or scalar field datasets.
The purpose of the new method is to get rid of some
restrictive approaches that are conventionally adopted
to interpret geophysical datasets, usually derived from
very simplistic assumptions about the physical reality,
often dictated by some more or less idealized or exotic
Figure 3 Application of the SPOP and SDOP to- geological concepts. We postulate that the geophysical
mographies to a simulated prospection along a profile
reality consists of two kinds of reality, say actual and
perpendicular to the strike of a 2D structure. (a) Cross-
section of the 2D model and relative anomaly profile. potential, where we mean for actual what we get when
(b) SPOP tomography. (c) SDOP tomography. we can directly explore the geophysical entity, and for
P.Mauriello and D.Patella
potential the largest spread of possible structural confi- Marshall I. and Zohar D., 1997. Who’s Afraid of Schrödinger’s Cat?,
gurations compatible with the measured datasets. Bloomsbury, London, 402 p.
The new method has been tested on a few synthetic Mauriello P., Monna D. and Patella D., 1998. 3D geoelectric tomo-
examples, which demonstrate that the whole spectrum graphy and archaeological applications. Geophysical Prospect-
ing, 46, 543-570.
of the potential solutions to a geophysical interpretation
problem can coexist, from a probabilistic point of view, Mauriello P. and Patella D., 1999a. Resistivity anomaly imaging by
with the actual model, i.e. with the model which can probability tomography. Geophysical Prospecting, 47, 411-429.
then be proved to closely represent the true situation. Mauriello P. and Patella D., 1999b. Principles of probability tomo-
As previously said, we have gone through the SPOP graphy for natural-source electromagnetic induction fields. Geo-
physics, 64, 1403-1417.
tomography again in order to introduce in a direct and
more fluent way the innovative argument of the source Mauriello P. and Patella D., 2000. A physical pattern recognition
dipole tomography. For details about the application of approach for 2D electromagnetic induction studies. Annali di
Geofisica, 43, 343-360.
the SPOP tomography method to specific geophysical
methods, the interested reader is referred to the papers Mauriello P. and Patella D., 2001a. Gravity probability tomography:
recalled in the introduction. a new tool for buried mass distribution imaging. Geophysical
Prospecting, 49, 1-12.
Mauriello P. and Patella D., 2001b. Localization of maximum-depth
gravity anomaly sources by a distribution of equivalent point
Acknowledgements Study performed with financial grants from
masses. Geophysics, 66, 1431-1437.
the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research (PRIN
2000 project), the European Commission (TOMAVE project) and the
Mauriello P. and Patella D., 2005. Localization of magnetic sources
Italian Group of Volcanology of the National Research Council.
//arxiv.org/physics/0511192, 1-15.
Mauriello P. and Patella D., 2005. Introduction to tensorial resistivity