IMP Science Gateway: from the Portal to the Hub of
Virtual Experimental Labs in Materials Science
Yuri Gordienko*, Lev Bekenev, Olexandra Baskova, Sergii Stirenko
Olexander Gatsenko, Elena Zasimchuk
G.V.Kurdyumov Institute for Metal Physics, High Performance Computing Center,
National Academy of Sciences National Technical University of Ukraine ”KPI”,
Kyiv, Ukraine Kyiv, Ukraine
Email: *gord@imp.kiev.ua Email: sergii.stirenko@hpcc.kpi.ua
Abstract—The user communities outside of computer science
itself (for example, in materials science, physics, chemistry, biol-
Keywords—Distributed computing infrastructure (DCI), grid
ogy,nanotechnologies,etc.)wouldliketoaccessdifferentsoftware
computing, cluster, service grid, desktop grid, science gateway,
components and various distributed computing infrastructures
computational physics, molecular dynamics, materials science,
(DCIs)(likegrids,clouds,clusters)inasuchtransparentway,that
physics, nanotechnologies.
theydonotneedtolearntheirpeculiarities.Inthiscontext,”sci-
encegateway”(SG)ideologymeansauser-friendlyintuitiveinter-
face between scientists (or scientific communities) and different I. INTRODUCTION
softwarecomponents+variousDCIs,whereresearcherscanfocus
Recently research boom in nanotechnologies has started to ontheirscientificgoalsandlessonpeculiaritiesofsoftware/DCI.
searchandinvestigatenewnanoscalematerials,likenanocrys-
complex workflow management and integration of distributed tals, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNT), boron nitride nan-
computing resources (like clusters, service grids, desktop grids, otubes (BNNT), and their complexes, because of their unique
clouds) is presented. It is created on the basis of WS-PGRADE properties.Moleculardynamics(MD)simulationsofnanoscale
and gUSE technologies, where WS-PGRADE is designed for structures, processes, and properties are very promising in
science workflow operation and gUSE - for smooth integration the wide range of physical parameters, because of necessity
of available resources for parallel and distributed computing to investigate wide range of parameters (so-called “parameter
in various heterogeneous distributed computing infrastructures
sweeping”). MD simulations with such “parameter sweeping”
(DCI).Thetypicalscientificworkflowswithpossiblescenariosof
can be carried out in the available heterogeneous distributed
itspreparationandusagearepresented.Severaltypicalusecases
computing infrastructure (DCI) with desktop grids, service
forthesescienceapplications(scientificworkflows)areconsidered
grids, clusters, supercomputers, cloud resources. The recent
for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of complex behavior
of various nanostructures (nanoindentation of graphene layers, advances in computing algorithms and infrastructures, es-
defect system relaxation in metal nanocrystals, thermal stability pecially in development of DCIs, allow us to solve these
ofboronnitridenanotubes,etc.).Theuserexperienceisanalyzed tasks efficiently without expensive scaling-up, especially by
in the context of its practical applications for MD simulations in means of the science gateway (SG) technology on the basis
materials science, physics and nanotechnologies with available of WS-PGRADE platform for workflow management and
heterogeneousDCIs.Themostcrucialadvantagesareasfollows: gUSE technology for integration of DCI-resources [1]. Here
powerful and flexible workflow construction tools, which allow
we demonstrate the capabilities of these technologies realized
userstoapplyLEGO-styleforcreationofcomplextunablechains
for MD simulations and further data post-processing on the
withdefactostandardcomponents(likeR,LAMMPS,AtomEye,
basis of LAMMPS package for MD simulation [2], and other
ffmpeg) and customized components (like debyer, Pizza, etc.);
packageslikeRforstatisticalanalysis[3],Pizza.pyToolkitfor
smooth access to heterogeneous DCI and software; division of
user roles (administrators: operators of portals; power users: manipulations with atomic coordinates files [4], AtomEye for
principal scientists; end users: scientists, students); user friendly visualisation of atomic configurations [5], debyer for simula-
andintuitivelyunderstandableGUI(withadditionalmodules,ad tion of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron diffraction (ND)
fora and helpdesks; short learning curve for usual scientists ical workflows were created for simulation of several physical
without extensive knowledge in computer science. Some non- processes with various demands for the computing resources:
critical drawbacks of the approach include: scarce ”stdout”and
tension of metal nanocrystals under different physical condi-
”stderr” information, tacit context help for beginners, some
tions, tension of ensemble of metal nanocrystals under the
unavoidable upgrade issues, etc. In conclusion, the ”science
same conditions, manipulations with complex nanostructures
gateway” approach - workflow manager (like WS-PGRADE) +
like indentation of graphene membranes, thermal stability of
DCI resources manager (like gUSE)- gives opportunity to use
the SG portal (like ”IMP Science Gateway Portal”) in a very BNNT, etc.
promising way, namely, as a hub of various virtual experimental
labs (different software components + various requirements to II. BACKGROUNDANDRELATEDWORKS
resources) in the context of its practical MD applications in ma-
Scientists from user communities outside of computer
terialsscience,physics,chemistry,biology,andnanotechnologies.
science itself (for example, in materials science, physics,
1v1165.4041:viXra
chemistry,biology,nanotechnologies,etc.)wouldliketoaccess
various DCIs (grids, clouds, clusters) and concentrate on their
scientific applications themselves in a such transparent way,
that they do not need to learn the peculiarities of these
DCIs. In general, “science gateway” (SG) implies a user-
friendly intuitive interface between scientists (or scientific
communities), various software (standard and/or proprietary)
and heterogenous DCIs. Usually, SGs are not specialized for
a certain scientific area and scientists from many different
fields can use them. By means of SGs researchers can focus
on their scientific goals and less on assembling the required
DCI components. The most important aspects of SG are: a
simplifiedintuitivegraphicaluserinterface(GUI)thatishighly
Fig.1. Thegraphicaluserinterfaceof“IMPScienceGatewayPortal”.
tailored to the needs of the given scientific community; a
smooth access to national and international computing and
storageresources;collaborativetoolsforsharingscientificdata
on national and international scale. Several SG technologies create (easily in LEGO-style manner) the complex workflows
and frameworks are known (like ASKALON [6], MOTEUR (Fig. 2a) from separate simple components, which can be
[7], WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridge [1]), which use differ- standard or proprietary executables, scripts in various lan-
ent enabling components and technologies: web application guages, and command-line arguments (Fig. 2b). Application
containers (Tomcat, Glassfish, etc.), portal or web application developers can design and create complex workflows with
frameworks (Liferay, Spring, Drupal, etc.), database manage- taking into account various runtimes and resources needed
ment systems (MySQL, etc.), workflow management systems for each component (Fig. 2c), and output data type and size
[8]. Here usage of WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DCI-bridge is de- (Fig. 2d). End-users can submit, monitor, save, upload, and
scribedwithsomeexamplesinphysics,materialsscience,nan- retrieve various workflows with one or many jobs, and obtain
otechnologies.Thearchitectureofsciencegatewayideologyon intermediate or final results (Fig. 2d).
the basis of gUSE+WS-PGRADE+DCI-Bridge technologies
The whole process of the complex workflow creation and
management can be demonstrated by the MD simulation of
In short, WS-PGRADE portal technology is a web based
tension of metal nanocrystals (Fig. 2a) with the following
front end of the gUSE infrastructure. gUSE (grid and cloud
steps: (1) to register/sign in “IMP Science Gateway Portal”;
User Support Environment) is a permanently improving open
(2) to create a graph scheme for the basic components of
sourceSGframeworkdevelopedbyLaboratoryofParalleland
the workflow (yellow bricks with small input-output ports-
DistributedSystems(MTA-SZTAKI,Budapest,Hungary),that
squares in Fig. 2a); (3) to create a workflow from the graph;
provides the convenient and easy access to DCI. It gives the
(4) to configure the workflow (links between yellow bricks
genericpurpose,workflow-orientedGUItocreateandmanage
in Fig. 2a); (5) to run the workflow; (6) to monitor the
workflows on various DCIs. WS-PGRADE supports develop-
current status of execution. The complex workflow (Fig. 2)
ment and submission of distributed applications executed on
for this application contains several independent components
the computational resources of DCIs. The resources of DCIs
(LAMMPS package, Pizza.py Toolkit, AtomEye package, de-
(including clusters, service grids, desktop grids, clouds) are
byer,R-package,FFMPEG),whichcanbecombinedinvarious
connected to the gUSE by a single point back end, the DCI-
sets for the purposes of the end users [11], [12]. The end-
Bridge [1].
users can check the intermediate results: after MD simulation
by LAMMPS package (tables in the red rectangles in the
III. IMPSCIENCEGATEWAYINTERNALS centerofFig.2d);convertedbyPizza.pyToolkitscriptpackage
for post-processing (table in the red rectangle in the bottom
“IMP Science Gateway Portal” [10] (Fig. 1) is based
of Fig. 2d); visualizations of atomic positions obtained by
on the WS-PGRADE/gUSE/DC-bridge framework [1], which
AtomEye package (images in the top part of Fig. 2d); post-
is the complex system with many features. It distinguishes
processed results of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron
different user communities: administrators, power-users and
diffraction (ND) analysis obtained by debyer (tables in the
end-users.Theadministratorsoperateportalitself.Thepower-
blue rectangles in the bottom part of Fig. 2d); final results
users can develop new workflow applications by means of
after XRD and ND analysis, coordination number (CN) and
variousworkflowfeatures(graph,abstractworkflow,template,
radial distribution function (RDF) analysis, and stress-strain
application).Theworkflowsandtheircomponentsarestoredin
(SS) analysis obtained by R-package (plots in the green
built-inrepositoryandpublishedbytheapplicationdevelopers,
rectanglesattheleftandright sides ofFig.2d);thefinalpost-
which can be shared among end-users. It provides scientific
processed video of visualizations of atomic positions obtained
workflowmanagementforbothapplicationdevelopersandend
by FFMPEG package (video in the violet rectangle in the top
users, and supports various DCIs including clusters, service
part of Fig. 2d).
grids, desktop grids and cloud.
A. Workflow Management B. Integration of Computing Resources
“IMP Science Gateway Portal” leverages easy and sim- To run jobs gUSE allows to compose various resources
ple GUI utilities for power-users (application developers) to and execute workflows on various DCIs: clusters (PBS, LSF),
side), several clusters (PBS) with different configuration and
policies,testsdesktopgrids(BOINC)andclustergrids(ARC),
andplanstousesupercomputersandclouds.Inthiscontext,the
different requirements for the various components were taken
into account as to their possible location, runtime, output file
size (see Table I).
TABLEI. THECOMPONENTSOFTHEGENERALWORKFLOW(FIG.2)
Component Location Runtime OutputFormat(Size)
LAMMPS Cluster,DCI 1-10days Text(1-10GB)
R-package Server(Cluster,DCI) 1-10min Plot(<1MB)
Pizza-script Server(Cluster,DCI) 1-10min Text(1-10GB)
AtomEye Cluster,DCI <1hour 3DImage(<1MB)
FFMPEG Cluster,DCI 1-10min 3DVideo(<10MB)
debyer Cluster,DCI 1-10days Text(10-100MB)
C. User Management
The development and execution stages are separated be-
tween users with different background and responsibility
(power-usersandend-users)inthenexttwomainusergroups:
(1) “end users” — the scientists without extensive knowledge
b) of computer science with limited power and permissions (like
common scientists in materials science, physics, chemistry,
etc.), usually they need only restricted manipulation rights
and obtain the scientific applications in the ready state to
configure and submit them with minimal efforts; (2) “power
users”(“applicationdevelopers”)—theactualdesignersofthe
scientificprocessesandrelatedworkflowsforsimulations,usu-
ally they need to design and create the application (workflow)
for comfortable work of the end-users.
IV. USECASESOFPRACTICALAPPLICATIONS
c) Several practical applications in materials science are pre-
sentedbelow,wherethedifferentworkflowsweredesignedby
WS-PGRADE workflow manager and used for computations
in DCI by gUSE technology.
A. Thermal Properties of Boron Nitride Nanotubes
The scientific aim of this use case (Fig. 2) consists in
MD simulations of boron nitride nanotubes (BNNT) with
exceptional physical properties, which are a prerequisite for
their wide practical applications in the future. The current
usercommunityinthefieldofnanotechnologiesandmaterials
science includes 2 user groups (4 end users) from IMP
and IPMS (Frantsevich Institute for Problems in Materials
Fig.2. TheschemeofworkflowcreatedbymeansofWS-PGRADEworkflow Science, Kiev, Ukraine). MD simulation workflow (Fig. 3a)
managementtechnologyforMDsimulations:(a)maincomponents(seetheir was used for investigation of thermal stability of BNNT with
description in the text); (b) invariant parts like executables, environmental different chirality, size and perfection of structure (Fig. 3b).
parameters(greencolor)andvariablepartslikeinputdata,scripts(redcolor);
The actually used workflow (Fig. 3a) was the part of the
(c) job runtimes and resources needed: short runtimes on a server side (red
general workflow (Fig. 2a). It included the following subset
color), medium — on DCI (blue color), long — on cluster (green color);
(d) output data: rough text data (coordinates and velocities of atoms) of the workflows: 1) LAMMPS + R-package — for MD simulations
hugesize(redcolor),post-processedtextdataofthemediumsize(bluecolor), and plotting some post-processed values; 2) LAMMPS + R-
output image data (plots, 3D images) of the small size (green color), and package+AtomEye—forthesameoperations+visualization
output3Dvideodataofthesmallsize(violetcolor).
of intermediate states of atoms.
From the physical point of view this work allowed us to
derive some conclusions as to dynamics (Fig. 3c) and temper-
clustergrids(ARC,gLite,GT2,GT4,GT5,UNICORE),super- ature dependence of the BNNT collapse for various physical
computers (e.g. via UNICORE), desktop grids (BOINC) and parameters (chiralities, sizes and perfection of structure) and
clouds (via CloudBroker Platform and GAE). At the moment the simulation parameters (type of potential, boundary condi-
“IMP Science Gateway Portal” uses local resources (server tions,thermalconditions,etc.).Theobtainedresultsextendthe
Fig. 3. Use case for MD simulations of thermal properties of BNNTs: (a)
the part of the general workflow (Fig. 2a), which was actually used here; Fig. 4. Use case for MD simulations of elastic properties of graphene: (a)
(b) visualization by AtomEye (collapse of BNNT, nitrogen atoms — red thepartofthegeneralworkflow(Fig.2a),whichwasactuallyusedhere;(b)
color, boron atoms — blue color), (c) data post-processing and plot output visualizationbyAtomEye(nanoindentationofthegraphenemonolayer,mobile
by R-package (dynamics of the collapse for BNNT characterized by atom carbonatoms—redcolor,fixedcarbonatoms—yellowcolor,nanoindentor
coordinationnumbers). atoms—graycolor),(c)datapost-processingandplotoutputbyR-package
(fordifferentspeedsofthenanoindentor).
known experimental data on the thermal stability of BNNTs
and described elsewhere [17]. membrane deforms and collapses within a wide range of
physical parameters (strain, applied force, indentor shape,
indentor velocity, etc.) (Fig. 4c). These results confirm and
B. Elastic Properties of Graphene
enrich the known experimental data of nanoindentation and
The scientific aim of this use case (Fig. 4) was MD described elsewhere [16].
simulation of nanoindentation of monolayer graphene mem-
brane in an atomic force microscope. Its user community in C. Mechanical Properties of Metal Nanocrystals
the field of nanotechnologies includes 2 user groups (5 end
The scientific aim of this use case (Fig. 5) was MD
users) from IMP and SPM/RS-Centre (Centre of scanning
simulationofrelaxationbehaviorofnanocrystalsafteruniaxial
probemicroscopyandresonancespectroscopy,Kyiv,Ukraine).
tension (Fig. 5b) [13], [14]. Its user community in the field of
MD simulation workflow (Fig. 4a) was used for investiga-
nanotechnologies includes 2 user groups (3 end users) from
tion of nanoindentation processes with different velocities,
IMP and KNU (Kyiv National University, Kyiv, Ukraine).
size of membranes and perfection of structure (Fig. 4b).
MD simulation workflow (Fig. 5a) was used for investigation
The actually used workflow (Fig. 4a) was the part of the
of relaxation behavior of nanocrystals for different crystals
general workflow (Fig. 2a). It included the following subset
(Al, Cu, and Si), physical conditions (tensile rate, size and
workflows: 1) LAMMPS + R-package — for MD simulations
orientationofthenanocrystals)andmethodologicalparameters
and plotting some post-processed values; 2) LAMMPS + R-
(potential type, boundary conditions, and others). The actually
package+AtomEye+FFMPEG—forthesameoperations+
used workflow (Fig. 5a) includes the biggest parts of the
visualization of intermediate states of atoms, and final video
general workflow (Fig. 2a). The simulations included the
visualization.
following subset workflows: 1) LAMMPS + R-package —
Fromthephysicalpointofviewitwasshownthatgraphene for MD simulations and plotting some post-processed values,
like stress-strain dependencies (Fig. 5c); 2) LAMMPS + R-
package + AtomEye + FFMPEG — for the same operations
+ visualization of intermediate states of atoms and final
video visualization; 2) LAMMPS + R-package + AtomEye
+ FFMPEG + debyer — for the same operations + processing
data for X-ray and neutron diffraction and their plotting, like
XRD-plots (Fig. 5d).
From the physical point of view it was shown that the
oscillatoryrelaxationofinternalstressesisassociatedwiththe
periodic rearrangement of the metastable defect substructure
(Fig. 5b). These results confirm and illustrate the known
experimental data and described elsewhere [15].
V. DISCUSSION
The use cases presented here demonstrate that the general
purpose and application specific workflows can be created in
LEGO-style way by combining separate components-bricks,
which corresponds to some real world operations, physical
methods, and experimental devices even (see Table II). Ac-
tually, such workflows can be easily designed and used in b)
practice for MD simulations of complex natural processes
in materials science, physics, and nanotechnologies. Each
simulationworkflowcanbeconsideredasavirtualcounterpart
(virtuallab)oftherealexperimentalprocess,andtheSGitself
can be used as a hub of such virtual experimental labs in
materials science.
TABLEII. RESULTSOBTAINED,VIRTUALLAB(SETOFCOMPONENTS
USED),ANDCORRESPONDINGREALLAB
Simulationresult Virtuallab, Reallab,
(methodneeded) i.e.setofcomponents device
Atomicstructure LAMMPS[2] JEOLR005
inbulk(TEM) +AtomEye[5] microscope[19]
Stress-strainplot LAMMPS[2] H-Ptestingmachine,
(AFM) +R[3] JEOLAFM
CN,RDFplots(neutron, LAMMPS[2] X-ray c)
X-rayscattering) +R[3] diffractometer
X-raydiffraction LAMMPS[2] SOLEIL[20]
spectrum(XRD) +debyer+R[3] synchrotronfacility
Neutrondiffraction LAMMPS[2] SwissLightSource[21],
spectrum(ND) +debyer+R[3] LargeHadronCollider
Some conclusions were made as to the possible future
improvements of the workflow and resource management.
The main problem was concerned with different demands for
resources for various job parameters. For example, double
increase of model size leads to nearly proportional double
increase of the required memory and runtime. Sometimes this
wasinconflictwiththeavailablepolicies,likequeueingrules,
whenthejobruntimeshouldbelowerthanthequeuewalltime.
The typical example for the use case A (Fig. 3) with the
physicalsimulationtimeof1nsisshowninTableIIIforoneof
Fig. 5. Use case for MD simulations of mechanical properties of metal
of NGI-UA. In this connection, the GUI-feature, which was
nanocrystals:(a)thepartofthegeneralworkflow(Fig.2a),whichwasactually
pre-designed in SG for selection of a queue for PBS-clusters, used here; (b) visualization by AtomEye (defect substructure evolution in
wasveryuseful,becauseitallowedtoconstructworkflowsop- Al nanocrystal, after 15 ps, atoms in ideal lattice — green color, stacking
timized for runtimes lower that the prescribed queue walltime faults — red color), (c) data post-processing and plot output by R-package
(or when the walltime is a multiple of the job runtime). This
(oscillationoftheinternalstressPxx fordifferentnanocrystalsizes),(d)data
post-processingandplotoutputbyR-package(X-raydiffractionanalysis).
allowedtoincreasetheoverallefficiency,butthemoreprogress
could be reached by additional measures in SG, for example,
by optimal job distribution over various queues (which should
be automatic, and not manual, like here), and by polling all Other means for increase of SG-efficiency, like dual-layer
available queues among all available clusters with selection of hardware and software management in cluster systems [18],
the pool with the empty or more efficient resources. will be also of interest and great value and should be taken
TABLEIII. THEQUEUERULESANDJOBSINUSECASEA(FIG.3)
[5] J.Li, AtomEye: an efficient atomistic configuration viewer, Modelling
Queuename Walltime Cores/User MaxBNNT(atoms) and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 11(2): 173-177,
ku-small 90min. 32 <10×10(<840) 2003.
ku-single 8days 4 >40×40(>3360) [6] T.Fahringer, A.Jugravu, S.Pllana, R.Prodan, C.Seragiotto, H.L.Truong,
ku-normal 180min. 32 <30×30(<2520) ASKALON:atoolsetforclusterandGridcomputing,Concurrencyand
kh-large 120min. 128 <20×20(<1680) Computation:PracticeandExperience,17(2-4):143-169,2005.
[7] T.Glatard, J.Montagnat, D.Lingrand, X.Pennec, Flexible and efficient
workflowdeploymentofdata-intensiveapplicationsongridswithmoteur,
into account. Additional important aspect is related with the International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications,
failedjobs,whichshouldbere-run.Theproblemisthatforthe 22(3):347-360,2008.
bignumberofjobs(eachfordifferentsetofparameters)itwas [8] E.Deelman, D.Gannon, M.Shields, I.Taylor, Workflows and e-Science:
not very easy to filter the faulty jobs and re-run them again. An overview of workflow system features and capabilities, Future
GenerationComputerSystems,25(5):528-540,2009.
At this stage, it was performed manually by means of job
managementsystem,butitwouldbemoreefficient,ifthiswill [9] WS-PGRADE Portal User Manual, 2013
done automatically by SG after obtaining the corresponding
[10] Yu.Gordienko, L.Bekenov, O.Gatsenko, E.Zasimchuk, V.Tatarenko,
report.
Complex Workflow Management and Integration of Distributed Com-
puting Resources by Science Gateway Portal for Molecular Dynamics
VI. CONCLUSIONS Simulations in Materials Science. Proc. Third Int. Conf. “High Perfor-
manceComputing”HPC-UA2013,(Ukraine,Kyiv,2013),148-155.
Science Gateway Portal (like “IMP Science Gateway Por- [11] Yu.Gordienko, O.Baskova, O.Gatsenko, Enabling High-Performance
tal”) for MD simulations of complex behavior of various Distributed Computing to e-Science by Integration of 4th
nanostructures can be relatively easily created on the basis of Generation Language Environments with Desktop Grid Architecture
and Convergence with Global Computing Grid. Proceedings
WS-PGRADE technology for workflow management. These
of Cracow Grid Workshop’10, Cracow, Poland, pp. 234-243,
resourceful MD simulations can be effectively carried out in
the heterogeneous DCI by means of gUSE technology for
[12] O.Gatsenko, L.Bekenev, E.Pavlov, Yu.Gordienko: From Quantity
parallel and distributed computing in various heterogeneous to Quality: Massive Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Nanostruc-
DCIs. Several typical scientific applications were considered tures Under Plastic Deformation in Desktop and Service Grid Dis-
asusecasesoftheirportingandpracticalusing.Severaladvan- tributed Computing Infrastructure, Computer Science, 14: 27-44;
tages should be emphasized: (1) the modular-based (“LEGO-
[13] Yu.Gordienko, Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Defect Substruc-
style”) principle of workflow creation and management; (2)
ture Evolution and Mechanisms of Plastic Deformation in Aluminium
easy access to heterogeneous DCI and software; (3) division
Nanocrystals, Metallofizika i Noveishie Tekhnologii, 33(9): 1217-1247,
of user roles (administrators as operators of portals; power 2011(inUkrainian).
users as principal scientists; end users as scientists, students); [14] A.Gatsenko, A.Baskova, B.Bandalak, V.Tatarenko, Yu.Gordienko,
(4) short learning curve for usual scientists without exten- Application of Desktop Grid Technology in Material Science,
sive knowledge in computer science. Some ways for further 5th Int. Conf. “Distributed Computing and Grid-technologies in
Science and Education” GRID’2012, Dubna, Russia, pp.123-129,
improvement were briefly outlined in relation to the better
performance and efficiency. Finally, the “science gateway”
[15] Yu.Gordienko, E.E.Zasimchuk, L.P.Steblenko, A.N.Krit,
approach – workflow manager (like WS-PGRADE) + DCI
D.V.Kalinichenko, The Oscillatory Nature of Internal Stress
resources manager (like gUSE) at the premises of the portal Relaxation due to Self-organization of Defect Substructure
(like“IMPScienceGatewayPortal”)–isverypromisinginthe in Nanocrystals, Int. Conf. NANSYS-2013, Kyiv, Ukraine,
physics, chemistry, biology, and nanotechnologies. [16] A.S.Gatsenko, E.E.Zasimchuk, V.A.Tatarenko, V.L.Karbovsky,
Yu.Gordienko, Elastic Properties and Strength of Graphene
Under Nanoindentation, Int. Conf. NANSYS-2013, Kyiv, Ukraine,
[17] Yu.Gordienko, L.P.Sartinska, Thermal Stability of Boron
The work presented here was partially funded by EU FP7
Nitride Nanotubes, Int. Conf. NANSYS-2013, Kyiv, Ukraine,
No. RI-283481, and partially supported in the framework of [18] S.Stirenko,O.Zinenko,D.Gribenko,Dual-layerhardwareandsoftware
the research theme ”Introduction and Use of Grid Technology management in cluster systems, Proc. Third Int. Conf. ”High Perfor-
inScientificResearchofIMPNASU”undertheStateTargeted manceComputing”HPC-UA2013,(Ukraine,Kyiv,2013),380-385.
Scientific and Technical Program to Implement Grid Technol- [19] S.J.Haigh, H.Sawada, K.Takayanagi, A.I.Kirkland, Exceeding conven-
ogy in 2009-2013. tional resolution limits in high-resolution transmission electron mi-
croscopyusingtiltedilluminationandexit-waverestoration,Microscopy
andMicroanalysis,16(04),409-415,2010.
REFERENCES [20] F.Baudelet, R.Belkhou, V.Briois, A.Coati, P.Dumas, SOLEIL a new
powerful tool for materials science, Oil Gas Science and Technology,
[1] P.Kacsuk, Z.Farkas, M.Kozlovszky, G.Hermann, A.Balasko,
60(5),849-874,2005.
K.Karoczkai, I.Marton, WS-PGRADE/gUSE generic DCI gateway
framework for a large variety of user communities, Journal of Grid [21] B.D.Patterson,R.Abela,H.Auderset,Q.Chen,F.Fauth,F.Gozzo,etal.,
Computing,10(4):601-630,2012. ThematerialssciencebeamlineattheSwissLightSource:designandre-
alization,NuclearInstrumentsandMethodsinPhysicsResearchSection
[2] S.Plimpton,Fastparallelalgorithmsforshort-rangemoleculardynamics,
A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment,
JournalofComputationalPhysics,117(1):1-19,1995.
540(1),42-67,2005.
[3] RDevelopmentCoreTeam,R:Alanguageandenvironmentforstatistical
computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.