TECHNISCHE UNIVERSITÄT MÜNCHEN
FAKULTÄT FÜR INFORMATIK
Lehrstuhl für Echtzeitsysteme und Robotik
Implementation and Evaluation of multimodal input/output
channels for task-based industrial robot programming
Implementierung und Evaluierung multimodaler
Ein-/Ausgabekanäle zur aufgabenbasierten
Programmierung industrieller Roboter
Masterarbeit in Robotics, Cognition, Intelligence
Author: Stefan Profanter
Supervisor: Prof. Dr.-Ing. Alois Knoll
Advisor: Alexander Perzylo
Submission Date: 15.10.2014
1v76940.3051:viXra
Ichversichere,dassichdieseMasterarbeitselbständigverfasstundnur
die angegebenen Quellen und Hilfsmittel verwendet habe.
I assure the single handed composition of this master thesis only sup-
ported by declared resources.
München, den 15.10.2014
StefanProfanter
Industrial robots are used in many diferent felds of application: from huge welding
production lines for automobiles to assembly tasks in Small and Medium-sized Enter-
prises(SMEs). Suchrobotsystemsrequirespeciallytrainedemployees,whoknowhow
toprogramtheserobotsandhowtoteachthemnewtasksusingTeachPadsandspecifc
programming languages like KRL (Kuka) or RAPID (ABB).
Programmingtheserobotsisnotveryintuitive,andtheprogrammerhastobeadomain
expert for e.g. welding and programming to know how the task is optimally executed.
ForSMEssuchemployeesarenotafordable,norcost-efective. Thereforeanewsystem
isneededwheredomainexpertsfromaspecifcarea,likeweldingorassembly,caneas-
ily program a robot without knowing anything about programming languages or how
to use TeachPads. Such a system needs to be fexible to adapt to new tasks and func-
tions. These requirements can be met by using a task based programming approach
wheretherobotprogramisbuiltupusingahierarchicalstructureofprocess,tasksand
skills. Italsoneedstobeintuitivesothatdomainexpertsdon’tneedmuchtrainingtime
on handling the system. Intuitive interaction is achieved by using diferent input and
outputmodalitieslikegestureinput,speechinput,ortouchinputwhicharesuitablefor
the current task.
Thismasterthesisfocusesontheimplementationofauserinterface(GUI)fortaskbased
industrialrobotprogrammingandevaluatesdiferentinputmodalities(gesture,speech,
touch,peninput)fortheinteractionwiththesystem. Theevaluationisbasedonauser
studyconductedwith30participantsasaWizard-Of-Ozexperiment,wherenonexpert
usershad toprogram assembly and weldingtasksto an industrialrobot,using thepre-
viously developed GUI and various input and output modalities.
The fndings of the task analysis and user study are then used for creating a semantic
description which will be used in the cognitive robotics-worker cell for automatically
inferringrequiredsystemcomponents,andtoprovidethebestsuitedinputmodality.
Zusammenfassung
Industrieroboter haben ein weitreichendes Anwendungsgebiet: von großen Schweiß-
fießbändernfürdieFahrzeugindustriebishinzuMontageaufgabeninKleinenundMit-
telständischenUnternehmen(KMU).DieseRobotersystemeerfordernspeziellausgebil-
detes Personal für die Programmierung der Roboter unter Verwendung von TeachPads
und speziellen Programmiersprachen wie KRL (Kuka) oder RAPID (ABB).
DieProgrammierungdieserRoboteristwederintuitivnochschnellerlernbar;zusätzlich
solltederProgrammierereinFachexpertefürz.B.Schweißensein,umeineefzienteund
korrekteAusführungderAufgabenzugewährleisten.FürKMUssindAngestelltefürnur
diesenZweckwederfnanzielltragbarnochkostenefzient.AusdiesemGrundwerden
neue Systeme benötigt, bei dem Fachexperten für z.B. Schweißen oder Montage ohne
spezielles Vorwissen im Bereich der Roboterprogrammierung in der Lage sind, diese
Industrieroboter zu programmieren. Solche Systeme haben eine hohe Anforderung an
die Flexibilität und Anpassung an neue Aufgaben.Diese Anforderungen können durch
VerwendungvonaufgabenbasierterProgrammierung erreichtwerden,beiderdasPro-
gramm hierarchisch in Prozesse, Aufgaben und Fähigkeiten aufgeteilt ist. Das System
muss zusätzlich intuitiv bedienbar sein, um aufwändige Schulungen zu vermeiden. In-
tuitive Interaktion wird erreicht durch verschiedene Ein- und Ausgabekanäle wie z.B.
Gesten, Spracheingabe oder Touch Eingabe passend für die aktuelle Aufgabe.
DerSchwerpunktdieserMasterarbeitliegtinderImplementierungeinergrafschenBe-
nutzeroberfäche für die aufgabenbasierte Programmierung von Industrierobotern und
derEvaluierungverschiedenerEingabekanäle(Gesten,Sprache,Touch,Stifteingabe)zur
Interaktion mit dem System. Die Evaluierung basiert auf einer Benutzerstudie mit 30
Teilnehmern, durchgeführt als ein Wizard-of-Oz Experiment. Dabei mussten die un-
erfahrenen Benutzer verschiedene Aufgaben wie z.B. Schweißen oder Montage unter
Verwendung der grafschen Benutzeroberfäche und verschiedenen Eingabemodalitä-
ten dem Roboter beibringen.
Die Ergebnisse der Aufgabenanalyse und der Benutzerstudie werden anschließend
für die Erstellung einer semantischen Beschreibung verwendet, die in der kognitiven
Roboter-Arbeiter Zelle zur automatischen Inferenz der erforderlichen Systemkompo-
nentenundzurVorauswahlderambestengeeignetenEingabemodalitätverwendetwer-
den kann.
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Industrial robot characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 History of industrial robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.4 Programming concepts for industrial robots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.4.1 Online programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4.2 Ofine programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.5 Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2 Related Work 11
2.1 Multimodal interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2 Intuitive programming and interaction with robots . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3 User study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4 Evaluation of multimodal systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3 Input & Output Modalities 17
3.1 Why multimodality? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.1 Human Input Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.2.2 Human Output Channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2.3 Computer Input Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2.4 Computer Output Modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.2.5 Fusion of modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4 Domains & Tasks 29
4.1 Skill, Task and Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3 Task Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.4 Domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4.1 Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.4.2 Welding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4.3 Woodworking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4.4 Metal processing & Bonding materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5 Semantic description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5 Graphical User Interface 51
5.1 Frameworks & Technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.2 Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.3 Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.4 Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
6 User Study 59
6.1 Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.2 User Study Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.2.1 Phase 1: Introduction to the Evaluation & Background Ques-
tionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2.2 Phase 2: Introduction to the Application & Expectation Ques-
tionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2.3 Phase 3: User Experiment & Experience Questionnaire . . . . . 65
6.2.4 Phase 4: Opinion Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
6.2.5 Open discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
7 Evaluation 69
7.1 Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.2 Expectation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
7.3 Input modalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.4 Opinion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
7.5 Video analysis & Open discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
8 Conclusions 81
8.1 Future Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
A Qestionnaires 85
A.1 English Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.1.1 Background Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.1.2 Expectations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.1.3 Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.1.4 Opinion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.2 German Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.2.1 Hintergrund Informationen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.2.2 Erwartungen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
A.2.3 Erfahrung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.2.4 Meinung . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Bibliography 99
1 Introduction
Since the frst industrial robots were developed in the 1970s, the research in intuitive
robot programming got more an more important. Large companies with a lot size of
a few thousand can aford specially trained robot programmers for their manufactur-
ingsystems,butforSmallandMedium-sizedEnterprises(SMEs),buyingarobotisstill
something which isn’t proftable. Current industrial robot systems are complex to pro-
gram. SMEs normally have small lot sizes and don’t want to have big stocks. Conse-
quently, concepts like fexibility and agility are fundamental in actual manufacturing
plants [JN Pires, 2006]. [Wallhof et al., 2010] states that "Flexibility and adaption to
rapidly changing market demands is one of the highest design criteria for the working
cells and production facilities of the future."
Therefore research groups all over the world try to build systems which combine hy-
bridassembly(collaborationbetweenhumanandrobot)andeasierprogramming,even
with no special knowledge in industrial robot programming. By using diferent input
modalities, not specially trained employees should be able to work with the robot and
reprogram/adapttherobottoanewproductioncycle. Relativelyfewrecentroboticsys-
temsarecurrentlyequippedwithmultimodaluserinterfacesthatpermittoprogramthe
robot, or simply control the robot using natural means [Burger, Ferrané, and Lerasle,
2010]. A multimodal system is "a system that features multiple input devices (multi-
sensor interaction) or multiple interpretations of input issued through a single device"
[Chatty, 1994].
Thegoalofthisthesisistodevelopamultimodaluserinterface(UI)forindustrialrobot
programming,usedforindustrialmanufacturingtasks,andevaluatethemultimodalin-
teraction with the system. The focus hereby lies on the evaluation of multimodality
usingdiferentinputmethodssuchastouch,gesturesandaugmentedreality. Thefnd-
ingsfromtaskanalysisandtheevaluationarethenusedtocreateasemanticdescription
which can be used within cognitive human-robot worker cells.
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation
Currentindustrialrobotsrequireafairlycomplexandtimeconsumingteach-inprocess
for each task it has to execute. New tasks are defned using TeachPads, or by manually
specifying each coordinate and each single step of the task. Using such a TeachPad re-
quiresspecialtrainingandalotofexperienceandthereforetheyarenotveryintuitive.
Using a multimodal approach to program these robots would make the teach-in pro-
cesslesscomplicated. Amultimodalinterfacecanincludegestures,speech,haptics,eye
blinks, touch input and many others. Such multimodal interfaces have many advan-
tages: they are more robust against errors and even prevent many errors due to the
natural interaction with the system. They help users to correct errors or recover from
them more easily and bring more bandwidth to the communication. Multimodal sys-
temscanadapteasiertodiferentsituationsandenvironments. [JaimesandSebe,2007]
Among those advantages, fexibility ofers the user to select the most adequate modal-
ities in his specifc situation, according to his preferences and capabilities. Multimodal
interfaces permit diverse user groups to control on how they interact with the system
andthereforeaccommodateabroaderrangeofusersthantraditionalinterfaces-includ-
ing users of diferent ages, skill levels, native language or even temporary illnesses or
permanenthandicaps. Multimodalinterfacesevenimprovetheefciencybymorethan
10% to 25% when using multiple modalities at the same time. [Oviatt, 2012]
1.2 Industrial robot characteristics
A robot in general is a system or machine guided by a controller or electrical circuit
having actors to interact with the world. It is in most of the cases equipped with sen-
sorstoperceivethesurroundingenvironmentandactbasedonthecurrentworldstate.
Industrial robots are a specifc subclass of robots located at a fxed position, repeating
tasksoverandoveragainwhileprovidingthepossibilitytoreprogramandperformnew
tasks. The main diference to other numerically controlled machines is the versatility
of the robot: it can be equipped with diferent tools and has a much larger workspace
compared to the volume of the robot itself.
The Robot Institute of America uses the following defnition:
A robot is a re-programmable multifunctional manipulator designed to
move materials, parts, tools or specialized devices through variable pro-
grammed motions for the performance of a variety of tasks. [Tzafestas,
1 Introduction
The most important statement in this defnition is the word "re-programmable" which
gives the robot two main characteristics: namely utility and adaptability. Those two
characteristics are very important for industrial robots, and even more when used in
SMEs (Small and Medium-sized Enterprises) [Wallén, 2008].
The International Organization for Standardization, ISO, uses another defnition
for a robot, "A manipulating industrial robot is an automatically controlled, re-
programmable, multi-purpose, manipulative machine with several degrees of freedom,
which may be either fxed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation applica-
tions" [Tzafestas, 2013].
In summary, an industrial robot shall be easily re-programmable without modifying
its physical structure. The robot should also be able to work independently and au-
tonomously, and it should be fexible to provide easy adaption to new tasks.
1.3 History of industrial robots
The frst industrial robot as we know it today was developed in 1954 by George Devol,
who patented the frst multijoined robotic arm called Programmed Transfer Article,
but he was uncertain on how the machine can be used. In 1956 Devol met Joseph
Engelberger and founded the new company Unimation (from Universal Automation).
They visited 15 diferent car factories and around 20 other industries to determine the
needs regarding industrial robots. The result of this gathering of requirements was the
robot Unimate which was released in the year 1961 and installed in a General Motor’s
(GM)factorytoserveadiecastingmachine(seeFigure1.1). Itwasafairlysimplerobot
able to perform only one task [Westerlund, 2000].
Figure1.1:Thefrstindustrialrobot,Unimate,sequencedandstackedhotpiecesofdie-castmetal.
1 Introduction
After installing another 66 robots for GM, Devol and Engelberger were convinced that
the industrial robot had a future, but at this time the market wasn’t ready yet: the
manufacturingindustrywasn’tveryinterestedinindustrialrobots,whereasmediawas
theopposite. Engelberger,DevolandtheirrobotswereregularguestsontheAmerican
television,wheretherobotsservedcofeeorappearedincommercialswheretheyserved
beer. The robot changed to be a "funny toy" instead of a scary object [Wallén, 2008].
The frst robots in Europe were installed in the year 1967 at Svenska Metallverken in
Upplands, Sweden. Those robots did simple monotonous tasks like picking up objects
and placing them somewhere. These simple pick and place robots were followed by
robotsforspot-welding,whichwereinstalledin1969atGMforspot-weldingcarbodies,
and in 1972 at Fiat, where the frst spot-welding line was set up [Westerlund, 2000].
VictorScheinmann,amechanicalengineeringstudentworkingintheStanfordArtifcial
IntelligenceLaboratory(SAIL),designedin1969theStanfordArm. This6-DOF(degrees
of freedom) all-electric robot manipulator introduced the non-anthropomorphic kine-
maticconfguration,whichmadesolvingtheequationsforrobotkinematicseasierand
therefore increased the computation speed. Subsequent robot designs were strongly
infuenced by Scheinman’s concepts [Hägele, Nilsson, and Pires, 2008].
Trallfa, a norwegian company, saw the potential of the robots and wanted to install a
Unimate robot for painting their wheelbarrows as a fexible spray painting device due
to the bad working environment and thereby difculties to recruit new personnel. The
Unimaterobotwastooexpensive,thustheydevelopedarobotontheirowncostingonly
15000Norwegiancrowns(theUnimatewouldhavecost600000Norwegiancrowns). In
1967theypresentedtheirelectro-hydrauliceasytoprogramrobot. In1985ASEA(later
ABB) took over Trallfa and integrated the painting robots into their industrial robot
portfolio [Westerlund, 2000].
In1973therewerealready3000robotsinoperationaroundtheworld,30%ofthemwere
Unimation robots [Hägele et al., 2008; Wallén, 2008].
The frst microcomputer, the Intel 8008, was built into ASEA’s IRB 6, their frst proto-
typeofanindustrialrobot. Duetothelimitedspaceof8KBtheprogramwasextremely
complicated. The IRB introduced some new concepts such as fully electrical (drive and
controlsystems),ananthropomorphicstructureandtheuseofmicrocomputer. Thefrst
customerofIRB6wasasmallcompanywithonly20employees: MagnussonsiGenarp
AB.Theyusedtherobotforstainlesssteelpipeproductionforthefoodindustry. Using
theserobotshewasthefrstintheworldtooperateanunmannedfactory24/7. TheIRB
6 has proved to be very robust: life-times of more than 20 years in harsh productions
were reported.
The PUMA (programmable universal machine for assembly, 1979) from Unimation be-
cameoneofthemostpopularrobotarmsduetoitsdexteritywhichwasclosetotheone
of a human arm [Hägele et al., 2008; Westerlund, 2000].
1 Introduction
In the end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s, the development of robots was
mainly concentrated on assembly tasks. Arc welding on the other hand required bet-
ter motors and control systems. Takeo Kanade, a japanese computer scientist, solved
thisproblembybuildingadirectdrivearm,wheremotorsaredirectlyinstalledintothe
joints of the arm. In the mid 1980s, industrial robots were used for machine tending,
material transfer, painting and welding.
In 1978, the selective compliance assembly robot arm (SCARA) was developed. It is par-
ticularlysuitedforassemblytasksduetotherigidityintheverticalaxisandcompliance
in the horizontal axis. Its low cost design and fast motions contributed signifcantly to
create a world-wide boom in high-volume electronics production and consumer prod-
ucts (see Figure 1.2).
In 1986, Honda began a robot research program that started with the premise that
the robot "should coexist and cooperate with human beings, by doing what a person
cannot do, and by cultivating a new dimension in mobility to ultimately beneft soci-
ety."[Donohoe, 2007]
(a) SCARA (b) Kukalightweightrobot
Figure 1.2: (a) The SCARA (selective compliance assembly robot arm) has a high rigidity in the
From early on, the reduction of the mass and inertia was a primary target in robot re-
searchwiththeultimategoalofaweight-to-loadratioof1:1,similartothehumanarm.
KUKA reached this goal in the year 2006 by presenting the 7-DOF KUKA lightweight
robot (see Figure 1.2).
Apart from the traditional cartesian design, the company Güdel introduced a curved-
track gantry in 1998. This new design allowed the robot to circulate and change its
location.
1 Introduction
In 2005 the frst commercial robot for synchronized, two-handed manipulation was in-
troducedbyMOTOMAN.Thissystemfeatures13axesofmotionandisidealforplacing
it on a site that was previously accommodated by human workers.
In the following years research mainly focused on simultaneous and synchronous op-
eration of robots on a single workpiece and the increased usage of vision systems for
object identifcation, localization, and quality control.
Decreasing costofrobotsystemsandadvancementin automationfexibility makesthe
usage of industrial robots for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) more and
more attractive. Unfortunately these systems are not yet fexible and intuitive enough
to achieve a widespread use for SMEs.
1.4 Programming concepts for industrial robots
Thedevelopmentofmodernmotion-orientedrobotprogramminglanguagesdatesback
to the mid 1970s. One of the frst languages was VAL (Variable Assembler Language),
usedforUnimationindustrialrobots. Itusesaclearandselfexplanatoryinstructionset.
VALalsosupportslibrariesandroutineswhichallowtheprogrammertocreatesubtasks
andreusecode. AnexampleVALprogramisshowninListing1.1. Duetoit’ssimplicity
it was fairly impossible to specify complex arithmetic computations or to use complex
sensor data. VAL was also used for programming PUMA robots. Stäubli currently uses
VAL3 for their robots.
PROGRAM PICKPLACE
1. MOVE P1
2. MOVE P2
3. MOVE P3
4. CLOSEI 0.00
5. MOVE P4
6. MOVE P5
7. OPENI 0.00
8. MOVE P1
Listing 1.1: A simple VAL program moving the robot to a save position (P1), then to ap-
proach position (P2), moving to the object (P3), closing the gripper and placing the object on
languages_for_Industrial_Robots)
Already in the early 1970s reasearch groups started to focus on so called task-oriented
programming languages. One of the frst examples are IBM’s AUTOPASS system and
the LAMA system proposed by MIT. The basic idea behind this approach is to make
1 Introduction
robot programming easier by relieving the programmer from knowing all the specifc
hardware details, achieved by avoiding to code every tiny motion/action. Instead the
programmer is specifying in an intuitive way what the robot should do and how it
should do it.
Itturnedoutthatthemostdifcultpartinautomaticandtaskbasedrobotprogramming
is the execution and control of automatically generated action/motion sequences and
automated generation of collision-free paths. Besides some simple applications, like 4-
DOF assembly of PCBs, this is still a subject of current research. [Wahl and Thomas,
2002].
Current programming concepts can be divided into two main categories: Online pro-
gramming and Ofine programming:
1.4.1 Online programming
Inonlineprogramming,theprogramiswrittendirectlyontherobotsystemorbyusing
the robot itself. The most popular method is Teach-In where the programmer can use
a so called TeachPad (see Figure 1.3) which allows direct robot controlling by moving
the robot through a 6D mouse and touch input. With the TeachPad the programmer
cangeneratenew programsbyinsertingtheinstructionsanddefningthepositionand
poseforeachcommandmovingittothespecifcposition. Theseprogramsarestilltext
based and require sufcient knowledge about the used programming language.
directindustry.com
1 Introduction
1.4.2 Ofline programming
Ofineprogramminghasthemainadvantagethatyoudon’tneedtherobottowritepro-
grams. TheprogrammerwritestheprogramonaPCwhichisindependentoftherobot
system. When fnished the program is uploaded to the robot and executed directly.
The most commonly used ofine programming concept is text-based programming:
tasksaredefnedonthebasisofproblemorientedmodernprogramminglanguages. The
advantagecomparedtoonlineprogrammingisthattheprogramcanbeeasilychanged
and documented. Unfortunately each robot manufacturer has its own programming
language which requires a specially qualifed programmer.
CADbasedprogramspecifcationisanotherofineprogrammingconceptwhererobots
areprogrammedbasedontechnicaldrawingsansimulations. Theprogrammercanuse
a3Dsoftwareinwhichtherobotandworkpieceareshownas3Dmodelsandtherobot
can be moved and positions can be programmed. This allows to detect planning and
construction errors early and the scene can be viewed from any position. The disad-
vantageisthatallthemodelsoftheworkpiece,robotandtoolsmustbeidenticaltothe
real one to avoid errors. Flexible pipes are also hard to visualize within the simulation
butareanimportantfactorwhenplanningrobotmovementsbecausetheyresultinsig-
nifcant movement restrictions. Additionally you need to calibrate the robot to ft the
simulated world to the real world.
1.5 Contribution
This master thesis contributes to the feld of intuitive robot programming by evaluat-
ing diferent input modalities for task-based robot programming and by providing an
ontology which can be used by cognitive robot cells for semantic reasoning about in-
put modalities and task parameters. The evaluation is performed through a user study
conducted with 30 participants using a newly developed touch-friendly user interface
which integrates the four input modalities: speech, gesture, touch and pen.
Chapter2(RelatedWork)givesanoverviewoverpreviouslypublishedworkforintuitive
robotprogramming,human-robotinteraction,multimodalsystemsanduserstudiesfor
multimodal interaction. In Chapter 3 (Input & Output Modalities) diferent human in-
put and output channels are described which can be used for interacting with com-
puter systems through computer input and output modalities. It also includes a histor-
ical overview of the diferent modalities and evaluates advantages and disadvantages.
Chapter4(Domains&Tasks)introducesthehierarchicalstructurefortask-basedrobot
programmingusingProcess,TaskandSkillnotation. Thischapterdescribessomebasic
1 Introduction
skills required from a robot system and lists example tasks including their parameters
for diferent domains like assembly, welding, woodworking or metal processing. The
input modalities, Skills, Tasks, Parameters and system components are then modeled
within an ontology. This ontology maps abstract descriptions of tasks to basic instruc-
tionsfortherobotanddescribescausalrelationsbetweenlowlevelsystemcomponents
like sensors and higher level task descriptions.
Chapter5(GraphicalUserInterface)givesanoverview overtheimplementationofthe
graphical user interface developed for task-based robot programming with the main
goaltoprovideaneasyunderstandableandintuitiveinterfacefordomainexpertstopro-
gram a robot. The used technologies and frameworks are listed and the basic structure
of the software is described, which was built up to allow easy integration of new soft-
warecomponentsandquickadaptiontonewfunctionsandrequirements. Thischapter
alsoincludesadescriptionhowthisGUIwasintegratedintothealreadyexistingsystem
using ROS (Robot Operating System).
Chapter 6 (User Study) describes the structure of the user study which was conducted
to evaluate diferent input modalities for task based robot programming. It describes
thefourmainphasesofthestudyandhowthestudywasconductedusingtheWizard-
of-Oz approach. In Chapter 7 (Evaluation) follows the evaluation of the user study and
analysis of the results. The results of the study are analyzed and assessed.
ThelastChapter8(Conclusions)summarizestheresultsofthismasterthesisandhigh-
lightstheoutcomesoftheuserstudy. Italsogivesanoutlookforfurtherimprovements
of the system and challenges for further research projects.
2 Related Work
Thismasterthesisisrelatedtodiferentfeldsofresearch. Multimodalinputisusedfor
human-robot interaction to provide an intuitive interface for task-based programming
andinteractingwithrobots. Auserstudyisthenconducted,whichevaluatespreviously
defned input modalities and the multimodal system in general.
Thefollowingsectionsgiveabriefoverviewonrelatedworkinthoseareasbysumma-
rizing previous research projects and publications.
2.1 Multimodal interaction
A review of major approaches in multimodal human-computer interaction, especially
forbody,gesture,gazeandafectiveinteractionisgivenin[JaimesandSebe,2007]. They
statethatmostresearchersprocessdiferentchannels(visual,audio)independently. Ad-
ditionally multimodal fusion is still in its infancy and a combination of low-level fea-
tures,high-levelreasoning,andnaturallanguageprocessingislikelytoprovidethebest
emotioninferenceinthecontextofMMHCI(multimodalhuman-computerinteraction).
A more comprehensive survey of existing and recent advances in the feld of HCI can
be found in [Karray, Alemzadeh, Saleh, and Arab, 2008].
[Ruiz, Chen, and Oviatt, 2010] give an overview over the advantages of multimodal
input interfaces (Robustness, Naturalness, Flexibility, Minimising errors) and evaluate
cognitive load and performance in relation to multimodal interfaces. [Hinckley and
Wigdor, 2012] and [Oviatt, 2012] provide a comprehensive overview on diferent input
modalitiesandevaluatethesebasedonvariousaspectslikeinputspeedoruserfeedback
possibilities and clear up some myths about multimodal interfaces by discussing how
users normally react to them.
[Kawamura, Nilas, Muguruma, and Adams, 2003] presents an agent-based architecture
formixed-initiative interactionbetweena humananda robot. The platform providesa
basis for developing various agents that control robots and user interface components.
This agent-based approach allows an efcient interaction between human and robots
through an adaptive interface where an Adaptive User Interface Manager shows only
the most relevant information from each agent for the current mission.
2 Related Work
In [Iba and Paredis, 2004] a multimodal robot programming framework is described
that allows the user to program a robot interactively through an intuitive interface
using hand gesture and spontaneous speech recognition. [Hahn, 2010] examines
diferentnew inputmodalitieswithafocusongestureandspeechinputandconcludes
that there’s still some work to do especially in the sector of human voice detection.
2.2 Intuitive programming and interaction with
When working together with a robot, multimodal interaction can be used to instruct
the robot to perform specifc tasks or support the human worker. [Bannat, Gast, Rehrl,
and Rösel, 2009] present a system where the human can give commands via three dif-
ferentinputmodalities(speech,gazeandsoft-buttons). Theyshowthatitispossibleto
use multimodality in a working hybrid assembly process where humans are working
together with an industrial robot.
[Wahl and Thomas, 2002] describe a system which allows intuitive task-oriented robot
programming using symbolic spatial relations (SSR), defned in [Ambler and Popple-
stone, 1975]. SSRs describe relations between assembly parts, e.g. "shaft1 of bulb fts
hole1 of rack". They state that there’s still a tremendous gap between commercially
available robot programming languages and methods developed in research laborato-
ries all over the world.
Afurtherstepintomoreintuitiveteachingmethodsforsmallandmediumenterprisesis
describedin[SchraftandMeyer,2006]: theypresentamethodforadaptingtrajectories
by transforming them into sequences of geometric primitives. Then these primitives
cangetchangedaccordingtothespecifctaskresultinginasignifcantlyfasterteach-in
process. Another approach of defning welding and gluing trajectories is described in
[Meyer,Hollmann,Parlitz,andHägele,2007]wheretheusercanprogramtherobotby
demonstration supported by graphical and verbal interfaces. [J.N. Pires, Godinho, and
Araújo,2007]exploresthepossibilitytoobtainrobotprogramsfromtechnicaldrawings
onasheetofpaperusingadigitalpenincombinationwithCADmodels. Heshowsthat
this approach is very useful and powerful, especially for Small and Medium-sized En-
terprises.
AnotherCAD-basedhuman-robotinterfaceallowingnon-expertuserstoteacharobot,
is presented in [Neto, Mendes, Araújo, Pires, and Moreira, 2012]: they show that it is
possibletogeneraterobotprogramsfromcommonCADdrawingsandrunthemonthe
robot. The programmer opens a 3D CAD Drawing and can draw robot trajectories di-
rectly into the model.
In [Carø e, Hvilshø j, and Schou, 2014] an intuitive programming system for a mobile
2 Related Work
KUKALWRisdevelopedwhichusesahierarchicalstructure(task,skillanddeviceprim-
itives) to generate a robot program. This tool is called Little Helper ++. The developed
TerminalandGraphicalUserInterfacestillrequirestheusertodefnealargenumberof
parameters since the system doesn’t use any knowledge base for automatic reasoning.
Theyconcludethattheskill-basedapproachisbenefcialforprogrammingandexecut-
ingcomplexindustrialtasks,especiallywhentryingtoabstractfromcomplexlowlevel
robot functionalities as used for task-based robot programming.
[Neto,Pires,andMoreira,2010]describeasystemusingahand-heldaccelerometer(Wii
Remote Controller) in combination with speech input for high-level robot program-
ming. They use Artifcial Neural Networks (ANNs) for gesture recognition to control
the movement of the robot and reach a recognition rate up to 96%.
Combining diferent input modalities with augmented reality (AR) even improves the
intuitivenessofhuman-robotinteraction. [Ameri,Akan,andCürüklü,2010]useimages
fromacameramountedonthegripperenhancedwithinformationoverlaysandshows
that it helps human workers to operate and program a robot easier and faster.
[Gaschler,Springer,Rickert,andKnoll,2014]presentintheirpaperanovelaugmented
reality system for defning virtual obstacles, specifying tool positions, and specifying
robottasks. A 3Dinputdeviceisusedtodefnepointsinrealworld,anoverlayprojec-
tion and monitor give the user feedback on the current system state.
Ahybridassemblystationforhuman-machinecoworkerisdescribedin[Wallhofetal.,
2010]: The robot learns new tasks from worker instructions using voice, gaze and tac-
tileinteractionbackedbyaknowledge-basedsystemcontrollerthatisorchestratingthe
skillsofconnectedmodulesandisrepresentingsensoreventsandtheworktasksasfrst
order logic predicates. [Rigoll, 2011] states that such hybrid assembly stations require
completerepertoireofmultimodalrecognitiontechniques,advancedoutputgeneration,
aswellasintelligentknowledgeprocessinginordertobeabletoassisthumanworkers
in assembly tasks with and without additional support from robots.
For robots who collaborate with human workers it’s important to know which action
the human is currently performing and if it is safe for the robot to move. [Hartmann,
2011]developedforhisPhDthesisasystemwhichusesvisualtrackersandinertialmea-
surementunitsandisabletorecognizelow-levelactivitiesandcomplextaskswhichare
sequences of low-level actions. He demonstrated that for task level recognition the in-
corporation of context knowledge is essential for recognition from uncertain inputs.
Another gesture based control and programming system is proposed by [Lambrecht,
Kleinsorge,andKruger,2011]wheretheusercandefnetrajectoriesusinghandgestures
and program an assembly sequence through task demonstration [Lambrecht, Klein-
sorge, Rosenstrauch, and Kruger, 2013]. Lambrecht constructs a virtual scene recon-
struction and pose estimation of the objects using 2D cameras from which the sub-
sequent poses of the objects can be derived. Out of these subsequent poses, a robot
program is generated.
[Gleeson, MacLean, Haddadi, Croft, and Alcazar, 2013] produced a gestural lexicon by
2 Related Work
observing human interactions during an industrial based assembly task. The gestures
were then implemented on a robot arm and evaluated in human-robot trials. Glesson
concludes that the gestures they found are intuitive to understand, even if they are ex-
ecuted by a robot arm.
Most of the systems presented above are optimized for a specifc domain or task and
arenotveryfexibleoradaptive. Usingthosesystemsoftenrequiresspecialknowledge
about robotics and is therefore not suitable for domain experts of other areas working
in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises. By integrating knowledge databases, most of
these parameters could be inferred automatically making it easier to program the sys-
tem and to be more fexible and adaptive. For some of the projects the graphical user
interface is not that intuitive or the system heavily relies on speech input which isn’t
appropriate for usage in loud environments like assembly factories.
2.3 User study
Designingauserstudyisaresearchfeldonitsown. Therearevariouswaysaquestion-
naire can be structured or how to focus on diferent aspects. A comparison of diferent
survey types and implementations in human-computer interaction is given in [Ozok,
2012]. Ozoklistsandcomparesvarioussurveytypes,designtechniquesandevaluation
techniques. He also discusses implementation challenges for user studies in open and
controlled environments.
[Kühnel,Westermann,Weiss,andMöller,2010]compareintheirpublicationestablished
questionnairesandinteractionparametersandevaluatediferentratingmethodsforus-
abilitymeasurements(SUS,CSUQ,SUMI)andtomeasureintuitiveuseanduserinterface
satisfaction (QUIS). They state that AttrakDif, SUS and USE are suitable for usability
evaluation of systems with multimodal interfaces but the selection of an appropriate
questionnaire depends on the goal of the evaluation.
[Dahlbäck,Jönsson,andAhrenberg,1993]argumentintheirpaper"WizardofOzStud-
ies-WhyandHow"thatWizardofOzstudiesarerequiredtoconsidertheuniquequali-
tiesofman-machineinteraction. Dialogsbetweenhumanandhumandiferfromdialogs
betweenhumanandmachineandthereforeitmayhaveamajorinfuenceifausertalks
to a machine instead of a human which makes data from human-human interaction
an unreliable source for designing natural language processing systems. Dahlbäck de-
scribes diferent factors which infuence how we speak to a human or a machine an
so it’s necessary to use Wizard of Oz studies to fully evaluate the requirements for the
system.
2 Related Work
SUXES is a user experience evaluation method for spoken and multimodal interaction
describedin[TurunenandHakulinen,2009]. Itcapturesuserexpectationsanduserex-
periences, making it possible to analyze the state of the application and its interaction
methods and compare the results. It’s suitable for iterative development and prototyp-
ing, while the most important feature is the collection of user expectations.
2.4 Evaluation of multimodal systems
Therealreadyarediferentuserstudiesandevaluationsofmultimodalsystemsforvari-
oustypesoftasksordomains. Thissectionpresentssomeofthesestudiesandhighlights
their result related to multimodal input and output.
[Ren, Zhang, and Dai, 2000] found out, that for CAD applications, users prefer
pen+speech+mouse input. Within another independent study by Ren, users preferred
pen+speechformapapplications. Notonlythetypeofthetaskbutalsothecomplexity
infuences the choice of modality: [Oviatt, Coulston, and Lunsford, 2004] reports that
the likelihood of multimodality increases with the cognitive load of the task.
[Bellik, Rebaï, and Machrouh, 2009] show that the output modality used by the system
infuences the choice of the user too: if the system uses verbal output, users tend to
usespeechinput,whilegraphicsoutput(icons)leadtotouchscreenuse. Anotherinfu-
encing factor is the situational context in terms of privacy of the situation, where the
interaction takes place. [Jöst, Häuß ler, Merdes, and Malaka, 2005] and [Wasinger and
Krüger, 2006] proof a declining willingness to use multimodal input with decreasing
intimacy of the relationship between the user and other persons around and that they
prefer to use non-observable modalities like handwriting and touch gestures.
The computer literacy (expert vs. non expert users) additionally infuences the choice
of modality. Expert users prefer to interact multimodally, whereas non expert users
showed no preference between unimodal and multimodal [Angeli and Gerbino, 1998].
Similar results were gained by [Althof, McGlaun, Spahn, and Lang, 2001] who found
out that experts tend to use haptic devices (Mouse, Touchscreen in combination with
Speech), whereas normal computer users and beginners prefer combinations of ad-
vanced input devices (speech in combination with hand gestures).
[Naumann,2009]comparedmultimodalitybetweenolderandyoungerusers. Heshows
thatolderusersratedmotioninteractionworsethanyoungerusersandthatolderusers
showed a generally lower performance. Overall he states that motion control was the
onlymodalitynotsuitableforolderusersandthatpriorknowledgeinfuencesthechoice
of modality.
[WasingerandKrüger,2006]examinedtheroleofgenderwhenchoosingmultimodality:
womenfeellesscomfortableusingspeechinapublicenvironmentthanmendo. [Schüs-
sel,Honold,andWeber,2013]confrmedthisresultintheirWizardofOzstudywith53
2 Related Work
subjects to study the infuencing factors on multimodal interaction using speech, ges-
tures,touchandarbitrarymultimodalcombinations. Femalesalmostonlyusethetouch
screen, males are much more diverse.
In1994[SturmanandZeltzer,1994]investigatedGlove-baseinputfordiferentapplica-
tions and systems. Sturman’s conclusion is that glove-based input or, more generally,
whole-handinput,requirestheusertowearaspecialdevicewhichisagainstthegoalof
devicelessnaturalcomputerinteraction. Untilnownotmuchhaschanged: togetaccu-
ratehandtrackingdata,there’sstilladatagloverequirednonetheless,thedevelopment
of 3D sensors like the LeapMotion or Kinect 2 sensor.
[Cohen,Johnston,McGee,andOviatt,1998]conductedauserstudycomparingagraph-
ical user interface with a pen/voice multimodal interface for the task of military force
laydown. Using this interface the participant reached a speed improvement of 3.2 to
8.7-fold. Cohen states that multimodal interaction leads to substantial speed an ef-
ciency advantages of multimodal interaction over direct manipulation-based graphical
user interfaces.
3 Input & Output Modalities
Currenthuman-computerinteraction(HCI)isbasedonthe35-year-oldWindows-Icons-
Menu-Pointer (WIMP) paradigm. Recent increase in computing power and develop-
mentofnewsensorsledtonewpossibilitiesformoreintuitiveuserinterfacesandinput
modalities, that should be used in modern systems especially for robots.
Multimodality is defned by [Chatty, 1994] as "a System that features multiple input
devices (multi-sensor interaction) or multiple interpretations of input issued through a
single device". [Nigay and Joëlle Coutaz, 1993a] uses a quite similar defnition of mul-
timodality: "it is the capacity ofthe system to communicate with a user along diferent
types of communication channels and to extract and convey meaning automatically".
This means that a multimodal system uses speech, gestures and other human input
channels to allow the user to interact with the system.
This chapter gives an overview over diferent input and output channels for human-
humanorhuman-computerinteractionfollowedbycomputerinputandoutputmodal-
ities. Laterchaptersarebasedonthedefnitionoftheseinputandoutputmodalitiesand
use them within the semantic description for tasks and parameter input.
3.1 Why multimodality?
The main goal for using multimodal interfaces is to support more fexible, powerfully
expressive, and low cognitive load means of human-computer interaction. They are
expected to be easier to learn and are preferred by users for many applications. Some
of the more notable advantages are [Maybury and Wahlster, 1998; Ruiz et al., 2010]:
Robustness Using diferent input methods at the same time increases the likelihood
of correct recognition, resulting in an increase of the quality of communication
between the user and the system. For example if using speech and gestures the
user says "Take this green object" and points to a specifc item, the system can
infer the task that it should do from speech, thus knows that it should pick a
green object. By using the gesture it can then determine which object the user
meant.
3 Input & Output Modalities
Naturalness Human-computer interaction is mainly based on the well-established
practices of human-human interaction where the user can choose the desired
modality and thus resulting in a high degree of naturalness. This increases the
communicative bandwidth and therefore leads to a higher expressivity.
Flexibility & Eficiency Flexibilityallowsindividualuserstoperceiveandstructure
the communication in diverse ways for specifc contexts and allows the user to
select the modality which is in his opinion the most suitable for the current task.
Users can also achieve faster error-correction when using multimodal interfaces.
Perceptability Especially modalities with spatial context, like gestures or pen selec-
tion,increasestheperceptabilityfortheuserandgiveshimabetterunderstanding
on how the task will be executed.
3.2 Overview
In human-computer interaction there are two main parties involved: a human which
uses the system and the computer itself which interprets the input from the human.
Thefollowingsectiongivesanoverviewwhichinputchannelsahumanbodyprovides.
Thenextsectiondescribespossiblesensorswhichcanprocesstheseinputchannelsand
convert them to the appropriate data format for the computer system.
3.2.1 Human Input Channels
Thehumanbodyhasdiferentreceptorcellswithwhichahumancanperceivetheworld.
Table 3.1 lists the seven main input modalities of the human body, giving a brief intro-
duction on how we interact with other humans.
Obviouslynotallofthesechannelsareofthesameinterestforhuman-computerinter-
action, especially in the feld of intuitive industrial robot programming. The senses of
taste and smell might not be very interesting for HCI. This is not due to the fact that
therearen’tanycorrespondingoutputdevicesavailableyet,butduetothefactthatit’s
not a very useful channel. One might think of smoke detection to automatically stop a
robot if there’s smoke, but for a simple smoke detector you don’t need such a complex
sensor or chemical analysis as the human nose, you can take a vision system and mea-
sure the cleanness of the air.
Proprioceptionontheothersideismuchmoreimportant. It’stheselfawareness(Kines-
thesis) of the body which can be divided into three submodalities: position sense (po-
3 Input & Output Modalities
Sensory system Modality Stimulus energy
Visual Vision Light
Auditory Hearing Sound
Vestibular Balance Gravity
Somatosensory Somatic senses:
Touch Pressure
Proprioception Displacement
Temperature sense Thermal
Pain Chemical, thermal, mechanical
Itch Chemical
Gustatory Taste Chemical
Olfactory Smell Chemical
Table 3.1: The seven main input channels of a human body. These diferent sensory modalities
arenotprocessedinisolation. Multimodalareasexistincorticalandsub-corticalareas,suchasthe
posterior parietal cortex and the superior culliculus. Source [Kandel, Schwartz, and Jessell, 2000;
Schomaker,2001]
sition of the body including all joint angles), sense of movement (direction, duration
andspeed),andforcesense(appliedforcethroughthemuscles,orestimatingweightby
hand).
3.2.2 Human Output Channels
Humanoutputchannelsareoutputmodalitieswhichweusetointeractwiththeworld
orchangetheworldstate. Theoutputchannelsareofbiginterestforhuman-computer
interactionbecausetheydefnehowausercaninputdataintothesystem,controlitor
change the world state.
The human body has four main output modalities:
Speech is the most expressive output modality. Using words we can explain complex
relations and facts to other people, we can express feelings and describe tasks.
Unfortunatelyitisalsothemostdifculttaskforacomputersystemtoelaborate
speech data and interpret it (see Section 7.3).
Force & Movement Using the muscles, a human body can apply forces to an object
forgripping,holdinganddeformingit. Thisforcemayalsocauseobjectstomove
inspaceinanarbitrarydirection. Ifanobjecthasappropriatesensorsitcansense
itsposeintheworldandinferadditionalinformation. Applyingforcetoasurface
isanimportantoutputmodalityusedincurrenttouchinputdevices,whichspread
3 Input & Output Modalities
rapidly. The combination of force and movement allows us for example to write
or draw on paper.
Gesture & Appearance The human gesture is another expressive output modality
which can indicate a position by pointing somewhere, give commands or even
communicatewholesentences(signlanguage). Thisalsoincludestheappearance
of the human body, e.g. is the human standing, sitting or looking at a specifc
spot.
Air Our lungs can produce in average 2 PSI (0.14 Bar) air pressure which can be used
to blow away small parts or remove dust.
3.2.3 Computer Input Modalities
Humanoutputchannelsproducephysicalenergypatternsvaryingovertime: potential,
kineticandelectrophysiologicalenergy. Theresultingforce,movementandairpressure
signals need to be transformed to use them as an input for computer systems. There’s
a various number of transducer devices available; the following list gives an overview
over the most important ones.
Keyboard & Mouse
Keyboard and Mouse are by far the most widely used input modalities for computers.
In the 1870s the frst teleprinter devices were used to simultaneously type and trans-
mit stock market data across telegraph lines. Since the frst computers were developed
(ENIAC,1946),keyboardsarethemainmeansofdataentry. Intheyear1984themouse
was introduced as a consumer device and since then mainly used in combination with
graphical user interfaces.1
Due to the high circulation level of Keyboard and Mouse, they are well known to
most of the users and don’t need additional training time. Therefore they are also
known for high performance and precision when used as input devices but also for
their un-intuitiveness. This input modality can be used for diferent input operations
[Schomaker, 2001]:
• Text input: naming objects and writing text which is displayed directly
3 Input & Output Modalities
• Actions: special keys like or generally have the function of accepting
or canceling an action. The mouse can be used to select items or change their
position (dragging).
• Navigation: usingthecursorkeys,theusercannavigatethroughitemsintheuser
interface. Themouseisamoreintuitivewayforselectinganitemandnavigating
through diferent user interface levels.
Speech Input
Inhuman-humaninteractionspeechisthemostimportantmodalityforcommunication
anddescribingtasks. Ahumancanevenexplaincomplexrelationsandsituationstoan-
other human being. Therefore it’s a good idea to use it as an intuitive input modality
for computer systems.
BellLaboratoriesdesignedin1952theAudrey systemwhichcouldonlyunderstanddig-
its spoken by a single voice. Ten years later, IBM demonstrated at the World’s Fair its
Shoebox machine, which could understand 16 words spoken in English. Carnegie Mel-
lon’s "Harpy" speech recognition system could understand 1011 words (approximately
the vocabulary of an average three-year-old) and was the result of the Department of
Defense DARPA Speech Understanding Research program from 1971 to 1976. In the
1980s, the development of Hidden Markov Models was an important breakthrough for
speech recognition. Using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) unknown sounds could be
combined to meaningful words. In the early stages of these systems the user needed
to dictate the sentences rather than fuently saying a sentence. In 1997, the software
DragonNaturallySpeaking wasreleasedatwhatyoucouldspeaknaturallyatabout100
words per minute. Until near the end of the 2010 decade the technology seemed to
be stalled at 80 percent accuracy. Then Google released Google Voice Search, an ap-
plication for mobile phones to use speech as an input method for search queries. In
combination with its huge cloud infrastructure they were able to get much better re-
sults,nowincorporatingmorethan230billionwordsfromactualuserqueries. [Pinola,
Mostmodernmobiledevicesandevendesktopmonitorsnowadayshaveatouchscreen,
on which the user can control the system through simple or multi-touch gestures.
Rather than using keyboard and mouse, touch input enables the user to directly in-
teract with what is displayed.
The frst fnger-driven touchscreen was invented by E.A. Johnson in 1965, described
3 Input & Output Modalities
in his article [Johnson, 1965]. His invention was a predecessor of current capacitive
touchscreens and could only process one touch at a time with only binary information
indicating if touched or not. Pressure sensitivity would arrive much later.
In1970theAmericaninventorG.SamuelHurstdevelopedthefrstresistivetouchscreen
usingaconductivecoversheetandanotheronethatcontainedtheX-andY-axis. Pres-
sure on the cover sheet caused voltage to fow between the X and Y wires. Resistive
touchscreens tend to be very afordable to produce and are durable even in harsh en-
vironments. One of the most widely used touch-capable devices at this time was the
PLATO IV terminal from the University of Illinois. It used infrared emitters and detec-
tors that could sense where the user’s fnger came down on the screen. At the begin-
ning of the 1980s, Hewlett-Packard began heavily commercializing touchscreens with
their HP-150 personal computer which also used infrared sensors. In 1993, IBM and
BellSouthlaunchedtheSimonPersonalCommunicator,oneofthefrstcellphoneswith
touchscreentechnology. Attheendofthe1990s,WayneWesterman,agraduatestudent
at the University of Delaware introduced the idea of multitouch capacitive displays as
we know them today in his doctoral dissertation [Westerman, 1999]. In the following
years more and more companies integrated touchscreens into their products. One of
those products was Microsoft’s Surface 30-inch tabletop which used cameras mounted
inside the table looking upwards to the surface detecting fnger and hand touches. The
fnal breakthrough for touchscreens is marked by the release of the frst iPhone from
Apple in June 2007. The combination of a capacitive multi-touchscreen with an intu-
itiveconceptofoperationwasanoveltyatthistimeandthereforeahugesuccess. [Ion,
3D input devices
The frst 3D input devices were developed even before the invention of computers. In
1926 C. B. Mirick invented an electrical two-axis joystick used for a remote controlled
aircraft. In1944Duringthesecondworldwar,Germanengineersdevelopedatwo-axis
joystick used to guide missiles against maritime and other targets. In the 1960s the use
ofjoysticksbecamewidespreadinradio-controlledmodelaircraftsbyPhillKraft. Kraft
Systems became an important OEM supplier of joysticks to the computer industry 2.
Until now, diferent devices for 3D input have been developed, which are based on dif-
ferent technologies. Following list gives an overview over the most widely used tech-
niques.
Joystick A joystick consists of a stick that pivots on a base, and buttons mounted on
thestickandbaseforadditionalinput. Itismainlyusedinaviationandtocontrol
3 Input & Output Modalities
video games. Most of the joysticks have three to four degrees of freedom (pitch,
yaw, roll and sometimes up/down).
Wired glove The frst wired glove, the Sayre Glove, was invented in 1977 used to
monitorhandmovements. Itwasequippedwithfexibletubes,alightsourceand
photocells at the other end. This glove could measure fnger and hand bending
[Sturman and Zeltzer, 1994]. Nowadays wired gloves use diferent techniques to
detectbendingandglobalpositions,likethe5thGloveorimagebaseddatagloves
proposed by [Pamplona and Fernandes, 2008] using visual marker at each fnger
tip and a camera to track movements.
Spaceball Thespaceball,alsoknownasSpaceMouseorSpaceNavigatorisa3Dmotion
controller mainly used for manipulating and navigating computer-generated 3D
imagery. Itsmaincomponentisaballshapedcontrolelementwhichcanbemoved
in 6 degrees of freedom.
Position tracking
A tracking system determines the position and orientation of the user. Mechanical
tracker systems physically connect the user to a point of reference and measure the
relative position change. Such trackers are quick and accurate but severely restrict the
user’s range of motion. Mechanical tracker systems are mainly used for medical surg-
eries.
For optical tracking, diferent systems are available which use a camera only setup in
combination with generative (model based) and discriminative (classifcation, regres-
sion) algorithms [Emídio de Campos, 2006]. [Gaschler, 2011] uses special visual mark-
erswhichrefectinfraredlightemittedbyLEDsandrecordedbyastereovisionsystem.
The user can hold a tool with buttons in his hand and the system tracks its six degrees
of freedom pose. The buttons are used for clicking or selecting objects.
Inertial trackers use gravity, inertia and the earth’s magnetic pole to track the orienta-
tion. These devices don’t require any additional hardware and are very compact, how-
ever sufer from orientation drift and cumulative errors.
Gesturerecognitionenableshumanstointeractwithmachinesinanaturalwaywithout
usinganyadditionalmechanicaldevices. Thefrstdevicesusedforgesturerecognition
were wired gloves (see previous paragraph). Current research mainly focuses on the
usageofcameraswheretheuserdoesn’tneedanyspecialglove. Depth-awarecameras
3 Input & Output Modalities
usestructuredlightortime-of-fighttogenerateadepthmapfromwhichaspecifcges-
ture can be recognized [Liu and Jia, 2004].
The leap motion sensor 3 is even more accurate than cameras: it can track the move-
mentofalltenoftheuser’sfngers. ItusesthreeseparateinfraredLEDemittersandtwo
infrared cameras and achieves an accuracy ofabout 0.5 to 0.01mm. The only disadvan-
tage compared to camera systems is its rather limited sensory space (500mm x 400mm
x 500mm) [Guna, Jakus, Pogačnik, Tomažič, and Sodnik, 2014].
The user’s line of sight can be used as an additional input information for computer
systems. It gives an indication at which location the user’s attention is focused. Using
this data, a system can show additional properties of the object the user looks at, and
hide information that isn’t of current interest.
There are a number of methods for measuring eye movement, the most popular vari-
ant uses video images from which the eye position is extracted. Other methods use
for example Electrooculography (measuring the electric potential diference) or optical
tracking (infrared light used to detect eye rotations).
For direct or indirect input in two dimensions there are special pens available. It’s a
mechanicalintermediaryespeciallysuitedforprecisecontrolandselectionofsmallob-
jects. Direct input means that the user can select or interact directly on the screen,
indirect input uses a special surface which detects the pen movements. A wide variety
of techniques exists. Using resistive, pressure sensitive, capacitive, or electromagneti-
cal transducer technology, the position of a pencil can be accurately measured. Such a
pen can provide diferent information like the position (x,y, velocity, acceleration), pen
force, height above the plane, angles and additional hardware button status.
3.2.4 Computer Output Modalities
There are many ways how machines can communicate with the user which appeal to
diferent input channels of the human body. This section describes the most important
output channels: visual, acoustical and tactile/haptic output.
3 Input & Output Modalities
Visual output
Visual output is by far the most commonly used output channel for computer systems
and other technical devices. There’s a wide variety of devices which produce an image
or a signal stimulating the visual sense of a human:
Monitor Computer displays are the predominant output channel for technical sys-
tems. Early electronic computers were ftted with a panel of light bulbs indi-
cating the states of the registers inside the computer (Zuse Z3 Terminal, 1941).
Cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) were frst used for memory and it didn’t take long be-
foretheywereusedasprimitivegraphicaldisplayswhichcouldshowvectorlines
only (5WAC Console, 1950). In the early 1960s, CRTs were more and more used
for displaying text (Uniscope 300, 1964). At this time another display technology
emerged: theliquidcrystaldisplay(LCD)mainlyusedforpocketcalculatorsinthe
late 1970s (Sharp PC-1211, 1980). In the early 1980s, the frst color displays were
build into computer systems (IBM 5153 CGA, 1983). Throughout the 1980s and
1990s, LCD technology continued to improve, especially the contrast and color
capabilities got better, driven by a market boom in laptop computers (TI Extensa
570CDT, 1990). Around 1997 vendors like ViewSonic, IBM or Apple introduced
color LCD desktop monitors which could compete with CRT monitors at a rea-
sonable price. Since then LCD monitorsoutsold CRT monitorsand are now used
for a wide variety of systems. A recent trend emphasizes monitors that support
3D visualization, higher resolutions and accurate color representation.4
The biggest defciency of monitors appears in the spatial vision stimuli: objects
look diferently from diferent angles of view. The lack of spatial efects has a
diminishing efect on the sensation of reality and involvement in the content of
the scene. A more advanced aspect of this problem is the lack of full immersion
invisualscenes,whichisbeingtriedtobesolvedwithaugmentedrealitydevices.
Video projector Videoprojectorsreceiveavideosignalandprojectitonaprojection
screen using a lens system. The frst projectors date back to the 1970s using
CRT (cathode ray tubes). In the 1980s, the trend to use PCs for presentations led
to the development of the Epson VPJ-700. Its successor the ELP-3000 became a
tremendous hit in 1994. In the following years diferent companies successfully
reducedthesizeandincreasedtheimagequalityandbrightnessoftheprojectors.
Augmented Reality allowsvirtualimagerytobeseamlesslycombinedwiththereal
world. Around 1960, Morton Heilig created a simulator called Sensorama which
producedvisualsounds,vibrationandsmell. Thefrstartifcialrealitylaboratory,
3 Input & Output Modalities
the Videoplace, was developed in the mid 1970s and surrounded the user with an
artifcial reality which responded to the users movements and actions.
Until recent years most of the research has been focused on the technology for
providing the AR experience rather than methods for interacting with the vir-
tual content. In the last few years, especially the interaction got more and more
important due to better sensors and increasing computing power. The latest de-
velopments aim at wearable computers like the Google Glass augmented reality
glasses announced in 2013. It is connected via Bluetooth to the Smartphone and
Internet and responds to voice commands, frame touch and head movement.
Printer Electricalprinterareusedasastaticoutputmethodproducingimagesoreven
objects for permanently visualizing data to the user. In 1953, the frst computer
printerwasconstructedtobeusedwiththeUnivaccomputerbyRemingtonRand.
Since then, various technologies had been adopted. The IBM 3800 was the frst
laser printer introduced in 1975, which printed more than 100 pages per minute.
The frst inkjet printer appeared in 1976, and was produced by Hewlett-Packard
(HP), but it took until 1988 to become a home consumer item due to unsolved
problems with clogged print heads. In 1970 the frst dot-matrix printer, the LA30
by Digital Equipment Corporation, could print at a speed of 30 characters per
second and was quite loud. In the last years 3D printing, also known as additive
manufacturing, got more and more popular. It uses additives to form solid 3D
objects of virtually any shape from a digital model.
Acoustic output
Acoustic output is achieved by using loudspeaker connected to a computer or other
electronic devices. It produces sound in response to an electrical signal input.
The predecessors of the loudspeaker were horns which didn’t use electricity and had a
disadvantage that they couldn’t amplify the sound very much. The frst electric loud-
speakerwasinstalledbyJohannPhilippReisinhistelephonein1861. Itwascapableof
reproducingcleartonesandmufedspeech. Primarilyfurtherdevelopmentsinthefeld
oftelecommunicationwereaccompaniedbynewdevelopmentsofbetterloudspeakers.
In the frst half of the 19th century new techniques allowed better sound quality and a
wider range of applications aside from telephones.
Nowadaysloudspeakerarebuiltintoalmosteverydeviceandarenexttocomputerdis-
plays one of the most important output modalities. They can give acoustic feedback to
the user or play diferent sounds, e.g. for warning or confrmation.
3 Input & Output Modalities
Haptic output
Haptic output or feedback is a recent development especially in the feld of virtual
reality. The word derives from the Greek haptikos meaning "being able to come into
contact with". It’s a generalization of the terms tactile and force feedback. Tactile,
or touch feedback applies to sensations felt by the skin which allows users to feel
things like texture of surfaces, temperature and vibration. Force feedback reproduces
virtual forces applied to the object within the virtual world like weight, inertia or solid
boundaries.
The frst commercial tactile device was the Touch Master in 1993, the frst commercial
force feedback device was the PHANTOM arm in 1993. The most popular design on
the market is a linkage-based system, which consists of a robotic arm attached to a
pen where the arm tracks the position of the pen and is capable of exerting a force
to the tip of the pen. Another quite popular design for force feedback is the tension
based system, in which the object or glove is connected with a cage through cables
and a motor. These motors can then exert force on the cables or increase the friction.
[Berkley, 2003]
3.2.5 Fusion of modalities
Fusionofinputmodalitiesisapowerfulandcomplexwayofimprovingtheinteraction
oftheuserwithaspecifcsystem. It’sthecombinationandsimultaneousprocessingof
diferent input modalities and allows a more intuitive way of interaction. A user can
give a speech command like "Take that object" and at the same time point to a specifc
object. Thereforethesystemhastounderstandfromthespeechcommandthattheuser
wants the system to take something, and by evaluating the gesture, defne this some-
thing as a specifc object.
Thecombinationofmodalitieshasbeensystematicallydescribedatthefusionlevelwith
the CASE model [Nigay and Joëlle Coutaz, 1993b] and at the user level with the CARE
properties [J Coutaz, Nigay, Salber, and Blandford, 1995]. [Nigay and Joëlle Coutaz,
1993b] defne the design space along three dimensions: Levels of Abstraction (e.g. pro-
cess speech as signal, sequence of phonemes, or interpreted as a meaningful sentence),
Use of Modalities (sequential or parallel), and Fusion (Combined, Independent). This
design space is then used for creating a system which is able to understand commands
like"Putthatthere". CAREstandsforComplementarity,Assignment,Redundancy,and
Equivalence that may occur between interaction techniques and models the diversity
on the user level of multimodal systems.
Thefusionofspeechandgestureinputandthedynamicusageofthosetwomodalitiesis
evaluatedin[Vallee,Burger,andErtl,2009]. Thefnalresultoftheuserstudystatesthat
3 Input & Output Modalities
there exist multiple factors which infuence the user’s satisfaction and that the fusion
of speech and gesture input is robust enough for commanding a service robot.
There’sasignifcantdiferencebetweenhuman-humaninteractionandhuman-machine
interaction (cf. [Dahlbäck et al., 1993]) and therefore it makes sense to think about
specifccombinationsofinputmodalitieswhicharenotthatcommoninhuman-human
interaction but may be quite suitable for human-machine interaction.
4 Domains & Tasks
Industrial robots are used in many diferent production domains and therefore require
high fexibility on the usage of diferent tools. Assembly requires a gripper for pick
and place tasks whereas welding needs a special welding gun to perform the required
tasks. Not only the robot hardware but also the teaching process for industrial robots
needstoprovidethemandatoryfexibilitytohandlediferentdomainsandvarioustasks.
EspeciallyforSmallandMedium-sizedEnterprises(SMEs)intuitiveprogrammingofin-
dustrial robots is essential due to the small lot sizes resulting in short reprogramming
cycles.
Thefrstsectionintroducestheconceptofskills,tasksandprocessesdescribingthehi-
erarchicalabstractionofanintuitiveteach-inprocess. TheSkillssectiongoesintomore
detailaboutwhichskillsarerequiredfromtherobotorthesystem. TaskAnalysismainly
focuses on which information is needed from the user to design a new system and to
increase the acceptance rate of such systems. The Domains section gives an overview
overthemostoccurringdomainsinproductionprocessesandliststheinputmodalities
which could be used for a specifc task within this domain. The last section, Seman-
tic description, combines the knowledge of previous sections into an abstract semantic
descriptionofthetasks,theirparameters,inputmodalitiesandrequiredsystemcompo-
nents. This ontology can then be used in cognitive robot cells for automatic reasoning
on which input modality can be used and is preferred by the user.
4.1 Skill, Task and Process
To hide the complexity of a robot system presented to a non-expert worker for
teaching a new work-fow, the skills of a robot and human need to be abstracted.
This reduces the workload and makes it easier to adapt an existing program to a
new product. Especially for human-robot cooperative working, the actions of a
human need to be known to the robot, and therefore inserted in an abstracted man-
nerintotheprocesssotherobotcaninformthehumanwhatitisexpectedforhimtodo.
4 Domains & Tasks
skill A skill is a basic action-block which is performed by the robot and normally re-
quires additional parameters for its execution, e.g. move to position, close gripper,
open gripper or actions requiring additional atomic steps like drill hole (switch
on, move downwards to drill the hole, move out of hole, switch of). Skills are
provided by the hardware and are very basic operations available to the user.
task The introduced skills can be combined to reach a specifc goal. Such a combina-
tion is called a task, e.g. pick object combines the skills move to object and close
gripper. Ataskcanhavediferentskillmappingsprovidingthesamefunctionality,
thustheremayexistmultipleskillimplementationsforthesametaskthatusefor
example diferent sensors or algorithms. Since tasks are mainly object based,e.g.
pick object, they need a specifc knowledge base and sensor system in the back-
groundtodetecttheobjectandmapitspositiontoabsolutecoordinatesreachable
bytherobot. Theknowledgebasealsodefnesadditionalparametersfortheskills,
which can be automatically inferred from the information given by the user, like
the electrical current needed for a welding gun if a specifc type of metal should
be welded.
Ataskmayalsobeaspecifcjobwhichneedstobecarriedoutbyahumanworker,
suchashandlingfexibleparts(cables,labels,gasket). Thesespecifchumantasks
canbeinsertedintheprocesstotelltherobotthatitneedstowaitforthehuman
worker to fnish his job.
process A process combines all the tasks needed for the production step and thus it
can be seen as a program which is executed in a loop for each product. It is an
abstract high-level description of a robot program.
Figure4.1showsanassemblyprocessstrippeddownintotasksandskills. Byproviding
predefnedskillsandlow-leveltaskstotheprogrammer,thewholeassemblyprocessis
easier to program and can be easily adapted to new assembly workpieces.
4.2 Skills
A Skillisabasicrepresentationofanactionarobotiscapableexecuting. Intask-based
robot programming, skills can be seen as commands which are called by a task and re-
quire diferent parameters. The skills are provided by the hardware or robot controller
andthereforeintroduceaHardwareAbstractionLayer(HAL)forhigherleveltasks. The
HALmakesitpossibletoeasilyswitchbetweendiferentrobotsystemsusingthesame
high level task.
Skills are not only implemented by the robot controller itself, but also by other system
componentslikecomputervisionorvisualoutputdevices. Thefollowinglistgivessome
4 Domains & Tasks
Assemble Gearbox
Pick bearing Place on axis Push down
Detect object Detect object Close gripper
Open gripper Move to Move down
Move to Open gripper
Close gipper
Figure 4.1: Hierarchical abstraction of an assembly process into process, tasks and skills. The
processdescribespartsofanassemblyofagearboxwherethebearingisputontheaxisandneeds
tobepusheddownuntilittouchesthecollar.
examples for skills which are used in Section 4.4. Each skill requires a set of parame-
terswhichareinferredonthetasklevelbyaninferenceengineorknowledgedatabase
based on other parameters defned for the task. For some of the skills uncertainties are
specifed which may arise when implementing or executing the skill.
move to (6D pose,speed,acceleration): Movestherobottothespecifed
position using the given speed with given maximum acceleration. The position
coordinate should be given as the Tool Center Point (TCP) and the orientation
based on the current tool attached to the robot arm.
Uncertainties: Whatisthebasecoordinatesystem(e.g. robotbase,wordbase)? Is
ittheToolCenterPoint(TCP)coordinate? IstheTCPcorrectlysetup? What’sthe
initialorientationofthetoolonwhichthegivenanglesarebased? Whenusinga
7-DOF robot arm, does the 7th DOF matter for the current task or not?
dual arm move to (6D Pose, 6D Pose, speed, acceleration): Moves
two robot arms simultaneously to the specifed Tool Center Point (TCP) coordi-
nates and given orientation.
4 Domains & Tasks
Uncertainties: Which parameter is for which arm? Do the arms need to move
simultaneously or is sequentially/delayed also allowed (e.g. to avoid collisions
between the arms)?
detect object (3D object model): Detectsthepositionandposeoftheobject
which looks similar to the given 3D object model within the workplace.
Uncertainties: If there are multiple objects of the same type detected, which po-
sition should be returned? What is the orientation of a symmetric object (e.g.
circular object or sphere)?
open gripper (): Opens the gripper to release the object currently grabbed or to
grab a new object.
Uncertainties: How to handle the situation if there’s currently another tool at-
tached to the robot arm (does the robot have an automatic tool changer)?
close gripper (force): Closesthegripperuntilthespecifedforceisreached. Used
to grab objects.
Uncertainties: Is the gripper attached to the robot?
set welding current (welding current): Sets the electrical current for the
welding gun. The current is dependent on the material which is being welded.
set welding speed (welding speed): Sets the moving speed for the welding
gun. It is dependent on the material and the type of welding.
weld point (6D Pose): Weldasinglepointatgivenpositionkeepingthewelding
gun at the given orientation.
Uncertainties: Istheweldinggunattachedtotherobot? Seeuncertaintiesformove
to skill.
weld seam (6D Pose array): Weldaseamalongthegivenpointsandorienta-
tion and interpolates between the points.
Uncertainties: Is the welding gun attached to the robot? Which interpolation
methodshouldbeusedbetweenthepoints? Seeadditionaluncertaintiesformove
to skill.
saw along trajectory (6D Pose array): Usesasawingbladetosawalongthe
given points and orientation and interpolates between the points.
Uncertainties: Is the sawing tool attached to the robot? Which interpolation
method should be used between the points? Which sawing technique should be
4 Domains & Tasks
used(sawingblade,lasercutting,stitching)? Seeadditionaluncertaintiesformove
to skill.
switch on/of grind/deburring/milling tool (): Switches the tool attached to
the robot arm on or of. This tool can be for example a grinding, deburring or
milling tool.
Uncertainties: Isthecorrecttoolattachedtotherobot? Isthecurrenttoolposition
safetoswitchiton? Shouldthetoolonlybeswitchedofiftherobotisn’tcurrently
moving?
drill screw (depth,force): Drillsascrewintothematerialatcurrentrobotarm
position stopping at given depth and drilling with given force.
Uncertainties: Is the drilling tool attached to the robot? How is the screw fed to
thedrillingtool? Istherobotatthecorrectposition? How cantherobotdetectif
the screw is set tight?
apply glue (amount,6D Pose array): Appliesthegivenamountofgluemov-
ing along the points given as parameter. The connection between the points is
interpolated.
Uncertainties: Is the gluing tool attached to the robot? Which interpolation
method should be used between the points? How can the robot detect a clogged
glueoutlet? Howmuchtimedoestherobothavetoapplytheglueuntilitisdry?
See additional uncertainties for move to skill.
4.3 Task Analysis
Tounderstandtheneedsofaworkerprogramminganindustrialrobotandtodetermine
thetypeofrequiredparameters,ataskanalysisshouldbecarriedoutoneachtaskwithin
every domain.
Catherine Courage defnes Task Analysis as:
Task analysis means understanding users’ work. Thus, task analysis en-
compasses all sorts of techniques, including naturalistic observations and
interviews, shadowing users or doing "day in the life of" studies, conduct-
ing ethnographic interviews, and observing and listening to users who are
performingspecifctasks. Itincludesgatheringinformationthatleadstoin-
sightsaboutusers’livesatworkorathome,toscenariosandusecases,and
sometimes to detailed fowcharts of work processes or specifc procedures.
[Courage, Jain, Redish, and Wixona, 2012]
4 Domains & Tasks
The most important statement of this defnition is that task analysis is "information
gatheringthatleadstoinsightsaboutusers’work"whichallowsthesystemdesignerto
ft the new system to the needs of the workers and therefore increases the acceptance
of new systems which is especially important for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(SMEs).
It’s also important to understand the user, the task he is performing and the user’s en-
vironment(physical,technological,cultural,socialandpolitical). Itmayhelptoanswer
the following questions [Courage et al., 2012]:
1. Users: Who are they? What do they know about the technology? What do they
know about the domain? How motivated are they?
2. Tasks: What are the tasks the user needs to accomplish?
3. Users’ environments: Physical situation in which the tasks occur; technology
available to the users; social, cultural, language considerations.
The following section will mainly focus on the users’ environment for task analysis.
4.4 Domains
This section gives an overview over typical application domains for industrial robots,
primarily suited for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs), which play a major
role within the SMErobotics 1 project, namely Assembly, Welding, Woodworking and
Metal processing & Bonding materials. Each domain is described briefy and contains a
list of the characteristic tasks within this domain.
Thislistoftasksforeachdomainshouldgiveanoverviewoverthemostcommonlyre-
quiredtasksforthedomainsandisbyfarnotcomplete. Eachtaskiskeptfairlygeneral
to ease the adaption to more complex and in more detail specifed tasks. It is briefy
explained how the task can be used and which skills are required from the robot. Ad-
ditionally all the parameters necessary to execute the task, including type and input
modalities, are listed.
Especially when using robots to execute the task, there may arise a huge number of
uncertainties and problems which a human worker automatically resolves but a robot
can’t resolve on its own. Therefore each task description also includes a few examples
for uncertainties with which the programmer of such a system has to cope with.
4 Domains & Tasks
4.4.1 Assembly
Assembly is a manufacturing process in which parts are added subsequently to an as-
sembly until the fnal product is produced. It is one of the most required production
steps within Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). When using a robot for as-
semblytasks,ithastocopewithincreasingcomplexityduetogrowingproductquality
requirementsandtohandlesmallcomponents. Themainreasonforthehighcomplexity
is the difculty of conventional industrial robots to adjust to any sort of change. Espe-
ciallyforSMEs,havingsmalllotsizesandthereforeahighproductvariety,adaptability
andfexibilityisimportant. Theycan’tafordasinglerobotforonespecifcproduction
step. Instead SMEs need a robot that can be used for diferent assembly steps and pro-
vides the required accuracy, e.g. for mounting a bearing onto a shaft.
Programmingarobottoexecuteaspecifcprocesswithintheassemblydomaininvolves
diferent types of tasks. The following list gives an overview over the most common
taskswithinassemblyandanalyseseachtaskregardingtheproblemsanduncertainties
which may arise and lists the required parameters which are needed by the robot to
successfully execute the task:
Pick Object
The Pick object task is defned as moving the robot to an object and closing the
gripper to lift that specifc object.
Required skills: move to, detect object, close gripper
Parameters:
• Object to pick: The user needs to defne which object the robot should pick up.
– Type: 3D model of the object
– Input modalities: Point by hand (gesture pointing to the object), Speech
(nameobjectordescribeposition),Touch(selectfromobjectlibrary),
PenInput(pointwith3Dpentoobjectandclick),Keyboard&Mouse
(type the name and select from library)
Uncertainties: Is the object already on the table or is it palletized. If the user
points in between of two objects, which one should be selected? If the same
typeofobjectismultipletimesonthetable,theuserhastoidentifywhichone
to pick (e.g. "Robot pick the left bearing"). If objects are already assembled
and the robot should disassemble them, how does the user defne if the robot
shouldtaketheassemblyordisassembletheassemblybyremovinganobject.
4 Domains & Tasks
Doestheobjectrequireaspecifcgrippingposition,thatthesystemshouldn’t
infer automatically? What happens if the object to pick isn’t there anymore?
Place Object
The Place object task tells the robot where to place the previously picked object.
Required skills: move to, open gripper, detect object
Parameters:
• Locationtoplace: Locationonthetableoranyotherplaneareawheretherobot
should place the object which is currently in it’s gripper.
– Type: 3D coordinate
– Input modalities: Point by hand (point to a location on the table/object),
Speech (describe the location, e.g. center of the table), Touch (coor-
dinate input), Pen Input (point to a location and click), Keyboard &
Mouse (coordinate input)
Uncertainties: Should the object be placed directly on the table or stacked onto
another object which is already on the table? Are intermediate positions re-
quired, i.e. must the robot move exactly above the object to move it down
straight or is there a specifc path to follow, so that the object is maneuvered
around obstacles? How does the robot know if it is a non rigid body? How
shouldtherobothandlenonrigidbodiesandavoidcollisionsduetounknown
object dimension?
Pick & Hold
Pick & Hold is a task where the robot picks an object and holds it at a specifc pose
in front of a human worker so that he can assemble or work with the object.
Required skills: move to, open gripper, detect object
Parameters:
• Object to pick: The object which should be picked up by the robot.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Hold pose: Pose of the object where the robot should hold it.
4 Domains & Tasks
– Type: 6D pose
– Input modalities: Point by hand (use gestures, e.g. draw a rectangle in the
airwheretheobjectshouldbe),Speech(defnetheposebydescribing
it),Touch(usea3Dvisualization),PenInput(likepointbyhand,draw
in the air and defne the space), Keyboard & Mouse (defne pose by
setting coordinates and rotations manually)
Uncertainties: How can it be defned that the objects should be rotated after a
specifcstep(e.g. thehumanworkerneedstoassemblesomethingonthefront
and back side of the object)? How tell the robot that the assembly step is fn-
ishedanditshouldcontinuewiththenexttask? Howcantherobotcheckifthe
human executed his work so that the next steps don’t fail? (cf. uncertainties
for Pick Object task on page 35).
Assemble objects
TheAssembleobjectstaskisusedtoassembletwoobjectsbasedonadefnedassem-
bly pose.
Required skills: move to, open gripper, close gripper, detect object, dual arm
Parameters:
• Object to assemble: The object which should be picked and assembled with an-
other object.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Assembly: Analreadyassembledobjectorasingleobjectwithwhichtheprevi-
ously selected object should be assembled.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Assembly constraints: How should the objects be put together/assembled.
– Type: object constraints
– Input modalities: Speech (defne constraints, e.g. "Put bearing on axis and
align them concentric"), Touch (3D editor where the user can defne
constraints between objects), Keyboard & Mouse (defne constraints
similar to a programming language)
Uncertainties : Doestheassemblysteprequireaspecifctrajectory/pathorcanit
beinferredautomaticallybytherobot? Howcantheuserdefneatrajectoryif
4 Domains & Tasks
thesystemdoesn’tfndany? Doestheassemblysteprequireahumanworker
(especiallyfornonrigidassemblyobjectslikecablesorgaskets)? Howdoesthe
robot know how the objects should be put together (just push or is a rotation
needed,likescrewing)? Iftheobjectsareholdtogetherwithclips,howdoesthe
robotgetfeedbackthattheclipislatched(humanworkersnormallylistenfor
the "click" sound)? How much force is needed? Can the objects be assembled
on the table or is a dual arm assembly station needed? How does the system
know if an object should be put for example onto an axis and then pushed to
the collar?
4.4.2 Welding
In welding, usually metals or thermoplastics are joined by coalescing the materials.
There are many diferent welding methods, requiring various hardware components
andtechniques. Inthissectionthefocusliesonthemainlyusedshieldedmetalarcweld-
ing and Flux-cored arc welding.
It’sacomplexmanufacturingstepwherediferentparametersmustbesetcorrectly(e.g.
current, speed, angle) to reach the required product quality. These parameters must be
set manually or can sometimes be automatically inferred or read from a knowledge
database. Thus programming a robot to weld two materials and bond them together
involves diferent types of tasks. The following list gives an overview over the most
common tasks within welding, analyses each task regarding the problems and uncer-
tainties which may arise, and lists the required parameters which are needed by the
robot to successfully execute the task:
Define material
For welding it is important to know which materials are welded to set the correct
weldingparameterslikecurrentandspeed. Theseparameterscanbeinferredfrom
a knowledge base or can be predefned values for each material.
Required skills: set welding current, set welding speed
Parameters:
• Material: The material of the object to weld.
– Type: material (string or id)
– Inputmodalities: Speech(nameofthematerial),Touch(selectmaterialfrom
a list), Keyboard & Mouse (write name of the material)
4 Domains & Tasks
• Thickness: Thickness of the material to be welded.
– Type: number (unit millimeters)
– Input modalities: Speech (say the number), Touch (select a thickness using
a slider), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number into a text feld)
Uncertainties: Can the system automatically infer the material based on its
knowledge about the object? How to handle two diferent materials which
need to be welded together? If the material has varying thickness, how to
defne it and how should the robot cope with it?
Point welding
Point welding is a process where two materials, mostly plates or fat parts, are
bonded together by one or multiple welding points.
Required skills: move to, weld point
Parameters:
• Object to weld: The object where point welding should be applied.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Position: Single point or vertex where the welding gun should apply current to
weld the parts together.
– Type: 3D point or vertex
– Input modalities: Point by hand (point on an object already lying on the
table), Speech (describe the point), Touch (use a touch-friendly 3D
visualization), Pen Input (use the pen to select a position), Keyboard
& Mouse (3D visualization or manual coordinate input)
• Material: Material of the object to weld.
See previous Defne material task.
Uncertainties: Howcantherobotcheckifthetwopartsarecorrectlyalignedbe-
foreweldingthemtogether? Isthereafxationoranotherrobotarmrequired
toholdthepartsataspecifcposition,oraretheyalreadyassembledinapre-
viousstep? Iftheweldingpointisn’treachable,howshouldtherobotbehave?
What’s the best orientation of the welding gun for optimal results?
4 Domains & Tasks
Seam welding
With seam welding, two materials or parts of an assembly are connected along an
edge or seam. These parts are often aligned perpendicular and therefore there is a
well defned edge between those two.
Required skills: move to, weld seam
Parameters:
• Object to weld: The object where seam welding should be applied.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Edge: Edgedefnedofmultiplepointsoranedgeontheobject,whichtherobot
should follow for seam welding.
– Type: List of 3D points or an edge
– Input modalities: Point by hand (point along an edge on an object already
lying on the table), Speech (describe the edge), Touch (use a touch-
friendly 3D visualization), Pen Input (use the pen to select one or
multiple connected edges), Keyboard & Mouse (3D visualization or
manual coordinate input)
• Material: Material of the object to weld.
See previous Defne material task.
Uncertainties: How can the robot weld along twisted planes or edges? Does the
welding require special steps like flling a gap or seam (move over the same
edge multiple times)?
See also previous Point welding task.
4.4.3 Woodworking
Woodworking or wood processing describes manufacturing and machining of work-
piecesmadeofwood,someofwhicharesolddirectlyasgoodsandsomeascomponents
assembled with other materials into functional products.
Especiallyinthefeldofprefabricatehouses,robotsareusedtohandletheheavyobjects
and provide accurate machining of the workpieces. Since each house is diferent from
previouslyproducedones,thisfeldofapplicationforroboticsrequiresahighfexibility
and easy adaption to changes.
4 Domains & Tasks
The following list gives an overview over the most required and used tasks for wood-
working whereas this domain also requires diferent tasks from the Assembly domain
in Section 4.4.1. Each task is analyzed regarding the problems and uncertainties which
may arise and the required parameters which are needed by the robot to successfully
execute the task:
Sawing is one of the main tasks within the woodworking domain. It’s used to cut
outpartsofawoodpanelortotrimplanksandbiggerpanels. Itrequiresaspecially
equipped robot using a saw blade to cut through the material.
Required skills: saw along trajectory
Parameters:
• Object to saw: The object where the robot needs to cut out parts or trim.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Startposition: positionwherethetrajectoryshouldstart. Thispositionnormally
needsadrilledholetoinsertthesawbladeifthetrajectoryisaclosedloop.
– Type: 3D or 6D pose
– Input modalities: Point by hand (point on an object already lying on the
table), Speech (describe the point), Touch (use a touch-friendly 3D
visualization), Pen Input (use the pen to select a position), Keyboard
& Mouse (3D visualization or manual coordinate input)
• Trajectory: The path or trajectory along which the sawing blade should move
to cut through the material or wood.
– Type: list of 3D or 6D points/poses
– Inputmodalities: Pointbyhand(pointalongthepathonanobject),Speech
(describe the path, e.g. circle at the center with a diameter of 30cm),
Touch(useatouch-friendly3Dvisualization),PenInput(usethepen
tomovealongthepath,likedrawingonthewood),Keyboard&Mouse
(3D visualization or manual coordinate input)
Uncertainties: Is the hole in the wood to insert the sawing blade already there?
Is another robot arm needed to hold the cut of part to avoid squeezing of the
blade? Should the robot use other cutting technologies like laser cutting or
stitch sawing?
4 Domains & Tasks
The grinding task describes the process of reducing unevenness on wood or other
materials by using a rotating grinding paper. It’s often used to make a surface
smoother or to reduce the thickness by a small amount.
Required skills: move along, grind on, grind of
Parameters:
• Trajectory: The path or trajectory along which the robot should grind.
– Type: list of 3D or 6D points/poses
– Inputmodalities: Pointbyhand(pointalongthepathonanobject),Speech
(describe the path, e.g. circle at the center with a diameter of 30cm),
Touch(useatouch-friendly3Dvisualization),PenInput(usethepen
tomovealongthepath,likedrawingonthewood),Keyboard&Mouse
(3D visualization or manual coordinate input)
• Grinding depth: Defnes how much material the robot should grind of.
– Type: number (unit millimeters)
– Input modalities: Speech (say the number), Touch (select a depth using a
slider), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number into a text feld)
• Coarseness: number defning the coarseness of the grinding paper to use.
– Type: list of available grinding papers.
– Inputmodalities: Speech(saythenumber),Touch(selectacoarsenessusing
a slider or select from a list), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number
into a text feld)
Uncertainties: If a plane area should be grinded, how can this be defned? How
cantherobothandletwistedplanes? Howcantherobotexchangethegrinding
paperifadiferentcoarsenessisneeded? Howmuchforcedoestherobotneed
toapplyforeachcoarseness? Inwhichdirectionshouldtherobotmove(when
grinding wood, it’s important to consider the fgure of the wood)?
Deburring/Rounding corner
The Deburring or Rounding corner task is used to remove sharp edges of an object.
4 Domains & Tasks
Required skills: movealong,switchdeburringtoolon,switchdeburringtoolof
Parameters:
• Deburring type: deburring can be achieved either by grinding or cutting of the
edgeinanangleof45degreeorbygrindingtheedgeinaroundedshape.
– Type: list (values: rounded, fat)
– Input modalities: Speech (say/describe the deburring type), Touch (select
from a list), Keyboard & Mouse (select from a list)
• Radius: radius for rounded deburring or depth for fat deburring
– Type: number (unit millimeters)
– Input modalities: Speech (say the number), Touch (select a depth using a
slider), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number into a text feld)
• Edge: Edgedefnedbymultiplepointsoranedgeontheobjectwhichtherobot
should deburr.
– Type: List of 3D points or an edge
– Input modalities: Point by hand (point along an edge on an object already
lying on the table), Speech (describe the edge), Touch (use a touch-
friendly 3D visualization), Pen Input (use the pen to select one or
multiple connected edges), Keyboard & Mouse (3D visualization or
manual coordinate input)
Uncertainties: Whichdeburringtoolshouldbeused(drill,grindingpaper)? How
handle twisted or peaked edges? What’s the optimal angle for the deburring
tool?
4.4.4 Metal processing & Bonding materials
Machining in general describes a process in which a piece of raw material is processed
until it reaches a desired fnal shape. This process consists commonly of a controlled
materialremoval,alsoknownassubtractivemanufacturing,andisoneofthemaintasks
within metal processing, but also for processing wood or other materials.
Bonding materials, in contrary, can be seen as material adding, since it connects two
materials so that they are fxed in a specifc relative position.
The following list contains two example tasks for metal processing, especially for ma-
chining, and one example task for material bonding using adhesives, including the re-
quired parameters and possible uncertainties and problems. Some of the tasks of the
4 Domains & Tasks
Woodworking domain in Section 4.4.3 can also be adapted to the metal processing do-
main and are therefore not listed within this section.
Milling is a task where the robot removes or cuts out a special amount of material
from the workpiece and is mainly used for creating recesses.
Required skills: move to, milling tool on, milling tool of
Parameters:
• Object to mill: The object where the robot needs to mill material of.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Milling depth: Defnes how much material the robot should mill of.
– Type: number (unit millimeters)
– Input modalities: Speech (say the number), Touch (select a depth using a
slider), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number into a text feld)
• Trajectory: The path, trajectory or area along which the milling tool should
move to mill out the material.
– Type: list of 3D or 6D points/poses or an arbitrary polygon
– Inputmodalities: Pointbyhand(pointalongthepathonanobject),Speech
(describe the path, e.g. circle at the center with a diameter of 30cm),
Touch(useatouch-friendly3Dvisualization),PenInput(usethepen
to move along the path or defne the area), Keyboard & Mouse (3D
visualization or manual coordinate input)
Uncertainties: Which milling tool should be used? How fast should the milling
head move? If an area is selected, how should the robot move in this area to
mill of with an optimal result?
Screwingisusedtofxatetwoormoreobjectssothatthemovementbetweenthese
objects is minimized. It requires holes and the corresponding screws to hold them
together.
4 Domains & Tasks
Required skills: move to, drill screw
Parameters:
• Screw type: screw type to use. It can be selected from a list of available screws.
– Type: list
– Inputmodalities: Speech(say/describethescrew),Touch(selectfromalist),
Keyboard & Mouse (select from a list)
• Objects to screw: Objects which should be screwed together.
See Pick Object task on page 35.
• Hole: Hole on the objects through which the screw should be rotated.
– Type:
– Input modalities: Point by hand (select the holes on the objects), Speech
(describe the hole, e.g. third hole from bottom), Touch (use a touch-
friendly3Dvisualization),PenInput(usethepentoselecttheholes),
Keyboard & Mouse (3D visualization or manual coordinate input)
Uncertainties: Istheholeforthescrew alreadydrilled? Ifaholewasdrilledina
previous step, the selection of the hole for screwing needs a simulated/modi-
fed model where the hole exists. How is the screw put into the hole to start
screwing? Howmuchrotationalforceisrequired? Howmuchpushingforceis
required? How can the robot check if the objects are correctly aligned before
screwing?
Adhesive bonding
Adhesive bonding or gluing is used to connect diferent materials and fxate their
relative position to each other.
Required skills: move to, apply glue
Parameters:
• Glue type: glue type to use. It can be selected from a list of available glues and
should be dependent on the material to glue together.
– Type: list
– Input modalities: Speech (say/describe the glue), Touch (select from a list),
Keyboard & Mouse (select from a list)
4 Domains & Tasks
• Trajectory: Thepath,trajectoryorareaalongwhichtheglueshouldbeapplied.
– Type: list of 3D or 6D points/poses
– Inputmodalities: Pointbyhand(pointalongthepathonanobject),Speech
(describethepath),Touch(useatouch-friendly3Dvisualization),Pen
Input (use the pen to move along the path), Keyboard & Mouse (3D
visualization or manual coordinate input)
• Amount of glue: Amount of glue to apply when moving along the trajectory.
– Type: number (unit milliliters or grams)
– Input modalities: Speech (say the number), Touch (select an amount using
a slider), Keyboard & Mouse (write the number into a text feld)
Uncertainties: Cantheamountofgluebeautomaticallyinferred? Whichpattern
shouldbeusedtoapplygluetoabiggerarea(e.g. S-shapeorjustlines)? How
arethepartsputtogetherafterapplyingtheglue? Howmuchtimeremainsto
put the parts together?
4.5 Semantic description
Asemanticdescriptionorontologydescribesrelationsbetweendiferentobjectsandis
usedtoformallyrepresentknowledgefromaspecifcdomain. BasedontheTaskAnaly-
sisfromprevioussectionswithinthischapter,anontologywascreated,thatrepresents
the hierarchical structure of Process, Tasks, Skills and shows the relations of diferent
system components like sensors with for example software components and task pa-
rameters.
This ontology can then be used to automatically infer, if a specifc input modality is
available to the system, and which input modality is the preferred one for each task
parameter.
The top level ontology is shown in Figure 4.2. Figure 4.3 lists all the available tasks
within the ontology, Figure 4.4 shows a subset of skills that are mapped to tasks. A
taskcanhavediferentskillmappingsprovidingthesamefunctionality. Figure4.5lists
all parameters which may be required by a task. Figure 4.6 shows the relations for the
ObjectModelparameter: itshowsalltheparameterswhichrequireanobjectmodel,
showsitsdatatypeandthepreferredinputmodality. Theobjectmodelparametertypeis
alsousedbytheDetectObjectskill,showninFigure4.7. Theontologyadditionally
includes a representation of all input and output modalities (Figure 4.8) as well as the
main hardware and software components (Figure 4.9).
Domains&Tasks
has subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
Task Process DataType Component CommunicationModality Parameter Skill
Figure4.2:ThetoplevelhierarchycontainsProcesses,TasksandSkills,ParametersforeachTask,datatypesoftheparameter,hardwareand
softwaresystemcomponentslikesensorsorspecifcsoftwarealgorithmsforexamplespeechrecognitionandcommunicationmodalitiesforinput
andoutput.
Thing Process
has subclassisImplementedBy(Subclass some)
has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
WoodworkingTask ProcessingTask AssemblyTask WeldingTask
has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
DeburringCorner Sawing Grinding Milling Screwing AdhesiveBonding AssembleObjects PlaceObject PickHold PickObject SeamWelding DefineMaterial PointWelding
Figure4.3:Aprocessisimplementedbyoneormoretasks.Thetaskscanbeseparatedintodiferentgroups:woodworking,processing,assembly
andwelding.
Domains&Tasks
has subclass
has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
MoveTo CloseGripper WeldingSkill OpenGripper ProcessingSkill DetectObject
Figure4.4:Askillisusedbytasksandrepresentsthelowesthierarchicalrepresentationofaprocess. MoveTo,CloseGripper,OpenGripperand
DetectObjectarecommonskills.ThereareadditionalskillsforeachdomaingroupedintoWeldingSkillandProcessingSkill.
has subclass
has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
GlueType Coarseness Amount Material Force Depth ElectricalCurrent ObjectPose ObjectModel Acceleration Position Radius ScrewType Trajectory Speed AssemblyConstraints
Figure4.5:EachTaskorSkillrequiresspecifcparametersforsuccessfulexecution.Thisfgurelistsalltheparametersusedwithintheontology.
DetectObject Parameter PointWelding Milling Screwing PickObject SeamWelding AssembleObjects PickHold
requiresParameter(Subclass all) has subclass requiresParameter(Subclass all) requiresParameter(Subclass all)requiresParameter(Subclass all) requiresParameter(Subclass all) requiresParameter(Subclass all) requiresParameter(Subclass all) requiresParameter(Subclass all)
ObjectModel
isOfType(Subclass some)has subclass preferredInputModality(Subclass some)
StringIdentifier Assembly GestureInput
Figure4.6:ThisFigureshowsanexamplepartialontologyfortheObjectModelparameter. Itisasubclassof Parameterandisrequiredby
diferentskills(DetectObject)andtasks(PointWelding,Milling,Screwing,PickObject,SeamWelding,AssembleObjects,PickHold).Itisofthedata
typeStringIdentifier,andhasasubclassAssembly(whichisaspecialobjectmodel)andthepreferredinputmodalityforsettingan
objectmodelisgestureinput.Thisontologyisusedforinferringdatatypesanddecidingwhichinputchannelshouldbeproposedbythesystem.
Domains&Tasks
PlaceObject PickObject AssembleObjects PickHold Skill
requiresSkill(Subclass some) requiresSkill(Subclass some)requiresSkill(Subclass some) requiresSkill(Subclass some) has subclass
DetectObject
requiresParameter(Subclass all)
ObjectModel
Figure4.7:SimilartopreviousFigure,thisoneshowsapartoftheontologywhichrepresentstheDetectObjectskill. It’srequiredby
diferenttasksandrequiresanObjectModelparameter(seeFigure4.6).
has subclass
CommunicationModality
has subclass has subclass
InputModality OutputModality
has subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
TouchInput PenInput GestureInput GazeInput MouseInput KeyboardInput SpeechInput DisplayOutput AcousticOutput HapticOutput AugmentedRealityOutput ProjectorOutput PrinterOutput
Figure4.8:Communicationmodalitiesareusedtointeractwiththesystem.Theyaredividedintotwogroups:inputandoutputmodalitiesand
referencedbyparametersanddatatypes.
has subclass
has subclass has subclass
HardwareComponent SoftwareComponent
has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
Sensor Display Robot TouchEvaluationSoftware SpeechRecognitionSoftware Tracking3DSoftware GestureRecognitionSoftware
has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass has subclasshas subclass has subclass has subclass has subclass
MicrophoneSensor PenTrackingSensor LeapMotionSensor TouchSensor KinectSensor Projector TouchDisplay ColorDisplay SingleArmRobot DualArmRobot
Figure4.9:Toknowifaspecifcinputoroutputmodalityisavailable,thesystemhastoknowwhichhardwareandsoftwarecomponentsare
builtintotherobotcell.Thecomponentontologyrepresentsthosecomponents(e.g.Sensors,Display,Robotoravailablesoftware). 49
5 Graphical User Interface
Each and every system requires some kind of visualization or visual feedback for the
user so that he knows what the system is currently doing and which data is required
from the human operator. It’s common ground to use a graphical user interface pre-
sentedonadisplaytoprovidethefeedbackandgiveawaytointeractwiththesystem.
For this master thesis a graphical user interface (GUI) was developed with the main
goal to ofer an intuitive touch friendly user interface for task-based industrial robot
programming, and to provide a visual feedback component for current performed ac-
tionsoftherobot. Flexibilityandportability(multidevicesupport)wasamaingoalfor
this user interface. It is based on the abstract semantic description introduced in the
previouschapterandusedfortheuserstudy(describedinthenextchapter)thatisone
of the main parts of this thesis.
5.1 Frameworks & Technologies
The frst step for the development of the graphical user interface was to evaluate dif-
ferent frameworks and technologies to build on to. The main requirement for the user
interfacewasfexibilityandportability. Flexibilityisimportanttoallowquickextension
and implementation of new system components and functions. The goal of portability
is to provide a system which can run on diferent devices (Windows, Linux, OS X, An-
droid, iOS) with varying screen resolutions.
Togetaportableapplicationwhichrunsunderdiferentoperatingsystems,webdevel-
opmenttechnologieslikeHTML5,JavascriptandCSS3arethebestcandidates. Usinga
responsive CSS design additionally comes with user friendly visualization on diferent
screen sizes. Using so called Web-Applications, the user can open the application on
his smartphone, tablet or workstation PC. This is a main advantage compared to pro-
prietaryprogrammedappsforeachoperatingsystem. AdrawbackofWeb-Appsisthat
theyconstantlyneedaconnectiontothewebserverdeliveringtheapp. Sincetheappli-
cation will be used within factory and production halls, this disadvantage shouldn’t be
a big problem.
Flexibilityisreachedbyusingstandardizedcomponentinterfaces,wellknownprogram-
minglanguagesandsoftwareengineeringpracticessuchastheModel-View-Controller
5 Graphical User Interface
design pattern.
AfterdecidingthattheclientsideshouldbewrittenasaWeb-Application,thenextstep
wastodecidewhichserversoftwaretouse. Afterconsideringdiferentpossibilitieslike
PHP1 and Zend Framework2 or Perl3 and Catalyst Framework4 the decision fell for us-
ingNode.js5 andexpress6 ontheserverside. Thishastheadvantagethattheclient-and
server-side uses the same programming language, namely JavaScript, and it’s possible
to reuse components for diferent parts of the software.
Ontheclientsidebackbone.js7andBootstrap8isused. Backbone.jsisaJavaScriptlibrary
which provides a powerful basis for Single-Page Web Applications using the Model-
View-Controller design pattern. The Boostrap HTML, CSS and JavaScript framework
developed by Twitter is useful for designing responsive Web Applications.
The Less CSS pre-processor9 is a useful tool for writing well structured and quickly
adaptable and manageable CSS code.
The GUI also required some kind of 3D visualization to show object models and to
allow interaction with these models. Since the application is running in the browser,
is was straightforward to use WebGL for this kind of visualization. There are diferent
JavaScript libraries available, which integrate WebGL and provide easy access to its
functions. One of the most advanced and widely used libraries is the three.js library 10
which was used for the implementation within this GUI.
5.2 Design
ThebasicideaforthedesignwastocreateaSingle-PageApplicationthatavoidsloading
and processing time for each clicked link and it has the possibility to dynamically add
and remove parts from the page based on the user’s input.
These dynamically added and removed parts are called cards. Cards are grouped using
so called pages. Figure 5.1 shows a frst mockup of the GUI explaining the concept of
cards and pages.
Opening a new page adds it to the right hand side of the rightmost page currently
shown by using a fy-in animation which moves the page from right to left until it
5 Graphical User Interface
reaches its fnal position. If the number of pages don’t ft on the current screen, the
leftmostpageisremovedfromthecurrentviewbymovingitoutoftheviewattheleft
side and the remaining pages slide over to the left, to fll the free space. Each page’s
size is dynamically adapted to the required size of each card within this page.
Page 1 Page 2
Moves out of viewport New page moves to the left
Figure5.1:FirstmockupoftheGUI.Thetopbarcontainsthemainnavigation. Ifanewpagegets
added and there isn’t enough space, the old one is moved out to the left and the new page flls the
newavailablespace. Apagecontainscards(boxes)whicharecontainersfordata.
A page has no real border or visible boundary and has a gray background. The cards
have a white background and a visible border and can be seen as diferent sections
within the page. The cards can have diferent width and height values depending on
the size of its content. A frst version of the GUI showing the described page and card
design can be seen in Figure 5.2. Using this concept allows to have a well defned fow
where the user has to go through the shown information from left to right, from page
topageandthenwithinapagefromtoptobottomthroughthediferentsectionscalled
cards.
5 Graphical User Interface
Figure5.2:BasicdesignoftheGUI:itconsistsofavariablenumberofpages. Eachpagecontains
anynumberofcards. Cardsarelikesectionswithinthepagecontainingdiferentinformation. Card
1belongstothefrstpage. Card2and Card3aresectionswithinthesecondpage.
5.3 Implementation
WhenimplementingtheGUIthemainfocuslayoneasyextensibilityfornewfunctions
and easy understandable code to provide new developers a code basis that doesn’t re-
quire much familiarization.
On the server side node.js with express was used. Since the GUI was developed as a
Single-Page-Application, there’s not much code required for delivering the page con-
tents. It delivers the static fles, like .js and .css, and renders the EJS11 HTML templates
for the client.
The client side needed much more implementation efort because most of the logic is
implemented within the browser, the server only handles page delivery and database
connections. The frst step on the client side was to set up a simple backbone.js basis
whichcanbereusedforallthediferentclasses. Backbone.jsisaModel-View-Controller
framework. The Models are JavaScript objects which contain the data displayed by
Views. IfanyattributechangeswithinthisModel,backbone.jsautomaticallytakescare
of updating the view and re-renders it.
ThebaseclassfortheapplicationisthePageAppclasswhichcontainscodetomanage
(add,remove,resize,show,hide)pagesinthecurrentview. ProcessAppextendsthis
class with additional functions for database initialization.
5 Graphical User Interface
The PageView class extends the Backbone.View and uses the PageModel class to
store and retrieve data for creating the page. Each page can contain one or multiple
cards. SuchacardisrepresentedbytheCardViewclassusingCardModeltostore
dataonhowthecardshouldbevisualized. ACardcontainsoneormoresections. There
are diferent section types available, which derive from the SectionView class. For
each listed section view, there’s a corresponding model class which is used for storing
the data shown within the view:
TextView simple block of multiline text.
MediaView displays an image or video.
InfoView is a combination of text an media view. It shows an image on the left side
and a description text on the right.
ListView a list of clickable items. An item can show an image including text, or text
CategoryView List of clickable items which can be fltered by category
AftertheProcessAppinitializedthedatabaseconnectionandretrievedtherequired
data (like list of processes and tasks) it creates the frst page containing the list of pro-
cesses. To create a page the developer simply has to create an instance of the Page-
Model class. This instance then contains a list of CardModel instances for each
card. Each CardModel again contains a list of all the sections (derived classes of
SectionModel) within this card. Creating and initializing the corresponding view
instancesisimplementedwithineachviewclass. Thisstructureallowseasycreationof
newpagesbyjustenteringthemetadata,withoutbotheringwiththespecifcvisualiza-
tion and rendering code.
Alltheviewsuseaneventbasedcommunication: iftheuserclicksonalistitem,anevent
is fred by the ListView to the model used for creation of this list. The programmer
can subscribe to such an event and then react on it by e.g. opening the corresponding
subpage. Figure5.3showsthefnalversionofthegraphicaluserinterfaceforprogram-
ming the robot.
For some of the parameters required by a task, a specifc input modality had to be im-
plemented. There’sforexamplea3Dvisualizationofobjectmodelsusingthree.jswhere
the user can select points or edges on the object or defne constraints between two ob-
jects.
5 Graphical User Interface
Figure5.3:ThefnalversionoftheGUI.Itcurrentlyshowstwopages:ontheleftisthe"ComauGear-
boxAssembly" task with one subtask. The detail page for this subtask is opened on the right hand
side. It shows the parameters required for this task, Pre- and Postconditions and Subtasks of this
task.
5.4 Integration
The goal of developing the GUI was to integrate it into the already existing system,
developed during the SMErobotics project at fortiss. There are diferent components,
like a semantic storage, a knowledge database, 3D tracking components and robot
simulation. All these components use ROS12 as an interface and communication
channel. Therefore the GUI should also integrate ROS so it can communicate with
these components and exchange or query data.
Since JavaScript doesn’t provide native ROS support, the rosbridge node 13 was used. It
provides a simple JSON API for non-ROS applications to communicate with other ROS
nodes. In combination with roslibjs 14, a JavaScript library for connecting to the JSON
API, it’s possible to subscribe to any ROS Topic, publish data or connect to a service
5 Graphical User Interface
usinganeventbasednotifcationsystem. Assoonasnewdataispublishedtoatopic,a
JavaScript callback function is called with this specifc data.
The GUI uses roslibjs for storing all the data into the database, to fetch data from the
semantic storage, and to integrate the diferent input modalities through it. When the
user selects the Point by hand input modality, a call to a ROS service is performed to
activate the Kinect or LeapMotion sensor. The corresponding software component
thenpublishescontinuously,whichobjecttheuserselected. TheGUIsubscribestothis
topic and then displays this information to give feedback to the user.
Browser Web-Server
roslibjs rosbridge ROS node
JSON Websocket TCP/IP Socket JSON
ROS master
Figure5.4:DatafowbetweentheBrowserandtheWeb-Server. TheBrowserrequeststhewebpage
tionsfromthislibrary. Whenafunctioniscalled,roslibjsgeneratesaJSONdatapackageandsends
it through a Websocket to the webserver, where rosbridge opened a TCP/IP socket and listens for
connections. RosbridgealsocreatesastandardROSnodetocommunicatewithothernodesandthe
ROS master. Published data on subscribed topics is automatically transformed by rosbridge into a
JSONpackage,senttotheclientandthereaneventiscalledhavingthedataaspayload.
6 User Study
The user study should evaluate the usability of multimodal input for task based indus-
trialrobotprogramming,andevaluatetheintuitivenessofthediferentinputmodalities
used in our system setup. It mainly focuses on which input modality the user prefers
for diferent tasks. It uses the graphical user interface presented in previous chapter as
the main interaction method with the system.
[Bevan, 1995] defnes usability as "quality of use" which has three main aspects: ef-
fectiveness, efciency and satisfaction of users carrying out specifed tasks in specifed
environments. According to [Frøkjæ r, Hertzum, and Hornbæ k, 2000] these three as-
pects are defned as:
Efectiveness is the accuracy and completeness with which users achieve certain
goals. Indicators of efectiveness include quality of solution and error rates.
Eficiency is the relation between the accuracy and completeness with which users
achieve certain goals and the resources expended in achieving them. Indicators
of efciency include task completion time and learning time.
Satisfaction is the users’ comfort with, and positive attitudes towards the use of the
system. Users’satisfactioncanbemeasuredbyattituderatingscalessuchasSUMI
[Kirakowski and Corbett, 1993].
[Frøkjæretal.,2000]showsthatit’simportanttoaccountforallthreeaspectsbecause
a subset is often insufcient as an indicator of overall usability. Since this user study
doesn’t aim to evaluate the usability of the system but only the diferent input modal-
ities and the users opinion on these modalities, the user study mainly focusses on the
satisfaction aspect and intuitiveness using the input modalities.
Intuitiveness is defned as "the subconscious application of prior knowledge that leads
to efective interaction" [Naumann, 2009]. This defnition of intuitive use is captured
in the user study by diferent subscales like Perceived Cognitive Load and evaluation of
preferred input modalities.
6 User Study
6.1 Hypothesis
Beforedesigningorconductingauserstudyyoushouldhaveahypothesisorstatement
toconfrmorcontradictbytheresultsofthestudy. Thismasterthesisevaluatesdiferent
inputmodalitiesforvarioustasksusedintask-basedindustrialrobotprogramming. For
most of the tasks four input modalities are available: gesture input (point by hand),
speech input, pen input (using a 3D device) and a graphical user interface for touch
input.
The goal of the user study is to fnd out which input modality is preferred by the user
for which type of parameter. The user study is using the Wizard of Oz approach for
implementation-independentevaluation. Thismeansthattheuserthinksthesystemis
recognizing his input (gestures, speech) but instead a human interprets the inputs and
forwards them to the system, invisible and unknowingly to the user (see [Dahlbäck et
al., 1993]).
Eachparticipanthastotryoutallfourinputmodalitiesforthesametasksandafterwards
order them based on his preferred use. My hypothesis is that most of the users prefer
pointingbyhand,followedbypeninput,touchinputandatlastspeechinput,sincefor
example pointing with the fnger to select an object is the most intuitive way, whereas
speech input is intuitive, but most of the users won’t feel comfortable or don’t know
how to describe the object to the system.
6.2 User Study Design
Each participant had to complete four diferent phases, which are based on the SUXES
evaluation method described in [Turunen and Hakulinen, 2009]. It divides the user
study into four phases (see Figure 6.1):
Phase 1 Introducestheparticipanttotheuserstudybyexplainingwhattheuserstudy
is about and gathers some Background Information from the user.
Phase 2 Inthisphasetheusergetsashortintroductiontothesystembypresentingto
himthemainfeatures. Afterwardshehastoflloutanexpectationquestionnaire.
Phase 3 The user has to conduct experiments with the system and evaluate his expe-
rience afterwards.
Phase 4 Inthelastphasetheparticipanthastoflloutanopinionquestionnaireabout
diferent aspects of the system.
6 User Study
Introduction to Background
the Evaluation Questionnaire
Introduction to Expectation
the Application Questionnaire
User Experience
Experiment Questionnaire
Questionnaire
Figure6.1:TheuserstudyisdividedintofourphasesbasedontheSUXESevaluationmethod. See
also: [TurunenandHakulinen,2009]
6.2.1 Phase 1: Introduction to the Evaluation & Background
Qestionnaire
The frst phase of the user study gives a short introduction to the whole user study,
how long itwilltake and whatthe main goalor hypothesisis. The participant also has
to sign an information consent where he agrees, that the collected data will be used
for evaluation and that there’s a video camera recording the practical parts during the
study.
The second part of phase 1 asks the user about some personal information like age,
gender, and important for the later evaluation, the expertise in using computers and
knowledge in the feld of robotics in general (see Appendix A.1.1).
6.2.2 Phase 2: Introduction to the Application & Expectation
Qestionnaire
AfterfllingouttheBackgroundQuestionnaire,theparticipantwillgetanintroduction
to the system set-up. This should explain all the diferent sensors, their location and
briefyhow theyprocessanddetectthediferentinputmodalities. Sincetheuserstudy
uses the Wizard ofOz approach the user should think that he is really interacting with
the system, therefore it’s important to have diferent sensors built into the system, but
6 User Study
it doesn’t matter if they are working or not.
Figure6.2:Thisimageshowstherobotcellorworkplacewherethehumancoworkerprogramsthe
robot. In the center is a big screen showing a simulation of the robot. The new version of this cell
already uses a real robot instead of the screen. At the right side the touchscreen is mounted, with
whichtheusercanprogramnewtasks.
Our robot cell has diferent components (see Figure 6.2): the table is used for putting
the work-pieces somewhere visible to the user, there’s a projector on top of the table
hiddenwithinthecagetoprojectobjectinformationontothetable,andatouchscreen
ismountedasidetovisualizethecurrenttasktoprogramandtogivetheuserfeedback
onalltheinputmodalities. There’salsoa(nonpluggedin)Kinect2devicemountedon
6 User Study
top of the table to pretend the gesture recognition is working. During the introduction
it’s also explained that the microphone for speech recognition is built into the Kinect
sensor. Two infrared cameras for tracking the pen input device are also mounted near
the Kinect 2 sensor. These cameras are not used during the experiment since it uses a
Wizard of Oz approach.
The touch screen is showing the GUI presented in Chapter 5. To introduce the user to
the system, there are three simple tasks which he has to go through. The frst task (see
Figure 6.3) only needs one parameter of the type object model.
Figure 6.3:The GUIused during the user study. Itvisualizes the task being programmed and the
parameterswhicharerequiredforthisspecifctask. Ontheleftsidethere’salistofthreetasksused
for introduction, where the user has to try out all the modalites. On the right side there’s a list of
parameters for the selected task. In this case the task requires only one parameter which is of the
type objectModel.
Selectingtheparameter,anewwindowisopenedwheretheuserhastoselectaninput
modality for how he wants to set the parameter (see Figure 6.4)
The user has four input modalities to choose from:
Touchscreen Thetouchscreenhasdiferentvisualizationtypes: forobjectselectionit
shows a list with all the objects (see Figure 6.5(a)) where the user can select one.
Point and edge selection can be done through a touch-friendly 3D visualization.
Point by hand When selecting point by hand the user doesn’t need any additional
deviceortooltosetaparameter. Hesimplypointswithhisforefngertoanobject
an hovers there for about a second to select the object or to select a point on an
object (see Figure 6.5(b)). This would require a working Kinect or Leap Motion
sensorandthealgorithmtotrackanddetecthandgestures. SincetheExperiment
for this thesis uses the Wizard of Oz approach, there’s someone standing behind
the participant with a tablet in his hands to manually select the correct value for
the parameter based on the participant’s input.
6 User Study
Figure 6.4: By selecting one of the four provided input modalities, the user can defne the value
for the requested parameter. Possible input modalities to chose are Touchscreen, Point by hand,
Speechand PointbyPen.
Speech For speech input we explained to the participant that he doesn’t need any
special vocabulary, instead he should speak to the robot like he would speed to
a human worker. The only thing the user has to do, is to begin his sentence
or command with "Robot: ...". These natural commands are possible since we
use Wizard of Oz where a human supervisor interprets the spoken commands
unknowingly to the participant.
Point by Pen For pen input we used the system developed in [Gaschler et al., 2014].
It’s a pen-shaped device with infrared tracking balls attached to determine the
position and orientation in space (see Figure 6.5(c)). The user has to point to
an object or specifc location and then press a button on the device to select it.
This tracking system is already working but is not yet accurate enough to not
infuence the results of the study too much. Therefore we used here the Wizard
ofOzapproachtoprovidehardwareandsoftwareindependentdetectionquality.
The remaining two tasks for the introduction are selecting a point on the object for
point welding and the last task is to assemble a bearing with an axis by selecting the
two objects and then setting the assembly pose as the third parameter for the task. To
defne the assembly pose,there are two input modalitiesavailable to the user: a 3D ed-
itor for touch input, and speech input to defne the assembly constraints (e.g. "Robot:
Put bearing on axis concentric").
Aftertryingallfourinputmodalitiesandfnishingthethreeintroductiontasks,theuser
hastofllouttheExpectationQuestionnaire(seeAppendixA.1.2). Thefrstexpectation
question asks the participant on how long he thinks it would take to program a simple
pick and place task for industrial robots using systems currently employed in produc-
tion. The next questions ask the user to order the input modalities according to which
input modality he would prefer the most for the following parameter types: select an
6 User Study
(a) Touchinputmodalityforobjectmodel
(b) Theuserpointstoanobjecttose- (c) Usingthe3Dtrackedpentheuser
lectit canselectobjects
Figure6.5:Diferentinputmodalitiesavailablefortheusertoselect
object, set a location where to place the object, set assembly constraints, select a point
on the object, select an edge on the object.
6.2.3 Phase 3: User Experiment & Experience Qestionnaire
After flling out the Expectation Questionnaire from Phase 2, the user has to program
multiple tasks using all four input modalities sequentially. First the participant has to
program all tasks with touch input only, then the same tasks with hand input, then
speech and at last pen input. The four tasks are:
6 User Study
Pick & Place Select an object an place it on the center of the table. Required param-
eters: object to pick, location to place
Assemble two objects Selectthebearingandputitontheaxis. Thebearingshould
beplacedconcentricallyontotheaxis. Requiredparameters: objecttopick,object
to place on, assembly constraints/pose
Weld point Select the rake object and weld a specifc point (third from bottom left).
Required parameters: object to weld, point on object
Weld seam Select the rake object and weld a specifc seam (third from bottom). Re-
quired parameters: object to weld, seam on object
Programming these four tasks using all input modalities sequentially, takes in total
about 15 minutes. After this practical part, the participant has to fll out the Experi-
ence Questionnaire (see Appendix A.1.3). The frst question asks the user to order the
inputmodalitiesbasedontheexperiencedcognitiveload. Thismeansthattheuserhas
toindicateforwhichinputmodalityhehadtothinkthemost. Thenext5questionsare
exactly the same as in the Expectation Questionnaire, to compare the expectation with
the experience after he conducted the experiment.
6.2.4 Phase 4: Opinion Qestionnaire
The last phase of the experiment is an Opinion Questionnaire (see Appendix A.1.4)
where the user has to express his opinion on the diferent input modalities and the
whole system. This includes questions like "It’s intuitive to use touch input" or "It was
difculttounderstandhowtousethediferentinputmodalities". Thegoalofthisques-
tionnaire is, to understand how the user feels about the system and what he thinks on
the input modalities.
ThesecondpartoftheOpinionQuestionnaireaskedtheusertoimaginethathe’swork-
ing in a factory and his job is to program industrial robots. Now he should express his
opinion on using the system for exactly this job, by answering diferent questions like
"Using the system would improve my job performance" or "Using the system would
makeiteasiertodomyjob". Theevaluationofthesequestionsshouldgivefeedbackon
theusageofmultimodaltask-basedindustrialrobotprogrammingforproductionusage
and for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises.
6 User Study
6.2.5 Open discussion
Theexperimentconcludeswithanopendiscussionwhereeachparticipantcangivead-
ditional feedback on the questionnaires or the system, and can suggest improvements.
This part also includes the reveal that the whole experiment is a Wizard of Oz experi-
ment,andthatthecomponentsofthesystemweren’tactuallyworking,buttheinstruc-
tor of the user study controlled and set the input parameters. This open discussion is
a valuable part of each user study because you get worthy feedback and other ideas of
which you didn’t think at frst.
7 Evaluation
Thischapterevaluatesthequestionnairesoftheconducteduserstudydescribedinpre-
vious chapter. It shows that the hypotheses previously defned is confrmed and that
most of the participants preferred hand input whereas speech input is the least pre-
ferred one. The evaluation of the opinion questionnaire gives an impression on how
the user felt during the user study and what he thinks about multimodal input tech-
nologies.
TheresultsofthisuserstudyarealsointegratedintotheontologydescribedinSection
4.5 to extend the knowledge of the system. It’s able to select the most preferred input
modality for each parameter based on the results of the user study and therefore pro-
viding the best user experience possible.
Theanswersofalltheparticipantsforallthequestionnairesarealsoavailablefordown-
7.1 Participants
The frst questionnaire asked the participant about background information like age,
gender, expertise in using computers and knowledge in robotics. There were 31 partic-
ipantsattheuserstudy,whereatthefrstparticipantwasusedasatesterforthewhole
setup and therefore the data from this participant isn’t included in the data. Conse-
quently the data includes answers from 30 participants. This number of participants
should provide a confdence interval reasonably tight as stated in [Nielsen, 2006]. For
each user it took about 30 minutes to complete the questionnaires, including the prac-
tical part.
Most of the participants were students of diferent technical and non technical felds
and researchers in the feld of robotics and embedded systems. Therefore the data of
this user study is based not especially on domain experts (i.e. employees in Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises) but on a widespread basis of knowledge of diferent peo-
ple.
The average age over all participants is 27 years with a standard deviation of about
5 years (max: 41, min: 20). Figure 7.1(a) shows that 23 participants (77%) were male
7 Evaluation
and 7 participants (23%) female. The questionnaires were available in two languages,
German and English, to make it easier for the participants to answer the questions,
and to make sure the questions are understood correctly. 23 users selected the German
questionnaire and 7 users the one in English.
WHAT'S YOUR GENDER? WHAT'S YOUR EXPERTISE IN USING
COMPUTERS?
Female; 7; 23% Basic; 2; 7%
Advanced; 7;
Expert; 21; 70%
Male; 23; 77%
(a) Genderdistributionofalltheparticipantsofthe (b) 2 participants indicated that they have a basic
userstudy.23weremaleand7female. knowledgeonusingcomputers,7advanced,andthe
majority were computer experts (either computer
scientistsorprogrammers).
Figure7.1:Backgroundinformationonthe30peoplewhoparticipatedintheuserstudy.
To get a better understanding on the knowledge of each participant in robotics and in-
dustrialrobotprogramming,thereweretwoquestionstoanswer(seealsoQuestionnaire
A.1.1): Howmuchdoyouknowaboutrobotics? AnddidyoualreadyuseaTeachPadto
program a robot?
The answer distribution for both questions is shown in Figure 7.2. It can be seen that
50%knowalotaboutrobotics(studiedrobotics,computerscienceorsimilar)andabout
40%knowwhataTeachPadis(seeFigure1.3onPage7)oruseditalreadytoprograma
robot.
7.2 Expectation
Afterfnishingthepracticalpartoftheuserstudy,eachparticipanthadtoanswersome
questions, if using the input modalities and the system met his expectation or not (see
AppendixA.1.4,question18). Figure7.3showstheaveragevalueandstandarddeviation
for each answer. As it can be seen the system outperformed the user’s expectation for
most of the components in terms of simplicity. Only touch input behaved as expected
since it wasn’t diferent than using a smart-phone or any other touch device. Touch
wasalsotheonlycomponentwhereWizardofOzwasn’tusedandthusrepresentedthe
7 Evaluation
HOW MUCH DO YOU KNOW ABOUT DID YOU ALREADY USE A TEACHPAD TO
ROBOTICS? PROGRAM A ROBOT?
programmed
with it; 6; 20%
Not that much;
Don't know
A lot; 15; 50% what it is; 18;
Know what it 60%
is; 6; 20%
robo?cist; 2;
(a) 13participantsansweredtothequestiononhow (b) 60% of the participants didn’t know what a
muchtheyknowaboutroboticswith"Notthatmuch TeachPad is or how it works. 20% indicated that
(heard or read about it)". 2 indicated that they are they know what it is and how it works, but never
hobbyroboticistsand15(50%)saidthattheyknowa usedone. Another20%alreadyprogrammedanin-
lotaboutrobots(studiedrobotics,computerscience dustrialrobotwithaTeachPad.
orsimilar).
Figure7.2:KnowledgeoftheparticipantsinthefeldofroboticsandusingaTeachPad.
current state of the art. The interpretation of all the other components (speech, ges-
ture,peninput)usedtheWizardofOzapproachwhereahumansetthevaluesforeach
parameter based on the participants input, unknowingly to the participant. This may
alsoexplain,whyformostoftheusers,handlingthoseinputmodalitieswaseasierthan
expected since it’s not yet possible to implement speech recognition or gesture recog-
nition which reaches the same detection accuracy as a human.
Anotherinterpretationofthisgraphisthatmostoftheparticipantsknoworthinkthat
programming an industrial robot is very complex and complicated, and by using this
system they were surprised how easy it can be, if the robot or the intelligence behind
the robot can infer information automatically and adapt to many diferent setups.
Looking at the data separated by gender, there’s a signifcant diference for speech in-
put: femaleparticipantsselectedanaveragevalueof1.7comparedtomaleparticipants
who have an average of 2.3. This means that for female participants speech input was
signifcantly easier than expected compared to male participants. This also somehow
confrms the statement from [Wasinger and Krüger, 2006] that women feel less secure
and confdent using speech in public environments.
Question 6 ofthe expectation questionnaire (seeAppendix A.1.2)asked theparticipant
to think about a simple pick and place task, where the robot has to pick up an object
from a palette and place it on the table with a specifc orientation. Then the partic-
ipant should estimate, how long it would take to program this task to a robot using
current systems employed in production. The average over all 30 estimates is about 78
minuteswithastandarddeviationofabout128minutes(maximumvalue: 600minutes,
minimum: 1 minute). The high variation between the values may be caused by the in-
accurately stated question, since it is not totally clear if the programmer is allowed to
7 Evaluation
EXPECTATIONS
using the input modali?es for programming a robot was
Touch input was
Speech input was
Gesture input was
Input by pen was
Overall, using this system to program a robot was
Figure7.3:Thisdiagramshowstheanswersforeachlistedquestionifitmatchedtheuser’sexpec-
tation. 1=aloteasierthanexpected,3=asexpected,5=muchmorecomplicatedthanIthought
usepredefnedmacros(whichwouldspeeduptheteachingsignifcantly)orifhehasto
start from scratch.
Nonetheless an average of 78 minutes is quite a big estimate. Asking an expert who
daily programs and teaches tasks to industrial robots stated that he would need about
15 minutes (using predefned macros) to program such a task.
7.3 Input modalities
After a short introduction to the system and quickly trying out the diferent input
modalities, the participant had to order the four input modalities touch input, speech,
pen input and point by hand according to his preference. After this step, the user had
to program four diferent tasks using all four input modalities sequentially, and then
in the next questionnaire, order the input modalities again according to his previous
experience. This is described in more detail in Section 6.2.
Figure7.5showstheresultsoftheorderedinputmodalitieswhichwillbeanalyzedhere
in more detail.
The frst question was about the perceived cognitive load for each input modality. The
participant had to order the four modalities according to where he had to think the
mosttousethemodality. Figure7.5(a)showsthatspeechinput requiresthemostthink-
ing whereas point by hand was selected by most of the users as the easiest one. The
main reason for this result may be due to the fact that most of the participants didn’t
really know how to talk to a machine or a computer. Even if the system was built to
understandeverything(WizardofOzExperiment),theuserswereindoubtaboutwhich
vocabulary they can use, despite they were told that they can talk to the machine like
they are talking to a human. This is also related to the fndings by [Dahlbäck et al.,
1993], who found out that dialogs between human and human difer signifcantly from
human-machinedialogs. Healsodescribesdiferentfactorsthatinfuencehowwespeak
7 Evaluation
to a machine or human.
Comparing the cognitive load between the seven female and 23 male participants,
there’s a signifcant diference between touch input and input by hand: female par-
ticipants have an average value of 3.2 for touch input and 2.7 for hand input, which
results in in the following order of cognitive load: speech input, pen input, input by
hand and the less cognitive load touch input. This means that for female participants
using touch input was easier than input by hand. In contrary for the male participants
input by hand has an average value of 3.4 and touch input 2.4 resulting in the order
speech,touch,penandthenhandinput,thusinputbyhandrequiredlessthinkingthan
touch input for most of the male users.
Speechisaverydiverseandversatileinputmodalitywhereyoucandescribesomething
inalotofdiferentways. Handinputontheotherhandhasmoreorlessonlyonepos-
sibility to tell the robot which object to pick: by pointing to this specifc object. This
canbeareasonwhymostoftheuserssaidthattheyhadtothinklesswhenusinghand
input. Pen input and Touch input are more or less on a par in the middle range.
For the next fve questions the user had to order four input modalities based on his
experienceinthepreviouspracticalpartoftheexperiment. Avalueof1meansthatthe
userpreferredthisinputmodalityandputitthereforeatthefrstplace. Figure7.5(b)to
7.5(f) shows the answers for each parameter type which will be analyzed here in more
detail.
The Select an object parameter required the user to set an object model using one of
the four available input modalities. By most of the users Point by hand was selected as
themostorsecondpreferredinputmodality(Figure7.5(b)). Theotherthreemodalities
are in average between 2.5 and 3 whereat Speech has the highest standard deviation of
about1.2points. Lookingattherawdataofthestudy,Speechwasoftensettothefourth
placebutalsoafewtimesatthefrstplaceresultinginthishighstandarddeviation. The
main reason for thisresult may be,that forPoint by hand the user doesn’thas to think
a lot how to use the input modality. Compared to touch input he has to search for the
object within the list which slows down the interaction, for speech input the user has
toknowthenameoftheobject,andpeninputrequiresanadditionalyetunknowntool
to use and handle. For speech input there’s a noticeable diference between the expec-
tation and experience questionnaire: before the practical part users thought that they
don’t like speech input, but after using it, speech gained a quite better average value
than before. This may be due to the fact that most people have a prior knowledge or
theimpressionthatspeechinputdoesn’tworkgoodenoughyet,butafterfnishingthe
experimenttheysawthatspeechrecognitionisbetterthantheythought(becauseitwas
a Wizard of Oz experiment where a human interpreted the speech commands, which
the user didn’t know).
Looking at the Select an object parameter results separated by gender, there’s a signif-
icant diference between male and female participants for the touch input and speech
input(seeFigure7.4). Forfemaleparticipantstouchinputwasmuchmorepreferred(av-
7 Evaluation
eragevalueof2.1)comparedtothemaleparticipants(averageof2.7)infavorofspeech
input which was put by most of the female participants on the last place.
Separatingthedatabasedontheanswerfortheexpertiseinusingcomputers(seeFigure
7.1(b)) into two groups, experts and non experts (includes basic and advanced), shows
that experts gave Point by hand a higher rating (average 1.4) compared to non experts
(average 1.9). The reason for this may be that experts already used touch and speech
input a lot more times, and know the limitations of those input modalities. Therefore
theypreferredpointbyhandoveralltheotherssinceitismuchmoreintuitiveandhas
a high potential to be improved.
EvaluatingthedataseparatelyforusersthatalreadyusedaTeachPadshowsalsoasig-
nifcant diference for the Select an object parameter regarding the expected preferred
inputmodality(answersbeforethepracticalpart)andthefnallypreferredinputmodal-
ity. TheTeachPadparticipantsexpectedthattheywon’tlikespeechinput(averagevalue
of3.4). Afterthe practicalpartthe averagepositionforspeechinputaspreferredinput
modality moved from 3.4 to 2.4 which moved speech input from least preferred to the
second most preferred input modality. This is most probably caused by the fact that
those users thought that speech input is not really suited for programming a robot in
any way but then after using it to set the object parameter, they got more convinced
and, given that speech input recognizes the commands perfectly, it may be a helpful
addition.
Select an object (female) Select an object (male)
Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand
(a) Female participants gave touch input a signif- (b) Comparedtofemaleusersspeechinputismore
cantlyhigherrating. preferredbymaleusers.
Figure7.4:Preferredinputmodalitiesfor Selectanobjectparameterseparatedbygender. 1isthe
most and 4 the least preferred modality. The blue circle indicates the average over all participants
inthisgroup,thegraybarshowsthestandarddeviationforeachmodality. Theorangecrossisthe
averagefromtheexpectationquestionnairewheretheuserhadtoorderthemodalitiesaccordingto
whichhewillmostlikelypreferthemost.
For the Set location parameter (Figure 7.5(c)) the choice of the participants is quite dif-
ferent. At the frst place is Touch input, followed closely by Point by hand. Pen input
has approximately the same average value as in the previous parameter, speech input
is even worse. During the open discussion at the end of the study some mentioned
that for them an infuential factor for choosing a specifc order of the modalities was
7 Evaluation
the time you need to switch between touch and other input modalities. This may have
playedabiggerroleforthelocationparametersincethevisualizationofthetableonthe
touchscreenwassimplya2Drectanglewheretheuserhadtotouchaspecifclocation.
Staying on the touchscreen is much faster than turning to the table and pointing to a
specifc location. Speech is at the last place since it is more complicated to describe a
positionaccuratelycomparedtosimplypointingatit. Peninput isapproximatelyinthe
same range as for the previous parameter, one reason for that may be that the user has
topickupthepenfrst,beforepointingtoalocation,whichisslowerthanjustpointing
with a fnger.
Todefneassemblyconstraintsonlytwoinputmodalitieswereavailable: Touchinputand
Speech,sincedefningconstraintsusinggestureorpeninputisnotthatintuitiveornot
evenpossible. ForTouchinputtheuserwaspresentedwithasimple3Deditorwherehe
could move parts around and defne relations between parts like concentric, coplanar
or a specifc distance. For example selecting two cylinders by touching them and then
pressingtheconcentricbutton,defnedaconcentricconstraintbetweenthosetwoparts.
25 of the 30 participants preferred Touch input over Speech input. Observing the user
studyshowedthatmoreorlessallparticipantsstruggledtofndaneasydescriptionfor
putting the bearing on the axis and aligning the cylinders concentrically.
Selectapoint andSelectanedgearetwoparametersthatneededtobesetforthewelding
task. The problem specifcation was to set the third point/edge from bottom left as the
welding position. For touch input the user had a 3D visualization of the object where
he had to touch the correct edge or vertex to select it. The results for point and edge
arenearlyidentical(seeFigure7.5(e)and7.5(f)): pointingbyhandisthepreferredway
for setting this parameter followed by pen input. The main reason why pen input is
before touch and speech may be, that it is more intuitive to use a sharpened object to
accuratelydefneapositionoredgein3D.Anadditionalcurtailoftouchinputinfavor
ofpeninputwasthenotperfectlyworking3Dvisualization,becauseithadsomeminor
bugsimpairinguserinputs. Usingspeechonly,todefneaspecifcpositionin3Donan
objectisquitedifcultandthemajorityoftheparticipantswereunsurehowtodescribe
it to the robot, one participant event refused to try it, because he said that it doesn’t
make any sense to defne such a position using speech.
Nearlyallparticipantswhichindicatedthattheyareexpertsinusingcomputers,didn’t
reallylikespeechinputforsettingapointoranedge. 20outofthe21expertssetspeech
input to the last place resulting in an average position of 3.9 among the experts.
7 Evaluation
7.4 Opinion
The opinion questionnaire (see Appendix A.1.4) asked the user about intuitiveness
of the modalities and general interaction with the system. It includes questions from
the After-Scenario Questionnaire (ASQ) [Lewis, 1995] and the Software Usability
Measurement Inventory (SUMI) [Kirakowski and Corbett, 1993].
Thegoalofthisquestionnairewastogetabasicimpressionwhattheuserthinksabout
the system and the diferent input modalities. Figure 7.6 shows the distribution of the
answers from all 30 participants.
The graph shows that on average users had fun using the diferent input modalities,
and they were satisfed about the ease of completing the tasks and the required time it
took to complete them.
Two interesting questions within this questionnaire are "The system should not allow
to select a modality. It should pre-select the most suited one for each task." and "I
feel more secure if there are less modalities to choose". The frst question has an
average value of 3.5 which means that in average the participants neither agree nor
disagree. Looking at the raw data shows that 5 participants selected option 6 (strongly
agree), only one participant selected option 1 (strongly disagree) and 9 selected option
2 (disagree). Giving these options a bigger weight it means that approximately 10
participants want to select the input modality on their own whereas only 6 say that
only the most suited one should be available. A conclusion of this result may be to
reduce the amount of available modalities to only two, so the user can still select the
one he prefers but doesn’t has to decide himself for one out of four input modalities.
When separating the data by the answer for expertise in using computers, the picture
gets even more clear: experts somewhat agree (average of 4.0) that the system should
preselect the most suited modality whereas non expert users would like to select the
input modality on their own (average value 2.3, disagree to somewhat disagree). The
sametrendcanbeseenifthedataisseparatedintotwogroups: participantswhoknow
alotaboutroboticsandtheothergroupconsistingofhobbyroboticistsandparticipants
who don’t know that much about robotics. Experts or daily users of the system likely
tend to rush through the programming steps. If they need to select the modality for
each step it slows them down, but if they know that for example selecting an object
they have to use input by hand, it makes their interaction with the system much more
efcient.
Looking at the subquestions regarding the intuitiveness of diferent input modalities,
it can be seen that speech input, and keyboard and mouse are seen as less intuitive by
most of the users. Point by hand is the most intuitive input modality even before pen
input and touch input.
For the second part of the opinion questionnaire the participant had to imagine that
he’s a factory worker and programming industrial robots is his daily job (see Figure
7 Evaluation
7.7). Summarizing all the questions and answers, the overall statement is that the par-
ticipantswouldfndthepresentedwayofprogramminganindustrialrobotveryuseful
for their job, and that it would increase their job performance. Looking at the raw data
for each participant and each answer, all participants selected at least somewhat agree
(4)ormore(forallquestionsexceptnumber4,9and11). Thismeansthatallparticipants
think the system is an improvement for their job.
Comparing the answers for "Learning to operate the system would be easy for me" be-
tweenexpertsandnonexperts,showsthatexpertsfnditeasiertolearnhowtooperate
thesystem(averagevalueof5.3,agreetostronglyagree)comparedtononexpertsusers
(average of 4.9, agree).
Itwouldbeinterestingtoasksomeworkerswhosejobreallyisprogrammingindustrial
robots,andcheckiftheyarealsoconvincedaboutthesystem. Unfortunatelythiswasn’t
possible for this thesis but such an experiment is already planned for next year as part
of the SMErobotics 1 project.
For participants who already used a TeachPad, or at least know what it is (see Figure
7.2(b)),anadditionalquestionwasshown,whichaskedtheusertoestimate,howmuch
time saving (in percentage) can be achieved by using the input modalities presented
for this system, compared to using a TeachPad. The average value over all 12 answers
is about 71% (standard deviation: 23%) which means that they think using multimodal
input would speed up the whole teach in process by 71%.
7.5 Video analysis & Open discussion
During the practical part of the user study, a video camera recorded the participant’s
interaction with the system to analyze it afterwards. After the study there was also an
opendiscussionwitheachusertogetadditionalfeedbackasidefromthequestionnaires.
This section summarizes observations made when watching the recorded videos and
evaluates comments from the open discussion.
A main observation which could be seen for almost all participants was that they had
problems using speech input: the users didn’t know how to explain something to the
robotincludingalltherequireddetails. SincetheexperimentusedtheWizardofOzap-
proach,itdidn’treallymatterhowtheusersaidsomething,becauseahumansupervisor
interpreted the commands and set the correct value for the system, whereas the users
of course didn’t knew about that. Nonetheless they said that they don’t really know
how to talk to the robot because they thought that it has a reduced set of vocabulary
or doesn’t understand everything. This may be due to the fact that most of the partic-
ipants already used speech input for a device (e.g the Smartphone) or at least heard or
7 Evaluation
readaboutitandthereforewerebiased. Aftertellingthemthattheycanuseanykindof
vocabularytheyfeltabitmoresecure,butstillitwasn’tthateasyastalkingtoahuman
counterpart. Oneparticipantsaidthatusingspeechinputisodd,butmaybeafterusing
it for a longer period it may get easier and faster. Looking through the recording has
shown that this is already the case after using speech only one time: during introduc-
tiontheparticipanthadtodefneassemblyconstraintsusingspeech,wheremostofthe
usersstruggledtogivethecorrespondingcommandbutthen,thesecondtimetheyhad
to defne similar assembly constraints, the user was signifcantly faster.
Whenusingspeechinput,italsomakesquiteadiferenceiftheuserisadomainexpert
or not: for the assembly task, where the robot hat to put the bearing on the axis and
alignitconcentrically,mostoftheusersgaveacommandsimilarto"Robot: Pickbearing
and put it on axis concentrically". In contrary one participant was a mechanical engi-
neer who gave a more precise description using special vocabulary from his domain of
expertise: "Robot: Putbearingonshafttocollar"whichexactlydefnesthatthebearing
must be pushed on the shaft until it touches the collar.
Anotherinterestingobservationwasthatquiteafewparticipantsalwayslookedtothe
microphonewhengivingspeechcommands. Duringtheintroductiontothesystem,the
location of the microphone was shown (it was located within the Kinect sensor on top
of the table). So instead of just looking at the touchscreen (which was mounted on the
leftsideofthetable)andgivingspeechcommands,theyturnedtothetableandlooked
upwardstotheKinectsensor. Whendesigningsuchasystemthedevelopershouldkeep
this in mind and mount a microphone near the touchscreen or show some animation
or feedback on the touchscreen to keep the user looking at the touchscreen and thus
saving time.
Oneparticipantsaidthathedidn’tlikehandinputthatmuchbecausethefeedbackwas
missing. Thesystemthatwasusedduringthestudy,didn’tprovideanyvisualfeedback
directlyonthetable,iftheobjectwasselectedproperly. Theuseralwayshadtolookat
thetouchscreentocheckit. Thismayalsohaveslightlyinfuencedtheoverallresultof
the experiment.
Another participant also noted that if you are looking already at the touchscreen and
youhavetodecide,whetheryouchoosetouchasinput,oranotherinputmodalitywhere
you have to move away, it is more likely or consequent to select touch over the other
modalities.
7 Evaluation
Cogni?ve load Select an object
Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand
(a) Input modalities ordered by cognitive load (b) ForselectinganobjecttheuserspreferredPoint
(wheredidtheuserhadtothinkthemost,required byhand. It’snoticeablethatspeechinputwasleast
themostattention). 1meanshighcognitiveload,4 preferred in the expectation questionnaire com-
lesscognitiveload. paredtotheexperience.
Set a loca?on where to place an object Set assembly constraints
Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand Touch input Speech
(c) Touchinputisthepreferredmodalityforsetting (d) 25ofthe30participantsfoundTouchinputeas-
a specifc location on the table closely followed by ier than Speech input because it’s quite difcult to
gestureinput. describeassemblyconstraintsusingspeech.
Select a point on the object Select an edge on the object
Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand Touch input Speech Pen input Point by hand
(e) Selectingapointontheobjectbypointingwitha (f) The answers for selecting an edge are nearly
fngerwaspreferredbymostoftheusers.Peninput identicaltoselectingapointontheleftside.
isrightafterPointbyhand.
Figure 7.5: Graphs showing the results for each question where the user had to order the input
modalities for the diferent tasks or cognitive load according his experience in previous practical
part. Forthecognitiveload,1meanshighload,4lesscognitiveload. Foralltheothergraphs1isthe
mostand4theleastpreferredmodality.Thebluecircleindicatestheaverageoverall30participants,
thegraybarshowsthestandarddeviationforeachmodality. Theorangecrossistheaveragefrom
theexpectationquestionnairewheretheuserhadtoorderthemodalitiesaccordingtowhichhewill
mostlikelypreferthemost.
7 Evaluation
It's fun to program a robot using mul?modality (different types of input)
The system should not allow to select a modality. It should pre-select the…
Using the System is natural
Speech input is accurate enough for loud industrial environments.
I feel more secure if there are less modali?es to choose
It's intui?ve to use speech input
It's intui?ve to use pen input
It's intui?ve to use touch input
It's intui?ve to use gesture input (point by hand)
It's intui?ve to use keyboard & mouse
It was difficult to understand how to use the different modali?es
Overall, I am sa?sfied with the ease of comple?ng the tasks in the scenarios
Overall, I am sa?sfied with the amount of ?me it took to complete the tasks
1 2 3 4 5 6
Figure7.6:Distributionoftheanswersforquestionsabouttheintuitivenessoftheinputmodalities
andopinionaboutthewholesystem. 1=stronglydisagree, 2=disagree, 3=somewhatdisagree, 4
=somewhatagree,5=agree,6=stronglyagree. Thebluedotmarksthearithmeticmeanofall30
participants,thegraylineindicatesthestandarddeviation.
FACTORY WORKER PROGRAMMING AN INDUSTRIAL ROBOT
Using the system in my job would enable me to accomplish tasks more quickly
Using the system would improve my job performance
Using the system in my job would increase my produc?ty
Using the system would slow me down and decrease the efficiency of my job
Using the system would make it easier to do my job
I would find the system useful in my job
Learning to operate the system would be easy for me
My interac?on with the system would be clear and understandable
Using the system would make my job more complicated
It would be easy for me to become skillful at using the system
I would find the system difficult to use
1 2 3 4 5 6
Figure 7.7: To answer the questions above, the participants had to imagine that they are factory
workers and programming industrial robots is their daily job. 1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree,
3=somewhatdisagree, 4=somewhatagree,5=agree,6=stronglyagree. Thebluedotmarksthe
arithmeticmeanofall30participants,thegraylineindicatesthestandarddeviation.
8 Conclusions
This master thesis focused on the implementation and evaluation of multimodal input
and output channels for task-based industrial robot programming.
Afterlistingandevaluatingdiferenthumaninputandoutputchannels,computerinput
and output modalities were explained in more detail, including historical background
and possible application areas.
Thepresentedtask-basedprogrammingisbasedonthehierarchicalconceptofprocess,
taskandskill. Skillsareprimitivefunctionsprovidedbythehardwareoractionsrequir-
ing additional atomic steps or sensor functions. Tasks is an abstract work description
that maps to one or multiple skills. A task can have diferent skill mappings provid-
ing the same functionality, thus there may exist multiple skill implementations for the
sametaskthatuseforexamplediferentsensorsoralgorithms. Aprocessisanabstract
description ofa robotprogram consisting ofone ormultiple tasks. Diferenttask types
in four application domains (assembly, welding, woodworking, metal processing and
bonding)were analyzed anddescribed in more detail: Which skillsare requiredforthe
task? What are the parameters the user needs to set? Which input modalities can be
used? What are the uncertainties or problems which may arise when executing the
task?
Based on this task analysis, an ontology was constructed which semantically describes
therelationbetweenthetasksandcorrespondingskills,whichparametersarerequired,
ofwhichdatatypetheyareandwhichinputmodalitiescanbeusedtosetthoseparame-
ters. Italsoincludesrepresentationsofhardwareandsoftwaresystemcomponentslike
sensors or specifc algorithms. This ontology can be used for cognitive robot cells, for
example to automatically infer, if specifc input modalities are available based on the
equipmentofthecellorwhichmodalityshouldbeusedforaspecifcparametertype.
Forprogrammingthetasksandevaluationwithintheuserstudy,anintuitivegraphical
user interface using modern web technologies was developed, which is optimized for
touch input and integrates multiple input modalities.
Thegoaloftheuserstudywastoevaluatewhichinputmodalitiesuserspreferforwhich
type of parameter. The study was divided into four phases: background information,
expectation, experience and opinion. These phases evaluate diferent aspects within
multimodal interaction: what the user expects from the system, how he experienced it
and what his opinion is.
Afterfllingoutaquestionnairetheparticipantshadtoprogramtwoassemblyandtwo
8 Conclusions
welding tasks to the robot using all four input modalities: speech, gesture input, touch
input and pen input sequentially. So each user had to use each modality for each task.
The tasks required various types of parameters, which the user had to set: object mod-
els, location on the table, assembly constraints and vertices or edges on an object.
Evaluatingtheresultsof30participantsclearlyshowsthatmostoftheuserspreferges-
tureinputovertouchinput,peninputandspeechinput. Forselectingavertexoredge,
peninputwasslightlymorepreferredcomparedtootherparametertypes. Thisissimi-
lartotheresultsfrom[Renetal.,2000]whereusersmainlypreferredpeninputforCAD
applications. Additionally the study confrms the results from [Wasinger and Krüger,
2006], who stated that women feel less secure and comfortable than men when using
speech input.
The study also reveals that speech input on its own is not very suitable for usage in
task-based robot programming. Due to the high diversity when using speech, there
aremultiplepossibilitiestodefnetheidenticalcommand,usingdiferentwordsorsen-
tences. During a Wizard-of-Oz experiment that’s no problem, but implementing such
a speech recognition system is quite complex, if it is even possible. For example posi-
tion indications (left, right, front, back) are not defned accurately: is it defned from
theuser’spointofvieworfromtherobot. Minimizingthesedrawbacksrequiresspecial
training for the user to sensitize him regarding these problems, which isn’t the goal of
intuitive and easy use of an interface.
[Naumann,2009]statethatpriorknowledgeorfamiliaritywithaspecifcinputmodal-
ity infuences the rating or preferred choice of modality. Looking at the results of the
userstudyforthismasterthesis,thisstatementcouldn’tbeconfrmed: nonethelessmost
usersarequitefamiliarwithtouchinterfaces,inputbypengainedasimilarhighoreven
betterratingthantouchinput,eventhoughmostoftheusersdidn’tyetusethiskindof
input modality.
Another conclusion drawn from this user study is to reduce the amount of available
input modalities for a specifc parameter: experts stated that the intuitiveness of the
GUI would increase if the system preselects the most suitable input modality whereas
non-expertuserstendtotryoutandplaywiththesystem,usingdiferentinputmodal-
ities.
The outcome of this thesis clearly motivates further research in multimodal interac-
tionforrobotprogrammingasitprovidestheuserwithgreaternaturalness,expressive
powerandfexibility. Theparticipantsstatethatusingmultimodalitymakesrobotpro-
gramming more intuitive, easier and faster.
8 Conclusions
8.1 Future Improvements
The evaluation of the current system showed that there is still space for improvement.
Forthisthesis,fusionofinputmodalitieswasn’tusedandimplementedduetotimecon-
straints,butusingmultiplemodalitiesatthesametimewillmostprobablyincreasethe
intuitivity of the whole system and make the programming of industrial robots easier.
Forfutureuserstudiesthisshouldbeconsideredandshouldalsoincludesomequestions
about modality fusion, for example if the user would have preferred to use gesture in
combination with speech or speech only.
Withinthestudytheuseralwayshadtoselecttheinputmodalityonthetouchscreento
use it. As some of participants encouraged, a huge improvement for the system would
betoautomaticallyselectthemostsuitedmodalitybasedonthecurrentparameterand
knowledgeofthesystemabouttheworldstate. Theontologycreatedwithinthisthesis
is a good starting point for this improvement. Additionally the system should detect a
switch between input modalities on the fy, without explicitly selecting one, or telling
it to the system.
During the Wizard-of-Oz study the system didn’t provide much user feedback: e.g.
when using gesture input to select an object there was no visual feedback on the ta-
ble,butonlyonthetouchscreen. Futureimprovementsshouldfocusonhowadditional
feedback can be provided to the user. A projector could be used to display selected el-
ements on the table. It’s also important to show to the user, if the robot is currently
executing or processing data, or if it is waiting for user input. A simple three-colored
light could be used for this purpose.
For a more expressive user study, additionally the mental/cognitive workload should
bemeasuredtodefnewhichinputmodalitiesaresuitableforlong-termusagetoavoid
early exhaustion. [Hirshfeld and Solovey, 2009] describes a novelexperiment protocol
and a set of analysis algorithms that can help UI evaluators or designers of adaptive
systems to gain information about the workload experienced by users in the various
cognitive resources in their brains, while they work with computer systems.
Cognitiverobotcellsshouldalsohavesituationalawareness: thechoiceforapreferred
input modality varies for diferent personalities and situations in which the user fnds
himselfinto. Thereforeit’simportanttounderstandtheuseritself. Iftheuserisengaged
in a task that occupies his hands, he may prefer to use speech input or other input
modalities, which don’t require moving his hands. Another example is described in [J
Coutaz et al., 1995]: suppose that the user wishes to book a fight from somewhere in
Europe to Las Vegas. He may not know what the nearest international airport is, so
he would prefer to indicate his destination by pointing on a map instead of selecting it
fromalist. Incontrary,ifthesameuserwantstobookafighttoadestinationwherehe
already knows the international airport code, he would most likely prefer to just write
it into a text feld instead of selecting the place on a map which is much slower.
A Qestionnaires
This chapter lists all the questions as they were asked during the user study. The par-
ticipantcouldchoosebetweenEnglishorGermanquestionswhereasthequestionshad
still the same meaning.
Theuserstudytookabout30minutesperparticipantandwasdividedintothefollowing
parts:
1. Questions: BackgroundInformation(2Minutes). Theuserhadtoflloutpersonal
information like age, gender, expertise in using computers and knowledge about
robotics.
2. Pratical: Introduction to the system (5 Minutes). The setup of the sensors and
touch screen was explained and the user could try out all the available input
modalities to get a feeling on how to use them.
3. Questions: Expectations (3 Minutes). This part of the questionnaire focused on
theexpectationsoftheuserregardingthepreviouslypresentedsystem. Thepar-
ticipant had to order the input modalities according to which input modality he
wouldpreferthemost. Thepossibleanswersforsortingwererandomlymixedto
not infuence the user by the given order.
4. Practical: Hands-On part (15 Minutes). During this step the participant had to
teachtherobotfourdiferenttasks: Pick&Place,Assembly,Pointwelding,Seam
welding. Foreachtasktheuserhadtouseallfourinputmodalities(touch,gesture,
speech, pen input).
5. Questions: Experience&Opinion(5Minutes). Thelastpartofthequestionnaire
askedtheuseraboutwhichinputmodalityhepreferred(samequestionsasinthe
Expectationssection,wheretheuserhadtoorderthem)andwhathisopinionon
the diferent input modalities is.
A Questionnaires
A.1 English Qestionnaire
A.1.1 Background Information
1. How old are you?
Age: years old.
2. What’s your gender?
male female
? ?
3. What’s your expertise in using computers? I know how to ...
Beginner: ... switch it on and open the browser
?
Basic: ... use most of the programms installed on my PC and handle fles
?
Advanced: ... add new hardware and install new software
?
Expert: ... program new software and how the computer hardware works
?
4. How much do you know about robotics?
Not that much: I read/heard about robots but don’t know that much about
?
Hobby roboticist: I build/program small robots in my freetime
?
A lot: I studied robotics, computer science or similar engineering course
?
5. Did you already use a TeachPad to program a robot?
No, I don’t even know what a TeachPad is.
?
I know what a TeachPad is, but never programmed a robot with it.
?
Yes, I already programmed a robot with a TeachPad
?
A.1.2 Expectations
6. Thinkaboutasimplepickandplacetask,wheretherobothastopickupan
object from a palette and place it on the table with a specifc orientation.
What’syourestimateinminutesonhowlongitwouldtaketoteacharobot
these steps (using current systems used in production)?
A Questionnaires
For each of the following parameters order the input modalities in descending order
according to which input modality you would prefer the most. (Most preferred on top,
least preferred on bottom)
7. Parameter: Select an object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
8. Parameter: Set a location where to place an object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
9. Parameter: Set assembly constraints between two objects
? Pen Input
?
?
10. Parameter: Select a point on the object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
11. Parameter: Select an edge on the object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
A Questionnaires
?
A.1.3 Experience
12. Ordertheinputmodalitiesbasedonyourexperiencedcognitiveload(which
modalityrequiredthemostconcentration,wheredidyouhavetothinkthe
most). Top = high cognitive load, bottom = less cognitive load
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
Now order the input modalities again. This time use your experience from previous
tasks and order them according to which you preferred the most. (Most preferred on
top, least preferred on bottom)
13. Parameter: Select an object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
14. Parameter: Set a location where to place an object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
15. Parameter: Set assembly constraints between two objects
? Pen Input
?
?
A Questionnaires
16. Parameter: Select a point on the object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
17. Parameter: Select an edge on the object
? Touch Input
?
? Pen Input
?
? Point by hand
?
?
A.1.4 Opinion
18. What are your expectations on the following statements?
aloteasier asexpected muchmorecompli-
thanexpected catedthanIthought
usingtheinputmodalitiesfor
? ? ? ? ?
programming a robot was
Touch input was
? ? ? ? ?
Speech input was
? ? ? ? ?
Gesture input was
? ? ? ? ?
Input by pen was
? ? ? ? ?
Overall, using this system to
? ? ? ? ?
program a robot was
19. Howmuchdoyouthinkisthetimesaving(inpercentage)ofusingtheinput
modalitiescomparedtousingaTeachPad? (Onlyshownifuserknowswhat
a TeachPad, see Question 5)
A value of 25% means that using these input modalities requires 75 seconds, when
using the TeachPad required 100 seconds.
% time saving.
20. What do you think about the following statements?
A Questionnaires
strongly disagree somewhat somewhat agree strongly
disagree disagree agree agree
It’s fun to program a robot
? ? ? ? ? ?
using multimodality (difer-
ent types of input)
The system should not al-
? ? ? ? ? ?
low to select a modality. It
should pre-select the most
suited one for each task.
Using the System is natural
? ? ? ? ? ?
Speech input is accurate
? ? ? ? ? ?
enough for loud industrial
environments.
Ifeelmoresecureifthereare
? ? ? ? ? ?
less modalities to choose
It’sintuitivetousespeechin-
? ? ? ? ? ?
It’s intuitive to use pen input
? ? ? ? ? ?
It’s intuitive to use touch in-
? ? ? ? ? ?
It’s intuitive to use gesture
? ? ? ? ? ?
input (point by hand)
It’s intuitive to use keyboard
? ? ? ? ? ?
It was difcult to under-
? ? ? ? ? ?
standhowtousethediferent
modalities
Overall, I am satisfed with
? ? ? ? ? ?
the ease of completing the
tasks in the scenarios
Overall, I am satisfed with
? ? ? ? ? ?
the amount of time it took to
complete the tasks
21. Now imagine you are a factory worker and programming industrial robots
is your daily job. Answer the following questions:
A Questionnaires
strongly disagree somewhat somewhat agree strongly
disagree disagree agree agree
Using the system in my job
? ? ? ? ? ?
would enable me to accom-
plish tasks more quickly
Using the system would im-
? ? ? ? ? ?
prove my job performance
Using the system in my job
? ? ? ? ? ?
would increase my produc-
Usingthesystemwouldslow
? ? ? ? ? ?
medownanddecreasetheef-
fciency of my job
Using the system would
? ? ? ? ? ?
make it easier to do my job
I would fnd the system use-
? ? ? ? ? ?
ful in my job
Learning to operate the sys-
? ? ? ? ? ?
tem would be easy for me
My interaction with the sys-
? ? ? ? ? ?
tem would be clear and un-
derstandable
Using the system would
? ? ? ? ? ?
make my job more compli-
Itwouldbeeasyformetobe-
? ? ? ? ? ?
comeskillfulatusingthesys-
I would fnd the system dif-
? ? ? ? ? ?
cult to use
A.2 German Qestionnaire
A.2.1 Hintergrund Informationen
1. Wie alt bist du?
Alter: Jahre alt.
2. Was ist dein Geschlecht?
A Questionnaires
männlich weiblich
? ?
3. Wie gut kennst du dich mit Computern aus? Ich wei wie man
Anfänger: ... den PC einschaltet und den Browser öfnet
?
Grundkenntnisse: ... Programme auf meinem PC bedient und mit Dateien um-
?
Fortgeschritten: ... neue Hardware hinzufügt und neue Software installiert
?
Experte:...programmeentwickeltundwiedieComputer-Hardwarefunktioniert
?
4. Wie viel weißt du über Robotik?
Nichtsoviel:IchhabeüberRobotergelesen/gehörtkennmichabernichtsogut
?
Hobby Robotiker: Ich entwickle/programmiere kleine Roboter in meiner Frei-
?
Ich kenn mich gut aus: ich studiere Robotik, Informatik oder ähnliche Inge-
?
nieurswissenschaf
5. Hast du schon mal ein TeachPad zur Programmierung eines Roboters ver-
wendet?
Nein, ich weiß nicht mal, was ein TeachPad ist.
?
Ich weiß was ein TeachPad ist, aber habe noch nie einen Roboter damit pro-
?
grammiert.
Ja, ich habe bereits einen Roboter mit einem TeachPad programmiert.
?
A.2.2 Erwartungen
6. Stelle dir eine einfache Pick & Place Aufgabe vor, wo der Roboter ein Teil
von einer Palette greifen und dieses auf den Tisch ablegen soll.
Wie lange schätzt du die Zeit, die man benötigt, um diese Aufgabe einem
Roboter beizubringen (bei bisher verwendeter Systeme in der Industrie)?
Für jeden folgenden Parameter ordne die Eingabemodalitäten in absteigender Reihen-
folge danach, welche du am meisten bevorzugst. (Oben: am meisten bevorzugt, unten:
wenigesten bevorzugt)
7. Parameter: Objekt auswählen
A Questionnaires
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
8. Parameter: Position zum Ablegen des Objekts auf dem Tisch
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
9. Parameter: Setzen der Positionen für das Zusammensetzen zweier Objekte
? Stift Eingabe
?
?
10. Parameter: Punkt auf dem Objekt auswählen
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
11. Parameter: Kante auf dem Objekt auswählen
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
A Questionnaires
A.2.3 Erfahrung
12. OrdnedieEingabemodalitätenbasierendaufdieerfahrenekognitiveBelas-
tung (bei welcher Modalität musstest du am meisten Nachdenken, wo war
am meisten Konzentration nötig).Oben = hohe kognitive Belastung,unten
= geringe kognitive Belastung
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
Jetzt ordne die folgenden Modalitäten nochmal. Diesmal verwende die Erfahrung aus
dem praktischen Teil und ordne die Modalitäten basieren auf welche du am meisten
bevorzugt hast. (Oben: am meisten bevorzugt, unten: am wenigsten bevorzugt)
13. Parameter: Wähle ein Objekt
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
14. Parameter: Position zum Ablegen des Objekts auf dem Tisch
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
15. Parameter:SetztenderPositionenfürdasZusammensetzenzweierObjekte
? Stift Eingabe
?
?
16. Parameter: Punkt auf dem Objekt auswählen
A Questionnaires
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
17. Parameter: Kante auf dem Objekt auswählen
? Touch Eingabe
?
? Stift Eingabe
?
? Zeigen mit der Hand
?
?
A.2.4 Meinung
18. Was ist deine Meinung bezüglich folgender Aussagen?
vieleinfacher wieerwartet deutlichkompli-
alserwartet zierteralsichdachte
verwenden der Eingabemo-
? ? ? ? ?
dalitäten zur Programmie-
rung des Roboters war
Touch Eingabe war
? ? ? ? ?
Spracheingabe war
? ? ? ? ?
Gesten Eingabe war
? ? ? ? ?
Stift Eingabe war
? ? ? ? ?
Insgesamt war die Verwen-
? ? ? ? ?
dung des Systems zum Pro-
grammieren des Roboters
19. Wie hoch schätzt du die Zeiteinsparung (in Prozent) bei Verwendung der
vorherigenEingabemodalitätenimVergleichzurVerwendungeinesTeach-
Pads? (Nur angezeigt, wenn der Benutzer weiß, was ein TeachPad ist, siehe
Ein Wert von 25% bedeutet, dass die Eingabemodalitäten 75 sekunden benötigen,
wenn die Programmierung mit dem TeachPad 100 Sekunden dauerte.
% Zeitersparnis.
20. Was denkst du zu den folgenden Aussagen?
A Questionnaires
stimmeüber- stimmenicht stimmeeher stimmeeher stimmezu stimmevoll-
hauptnichtzu zu nichtzu zu kommenzu
Programmieren des Roboters
? ? ? ? ? ?
mit multimodaler Eingabe
macht Spaß
Das System sollte keine Aus-
? ? ? ? ? ?
wahl an Modalitäten bieten,
sondern nur die am Besten
geeignete anbieten
DieVerwendungdesSystems
? ? ? ? ? ?
ist natürlich
Spracheingabe ist genau ge-
? ? ? ? ? ?
nug in lauter industrieller
Ichfühlemichsicherer,wenn
? ? ? ? ? ?
weniger Eingabemodalitäten
zur Auswahl stehen
Spracheingabe ist intuitiv
? ? ? ? ? ?
Stift-Eingabe ist intuitiv
? ? ? ? ? ?
Touch-Eingabe ist intuitiv
? ? ? ? ? ?
Gesten Eingabe (Zeigen mit
? ? ? ? ? ?
der Hand) ist intuitiv
Tastatur & Maus ist intuitiv
? ? ? ? ? ?
Es war schwer, die verschie-
? ? ? ? ? ?
denenModalitätenzuverste-
Insgesamt bin ich mit der
? ? ? ? ? ?
Leichtigkeit der Ausführung
derAufgabenindenSzenari-
en zufrieden
Insgesamtbinichmitderbe-
? ? ? ? ? ?
nötigten Zeit zur durchfüh-
rung der Aufgaben zufrieden
21. JetztstelldirvorduarbeitestineinerFabrikunddeinetäglicheAufgabeist
es, Industrieroboter zu programmieren. Beantworte folgende Fragen:
A Questionnaires
stimmeüber- stimmenicht stimmeeher stimmeeher stimmezu stimmevoll-
hauptnichtzu zu nichtzu zu kommenzu
Verwenden des Systems in
? ? ? ? ? ?
meiner Arbeit würde mir er-
möglichen,Aufgabenschnel-
ler zu erledigen
DieVerwendungdesSystems
? ? ? ? ? ?
würde meine Arbeitsleistung
DieVerwendungdesSystems
? ? ? ? ? ?
würde meine Produktivität
DieVerwendungdesSystems
? ? ? ? ? ?
würde meine Arbeit verlang-
samen und die Efzienz ver-
DieVerwendungdesSystems
? ? ? ? ? ?
würde meinen Job einfacher
Ich würde das System nütz-
? ? ? ? ? ?
lich fnden
Lernen das System zu ver-
? ? ? ? ? ?
wenden wäre einfach für
Die Interaktion mit dem Sys-
? ? ? ? ? ?
tem wäre klar und verständ-
DasSystemwürdemeineAr-
? ? ? ? ? ?
beit komplizierter machen
Eswäreeinfachfürmich,ein
? ? ? ? ? ?
Experte in dem System zu
IchfändedasSystemkompli-
? ? ? ? ? ?
ziert zu bedienen