]MQ.oib-q[
3v3753.1131:viXra
Improved design and screening of high bioactivity
peptides for drug discovery
S´ebastien Gigu`ere∗1, Franc¸ois Laviolette1, Mario Marchand1,
Denise Tremblay2, Sylvain Moineau2, E´ric Biron3, and Jacques
1Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Universit´e Laval, Qu´ebec, Canada
2Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Bioinformatics,
Universit´e Laval, Qu´ebec, Canada
3Faculty of Pharmacy, Universit´e Laval, Qu´ebec, Canada
4Department of Molecular Medicine, Universit´e Laval, Qu´ebec,
April 7, 2019
The discovery of peptides having high biological activity is very chal-
lenging mainly because thereisan enormous diversityof compoundsand
only a minority have the desired properties. To lower cost and reduce
the time to obtain promising compounds, machine learning approaches
can greatly assist in the process and even replace expensive laboratory
experiments by learning a predictor with existing data. Unfortunately,
selecting ligands havingthegreatest predicted bioactivity requiresa pro-
hibitive amount of computational time. For this combinatorial problem,
heuristicsandstochasticoptimizationmethodsarenotguaranteedtofind
adequate compounds.
We propose an efficient algorithm based on De Bruijn graphs, guar-
anteed tofind thepeptidesof maximal predicted bioactivity. Wedemon-
stratehowthisalgorithm canbepartofaniterativecombinatorialchem-
istry procedure to speed up the discovery and the validation of peptide
leads. Moreover,theproposedapproachdoesnotrequiretheuseofknown
ligandsforthetargetproteinsinceitcanleveragerecentmulti-targetma-
chine learning predictors where ligands for similar targets can serve as
initialtrainingdata. Finally,wevalidatedtheproposedapproachinvitro
with thediscovery of new cationic anti-microbial peptides.
∗sebastien.giguere.8@ulaval.ca
1 Introduction
Drugdiscoveryfacesimportantchallengesintermsofcost,complexityandinthe
rapid discovery of promising compounds. A valuable drug precursor must have
high affinity with the target protein while minimizing interactions with other
proteins, in order to avoid side effects. Unfortunately, only a few compounds
havesuchpropertiesandthese haveto be identifiedfromanastronomicalnum-
ber of candidate compounds. Other factors, such as bio-availability, stability,
among many others have to be considered; but this combinatorial search prob-
lem by itself is very challenging (MEE et al., 1997). The process of discovering
novelcompounds with both high bioactivity and low toxicity must therefore be
optimized.
Fortunately,inthelastdecade,machinelearningandkernelmethods(Scho¨lkopf and Smola,
2002;Shawe-Taylorand Cristianini,2004)havebeenextremelyeffectiveatpro-
viding efficient learning algorithms for a wide range of application domains.
These methods provide novel way to find patterns in biological and chemical
data. Theseinclude the predictionofmutagenicity,toxicityandthe anti-cancer
activity of small molecules (Swamidass et al., 2005). They are also used in the
prediction of protein-protein interactions (Ben-Hur and Noble, 2005), protein-
ligand interactions and the in silico screening of novel targets (Jacob et al.,
2008). Thissuccesscanbemainlyattributedtothe inclusionofsimilarityfunc-
tions,knownaskernels (Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini,2004;Scho¨lkopf and Smola,
2002). Thekernelsincorporatevaluablebiologicalandchemicalknowledgepro-
posed by biologists and, consequently, provide a natural and efficient way to
improve the accuracy of learning algorithms. However, the use of state-of-
the-art learning algorithms to design and enhance the pharmaceutical proper-
ties of known compounds have remained largely unexplored and unexploited
(Schneider, 2010; Damborsky and Brezovsky, 2009).
In the context of drug design, knowing if a ligand will interact with a par-
ticular protein is helpful. However, most potential ligands have low activity
and would not represent valid drug precursors. To predict more valuable in-
formation,recent work has addressedthe task of predicting the bioactivity and
bindingaffinitybetweenligandsandatargetprotein(Gigu`ere et al.,2013a). For
instance, starting with a training set containing approximately 50−100 pep-
tides with their corresponding quantified activity (bioactivity, binding affinity,
etc) one can expect that a state-of-the-art kernel method will give a bioactiv-
ity predictor which is accurate enough to find additional peptides with higher
activity than the best ones in the original . This is possible, since each peptide
thatpossessesasmallbinding affinitycontainsinformationaboutsubsequences
of residues that can bind to the target.
For novel and less studied targets, screening libraries remain the method of
choice for rapid ligand development. To fully exploit the great conformational
and functional diversity that is accessible with peptides, combinatorial chem-
istryiscertainlythemostpowerfultool. Amajorassetofcombinatorialpeptide
libraries over classic combinatorial libraries, where the scaffold is fixed, is the
possibility to generate enormous conformational diversity as well as functional
diversity using a randomized synthesis procedure. This chemical diversity and
functionality can be further enhanced by the inclusion of non-natural amino
acids. Furthermore,havinga peptide scaffoldcanbe veryinformativeto screen
for similarities in peptidomimetics libraries. However, it is important to note
thatcombinatorialpeptide chemistrycannotcoverasignificantpartofthepep-
tide diversity when using more than a few amino acids. For example, 2g of a
one-beadone-compoundcombinatoriallibrarycomposedofrandomly-generated
peptides of nine residues will generate a maximum of six million compounds,
representing a vanishingly small fraction (less than 0.0016%) of the set of all
209 peptides. Consequently, it is almost certain that the best peptides will not
be present in the initial screening and most synthesized peptides will have low
bioactivity.
The drug discovery challenge is a complex combinatorial problem which
unfortunately cannot be solved using combinatorial chemistry alone. Many
have proposed to use combinatorial chemistry or existing databases to learn a
machine learning predictor to tackle this problem. The main motivation was
that,in silico predictionisfastandinexpensiveandwouldultimatelyaccelerate
this costly process. Unfortunately, this effectively transformsthe combinatorial
drugdiscoveryproblemintoaequallyhardoptimizationtaskwhichissometime
know to be NP-Hard (Cortes et al., 2005). Indeed, predicting the bioactivity
of all possible ligands, then selecting the most promising ones, would require a
prohibitive amount of computational time. Heuristics and stochastic optimiza-
tion are generally the methods of choice when facing such tasks (Jamois, 2003;
Pickett et al., 2000). However,these time andresourceconsuming methods are
not guaranteed to find the optimal solution. In fact, because of the size of the
searchspace,stochasticoptimizationislikelytofindapoorsolution. Theprob-
lem of finding the most active and specific ligand is still an open algorithmic
problem.
We propose, for a large class of machine learning predictors, an efficient
algorithm based on De Bruijn graphs to find the peptide of maximal predicted
bioactivity. This algorithm can be part of an iterative combinatorial chemistry
procedurethatcouldspeedupthediscoveryandthevalidationofpeptideleads.
Moreover, the proposed approach can be executed without known ligands for
the target protein, since it can leverage recent multi-target machine learning
predictors where ligands for similar targets can serve as an initial training set.
Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness and validate our approachin vitro by
providing an example of how anti-microbial peptides with proven activity were
selected.
2 Approach
2.1 The Generic String kernel
String kernels are similarity functions between strings, which are arbitrary se-
quences of characters. In our context, strings are composed of amino acids
or nucleotides. Such kernels have been widely used in applications of machine
learningtobiology. Forexample,thelocal-alignmentkernel(Saigo et al.,2004),
closely related to the well known Smith-Waterman alignment algorithm, was
used for protein homology detection. It was observed that kernels for large
molecules such as proteins were not suitable for smaller amino acids sequences
such as peptides. Indeed the idea of gaps in the local-alignment kernel or the
Smith-Waterman algorithm is well suited for protein homology, but a gap of
only a few amino acids in a peptide would have important consequence on the
binding affinity with a target protein.
Many recently proposed string kernels have emerged from the original idea
of the spectrum kernel (Leslie et al., 2002) were each string is represented by
the set of all k-mers that are present. For example, PALI can be represented
by it’s set of 2-mers {PA,AL,LI}. As defined by the spectrum kernel, the
similarity score between two strings is simply the number of k-mers that they
have in common. For example, the spectrum similarity between PALI and
LIPAT would be 2, because they have two 2-mers in common (PA and LI).
To characterizethe similarity between peptides, two different k-mer criteria
were found to be important. First, two k-mers should only contribute to the
similarity if they are in similar positions in the two peptides (Meinicke et al.,
2004). Second, the two k-mers should share common physico-chemical proper-
ties (Toussaint et al., 2010).
Meinicke et al. (2004) proposed to weight the contribution of identical k-
mers with a term that decays exponentially rapidly with the distance between
their positions. If i and j denote the positions of the k-mers in their respective
strings, the contribution to the similarity is given by
where σ is a parameter that controls the length of the decay.
Toussaint et al. (2010) proposedto considerproperties of amino acids when
comparing similar k-mers. This was motivated by the fact that amino acids
with similar physico-chemical properties can be substituted in a peptide while
maintaining the binding characteristics. To capture the physicochemical prop-
erties of amino acids, they proposed to use an encoding function ψψψ : Σ −→Rd
where ψψψ(a) = (ψ 1(a),ψ 2(a),...ψ d(a)), to map every amino acids a ∈ Σ to a
vector where each component ψ (a) encodes one of the d properties of amino
acida. Ina similarway,we candefineψψψk :Σk −→Rdk asanencodingfunction
for k-mers, where
1 2 k 1 2 k
by concatenning k physico-chemical property vectors, each having d compo-
nents. It is now possible to weight the contribution of two k-mers a and a′
according to their properties:
where k·k denotes the Euclidean distance.
Morerecently,theGenericString(GS)kernelwasproposedforsmallbiolog-
icalsequencesandpseudo-sequencesofbindinginterface(Gigu`ere et al.,2013a).
The GS kernel is defined by
GS(x,x′,k,σ ,σ )d=ef e 2σ p 2 !
X l=1 X i=0 X j=0 (4)
,..,x j+l)k2
 2σ c 2 
×e .
Hence, the similarity between string x and x′, as defined by the GS kernel, is
givenbycomparingtheir1-mers,2-mers,...uptotheirk-merswiththeposition
penalizing term of Equation (1) and the physico-chemical contribution term of
Equation(3). k, σ , σ arehyper-parametersusedfortuning theGSkerneland
are generally chosen by cross-validation.
This Generic String kernel is very versatile since, depending on the chosen
hyper-parameters, it can be specialized to eight known kernels (Gigu`ere et al.,
2013a): theHammingkernel,theDiracdelta,theBlendedSpectrum(Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini,
2004),theRadialBasisFunction(RBF),theBlendedSpectrumRBF(Toussaint et al.,
2010),theOligo(Meinicke et al.,2004),theWeighteddegree(Ra¨tsch and Sonnenburg,
2004), and the Weighted degree RBF (Toussaint et al., 2010).
In a recent study (Gigu`ere et al., 2013a), the GS kernel was used to learn a
universal peptide-protein binding affinity predictor capable of predicting, with
reasonableaccuracy,thebindingaffinityofanypeptidetoanyproteinusingthe
PepX database as the training set. The GS kernel has also outperformed the
currentstate-of-the-artmethodsforpredictingpeptide-proteinbindingaffinities
on single-target and pan-specific Major Histocompatibility Complex class II
benchmarkdatasetsandthreeQuantitativeStructureAffinityModelbenchmark
datasets. Recently, the GSkernelwonthe 2012Machine LearningCompetition
in Immunology (Gigu`ere et al., 2013b). External validation determined that
an SVM classifier equipped with the GS kernel was the overall best method to
identify,givenunpublishedexperimentaldata,newpeptidesnaturallyprocessed
by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Class I pathway. The proven
effectiveness of this kernel made it ideal to tackle the present problem.
2.2 The machine learning approach
In a binary classification setting, the learning task is to predict whether an
examplehasaspecificpropertysuchasbindingtoatargetmolecule. Inthiscase,
thetrainingsetconsistsofpositiveexamples,thosehavingthedesiredproperty,
and negative examples, those who do not. In a regression setting, the learning
taskistopredictarealvaluethatquantifiesthequalityofapeptide,forexample,
itsbioactivity,inhibitoryconcentration,bindingaffinity,orbioavailability. Such
values are generally obtained from in vitro or in vivo experiments.
In this paper, each example will be of the form ((x,y),e), where x repre-
sents a peptide and y the drug target, which is typically a protein (but other
biomolecules could be considered). In the present regression context, e ∈ R
is a real number representing the bioactivity of the peptide x with the target
y. In classification, e ∈ {+1,−1} denotes if (x,y) has the desired property or
not. Since predicting real values is strictly more generalthan predicting binary
values, we focused on the more general case of real-valued predictors.
A predictor can be a function h that returns an output h(x,y) when given
any input (x,y). In our setting, the output h(x,y) is a real number that es-
timates the “true” bioactivity e between x and y. Such a predictor is said to
be multi-target since it’s output depends on the ligand x and the target y. A
multi-targetpredictorisgenerallyobtainedbylearningfromnumerouspeptides,
binding to various proteins, for example, a protein family. For this reason, it
can predict the bioactivity of any peptide with any protein of the family even
if some proteins are not present in the training data.
Incontrast,apredictorh (x)issaidtobetarget-specificwhenitisdedicated
to predict the bioactivity of a specific (fixed) protein y and any peptide x. A
target-specificpredictoris obtainedbylearningonlyfrompeptides bindingtoa
specificproteiny. Forthisreason,itcanonlypredictthebioactivityofpeptides
forthetargety. Inthispaper,wefocusonthemoregeneralcaseofmulti-target
predictors.
Givenatrainingset{((x ,y ),e ),...,((x ,y ),e )},alargeclassoflearn-
1 1 1 m m m
ingalgorithms,producemulti-targetpredictorshwiththe outputh(x,y) onan
arbitrary example (x,y) given by
where k and k are, respectively, the similarity functions between proteins
and peptides, and α is the weight on the i-th training example. The weight
vector ααα d=ef (α ,...,α ) depend on the learning algorithm used, but many
algorithms produce prediction functions given by Equation (5), including the
SupportVectorMachine,the SupportVectorRegression,the Ridge Regression,
GaussianProcesses,...Thismakesoursolutionfordrugdesigncompatiblewith
these learning algorithms1.
Since we use the GS kernel, we have
1Note that all these learning methods require both kernels to be symmetric and positive
semi-definite. ThisisthecasefortheGSkernel.
2.3 The combinatorial search problem
The general motivation for learning a predictor from training data is that once
an accurate predictor is obtained, finding druggable peptides would be greatly
facilitated. It is true that replacing expensive laboratory experiments by an in
silico prediction will reduce cost. However, peptides having an average bioac-
tivitydonotqualifyasdrugprecursors. Instead,weshouldfocusonidentifying
the most bioactive compounds. The computational problem is thus to identify
and rank peptides according to a specific biological function.
LetAbethesetofallaminoacids,andAl bethesetofallpossiblepeptides
of length l. Then, finding the peptide x⋆ ∈ Al that, according to h, has the
maximal bioactivity with y, amounts at solving
x⋆ =argmaxh(x,y). (7)
Thispre-imageproblemisknowntobeNP-Hardforseveralkernels(G¨artner and Vembu,
2009). Since the number ofpossiblepeptides, growsexponentiallyfastwith the
length l of the peptide, a brute force algorithm has an intractable complexity
ofO(|A|l·O(h)) whereO(h) is the time complexity ofcomputingthe outputof
the predictor h. Such an algorithm becomes impractical for any long peptides,
such as stapled peptides known to have up to 35 amino acids.
Stochastic methods such as Metropolis-Hasting are often used to optimize
such functions h. These methods are time consuming, highly dependent on
optimization parameters and have no guarantee on the solution found.
In the next section, we present an efficient algorithm to find the exact solu-
tion to the GS kernelpre-image problem. The time complexity of the proposed
algorithmislinearlydependentonl,yieldingtractableapplicationsforpeptides
and proteins.
3.1 Finding the peptide of maximal bioactivity
Inthissubsection,weassumethatwehaveinhandapredictionfunctionh(x,y)
intheformofEquation(6). Inthiscase,wewillshowhowtheproblemoffinding
the peptide x⋆ ∈ Al of maximal bioactivity reduces to the problem of finding
the longestpath in a directed acyclic graph(DAG). To do so,we will construct
a graph with a source and a sink vertex such that for all possible peptides
x∈Al, thereexistsonlyonepath, whichhaslengthh(x,y), thatgoesfromthe
source to the sink. If the size of the constructed graph is polynomial in l, any
algorithm that efficiently solves the longest path problem in a DAG will also
efficiently solve the pre-image problem of the GS kernel.
A bipartite graph G=((U,V),E) is a graph whose vertices can be divided
into two disjoint sets U and V such that every edge in E connects a vertex in
U to one in V. For any integer i, let G = ((U ,V ),E ) be the i-th De Bruijn
directedbipartitegraphofsomeset. Thismeansthatforeverysequences∈Ak,
there is a vertex in U with the tuple (s,i) as label and a vertex in V with the
tuple (s,i+1) as label. Moreover, there is a De Bruijn edge ((u,i),(v,i+1))
from (u,i) ∈ U to (v,i+1) ∈ V if and only if the last k−1 amino acids of
u are the same as the first k−1 amino acids of v. Note that ∀i ∈ N, directed
edges in G only go from vertices in U to vertices in V . There are exactly |A|
edges that leave eachvertex in U and there are exactly |A| edges that point to
each vertex in V . Moreover, for any chosen integer k, |U | = |V | = |Ak| and
|E | = |Ak+1|. Consequently, for each sequence in Ak+1, there is a single edge
going from a vertex in U to a vertex in V .
The union between bipartite graph G = ((U ,V ),E ) and bipartite graph
G =((U ,V ),E ) is defined to be the 3-partite graph
i+1 i+1 i+1 i+1
G ∪G d=ef((U ,V ∪U ,V ),E ∪E ),
i i+1 i i i+1 i+1 i i+1
where vertices with the same label in V ∪U are merged.
Moregenerallywe define an-partitegraphasthe consecutiveunionofn−1
bipartite graphs:
Gn d=efG ∪...∪G
d=ef((U ,V ∪U ,...,V ∪U ,V ),E ∪...∪E ).
1 1 2 n−2 n−1 n−1 1 n−1
Consequently, there is a one-to-one correspondence between each sequence
of Ak+n−1 and each path u,...,v :u∈U ,v ∈V of length n in Gn.
Finally,weaddtoGnasourcevertex,labeled(λ,0),connectedtoallvertices
inU andasinkvertextconnectedtoallverticesinV (λistheemptystring).
The set of all possible paths going from the source (λ,0) to the sink t give rise
to all sequences in Ak+n−1.
Using the definition of the GS kernel given at Equation (4) and the general
class of predictors given by Equation (6), we can rewrite the generic prediction
function as
q=1 p=1 i=0 j=0
×e 2σc 2 !.
For any string s of length k and any i∈{1,...,n}, we define
X q=1 X p=1 X j=0 (8)
×e 2σc 2 !
as the weight on edges ((s′,i − 1),(s,i)) where s′ ∈ Ak ∪ λ, s ∈ Ak, and
i ∈ {1,...,n} i.e. all edges of Gn except edges heading to the sink vertex t.
When k >1, edges ((s,n),t), heading to the sink vertex t, are weighted by the
W (s,i),t = W(s ...s ,n+j), (9)
(cid:0) (cid:1) X
otherwise, W (s,i),t =0 when k =1.
For n=|x|−k+1, we can now write h(x,y) as
(cid:0) (cid:1)
W (x ,..,x ,n),t + W(x ,..,x ,i).
t n |x| i i+k−1
(cid:0) (cid:1) X
Therefore,everypathfromthe sourcetothe sinkinGn buildsauniquepeptide
suchthatthe estimated bioactivityofthat peptide is givenby the lengthof the
path.
The problem of finding the peptide of highest activity thus reduces to the
problem of finding the longest path in Gn. Despite being NP-hard in the gen-
eral case, the longest path problem can be solved by dynamic programming
in O(|V(G)| + |E(G|) for a directed acyclic graph given a topological order-
ing of it’s vertices. By construction, Gn is clearly acyclic and its vertices
can always be topologically ordered by visiting them in the following order:
(λ,0),U ,...,U ,V ,t. Since Gn has (n|A|k + 2) ∈ O(n|A|k) vertices and
(2|A|k +(n−1)|A|k+1) ∈ O(n|A|k+1) edges, the complexity of the algorithm
will thus be dominated by the number of edges.
We propose an algorithm in O(n|A|k+1)=O((l−k+1)|A|k+1) for solving
the pre-image problem of the GS kernel. Recall that k is a constant and l is
the length of the peptide we are trying to identify. Thus n = l−k+1. Small
values of k are motivated by the fact that k ψψψk(a ,..,a ) −ψψψk(a′,..,a′) k2
is a monotonically increasing function of k such that Equation (3) vanishes
exponentially fast as k increases. Long k-mers will have negligible influence on
the dot product and the estimated bioactivity, explaining why small values of
k ≤6≪l arechosenby cross-validation. Therefore,the time complexityof the
proposedalgorithmisordersofmagnitudelowerthanthe bruteforcealgorithm
which is in O(|A|l) since k ≤ 6 ≪ l in practice. The pseudo-code to find the
longest path in Gn is given by Algorithm 1 (supplementary material).
3.2 Ranking peptides by bioactivity
Ranking peptides according to their bioactivity will provide valuable informa-
tionwith the potential ofacceleratingfunctional peptide discovery. Indeed, the
best peptide candidates can be synthesized quickly by an automated peptide
synthesizer and then tested in vitro. Such a procedure will allow quick in vitro
feedback and minimize turnaround time. Also, the best predicted candidates
canbeutilizedtopredictabindingmotifforanewtargetprotein. Suchamotif
should assist researchers in the early study of a target and for the design of
peptidomimetic compounds by providing residue preferences.
In the previous section, we have shown how the problem of finding the pep-
tide ofgreatestbioactivityreducedto theproblemoffinding apathofmaximal
length in the De Bruijn graph Gn. By using the same arguments, finding the
peptide with the second greatest activity reduces to the problem of finding the
second longest path in Gn. By induction, it follows that the problem of find-
ing the K peptides of maximal activity reduces to the problem of finding the
K-longest paths in Gn.
Unfortunately, this problem has not been studied much since the longest
path problem is generally NP-Complete. The closely related K-shortest paths
problem was first studied in 1957, but attracted most attention following the
work of Yen et al. (1989); Yen (1971). Yen’s algorithm was later improved
by Lawler (1972). Both algorithms are relatively simple as they use existing
shortest path algorithms such as Dijkstra’s algorithm to solve the K-shortest
paths problem.
ByexploitingsomerestrictivepropertiesofGn,weshowhowYen’salgorithm
for the K-shortest paths can be adapted to find the K-longest paths in Gn.
The time complexity of the resulting algorithm, given in Section 6.2 of the
supplementarymaterial,iscompetitivewiththelatestworkonK-shortestpaths
algorithms (Eppstein, 1998; Brander and Sinclair, 1995).
3.3 From K-longest paths to motif
Itis easyto use the K-longestpaths algorithmto efficiently predicts a motifby
simply feeding the K peptides to an existing motif tool. Here, the motif is a
property of the learned model h(x,y) as opposed to a consensus among known
binding sequences.
When the learned model h(x,y) is a multi-target model, it is then possible
to predict affinities for proteins with no known ligand by exploiting similarities
with relatedproteins. In this case, it is feasible to predict a binding motif for a
targetwithnoknownbinders. Toourknowledge,thishasneverbeenattempted
successfully.
3.4 Protocol for split and pool peptide synthesis
Split and pool combinatorial peptide synthesis is a simple but efficient way
to synthesize a very wide spectrum of peptide ligands. To synthesize several
peptides of length l using the 20 natural amino acids, the standard approach
is to use 20 reactors for natural amino acids and a pooling reactor. At every
step of the experiment, all reactorsare pooled into the pooling reactorwhich is
then split in equal proportions back into the 20 amino acids reactors. Within
this standard approach, each peptide in Al has an equal probability of being
synthesized. Since the number of polystyrenebeds (used to hosteverypeptide)
isgenerallyordersofmagnitudesmallerthan|A|l,thereisonlyavanishingsmall
fraction of the peptides in Al that can be synthesized in each combinatorial
experiment.
Clearly, not every peptide has an equal probability of binding to a target.
More restrictive protocols have been proposed to increase the hit ratio of this
combinatorial experiment. For example, one could fix certain amino acids at
specific positions or limit the set of possible amino acids at this positions (for
example, only use hydrophobic amino acids). Such practice will impact the
outcome of the combinatorial experiment. One can probably increase the hit
ratio by modifying (wisely) the proportionof amino acids that can be found at
different positions in the peptides. To explore more thoroughly this possibility,
let us define a (combinatorialchemistry)protocol P by a l-tuple containing,for
eachpositioniinthepeptideoflengthl,anindependentdistributionP (a)over
the 20 amino acids a∈A. Hence, we define a protocol by
P d=ef(P ,...,P ). (10)
Consequently,thepeptides producedbythisprotocolwillbedistributedfollow-
ing the joint distribution P ×...×P . Hence, the probability of synthesizing
a peptide is given by
This family of protocols is easy to implement in the laboratory since, at each
stepi,it only requiressplitting the contentofthe pooling reactorinproportion
equal to the distribution P over amino acids.
3.5 Expected outcome of a library given a protocol
Wepresentamethodforefficientlycomputingexactstatisticsontheoutcomeof
a protocol P. More precisely, we present an algorithm to compute the average
bioactivity and its variance over all peptides that a protocol can synthesize.
Note that we cannot compute these statistics by simply predicting the activity
of each peptide since the set of all possible peptides of length l is simply too
large.
Such statistics will assistchemists in designing a protocolwith a greater hit
ratioandavoidsuperfluousexperimentsincreasingcost. Indeed,thecountofall
possible peptides will help to choose the right amount of peptide-coated beads
in the assay. Moreover, the average bioactivity will help designing a protocol
that synthesizes as many potential active candidates as possible. Finally, the
bioactivity variance will allow to control the exploration/exploitation trade off
of the experiment.
The proposed approach makes use of the graph Gn, the protocol P, and a
dynamic programming algorithm that exploits recurrences in the factorization
of first and second order polynomials to efficiently compute the following two
Figure 1: Iterative process for the design of peptide ligand.
quantities:
Indeed, the average and variance bioactivity of peptides synthesized by the
protocol are then respectively given by τ and β −τ2. The algorithm and its
details are given in Section 6.3 (supplementary material).
3.6 Application in combinatorial drug discovery
Weproposeaniterativeprocesstoacceleratethediscoveryofbioactivepeptide.
TheprocedureisillustratedinFigure1. First,aninitialsetofrandompeptides
is synthesized, typically using a split and pool approach. Then peptides are
assayedinlaboratorytomeasuretheirbioactivities. Atthispointmostpeptides
arepoorcandidates. Theyarethenusedasatrainingsettoproduceapredictor
h. Then h is used for the generation of K bioactive peptides by finding the K-
longest paths in Gn as described previously. After, a protocol that consists of
usingforeachposition,aminoacidswithequalproportioninwhichtheyappear
in the K lead compounds is used to synthesize a large array of potential active
peptides. The algorithm described in Section 3.5 is then used to predict the
statistics of the assay. This ensures that the protocol meets the expectations
in terms of quality (average bioactivity) and diversity (bioactivity variance).
To lower the cost, we proceed to synthesize and test the peptides only if the
expectationsaremet. Thisprocesscanberepeateduntilthedesiredbioactivity
is achieved.
3.7 Peptide synthesis, bacterial strains and minimal in-
hibitory concentration assay
Peptides were synthesized ona Prelude Peptide Synthesizer (ProteinTechnolo-
giesInc,AZ)usingstandardFmocsolidphasepeptidechemistry(Wellings and Atherton,
1997). Briefly, the synthesis was performed on Rink Amide AM resin and the
amino acid couplings achieved with HCTU/NMM. The peptides were cleaved
from the resin using a mixture of 95% trifluoroacetic acid, 5% triisopropylsi-
lane, 5% water for 3h at room temperature and precipitated in cold diethyl
ether. After triturating for 2 min, the peptides were collected upon centrifuga-
tion and decantation of the ether. The peptides were purified on a Vydac C18
reversed-phase HPLC column (22×250 mm, 5µm) over 20 min using a linear
gradientof 10−90%acetonitrile with 0.1%trifluoroaceticacidata flow rate of
10 mL/min with optical density monitoring at 220 nm. The collected fractions
were lyophilised and the identity and purity of the peptides assessed by ana-
lytical HPLC and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Peptides were obtained in
good yields and with purity greater than 90%.
EscherichiacoliK12MG1655andStaphylococcusaureus68(HER1049)were
obtainedfromtheF´elixd’H´erelleReferenceCenterforBacterialVirusesofUni-
versit´e Laval (www.phage.ulaval.ca). Both strains were grown in Trypticase
soy broth with agitation at 37◦C. The minimal inhibitory concentration assay
was performed as described in Wiegand et al. (2008). The broth microdilution
protocolperformedin96-wellplates. Thebacterialstrainsweregrownovernight
at 37◦C with aeration and diluted to a final concentration of 5×105 cfu/ml in
the assay. The peptides were diluted in sterile water andwere tested atthe fol-
lowing concentrations: 0,1,2,4,8,16and 32 µg/ml. The optic density (600nm)
wasfollowedevery30 minutes for 24 hours in a Synergy2 plate reader (BioTek
Instruments, Inc.).
4 Result and Discussion
Two public datasets were used to test and validate our approach. The first
dataset consisted of 101 cationic antimicrobial pentadecapeptides (CAMPs)
from the SAPD database (Wade and Englund, 2002). Peptide antibacterialac-
tivities are expressed as the logarithm bactericidal potency which is the aver-
age potency over 24 bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Bactero¨ıdes fragilis, and
Staphylococcus aureus. The averageantibacterialactivity was0.39andthe best
peptide had an activity of 0.824.
The second dataset consisted of 31 bradykinin-potentiating pentapeptides
(BPPs) reported by Ufkes et al. (1982). The bioactivities are expressed as the
logarithm of the relative activity index compared to the peptide VESSK. The
averagebioactivity was 0.71 and the best peptide had an activity of 2.73.
Figure2: The K-longestpathalgorithmwasusedto rankthe 100,000peptides
with highestanti-microbialactivity. We observeda smoothpowerlaw with few
exceptional peptides.
0 20000 40000 60000 80000
k-th best peptide
lairetcabitnA
4.2 Improving the bioactivity of peptides
To assessthe capability of our approachto improve upon known peptides, that
is, to predict peptides with superior biological activities to the known ones,
we carried out the following experiment using the CAMPs and BPPs peptide
datasets. First, a predictor of biological activity was learned by kernel ridge
regression (KRR) for both datasets. Hyper-parameters for the GS kernel and
the KRR were chosen by standard cross-validation. Then, using the K-longest
path algorithm and the learned predictor, we generated the K peptides (of
the same length as those of the training data) having the greatest predicted
biological activity.
On the CAMPs dataset, our approach predicted that the peptide WWK-
WWKRLRRLFLLVshouldhaveanantibacterialpotencyof1.09,alogarithmic
improvement of 0.266 over the best peptide in the training set (GWRLIKKIL-
RVFKGL, 0.824), and a substantial improvement over the average potency of
that dataset (average of 0.39). The anti-microbial activity of the top 100000
peptides are showed in Figure 2. As expected, we observe a smooth power law
with only a few peptides having outstanding biological activity.
OntheBPPsdataset,ourapproachpredictedthatthepentapeptideIEWAK
shouldhaveanactivityof2.195,slightlylessthanthebestpeptideofthetraining
set (VEWAK, 2.73, predicted as 2.192). However, the predicted activity of
IEWAK is much better than the average peptide activity of the dataset, which
is 0.71. One can ask why IEWAK has a lower biologicalactivity than VEWAK
which was part of the training data? Machine learning algorithm are known
to be resistant to errors and noise in the data. A possible explanation for this
discrepancyisthatthebiologicalactivityofVEWAKcouldbeslightlyerroneous
asthelearningalgorithmcouldnotfindasimplepredictorgivensuchanoutlier.
In addition, VEWAK was predicted an activity of 2.192 in spite of been seen
during training with an activity of 2.73. It seems that, given the data, the
activity of IEWAK is more easily justified than of VEWAK.
4.3 Application in drug discovery
When facing a new target, there is typically none to little information on pep-
tides that could bind to the target protein. To gather some information, the
standard approach is to synthesize a library of random peptides and measure,
foreachcandidate,the desiredbiologicalactivity. Typically,this will onlyyield
a few candidates. The proposed approach has the capability of extracting rel-
evant information from weak candidates and in an iterative manner, predict
stronger ones.
Asaproofofconcept,weproposetoreplacethelaboratoryexperimentinthe
proposed procedure by a predictor learned on available datasets. We will refer
to this predictor as the “expert”, since it encapsulates the current knowledge
about the studied problem. The expert predictor is only used to determine the
activities of the peptides generated in the initial random screening phase and
those generated by our approach. To prevent bias, once the expert predictor
is learned, the dataset is hidden from the process. Then, we randomly draw
peptides and, instead of testing them in lab, we use the expert predictor to
determinetheiractivities. Atthispointmostpeptidesareveryweakcandidates.
A student predictor is learned with the weak peptides serving as the training
data. We then use the K-longest path approach and the student predictor to
predictimprovedcompounds. Tovalidatethatpeptidespredicted(orgenerated)
by this student predictor are indeed relevant, we then validate them with the
expert predictor. Recall that the expert predictor was only used to determine
the activity of the randomly generated peptides.
This proof of concept was conducted twice on both the CAMPs and the
BPPs datasets. Once by drawing 100 random peptides, and then by drawing
1000 random peptides at the initial screening stage. The results are shown in
Table 1. As expected, the number of drawn peptides had no significant effect
on the average activity on both datasets. On both datasets, the number of
randompeptideshadnosignificanteffectonthebestpeptide found,supporting
the development of new techniques to facilitate the discovery of high activity
compounds.
Using the proposed approach and the same 100 random peptides to train
the student predictor, we were able to reach an antimicrobial potency of 0.83,
similartothebestpeptideoftheCAMPsdataset. Byincreasingto1000training
peptides,we foundapeptide havingapredictedpotency of1.09,surpassingthe
bestknownpeptide. OntheBPPsdataset,theproposedapproachconsiderably
outperformedthe randompeptides methodonboththe bestpeptide foundand
the average bioactivity. Finally, on both datasets, increasing the number of
initialpeptides from100to1000hadastrongerpositiveeffectthanthe random
approach: 0.26 increase in potency for CAMPs and 0.16 increase for BPPs.
4.4 Binding motifs results
To demonstrate the ability of the proposed approach to predict potential func-
tional motifs, we took further the proof of concept proposed in the previous
Table 1: Results from the drug discovery simulation. Comparison between the
standardcombinatorialscreening(randompeptides)andtheproposedapproach
(longest paths).
Random peptides Longest Paths
Dataset # of peptides Average Max. Average Max.
CAMPs 100 −0.58 0.17 0.76 0.83
1000 −0.59 0.18 1.07 1.09
BPPs 100 0.31 1.39 1.50 2.04
1000 0.26 1.36 1.66 2.20
section. Aspreviously,welearnedanexpertpredictorfromtheCAMPsdataset
which was then hidden for the rest of the procedure. Using the expert predic-
tor, we predicted the best 103 peptides and produced a bioactivity motif using
theses candidates (top panel of Figure 3). Our goal was to assess how much of
that reference motif could we rediscover if we were to hide all of the CAMPs’
dataset. Next, we drew 1000 random peptides and use the expert predictor to
determine their activities. Theses peptides have, as illustrated in Table 1, on
average, very weak antimicrobial potency. As previously, we learned a student
predictor using the random peptides as training data and generated, according
to the student predictor, the best 1000 candidates. The motif obtained from
theses candidates is shown in the middle panel of Figure 3.
Wewereabletorecoverallofthereferencemotifsignalusingonlyweaklyac-
tivepeptides. Thisprovidesevidencethattheproposedapproachcoulduncover
complexsignalsfornew,poorlyunderstood,proteins. Topushtheanalysiseven
further, we decreased the number of peptides used to train the student predic-
tor to 100 training examples. Even then, for 12 residue positions, we were able
to correctly identify the dominant amino acid property (polar, neutral, basic,
acidic, hydrophobic). This is achieved since the GS kernel encodes amino acids
physico-chemicalproperties.
To put these results in perspective,we took the same peptides used to train
the student predictor and generated a motif from them. The resulting signal
was very poor, generating a meaningless motif. We had to draw 106 random
peptides and select the best 103 to produce a motif with minimal information
(Figure 3 bottom panel). This clearly illustrates the potential of the proposed
approachfor accelerating the discovery of potential peptidic effectors.
4.5 In vitro antimicrobial assay
A total of 12 peptides were synthesized. The two most active peptides of the
CAMPs dataset (Peptide #5 and #6) were used for comparison. We also se-
lected one peptide with poor activity (Peptide #7) as a control. The proposed
machine learning approach was used to generate a list of 1000 putative candi-
dates with the highest predictedactivity. Fromthis list, we selected three com-
pounds in a way to maximize the chemical diversity among chosencompounds.
Figure 3: CAMP bioactivity motifs. Top motif: obtained from the 103 best
candidates generated by the expert predictor. Middle motif: obtained from
the 103 best candidates generated by the student predictor. Bottom motif:
obtained from the best 103 candidates out of 106 random peptides.
✭✫✪✩★✧✦ ☛☛
Table 2: Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) resulting from the in vitro
CAMPs assay.
# Peptide sequence E. coli S. aureus
1 YWKKWKKLRRIFMLV 2 8
2 WWKRWKKLRRIFLML 4 4
3 WWKRWKRIRRIFMMV 4 8
4 WWKWWKRLRRLFLLV 16 16
5 KWKLFKGIRAVLKVL 4 8
6 GWRLIKKILRVFKGL 4 4
7 KWKLFLGILAVLKVL >32 >32
We then tested these peptides (Peptide #2, #3, #4) with a high throughput
growth inhibitory assay as described in Section 3.7. Results from the minimal
inhibitory concentration assay are shown in Table 2. Two of the three candi-
dates have activities equal to the best candidate of the CAMPs dataset. We
were intriguedby the failure of Peptide #4 andafter investigationverifiedthat
the poor performance was due to poor water solubility. In a second series, we
ensured that a filter for water solubility was employed. In this second series of
tests, Peptide #1 showed (at least against E. coli) better activity than any of
the original candidates from the CAMPs dataset, demonstrating that, in this
limited biological experiment, we could improve the putative candidates using
the proposed machine learning methodology.
5 Conclusion and Outlook
We proposedanefficient graph-theoreticalalgorithmthat predicts the peptides
with the highest biological activities for machine learning predictors using the
GSkernel. We showedhow this algorithmcanalsobe usedto predictthe bind-
ing motif for a target with no known ligands. This is feasible thanks to the
multi-target model which is capable of exploiting similarities with related pro-
teins that share common structures. To increase the hit ratio of combinatorial
libraries,we havedemonstratedhow a combinatorialchemistry protocolrelates
toamotifdistribution. Thisallowedustocomputetheexpectedbioactivityand
its variance that can be exploited by a combinatorial chemistry protocol such
as a one bead one compound protocol. These steps can be part of an iterative
drugdiscoveryprocessthatwillhaveimmediateuseinboththepharmaceutical
industry and academia. This methodology will reduce costs and the time to
obtain lead compounds as well as facilitating their optimization. Finally, the
proposed approach was validated in a real world test for the discovery of new
antimicrobial peptides. These in vitro experiments confirmed the effectiveness
of the new compounds uncovered.
The K-best peptides were shown to be valuable for the design of split and
pool libraries of compounds. However, in such libraries, it is unclear how we
should prioritize high activity candidates (average) over the chemical diversity
(variance). This exploration/exploitation trade-off could be examine in future
work. Moreover,recent advances in domain-adaptation machine learning could
possiblyimprovetheaccuracyofthelearnedpredictorsincethedatagenerating
and the testing distributions are both known. Finally, the method could be
expanded to cyclic peptides and chemical entities (building blocks) of common
structure found in clinical compounds.
Acknowledgement
JC is the Canada Research Chair in Medical Genomics.
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbytheFondsderechercheduQu´ebec-Nature
et technologies (FL, MM & JC; 2013-PR-166708) and the NSERC Discovery
Grants (FL; 262067,MM; 122405).