1v3221.8011:viXra
Incorporating Individual and Collective Ethics into
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs
Jay Bartroff∗
Department of Mathematics, University of Southern California,
3620 South Vermont Avenue, KAP 108, Los Angeles, CA 90089, U.S.A.
*email: bartroff@usc.edu
Tze Leung Lai∗∗
Department of Statistics, Sequoia Hall, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,U.S.A.
∗∗email: lait@stat.stanford.edu
Summary: A general framework is proposed for Bayesian model-based designs of Phase I cancer
trials, in which a general criterion for coherence (Cheung, 2005) of a design is also developed. This
frameworkcanincorporateboth“individual”and“collective”ethicsintothedesignofthetrial.We
proposeanewdesignwhichminimizesariskfunctioncomposedoftwoterms,withonerepresenting
theindividualriskofthecurrentdoseandtheotherrepresentingthecollectiverisk.Theperformance
of this design, which is measured in terms of the accuracy of the estimated target dose at the end
of thetrial, the toxicity and overdose rates, and certain loss functions reflecting the individual and
collectiveethics, isstudiedandcompared with existingBayesian model-based designsandisshown
tohavebetter performance than existing designs.
Key words: Cancer trials; Coherence; Dose-finding; Logistic regression; Markov decision prob-
lem; Phase I.
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 1
1. Introduction
A Phase I trial for a new treatment is generally intended to determine a dose to use in
subsequent Phase II and III testing. Phase I cancer trials have the additional complexity
that the treatment in question is usually a cytotoxic agent and the efficacy usually increases
withdose,andthereforeitiswidelyacceptedthatsomedegreeoftoxicitymustbetoleratedto
experience any substantial therapeutic effects. Hence, an acceptable proportion p of patients
experiencing dose limiting toxicities (DLTs) is generally agreed on before the trial, which
depends on the type and severity of the DLT; the dose resulting in this proportion is thus
referred to as the maximum tolerated dose (MTD). In addition to the explicitly stated
objective of determining the MTD, a Phase I cancer trial also has the implicit goal of safe
treatment of the patients in the trial. However, the aims of treating patients in the trial and
generating an efficient design to estimate the MTD for future patients often run counter to
each other. Commonly used designs in Phase I cancer trials implicitly place their focus on
the safety of the patients in the trial, beginning from a conservatively low starting dose and
escalating cautiously. Escalation is further slowed by the assignment of the same dose to
groups of consecutive patients, as in the widely used 3-plus-3 design, which is convenient to
administer and shortens trial duration by simultaneously following patients in groups of 3.
Von Hoff and Turner (1991)havedocumented thattheoverallresponse ratesinthesePhaseI
trialsarelow,andsubstantialnumbersofpatientsaretreatedatdosesthatareretrospectively
foundtobenon-therapeutic.Moreover,aspointedoutbyO’Quigley, Pepe and Fisher(1990),
these designs are very inefficient for estimating the MTD, which is implied by the 3-plus-3
design to correspond to the case p = 1/3. They proposed a Bayesian model-based design,
called the “continual reassessment method” (CRM), to choose the dose levels sequentially,
making use of all past data at each stage.
MorethanninetynewPhaseImethodswerepublishedbetween1991and2006(Rogatko, Schoeneck, Jonas, Tighiouart, Khuri and Porter,
2 Biometrics, 000 2009
2007),andtherehavebeenseveralreviewsofthenewmethods(e.g.,Rosenberger and Haines,
2002). In this paper we focus on Bayesian model-based designs and Section 2 describes a
generalframeworktodevelopandanalyzethem.AsshowninSections2and3,thisframework
allows one to incorporate the competing aims of a Phase I cancer trial by choosing the loss
function accordingly. It also enables one to derive certain desirable properties of the design,
such as coherence (Cheung, 2005), from the loss function, or to enforce them by using simple
reformulations in this framework. Section 4 provides implementation details and gives a
simulation study comparing Bayesian designs that correspond to different loss functions in
the setting of a colon cancer trial considered by Babb, Rogatko and Zacks (1998).
2. Posterior Distributions, Loss Functions and Sequential Dose Determination
A commonly used model-based approach to Phase I cancer clinical trial design assumes the
usual logistic regression model for the probability F (x) of DLT at dose level x:
inwhichβ > 0andθ = (α,β)isunknownandtobeestimatedfromtheobservedpairs(x ,y ),
where y = 1 if the ith subject, treated at dose x , experiences DLT and y = 0 otherwise.
The frequentist approach to inference on θ uses the likelihood function and estimates θ by
maximum likelihood, while the Bayesian approach assumes a prior distribution of θ and uses
the posterior distribution for inference on θ.
DenotetheMTDbyη = F−1(p)andtheposteriordistributionofθbasedon(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )
by Π , and let Π denote the prior distribution. The Bayes estimate of η with respect to
squarederrorlossistheposteriormeanE (η),andtheCRMproposedbyO’Quigley, Pepe and Fisher
(1990) uses this posterior mean to set the dose for the next patient, i.e., x = E (η).
Instead of the posterior mean, Babb, Rogatko and Zacks (1998) proposed to set x equal
to the ω-quantile of the posterior distribution, where 0 < ω < 1/2 is chosen to be slightly less
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 3
than p in their examples. This design is called “escalation with overdose control” (EWOC)
and ω is called the “feasibility bound.” A sequence of doses x is called “Bayesian feasible”
at level 1 − ω if P (η > x ) > 1 − ω for all n > 1, and the EWOC doses are optimal
among Bayesian-feasible ones; see Zacks, Rogatko and Babb (1998).
Note that the dose for the nth patient in CRM or EWOC depends only on the posterior
distribution Π , i.e., x is a functional f(Π ) of Π . This functional defines {Π : k >
n−1 n n−1 n−1 k
0} as a Markov chain whose states are distributions on the parameter space Θ and whose
state transitions are given by the following.
Bayesian updating scheme: Given current state Π (which is a prior distribution of θ), let
x = f(Π) and generate first θ from Π and then y ∼ Bern(F (x)). The new state is the
posterior distribution of θ given (x,y).
The functional x = f(Π) for CRM is E (η), which minimizes the expected squared error
loss E [(η−x)2]. As pointed out by Babb, Rogatko and Zacks (1998), the symmetric nature
of the squared error loss may not be appropriate for modeling the toxic response to a cancer
treatment. Instead of squared error loss, EWOC with feasibility bound ω uses the functional
x = x(Π) that minimizes the asymmetric loss function E [ℓ(η,x)], where
More generally, we can consider other loss functions ℓ(θ,x) and define x(Π) that attains
min E [ℓ(θ,x)].Inparticular,thefollowingexamplegivesaresponse-basedversionofEWOC.
Example 1: Inverted overdose control. The EWOC loss function (2) penalizes an overdose
x > η by the amount (1 − ω)(x − η), and an under-dose x < η by the amount ω(x − η).
However, a dose x deemed “too large” on this scale may actually correspond to a probability
of DLT not much larger than the target rate p depending on the dose-response curve, making
x a relatively desirable dose. Likewise, a small value of |x−η| may correspond to a large
4 Biometrics, 000 2009
discrepancy between the actual DLT probability F (x) and p. Hardwick and Stout (2001)
suggest to measure the excess/deficit of the DLT rate on the “probability scale.” Taking
0 < γ < 1/2, this leads to the “inverted” loss function
Remark: The loss when the dose falls below η, measured by the difference ω(η−x) in (2) and
γ(p−F (x)) in (3), should ideally be measured by the difference in response rates at η and x,
respectively, when efficacy data, taking the value 1 if the patient responds to the treatment
and 0 otherwise, arealso available besides the toxicity data. Note, however, that this involves
bivariateefficacy-toxicity data.Whilemanyexistingdesignssolelyconsider toxicityoutcomes
and the MTD, designs that incorporate efficacy responses as well have been proposed by a
number of authors, including Li, Durham and Flournoy (1995), Hardwick and Stout (2001),
Kpamegan and Flournoy(2001),Thall and Cook(2004),Dragalin and Fedorov(2006),Dragalin, Fedorov and Wu
(2008), and Pronzato (2010). When efficacy responses are available, the minimum effective
dose (MED) is of interest, i.e., the lowest dose at which some desired proportion of positive
efficacy responses is attained. When both efficacy and toxicity data are available, the optimal
safe dose, which is the dose between the MED and the MTD maximizing the probability of
simultaneous efficacy and non-toxicity, is of interest. Since this paper focuses on univariate
toxicity data, we consider elsewhere better alternatives to (3) for x 6 η that also require
efficacy data.
Noting that the explicitly stated objective of a Phase I cancer trial is to estimate the MTD,
Whitehead and Brunier (1995) considered Bayesian sequential designs that are optimal, in
some sense, for this estimation problem. Haines, Perevozskaya and Rosenberger (2003) made
use of the theory of optimal design of experiments (Fedorov, 1972; Atkinson and Donev,
1992; Dette, Melas and Pepelyshev, 2004) to construct Bayesian c- and D-optimal designs,
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 5
and further imposed a relaxed Bayesian feasibility constraint on the design to avoid highly
toxic doses. Optimal design theory involves a design measure ξ on the dose space X, and
a sequential design updates the empirical design measure ξ at stage n by changing it to
ξ with the addition of the dose x . The empirical measure ξ of the doses x ,...,x up
to stage n can be represented by ξ = n−1 n δ , where δ is the probability measure
n i=1 xi x
degenerate at x. We let ||ξ|| denote the numbePr of x (not necessarily distinct) in the support
of ξ. Thus ||ξ || = n and ||ξ || = 0, with ξ being the zero measure on X. To include the
construction of sequential Bayesian optimal designs as a special case of our general approach,
we can modify the preceding procedure that minimizes E [ℓ(θ,x)] to choose the next dose
based on the current posterior distribution Π, by including the current design measure ξ in
the loss function.
Example2:Bayesianc- orD-optimaldesigns.AsdescribedbyHaines, Perevozskaya and Rosenberger
(2003), optimal design theory is concerned with choosing a design measure ξ to minimize a
convex function Ψ of the information matrix M(θ,ξ) = I(θ,x)dξ(x), where I(θ,x) is the
Fisher information matrix at design point x:
I(θ,x) = .
(1+eα+βx)2
Theconvex functionΨisassociatedwiththeoptimalitycriterion,e.g.,Ψ(M) = −logdet(M)
for D-optimality and Ψ(M) = c′M−1c for c-optimality. Since θ = (α,β) is unknown,
the frequentist approach uses a sequential design that replaces θ in M(θ,ξ ) by its max-
imum likelihood estimate at every stage t. The Bayesian approach puts a prior distribu-
tion Π on θ and minimizes Ψ(M(θ,ξ ))dΠ (θ). Noting that this Bayesian approach does
not accomodate the fact that patients are assigned doses sequentially in Phase I trials,
Haines, Perevozskaya and Rosenberger (2003, Section 5) propose to start the optimal design
after an initial sample of k patients so that the dose x of a patient after this initial sample
6 Biometrics, 000 2009
can be determined by minimizing
whereξ istheempirical measure oftheinitialsample ofdesignpointsandΠ istheposterior
distribution of θ based on the initial sample.
We can easily extend our loss function approach to Bayes sequential designs by including ξ
asanargument of theloss function inthis setting. Let Πbethe current posterior distribution
of θ and ξ be the current empirical design measure. Define
ThesequentialBayesoptimaldesignchoosesthenextdesignlevelxthatminimizesE ℓ(θ,x;ξ).
The measure ξ in (5) represents the new empirical measure obtained by adding x to the
support of ξ, with ||ξ || = ||ξ||+1. We can also impose a relaxed feasibility constraint in
the choice of x:
Minimize E ℓ(θ,x;ξ) subject to P (η < x) 6 ω, (6)
as in Haines, Perevozskaya and Rosenberger (2003), where ηe= F−1(q) with q > p and ω
is a prescribed positive constant. If q = p, then η = η and the constraint corresponds to
requiring the doses to be Bayesian feasible (see the description of EWOC above).
3. Coherence and Dilemma Between Individual and Collective Ethics
The preceding section has focused on determining the next dose by minimizing E [ℓ(θ,x)],
where Π is the current posterior distribution and ℓ is a loss function incorporating the trial’s
main objective into the Bayes sequential design. In Example 2 we have shown how additional
information, such as the empirical measure of previous design points, can be included in the
minimization problem to determine the dose. The following subsections extend this idea to
address two important issues in Phase I cancer clinical trial designs.
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 7
3.1 Coherence and Its Enforcement
Motivated by ethical concerns, Cheung (2005) introduced coherence principles for sequential
dose escalation or de-escalation. A dose sequence is said to be “coherent” if a higher (re-
spectively, lower) dose is not given to the next patient when the current patient experiences
(respectively, does not experience) DLT. In particular, CRM and EWOC are coherent and
the following theorem, whose proof is given in the Appendix, provides conditions for the
coherence of a Bayes sequential design that minimizes the posterior loss at every stage.
Theorem 1: Suppose that the dose space is a finite interval and that ℓ(η,x) is convex
in x for every fixed η. Assume that for fixed x > x′, ℓ(η,x)−ℓ(η,x′) is non-increasing in η.
Then the dose sequence x = argmin E ℓ(η,x) is coherent.
Theorem 1 shows that CRM is coherent since ℓ(η,x) = (η −x)2 is convex and
isnon-increasinginηforx > x′.Thelossfunction(2)associatedwithEWOCalsosatisfiesthe
assumption of Theorem 1, which therefore shows the coherence of EWOC. The loss functions
in Examples 1 and 2, however, may not satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 1. Moreover, a
modification of EWOC recommended by its proponents (Babb and Rogatko, 2004), in which
the feasibility bound is escalated throughout the trial from a low starting value to 1/2 at the
end of the trial, does not satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 1 and it indeed exhibits slight
incoherence in the simulation studies in Section 4. This can be understood by noting that,
toward the end of the trial, the posterior distribution does not change much from patient to
patient, and that an increase in the feasibility bound may overwhelm the slight downward
shift in the posterior following an outcome y = 0, causing a dose higher than the previous
to be assigned. Cheung (2005, p. 865) also found a certain two-stage modification of CRM
to be incoherent. On the other hand, we can enforce coherence by modifying x = f(Π )
8 Biometrics, 000 2009
into x = f(Π ,x ,y ), where
n n−1 n−1 n−1
argmin E ℓ(η,x) if y = 1,
argmin E ℓ(η,x) if y = 0.
3.2 Treatment of Current Patient versus Information for Future Patients
We have noted in Section 2 that CRM or EWOC treats the next patient at the dose x that
minimizes E [ℓ(θ,x)] for ℓ(η,x) given by (η−x)2 or by (2), where Π is the current posterior
distribution. This is tantamount to dosing the next patient at the best guess of η, where
“best” means “closest” according to some measure of distance from η. On the other hand, a
Bayesian c- or D-optimal design aims at generating doses that provide most information, as
measured by the Fisher information matrix of a design measure, for estimating the dose-
toxicity curve to benefit future patients. To resolve this dilemma between treatment of
patients in the trial and efficient experimental design for post-trial parameter estimation,
Bartroff and Lai (2010) considered the finite-horizon optimization problem of choosing the
dose levels x ,x ,...,x sequentially to minimize the “global risk”
in which Π denotes the prior distribution of θ, h(η,xb) represents the loss for the ith patient
in the trial, η is the terminal estimate of the MTD and g represents a terminal loss function.
The optimizing doses x depend on n − i, where the horizon n is the sample size of the
trial, and therefore are not of the form x = f(Π ) considered in Section 2. In terms of
“individual” and “collective” ethics, note that (8) measures the individual effect of the dose
x on the kth patient through h(η,x ), and its collective effect on future patients through
PBy using a discounted infinite-horizon version of (8), we can still have solutions of the form
x = f(Π ) for some functional f that only depends on Π . Specifically, take a discount
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 9
factor 0 < δ < 1 and replace (8) by
as the definition of global risk. Note that this global risk measures the individual effect of the
dosex onthekthpatientthroughh(η,x ),anditscollectiveeffectonfuturepatientsthrough
h(η,x )δi−k. This means the myopic dose x that minimizes E [h(η,x)] for treating
i>k i k Πk−1
Pthe kth patient has to be perturbed such that it also helps to create a more informative
posterior distribution Π that is used for dosing future patients. Note that (9) does not have
the term g(η ,η) appearing in the finite-horizon problem (8), but even without this term,
the global risk (9) still captures the collective effect of the doses, as indicated above. As we
have pointed out in Section 2, if x is of the form f(Π ) for all i, then {Π : k > 0} is a
Markov chain whose states are distributions of θ and undergo Markovian dynamics described
by the updating scheme for posterior distributions. In the context of the present problem
of minimizing (9), the optimal expected loss V(Π) at state Π (posterior distribution of θ)
satisfies Bellman’s dynamic programming equation
whereΠ isthenewposteriordistributionofθafter(x,y)isobserved,withy ∼ Bern(F (x))
and θ ∼ Π; see the Bayesian updating scheme in Section 2. For finite-state controlled Markov
chains, iteration is a commonly used method to solve (10); see Bertsekas (2007, Section 1.3).
In the present case, not only is the state space infinite, but it is also infinite-dimensional
(space of all posterior distributions of θ), making dynamic programming intractable.
The main complexity of the infinite-horizon problem is that the dose x for the next patient
involves also consideration for future patients who will receive optimal doses themselves;
these future doses depend on the future posterior distributions. A simple way to reduce the
complexity is to consider two (instead of infinitely many) future patients. This amounts to
choosing the next dose x to minimize E ℓ(η,x;Π) when the current posterior distribution
10 Biometrics, 000 2009
of θ is Π, where
inwhichη′ = F−1(p)withθ′ ∼ Π′,andΠ′ andx′ aredefinedbelow.Thefirstsummandin(11)
measures the (toxicity) effect of the dose x on the patient receiving it. The second summand
considers the patient who follows andreceives a myopic dosex′ which minimizes thepatient’s
posterior loss; the myopic dose is optimal because there are no more patients involved in
(11). The effect of x on this second patient is through the posterior distribution Π′ that
updates Π after observing (x ,y ), with x = x. Since y is not yet observed, the expectation
outside the curly brackets is taken over y ∼ Bern(F (x)), with θ ∼ Π. For example, when
implemented with h(η,x) given by the EWOC loss function (2), this proposal can be viewed
as a modification of EWOC since it utilizes its loss function but adds an additional term to
represent the effect on future patients.
Unlike 0 < δ < 1 in the discounted infinite-horizon problem, the choice of λ > 0 in (11)
can exceed 1 and reflects the balance between the collective ethics in generating information
for future patients and the individual ethics for the patient receiving the dose. Although
we use here a single patient to represent all patients following the one receiving the next
dose, because the posterior distributions also change successively, the doses are functionals
of these posterior distributions.
4. Implementation and a Simulation Study
In this section we first describe three main components in the implementation of the above
Bayesian sequential designs and then evaluate their performance in a simulation study.
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 11
4.1 Updating the Posterior Distribution
Letting η denote the MTD and ρ = F (x ), we follow Babb, Rogatko and Zacks (1998) to
transform (α,β) in (1) to (ρ,η) via the formulas
and therefore
We assume that the joint prior distribution of (ρ,η) has density π(ρ,η) with support on
[0,p]×[x ,x ]. Therefore the F -posterior density of (ρ,η) is
min max k−1
i=1(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
xmax qk−1 1 yi 1 1−yi
Zxmin Z0 i=1(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
The marginal F -posterior distribution of η is then π (ρ,η)dρ, and the CRM and
EWOC doses based on F are the mean and ω-quantile of this distribution, respectively.
4.2 Computation of E ℓ(η,x) and its Minimizer in Sections 2 and 3.1
Theintegralsin(12)canbeevaluatedbyusing anumerical double-integrationroutineinvolv-
ing Gaussian quadrature in MATLAB . This can be used to evaluate E ℓ(η,x) for a posterior
distribution Π. We can find the minimum of E ℓ(η,x) over x by a grid search in [x ,x ],
orbyusing gradient descent ifℓissmooth. Forcomputationoftheconstrained Bayesian opti-
mal design (6), a constrained nonlinear optimization routine in can be used in con-
junction with numerical integration, as outlined in Haines, Perevozskaya and Rosenberger
(2003, p. 593).
12 Biometrics, 000 2009
4.3 Minimization of E ℓ(η,x;Π) in Section 3.2
While MCMC or rejection sampling can be used to compute (11) for any candidate dose x,
importance sampling (e.g., Robert and Casella, 2004, Chapter 3.3) is a simple, robust alter-
native that takes advantage of the fact that just an expectation with respect to the posterior
distribution is needed. Letting Π denote the uniform distribution of the transformed coor-
dinates (ρ,η) over [0,p]×[x ,x ], we have
for large B, where (ρ ,η ), b = 1,...,B, are i.i.d. and generated from Π . Letting Π
b b 0 +{x,y}
denote the posterior distribution obtained from Π by including (x,y) and letting x′ =
x′(Π ), the nested expectation in (11) can be similarly approximated by using
Z b=1 0 b b
b b b b 0 b b b Π Π
hand sides of (14) and (15), respectively. Combining (13)-(15) gives
We can minimize the right-hand side of (16) over x ∈ [x ,x ] by using a bounded
minimization routine in .
4.4 Simulation Study
To compare the proposed procedure in Section 3.2 to EWOC, CRM, and the inverted
overdose control (IVOC) design in Example 1, a simulation study was performed in the
setting of the trial to determine the MTD of the antimetabolite 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) for
treating solid tumors in the colon, as described in Babb, Rogatko and Zacks (1998). Based
on previous studies of 5-FU, a dose of 140 mg/m2 of 5-FU was believed to be safe, and the
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 13
MTD was believed to be no greater than 425 mg/m2, thus the dose space was taken to be
the interval [x ,x ] = [140,425]. The two-parameter logistic model (1) was chosen based
on previous experience with the agent, and the uniform distribution over [0,p]×[x ,x ]
was chosen as the prior distribution Π for (ρ,η), with p = 1/3. The feasibility bound of
ω = .25 was chosen, which was also used here for the IVOC weight γ in (3). In a trial
of length n = 24, Table 1 compares EWOC that uses a linearly escalated feasibility bound
(Babb and Rogatko, 2004), denoted by EWOC∗, with IVOC, CRM, and the proposed design
in Section 3.2 with h in (11) given by the EWOC loss function (and denoted by EWOC , in
which + signifies an additional future patient considered by (11)), for two different values of
the discount factor λ in (11). Each entry in the table was calculated from 10,000 simulated
trials. The first set of rows is a Bayesian setting in which, for each replication, a pair (ρ,η) is
drawn fromΠ , and thenext three sets ofrows arefrequentist settings (denoted Freq , Freq ,
Freq ) where the true values (ρ,η) are set at fixed values for all 10,000 replications; these
three pairs of fixed values were drawn from Π . A comprehensive comparison of EWOC,
CRM, sequential c-optimal, constrained D-optimal, ADP and other designs has been given
by Bartroff and Lai (2010), who use approximate dynamic programming (ADP) to minimize
the finite-horizon risk (8).
[Table 1 about here.]
Table 1 reports two different risk measures. Since the length of the trial is fixed at n = 24
in the simulation study, Risk is the finite-horizon analog of (9), which is (8) with h given
by the EWOC loss function (2) and no terminal loss (i.e., g = 0), and Risk is the same risk
function but with h given by the “inverted” loss function (3). Also reported are the bias and
RMSE (root mean squared error {E(η −η)2}1/2) of the terminal MTD estimate η (which
is the mean of the terminal posterior distribution of η), the DLT rate P(y = 1) (denoted
DLT),theoverdose rateP(x > η) (denotedOD),theexcess DLTrateE[F (x)−p]+ (denoted
14 Biometrics, 000 2009
OD∗), and the coherence violation rate (denoted ChV)
i i+1 i i i+1 i
In these expressions, P and E denote the probability and expectation, respectively, with
respect to the prior distribution in the Bayesian setting, or with respect to the appropriate
fixed values of (ρ,η) in the frequentist settings, and are computed by Monte Carlo.
In terms of Risk and Risk , EWOC performs better in the Bayesian setting than the
myopic designs EWOC∗, IVOC, and CRM, in that order. This occurs in the frequentist
settings as well, although the ordering of the myopic designs varies depending on the par-
ticular parameter values. Even though it myopically minimizes the posterior risk at every
stage, IVOC performs poorly in terms of the cumulative risk, Risk , in the Bayesian setting.
A possible explanation is that its loss function (3) is a function of F (x), whose posterior
distribution (induced by the posterior distribution of θ) has relatively large variance toward
the middle of the interval (0,1) in which F (x) takes values and, in particular, near p = 1/3,
resulting in low initial doses observed in the simulations. On the other hand, in the Freq
setting, where η is relatively small and the dose-response curve is relatively flat (e.g., ρ
large), IVOC performs well in terms of the risks. In terms of estimation, EWOC has
thesmallest RMSE,withEWOC∗ andEWOC bothcomparableintheBayesian setting.
Moreover, EWOC has uniformly the smallest RMSE in the frequentist settings, with
IVOC comparable to it in Freq and IVOC and EWOC comparable to it in Freq .
2 +,λ=.1 3
5. Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper we present a general formulation of Bayesian sequential design of Phase I
cancer trials. This formulation enables us to prove a general coherence result in Theorem 1
applicable to any design that can be defined as the minimizer of the posterior risk when the
loss function satisfies some mild conditions. Although the theorem is proved for the widely-
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 15
used logistic regression model (1), the last paragraph of its proof in the Appendix shows that
it is applicable to any dose-response model that is non-increasing in the MTD, such as the
model F (x) = {(tanhx+1)/2}θ, which is also popular.
In Section 3.2 we propose a new design that incorporates both the individual ethics of
the current patient begin administered the dose, through a given loss function such as the
EWOC loss (2), and the collective ethics of all future patients by including an additional
term in the overall loss function to represent the dose’s information content for determining
another dose for the next patient. The simulation study in Section 4.4 shows that this new
design is indeed an improvement over myopic designs in terms of global risk minimization,
post-trial estimation of the MTD, and DLT and OD rates. This design provides a practical
alternative to the optimal design associated with the intractable Markov decision problem of
minimizing (9),which requires ateachstagethedaunting considerationofallfutureposterior
distributions and calculating their associated optimal doses. For the finite-horizon problem
of minimizing (8), Bartroff and Lai (2010) have developed an approximate solution which
is a time-varying mixture of myopic and c-optimal designs. The new design in Section 3.2,
which can be described by a time-invariant functional of the posterior distribution at each
stage, is substantially simpler computationally and provides substantial improvement over
the myopic designs. We conjecture that with suitably chosen λ (depending on δ), its global
risk (9) can approximate that of the optimal design minimizing (9). Instead of minimizing
(9) directly, it may be possible to obtain a good lower bound for (9). Such a bound, which
can provide a benchmark for assessing the proposed design, is a topic for future work.
We also consider an “inverted” loss function (3), which measures deviation from the target
DLT rate p on the probability scale rather than on the dose scale, and the associated myopic
design IVOC. Even though IVOC minimizes the myopic posterior expected loss (3) at each
stage, its cumulative global loss Risk in Table 1 is far from optimum, exceeding even that of
16 Biometrics, 000 2009
EWOC which uses a completely different loss function, in the Bayesian setting. On the other
hand, the design proposed in Section 3.2 can be applied with the IVOC loss function (3) to
yield a substantially improved design IVOC .
Proof of Theorem 1. We prove coherence in de-escalation; the proof for escalation is similar.
Let x < x be the boundaries of the dose space, which is assumed to be a finite interval.
For fixed η, since ℓ(η,x) is a convex function of x, its right derivative ℓ (η,x) with respect
to x is nondecreasing for x 6 x < x , and the same is also true for the left derivative
for x < x 6 x . Moreover, the left and right derivatives are equal and continuous
except for at most countably many points; see Rockafellar (1970, pages 214, 228, 244). Let
x = argmin E ℓ(η,x), Π be the posterior distribution obtained from Π and the additional
dose-response pair (x,y)
,1), and let L(x) = E
eℓ(η,x). Since ℓ(η,x) is convex in
x for every η, so is L(x); moreover, its right derivative is given by L
(η,x).
To show that x Π e 6 x Π , we shall assume that x Π < x max because the case x Π = x max is
trivial. It suffices to show that L˙
) > 0 because L is convex and has minimizer x
it follows that
where A = ℓ (η,x )[F (x ) − F (x )]dΠ(θ)dΠ(θ′). A change of variables also yields
Phase I Cancer Trial Designs 17
in which the inequality follows from
for all x, θ and θ′, as will be shown below. Combining (17) and (18) yields L˙ (x ) > 0,
completing the proof of the theorem.
From the assumption that ℓ(η,x)−ℓ(η,x′) is non-increasing in η for any x > x′, it follows
that ℓ (η,x) is non-increasing in η for fixed x. It therefore suffices for the proof of (19)
to show that F (x) is non-increasing in η = F−1(p). Since p−1 = 1/F (η) = 1 + e−(α+βη),
F (x) = 1/[1+exp{log(p−1 −1)+βη−βx}], which is non-increasing in η since β > 0.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation grants DMS-0907241 at
University of Southern California and DMS-0805879 at Stanford University. The authors
thank the Associate Editor and two referees for their helpful comments.