Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 1
Inference and Learning in Probabilistic Logic
Programs using Weighted Boolean Formulas
DAAN FIERENS, GUY VAN DEN BROECK, JORIS RENKENS,
DIMITAR SHTERIONOV, BERND GUTMANN, INGO THON,
GERDA JANSSENS, LUC DE RAEDT
Department of Computer Science
Celestijnenlaan 200A, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium
(e-mail: FirstName.LastName@cs.kuleuven.be)
submitted 26 June 2012; revised 04 January 2013; accepted 07 March 2013
Probabilistic logic programs are logic programs in which some of the facts are annotated
withprobabilities.Thispaperinvestigateshowclassicalinferenceandlearningtasksknown
from the graphical model community can be tackled for probabilistic logic programs.
Several such tasks such as computing the marginals given evidence and learning from
(partial) interpretations have not really been addressed for probabilistic logic programs
before.
Thefirstcontributionofthispaperisasuiteofefficientalgorithmsforvariousinference
tasks.Itisbasedonaconversionoftheprogramandthequeriesandevidencetoaweighted
Boolean formula. This allows us to reduce the inference tasks to well-studied tasks such
as weighted model counting, which can be solved using state-of-the-art methods known
from the graphical model and knowledge compilation literature. The second contribution
is an algorithm for parameter estimation in the learning from interpretations setting.
The algorithm employs Expectation Maximization, and is built on top of the developed
inference algorithms.
The proposed approach is experimentally evaluated. The results show that the infer-
encealgorithmsimproveuponthestate-of-the-artinprobabilisticlogicprogrammingand
that it is indeed possible to learn the parameters of a probabilistic logic program from
interpretations.
KEYWORDS:Probabilisticlogicprogramming,Probabilisticinference,Parameterlearn-
1 Introduction
Thereisalotofinterestincombiningprobabilityandlogicfordealingwithcomplex
relational domains. This interest has resulted in the fields of Probabilistic Logic
Programming (PLP) (De Raedt et al. 2008) and Statistical Relational Learning
(SRL) (Getoor and Taskar 2007). While the two fields essentially study the same
problem, there are differences in emphasis. SRL techniques have focussed on the
extension of probabilistic graphical models like Markov or Bayesian networks with
1v0186.4031:viXra
2 D. Fierens et al.
logical and relational representations, as in for instance Markov logic (Poon and
Domingos 2006). Conversely, PLP has extended logic programming languages (or
Prolog) with probabilities. This has resulted in differences in representation and
semanticsbetweenthetwoapproachesand,moreimportantly,alsoindifferencesin
the inference tasks and learning settings that are supported. In graphical models
and SRL, the most common inference tasks are that of computing the marginal
probabilityofasetofrandomvariablesgivensomeevidence(wecallthistheMARG
task) and finding the most likely joint state of the random variables given the
evidence (the MPE task). The PLP community has mostly focussed on computing
thesuccessprobabilityofquerieswithoutevidence.Furthermore,probabilisticlogic
programs are usually learned from entailment (Sato and Kameya 2008; Gutmann
et al. 2008a), while the standard learning setting in graphical models and SRL
corresponds to learning from interpretations. This paper bridges the gap between
thetwocommunities,byadaptingthetraditionalgraphicalmodelandSRLsettings
towards the PLP perspective. We contribute general MARG and MPE inference
techniques and a learning from interpretations algorithm for PLP. In this paper
we use ProbLog (De Raedt et al. 2007) as the PLP language, but our approach
is relevant to related languages like ICL (Poole 2008), PRISM (Sato and Kameya
2008) and LPAD/CP-logic (Vennekens et al. 2009) as well.
The first key contribution of this paper is a two-step approach for performing
MARG and MPE inference in probabilistic logic programs. In the first step, the
program is converted to an equivalent weighted Boolean (propositional) formula.
Thisconversionisbasedonwell-knownconversionsfromtheknowledgerepresenta-
tion and logic programming literature. The MARG task then reduces to weighted
model counting (WMC) on the resulting weighted formula, and the MPE task to
weightedMAX-SAT.Thesecondsteptheninvolvescallingastate-of-the-artsolver
forWMCorMAX-SAT.Inthisway,weestablishnewlinksbetweenPLPinference
and standard problems such as WMC and MAX-SAT. We also identify a novel
connection between PLP and Markov Logic (Poon and Domingos 2006). From a
probabilistic perspective, our approach is similar to the work of Darwiche (2009)
and others (Sang et al. 2005; Park 2002), who perform Bayesian network inference
byconversiontoweightedformulas.WedothesameforPLP,amuchmoreexpres-
sive representation framework than traditional graphical models. PLP extends a
programming language and allows us to concisely represent large sets of dependen-
cies between random variables. From a logical perspective, our approach is related
to Answer Set Programming (ASP), where models are often computed by trans-
lating the ASP program to a Boolean formula and applying a SAT solver (Lin and
Zhao 2002). Our approach is similar in spirit, but is different in that it employs a
probabilistic context.
The second key contribution of this paper is an algorithm for learning the pa-
rameters of probabilistic logic programs from data. We use the learning from in-
terpretations (LFI) setting, which is the standard setting in graphical models and
SRL (although they use different terminology). This setting has also received a lot
ofattentionininductivelogicprogramming(DeRaedt2008),buthasnotyetbeen
used for probabilistic logic programs. Our algorithm, called LFI-ProbLog, is based
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 3
on Expectation-Maximization (EM) and is built on top of the inference techniques
presented in this paper.
The present paper is based on and integrates our previous papers (Fierens et al.
2011; Gutmann et al. 2011) in which inference and learning were studied and im-
plemented separately. Historically, the learning from interpretations approach as
detailed by Gutmann et al. (2011) and Gutmann et al. (2010) was developed first
and used BDDs for inference and learning. The use of BDDs for learning in an
EM-styleisrelatedtotheapproachofIshihataetal.(2008),whodevelopedanEM
algorithmforpropositionalBDDsandsuggestedthattheirapproachcanbeusedto
perform learning from entailment for PRISM programs. Fierens et al. (2011) later
showed that an alternative approach to inference - that is more general, efficient
and principled - can be realized using weighted model counting and compilation
to d-DNNFs rather than BDDs as in the initial ProbLog implementation (Kim-
mig et al. 2010). The present paper employs the approach by Fierens et al. also
for learning from interpretations in an EM-style and thus integrates the two ear-
lier approaches. The resulting techniques are integrated in a novel implementation,
called ProbLog2. While the first ProbLog implementation (Kimmig et al. 2010)
was tightly integrated in the YAP Prolog engine and employed BDDs, ProbLog2
is much closer in spirit to some Answer Set Programming systems than to Prolog
and it employs d-DNNFs and weighted model counting.
This paper is organized as follows. We first review the necessary background
(Section 2) and introduce PLP (Section 3). Next we state the inference tasks that
we consider (Section 4). Then we introduce our two-step approach for inference
(Section 5 and 6), and introduce the new learning algorithm (Section 7). Finally
we briefly discuss the implementation of the new system (Section 8) and evaluate
the entire approach by means of experiments on relational data (Section 9).
2 Background
We now review the basics of first-order logic (FOL) and logic programming (LP).
Readers familiar with FOL and LP can safely skip this section.
2.1 First-Order Logic (FOL)
A term is a variable, a constant, or a functor applied to terms. An atom is of the
form p(t ,...,t ) where p is a predicate of arity n and the t are terms. A formula
isbuiltoutofatomsusinguniversalandexistentialquantifiersandtheusuallogical
connectives ¬, ∨, ∧, → and ↔. A FOL theory is a set of formulas that implicitly
form a conjunction. An expression is called ground if it does not contain variables.
Aground(orpropositional)theoryissaidtobeinconjunctivenormalform(CNF)
if it is a conjunction of disjunctions of literals. A literal is an atom or its negation.
Each disjunction of literals is called a clause. A disjunction consisting of a single
literal is called a unit clause. Each ground theory can be written in CNF form.
The Herbrand base of a FOL theory is the set of all ground atoms constructed
using the predicates, functors and constants in the theory. A Herbrand interpreta-
4 D. Fierens et al.
tion, also called a (possible) world, is an assignment of a truth value to all atoms
intheHerbrandbase.Aworldorinterpretationiscalledamodel ofthetheoryifit
satisfies all formulas in the theory (in other words, if all formulas evaluate to true
in that world).
2.2 Logic Programming (LP)
Syntactically, a normal logic program, or briefly logic program (LP) is a set of
rules. A rule (also called a normal clause) is a universally quantified expression of
the form h :- b1, ... , bn, where h is an atom and b ,...,b are literals. The
atom h is called the head of the rule and b ,...,b the body, representing the
conjunction b ∧...∧b . A fact is a rule that has true as its body and is written
more compactly as h.
We use the well-founded semantics for LPs (Van Gelder et al. 1991). In the case
of a negation-free LP (or definite program), the well-founded model is identical to
thewell-knownLeastHerbrandModel(LHM).TheLHMisequaltotheleastofall
models obtained when interpreting the LP as a FOL theory of implications. The
least model is the model that is a subset of all other models (in the sense that it
makes the fewest atoms true). Intuitively, the LHM is the set of all ground atoms
that are entailed by the LP. For negation-free LPs, the LHM is guaranteed to exist
and be unique. For LPs with negation, we use the well-founded model. We refer
to Van Gelder et al. (1991) for details. The ProbLog semantics requires all consid-
ered logic programs to have a two-valued well-founded model (see Section 3.2). For
suchprograms,thewell-foundedmodelisidenticaltothestablemodel(VanGelder
et al. 1991).
Intuitively,thereasonwhyoneconsidersonlytheleastmodelofanLPisthatLP
semanticsmakestheclosedworldassumption(CWA).UndertheCWA,everything
that is not implied to be true is assumed to be false. This has implications on how
to interpret rules. Given a ground LP and an atom a, the set of all rules with a
in the head should be read as the definition of a: the atom a is defined to be true
if and only if at least one of the rule bodies is true (the ‘only if’ is due to the
CWA). This means that there is a crucial difference in semantics between LP and
FOL since FOL does not make the CWA. For example, the FOL theory {a ← b}
has 3 models {¬a,¬b}, {a,¬b} and {a,b}. The LP {a :- b} has only one model,
namely the least Herbrand model {¬a,¬b} (intuitively, a and b are false because
thereisnorulethatmakesb true,andhencethereisnoapplicablerulethatmakes
a true either).
Because of the syntactic restrictions of LP, it is tempting to believe that FOL
is more ‘expressive’ than LP. This is wrong because of the difference in semantics:
certain concepts that can be expressed in LP cannot be expressed in FOL (see
Section 3.3 for details). This motivates our interest in LP and PLP.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 5
3 Probabilistic Logic Programming and ProbLog
Mostprobabilisticlogicprogramminglanguages,includingPRISM(SatoandKameya
2008), ICL (Poole 2008), ProbLog (De Raedt et al. 2007) and LPAD (Vennekens
et al. 2009), are based on Sato’s distribution semantics (Sato 1995). In this paper
we use ProbLog, but our approach can be used for the other languages as well.
3.1 Syntax of ProbLog
A ProbLog program consists of two parts: a set of ground probabilistic facts, and
a logic program, i.e. a set of rules and (‘non-probabilistic’) facts. A ground prob-
abilistic fact, written p::f, is a ground fact f annotated with a probability p. We
allow syntactic sugar for compactly specifying an entire set of probabilistic facts
withasinglestatement.Concretely,weallowwhatwecallintensional probabilistic
facts, which are statements of the form p::f(X1,X2,...,Xn) :- body, with body
a conjunction of calls to non-probabilistic facts.1 The idea is that such a statement
defines the domains of the variables X1, X2, ... and Xn. When defining the
semantics, as well as when performing inference or learning, an intensional prob-
abilistic fact should be replaced by its corresponding set of ground probabilistic
facts, as illustrated below. An atom that unifies with a ground probabilistic fact is
called a probabilistic atom, while an atom that unifies with the head of some rule
in the logic program is called a derived atom. The set of probabilistic atoms must
be disjoint from the set of derived atoms. Also, the rules in the program should be
range-restricted: all variables in the head of a rule should also appear in a positive
literal in the body of the rule.
Ourrunningexampleistheprogramthatmodelsthewell-known‘Alarm’Bayesian
network.
Example 1 (Running Example)
0.1::burglary. person(mary).
0.2::earthquake. person(john).
0.7::hears_alarm(X) :- person(X).
alarm :- burglary.
alarm :- earthquake.
calls(X) :- alarm, hears_alarm(X).
This Problog program consists of probabilistic facts and a logic program. Pred-
icates of probabilistic atoms are burglary/0, earthquake/0 and hears_alarm/1,
predicates of derived atoms are person/1, alarm/0 and calls/1. Intuitively, the
probabilistic facts 0.1::burglary and 0.2::earthquake state that there is a bur-
glary with probability 0.1 and an earthquake with probability 0.2. The statement
0.7::hears_alarm(X) :- person(X) is an intensional probabilistic fact and is
syntactic sugar for the following set of ground probabilistic facts.
1 The notion of intensional probabilistic facts does not appear in earlier ProbLog papers but is
oftenusefulinpractice.
6 D. Fierens et al.
0.7::hears_alarm(mary).
0.7::hears_alarm(john).
Therulesintheprogramdefinewhenthealarmgoesoffandwhenapersoncalls,
as a function of the probabilistic facts.
3.2 Semantics of ProbLog
A ProbLog program specifies a probability distribution over possible worlds. To
define this distribution, it is easiest to consider the grounding of the program with
respecttotheHerbrandbase.2Inthispaper,weassumethattheresultingHerbrand
base is finite. For the distribution semantics in the infinite case, see Sato (1995).
Each ground probabilistic fact p::f gives an atomic choice, i.e. we can choose
to include f as a fact (with probability p) or discard it (with probability 1−p). A
total choice is obtained by making an atomic choice for each ground probabilistic
fact. Formally, a total choice is any subset of the set of all ground probabilistic
atoms. Hence, if there are n ground probabilistic atoms then there are 2n total
choices. Moreover, we have a probability distribution over these total choices: the
probability of a total choice is defined to be the product of the probabilities of the
atomicchoicesthatitiscomposedof(wecantaketheproductsinceatomicchoices
are seen as independent events).
Example 2 (Total Choices of the Alarm Example)
ConsidertheAlarmprogramofExample1.The24 =16totalchoicescorresponding
to the 4 ground probabilistic atoms are given in Table 1. The first row corresponds
to the total choice in which all the probabilistic atoms are true. The probability of
this total choice is 0.1 × 0.2 × 0.7 × 0.7 = 0.0098. The second row corresponds to
thesametotalchoiceexceptthathears alarm(mary)isnowfalse.Theprobability
is0.1×0.2×0.7×(1-0.7)=0.0042.Thesumofprobabilitiesofall16totalchoices
is equal to one.
Given a particular total choice C, we obtain a logic program C ∪R, where R
denotestherulesintheProbLogprogram.Wedenotethewell-foundedmodelofthis
logic program as WFM(C ∪R).3 We call a given world ω a model of the ProbLog
program if there indeed exists a total choice C such that WFM(C ∪R) = ω. We
useMOD(L)todenotethesetofallmodelsofaProbLogprogramL.TheProbLog
semanticsisonlywell-definedforprogramsthataresound(RiguzziandSwift2013),
i.e., programs for which each possible total choice C leads to a well-founded model
that is two-valued or ‘total’ (Riguzzi and Swift 2013; Van Gelder et al. 1991).4
ProgramsforwhichthisisnotthecasearenotconsideredvalidProbLogprograms.
Everything is now in place to define the distribution over possible worlds: the
2 Beforehand,apreprocessingstepalreadyreplacedtheintensionalprobabilisticfactswiththeir
correspondinggroundset,asillustratedbefore.
3 RecallfromSection2.2thatfornegation-freeprograms,theWFMistheleastHerbrandmodel.
4 A sufficient condition for this is that the rules in the ProbLog program are locally stratified
(VanGelderetal.1991).Inparticular,thistriviallyholdsforallnegation-freeprograms.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 7
Table 1. Total choices and their probabilities
Total choice C P(C)
1 { burglary, earthquake, hears alarm(john), hears alarm(mary) } 0.0098
2 { burglary, earthquake, hears alarm(john) } 0.0042
3 { burglary, earthquake, hears alarm(mary) } 0.0042
4 { burglary, earthquake } 0.0018
5 { burglary, hears alarm(john), hears alarm(mary) } 0.0392
6 { burglary, hears alarm(john) } 0.0168
7 { burglary, hears alarm(mary) } 0.0168
8 { burglary } 0.0072
9 { earthquake, hears alarm(john), hears alarm(mary) } 0.0882
10 { earthquake, hears alarm(john) } 0.0378
11 { earthquake, hears alarm(mary) } 0.0378
12 { earthquake } 0.0162
13 { hears alarm(john), hears alarm(mary) } 0.3528
14 { hears alarm(john) } 0.1512
15 { hears alarm(mary) } 0.1512
16 { } 0.0648
probability of a world that is a model of the ProbLog program is equal to the
probability of its total choice; the probability of a world that is not a model is 0.
Example 3 (Models and their probabilities)
(ContinuingExample2)Thetotalchoice{burglary,earthquake,hears alarm(john)},
which has probability 0.1 × 0.2 × 0.7 × (1-0.7) = 0.0042, yields the following logic
program.
burglary. person(mary).
earthquake. person(john).
hears_alarm(john).
alarm :- earthquake.
alarm :- burglary.
calls(X) :- alarm, hears_alarm(X).
The WFM of this program is the world {person(mary),person(john),burglary,
earthquake,hears alarm(john),¬hears alarm(mary),alarm,calls(john),¬calls(mary)}.
Hencethisworldisamodelanditsprobabilityis0.0042.Intotalthereare16mod-
els,correspondingtoeachofthe16totalchoicesshowninTable1.Notethat,outof
allpossibleinterpretationsofthevocabulary,therearemanythatarenotmodelsof
theProbLogprogram.Anexampleisanyworldoftheform{burglary,¬alarm,...}:
it is impossible that alarm is false while burglary is true. The probability of such
worlds is zero.
3.3 Related Languages
ProbLogisstronglyrelatedtoseveralotherlanguages,inparticulartoProbabilistic
Logic Programming (PLP) languages like PRISM (Sato and Kameya 2008), ICL
8 D. Fierens et al.
(Poole 2008) and LPAD (Vennekens et al. 2009), and other languages like Markov
Logic(PoonandDomingos2006).Table2showsthemainfeaturesofeachlanguage
and the major corresponding system.
Table 2. Overview of features of several probabilistic logical languages and the
corresponding systems (implementations). The first three features are properties
of the language, the last two are properties of the system. We refer to the first
ProbLog system as ProbLog1 and to the system described here as ProbLog2.
Language ProbLog ProbLog PRISM ICL LPAD MLN
System ProbLog1 ProbLog2 PRISM AILog2 PITA Alchemy
Cyclic rules (cid:88) (cid:88) − − (cid:88) (cid:88)
Overlapping (cid:88) (cid:88) − (cid:88) (cid:88) n/a
rule bodies
Inductive (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) −
definitions
Evidence on
− (cid:88) − (cid:88) − (cid:88)
arbitrary atoms
Multiple queries − (cid:88) − − − (cid:88)
ComparedtomostotherPLPlanguages,ProbLogismoreexpressivewithrespect
to the rules that are allowed in a program. This holds in particular for PRISM
and ICL. Both PRISM and ICL require the rules to be acyclic (or contingently
acyclic) (Sato and Kameya 2008; Poole 2008). In ProbLog we can have cyclic pro-
gramswithrulessuchassmokes(X) :- smokes(Y), influences(Y,X).Thistype
of cyclic rules are often needed for tasks such as collective classification or social
network analysis (see Section 9). In addition to acyclicity, PRISM also requires
rules with unifiable heads to have mutually exclusive bodies (such that at most
one of these bodies can be true simultaneously; this is the mutual exclusiveness
assumption). ProbLog does not have this restriction, so rules with unifiable heads
can have ‘overlapping’ bodies. For instance, the bodies of the two alarm rules in
ourrunningexampleareoverlapping:eitherburglaryorearthquakeissufficientfor
making the alarm go off, but both can also happen at the same time.
LPADs, as used in the PITA system (Riguzzi and Swift 2013), do not have
these syntactic restrictions, and are hence on par with ProbLog in this respect.
However, the PITA system does not support the same tasks as the new ProbLog2
system does. For instance, when computing marginal probabilities, ProbLog2 can
dealwithmultiplequeriessimultaneouslyandcanincorporateevidence,whilePITA
usesthemoretraditionalPLPsettingwhichconsidersonequeryatatime,without
evidence(thesuccesprobability setting,seeSection4).Thesamealsoholdsforthe
first ProbLog system (Kimmig et al. 2010). Note that while evidence can in some
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 9
specialcasesbeincorporatedthroughmodelling,5 weherefocusonthegeneralcase,
i.e.,theabilityofthesystemtohandleevidenceonanyarbitrarysubsetofallatoms
in the Herbrand base.
ProbLog2 is the first PLP system that posesses all the features considered in
Table 2, i.e., that supports multiple queries and evidence while having none of the
language restrictions. The experiments in this paper (Section 9) require all these
features and can hence only be carried out in ProbLog2, but not in the other PLP
systems.
MarkovLogic(PoonandDomingos2006)isstrictlyspeakingnotaPLPlanguage
as it is based on First-Order Logic instead of Logic Programming. Nevertheless,
Markov Logic of course serves the same purpose as the above PLP languages. In
terms of expressivity, Markov Logic has the drawback that it cannot express (non-
ground)inductivedefinitions.Anexampleofaninductivedefinitionisthedefinition
of the notion of a path in a graph in terms of the edges. This can be written in
plain Prolog and hence also in ProbLog.
path(X,Y) :- edge(X,Y).
path(X,Y) :- edge(X,Z), path(Z,Y).
In the knowledge representation community, it is well-known that inductive defini-
tions can naturally be represented in Logic Programming (LP), due to LP’s least
orwell-foundedmodelsemantics(Deneckeretal.2001).Incontrast,inFirst-Order
Logic(FOL)onecannotexpressnon-groundinductivedefinitions,suchasthepath
definition above (Gr¨adel 1992). The reason is, roughly speaking, that path is the
transitive closure of edge, and FOL can express that a given relation is transitive,
butcannotingeneralspecifythisclosure.Thisresultcarriesovertotheprobabilis-
tic case: we can express inductive definitions in PLP languages like ProbLog but
not in FOL-based languages like Markov Logic.6 While the non-probabilistic case
has been well-studied in the knowledge representation literature (Denecker et al.
2001; Gr¨adel 1992), the probabilistic case has only very recently received attention
(Fierens et al. 2012).
4 Inference Tasks
In the literature on probabilistic graphical models and statistical relational learn-
ing, the two most common inference tasks are computing the marginal probability
of a set of random variables given some observations or evidence (we call this the
MARG task), and finding the most likely joint state of the random variables given
theevidence(knownastheMPEtask,forMostProbableExplanation).InPLP,the
5 For instance, when encoding a Bayesian network in PLP, evidence on nodes at the top of the
network (nodes without parents) can be incorporated by including deterministic facts in the
program.
6 Thisdiscussionappliestonon-groundProbLogprogramsandMarkovLogicNetworks(MLNs).
InSection5.3weshowthateveryground ProbLogprogramcanbeconvertedtoanequivalent
groundMLN.Theaboveimpliesthatnosuchconversionexistsonthenon-ground(first-order)
level.
10 D. Fierens et al.
focushasbeenonthespecialcaseofMARGwherethereisonlyasinglequeryatom
Q andnoevidence.Thistaskisoftencalledcomputingthesuccessprobability ofQ
(De Raedt et al. 2007). The only works related to the general MARG or MPE task
in the PLP literature make a number of restrictive assumptions about the given
program such as acyclicity (Gutmann et al. 2011) and the mutual exclusiveness
assumption of PRISM (Sato and Kameya 2008). There also exist approaches that
transform ground probabilistic programs to Bayesian networks and then use stan-
dardBayesiannetworkinferenceprocedures(Meertetal.2009).However,theseare
also restricted to acyclic and already grounded programs.
OurapproachfortheMARGandMPEinferencetasksdoesnotsufferfromsuch
restrictionsandisapplicabletoallProbLogprograms.Wenowformallydefinethese
tasks,inadditiontoathird,stronglyrelatedtask.LetAtbetheHerbrandbase,i.e,
thesetofallground(probabilisticandderived)atomsinagivenProbLogprogram.
We assume that we are given a set E⊂At of observed atoms and a vector e with
their observed truth values. We refer to this as the evidence and write E=e. Note
thattheevidenceisessentiallyapartialinterpretationoftheatomsintheProbLog
program.
• In the MARG task, we are given a set Q ⊂ At of atoms of interest, called
query atoms. The task is to compute the marginal probability distribution
of every such atom given the evidence, i.e. compute P(Q | E = e) for each
• The EVID or ‘probability of evidence’ task is to compute P(E = e). It
corresponds to the likelihood of data in a learning setting and can be used as
a building block for solving the MARG task (see Section 6.2).
• TheMPEtaskistofindthemostlikelyinterpretation(jointstate)ofallnon-
evidence atoms given the evidence, i.e. finding argmax P(U = u | E = e),
with U being the unobserved atoms, i.e., U=At\E.
As the following example illustrates, the different tasks are strongly related.
Example 4 (Inference tasks)
Consider the ProbLog program of Example 1 and assume that we know that John
calls, so E = {calls(john)} and e = {true}. It can be verified that calls(john)
is true in 6 of the 16 models of the program, namely the models of total choices
1, 2, 5, 6, 9 and 10 of Table 1. The sum of their probabilities is 0.196, so this is
theprobabilityofevidence(EVID).TheMPEtaskboilsdowntofindingtheworld
with the highest probability out of the 6 worlds that have calls(john) = true. It
canbeverifiedthatthisistheworldcorrespondingtototalchoice9,i.e.,thechoice
{earthquake,hears alarm(john),hears alarm(mary)}.AnexampleoftheMARG
taskistocomputetheprobabilitythatthereisaburglary,i.e.,P(burglary =true|
calls(john)=true)= P(burglary=true∧calls(john)=true).Thereare4modelsinwhich
P(calls(john)=true)
both calls(john) and burglary are true (models 1, 2, 5 and 6), and their sum of
7 ThecommonPLPtaskofcomputingthesuccessprobability ofanatomQ isaspecialcaseof
MARGwithQbeingthesingleton{Q}andE=∅.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 11
probabilities is 0.07. Hence, P(burglary =true|calls(john)=true)= 0.07/ 0.196
= 0.357.
Our approach to inference consists of two steps: 1) convert the program to a
weighted Boolean formula and 2) perform inference on the resulting weighted for-
mula. We discuss these two steps in the next sections.
5 Conversion to a Weighted Formula
Our conversion takes as input a ProbLog program L, evidence E=e and a set
of query atoms Q, and returns a weighted Boolean (propositional) formula that
contains all necessary information. The conversion is similar for each of the consid-
ered tasks (MARG, MPE or EVID). The only difference is the choice of the query
set Q. For MARG, Q is the set of atoms for which we want to compute marginal
probabilities. For EVID and MPE, we can take Q=∅ (see Section 6.1.1).
The outline of the conversion algorithm is as follows.
1. Ground L yielding a program L while taking into account Q and E=e (cf.
Theorem 1, Section 5.1).
It is unnecessary to consider the full grounding of the program, we only need
thepartthatisrelevanttothequerygiventheevidence,thatis,thepartthat
capturesthedistributionP(Q|E=e).WerefertotheresultingprogramL
as the relevant ground program with respect to Q and E=e.
2. Convert the ground rules in L to an equivalent Boolean formula ϕ (cf.
Lemma 1, Section 5.2).
This step converts the logic programming rules to an equivalent formula.
3. Asserttheevidenceanddefineaweightfunction(cf.Theorem2,Section5.3).
To obtain the weighted formula, we first assert the evidence by defining the
formula ϕ as the conjunction of the formula ϕ for the rules (step2) and for
the evidence ϕ . Then we define a weight function for all atoms in ϕ.
The correctness of the algorithm is shown below; this relies on the indicated theo-
rems andlemma’s. Beforedescribing thealgorithmin detail,weillustrate itonour
Alarm example.
Example 5 (The three steps in the conversion)
As in Example 4, we take calls(john) = true as evidence. Suppose that we want
tocomputethemarginalprobabilityofburglary,sothequerysetQis{burglary}.
The relevant ground program is as follows.
% ground probabilistic facts
0.1::burglary. 0.2::earthquake. 0.7::hears_alarm(john).
% ground rules
alarm :- burglary.
alarm :- earthquake.
calls(john) :- alarm, hears_alarm(john).
12 D. Fierens et al.
Note that mary does not appear in the grounding because, if we have no evi-
dence about her hearing the alarm or calling, she does not affect the probability
P(burglary |calls(john)=true).
Step2convertsthethreegroundrulesoftherelevantgroundprogramtoanequiv-
alent propositional formula ϕ (see Section 5.2). This formula is the conjunction of
alarm↔burglary∨earthquake and calls(john)↔alarm∧hears alarm(john).8
Step 3 adds the evidence. Since we have only one evidence atom in our example
(namely, calls(john) is true), all we need to do is to add the positive unit clause
calls(john) to the formula ϕ . The resulting formula ϕ is ϕ ∧calls(john). Step
3 also defines the weight function, which assigns a weight to each literal in ϕ, see
Section 5.3. This results in the weighted formula, that is, the combination of the
weight function and the Boolean formula ϕ.
We now explain the three steps of the conversion in detail.
5.1 The Relevant Ground Program
In order to convert the ProbLog program to a Boolean formula we first ground it.
We try to find the part of the grounding that is relevant to the queries Q and the
evidence E = e. In SRL, this is also called knowledge-based model construction
(Kersting and De Raedt 2001). To do this, we make use of the concept of a depen-
dency set with respect to a ProbLog program. We first explain our algorithm and
then show its correctness.
The dependency set of a ground atom a is the set of all ground atoms that
occur in some proof of a. The dependency set of multiple atoms is the union of
their dependency sets. We call a ground atom relevant with respect to Q and E
if it occurs in the dependency set of Q∪E. We call a ground rule relevant if it
contains only relevant atoms. It is safe to restrict the grounding to the relevant
rules only. To find the relevant atoms and rules, we apply SLD resolution to prove
all atoms in Q∪E (this can be seen as backchaining over the rules starting from
Q∪E). We employ tabling to avoid proving the same atom twice (and to avoid
going into an infinite loop if the rules are cyclic). The relevant rules are all ground
rules encountered during the resolution process. As our ProbLog programs are
range-restricted, all the variables in the rules used during the SLD resolution will
eventually become ground, and hence also the rules themselves.
The above grounding algorithm is not optimal as it does not make use of all
available information. For instance, it does not make use of exactly what the evi-
dence is (the values e), but only of which atoms are in the evidence (the set E).
One simple, yet sometimes very effective, optimization is to prune inactive rules.
We call a ground rule inactive if the body of the rule contains a literal l that is
falseintheevidence(l canbeanatomthatisfalseine,orthenegationofanatom
that is true in e). Inactive rules do not contribute to the semantics of a program.
8 For subsequent steps, it is often convenient to write this formula in conjunctive normal form
(CNF).Forexample,someknowledgecompilationsystemsrequireCNFinput.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 13
Hence they can be omitted. In practice, we do this simultaneously with the above
process: we omit inactive rules encountered during the SLD resolution.9
The result of this grounding algorithm is what we call the relevant ground pro-
gramL forLwithrespecttoQandE=e.Itcontainsalltheinformationnecessary
for solving the corresponding EVID, MARG or MPE task. The advantage of this
‘focussed’ approach (i.e., taking into account Q and E = e during grounding) is
that the program and hence the weighted formula becomes more compact, which
makessubsequentinferencemoreefficient.Thedisadvantageisthatweneedtoredo
the conversion to a weighted formula when the evidence and queries change. This
is no problem since the conversion is fast compared to the actual inference (see
Section 9).
The following theorem shows the correctness of our approach.
LetLbeaProbLogprogramandletL betherelevantgroundprogramforLwith
respect to Q and E=e. L and L specify the same distribution P(Q|E=e).
The proofs of all theorems in this paper are given in the appendix.
We already showed the relevant ground program for the Alarm example in Ex-
ample 5 (in that case, there were irrelevant rules about mary, but no inactive
rules because there was no negative evidence). To illustrate our approach for cyclic
programs, we use the well-known Smokers example (Domingos et al. 2008).
Example 6 (ProbLog program for Smokers)
The ProbLog program for the Smokers example models two causes for people to
smoke: either they spontaneously start because of stress or they are influenced by
one of their friends.
0.2::stress(P) :- person(P).
0.3::influences(P1,P2) :- friend(P1,P2).
person(p1). person(p2). person(p3).
friend(p1,p2). friend(p1,p3)
friend(p2,p1). friend(p3,p1).
smokes(X) :- stress(X).
smokes(X) :- smokes(Y), influences(Y,X).
With the evidence {smokes(p) = true,smokes(p) = false} and the query set
{smokes(p)}, we obtain the following ground program:
0.2::stress(p1). 0.2::stress(p2). 0.2::stress(p3).
0.3::influences(p2,p1). 0.3::influences(p1,p2). 0.3::influences(p1,p3).
% irrelevant probabilistic fact !! 0.3::influences(p3,p1).
9 This deals with literals that are false in the evidence. Conversely, when a body of a ground
rule contains a literal that is true in the evidence, it has to be kept and the rule cannot be
simplified.Thereasonisthattheatom’spresencemightgiverisetoapositiveloop,whichhas
to be detected during the conversion of the ground program to a Boolean formula in the next
step.
14 D. Fierens et al.
smokes(p1) :- stress(p1).
smokes(p1) :- smokes(p2), influences(p2,p1).
% inactive rule !! smokes(p1) :- smokes(p3), influences(p3,p1).
smokes(p2) :- stress(p2).
smokes(p2) :- smokes(p1), influences(p1,p2).
smokes(p3) :- stress(p3).
smokes(p3) :- smokes(p1), influences(p1,p3).
The evidence smokes(p) = false makes the third rule for smokes(p1) inactive.
This in turn makes the probabilistic fact for influences(p3,p1) irrelevant. Nev-
ertheless, the rules for smokes(p3) have to be in the grounding, as the truth value
of the head of a rule constrains the truth values of the bodies.
5.2 The Boolean Formula for the Ground Program
We now discuss how to convert the rules in the relevant ground program L to an
equivalent Boolean formula ϕ . Converting a set of logic programming (LP) rules
to an equivalent Boolean formula is a purely logical (non-probabilistic) problem.
ThishasbeenwellstudiedintheLPliterature,whereseveralconversionshavebeen
proposed,e.g.Janhunen(2004).Notethattheconversionisnotmerelyasyntactical
rewriting issue; the point is that the rules and the formula are to be interpreted
accordingtoadifferentsemantics.Hencetheconversionshouldcompensateforthis:
therulesunderLPsemantics(withClosedWorldAssumption)shouldbeequivalent
to the formula under FOL semantics (without CWA).
For acyclic rules, the conversion is straightforward, we can simply take Clark’s
completion of the rules (Lloyd 1987; Janhunen 2004). We illustrate this on the
Alarm example, which is indeed acyclic.
Example 7 (Formula for the alarm rules)
AsshowninExample5,thegroundingoftheAlarmexamplecontainstworulesfor
alarm, namely alarm :- burglary and alarm :- earthquake. Clark’s comple-
tionoftheserulesisthepropositionalformulaalarm ↔burglary∨earthquake,i.e.,
the alarm goes off if and only if there is burglary or earthquake. Once we have the
formula,weoftenneedtorewriteitinCNFform,whichisstraightforwardforacom-
pletion formula. For the completion of alarm, the resulting CNF has three clauses:
alarm ∨¬burglary, alarm ∨¬earthquake, and ¬alarm ∨burglary ∨earthquake.
The last clause reflects the CWA.10
For cyclic rules, the conversion is more complicated. This holds in particular
for rules with positive loops, i.e., loops with atoms that depend positively on each
other, as in the recursive rule for smokes/1. It is well-known that in the presence
10 The Alarm example models a Bayesian network for the MARG task. For Bayesian networks,
theproblemofconversiontoaweightedCNFformulahasbeenconsideredbefore,andseveral
encodings exist (Darwiche 2009; Sang et al. 2005). For ProbLog programs modelling Boolean
Bayesiannetworks,likeAlarm,ourCNFencodingcoincideswiththatofSangetal.(2005).
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 15
of positive loops, Clark’s completion is not correct, i.e. the resulting formula is not
equivalent to the rules (Janhunen 2004).
Example 8 (Simplified Smokers example)
Let us focus on the Smokers program of Example 6, but restricted to person p1
and p2.
0.2::stress(p1). 0.3::influences(p2,p1).
0.2::stress(p2). 0.3::influences(p1,p2).
smokes(p1) :- stress(p1).
smokes(p1) :- smokes(p2), influences(p2,p1).
smokes(p2) :- stress(p2).
smokes(p2) :- smokes(p1), influences(p1,p2).
Clark’s completion of the rules for smokes(p1) and smokes(p2) would result in a
formula which has as a model {smokes(p),smokes(p),¬stress(p),¬stress(p),
influences(p,p),influences(p,p),...}, but this is not a model of the ground
ProbLog program: the only model resulting from the total choice {¬stress(p),
¬stress(p),influences(p,p),influences(p,p),...},isthemodelinwhichsmokes(p)
and smokes(p) are both false.
Since Clark’s completion is inapplicable with positive loops, a range of more
sophisticatedconversionalgorithmshavebeendevelopedintheLPliterature.Since
the problem is of a highly technical nature, we are unable to repeat the full details
in this paper. Instead, we briefly discuss the two conversion methods that we use
in our work and refer to the corresponding literature for more details.
Both conversion algorithms take a set of rules and construct an equivalent for-
mula. The formulas generated by the two algorithms are typically syntactically
different because the algorithms introduce a set of auxiliary atoms in the formula
and these sets might differ. For both algorithms, the size of the formula typically
increases with the number of positive loops in the rules. The two algorithms are
the following.
• The first algorithm is from the Answer Set Programming literature (Jan-
hunen 2004). It first rewrites the given rules into an equivalent set of rules
withoutpositiveloops(allresultingloopsinvolvenegation).Thisrequiresthe
introduction of auxiliary atoms and rules. Since the resulting rules are free of
positiveloops,theycanbeconvertedbytakingClark’scompletion.Theresult
can then be written as a CNF. This algorithm is rule based, as opposed to
the next algorithm.
• The second algorithm was introduced in the LP literature (Mantadelis and
Janssens 2010) and is proof-based. It first constructs all proofs of all atoms
of interest, in our case all atoms in Q ∪ E, using tabled SLD resolution.
The proofs are collected in a recursive structure, namely a set of nested tries
(Mantadelis and Janssens 2010), which will have loops if the given rules had
loops. The algorithm then operates on this structure in order to ‘break’ the
loops and obtain an equivalent Boolean formula. This formula can then be
written as a CNF.
16 D. Fierens et al.
Both the rule-based and the proof-based conversion algorithm return a formula
that is ‘equivalent’ to the rules in L , in the sense of the following lemma.
Let L be a ground ProbLog program. Let ϕ denote the formula derived from the
rules in L . Then SAT(ϕ )=MOD(L ).
Recall that MOD(L ) denotes the set of models of a ProbLog program L , as
defined in Section 3.2. On the formula side, we use SAT(ϕ ) to denote the set of
models of a formula ϕ .11
Example 9 (Boolean formula for the simplified Smokers example)
Consider the ground program for the simplified Smokers example, given in Ex-
ample 8. The proof-based conversion algorithm converts the ground rules in this
program to an equivalent formula (in the sense of Lemma 1) consisting of the con-
junction of the following four subformulas.
aux ↔ smokes(p)∧influences(p,p)
aux ↔ stress(p)∧influences(p,p)
Here aux and aux are auxiliary atoms that are introduced by the conversion
(though they could be avoided in this case). Intuitively, aux says that person p1
started smoking because he is influenced by person p2, who smokes himself. Note
that while the ground program (in Example 8) is cyclic, the loop has been broken
by the conversion process; this surfaces in the fact that the last subformula uses
stress(p) instead of smokes(p).
5.3 The Weighted Boolean formula
The final step of the conversion constructs the weighted Boolean formula starting
from the Boolean formula for the rules ϕ . First, the formula ϕ is defined as the
conjunction of ϕ and a formula ϕ capturing the evidence E=e. Here ϕ is a
conjunctionofunit clauses:thereis aunitclause a foreachtrueatomand aclause
¬a foreachfalseatomintheevidence.Second,wedefinetheweightfunctionforall
literalsintheresultingformula.Theweightofaprobabilisticliteral isderivedfrom
the probabilistic facts in the program: if the relevant ground program contains a
probabilistic fact p::f, then we assign weight p to f and weight 1−p to ¬f. The
weightofaderivedliteral (aliteralnotoccuringinaprobabilisticfact)isalways1.
The weight of a world ω, denoted w(ω), is defined to be the product of the weight
of all literals in ω.
11 Bothconversionsforcyclicrulesintroduceadditionalor‘auxiliary’atomsintoϕr.Wecansafely
omit these atoms from the models in SAT(ϕr) because both conversions are ‘faithful’, so the
truthvalueofauxiliaryatomsisuniquelydefinedbythetruthvalueoftheoriginalatoms.This
meansthattheintroductionoftheauxiliaryatomsdoesnotcreateextramodels.Hence,w.r.t.
theoriginalatomswehavethestatedequivalence:SAT(ϕr)=MOD(Lg).W.r.t.allatoms,ϕr
andLg areequisatisfiable.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 17
Example 10 (Weighted formula for Alarm)
WehaveseentheformulafortheAlarmprograminExample7.Ifwehaveevidence
that calls(john) is true, we add a positive unit clause calls(john) to this formula
(afterdoingthis,wecanpotentiallyapplyunitpropagationtosimplifytheformula).
Thenwedefinetheweightfunction.Theformulacontainsthreeprobabilisticatoms
burglary, earthquake and hears_alarm(john). The other atoms in the formula,
alarmandcalls(john),arederivedatoms.Hencetheweightfunctionisasfollows.
burglary (cid:55)→ 0.1 ¬burglary (cid:55)→ 0.9
earthquake(cid:55)→ 0.2 ¬earthquake(cid:55)→ 0.8
hears alarm(john)(cid:55)→ 0.7 ¬hears alarm(john)(cid:55)→ 0.3
alarm (cid:55)→ 1 ¬alarm(cid:55)→ 1
calls(john)(cid:55)→1 ¬calls(john)(cid:55)→ 1
We have now seen how to construct the entire weighted formula from the rele-
vant ground program. The following theorem states that this weighted formula is
equivalent - in a particular sense - to the relevant ground program. We will make
use of this result when performing inference on the weighted formula.
Let L be the relevant ground program for some ProbLog program with respect to
Q and E=e. Let MOD (L ) be those models in MOD(L ) that are consistent
with the evidence E=e. Let ϕ denote the formula and w(·) the weight function of
the weighted formula derived from L . Then:
- (model equivalence) SAT(ϕ)=MOD (L ),
- (weight equivalence) ∀ω ∈ SAT(ϕ): w(ω) = P (ω), i.e., the weight of ω
according to w(·) is equal to the probability of ω according to L .
Note the relationship with Lemma 1 (p. 16): Lemma 1 applies to the formula ϕ
prior to asserting the evidence, whereas Theorem 2 applies to the formula ϕ after
asserting evidence.
Example 11 (Equivalence of weighted formula and ground program)
The ground Alarm program of Example 5 has three probabilistic facts and hence
23 = 8 total choices and corresponding possible worlds. Three of these possible
worlds are consistent with the evidence calls(john) = true, namely the worlds
resulting from choices in which hears alarm(john) is always true and at least one
of {burglary,earthquake} is true. The reader can verify that the Boolean formula
constructed in Example 10 has exactly the same three models, and that weight
equivalence holds for each of these models.
There is also a link between the weighted formula and Markov Logic Networks
(MLNs). Readers unfamiliar with MLNs can consult Appendix B. The weighted
formula that we construct can be regarded as a ground MLN. The MLN contains
the Boolean formula as a ‘hard’ formula (with infinite weight). The MLN also has
two weighted unit clauses per probabilistic atom: for a probabilistic atom a and
18 D. Fierens et al.
weight function {a (cid:55)→ p,¬a (cid:55)→ 1−p}, the MLN contains a unit clause a with
weight ln(p) and a unit clause ¬a with weight ln(1−p).12
Example 12 (MLN for the Alarm example)
The Boolean formula ϕ for our ‘Alarm’ running example was shown in Example 5.
The corresponding MLN contains this formula as a hard formula. The MLN also
contains the following six weighted unit clauses.
ln(0.1) burglary ln(0.9) ¬burglary
ln(0.2) earthquake ln(0.8) ¬earthquake
ln(0.7) hears alarm(john) ln(0.3) ¬hears alarm(john)
We have the following equivalence result.
Let L be the relevant ground program for some ProbLog program with respect to
Q and E = e. Let M be the corresponding ground MLN. The distribution P(Q)
according to M is the same as the distribution P(Q|E=e) according to L .
Note that for the MLN we consider the distribution P(Q) (not conditioned on the
evidence). This is because the evidence is already hard-coded in the MLN.
6 Inference on the Weighted Formula
TosolvethegiveninferencetaskfortheprobabilisticlogicprogramL,thequeryQ
andevidenceE=e,wehaveconvertedtheprogramtoaweightedBooleanformula.
A key advantage is that the inference task (be it MARG, MPE or EVID) can now
be reformulated in terms of well-known tasks such as weighted model counting or
weighted MAX-SAT on the weighted formula. This implies that we can use any of
the existing state-of-the-art algorithms for solving these tasks. In other words, by
the conversion of ProbLog to weighted formula, we get the inference algorithms for
free.
6.1 Task 1: Computing the probability of evidence (EVID)
Computingtheprobabilityofevidencereducestoweightedmodelcounting(WMC),
a well-studied task in the SAT community. Model counting for a propositional
formula is the task of computing the number of models of the formula. WMC is
the generalization where every model has a weight and the task is to compute the
sum of weights of all models. The fact that computing the probability of evidence
P(E=e) reduces to WMC on our weighted formula can be seen as follows.
(cid:88) (cid:88)
12 Thevaluesofthelogarithms(andhencetheweights)arenegative,butanyMLNwithnegative
weights can be rewritten into an equivalent MLN with only positive weights (Domingos et al.
2008).
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 19
The first equality holds because P(E = e) by definition equals the total proba-
bility of all worlds consistent with the evidence. The second equality follows from
Theorem 2: model equivalence implies that the sets over which the sums range
are equal, weight equivalence implies that the summed terms are equal. Comput-
ing w(ω) is exactly what WMC on the weighted formula ϕ does. It is
well-knownthatinferencewithBayesiannetworkscanbesolvedusingWMC(Sang
et al. 2005). In (Fierens et al. 2011) we were the first to point out that this also
holds for inference with probabilistic logic programs. As we will see in the experi-
ments, this approach improves upon state-of-the-art methods in probabilistic logic
programming.
The above leaves open how we solve the WMC problem. There exist many ap-
proaches to WMC, both exact (Darwiche 2004) and approximate (Gomes et al.
2007). An approach that is particularly useful in our context is that of knowledge
compilation, ‘compiling’ the weighted formula into a more ‘efficient’ form. While
knowledge compilation has been studied for many different tasks (Darwiche and
Marquis 2002), we need a form that allows for efficient WMC. Concretely, we com-
piletheweightedformulaintoaso-calledarithmeticcircuit(Darwiche2009),which
iscloselylinkedtotheconceptofdeterministic,decomposablenegationnormalform
(d-DNNF) (Darwiche 2004).
6.1.1 Compilation to an Arithmetic Circuit via d-DNNF
We now introduce the necessary background on knowledge compilation and illus-
trate the approach with an example.
Knowledgecompilationisconcernedwithcompilingalogicalformula,forwhicha
certainfamilyofinferencetasksishardtocompute,intoarepresentationwherethe
sametasksaretractable(sothecomplexityoftheproblemisshiftedtothecompila-
tionphase).Inthiscase,thehardtaskistocomputeweightedmodelcounts(which
is #P-complete in general). After compiling a logical formula into a deterministic,
decomposable negation normal form circuit (d-DNNF) representation (Darwiche
2004) and converting the d-DNNF into an arithmetic circuit, the weighted model
countoftheformulacanefficientlybecomputed,conditionedonanysetofevidence.
This allows us to compile a single d-DNNF circuit and evaluate all marginals effi-
ciently using this circuit.
A negation normal form formula (NNF) is a rooted directed acyclic graph in
which each leaf node is labeled with a literal and each internal node is labeled
with a conjunction or disjunction. A decomposable negation normal form (DNNF)
is a NNF satisfying decomposability: for every conjunction node, it should hold
that no two children of the node share any atom with each other. A deterministic
DNNF(d-DNNF)isaDNNFsatisfyingdeterminism:foreverydisjunctionnode,all
children should represent formulas that are logically inconsistent with each other.
For WMC, we need a d-DNNF that also satisfies smoothness: for every disjunction
node, all children should use exactly the same set of atoms. Compiling a Boolean
formulatoa(smooth)d-DNNFisawell-studiedproblem,andseveralcompilersare
available (Darwiche 2004; Muise et al. 2012). These circuits are the most compact
20 D. Fierens et al.
circuit language we know of today that supports tractable WMC (Darwiche and
Marquis 2002).
A d-DNNF is a purely logical construct. It is constructed by compiling the for-
mula,irrespectiveoftheassociatedweightingfunction.Hencead-DNNFallowsfor
model counting, but not for WMC. In order to do WMC, we need to convert the
d-DNNF into an arithmetic circuit, by taking into account the weighting function
of our weighted formula. This conversion is done in two steps (Darwiche 2009):
1)replaceallconjunctionsintheinternalnodesbymultiplications,andalldisjunc-
tions by summations, 2) replace every leaf node involving a literal l by a subtree
consisting of a multiplication node having two children, namely a leaf node with
an indicator variable for the literal l and a leaf node with the weight of l according
the weighted formula. We now illustrate this for the Alarm example.
Example 13 (d-DNNF and Arithmetic Circuit for the Alarm example)
WecontinuetheAlarmexample(Example10).Theformulaforthisexample,under
the evidence calls(john) = true, is the conjunction of the following three subfor-
mulas.
alarm ↔burglary∨earthquake
calls(john)↔alarm,hears alarm(john)
calls(john)
A corresponding d-DNNF is shown in Figure 1a. Note that the AND-nodes in the
d-DNNF (like the root note) indeed satisfy the property of decomposability; while
theOR-nodessatisfydeterminism.ThefunctionoftheOR-nodeonthelower-right
is to make the d-DNNF smooth.
Thearithmeticcircuitcorrespondingtothisd-DNNFisshowninFigure1b.The
values in brackets in the interal nodes will be used later and can be ignored for
now. The λ-variables in the leaves are the indicator variables for the literals. The
indicator variable for a literal l is multiplied with a number, which is the weight of
l according to our weighting function.
Nowthatwehaveanarithmeticcircuitforourweightedformula,wearereadyto
performWMCandcomputetheweightedmodelcount w(ω).Thiscount
is found by simply evaluating the arithmetic circuit: we instantiate all indicator
variables to the value 1 and then bottom-up evaluate all nodes, until we arrive at
therootnode.Thevaluefoundattherootisthedesiredweightedmodelcountand
also equals the probability of the evidence P(E=e).
Example 14 (Evaluating the arithmetic circuit for the Alarm example)
We use the arithmetic circuit for the Alarm program given in Example 13. Re-
call that this program and circuit were obtained using calls(john) = true as
the evidence, so we can use this circuit to calculate the probability of evidence
P(calls(john) = true). This is done by instantiating all indicator variables λ to
1, and then evaluting the circuit. Figure 1b illustrates this: the obtained values in
each node are given between brackets. The value for the root is 0.196. This is the
probability of evidence.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 21
calls(john) hears_alarm(john) OR alarm
-burglary burglary OR
earthquake -earthquake
(a) d-DNNF
λ[calls(john)] 1.0 λ[hears_alarm(john)] 0.7 * (0.18) * (0.1) λ[alarm] 1.0
λ[-burglary] 0.9 * (0.2) * (0.8) λ[burglary] 0.1
λ[earthquake] 0.2 λ[-earthquake] 0.8
(b) arithmeticcircuit
Fig. 1. The d-DNNF for the Alarm example and the corresponding arithmetic
circuit.
The above does not explain why we really need the indicator variables. The
indicator variables allow us to add further evidence, on top of E = e, which is
useful for MARG inference as we will see later. For instance, we can compute
P(E = e ∧ X = true), for some additional atom X in the arithmetic circuit,
by setting the indicator variable λ[X] to 1 and λ[−X] to 0 when evaluating the
circuit.13
13 In a purely logical context, setting indicator variables to 0 corresponds to conditioning the
d-DNNFcircuit.
22 D. Fierens et al.
Example 15 (Evaluating the arithmetic circuit in case of additional evidence)
AssumewewanttocomputeP(calls(john)=true∧earthquake=true),usingthe
samearithmeticcircuitseenbefore,namelythecircuitforcalls(john)=true.Since
weadditionallyhaveearthquake=true,wesetλ[earthquake]to1,λ[−earthquake]
to 0, and all other indicator variables to 1 as before. The evaluation is illustrated
in Figure 2, yielding the result 0.14. Hence P(calls(john) = true∧earthquake =
true)= 0.14.
Inthesameway,theprobabilityofanysetofevidencecanbecomputed,provided
thatthissetextendstheinitialsetE=e(andthattheadditionalatomsalsoappear
in the compiled circuit). This also means that Step 3 of our conversion algorithm
(Section 5.3), where we add the evidence ϕ to the weighted Boolean formula, is
not strictly needed: we can achieve the same result by using only the formula ϕ
(capturingtherulesoftheprogram)andsettingtheindicatorvariablesinthecircuit
according to the evidence E = e. However, asserting the evidence ϕ early makes
the compilation phase more efficient (it allows for more unit propagation, etc).
λ[calls(john)] = 1 1.0 λ[hears_alarm(john)] = 1 0.7 * (0.18) * (0.02) λ[alarm] = 1 1.0
λ[-burglary] = 1 0.9 * (0.2) * (0.0) λ[burglary] = 1 0.1
λ[earthquake] = 1 0.2 λ[-earthquake] = 0 0.8
Fig. 2. Evaluating an arithmetic circuit with additional evidence (the nodes which
get a different value than in Figure 1(b) are highlighted in boldface).
InSRL,theworkofChaviraetal.(2006)isclosesttotheapproachinthissection.
They perform inference in relational Bayesian networks by encoding them into a
weighted Boolean formula and compiling this formula into an arithmetic circuit.
The main difference is that relational Bayesian networks are not a programming
languageandassumeacyclicity.Thatassumptiongreatlysimplifiesthestepofcon-
verting to a weighted Boolean formula (cf. Section 5).
In summary, to compute the probability of evidence we 1) compile the formula
to a d-DNNF, 2) convert the d-DNNF into an arithmetic circuit, 3) evaluate the
arithmetic circuit.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 23
6.1.2 Compilation to an Arithmetic Circuit via BDD
Intheprobabilisticlogicprogramming(PLP)community,thestate-of-the-art(DeRaedt
etal.2007)istocompiletheprogramintoanotherform,namelyareducedordered
Binary Decision Diagram (BDD) (Bryant 1986). This approach is a special case
of our above WMC approach (although it is usually not formulated like that; in
fact, in Fierens et al. (2011) we were the first to point out the connection of the
PLP-BDD approach to WMC).
A BDD is a special kind of d-DNNF, namely one that satisfies the additional
properties of ordering and decision, see Darwiche (2004). In our approach, we can
alternatively replace the d-DNNF compiler by a BDD compiler. Computing the
probability of evidence can then be done by either operating directly on the BDD,
or by converting the BDD to an arithmetic circuit and evaluating the circuit (the
first approach is merely a reformulation of the second). So while both compilation
to BDD and d-DNNF are possible, there is theoretical and empirical evidence in
the model counting literature that d-DNNFs outperform BDDs (Darwiche 2004).
Our experimental results confirm the superiority of d-DNNFs (Section 9).
We have now seen two ways of computing the probability of evidence: via d-
DNNFsorBDDs.Wewillnowseehowthisapproachforcomputingtheprobability
of evidence can be used as a building block for the MARG inference task (as is
standard in the probabilistic literature).
6.2 Task 2: Computing marginal probabilities (MARG)
In MARG, we are given a set of query atoms Q and for each Q ∈ Q we need to
computeP(Q |E=e).BydefinitionP(Q |E=e)= P(Q∧E=e).Hence,ifwehave
N atoms in the query set Q, solving MARG reduces to computing the probability
of the evidence, and computing N probabilities of the form P(Q∧E=e), i.e., the
probability of the conjunction of the evidence with a single atom. In the previous
section, we have already seen how we can compute such probabilities from the
compiled arithmetic circuit, by appropriately instantiating the indicator variables
λ and evaluating the circuit. The simplest approach is to apply this once for each
query atom Q ∈ Q separately. However, we can solve this even more efficiently.
Concretely, all required probabilities can be found in parallel. To be precise, all
probabilities of the form P(X ∧E = e), with X being any atom in the circuit,
can be computed simultaneously by traversing the circuit twice (bottom-up and
top-down). The required traversal algorithm can be found in the literature, see
Algorithm34(simpleversion)and35(optimizedversion)inDarwiche(2009).From
this,weobtainallprobabilitiesoftheformP(X∧E=e).Wethenretainthosethat
involve an atom from the query set (X ∈Q) and compute the required conditional
probabilities P(Q | E = e) as P(Q∧E=e). As in the previous section, this entire
approach can be performed using an arithmetic circuit derived from a compiled
d-DNNF or from a BDD.
The knowledge compilation approach is typically used for exact inference. When
dealing with large domains, we often need to resort to computing approximate
24 D. Fierens et al.
marginals. Approximate inference is often achieved by means of sampling tech-
niques,suchasMarkovChainMonteCarlo(MCMC).StandardMCMCapproaches
like Gibbs sampling cannot deal with weighted formulas because the formula itself
isdeterministic.Instead,weusetheMC-SAT algorithmthatwasdevelopedspecif-
icallytodealwithdeterminism(PoonandDomingos2006).MC-SATisanMCMC
algorithm that in every step of the Markov chain calls a SAT solver to construct a
new sample. MC-SAT takes an MLN as input. Theorem 3 ensures that if we apply
MC-SATon the appropriate MLN, we indeed obtain samples from the distribution
P(Q|E=e).
Tosummarize,wecurrentlyhavethreemethodsfortheMARGtask:exactinfer-
ence by compilation to 1) d-DNNFs or 2) BDDs, or 3) approximate inference with
MC-SAT.
6.3 Task 3: Finding the most likely explanation (MPE)
MPE is the task of finding the most likely interpretation (joint state) of all un-
observed atoms given the evidence, i.e. finding argmax P(U = u | E = e), with
U all unobserved atoms (i.e, all atoms in the ground program that are not in E).
MPE inference on weighted formulas has been studied before. We consider two
approaches.
The first approach is to perform MPE by means of knowledge compilation. The
compilation step (to compile an arithmetic circuit via a d-DNNF or BDD) is the
same as before, only the traversal step differs.14 Again, the traversal algorithm can
be found in the literature, see Algorithm 36 in Darwiche (2009). This yields the
exact MPE solution.15
The second approach is to perform MPE using techniques from the SAT solving
community. Concretely, it is known that MPE reduces to partially weighted MAX-
SAT(Park2002).Apopularapproximateapproachforsolvingthistaskisstochastic
local search (Park 2002). An example algorithm is MaxWalkSAT, which is also the
standard MPE algorithm for MLNs (Domingos et al. 2008).
Since our current ProbLog implementation focusses on MARG inference rather
thanMPE,wedonotdiscusstheseapproachesindetailandwillnotconsiderthem
further in this paper.
14 FortheMPEtask,itissufficienttocompileintoaDNNFcircuit,whichisnotnecessarilydeter-
ministic.DNNFcircuitsarepotentiallymoresuccinctthand-DNNFcircuits,butunfortunately
thereexistnocompilersspecificallyforDNNF.
15 This approach yields the truth value of all ground atoms that occur in the relevant ground
program(RGP)forthegivenevidence.AllprobabilisticatomsthatdonotoccurintheRGPare
irrelevantw.r.t.theevidence(i.e.,theyareprobabilisticallyindependentoftheevidence).Hence,
for each of these atoms, we can simply independently chose the truth value with maximum
probabilityaccordingtotheassociatedprobabilisticfact.Thetruthvalueofallderivedatoms
thatdonotoccurintheRGPisthenfoundbycomputingthewell-foundedmodeloftheMPE
totalchoice.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 25
7 Learning Probabilistic Logic Programs from Partial Interpretations
We now present an algorithm for learning the parameters (the probabilities of the
probabilistic facts) of a ProbLog program from data. We use the learning from
interpretations (LFI) setting.
7.1 The Learning Setting
Learning from (possibly partial) interpretations is a common setting in statistical
relational learning, which has so far not yet been studied in its full generality for
probabilistic programming languages (but see also Gutmann et al. (2011)).
In the terminology used for inference in Section 4, partial interpretations corre-
spond to evidence, and hence, in this section we shall often use the term evidence
instead of partial interpretation. Let At be the Herbrand base, i.e., the set of all
ground (probabilistic and derived) atoms in a given ProbLog program. In the fully
observablecase,welearnfromasetofcompleteinterpretations,thatis,theobserved
truth-valueseofalltheatomsintheHerbrandbaseAtaregivenandtheevidence
variables E coincide with At. On the other hand, in the partially observable case,
we learn from a set of partial interpretations, that is, we only observe the truth-
values e of a set E ⊂ At of observed atoms. We now develop an algorithm, called
LFI-ProbLog, that learns from (possibly partial) interpretations of a ProbLog pro-
gram.Inagenerativesetting,oneistypicallyinterestedinthemaximumlikelihood
parameters given the training data. This can be formalized as follows.
Given:
• a ProbLog program T containing a set of rules R and a set of probabilistic
facts F ={p ::f } with unknown parameters p=(cid:104)p ,...,p (cid:105)
• a set of (possibly partial) interpretations D = {E = e ,...,E = e }
(the training examples)
Find: the maximum likelihood probabilities p=(cid:104)p ,...,p (cid:105), that is,
(cid:98) (cid:98)1 (cid:99)N
p=argmaxP (D)=argmax P (E =e )
where P (E = e ) is the probability of evidence E = e in the ProbLog
Tp m m m m
program T with parameters p.
Example16illustratestheLFIsettingusingtheAlarmprogramfromExample1.
Example 16 (Learning From Interpretations)
P1::burglary. person(mary). alarm:- burglary.
P2::earthquake. person(john). alarm:- earthquake.
P3::hears_alarm(X):- person(X). calls(X) :- alarm, hears_alarm(X).
A ProbLog program is given in which the probabilities P1, P2 and P3 are un-
known and should be learned from partial interpretations, which contain the truth
value for some of the atoms: {alarm = true},{earthquake = true,calls(mary) =
true},{calls(john)=true}.ThegoalistofindtheprobabilitiesP1,P2andP3such
that the combined probability of the partial interpretations is maximal.
26 D. Fierens et al.
One has to consider two cases when computing the maximum likelihood param-
eters p.Inthe fully observablecase wherethetruthvaluesforeachof theatomsin
the Herbrand base is known, one can obtain p by counting. In the more complex
case of partial interpretations, one has to use an approach such as Expectation
Maximization to deal with the partial observability.
7.2 Full Observability
Inthefully-observablecase,themaximumlikelihoodestimatep foraprobabilistic
fact p :: f can be calculated directly from the interpretations. When p :: f
is intensional, it represents multiple ground instances, that is, probabilistic facts:
p ::f ,...,p ::f where Km is the number of ground instances represented
n n,1 n n,K n m n
by the fact p :: f in interpretation E = e . When p :: f is ground and
n n m m n n
extensional, Km is equal to 1 and the fact represents itself only. The maximal
likelihood estimates can be calculated using the following formula.
p = 1 (cid:88) M (cid:88) K n m δm where δm = (cid:26) 1 if f n,k =true ∈E m =e m (1)
(cid:99)n Z n,k n,k 0 if f =false ∈E =e
The sum is normalized by Z = (cid:80)M Km, the total number of probabilistic
facts represented by f in all training examples. When Z is 0 in the data, p is
n n (cid:99)n
not calculated (there is no data to estimate it from).
7.3 Partial Observability
In many applications the training examples are only partially observed. In the
alarm example, we may receive a phone call but we may not know whether an
earthquake has occurred. In the partially-observable case – similar to Bayesian
networks–itisimpossibletocomputethemaximumlikelihoodestimatesinclosed-
form.Instead,weusetheExpectationMaximization(EM),seeAlgorithm1.Inthis
algorithm, the parameters p0 are initialized randomly. During each iteration i, the
ProbLog program T with parameters pi is used to estimate the probability of
the unobserved atoms being true in each interpretation, P (f |E = e ) (the
T pi n,k m m
expectation step). These expectations are then used as to update the parameters
of the program using the following equation (the maximization step).
1 (cid:88) M (cid:88) K n m
T pi n,k m m
Algorithm1usestheinferencemechanismdescribedinSection6.2forcomputing
the marginals in the expectation step. We can make two optimizations. Firstly, for
thefactsf thatarenotcontainedinthedependencysetofapartialinterpretation
E = e , the probability P (f |E = e ) is equal to pi. These facts slow
m m T pi n,k m m n
down the updating process and should therefore not be included in the sum. This
canberealizedbycompilingthed-DNNFforthequeryP (E =e )andtouse
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 27
the resulting d-DNNFs to compute the marginal probabilities P (f |E =e )
T pi n,k m m
onlyforthosefactsf includedinthed-DNNF.Forexample,whenwecompilethe
d-DNNF for the third partial interpretation of Example 16, we obtain the ground
programfrom Example5 andthe d-DNNFfrom Figure1a. Thisd-DNNF does not
contain calls(mary) so this atom will not be used to update the probabilities for
thethirdpartialinterpretation.Whennogroundingsforalearnablefactarepresent
in any of the d-DNNFs, a zero probability is learned as no information is given.
Secondly, one can observe that changing the parameters of a ProbLog program
does not change the structure of the compiled d-DNNFs. This means that the d-
DNNFs that have been compiled in the first iteration can be reused in all further
iterations.Thealgorithmkeepsonupdatingtheparametersuntiltheloglikelihood
of the interpretations is maximal. Each iteration of the algorithm is guaranteed to
improve the likelihood of the data.
Algorithm 1 The main loop of LFI-ProbLog. The ProbLog program is compiled
into a d-DNNF for each partial interpretation E = e . After the compilation
step, the algorithm follows an EM update scheme, first using the current model to
completethedataandthenestimatingthenewmodelparametersfromtheresulting
counts until convergence.
1: function LFI-ProbLog(T = {p 1 :: f 1 ,...,p N :: f N } ∪ R,D = {E 1 =
e ,...,E =e })
2: for 1≤n ≤N do
3: p0 ←rand(0,1) (cid:46) The fact probabilities are initialized with a random
probability
4: for 1≤m ≤M do (cid:46) Loop over training examples
5: d-DNNF m ← compile(P T0 (E m =e m ))
7: while not converged do (cid:46) EM algorithm
8: i ←i +1
9: for 1≤m ≤M do
10: for 1≤n ≤N do
11: for 1≤k ≤Km do
12: compute P Ti−1 (f n,k |E m ) using d-DNNF m (cid:46) E Step
13: for 1≤n ≤N do (cid:46) Loop over probabilistic facts
14: p n i ← Z 1 n (cid:80)M m=1 (cid:80)K k= n m 1 P Ti−1 (f n,k |E m ) (cid:46) M Step (cf. Eq. 2)
15: return {p n i ::f n | f n ∈F}∪R
ThelearningalgorithmusesablackboxfortheMARGinferencetask(line12).In
principle, any inference algorithm will work, including approximate ones. However,
by choosing knowledge compilation for inference, we need to compile a circuit only
once for each training example. This is the hard task. Once we have a circuit,
computing expectations becomes easy, and we can reuse the circuit many times,
for all i, k and n in lines 6, 10 and 11 of Algorithm 1. Furthermore, all marginal
28 D. Fierens et al.
probabilities P (f |E ) for the same evidence set E and parameterization p
Tp n,k m m
can be computed at once, in only two passes over the d-DNNF circuit.
7.4 Discussion
The above learning algorithm is based on the LFI algorithm that we developed
in earlier work (Gutmann et al. 2011), see the discussion in Section 1. Our new
algorithm has some advantages over the earlier version. First, the new algorithm
can deal with cyclic programs (the old algorithm uses Clark’s completion, which
applies only to acyclic programs, cf. Section 5.2). Second, the new algorithm scales
better as it employs a more efficient approach for inference in the expectation
step, namely compilation to d-DNNFs instead of to BDDs (see the experiments
in Section 9.3.3). Furthermore, the new description of the algorithm more clearly
separates the learning from the inference steps.
The complexity of parameter learning (and of MARG and MPE inference) is
worst-case exponential in the treewidth (Robertson and Seymour 1986) of the
weighted Boolean formula when using knowledge compilation to d-DNNF (Dar-
wiche 2001). This theoretical complexity bound is in line with the complexity of
classicalalgorithmsforinferenceandlearninginprobabilisticgraphicalmodels.For
example, hidden Markov models have a constant treewidth in terms of the number
of time steps considered. Learning the parameters of these models is linear in the
number of time steps, both when using LFI-ProbLog with d-DNNF compilation
and, for example, expectation maximization with the classical junction tree algo-
rithm. These bounds assume that both algorithms succeed at finding the optimal
tree decomposition of the model, which itself is a hard task in theory. In practice,
however, there exist heuristics that can find good tree decompositions of many
different kinds of models.
8 Implementation of the System ProbLog2
The first ProbLog system (Kimmig et al. 2010) focused on the inference task of
computingthesuccessprobabilityofasingleatom(Section4)andonlearningfrom
entailment (Gutmann et al. 2008b). ProbLog2, the new ProbLog system described
in this paper, focusses on different tasks, namely computing marginal probabilities
and the probability of evidence, as well as learning from interpretations. This new
settingiscloserinspirittotheworkongraphicalmodelsandStatisticalRelational
Learning (like Markov Logic). As a consequence of this new emphasis, the design
of ProbLog2 is quite different from that of the first ProbLog. The implementation
of the first ProbLog was tightly integrated in YAP Prolog (Kimmig et al. 2010). In
contrast, ProbLog2 consists of a number of relatively loosely-coupled components,
and involves almost no Prolog code. This new design is closer in spirit to that of
some Answer Set Programming systems than to Prolog.
We now briefly discuss the different components of the implementation. Most of
these components are existing state-of-the-art programs, rather than being tailor-
made for ProbLog.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 29
• The grounding component computes the relevant ground program from the
given ProbLog program (and query and evidence). This is the only compo-
nent that is written in (YAP) Prolog. It is essentially a meta-interpreter that
collects proofs to construct the dependency set (Section 5.1).
• The conversion component converts the rules in the relevant groundprogram
to a Boolean (CNF) formula. The user can choose between the proof-based
and the rule-based conversion (Section 5.2). For the proof-based conversion
(Mantadelis and Janssens 2010), we use our own implementation. For the
rule-based conversion, we use the code of Janhunen (2004), as used in the
Answer Set Programming community.
• The exact inference component is based on knowledge compilation and con-
sistsoftwoparts:acompilerandanevaluationalgorithm.Forcompilationto
d-DNNF,theusercanchoosebetweenthe‘c2d’compilerbyDarwiche(2004)
orthemorerecent‘DSHARP’compiler(Muiseetal.2012).16 Forcompilation
For constructing and evaluating the corresponding arithmetic circuit we use
our own code.
• The approximate inference component converts the weighted formula to a
Markov Logic Network and then uses the MC-SAT (Poon and Domingos
2006) code from the Alchemy package to perform the sampling.
• The learning component, LFI-ProbLog, builds heavily on the inference com-
ponent,asexplainedbefore(Section7).ItisessentiallyanExpectationMax-
imization loop around the inference component.
As mentioned, the above components are relatively loosely-coupled. They are bun-
dled into a pipeline by means of Python code. A major advantage of our design is
that it allows to build an entire ProbLog system by (mostly) using existing state-
of-the-art programs for the different components, such as Janhunen’s conversion
program and the various d-DNNF and BDD compilers. Moreover, research on con-
version of logic programs, knowledge compilation, weighted model counting, etc,
continues, with new tools being released. Whenever a new tool becomes available
for a particular component, we can benefit from this, and integrate it into our sys-
tem.Suchadesignofcoursealsohasdrawbacks.Thetwomaindrawbacksarethat
there is a certain latency between the components because of I/O issues, and that
the system is complex to install and configure because of the different components
written in different programming languages.
16 Allexperimentsinthispaperusec2d.
17 InadditiontotheMARG,MPEandlearningtasks,theProbLog2systemsupportsMAPand
decision-theoreticinference(VandenBroecketal.2010),whicharenotdiscussedhere.
30 D. Fierens et al.
9 Experiments
The goal of our experiments is to establish the feasibility of our approach, and to
analyzetheinfluenceofthedifferentparameters.WefocusonMARGinferenceand
learning. Concretely, we aim to answer six questions.
Q1 Is working with the relevant rather than the complete ground program more
efficient?
Q2 Which of the two considered algorithms for converting the ground program
to a Boolean formula (rule-based or proof-based conversion) performs best?
Q3 Which of the two considered approaches for knowledge compilation (using
d-DNNFs or BDDs) performs best?
Q4 When computing success probabilities (the ‘classical’ ProbLog setting), does
ProbLog2 outperform the previous ProbLog implementation?
Q5 When learning from data generated from a known ProbLog program, can we
recover the parameters of the original program given a reasonable amount of
data?
Q6 Whenlearningfromreal-worlddata,canweobtainresultscomparabletothe
ones obtained with a state-of-the-art system (namely Alchemy)?
Note that in Q6 we compare our system to Alchemy, which is the standard system
9.1 Programs and Datasets
We perform experiments on three types of applications.
Social networks. Weusethe standardSmokers application(Domingosetal.2008).
The ProbLog program contains the following intensional probabilistic facts and
rules.
0.2::stress(P) :- person(P).
0.3::influences(P1,P2) :- friend(P1,P2).
0.1::cancer_spont(P) :- person(P).
0.3::cancer_smoke(P) :- person(P).
smokes(X) :- stress(X).
smokes(X) :- smokes(Y), influences(Y,X).
cancer(P) :- cancer_spont(P).
cancer(P) :- smokes(P), cancer_smoke(P).
Inaddition,theprogramcontainsground(non-probabilistic)factsforthepredicates
person/1 and friend/2. The number of such facts is varied; see the next section.
Collective classification. We use the relational WebKB dataset.18 In WebKB, uni-
versity web pages need to be tagged with classes (like course page, student page,
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 31
etc). This is modeled with a predicate has class(Page,Class). The rules in the
ProbLog program are the following; they specify how the class C of a page P de-
pends on the textual content of P (the words W on the page), and on the classes
of pages that link to P.
has_class(P,C) :- word_class(P,W,C).
has_class(P,C) :- has_class(P2,C2), link_class(P,P2,C,C2).
For the predicate word class/3, there is a different intensional probabilistic fact
for every (word,class)-pair in the dataset. Each such intensional probabilistic fact
looks as follows.
prob::word_class(P,word1,class1) :- has_word(P,word1).
Thereasonwhyweneedadifferentintensionalprobabilisticfactforeach(word,class)-
pair is that for every such pair the involved probability (prob) can be different.
Similarly, for the predicate link class/4, there is one intensional probabilistic fact
for every pair of classes in the dataset.
prob::link_class(P,P2,class1,class2) :- links_to(P,P2).
The predicates that occur in the ‘bodies’ of these intensional probabilistic facts
(has word/2 and links to/2) are defined in the dataset. The probabilities of the
probabilistic facts were learned from data using LFI-ProbLog.
Probabilistic grids. For comparing ProbLog2 to the previous ProbLog implemen-
tation, we use the classical ProbLog application of probabilistic graphs (De Raedt
et al. 2007). The program represents a graph in which edges are labelled with a
probability.Hereweusea16×16gridasthegraph.Thisconsistsofnodesn ,with
x,y ∈{1,...,16}, lined out on a square grid with horizontal, vertical and diagonal
directed edges between adjacent nodes. Concretely, the edges are the following.
n →n ∀x ∈{1,...,15},y ∈{1,...,16} (horizontal)
n →n ∀x ∈{1,...,16},y ∈{1,...,15} (vertical)
n →n ∀x ∈{1,...,15},y ∈{1,...,15} (diagonal)
x,y x+1,y+1
Every edge has probability 0.5. Such a probabilistic graph is modelled in ProbLog
by a set of probabilistic edge/ facts. For instance, the horizontal edge from n
to n is represented as the probabilistic fact 0.5::edge(n_1_1,n_2_1). The goal
is to find the probability of there being a path between certain nodes in the graph,
where path is defined in the usual Prolog way.
path(X,Y) :- edge(X,Y).
path(X,Y) :- edge(X,Z), path(Z,Y).
9.2 Experimental Setup
Wenowdescribehowweusethesethreeprograms(Smokers,WebKBandgrids)in
our experimental setup.
32 D. Fierens et al.
9.2.1 Inference Setup
MARG inference. We test MARG influence on Smokers and WebKB. The main
parameter influencing the complexity of our inference experiments is the ‘domain
size’, i.e., the number of constants considered. For Smokers, the domain size is the
number of people; for WebKB, it is the number of webpages (we take subsets of all
pages that occur in the dataset). In our experiments, we vary the domain size and
see how different measures, such as runtime, evolve. For each considered domain
size we generate multiple different instances of the MARG task (10 for Smokers,
8 for WebKB), as described below. We report median results over these different
instances (we use median because it is more stable than arithmetic average).
Given a particular domain size, one instance of the MARG task is generated as
follows. (1) For both Smokers and WebKB, the program involves ground (non-
probabilistic) facts for certain ‘background’ predicates. We first generate interpre-
tations for these predicates. For Smokers, the background predicate is friend/2,
which determines the actual social network. We use a generator of synthetic power
law random graphs (since such graphs are known to resemble real social networks)
and convert the obtained graph to friend/2 facts. For WebKB, the background
predicates are has word/2 and links to/2, for which interpretations can be found
in the dataset. (2) Given the domains and background facts, we select the set of
query and evidence atoms, Q and E. For Smokers, we use 50% of all smokes/1
and cancer/1 atoms as evidence and the other smokes/1 and cancer/1 atoms as
queries. All atoms for the other predicates are neither query nor evidence. For We-
bKB, we have a similar setup: we use 50% of all has class/2 atoms as evidence
andtheotherhas class/2atomsasquery.(3)Thepreviousstepgeneratesthesets
Q and E, but not yet the values for the evidence atoms, i.e. the vector of truth
values e. To do so, we generate a ‘sample’ of the ProbLog program. This is done
by independently sampling each ground probabilistic fact, and then computing the
well-founded model of the resulting logic program (as dictated by the ProbLog se-
mantics). The result is a complete interpretation of all predicates in the program.
From this interpretation, we extract the truth values of all atoms in the evidence
set E, and we use these truth values to construct the vector e. (We similarly store
the values of all atoms in the query set Q because we need them later as ‘query
ground truth’; see Section 9.3.2).
Special case: success probability. The above is for MARG inference in the presence
of multiple queries and evidence. In addition we also perform an experiment in the
classical success probability setting, where the goal is to compute the probability
of a single query, without evidence (Kimmig et al. 2010). For this experiment, we
use the probabilistic grid program. Per experiment, we ask a single query of the
form path(n_i_i,n_16_16) where i is being varied from 1 to 15. In other words:
we are asking for the probabibity of there being a path from a node n on the
diagonal of the grid to n , the lower right corner of the grid. The smaller the
value of i, the longer these paths become (and the more possible paths there are),
and hence the harder the computation. We measure the effect of the value of i
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 33
on the runtime of the query in both ProbLog2 and the first ProbLog implemen-
the experiment 10 times and average the measured runtimes.
9.2.2 Learning Setup
In the learning experiments, we estimate the probabilities of all probabilistic facts
from data.
For Smokers, we again vary the domain size. For each size we generate 170 ex-
periments. We sample 40, 50, ..., 200 interpretations from which we retain 10,
40, 70 and 100 percent of the atoms together with their truth value in the partial
interpretations. From these interpretations we learn the probabilities for all in-
tensional probabilistic facts in the program (predicates stress/1, influences/2,
cancer_spont/1 and cancer_smoke/1).
For WebKB, the dataset consists of four disjoint sets of webpages, one per uni-
versity. Per university, we use only the 20 words that contain the most information
(as measured by information gain with respect to the class labels). We perform
four-fold cross validation using both the Alchemy system (with a standard MLN
for this application) and LFI-ProbLog.
The ProbLog program that we use for learning is slightly different from the one
we use for inference. In addition to the rules given earlier (Section 9.1), we include
in the program two more causes for a page to have a certain class.
has_class(P,C) :- fixed_prior(P,C).
has_class(P,C) :- learnable_prior(P,C).
Thepredicatelearnable prior/2accountsforthepagesthataretaggedwithaclass
that can not be explained through words and links. There is one such probabilistic
fact for each class.
prob::learnable_prior(P,class1) :- page(P).
The predicate fixed prior/2 makes sure that every page can be tagged with every
class.
0.001::fixed_prior(P,C) :- page(P), class(C).
Finally,forcomputationalreasons,wemodifytherulethatspreadsinfluenceacross
links (link class/4) such that pages can only influence their direct neighbors.
Welearnallprob-parametersintheprogram(nottheprobabilityoffixed prior/2).
Thelearnedprogramistoobigtoperformexactinference.Hence,whenevaluating
the learned program (which requires running inference), we use an approximation,
namely we remove all probabilistic facts with a learned probability below 0.05.
9.3 Experimental Results
We now discuss our results in terms of the six questions raised earlier.
34 D. Fierens et al.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
noisrevnoc
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
number of people
(a) runtimeofconversiontoaweightedBooleanformula
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
number of people
(b)sizeoftheBooleanformula(numberofclausesintheCNF)
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
d-DNNF / proof-based
BDD / proof-based
d-DNNF / rule-based
BDD / rule-based
number of people
(c) runtimeofexactinference(compilation+traversal)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
doohilekilgol
proof-based
rule-based
number of people
(d) normalized negative log-likelihood of MC-SAT (lower is
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
proof-based
rule-based
number of people
(e) numberofsamplesdrawnbyMC-SAT
Fig. 3. Results for Smokers as a function of domain size. (When the curve for
an algorithm ends at a particular domain size, this means that the algorithm is
intractable beyond that size.)
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 35
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
noisrevnoc
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
number of pages
(a) runtimeofconversiontoaweightedBooleanformula
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
proof-based (naive)
proof-based (RGP)
rule-based (naive)
rule-based (RGP)
number of pages
(b)sizeoftheBooleanformula(numberofclausesintheCNF)
0 5 10 15 20 25
d-DNNF / proof-based
BDD / proof-based
d-DNNF / rule-based
number of pages
(c) runtimeofexactinference(compilation+traversal)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
doohilekilgol
proof-based
rule-based
number of pages
(d) normalized negative log-likelihood of MC-SAT (lower is
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
proof-based
rule-based
number of pages
(e) numberofsamplesdrawnbyMC-SAT
Fig. 4. Results for WebKB as a function of domain size. (When the curve for
an algorithm ends at a particular domain size, this means that the algorithm is
intractable beyond that size.)
36 D. Fierens et al.
9.3.1 Q1 - Influence of the Grounding Algorithm
Question Q1 is: is working with the relevant rather than the complete ground
program more efficient? To answer this question, we measured the time needed for
grounding, the size of the resulting ground program, and the size of the Boolean
formula derived from this program.
The grounding step. The idea behind the relevant ground program (RGP) is to
reduce the grounding by pruning clauses that are irrelevant or inactive w.r.t. the
queriesandevidence.Oursetupissuchthatallclausesarerelevant.Hence,theonly
reduction comes from pruning inactive clauses (that have a false evidence literal in
the body). The effect of this pruning is small: on average the size of the ground
program is reduced by 17% (results not shown).
ImplicationsontheconversiontoaBooleanformula.Theproof-basedconversion
becomes intractable (i.e., takes prohibitively long) for large domain sizes, but the
size where this happens is significantly larger when working on the RGP instead of
onthecompletegrounding(seeFig.3a/4a).AlsothesizeoftheBooleanformulais
reducedsignificantlybyusingtheRGP(uptoa90%reductioninnumberofclauses
intheCNF,Fig.3b/4b).Thereasonwhya17%reductionoftheprogramcanyield
a 90% reduction of the corresponding formula is that loops in the program cause
a ‘blow-up’ of the formula. Removing only a few rules in the ground program can
alreadybreakloopsandmaketheformulasignificantlysmaller.Notethattheproof-
based conversion suffers from this blow-up more than the rule-based conversion
does.
Computingthegroundingisalwaysveryfast,bothfortheRGPandthecomplete
grounding (milliseconds on Smokers; around 1s for WebKB). Hence, as an answer
toquestionQ1,weconcludethatusingtheRGPinsteadofthecompletegrounding
is beneficial and comes at almost no computational cost. Hence, from now on we
always use the RGP.
9.3.2 Q2 - Influence of the Conversion Algorithm
Question Q2 is: which of the two considered algorithms for converting the ground
programtoaBooleanformulaperformsbest?Recallthatwehaveseenarule-based
andaproof-basedconversion(Section5.2).Toanswerthisquestion,wemeasurethe
time of the conversion process, the size of the resulting formula, and how efficient
this formula is for inference.
Theconversionstep.Theproof-basedalgorithm,byitsnature,doesmoreeffortto
converttheprogramintoacompactformula.Thishasimplicationonthescalability
of the algorithm: on small domains the algorithm is fast, but on larger domains it
becomes intractable (Fig. 3a/4a). In contrast, the rule-based algorithm is able to
deal with all considered domain sizes and is always fast (runtime at most 0.5s).
A similar trend holds in terms of the size of the formula. For small domains, the
proof-based algorithm generates smaller formulas than the rule-based algorithm,
but for larger domains the opposite holds (Fig. 3b/4b).
Implications on inference. The ultimate question is how efficient the formulas
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 37
of the different conversions are for subsequent inference. We discuss this for exact
inference in the next section; here we focus on approximate inference. We use the
MC-SAT inference algorithm (Section 6.2) as a tool to evaluate how efficient the
differentformulasareforinferencebyrunningMC-SATonthetwotypesofformulas
and measuring the quality of the estimated marginals. Evaluating the quality of
approximatemarginalsisnon-trivialwhencomputingtruemarginalsisintractable.
We use the same solution as the original MC-SAT paper: we let MC-SAT run for a
fixed time (10 minutes) and measure the quality of the estimated marginals as the
likelihood of the ‘query ground truth’ according to these estimates; see Poon and
Domingos (2006).
On domain sizes where the proof-based algorithm is still tractable, inference
results are better with the proof-based formula than with the rule-based formula
(see Fig. 3d, and to a smaller extent Fig. 4d). This is because the proof-based
formulas are more compact and hence more samples can be drawn in the given
time (Fig. 3e/4e).
As an answer to question Q2, we conclude that for smaller domains the proof-
based algorithm is preferable because of the smaller formulas. On larger domains,
the rule-based algorithm should be used.
9.3.3 Q3 - Influence of the Inference Algorithm
For exact inference, our approach consists of knowledge compilation, with either
d-DNNFs or BDDs. Question Q3 is: which of the two considered approaches, d-
DNNFs or BDDs, performs best? To answer this question, we increase the domain
size up to the point where inference (doing the compilation to d-DNNF or BDD)
becomes intractable. It is useful to distinguish between compilation of rule-based
and proof-based formulas.19
Proof-basedformulas.OntheSmokersdomain,BDDsperformrelativelywell,but
they are nevertheless clearly outperformed by the d-DNNFs (Fig. 3c). On WebKB,
the difference is even larger: BDDs are only tractable on domains of size 3 or 4,
whiled-DNNFsreachuptosize18(Fig.4c).WhenBDDsbecomeintractable,this
is mostly due to memory problems.20
Rule-based formulas. As seen before, these formulas are less compact than the
proof-based formulas (at least for those domain sizes where exact inference is fea-
sible). The results clearly show that the d-DNNFs are much better at dealing with
these non-compact formulas than the BDDs are. Concretely, the d-DNNFs are still
19 In the PLP literature, BDDs have almost exclusively been used for proof-based formulas
(De Raedt et al. 2007; Gutmann et al. 2011). Compiling our proof-based formulas to BDDs
yieldsexactlythesameBDDsasusedbyGutmannetal.(2011).Inthespecialcaseofasingle
queryandnoevidence,thisalsoequalstheBDDsusedDeRaedtetal.(2007).
20 ItmightbesurprisingthatBDDs,whicharethestate-of-the-artinPLP,donotperformbetter.
However,oneshouldkeepinmindthatweareusingBDDsforexactinferencehere.BDDsare
alsousedforapproximateinference,onesimplycompilesanapproximateformulaintoaBDD
(DeRaedtetal.2007).Thesamecanbedonewithd-DNNFs,andweagainexpectimprovement
overBDDs.
38 D. Fierens et al.
2 4 6 8 10
Fig. 5. Runtime of ProbLog1 and ProbLog2 on the probabilistic grid query, as a
functionofthedistance16−i betweenthestartandendnode.(Whenthecurvefor
analgorithmendsataparticularpoint,thismeansthatthealgorithmisintractable
beyond that point.)
tractableuptoreasonablesizes.Incontrast,usingBDDsontheserule-basedformu-
las is nearly impossible: on Smokers the BDDs only solve size 3 and 4, on WebKB
they even do not solve any of the inference tasks on rule-based formulas.
As an answer to question Q3, we conclude that the use of d-DNNFs pushes the
limit of exact MARG inference significantly further as compared to BDDs, which
were the standard in PLP.
9.3.4 Q4 - Computing Success Probabilities with ProbLog2
Question Q4 is: when using the ‘classical’ ProbLog setting of computing suc-
cess probabilities, does ProbLog2 (our new ProbLog implementation) outperform
ProbLog1 (the previous ProbLog implementation)?
For ProbLog1 we use the default parameter settings and we table the path/
predicate. For ProbLog2 we use the proof-based conversion and we compile to d-
DNNF. These settings are motivated by our previous conclusions, which show that
the proof-based conversion works well on programs that are small enough to allow
for exact inference (as we do here) and that d-DNNFs are superior to BDDs.
As explained before (Section 9.2.1), we ask the query path(n_i_i,n_16_16),
wherewevaryi from15to1.Thesmalleri,thelargerthe‘distance’16−i between
the start and end node, and hence the harder the problem. Figure 5 shows the
measured runtimes for ProbLog1 and ProbLog2.
TheresultsshowthatProbLog2scalesbetterthanProbLog1.ProbLog1istractable
up to distance 6. From distance 7 onwards, it becomes intractable, i.e., it incurs a
time-out. We have put the time limit on 300 seconds and repeated every experi-
ment10times.Fordistance7,all10repetitionstimed-out,whilefordistance6the
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 39
average runtime was only 1.2 seconds.21 This shows that the runtime of ProbLog1
explodes beyond distance 6. In contrast, ProbLog2 is tractable up to distance 10.
For distance 10, all 10 repetitions finish in time, taking on average 110 seconds.
For distance 11, only 5 out of 10 repetitions still finish in time. From distance 12
onwards, all 10 repetitions time out.
9.3.5 Q5 - Ability to Learn the Original Probabilities
QuestionQ5is:whenlearningfromdatageneratedfromaknownprogram,canwe
recover the parameters of the original program given a reasonable amount of data?
We answer this question by generating data from the given Smokers program (Sec-
tion9.1),applyingourlearningalgorithmtothisdata,andmeasuringthedifference
between the learned probabilities and those in the original program. We measure
this difference in two ways. First, we use the mean absolute error (MAE) between
both sets of probabilities. Second, we use the Kullback-Leibler(K-L)-divergence,
a measure of similarity between a ‘true’ probability distribution (the one of the
original program) and an ‘approximating’ distribution (the one of the learned pro-
gram). ProbLog allows for an efficient calculation of the K-L-divergence because of
the independence of the probabilistic facts; see Appendix D.
Both the MAE (Figure 6) and the K-L-divergence (Figure 7) show that LFI-
ProbLog can learn the original probabilities: both MAE and K-L-divergence ap-
proach zero when more examples are given. The 100% knowledge line shows the
optimalwayofcalculatingtheprobabilities,giventheinterpretations.Theremain-
ing cases, 10%, 40% and 70% show that the quality of the approximations, as
expected, drops when more atoms become unobserved. However, the approxima-
tions remain of good quality. Hence we can conclude that LFI-ProbLog is capable
of recovering the original probabilities and is robust against missing values. When
we compare the figures for the different domain sizes, we see that the results are
independent of the number of persons in the domain.
9.3.6 Q6 - Learning of real-world data
Question Q6 is: when learning from real-world data, can we obtain results compa-
rable to the ones obtained with a state-of-the-art system? To answer this question,
we compare LFI-ProbLog with the Alchemy system for Markov Logic, running
four-fold cross validation on the WebKB dataset. Table 9.3.6 shows the negative
log-likelihood obtained with LFI-ProbLog and Alchemy on the test-sets of the four
folds. In the case of Alchemy, we report two results: ‘Alchemy’ stands for using the
system with its default parameters, ‘Alchemy*’ stands for Alchemy with a modi-
fied setting that puts a very strong prior on the weights (prior around zero, with
standard deviation 0.1 instead of the default 100).22
21 To verify that the measurement for distance 7 is not a glitch, we also tried distance 8 and
further,butProbLog1consistentlytimed-outforallofthese.
22 ThismodifiedsettingwasrecommendedtousbytheAlchemydevelopers(personalcommuni-
cationwithDanielLowd).
40 D. Fierens et al.
(a) 4persons
(b) 5persons
(c) 6persons
(d) 7persons
Fig. 6. Mean absolute error (MAE, lower is better) when learning from Smokers
data with 10%, 40%, 70% and 100% knowledge of the possible world.
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 41
(a) 4persons
(b) 5persons
(c) 6persons
(d) 7persons
Fig. 7. K-L-divergence (lower is better) when learning from Smokers data with
10%, 40%, 70% and 100% knowldege of the possible world.
42 D. Fierens et al.
Test Set LFI-Problog Alchemy* Alchemy
Cornell 1309.72 613.37 1603.31
Texas 1210.51 640.56 1075.75
Washington 646.39 622.55 1420.87
Wisconsin 1033.90 783.51 3479.04
Table 3. Negative Log-Likelihood (lower is better) on the WebKB learning experi-
ment.
LFI-ProbLog outperforms Alchemy with its default settings on three of the
four folds. However, Alchemy with the strong prior (Alchemy*) outperforms LFI-
ProbLog on all four folds. We conclude that LFI-ProbLog is competitive with
Alchemy, but parameter tuning can have a large impact. These results illustrate
the importance of setting a suitable prior when learning. This is a topic that we
havenotyetexploredindetailforLFI-ProbLogbutthatweplantostudyinfuture
research.
10 Conclusion
The contributions of this paper are threefold.
First,wehaveintroducedatwo-stepprocedureforMPEandMARGinferencein
general probabilistic logic programs. In a first step it generates a weighted Boolean
formula that captures all relevant information about a specific query, evidence and
probabilistic logic program. This step relies on well-known conversion techniques
from logic programming. The second step then invokes well-known solvers (for in-
stance for WMC and weighted MAX-SAT) on the generated weighted formula.
The resulting inference procedure is akin to that employed by Darwiche (2009)
and others (Park 2002; Sang et al. 2005) for probabilistic graphical models (where
many inference problems are also cast in terms of weighted Boolean formulas) but
adapted to the much more expressive class of probabilistic logic programs. Our
conversion-based approach is advantageous because it allows us to employ a wide
rangeofwell-knownandoptimizedsolversontheweightedformula,essentiallygiv-
ing us “inference algorithms for free”. Furthermore, the approach also improves
upon the state-of-the-art in probabilistic logic programming, where one has typi-
callyfocussedoninferencewithasinglequeryatomandnoevidence(cf.Section4),
often by using BDDs. By using d-DNNFs instead of BDDs, we obtained speed-ups
that push the limit of exact MARG inference significantly further.
Second, we have developed an Expectation-Maximization approach to learning
probabilisticlogicprogramsfrominterpretations.Thisapproachemploysournovel
inference procedures in the expectation step. The learning from interpretation set-
tingisakintothatusedinthegraphicalmodelandStatisticalRelationalLearning
(SRL) communities.
Third, the two approaches have been incorporated in a novel implementation
of the PLP language ProbLog, which unlike its previous implementation in YAP-
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 43
Prolog (Kimmig et al. 2010), is closer to that of answer set programming systems
than to Prolog systems,
Overall our approach provides new insights into the relationships between PLP,
graphicalmodelsandSRL.Asoneimmediateoutcome,wepointedoutaconversion
of probabilistic logic programs to ground Markov Logic, which allowed us to apply
MC-SAT to PLP inference. This contributes to further bridging the gap between
PLP and the field of SRL.
Appendix A Proofs
In this appendix we give the proofs of Theorem 1 to 3.
Proof of Theorem 1
ToproveTheorem1wefirstgivenecessarysomelemma’s.WeusepruneInactive(L,
E=e)todenotetheresultofremovingfromagroundprogramLallrulesthatare
inactive under the evidence E=e.
LetLbeagroundnormallogicprogramandletL(cid:48) =pruneInactive(L,E=e).For
each world/interpretation ω that is consistent with the evidence E=e it holds:
a) for each subset A of atoms: A is an unfounded set with respect to ω under
program L if and only if it is so under program L(cid:48), and
b) ω is the well-founded model of L if and only if it is the well-founded model of
L(cid:48).
Proof:
Parta:WeusethenotionofunfoundedsetseeDefinition3.1inVanGelderetal.
(1991). We prove both directions of the ‘if and only if’.
• If A is an unfounded set with respect to ω under program L, then this also
holds under program L(cid:48):
The definition of unfounded set imposes a certain condition on each rule in
theprogramwhoseheadisinthesetA,werefertothisastheunfoundedrule
condition. If we know that this condition holds for all such rules in L, then it
also holds for all such rules in L(cid:48), because the latter set of rules is a subset of
the former (L(cid:48) is the result of removing inactive rules from L).
• If A is an unfounded set with respect to ω under program L(cid:48), then this also
holds under program L:
The ‘if’ part of this ‘if-then’ implies that the unfounded rule condition holds
for all rules in L(cid:48), so to prove the ‘then’ part we only need to show that the
unfounded rule condition also holds for all rules in L\L(cid:48) (i.e., for all rules
in L that were removed because of being inactive under the evidence). Every
ruler ∈L\L(cid:48) containsatleastoneatominitsbodythatisfalseaccordingto
theevidence(thatiswhatmader inactive).Sincethislemmaappliesonlyto
worlds ω that are consistent with the evidence, we have for every such world
44 D. Fierens et al.
ω: every rule r ∈L\L(cid:48) contains in its body at least one atom false in ω. This
is a sufficient condition to make the rule r an unfounded rule, see condition
‘1.’ in Definition 3.1 in Van Gelder et al. (1991).
Partb: WecannowusePartatoprovethat,foreveryevidence-consistentworld
ω, ω is the well-founded model (WFM) of L if and only if it is the WFM of L(cid:48).
The WFM is the fixed point of the W operator (Van Gelder et al. 1991). For
a program L, this operator is defined as W (ω)=T (ω)∪¬U (ω), see Definition
3.3 in Van Gelder et al. (1991). We prove below that, for every evidence-consistent
L L(cid:48) L L(cid:48) L L(cid:48)
their fixed points are identical, hence Part b holds.
• For every evidence-consistent world ω: T (ω)=T (ω)
L L(cid:48)
LconsistsofallrulesinL(cid:48)plussomerulesthatareinactiveundertheevidence.
For each evidence-consistent ω, the bodies of the inactive rules in L are false
under ω and hence these rules cannot ‘fire’. Hence these rules play no role in
the execution of the T operator on ω. Hence T (ω)=T (ω).
P L L(cid:48)
• For every evidence-consistent world ω: U (ω)=U (ω):
L L(cid:48)
U (ω) is the greatest unfounded set with respect to (wrt) ω, which is defined
astheunionofallunfoundedsetswrtω,seeDefinition3.2inVanGelderetal.
(1991).PartasaysthatanysubsetAofatomsisanunfoundedsetwrtωunder
program L if and only if it is so under program L(cid:48). Hence U (ω)=U (ω).
L L(cid:48)
Let L be a ground ProbLog program and let L(cid:48) =pruneInactive(L,E=e). Then
MOD (L)=MOD (L(cid:48)).
Proof: MOD (L)isdefinedasthesetofallworldsω thatareconsistentwiththe
evidenceE=eandaremodelsoftheProbLogprogramL,i.e.,forwhichthereexists
atotalchoiceC andWFM(C∪R)=ω,withR therulesinLandWFM()thewell-
founded model. The previous lemma implies that, for every ω consistent with the
evidence,removinginactiverulesfromagivenlogicprogramdoesnotalterwhether
or not ω is the WFM of that program or not. In other words: ω ∈ MOD (L) if
and only if ω ∈MOD (L(cid:48)). Hence MOD (L)=MOD (L(cid:48)). (cid:3)
E=e E=e E=e
Let L be a ground ProbLog program and let L(cid:48) =pruneInactive(L,E=e). Then
L L(cid:48)
Proof: We prove the stronger condition ∀ω : P (ω | E = e) = P (ω | E = e) The
L L(cid:48)
conditional probability P (ω |E=e) of an interpretation ω according to program
L is:
• (case1) if ω ∈MOD (L) then
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 45
Since ω agrees with E = e, we have that the combined assignment ω,E = e
is simply equal to ω. Hence:
Wenowprovethatforeveryω,P (ω |E=e)=P (ω |E=e).Theproofconsists
L L(cid:48)
of two parts.
1. We need to prove that we are in case1 under L if and only if we are in
case1 under L(cid:48). In other words: for every ω: ω ∈ MOD (L) if and only if
ω ∈MOD (L(cid:48)). This follows from the previous lemma.
2. We need to prove that if we are in case1 (i.e. if ω ∈ MOD (L)), then the
conditionalprobabilitygivenbythefractioninEquationA1isthesameunder
L as under L(cid:48).
• ThenumeratoristhesameunderLandL(cid:48).Thiscanbeseenasfollows.
For any ω ∈ MOD (L), the probability P(ω) is by definition equal
to the probability of ω’s total choice. The ProbLog programs L and
L(cid:48) differ in their rules, but they have exactly the same probabilistic
facts and hence determine the same probability distribution over total
choices. Hence P(ω) is the same under L as under L(cid:48).
• The sum in the denominator is also the same under L and L(cid:48). This can
beseenasfollows.First,thesetMOD (L)overwhichthesumranges
is the same under L as under L(cid:48) because of the above lemma. Second,
each term in the sum is the same under L as under L’, i.e. for every
ω ∈MOD (L) the probability P(ω) is the same under L as under L(cid:48)
(because of the same reasoning as for the numerator).
This concludes the proof. (cid:3)
LetLbeaProbLogprogramandletL betherelevantgroundprogramforLwith
respect to Q and E=e. Then P (Q |E=e)=P (Q |E=e).
Proof: It follows from the grounding semantics of ProbLog that replacing the orig-
inal program L by its full grounding (w.r.t. the Herbrand base) L preserves the
distribution, i.e., P (Q|E=e)=P (Q|E=e). The relevant ground program
L differs from L only in that it does not contain inactive rules (with respect to
E=e)orirrelevantrules(withrespecttoQ∪E).Thelemmaabovestatesthatre-
movinginactiverulespreservesthedistributionP(Q|E=e).Removingirrelevant
rulesalsopreservesthisdistribution;thiscanbeseenasfollows.Theprobabilityof
anatombeingtruecanbedeterminedfromallproofsoftheatomandtheprobabili-
tiesoftheprobabilisticfactsappearingintheseproofs,seeDeRaedtetal.(2007).Ir-
relevantrulesare-bydefinition-rulesthatarenotusedinanyproofofanyatomin
Q∪E.HenceomittingsuchirrelevantrulesdoesnotalterthedistributionP(Q,E).
Hence, also the distribution P(Q | E = e) is preserved because P(Q | E = e) can
be defined in terms of P(Q,E), i.e., P(Q|E=e)= P(Q,E=e) = P(Q,E=e) .
46 D. Fierens et al.
Proof of Theorem 2
Let L be the relevant ground program for some ProbLog program with respect to
Q and E=e. Let MOD (L ) be those models in MOD(L ) that are consistent
with the evidence E=e. Let ϕ denote the formula and w(·) the weight function of
the weighted formula derived from L . Then:
- (model equivalence) SAT(ϕ)=MOD (L ),
- (weight equivalence) ∀ω ∈ SAT(ϕ): w(ω) = P (ω), i.e., the weight of ω
according to w(·) is equal to the probability of ω according to L .
Proof: The proof consists of two parts.
Model equivalence. Consider Lemma 1 (Section 5.2). The lemma is about the
formulaϕ thatcapturestherulesbutnotyettheevidence.Thelemmastatesthat
SAT(ϕ ) = MOD(L ). The present theorem is about the formula ϕ = ϕ ∧ϕ ,
where ϕ captures the evidence. The effect of adding ϕ to the formula is that
all worlds not consistent with the evidence are ruled out. Hence SAT(ϕ ∧ϕ ) =
MOD (L ).
Weight equivalence.Weightequivalencesaysthattheprobabilityofeverymodel
(according to L ) is equal to the weight of the model (according to our weight
function w(·)). This follows from the way the probability and the weight function
are defined.
• The probability of a model of a ProbLog program, according to the distri-
bution semantics, is the probability of the underlying total choice, which in
turn is defined as the product of probabilities of each of the atomic choices.
Formally, the probability of a model ω is:
(cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89)
with PA+(ω) (respectively PA−(ω)) being the set of all ground probabilis-
tic atoms that are true (resp. false) in ω and p(·) denoting the probability
distribution specified by the probabilistic facts.
• The weight of a world ω according to our weight function is the product of
the weights of all literals l constituting the world/interpretation ω:
Theliterals/atomsinω fallintofourgroups:probabilisticatomsthataretrue
in ω (denoted PA+(ω), non-probabilistic or derived atoms that are true in
ω (denoted DA+(ω)), and similar for the atoms that are false in ω (PA−(ω)
and DA−(ω)). Hence:
(cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89)
By definition of the weight function, the weight of an atom a ∈ PA+(ω) is
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 47
p(a), the weight of a ∈ PA−(ω) is 1−p(a), the weight of a ∈ DA+(ω)∪
DA−(ω) is 1. Hence:
(cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89) (cid:89)
(cid:89) (cid:89)
This proves weight equivalence. (cid:3)
Proof of Theorem 3
Let L be the relevant ground program for some ProbLog program with respect to
Q and E = e. Let M be the corresponding ground MLN. The distribution P(Q)
according to M is the same as the distribution P(Q|E=e) according to L .
Proof: We prove that (1) the set of worlds with non-zero probability according to
theMLNisthesameasthesetofworldswithnon-zeroprobabilityaccordingtothe
ProbLog program and the evidence; (2) for every such world ω, P (ω) = P (ω |
(Part 1) A world has non-zero probability according to an MLN if it satisfies all
hardclausesintheMLN.ThehardclausesintheMLNarethesameastheclausesin
theweightedformulaϕ.Hencethesetofworldswithnon-zeroprobabilityaccording
to the MLN equals SAT(ϕ). Theorem 2 (model equivalence) implies that this set
equals MOD (L ), which is exactly the set of worlds with non-zero probability
according to the ProbLog program and the evidence.
(Part 2) The probability of a world ω ∈SAT(ϕ) according to an MLN is defined
as P (Q) = W(ω)/Z, with W(ω) the product of exponentiated weights of the
soft clauses satisfied in ω, and Z the normalization constant. The probability of
ω according to the ProbLog program conditioned on the evidence is P (ω|E =
e) = P (ω)/P (E = e). We now show that both expressions are the same (i.e.
• The numerators are the same (W(ω)=P (ω)): The only soft clauses in the
MLN are unit clauses, whose weights are derived from the probabilistic facts.
Theunitclausesaresuchthat,foranygivenworldω,thereisoneunitclause
per probabilistic atom that is satisfied. W(ω) is the product of the expo-
nentiated weights of all these clauses. It follows from the way these weights
are defined in terms of the weighted formula, and from weight equivalence
between the weighted formula and the ProbLog program (Theorem 2), that
this product is equal to the probability of the total choice of ω according to
the ProbLog program and hence to the numerator P (ω).
• The denominators are the same (Z = P (E = e)): The normalization con-
stantZ oftheMLNisdefinedas W(ω).Theevidenceprobability
P (E = e) equals P(ω). These sums are equal since (a) the
sets over which they range are equal due to Theorem 2 (model equivalencce),
48 D. Fierens et al.
calls(john) hears_alarm(john) OR alarm
calls(john) hears_alarm(john) OR alarm
AND burglary
-burglary burglary OR
-burglary earthquake
earthquake -earthquake
(a) Anonsmoothd-DNNF (b) Asmoothd-DNNF
Fig. C1. A d-DNNF and the corresponding smooth d-DNNF for the formula
burglary ∨earthquake.
(b) the summed terms are equal (because of the same reasoning as for the
numerator).
This concludes the proof. (cid:3)
Appendix B Markov Logic
WebrieflyreviewMarkovLogic(Domingosetal.2008).WhileMarkovLogicgener-
allyworkswithFOLformulas,weconsideronlythegroundcase,asthisissufficient
for our paper.
A Markov Logic Network (MLN) consists of two parts: a set of ‘soft’ formulas f ,
whicheachhaveanassociatedweightw ∈R,andasetof‘hard’formulas.AnMLN
determines a probability distribution on the set of possible worlds (determined by
the Herbrand base). The probability of a world ω is 0 if it violates some hard
formula and is 1e (cid:80) i wiδi(ω) otherwise, where the sum is over all soft formulas and
δ (ω)istheindicatorfunctionbeing1ifthesoftformulaf istrueinworldω and0
otherwise.Notethattheexponent w δ (ω)isthesumofweightsofsatisfiedsoft
formulas in world ω; the higher this sum, the more likely ω is. The name ‘MLN’
comes from the fact that this probability distribution can also be written as the
distribution of a Markov network.
Appendix C The need for smoothing d-DNNFs
Thealgorithmweusetocomputemarginalprobabilitiesrequiresasmoothd-DNNF.
A smooth d-DNNF is a d-DNNF where for every disjunction node all children use
exactly the same set of atoms. That is, if C ··C are the children of an OR node
C, then Atoms(C ) = Atoms(C ), for i (cid:54)= j, where Atoms(C ) is the set of atoms
which C uses.
Figure C1a shows a non-smooth d-DNNF, while Figure C1b shows the corre-
sponding smooth d-DNNF (which we have already shown before in Figure 1a but
we repeat here for convenience). Consider the non-smooth d-DNNF. The OR node
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 49
doesn’t satisfy smoothness, since the sets of atoms of its children differ ({burglary,
earthquake}and{burglary};thenegationisignoredhere).Henceweneedtotrans-
form this d-DNNF into a smooth d-DNNF, see Figure C1b. This is done by sub-
stituting the burglary node by an AND node, then adding the burglary node as
a child to the new AND node and creating a new smoothing node for the missing
atom -earthquake. The smoothing node is an OR node which links to earthquake
and -earthqake. It is then linked to the AND node.
Let us illustrate how smoothness affects the computation of probabilities using
ourAlarmrunningexample(sonottherestrictedversionoftheexampleconsidered
above). We have seen the arithmetic circuit (AC) corresponding to the smooth d-
DNNF for this example before, recall Figure 2 on p. 22. This figure also illustrates
how we can compute the probability of the conjunction P(earthquake = true∧
calls(john) = true). This yields the value 0.14, which is indeed the correct value.
In contrast, Figure C2 shows the same evaluation process on an AC for the non-
smooth d-DNNF. This results in an incorrect value (0.196). This shows the need
for smoothness of the d-DNNF.
λ[calls(john)] = 1 1.0 λ[hears_alarm(john)] = 1 0.7 * (0.18) * (0.1) λ[alarm] = 1 1.0
* (0.9) * (0.2) λ[burglary] = 1 0.1
λ[-burglary] = 1 0.9 λ[earthquake] = 1 0.2
Fig. C2. The arithmetic circuit corresponding to the non-smooth d-DNNF for the
Alarm example.
Appendix D Kullback-Leibler Divergence Between ProbLog Programs
The Kullback-Leibler divergence D(P||Q) is a non-symmetric measure for the dif-
ferenceoftwoprobabilitydistributionsP andQ (cf.Wasserman(2003)).Itisused
in probability theory as well as in information theory where it is also known as
informationgain.TheK-Ldivergenceaggregatesthedifferenceofthetwodistribu-
tions on all elements of the outcome space. It is only defined if the support of Q is
larger than the one of P, that is, for all i where P(i)>0 also Q(i)>0.
We use the K-L divergence to evaluate the LFI-ProbLog learning algorithm
(cf. Algorithm 1) and measure how close the learned program T is to the ground
50 D. Fierens et al.
truthprogramT .Wearedoingparameterestimation,thatis,thestructureofthe
program is fixed and only the fact probabilities change. Hence we can restrict the
definition of the K-L divergence to programs that are identical except for the fact
probabilities.
Definition 1 (K-L Divergence)
Let T = F ∪R and T = F ∪R be ground ProbLog programs such that the
probabilistic facts are identical except for the probabilities, that is, F = {p ::
f |1≤i ≤n}andF ={q ::f |1≤i ≤n}.LetAt denotetheHerbrandbaseofT
and T (note that they have the same Herbrand base). We denote interpretations
as subsets of atoms, i.e., L ⊆ At is the interpretation in which the atoms that are
in L are true and the other atoms are false. Then the K-L Divergence between T
and T is defined as
1 2 T1 P (L)
ThereareexponentiallymanyinterpretationsL⊆At,whichmakesevaluatingthe
K-L divergence as defined above impossible in practice. However, the probabilistic
facts in a ProbLog program are independent, which can be exploited to compute
the K-L divergence in linear time by looping once over F.
Let T = F ∪R and T = F ∪R be ground ProbLog programs such that the
probabilistic facts are identical except for the probabilities, that is, F = {p ::
f |1≤i ≤n} and F ={q ::f |1≤i ≤n}. Then the K-L Divergence between T
and T can be calculated as
n (cid:18) (cid:19)
D(T ||T )= (cid:88) p log p i +(1−p )log 1−p i · (D2)
1 2 i q i 1−q
ItispossibletoextendtheK-Ldivergenceandthetheoremtonon-groundfacts.
Todo so, one needs tomultiply eachsummand p logpi +(1−p )log1−pi with the
i qi i 1−qi
number of ground instances of the probabilistic fact f .
We prove Theorem 4 by induction over the number of probabilistic facts.
Base case n =1.
D(T ||T ) = (cid:88) P (L)log P T1 (L)
1 2 T1 P (L)
= P ({f })log T1 1
= p log 1 +(1−p )log 1
n (cid:18) (cid:19)
= (cid:88) p log p i +(1−p )log 1−p i
Inference and Learning in PLP using Weighted Formulas 51
Inductive case n → n +1. To simplify the notation, we define Tn+1 = T ∪
{p ::f } and Tn+1 =T ∪{q ::f }
n+1 n+1 2 2 n+1 n+1
= L⊆(At (cid:80) ∪{fn+1}) P T 1 n+1 (L)log P P T T 2 1 n n + + 1 1 ( ( L L ) )
(cid:34) (cid:35)
= L (cid:80) ⊆At P T 1 n+1 (L∪{f n+1 })log P P T T 1 2 n n + + 1 1 ( ( L L ∪ ∪ { {f fn n + + 1 1 } } ) ) +
(cid:34) (cid:35)
L (cid:80) ⊆At P T 1 n+1 (L)log P P T T 1 2 n n + + 1 1 ( ( L L ) )
Probabilistic facts are independent and thus we can
factorize the probabilities
(cid:34) (cid:35)
= L (cid:80) ⊆At p n+1 ·P T1 (L)log p qn n + + 1 1 · · P P T T 2 1 ( ( L L ) ) +
(cid:34) (cid:35)
L (cid:80) ⊆At (1−p n+1 )·P T1 (L)log ( ( 1 1 − − p qn n + + 1 1 ) ) · · P P T T 2 1 ( ( L L ) )
using the rules for log and factoring out the constants
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
= p n+1 L (cid:80) ⊆At P T1 (L) logp qn n + + 1 1 +log P P T T 2 1 ( ( L L ) ) +
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(1−p n+1 ) L (cid:80) ⊆At P T1 (L) log1 1 − − p qn n + + 1 1 +log P P T T 1 2 ( ( L L ) )
expanding the inner sums and factoring out constants
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
= p logpn+1 (cid:80) P (L) +
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
p n+1 L (cid:80) ⊆At P T1 (L) log P P T T 2 1 ( (L L) ) +
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
n+1 1−qn+1
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(1−p n+1 ) L (cid:80) ⊆At P T1 (L) log P P T T 2 1 ( ( L L ) )
since P (L) is 1, rearranging yields
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
= p logpn+1 +(1−p ) log1−pn+1 +
n+1 qn+1 n+1 1−qn+1
L (cid:80) ⊆At P T1 (L)log P P T T 2 1 ( ( L L ) )
using the inductive assumption
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
= p logpn+1 +(1−p ) log1−pn+1 +
n+1 qn+1 n+1 1−qn+1
52 D. Fierens et al.
n (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:80) p logpi +(1−p )log1−pi
i qi i 1−qi
rearranging the terms
n+1(cid:16) (cid:17)
= (cid:80) p logpi +(1−p )log1−pi
i qi i 1−qi
Acknowledgements
Wethankthereviewersfortheirusefulsuggestions.WethankMauriceBruynooghe,
Jesse Davis, Kristian Kersting, Angelika Kimmig and Theofrastos Mantadelis for
useful discussions.
Daan Fierens, Guy Van den Broeck and Bernd Gutmann are supported by the
Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO-Vlaanderen). Joris Renkens is supported by
PF-10/010 NATAR. Research supported by the European Commission under con-
tract number FP7-248258-First-MM.