Inflation securities valuation with
macroeconomic-based no-arbitrage dynamics
Gabriele Sarais
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
gs1608@imperial.ac.uk
Damiano Brigo
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
damiano.brigo@imperial.ac.uk
Capco Institute
Second version:
June 25, 2018
We develop a model to price inflation and interest rates derivatives using continuous-time dynamics
that have some links with macroeconomic monetary DSGE models equipped with a Taylor rule: in
particular, the reaction function of the central bank, the bond market liquidity, inflation and growth
expectations play an important role. The model explains the effects of non-standard monetary policies
(like quantitative easing or its tapering) and sheds light on how central bank policy can affect the value
of inflation and interest rates derivatives.
Themodelisbuiltunderstandardno-arbitrageassumptions. Interestingly,themodelyieldsshortrate
dynamics that are consistent with a time-varying Hull-White model, therefore making the calibration
to the nominal interest curve and options straightforward. Further, we obtain closed forms for both
zero-coupon and year-on-year inflation swap and options. The calibration strategy we propose is fully
separable, which means that the calibration can be carried out in subsequent simple steps that do not
require heavy computation. A market calibration example is provided.
The advantages of such structural inflation modelling become apparent when one analysed the risk
of an inflation derivatives book: because the model explicitly takes into account economic variables, a
tradercaneasilyassesstheimpactofachangeincentralbankpolicyonacomplexbookoffixedincome
instruments, which is normally not straightforward if one is using standard inflation pricing models.
Keywords: Inflation, Derivatives, DSGE Models, Monetary Macroeconomic Models, Calibration, Hull-
White Model, Central Bank Policy, Risk-Neutral Valuation, Option Pricing, Taylor Rule, Inflation-Linked
Securities, Stress Testing, Macro-Hedging.
AMS classification codes: 60H10, 91B25, 91B51, 91B64, 91B70
JEL classification codes: E440, E630, G130
]RP.nif-q[
3v9977.3041:viXra
1 Monetary macroeconomic inflation models 3
2 Introduction to DSGE models 4
2.1 Axiomatic foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.1 Time scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.2 Probability space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.3 Financial instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 Model derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.1 Economy description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.2 Consumers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.3 Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2.4 Putting things together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.5 The Taylor rule and the central bank. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3 System stability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3 Using the DSGE for pricing purposes 11
3.1 Arbitrage-free pricing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.1.1 Use of the macroeconomic model: inputs and outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.2 Statistical properties of the inflation rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.3 Statistical properties of the short term nominal interest rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.4 Calibrating to rates and inflation smiles: the normal case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1.5 Measure change under normality assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1.6 Calibrating to the nominal term structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.7 Calibrating to the ZCIIS
4 Building the continuous-time version 17
4.1 Testing the dynamics against empirical evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2 Comparing the DSGE model with the continuous-time model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5 Inflation derivatives pricing with a central bank reaction function: the CTCB model 25
6 Inflation model assumptions 26
6.1 Probabilistic set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.2 Financial instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.3 Financial market . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.4 Economy dynamics and central bank role . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7 CTCB Model construction 30
8 Equivalent interest rates model 32
9 Further analysis on the mean-reversion property 34
9.1 General case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
9.2 Constant mean reversion speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
10 Pricing of vanilla interest rates derivatives 37
11 Pricing zero-coupon inflation swaps and options 39
12 Pricing year-on-year inflation swaps and options 40
13 Single currency derivatives pricing simulation 42
14 Extension to the open economy 45
15 Uncertain-parameters extension: modelling the inflation smile 46
16 Model calibration and applications 46
16.1 At-the-money calibration strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
16.2 Calibration steps: a first strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
16.3 Calibration steps: an alternative strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
16.4 Variance split and calibration to correlations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
17 At-the-money calibration results 52
17.1 Technical assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
17.2 Economic assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
17.3 Market data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
17.4 Correlation targeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
17.5 Results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
18 Applications 54
18.1 Derivatives risk as a function of the central bank reaction function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
18.2 Inflation book macro-hedging in the CTCB model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
18.3 Stress testing in the CTCB model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
19 Conclusions 55
1 Monetary macroeconomic inflation models
We consider a macroeconomic model and propose a strategy to use it to price inflation derivatives: the
main advantage of this approach is that the inflation dynamics are not takenexogenously but rather are the
result of a well-established macroeconomic model with central bank policy. In particular, the co-movement
of inflation and nominal interest rates is not taken as an input or modelled via a correlation structure (as
it happens in many models currently used in the industry) but is the result of central bank policy, via a
well-known macroeconomic relationship (Taylor rule or some variation of it).
Thetaskisnotstraightforwardbecausemostmacroeconomicliteratureiswritteninasomewhatlessfor-
malised way compared to financial mathematics. Expectations are taken only with respect to the real-world
econometric measure (which is known as P or as “physical measure” in financial mathematics): therefore
there is no apparent need to specify the measure used to take expectations, and measure changes are not
used. No mention is made of filtrations, adapted processes, measurability. Distributional assumptions tend
to be loose (randomness is usually introduced via some so-called “white noise”, defined as a zero-mean pro-
cesswhoserealisationsareindependentfromeachotherovertime). Stochasticprocessestendtobeassumed
to reach a “steady state”, i.e. to converge to some equilibrium value in the long run: this level is always
supposed to exist and to be finite. Sometimes variables are expressed as their percentage deviations with
respect to their long term equilibrium level. Securities payoffs may be defined with few details.
Despite all these issues, this theory is the one that central bankers, economists, researchers, and market
operatorsuseandreferto: itcannotbeignored. Thechallengesthatonefacestousethistheoryinfinancial
mathematics to carry out derivatives pricing are manifold: to complement the macroeconomic model with
all the mathematical machinery that has been originally taken as a given in a way that the kernel of the
model is not arbitrarily changed but is rather enhanced by an improved formalism. Further, when changes
are made to the original model assumptions, these changes have to be not invasive and have to bear a clear
advantage, especially in the calibration phase. At the same time, some approximations may be needed to
derivesomeresultsthatareessentialforpricing(closedformsfornominalandinflationbonds,forexample).
Further,onarecentarticleappearedonBloomberg,financeprofessorNoahSmithsuggeststhatfinancial
institution should use more the DSGE macroeconomic model to fully understand the causality relationships
in the economy (“Wall Street Skips Economics Class”, www.bloombergview.com/articles/2014-07-23/wall-
street-skips-economics-class): this seems to confirm the intuition behind our work.
The article is structured as follows. Firstly, we build a general axiomatic framework around the original
macroeconomic discrete-time model: this entails specifying the feature of the time scale, probability space,
and traded instruments. Then, for the benefit of the reader not expert in monetary macroeconomics, all the
economic quantities and assumptions are listed and defined. Secondly, we introduce a standard monetary
macroeconomics discrete-time model (DSGE model, or “Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium” model)
where some P-dynamics for inflation are derived from optimality conditions and realistic market frictions.
Thirdly,wederivetheexpressionforthenominalrateandinflationratevolatilityandhigherordermoments
based on the DSGE model: they turn out to be linear combinations for the volatilities and the higher order
moments of the random processes used originally in the DSGE model; the advantage is clear, as one chooses
these parameters to match the moments of the distribution implied by market-traded options on interest
rates and inflation. Fourthly, we obtain approximated expressions for the nominal and inflation bonds, to
calibrate the model to the observed nominal and inflation term structures.
To sum up, the first part of this article constitutes a useful attempt to bridge the gap between monetary
macroeconomicsandfinancialmathematics: asaresult,wehavebuiltatoypricingmodelbasedontheDSGE
model. However,inthesecondpartofthisarticlewesuggesthowtheframeworkcanbesomewhattranslated
into continuous time to improve its analytical tractability and to take into account some very recent market
features, like low interest rates and quantitative easing. Although there is no exact correspondence between
the original discrete-time DSGE model and the newly-introduced continuous-time dynamics, the latter are
clearlyinspiredbytheformer. Interestingly,weobtainHull-Whitedynamicsfortheshortrateinthismodel.
We develop the theory in continuous time under no-arbitrage, and provide some closed forms for common
inflationandinterestratespayoffs. Finally,wemakeanexampleofcalibrationofthecontinuous-timemodel
to market data. To conclude, we discuss some pricing and risk management applications.
2 Introduction to DSGE models
DSGEmodelsareanessentialtoolfortheworkingmacro-economist: theyarewidelyusedbothinacademia
and by central banks since they explain the short term real effects of monetary policy. Strong empirical
evidence supports the idea that money has real effects: DSGE models describe this effect by assuming a
stochastic environment, optimizing behaviour and nominal rigidities in the economy. Consumers maximize
their expected utility, which is based on consumption and real cash balances; firms maximize their expected
profit stream but are not able to change in each period the prices they charge. The result is a discrete-
time model where the macroeconomic variables are affected by their future expectations and some external
shocks. Theshorttermnominalinterestrate(“shortrate”)ispartofthesedynamics. Afurtherassumption
is that the central bank uses a Taylor rule to set the short rate: this means that the short rate is changed in
response to the other macroeconomic variables using a simple linear rule (see Taylor [40]). This approach,
albeit simple, has proven to be powerful to explain the central bank behaviour.
Finally, we stress that so far we referred to DSGE models in plural as they can be regarded as a family
of models that share the main features listed above: consumer habits, capital, labour market rigidities,
government, taxes, lagged variables, different central bank policies can be introduced in this framework,
giving rise to more complex dynamics. Here we describe the baseline version of this model, which offers
enough flexibility for our purposes.
We present the assumptions of a basic version of the DSGE macroeconomic model, which explains the
behaviour of the inflation rate p and the output gap x based on a general description of the economy. A
complete description of this model can be found in this section or in Walsh [42], which we follow to present
themodel. However,beforepresentingthemacroeconomicmodel,wespecifytheaxiomaticfoundationsthat
are implicit in the model and that are normally not fully specified by economists.
2.1 Axiomatic foundations
2.1.1 Time scale
Themodelissetindiscretetime, wheretimeisanon-negativevariable: t ∈T={t ,t ,t ,...,t ,...},n∈N.
Heret isthepresenttime. Topreservegenerality,thediscrete-timepointsarenotrequiredtobeequally
spaced. Foravariabley attimet weoftenwritey tomakethenotationlighter: similarly,thediscrete-time
stochastic processes {y } can be denoted by {y }.
ti i=0,1,... i
2.1.2 Probability space
We work with the probability triplet {Ω,F,P} and assume the existence of a market filtration {F } . In
particular P is the real-world (“physical”) probability measure. All filtration-related concepts (mainly the
martingalityproperty)aredefinedwithrespecttothemarketfiltration. Tosimplifythenotation,indiscrete
time we use the following notation for conditional expectations: E x =E [x ]=EP[x |F ].
i i+j i i+j ti+j ti
Therefore, in this section if no probability measure is specified, the expectation is taken with respect to
the real-world measure (P). To perform a measure change from the physical measure P to the risk-neutral
measure Q, we introduce the Radon-Nikodym derivative (dQ/dP) | , written µ for brevity. All regularity
requests for the measure change process to exist and to be an L2 positive martingale are supposed to hold.
2.1.3 Financial instruments
Weassumethatthefinancialmarketissuchthattherearenotransactioncostsnortaxes: investorscantake
any position (either long or short) in any asset. We assume the existence of the following:
1. The short term nominal interest rate n – set by the central bank – is the interest agreed at time t
and paid at time t by the bank account on the balance at time t 1. It is used to discount payments.
The short term nominal interest rate process {n } is a previsible process, i.e. the short term
i i=0,1,...
nominal interest rate n is F -measurable.
2. The bank account B =
(1+τ n ), with B = 1. Here τ represents the year fraction between
i j=1 j j 0 i
times t and t . Since the interest rate n is F -measurable, the bank account process {B }
i−1 i i i−1 i i=0,1,...
is a previsible process. At time t the cash flow that occurs at time t is already known: this is why
the bank account is often referred to as the riskless asset.
3. The first two properties implicitly imply a lower bound on negative short nominal interest rates: in
this model rates can be negative (as they have been in 2012, for example German Bunds up to 2 years
maturity,andtheEuropeanCentralBankhassetthedepositrateto-0.1%in2014),howevertheycan
not be lower than -100%, otherwise the nominal bank account would have a negative value, which is
not possible. Rational agents would not put money into such account that turns assets into liabilities.
4. A system of discount bonds P(t ,t ), that pay one unit of currency at time t and have the following
properties:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
i N i j=i+1 j j
• lim P(t ,t )=0
• P(t ,t )=B /B .
i i+1 i i+1
1Hereweareassumingthatthecentralbanklendsmoneytothecommercialbanksatthesameinterestratepaidbythese
tothemoneymarketaccountholders. Wearemakingthesimplifyingassumptionthatthecentralbankreviewsitsinterestrate
with the same time scale by which the interest are accrued in the money market account. This assumption let one include in
thepricingmodelafairlyrealisticdescriptionofcentralpolicy.
5. Theseasonality-adjustedpriceindexprocess{I } thatdescribestheevolutionofthepricelevel2.
i i=0,1,...
6. Asystemofzero-couponinflationindexswaps(ZCIIS),suchthatthefloatinglegpays(I /I )−1
andthefixedlegpays(1+X
)Mτi−1. Bothpaymentshappenatmaturity. ThestrikesX
at time t for all maturities t > t . Inflation payments are time-lagged in this model as it happens
in reality: in fact the price index is subject to revisions and in practice ZCIIS pay the inflation lagged
by one period.
7. A system of index-linked zero-coupon bonds PI(t ,t ), which pay at maturity t the cash equivalent
of the price index I . These bonds are priced consistently with the zero-coupon inflation swaps
presented in the previous point. Inflation payments are time-lagged in this model as it happens in
reality: in fact the price index is subject to revisions and in practice the inflation bonds pay the
inflationlaggedbyoneperiod. Thesebondsarequotedattimet forallmaturitiest >t . Weignore
the deflation floor that commonly traded inflation bonds have.
Macroeconomic variables. The inflation rate is defined by p = ((I /I ) − 1)/τ . This is the
annualised percentage growth rate of the price index.
The output gap x is defined as the difference between the actual and the potential log-linearised growth
rate of the economy3: x = yˆ −yˆf . To provide a complete definition of the output gap, we introduce
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Y – also known as output – which is the value of all final goods and
servicesproducedintheeconomybetweentimest andt . TheGDPannualisedgrowthrateisdefinedas:
y = ((Y /Y )−1)/τ . The growth rate y is assumed to have a long term equilibrium level y¯ such that
i i i−1 i i
E(y )→y¯as i→+∞. The variable yˆ is defined as the percentage deviation between the GDP growth rate
y and its long term equilibrium level y¯: yˆ =((y /y¯)−1). Economists often refer to it as the log-linearised
If we assume that the economy is subject to some “inefficiencies”, we can introduce the potential GDP
Yf, which can be defined as the GDP produced if there is no inefficiency: intuitively these inefficiencies
preventtheactualGDPY fromreachingthe“fullemployment”GDPYf. Thereforewesimilarlyderivethe
variables yf, y¯f, and yˆf, which complete the definition of the output gap x .
We assume that the processes {Y } , {Yf} , and {I } are adapted, therefore also the
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
processes {x } and {p } are adapted too. To complete the formalisation, one needs to assume
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
that all stochastic processes involved in the model converge in some sense to a finite equilibrium level when
time tends to infinity. No further specification of such convergence is normally made in the macroeconomic
model.
Economic assumptions. We list the microeconomic and macroeconomic assumptions:
1. The economy is closed, i.e. there is no exchange rate nor foreign market.
2. All markets are in equilibrium, i.e. demand matches supply for all goods and services markets.
3. The economy is a monetary one, i.e. there is no barter.
4. The representative consumer maximizes his utility function under an intertemporal budget constraint.
5. The representative consumer draws his utility from consuming and keeping cash balances for safety
(money-in-utility approach).
6. There is no public sector, therefore there is no taxation.
2Price indices time series clearly show seasonality, mainly driven by sales in January and July and prices increases around
Christmas. Wedonotmodelthesepatternsdirectlyatthisstagebecauseaseasonalitycorrectioncanbeeasilyintroducedat
thelaststage. Thiscanbedonebyassumingthatthemonthlyinflationratediffersfromtheseasonality-adjustedinflationrate
byacertainpercentage. Intuitively,seasonalityismorerelevantforshort-maturityinflationtrades.
3Thereasonwhyweareinvolvinglog-linearisationwillbecomeclearshortly. Moreinformationisalsoavailablelaterinthis
section.
7. Labour is the only production factor: no capital is required, therefore there are no investments.
8. Savings are invested in bonds that pay a nominal interest rate.
9. The representative consumer consumes multiple goods, each produced in a monopolistic market.
10. The output coincides with the private consumption, as there is no government expenditure, no im-
port/export, no taxes nor investment.
11. Firmsmaximizeprofitsbutarenotfreetomodifyineachperiodthepricestheycharge(stickyprices).
12. Thecentralbanksetstheshortrateasalinearfunctionofinflationandoutputgap(Taylorrule). The
short rate moves around its equilibrium level.
13. The short rate can be negative in some circumstances.
14. There exists a system of expectations for the output gap and inflation.
15. Time is discrete.
16. There is no credit risk.
2.2 Model derivation
We follow Walsh [42] to introduce the main equations of the DSGE baseline model: as the material of this
section is standard, we give a high level overview. Another interesting overview can be found in Clarida,
Gali & Gertler [13]. The reader who is already familiar with this model can skip this section.
2.2.1 Economy description
The baseline model we work with represents a simple closed economy, with no government and no tax
system. The production function depends only on labour since capital is not considered: therefore there is
no investment. From a macroeconomic perspective we can therefore state that the output at time t equals
the aggregate consumption at time t :
Y =C .
The economy is a monetary one with money M and price level I .
2.2.2 Consumers
The representative household solves a two-steps optimisation problem. It first decides how to allocate its
totalconsumptionbetweendifferentgoods–producedbymonopolisticallycompetitivefinalgoodsproducers
(firms) – and then chooses how much to consume in total, how much cash to hold, how much to invest in
bond holdings and how many hours to work.
In the first step we assume the existence of a continuum of goods c produced by a continuum of
monopolistic firms j (j ∈ [0,1]). At time t the household chooses the combination of goods c that
minimizes the cost of the total consumption:
(cid:90) 1
min p c dj
by taking into account the constraint
(cid:18)(cid:90) 1 (cid:19) θ− θ 1
(c ji ) θ dj ≥C i .
Herep isthepriceofthegoodj attimet andC isthetotalconsumptiontimet . Theparameterθ isused
to model the price elasticity, i.e. how price-sensitive consumption is. This standard optimisation problem
is solved in Walsh [42] (p. 233) and yields the optimal amount of consumption of good j given the general
price level I , the total consumption C (to be determined in the next step) and the price of good j, p :
(cid:19)−θ
c = ji C . (1)
The second step is modelled as an intertemporal maximisation of the expected utility under a budget con-
straint, and yields the usual Euler conditions.
Therepresentativehouseholddrawsitsutilityfromconsuming(C )andholdingrealcashbalances(M /I )
as insurance against uncertainty: furthermore it has negative utility from supplying labour N and can save
moneyandpurchasebondsB thatpayanominalinterestraten ineachperiod. Weassumeapowerutility
function: the problem is therefore to find the sequences C , M , B and N that solve the problem
max (cid:88) ∞ βtiE (cid:34) C i 1−σ + α (cid:18) M i (cid:19)1−d − N i 1+η (cid:35) .
The parameters σ, d, α>0, η indicate how consumption, real cash balance and labour supply influence
the utility function. The expectation E[·] is taken with respect to the physical measure P, as usual in
any macroeconomic model: in this section when no measure is specified it is assumed that the physical
measure is used. The parameter β ∈(0,1] represents as usual a subjective discount factor over one period.
The parameter σ, that is also known as “relative risk aversion”, is used to model elasticity of utility to
consumption in a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility function. When σ is very high, the agents
are extremely risk-averse, as an increase in consumption creates an smaller increase in utility than the
correspondent reduction in utility given the same absolute reduction in consumption; when σ is zero, there
is risk-neutrality, i.e. the utility grows linearly with consumption; when σ tends to 1, the utility function
becomes a logarithmic utility function, which is moderately risk averse.
The optimisation is carried out under the constraint that the total wealth at time t (which is allocated
between consumption, real cash balance and bond holding) has been derived from the previous period or
gainedfromsupplyinglabour(W isthewagegainedfor1unitoflabourattimet ). Nowealthisintroduced
into the system ex nihilo:
M B W N M B
C + i + i = i i + i−1 + i−1(1+n ).
i I I I I I i−1
The derivation of the Euler conditions is standard and can be found for example in the second chapter of
Walsh [42]. The first order conditions for this problem are the following:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
i i i I i+1
(cid:18) (cid:19)
i = i. (4)
Because the utility function is concave, the first order conditions are sufficient to find maxima. Since we
assume that there is no government, no capital stock (and therefore no investment) and the economy is
closed, we substitute the consumption with the output definition Y =C , getting
(cid:20) (cid:21)
i i i I i+1
This condition may be rewritten in log-linearized terms around a zero inflation equilibrium point, after
making some approximations:
i i i+1 σ i i i+1
The inflation rate p is defined as the annualised relative change of the price level I from t to t .4
2.2.3 Firms
The firm profit maximisation problem has to take into account three constraints: the demand curve, the
production technology and price stickiness. It involves finding the optimal amount of labour N to minimize
the production cost and the optimal good price p to maximize the expected profit stream. The demand
curve is (1). Secondly, technology is such that the output of the j-th firm depends only on labour N
c =Z N .
Z is a positive random variable with mean 1 that represents a stochastic productivity shock. Thirdly, firms
are able to adjust their prices in each period only with probability 1 - ω. This price stickiness assumption is
the most interesting one and is essential to define the inflation dynamics of this model.
The first consequence is that the output Y deviates from the output in flexible prices Yf: by making
use of (4), we can then define their difference in log-linearized terms as the output gap
Wedonotexplainthesubsequentdetails: insteadwedevelopsomeintuitionoftheinflationmechanics. Since
prices are sticky and firms are maximizing their expected profit stream, firms increase their prices not only
ifproductioncostsrise(whichwouldalsohappeninaflexiblepricesframework), butalsotocompensatefor
the expected losses they can face as they may not increase prices in the future (with probability ω).
This has two important consequences: firstly, as prices influence output via the demand curve (1) and
the macroeconomic identity Y = C , inflation is related to the output gap. The output gap increases with
inflation. Secondly, if there are inflation expectations, firms raise prices in the current period because they
may not be able to do so in the future. Inflation is therefore a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Theresult,aftersomealgebraicmanipulations,istheso-calledneo-KeynesianPhillipscurve,whichstates
that the current level of inflation depends both on inflation expectations and the output gap:
p =βE p +kx . (6)
The parameter k (cid:62)0 can be regarded as a measure of the market price flexibility and is defined as
k = .
4It is worth explaining how the log-linearisation used above works. Given a variable Fi at time ti we assume that its long
term equilibrium level is F¯ (i.e. that the limit of Fi when time goes to infinity is F¯). With the lower case hat fˆ i we indicate
thedeviationattimetiofthevariableFifromitslongtermequilibriumlevelF¯inpercentageterms: thiscanbeapproximated
withthenaturallogarithmoftheirratioforsmalldeviations. Informulas:
i).
Uhlig[41]givesextensiveexplanationsandexamplesofthistechnique: giventheanalogybetweenthistransformationandthe
naturallogarithm,productscanbeapproximatedwithsums,powersbecomemultiplicativecoefficientsandconstantsdisappear.
It is worth stressing that if prices never change, ω = 1: therefore k equals zero and inflation is only driven
by expectations. As before, the derivation can be found in Walsh [42] (5.4, 5.7).
2.2.4 Putting things together
Equation (5) can be rewritten in terms of output gap x =yˆ −yˆf: defining
u =E yˆf −yˆf,
we get to a final form for (5) that can be put in a system with (6)
i i i+1 σ i+1 i i+1 i
As we define the rate n as the rate set by the central bank at time t and paid at time t we have
written nˆ rather than nˆ : we reconcile the standard DSGE model with the request that the short rate is
previsible: thishasnosignificantimpactonthefollowingmodelconstruction. Thiscurvecanbeinterpreted
as a neo-Keynesian demand curve, where the output gap shows a negative dependency on a function of the
realinterestrate. Theprocess{u } canbethoughtasadiscrete-timestochasticprocessthatrelatesthe
i i=0,1,...
level of the log linearised flexible price output deviation from its expectations: this difference should depend
somehow on the productivity shock Z , but for our purposes we can think of it as a general stochastic
process. Again, we stress that the original macroeconomic model does not make any further assumption on
the shock processes: we make the necessary assumptions this problem in the following sections, where the
DSGE model is used for pricing purposes.
2.2.5 The Taylor rule and the central bank
Equations (7) and (6) define a discrete-time, bi-dimensional, forward looking stochastic system which is
influencedbytwoexogenousvariables: thelog-linearizedshortratenˆ andtheprocess{u } ,related
i+1 i i=0,1,...
to the productivity shock. We introduce the central bank, which uses the short rate as policy instrument.
In each period the central bank changes the short rate in response to the inflation and output gap with the
following rule:
i+1 π i x i i
Thisrule,proposedbyTaylor[40],statesthatthecentralbankrespondstoinflationandoutputgapbysetting
the short rate: a discrete-time stochastic process {v } , independent from the process {u } , is
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
added to increase the flexibility of the model. We remind the reader that the rate n is set by the central
bank at time t and paid at time t : for this reason we allow a lag in the above form of the Taylor rule.
At this stage we also notice that the short rate can be negative in this formulation, which is consistent with
the assumptions we have made earlier: however values of the nominal rate below -100%, albeit theoretically
possible, are to be ruled out under a reasonable model parametrisation. Finally one notes that the Taylor
rule has been defined for nˆ , which, as explained for the other variables, is the percentage deviation of the
nominal rate from its equilibrium level.
Bullard & Mitra [11] analyse similar rules with more realistic timing assumptions (the central bank may
be reacting to future expectations of gap and inflation, or may be looking at their lagged values instead).
In addition, the short rate can be smoothed as suggested by Woodford [43], essentially by combining (8)
with an autoregressive process. This framework is somehow simple, as the central bank is not optimizing
any objective function: however, ithas explainedthe behaviourof theFED inthe lastdecades, as shown by
Clarida, Gali & Gertler [14]. Finally, this linear rule can be regarded as good linear approximation of the
optimal policy solution.
2.3 System stability
If the Taylor rule (8) is plugged into (7) and (6), we obtain the following system:
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:18)(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:19)
x 1 σ 1−βδ x 1
The notation is made more compact by defining:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Using the above definitions we get a more compact expression of the system:
We investigate the stability conditions, which is equivalent to ask what reaction function – characterised
by the parameters δ and δ – keeps the economy on a stable path. For example, if the central bank only
responds to inflation (i.e. δ = 0), we ask whether δ has to be greater or lower than one, i.e. if the
centralbankhastoincreasetheshortrateaboveitsequilibriumlevelmoreorlessthantherealisedinflation.
Clarida, Gali & Gertler [14] show that δ > 1 is typical of the FED during the Volker tenure (in the early
1980s in the U.S.), which was characterized by lower inflation and output volatility.
Theeconomicintuitionisthatareactionparameterclosetoonemeansthatthenominalrateisincreased
by the same amount of inflation, thus keeping the real rate unchanged and not stimulating the economy.
Bullard & Mitra [11] find that in general the system is stable if and only if
TheyobtainthisrulebyrequiringthatbotheigenvaluesofAlieinsidetheunitcircle. Thisrequestisderived
also by Blanchard & Khan [6] and used by Flashel & Franke [21] or Walsh [42].
3 Using the DSGE for pricing purposes
3.1 Arbitrage-free pricing
Theset-upintroducedisstandard(wehavefollowedWalsh[42]),howeveritletsonetouseaDSGEmacroe-
conomic model to price inflation derivatives in a no-arbitrage framework with a few minor changes. In
general, thepricingkernelψ propertiesdiscussedforexampleinConstantinides[16]enableonetowritethe
present value at time t of a derivative h paying the inflation-linked payoff Hπ at time t in the form:
Here we build a toy pricing model in discrete time that is based on the DSGE model.
3.1.1 Use of the macroeconomic model: inputs and outputs
Wemakeadistinctionbetweeninputparameters(thestructuralparametersoftheDSGEmodel,equilibrium
nominal rates, inflation expectations, output-gap expectations), and calibrated parameters (the volatilities
and the market prices of risk, introduced later).
Calibratingthemarketpricesofriskisnotausualprocedureinderivativespricing,becausethereal-world
drift is not an input in the classic Black-Scholes framework to price contingent claims: however, the DSGE
model takes expectations (under the P measure) as an input. Since these expectations play the role of the
drift in (10) we need to take both inflation expectations and market implied levels (from the zero-coupon
inflation swaps, for example) to calibrate the market prices of risk. The expectation of inflation is a kind
of self-fulfilling prophecy: if there are expectations of inflation, then inflation will rise. This exercise is
particularly useful for inflation markets, since it is often observed that inflation forecasts and expectations
can significantly differ from levels of inflation calculated on a forward basis. Such differences can arise both
because of risk aversion and market supply and demand factors: the market can be to a significant extent a
“one-way street”, overall “short” inflation. In other words, market participants on the whole wish to hedge
themselves against inflation. In particular, pension funds liabilities have to be covered.
The idea of using market forecasts as model input, although not commonly used in standard derivatives
pricing, lets one use a theoretically consistent macroeconomic model for the pricing of inflation derivatives.
The algorithm we suggest calibrates to both the nominal term structure and the zero-coupon inflation
index swaps (ZCIIS), leaving much flexibility to calibrate to market smiles. To achieve this we explore the
statistical properties of the main economic variables, as implied by the DSGE model presented above.
3.1.2 Statistical properties of the inflation rate
From equation (10) we write explicitly the dynamics of the inflation rate:
p =A E x +A E p +K w . (12)
i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 2 i
Here A is the (i,j)-th element of the matrix A. This equation states that the inflation dynamics depend
on future expectations of output gap and inflation, plus a stochastic noise term introduced by the dynamics
of the output gap and the central bank behaviour: we can safely assume that other factors, such as mea-
surement errors, price index basket rebalancing or any other idiosyncratic factor not directly modelled in
this framework, may add noise to the inflation dynamics.5 On the basis of these considerations, we add a
further independent source of randomness, modelled with the adapted process {z } : we require this
i i=0,1,...
process to have zero mean, to be independent from its past realisations, to be independent from {u }
i i=0,1,...
and {v } , and to have finite variance Var(z ), third and fourth moments (Skew(z ) and Kurt(z )
i i=0,1,... i i i
respectively).
The new expression for the inflation rate becomes:
p =A E x +A E p +K w +z . (13)
i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 2 i i
Its mean, variance and autocovariance are therefore:
E[p ]=A E x +A E p
i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1
Cov(p ,p )=0, j (cid:54)=0.
We note that the variance of the inflation process is a linear combination of the variances of the three
5Ifonetakestheviewthatthisthirdsourceofrandomnessisnotadvisabletoinclude,oneassumesthatitsvalueisalways
0 with probability 1. As one notices in the following developments, this third source of randomness is mainly used in the
calibration phase in order to have an additional degree of freedom and has no impact on the theoretical development of the
model.
processes {u } , {v } and {z } .
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
Finally, we calculate the centered third and fourth moments: these may be needed in order to analyse
their distribution in a more complete fashion:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
i i 2 i 2 i i
(cid:104) (cid:105)
i i 2 i 2 i i
2 i i 2 i i 2 i i
3.1.3 Statistical properties of the short term nominal interest rate
The nominal interest rate n is defined as
where n¯ is the equilibrium nominal interest rate, which is the short rate that would be chosen by the central
bankiftheadjustmentrequiredbytheTaylorrulewaszero—asnˆ follows(8). Thisfollowsbythedefinition
of nˆ as the log-linearised difference between the actual rate and equilibrium rate.
We take the equilibrium nominal rate n¯ as a constant input that can be obtained from research and is
therefore not calibrated to any traded asset. We assume that the short rate is used to discount payments
between different counterparties, i.e. it plays the role of the Libor rate : this assumption, albeit strong,
simplifies the problem considerably.6
If we plug the Taylor rule (8) into (16) we rewrite the nominal rate as
i+1 x i π i i
We can compact the notation by introducing the vectors
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21)
δ = x ; ξ = i .
Thereforetheinterestratecanbewrittenasn =n¯(1+δTξ )where(x)T isthetransposeofthevector
x. The source of randomness v is included in the dynamics of ξ , as can be deduced from (10). Finally, by
making use of (10) and (13) we get:
i+1 i i+1 i 2 i
where eT = (cid:2) 0 1 (cid:3) .
By making use of this expression we calculate the mean, variance and the autocovariance of the nominal
interest rate:
i+1 i i π i
Cov(n ,n )=0, j (cid:54)=0.
Wenotethatthevarianceoftheinterestrateprocessisalinearcombinationofthevariancesofthethree
processes {u } , {v } and {z } . We take the equilibrium rates, output gap and inflation
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
expectations as inputs: they may be provided by macroeconomic research or can just be expression of the
trader’s views.
6Werecallthatincontinuoustimetheshortraten(t)=f(t,t)=lim∆T→0F(t,t,t+∆T)wheretheforwardrateisdefined
asF(t,S,T)=(P(t,S)/P(t,T)−1)/(T−S)withT >S.Indiscretetimewedefineni=fi,i=F(ti,ti,ti+1),thereforegetting
ni=(1/P(ti,ti+1)−1)/τi+1. Asaconsequence,theshortratecanbeusedastheLiborrate,providedthattherearenocredit
concernsintheinterbankmarkets.
Similarlytowhatcouldbedonefortheinflationrate,wecanalsocalculatethecenteredthirdandfourth
moments: these are needed in order to analyse their distribution in a more complete fashion:
(cid:104) (cid:105)
i i i i π i
(cid:104) (cid:105)
i i i i π i
i i π i i π i i
Finally, we calculate the covariance between the nominal rate n and the inflation p , both F -
measurable:
i i+1 2 i 2 i π i
The covariance depends on the Taylor rule parameters vector δ, which makes explicit the philosophy of
our modelling approach: any dependence between the nominal interest rate and inflation is not specified
exogenouslybutisaconsequenceofthecentralbankreactionfunction. Furthermore,thecorrelationbecomes
one if there is no uncertainty in the Taylor rule, i.e. Var(v )=0 and if Var(z )=0: in this case the central
bank reacts deterministically to any change in the economy.
The other interesting limit case is when the output gap evolves deterministically, i.e. Var(u ) = 0,
δTK < 0, and Var(z ) = 0: rates evolve stochastically and correlation becomes −1. As rates increase,
the output gap decreases deterministically (because of the demand curve (7)), bringing down the inflation
accordingtothePhillipscurve(6). Inthiscasetheonlysourceofrandomnessistheuncertaintyintheshort
rate evolution due to the Taylor rule.
TheDSGEmodelaugmentedwiththeTaylorruleallowsforthiscorrelationtotakevaluesbetween-1and
1, depending on the central bank reaction function and the specification of the sources of randomness: this
can be arguably regarded as an interesting feature of the model, because it does not impose any constraint
on the correlation range.
3.1.4 Calibrating to rates and inflation smiles: the normal case
The prices of nominal rates and inflation caps/floors across different strikes and maturities are available
from brokers or investment banks (for example the Bloomberg pages VOLS or RILO): we can thus deduce
the caplet/floorlet prices. Unlike options on other underlyings, inflation options are quoted in prices, not
in implied volatilities. By making some distributional assumptions on the nominal rates and inflation, we
summarise the distribution using only a few parameters.
For example, we can assume a normal distribution and fit its volatility to the option prices for each
maturity: this assumption is both convenient from an analytical perspective (closed formulas for option
prices are obtained) and from a practitioner point of view: if rates are normally (and not lognormally)
distributed,thedistributionoftheirrelativeincrementsisskewed,(andnotGaussianasintheBlackmodel).
In this case we calibrate the variances of {u } , {v } , and {z } to obtain the market
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
implied variances for nominal rates and inflation for at-the-money trades. We calculate the market implied
variances for {u } , {v } , and {z } given the market implied variances of rates/inflation
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
caplets/floorets. A word of caution should be issued, as there is no guarantee to obtain positive variances
from this basic algorithm. Negative variances could be floored to zero or more sophisticated root-searching
algorithms can be used.
3.1.5 Measure change under normality assumptions
At this stage we make the measure change process {µ } explicit to use the real-world expectations
i i=0,1,...
to price derivatives in the risk-neutral measure. We define the measure change processes as discretely
sampled exponential Gaussian martingale: with this strategy one obtains a positive martingale. A general
introduction to exponential L´evy martingales can be found in Appelbaum [2].
To simplify the notation, we rewrite equation 2.3 including the variable z in matrix format:
i i i+1 i 2 i i i+1 i i 2 i
Defining the matrix C as follows:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:2) (cid:3)
andcompactingallthreesourcesofrandomnessinthethree-dimensionalvectorε definedasε = u v z ,
the notation is further simplified into ξ =AE ξ +CεT.
One notes that the variance-covariance matrix for the vector ε is written as:
 Var(u ) 0 0   Var(ε1) 0 0 
= 0 Var(v
) 0 .
0 0 Var(z ) 0 0 Var(ε3)
At this point we introduce the three-dimensional deterministic vector process {λ } defined as:
i i=0,1,...
=λv i.
The quantities defined above are used to specify the measure change process {µ } , following and gen-
i i=0,1,...
eralisingShreve[38]. ThemeasurechangeprocessisthereforedefinedasamultivariateGaussianexponential
martingale in the form: d d Q P | Fi =µ i =e−(cid:15)iλi−1/2λT i Σε i λi.
One requires µ =1 and the market price of risk vector process {λ } to be regular enough for the
0 i i=0,1,...
measure change process {µ } to be a positive martingale (i.e. its expectation has always to be finite)
i i=0,1,...
and square-integrable. Moving to the risk-neutral measure Q, one obtains that the new process ν =ε +λ
is a zero-mean Gaussian process with independent realisations under Q. In this measure we also write
i i i i i i i i i i i i
We rewrite the expression for the macroeconomic variables (output gap and inflation) once the measure
change from P to Q has been performed: ξ =AE ξ +Cν =AE ξ +Cλ +CεT.
i i i+1 i i i+1 i i
Informally, one can think to the linear function of the market prices of risk λ as a “wedge” that is
multiplied by some coefficients in the matrix C and then added to the deterministic linear function of the
expectations AEξ in order to calibrate the model to the traded prices of nominal bonds and inflation
breakevens (through the relationship between nominal bonds, real bonds and inflation zero-coupon swaps).
Finally, one finds a compact expression for the nominal short rate n and the inflation rate p under Q:
i+1 i i i+1 i i i+1 i i
p =A E x +A E p +K w∗+z∗ =A E x +A E p +σK u∗−K v∗+z∗ =
i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 2 i i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 2 i 2 i i
2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 2 i i 2 i i i i 2,1 i i+1 2,2 i i+1 i
(cid:2) (cid:3)
where the vector h has been defined as h= σK −K 1 .
3.1.6 Calibrating to the nominal term structure
We show how to calibrate the model to the nominal interest rates observed in the market by making some
approximations. Weusemarketpricesofoneperioddiscountfactorstoprovidesomeexpressionstobeused
in the calibration. We write:
P(t 0 ,t i+1 )=EP 0 [ψ i+1 ]=EQ 0  (cid:89) (1+n j+1 τ j+1 )−1  ∼ =EQ 0 (cid:104) e−(cid:80)i j=0 nj+1τj+1 (cid:105)
where the last linearisation creates some error that can be reduced by calibrating the model on a finer
time grid. The term τ is the year fraction: τ = t −t . In practice one does a bootstrapping over
i+1 i+1 t+1 i
each time step, thanks to the fact that the interest rates level is independent from its previous levels.
The following step is to introduce the closed form expression for the nominal rate n :
(cid:2) e−ni+1τi+1 (cid:3) =EQ
By taking the expectations under the normality assumption for the vector ν , the one-period discount
factors approximated closed form is:
where:
1 i+1 i i+1
c = 1(cid:0) τ n¯δTKσ (cid:1)2
c =+ 1(cid:0) τ n¯δTK (cid:1)2
3.1.7 Calibrating to the ZCIIS
As shown in Brigo & Mercurio [7], the value of a zero-coupon inflation index swap (ZCIIS) can be regarded
as the difference between the real and nominal zero-coupon bond prices with the same maturity date. For
the full definition of the real bond and term structure we refer to Hughston [23].
We exploit the model-independent relationship between real and nominal bond to write:
PR(t ,t )=P(t ,t )+ZCIIS(t ,t ).
0 i+1 0 i+1 0 i+1
Since we observe the market prices of nominal bonds and ZCIIS for different maturities, we deduce the
value of a real bond, even if these instruments are not traded in the market.
We assume that the real bond pays at maturity t the unit nominal multiplied by the underlying
inflation index appreciation between times t and t : this is to introduce the inflation publication lag in the
formula, which becomes necessary since in reality the inflation rate is only published after a time lag.
The approximated closed form is obtained as follows:
(cid:20) (cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:21) i+1 i+1
PR(t 0 ,t i+1 )=EP 0 I I i ψ ψ i+1 =EP I I iψ i+1 =EQ  I I i (cid:89) 1+ 1 τ n =EQ  (cid:89) 1+ 1+ τ j− τ 1 n p j−1 
0 0 0 0 j j j j
By making some straightforward Taylor expansions the last expression can be rewritten as:
PR(t 0 ,t i+1 )=EQ  i (cid:89) +1 elo e g l ( o 1 g + (1 τ + j− τj 1 n pj j − ) 1)  ∼ =EQ  i (cid:89) +1 eτj e − τj 1 n pj j −1 =EQ (cid:104) e (cid:80)i j + = 1 1 (τj−1pj−1−τjnj) (cid:105) .
We assume that p =0 and focus the attention on the one-period real discount factor.
By the same Gaussianity assumptions used above, the following closed formula is obtained by plugging
(13) into the above expression:
T))+τi(A2,1 E ixi+1+A2,2 E ipi+1+hν
1 i 2,1 i i+1 i 2,2 i i+1 i+1 i i+1
2 2 i 2 i+1
3 2 i 2 i+1
4 2 i i+1 π
We stress that the variances calibrated from option prices are taken as an input in the above expression.
The two approximated closed formulas for the nominal (22) and the real bond (23) can be used to find the
values of λ that calibrate the model to the market, given the variances of the distributions of the shock
factors u , v , and z .
To conclude this section, we observe that the adaptation of the DSGE model to pricing proposed above
is extremely respectful of the the original macroeconomic model, but for this reason it is also not straight-
forward to price derivatives. In fact, to obtain closed forms for the nominal and real bonds one has to resort
to approximations and linearisations of exponentials, which are doable but not elegant. The model offers
an insight of the macroeconomic forces operating behind the yield curve and the inflation dynamics, but
all pricing has to happen using Monte Carlo simulations, which can be cumbersome and time consuming.
Interestingly, the above section shows a first attempt to bridge the gap between two disciplines (monetary
macroeconomics and financial mathematics) that are dealing with the same problem (inflation) in two dif-
ferent ways (DSGE modelling versus arbitrage pricing). This represent a step forward in the same direction
indicated by Hughston & Macrina [25], who derive some inflation dynamics from a macroeconomic model
— even if there is no concept of central bank policy in their work.
With these ideas in mind, in the following section we propose some continuous-time dynamics that,
while retaining the most significant aspects of the DSGE model presented in the previous sections, are more
tractable from a derivatives pricing perspective. It is important to stress that the new dynamics we propose
are not a one-to-one translation of the discrete-time DSGE model, but rather they are inspired by it and
take into account that in the post-Lehman environment the short rate is not the only policy tool used by
the central bank.7 To ensure that the proposed dynamics are meaningful, we bring some empirical evidence
that shows that the proposed dynamics are realistic. Finally, we show that the discrete-time DSGE model
and the continuous-time model proposed generate similar distributions for the main economic variables.
4 Building the continuous-time version
Here we propose a strategy to loosely translate the DSGE model into continuous time by making some
assumptions. Thereforeweshowthatsomecontinuous-timedynamicscanbederivedfromawidely-accepted
macroeconomic model: they are used in the next section to build the inflation model. From this point, the
notation for the variable y in continuous time is y(t).
The following assumptions are made:
1. There is no price flexibility for the firms, i.e. ω = 1 and k = 0. This assumption is reasonable as
markets tend to be far from the perfect competition model, and therefore prices are sticky, especially
7Whenshortratesareloworineffectivetostimulatetheeconomy,thecentralbankcanpurchaseassetstoreducelongterm
interestratesandincreasethemoneysupplytospurgrowth.
over a shorter time step.
2. The one-period subjective discount factor is equal to the inverse of the inflation targeting parameter:
βδ =1. This assumption is sensible because, when the central bank fights inflation aggressively (i.e.
δ (cid:29)1), interest rates increase, pushing down the discount factor β.
3. The GDP growth rate is modelled in the same way as the output gap. In fact, because the output
gap is defined as the difference between the actual and the potential GDP growth rate, and because
the latter is an abstract concept (normally deemed to be constant over time), this means adding the
constant potential growth rate to the output gap.
4. The GDP growth rate is defined as the percentage change of the GDP level from one period to the
next one: x = (X −X )/X . One changes the notation and write: x = (X −X )/X .
i i i−1 i−1 ti ti ti−1 ti−1
Furthermore, one generalises the time step and write: ∆t = t −t , therefore obtaining: x =
i i i−1 ti
(X −X )/X = ∆X /X . Moving to continuous time one writes x(t) as dX(t)/X(t).
ti ti−∆ti ti−∆ti ti ti−∆ti
One needs to assume that the positive process {X } is regular enough for the limit to exist.
i i=0,1,...
5. A similar line of thought can be followed to show how one moves from the discrete-time definition
of inflation, as the percentage change in the price index level (p = (I −I )/I ), to the equiva-
i i i−1 i−1
lent continuous-time definition (p(t) is written as dI(t)/I(t)). Again we make an obvious request of
positivity for the price index process {I } .
i i=0,1,...
6. There are measurement errors and other sources of uncertainty for both inflation and growth rate,
modelled by the m-dimensional zero-mean random variable z . The m components of this random
variable (called zj, with 1,2,...,j,...,m) are independent from each other. The random variable z is
also independent from w . The effects of the shock zj on x and p are modelled by the m-dimensional
real-valued deterministic processes {a } and {b } , where their single components have
i i=0,1,... i i=0,1,...
notation a and b .
7. TheproductoftheexpectationtermsbysomeconstantsthatappearintheDSGEmodelcanbewritten
x π i i+1 X i i+1 i x x π i i+1 I i i+1 i
respectively. We assume that the quantities m (t ) and m (t ) are realisations of adapted stochastic
processes. This means that these expectations are not dependent on the chosen time lag, and can be
written as the product by a real function of time (m (t ) and m (t ) respectively) and the chosen
time lag. One generalises the time lag by writing σ/(σ + δ + kδ ))E x = m (t )∆t and
x π ti ti+∆ti X i i
(k+β(σ+δ ))/(σ+δ +kδ )E p =m (t )∆t respectively. Whenonemovestocontinuoustime,
x x π ti ti+∆ti I i i
∆t →dt, and the real quantities m (t) and m (t) do not change. Therefore one writes the products
of expectation terms and constants as a continuous time drift (m (t)dt and m (t)dt respectively).
8. The random variables u and zj are independent and normally distributed, with mean 0 and unit
variance.
9. Therandomvariablesu andzj areindependentfromtheirpreviouslevels. Forexample,takenu ,one
writes Cov(u ,u ) = δ . In this context δ is the Kronecker’s delta sign, taking value 0 in all cases
i l i,l i,l
where i(cid:54)=l and 1 when i=l.
10. Taken the random standard normal variable w , one introduces the random variable U , defined as
w , with U = 0. Based on all the assumptions made, one shows that U ∼ N(0,i). By
i k=1 k 0 i
construction, the process {U } has zero mean, independent increments and U −U ∼ N(0,i−
i i=0,1,... i l
l), i>l. The increment U −U has the same distribution as the increment U −U , for each k.
i+k l+k i l
11. By generalising the time lag, one finds that ∆U =U −U ∼N(0,∆t ). Moving to continuous
ti ti ti−∆ti i
time one gets a Brownian motion. A similar discussion can be held for the m-dimensional random
variable z , which becomes an m-dimensional Brownian motion with independent components. Shreve
[38] gives full details of this procedure to build the Brownian motion starting from a discrete-time
Gaussian process.
12. To compact notation, one introduces the m+1-dimensional (or alternatively n-dimensional) vectors,
defined as sX = [σ,a1,...,aM], and sI = [0,b1,...,bM]. The idea is to compact all the random terms
ti ti ti ti ti ti
to express them using a lighter notation.
13. To move to continuous time, one assumes that the processes {sX} and {sI } are regular
ti ti=0,1,... ti ti=0,1,...
enough for the limits sX → s (t) and sI → s (t) to exist and for the total variance to be the same.
The system 2.3 can be rewritten in discrete time using a generic time step ∆t as:
(cid:20) p x t t i i (cid:21) = (cid:20) m m X I ( ( t t i i ) ) (cid:21) ∆t i + (cid:20) σ 0 (cid:21) (w ti )∆t1 i /2+ (cid:88) j M =1 (cid:20) a b i i , , j j (cid:21)(cid:16) z t j i (cid:17) ∆t1 i /2  (24)
Fromtheassumptionsmadeabove, thetwoaboveequationscanbetranslatedincontinuoustimeasfollows:
where{W(t)} t(cid:62)0 isann-dimensionalBrownianmotion. Thenotation·isusedtorefertothevectorproduct.
At this stage one complements this model with some dynamics for the expectations of the drift: in fact,
as shown in the following section, empirical evidence suggests that expectations themselves are subject to
frequent revisions (as the economic agents process new information and data) and therefore are themselves
stochastic. A possible expression for the dynamics of the expectations is the following:
where the scalar processes {a (t)} and {a (t)} , and the m+1-dimensional processes {b (t)} and
X t≥0 I t≥0 X t≥0
{b (t)} are deterministic processes regular enough for the SDEs to be integrated and to have a unique
strong solution. To conclude, the above stochastic differential equations are derived from a well-established
macroeconomic model. They are consistent with empirical evidence (as shown in the next section) and are
used in the following section as a part of a wider setup to build a structural continuous-time pricing model
for inflation derivatives, based on macroeconomic assumptions.
4.1 Testing the dynamics against empirical evidence
Inthissectionweshowsomeeconomictimeseriestoconfirmthat,overtime,thegrowthrateofrealGDPand
ofthepriceindexarestationaryprocessesthatshowsomerandomness. Thispaperisnotabouteconometrics,
so the evidence is presented in a somewhat intuitive and loosely defined fashion. The actual levels of real
GDP and price index are growing in an exponential fashion over time: these two observations confirm that
the choice of a Brownian motion with time-changing coefficients and stochastic drift is sensible.
Evidence is shown for the US and the UK economy, however similar results hold for all economies. All
dataaresourcedfrom Bloomberg. Wedonotperformanystatisticaltest, becauseforour purposesit would
sufficetogainintuitiononthebehaviouroftheeconomicvariablessimplybylookingattheproposedgraphs.
Fact 1 - Over time both price indexes and GDP have grown steadily, as shown by the first four figures.
Fact 2 - Over time their growth rate has been subject to some randomness, as shown by the fifth to the
eighth figure of this section.
Further, we show some evidence of expectations (or forecast) of UK GDP growth rate (compiled by
Bloomberg) and of the US inflation rate (compiled by the University of Michigan): both series show that
the expectations themselves are stochastic, which suggests that the assumption of assuming the processes
for the expectations is sensible and consistent with empirical evidence.
Fact 3 - Growth rate and inflation expectations are subject to randomness: this is shown by the last
two figures of this section.
Figure 1: Time series of US CPI Price Index Figure 2: Time series of US real GDP.
Figure 3: Time series of UK RPI price index. Figure 4: Time series of UK real GDP.
Figure 5: Time series of US CPI inflation. Figure 6: Time series of US real GDP growth rate.
Figure 7: Time series of UK RPI inflation. Figure 8: Time series of UK real GDP growth rate.
Figure 9: Time series of UK real GDP growth expec-Figure 10: Time series of US inflation expectations
tations (survey by Bloomberg). (survey by University of Michigan).
4.2 Comparing the DSGE model with the continuous-time model
Thissectionshowsthatthediscrete-timeDSGEmodelandthecontinuous-timemodelweproposecandeliver
similar distributions for the main economic variables if parametrized in a consistent way. Therefore in the
following section we choose the continuous-time model to develop the theory as it is superior compared to
the DSGE model as far as its analytical tractability is concerned.
Further, in the following section we show that one finds closed form expressions in the continuous-time
model to both the nominal and inflation term structure, to both nominal rates and inflation options, and to
year-on-year inflation forward, without having to resort to the linearisations and approximations proposed
earlier in this section when dealing with the discrete-time DSGE model.
Inordertoobtainsimilardistributionsforthemostrelevantfinancialquantitiesinbothcases,oneapplies
a moment-matching technique to the two models. We assume that all parameters in the continuous-time
model are expressed as right-continuous step functions and that the dimensionality of the Brownian motion
is 3. We focus our attention on second order moments, as the first order moments are straightforward to
match.
Inflation rate. In the discrete-time DSGE model, we showed that the variance of the inflation rate is:
In the next section (see 80 on page 40) we show that the diffusion term of the inflation rate (approximated
This implies that the total variance over the first year (t=0 and T =1) is (cid:80)3 [b (0)+s (0)]2.
Inthediscretetimegrid,wehavet =0andt =1. Thereforeitmakessensetomatchbothconditions
by requesting that:
i i i−1 2 i i i i i−1 I I
Short rate. A similar method can be applied to the variance of the nominal short rate, that in the DSGE
set-up is calculated as:
i+1 i i π i
Because the short term nominal rate level at time t is independent from its level at the previous time t
(this follows because the nominal rate is a linear combination of the output gap and inflation, both of which
aredrivenbyGaussianprocessesthatareindependentfromtheirownrealisationsovertime), onewritesthe
variance of the change in the nominal rate as:
i+1 i i+1 i
i i−1 i i−1 π i i−1
In the next section (see 59 on page 33) we show that the diffusion term of the nominal short rate differential
dn(t) is:
− x X p I .
The matching condition is therefore:
i i−1 i i−1 π i i−1 i i−1
=− x X p I .
Weassumethatζ(t)isamerepositivecalibrationfunction, andthattherealpositiveparametersh andh
aretakenexogenously. Infact,asshowninthenextsection,theyhaveaprecisefinancialmeaning. Thissaid,
the purpose of this exercise at this stage is simply to show that some statistical properties in two different
models can be matched.
Covariance between nominal short rate and inflation. The covariance in the DSGE model is:
i i+1 2 i 2 i π i
Because the short term nominal rate level at time t is independent from the inflation level at the same
time t (as discussed above), this covariance can be interpreted also as
Cov(p ,n )=Cov(p ,n −n ).
i i+1 i i+1 i
The correlation is calculated as follows:
Corr(p ,n −n )= 2 i 2 i π i .
2 i i i i+1 i
By doing some basic calculations, and by taking into account results 59 on page 33 and 80 on page 40, one
calculatestheinstantaneouscovarianceofthenominalshortratechangeandtheinflationratebetweentimes
t and T :
I I x X p I
Therefore the matching condition is:
i i+1 i I I x X p I
Example. To show the application of the above methodology, we simulate over the first year the GDP
growth rate, the inflation rate, and the short nominal interest rate over 5,000 Monte Carlo trials. We
assumethattheshocksintheDSGEmodelarenormallydistributedwithsomevariancesthatarecalibrated
below. The parametrisation we propose has no specific economic meaning, as we only want to show how the
moment-matching works in practice. The assumptions made on the economy and the financial market are
the following:
1. Market agents are risk-neutral. This translates in a σ parameter of 0 in the DSGE model, and in zero
market prices of risk, both in the discrete-time and in the continuous-time Gaussian processes.
2. The inflation rate is expected to be 3% in the first year, with a standard deviation of 1.1%. This
standard deviation can be either an empirical estimate or can be inferred from traded derivatives
markets. The source of this standard deviation is not relevant in this exercise.
3. The output gap is expected to be -2% in the first year.
4. The potential growth rate of the economy is 2%.
5. The equilibrium level of the short term nominal rate is 4%.
6. The standard deviation of the nominal short rate is 0.45%. The short rate is currently at 2.1%.
7. The central bank is attaching three times more importance to fighting inflation than to stimulating
growth.
8. The correlation between the nominal rate change and the inflation rate is positive (given that the
central bank is targeting inflation in a very aggressive way), and is 65%.
The time index at 1 means that the parameter is relative to the first year, that is the point in time that
we are simulating. The parametrisation we choose for the DSGE model is the following:
Parameter Value Comment
σ 0 Agents are risk-neutral
k 0.01 Prices are sticky
δ 3 The central bank fights inflation aggressively
δ 1 The central bank is not targeting growth
β 0.95 Standard subjective discount factor
Var(u ) 0.01
Var(v ) 0.01
Var(z ) 0.0001
Moving to the continuous time model, we propose the following parametrisation based on the same
economic assumptions proposed above, applying the moment matching conditions stated above. The time
indexes are either 0 (initial condition) or 1 (final condition). Between these two times one can think to
the parametric functions like a (t), a (t), b (t), b (t), s (t), and s (t) as right-continuous step functions:
X I X I I X
because the dimensionality of the Brownian motion is 3, there are three values for the volatility vectors
specified below. The Monte Carlo simulation has been run in one time step equal to one year. Finally,
some model parameters that appear in the table below have not been explained in the continuous-time
construction presented above, but are introduced in the following section. The aim of this section is simply
to show that the two models provide results that are broadly in line, however the full explanation of the
continuous-time model and of its parameters is given in the following section.
Parameter Value Value (2) Value (3) Comment
h 3 Central bank focus on growth
h 1 Central bank focus on inflation
x¯ 2% Central bank target growth
p¯ 2% Central bank target growth
ζ(0) 2.015 Please refer to next section for this parameter
a (0) 0.5%
µ (0) 4.5%
s (0) 0.01 0.01 0.01
s (0) 0.01 0.01 0.01
b (0) 0.004 -0.01 -0.00005
b (0) -0.001 0.0005 -0.0005
Results Here we show a table comparing the target levels, the results in the DSGE model, and the
results in the continuous-time model for the short rate change and the inflation rate in the first year.
Statistic Target DSGE simulation Continuous-time simulation
E[n −n ] 2% 2.01% 1.98%
E[p ] 3% 3.01% 2.97%
StDev[n −n ] 0.45% 0.42% 0.44%
StDev[p ] 1.1% 1.08% 1.07%
Corr[n −n ,p ] 65% 64.16% 69.07%
Here we show the scatter-plot of the two variables together. Both the marginal and the joint distributions
are matched well.
Figure 11: Scatter plot of 5,000 Monte Carlo simula-Figure 12: Scatter plot of 5,000 Monte Carlo simula-
tions of the DSGE model. tions of the continuous-time model.
5 Inflation derivatives pricing with a central bank reaction func-
tion: the CTCB model
In this section we propose a continuous-time model to price inflation-linked derivatives by use of a model
that explicitly takes into account the economic dynamics and the central bank behaviour. Therefore, as it
happened in the discrete-time DSGE model analysed in the previous section, the co-movement of interest
rates and inflation is not specified exogenously but rather is the result of central bank policy.
To achieve this, we make some standard assumptions regarding the structure of the financial market
(absence of arbitrage) and model the relative changes of both real GDP (Gross Domestic Product) and
Price Index using Brownian motions with stochastic drifts. Furthermore the central bank trades nominal
bonds to change the money supply in the economy, to keep the growth rate and inflation around some pre-
specifiedtargets(seeforexampleWalsh[42]). Thesebondtradeshaveanimpactonthenominalbondprices,
and therefore on the term structure of interest rates. Normally inflation-linked pricing models model the
co-movement of inflation and nominal interest rates exogenously, without specifying the economic rationale
behindthis: wethinkthatbridgingthegapbetweeneconomicsandfinanceisbeneficialforbothdisciplines.8
The advantages of this approach are manifold. Firstly, the dynamics assumed in this model appear to
be consistent with the behaviour of central banks in recent years, when significant purchases of bonds (the
so-called “quantitative easing”) have been made since short term interest rates have reached and sometimes
crossed the zero bound in many developed economies. One can ask why it is important that a pricing
model generates asset prices using realistic dynamics: after all, this could be irrelevant once the model has
calibrated to a set of market observables. The answer is that such model would fail to minimise hedging
profit and loss volatility if a dynamic hedging simulation was run and would make realistic stress testing
difficult.9
Secondly, this approach does not rely on the so-called “Forex Analogy”, which assumes the existence of
the“real”economy(seeHughston[23]). TheForexanalogyhasrootsintheeconomictheory(seeFisher[20]).
We use this only as a calculation device, however the quantities we model are all market observables: this
makesthismodeldifferentfromtheJarrow-Yildirimmodel(seeJarrow&Yildirim[29]orBrody,Crosby&Li
[9]). The main advantage is that the model parameters are calibrated in a transparent way to liquid market
observables(nominalbonds,inflationswaps,nominalandinflationcapsandfloors),asopposedtousingand
estimatingarealratevolatilitywhichishardlyobservableinthemarket. Inpractice,oneavoidstakingcostly
uncertain-parameters reserves or valuation adjustments, as required by accounting principles. Examples of
models that do not rely on the Forex Analogy can be found in Dodgson & Kainth [18], in Mercurio [34] or
in Brigo & Mercurio [7]: however none of these models is based on macroeconomic foundations.
Thirdly,althoughthemodelisextremelycomplexandtakesintoaccountmanymarketfeatures(dynamics
for the price index and the real economy, their expectations, the no-arbitrage principle, central bank policy,
liquidity effects), we show that the dynamics of the short term nominal rate can be reconciled with a well-
establishedshortinterestratemodel(thegeneralisedHull-Whitemodel, whichisatime-varyingparameters
version of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process). This provides both an elegant link with the established theory
and some closed forms for interest rates derivatives that are useful for the model calibration.
Fourthly,zero-couponandyear-on-yearforwardandoptionspricesarederivedinclosedforms: themodel
remains tractable even if is based on realistic assumptions.
Fifthly, the extension of this model to the open economy is straightforward.
Sixthly, the calibration of this model is computationally not intensive, which allows fast pricing of all
kindoftrades,frominflationoptions,toyear-on-yearcapsandfloors,tomorecomplexinflationstructuresas
LPI(LimitedPriceIndex). Themainreasonforthiscomputationalsimplicityisthatweproposeaseparable
8Another example of inflation-linked pricing model based on sound economic assumptions can be found in Hughston &
Macrina [24], Hughston & Macrina [25], and Alexander [1]: the spirit of these papers has been a source of inspiration for the
current model, as they use a microeconomic approach based on Sidrauski [39] to determine the continuous-time dynamics of
thepriceindex(howevertheydonotmodelthecentralbankreactionfunction).
9Dynamic hedging simulations can be used to assess the quality of a mode. The idea is to generate some “real world”
dynamics and assess how the delta hedging done through a model performs, in terms of reducing hedging profit and loss
volatility(“slippages”). Examplesofthesetechniquescanbefound,forexample,inRebonato[35].
calibration. This point is fully developed in the following section.
The reader interested in the inflation derivatives market can refer to some marketing notes edited by
investmentbanks,likeBarclays[3]orLehmanBrothers[31],oralternativelyDeacon,Derry&Mirfendereski
[17], Benaben [5], Campbell, Shiller & Viceira [12], McGrath & Windle [33], and J¨ackel & Bonneton [27].
6 Inflation model assumptions
6.1 Probabilistic set-up
1. The model is set in continuous time t. Time is a positive real number and is expressed in years. From
this point the notation for the continuous-time variable y at time t is y(t).
2. Randomnessismodelledviaan-dimensionalP-Brownianmotion{W(t)} . Theprobabilitymeasure
P is fully defined in the next point. The n components of the Brownian motion W(t) are independent.
3. We work with the probability triplet {Ω,F,P} equipped with the natural filtration {F } generated
by the Brownian motion {W(t)} . All filtration-related concepts are defined with respect to this
filtration. InparticularPisthereal-world(“physical”)probabilitymeasure. Ifnoprobabilitymeasure
is specified, the expectation is taken with respect to the real-world measure (P).
4. Derivatives pricing is carried out in the P measure via the pricing kernel (defined below), or in the
risk-neutral measure Q (defined as the pricing measure which is characterised by having the money
market account B(t) as numeraire), or finally in the T−forward measure QT, defined as the pricing
measure using the bond price P(t,T) as numeraire. The money market account B(t) and the bonds
P(t,T) are defined in detail in the next section. Expectations of a payoff Π taken under the generic
measure M given the information available at time t are denoted as EM[Π|F ] or alternatively EM[Π].
6.2 Financial instruments
Allinstrumentslistedbelowandtheirrelatedquantitiesaremodelledas{F } -adaptedstochasticprocesses
and are regular enough to ensure the existence of the expectations introduced later. The list of instruments
is not exhaustive but only contains the ones needed to build the model.
1. Nominal zero-coupon bonds, that pay with certainty (i.e. they are risk-free) one unit of currency
at time T, have price P(t,T) at time t. There exists a continuum of bond prices, i.e. T ∈ [t,+∞).10
From the nominal bond prices one derives all kind of rates, for example instantaneous forward rates
f(t,T) = −∂log(P(t,T))/∂T and the short rate n(t) = f(t,t). See Brigo & Mercurio [7] for further
details.
2. Money market account B(t), with dynamics dB(t)=n(t)B(t)dt, B(0)=1.
3. Price Index I(t), which is a positive stochastic process that reflects the price level of the economy.
Its dynamics are specified later in the economy set-up.
4. Zero-Coupon Inflation Index Swaps ZCIIS(t,T): the inflation leg pays I(T)/I(t)−1, while the
fixed leg pays (1 + K(t,T))T−t−1. Both payments happen at maturity T and there is no time lag.
The inflation breakeven K(t,T) is agreed at time t: there exists a continuum of inflation breakevens,
i.e. T ∈ [t,+∞)11. In a zero-coupon inflation swap the strike K(t,T) is such that at inception the
expected value at maturity of the swap is zero: EQ [((I(T)/I(t)−(1+K(t,T))T−t)B(t)/B(T))]=0.
10When calibrating the model to market observables, this assumption is relaxed because only a finite amount of bond
maturitiesarequotedonthemarket.
11When calibrating the model to market observables, this assumption is relaxed because only a finite amount of inflation
swapsmaturitiesarequotedonthemarket.
5. Inflation bonds PI(t,T), which pay at time T the level of the price index I(T), with no time lag.
There exists a continuum of inflation bond prices, i.e. T ∈[t,+∞). They are also known as “linkers”.
Because we are working in a market without liquidity concerns, the inflation dynamics implied by the
inflation bond prices are the same as the ones implied by the inflation swap market. The zero-coupon
linker price is PI(t,T) = EQ [I(T)B(t)/B(T)]. Normally these bonds have an implicit deflation floor:
the bond holder will not pay the issuer in case of deflation. This feature is ignored in this work.
6.3 Financial market
The assumptions regarding the financial market are standard:
1. There is no credit risk in the economy.
2. Thefinancialmarketisarbitrage-free. Athoroughtreatmentofabsenceofarbitrageanditsimplications
can be found in Bj¨ork [10], Cochrane [15], or Duffie [19].
3. AssumingthatweusethemoneymarketaccountB(t)asnumeraire,weareworkingintherisk-neutral
measure Q. This implies that the bond price Q-dynamics are given by
where the bond volatility σ (t,T) is an n-dimensional deterministic process.12 These volatilities are
referredtoas“model”volatilitiesinthecalibrationsection,asopposedtovolatilitiesimpliedbymarket
prices of options. The form of these bond volatilities is left general at this point, however at a later
stage we characterise them fully in terms of model parameters.
4. The Radon-Nikodym derivative L(t) = dQ/dP| has the dynamics: dL(t) = − L(t)λ(t)·dWP(t),
where λ(t) is an n-dimensional deterministic process. The process {λ(t)} is called “market price of
risk”.
5. The pricing kernel ψ(t) defined as ψ(t) = L(t)/B(t) has dynamics: dψ(t)/ψ(t) = −n(t)dt − λ(t)·
dWP(t). The pricing kernel has many useful properties, however for these purposes we remember
that P(t,T) = EP[ψ(T)/ψ(t)]. Further analysis of the pricing kernel properties can be found in
Constantinides [16], Hughston [22], Leippold & Wu [32], Shefrin [37], and Rogers [36].
6. Therealbond,whichisnotanassettradedonthemarket,isdefinedastheratiobetweentheinflation
bond and the current price index level: PR(t,T) = PI(t,T)/I(t).13 Both PI(t,T) and I(t) have
been defined previously. Using the same logic above, from the real bond prices one extracts a real
term structure of interest rates: in particular one defines the real short rate r(t) = fR(t,t), where
fR(t,T)=−∂log(PR(t,T))/∂T. The process {r(t)} is {F } -adapted and can be used to define
the real money market account BR(t), with dynamics dBR(t)=r(t)BR(t)dt: BR(t) is locally riskless
in the real risk-neutral measure QR (as B(t) is in the Q measure). One also defines the real pricing
kernel ψR(t) = I(t)ψ(t): similarly one shows that PR(t,T) = EP[ψR(T)/ψR(t)]. Furthermore, one
introduces the {F } -adapted process (cid:8) λR(t) (cid:9) , called “real market price of risk” and obtain the
7. Thedefinitionoftherealbond,realratesandrealpricingkernelissufficienttodefineanothereconomy,
labelled “real” economy. This is the cornerstone of the so-called “Forex Analogy” (see Hughston [23],
Hughston [22], or Brigo & Mercurio [7]): because one writes I(t)=ψR(t)/ψ(t), one regards the price
12Giventwon-dimensionalvectorsa,b,withcomponentsa1,...,an andb1,...,bn respectively,thenotationa·bisequivalent
to(cid:80)n
aibi. Thisnotationisusedextensivelyinthiswork. Undernocircumstancesthisnotationhastobeconfusedwitha
Stratonovichintegral.
13It is worth stressing that, although the model proposed in this paper does not require the concept of real bond and real
rates,theseareoftenfoundintheliterature: thereforeitisusefultoshowhowthesequantitiescanberecoveredinthepresent
set-up. Weuseitasacalculationdevicetoobtaintheyear-on-yearforward.
index I(t) as the exchange rate between the real and the nominal economy. With this one obtains, in
analogy with the FX spot rate drift, the risk-neutral drift for the price index:
6.4 Economy dynamics and central bank role
Wemakesomeassumptionsregardingtheeconomy. Withtheseassumptionsonemakesarealisticdescription
of the economy based on the continuous-time model, that is based on the widely-used discrete-time DSGE
macroeconomic model (presented and discussed in the previous section).
1. At time t, the closed economy is described by three positive quantities X(t),I(t), and M(t), that
represent the real output of the economy, the price level in the economy, and the money supply
respectively. The real output is an alternative expression for the real Gross Domestic Product, also
referredtoasrealGDP.Moneysupplyisdefinedasthetotalamountofcashavailableintheeconomy:
in this paper we do not distinguish between the different monetary aggregates like M1, M2, ... . The
processes {X(t)} , {I(t)} , and {M(t)} are positive {F } -adapted processes.
t≥0 t≥0 t≥0 t t≥0
2. The P-dynamics of instantaneous output and price index are defined as follows:
wherem (t)andm (t)areone-dimensionalstochastic{F } -adaptedprocesseswhosedynamicsare
to be defined below, and s (t) and s (t) are n-dimensional deterministic processes. These volatilities
are referred to as “model” volatilities in the calibration section, as opposed to volatilities implied by
market prices of options. The choice of Brownian motions for the real output and price index relative
change processes is reasonable as these quantities are always positive and have historically shown an
upward trend with some noise14. In particular we showed in the previous section that the above two
equationsforthegrowthandinflationratecanbederivedfromawell-specifiedmacroeconomicmodel.
3. The dynamics of the expectations are modelled using the SDEs:
where the processes a (t) and a (t) are one-dimensional deterministic processes and b (t) and b (t)
are n-dimensional deterministic processes.
4. We assume that the central bank is the only institution responsible for money supply. The central
bank uses the money supply as a policy tool and tries to keep the economy close to a target annual
growth rate x¯ and to a target annual inflation rate p¯. The targets x¯ and p¯are constant real numbers.
Accordingtostandardmacroeconomictheory,anincreaseinmoneysupplycanincreaseboththeprice
levelandtheoutput: thecentralbankcanattachmoreimportancetothegrowthtargetortotheprice
stability. The relative importance of these two goals is modelled with the two real positive constants
h and h . To summarise the above assumptions, we assume that the central bank policy is explained
by the newly proposed P-dynamics
14Inordertoensurethatthisassumptionisreasonable,wehaverunanormalitytest(Jarque-Bera)tothetimeseriesofthe
Eurozone GDP (quarterly readings) and Consumer Price Index (monthly readings) for the last 30 years. In both cases the
normalityassumptionsisaccepted.
This curve is also known as “central bank reaction function”.15 Here s (t) is an n-dimensional
deterministic process that measures the uncertainty around the central bank policy. These volatilities
are referred to as “model” volatilities in the calibration section, as opposed to volatilities implied
by market prices of options. The above equation can be read as follows: modulo some uncertainty
(modelled by the term s (t)· dW(t)), the central bank reduces the money supply (both −h and
−h are negative real numbers16) when inflation or output growth are above their targets. It should
be noted that the above specification for the central bank policy is similar to the Taylor rule (see
Walsh [42], Woodford [43], Taylor [40], Clarida, Dali & Gertler [14], or Clarida, Dali & Gertler [13]):
however, because the Taylor rule assumes that the short term interest rate is the monetary policy tool
(as opposed to the money supply), the Taylor rule can lead to negative policy rates, while in a low
rates environment central banks tend to use open market operations as policy tools.17
5. Thecentralbankchangesthemoneysupplybytradinginthesecondarybondmarket, whichhassome
feedback effects on bond prices. These effects are known by market participants and discounted into
themarketprices. Thecentralbankcanalsotargetsomespecificsectorsoftheyieldcurve,forexample
it can decide to sell short maturity bonds and buy longer maturities bonds to make the curve flatter
while not inflating its balance sheet.18 We assume that the relative increase in the money supply has
a linear relationship with the relative increase in the bond prices, weighted for each maturity T by a
weight function Z(T). These effects are priced by the market and are modelled by the Q-dynamics for
the money supply:
Here γ is a real constant that models the natural growth of the money supply; Z(T) is a real, positive
andincreasingdeterministicscalarfunctionofthebondmaturityT.TherequestthatthefunctionZ(T)
isalwayspositivecomesfromeconomicconsiderations: ifbondpricesincrease,nominalratesdecrease,
whichisequivalenttosayingthatthemoneysupplygoesup;inthisframeworktheinterestrateitselfis
not the policy tool, because all monetary policy is modelled via the money supply M(t). The integral
in the above expression is a deterministic one, given that at time t the quantity dP(t,T)/P(t,T) is
known for each maturity T and therefore deterministic: the integral in the above expression has to
be regarded as a way to weight the impact of relative changes in the bond prices across the different
maturities T ∈[t,t+Ω] of the term structure.19 The real positive constant Ω>0 represents the time
horizon used by the central bank to purchase or sell nominal bonds in order to influence the money
supply M(t). For example, if the central bank is trading bonds up to the 30 years maturity, one sets
15The above expression for the reaction function attaches more importance to intuition than to formal correctness: if one
wanted to write an expression containing only stochastic differentials and not involving ratios of stochastic differentials (like
dM(t)/M(t), dI(t)/I(t), or dX(t)/X(t)) one can define the reaction function in logarithmic differential terms and adjust the
equilibriumlevelsfromp¯andx¯top¯∗ andx¯∗ respectivelyforthechangeindrifts:
Intherestofthepaperwewillnotbeusingtheaboveexpressionandwilldevelopourtheoryusing37.
16Because the so-called “quantitative easing” has been implemented only in the last few years by some central banks, it is
notpossibletoprovidedata-basedestimatesoftheseparametersforthemoment.
17Thisconsiderationisevenmorerelevantinthecurrentlowratesenvironment,wherethemainoptionlefttothecentralbanks
intheUSA,UK,JapanandtheEuroareaistopurchasebondstostimulateandreflatetheeconomy(so-called“quantitative
easing”).
18The“operationtwist”implementedbytheFEDin2011isagoodexample.
19Anobservationsimilartothecommentmadeonthereactionfunctioncanbedoneatthisstage: theliquidityrelationship
canberewrittenas:
Wewillnotbeusingtheaboveexpressioninthemodeltheorydevelopment,butrather39.
the parameter Ω to 30.
Uncertaintyaroundthisrelationshipiscapturedbythestochasticdifferential,multipliedbyaliquidity
volatility deterministic n-dimensional process {s (t)} .
6. We finally require the following relationship to hold:
It should be noted that the reaction function is still stochastic as the drifts are stochastic, and that
the liquidity relationship is stochastic as the short rate is stochastic. We also note that the above
condition ensures that the diffusion term for the P-dynamics 37 is the same as the diffusion term for
the Q-dynamics 39, therefore satisfying Girsanov’s theorem.
7 CTCB Model construction
We build the pricing model, which is referred to as “Continuous-Time Central Bank” (CTCB) model in the
followingsections. Theassumptionsmadesofarcanberegardedasstandardno-arbitrageassumptionsinthe
financial market, in conjunction with some reasonable assumptions on growth and inflation rate (modelled
asBrownianmotionswithsomestochasticdrifts—historicallyGDPandpricelevelshaveshownanupward
trend with some noise). Furthermore, the central bank trades nominal bonds to keep the economy around
some target levels, and this has some (wanted) effects on the bond prices, and hence on the yield curve.
The model construction that follows puts together the financial market and macroeconomic assumptions
toobtainapricingframeworkthatisconsistentbothwiththeeconomictheoryandtheno-arbitrageprinciple.
Step1-TheQ-dynamicsoftheeconomicvariablesandexpectationsareobtainedwithGirsanovtheorem:
Step 2 - Similarly, the Q-dynamics for the central bank policy are obtained using Girsanov theorem:
Step 3 - Putting together the central bank policy equation 46 and the economy dynamics (equations 44
and 45) in the risk-neutral measure we get:
x X X X M M
Step 4 - Equating the central bank policy equation 47 and equation 39, which models the impact of
central bank policy on bond prices, we obtain:
x X X X M M
Step 5 - Combining the above and the no arbitrage condition for the bond price dynamics (32), we obtain:
P L p I I I
x X X X M M
We compact the notation by introducing the following quantities:
We note that the quantity ζ(t) is always strictly positive because the function Z(T) and the constant Ω are
requested to be strictly positive. With the above definitions the model equation becomes:
x X X X M M L
Step 6 - The no-arbitrage conditions are obtained from the above equation by collecting the terms
multiplied by dt and dW(t) in the following way:
p I I x X X M
P P p I x X M L
We note that we can equate the equation above to s (t) thanks to condition 39:
P P p I x X M L L
Some observations can be made regarding these conditions:
1. The first condition can be regarded as the risk-neutral drift for the money supply assuming that there
is no uncertainty and no monetary policy. Here we group all deterministic terms multiplied by dt.
Therefore we can refer to the constant γ as the natural money supply growth rate. We also note that
theconstantγ islikelytobepositive,giventhatthecentralbankreactionfunctionparametersh and
h arepositivebyconstructionandthatthetargetlevelsx¯andp¯arenormallypositivenumbers. This
matches the intuition that over time the money supply tends to grow, unless the central bank tries to
reduce it.
2. The second calibration conditions gives us a closed-form expression for the short rate that is used in
the following section to get the short rate dynamics. If remembers the condition 41
the calibration condition simplifies into
which shows that the second calibration condition contains all stochastic terms multiplied by dt, given
that m (t) and m (t) are stochastic.
3. The bond volatilities σ (t,T) are determined by other model parameters and can be regarded as a
combinationoftheeconomicfactorvolatilities. Thisisclearfromthethirdcalibrationcondition,which
contains all terms multiplied by dW(t). There are constraints on s (t) (see condition 41) for which
one needs to write Σ (t)=−s (t).
Step7-Topriceinflationderivatives,itcanbeusefultoworkwiththeT∗-forwardmeasure. Byusingthe
techniques detailed for example in Brigo & Mercurio [7], one obtains the inflation and bond price dynamics
under this measure:
We close this section with an observation on instantaneous correlations. In this model the same n-
dimensional Brownian motion is the source of randomness for all variables. One remembers that, given two
stochastic differential equations dX(t) = adW1(t)+bdW2(t) and dY(t) = cdW1(t)+fdW2(t) (where
{W1(t)} and {W2(t)} are two independent one-dimensional Brownian motions and a,b,c, and f are
deterministic real constants), one obtains dX(t)dY(t) = (ac+bf)dt. Perhaps we can write a general for-
mula for the instantaneous correlation ρ t using quadratic variations and covariation ρ t = √ d(cid:104)X,Y(cid:105) t =
d(cid:104)X,X(cid:105) d(cid:104)Y,Y(cid:105)
√ (ac+ √ bf) . Therefore one can in principle use the model volatilities to calibrate also market-implied in-
a2+b2 c2+d2
stantaneouscorrelationsbetweenthemacroeconomicvariables: thisideaisfurtherdevelopedinthefollowing
sections.
8 Equivalent interest rates model
Here we show that the model presented in the previous section, although is a completely new model and
is derived from macroeconomic assumptions, yields some dynamics for the short rate that follow a mean-
reverting Hull-White model. The Hull-White model, presented in Hull & White [26] and further analysed
in Brigo & Mercurio [7], is a widely-used model for the short rate n(t) that has the properties to be mean-
reverting and to calibrate to any given term structure of interest rates. Here we show how this model is
derived within the macroeconomic framework and study its mean-reverting property as a function of the
economy parameters.
The derivation is carried out as follows. The second calibration condition 51 gives an expression containing
the short term interest rate n(t):
p I I x X X M
If one differentiates this condition and remembers the condition 41 one gets:
Thereisnocovariancetermintheleft-handsideoftheabovedifferentialgiventhatζ(t)isadeterministic
quantity. One remembers the expressions for the drift differentials 42 and 43 and substitute them in the
above expression, obtaining:
p I I I x X X X
Further, one needs to calculate the differential of ζ(t):
(cid:32) (cid:82)t+Ω (cid:33)
One substitutes the above in the differential, and after rearranging one obtains:
We can express the differential of the short rate n(t):
To compact notation one defines the following terms:
This shows that the model implies some short nominal interest rates dynamics that are similar to the ones
assumed by the generalised Vasicek model:
It is important to notice that the requests made on the function Z(T) (to be an increasing and positive
function) imply that f (t) is always positive, i.e. that the nominal short rate is mean-reverting: therefore
this condition makes sense both from a financial perspective (it guarantees mean reversion) and from a
monetarymacroeconomicperspective,giventhattheserequestimpliesthathigherbondprices,andtherefore
lower interest rates, are equivalent to a higher money supply. Before doing some further analysis, we notice
that the source of randomness in the CTCB model is n-dimensional, and the volatility function σ (t) is
n-dimensionalaccordingly. TostressthedifferenceagainsttheoriginalHull-Whitemodel, wherethedriving
Brownian motion is scalar, we write the scalar Hull-White volatility as σ∗(t): one links the two processes
by asking that the total variance of the source of randomness of the CTCB model is the same as the total
variance of the Hull-White model. The relationship is:
where σi(t) is the i-th component of the n-dimensional model volatility function σ (t).
Consistently with the Hull-White model, the distribution of the short rate is Gaussian and can generate
negativeshortnominalrates: inthecurrentlowratesenvironment,whencentralbanksareexplicitlysetting
negative deposit rates, we don’t think this is a theoretical problem, rather we think that this model is
probably better suited than other positive rates models to deal with the current market conditions. In
Denmark the central bank set the short interest rate to -0.2%, the European Central Bank to -0.1%: in
practicecentralbankscansetanegativeshortratetostimulatecommercialbankstolendtoconsumersand
firms in times of economic distress.
Theonlydifferencesw.r.t. totheoriginalextendedVasicekmodelisthatthevolatilityisamultidimensional
function of time, and that the driving source of randomness is a multidimensional Brownian motion: as
explained in detail in point 4 below, one finds the volatility vector components to target a certain level of
total volatility, and therefore the marginal distribution. However these differences do not prevent us from
reaching the following conclusions:
1. If we only want to use this model to price interest rates derivatives, one calibrates the function f (t)
to the nominal forward rates observed in the market, as suggested in the original Hull-White paper,
modulo some changes. Alternatively, one uses the calibration condition ET∗[n(T)]=f(t,T).
2. The nominal bond price is such that the volatility of the relative moves is a deterministic volatility
function. This is no surprise given the original assumptions. This is important because it can simplify
the calculation of the year-on-year convexity adjustment, as shown in the following sections.
3. Thanks to the above fact one uses Black-Scholes formulas to price European bond options. In the
relevantforwardmeasureonecarriesoutdiscountingbysimplymultiplyingbythemarketbondprices.
Because it is trivial to price bond options in this model, one writes Black-type formulas for bond
options. These yield closed forms for nominal cap/floors and swaptions (using the method presented
in Jamshidian [28]): this intuition is developed in the following sections.
4. Because the process for the short rate is normal, trees can be easily constructed. In fact the n-
dimensional Brownian motion can be treated as a one-dimensional process for this purpose (this
technique is also called “flattening”, where the independent components of the Brownian motion are
“summed” and considered as a single Brownian motion with the appropriate diffusion term).
9 Further analysis on the mean-reversion property
9.1 General case
Here we analyse the mean-reversion coefficient found in the previous section (result 57) and we link it to
the general theory of mean-reverting Gaussian models developed by Hull & White [26]. Here we refer to
the original formulation of the model, where the driving Brownian motion σ∗(t) is a scalar process: one
translates it into vector by using 60. This is not a major problem, as one can “flatten” the vector volatility
into an equivalent scalar volatility that leaves the total variance unchanged.
In particular, in that paper the authors present a version of the model with time-dependent coefficients,
where the dynamics of the short rate are governed by the SDE:
For simplicity we pose the parameter b = 0, using the notation of the Hull-White original paper. They
suggest a calibration strategy that yields the model parameters as functions of two functions used to fit the
term structure of interest rates using the Ansatz P(t,T)=A(t,T)e−n(t)B(t,T). At the initial time t=0 the
positive functions A(0,T) and B(0,T) are numerically calibrated to the market term structure P(0,T).
In particular, the Hull & White find that the mean reversion speed a(t) has to satisfy the condition:
where we have made the notation lighter by defining: β(t)=B(0,t).
Further, the authors prove a calibration condition for the mean reversion level parameter θ(t):
∂logA(0,t) ∂2logA(0,t) (cid:20) ∂B(0,t) (cid:21)2(cid:90) t (cid:34) σ∗(s) (cid:35)2
Atthisstageweobservethatthetime-dependentversionoftheHull-Whitemodeldoesnotnecessarilyimply
mean reversion: in fact, the mean reversion speed coefficient a(t) is positive (i.e. there is mean reversion)
only if the sign of the first derivative β(cid:48)(t) is different from the sign of the second derivative β(cid:48)(cid:48)(t).
For example, if one takes A(0,t) = 1 (which is a legitimate choice) and if n(0) > 0, the function B(0,t)
is increasing where the term structure is upward-sloping. Let us introduce the compound spot rate for
maturity T observed at time t and denote it by Y(t,T): it is defined as the flat interest rate such that:
P(t,T)=e−Y(t,T)(T−t). If A(0,t)=1, this expression has to be equal to P(0,T)=e−n(0)B(0,T). Equalling
the two terms one gets Y(0,T)=n(0)B(0,T).
Wefocusourattentiononthemean-reversionspeed,andequatetheresultfromHull&White[26]tothe
expression found in the previous section. One draws some conclusions on the function Z(T). By equating
57 and 62 one gets:
We take a derivative of the above expression w.r.t. t:
(cid:48) (cid:48)
One rearranges the above expression as:
=− =− .
(cid:48) (cid:48)(cid:48)
one rewrites the above expression as:
u(cid:48)(t) dlog u(t)
= =α−1(t).
One recalls that the first two conditions β(cid:48)(t)(cid:54)=0, β(cid:48)(cid:48)(t)(cid:54)=0 have already been used in the above examples
and are equivalent to requiring that the term structure is not flat (a trivial case that never happens in
practice) and that the term structure is not explosive, so that mean reversion can be ensured.
This linear ODE is solved in t>t 0 to yield u(t)=u(t 0 )e
α−1(s)ds.
The meaning of the above result is a relationship between the functions Z(t) and β(t):
We make two observations from this expression:
1. To ensure mean reversion, one has to require that the function Z(t) is positive and increasing: this
request was made in the previous section and is confirmed by looking at the properties of the Hull-
White model, in particular 64. In fact, if Z(t) is positive and increasing, Z(t + Ω) > Z(t ) (an
exponential is always positive), being consistent with the request Z(t+Ω)>Z(t).
2. One uses the relationship above to calibrate the function Z(t) as a function of β(t) and A(0,t) (i.e.
the term structure of interest rates): alternatively one sets the functions A(0,t) and Z(t) using some
functional forms, and obtain the function β(t) by calibrating to the term structure. The latter seems
more appropriate, as we may want to make some assumptions on the market liquidity function Z(t).
One also impose a further calibration constraint on the model bond volatilities. In the previous section we
haveintroducedthebondvolatilitiesσ (t,T)withoutspecifyingmoredetails: takinginconsiderationresult
59 and the bond volatility formula in the Hull-White model, one imposes a further calibration condition:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
P x X p I β(cid:48)(t)
9.2 Constant mean reversion speed
WeconcludethissectionwithanobservationregardingtheconstantmeanreversionspeedoftheHull-White
model, that is used in many applications. The main result we find is that if one imposes that the function
Z(T)isanexponentialintheformZ(T)=eδT (withδ >0toensurethatZ(t)isincreasing),oneimmediately
shows that the mean reversion speed has the property:
Thisresultisinterestingfromatheoreticalperspective,becauseahighermeanreversionspeeddecreasesthe
intra-curve rates correlation, as it is well known in literature, and this has a similar meaning as increasing
the parameter δ: a higher parameter δ means that the longer maturities of the curve react more strongly to
monetary policy compared to the short end of the curve, therefore increasing the intra-curve decorrelation.
However this result has a very practical implication too: the relationship 64 can be difficult to implement
numerically,asonewantstoimposetheliquidityfunctionZ(t)andimplyβ(t)(theconversewouldbetrivial):
this could reduce the flexibility of the model.
(cid:48)(cid:48)
However, we remember result 62 and obtain the differential equation δ =−β (t), which is solved by β(t)=
e−δt. Therefore, known Z(t), one has B(0,t)=β(t). By observing from the market the short rate n(0) and
the term structure P(0,t), one uses the Ansatz P(0,T)=A(0,T)e−n(0)B(0,T) to obtain A(0,t)= P(0,t) ,
e−n(0)e−δt
whichfullycalibratesthemodeltothenominalyieldcurve. Thisresultisexploitedinthecalibrationprocess
in the following section. From this point we assume that Z(T)=eδT.
By doing some calculations one sees how the form Z(T)=eδT compares with the relationship 64:
Finally it is useful to show how the choice of Z(T) = eδT is consistent with the classical integration of the
Ohrstein-Uhlenbeckprocess: infact,giventheSDEdn(t)=[θ(t)−an(t)]dt+σ∗(t)dW(t)withknowninitial
condition n(s), one writes the differential for n(t)eat, integrates and obtains the standard result:
(cid:90) t (cid:90) t
In the above formula σ∗(u) refers to the Hull-White scalar short rate volatility. If one remembers the
calibration condition 51 one substitutes the expression for ζ(t) inside it and confirm that one gets the same
result stated in the above formula. In fact:
If one recalls the calibration condition 51 and the condition 41 one writes:
p I I x X X M p I x X
One integrates the SDEs 36 on page 28 and 35 on page 28 and obtains:
δ p I x X p I x X p I x X
where we recall the calibration condition 54 on page 31 written as n(s)= −[hpmI(s)+hxmX(s)].
Further calculations yield:
If one remembers the definitions 58 and 59, one finally obtains the desired result:
(cid:90) t (cid:90) t
In the above formula we stress that the function σ (u) is the CTCB vector short rate volatility.
10 Pricing of vanilla interest rates derivatives
Finding that our macro-based CTCB model yields a short rate model that is a Hull-White model makes
the pricing of interest rates derivatives much simpler. The main result is that, because bond prices are
lognormally distributed, one uses Black-type formulae to price bond options. Bond options are used also
to find the prices of caplets and floorlets, to price caps and floors: this is explained for example in Brigo
& Mercurio [7]. For swaptions, the method suggested by Jamishidian [28] can be followed. Closed forms
allowfasterpricingofvanillainterestratesderivatives,thereforespeedingupthecalibration. Wequotesome
results that are useful and that can be found for example in Hull & White [26] and Brigo & Mercurio [7].
In the following calculations we use the quantity P(t,T ,T ), defined as a portfolio of a long bond P(t,T )
and a short bond P(t,T ).
Lemma 1 The undiscounted price of a European vanilla option on a lognormally distributed asset X(T)
with strike K, whose logarithm has expectation E[logX(T)]=M and variance Var[logX(T)]=V2, is:
where the function N(x) is the cumulative standard Gaussian distribution, i.e. N(x) = (cid:82)x (2π)−1e−t 2 2 dt
and ω ∈{−1,1} for puts and calls respectively.
Lemma 2 The variance between times t and T of the quantity P(t,T ,T ), with t < T < T , in the
Hull-White model is
(cid:90) T1 (cid:20) σ∗(u) (cid:21)2
P 1 2 2 1 β(cid:48)(u)
Lemma 3 The price at time t of an option on the quantity P(t,T ,T ) with option maturity T and option
strike K in the Hull-White model with t<T <T is
ZBO(call,t,T
ZBO(put,t,T
,K)=−P(t,T
(cid:104) (cid:105) 1
where h= 1 log P(t,T2) + VP(t,T1,T2))2.
VP(t,T1,T2))
P(t,T1)K 2
Lemma 4 The price at time t of a caplet (floorlet) with maturity T , strike K, and notional M, on the
forward rate between times T and T , denoted as F(t,T ,T ), is the price of a put (call) option with strike
(1+K(T −T ))−1, notional M(1+K(T −T )), maturity T on the quantity P(t,T ,T ). The result is
2 1 2 1 1 1 2
model independent and we assume t<T <T .
Caplet(t,T ,T ,K,N)=M(1+K(T −T ))ZBO(put,t,T ,T ,(1+K(T −T ))−1) (71)
1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1
Floorlet(t,T ,T ,K,N)=M(1+K(T −T ))ZBO(call,t,T ,T ,(1+K(T −T ))−1). (72)
1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1
Lemma 5 The price of a coupon-bearing bond option with maturity T in the Hull-White model is equivalent
to pricing a portfolio of zero-coupon bond options using the special nominal rate n∗. Coupons paid at times
T >T are denoted by c . The last coupon includes the payment of the notional.
CBO(call,t,T,T ...T ,c ...c ,K)= c ZBO(call,t,T,T ,P(t,T ,n∗)) (73)
1 M 1 M i i i
CBO(put,t,T,T ...T ,c ...c ,K)= c ZBO(put,t,T,T ,P(t,T ,n∗)). (74)
1 M 1 M i i i
Lemma 6 The price at time t of a payer (P) swaption (that gives the right to enter at time T into a payer
swaption with fixed rate K and payment dates T > T) is equivalent to the price of a coupon-bearing bond
option. The result is model-independent.
Swtpn(P,t,T,T ...T ,K)=CBO(put,t,T,T ...T ,c ...c ,K)= c ZBO(put,t,T,T ,X ) (75)
1 M 1 M 1 M i i i
Swtpn(R,t,T,T ...T ,K)=CBO(call,t,T,T ...T ,c ...c ,K)= c ZBO(call,t,T,T ,X ) (76)
1 M 1 M 1 M i i i
Lemma 7 The price of a swaption with strike K, maturity T and payment dates T >T in the Hull-White
model is:
,K)= (cid:88) c
ZBO(put,t,T,T
,K)= (cid:88) c
ZBO(call,t,T,T
h = 1 log (cid:20) P(t,T i ) (cid:21) + V P (t,T i−1 ,T i ))1 2
i V P (t,T i ,T i−1 ))2 1 P(t,T i−1 )X i 2
We can start pricing derivatives based on the above results using the macroeconomic model defined in
the previous sections and leveraging on the equivalent short rate model.
Lemma 8 The price of bond options, caplets and floorlets, and swaptions in the CTCB model follow the
formulas proposed above with the following parametrisation
wherenisthedimensionalityoftheBrownianmotionW(t). Herebi (t)isthei-thcomponentofthevolatility
vector b (t), and bi(t) is the i-th component of the volatility vector b (t).
11 Pricing zero-coupon inflation swaps and options
InthissectionwecalculatethefullexpressionforthepriceindexI(t): itsconditionallognormalitytranslates
into closed forms (“Black type”) for zero-coupon Inflation options. This makes the model calibration much
faster. Thepriceindexdynamicsintheforwardmeasurecanbeusedtosimplifytheproblembydiscounting
via multiplication by the zero-coupon bond.
To do these analyses, we calculate the closed form dynamics of I(t) taking into account the stochastic
dynamics of its drift m (t).
We start by obtaining their T∗-forward dynamics:
I I I P I I
1 I P 2 I I
σ (t,T∗)).
We notice that g (t) is deterministic as all the quantities used to build it are deterministic. At this stage
we recall that in the CTCB model the bond option volatilities are expressed as:
The dynamics are therefore rewritten in a more compact form as:
(t).
We integrate the expression for m (s) between times t and T:
(cid:90) T (cid:90) T (cid:90) s (cid:90) T (cid:90) s
(u)ds.
Applying Fubini’s theorem, we write the integral of the price index drift in a simpler form:
(cid:90) T (cid:90) T (cid:90) T
(s).
We write the normal distribution of the integral of the drift:
(cid:32) (cid:33)
(cid:90) T (cid:90) T (cid:90) T
With the above results in mind we derive the expression for the price index level I(t):
To achieve a lighter notation, we define:
3 I 2 1 2 I I
We note that g (t) and g (t) are deterministic functions. Based on the above, we obtain the following
expression for the T∗-dynamics and the terminal distribution of I(t):
(cid:32) (cid:33)
I(T) (cid:90) T (cid:90) T (cid:90) T (cid:90) T
log = g (s)ds+ g
I(t) 3 4 3 4 4
A similar analysis can be done for X(t). We are in a position to price zero-coupon inflation options.
Lemma 9 The undiscounted price of a zero-coupon inflation option priced at time t with maturity T and
strike K in the CTCB model is
where N(x)= (cid:82)x (2π)−1e−s 2 2 ds and ω ∈{−1,1} for puts and calls respectively. Further,
(cid:90) T
M = g (s)ds
(cid:90) T
Proof. Using result 67 and the distribution of the logarithm of I(t) shown in 83 one obtains the above.
12 Pricing year-on-year inflation swaps and options
Here we focus our attention on year-on-year payoffs, that are model dependent. In fact, a convexity ad-
justment has to be introduced to take into account the co-movement of the nominal interest rate (used for
discounting between times t and T ) and the price index.
Step 1 – We work with the real economy as a calculation device, and obtain the dynamics of the real
bond, defined as:
Pr(t,T)=EQ
5 3 2 4 4 I 1 2 2 4 4 2 I I
ByapplyingIto’s lemmato Pr(t,T), andtakinginto accountthedynamics ofP(t,T)and m (t), weobtain:
where σ (t,T) = σ (t,T)+b (t)(T −t). We are not interested in the drift component, but only in the
diffusion term. This result is obtained by explicitly calculating the diffusion term:
(cid:18) ∂Pr(t,T) ∂Pr(t,T) (cid:19)
P (t,T)+(T
Step 2 – We build a T-forward martingale by building a portfolio with a zero-coupon inflation swap with
notional I(t) andmaturityT anddividebythenumeraire,i.e. thenominalbondP(t,T). Werecallamodel-
independent result that states that the present value (PV) of a zero-coupon inflation swap is the difference
between the real and nominal bond of the same maturity. We get:
WeconsiderthequantityI(t)Pr(t,T)/P(t,T),knownastheforwardpriceindex: Iˆ(t,T)=I(t)Pr(t,T)/P(t,T).
The reason why this is called forward price index is clear if one makes the following observation:
Pr(t,T)=EQ
[I(T)].
Therefore one obtains:
[I(T)].
By using Ito’s Lemma on Iˆ(t,T)=I(t)Pr(t,T)/P(t,T), we obtain its risk-neutral dynamics. Again, we
confirm that in the T-forward dynamics the forward price index has to be a positive martingale:
where s (t,T) is determined from the other model volatilities via Ito’s Lemma in the way showed below.
In particular one obtains:
Toshowthis,oneappliesIto’slemmaforthediffusionpartoftheforwardpriceindexIˆ(t,T)=I(t)Pr(t,T)/P(t,T):
(cid:32) (cid:33)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
I Pr P I I
This final step was possible thanks to the expression of the diffusion term of the real bond found in step 1.
Step 3 – By a simple application of Ito’s lemma one shows that, taken some deterministic and regular
functions a, b, and s, (here a is a scalar function, b and s are vectorial functions with the same dimension
of the driving Brownian motion W(t)) if one has two SDEs defined as dX(t)=X(t)s· dW(t) and dY(t)=
This result is used in Step 5.
Step 4 – Similarly to what is done for the BGM model, one chooses a reference tenor T∗ and changes the
dynamics of the inflation forwards to the same forward measure: an example of this technique is available
in Belgrade & Benhamou [4]. The dynamics of the inflation forwards were found in step 2: therefore we
knowexplicitlythedynamicsofIˆ(t,T )andIˆ(t,T ).Forexample, ifthereferencetenorisT oneobtainsthe
following dynamics for the inflation forwards at tenors T and T (T >T ):
j j P i P j Iˆ j Iˆ j
Step 5 – One introduces the price index ratio process I(t,T ,T )=I(t,T )/I(t,T ): using Ito’s lemma and
the results found at step 3 above one obtains its dynamics.
j i j i P i P j Iˆ j Iˆ j Iˆ j Iˆ i Iˆ j
QTi(t)].
Assuming t<t <T <T , we can write the expectation of the ratio as:
EQ t Ti[I(t h ,T j ,T i ]=I(t,T j ,T i )e (cid:82) t Tj((σP(u,Ti)−σP(u,Tj))·s Iˆ(u,Tj)+s Iˆ(u,Tj)·s Iˆ(u,Tj)−s Iˆ(u,Ti)·s Iˆ(u,Tj))du.
Step 6 –Welinkthepriceindexratiototheyear-on-yearpayoff: theyear-on-yearforwardcanbeexpressed
as an expectation of I:
t i j t i i j j t Tj i i j j t j i j j
EQ t Ti[I(T j ,T j ,T i ]=I(t,T j ,T i )e (cid:82) t Tj((σP(u,Tj)−σP(u,Ti))·s Iˆ(u,Tj)+s Iˆ(u,Tj)·s Iˆ(u,Tj)−s Iˆ(u,Ti)·s Iˆ(u,Tj))du =
We give the following lemma, thanks to the analysis done above.
Lemma 10 The undiscounted price of a year-on-year inflation caplet/floorlet priced at time t with maturity
T and strike K in the CTCB model is
where N(x) = (cid:82)x (2π)−1e−t 2 2 dt and ω ∈ {−1,1} for floorlets and caplets respectively. The year-on-year
inflation is calculated between times T and T . Further,
(cid:90) Tj (cid:90) Ti
P i P j Iˆ j Iˆ j Iˆ j Iˆ i Iˆ j 3
(cid:90) Ti
Iˆ i Iˆ j Iˆ i Iˆ j
Proof. Using result 67, the result in step 6, and the distribution of the logarithm of I(t) shown above one
obtains the result.
13 Single currency derivatives pricing simulation
To test the results found in the previous sections, we implemented a Monte Carlo simulation and the closed
forms for zero-coupon and year-on-year inflation options. We have run 20,000 simulations over 10 years,
and here we show the results, the standard error and the closed form results. We price caps with strikes 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 percent with maturities from 1 to 10 years. We assume that the dimensionality of the driving
Brownian motion is 3.
For this simulation, we assume the following set of parameters, that are constant over time: a (t) = 0%,
I X I X I P I
incaseofvectorfunctions,likethevolatilities,weassumethatthevalueisthesameforallthe3components.
For this analysis we have only presented the parameters that are directly relevant for the pricing of inflation
derivatives: a full calibration exercise is presented in the following section.
The data show that there is good agreement between the Monte Carlo simulation (denoted as MC PV in
thefollowingtables)andtheclosedforms(denotedasPVforms)andthatthenumberofsimulationsishigh
enough to control the numerical error.
The results for zero-coupon options are the following (strikes in columns, maturities in rows):
MC PV 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00209 0.00006 0 0 0 0
2 0.00772 0.00058 0 0 0 0
3 0.01804 0.00268 0.00009 0 0 0
4 0.03359 0.00784 0.00056 0.00001 0 0
5 0.05477 0.01731 0.00219 0.00009 0 0
6 0.08208 0.03225 0.00625 0.00046 0.00002 0
7 0.11599 0.05352 0.01421 0.00167 0.00009 0
8 0.15721 0.08208 0.02753 0.00475 0.00038 0.00002
9 0.20641 0.1188 0.04775 0.01112 0.00129 0.00008
10 0.26444 0.16451 0.07619 0.02256 0.00363 0.00032
MC Error 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00002 0 0 0 0 0
2 0.00006 0.00002 0 0 0 0
3 0.00012 0.00005 0.00001 0 0 0
4 0.00018 0.0001 0.00003 0 0 0
5 0.00027 0.00018 0.00006 0.00001 0 0
6 0.00036 0.00027 0.00012 0.00003 0 0
7 0.00047 0.00039 0.00021 0.00007 0.00002 0
8 0.0006 0.00052 0.00033 0.00014 0.00004 0.00001
9 0.00074 0.00068 0.00049 0.00024 0.00008 0.00002
10 0.00091 0.00086 0.00067 0.00038 0.00015 0.00004
PV - form 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00212 0.00006 0 0 0 0
2 0.00779 0.00059 0.00001 0 0 0
3 0.01814 0.00271 0.00009 0 0 0
4 0.03374 0.00786 0.00057 0.00001 0 0
5 0.05502 0.0174 0.00224 0.00009 0 0
6 0.08244 0.03244 0.00631 0.00047 0.00001 0
7 0.11649 0.05391 0.01427 0.00172 0.00008 0
8 0.15781 0.08265 0.02766 0.00483 0.00038 0.00001
9 0.20712 0.11952 0.04799 0.01121 0.00133 0.00007
10 0.26534 0.16545 0.07674 0.02262 0.00371 0.00031
Difference: PV - form, MC sim. 0 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 -0.00003 0 0 0 0 0
2 -0.00006 -0.00001 0 0 0 0
3 -0.0001 -0.00003 0 0 0 0
4 -0.00015 -0.00003 -0.00001 0 0 0
5 -0.00025 -0.00009 -0.00005 0 0 0
6 -0.00036 -0.00019 -0.00007 -0.00002 0 0
7 -0.0005 -0.00038 -0.00006 -0.00005 0.00001 0
8 -0.0006 -0.00057 -0.00013 -0.00008 0 0
9 -0.00071 -0.00073 -0.00025 -0.00009 -0.00004 0.00001
10 -0.0009 -0.00095 -0.00055 -0.00006 -0.00008 0.00001
The results for year-on-year options are the following:
MC PV 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.0021 0.00006 0 0 0 0
2 0.00621 0.00114 0.00007 0 0 0
3 0.01081 0.00375 0.00066 0.00005 0 0
4 0.01562 0.00736 0.00229 0.00041 0.00004 0
5 0.02055 0.01159 0.0049 0.00141 0.00025 0.00003
6 0.02549 0.01611 0.0083 0.00322 0.00087 0.00015
7 0.03051 0.0209 0.01233 0.00588 0.00212 0.00055
8 0.03558 0.02581 0.01672 0.00922 0.0041 0.00142
9 0.04066 0.0308 0.02139 0.01311 0.00681 0.00288
10 0.04566 0.03575 0.02613 0.01731 0.01005 0.00493
MC Error 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00002 0 0 0 0 0
2 0.00004 0.00002 0 0 0 0
3 0.00006 0.00004 0.00002 0 0 0
4 0.00007 0.00006 0.00003 0.00001 0 0
5 0.00008 0.00007 0.00005 0.00003 0.00001 0
6 0.00009 0.00008 0.00007 0.00004 0.00002 0.00001
7 0.0001 0.00009 0.00008 0.00006 0.00004 0.00002
8 0.00011 0.0001 0.00009 0.00008 0.00005 0.00003
9 0.00011 0.00011 0.00011 0.00009 0.00007 0.00004
10 0.00012 0.00012 0.00012 0.0001 0.00008 0.00006
PV - form 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00002 0 0 0 0 0
2 0.00004 0.00002 0 0 0 0
3 0.00006 0.00004 0.00002 0 0 0
4 0.00007 0.00006 0.00003 0.00001 0 0
5 0.00008 0.00007 0.00005 0.00003 0.00001 0
6 0.00009 0.00008 0.00007 0.00004 0.00002 0.00001
7 0.0001 0.00009 0.00008 0.00006 0.00004 0.00002
8 0.00011 0.0001 0.00009 0.00008 0.00005 0.00003
9 0.00011 0.00011 0.00011 0.00009 0.00007 0.00004
10 0.00012 0.00012 0.00012 0.0001 0.00008 0.00006
Difference: PV - form, MC sim. 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5%
1 0.00003 0 0 0 0 0
2 0.00068 0.00065 0.00006 0 0 0
3 0.00036 0.0007 0.00034 0.00004 0 0
4 0.00019 0.00051 0.00053 0.0002 0.00003 0
5 0.00011 0.00034 0.0005 0.00035 0.00011 0.00002
6 0 0.00016 0.00036 0.00041 0.00022 0.00006
7 -0.00002 0.00008 0.00028 0.0004 0.00031 0.00014
8 -0.00002 0.00005 0.00018 0.00033 0.00035 0.00024
9 0 0.00004 0.00014 0.00029 0.00038 0.00032
10 -0.00006 -0.00004 0.00004 0.00017 0.0003 0.00033
14 Extension to the open economy
In this setting one also prices inflation derivatives struck in a different currency. To do this, one simply
defines the quantities defined in the previous sections also for the foreign economy and then introduces a
domestic risk-neutral process for the FX rate {Y(t)} , expressed in the FORDOM convention. One as-
sumes that the foreign economy works in a similar way, that there is a foreign central bank and that there
is a liquidity relationship in the foreign bond market between foreign bond prices and foreign money supply.
In particular, all parameters for the foreign economy variables are the same used in the domestic one, with
an index f.
The dynamics of the foreign assets and other quantities are:
Xf Xf Xf Xf
If If If If
We are assuming that the same Brownian motion drives both the domestic and the foreign economy. In
particular the parameters for the foreign short rate dynamics are defined in the same way as the domestic
ones:
1 p If x Xf
n x Xf p If
By changing the numeraire in the foreign economy from Bf(t) to Y(t)Bf(t), one achieves the domestic risk-
neutral dynamics for the foreign economic variables. This translates into a change of drift of s (t)·s (t),
where s (t) is the Brownian volatility for a generic model variable.
15 Uncertain-parameters extension: modelling the inflation smile
The model presented gets its randomness from an n-dimensional Brownian motion W(t). In principle, one
extends the theory proposed to the Merton jump-diffusion case, which could add flexibility especially to
model inflation options skew. Here we show that the Merton equation can be obtained in the framework
proposed above if one assumes that the model has uncertain parameters. An uncertain-parameters model
is a model whose parameters can take random values that are known at inception. Normally one assumes
that there is a finite number of possible levels for the parameters and that the parameter set is determined
loosely speaking one instant before the process starts. The distributions of the state variables are mixtures
of distributions. For an introduction to these models one can see Brigo & Mercurio [7].
In the Merton Model the source of randomness is the process Λ(t)=s (t)W(t)+
−1), where:
1. N(t) is a Poisson process with intensity h independent from the Brownian motion W(t) and the jump
sizes J ,J ,...
2. ThelogarithmofthejumpsizeJ hasanormaldistributionwithconstantmeanµ andvariance(δ )2.
Therefore the expected jump size is E[J −1]=eµJ+ 2 1(δJ)2 −1=k. The logarithm of the jump size is
also independent from the Brownian motion W(t).
3. The drift of the process has been adjusted to take into account the compensator: µ (t)−hk.
For simplicity, here we consider a one-dimensional source of randomness. The equation governing the evolu-
tion of the price index would read:
As Merton has showed, because the distribution of J is lognormal, the distribution of log[I(T)/I(t )] is still
normal conditional to the event {N(T)=n}.
Therefore one regards such model as an uncertain-parameters model, where, with probability Q(N(T)=
n)=e−hT(hT)n/n!, the SDE for I(t) is:
(t)−hk+n(µ
ThereforethetheorydevelopedsofarfortheBrowniancaseisextendedtotheMertoncasebymakingsome
assumptions regarding uncertain model parameters.
16 Model calibration and applications
Here we propose a strategy to calibrate the CTCB model to market observables by finding suitable model
parameters, and show some practical applications. Two main advantages become apparent: firstly, the
CTCB calibration process is separable and model is analytically tractable and secondly, because it is based
oneconomictheory,onerunssomeeconomicstressscenariosandobtainstheanswersdirectlyfromthemodel
itself, without making assumptions on how an economic shock would impact on financial quantities such as
inflation and rates volatilities.
16.1 At-the-money calibration strategy
Wearecalibratingthemodelattimet =0: wearestillmakingtheassumptionthatthemarketobservables
are continuous functions of the maturity, to keep the notation light (this assumption is removed in the
next sections). When calibrating vector parameters, like b (t) or s (t) to name a few, we do not make
any assumptions regarding how the total quantity needed to calibrate the model is split across the single
components to model instantaneous correlations: this topic is analysed later.
16.2 Calibration steps: a first strategy
1. One makes explicit the assumptions on the structural parameters of the model, namely the reaction
functionparametersh andh ,thereactionfunctiontargetsx¯andp¯,theliquidityhorizonofthecentral
bank Ω, and the function Z(T)=eδT by choosing the parameter δ >0. In practice, these parameters
are to be regarded not as a target for the calibration, but as an input from economic research that
is expected to stay constant over time. The GDP volatility s (t) can be regarded as an input of the
model, and therefore estimated based on some historic data.
2. If one knows the parameter δ > 0, one writes Z(T) = eδT and ζ(t) = (cid:82)t+Ω Z(T)dt = (δ−1)(eδ(t+Ω)−
eδt). Further one finds the function β(T) = B(0,T) = e−δT: we remind the reader that this function
is the one used in the Ansatz P(t,T)=A(t,T)e−n(t)B(t,T) that characterises the nominal bond prices
P(t,T) as a function of the short rate n(t). Once B(0,t) is found, from the market bond prices
P(0,T) and the market quote for n(0) one deduces the function A(0,T) = P(0,T)/e−n(0)e−δT. One
should remember that the functions A(t,T) and B(t,T) are not core functions of the CTCB model,
but are only relevant to its dual Hull-White model. Finally, if needed one gets the function B(t,T)=
result in the Hull-White model.
3. By exploiting the fact that a CTCB model implies an equivalent (dual) Hull-White model for the
short rate n(t), one calculates the mean reversion speed a(t): as proved in the previous section, the
parametrisation Z(T)=eδT implies that the mean reversion speed is constant and equivalent to δ; in
fact we recall that
We notice that we are still missing the short rate volatility σ∗(t) and the market price of risk λ(t) to
get the mean reversion level function θ(t). This function is found in the following steps.
4. One takes the market quotes of at-the-money caps and floors: from these it is straightforward to get
the single at-the-money caplets and floorlets. These are sensitive to the interest rate volatility, and
can be used to calibrate some CTCB model volatilities: we recall that at time t the price of a caplet
with strike K on the Libor between times T and T is equivalent to the price of a put option with
expiryT onazero-couponbondwithmaturityT >T . Thepriceofsuchoptioncanbeobtained
in closed form via a Black-type formula in the Hull-White model, where the total variance used for
pricing is:
(cid:90) Ti−1 (cid:20) σ∗(u) (cid:21)2
i−1 i i i−1 β(cid:48)(u)
Because β(T)=B(0,T)=e−δT and β(cid:48)(T)=∂B(0,T)/∂T =−δe−δT , the above is written as:
(cid:90) Ti−1 (cid:20) σ∗(u) (cid:21)2
Finally, we recall that in the equivalent Hull-White model the short rate volatility was expressed as:
n x X p I x X p I
One should refer to 60 to show how one moves from the scalar original Hull-White volatility σ∗(t) to
the short rate n-dimensional model volatility in the CTCB model, denoted as σ (t).
Therefore, attheendofthisstepwehavefullycalibratedtheCTCBmodeltothenominaltermstruc-
ture and at-the-money caps-floors volatilities, and found the economic expectation volatility functions
b (t) and b (t): one chooses these functions to ensure that the model at-the-money cap-floors prices
match the ones observed in the market. If one wanted to use the CTCB model to price nominal rate
derivatives, thecalibrationprocesscouldbeendedhere. Alternatively, onespecifiesthefunctionb (t)
based on historic data and only calibrate b (t).
5. Afirstconsequenceoftheaboveresultisthat,exploitingthestandardresultσ (t,T)=−σ (t)B(t,T)
in the Hull-White model, we can write explicitly the bond volatilities: these are needed either if one
needs to simulate Libor rates F(t,T ,T ) = (P(t,T )/P(t,T )−1)/(T −T ) or when building
i−1 i i−1 i i i−1
the drift adjustment to move to the T∗-forward measure. Making all dependencies explicit we write
6. The function A(t,T) can be made explicit using a standard Hull-White result:
∂logA(0,t) 1 (cid:20) ∂B(0,t) (cid:21)2(cid:90) t (cid:34) σ (s) (cid:35)2
logA(t,T)=logA(0,T)−logA(0,t)−B(t,T) − B(t,T) n ds.
7. Wecalibratetotheinflationvolatilitiesimpliedbythemarket. Werecallthatthetotalvarianceofthe
quantitylog(I(T)/I(0))is g (s)·g (s)dswhereg (t)=(T−t)b (t)+s (t). Thereforeonefindsthe
0 4 4 4 I I
function s (t), under the constraint that we know already the function b (t), using the closed forms
for inflation zero-coupon options that we found in the previous section.
8. At this stage one has enough information to calibrate the model to the inflation breakeven strikes
from zero-coupon inflation swaps, remembering that the expectation of the quantity log(I(T)/I(0)) is
(cid:82)T g (s)ds where we recall the definitions of g (t) = −s (t)·(λ(t)−s (t,T∗)), g (t) = a (t)−b (t)·
0 3 1 I P 2 I I
P 3 I 2 1 2 I I
themarketpricesofriskfunctionλ(t)andtheinflationexpectationdriftfunctiona (t). Alternatively,
one specifies the market price of risk λ(t) based on historic data and calibrates only a (t). The former
alternativeiswellsuitedforrelativevalueanalysis,i.e. thetrader,basedonaviewoftheeconomyand
theobservedmarketprices,impliesthemarketpricesofrisksimpliedbymarketprices,andgaugesthe
illiquidity spots or the inconsistencies between the market participants’ risk preferences. The latter is
moresuitedtoreplicatemarketprices,i.e. thetradermakesanassumptiononthemarketriskaversion
and implies the implied paths for the price index and GDP growth expectations.
9. We can write the Hull-White equivalent mean reversion level by exploiting the standard result:
∂logA(0,t) ∂2logA(0,t) (cid:20) ∂B(0,t) (cid:21)2(cid:90) t (cid:34) σ (s) (cid:35)2
This result is used to find the growth expectation drift function a (t) remembering that the mean
reversion level in the Hull-White equivalent model was given by θ(t)=[−h a (t)−h a (t)]/ζ(t).
10. The previous two points can be compacted into one, if one assumes to know the expectation drifts
a (t) and a (t) and therefore calibrates only the market price of risk λ(t).
11. Finally, onerecallsthevolatilitycondition41tocalculates (t)=h s (t)+h s (t): thesevolatilities
may be needed to run a full simulation of the model but are not needed to price derivatives.
16.3 Calibration steps: an alternative strategy
Here we propose a minor change to the calibration strategy proposed above that can be introduced in order
to ensure full calibration of the model. In fact, we are calibrating the functions b (t) and b (t) first, based
on the market prices of nominal caps and floors (step 4): in a second step (step 7) we find the function s (t)
thatcalibratesthemarketpricesofinflationzero-couponoptions. Inthissteptherecanbeaproblem, given
that the total variance is g (s)·g (s)ds, where g (t) = (T −t)b (t)+s (t): the function s (t) in some
0 4 4 4 I I I
casescanonlyincreasethetotalvariancegivenb (t),andthefunctionb (t)ismultipliedbyT−t,whichcan
lead to excessive impliedvarianceat longmaturities. In practice, in some casesthe modelmay notcalibrate
to inflation zero-coupon options, because it can not reduce the implied variance below a certain threshold.
If inflation volatilities are too low, full calibration to the inflation option prices may not be achieved.
To overcome this problem, we suggest to calibrate the functions b (t) and s (t) to inflation zero-coupon
options across all maturities as a first step, and then to use the function b (t) to calibrate the nominal
caps and floors: the advantage is that the calibration is guaranteed in both inflation and caps and floors
volatilities. However the trader can not freely mark the output expectation volatilities b (t), which was
possible in the approach proposed originally. We do not have an explicit preference for either approach: the
choice depends on whether one wants to control the output expectation volatilities b (t) or guarantee a full
calibration to option prices. We decided to show both strategies as the first one is perfectly suited, up to
step6, tocalibrateonlytothenominaltermstructure, whichcanbedonetopriceinterestratesderivatives.
16.4 Variance split and calibration to correlations
In the steps of the previous section we found some model volatilities, namely b (t), b (t), s (t), and s (t).
Because these processes are multidimensional with dimension n, given some option prices one wants to
calibrate to, there are multiple ways to split the total variance into its components. We regard this fact as
an opportunity to calibrate to an instantaneous correlation structure that the trader can choose.
Let us take the model volatility process b (t): all we say for it can be exactly extended to the remaining
threeprocesses. Weintroducesomeweights,calledwi withi=1,2,...,nandsuchthat (cid:80)n [wi ]2 =1.
Onewritesv = (cid:80)n [bi(t)]2,wherebi(t)isthei-t b h I( c t o ) mponentofb (t): inpracticethecal i i = b 1 rati b o I n (t) process
bI(t) i=1 I I I
proposedintheprevioussectiononlyyieldsthetotalvariancev thatmatchesmarketoptionprices. One
defines [bi(t)]2 =v [wi ]2 and the total variance is split according to some pre-defined weights: this is
doneforallfourmodelvolatilities,yieldingthetotalvariancesv ,v ,v ,andv ,assumingthat
one knows the weights wi , wi , wi , and wi .
These four sets of weights can be determined in a way to target a given instantaneous correlation level.
Thevariablesforwhichwewanttoimposeacorrelationstructurearethechangesintheshortratedn(t),and
relative changes in the price index dI(t)/I(t). Perhaps one may also be interested to impose a correlation
structure that includes the relative changes of the real GDP dX(t)/X(t). We assume we know the market-
implied 3 x 3 correlation matrix.
Wewanttofindtheweightswi ,wi ,wi ,andwi sothattheinstantaneousmodelcorrelations
are as close as possible to the market-implied correlations: clearly there is a trade-off between the accuracy
of this fit and the dimensionality n of the Brownian motion {W(t)} . A high enough dimensionality n
can ensure a perfect fit, however this would make the model overparametrised and difficult to manage. The
accuracyismeasuredasthesquaredifferencebetweenthemarketimpliedcorrelationρMKT (t)ofthegeneric
variablesa(t)andb(t)andthemodelcorrelationsρMOD (t): herea(t)∈V ={dn(t),dI(t)/I(t),dX(t)/X(t)}
and b(t)∈V.
We know the model volatility functions for the 3 variables in closed form from the previous section, for
the short rate change, for the price index relative change, and for the output relative change respectively:
ModelVol(n(t))= x X p I
In general, for two generic driftless scalar real processes Y(t) and Z(t), four real constants a,b,c,f, two n-
dimensionalvectorvolatilitydeterministicrealprocesses{s (t)} and{s (t)} ,andforann-dimensional
1 t≥0 2 t≥0
Brownianmotion{W(t)} withindependentcomponents,wecanassumethefollowingdynamicequations:
We drop the time dependency to make the notation lighter and write the above as a sum of component-by-
component products. The Brownian motion differential components are denoted by dW , while the single
volatility components are denoted by si and si:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
dY =a sidW +b sidW
(cid:88) (cid:88)
dZ =c sidW +f sidW .
We substitute the single components using the total variance technique proposed above, writing [si]2 =
v [wi]2 and [si]2 =v [wi]2:
dY =a (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +b (cid:88) v 1 2[wi]dW
1 1 i 2 2 i
dZ =c (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +f (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW .
1 1 i 2 2 i
We want to write the instantaneous correlation between dY(t) and dZ(t), written as
(cid:104)dY(t),dZ(t)(cid:105)
ρ (t)= .
dY(t),dZ(t) [(cid:104)dY(t),dY(t)(cid:105)(cid:104)dZ(t),dZ(t)(cid:105)]2 1
By doing the calculations and thanks to the independence of the components of the Brownian motion, one
gets:
(cid:34) n n (cid:35)(cid:34) n n (cid:35)
(cid:104)dY,dZ(cid:105)= a (cid:88) v 1 2[wi]dW +b (cid:88) v 1 2[wi]dW c (cid:88) v 1 2[wi]dW +f (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW =
1 1 i 2 2 i 1 1 i 2 2 i
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
n n n (cid:40) n (cid:41)
(af+bc)v2 1 v2 1 (cid:88) wiwidt+acv (cid:88) [wi]2dt+bfv (cid:88) [wi]2dt= (af +bc)v2 1 v 1 2 (cid:88) wiwi +acv +bfv dt.
1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
For the denominator terms one writes similarly:
(cid:34) n n (cid:35)(cid:34) n n (cid:35)
(cid:104)dY,dY(cid:105)= a (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +b (cid:88) v 1 2[wi]dW a (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +b (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW =
1 1 i 2 2 i 1 1 i 2 2 i
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
(a2v +b2v )dt+2abv2 1 v 1 2 (cid:88) wiwidt
1 2 1 2 1 2
(cid:34) n n (cid:35)(cid:34) n n (cid:35)
(cid:104)dZ,dZ(cid:105)= c (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +f (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW c (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW +f (cid:88) v2 1 [wi]dW =
1 1 i 2 2 i 1 1 i 2 2 i
i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1
(c2v +f2v )dt+2cfv 1 2v 1 2 (cid:88) wiwidt.
1 2 1 2 1 2
One therefore writes:
(af +bc)v2 1 v 1 2 (cid:80)n wiwi +acv +bfv
ρ (t)= 1 2 i=1 1 2 1 2 .
2 1 (cid:80)n
i]2 1[(c2v
1 2 (cid:80)n
It is clear that the above generic parametrisation is a slight simplification of the format of all SDEs in the
CTCB model, and therefore can be used as a general framework (the simplification is that in the above
example for clarity we have assumed only two model volatility functions s (t) and s (t), while the CTCB
hasfour,namelyb (t),b (t),s (t),ands (t)). Herewenoticethat,knownsomemodelparametersa,b,c,f
and the total variances v and v from the previous calibration step, one chooses the weights wi and wi to
target a specific correlation level.
For example, to get ρMKT (t), one writes:
ρMKT (t)= n I I
By doing the calculations one gets to the final result.
This example shows that all model correlations can be computed in closed form as a function of the
known model parameters and the unknown model volatilities weights wi , wi , wi , and wi .
The non-linear optimisation problem can be formalised as follows:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
min [ρMKT (t,wi ,wi ,wi ,wi )−ρMOD (t)]2 (96)
under the constrains: (cid:80)n [wi ]2 =1, (cid:80)n [wi ]2 =1, (cid:80)n [wi ]2 =1, (cid:80)n [wi ]2 =1.
17 At-the-money calibration results
17.1 Technical assumptions
We make some operational assumptions to deal with the data, and they are not to be considered part of the
core model construction; however we make explicit here. In general, when making choices, we assume we
want to maximise the calibration accuracy for pricing purposes, as a market maker would do.
1. Weassumethatallmodelfunctionsb (t),s (t),a (t),b (t),s (t),anda (t)asstepfunctions,where
I I I X X X
the discontinuities are located at the quoted maturities.
2. We linearly interpolate the market observables at equally spaced time steps, where the time interval is
one year. The market observables are the nominal interest curve, the inflation zero-coupon curve, the
prices of at-the-money caplets, and the prices of at-the-money zero-coupon inflation options.
3. At-the-money caplets are not directly traded in the market, but are recovered as differences between
the PV of the at-the-money caps of two maturities.
4. Thepricesofzero-couponinflationoptionsarenotquotedforat-the-moneystrikesbutforfixedstrikes,
therefore a second linear interpolation across strikes is done for each maturity.
5. We assume that the market prices of risk are constant and equal to zero for all components: therefore
one implies the risk-neutral paths for the expected inflation and growth rate.
6. We calibrate inflation options first and then nominal caplets, by keeping the function b (t) constant.
Therefore we use the “alternative strategy” detailed in the previous section 17.2.
7. The dimensionality of the driving Brownian motion is 3. The choice appears to be a good compromise
between model simplicity and calibration flexibility.
8. For the zero-finding routine, we used Newton’s method with maximum 5,000 iterations and absolute
price difference tolerance of 0.00000001.
9. The integrals such as the ones in 91 are calculated using the rectangles method with a time interval of
0.01 years.
10. The weights used in the correlation targeting step to allocate the variance between the different com-
ponents of the noise source are assumed to be constant over time.
11. The correlations assumed are: -60% for interest rates/inflation, -60% for interest rates/growth, and
70%forinflation/growth;theyarechosenbyfollowingstandardeconomictheory. Higherinterestrates
reduce growth and inflation. Higher growth normally brings about higher inflation.
17.2 Economic assumptions
We made the following assumptions regarding the static model parameters.
Parameter Level
This model parametrisation is certainly subjective, however it reflects our view that the European Central
Bank (ECB) under governor Draghi is attaching more importance to growth than inflation (therefore h >
h ) in the last years. The ECB’s official inflation target is 2%, and it is consensus between economists that
thelongtermgrowthrateofadevelopedeconomyshouldbearound2%: hencewesetp¯=0.02andx¯=0.02.
Finally, up to 2012 the ECB had no tradition of quantitative easing on long maturities (like, for example,
the FED): therefore we cap the maturity of the instruments used for monetary policy to 5 years (Ω = 5).
The choice of δ has been made as follows: in the Hull-White model, this parameter is the product between
the long-term equilibrium level for the short interest rate and the adjustment speed. Because interest rates
are at historic lows, we assume a much higher equilibrium level at 4%: further, an acceptable adjustment
speed is 1.25, therefore yielding δ = 0.05. To ensure the stability of the calibration, these parameters have
been shocked and the model was recalibrated satisfactorily.
17.3 Market data
We calibrate the model to the European inflation market as of 7th December 2012 (data show below).
Maturity (years) Nominal IR Inflation ZC B/E ATM Caplet PV ATM ZC Infl. Option PV
1 0.0022 0.0152 0.0007 0.0039
2 0.0026 0.016 0.0017 0.0086
3 0.0045 0.0163 0.0044 0.0147
4 0.0063 0.0166 0.0055 0.0234
5 0.0081 0.017 0.0076 0.0317
6 0.01 0.0173 0.0094 0.0402
7 0.0118 0.0176 0.0108 0.0483
8 0.0136 0.0182 0.0119 0.0594
9 0.0152 0.0189 0.0127 0.0696
10 0.0168 0.0195 0.0134 0.079
17.4 Correlation targeting
Correlation targeting has been has been achieved by finding the variance weights wi , wi , wi , and
wi under constraints. Given that the dimension of the Brownian motion is 3, we have to find 8 weights
(2weightsforeachfunction,giventhatthethirdiscalculatedfromtherequestthatthesumoftheirsquares
hastobe1). Weassumedthattheweightsareconstantovertime. Theresultofthenumericaloptimisationis:
i=1 i=2 i=3
wi 0.20285 0.13219 0.97024
wi -0.95101 -0.02865 0.30781
wi 0.14035 0.10000 0.98503
wi 0.85195 -0.07168 0.51868
Interestingly the weights for b (t) and s (t) have the same sign across the 3 components, which is consistent
withtheoriginalideaoftheDSGEmacroeconomicmodel, i.e. inflationdependsheavilyonitsexpectations.
Instead, the first component shows different signs for b (t) and s (t), which is consistent with the idea of
productivity shocks, i.e. that the growth expectations can differ from realised growth rates.
17.5 Results
The following model parameters have been found for the price index processes:
Maturity (years) b1(t) b2(t) b3(t) s1(t) s2(t) s3(t) a (t)
I 2 3 I I I I
1 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.000273 0.005481 0.007732 -0.000059
2 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.000512 0.010292 0.014518 0.001543
3 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.000783 0.015726 0.022182 -0.000174
4 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001167 0.023437 0.03306 0.000697
5 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001317 0.026467 0.037333 0.00026
6 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001461 0.029347 0.041396 0.00016
7 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001517 0.030486 0.043003 0.00043
8 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001919 0.038553 0.054382 0.003361
9 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001895 0.038063 0.053691 0.000545
10 -0.000269 0.000314 0.000911 0.001803 0.036218 0.051088 0.00151
The following model parameters have been found for the GDP processes:
Maturity (years) b1 (t) b2 (t) b3 (t) s1 (t) s2 (t) s3 (t) a (t)
X X X X X X X
1 -0.003463 -0.000807 0.001562 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.009337
2 -0.008657 -0.002016 0.003905 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.015211
3 -0.024641 -0.005739 0.011115 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.008325
4 -0.022408 -0.005219 0.010107 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.013803
5 -0.038067 -0.008867 0.01717 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.013651
6 -0.045838 -0.010677 0.020675 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.013985
7 -0.049767 -0.011592 0.022448 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.013004
8 -0.053907 -0.012556 0.024315 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.015206
9 -0.05733 -0.013353 0.025859 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.012411
10 -0.05733 -0.013353 0.025859 0.009875 0.000464 0.001507 -0.009437
In all cases the absolute calibration error has been below the threshold of 0.0000001.
18 Applications
18.1 Derivatives risk as a function of the central bank reaction function
We price a 2% zero-coupon inflation cap with 10 years maturity and 1 EUR notional in the CTCB model
and then shock the central bank reaction function parameters. In this way we assess the impact of a sudden
(and not hedgeable) change in the central bank reaction function (or, more practically, of a new president
of the central bank who may have different views compared to the current one).
In particular we find that inflation delta (defined as the change in PV when the inflation curve is shifted
up by 1 basis point) is not sensitive to the central bank reaction function parameters (we shock separately
the parameters h and h by 0.5 and in both cases the inflation delta stays at 0.04447): this is expected as
the sensitivity of an inflation claim to inflation should mainly depend on the inflation level and not by the
central bank reaction function.
18.2 Inflation book macro-hedging in the CTCB model
Letusassumethataninvestmentbankhassoldalowstrikeinflationfloor, whichisapopularhedgeagainst
deflation: for example a macro hedge fund may want to buy protection against a deflation scenario. This
trade would probably make good margin for the bank, given the relative low liquidity of low strike inflation
options, however this would expose the bank to a significant downside risk that is difficult to recycle. An
option for the bank would be to buy a nominal interest rates floor, given that this market is much more
liquidthantheinflationoptionsmarket: theideawouldbethatinalowinflationenvironmentinterestrates
would go down, therefore making money on the long nominal interest rates hedge while losing on the short
inflationclienttrade. Investmentbanksusedifferentmodelstopricenominalratesandinflationtrades, and
the decision on the amount of nominal hedge to buy to offset the short inflation position is taken in a very
informal way. This can lead to significant losses due to model risk. We argue that one of the advantages
of the CTCB model is that it offers a global representation of the economy and allows consistent pricing of
interest rates and inflation trades with no ambiguity: this is because this hedging problem boils down to
how the central bank can affect the nominal yield curve given a deflationary scenario.
For example, one uses the calibrated CTCB model to run a Monte Carlo simulation over the maturity
of the inflation client trade. One selects the paths where inflation has gone down enough for the short client
tradetobeinthemoney,andobtainsaconditionaldistributionfortheforwardLiborratesgiventheinflation
decrease: by pricing nominal floors in these scenarios, the trader can assess what nominal rates strikes are
best used to hedge a deflationary scenario, choose the cheapest strikes, and, most importantly, calculate a
scenario-driven hedge ratio. We stress that this example is not a pricing application, and therefore there is
some profit and loss volatility during the life of the trade, as we are simply hedging a deflationary scenario
that may not materialise in the end: however, we think that this methodology would help the trader to
macro-hedge his inflation book in a way that is consistent with his view of the economy and with no model
bias,giventhatthesamemodelwouldbeusedtopricetheinflationclienttradeandtheinterestratesmacro
hedge.
18.3 Stress testing in the CTCB model
In recent years regulators have increasingly requested financial institutions to run stress tests: for example,
the FED has introduced the CCAR in late 2010 (Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review). One of
the challenges that financial institutions had to face was how to convert the market moves observed in the
market and in the economy into the model parameter. Because the CTCB model takes the economy as an
input, the economic shocks can be easily taken as an input and the model answers the questions asked by
regulators: there is no need to shock model parameters like volatilities, given that the model calibration
delivers the new set of parameters that fit to the stressed economic conditions.
19 Conclusions
In this article we have proposed a continuous-time model inspired by the DSGE model to price inflation
derivatives: in the recent years the debate around the central bank behaviour towards growth and inflation
as been a pivotal topic, and the central bank reaction function is an essential ingredient in our model.
Our modelling choice offers new perspectives on inflation securities pricing and at the same time is
extremelytractable,providingclosedformsolutionsforthemostcommoninflationandinterestratespayoffs.
Interestingly,wehaveshowedthattheshortratebehavesaccordingtothewell-establishedHull-Whitemodel.
This makes the model calibration much simpler: we proposed a separable calibration strategy.
The good model tractability does not prevent one to use it for many pricing and risk applications,
including stress tests and macro-hedging.
We are working to extend this framework in the following directions:
1. Calibrating the model to inflation and interest rates options smiles;
2. Introducing credit risk and a multi-curve setting in this model;
3. Using this model to calculate counterparty and funding adjustments for OTC derivatives.