BERNARDO SORJ
INFORMATION
SOCIETIES AND
DIGITAL DIVIDES
an introduction
THIS EDITION OF THE WORK IS FULLY
AVAILABLE FOR READING BUT IT CAN'T BE
PRINTED OR MODIFIED.
YOU CAN FIND THE COMPLETE EDITION AT
Polimetrica®
PUBLISHING STUDIES
directed by Giandomenico Sica
BERNARDO SORJ [1]
INFORMATION
SOCIETIES AND
DIGITAL DIVIDES
an introduction
Polimetrica
Copyright and license
You are free:
to Share — to copy, distribute and transmit the work
to Remix — to create and reproduce adaptations of the work
Under the following conditions:
Attribution. You must attribute the work in the manner specified by
the author or licensor (but not in any way that suggests that they
endorse you or your use of the work).
Noncommercial. You may not use this work for commercial purposes.
* For any reuse or distribution, you must make clear to others the
license terms of this work. The best way to do this is with a link to
this web page.
* Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission
from the copyright holder.
* Nothing in this license impairs or restricts the author's moral rights.
The work is licensed by the author through the following license:
Creative Commons license
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported
2008 Polimetrica ® S.a.s.
Corso Milano, 26
20052 Monza (Milan) – Italy
Phone: ++39. 039.2301829
E-mail: info@polimetrica.org
Web sites: www.polimetrica.com/eu/it/org
ISBN 978-88-7699-127-1 Printed Edition
ISBN 978-88-7699-128-8 Electronic Edition
ISSN 1973-6061 Printed Edition
ISSN 1973-6053 Electronic Edition
Printed in Italy
Note for the Reader
In our view, doing research means building new knowledge, setting
new questions, trying to find new answers, assembling and
dismantling frames of interpretation of reality.
Do you want to participate actively in our research activities?
Submit new questions!
Send an email to the address questions@polimetrica.org and include
in the message your list of questions related to the subject of this
book.
Your questions can be published in the next edition of the book,
together with the author's answers.
Please do it.
This operation only takes you a few minutes but it is very
important for us, in order to develop the contents of this research.
Thank you very much for your help and cooperation!
We're open to discuss further collaborations and proposals.
If you have any idea, please contact us at the following address:
Editorial office
POLIMETRICA
Corso Milano 26
20052 Monza MI Italy
Phone: ++39.039.2301829
E-mail: info@polimetrica.org
We are looking forward to getting in touch with you.
IST OF UESTIONS
INTRODUCTION.........................................................................11
1. CONSUMPTION.......................................................................17
1.1 How should we analyze consumption?..............................17
1.2 What are consumption goods?...........................................18
1.3 What are the social consequences of consumption? ..........20
1.4 What are the “social cycle of the product cycle”
and the “international social cycle of the product”? ................22
2. SOCIAL INEQUALITY............................................................23
2.1 What are the forms of social inequality? ...........................23
2.2 What are the types of collective goods?.............................24
2.3 How can social inequality be confronted?..........................26
2.4 How does consumption relate to inequality?......................28
2.5 What is the difference between the Internet and
previous consumption goods?..................................................29
3. THE INFORMATION SOCIETIES..........................................31
3.1 What is the information society?........................................31
8 List of Questions
3.2 What has changed with the Internet?..................................32
3.3 What is the social context of the information revolution?.....33
3.4 What are the main social consequences of the
information revolution?...........................................................37
3.5 What are the limits of the information revolution? ............39
3.6 What are the main social applications of the Internet?.......40
3.7 What are consequences of Internet on education? .............46
3.8 What are the consequences of the Internet on politics? .....49
3.9 How do networks and centralized power interrelate? ........53
3.10 Why have copyrights become a central political
issue for Internet activists?.......................................................55
3.11 What is the open source movement?................................59
3.12 What are the Internet governance challenges? ................61
4. DIGITAL DIVIDES..................................................................62
4.1 What is the Digital Divide? ...............................................62
4.2 Why digital exclusion can’t be separated from
other forms of inequality?........................................................63
4.3 What are the different aspects/dimensions of access
to Internet? ..............................................................................65
4.4 What is the relationship between the Internet
and literacy?.............................................................................68
4.5 How Internet content is related to social inequality? .........70
4.6 What are the main policies which can diminish the
digital divide? .........................................................................72
4.7 What is e-readiness?..........................................................75
List of Questions 9
4.8 What are the main public uses of the Internet
in developing countries? .........................................................77
CONCLUSIONS...........................................................................81
What can be done? .................................................................81
FURTHER E-READING ..............................................................86
NOTES .........................................................................................89
LIST OF KEYWORDS.................................................................91
NTRODUCTION
The topic of this book, the digital divide, refers to the un-
equal distribution of resources associated with information
and communication technologies, between countries and with-
in societies. The case of access to information technologies,
provides an excellent opportunity to study the way that one
technology-based product, in this case the Internet, can favor
both economic and social development, greater freedom and
circulation of information and social participation while it also
possesses the capacity to deepen social inequality and create
new forms of power concentration.
To approach the challenge of analyzing the digital divide,
we must avoid simple, easily formulated views with strong
media and/or political appeal, which overlook the richness,
diversity, and complexity of social life. For some authors and
international institutions, new technologies may allow less
developed countries and poorer sectors of the population to
substitute advanced technologies for investment in education,
producing economic and social leapfrog. Others argue that
new technologies will widen the gap between the rich and the
poor both internationally and within societies hence the digi-
tal divide is a secondary problem, and that new technologies
are luxuries of a consumer’s society.
12 Introduction
These visions reveal real but only partial tendencies.
While current data shows that new information technologies
tend in general to increase social inequality, giving new ad-
vantages to the more educated, there are indications that they
could be equally powerful in helping the least privileged sec-
tors of the population.
The impact of each technology depends on the way it is
creatively appropriated by different social groups, in specific
economic and political conditions. Dismissing new technolo-
gies represents a narrow and elitist perspective of the con-
sumer world. Though we accept that new technologies are
not a panacea for the problems of inequality, their universal-
ization is today among the fundamental conditions of integra-
tion within society. Therefore the social consequences of
new technologies are neither linear nor predictable and are
capable of generating new forms of stratification and social
fragmentation. To understand the digital divide it is neces-
sary to place it within the broader dynamic of each society
and the international system, as an element in the set of
goods and services that determine social inequality. The
shape of the information society will depend on the way new
technologies are creatively appropriated by companies, non-
governmental organizations, social movements and public
policies. Therefore instead of a single model of information
society we prefer the notion of information societies, as each
society absorbs in different ways the new technologies.
Communication and information technologies (C&IT)
include an array of products (radio, TV, cable TV, fixed
and mobile phones, computers, Internet access), and all of
them are part of the information society and each one of
them creates its own digital divide. In this study, we will
focus on the digital divide related to the social, economic
and cultural consequences of the unequal distribution of ac-
cess to the Internet. We will need focus therefore on the
Introduction 13
specific consequences of the new technologies on the econ-
omy. The text does not look specifically at radio, TV, fixed
and mobile telephone access.[2] Although these technologies
belong to the same set of information communication tech-
nologies, even sharing the same infrastructure, from a soci-
ological perspective, these products have quite different
qualities and each of them produce a specific digital divide.
The “old” communication technologies are part of the fami-
ly of ‘illiterate friendly’ products – that is, products that can
be used by individuals who have very low reading and writ-
ing skills – while computers and Internet demand basic edu-
cational skills. However, in the future, the convergence of
technologies will increase the need to process written infor-
mation even to manipulate a cell phone creating an internal
digital divide among users according to their literacy.
Technology embedded goods are massively consumed
and therefore we need to integrate them within a larger view
of the meaning of consumption in contemporary societies. In
the first chapter I argue that although there are consumer ob-
jects with mainly symbolic dimensions, from which people
establish social status, and although product choice can be in-
fluenced by publicity and personal taste, most of the technol-
ogy embedded consumption products are prerequisites of
civilized life, of access to a better quality of life, to jobs, and
to active participation in society. A large part of the bibliog-
raphy concerning the consuming society is focused on a rela-
tively small number of fashionable products saying little
about the majority of products consumed in contemporary
society. This includes products that are not oriented toward a
specific social class and that are not consumed because, or
not mainly, of the influence of publicity or pure individual
choice. New consumer goods are scientifically embedded
technological artifacts that have profoundly transformed so-
14 Introduction
ciety and the access to these goods is a prerequisite for full
participation in social life.
Inequalities are both the product of different personal in-
come but they are also related to the distribution policies of
the state. In the second chapter we present a general view of
the multiple aspects of social inequality and their relationship
to private and collective consumption goods. The various
kinds of social inequality – personal and collective – are not
independent; they are interrelated and reinforce or neutralize
one another. The digital divide has added another dimension
to the diversity of existing inequalities in society: that of un-
equal access to the set of new goods and services associated
with new information and communication technology.
Beginning with a summary description of the principal
dimensions of the information society, chapter three will
show that an emphasis on new processes does not allow us to
overlook the continuity that exists in social organization. Af-
ter presenting the general impact of Internet on society we ar-
gue that in spite of the expansion of networks, pyramid pow-
er shaped structures continue to control vast resources of
power. The challenge for democratic change in the contem-
porary world is the integration between networks and pyra-
mids, between states and non-governmental organizations,
and between national and international organizations.
In the fourth chapter we introduce the problem of the dig-
ital divide and how it is related to the overall problem of so-
cial inequality, economic development, and the fight against
poverty. The digital divide is played out on many levels, in
each case with specific impacts on social inequality. The ex-
istence of physical infrastructure, access to individual con-
nections, digital literacy, education, and contents developed
specifically to reach the needs of the poorest sectors of the
population all have an impact on inequality.
Introduction 15
At the conclusion we analyze the principal problems that
must be addressed by public policy to fight the digital divide,
particularly in developing countries, to establish efficient
uses of resources. Public policy and civil society initiatives
should confront the diverse forms of social inequality as an
interdependent set of phenomenon and address them with si-
multaneous and coordinated actions.
Given the continuously changing situation, we prefer in-
stead of including statistics and graphics in the text to refer the
reader at the end of the book to the sites were he/she can find
updated statistics. Finally I would like to thank Joel Edelstein
for his comments on a first draft and Giandomenico Sica for
his invitation to write this book.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 17
1. CONSUMPTION
1.1 How should we analyze consumption?
KEYWORDS:
SOCIALTHEORY,CONSUMPTION,BASICANDARTIFICIALNEEDS
Social science lacks comprehensive theories regarding the re-
lationship between consumption and society. Economics,
with its nearly exclusive focus on efficiency and rationality
has reduced consumption to a simple question of personal
choice and utility. Sociological theories, such as those men-
tioned earlier, were developed to confront this perspective
showing that consumer options are constructed socially and
that individuals make choices based on aesthetic standards
and life styles. However, most of these theories have over-
emphasized the cultural dimensions, leaving aside the materi-
al reality of consumer goods.
In recent decades theories regarding the consumption soci-
ety have focused on the analysis of consumption objects as a
symbolic system, a type of communication system in which
consumption objects main role is to be used as symbols of so-
cial status. Thus the use value of a product is viewed not in its
material utility, but rather by its capacity to indicate social dis-
tinctions. The differentiation of products are related to the dif-
ferentiation between social groups, in particular middle and
upper classes make a constant effort to mark their social status
through objects and an aesthetic to which only they can afford.
The main supposition of many of those critical of the
consumption society is based on the idea that there are “real”
as against “created” (or artificial) needs. In contemporary so-
ciety in particular, most goods would be based on artificial
needs, reflecting the demand created by publicity and of a so-
ciety dominated by exhibitionism and ostentation. However
18 Bernardo Sorj
anthropological studies have criticized the notion that there is
a direct link between what we consume and intrinsic or natu-
ral need. Culture always permeates tastes and defines which
products are appropriate for consumption. For example, there
is nothing natural about the readiness in some cultures to eat
beef while others prefer dog meat.[3] Anthropology also shows
that consumption objects are not only instruments of social
distinction for dominant groups, since they are used equally
to mark a variety of identities – of minorities, underprivi-
leged, age or protest groups –.[4]
1.2 What are consumption goods?
KEYWORDS:
CONSUMPTION,TECHNOLOGYEMBEDDEDPRODUCTS
Though ostentation has always characterized, and will con-
tinue to characterize particularly the lives of the dominant
classes, in modern society most goods are not consumed due
to publicity but because the large majority of consumption
products are pre-conditions of access to health, education,
work, and sociability. The majority of consumption products
are used because, within the context of contemporary society,
they are useful. They represent technologies that allow im-
provements to the quality of life and social integration. After
they have reached a certain level of dissemination in society,
not having them means social ostracism. For example, not
having a phone, or more recently an email address, can lead
to social exclusion.
Theories that connect social stratification with consump-
tion and describe its symbolic aspects tend to forget that this
dimension has, in general, only secondary importance in the
world of consumption. This also includes economics with its
focus on production. These theories ignore the central char-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 19
acteristic of consumption goods in society: from the begin-
ning of mankind knowledge was embedded as much in
the objects of consumption (food, housing, medicines) as
in the means of production. And changes in the ways of
consumption have major consequences on social relations
and life expectancy, affecting the whole fabric of society
including the economy. In contemporary societies the ma-
jority of consumption products are embedded expressions of
scientific and technological knowledge, and did become pre-
requisites for social integration in everyday life, as much in
terms of quality of life as in terms of chances for participation
in society in general and in the labor market in particular.
Consumption as a mechanism of social distinction in a
mass society is important at the margins of the productive sec-
tor. Much advertising focuses primarily on brand fidelity. In
fact many consumption products like home water, electricity,
radio, TV and telephone lines, which were also once objects of
conspicuous consumption, are now considered commodities or
even public goods. The critiques of the McDonaldization of
the world and the alienating role of trademarks epitomized by
Nike refer only to one side, which is generally secondary, of
the world of consumption. For the poorest populations of the
planet, globalization is not so much the expectation of eating
at McDonald’s or wearing Nike, it is access to food, water,
electricity, appliances, radio, television, telephone, Internet,
antibiotics, books, cinema, CD players, cars, travel, and all
those products and services to which persons opposed to glo-
balization would not deprive themselves. These products bring
material quality of life to such a level that the poorest person
in France today enjoys a better material quality of life than
richest French person did 200 years ago. Be it to treat a
toothache or an infection, to access information, to deliver
children, to lie down in a comfortable bed, or to have a good
heating or cooling system to face winter or summer, con-
20 Bernardo Sorj
sumption goods are disseminated because they facilitate life,
not through publicity brainwashing.
Capitalist consumption civilization’s principal challeng-
es are not so much the addiction to given brands but in their
impact on environmental and the relationship between con-
sumer goods, intellectual property, privacy and ethics. Such
is the case, for example, with the problems surrounding ge-
netic engineering which raises questions about the control
of life or, as we will see, information technology with its
potential to destroy privacy.
1.3 What are the social consequences of consumption?
KEYWORDS:
CAPITALISM,MARX,PARADOXICALCONSEQUENCES
Consumption products, particularly within capitalist society,
but also throughout all human history, incorporate and con-
dense as much technology and knowledge as the instruments
used in the production process. Social relations are trans-
formed through consumption as much as through relations of
production.
The difficulties that social science encounters as it attempts
to analyze the role of consumption in capitalist civilization
originate with a false starting point that radically separates the
processes of production and consumption. Treating both
spheres as autonomous realities results in a search for separate
explanations for each one. But consumption is one of the con-
stitutive elements of the productive system, not only because it
allows the flow of production but also because the majority of
products consumed transform the context of production, work-
ers life style, productivity and social relations.
Even Marx, who tried to relate production and consump-
tion, made a major analytical error by reducing work to a
commodity. He didn’t grasp that labor is a very particular
Information Societies and Digital Divides 21
commodity, one that not only is capable of fighting for its
market value, but which is transformed through the process
of consuming other commodities. In other words, consumer
goods have qualities that affect the way society is organized.
To the degree to which they increase longevity, facilitate lo-
comotion, permit communication between workers and their
private lives, and reduce time spent on housework, they di-
rectly impact the productive system, transform society, and
become essential to social life.
The social consequences of consumption cannot be re-
duced to the specific utility that a product brings its users,
given that there are often other consequential or paradoxical
impacts when they are disseminated throughout society. In
many cases, the dynamics of the social product cycle play a
role in determining the product utility. The diffusion of a
product is in some cases a condition of its practical use. This
is due either to the availability of necessary infrastructure, as
is the case with paved roads and highways whose develop-
ment depends on a minimum number of cars in circulation;
or the existence of other users to permit interaction, as with
case of the telephone, which requires a minimum number of
telephone owners to become a useful tool of communication.
The paradoxical effects are the product of unexpected dys-
functions produced by the dissemination of a given product or
service. For example, the car facilitates transport of an individu-
al from one place to another, but today in many cities, an excess
of cars makes the bicycle a faster mode of transportation not to
mention its non-polluting nature. New medicines can save lives
but their effects on the human gene pool could be disastrous.
New seeds can increase production but can also have irrevers-
ible negative impact on biodiversity. Or, as we will show, with
the case of the information society, databases containing patient
medical histories or credit card purchase records can save lives
or reduce the risks involved with carrying money, but they gen-
22 Bernardo Sorj
erate information on people’s private lives that could lead to
control over privacy and new types of discrimination based on
genetics or illness expectancies (at work or insurance).
1.4 What are the “social cycle of the product cycle”
and the “international social cycle of the product”?
KEYWORDS:
SOCIAL CYCLEOFTHEPRODUCT,INTERNATIONALSOCIALCYCLEOFTHE
PRODUCT,STRATIFICATION,INTERNATIONALINEQUALITIES
The social dynamics of new technologically based consump-
tion goods goes through a social product cycle and an inter-
national social product cycle. The social product cycle is
based on the economic product cycle, in which initially a
product is introduced in small quantities with high price and
later it is mass-produced permitting access of a large part of
the population.
A new product initially reaches only those at the highest
income levels and later, with mass production and price re-
duction, is disseminated throughout all sectors of the popula-
tion. Thus, the dynamics of technological innovation rein-
force social inequality in the initial stages, when a product
reaches only the highest income sectors of the population,
later to play an equalizing role through mass production.
The international product cycle refers to the dissemina-
tion of new products, mostly created in advanced countries,
on a global scale. In developing countries many products
reach the highest classes and later the middle classes, but in
many cases it takes a long time to reach the lowest classes
and in some cases never do. When the product cycle is in-
complete, excluding certain sectors of the population from
new technological innovation, it consolidates and/or creates
new forms of social inequality.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 23
2. SOCIAL INEQUALITY
2.1 What are the forms of social inequality?
KEYWORDS:
INEQUALITY, INDIVIDUALINCOME, INDIVIDUAL ANDCOLLECTIVE PUBLIC
GOODS,GLOBALSOCIALGOODS
Social inequality supposes differential access to social wealth
within a social system. Analyses of social inequality tradi-
tionally distribute the population of a country as though it
were a continuum of individuals, a straight line from those
who have a lot to those who have very little. Studies on so-
cial inequality analyze the distance between the poorest and
richest sectors of the population taking as an indicator the in-
come of individuals or families. Individual income is without
question an important criterion in social inequality but it rep-
resents only one dimension of the problem. The unequal dis-
tribution of public goods and services is equally important,
and in some cases this unequal distribution is even more de-
cisive in defining life chances. Not being able to count on po-
lice protection or access to electricity, water, sewage and
telephone networks, medical services, or schools, has dra-
matic consequences on the quality of life. These goods are
delivered, directly or indirectly, through the public sector,
state concessions or publicly regulated services.
Goods and services can be divided into two major catego-
ries: individual and collective consumption goods. Individual
consumption goods are those that are selected on the basis of
individual personal option. Goods and services for collective
consumption are those that, in a given historical period, are
considered fundamental conditions for citizenship and there-
fore require public intervention to ensure universal access.
Public action concerning collective goods can cause them
24 Bernardo Sorj
to lose the quality of being mercantile goods. In other cases
they can be produced and/or distributed through the markets,
under public control. In all of these cases the state intervenes,
be it to through orienting investments or subsidies and price
controls, to insure universal access – independent of individ-
ual income –. Though economists have tried to identify traits
or qualities that can be associated with public utility or social
goods, there are no criteria to distinguish public and private
goods in their pure states. The definition of the public or so-
cial character of goods will depend on the values of each so-
ciety in a given historical moment. In democratic societies,
public debate determines which products and services should
be universally accessible.
In the past few years, a new type of collective consump-
tion goods has begun to be discussed global social goods.
These are goods that cannot be delimited by national borders
or whose absence in one country can affect the quality of life
in other countries (such as the protection of the environment,
control of epidemics, but also free international circulation of
ideas and information). The concept of global social goods
and the unequal access to them has yet to be adopted and
elaborated by public opinion, but they have an enormous
practical and political potential as they demand a broad dis-
cussion on global governance mechanisms that can ensure ef-
fective creation of an international space for public goods
2.2 What are the types of collective goods?
KEYWORDS:
BASIC SERVICES, COMMON SERVICES, INDIVISIBLE GOODS, NETWORKS,
NATURALRESOURCES
There are four types of collective consumption goods in con-
temporary national societies. The first group is made up of
Information Societies and Digital Divides 25
public services connected to basic government institutions.
Access to these services is completely separate from payment.
They are state run goods and services like police, the justice
system, and the services associated with the functioning of the
legal system. Their nature requires a complete separation be-
tween public employees and citizen’s income or ability to pay,
to ensure egalitarian and universal treatment. The financing of
these services is carried out indirectly through the tax system.
A second group is made up of common services such as
public lighting, cleaning services, road maintenance, parks
and gardens, fire department, and environment. Generally
they are the responsibility of local authorities. They are fi-
nanced through taxes, usually taxes related to housing, and
can be carried out by public or private companies under state
concession contracts and regulation.
A third group is made up of collective goods and services
that are not by nature indivisible. This is made up of goods and
services that are regarded as basic conditions of citizenship such
as health, education (at least basic education), and social securi-
ty and, to a lesser extent, housing. They are financed by direct
taxation and/or employers and employees contributions. These
goods and services can be offered by public or private institu-
tions as well as by non-profit organizations. When they are of-
fered directly by the state, these services generally coexist with
private services of the same type oriented toward individual
consumers such as private health plans and private education.
Finally, the fourth category of collective consumption
goods is made up of goods and services considered essential
or of public interest that are connected to networks and/or
natural resources that control a given space (be it under the
earth in urban areas, or in the form of waves that travel
through air) and give their owners a position of monopoly or
oligopoly. They include water, electricity, sewage, radio, tele-
vision, transportation, and telephone. These collective con-
26 Bernardo Sorj
sumption goods can be offered either by public or private
companies with use rights delegated by the state. In either
case, the state takes responsibility for ensuring the quality
and pricing of these services and that the network’s control-
lers provide universal access. Though these services are gen-
erally paid by individual consumers (or in some cases by tax-
es), effective access requires that the network reaches every
home and that the prices are reasonable even for low-income
groups. While in the case of the previous types of collective
consumption goods, it is expected that the different capacity
of each citizen to contribute financially to the goods and ser-
vices is carried out in a progressive way – e.g. a taxation
structure where fees are inversely related to income –, in the
case of networked goods and services, compensatory pricing
systems usually take the form of subsidies in which certain
consumers (for example, those in high income areas or busi-
nesses) pay a higher price thereby permitting other consumers
to pay a reduced price for the same services.
These state regulated goods and services impact positive-
ly on social inequality by partially or totally dissociating ac-
cess to goods and services from personal means. To these
public services should be added other redistribution policies,
which include unemployment insurance, social services, dis-
ability insurance, minimum income policies, food distribu-
tion programs, and subsidized housing.
2.3 How can social inequality be confronted?
KEYWORDS:
MARKET,STATE,INDIVIDUALINITIATIVE,SOLIDARITY,EQUALITY,CITIZENSHIP
The fight against social inequality therefore takes place on
two fronts: at the level of the market and at the level of state
as provider of social goods, regulating the private sector.
Contemporary capitalism therefore is the product of the com-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 27
bined and contradictory actions of two structuring principles:
on the one hand liberty and individual initiative – consolidated
in the institutions of private property, of freedom of contracts
and of markets as organizer of the system of production and
of exchange–; and on the other hand the values of solidarity
and equality – expressed through the idea of citizenship and of
the nation as a community that should ensure for its inhabit-
ants some minimum living conditions and chances for partici-
pation in society–.
While the first principle indicates that each person should
acquire goods and services in the market according to his or
her assets and personal options, the second requires some pri-
vate intervention in the system of distribution to assure that all
citizens have access to a minimum set of goods and services
that are considered basic at the particular point in history. In
practice these two contradictory principles coexist in all capi-
talist societies and the results of the conflict and synthesis of
these principles defines the specific profile of each national so-
ciety. It is important to note that they are different principles,
associated with values that coexist simultaneously in moderni-
ty and that there is no scientific formula that can resolve the
problem of how to combine them. Each solution will depend
on political struggle and on working out solutions and creative
arguments with the capacity to convince the majority of soci-
ety. The coexistence of these two organizing principles of cap-
italism constantly generates new models that define the pattern
of state regulation and public intervention in the production,
distribution, and consumption of goods and services.
Each new product that society considers a basic condition
of social integration and quality of life becomes a field of
struggle regarding the way its dissemination should be as-
sured to all citizens, through public or private means, or a
mixture of both. The case of information and communication
technologies is a typical example of this type of product.
28 Bernardo Sorj
2.4 How does consumption relate to inequality?
KEYWORDS:
NEW PRODUCTS, CIVILIZING THRESHOLD, COLLECTIVE AND INDIVIDUAL
GOODS,SOCIALPOLICIES
The central question for contemporary society is that the per-
manent introduction of new consumption products that im-
pacts quality of life involves changes in the civilizing thresh-
old, i.e. , which goods are considered essential for a decent life
in society. In this sense, each technological innovation that in-
troduces new consumption products changes the perception of
what it means to be socially included or excluded (based on
access or lack thereof), thereby changing the universe of goods
and services that require some type of state intervention. In
other words, poverty, and the fight against it are dynamic and
require constant efforts to re-adapt social policies.
A classification of individual consumption goods is out-
side the limits of this work but it is fundamental to empha-
size its deep relationship with collective consumption goods.
The different individual and collective goods and services
cannot be dissociated from one another. Personal health, for
example, is enormously affected by the problems caused by
lack of treated water and sewage, the principal causes of
child illness in poor neighborhoods in developing countries.
The large majority of individual consumption goods depend
on prior access to collective consumption goods. To use home
appliances, access to electricity is needed. Telephone use re-
quires telephone access to telephone networks. Home water
and sewage services require access to urban infrastructure.
The relationship between individual income and access to
goods and services can generate both virtuous and vicious
circles. For example people who live in neighborhoods domi-
nated by drug trafficking find difficulty in getting jobs. Simi-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 29
larly, low-income levels force some families to take their
children out of schools so that they can make an early en-
trance into the workforce. At the same time low incomes are
often the result of low education levels that limit the possibil-
ities for obtaining higher wage jobs. On the other hand, for
instance, students from highly educated and well off families
have more chances of access to public universities.
Combating the many dimensions of inequality requires a
complex view of social policies. The challenge is to identify
those areas where positive consequences can be greatest both
in the short and medium term. Some actions, such as invest-
ment in education may be decisive to improve personal in-
come but they take years to mature while other actions such
as extension of water and sewage networks have immediate
consequences over quality of life but do not directly impact
on income levels. In practice, social policies are oriented
both by technical logic and by pressures from diverse social
groups in each city and state. In each location needs are dif-
ferent and the capacity of each social group, including the
lower, middle, and upper classes, to put pressure on the state,
determines the priorities of public investments.
2.5 What is the difference between the Internet and
previous consumption goods?
KEYWORDS:
MASSCONSUMPTION,INTERNET,LITERACY,ACCESSBARRIERS
The new wave of information technology related to the Inter-
net has characteristics that are new or more pronounced than in
previous waves of mass consumption. First, information tech-
nology, in addition to being interactive (like the telephone), is
proactive, meaning that it allows users to personally appropri-
ate the contents of instruments of communication (for example
30 Bernardo Sorj
by making their own web site). The uses and possibilities of
information technology depend, however, on the intellectual
training, in particular the education and profession of the user.
While the use of appliances, telephones, radio, and television
require almost no formal education, information technology
not only requires literacy but its usefulness depends on each
user’s intellectual ability in selecting, analyzing, understand-
ing, and evaluating available information. Although the Inter-
net can influence a user’s ability to analyze, we will see that
these abilities are developed in large part outside the Internet.
While for the user with limited analytical competence the In-
ternet is an information tool, for the user with greater analyti-
cal capacity, it is a knowledge tool.
In addition, information technology presents specific bar-
riers to initial access that are greater than those of previous
electronic products. The majority of previous electronic
products require minimal service expense after initial pur-
chase. The only exception is the telephone with its monthly
service charges. Internet requires either fixed monthly fees
(for example wide-band service), or increases in telephone
charges (for users of dial-up service, as flat-rate local resi-
dential service is not available in most countries). We will
see that these fees make up one of the principal barriers for
the diffusion of information technology among low income
groups (and sometimes even the low middle class). In the case
of the computer, their use requires other ongoing expenses
such as printer cartridges, paper, periodic technical support,
updates to programs, and the constant need to update equip-
ment that makes these products reach obsolescence rapidly.
Finally, information technology products, due to their pro-
active character, are for individual and personal use. Older
systems of communication such as radio, television, and fixed
telephones, were easily shared between family members.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 31
3. THE INFORMATION SOCIETIES
3.1 What is the information society?
KEYWORDS:
INFORMATIONSOCIETY,KNOWLEDGESOCIETY,TECHNOLOGYCONSUMING
CAPITALISTSOCIETIES
The term “Information Society” is currently the most common
way to refer to the impact and social consequences of new in-
formation and communication technologies. While it is useful
as a concept that identifies a theme, it is not a theory or an ex-
planatory framework for the dynamics of societies in the con-
temporary world. In a strict sense, the term is also incorrect,
first because information is equally important in all societies,
and second because information on its own has no value, its
relevance depends on its insertion into a system of knowledge.
In this sense, another widely used term, “knowledge society”,
is more appropriate, but once again the term overlooks the fact
that all societies are based on knowledge. In practice the con-
cept of a “knowledge society” refers to a particular type of
knowledge, scientific knowledge, through which technological
innovation, the principal vehicle for economic expansion in
the contemporary world, is possible. From a sociological point
of view, it is perhaps more appropriate to speak of technology
-consuming capitalist societies, that is, societies where com-
munication, quality of life, and economic, social and political
relations are mediated by technological artifacts (in the form of
products and services) that incorporate scientific knowledge
under capitalist based social relations.
Since the social processes associated with the “Informa-
tion Revolution” are in their initial phases, many analysts
confuse trends, extrapolations, and speculation with current
reality. Certain argumentative exaggerations play an impor-
32 Bernardo Sorj
tant role in expanding our field of perception and sensibility
to new phenomenon but it is important, especially with re-
gards to the use of scarce resources in public policy, to focus
as much on continuities as on discontinuities, on the new and
the old, without carelessly extrapolating experiences from
other contexts, remembering that the world is not California
and that each land has its own realities.
3.2 What has changed with the Internet?
KEYWORDS:
KNOWLEDGE MANIPULATION, KNOWLEDGE, COMMUNICATION, VIRTUAL
The unilateral emphasis on the impact of the Internet can cre-
ate a perception of a radical transformation dividing the new
and old forms of social organization. But we cannot overlook
the fact that the computer has been influencing society for sev-
eral decades. Its influence was already discussed extensively
in the seventies and eighties before the Internet. The Internet
represents a new communication technology that adds, in a
revolutionary way, to the long list of instruments of voice and
image transmission such as telegraph, telephone, record-play-
er, telex, radio, television, and fax that have changed commu-
nication in contemporary society.
Information technology, and its most widespread system, the
Internet, are of enormous importance because they allow the
convergence of two activities that are central to social life:
the manipulation of knowledge and communication. Infor-
mation technology allows the storage, organization, and
processing of an enormous amount of information in a small
space and at incredible speed. New communication technolo-
gies permit instantaneous voice, text, or image communica-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 33
tion on a worldwide scale, constantly increasing the availa-
bility of information while decreasing communication costs.
These combined technologies working through a set of
protocols (TCP/IP is the most common on the Internet) allow
communication between computers. The Internet is a network
of computer networks, all communicating in real time, making
information instantaneously available in any part of the planet.
Thus, information and communication cease to be spatially lo-
calized and are transferred to “virtual space” (or cyberspace),
allowing simultaneous contact between an infinite number of
people using the memory of the computers participating in the
network, independent of their physical location. While this
technology is associated with computers as physical differenti-
ated objects (desktop or laptop) convergence tendencies are
transforming mobile phones or TVs into the new vehicle of ac-
cess to Internet.
3.3 What is the social context of the information
revolution?
KEYWORDS:
CHANGES IN CAPITALISM, SERVICE SECTOR, WORK FLEXIBILISATION,
DEMATERIALIZATION,INDIVIDUALIZATION,GLOBALIZATION
The Internet appeared in a period when capitalism was un-
dergoing a deep change in its productive and social system. It
acted as a catalyser and accelerator, but the Internet wasn’t
the only cause for these transformations. By forgetting recent
social and economic history, several authors have ended up
with technological determinist interpretations. In order to get
a historical perspective it is worth mentioning, albeit in a
summary form, processes which although prior to and not
correlated to the Internet, were a strong impetus to the new
C&I technologies:
34 Bernardo Sorj
1) The transformation, in the last decades, of the service sector
in the dynamic core of the productive system. The capacities
for technological innovation associated with the application of
knowledge became the principal source of aggregate value,
productivity gains and dynamism of the economy. Information
technology was not the initiator of the so-called information
society or knowledge based society, but an accelerator or vec-
tor of a process that preceded it. The increasing importance of
applied scientific knowledge as the principal source of innova-
tion and value creation in a constantly changing world trans-
forms learning into an ongoing process, driven by the necessi-
ty to update and adapt professional skills to the requirements
of new technological transformations.
By putting a large part of human knowledge in virtual
space, facilitating the interchange and expression of ideas
and developing online services in real time, the Internet al-
lows people to break the barriers that in the past have limited
access to, and transmission of, information. But the Internet
is not a substitute for human capital, which is the product of
large, long-term, investments. Nor does it substitute the labo-
ratories, research centers, and corporate resources under
which scientific knowledge is produced and transformed into
technology and finally into consumer products.
2) The increasing “flexibilisation” of the work process and
the production arrangements. This trend is partly associated
to the processes described above, in particular to the greater
value assigned to knowledge demanding greater autonomy
and creativity, and overall changes in the socio-political sys-
tem with the relative decline of trade unions, welfare bene-
fits and labor rights. The Internet, in some cases has been a
tool for the advancement of new models of management and
the flexibilization and decentralization of production and
work.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 35
3) The tendency known as dematerialization of production
(products with extremely low (or non) material content and the
surge of the “new economy”. The idea of dematerialization of
production describes a twofold process in which: a) added
knowledge is the principal component in the value of the final
product, while the relative costs of physical materials decline
constantly, and b) the most dynamic goods and services in the
economy are those that transmit (as is the case with goods con-
nected to the culture industry or finances) or condense/incor-
porate information (as is the case of medicines or genetically
modified seeds).
The new economy related to “dematerialized” products is
dominant in the telecommunications, audiovisual, biotech-
nology, nanotechnology and pharmaceutical industries. The
principal characteristic of these companies is that they are
dependent on permanent technological innovation, which
transforms knowledge into products and services. The market
value of enterprises based on research or innovative prod-
ucts, is not only related to their current income levels, but
based on the projections of their potential for future sales if
the product/service they invent is adopted by the market.
The new economy has transformed a considerable part of fi-
nancial investment into venture capital, as it is carried out
under high-risk conditions in which expected potential gains
may never materialize.
4) The deepening of the process of individualization, in the
sense that there has been a reduction of outside references in
standards and values of social conduct. Individuals are no lon-
ger guided by traditional values, norms, institutions, and ideol-
ogies of modernity (such as patriotism, parties, work, family),
bringing about a new form of reflexive individualism in which
people must constantly negotiate social relations (for example
with spouses, sons, daughters, and colleagues). By inserting
the reflexive individual in a world of global information and
36 Bernardo Sorj
increasing contacts with diverse social networks, information
technology enhances individualism.
5) The globalization process and loss of symbolic significance
of the nation, is a manifold process. New transnational agents
have been proliferating since the 1960’s, when multinational
companies began acting on an international scale according to
a strategic vision that is not delimited by national borders. In
the past decades the number of these transnational agents has
multiplied due to the growing internationalization of various
groups, including financial capital, scientific and technological
systems, religious groups, non-governmental organizations,
and criminal and terrorist organizations. The processes of in-
ternationalization of financial flow, of international commerce,
and of patent regimes, have limited the breadth of action avail-
able to governments. Meanwhile, the Internet facilitated the
globalization of social and cultural interactions, limiting state
control over sources of information and restricting the ability
to limit cultural systems to those compatible with national
characteristics. The consequence is the acceleration of the for-
mation of worldwide public opinion movements.
Despite this, the state continues to be the principal actor
in national and international politics and the nation the main
locus of life chances for most citizens. If the globalization of
societies has limited governmental freedom of action, by dis-
seminating a cosmopolitan agenda and global standards of
consumption it has also increased the expectation that gov-
ernments will ensure access to the new rights and goods.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 37
3.4 What are the main social consequences of the
information revolution?
KEYWORDS:
SOCIETY,CULTURE,SPACE-TIMEPERCEPTION,HYPERTEXT
Information technology has accelerated the following pro-
cesses and had specific impacts on knowledge and culture.
The first, about which there is some consensus among re-
searchers, is the unification of the perception of space-time at
least in relation to all of the dimensions that are based on the
flow of information (in the form of text, voice, or image). In
human experience, the limited reach of the bodily senses re-
quire that individuals go from one place to another to reach
another individual or place, determining the sense of distance
as related to time. Mechanisms for sending information such
as drums, smoke signals, mail, telegraph, telephone, and tele-
vision, were the means developed by humans to transmit in-
formation without going from one place to another. These
tools brought a new dimension to the relationship between
time and distance.
Now that voice, text, and images can be instantly trans-
mitted, the association of space with time is disappearing, at
least with relation to things that can be transmitted digitally.
The feeling of a global village is accelerated with each new
communication technology. With the introduction of trans-
mission of television images via satellite, televised events
take place for the whole world at the same instant regardless
of space or time. The Internet brought this revolution to a
new level allowing an individual in any place on earth to be
in immediate contact via a choice of voice, text, or images,
with any other person on the planet. At the same time, it
brought a large part of the collection of human knowledge
and culture (at least those parts that can be transformed into
38 Bernardo Sorj
digital format) to cyberspace, making it available for any
user in any place.
The unification of space and time does not mean that
temporality has disappeared. On the contrary, it repre-
sents the contraction, acceleration, and increased value
of time brought about by the disappearance of space
barriers.
A second aspect, about which there is debate and some-
times confusion regards the concept of virtual reality, de-
fined as a set of images and sensations produced electroni-
cally. Virtual reality is often contrasted with “real” reality, as
though the virtual world were less real or authentic than the
world of sensations or the world as we experienced it before
these new technologies. In general this is a romantic vision
of the past, of sensory experience, and social life. The world
of humans was always “virtual”. Human beings relate to their
world through individual imagination structured around cul-
tures, a set of abstract symbols that determine how things
transmitted by the senses are perceived, understood, inter-
preted, and evaluated. Be it by way of the Bible, the Koran,
or a science book, the only way to get beyond the finiteness
of individual experience is through the world of meanings
that organize our perception.
The third impact of the Internet is perhaps the deepest and
still in its early infancy. It is the transformation of the human
universe by the growing integration between machines and
humans. This is an area where speculation abounds and of
which there are two main schools of thought. For some, the
computer has the potential to mirror the human mind, allowing
integration between the two in the future. For others, the
distance between the human mind and artificial intelligence is
unsurpassable because the human mind cannot be dissociated
from the biological and cultural support that allows it to
function.[5]
Information Societies and Digital Divides 39
An ample bibliography already exists concerning the con-
sequences of hypertext on intelligence and perception. Hy-
pertext allows the development of reading written material in
permanent connection and association to other texts, thereby
allowing instant access from one text to another in a continu-
ing spiral. It is different from “classic” text reading: from be-
ginning to end. Some authors claim that the capacity to con-
nect large amounts of information associated with diverse
contents and networked material could cause losses in the in-
tellectual culture of the “the age of books”, with its emphasis
on deep reflection and conceptual development carried out in
large part by individuals making isolated efforts. Others em-
phasize that the intellectual activity associated to hypertext
takes place with more awareness of the collective character
of all works, is less individualist, and more fluid.[6]
3.5 What are the limits of the information revolution?
KEYWORDS:
SOCIAL CHANGE, FACE-TO-FACE RELATIONS, STRATIFICATION, POWER
RELATIONS,SOCIALVALUES
Since the Internet evolved into the most commonly used
means of distance communication (substituting the post and
to a degree the telephone), naturally it’s presence has perme-
ated all social, economic, and political relations. But this
does not mean that the Internet is capable by itself of chang-
ing these relations. If the Internet, as we have shown, deep-
ens existing trends in contemporary society, nothing so far,
indicates that it is a factor in radical transformations of social
structures, systems of stratification, or the norms and values
of society.
Electronic networks do not substitute face-to-face rela-
tions, which continue to be the principal source of trust in
40 Bernardo Sorj
human relations. The possibilities that the Internet opens in-
tensify interchanges and diversify social networks but with
the exception of marginal cases, generally of adolescents ap-
proaching adulthood who encounter an alternative world on
the Internet, this has not been sufficient to substitute or modi-
fy in a dramatic way the social ties that are established by di-
rect coexistence.
3.6 What are the main social applications of the Internet?
KEYWORDS:
E-MAIL, INFORMATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTION, E-
EMPLOYMENT,E-CULTURE,E-GOVERNMENT,E-HEALTH,E-CRIME
Being an all pervasive technology in order to understand the
impact of the Internet on social inequality we need to map
some of its most common applications.
E-Mail: Through the vehicle of e-mail the Internet offers a
mechanism for sending messages and documents instantly
causing the postal mail (as well as of the telegraph, fax, and
telex) to practically disappear as a means of transmission of
text and even to a certain extent substituting telephone calls.
The Internet has changed the rhythm of communication re-
quiring greater speed and creating the expectation of immedi-
ate responses. However, the speed of human emotional and
intellectual processing, based on evolution, is not the speed
of light, creating new sources of stress. E-mail is the most
common use of the Internet, and increasingly, having an e-
mail address is viewed as the equivalent of a residential ad-
dress, a way that a person can be “located”. The lack of an e-
mail address will cause social isolation. In the future an e-
mail address will be a basic condition of citizenship.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 41
Information: The Internet has facilitated the process of ac-
cessing information enormously, a process which by tradi-
tional methods required great investments of time, energy,
and resources. The Internet does not just store computerized
cultural production; it is also a way of making the material
publicly available. The Internet allows access to a growing
collection of text, images, and sounds to which the public
would not have access if material reproduction were neces-
sary. The growth in the amount of material available through
Web sites is exponential causing users to depend increasingly
on research mechanisms to locate information of interest.
While on the one hand the fact that anyone can put content
on the Internet represents a form of democratization of infor-
mation, on the other hand it causes dependence on search en-
gines that have the capacity to influence the priority level of
texts for users.
It is possible to distinguish between the use of the Inter-
net to get information and knowledge, involving material
with high and low informational content. Low informational
content material refers to facts that do not require any special
intellectual training to understand and comprehend and
which are depleted after serving their immediate function.
For example the name of a street, a pornographic image, a
bank transaction, or online shopping, are all low-content in-
formation. High informational content material depends on
the analytical ability of the user and has an impact on his or
her further competences and intellectual abilities. As we will
see, the prior intellectual ability of the user is a determining
factor in the transformation of the Internet into a tool of cul-
tural empowerment and social creativity.
Science and Technology: in addition to facilitating access to
databases, virtual libraries, and all kinds of information, the
Internet has enhanced two traditional characteristics of the
42 Bernardo Sorj
fields of scientific research and technology: the functioning
of networks and the international character of interaction.
These professional sectors are more open to the Internet and
its possibilities for restructuring communication, and are also
among the most influential to the extent that the strengthen-
ing of international networks related to the interests of each
researcher has contributed to the weakening of immediate so-
cial ties based on departments and faculty life.
The ability to circulate scientific work on the Internet al-
lows new possibilities for scientific publication in electronic
periodicals without printing costs. This has contributed to ac-
ademic debate concerning the regulation of these publica-
tions (whether they should follow the same editorial norms
as printed publications) as well as disputes concerning intel-
lectual rights.
Production: as discussed earlier, information technology did
not globalize the economy itself, but it accelerated communi-
cation between and within companies enormously, indepen-
dent of the location of any given employee, increasing the
speed and quantity of informational interchanges. The Inter-
net allows companies to keep track of inventories, market
trends, and relations with providers and clients online, reduc-
ing the time of the production, distribution, and consumption
cycle.
The impact of information technology on the productive
system is varied. In the first place it has created an enormous
market for information technology products, from communi-
cation infrastructure to computers, equipment, and software.
Second, it opens up the possibility of new products and ser-
vices that can be transmitted via the Internet. Third it has al-
lowed revolutionary changes in systems of knowledge man-
agement and communication within companies. Fourth the
different forms of e-commerce (the principal forms are B2B -
Information Societies and Digital Divides 43
business to business, B2C - business to consumer, C2C -
consumer to consumer, and B2G - business to government)
have revolutionized selling and buying. Fifth, the electronic
auctions of B2B, B2G, and C2C have reduced transaction
costs enormously while B2C and B2G have modified logis-
tics and the supply chain between and among businesses
while increasing the speed and reducing the costs of transac-
tions. Finally, services that were previously carried out by
employees serving clients can be transferred to the client, as
is the case of automatic teller machines and Internet banking,
or secretarial services which are now in large part carried out
by each employee, or with the reduced importance of the
sales staff in commerce between businesses.
The tendency to contract time has had a particular impact
on the financial sector, one of the sectors that due to strictly
informational nature of money, has come closest to the elimi-
nation of time. As time can never be eliminated, the financial
sector has always been characterized by the fact that many
lucrative opportunities depend on the ability to arrive first.
Today this translates to an advantage that is counted some-
times in terms of seconds.
E-Employment: The Internet allows all information to be
encountered in virtual space. Because all information can be
accessed in virtual space, the necessity to use physical space
has diminished and contact between the employee and the
employer has become independent of their location, allowing
increased productivity and making the structure of businesses
more flexible. Transmission of messages by Internet has
changed labor practices in the service sectors where informa-
tion is circulated via e-mail permitting more agile communi-
cation, documentation, and control.
If the Internet allows companies to be reached any place,
when combined with cellular telephones, it also allows em-
44 Bernardo Sorj
ployees to be reached wherever they are. The consequences
of this have been calamitous, increasing the amount of work
that is performed outside normal work hours and in practice,
destroying the notion of work hours, weekends, vacations,
and the distinction between work and the private sphere. The
rhythm of electronic communication enters into conflict with
the biological and emotional rhythms of people and this con-
flict leads to growth of social problems and ills, whose cur-
rent symptoms are the epidemic of stress and depression
caused by the difficulty of keeping up with the rhythm of
things. Sooner or later it will result in demands for new regu-
lations in the world of work. The worker’s rights will need to
include the right to remain unplugged outside of work
hours. If we do not move in this direction in the near future,
humanity will have to reinvent one of the principal contribu-
tions of the Bible: the right to a day of rest.
E-Culture: A growing part of the potentially digital aspects
of humanity’s cultural heritage is available on the Internet.
It’s already possible to visit a large number of museums, vir-
tual historical archives, and virtual libraries. These collec-
tions comprise a large part of the great works of literature, at
least those works that are in the public domain. These materi-
als can be obtained on the Internet usually without cost. In
the future every new musical work, film, and literary work
will be available via the Internet.
E-Government: the impact of the Internet on political life
can be divided into three levels: e-governance refers to the
use of the Internet for increasing efficacy, quality, efficiency,
transparency, and enforcement of the actions and services of
the government and public institutions; e-government in-
cludes a set of new instruments that allow greater and differ-
ent types of citizen participation in government decisions; e-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 45
politics refers to the impact of the Internet on the social
structure and the political organization of society.
E-governance allows the use of the Internet for: 1) publi-
cizing all activities of the government including budgets and
public spending, allowing greater transparency and public
monitoring; 2) improving the quality of administrative services
by increasing their speed and outreach; 3) offering services on-
line, including government documents, health and education
service requests, bill payments, and tax declarations; 4) the
electronic transmission of public bids and auctions.
E-government includes electronic voting, the possibility
of interacting with public institutions, and regulating activity
associated with the Internet – development of legislation con-
cerning commercial activities, security and individual priva-
cy rights – as well as all measures designed to ensure univer-
sal access to the Internet.
E-Health: The Internet has facilitated work in the areas of
monitoring and controlling epidemics, reorganizing health-
care systems and patient relations, and allowing access to
medical information by laymen (a trend that is frequently
criticized for producing erroneous or counterproductive in-
formation). In the area of health information technology is
particularly promising despite its limited impact at the mo-
ment. There have already been several successful experi-
ments in tele-medicine including diagnosis, distance surgery,
medical teleconferences, and tele-monitoring. The majority
of these experiments are still in the pilot stages.
One service that has been developed in many advanced
countries is the so-called health card, a card that allows ac-
cess to patient medical histories regardless of location. The
health card facilitates remote health services and medical re-
search. If the confidentiality of these databases is not protect-
ed it is possible that insurance companies and employers in
46 Bernardo Sorj
possession of this information could develop discriminatory
insurance and employment policies.
E-Crime, E-Terrorism, and E-War: Finally, we can’t for-
get the potential of information technology to be used for fal-
sification, theft, and destruction by criminal and terrorists
networks and by a new type of criminal, who specializes in
breaking the security systems of networks and sites for de-
structive goals. Crime and terror have been, so far, much
more effective at making use of new information technolo-
gies than most of the security systems of the national states.
This is particularly dramatic in less developed countries.
3.7 What are consequences of Internet on education?
KEYWORDS:
PEDAGOGIC SOFTWARE, SCHOOLS, UNIVERSITY, TEACHERS, LEARNING,
TECHNOLOGYEDUCATION
E-Education, i.e., the capacity to analyze, bring together, and
make use of information is a central component of profes-
sional competence for the majority of economic activities in
the contemporary world. In principle, the Internet and Educa-
tion seem to mutually reinforce one another but in practice
the relationship between them is quite complex. The intersec-
tion of education and information technology has two axes:
the transmission of specific educational content, and educa-
tion oriented to further development of the capacity to use in-
formation technology independently.
The use of the Internet to develop specific competence or
knowledge (language education, extension courses, profes-
sional courses, and courses in diverse areas including higher
education) is widespread today. A growing number of com-
panies, and practically every university in the developed
Information Societies and Digital Divides 47
world and many developing countries have multimedia pro-
duction facilities and/or distance education courses. Educa-
tional CDs, which in many cases require only computers and
not access to the Internet, represent an important segment of
the education markets.
Although there is still very little long-term comparative
data concerning the effects of the Internet on adult education,
several international and governmental institutions have com-
piled reports attempting to evaluate the impact of the Internet
on education. They indicate positive results in the area of sec-
ond language instruction, training for the business sector,
higher education, and teacher education. Private industry and
universities have been functioning in all of these well-estab-
lished markets, which have been little affected by the recent
crisis in the new economy.
At school level, aside from special cases such as children
with special needs, the impact of the Internet on education
appears to be ambiguous. There is a shortage of long-term
and comparative studies for clearly identifying the contribu-
tion of the Internet in elementary schools. Case studies indi-
cate that teacher training continues to be a fundamental ele-
ment in the educational system and that the Internet can be
used as a complement, but not as a substitute, for the func-
tioning of the teacher. The principal differential in terms of
individual performance in school, aside from social context
and family background, continues to be the teacher’s qualifi-
cation level. Through the words (and emotions) of teachers,
children develop intellectual instruments that allow them to
advance their reasoning capabilities and analytical autonomy
that are so fundamental in the Internet age, where the avail-
ability of an unlimited quantity of information can be practi-
cally as paralyzing as the lack of information.
In addition to personal relationship between teacher and
student, there is no substitute (at least not in the near future)
48 Bernardo Sorj
for paper and pencil, both because of its importance in the
development of writing skills and for the value of paper as
the best means of storing information and work compiled by
students and making this work available for teacher and par-
ent review.
New technology tends to transform the role of the teacher
by subverting his or her function. If it offers a great potential
for supporting classroom activities, when used to substitute the
role of the teacher it limits the creative application of his or her
pedagogic experience and interaction with students. In prac-
tice, some interactive educational software excludes teachers
from their pedagogical functions.
Since the introduction of the Internet in education is still
experimental, it should be carried out gradually, backed by
the experiences of pilot programs and as part of the (much
needed in most countries) general reorganization of the
teaching system. For example the three-dimensional com-
puter images are an excellent tool for facilitating comprehen-
sion of things like the human body, the subatomic world, or
geology. But using these tools to develop children’s complex
reasoning will require more advancement and redefinition of
the role of the teacher and curricula. This type of instruction-
al practice is still its initial stages and the instruments that are
used still need improving. Since multimedia products tend to
standardize education, they tend to move away from the re-
quirements for individualization, an adaptation to the neces-
sities of each student, especially at the school level.
At the secondary and university level, excessive emphasis
on the importance of the Internet as a source of information
and ideas can have damaging consequences. Research indi-
cates students have substituted reading and writing efforts
with Internet searches for texts that can be adapted to meet
their assignments. Rather than being used as a starting point
Internet searches have been transformed into arrival points
Information Societies and Digital Divides 49
leaving behind the practices of sustained reading and reflec-
tion. The excessive emphasis on the computer screen and on
multimedia educational tools risk compromising the peda-
gogic necessity of developing the intellectual discipline
needed for reading a book and or the patience necessary to
develop creative ideas.
The indiscriminate introduction of computers and Internet
can have negative effects on education especially when
teachers lack adequate training in computer and Internet use.
Massive investments in teacher training will be necessary to
avoid gaps between the knowledge of teachers and students
in relation to technology use.
Education supported by information technology should
not be confused with information technology education, an
urgent necessity in all school systems. Information technology
education requires the creation of mandatory courses designed
to prepare students in the use and evaluation of information
technology instruments, from their technical basics and uses to
considerations of the challenges they create for society. The
introduction of computers as teaching instruments should be
preceded by teacher education programs designed not only to
prepare teachers in purely operational terms, but also to offer
them a more general understanding of the environment in
which computers and the Internet function as research tools
that can advance student ability to pose questions rather than
simply finding means and not ends.
3.8 What are the consequences of the Internet on politics?
KEYWORDS:
DEMOCRACY,SOCIALNETWORKS,POWER,PYRAMIDS
An analysis of the impact of the Internet on politics must not
overlook the fact that there is a historical tendency to associ-
50 Bernardo Sorj
ate the way that policy is made with the dominant means of
communication. Mass society is often associated with Radio
and in some cases even ascribed to it. In the same way that
television has promoted the “spectacle society”. Today Inter-
net is related to a new way of making policy through the
strengthening of civil society networks disassociated from, or
marginally connected to, the state.
Though past results do not permit predictions for the fu-
ture, we must not forget that many socialists regarded the radio
era as the advent of a new era of popular participation. We
lack sufficient evidence for confirming theories regarding the
impact of the Internet on politics. Currently there co-exist two
opposite interpretations of its consequences: some analysts be-
lieve that we are about to experience a radical social transfor-
mation from representative democracy to referendum democ-
racy while for others, new forms of virtual socialization
could destroy the basis for interaction that allow the con-
struction of public space and increases the capacity of control
over the population by the state or by political marketing
companies.[7]
The interactive and open character of the Internet have
caused many authors to view the Internet as a source for a new
paradigm of social organization in which the central category
is the social network, a system of communication comprised
of interconnected nodes which are fluid and constantly chang-
ing form. In this model, each social actor participates in dif-
ferent networks each one depending on one another within
relations that may be asymmetric or hierarchical but within
which all parts are interdependent without a defined center.
The network would subvert the hierarchical and rigid social
structures of industrial capitalism, which in contrast are char-
acterized by vertical systems of communication with well-
defined structures of power.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 51
In the 20th century the dominant metaphor for describing
society was that of a social structure taking the form of a
pyramid. From the pyramidal perspective, society is orga-
nized with a small top representing the most rich and power-
ful with workers at the base, while some sectors of the popu-
lation are in the middle. In another metaphor of social orga-
nization societies had a center and a periphery; companies
divided themselves between employers and employees, while
the political structures were based on dominant and dominat-
ed groups. In this model, interaction and communication be-
tween the different levels was underplayed. However if the
mere existence of the state implies a power structure, social
participation was always present in political parties, social
movements, and public opinion. If companies were based on
authoritarian power systems, workers responded with unions
or factory commissions. Finally if the distribution of resourc-
es stratified society, social mobility presented a more flexible
reality. Even highly centralized totalitarian states depended
on networks for keeping informed and controlling society.
In contemporaries societies it has become obvious that
the unilateral nature of the pyramid metaphor is inadequate.
The question is whether the use of the network metaphor
should cause us to completely abandon the idea of power
structures or society as a pyramid. We believe that both con-
cepts are only partial explanations: information technology has
affected the techniques of power transforming traditional sys-
tems of organization and the functioning of decision-making
centers without eliminating them.
Rather than viewing the metaphor of the network as a
radical break between the present and the past, we should
consider how networks have always been a central part of
human society. In fact the importance of communication and
information has been a central theme concerning the nature
of capitalism since the work of Adam Smith. Not only the
52 Bernardo Sorj
markets but also democracy has all the characteristics of a
network, where participation in the circulation of information
is central for its functioning.
The danger of a unilateral emphasis on the role of net-
works is that we move from a partial metaphor of structures
and pyramids to another equally insufficient metaphor. Virtu-
al networks multiply and change the functioning of vertical
organizations, which increasingly make wider use of net-
works, but they come a long way from making those struc-
tures disappear. In the same way that the unification of space
and time has not eliminated time, the creation of virtual net-
works has not eliminated the material nature of the world and
the importance of the centers of political and economic deci-
sion-making and control of power and economic resources.
The principal source of technological innovation in telecom-
munications continues to be investments in research connect-
ed to the military sector, a highly centralized structure.
Networks and structures have always been interlinked.
National governments have always known about the impor-
tance of the means of communication for unifying and con-
trolling national space. The centers of power concentrate po-
litical, cultural, and economic resources imposing unequal
distribution of decisions and communication flows. If the In-
ternet indeed has the effect of weakening territorial trends, by
allowing interchanges on a global scale, territorial spaces
continue to be important not despite but because of their ma-
terial nature, their human resources and their infrastructures.
However the illusion of a world of participatory global
networks functioning apart from the government and corpo-
rate sector power structures of global society not only offers
a partial vision of social reality, but is also problematic be-
cause it causes us to overlook new problems in global society
and to abandon the dialogue with organizations (states and
large companies) that continue to be decisive actors in con-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 53
temporary society. The great intellectual challenge at the be-
ginning of this century is to invent new forms of interaction
between pyramids and networks to increase the democratic
potential of new technologies.
3.9 How do networks and centralized power interrelate?
KEYWORDS:
PARTICIPATION,COPYRIGHTS, FREESOFTWARE, PRIVACY, GLOBALVILLAGE,
The optimistic vision includes disparate views. For some the
Internet allows increased citizen participation in government
decisions by way of a system of ongoing consultation allow-
ing day-to-day referendums on diverse themes. For others,
the Internet enhances democracy radically, creating a new
public space in which civil society organizes itself separately
from the state. The pessimistic perspective includes those
who consider the Internet as a threat to face-to-face relations,
the only source of communication capable of generating sol-
id and stable groups with historic memory (rather than the a-
temporal world of the Internet), and capable of sustaining
public life and constant political action. By creating a world
of virtual relations the Internet facilitates the growing control
of governments and of corporations over citizens, destroying
privacy and liberty.
The diverse positions about the impact of the Internet in-
dicate real tendencies that depending on the outcomes of so-
cial conflict could someday become dominant. In practice
both the strengthening of democratic life and the weakening
of privacy and freedom through the control of information
can be encountered today. Databases that centralize informa-
tion from genetic codes to medical histories, laws that require
service providers to keep copies of all e-mails, cameras that
54 Bernardo Sorj
film activities in workplaces, streets, and stores, tracking sys-
tems for Internet users, credit cards that record details on all
purchases, electronic toll booths, cellular telephones with
cameras and GPS systems, new systems of biometric recog-
nition, and in the future microchip implants with medical or
other functions, converge, destroying the notion of privacy
and together comprise an enormous potential for social con-
trol and the destruction of freedom.
The global village runs the risk of reproducing the aspects
of traditional villages that made them into places of control
and social oppression and where anonymity and the feeling
of freedom were impossible. The growing impossibility of
lying (as an individual choice) has a destructive potential for
human sociability, as we know it. Though lying can be used
to hide crimes, it is also a defense mechanism for the under-
dog and the oppressed, and a fundamental recourse of human
freedom. The impact of the Internet is in fact bi-directional.
If on the one hand it expands the possibilities for action, for
worldwide public opinion, and for activism among decentral-
ized social movements it also allows new forms of social
control as well as facilitating international networks of orga-
nized crime and terrorist groups.
The dependency of society on networks of electronic
communication for the proper functioning of practically any
service creates an enormous risk of paralysis and destruction
on a global scale in case of successful attack on the system.
Processes that make humanity vulnerable have always been a
part of the interactions between the diverse groups of people
made possible by the encounters of societies. When people
lived in isolation they did not have access to others’ techno-
logical and social innovations, but they were also protected
from diseases, epidemics, and new problems that are parts of
the homogenization of productive, social, and political sys-
tems. With globalization, epidemics travel by airplane and an
Information Societies and Digital Divides 55
electronic virus at the speed of light. The homogenization of
crops is now on a worldwide scale and advances in medicine
save life but can have a neutralizing effect on bio-diversity
and the natural selection mechanisms of the species, impact-
ing on all of humanity and the planet rather than local people
and ecosystems.
New technologies have increased individual communica-
tion and access to information but also have built a fragile
system of life, dependent on technology which is vulnerable
to attacks and whose existence could lead to totalitarian prac-
tices of social control. It has also changed the art of war,
thanks to new satellite systems and remotely guided missiles
that combine, with increasing efficacy, information, commu-
nication, and destructive power. Perhaps there is a tendency
in human history for every new technological instrument that
increases the capacity to control nature and society and
which simultaneously promise improvements in the quality
of life, renewing the hope of a better world, to at the same
time increase the potential for destroying the environment
and society.
3.10 Why have copyrights become a central political
issue for Internet activists?
KEYWORDS:
PARTICIPATION,SOCIALMOVEMENTS,INTELLECTUALPROPERTY
Internet networks (represented by citizens and consumers)
and pyramids (represented by the states and by corporations)
tend to confront one another. While large companies con-
nected to the information technology industry promote the
broadest interpretations of copyrights in order to transform
every piece of information and artistic works in private prop-
erty, individuals and voluntary groups have developed free
56 Bernardo Sorj
software and free access sites and alternative copyrights li-
cense models, like Creative Commons. Government security
services try to control the communication and information of
each citizen (and in dictatorships explicitly censoring and
limiting the access to the Internet) individuals and organized
groups work to limit these powers and strengthen privacy
rights.
To the extent that scientific knowledge, information, and
culture can be transmitted by the Internet, the most appropri-
ate forms of social regulation of the system have become the
basis of a worldwide confrontation. Information, knowledge,
and culture can be seen as merchandise and sources of profit
or as public goods that should benefit from state intervention
to ensure effective universal access for the population. The
two main issues are the regulation of copyrights and the gov-
ernance of the Internet.
Public debate over what can be patentable became a cen-
tral issue for civil society already in the 1980’s, mainly relat-
ed to biotechnology products like genetic engineered seeds
and later human genes. Historically the concept of the patent
was founded on the distinction between invention and dis-
covery. While the former could be patented, as it was associ-
ated with the creation of something new that does not exist in
nature or in the public domain, discovery refers to knowledge
of something pre-existing in nature or society, as is the case
with scientific knowledge, which cannot be patented. The ob-
jective of patenting was to ensure that new knowledge would
not be transformed into industrial secrets. As an incentive for
inventors to put their inventions in the public domain they
were insured a monopoly of use or royalties from third par-
ties for a certain limited period of time. With biotechnology,
the separation between discovery and invention was called
into question, with attempts to patent knowledge concerning
the utility or function of certain genes, giving the patent
Information Societies and Digital Divides 57
holders the rights to charge royalties to anyone using this
knowledge to develop new products. Thus science was colo-
nized by industry and the knowledge that it produced started
to lose its universality and free communication character
which is among its chief historical characteristics.
In the intellectual field, production copyrights were origi-
nally used to protect editors and later authors of all types of
artistic and intellectual works. In the European tradition,
copyrights protect the author and in the United States copy-
rights can be transferred in their entirety to companies. Re-
cently copyrights of all literary and artistic property were
standardized worldwide from 50 to 70 years after author
death and 95 years after publication or 125 years after cre-
ation in cases where the rights of a work have been acquired
by a company.
Copyright law has always accepted fair use clauses, in-
cluding the reproduction of work for educational research
and for personal use. With the widespread use of photocopi-
ers the meaning of fair use was already being questioned by
editors. Later, with the introduction of Internet, the copyright
problem become central because of the possibility of placing
almost any written, musical, or visual work on a Web site at
practically no cost short-circuiting the owners of copyrights.
Various sites specialized in making music and later films re-
cently released available at no cost on the Internet. Recording
companies responded by demanding the closure these sites in
court. Though the companies won in the courtroom, the near
impossibility of eliminating these sites has caused the decline
of these companies and sooner or later will force them to re-
define their business model.
The new trends in copyrights have allowed the transfor-
mation of activities that were traditionally considered crafts
such as teaching classes, organizing courses, conferences,
and developing pedagogic material, into potentially patent-
58 Bernardo Sorj
able products. Institutions began to regard their staffs as pro-
ducers of patentable material, transforming work that used to
belong to the nonprofit category into income generating ac-
tivity and by so doing they have modified the scientific
ethos. In the United States, in particular, demands for copy-
right payments by third party users of any innovation, text, or
image, even marginal or tangential uses, has become a mania
with paralyzing impact on creativity.[8]
The Internet has raised questions regarding the definition
of fair use in the cyberspace context. Should permission or
payment be required for non-commercial use of information
and material made available on the Internet to anyone with ac-
cess to a Web browser or search engine? Should the browser
or search engine receive payment? Internet companies and
holders of copyrights expect than in the future they will be
able to require payment from each user for any downloaded
information. To gain control over Internet users, many pres-
sure the hardware industry to include mechanisms that control
and monitor each user action.
If solutions to the question of payments for sites and search
engines center on individualized solutions including control
mechanisms that take away the public domain character of the
Internet, companies will gain unprecedented access to private
information. An open national and international public discus-
sion should seek to identify answers that allow payments for
content producers while ensuring the open and public service
character of the Internet and preserving personal privacy. One
proposed solution is a fee-based system, collecting from users
and distributing among visited sites according to a publicly
controlled system.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 59
3.11 What is the open source movement?
KEYWORDS:
MICROSOFT,OPENSOURCE,LINUX
The creators of the Internet left the source code of their work
in the public domain allowing any person to develop compat-
ible programs without paying for copyrights. Since the be-
ginning of the Internet a group comprised primarily of re-
searchers and hackers have worked to keep source codes for
computer programs in the public domain. This movement
seeks to confront the growing oligopolisation of source codes
within the software industry such as the best-known Micro-
soft case. These movements created the Open source Stan-
dard, certifying that the source code is available without cost
to individual users and Creative Commons, as an alternative
intellectual property system.
The most important product of the open source move-
ment is the Linux operating system. The use of Linux is
widespread within large companies, institutions, universities,
and governments. These groups generally use large comput-
ers with sufficient human resources for providing technical
support to users. For individuals and small businesses with-
out technical knowledge, commercial software has the ad-
vantage of easy installation and technical support. Although
its use continues to be small, there are increasing number of
companies that specialize in providing technical support for
open source programs.
Discussion concerning open source software often re-
volves around economic themes, particularly in developing
countries where open source software use is viewed as a way
of reducing expenses. The existence of open source software
has, in fact, pressured the industry to reduce prices. But the
central question raised by the open source movement is fun-
60 Bernardo Sorj
damentally political. The original architecture of the Internet
facilitated communication rather than identification of the
user and the content being transmitted. Both companies and
governments have since developed tools aimed at identifying
users and their movements. For companies, monitoring users
each time they access the Internet is the only way to ensure
payments of copyrights while also offering information re-
garding the consumer profile of Internet users. For govern-
ments, access to and storage of information transmitted in cy-
berspace is seen as a necessary component of vigilance over
activities that could affect national security, causing many
countries to restrict or prohibit the use of cryptographic sys-
tems by private parties, to regulate the commercialization of
advanced deciphering systems, and to oblige service provid-
ers to store all e-mail for a certain period of time.
The existence and ongoing development of alternative
open source programs is among the fundamental conditions,
together with copyright laws, for limiting the capacity of the
corporate sector, to subordinate the Internet to the logic of
their interests. For the large majority of information technol-
ogy users, commercial programs and hardware are black
boxes. Most users lack a notion of the information that they
transmit when they use the Internet. More public debate is
needed to assess the public liberties threaten by the power of
the state and the corporate sectors to interfere, monitor, ex-
tract and make use information from Internet navigators and
email users and define the rights and ways of private compa-
nies to collect returns on their investments and of the state’s
concern with public security.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 61
3.12 What are the Internet governance challenges?
KEYWORDS:
INTERNETGOVERNANCE,PUBLICSPACE,INTERNATIONALREGULATION
Cyberspace represents one of the great challenges to the new
forms of international governance. Besides the problem of copy-
rights, previously discussed, the regulation of cyberspace in-
volves two major issues: 1) the governance institutions of the In-
ternet; and, 2) the regulation of cyberspace as a public space.
The first issue attracts most of the attention of social ac-
tivists, and the main focus is the governance structure of the
Internet (the ICANN - Internet Corporation for Names and
Numbers – known widely as ICANN –). The ICANN was
created as a non - profit organization, by the USA govern-
ment Department of Commerce in 1998, and has as its main
responsibility the allocation and management of IP address-
es, domain names and the root server system. The main polit-
ical issues around the ICANN are related to its scope and the
role that it should play in it the United Nations, national gov-
ernments and civil society.
Cyberspace has become a central part of the public sphere
and as such poses the problem of regulation. The challenge
we face now is how to prevent this tool from being colonized
by antidemocratic groups, i.e., that the potential exchange
and debate of ideas not be thwarted by the dynamics that the
new medium itself may generate. There are good reasons to
be suspicious about states trying to control the contents and
messages that circulate on the Internet. Notwithstanding, giv-
en the fact that the Internet is becoming the privileged medi-
um for public debate, it is now necessary to analyze and eval-
uate the specific characteristics of communication via the In-
ternet, so as to create regulating mechanisms, which as far as
possible do not depend on state interventionism.
62 Bernardo Sorj
4. DIGITAL DIVIDES
4.1 What is the Digital Divide?
KEYWORDS:
DIGITAL DIVIDE, SOCIAL INEQUALITY, ACCESS TO COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES
The term digital divide refers to the unequal access to a diverse
collection of communication tools such as radio, telephone,
television, and the Internet. Although we will be focusing on
access to and uses of the Internet, the digital divide cannot be
disassociated from access to other communication technolo-
gies and in fact each of them produces a specific divide.
Therefore rather than a digital divide (related to only one given
communication artifact or an abstract average use of all the
communication vehicles) it would be more precise to speak of
digital divides. This chapter will focus on the digital divide
produced by the Internet.
There is a strong correlation between the digital divides
and other forms of social inequality. Generally the highest
levels of digital exclusion are found in the lowest income
sectors. Communication divides do not manifest themselves
solely only on the basis of access to material goods such as
radio, telephone, television, and Internet. Each user’s intel-
lectual and professional capacity to make the most of each of
these communication and information technologies is as im-
portant as access itself.
Although most of the literature on digital inclusion, espe-
cially reports produced by international agencies on develop-
ing countries emphasize the potential of ICTs to reduce pover-
ty and social inequality, the social dynamic is quite the re-
verse: the introduction of new ICT’s generally increases, at
least at the beginning, social exclusion and inequality. Univer-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 63
salization of access can limit the damage, and sometimes offer
new opportunities, from as regards social inequality.
4.2 Why digital exclusion can’t be separated from other
forms of inequality?
KEYWORDS:
POVERTY,QUALITATIVESTUDIES, QUANTITATIVESTUDIES
Poverty is not an isolated phenomenon. How poverty is de-
fined and perceived depends on a given level of cultural/eco-
nomic/technological/political development in each society.
The introduction of a new product that becomes a condition of
‘civilized’ life (be it a telephone, electricity, a refrigerator, ra-
dio or TV) raises the minimum standard by which one is de-
fined as poor. Richer sectors of society are generally the first
to have access to new products, and it takes a long time before
these products are made available to the poor – if at all. There-
fore, the introduction of new ‘essential’ products increases in-
equality.
Moreover, since richer sectors of society are the first to
have access to new products, they have the benefit of initial
competitive advantage in using and mastering them. At the
same time, those who are excluded face new, or greater, dis-
advantages. In both cases, new ICT products increase, in prin-
ciple, poverty and social exclusion. The main aim of digital in-
clusion policies therefore is to diminish the negative impact of
new ICTs on wealth distribution and life opportunities.
Most of existing in-depth studies on digital exclusion focus
on small communities or local experiences and do not inte-
grate studies based on quantitative data. On the other hand,
statistical studies – in particular those on developing countries
– have as a central and generally unique parameter: the divi-
sion between those who have and those who do not have ac-
64 Bernardo Sorj
cess to computers and to the Internet. Although important, this
measurement is insufficient to understand the broader social
dynamics and to define policies which make access universal,
because of three important factors:
a) They do not identify the quality of access, whether in terms
of connection speed or cost/access time available, in particular
for the poorest groups of the population.
b) When quantitative studies do distinguish between socio-
economic strata, they use possession of a computer in the
home as the basic criterion for access, while in fact tele-cen-
ter and cybercafés, workplace and family or friends with ac-
cess are as important for the poorest sector of the population.[9]
Most of these studies do not give information on different
types of uses, and its relevance for users.
c) Digital exclusion is not only about access to the Internet
versus those who do not have access – of those who are in-
cluded versus those who are excluded.[10] While there is a real
polarity, it sometimes masks the multiple aspects of digital ex-
clusion, which are related not only to access but also to appro-
priation, the capacity of making sense, interpreting and making
use of the information available on the Internet.
The digital divide represents a dimension of social inequality:
it measures the relative level of access to products, services,
and benefits of new information and communication technolo-
gies between different segments of the population. The digital
divide also addresses another subject associated with social in-
equality that cannot be confused with the digital divide itself,
that is, information technology as a tool in the fight against
poverty. In situations of economic growth it is possible to re-
duce poverty indicators (the size of the population below a set
Information Societies and Digital Divides 65
poverty line), while simultaneously increasing social inequali-
ty. Thus the fights against inequality and poverty have some
commonalities but are not synonymous.
As already mentioned, the initial social impact of the In-
ternet did increase social inequality because it reached first the
wealthiest sectors of the population. Thus, the fight against the
digital divide is not so much a fight to diminish social inequal-
ity in itself as it is an effort to prevent inequality from increas-
ing because of the advantages that those groups of the popula-
tion with more resources and education enjoy as a result of ex-
clusive access to this information technology.
4.3 What are the different aspects/dimensions of access
to Internet?
KEYWORDS:
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, TRAINING, INTELLECTUAL CAPABILITIES,
SOCIALINSERTION, CONTENTPRODUCTION
The digital divide depends on five factors that determine the
level of equality of access to information technology systems:
1) the existence of physical infrastructure for transmission;
2) the availability of connection equipment such as a com-
puter, modem, and access line; 3) training in the use of the
computers and the Internet; 4) intellectual capabilities and
the social insertion of users (this is the product of the educa-
tional and intellectual level, profession and the social network
that determines the effective use of information and the neces-
sities of Internet communication; 5) the production and use
of specific contents adapted to the needs of the diverse seg-
ments of the population. While the first two criteria refer to
passive dimensions of Internet access, the last three dimen-
sions define the potential of its active appropriation.
66 Bernardo Sorj
The distinction, between the different levels of access and
use, is basic to development of methodologies for evaluating,
accompanying, and acting in the fight against the digital di-
vide. Public programs aimed at universal communication ser-
vices focus primarily on the first and second levels of physi-
cal infrastructures and connection equipment.
Access infrastructures are comprised of transmission sys-
tems that can function by way of telephone, satellite, radio, ca-
ble television, electricity wires and cellular phones. In the fu-
ture it will be possible to access the Internet by way of interac-
tive digital television. Internet connections can be by fixed
phone dial connexion, or a variety of broadband systems of ac-
cess, which determine the speed of information transfer. The
availability of individual access is dependent upon the exis-
tence of local providers for these services.
The universalization of access infrastructures is a process
that is practically complete in advanced countries, though
there are still some isolated regions where broadband is still
not available. In developing countries, on the other hand, the
universalization of infrastructures is still a central problem,
particularly in rural areas and remote villages. In the develop-
ing world, broadband is generally only available in large and
some medium-sized cities. In the majority of developing coun-
tries, the Internet is concentrated primarily in large cities.
The most common equipment for accessing the Internet for
the poor in developing countries is still a computer with a mo-
dem and a telephone line with a dialup access to a service pro-
vider. The main mechanisms of individual access are: home,
work, school and public or private tele-centers. In low-income
sectors without equipment or access services, access to the In-
ternet depends on collective access points such as school,
work, or tele-centers (non-profit collective access points) and
cyber-cafes (private profit oriented access points).
Information Societies and Digital Divides 67
The bibliography on the digital divide is generally consis-
tent in defining two main factors that determine Internet access
levels, given the existence of communication infrastructure.
They are personal income and educational level. Given the
same income level, people with higher education levels are
more likely to have access to the Internet. With the exception
of some particular regions, there is relative equality of Internet
access between men and women. The unequal impact on dif-
ferent racial and ethnic groups tends to be consistent with in-
equalities in income and education, with the exception of some
situations where unequal access is aggravated by language dif-
ferences between ethnic groups. The penetration of the Inter-
net in developing countries is also associated with the level of
urbanization. The digital divide, particularly in the developing
countries, is aggravated dramatically in rural regions. In gener-
al, higher levels of urban concentration correspond to a higher
numbers of users.
The digital divide has a strong age component that is more
pronounced among low-income sectors. In general the likeli-
hood of a poor person being computer and Internet literate de-
creases with age. The difficulty of learning at a later age and
the high concentration of illiteracy among older populations
cause the digital divide to be particularly large among low-in-
come older adults in developing countries.
The number of computers and users registered to Internet
access providers is the principal means for measuring the num-
ber of users. For some authors it is necessary to distinguish be-
tween active users, for whom the Internet is integrated into
daily life, and passive users, for whom Internet use is casual.
The diversity of methods of access makes it difficult to count
the number of Internet users. There is great disagreement re-
garding the criteria for evaluating the number of users, even
within the United States, between the different organizations
and companies specialized in the business. In principle, one
68 Bernardo Sorj
assumes that the number of users per access point (computer
connected to the Internet) is larger in developing countries
than in developed countries and that poor families have more
users per computer than rich families (some families have
more than one home computer connected to the Internet). In
some cases, a single user can be registered with multiple pro-
viders, in other cases, as in the tele-centers or cyber-cafes; a
single computer provides access to a great numbers of users.
When Internet access penetrates the poorest sectors of the pop-
ulation, the number of users per computer tends to increase.
4.4 What is the relationship between the Internet and
literacy?
KEYWORDS:
KNOWLEDGE SKILLS,BOOKLITERACY, EDUCATIONALINEQUITY
The ability to use the information available on the Internet as a
source of knowledge and intellectual and professional devel-
opment depends on the users’ prior skills. This qualification
assumes basic literacy and abilities acquired within the school
system. Digital literacy cannot be dissociated from book lit-
eracy. The network multiplies the possibilities for intellectual
and professional work but at least until the present moment, it
is not a substitute for the basic intellectual qualifications that
are acquired at school and its effective potential depends on
them. Thus social inequality as expressed in educational ineq-
uity is reproduced and increases with use of the Internet. As
long as much of the population of the developing world con-
tinues to struggle with illiteracy and semi-literacy, universal
access to the Internet will be an illusory goal.
Training in the use of the computer and the Internet
(called digital literacy or e-literacy) can be offered through
formal courses in school or at work, private courses, or
Information Societies and Digital Divides 69
courses promoted by non-governmental organizations, or in
contexts (schools, work or home) where the Internet is used
and people nearby are able to offer assistance when needed.
Children, in particular, tend to learn to use computers and the
Internet through play almost without direct orientation.
However the probability of having the type of access that al-
lows this kind of learning by osmosis, either at home or
work, is lower in low-income sectors where the chances of
owning a home computer as well as having access to a com-
puter in the work place are extremely low.
The aforementioned factors combine in determining the
uses of information technology, the most important criteria for
evaluating its effective relevance for society. These uses de-
pend on the creative appropriation of the new technology by
the different social actors and each user, producing new con-
tents and applications that represent innovative responses to
economic, social political, and cultural problems.
The use of the Internet can be analyzed according to its
dual dimensions as both an instrument of communication and
dissemination of information and an instrument for access to
information. It’s potential as a communication instrument
(email) is greater among high income users since most proba-
bly all the members of his/her network have access to the In-
ternet, while this is not the case of the low income users. This
is even truer in the case of international contacts, because low
income sectors are very unlikely to have an international social
network. The only relevant exception relates to poor families
with members working abroad, often illegally, for whom the
Internet offers cheap communication and contact with their na-
tive land and families.
70 Bernardo Sorj
4.5 How Internet content is related to social inequality?
KEYWORDS:
CONTENT,CONTENTPRODUCTION, CONTENTBIAS, LANGUAGES
The content available on the Internet constitutes a decisive
area in the dynamics of the digital divide. The uses that it en-
ables are central factors in the impact of the Internet on social
inequality. Even if universal access is assured, the lack of con-
tent targeting the poor can limit the effective impact of the In-
ternet on low-income sectors.
Generally, in both developing and developed countries a
large part of Internet content is developed for the middle
class, the principal market with the potential to indirectly or
directly generate revenues for web sites, either through
advertising, buying advertised products, or by direct payment
for access. The orientation toward middle class users is
evident in both form and content as the majority of the sites
assume a relatively high user educational level. Even non-
commercial home pages tend to be produced by the middle
class, since making a web site requires certain knowledge of
the Internet or a minimum of financial resources.
The shortage of content specifically created for rural
communities is aggravated by the fact that the Internet is
basically an urban phenomenon. Users and especially producers
of web sites are largely concentrated in large urban centers. In
small cities and in low-income neighborhoods of large cities, the
production of information concerning local necessities is very
limited.
For some time, the main concern associated with the global
impact of Internet content production was the predominance of
English language sites. In addition to imposing an Anglo-Saxon
cultural hegemony, English language sites are socially exclusive
as much because of their content (which is not relevant to local
Information Societies and Digital Divides 71
conditions), as because they require knowledge of English. In
non-English speaking regions, this skill is usually limited to the
upper classes.
This concern has been shown to be an exaggeration: as the
Internet grows, the percentage of home pages in each language
tends to be consistent with the percentage of Internet users
(with exception of Asian languages and ethnic minorities).
Still international inequalities continue to be important. Inter-
national Internet traffic indicators show that Latin American
and African users consult web sites in advanced countries
many times more often than the reverse and, that, while
growth in the number of sites in developing countries has ac-
celerated, in comparative terms, most sites still leave much to
be desired in terms of quality and the amount of information
they offer (this can be easily confirmed by visiting sites of
many of the governments of central Africa). The importance
of the quantity of information available on English language
web sites means that those who lack English language abilities
have a limited capacity to make use of the Internet. In the fu-
ture, instantaneous text translation systems (many of which al-
ready are available but do not yet produce high quality transla-
tions) will be important instruments in the intra-cultural com-
munication and dissemination of information on a global level.
The existing bibliography indicates a shortage of sites
aimed at minority ethnic indigenous groups in developing
countries, and has shown that where these sites do exist, they
tend to be produced by outside specialists. The shortage of
sites dedicated to the needs of poor urban sectors of the popu-
lation, whose main point of access are the tele-centers, is
equally dramatic.
72 Bernardo Sorj
4.6 What are the main policies which can diminish the
digital divide?
KEYWORDS:
PRICE-SUBSIDY, LOW-COST COMPUTERS, TELE-CENTERS, CIBERCAFÉS,
COMMUNITYCENTERS
The policies of infrastructure access expansion, oriented by the
privatization policies of the 1990’s have been generally suc-
cessful in expanding the use of the cellular telephone to the
low income sectors of society of developing societies. Howev-
er in relation to Internet access they have collided with the lim-
its of effective demand due. The poorest members of the popu-
lation do not have the resources to buy a computer and are
even less able to pay monthly fees for a telephone line and In-
ternet access provider. The most common mechanisms for ad-
dressing this barrier to universal access are: 1) price subsidies
for the low-income users, 2) promotion of low-cost or recycled
computers, 3) support for the creation of technology centers.
A) Price subsidies – International experience offers examples
of reduced access rates in poor neighborhoods, tele-centers
with free or subsidized access fees, and subsidized rates that
favor low-income users and tele-centers.
B) Promotion of low-cost and recycled computers – The pro-
duction of “people’s computers” has as its main challenge the
creation of a product capable of confronting the “double helix”
of the computer industry: the need for constant renewal of the
hardware due to the increasing demand of information storage
and processing of the new software. The main possibility for
such a computer to be created would be either through: 1) the
development of an alternative computer through joint efforts
of a non-profit research center and local firms; or 2) the pro-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 73
duction of a cheaper computer by the multi-national industry.
In the latter case the problem is that a low-cost computer could
take a share away from their existing market. One possible so-
lution would be to target such a device only to the institutional
market (schools and public institutions) and tele-centers in
low-income areas. In addition to efforts to reduce hardware
costs, it would be necessary to find alternative solutions to
lowering the costs of the software. The first low-cost comput-
ers have failed but new experiences, like the one lead by Nich-
olas Negroponte are under way. An alternative way to increase
access could be the reduction of taxes on basic computers. Re-
cent experience in Brazil has proven to be quite successful in
increasing the demand for computers in the lower middle
classes.
Still the most important policy to increase access for the poor
are collective access points where users can benefit from Inter-
net services using equipment that does not belong to them.
Those access points can be tele-centers, with non-profit orien-
tation, or cybercafés, which are profit oriented, and they play a
role comparable to that of the public telephone. Tele-centers
and cybercafés are the main instrument for advancing univer-
sal access in developing countries.
International organizations have developed several typol-
ogies of tele-centers. They can be simplified in to the follow-
ing main types:
Access providing tele-centers, provide basic access such as
computing, Internet, fax, photocopying, printing and telephone
service. In the poorest countries tele-centers often provide only
telephone service.
Single purpose technology centers; offer a single type of
content and services, such as governmental or educational in-
formation.
74 Bernardo Sorj
Training tele-centers, that include courses in information
technology use and user support along with the services men-
tioned in the first type.
Multipurpose community tele-centers, offer several of the
following services: local access, information, public services,
educational courses, technology courses, community radio,
content production, and services for the community.
Despite the importance given to tele-centers, the bibliography
details only a small number of documented examples of self-
sustainability. Most of the bibliography doesn’t go beyond an-
ecdotal material. Still more work is needed to advance tele-
centers and cybercafés business models that include techno-
logical alternatives, types of software, models of management,
systems of payment, services offered, partnerships between the
NGOs and the private and public sectors, and forms of integra-
tion with the local community.
With the expansion of Internet there is a tendency that the
non-profit tele-centers tend to be substituted by privately
owned cybercafés. Sometimes based in small spaces or house
annexes, administered by the family, or in big cities in more
formal spaces, cyber-cafes become the most important way
for digital inclusion in most big cities in developing coun-
tries. In most of the cases they don’t receive direct or indirect
support from government and are not considered by regulato-
ry agencies. In general, telecommunications regulating agen-
cies, due to limitations of their mandates or other factors,
tend not to regulate access fees that could allow cybercafés in
poor regions to reduce access rates.
The models of tele-centers and cybercafes must be adapted
to the diverse local contexts, and should be developed directly
by the public sector supported by non-governmental organiza-
tions and enterprises. The creation of public access points
should creatively combine a variety of types of tele-centers.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 75
For example, a model can be imagined where in a particular
neighborhood or small village, some collective access points
are installed by the private initiative while a public multi-pur-
pose tele-center offers courses, orients the population in Inter-
net use and supports efforts to produce local content with in-
formation on the life of the community.
4.7 What is e-readiness?
KEYWORDS:
TELECOMMUNICATION PENETRATION, INTERNATIONALRATING, INTERNATIONAL
COMPETITIVENESS
Some international studies seeking to develop indicators for
establishing the relative position of countries in terms of infor-
mation technology development, created the concept of e-
readiness. This concept allows evaluating the penetration of
communication technologies within countries in comparison
with other countries, and is considered to be an important fac-
tor in determining international economic competitiveness.
The relative e-readiness of a country is not necessarily corre-
lated with the country’s internal digital divide. Even so, poli-
cies that fight against the digital divide positively affect na-
tional capacity in terms of e-readiness.
There are many ways to formulate and define the e-readi-
ness of each country. Some authors identify stages of e-readi-
ness development based on key indicators such as the num-
ber of people with access to communication technologies.
More complex models consider factors including the institu-
tional contexts, regulatory systems in the area of telecommu-
nications, human resources, systems of innovation, and the
uses and impacts on society of new technologies. The sim-
pler formulas suffer from the types of problems that are typi-
cal of quantitative comparisons between countries with di-
76 Bernardo Sorj
verse economic, political, and socio-cultural realities. This is
particularly important in the area where product dissemina-
tion and education levels determine the diversity of potential
uses for Internet. The more complex formulas also have their
shortcomings in that by considering qualitative dimensions,
they are more difficult to quantify and they depend on allo-
cating more or less random values to each index.
Despite the different criteria they use, the majority of stud-
ies arrive at a typology of levels of e-readiness that confirms
strong correlation with the relative international position of the
country in terms of per capita income. Still, within each group
of countries, there are important differences.
Since Internet use by tourists in developed countries is
practically universal, nearly all governments and many hotels
in developing countries have web sites aimed at this audience.
In many of the poorest developing countries, a large part of
publicly and privately run web sites are used mainly for the
promotion of tourism. International and national institutions
have touted the Internet as an instrument for modernizing
small and medium-sized businesses, and as a mechanism for
accessing international markets.
We should mention the impact of the new technologies on
the flow of payments between developed and developing
countries and its consequences not only on development but
also on the digital divide. While the international telephone
payment system favors developing countries, the payment sys-
tems for information transfer via the Internet favor developed
countries, primarily the United States, the main center of inter-
national of Internet traffic.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 77
4.8 What are the main public uses of the Internet in
developing countries?
KEYWORDS:
DISTANCE EDUCATION, E-GOVERNMENT, E-SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
E-CULTURE,E-HEALTH,
Distance education - Distance education precedes the Inter-
net. Correspondence courses followed by radio, television and
videocassette, have a long tradition and have served innumera-
ble people, who, either due to time or distance, could not at-
tend a traditional class. In 1969 the Open University, in Great
Britain, had a pioneering role in university level education by
way of correspondence courses. In the 1980’s and 1990’s sev-
eral developing countries created higher education distance ed-
ucation courses, especially for inhabitants of rural areas. To-
day distance universities in Turkey, China, Indonesia, Thai-
land, Korea and India have hundreds of thousand of students.
In the majority of distance universities established in de-
veloping countries the main means of communication are the
post office, radio, television, videotapes and CDs, with the In-
ternet still playing, in general, a supporting role. One of the
obvious reasons for the limited use of the Internet is that the
majority of poor students lack access. This situation is starting
to change and in the past few years, nearly the majority of the
principal universities in developing countries have begun to
conduct distance education via the Internet.
In primary schools in developing countries, the intensive
use of the Internet is mainly concentrated in privates institu-
tions. Since most of the children in developing countries can
only access computers in schools, it is fundamental that com-
puters be available to schools even if they are concentrated in
collective laboratories. This allows children to become social-
ized in computer and Internet use, offering a minimum of fa-
78 Bernardo Sorj
miliarity with information technology and increasing their fu-
ture chances in the market place.
Distance education has been defended as a solution for
teacher training problems, especially in rural areas. There are
several cases in developing countries of the creation of region-
al training using the Internet and videoconferencing, and
“school nets” that offer teachers continuously updated pro-
grams and didactic material. The success of these initiatives
depends on the availability of Internet access in schools and on
the basic training of the teachers in the use of the Internet.
Among countries that have made important advancements in
the creation of “school nets” are Chile (with the Enlace pro-
gram supported by a network of universities that already
reaches almost all secondary schools and more of the half of
primary schools), South Africa, and Thailand .
E-Science and Technology - The Internet was originally a
tool used by the scientific community and spread rapidly
among the most advanced developing countries including the
majority of Latin America countries, China, India, the north of
Africa and South Africa. It has already spread in the poorest
countries, generally with the support of international organiza-
tions, foundations, and corporations. For the scientific commu-
nities of developing countries, access to the Internet has meant
the possibility of easy, fast, and cheap communication with the
international scientific community and online access to data-
bases, scientific interchange and participation in specialized
international networks and virtual libraries to which they do
not have material access. The Internet has an important role in
facilitating the dissemination of the intellectual production that
otherwise would be effectively lost.
E-Culture - In the field of culture one the most important ar-
eas of impact of the Internet has been the creation of virtual li-
Information Societies and Digital Divides 79
braries, that allow populations of developing countries that are
financially unable to construct and to maintain traditional li-
braries, to access the written assets of humanity. Although ac-
cess to these texts by computer screen is neither equivalent,
nor a substitute to paper based text, virtual libraries allow con-
tact with texts that would otherwise be unavailable to students
at schools and universities in the developing world.
The Internet has been a vehicle of cultural globalization
as well as an instrument for expression of cultural diversity
in the contemporary world as well as making cultural works
available around the world. The creation of virtual museums
has advanced substantially in some developing countries in
particular in Latin America followed by some Asian coun-
tries like Korea, China, and Turkey, as well as South Africa.
E-Health - The Internet is often presented as the solution for
remote regions and/or for regions of developing countries that
lack sufficient local medical staffing. Although there is an
enormous potential for this use, there are limited possibilities
for success in the near future, because the regions with the
greatest needs are those with the least access to resources and
staff trained for using the instruments of telemedicine, with
their continuing high costs. This area continues to be a low-
priority for health care systems in developing countries.
The Internet has already been introduced for modernizing
administration systems and organization of health care sys-
tems in developing countries, leading to more rational re-
source management and improving the quality of services.
Information technology is also used in controlling epidemics,
for participation in international monitoring, making the
body of medical literature available via virtual libraries,[11]
and distributing information between health care profession-
als, particularly in public health campaigns.
80 Bernardo Sorj
E-Government - In developing countries, e-government can
be an important instrument for reducing inefficiency and the
private appropriation of the state by bureaucracies that trans-
form public services into sources of favors, gratuities and sys-
tematic corruption. The ability to access an increasing number
of documents and official information via the Internet dimin-
ishes the power of bureaucratic and political intermediaries.
However, to the extent that public state services are ac-
cessible via the Internet, they tend to create an increasing di-
vide between citizens with and without access. This problem
is aggravated with widespread use of public services via the
Internet. Since the universalization of Internet access in de-
veloping countries will be a long process, it will be necessary
to maintain and improve alternative lines of communication
between the government and citizens, such as mobile tele-
phone and face to face contact.
Information Societies and Digital Divides 81
CONCLUSIONS
What can be done?
KEYWORDS:
INTER-RELATEDPUBLICPOLICIES,DIGITALINCLUSION,SOCIALINEQUALITIES,
POVERTY,STRATEGICPLANNING
E-social development does not substitute other kinds of social
development, nor does the fight against the digital divide sub-
stitute the set of measures necessary for facing poverty, social
inequality, and one of their most terrible consequences, urban
violence. But e-development has become one of the dimen-
sions of social development, as the fight against the digital di-
vide is one of many dimensions of the fight against poverty
and inequality. Basic knowledge of ICTs increasingly be-
comes a precondition for employment. Universalizing basic
knowledge of computers and the Internet is fundamental in
limiting the negative impact their absence has on the poorest
sectors in spite of several limitations of the policies to democ-
ratize information.
The struggle for digital inclusion is a struggle against
time. New information technologies increase existing social
inequalities, therefore policies for digital inclusion are noth-
ing more than a struggle to re-align the possibilities for ac-
cess to the job market and living conditions. The true value
of information depends on the user’s ability to interpret it. To
be useful, information must be meaningful, must be trans-
formed into knowledge through a process of socialization
and practices that build analytical capacities. Therefore con-
fronting the digital divide cannot be separated from confront-
ing the educational divide. Policies to universalize access to
the Internet in developing countries will not be successful if
they are not associated with other social policies, in particu-
82 Bernardo Sorj
lar those relating to education. Obviously, this does not
mean that we must wait until we are able to eradicate illitera-
cy in order to develop digital inclusion policies. The de-
mands of the economy and of job creation require interrelat-
ed policies that work with different social sectors and differ-
ent rhythms in order to universalize public services. At the
same time we can not ignore the strong links between differ-
ent social policies.
The criteria for evaluating efforts in combating the digital
divide are how these programs reduce other forms of social in-
equality and poverty. For example, in the past decade, the
United States has practically achieved universal access to the
Internet but social inequality has not diminished because of
this, in fact it has increased.
The increasing complexity associated with the fight against
social inequality creates new challenges for strategic planning
of governmental actions and for the development of social pol-
icies. Policies aimed at reducing the digital divide are a neces-
sary component of social policy but they are not the answer to
all social and economic problems. The same is true in relation
to e-education and to the problems brought on by declines in
school performance. The introduction of the Internet should be
part of the general rethinking of teaching methods and the role
of both schools and teachers.
The search for miraculous solutions is constant in develop-
ing countries. The Internet is too important to be brought into
the cycle of miracle cures that later are abandoned for not
meeting unrealistic expectations.
In the first place, developing countries should take the dy-
namic nature of the digital divide into consideration, which
means that countries which are not part of the central nucleus
of technology generation develop at least the capacity for de-
fensive strategic analysis. This will allow them to follow the
trends and experiences developed by information technology
Information Societies and Digital Divides 83
leaders in the developing and developed world, thereby reduc-
ing the experimentation costs and helping to define the best
technological options and most appropriate products for their
social realities.
Second, policies must assure the coherence, integration, se-
curity and inter-operability of different public services, con-
trolling costs and making government action more coherent.
The coordination of the policies cannot be left to short sighted
party interests, the institution responsible for defining the strat-
egies for the information society must be part of the central
core of government. If the decision making nucleus of the gov-
ernment does not commit to the coordination of ministerial ac-
tivities associated with the information society, the result will
produce waste due to duplicated efforts and unrealistic pro-
grams. The fight against the digital divide must be viewed as a
long term state policy, avoiding the tendency in developing
countries for new governments to abandon and devalue the ac-
complishments of their predecessors.
Third, the coordination of infrastructure development poli-
cies is necessary to increase the synergy between different
physical networks such as roads, electric lines, telephone and
fiber optics. Universal service should be promoted, either by
creating incentives so that private companies invest directly in
the neediest areas, or government intervening directly to as-
sure services at accessible costs.
Fourth, the urgency to resolve the problem of the digital di-
vide cannot justify hasty pharaonic investments in areas that
demand experimental pilot programs, adequate local condi-
tions, user training, systems of evaluation and technical sup-
port. This is particularly true of the installation of Internet ac-
cess in schools, which should be a gradual process. This
means that ICTs should not be transformed overnight in a
privileged instrument for the educational system through over-
invest in exaggerated quantities of computers in each school.
84 Bernardo Sorj
Furthermore, the experience in most developing countries
shows that the introduction of computers in public schools is
not accompanied by sustained long term investment in equip-
ment maintenance and renewal. The adaptation of professors
to this new instrument is a long process that can not be disas-
sociated with the general improvement of professional devel-
opment. Developing adequate software, adapting pedagogical
systems, and developing critical teaching techniques on the
use of ICTs will be a necessarily long term learning process in
the majority of developing countries. Until that time, the role
of ICT labs in schools should be to introduce students to these
instruments and their uses and provide them training on basic
programs, in order to motivate them to facilitate future inser-
tion in the job market.
Fifth, investments in collective access must be accompa-
nied by preparation of local human resources. For instance,
the Internet allows access to excellent educational programs
for remote areas, but this possibility does not resolve the
problem of shortages of teachers with a minimum education
(typical of many remote places). Qualified teachers are nec-
essary for making good use of the available material on the
Internet.
Sixth, it is necessary to advance policies that assure the de-
velopment of tele-centers and cyber-cafes. Specific regulations
should ensure that communication services operators and In-
ternet service providers offer public institutions and tele-cen-
ters and cybercafés in low-income areas access to infrastruc-
ture at reduced cost.
Seventh, the fight against the digital divide requires part-
nerships between non-governmental organizations, companies,
and government, in which the non-governmental organizations
and enterprises play an important role as a source of innova-
tion and contracted services. The fight against the digital di-
vide depends, above all, on the capacity of state action to use
Information Societies and Digital Divides 85
market impulses and the experiences of non-governmental or-
ganizations and private initiatives to assure that poor sectors of
the population are integrated into and participate in the con-
struction of the global society.
86 Bernardo Sorj
FURTHER E-READING [12]
The number of sites devoted to the subjects discussed in the
book is extremely vast. The following is a partial list of sites
where the reader can begin her/his research on information so-
cieties and digital divides:
BRIDGES.ORG
COMMUNITY TECHNOLOGY CENTERS NETWORK
COMPUTERS FOR AFRICA
DIGITAL DIVIDE NETWORK
DIGITAL DIVIDE.ORG
DIGITAL OPPORTUNITY NETWORK
GLOBAL CULTURE TRADE AND TECHNOLOGY DIGITAL
DIVIDE PROJECT
INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH
CENTER - IT SITE
Information Societies and Digital Divides 87
THE MORINO INSTITUTE
_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=-465.html
SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH COUNCIL - IT SITE
THE JOURNAL OF COMMUNITY INFORMATICS
UN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
WOMEN IN GLOBAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
WORLD BANK ITC SITE
[1] Professor of Sociology, Federal University of Rio de
Janeiro and Director of the Edelstein Center for Social
Research (www.bernardosorj.com).
[2] For a broader discussion on the digital divide see:
Sorj, Bernardo, Brazil@digitaldivide – Confronting Inequality
in the Information Society, UNESCO, 2003 (available at
www.centroedelsteing.org).
[3] See, Marshall, Sahlin, Culture and Practical Reason.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.
[4] Cf. Douglas, M., and Isherwood, B., The World of
Goods, London: Routledge, 1996.
[5] See in particular, Fodor, J., The Mind Doesn’t Work That
Way: The Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,2000, and Pinker, S., How the
Mind Works. New York: Norton, 1997.
[6] On the interaction of internet and perception of reality
see Levy, Pierre, ¿Qué es lo virtual?, Barcelona: Paidós, 1999.
[7] Our own research in this area indicates at least very
ambiguous results of the use of Internet in politics, see
Bernardo Sorj, Internet, Public Sphere and Political Marketing:
Between the Promotion of Communication and Moralist
Solipsism. Rio de Janeiro: The Edelstein Center for Social
pdf/wp2_english.pdf
[8]See, in particular, Lawrence Lessig books on the subject:
[9] See for instance our work on Rio de Janeiro
shantytowns: Sorj, B, Guedes, L.E., Internet y pobreza.
Montevideo: Editora Unesco - Ediciones Trilce, 2005.
[10] The ‘new wave’ of literature on the digital divides
converges on the need to consider different levels of digital
inclusion. See, inter alia, “Digital Divides: Past, Present and
Future”, IT&Society, Vol. 1, Issue 5, Summer 2003 and Mark
Warschauer, “Reconceptualizing the Digital Divide”, First
Monday, Vol. 7, no. 7, 2002. Still, there are few quantitative
studies that go beyond the access/non access parameter,
especially for developing countries. See, for the United States,
“The UCLA Internet Report - Surveying the Digital Future,
Year Three”, UCLA Center for Communication Policy,
February 2003 (www.ccp.ucla.edu); and on Europe, see,
Eurostat “ICT usage in household and by individuals”, 2004,
activities/statistics/index_en.htm).
[11] See for instance the extremely successful Latin Amer-
ican virtual scientific library of BIREME: www.scielo.org.
[12] I would like to thank Julie Remold for her assistance
in elaborating the Further E-Reading - list.
IST OF EYWORDS
(Some keywords appear duplicated in order to facilitate the search)
Access barriers...................29 Dematerialization...............33
Access to communication Democracy.........................49
technologies.......................62 Digital divide.....................62
Digital inclusion.................81
B Distance education.............77
Basic and artificial needs....17 E
Basic services.....................24
Book literacy......................68 E-Crime..............................40
E-Culture......................40, 77
C E-Employment...................40
E-Government..............40, 77
Capitalism..........................20
E-Health.......................40, 77
Changes in capitalism.........33
E-Mail................................40
Cibercafés..........................72
E-Science and Technology...77
Citizenship.........................26
Educational inequity...........68
Civilizing threshold............28
Equality..............................26
Collective and individual
goods..................................28 F
Common services...............24
Communication..................32 Face-to-face relations.........39
Community centers............72 Free software......................53
Consumption...................17p. Freedom.............................53
Content...............................70
Content bias.......................70 G
Content production.............70
Global social goods............23
Content production............65
Global village.....................53
Copyrights..........................53
Globalization......................33
Culture...............................37
92 List of Keywords
H Learning.............................46
Linux..................................59
Hypertext...........................37 Literacy..............................29
Low-cost computers...........72
Individual and collective
public goods.......................23 Market................................26
Individual income..............23 Marx...................................20
Individual initiative............26 Mass consumption..............29
Individualization................33 Microsoft............................59
Indivisible goods................24
Inequality...........................23 N
Information........................40
Information society............31 Natural resources................24
Intellectual capabilities.......65 Networks............................24
Intellectual property...........55 New products.....................28
Inter-related public
policies...............................81
International
Open source.......................59
competitiveness.................75
International inequalities....22
International rating.............75
International regulation......61 Paradoxical consequences....20
International social Participation.................53, 55
cycle of the product............22 Pedagogic software............46
Internet...............................29 Physical infrastructure........65
Internet governance............61 Poverty.........................63, 81
Power.................................49
Power relations...................39
Price-subsidy......................72
Knowledge.........................32
Privacy...............................53
Knowledge manipulation...32
Production..........................40
Knowledge skills................68
Public space.......................61
Knowledge society.............31
Pyramids............................49
Languages..........................70
Qualitative studies..............63
List of Keywords 93
Quantitative studies............63 T
S Teachers.............................46
Technology education........46
Schools...............................46 Technology embedded
Science and technology......40 products..............................18
Service sector.....................33 Technology-consuming
Social change.....................39 capitalist societies...............31
Social cycle of the product...22 Tele-centers........................72
Social inequalities..............81 Telecommunication
Social inequality.................62 penetration.........................75
Social insertion...................65 Training..............................65
Social movements..............55
Social networks..................49 U
Social policies....................28
Social theory......................17 University...........................46
Social values......................39
Society...............................37 V
Solidarity............................26
Virtual space......................32
Space-time perception........37
State...................................26
Strategic planning..............81
Stratification.................22, 39 Work flexibilisation...........33
Creative Commons Legal Code
Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported
CREATIVE COMMONS CORPORATION IS NOT A LAW FIRM AND DOES NOT
PROVIDE LEGAL SERVICES. DISTRIBUTION OF THIS LICENSE DOES NOT
CREATE AN ATTORNEY-CLIENT RELATIONSHIP. CREATIVE COMMONS
PROVIDES THIS INFORMATION ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS. CREATIVE COM-
MONS MAKES NO WARRANTIES REGARDING THE INFORMATION PROVID-
ED, AND DISCLAIMS LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM ITS
USE.
THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF
THIS CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE
WORK IS PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW.
ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LI-
CENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED.
BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU AC-
CEPT AND AGREE TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE
EXTENT THIS LICENSE MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LI-
CENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERA-
TION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
1. Definitions
a) "Adaptation" means a work based upon the Work, or upon the Work and
other pre-existing works, such as a translation, adaptation, derivative work,
arrangement of music or other alterations of a literary or artistic work, or
phonogram or performance and includes cinematographic adaptations or
any other form in which the Work may be recast, transformed, or adapted
including in any form recognizably derived from the original, except that a
work that constitutes a Collection will not be considered an Adaptation for
the purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a
musical work, performance or phonogram, the synchronization of the Work
in timed-relation with a moving image ("synching") will be considered an
Adaptation for the purpose of this License.
b) "Collection" means a collection of literary or artistic works, such as ency-
clopedias and anthologies, or performances, phonograms or broadcasts, or
other works or subject matter other than works listed in Section 1(f) below,
which, by reason of the selection and arrangement of their contents, consti-
tute intellectual creations, in which the Work is included in its entirety in
unmodified form along with one or more other contributions, each constitut-
ing separate and independent works in themselves, which together are as-
sembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collection will
not be considered an Adaptation (as defined above) for the purposes of this
License.
c) "Distribute" means to make available to the public the original and copies
of the Work or Adaptation, as appropriate, through sale or other transfer of
ownership.
d) "Licensor" means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s)
the Work under the terms of this License.
e) "Original Author" means, in the case of a literary or artistic work, the indi-
vidual, individuals, entity or entities who created the Work or if no individu-
al or entity can be identified, the publisher; and in addition (i) in the case of
a performance the actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons
who act, sing, deliver, declaim, play in, interpret or otherwise perform liter-
ary or artistic works or expressions of folklore; (ii) in the case of a phono-
gram the producer being the person or legal entity who first fixes the sounds
of a performance or other sounds; and, (iii) in the case of broadcasts, the or-
ganization that transmits the broadcast.
f) "Work" means the literary and/or artistic work offered under the terms of
this License including without limitation any production in the literary, sci-
entific and artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expres-
sion including digital form, such as a book, pamphlet and other writing; a
lecture, address, sermon or other work of the same nature; a dramatic or dra-
matico-musical work; a choreographic work or entertainment in dumb
show; a musical composition with or without words; a cinematographic
work to which are assimilated works expressed by a process analogous to
cinematography; a work of drawing, painting, architecture, sculpture, en-
graving or lithography; a photographic work to which are assimilated works
expressed by a process analogous to photography; a work of applied art; an
illustration, map, plan, sketch or three-dimensional work relative to geogra-
phy, topography, architecture or science; a performance; a broadcast; a pho-
nogram; a compilation of data to the extent it is protected as a copyrightable
work; or a work performed by a variety or circus performer to the extent it
is not otherwise considered a literary or artistic work.
g) "You" means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License
who has not previously violated the terms of this License with respect to the
Work, or who has received express permission from the Licensor to exercise
rights under this License despite a previous violation.
h) "Publicly Perform" means to perform public recitations of the Work and to
communicate to the public those public recitations, by any means or proc-
ess, including by wire or wireless means or public digital performances; to
make available to the public Works in such a way that members of the pub-
lic may access these Works from a place and at a place individually chosen
by them; to perform the Work to the public by any means or process and the
communication to the public of the performances of the Work, including by
public digital performance; to broadcast and rebroadcast the Work by any
means including signs, sounds or images.
i) "Reproduce" means to make copies of the Work by any means including
without limitation by sound or visual recordings and the right of fixation
and reproducing fixations of the Work, including storage of a protected per-
formance or phonogram in digital form or other electronic medium.
2. Fair Dealing Rights. Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict
any uses free from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are
provided for in connection with the copyright protection under copyright law or other
applicable laws.
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby
grants You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the
applicable copyright) license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated below:
a) to Reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collec-
tions, and to Reproduce the Work as incorporated in the Collections;
b) to create and Reproduce Adaptations provided that any such Adaptation, in-
cluding any translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly la-
bel, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to the original
Work. For example, a translation could be marked "The original work was
translated from English to Spanish," or a modification could indicate "The
original work has been modified.";
c) to Distribute and Publicly Perform the Work including as incorporated in
Collections; and,
d) to Distribute and Publicly Perform Adaptations.
The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or
hereafter devised. The above rights include the right to make such modifications as are
technically necessary to exercise the rights in other media and formats. Subject to Sec-
tion 8(f), all rights not expressly granted by Licensor are hereby reserved, including but
not limited to the rights set forth in Section 4(d).
4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to
and limited by the following restrictions:
a) You may Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work only under the terms of
this License. You must include a copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identi-
fier (URI) for, this License with every copy of the Work You Distribute or
Publicly Perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Work
that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of the recipient of the
Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
License. You may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all no-
tices that refer to this License and to the disclaimer of warranties with eve-
ry copy of the Work You Distribute or Publicly Perform. When You Dis-
tribute or Publicly Perform the Work, You may not impose any effective
technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability of a recipient
of the Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under
the terms of the License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorpo-
rated in a Collection, but this does not require the Collection apart from
the Work itself to be made subject to the terms of this License. If You cre-
ate a Collection, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent
practicable, remove from the Collection any credit as required by Section
4(c), as requested. If You create an Adaptation, upon notice from any Li-
censor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from the Adaptation
any credit as required by Section 4(c), as requested.
b) You may not exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above
in any manner that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial
advantage or private monetary compensation. The exchange of the Work
for other copyrighted works by means of digital file-sharing or otherwise
shall not be considered to be intended for or directed toward commercial
advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no pay-
ment of any monetary compensation in connection with the exchange of
copyrighted works.
c) If You Distribute, or Publicly Perform the Work or any Adaptations or
Collections, You must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section
4(a), keep intact all copyright notices for the Work and provide, reasonable
to the medium or means You are utilizing: (i) the name of the Original Au-
thor (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or if the Original Au-
thor and/or Licensor designate another party or parties (e.g., a sponsor in-
stitute, publishing entity, journal) for attribution ("Attribution Parties") in
Licensor's copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means,
the name of such party or parties; (ii) the title of the Work if supplied; (iii)
to the extent reasonably practicable, the URI, if any, that Licensor speci-
fies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does not refer to the
copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, (iv) consistent
with Section 3(b), in the case of an Adaptation, a credit identifying the use
of the Work in the Adaptation (e.g., "French translation of the Work by
Original Author," or "Screenplay based on original Work by Original Au-
thor"). The credit required by this Section 4(c) may be implemented in any
reasonable manner; provided, however, that in the case of a Adaptation or
Collection, at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all contrib-
uting authors of the Adaptation or Collection appears, then as part of these
credits and in a manner at least as prominent as the credits for the other
contributing authors. For the avoidance of doubt, You may only use the
credit required by this Section for the purpose of attribution in the manner
set out above and, by exercising Your rights under this License, You may
not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply any connection with, sponsor-
ship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution
Parties, as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work, without the sepa-
rate, express prior written permission of the Original Author, Licensor
and/or Attribution Parties.
d) For the avoidance of doubt:
i. i.Non-waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in
which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory
licensing scheme cannot be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive
right to collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights
granted under this License;
ii. e.Waivable Compulsory License Schemes. In those jurisdictions in
which the right to collect royalties through any statutory or compulsory
licensing scheme can be waived, the Licensor reserves the exclusive
right to collect such royalties for any exercise by You of the rights
granted under this License if Your exercise of such rights is for a pur-
pose or use which is otherwise than noncommercial as permitted under
Section 4(b) and otherwise waives the right to collect royalties through
any statutory or compulsory licensing scheme; and,
iii. f.Voluntary License Schemes. The Licensor reserves the right to collect
royalties, whether individually or, in the event that the Licensor is a
member of a collecting society that administers voluntary licensing
schemes, via that society, from any exercise by You of the rights grant-
ed under this License that is for a purpose or use which is otherwise
than noncommercial as permitted under Section 4(c).
e) Except as otherwise agreed in writing by the Licensor or as may be other-
wise permitted by applicable law, if You Reproduce, Distribute or Publicly
Perform the Work either by itself or as part of any Adaptations or Collec-
tions, You must not distort, mutilate, modify or take other derogatory ac-
tion in relation to the Work which would be prejudicial to the Original Au-
thor's honor or reputation. Licensor agrees that in those jurisdictions (e.g.
Japan), in which any exercise of the right granted in Section 3(b) of this
License (the right to make Adaptations) would be deemed to be a distor-
tion, mutilation, modification or other derogatory action prejudicial to the
Original Author's honor and reputation, the Licensor will waive or not as-
sert, as appropriate, this Section, to the fullest extent permitted by the ap-
plicable national law, to enable You to reasonably exercise Your right un-
der Section 3(b) of this License (right to make Adaptations) but not other-
wise.
5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRIT-
ING, LICENSOR OFFERS THE WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTA-
TIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE WORK, EX-
PRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT
LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTIBILITY, FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF LA-
TENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE
OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO
NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EX-
CLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.
6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICA-
BLE LAW, IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LE-
GAL THEORY FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNI-
TIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE
USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSI-
BILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
7. Termination
a) This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically
upon any breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities
who have received Adaptations or Collections from You under this License,
however, will not have their licenses terminated provided such individuals
or entities remain in full compliance with those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6,
7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
b) Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is per-
petual (for the duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwith-
standing the above, Licensor reserves the right to release the Work under
different license terms or to stop distributing the Work at any time; provid-
ed, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw this License
(or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the
terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect
unless terminated as stated above.
8. Miscellaneous
a) Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform the Work or a Collection, the
Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and
conditions as the license granted to You under this License.
b) Each time You Distribute or Publicly Perform an Adaptation, Licensor of-
fers to the recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and
conditions as the license granted to You under this License.
c) If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable
law, it shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the
terms of this License, and without further action by the parties to this agree-
ment, such provision shall be reformed to the minimum extent necessary to
make such provision valid and enforceable.
d) No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach
consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by
the party to be charged with such waiver or consent.
e) This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with re-
spect to the Work licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or
representations with respect to the Work not specified here. Licensor shall
not be bound by any additional provisions that may appear in any communi-
cation from You. This License may not be modified without the mutual
written agreement of the Licensor and You.
f) The rights granted under, and the subject matter referenced, in this License
were drafted utilizing the terminology of the Berne Convention for the Pro-
tection of Literary and Artistic Works (as amended on September 28, 1979),
the Rome Convention of 1961, the WIPO Copyright Treaty of 1996, the
WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty of 1996 and the Universal
Copyright Convention (as revised on July 24, 1971). These rights and sub-
ject matter take effect in the relevant jurisdiction in which the License terms
are sought to be enforced according to the corresponding provisions of the
implementation of those treaty provisions in the applicable national law. If
the standard suite of rights granted under applicable copyright law includes
additional rights not granted under this License, such additional rights are
deemed to be included in the License; this License is not intended to restrict
the license of any rights under applicable law.
Creative Commons Notice
Creative Commons is not a party to this License, and makes no warranty whatsoever in
connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to You or any party on
any legal theory for any damages whatsoever, including without limitation any general,
special, incidental or consequential damages arising in connection to this license. Not-
withstanding the foregoing two (2) sentences, if Creative Commons has expressly iden-
tified itself as the Licensor hereunder, it shall have all rights and obligations of Licen-
sor.
Except for the limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is licensed un-
der the CCPL, Creative Commons does not authorize the use by either party of the
trademark "Creative Commons" or any related trademark or logo of Creative Commons
without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any permitted use will be in
compliance with Creative Commons' then-current trademark usage guidelines, as may
be published on its website or otherwise made available upon request from time to
time. For the avoidance of doubt, this trademark restriction does not form part of the
License.
Publishing studies series
The book argues ICT are part of the set of goods and services that determine
quality of life, social inequality and the chances for economic development.
Therefore understanding the digital divide demands a broader discussion of the
place of ICT within each society and in the international system. The author
argues against the perspectives that either isolates ICT from other basic social
goods (in particular education and employment) as well as those that argue that
new technologies are luxury of a consumer society. Though the author accepts
that new technologies are not a panacea for the problems of inequality, access
to them become a condition of full integration of social life. Using examples
mainly from Latin America, the work presents some general policy proposals on
the fight against the digital divide which take in consideration other dimensions
of social inequality and access to public goods.
Bernardo Sorj was born in Montevideo, Uruguay. He is a naturalized Brazilian, living
in Brazil since 1976. He studied anthropology and philosophy in Uruguay, and holds
a B.A. and an M.A. in History and Sociology from Haifa University, Israel. He received
his Ph.D. in Sociology from the University of Manchester in England. Sorj was a
professor at the Department of Political Science at the Federal University of Minas
Gerais and at the Institute for International Relations, PUC/RJ. The author of 20 books
and more than 100 articles, was visiting professor and chair at many European and
North American universities, including the Chaire Sérgio Buarque of Hollanda, at the
Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, and the Cátedra Simón Bolívar of the Institut des
Hautes Études de l'Amérique Latine, in Paris. He is member of the board of several
academic journals, advisor to scientific institutions and consultant to international
organizations and governments. In 2005 was elected Man Of ideas of the Year.
Currently he is professor of Sociology at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro,
Director of the Edelstein Center for Social Research and of the Plataforma
Democrática Project, and Coordinator of SciELO Latin American Social Sciences
Journals English Edition.
ISSN 1973-6061
ISBN 978-88-7699-127-1
9788876 991271