Information retrieval in folktales using natural
language processing
Adrian Groza and Lidia Corde∗
∗Intelligent Systems Group,
Department of Computer Science,
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Adrian.Groza@cs.utcluj.ro,Lidia.Corde@cs-gw.utcluj.ro
Abstract—Our aim is to extract information about literary TABLEI
characters in unstructured texts. We employ natural language MAINCHARACTERSINTHEPROPP’SMODEL.
processing and reasoning on domain ontologies. The first task is
Name Description
to identify the main characters and the parts of the story where
Villain Theopponentofthehero-oftentherepresentation
thesecharactersaredescribedoract.Weillustratethesystemin
ofevil.
ascenariointhefolktaledomain.Thesystemreliesonafolktale
Dispatcher The person that sends the hero into the journey, or
ontology that we have developed based on Propp’s model for
thepersonthatinformstheheroaboutthevillainy.
folktales morphology.
(Magical)Helper Theonethathelpstheherointoitsjourney.
IndexTerms—Naturallanguageprocessing,ontologies,literary PrincessorPrize It represents what the hero receives when it is
character, folktales. victorious.
Donor Preparestheheroforthebattle.
I. INTRODUCTION Hero The main character in a story - often the represen-
tationofgood.
Recognising literary characters in various narrative texts Falsehero The one that tries to steal the prize from the hero,
ortriestomarrytheprincess.
is challenging both from the literary and technical perspec-
tive. From the literary viewpoint, the meaning of the term
“character” leaves space to various interpretations. From the
the domain of folktales. Section III depicts the architecture
technical perspective, literary texts contain a lot of data about
of our system. Section IV illustrates our method to extract
emotions, social life or inner life of the characters, while they
knowledge about characters. Section V presents the experi-
areverythinontechnical,straight-forwardmessages.Toinfer
mental results on seven folktales. Section VI browses related
thecharactertypefromliterarytextsmightposeproblemseven
work, while section VII concludes the paper.
to the human readers [4].
Interactions between literary characters contain rich social II. ENGINEERINGTHEFOLKTALEONTOLOGY
networks. Extracting these social networks from narrative text
To support reasoning in the folktale domain, we developed
has gained much attention [13] in different domains such as
an ontology used to extract knowledge regarding characters.
literary fiction [6], screenplays [1], or novels [9], [2].
We assume the reader is familiarised with the syntax of
Our aim is to correctly determine the relationships of a
Description Logic (DL). For a detailed explanation about
character in a tale and to find its role upon the development
families of description logics, the reader is referred to [3].
of the story. In line with [16], the first task is to identify
To support character identification and reasoning on these
the parts of the story where that character is involved. Our
characters we need structured domain knowledge. Hence, we
approach relies on interleaving natural language processing
developed an ontology for the folktale domain as shown in
and ontology-based reasoning. We enact our method in the
Fig. 3. Our folktale ontology formalizes knowledge from
folktale domain.
three sources: 1) the folktale morphology as described by the
Information extraction systems usually have three compo-
Proppmodel[15];2)variousentitiesspecifictofolktales(i.e.,
nents responsible for: named entity recognition, co-reference
animals,witch,dragons);and3)commonfamilyrelations(i.e.,
resolution and relationship extraction. These modules are
child,fiancee,groom).Inthefollowing,thesethreeknowledge
integrated in a pipeline, in a layered manner, given that each
sources are detailed:
task will use information provided by the previous neighbor.
a) Folktale morphology: Firstly, we rely on the Propp’s
Natural language processing has been applied in the domain
model [15] of the folktale domain. In the Propp’s model the
of folktales [14], [8]. Formal models for folktales have been
story broke down into several sections. Propp demonstrated
proposed in [12], [15]. Character identification in folktales
thatthesequenceofsectionsappearsinthesamechronological
have been approached in [17], [19].
order in Russian folktales. Propp identified a set of character
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: Sec-
types that appear in most of the folktales (see Table I).
tion II presents the ontology that we developed for modeling
The corresponding formalization in Description Logic ap-
978-1-4673-8200-7/15$31.00(cid:13)c 2015IEEE pears in Fig. 1, where the characters are divided in nine types
1v21030.1151:viXra
A1 Agent (cid:116) Donor (cid:116) FalseHero (cid:116) Hero (cid:116) Prisoner (cid:116) Villain (cid:116) Dis-
patcher(cid:116)MagicalHelper(cid:116)Princess(cid:118)Character
A2 Hero(cid:117)Villain(cid:118)FalseHero
A3 PositiveCharacter(cid:116)NegativeCharacter(cid:118)Character
A4 Villain(cid:116)FalseHero(cid:116)Prisoner(cid:118)NegativeCharacter
A5 Hero(cid:116)MagicalHelper(cid:116)Agent(cid:116)Donor(cid:116)Prisoner(cid:116)Dispatcher(cid:118)
PositiveCharacter
Fig.1. FormalisingthePropp’smodeloffolktales.
A21 Bear(cid:116)Bird(cid:116)Dog(cid:116)Duck(cid:116)Frog(cid:116)Horse(cid:116)Lion(cid:118)SingleAnimal
A22 Enchantress≡Witch
A23 Enchantress(cid:118)Woman(cid:117)SingleSocialStatus
A24 Giant(cid:118)Supernatural
A25 Goldsmith(cid:116)Helmsman (cid:118)SingleSocialStatus
A26 King(cid:118)SingleSocialStatus
A27 Oven(cid:118)Object
A28 Prince≡Son(cid:117)∃hasParent.King(cid:116)∃hasParent.Queen
A29 Prince(cid:118)SingleSocialStatus
A30 Princess≡Daughter(cid:117)∃hasParent.King(cid:116)∃hasParent.Queen
Fig.2. Commonentitiesinthefolktaledomain.
(axiom 1). In axiom 2, a false hero is a hero who is also
a villain. Axiom 3 divides the characters into negative and
Fig.3. Folktaleontology.
positive ones. Note that positive and negative characters are
not disjoint, as for instance the concept Prisoner belongs to
both sets.
A50 Boy(cid:118)SinglePerson
b) Folktalemainentities: Secondly,thecommonentities
A51 Boys(cid:118)MultiplePerson
appearing in folktales were formalized in Fig. 2. The axioms
A52 Bride≡Fiancee
depicttheanimals(axiom21),witchesorenchantresseswhich
A53 Bride(cid:118)UnmarriedCoupleMember
are women with a single social status (axioms 22 and 23),
A54 Brother(cid:118)Sibling(cid:117)Male
and supernatural characters like Giant in axiom 24. Specific
A55 Daughter≡Girl(cid:117)(cid:117)Child∃hasParent.Parent
characters like Goldsmith or King, and various objects (i.e.
A56 Father≡Man(cid:117)∃hasChild.Child
oven) are also modeled. A prince is defined in axiom 28 as a
A57 Fiance≡Groom
son that have a parent either a king or a queen. Similarly, the
A58 Fiance(cid:118)UnmarriedCoupleMember
princess is a daughter with at least on parent of type king or
A59 Fiancee≡Bride
queen (axiom 30).
A60 Fiancee(cid:118)UnmarriedCoupleMember
c) Familyrelationshipsinfolktale: Fig.4listspartofthe
A61 Girl≡Maiden
family relationships adapted to reason in the folktale domain.
A62 Girl(cid:118)SinglePerson
Asignificantpartoftheserelationshipsarecorrelatedwiththe
A63 Husband(cid:118)Consort
recurrentthemeofthemaincharacterwhoisfindinghisbride
or fiancee.
To facilitate reasoning on the ontology, we allow several Fig.4. Familyrelationshipsinthefolktaledomain.
extensionsoftheALC versionofdescriptionlogics[3].Using
roleinheritancewecanspecifythattherolehasFatherismore
specific than the role hasParent. Hence, if we find in thefolk- TABLEII
tale that a character has a father, the system deduces based on
EXPLOITINGROLECONSTRAINTSTOREASONONTHEONTOLOGY.
role inheritance that the character has also a parent. Similarly, ExtensiosofALC Folktaleexamples
inverse roles like hasChild and hasParent are used to infer Roleinheritance hasBrother(cid:118)hasSibling,hasFather(cid:118)hasParent,
hasHusband(cid:118)hasConsort
new knowledge based on the partial knowledge extracted by
Inverseroles hasHusband≡hasWife−,hasChild≡hasParent−
naturallanguageprocessing.Ifweidentifythattwoindividuals Transitiveroles hasSiblingt
arerelatedbytherolehasChild,thesystemdeducesthatthose Domainrestriction ∃hasBrother.(cid:62)(cid:118)Person
individualsarealsorelatedbytherolehasParent.Thedomain Rangerestriction (cid:62)(cid:118)∀hasBrother.Person,(cid:62)(cid:118)∀hasGender.Gender
symmetricroles hasConsort≡hasConsort−
restriction specifies that only persons can have brothers. The
cardinality (cid:62)(cid:118)≤1hasGender.Thing
range restriction constraints the range of the role hasGender constraints
to the concept Gender.
Fig.5. TheSystemArchitecture
III. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE pronominal and nominal coreference resolution. After coref-
erence resolution, the stories are updated with the coreference
Extracting knowledge about characters is obtained by inter-
information.
leaving natural language processing (NLP) and reasoning on
The Reverb information extraction tool [7] is used to
ontologies. The NLP component is based on GATE text engi-
generate triplets containing the following structure: (cid:104)nominal
neering tool[5], while reasoning inDL on theOWLAPI [10],
phrase,verbphrase,nominalphrase(cid:105).Forthesentence”Good
as depicted by the architecture in Fig. 5.
heavens, said the girl, no strawberries grow in winter”, the
Firstly,thefolktaleontologyisprocessedusingOWLAPIto
outputofReverbisexemplifiedinTableIII.Inordertoobtain
generate classes of characters from the ontology into GATE.
the triplets, each sentence has to be POS-tagged and NP-
The folktale corpus is analysed aiming to populate the ontol-
chunked.
ogy and to annotate each folktale with the identified named
entities. In parallel to the annotation process, the Stanford IV. INTERLEAVINGNATURALLANGUAGEPROCESSING
parser creates the coreference information files. The task is WITHREASONINGONONTOLOGIES
challenging,asevenahumanmighthaveaproblemindecoref- Thissectiondetailsthreealgorithmsusedtoidentifyknowl-
erencing some of the sentences, as example 1 illustrates. edgeaboutcharacters.Algorithm1identifiescharactersinthe
folktale. Algorithm 3 is used for anaphora resolution of the
Example 1. ”The Smiths went to visit the Robertsons. After
named entities recognized as characters. Algorithm 2 extracts
that, they stayed home, watching tv.”, where ”they” might be
knowledge about characters from the de-coreferences. The
tiedtotheSmiths,ortheRobertsons,ortobothofthefamilies.
execution flow of this pipeline, is presented in Fig. 6.
Natural language processing is enacted to populate the
For de-coreferencing, the following pipeline was designed folktale ontology. The extraction Algorithm 1 is performed
(left part of Fig. 5). The tokenizer groups all the letters into repetitively on a document, each time using the newly pop-
words.Next,thesentencesplitter(Ssplit)groupsthesequence ulated ontology file. In this way, the algorithm interleaves
of tokens obtained in the previous step into sentences. The reasoningonontologywithnaturallanguageprocessingbased
part of speech (POS) annotation labels all the tokens from on Japes rules [18]. The first step is to apply the Jape rules
a sentence with their POS tags. Lemma annotation generates JN on the folktale corpus aiming to identify all the definite
the word lemmas for all the tokens in the corpus. The next and indefinite nominal phrases. Given that the characters are
step is to apply named entity recognition (NER) so that the nominal phrases, this first step returns all the information
numerical and temporal entities are recognized. This is done needed, plus some extra phrases that have to be filtered out.
using a conditional random fields (CRF) sequence taggers Next,theJaperulesJC areenactedtoselectcandidatechar-
trained on various corpora. The parse function provides a full acters from the set of nominal phrases previously identified.
syntactic analysis for each sentence in the corpora. Finally, For each character found, a set of rules JR is used to match
the coreference chain annotation (Dcoref) obtains both the the character against a concept in the ontology.
EXTRACTINGTRIPLETSFROMFOLKTALESUSINGREVERB.
OriginalSentence Nominal Verb Nominal Extraction POStags Chunktags
Phrase Phrase Phrase Confi-
(arg1) (arg2) (arg3) dence
10 3 4 5 9 11 12
Good heavens, said the girl, no no growin winter 0.505 JJ NNS , VBD DT NN , DT B-NPI-NPOB-VPB-NPI-NP
strawberriesgrowinwinter. straw- NNSVBINNN. OB-NPI-NP
Theking’sdaughterbegantocry daughter was the cold 0.691 DTNNPOSNNVBDTOVB B-NP I-NP I-NP I-NP B-VP I-
, for daughter was afraid of the afraidof frog ,INNNVBDJJINDTJJNN VPI-VPOB-PPB-NPB-VPB-
coldfrogwhichdaughterdidnot WDTNNVBDRBINTOVB, ADJPB-PPB-NPI-NPI-NPB-
like to touch, and which was CCWDTVBDRBTOVBRP NPI-NPB-VPOOB-VPI-VP
nowtosleepindaughterpretty, NNRB,JJJJNN. OOB-NPB-VPB-ADVPB-VP
cleanlittlebed. I-VPB-NPI-NPB-ADVPOB-
NPI-NPI-NPO
Wheneverythingwasstowedon John puton the 0.876 WRB NN VBD VBN IN NN B-ADVP B-NP B-VP I-VP B-
board a ship, faithful John put dress of DTNN,NNNNPVBDINDT PPB-NPB-NPI-NPOB-NPB-
onthedressofamerchant,and a mer- NN IN DT NN , CC DT NN NPB-VPB-PPB-NPI-NPI-NP
the king was forced to do the chant VBD VBN TO VB DT JJ IN I-NP I-NP O O B-NP I-NP B-
sameinordertomakekingquite NNTOVBNNRBJJ. VPI-VPI-VPI-VPB-NPI-NP
unrecognizable. B-SBAROB-VPI-VPB-NPB-
ADJPI-ADJPO
Sons each kept watch in turn, each kept turn 0.880 NNPS DT VBD NN IN NN , O B-NP B-VP B-NP B-PP B-
and sat on the highest oak and watchin CC VBD IN DT JJS NN CC NPOOB-VPB-PPB-NPI-NP
lookedtowardsthetower. VBDINDTNN. I-NPOB-VPB-PPB-NPI-NP
Rapunzel grew into the most Rapunzel grew the most 0.830 NNP VBD IN DT RBS JJ NN B-NPB-VPB-PPB-NPI-NPI-
beautifulchildunderthesun. into beautiful INDTNN. NPI-NPB-PPB-NPI-NPO
The king’s son ascended, but the en- gazedat son 0.586 DTNNPOSNNVBD,CCRB B-NP I-NP I-NP I-NP B-VP O
instead of finding son dearest chantress INVBGNNNNNN,NNVBD O B-PP I-PP B-VP B-NP I-NP
rapunzel, son found the en- DT NN , WP VBD IN NN IN I-NPOB-NPB-VPB-NPI-NP
chantress,whogazedatsonwith JJCCJJNNS. OB-NPB-VPB-PPB-NPB-PP
wickedandvenomouslooks. B-NPI-NPI-NPI-NPO
Input : O f - Folktale ontology; After identifying a concept for which the character is an
S - Corpus of folktales; instance, the algorithm exploits reasoning on ontology to
JN - Jape rules to identify definite and indefinite identify all atomic concepts to which the character belongs.
nominal phrases; For instance, a character identified as Daughter will be
JC - Jape rules to identify candidate characters; an instance of Girl, Child, Maiden, SinglePerson (recall
JR - Jape rules to identify character’s relation to Fig. 4). For each concept to which the character belongs, the
the ontology; algorithm looks again in the corpus to see if there are other
Result: C: Set of annotated characters; mentionsofthenewlyintroducedcharacter.Ifthisisthecase,
the character is related with the new knowledge.
NP ← applyRules(JN, S);
Input : S: Corpus of folktales; P: Pipeline configuration
while applyRules(JC, S, NP) (cid:54)= null do
for decoreferencing;
NC ← applyRules(JC, S, NP);
FN: List with filenames for each S;
Rel← applyRules(JR, S, NC);
SC: Stanford-CoreNLP command;
foreach r ∈Rel do
Result: D: Decoreferenced texts of files from FN;
foreach concept from r do
if checkCast(NC, concept) then Files = run(SC, P, FN);
cast(NC, concept); foreach file in Files do
end foreach coref group∈file do
rep← findRepresentative(coref group);
while is referred(S, NC) do
foreach coref word∈coref group do
Ref = getReference();
replace(D, coref word, rep );
link(NC, Ref);
C ←C∪NC; end
Algorithm 2: Decoreference algorithm.
Algorithm 1: Character extraction algorithm.
Input : R: Reverb command;
V:Theversionindicator.Trueiflongversion,false
otherwise;
C: Set of characters resulted from algorithm 1;
D: Decoreferenced text resulted from algorithm 2;
Result: P: String containing character’s perspective in S;
RR = run(R, D);
if V = true then
foreach c∈C do
foreach line∈RR do
sentence← getSentence(line);
if c∈sentence then
P ←P ∪sentence;
foreach c∈C do
foreach line∈RR do
triplet← getTriplet(line);
if c∈triplet then
P ←P ∪triplet;
Algorithm 3: Finding character’s perspective.
format of the Reverb service presented in Table III. If the
character,fromthecharacterset,ismentionedinthesentence,
then the sentence is appended to the output variable. These
Fig.6. Mainexecutionphases.
columns are combined in a triplet, and it is checked to see
whether the current character appears is present in this triplet.
Inthiscase,thetripletisappendedtotheoutputvariable.This
The decoreferencing algorithm (Alg. 2) uses as input the algorithms score is represented by a subunitary number that
processing pipeline and the folktale corpus. The basic pro- represents the confidence that the extraction was correct.
cessing steps needed are the following: tokenize, ssplit, pos,
lemma, ner, parse, dcoref. The decoreferencing algorithm is V. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
run on all stories at once, but it generates different output file
A. Running scenario
foreachstoryrepresentedbythefilename.Inthefirststep,the
Thesystemwastestedagainstsevenstories(TableV).This
Stanford parser applies the execution pipeline on the corpora
sectionillustratestheresultsofthispipelineforthesecondary
of folktales. For each resulted file, the algorithm searches for
characterHenryfromthestory“Thefrogking”.Thefragment
coreference groups. In order to be able to return the modified
on which the algorithms were applied is listed in Example 2.
text,theoriginaltexthastobestoredinthereturningargument
of the algorithm. For each coreference group found, firstly Example2. ”Thentheywenttosleep,andnextmorningwhen
the referenced word has to be processed and kept into a the sun awoke them, a carriage came driving up with eight
variable and then, each coreferenced word found, belonging whitehorses,whichhadwhiteostrichfeathersontheirheads,
to the group, has to be replaced in the original text with the and were harnessed with golden chains, and behind stood the
referenced variable. In the end, the decoreferenced text for young king’s servant Faithful Henry. Faithful Henry had been
each corpus file is obtained. so unhappy when his master was changed into a frog, that
Algorithm 3 takes as input the result of algorithms 1 and he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart,
(alg 2. The set of characters is used as the input, while the lest it should burst with grief and sadness. The carriage was
decoreferenced texts are used as an environment from which to conduct the young king into his kingdom. Faithful Henry
thealgorithmextractstheperspective.Foreachcharacterinthe helped them both in, and placed himself behind again, and
setofcharactersresultedfromtheextractionalgorithm(alg1), was full of joy because of this deliverance. And when they
each line that resulted from reverb execution is processed. had driven a part of the way the king’s son heard a cracking
From each line, the sentence is extracted based on the output behind him as if something had broken. So he turned round
TABLEIV TABLEV
ELICITINGKNOWLEDGEABOUTHENRY. ACCURACYOFTHEALGORITHMS.
Character:Henry Story Accuracy
1 Henrymasterwaschangedintoafrog TheMagicSwan-Geese 75%
2 Henryhadcausedthreeironbands TheFrogKing 62%
3 faithfulHenryhelpedbands TheKing’sSonwhoFearedNothing 76%
4 bandsplacedHenry FaithfulJohn 63%
5 Henrywasfullofjoy TheTwelveBrothers 65%
6 thebandswerespringingfromtheheartoffaithfulHenry Rapunzel 74%
TheThreeLittleMenintheWoods 73%
Average 70%
and cried, ”Henry, the carriage is breaking.” ”No, master, it
is not the carriage. It is a band from my heart, which was put
This happens because, when the anaphoric decoreference is
there in my great pain when you were a frog and imprisoned
run (Algorithm 2), the file is changed in the following way:
in the well.” Again and once again while they were on their
”Girltookohbythehandandledohupstairs,forgirlwasthe
way something cracked, and each time the king’s son thought
girl.”.Thechangehappenedbecausethedecoreferencingtool
the carriage was breaking, but it was only the bands which
interpreted ”the waiting-maid” as being tied up to the word
were springing from the heart of Faithful Henry because his
”she”, and, which is tied to ”the girl” from the following
master was set free and was happy.”
phrase ”Then said the girl ‘ the princess must see these ,
The method has two kind of results - one for the long girl has such great pleasure in golden things , that girl will
version, and one for the short version. Firstly, the results for buy all you have . ’”. In this way, this character’s part will
the short version are listed in Table IV. Note that the output be attributed to the ”girl”, which is the main character of
text is the decoreferenced one - this is the reason why the the story. This situation in which the story is talking about a
charactermighttalkaboutitselfinthirdperson.Becauseofthe generalcharacter,butonlyafterthemainevents,thecharacter
de-coreferencedversionofthestoriespartoftextmightnotbe is finally revealed, is called cataphora [11].
correctfromthehumanreaderperspective.Butitistheeasiest
way to understand the context of a character. Otherwise, it B. Accuracy of the method
would be hard to see that when the text says ”his master”, The accuracy of our method is influenced by: 1) accuracy
that ”his” refers to Henry, as Example 3 bears out. of character identification; 2) accuracy of identifying co-
references;3)accuracyofReverbwhenextractingtriplets(the
Example 3. 1. Then companion went to sleep, and next
confidence indicator). Each of this services has an accuracy
morningwhenthesunawokecompanion,abandcamedriving
error that will be propagated from one component to another.
up with eight white horses, which had white ostrich feathers
We performed various tests on the corpus used for character
on companion heads, and were harnessed with golden chains,
identification, and we obtained an average accuracy of 70%
and behind stood the young king’s servant faithful Henry.
(Table V). When calculating the accuracy, 20 characters were
2. Faithful Henry had been so unhappy when henry master
taken into consideration, meaning that for each story, about
was changed into a frog, that Henry had caused three iron
3 characters were chosen. These characters were manually
bands to be laid round henry heart, lest heart should burst
selected from the set of characters output by the character
with grief and sadness.
extraction system presented in [17], [19]. The characters were
3. Faithful Henry helped bands both in, and placed Henry
selected by choosing 2 main characters and a secondary
behind again, and was full of joy because of this deliverance.
character for each story.
4. Again and once again while you were on you way
The testing was performed on seven different stories, and
something cracked, and each time the king’s son thought the
for each story, a set of main characters was chosen. The
band was breaking , but it was only the bands which were
obtained overall accuracy is 74%, having an overall precision
springing from the heart of faithful Henry because Henry
of 90% and a recall of 60%. The results are presented in
master was set free and was happy.”
Fig.7.Figure8depictsthedistributionofprecision,recalland
There are some cases in which there will be no result for a accuracyoverthestories.Thevalueswerecalculatedusingthe
character (Example 4). Given that the character was extracted following formulas:
fromtheoriginalfile,byusingAlgorithm1,thereisacertainty
precision = tp
that the character exists in the story. tp+fp
recall = tp
Example 4. When trying to search for the perspective of tp+fn
accuracy = tp+tn
character ”waiting-maid” in the story ”Faithful John”, the tp+fp+tn+fn
application will not be able to find any solution. In the un- where tp means true positive, and represents the number
modified text, the son character is introduced in the following of sentences that are found both in the manually annotated
way: ”She took him by the hand and led him upstairs, for she set and the test set, tn means true negative and represents the
was the waiting-maid.” numberofsentencesthatareneitherinthemanuallyannotated
recall of 72%. These scores do not influence directly the
algorithmsperformance,buttheyhaveaneffectonthenumber
of characters for which the algorithm will try to find the roles
they have on the development of the story. Together, all these
scorescombined,givetheperformancescoresofthecharacters
perspective in texts.
The current version does not extract information about the
characters’ roles. The information extracted consists of the
character identification, that is presented in [17], [19], and
the story involving the character. The story can be presented
in a standardized version.
Fig.7. Precision,recall,andaccuracyforthesevenfolktalesanalyzed.
VI. DISCUSSION
Wecanenactoursolutioninotherdomainsinsteadoffolk-
tales. We exemplify he following three domains: a) software
requirements, b) marketing and c) medical domain.
Consider the domain of software requirements, where these
requirements are written in natural language. Our system will
support the identification of various actors appearing in the
requirementsdocument.First,oneneedstoreplacethefolktale
ontologywitharequirementontologythatprovidesknowledge
on use cases, actors, their roles, etc. The same pipeline will
be used to: 1) identify main actors (admin, various users, etc)
and 2) extract knowledge about various actions these actors
are supposed to perform.
Anotherdomainthatcouldbenefitfromthesamepipelineof
Fig.8. Comparingprecision,recallandaccuracyforeachstory. execution,wouldbethemarketingdomain.Consideradataset
of product reviews or accommodation places in the tourism
domain [20]. The system would extract only the sentences
set, nor in the test set, fp means false positive and represents that reference the mentioned item. By having access to all
the number of sentences that are in the test set and not in the sentences of interest, further analysis is facilitated without
the manually annotated set, and fn means false negative and having to process the entire text.
represents the number of sentences that are in the manually Similarextractionsystemshavebeenproposedforthemed-
annotated set, but not in the test set. In the folktale context, ical domain to extract information from clinical narratives. In
the tp represents the number of sentences that belong to the thisline,theMedExsystem[21]aimstoextractthemedication
character’s perspective, all those sentences that involve the informationfromclinicalnarratives.Similarly,thereisalsothe
character in any way. OpenClinical system for assisting health care providers.
The average F-score for the Stanford-CoreNLP of 59.5 In our approach, the extraction algorithm part is separated
influences greatly the performance of the algorithm, as the from the perspective searching part. Therefore, any ontology
characters perspective cannot be extracted, given that the and any document can be used in order to find the character’s
character is not seen as being part of the sentence. The or object’s perspective in the document.
accuracy can be improved if a better decoreferencing tool We tested our method only on seven stories. With a com-
will be used. Other coreference tools are For the anaphoric plexity of O(n3) in sentence length of syntactic parsing, our
decoreference,thereareseveralothertools(BART,JAVARAP, syntacticbasedonStanfordparsermightbetooslowforlarge
GuiTarandARKref),but,fromall,theStanford-CoreNLPhas corpus as the one of 15099 narratives analysed in [4].
be highest accuracy percentage.
There is ongoing research in the coreference resolution
VII. CONCLUSIONS
domain, When calculating the performance scores, the ex- Our method is able to extract knowledge on various char-
traction of the correct sentence was considered, and not on acters. Our current accuracy for information extraction in
the correctness of the extracted sentence. Even though the the folktale domain is 74%. The experimental results were
right sentence was extracted, the information in the sentence obtainedforsevenstoriesinthefolktaledomain.Theprecision
will be according to the coreference resolution result. Hence, score is above 90%, With an overall recall of only 60%,
an error might be observed when reviewing the structure of there are high chances that not all the information regarding
the sentences. The algorithms performance is also influenced a product was extracted.
by the scores obtained by the Reverb tool. Also, the named Thedevelopedalgorithmsaggregatethreedifferentservices:
entity recognition has an average precision of 79% and a Firstly, the named entity recognition was implemented by
using an ontology based on Propps formal model. Based of [20] B.VargaandA.Groza,“IntegratingDBpediaandSentiWordNetfora
thisontology,andsomeimplementedJaperules,thecharacters tourismrecommendersystem,”inIntelligentComputerCommunication
andProcessing(ICCP),2011IEEEInternationalConferenceon. IEEE,
areextractedfromagivenstory.Secondly,acoreferencereso-
2011,pp.133–136.
lution tool was implemented by enacting anaphoric resolution [21] H.Xu,S.P.Stenner,S.Doan,K.B.Johnson,L.R.Waitman,andJ.C.
to eliminate co-referenced words and to replace them with Denny,“Medex:amedicationinformationextractionsystemforclinical
narratives,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
their representative, Thirdly, finding relationships between
vol.17,no.1,pp.19–24,2010.
characters was integrated in order to link two noun phrases
with a verbal phrase.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the reviewers for their valuable comments. Part
of this work was supported by the Department of Computer
Science of Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania.