]MB.oib-q[
1v4005040/oib-q:viXra
Information Theory in Molecular Biology
Christoph Adami1,2
1Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences,
535 Watson Drive, Claremont, CA 91711
2Digital Life Laboratory 139-74,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
Thisarticleintroducesthephysicsofinformationinthecontextofmolecu-
lar biology and genomics. Entropy and information, the two central concepts
of Shannon’s theory of information and communication, are often confused
with each other but play transparent roles when applied to statistical ensem-
bles (i.e., identically prepared sets) of symbolic sequences. Such an approach
can distinguish between entropy and information in genes, predict the sec-
ondary structure of ribozymes, and detect the covariation between residues
in folded proteins. We also review applications to molecular sequence and
structure analysis, and introduce new tools in the characterization of resis-
tance mutations, and in drug design.
In a curious twist of history, the dawn of the age of genomics has both
seen the rise of the science of bioinformatics as a tool to cope with the
enormous amounts of data being generated daily, and the decline of the
theory of information as applied to molecular biology. Hailed as a harbinger
of a “new movement” (Quastler 1953) along with Cybernetics, the principles
ofinformationtheory were thoughtto beapplicable tothehigher functions of
living organisms, and able to analyze such functions as metabolism, growth,
and differentiation (Quastler 1953). Today, the metaphors and the jargon of
information theory are still widely used (Maynard Smith 1999a, 1999b), as
opposed to the mathematical formalism, which is too often considered to be
inapplicable to biological information.
Clearly, looking back it appears that too much hope was laid upon this
theory’s relevance for biology. However, there was well-founded optimism
that information theory ought to be able to address the complex issues as-
sociated with the storage of information in the genetic code, only to be
repeatedly questioned and rebuked (see, e.g., Vincent 1994, Sarkar 1996). In
this article, I outline the concepts of entropy and information (as defined by
Shannon) in the context of molecular biology. We shall see that not only are
these terms well-defined and useful, they also coincide precisely with what
we intuitively mean when we speak about information stored in genes, for
example. I then present examples of applications of the theory to measuring
the informationcontent of biomolecules, the identification of polymorphisms,
RNA and protein secondary structure prediction, the prediction and analysis
of molecular interactions, and drug design.
1 Entropy and Information
Entropy and information are often used in conflicting manners in the lit-
erature. A precise understanding, both mathematical and intuitive, of the
notion of information (and its relationship to entropy) is crucial for applica-
tions in molecular biology. Therefore, let us begin by outlining Shannon’s
original entropy concept (Shannon, 1948).
1.1 Shannon’s Uncertainty Measure
Entropy in Shannon’s theory (defined mathematically below) is a measure of
uncertainty about the identity of objects in an ensemble. Thus, while “en-
tropy” and “uncertainty” can be used interchangeably, they can never mean
information. There is a simple relationship between the entropy concept in
information theory and the Boltzmann-Gibbs entropy concept in thermody-
namics, briefly pointed out below.
Shannonentropyoruncertaintyisusuallydefinedwithrespecttoapartic-
ular observer. More precisely, the entropy of a system represents the amount
ofuncertainty one particular observerhasaboutthestateofthissystem. The
simplest example of a system is a random variable, a mathematical object
that can be thought of as an N-sided die that is uneven, i.e., the probability
of it landing in any of its N states is not equal for all N states. For our
purposes, we can conveniently think of a polymer of fixed length (fixed num-
ber of monomers), which can take on any one of N possible states, where
each possible sequence corresponds to one possible state. Thus, for a se-
quence made of L monomers taken from an alphabet of size D, we would
have N = DL. The uncertainty we calculate below then describes the ob-
server’s uncertainty about the true identity of the molecule (among a very
large number of identically prepared molecules: an ensemble), given that he
only has a certain amount of probabilistic knowledge, as explained below.
This hypothetical molecule plays the role of a random variable if we are
given its probability distribution: the set of probabilities p ,...,p to find it in
itsN possible states. Letusthuscallourrandomvariable(randommolecule)
“X”, and give the names x ,...,x to its N states. If X will be found in
state x with probability p , then the entropy H of X is given by Shannon’s
H(X) = − p logp . (1)
I have not here specified the basis of the log to be taken in the above formula.
Specifying it assigns units to the uncertainty. It is sometimes convenient to
use the number of possible states of X as the base of the logarithm (in which
case the entropy is between zero and one), in other cases base 2 is convenient
(leading to an entropy in units “bits”). For biomolecular sequences, a con-
venient unit obtains by taking logarithms to the basis of the alphabet size,
leading to an entropy whose units we shall call “mers”. Then, the maximal
entropy equals the length of the sequence in mers.
Let us examine Eq. (1) more closely. If measured in bits, a standard
interpretation of H(X) as an uncertainty function connects it to the smallest
number of “yes-no” questions necessary, on average, to identify the state of
random variable X. Because this series of yes/no questions can be thought
of as a description of the random variable, the entropy H(X) can also be
viewed as the length of the shortest description of X (Cover and Thomas,
1991). In case nothing is known about X, this entropy is H(X) = logN, the
maximal value that H(X) can take on. This occurs if all states are equally
likely: p = 1/N ;i = 1,...,N. If something (beyond the possible number of
states N) is known about X, this reduces our necessary number of questions,
or the length of tape necessary to describe X. If I know that state X = x ,
for example, is highly unlikely, then my uncertainty about X is going to be
smaller.
How do we ever learn anything about a system? There are two choices.
Either we obtain the probability distribution using prior knowledge (for ex-
ample, by taking the system apart and predicting its states theoretically) or
by making measurements on it, which for example might reveal that not all
states, in fact, are taken on with the same probability. In both cases, the
difference between the maximal entropy and the remaining entropy after we
have either done our measurements or examined the system, is the amount of
information we have about the system. Before I write this into a formula, let
me remark that, by its very definition, information is a relative quantity. It
measures the difference of uncertainty, in the previous case the entropy be-
fore and after the measurement, and thus can never be absolute, in the same
sense as potential energy in physics is not absolute. In fact, it is not a bad
analogy to refer to entropy as “potential information”, because potentially
all of a system’s entropy can be transformed into information (for example
by measurement).
1.2 Information
In the above case, information was the difference between the maximal and
the actual entropy of a system. This is not the most general definition as I
have alluded to. More generally, information measures the amount of cor-
relation between two systems, and reduces to a difference in entropies in
special cases. To define information properly, let me introduce another ran-
dom variable or molecule (call it “Y”), which can be in states y ,...,y with
probabilities p ,...,p . We can then, along with the entropy H(Y), intro-
duce the joint entropy H(XY), which measures my uncertainty about the
joint system XY (which can be in N ·M states). If X and Y are indepen-
dent random variables (like, e.g., two dice that are thrown independently)
the joint entropy will be just the sum of the entropy of each of the random
variables. Not so if X and Y are somehow connected. Imagine, for example,
two coins that are glued together at one face. Then, heads for one of the
coins will always imply tails for the other, and vice versa. By gluing them
together, the two coins can only take on two states, not four, and the joint
entropy is equal to the entropy of one of the coins.
The same is true for two molecules that can bind to each other. First,
remark that random molecules do not bind. Second, binding is effected by
mutual specificity, which requires that part of the sequence of one of the
molecules is interacting with the sequence of the other, so that the joint
entropy of the pair is much less than the sum of entropies of each. Quite
clearly, this binding introduces strong correlations between the states of X
and Y: if I know the state of one, I can make strong predictions about the
state of the other. The information that one molecule has about the other is
i.e., it is the difference between the sum of the entropies of each, and the joint
entropy. The colon between X and Y in the notation for the information is
standard; it is supposed to remind the reader that information is a symmet-
ric quantity: what X knows about Y, Y also knows about X. For later
reference, let me introduce some more jargon. When more than one random
variable is involved, we can define the concept of conditional entropy. This
is straightforward. The entropy of X conditional on Y is the entropy of X
given Y, that is, if I know which state Y is in. It is denoted by H(X|Y)
(read “H of X given Y”) and is calculated as
This formula is self-explanatory: the uncertainty I have about X if Y is
known is the uncertainty about the joint system minus the uncertainty about
Y alone. The latter, namely the entropy of Y without regard to X (as op-
posed to “conditional on X”) is sometimes called a marginal entropy. Using
the concept of conditional entropy, we can rewrite Eq. (2) as
We have seen earlier that for independent variables H(XY) = H(X) +
H(Y), so information measures the deviation from independence. In fact, it
measures exactly the amount by which the entropy of X or Y is reduced by
knowing the other, Y or X. If I is non-zero, knowing one of the molecules
allows you to make more accurate predictions about the other: quite clearly
this is exactly what we mean by information in ordinary language. Note that
this definition reduces to the example given earlier (information as difference
between entropies), if the only possible correlations are between X and Y,
while in the absence of the other each molecule is equiprobable (meaning
that any sequence is equally likely). In that case, the marginal entropy
H(X) must be maximal (H = logN) and the information is the difference
between maximal and actual (i.e., conditional) entropy, as before.
1.3 Entropy in Thermodynamics
I will briefly comment about the relationship between Shannon’s theory and
thermodynamics (Adami and Cerf 1999). For the present purpose it should
suffice to remark that Boltzmann-Gibbs thermodynamic entropy is just like
Shannon entropy, only that the probability distribution p is given by the
Boltzmann distribution of the relevant degrees of freedom (position and mo-
mentum):
ρ(p,q) = e
−E(p,q)/kT
and the thermodynamic quantity is made dimensional by multiplying Shan-
non’s dimensionless uncertainty by Boltzmann’s constant. It should not
worry us that the degrees of freedom in thermodynamics are continuous,
because any particular measurement device that is used to measure these
quantities will have a finite resolution, rendering these variables effectively
discrete through coarse-graining. More importantly, equilibrium thermo-
dynamics assumes that all entropies of isolated systems are at their max-
imum, so there are no correlations in equilibrium thermodynamic systems,
andtherefore thereisno information. Thisisimportant forourpurposes, be-
cause it implies, a fortiori, that the information stored in biological genomes
guarantees that living systems are far away from thermodynamical equilib-
rium. Information theory can thus be viewed as a type of non-equilibrium
thermodynamics.
Beforeexploring theuses oftheseconcepts inmolecular biology, let mere-
iterate the most important points which tend to be obscured when discussing
information. Informationisdefined asthe amount ofcorrelation between two
systems. It measures theamount of entropy sharedbetween two systems, and
this shared entropy is the information that one system has about the other.
Perhaps this is the key insight that I would like to convey: Information is
always about something. If it cannot be specified what the information is
about, then we are dealing with entropy, not information. Indeed, entropy
is sometimes called, in what borders on an abuse of language, “useless in-
formation”. The previous discussion also implies that information is only
defined relative to the system it is information about, and is therefore never
absolute. This will be particularly clear in the discussion of the information
content of genomes, which we now enter.
2 Information in Genomes
There is a long history of applying information theory to symbolic sequences.
Most of this work is concerned with the randomness, or, conversely, regular-
ity, of the sequence. Ascertaining the probabilities with which symbols are
found on a sequence or message will allow us to estimate the entropy of the
source of symbols, but not what they stand for. In other words, informa-
tion cannot be accessed in this manner. It should be noted, however, that
studying horizontal correlations, i.e., correlations between symbols along a
sequence rather than across sequences, can be useful for distinguishing cod-
ing from non-coding regions in DNA (Grosse et al., 2000), and can serve as
a distance measure between DNA sequences that can be used to assemble
fragments obtained from shotgun-sequencing (Otu and Sayood, 2003).
In terms of the jargon introduced above, measuring the probabilities with
which symbols (or groups of symbols) appear anywhere in a sequence will re-
veal the marginal entropy of the sequence, i.e., the entropy without regard to
the environment or context. The entropy with regard to the environment is
the entropy given the environment, a conditional entropy, which we shall cal-
culate below. This will involve obtaining the probability to find a symbol at
a specific point in the sequence, as opposed to anywhere on it. We sometimes
refer to this as obtaining the vertical correlations between symbols.
2.1 Meaning from Correlations
Obtaining the marginal entropy of a genetic sequence can be quite involved
(in particular if multi-symbol probabilities are required), but a very good
approximative answer can be given without any work at all: This entropy
(for DNA sequences) is about two bits per base. There are deviations of
interest (for example in GC-rich genes, etc.) but overall this is what the
(non-conditional) entropy of most of DNA is (see, e.g., Schmitt and Herzel
1997). The reason for this is immediately clear: DNA is a code, and codes
do not reveal information from sequence alone. Optimal codes, e.g., are
such that the encoded sequences cannot be compressed any further (Cover
and Thomas, 1991). While DNA is not optimal (there are some correlations
between symbols along the sequence), it is nearly so. The same seems to
hold true for proteins: a random protein would have log (20) = 4.32 bits
of entropy per site (or 1 mer, the entropy of a random monomer introduced
above),whiletheactualentropyissomewhatlowerduetobiasesintheoverall
abundance (leucine is over three times as abundant as tyrosine, for example),
and due to pair and triplet correlations. Depending on the data set used,
the protein entropy per site is between 2.5 (Strait and Dewey, 1996) and 4.17
bits (Weiss et al., 2000), or between 0.6 and 0.97 mers. Indeed, it seems
that protein sequences can only be compressed by about 1% (Weiss et al.
2000). This is a pretty good code! But this entropy per symbol only allows
us to quantify our uncertainty about the sequence identity, but it will not
reveal to us the function of the genes. If this is all that information theory
could do, we would have to agree with the critics that information theory is
nearly useless in molecular biology. Yet, I have promised that information
theory is relevant, and I shall presently point out how. First of all, let us
return to the concept of information. How should we decide whether or not
potential information (a.k.a entropy) is in actuality information, i.e., whether
it is shared with another variable?
The key to information lies in its use to make predictions about other
systems. Only in reference to another ensemble can entropy become infor-
mation, i.e., be promoted from useless to useful, from potential to actual.
Information therefore is clearly not stored within a sequence, but rather in
the correlations between the sequence and what it describes, or what it cor-
responds to. What do biomolecular sequences correspond to? What is the
meaning of a genomic sequence, what information does it represent? This
depends, quite naturally, on what environment the sequence is to be inter-
preted within. According to the arguments advanced here, no sequence has
an intrinsic meaning, but only a relative (or conditional) one with respect to
an environment. So, for example, the genome of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (a
bacterium that causes pneumonia-like respiratory illnesses) has an entropy
of almost a million base pairs, which is its genome length. Within the soft
tissues that it relies on for survival, most of these base pairs (about 89%)
are information (Dandekar et al., 2000). Indeed, Mycoplasmas are obligate
parasites in these soft tissues, having shed from 50% to three quarters of the
genome of their bacterial ancestors (the Bacillae). Within these soft tissues
that make many metabolites readily available, what was information for a
Bacillus had become entropy for the Mycoplasma. With respect to other
environments, the Mycoplasma information might mean very little, i.e., it
might not correspond to anything there. Whether or not a sequence means
something in its environment determines whether or not the organism host-
ing it lives or dies there. This will allow us to find a way to distinguish
entropy from information in genomes.
2.2 Physical Complexity
In practice, how can we determine whether a particular base’s entropy is
shared, i.e., whether a nucleotide carries entropy or information? At first
glance one might fear that we would have to know a gene’s function (i.e.,
know what it corresponds to within its surrounding) before we can determine
the information content; that, for example, we might need to know that a
gene codes for an alcoholdehydrogenase before we can ascertain which base
pairs code for it. Fortunately, this is not true. What is clear, however, is
that we may never distinguish entropy from information if we are only given
a single sequence to make this determination, because, in a single sequence,
symbols that carry information are indistinguishable from those that do not.
The trick lies in studying functionally equivalent sets of sequences, and the
substitution patterns at each aligned position. In an equilibrated population,
i.e, onewhere sufficient timehaspassedsincethelastevolutionaryinnovation
or bottleneck, we expect a position that codes for information to be nearly
uniformacrossthepopulation(meaningthatthesamebasepairwillbefound
at that position in all sequences of that population), because a mutation at
that position would detrimentally affect the fitness of the bearer, and, over
time, be purged from the ensemble (this holds in its precise form only for
asexual populations). Positions that do not code for information, on the
other hand, are selectively neutral, and, with time, will take on all possible
symbols at that position. Thus, we may think of each position onthe genome
as a four-sided die. A priori, the uncertainty (entropy) at each position is
two bits, the maximal entropy:
H = − p(i)log p(i) = log 4 = 2 bits (6)
because, a priori, p(i) = 1/4. For the actual entropy, we need the actual
probabilities p (i), for each position j on the sequence. In a pool of N
sequences, p (i) is estimated by counting the number n (i) of occurrences of
nucleotide i at position j, so that p (i) = n (i)/N. This should be done for
all positions j = 1,...,L of the sequence, where L is the sequence length.
Ignoring correlations between positions j on a sequence (so-called “epistatic”
correlations, to which we shall return below), the information stored in the
sequence is then (with logs to base 2)
I = H −H = 2L−H bits , (7)
j=1 i=G,C,A,T
Note that this estimate, because it relies onthe difference of maximal and ac-
tual entropy, does not require us to know which variables in the environment
cause some nucleotides to be uniform, or “fixed”. These probabilities are
set by mutation-selection balance in the environment. I have argued earlier
(Adami and Cerf 2000, Adami et al. 2000) that the information stored in
a sequence is a good proxy for the sequences’s complexity (called “physical
complexity”), which itselfmightbeagoodpredictoroffunctionalcomplexity.
Andindeed, itseems tocorrespondtothequantity thatincreases duringDar-
winian evolution (Adami 2002a). We will encounter below an evolutionary
experiment that seems to corroborate these notions.
In general (for sequences taken from any monomer alphabet of size D),
the information stored in the sequence is
max X X j D j
= L−J mers , (10)
where J can be thought of as the number of non-functional (i.e., “junk”)
instructions,andIremindthereaderthatwedefinedthe“mer”astheentropy
of a random monomer, normalized to lie between zero and one.
2.3 Application to DNA and RNA
In the simplest case, the environment is essentially given by the intra-cellular
binding proteins, and the measure (7) can be used to investigate the infor-
mation content of DNA binding sites (this use of information theory was
pioneered by Schneider et al., 1986). Here, the sample of sequences can be
provided by a sample of equivalent binding sites within a single genome. For
example, the latter authorsalignedthe sequences of 149E. coli andcoliphage
ribosome binding sites in order to calculate the substitution probabilities at
each position of a 44 base pair region (which encompasses the 34 positions
that can be said to constitute the binding site). Fig. 1 shows the information
Figure 1: Information content (in bits) of an E. coli ribosome binding site,
aligned at the fMet-tRNA initiation site (L=0), from Schneider et al.
(1986).
content asafunctionofposition(Schneider et al.1986),where positionL = 0
is the first base of the initiation codon. The information content is highest
near the initiation codon, and shows several distinct peaks. The peak at
L = −10 corresponds to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (Shine and Dalgarno,
1974).
When the information content of a base is zero we must assume that
it has no function, i.e., it is neither expressed nor does anything bind to
it. Regions with positive information content1 carry information about the
binding protein, just as the binding protein carries information about the
binding site.
It is important to emphasize that the reason that sites L = 1 and L = 2,
for example, have maximal information content is a consequence of the fact
that their conditional entropy Eq. (8) vanishes. The entropy is conditional
because only given the environment of binding proteins in which it func-
tions in E. coli or a coliphage, is the entropy zero. If there were, say, two
different proteins which could initiate translation at the same site (two dif-
ferent environments), the conditional entropy of these sites could be higher.
Intermediate information content (between zero and 2 bits) signals the pres-
ence of polymorphisms implying either non-specific binding to one protein or
competition between more than one protein for that site.
A polymorphism is a deviation from the consensus sequence that is not,
as a rule, detrimental to the organism carrying it. If it was, we would call
it a “deleterious mutation” (or just“mutation”). The latter should be very
infrequent as it implies disease or death for the carrier. On the contrary,
polymorphisms can establish themselves in the population, leading either to
no change in the phenotype whatsoever, in which case we may term them
“strictly neutral”, or they may be deleterious by themselves but neutral if
associatedwithacommensurate(compensatory)mutationeitheronthesame
sequence or somewhere else.
Polymorphisms are easily detected if we plot the per-site entropies of
a sequence vs. residue or nucleotide number in an entropy map of a gene.
Polymorphisms carry per-site entropies intermediate between zero (perfectly
conserved locus) and unity (strictly neutral locus). Mutations, on the other
hand, (because they are deleterious) are associated with very low entropy
(Rogan and Schneider 1995), so polymorphisms stand out among conserved
regions and even mutations. In principle, mutations can occur on sites which
are themselves polymorphic; those can only be detected by a more in-depth
analysis of substitution patterns such as suggested in Schneider (1997). Be-
cause polymorphic sites in proteins are a clue to which sites can easily be
mutated, per-site entropies have also been calculated for the directed evolu-
tion of proteins and enzymes (Saven and Wolynes 1997, Voigt et al. 2001).
1Finite sampling of the substitution probabilities introduces a systematic error in the
information content, which can be corrected (Miller 1954, Basharin 1959, Schneider et
al. 1986). In the present case, the correction ensures that the information content is
Figure 2: Entropy (in bits) of E. coli tRNA (upper panel) from 5’ (L=0) to
3’ (L=76), from 33 structurally similar sequences obtained from Sprinzl et
al. (1996), where we arbitrarily set the entropy of the anti-codon to zero.
Lower panel: Same for 32 sequences of B. subtilis tRNA.
As mentioned earlier, the actual function of a sequence is irrelevant for
determining its information content. In the previous example, the region in-
vestigated was a binding site. However, any gene’s information content can
be measured in such a manner. In Adami and Cerf (2000), the information
content of the 76 base pair nucleic acid sequence that codes for bacterial
tRNA was investigated. In this case the analysis is complicated by the fact
that the tRNA sequence displays secondary and tertiary structure, so that
the entropy of those sites that bind in Watson-Crick pairs, for example, are
shared, reducing the information content estimate based on Eq. (2) signifi-
cantly. In Fig. 2, I show the entropy (in bits) derived from 33 structurally
approximately zero at the left and right edge of the binding site.
65 49 48 44
3’ 73 72 71 70 69 68 67 66 43 42 41 40 39
5’ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 27 28 29 30 31
Figure 3: Secondary structure of tRNA molecule, with bases colored black
for low entropy (0 ≤ H ≤ 0.3 mers), grey for intermediate (0.3 < H ≤ 0.7
mers), and white for maximal entropy (0.7 < H ≤ 1.0 mers), numbered 1-76
(entropies from E. coli sequences).
similar sequences of E. coli tRNA (upper panel) and 32 sequences of B.
subtilis tRNA, respectively, obtained from the EMBL nucleotide sequence
library (Sprinzl et al. 1996). Note how similar these entropy maps are across
species (even though they last shared an ancestor over 1.6 billion years ago),
indicating that the profiles are characteristic of the function of the molecule,
and thus statistically stable.
Because ofbase-pairing, weshouldnotexpect tobeabletosimply sumup
the per-site entropies of the sequence to obtain the (conditional) sequence
entropy. The pairing in the stacks (the ladder-like arrangement of bases
that bind in pairs) of the secondary structure (see Fig. 3) reduces the actual
entropy, because two nucleotides that arebound together sharetheir entropy.
This is an example where epistatic correlations are important. Two sites
(loci) are called epistatic if their contributions to the sequence’s fitness are
not independent, in other words, if theprobability to finda particular base at
one position depends on the identity of a base at another position. Watson-
Crick-binding in stacks is the simplest such example; it is also a typical
example of the maintenance of polymorphisms in a population because of
functional association. Indeed, the fact that polymorphisms are correlated
in stacks makes it possible to deduce the secondary structure of an RNA
molecule from sequence information alone. Take, for example, nucleotide
Figure 4: Mutual entropy (information) between base 28 and bases 39 to
45 (information is normalized to I = 1 by taking logarithms to base 4).
Because finite sample size corrections of higher order have been neglected,
the information estimate can appear to be negative by an amount of the
order of this error.
L = 28 (in the anti-codon stack) which is bound to nucleotide L = 42, and
let us measure entropies in mers (by taking logarithms to the base 4). The
mutual entropy between L = 28 and L = 42 (in E. coli) can be calculated
using Eq. (4):
I(28 : 42) = H(28)+H(42)−H(28,42) = 0.78 . (11)
Thus indeed, these two bases share almost all of their entropy. We can see
furthermore that they share very little entropy with any other base. Note
that, in order to estimate the entropies in Eq. (11), we applied a first-order
correction that takes into account a bias due to the finite size of the sample,
asdescribed inMiller (1954). This correction amounts to ∆H = 3/(132ln2)
for single nucleotide entropies, and∆H = 15/(132ln2) for the joint entropy.
InFig.4,Iplotthemutualentropyofbase28withbases39to45respectively,
showing that base 42 is picked out unambiguously. Such an analysis can be
carried out for all pairs of nucleotides, so that the secondary structure of
the molecule is revealed unambiguously (see, e.g., Durbin et al. 1998). In
Fig. 5, I show the entropy (in bits) for all pairs of bases of the set of E. coli
sequences used to produce the entropy map in Fig. 2, which demonstrates
how the paired bases in the four stems stand out.
Figure 5: Mutual entropy (information) between all bases (in bits), colored
according to the color bar on the right, from 33 sequences of E. coli tRNA.
The four stems are readily identified by their correlations as indicated.
Since we found that most bases in stacks share almost all of their entropy
with their binding partner, it is easy to correct formula (10) to account for
the epistatic effects of stack-binding: We only need to subtract from the
total length of the molecule (in mers) the number of bases involved in stack
binding. In a tRNA molecule (with a secondary structure as in Fig. 3) there
are 21 such bases, so the sum in Eq. (8) should only go over the 52 “reference
positions”2. For E. coli, the entropy summed over the reference positions
gives H ≈ 24 mers, while the B. subtilis set gives H ≈ 21 mers. We thus
conclude that bacterial tRNA stores between 52 and 55 mers of information
about its environment (104-110 bits).
This type of sequence analysis combining structural and complexity in-
formation has recently been used to quantify the information gain during
in-vitro evolution of catalytic RNA molecules (ribozyme ligases) (Carothers
et al. 2004). The authors evolved RNA aptamers that bind GTP (guanine
triphosphate) with different catalytic effectiveness (different functional ca-
pacity) from a mutagenized sequence library. They found 11 different classes
of ribozymes, whose structure they determined using the correlation analysis
outlined above. They subsequently measured the amount of information in
each structure [using Eq. (7) and correcting for stack binding as described
above] and showed that ligases with higher affinity for the substrate had
more complex secondary structure and stored more information. Further-
more, they found that the information estimate based on Eq. (7) was consis-
tent with an interpretation in terms of the amount of information necessary
to specify the particular structure inthe given environment. Thus, at least in
thisrestricted biochemical example, structural, functional, andinformational
complexity seem to go hand in hand.
2.4 Application to Proteins
If the secondary structure of RNA and DNA enzymes can be predicted based
on correlations alone, what about protein secondary structure? Because
proteinsfoldandfunctionviatheinteractionsamongtheaminoacidstheyare
made of, these interactions should, in evolutionary time, lead to correlations
between residues so that the fitness effect of an amino acid substitution at
2We excludethethreeanticodon-specifyingbasesfromthe entropycalculationbecause
they have zero conditional entropy by definition (they cannot vary among a tRNA-type
because it would change the type). However, the substitution probabilities are obtained
from mixtures of different tRNA-types, and therefore appear to deviate from zero or one.
one position will depend on the residue at another position. (Care must be
taken to avoid contamination from correlations that are due entirely to a
common evolutionary path, see Wollenberg and Atchley 2000; Govindarajan
et al. 2003.) Such an analysis has been carried out on a number of different
molecule families, such as the V3 loop region of HIV-1 (Korber et al. 1993),
which shows high variability (high entropy) and strong correlations between
residues (leading to shared entropy) that are due to functional constraints.
These correlations have also been modelled (Giraud et al. 1998).
A similar analysis for the homeodomain sequence family was performed
by Clarke (1995), who was able to detect 16 strongly co-varying pairs in
this 60 amino acid binding motif. However, determining secondary structure
based on these correlations alone is much more difficult, because proteins do
not fold neatly into stacks and loops as does RNA. Also, residue covariation
does not necessarily indicate physical proximity (Clarke 1995), even though
the strongest correlations are often due to salt-bridges. But the correlations
can at least help in eliminating some models of protein structure (Clarke
1995).
Atchley et al. (2000) carried out a detailed analysis of correlated mu-
tations in the bHLH (basic helix-loop-helix) protein domain of a family of
transcription factors. Their set covered 242 proteins across a large num-
ber of vertebrates that could be aligned to detect covariation. They found
that amino acid sites known to pack against each other showed low entropy,
whereas exposednon-contact sitesexhibited significantly largerentropy. Fur-
thermore, they determined that a significant amount of the observed correla-
tions between sites was due to functional or structural constraints that could
help in elucidating the structural, functional, and evolutionary dynamics of
these proteins (Atchley et al. 2000).
Some attempts have been made to study the thermodynamics of protein
structures and relate it to the sequence entropy (Dewey 1997), by studying
the mutual entropy between protein sequence and structure. This line of
thought is inspired by our concept of the genotype-phenotype map, which
implies that sequence should predict structure. If we hypothesize a struc-
tural entropy of proteins H(str), obtained for example as the logarithm of
the possible stable protein structures for a given chain length (and a given
environment), then we can write down the mutual entropy between structure
and sequence simply as
I(seq : str) = H(seq)−H(seq|str) , (12)
where H(seq) is the entropy of sequences of length L, given by L, and
H(seq|str) is the entropy of sequences given the structure. If we assume
that the environment perfectly dictates structure (i.e., if we assume that
only one particular structure will perform any given function) then
and I(str : seq) is then roughly equal to the physical complexity defined
earlier. Because H(str|seq) = 0 (per the above assumption that any given
sequence gives rise to exactly one structure), we can rewrite (12) as
I(seq : env) ≈ I(seq : str) = H(str)−H(str|seq) , (14)
i.e., the mutual entropy between sequence and structure only tells us that
the thermodynamical entropy of possible protein structures is limited by the
amount of information about the environment coded for by the sequence.
This is interesting because it implies that sequences that encode more in-
formation about the environment are also potentially more complex, a rela-
tionship we discussed earlier in connection with ribozymes (Carothers et al.
2004). Note, however, that the assumption that only one particular structure
will perform any given function need not hold. Szostak (2003), for exam-
ple, advocates a definition of functional information that allows for different
structures carrying out an equivalent biochemical function.
3 Molecular Interactions and Resistance
One of the more pressing concerns in bioinformatics is the identification of
DNA protein-binding regions, such as promoters, regulatory regions, and
splice junctions. The common method to find such regions is through se-
quence identity, i.e., known promoter or binding sites are compared to the
region being scanned (e.g., via freely available bioinformatics software such
as BLAST), and a “hit” results if the scanned region is sufficiently identical
according to a user-specified threshold. Such a method cannot, of course,
find unknown binding sites, nor can it detect interactions between proteins,
which is another one of bioinformatics’ holy grails (see, e.g., Tucker et al.
2001). Information theory can in principle detect interactions between dif-
ferent molecules (such as DNA-protein or protein-protein interactions) from
sequence heterogeneity, because interacting pairs share correlated mutations,
that arise as follows.
3.1 Detecting Protein-Protein and DNA-Protein In-
teractions
Imagine two proteins bound to each other, while each protein has some en-
tropy in its binding motif (substitutions that do not affect structure). If a
mutation in one of the proteins leads to severely reduced interaction speci-
ficity, the substitution is strongly selected against. It is possible, however,
that a compensatory mutation in the binding partner restores specificity,
such that the pair of mutations together is neutral (and will persist in the
population), while each mutation by itself is deleterious. Over evolutionary
time, such pairs of correlated mutations will establish themselves in popula-
tions and in homologous genes across species, and could be used to identify
interacting pairs. This effect has been seen previously in the Cytochrome
c/Cytochrome oxidase (CYC/COX) heterodimer (Rawson and Burton 2002)
of the marine copepod Tigriopus californicus. In Rawson and Burton (2002),
the authors performed crosses between the San Diego (SD) and Santa Cruz
(SC) variants from two natural allopatric populations that have long, inde-
pendent evolutionary histories. Inter-population crosses produced strongly
reduced activity of the cytochrome complex, while intra-population crosses
were vigorous. Indeed, the SD and SC variants of COX differ by at least 30
amino acid substitutions, while the smaller CYC has up to 5 substitutions.
But can these correlated mutations be found from sequence data alone? This
turns out to be a difficult computational problem unless it is known precisely
which member of a set of N sequences of one binding partner binds to which
member of a set of N of the other. Unless we are in possession of this N to
N assignment, we cannot calculate the joint probabilities p that go into the
calculation of the mutual entropies such as Eq. (11) that reveal correlated
mutations.
Of course, if we have one pair of sequences from N species of organisms
with the same homologous gene, the assignment is automatically implied. In
the absence of such an assignment, it may be possible to recover the correct
matches from two sets of N sequences by searching for the assignment with
thehighest mutual entropy, because we cansafely assume that thecorrect as-
signment maximizes the correlations (Adami and Thomsen 2004). However,
this is a difficult search problem because the number of possible assignments
scales like N!. Still, because correlated mutations due to coevolution seem
to be relatively common (Bonneton et al. 2003), this would be a useful tool
for revealing those residues involved in binding, or even in protein-protein
interaction prediction.
In principle, the information-theoretical method described above can po-
tentially identify unknown binding sites by identifying complementary pat-
terns (between binding sites and protein coding regions), if the binding re-
gions are not well-conserved, i.e., when the binding site and the correspond-
ing transcription factor carry a reasonable amount of polymorphisms, and if
enough annotation exists to identify the genomic partners that correspond to
each other in a set. If sufficient pairs of transcription-factor/binding-domain
pairs can be sequenced, an information-theoretic analysis could conceivably
reveal genomic regulatory regions that standard sequence analysis methods
miss. For example, it was suggested recently (Brown and Callan, 2004) that
the cAMP response protein (CRP, a transcription factor that regulates many
E. coli genes) binds to a number of entropic sites in E.coli, i.e., sites that are
not strictly conserved, but that still retain functionality (see also Berg and
von Hippel, 1987).
Figure 6: Normalized (0 ≤ H ≤ 1) entropy of HIV-1 protease in mers, as a
function of residue number, using 146 sequences from patients exposed to a
protease inhibitor drug (entropy is normalized to H = 1 per amino acid
by taking logarithms to base 20).
3.2 Tracking Drug Resistance
Aninteresting patternofmutations canbeobserved intheproteaseofHIV-1,
aproteinthatbindstoparticularmotifsonaviruspolyprotein, andthencuts
it into functional pieces. Resistance to protease inhibitors (small molecules
designed to bind to the “business end” of the protease, thereby preventing
its function) occurs via mutations in the protease that do not change the
protease’s cutting function (proteolysis), while preventing the inhibitor to
bind to it. Information theory can be used to study whether mutations are
involvedindrugresistanceorwhethertheyarepurelyneutral, andtodiscover
correlated resistance mutations.
The emergence of resistance mutations in the protease after exposure to
antiviral drugs has been well studied (Molla et al. 1996, Schinazi, Larder,
and Mellors 1999). The entropy map of HIV protease in Fig. 63 (on the level
of amino acids) reveals a distinctive pattern of polymorphisms and only two
strictly conserved regions. HIV protease not exposed to inhibitory drugs, on
the other hand, shows three such conserved regions (Loeb et al. 1989). It is
believed that the polymorphisms contribute to resistance mutations involved
in HAART (Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy) failure patients (Servais
et al. 2001b). But, as a matter of fact, many of the observed polymorphisms
can be observed in treatment-naive patients (Kozal et al. 1996, and Lech et
al. 1996) so it is not immediately clear which of the polymorphic sites are
involved in drug resistance.
In principle, exposure of a population to a new environment can lead to
fast adaptation if the mutation rate is high enough. This is certainly the case
with HIV. The adaptive changes generally fall into two classes: mutations
in regions that were previously conserved (true resistance mutations), and
changes in the substitution pattern on sites that were previously polymor-
phic. In the case of HIV-1 protease, both patterns seem to contribute. In
Fig. 7, I show the changes in the entropic profile of HIV-1 protease obtained
from a group of patients before and six months after treatment with high
doses of saquinavir (a protease inhibitor). Most spikes are positive, in par-
ticular the changes around residues 46-56, a region that is well-conserved in
treatment-naive proteases, and that is associated with a flap in the molecule
that must be flexible and that extends over the substrate binding cleft (Shao
et al. 1997). Mutations in that region indeed appeared on sites that were
3Themapwascreatedusing146sequencesobtainedfromacohortinLuxembourg,and
deposited in GenBank (Servais et al. 1999 and 2001a).
previously uniform, while some changes occurred on polymorphic sites (neg-
ative spikes). For those, exposure to the new environment usually reduced
the entropy at that site.
Some of the resistance mutations actually appear in pairs, indicating that
they may be compensatory in nature (Leigh Brown et al. 1999, Hoffman et
al. 2003, Wu et al. 2003). The strongest association occurs between residues
54 and 82, the former associated with the flap, and the latter right within the
binding cleft. This association does not occur in treatment-naive patients,
butstandsoutstronglyaftertherapy(such correlationsareeasilydetected by
creatingmutualentropygraphssuchasFig.5,datanotshown). Thecommon
explanation for this covariation is again compensation: while a mutation in
the flap or in the cleft leads to reduced functionality of the protease, both
together restore function while evading the inhibitor.
Figure 7: Change in per-site entropy of HIV-1 protease after six months of
exposure to saquinavir, ∆Entropy=H −H , where H is the entropy after
26 weeks of exposure. The entropies were obtained from 34 sequences before
and after exposure, available through GenBank (Schapiro et al. 1997). The
three highest (positive) spikes are associated to the well-known resistance
mutations G48V, T74(A,S), and L90M, respectively.
3.3 Information-theoretic Drug Design
Because many of the protease polymorphisms are prevalent in treatment-
naive patients, we must assume thatthey areeither neutral, or thatthesteric
changes they entail do not impede the protease’s proteolytic activity while
failing to bind the protease inhibitor. Thus, a typical protease population is
a mixture of polymorphic molecules (polymorphic both in genotype and in
structure, see Maggio et al. 2002) that can outsmart a drug designed for a
singleproteasetyperelativelyeasily. Aninterestingalternativeindrugdesign
would therefore use an entropic mixture of polymorphisms, or “quasispecies”
(Eigen 1971) as the drug target. Such a drug would itself form a quasispecies
rather than a pure drug. Indeed, an analysis of the information content of
realistic ensembles shows that consensus sequences are exceedingly rare in
real populations (Schneider 1997), and certainly absent in highly variable
ones such as HIV proteases. The absence of a consensus sequence is also
predicted for molecules evolving at the error threshold (Eigen 1971), which
is very likely in these viruses.
The ideal superdrug should represent a mixture of inhibitors that is per-
fectly tuned to the mixture of proteases. What this mixture is can be deter-
mined with information theory, by ensuring that the ensemble of inhibitors
co-varieswith theprotease, such astoproduce tightbinding even inthepres-
ence of mutations (or more precisely because of the presence of mutations).
Thesubstitution probabilities oftheinhibitor ensemble wouldbeobtainedby
maximizing the mutual entropy (information) between the protease and an
inhibitor library obtained by combinatorial methods, either on a nucleotide
or on the amino acid level (Adami 2002b). If such a procedure could create
a drug that successfully inhibits resistance mutations, we could no longer
doubt the utility of information theory for molecular biology.
4 Conclusions
Information theory is not widely used in bioinformatics today even though,
as the name suggests, it should be the relevant theory for investigating the
information content of sequences. The reason for the neglect appears to be
a misunderstanding of the concepts of entropy versus information through-
out most of the literature, which has led to the widespread perception of its
incompetence. Instead, I point out that Shannon’s theory precisely defines
both entropy and information, and that our intuitive concept of information
coincides with the mathematical notion. Using these concepts, it is possible
in principle to distinguish information-coding regions from random ones in
ensembles of genomes, and thus quantify the information content. A thor-
ough application of this program should resolve the C-paradox, that is, the
absence of a correlation between the size of the genome and the apparent
complexity of an organism (Cavalier-Smith 1985), by distinguishing infor-
mation that contributes to complexity from non-functional stretches that do
not. However, this is a challenge for the future because of the dearth of
multiply sequenced genomes.
Another possible application of information theory in molecular biology
is the association of regulatory molecules with their binding sites or even
protein-protein interactions, in the case where transcription factors and their
corresponding binding site show a good amount of polymorphism (methods
basedoncorrelatedheterogeneity), andthebindingassociationbetweenpairs
can be established. This approach is complementary to sequence comparison
of conserved regions (methods based onsequence identity), inwhich informa-
tion theory methods cannot be used because zero (conditional) entropy re-
gions cannot share entropy. Conversely, sequence comparison methods must
fail if polymorphisms are too pronounced. Finally, the recognition of the
polymorphic (or quasispecies) nature of many viral proteins suggests an in-
formation theory based approach to drug design in which the quasispecies of
proteins—rather than the consensus sequence—is the drug target, by maxi-
mizing the information shared between the target and drug ensembles.
Acknowledgements
I thank David Baltimore and Alan Perelson for discussions, and Titus
Brown for comments on the manuscript. Thanks are also due to Daniel
Wagenaar for producing Fig. 5. This work was supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant DEB-9981397.