2v6616010/ht-peh:viXra
INTEGRABILITY IN FLUID DYNAMICS
Subir Ghosh
Physics and Applied Mathematics Unit,
Indian Statistical Institute,
203 B. T. Road, Calcutta 700035,
India.
Abstract:
3+1-dimensional free inviscid fluid dynamics is shown to satisfy the criteria for exact integra-
bility, i.e. having an infinite set of independent, conserved quantities in involution, with the
Hamiltonian being one of them. With (density dependent) interaction present, distinct infinite
serieses of conserved quantities in involution are discovered. Clebsch parametrization of the
velocity field is used in the the latter analysis. Relativistic generalization of the free system is
also shown to be integrable.
Keywords: Integrable model, Fluid dynamics, Field Theory.
The necessary conditions for a (classical) field theory to be completely integrable in more
than one spatial dimensions are expected to correspond to their 1+1-dimensional counterpart:
existence ofaninfinitenumber ofindependent conserved quantities ininvolution, (meaning that
they commute at the Poisson Bracket (PB) level) with the Hamiltonian being one of the above
[1]. These features generally induce soliton like solutions, which are physically interesting,
both in (non-relativistic) condensed matter theory and in (relativistic) high energy physics, for
simulatingparticle-likeexcitations. However, examplesofintegrablemodelsinhigherdimension
are quite rare [2]. In the present Letter, we study various aspects of integrability in the inviscid
fluid model in 3+1-dimensions, both with and without interaction [3]. Specifically, we show
that (i) the free fluid models, compressible andincompressible, are integrable, (ii) compressible
fluidmodelwith(densitydependent) interactionhastwodistinct infiniteserieses ofindependent
conserved quantities in involution and (iii) a relativistic generalization of the free fluid model is
also integrable. ”Free” model means that there is no pressure term in the equations of motion.
Exact integrability in 1+1-dimensions has been proved [4] by exploiting the connection
between fluidmodelswith(Chaplygintypeof)density dependent interactionsandbranesystem
[5]. Conservation laws for irrotational fluids in higher dimensions have also been studied [4].
The Hamiltonian system with the basic PBs and equations of motion are the following [6],
2 i i i ∂xi i j ρ
t i i t i i j j i i
where ρ and v denote the density and velocity fields respectively, i = 1,2,3 and a density
dependent pressure term has been considered. Immedietely we notice that for the free theory,
(R = 0), for arbitrary smooth functions F(v ) and G(v ),
Z Z Z j ∂v
(3) constitute an infinite number of conservation laws and (4) shows that the corresponding
charges are in involution. Obviously the free H belongs to this set. Hence the free theory
satisfies the criteria of exact integrability. However, in presence of the interaction, R 6= 0, the
conservation law (3) does not hold [7]. To study the effects of interaction a better framework is
provided by the Clebsch parametrization of the velocity field [6], v (x) ≡ ∂ θ(x)+α(x)∂ β(x),
with the non-zero PBs [8],
Time evolution of the Clebsch variables are
i i i i i i i i
Using above relations, one can easily check that
t i i t i i t i i
where A, B and C are smooth functions. The above constitute the three independent serieses
of local current conservation equations. Clearly the conserved charges A[α] = (A(α)ρ) etc.
are trivially involutive, R
but the rest of the PBs between charges are non-vanishing. Hence one can take either the set
A[α] or the set B[β] as the independent and conserved charges in involution. This constitues
analysis of the interacting case. Notice that H does not belong to any of the three sets as it
contains θ. It would be interesting if a bi-Hamiltonian structure [9] could be found, in which a
term from one of the above serieses will act as Hamiltonian to reproduce (6) via a PB algebra
other than (5).
In this connection, the incompressible fluid turns out to be integrable. We introduce the
constraint ρ(x) − ρ 0 ≈ 0 which generates another constraint ∂ i v i ≈ 0 due to the equations
of motion (2). One can replace θ = −(∂ ∂ ) −1∂ (α∂ β) from H so that it belongs to C(α,β).
Explicitly performing the Dirac analysis [10] of the above second class pair of constraints [11]
one can check that the conservation laws in (7) and the corresponding charges become ρ-
independent. Hence the Hamiltonian and either the set A(α) or the set B(β) constitute the
conserved quantities in involution.
Some peculiarities are involved in the Noether description of the above conserved currents
(7) from the Lagrangian [5]
whichcorrectlyreproducesthePBs(5)byDiracconstraintanalysis[10]orsymplectic procedure
[12]. Possibly due to the non-canonical and first order nature of the system, the action respects
the symmetry transformations leading to the currents in a restricted way, where the arbitrary
functions A(α), B(β) and C(α,β) have to be replaced by polynomials αn etc [3].
In the relativistic generalization, the free Lagrangian is expressed as [13]
Expanding the square root as ρ(1+viv i ) 1 2 ≈ ρ(1+ 2 1 viv i +...), and dropping the uninteresting
ρ term [13], (since it can only influence the time evolution of θ by a constant translation), we
Rcan recover the non-relativistic Lagrangian. We emphasise that the symplectic structure and
the associated PB algebra remains unaltered from (5). The Hamiltonian now is modified to
rel i i i i
which changes the equations of motion to the following:
i i i i i i i i i i i i
Notice that in the lowest order, L ≈ v +O(v3 ), the previous equations are recovered. Clearly
the previous conservation laws will remain intact by replacing v by L in the expressions (7) for
thecurrents. Integrabilityisprovedsince inanalogyto(3), wehave∂ (ρF(v ))+∂ (ρF(v )Li) =
0, (4) remains unchanged and H belongs to F(v ).
Regarding the possibility of soliton solutions in the fluid model, a comment is in order. The
Virial theorem [14] proving absence of solitons in models in higher dimensions, involving only
scalar fields, depends on the Lagrangian having the canonical relativistic form L = ∂ φ ∂µφ −
U(φ ). The relativistic Lagrangian (10) and its non-relativistic limit (9) both are first order in
nature with a non-canonical PB algebra between the basic scalar fields ρ, θ, α and β. Hence,
a priori it is not obvious whether the Virial theorem is applicable here. A natural starting
point is provided in the Batalin-Tyutin [15] extension of this model (see Ghosh in [8]), where
the PBs are canonical. All the above results are derivable here in a modified form. Also this
version is suitable for quantiztion.
To conclude, we have shown that the 3+1-dimensional free fluid model satisfies the exact
integrability criteria. For a density dependent interaction, there exist three distinct infinite sets
of independent, conserved charges of which terms in two sets are in involution. Subtleties in
the Noether description of the conservation laws are pointed out. We have also shown that
these conservation laws survive, albeit with modifications, in a relativistic generalization of
the free theory. Establisment of a bi-Hamiltonian structure in case of interactions and soliton
solutions in the model will be worth studying. How far these conclusions can be generalized to
d-brane systems remains an open question. From another point of view, stability analysis of
non-linear systems [16] in Clebsch representation will be interesting since, (as stated in [16]),
a large amount of arbitrariness in the structure of the conserved quantities, which is present
here, is required in the analysis.
It is a pleasure to thank Dr. B. Basu Mallick for discussions. Also I thank Dr. D. Bazeia
for correspondence.