Interaction of Psychological Factors
in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention
Among Computer and Electrical
Engineering Students
Chao-Tung Liang1, Chaoyun Liang2
Numerous technopreneurs start their ventures at college age, but the entrepreneurship
of computer and electrical engineering (CEE) students remains under-studied. This
study analysed both the combined and interactive effects of psychological factors on
the entrepreneurial intentions of CEE students. In this study, entrepreneurial intention
comprised two dimensions, conviction and preparation. Regarding the direct effects,
the results indicated that self-efficacy affected entrepreneurial conviction the most,
followed by negative emotion, intrinsic motivation, and metacognition. Negative
emotion affected entrepreneurial preparation the most, followed by self-efficacy and
positive emotion. The results also revealed several crucial interactive effects resulting
from psychological factors. An increase in cognitive load increased the entrepreneurial
intention of students exhibiting high intrinsic motivation and reduced the intention
of students exhibiting low intrinsic motivation. An increase in metacognition
increased the entrepreneurial conviction of students exhibiting either high or low
intrinsic motivation. An increase in positive emotion reduced the entrepreneurial
intention of students exhibiting high negative emotion and increased the intention of
students exhibiting low negative emotion. An increase in self-efficacy increased the
entrepreneurial intention of students exhibiting either high or low negative emotion.
Keywords: computer and electrical engineering (CEE), entrepreneurial intention,
interactive effects, psychological factors, university students.
Introduction
Entrepreneurship is a primary source of economic growth that creates business
opportunities and reduces unemployment (Szirmai, Naude, & Goedhuys,
1 Chao-Tung Liang, Assistant Professor, Department of Cultural Creativity and Digital Media Design, Lunghwa University
of Science and Technology, New Taipei, Taiwan. E-mail: liangdondon@gmail.com.
2 Chaoyun Liang, Professor, Department of Bio-Industry Communication and Development, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Chaoyun Liang, Department of Bio-
Industry Communication and Development, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei, 10617,
Taiwan. E-mail: cliang@ntu.edu.tw.
6 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
2011). Specifically, information technology sectors have been amongst the
major drivers of economic growth in numerous countries over the past
decades. Among the emerging concerns of technology sector management,
technopreneurship has become a central one (Klincewicz, 2012), particularly
in developing countries (Szirmai et al., 2011).
Taiwan’s computer and electrical engineering (CEE) industry has been
ranked high worldwide. A high percentage of worldwide CEE products
are manufactured by Taiwanese original equipment manufacturers, thus
influencing the choice of programmes of university students in Taiwan.
In the past 10 years, CEE related programmes (i.e., electrical engineering,
electronic engineering, computer technology, and information management)
in universities have been listed amongst the top 10 choices of high school
students (Ministry of Education, 2015). Most students graduating from CEE
programmes choose large CEE firms in science parks to work, but increasing
numbers of them have undertaken ventures on the basis of their innovative
ideas and techniques in CEE. Entrepreneurship has become a widely discussed
concept and an action of choice for numerous CEE graduates.
Although numerous CEE entrepreneurs start their ventures at college
age, student entrepreneurship remains under-studied in business research
(Liang, Chia, & Liang, 2015). Particularly, research on CEE entrepreneurial
intention and behaviour has been ignored in technology education disciplines
(Chen, 2013). Scholars indicated that entrepreneurial intention and
behaviour involves numerous psychological factors that should be intensively
studied (Leon, Gorgievski, & Lukes, 2008; Obschonka, Schmitt-Rodermund,
Silbereisen, Gosling, & Potter, 2013). These psychological factors include
cognition, motivation, emotion, and self-efficacy (Carsrud & Brännback,
2012; Markman, Balkin, & Baron, 2002; Ooi & Ahmad, 2012; Welpe, Spörrle,
Grichnik, Michl, & Audretsch, 2012). However, few studies have empirically
examined how these psychological factors interactively influence the
entrepreneurial intention amongst CEE students.
In keeping with these findings and to fill the research gap, the present
study used college students with CEE majors to analyse the integrated
effects of psychological factors on entrepreneurial intention and test the
interactive effects resulting from these psychological factors. We focused on
the psychological factors intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, positive
emotion, negative emotion, cognitive load, metacognition, and self-efficacy.
The assessment of entrepreneurial intention was based on Liñán and Chen
(2009) and Lans, Gulikers, and Batterink (2010). The measurements of
psychological factors were adopted from several international scales (Chen,
Gully, & Eden, 2001; Harter, 1981; Hsu, Liang, & Chang, 2013; Paas, & van
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 7
Merriënboer, 1994; Schraw & Dennison, 1994; Tuccitto, Giacobbi, & Leite,
2010).
Entrepreneurial intention
Thompson (2009) defined entrepreneurial intention as “a self-acknowledged
conviction by a person that they intend to set up a new business venture
and consciously plan to do so at some point in the future” (p. 676). Previous
studies have indicated that entrepreneurial intention is a strong predictor
of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1991; Bird, 1988; Covin & Slevin, 1989).
Pittaway and Cope (2007) suggested that more studies on entrepreneurial
intention should be linked to employability in small and medium enterprises
to provide a justification that is more than merely economical. Universities
have been regarded as a source of technological development that is useful
to entrepreneurial activity (Shane, 2004). The present study focused on
entrepreneurial intention, because intention towards purposive behaviour
can be a crucial antecedent to entrepreneurial behaviour.
Cooper and Dunkelberg (1986) indicated that various paths to
achieving business ownership are related to the background characteristics,
motivations, attitudes, and employment history of owner-managers, as well
as the support they receive and the processes they employ to start a new
business. Cooper and Dunkelberg reported that entrepreneurs who establish
firms differ considerably from those who are promoted or hired. Moreover,
those who inherit or purchase a firm fall between these two extremes. On the
basis of this observation, Lans et al. (2010) defined three types of intention
to create a business; classical entrepreneurial intention (i.e., the intention to
establish a business), alternative entrepreneurial intention (i.e., the intention
to continue operating an inherited or acquired firm), and intrapreneurial
intention (i.e., the intention to be an intrapreneur or corporate entrepreneur).
These three types of intention suggest that learning goals and professional
needs differ amongst entrepreneurs. In the current study, entrepreneurial
intention was measured according to Liñán and Chen (2009) and Lans et al.
(2010).
Prodan and Drnovsek (2010) claimed that there are knowledge gaps
regarding the specific determinants and processes that characterise the
emergence of academics’ entrepreneurial intentions that lead them
to establish spin-off companies. Prodan and Drnovsek proposed that
psychological and entrepreneurial research on intentionality should be
devoted to this topic. Previous studies have indicated that the entrepreneurial
intentions of undergraduate students in business and engineering majors
are influenced by their family members, academics, attending courses on
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
8 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
entrepreneurship, gender differences, and personality traits (Chen & Chen,
2015; Gerba, 2012; Zain, Akram, & Ghani, 2010). Murah and Abdullah (2012)
studied computer science students and found that their entrepreneurial
intentions were influenced by entrepreneurial experience in childhood,
family background, personality type, and future plans. Kaltenecker and
Hörndlein (2013) identified attitude as the main driver for information
systems students, and discovering business ideas was the most influential
factor for computer science students. The opportunity for self-fulfilment and
the prospect of a high monetary reward were identified as the crucial drivers
for these students. The results of aforementioned studies indicate that
various psychological factors have a profound impact on student intention of
entrepreneurship.
Psychological factors
Leon et al. (2008) indicated that prior research on entrepreneurial
intentions has long been associated with the field of psychology. The critical
psychological factors may include motivation, cognition, emotion, and self-
efficacy. Both extrinsic and intrinsic motivation affect a person’s future
actions and provide energy, direction, and persistence for entrepreneurial
intention (Dej, 2008; Ryan & Deci, 2000). Extrinsic motivation refers to a
person’s internal desire, which is driven by their interest or enjoyment in
performing a task, and includes security, wealth, status, power (Vesalainen
& Pihkala, 1999), group setting, organisational characteristics (Choi, Price,
& Vinokur, 2003), social norms (Ajzen, 1991), and cultural context (Liñán &
Chen, 2009). Extrinsic motivation can transform into intrinsic motivation in
supportive environments (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Intrinsic motivation refers to
that from external pressures or rewards, and includes attitude, behavioural
control (Ajzen, 1991), personal attractiveness, experience, involvement,
and engagement (Kamau-Maina, 2008). Previous research has particularly
suggested that the closer to an entrepreneurial career the decision making
occurs, the more personal intrinsic motivation is involved (Carsrud &
Brännback, 2012; Vesalainen & Pihkala, 1999). Therefore, we proposed the
first following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: Both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation predict
entrepreneurial intention.
Previous studies have determined that positive emotions (emotional
responses that are modelled to dictate positive affection, including excitement,
happiness, joy, and satisfaction) and negative emotions (unpleasant or unhappy
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 9
emotions that express a negative affection towards an event or person,
including fear of failure, anger, loneliness, mental strain, and grief) influence
people’s judgment, memory recall, and deductive and inductive reasoning
(George, 2000), as well as the decision to engage in self-employment (Patzelt
& Shepherd, 2011; Welpe et al., 2012). Numerous scholars have confirmed
that entrepreneurs’ emotions, which are antecedent to, concurrent with,
and a consequence of the entrepreneurial process, are likely to affect the
recognition, creation, evaluation, reformulation, and exploitation of business
opportunities (Cardon, Foo, Shepherd, & Wiklund, 2012; Podoynitsyna, Van
der Bij, & Song, 2012); hence, emotional intelligence has become a crucial
factor in cultivating entrepreneurial students (Zakarevičius & Župerka, 2010).
We thus proposed the second hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2: Both positive and negative emotions predict
entrepreneurial intention.
Furthermore, previous studies have emphasised the effects of cognitive
resources on business start-ups (Haynie, Shepherd, & Patzelt, 2012; Van
Gelderen, 2009). Successful entrepreneurs must be capable of making
appropriate choices to avoid cognitive overload resulting from novelty,
change, uncertainty, and complexity (Van Gelderen, 2009). Cognitive load
here refers to the overall mental activity imposed on a person’s working
memory at a particular time. Sánchez (2012) concluded that people intending
to establish a business apply cognitive scripts that allow them to process
information and perceive the advantages of starting a business despite
adverse market conditions. In addition, Haynie, Shepherd, Mosakowski, and
Eagly (2010) suggested that metacognitive abilities are core characteristics
of entrepreneurial cognition because they enable entrepreneurs to think
beyond existing knowledge and promote adaptable cognition in novel
decision contexts. Metacognition here refers to the processes that allow
people to consider their cognitive abilities. Urban (2012) concluded that
potential entrepreneurs consciously consider the possibility of starting a
new business, and that their entrepreneurial intentions are the result of
metacognitive processes. Therefore, we proposed the third hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3: Both the cognitive load and metacognition predict
entrepreneurial intention.
In addition to expected outcomes and social influences, self-efficacy
has been proven to be the most crucial psychological factor affecting the
entrepreneurial intentions of students (Chen, 2013). Self-efficacy refers
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
10 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
to a person’s belief regarding their ability to succeed in specific situations.
People with high self-efficacy typically perceive themselves as capable
of affecting change and performing actions that are necessary to resolve
problems (Bandura, 2000). Self-efficacy has frequently been applied to
explain entrepreneurship as a series of definitive thought processes in which
entrepreneurs perceive their abilities to be superior to those of other people,
and hence they reason that their abilities can be applied to achieve favourable
outcomes (Neck, Neck, Manz & Godwin, 1999; Zhao, Seibert, & Hills, 2005).
Markman et al. (2002) determined that general self-efficacy can be applied
to entrepreneurship, and it has been used to link inventors with people who
establish new ventures. We thus proposed the fourth hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4: Self-efficacy predicts entrepreneurial intention.
Regarding the interactive effects amongst these psychological factors,
previous research has indicated that human motivation affects cognitive
resources and vice versa (Liang, Hsu, & Chang, 2013). Positive and negative
emotions affect each other (Waugh, 2013), and self-efficacy and negative
emotion also exhibit a mutual influence (Lightsey, Maxwell, Nash, Rarey, &
McKinney, 2011). Therefore, we proposed the following four hypotheses:
Hypothesis 5: Intrinsic motivation and cognitive load interact in
predicting entrepreneurial intention.
Hypothesis 6: Intrinsic motivation and metacognition interact in
predicting entrepreneurial intention.
Hypothesis 7: Negative and positive emotions interact in predicting
entrepreneurial intention.
Hypothesis 8: Negative emotion and self-efficacy interact in predicting
entrepreneurial intention.
This study examined the effects of psychological factors on the entrepreneurial
intention of CEE students and tested the interactive effects resulting from
these psychological factors. A 9-item entrepreneurial intention scale (EIS)
was adopted from Wang, Peng, and Liang (2014), which was based on Liñán
and Chen (2009) and Lans et al. (2010). In addition, we adopted a 37-item
psychological variable scale (PVS; Wang et al., 2014), which was based on
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 11
several international scales (Chen et al., 2001; Harter, 1981; Hsu et al., 2013;
Paas & van Merriënboer, 1994; Schraw & Dennison, 1994; Tuccitto et al.,
2010). These two scales were scored on a 6-point Likert type scale ranging
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree). The details regarding the
reliability and validity of the survey tools are reported in the following section.
We recruited 815 CEE students from three universities in Taiwan and
divided this sample into two groups. The first group consisted of 305 students
and was used to confirm the factor structures of the scales. The second group
comprised 510 students and was used to test the hypotheses and build a
structural model. In the first group, most of them were men (65.57%); 23.61%
were freshmen, 25.57% were sophomores, 26.89% were juniors, and 23.93%
were seniors. The participants were between 18 and 25 years of age (M =
20.54, SD = 0.76). In the second group, most of them were men (64.12%);
22.16% were freshmen, 23.73% were sophomores, 26.67% were juniors, and
27.44% were seniors. The participants were between 18 and 27 years of age
(M = 20.96, SD = 0.87).
The research team discussed the scale items with instructors in the target
CEE programmes before conducting the survey. A paper questionnaire was
administered by trained graduate assistants, either during or immediately
after regular class time. Thus, any problems that participants faced when
answering the questions could be directly resolved. Identical survey
procedures were used to administer the survey in each target programme
in the absence of class instructors to decrease social desirability bias (i.e.,
students may attempt to project a positive self-image to adapt to social norms
whilst answering the questions if class instructors are present). Moreover,
participation by the students was voluntary, confidential, and anonymous.
Confirmatory factor analysis
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with a maximum likelihood estimator was
performed using LISREL 8.80 to test the factorial validity of the scales used
in this study. We adopted indicators recommended by Hu and Bentler (1999)
and Tabachnick and Fidell (2001) to assess the goodness of fit of the model.
Regarding the EIS, the two-factor solution yielded a good fit (χ2 = 223.12, df
= 26, p < .005, RMSEA = .080, SRMR = .067, CFI = .97, NFI = .96, TLI = .96). The
seven-factor solution of the PVS yielded a good fit (χ2 = 1702.692, df = 608,
p < .005, RMSEA = .078, SRMR = .072, CFI = .94, NFI = .91, TLI = .93). Table 1
shows the factor loadings and composite reliability result.
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
12 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
According to our data, the analysis of the composite reliability estimates
demonstrated that both PVS and EIS exhibited strong internal consistency.
For group one (n = 305), construct validity was determined on the basis
of convergent and discriminant validity. The convergent validity of each
factor was tested by assessing the standardised factor loadings (Hair, Black,
Babin, & Anderson, 2010). Discriminant validity was assessed by calculating
the confidence intervals of the interfactor correlation estimates, denoted
as φ (Bagozzi & Yi, 1998). The results indicated that both convergent and
discriminant validity were assured.
Table 1. The CFAs of PVS and EIS (n = 305)
Entrepreneurial
Variable Psychological Variable Scale
Intention Scale
Item/ Intrinsic Extrinsic Positi- Negati- Cogniti- Meta- Self- Convic- Prepara-
Factor motiva- motiva- ve emo- ve emo- ve load cogni- efficacy tion tion
tion tion tion tion tion
1 0.72 0.62 0.81 0.67 0.56 0.53 0.61 0.85 0.90
2 0.74 0.68 0.80 0.73 0.60 0.75 0.77 0.90 0.91
3 0.72 0.51 0.83 0.63 0.87 0.73 0.69 0.78 0.68
4 0.77 0.72 0.85 0.86 0.77 0.76 0.76
5 0.81 0.83 0.80 0.82 0.73
6 0.79 0.83 0.72
7 0.67 0.81
8 0.65 0.74
site re- 0.827 0.635 0.895 0.863 0.820 0.893 0.915 0.909 0.875
Interactive effects
For group two, the hypotheses of interactive effects were tested using LISREL
8.80. Simple slopes and regression lines for each level of the first moderator
(intrinsic motivation) were calculated to further examine the form of the
interaction for interpreting the interactive effects. The results revealed that
the entrepreneurial conviction of CEE students with high intrinsic motivation
(high-IM, one standard deviation above the mean) was lower than that of
those with low intrinsic motivation (low-IM, one standard deviation below the
mean) at low levels of cognitive load. However, at high levels of cognitive load,
the entrepreneurial conviction of the high-IM students largely exceeded that
of the low-IM students (Figure 1). Regarding the interactive effect resulting
from intrinsic motivation and cognitive load on entrepreneurial preparation,
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 13
the pattern was similar (Figure 2). Therefore, Hypothesis 5 was supported.
The interactive effect on entrepreneurial conviction was higher than that on
entrepreneurial preparation.
In addition, the results showed that the entrepreneurial conviction of
the high-IM students was higher than that of the low-IM students when
metacognition was low. However, at high levels of metacognition, the
entrepreneurial conviction of the low-IM students approximated the same
level of the high-IM students (Figure 3). The entrepreneurial conviction
of the high-IM students appeared stable regardless of the level of their
metacognition. The interactive effect resulting from intrinsic motivation and
metacognition on entrepreneurial preparation was nonsignificant. Therefore,
Hypothesis 6 was partially supported.
Simple slopes and regression lines for each level of the second moderator
(negative emotion) were calculated to further examine the interactive effects.
The results showed that the entrepreneurial conviction of CEE students with
low negative emotion (high-NE, one standard deviation above the mean) was
lower than that of those with high negative emotion (low-NE, one standard
deviation below the mean) at low levels of positive emotion. However, at
high levels of positive emotion, the entrepreneurial conviction of the low-NE
students was higher than that of the high-NE students (Figure 4). The levels
of entrepreneurial conviction of middle-NE students were stable regardless
of whether the levels of positive emotion changed. Regarding the interactive
effect resulting from negative and positive emotion on entrepreneurial
preparation, the pattern was similar (Figure 5). The levels of entrepreneurial
preparation of middle-NE students decreased in response to increased levels
of positive emotion. Therefore, Hypothesis 7 was supported.
The results showed that the entrepreneurial conviction of the high-NE
students was lower than that of the low-NE students when self-efficacy was
low. However, at high levels of self-efficacy, the entrepreneurial conviction
of the high-NE students was considerably higher than that of the low-NE
students (Figure 6). In addition, the levels of entrepreneurial preparation
of both high-NE and low-NE students were the same when self-efficacy was
low. At high levels of self-efficacy, the entrepreneurial preparation of the
high-NE students was considerably higher than that of the low-NE students
(Figure 7). Therefore, Hypothesis 8 was supported. The interactive effect
on entrepreneurial conviction was higher than that on entrepreneurial
preparation.
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
14 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Metacognition
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
Figure 1. Plots of the interactive effects of intrinsic motivation and cognitive
load on entrepreneurial conviction (n = 510)
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Metacognition
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
Figure 2. Plots of the interactive effects of intrinsic motivation and cognitive
load on entrepreneurial preparation (n = 510)
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 15
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Metacognition
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
Figure 3. Plots of the interactive effects of intrinsic motivation and metacog-
nition on entrepreneurial conviction (n = 510)
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Cognitive load
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Metacognition
Average-IM
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
Figure 4. Plots of the interactive effects of negative emotion and positive
emotion on entrepreneurial conviction (n = 510)
16 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
noitaraperP
Figure 5. Plots of the interactive effects of negative emotion and positive
emotion on entrepreneurial preparation (n = 510)
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
noitaraperP
Figure 6. Plots of the interactive effects of negative emotion and self-effica-
cy on entrepreneurial conviction (n = 510)
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 17
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Positive emotion
Average-NE
noitcivnoC
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
noitaraperP
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Self-efficacy
Average-NE
Figure 7. Plots of the interactive effects of negative emotion and self-effica-
cy on entrepreneurial preparation (n = 510)
Structural model
The hypotheses were tested using LISREL and by performing structural
equation modelling with maximal likelihood estimation. The results showed
that the model fit was adequate (χ2 = 5332.29, df = 1994, p < .005, RMSEA
= .057, SRMR = .055, CFI = .94, NFI = .91, TLI = .94). The results enabled
explaining a substantial level of variance for entrepreneurial conviction (R2 =
.35), and entrepreneurial preparation (R2 = .34). Figure 8 depicts the structural
model. The solid lines indicate a significant effect, whereas the dotted lines
indicate a nonsignificant effect. Table 2 lists the correlations amongst the
latent independent variables.
18 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
Intrinsic motivation
Extrinsic motivation .14
Positive emotion
Negative emotion Conviction
Cognitive load .05
Metacognition
Self-efficacy
Intrinsic motivation
X Cognitive load .17
Intrinsic motivation Preparation
X Metacognition
Negative emotion
X Positive emotion
Negative emotion
X Self-efficacy
Figure 8. Moderating model depicting the relationship between the psycho-
logical factors and entrepreneurial intention (n = 510)
Table 2. Correlation of latent independent variables
Variables 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Intrinsic motivation 1
Extrinsic motivation .18 1
Positive emotion .60 .45 1
Negative emotion .23 .11 .06 1
Cognitive load .02 .32 .15 .27 1
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 19
Metacognition .71 .21 .50 .29 .12 1
Self-efficacy .73 .18 .55 .30 .09 .74 1
Intrinsic motivation x Cogniti- .12 .10 .00 .20 .21 .11 .06
Intrinsic motivation x Metaco- .07 -.01 .14 .02 .10 .13 .09 -.02
Negative emotion x positive .08 -.01 -.09 .54 .06 .13 .03 .25 .07
Negative emotion x Self-efficacy .04 .14 .02 .33 .14 .06 .02 .17 .25 .57 1
Note: *p < .05.
According to the data, intrinsic motivation positively predicted
entrepreneurial conviction, whereas extrinsic motivation had no significantly
direct effects on both entrepreneurial conviction and preparation. Therefore,
Hypothesis 1 was partially supported. The effect of positive emotion on
entrepreneurial conviction was nonsignificant, whereas the effect of positive
emotion on entrepreneurial preparation was significantly negative. Negative
emotion positively predicted both entrepreneurial conviction and preparation.
Therefore, Hypothesis 2 was partially supported. In addition, the direct
effects of cognitive load on both entrepreneurial conviction and preparation
were nonsignificant, whereas the direct effects of metacognition on both
entrepreneurial conviction and preparation were significant. Therefore,
Hypothesis 3 was partially supported. Finally, self-efficacy positively predicted
both entrepreneurial conviction and preparation. Therefore, Hypothesis 4
was supported.
Discussion
Direct effects
Through the CFA, this study concludes that the entrepreneurial intentions of
Taiwanese CEE students comprise two factors (conviction and preparation),
thus supporting the findings of previous studies (Liñán & Chen, 2009; Wang et
al., 2014). In this study, conviction refers to a strong belief or opinion towards
entrepreneurial career commitment, and preparation refers to the activities
or processes that prepare a person for entrepreneurship.
The current study contributes to an understanding regarding the levels
of influences of psychological factors on the entrepreneurial intentions of
CEE students. According to the results regarding direct effects, self-efficacy
influenced entrepreneurial conviction the most, followed by negative
emotion, intrinsic motivation, and metacognition. By contrast, negative
emotion influenced entrepreneurial preparation the most, followed by
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
20 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
self-efficacy and positive emotion (a negative effect). Previous studies have
indicated that metacognition is necessary for entrepreneurial performance
(Frese, 2006; Haynie et al., 2010), though its effect was significant only on
entrepreneurial conviction in this study. The function of metacognition is
bridging the gap between intention and action (Van Gelderen, 2009), but
its effect was nonsignificant on entrepreneurial preparation; this is a crucial
topic that requires further research.
Regarding practical implications, the results indicate that CEE educators
should encourage students and assist them in building their efficacy to
engage in entrepreneurial activities. Educators should consider linking
their students’ negative emotions and intrinsic motivations to stimulate
their entrepreneurial intentions and foster their entrepreneurial behaviour.
Goethner et al. (2012) indicated that entrepreneurial intentions enabled
forecasting entrepreneurial behaviour. Possible strategies for CEE educators
to enhance student self-efficacy beneficial for fostering entrepreneurial
behaviour include constructing challenging and proximal goals, setting
appropriate task demands and expectations, demonstrating confidence in
students, and promptly recognising and praising effort. Strategies related to
negative and positive emotions can include promoting undesirable attitudes
towards the current status of the job market, unsatisfied quality of life in
the workplace, relieving mental strain towards career choice, and decreasing
the fear of failure in entrepreneurship. Strategies for enhancing intrinsic
motivation can include arousing student curiosity and interest, encouraging
students to work purposefully, offering various self-monitoring tasks, and
encouraging feedback.
Interactive effects
The results of the interactive effect resulting from intrinsic motivation and
cognitive load on entrepreneurial intention reveal that the levels of intention
of high-IM (high intrinsic motivation) students increase in response to
increased levels of cognitive load. However, the levels of intention of low-IM
students decrease in response to increased levels of cognitive load. Therefore,
the entrepreneurial intention of students is greatly influenced by intrinsic
motivation, considering the impact of cognitive load. In addition, the results
of the interactive effect caused by intrinsic motivation and metacognition
on entrepreneurial conviction indicate that the entrepreneurial conviction
of students exhibiting low levels of intrinsic motivation was particularly
beneficial when their metacognitive capacity increased.
The results of the interactive effect caused by negative emotion and
positive emotion on entrepreneurial intention reveal that the levels of
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 21
intention of high-NE (high negative emotion) students decrease in response
to increased levels of positive emotion. However, the levels of intention
of low-NE students increase in response to increased levels of positive
emotion. Therefore, positive emotion may serve as a trigger to facilitate the
entrepreneurial intention of low-NE students, but not of high-NE students.
Furthermore, the results of the interactive effect caused by negative
emotion and self-efficacy on entrepreneurial intention reveal that the levels
of intention of both high-NE and low-NE students increase in response to
increased levels of self-efficacy. The increase of high-NE students’ intention is
stronger than that of low-NE students.
Regarding practical implications, our findings suggest that cognitive load
is not a critical factor affecting entrepreneurial intention, if intrinsic motivation
remains at a high level. Thus, CEE educators should focus on encouraging
low intrinsic-motivation students to increase their metacognitive capacity.
According to the link between entrepreneurial intention and behaviour,
proposed by Goethner et al. (2012), possible strategies for enhancing
metacognition include activating background knowledge, assisting students
in goal setting, facilitating practice in planning and monitoring, and supporting
student self-regulatory processes. Our findings also indicate that negative
emotion reliably predict entrepreneurial intention, but suggest that students
exhibiting various levels of negative emotion require different strategies to
facilitate their entrepreneurial intention. CEE educators should pay attention
not only to negative emotion (such as unsolicited attitudes towards their
current employment status) and self-efficacy but also to the combined
strategy of these two psychological factors to stimulate their entrepreneurial
conviction and pursue their goals.
Conclusion, research limitations, and future research
This study could serve as a reference for initiating a wide exploration of
relevant topics from the perspective of entrepreneurship. The results of this
study provide several valuable conclusions. First, self-efficacy exerted the
strongest direct effects on entrepreneurial conviction, followed by negative
emotion, intrinsic motivation, and metacognition. Negative emotion exerted
the strongest direct effects on entrepreneurial preparation, followed by
self-efficacy and positive emotion. In addition, an increase in cognitive load
increases the entrepreneurial intention of students exhibiting high intrinsic
motivation and reduces the intention of students exhibiting low intrinsic
motivation. An increase in metacognition increases the entrepreneurial
conviction of students exhibiting either high or low intrinsic motivation.
Moreover, an increase in positive emotion decreases the entrepreneurial
Journal of Entrepreneurship Management and Innovation (JEMI),
Volume 11, Issue 2, 2015: 5-29
22 / Interaction of Psychological Factors in Shaping Entrepreneurial Intention Among
Computer and Electrical Engineering Students
intention of students exhibiting high negative emotion and increases the
intention of students exhibiting low negative emotion. An increase in self-
efficacy increases the entrepreneurial intention of students exhibiting either
high or low negative emotion.
Although this study expands the findings of previous research, it is not
without limitations. First, we used self-reported scales for empirical validity
and to simplify the process of administering the surveys; this may have
caused common method bias. The survey employed in this study contained
no sensitive questions, and the consistency of research results between the
CFA in this study and that of previous studies supports the factor structure
of the measures. Based on both studies of Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, and
Podsakoff (2003) and Malhotra, Kim, and Patil (2006), we adopted simple
measures, carefully selected instruments, and offered necessary feedback
after a survey to decrease this bias and to minimize this limitation. Second, we
used the data of 815 CEE students from three universities in Taiwan. Further
studies should use a larger sample or conduct international comparisons
to discuss the possible differences resulting from regional distribution, as
indicated by Obschonka et al. (2013).
Third, we did not adopt the leading established intention models in
entrepreneurship research, such as Shapiro’s entrepreneurial event model
or the models of Ajzen and Fishbein, because we did not want to mimic
current research; rather, we sought to explore alternative approaches. In
addition, because the research subjects of the present study were university
students, the selection of psychological factors in this study was based on
the perspective of educational psychology rather than on entrepreneurship
models or research. Fourth, previous studies have indicated that gender and
cultural concerns influence entrepreneurial intention (Goethner et al., 2012;
Obschonka et al., 2013). Although these concerns were not the focus of the
present study, they warrant further investigation, particularly to test whether
gender plays a moderating role, and to analyse the impact of diverse socio-
cultural and economic factors.
The results of this study provide a basis for further testing the relationship
between entrepreneurial intentions and entrepreneurial practices. Fayolle et
al. (2006) asserted that entrepreneurial intention could function as a catalyst
for action; hence, we considered the following questions. First, how can
entrepreneurial intentions stimulate realistic practices? Second, what if we
treat negative emotion or self-efficacy as a mediator in the structural model?
Third, do domains differ amongst CEE programmes regarding the relationship
between the psychological factors and entrepreneurial intentions examined
in this study? If so, what are the implications of these differences? We
Entrepreneurship: Intentions, Institutional and Process,
Anna Ujwary-Gil, Krzysztof Klincewicz (Ed.)
Chao-Tung Liang, Chaoyun Liang / 23
anticipate that the answers to these questions will yield insights into
educational strategies for CEE education.
Closing remarks
This study is unlike typical studies on entrepreneurship and the CEE engineering
profession in particular. The results provide several contributions to CEE and
entrepreneurship education. First, few studies have thoroughly examined the
relationships between psychological factors and entrepreneurial intention
in CEE students. This study developed a novel approach, provided evidence
regarding this relationship, and discussed the practical implications of the
findings. Second, most relevant studies have examined the direct effects
of selected psychological factors on entrepreneurial intention, whereas
the current study additionally tested the interactive effects amongst
psychological factors on entrepreneurial intention. Third, entrepreneurship
is crucial because it facilitates economic efficiency, innovative product and
service development, and new employment opportunities. Enhancing
student interest and career choice in professional practice is amongst the
primary goals of engineering educators. However, engineering colleges
have not acknowledged the importance of entrepreneurship. This study
clarifies the facilitative role that psychological factors can play in enhancing
entrepreneurial intention.
The findings of this study are sufficiently promising to warrant further
inquiry into this topic. Technopreneurship cannot be achieved without
feasible entrepreneurial intentions. Entrepreneurial intentions cannot
be facilitated without a careful consideration of the interplay of diverse
psychological factors. The findings of this study are intended as a reference
for initiating a wider exploration of this topic.