]hp-oa.scisyhp[
1v0116.9021:viXra
ManuscriptpreparedforNonlin.ProcessesGeophys.
withversion4.2oftheLATEXclasscopernicus.cls.
Date: 16July2018
Interaction of a monopole vortex with an isolated topographic
feature in a three-layer geophysical flow
EvgenyA.Ryzhov1andKonstantinV.Koshel1,2
1V.I.Il‘ichevPacificOceanologicalInstitute,43,BaltiyskayaStreet,Vladivostok,690041,Russia
2FarEasternFederalUniversity,8,SukhanovaStreet,Vladivostok,690950,Russia
Abstract.Intheframeofathree-layerquasi-geostrophican- pographic vortices play a fundamental role in mass, salin-
alyticalmodelofaf-planegeophysicalflow,Lagrangianad- ity and temperature advection in the ocean. Moreover,
vectionbeinginducedbytheinteractionofamonopolevor- topographic vortices are known to influence the dynam-
tex with an isolated topographic feature is addressed. Two ics of different coherent structures, such as unrestrictedly
differentcases whenthe monopolelocateseitherwithin the movingvortices(e.g.,vanGeffenandDavies,1999;Dewar,
upperor the middlelayer are of our interest. In the bottom 2002;AnandMcDonald,2005;CandonandMarshall,2012;
layer, there is a delta function topographic feature, which ZavalaSanso´netal., 2012). Such topographic vortices
generatesa closed recirculationregionin its vicinity due to greatlyvaryintimeandsizescales(BainesandSmith,1993;
the background flow. This recirculation region extends to Baines, 1993). In this paper, however, we are only inter-
themiddleandupperlayers, anditplaystheroleofatopo- ested in meso- and synoptic scale topographicvortices due
graphic vortex. The interaction between the monopole and tothesescalesaregenerallybelievedtobeprevailinginthe
the topographic vortex causes complex, including chaotic, ocean(Cheltonetal.,2011).
advection of fluid particles. We show that the model’s pa- The present paper deals with Lagrangian regular and ir-
rameters, namely, the monopole and topographic vortices’ regular (chaotic) advection being generated by a vortex
15 strengthsandinitial positions, the layers’depthsanddensi- monopole interacting with a topographic vortex. The to-
tiesareresponsibleforthediverseadvectionpatterns.While pographic vortex under investigation is generated by a reg-
thepatternsarerathercomplicated,however,onecansingle ular three-layer f-plane background flow (e.g., Pedlosky,
out two major processes, which mostly govern fluid parti- 1987; Kozlov, 1995) with a delta function bottom ir-
cle advection. The first one is the variation in time of the regularity within the lower layer (e.g., Sokolovskiyetal.,
20 system’sphasespacestructure,sothatwithintheclosedre- 1998; Izrailskyetal., 2004; Kozlovetal., 2005). Then we
gionofthetopographicvortex,thereappearperiodicallyun- embed a monopole singular vortex (e.g., Gryanik, 1983;
closedparticlepathwaysbywhichtheparticlesleavetheto- GryanikandTevs,1989;Gryaniketal.,2000;Carton,2001;
pographicvortex. The second one is chaotic advectionthat Reznik, 2010; ReznikandKizner, 2010) either within the
arisesfromthenonstationarityofthe monopole-topography upper or middle layer. So, these singularities move like
25 interaction. passive tracers along regular background flow stream-lines
Keywords. Three-layerflow,chaoticadvection,monopole- (ReznikandKizner, 2007a,b, 2010), although, generating a
topographyinteraction complex either periodically (for a time-independent back-
ground flow) or quasi-periodically (for a periodically time-
dependentbackgroundflow) velocityfieldinthe vicinityof
themselves. Our main reason for employing such a three-
1 Introduction
layer model (e.g., Sokolovskiy, 1997; RyzhovandKoshel,
2011a) is to study Lagrangian advection being induced by
Generally speaking, topographic vortices are coherent vor-
30 the monopole-topography interaction when the monopole
tical structures appearing as closed recirculation regions 65
being located within either the upper or middle layers.
over bottom features in the ocean and atmosphere. To-
Such monopole positioning can be considered as the sim-
Correspondenceto: E.A.Ryzhov plest models for a surface eddy, and for an interthermo-
(ryzhovea@poi.dvo.ru) clinelens(e.g.,Cartonetal.,2002;WangandDewar,2003;
2 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
Filyushkinetal., 2011; FilyushkinandSokolovskiy, 2011), Substituting(2)into(1),onecanobtainthedetailedpoten-
respectively. However, we should emphasize the paper to tialvorticity,
deal only with surface Lagrangian advection in both cases.
The middle-layer singular monopole appears on the upper120
layerasaregularvortex,sothisconfigurationgeneratesdif- q2 =∆ψ2+(k21ψ1−ψ2(k21+k22)+k22ψ3)+f,
field.
Weinvestigatetwokindsofthemonopole-topographyin- where k1=
teraction,thefirstoneisaninfinity-timeinteractionandthe f2ρ3
.
secondoneis afinite-timeinteraction. Theinfinite-timein-
80 Sinceourstudyconcernsonlythecasesoftheupper-and
teractionmeansthemonopoletomoveinclosedregulartra-
middle-layermonopolepropagation, we set the lower-layer
jectoriesaboutthetopographicvortex’sellipticpointforinfi-
potentialvorticitytobealwaystime-independent. However,
nitetimeduetotheconstancyofthebackgroundflow.How-
either the upper or middle layer potential vorticity has one
ever, if the background flow depends periodically on time,
time-dependentsingular value movingwith the monopole’s
the dynamics of the monopole becomes more complicated.
85 center. Hence,wehavetwosetsofsingularperturbationsof
So that now the monopoleitself can be capturedwithin the
topographicvortexfromthebackgroundflowor,onthecon-
ity.
90 where m,n=1,2, m6=n, µ is the monopole’s strength
Thus, the main aim of the present study is to investigate m
andr∗ is the position of the monopole’ssingularitywithin
Lagrangianadvectionof fluidparticlesoccurringdueto the m
the m-layer, q ∗ is the potential vorticity backgroundvalue,
velocityfield beinggeneratedbythe infiniteandshort-term135 i
monopole-topographyinteractions. and|r i −r∗ m |= (x i −x∗ m ) 2 +(y i −y m ∗) 2 withx i ,y i being
Cartesiancoordiqnatesofafluidparticlewithinthei-layer.
Potentialvorticity(1)shouldsatisfythepotentialvorticity
2 Modelformulation
95 conservationlawineachlayer,
The simplestway to study a quasi-two-dimensionallayered ∂ q +J(ψ ,q )=0. (5)
140 t i i i
geophysicalflowisbyexploitingthepotentialvorticitydefi-
nitionineachlayer. Forabackgroundthree-layerflowunder Toobtainexplicitanalyticalrelationsforstream-functions
therigidlidapproximation,thesedefinitionsread(Pedlosky, ψ i ,onecansplitrelations(3)bymakinguseofthefollowing
1987) procedure(e.g., GryanikandTevs, 1989). First, we rewrite
(3)inamatrixform,
where Ψ= ψ2 , A= k21 −(k21+k22) k22 , and
where i=1,2,3 corresponds to the upper, middle, and    
ψ3 0 k3 −k3
lower layer respectively; q is the i-layer potential vortic-
ity, ∆ψ = ∂vi −∂ui is th
e two-dimensional relative vor-
105 i ∂x ∂y B= − f+q2 . Second, we diagonalize matrix A
ticitywithstream-functionψ i andtwo-dimensionalvelocity  f+q3 
;ζ1,ζ2aretheinterfaceheightsbetweentheupper
throughasimilaritytransformation,A=SJS−1. MatrixS,
and middle, and the middle and lower layers, respectively;
h(x,y)=τδ(r))istheDiracdeltafunctionbottomirregular-
whosecolumnsaretheeigenvectorsofmatrixA,anddiago-
nalmatrixJ,whosemaindiagonalisconsistedoftheeigen-
itywitheffectivevolumeτ;H isthei-layerdepth;f isthe150
110 i valuesofmatrixA,havetheform,
constantCoriolisparameter. Accordingtothepressurecon-
tinuity condition,the interfaceheightscan be written in the 1α1 β1 0 0 0
form(Pedlosky,1987), S= 1α2 β2 , J= 0−k3(α2−1) 0 ,(7)
(g(ρ2−ρ1))
(g(ρ3−ρ2))
whereρ isthei-layerfluiddensity;gisthegravitationalac-
jumps.
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 3
β1 =−k22/k21−β2/k21(−k21−k22+k3(β2−1)), substantiation in, e.g., Izrailskyetal., 2004), where U is a
characteristic velocity, one can formulate the final stream-
functionsofthethree-layermodelwiththemonopolemoving
λ0 = (k1−k3+k21+k22) −4(−k1k3−k3k21+k1k22). withinthem-layer,
Third, we introduce vector Φ such that Ψ = SΦ, ψ
Φ3m , (11)
and obtain from (6) new expression ∆Φ + JΦ =
S−1B, which, taking into consideration relations whereα3=β3=1. So,furtherwewillmakeuseofstream-
α2−β2 β1−α1 α1β2−α2β1 functions(11) with the (10) set of functionsΦ
either for
theupper(m=1)ormiddle(m=2)layermonopolepropa-
1−α2 α1−1 α2−α1 gationcase.
γ =α2−α1+β1−β2+α1β2−α2β1, has the follow- Now, we can introduce certain dimensionless values,
ingdetailedform, whichwill be used furtheras parametersgoverningthe dif-
ferent regimes of Lagrangian advection. Introduce length
number,ε= U ; andaneffectivevolumeofthetopography
as τ=πh0L2
where h0, L are the heightand radiusof an
∆Φ2 −k3(α2−1)Φ2=− [(β2−1)q1+(1−β1)q2+ correspondingcylinder(Sokolovskiyetal.,1998). Thenwe
introducethefollowinggoverningparameters,
170 +(α2−α1)q3]. which characterize the dimensionless topographic vortex
strength the dimensionless monopole vortex strength, re-
The last step is to obtain explicitly barotropic mode Φ1
spectively. Then, by satisfying the quasi-geostrophic re-
and two baroclinic modes Φ2, Φ3. As it has been men-
quirement of h0 ∼O(ε), we set χ=π. Thus, choos-
tioned above, we are interested only in the singular pertur- H3
bations of form (4) (without losing any generality, we put215
ing the following parameters, H1=200m, H2=400m,
the backgroundflow value to be zero, i.e. q ∗ =0 (Kozlov, H3=3000m, ρ1=1026.56kg/m3, ρ2=1027.84kg/m3,
1995; Izrailskyetal., 2004)). Hence, by set
ting boundary
ρ3=1028.32kg/m3,weobtainthecharacteristichorizontal
conditions Φ | =0, and ∂Φ /∂r| =0 to Laplace
topographicvortexscale,L∼1.3·104m.
andHelmholtzequations(9), weobtaintwosetsofGreen’s
function superpositions satisfying system (9) for the upper
3 Equationsofmotion
(m=1) and middle (m=2) layer monopole propagation
Now, by making use of the dimensionless parameters and
(cid:18) advected by the monopole-topography interaction velocity
log(r ) , field. The monopole motion in the m-layer is governedby
(cid:19) 225 thefollowingequationsofmotion,
185 Φ3m =− + f γ ( ( β α (cid:18) (cid:18) 1 2 ( − H − − 3 β α 1 2 ) 1 ) n ) τ τ ( H 1 K − 1 0 (cid:16) α p n ) k µ 3 1 ( K α2 0 (cid:16) − (cid:16) p p 1) k r 3 i (cid:17) (β (cid:19) 2 , −1)r i ∗ 1 (cid:17) (cid:17) + w d d d t t h y er m m ∗ e = m= ∂ψ ∂ 1 m , x ∂ 2 m , y a (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)n x y (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) d = = x y y x = = W m ∗ ∗ m y x m ∗ ∗ m = =− W χ (t x r ) m ∗ ∗ m is V m t r h m ∗ ( e r d m ∗ m im ), en m sionless back-
groundflowvelocity;
(cid:17)(cid:19)
andm,n=1,2,m6=n. q (cid:18)
190 Now,introducinganonvorticalplaneboundarysourceflux (β2−1) (β2−1)
intheform,−Uy,whichdoesnotgenerateanyvorticityand
!!
is compensated by an analogous drain flux (see a detailed
4 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
and r ∗ = (x∗ ) 2 +(y∗ ) 2 is the monopole position with
m=1,2 foqr the upper-and middle-layermonopolemotion,
respectively. System(13) isanelaboratedsystemtogovern
thedynamicsofafluidparticleduetothevelocityfieldbeing
generatedbyanexteriorbackgroundflowintersectingadelta
functionbottomirregularity.Lagrangianadvectionbeingde-
termined by system (13) has been studied recently in the
frameofbarotropic(Sokolovskiyetal.,1998;Izrailskyetal.,
2004; KoshelandPrants, 2006), two-layer (Kozlovetal.,
2005;RyzhovandKoshel,2011b)andthree-layerbaroclinic
geophysicalflows(RyzhovandKoshel,2011a). Inourcase,
however, system (13) governsnot a fluid particle’s motion,
but a singular vortex’s center motion. So, the upper- and
middle-layer monopoles themselves move as fluid particles
due to the topographicvortex velocityfield. Fluid particles
of the monopole-topography interaction system, although,
undergothe joint influenceof both the monopoleand topo-
graphicvortexvelocityfields.
Motion of a fluid particle being influenced by the coop- Fig.1:Azimuthalvelocitiesofthetopographicvortexwithin
erate monopole-topographyvelocity field obeysto the rela- the layers. Curves 1,2,3 correspond to the upper, middle,
tions, and bottom layer, respectively. The horizontal straight line
indicatesconstantbackgroundvelocityvalueW0=0.2π.
255 =W+κ m i r i ∗ m m P im (r i ∗ m )+χ r i i V i (r i ), 275 v co al r u re e sp is on th d e in m g a l x a i y m e a r. l v S al o u , e i o f f o t n h e e a c z h i o m o u se th s al th v e el b o a c c it k y g i r n ou t n h d e
∂ψ flow to satisfy this condition, then three different-size Tay-
i ∂x lorcolumnswilloccurduetothebottomirregularity. These
(x −x ∗ ) x three columnsmay be thoughtof as a discrete Taylor cone.
=− κ m i r∗ m P im (r i ∗ m )+χ r i V i (r i ) , 280 Figure 1 depicts azimuthal velocities V i depending on dis-
(cid:18) im i (cid:19) tance r to the topographic vortex elliptic point. We chose
where r ∗ = (x −x∗ ) 2 +(y −y∗ ) 2 is the fluid particle W0=0.2,χ=0.2π to ensure the mesoscale closed regions
im i m i m toexistintheallthreelayers.Thepoints,wherethehorizon-
positionrelatiqvelytothemonopole’scenterposition,
tal line intersects the azimuthalvelocity curves, correspond
(−1)n 1 to elliptic and hyperboliccritical points of the vortex. Fig-
ure2demonstratesstream-linesoftheresultingtopographic
vortexin the upper-layer. The red curveindicatesthe sepa-
ξ , ratrix dividing the flow into the vortical region and the ex-
!! teriorflow. Sincewe alsoare interestedin themiddle-layer
monopolepropagationcase,thevorticalregionofthemiddle
andm,n=1,2,m6=n. 290
layerisindicatedbythebluedashedcurve.
4 Monopolemotion
5 Fluidparticleadvection
First, we briefly analyze system (13). that governs the
monopole’s dynamics. An elaborated study of this system 5.1 Regularmonopolemotion
has been conducted in (RyzhovandKoshel, 2011a). If the
backgroundexteriorflowisconstant(W=W0),system(13) Now we can analyze fluid particle advection being induced
is integrablein the sense of the stream-line-trajectorycoin- bythemonopole-topographyinteractionvelocityfield. Mo-
cidence(e.g.,Zaslavsky,1998). Duetothebottomtopogra- tionofafluidparticleisgovernedbysystem(14),wherethe
phy is singular, any nonzero value of W0 always produces right part of the relations comprises the monopole motion
a closed Taylor column region called a topographic vortex solution given by (13). First, we consider the periodic so-
within the lower layer. To have such closed regions within lution of (13). This solution, althoughcannotbe expressed
the middle and upper layers, however, the background ve- in an analytical form, is time-dependent with a period be-
locity should be lower than a critical value. This critical ing equal to the time of the monopolepassing a closed tra-
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 5
in certain moment of time. So, to address the question,
how these fluid particles move during the monopole pass-
ingarevolutionaboutthetopography,wecalculatethenum-
ber of the flow’s critical points that appear at each instant
(RyzhovandKoshel,2011b;Ryzhovetal.,2012). Thesim-
pleideaofthisclassificationisthatthemorecriticalpointsof
theirinitialsetsurviveor, in otherworlds, theless topolog-
icalchangesappearduringa monopolerevolutionthe more
regularsystem(14)is.
5.2 Diagramofthenumberofthecriticalpoints
As the monopole moves about topography, the number of
the flow’s regular critical points changes, that results in
the flow topology altering its characteristics in time (e.g.,
ArefandBrons, 1998). It shouldbe mentioned, that, in the
upperlayermonopolepropagationcase,onesingularcritical
pointcorrespondingtothemonopole’scenteralwaysexists,
Fig. 2: Topographicvortexstream-linesfortheupperlayer.350 so, we have excluded it from the consideration. Although,
Theredcurveindicatestheseparatrix.Thedashedbluecurve inthemiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase, nosingular
correspondstothemiddlelayerseparatrix. pointsoccurwithin theupper-layervelocityfielddueto the
singularmiddle-layermonopoleappearsas a regularone in
theupperlayer. So,makinguseoftheintroducedclassifica-
jectory within the separatrices shown in 2. Hence, system355 tion,wepresentdiagramsofthenumberoftheregularcriti-
(14) is a dynamical system with one and a half degrees of calpointsintheupper-layermonopolepropagationcaseand
freedom, that permits to occur the fluid particle irregular inthemiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase,respectively,
dynamics which is conventionally called chaotic advection depending on monopole’s strength κ and initial position y.
(Aref,1984;Wiggins,1992;Aref,2002). Chaoticadvection These diagrams depict by color how many regular critical
manifestsitselfthroughexponentialdivergenceofclosetra-360 pointsappearatthebeginningofthemonopolerotation(ini-
jectories in a finite time (e.g., LichtenbergandLieberman, tialcriticalpoints)andatthetimethemonopolepassesahalf
1983;Zaslavsky,1998). Theeasiestwaytodemonstratethe ofitsrotationperiod(half-periodcriticalpoints). Figure4a,
chaotic advectionmanifestationis byconstructingPoincare´ and fig. 4b correspond to the upper-layer monopole prop-
sections of system (14). Figure 3a shows a Poincare´ sec- agationcase and to the middle-layermonopolepropagation
tion as κ1=0.01, y
∗ (0)=−4, correspondingto frequency365 case,respectively.
ω=0.1611 of monopole rotation along an orbit shown in Now, we offer a detailed explanation for the diagrams.
fig. 2. κ<0regioncorrespondstocounter-rotationofthemonopole
That half degree of freedom corresponds to a time- andtopographicvortex,andκ>0correspondstoco-rotation
dependentperturbation,whichconcerningsystem(14)isthe ofthemonopoleandtopographicvortex. First, weconsider
monopole motion term comprising strength κ m . However, 370 fig. 4a depicting the diagram associated with the upper-
this monopole strength is not the only parameter greatly layermonopolepropagationcase. Figure5showstheflow’s
affecting Lagrangian advection, the initial position of the stream-lines at the initial stage of monopole motion and at
monopole is also of great importance. As the initial posi- the half-periodstage. The redcurvesare the monopoletra-
tionparameter,wechoosethepositionsonthey-axisdueto jectories, and the dashed blue curve correspondsto the un-
allthestream-linesshowninfig. 2intersectthisline.Figures perturbedtopographicvortexseparatrix.
3b,cshowthesystem(14)phasespaceequivalentstructures Also, as a Lagrangian advection measure, we have cal-
for differentmonopoleinitial positions, nevertheless,corre- culated the escaping time (KozlovandKoshel, 1999, 2000;
sponding to the same stream-line. Hence, the positions on Izrailskyetal.,2004),whichisdeterminedasthetimeafluid
they-axiscorrespondtoallthefrequenciesofthemonopole particle needs to be carried away by the exterior flow from
rotationabouttopography.Thus,furtherwewilladdresshow theunperturbedtopographicvortexregion. Thismeasureis
themonopole’sstrengthandinitialpositionparametersaffect ananaloguefortheLyapunovexponentanditshowswhere
thefluidparticledynamics. Lagrangianadvectionprogressesfasterorslower. Thus, we
The Poincare´ section analysis is a very useful technique have uniformly distributed within the separatrix 104 mark-
to estimate which part of fluid particles is involved either ers, and, then, takeninto considerationthetime theywould
in regular advection or in chaotic advection, however, this needtocrossthelinefarenoughoutofthevortexinteraction
technique fails to show what happens with fluid particles (line x=5). The escaping time distributions are shown in
6 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
Fig. 3: Equivalent Poincare´ sections of system (14) for the same values of κ=0.01 and the same values of perturbation
frequencyωbutdifferentmonopoleinitialpositions(x ∗ ,y ∗ ).
fig. 6,whereunityofthetimeisequaltothecorresponding
periodofamonopolerevolution.Ageneralfeatureofallthe
subfiguresis the almost circle areasof long-livefluid parti-
cles. Theseareascorrespondtothemonopoleregion,which
is veryintense dueto the singularity. Hence, fluid particles
withintheseareasmovemostlyregular(RyzhovandKoshel,
2011b),and,therefore,theydonotleavethetopographicvor-
texregion.
The blue color region corresponds to a strong influence
of the monopole motion. At the initial stage of monopole
motion,therearethreeregularcriticalpointstoformahete-
roclinicstructure(seefig. 5a). Thetopographicvortexcan-
notbedistinctlyidentifiedduetonohyperbolicpointcorre-
spondstotheunperturbedhyperbolicpoint. So,thiscaseof
monopole-topographyinteractioncannotbe consideredas a
perturbation of the topographic vortex. Moreover, this ini-
(a) upper-layer monopole (b) middle-layer monopole
tial stream-line picture resembles a counter-rotating dipole
propagationcase propagationcase
structure(e.g.,Voropayevetal., 2001;Ryzhov, 2011). This
structure changingin time results in that, at the half-period
Fig.4: Numberoftheflow’sregularcriticalpointsbycolor. stage,therearealsothreeregularcriticalpointstoformtwo
Blue − 3 initial and 3 or 5 half-period points; purple − 5 homoclinic structures each associated either with the topo-
initial and 5 half-periodpoints, grey − 3 initial and 3 half- graphicorwiththemonopolevortices(seefig. 5b). Dueto
periodpointsred−3initialand1half-periodpoints;green thattopologicalalteration,fluidparticleadvectionisveryef-
− 1 initial and 1 half-periodpoints. Yellow − 6 initialand410 fective. Mostparticles are carriedaway within 5 monopole
2 half-period points, orange − 4 initial and 2 half-period revolutions(seefig. 6a).
points,brown−2initialand2half-periodpoints The purple colorregion correspondsto a moderate influ-
enceofthemonopolemotion. Attheinitialstage, thereare
fiveregularcriticalpointstoformbothoneheteroclinicand
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 7
one homoclinic structures (see fig. 5c). This homoclinic one elliptic point, which is formed by the merger, and one
structurealmostcoincideswiththeunperturbedtopographic hyperbolicpoint. Also, the lackofa singularpointleadsto
vortexseparatrix,thatindicatesthiscasecanbeconsideredas thatLagrangianadvectionismuchmoreregularincompari-
a perturbationof thetopographicvortex. Atthehalf-period sonwiththatconsideredabove.
stage, thestream-linepictureappearsasalmostthe sameas The yellow color region corresponds to six initial regu-
in the aforementionedone of the blue color region(see fig. lar critical points (see fig. 7a) and two half-period critical
5d).Lagrangianadvectionprogressesalthoughlessefficient, points(seefig. 7b),thatbothcorrespondtothetopographic
but still veryfast and it extendson the whole separatrixre- vortexwiththemonopolevortexbeingdisappearedsincethe
gion. Nostagnationzoneappearswithintheregion(seefig. velocityofsurroundingflowistoohighforaclosedcircula-
6b). tionregiontobeformed. Thepositionofthecorresponding
The grey color region correspondsto the least monopole middle-layermonopolevortexismarkedbythecross. Such
influence. This positive κ region differstopologicallyfrom ahalf-periodstream-lineportraitisuniversalforallthecolor
thosepresented. Duetothevorticesareco-rotating,theini- regionsshown in fig. 7b. The correspondingescapingtime
tial topologicalstructureappearsasa co-rotatingdipoleen- distribution is shown in fig. 8a. There is a big stagnation
velopedbyacommontopographicvortexseparatrix(seefig. region with mostly regular advection corresponding to the
5e).So,thisstructurecanbeconsideredasatopographicvor- lowerclosedregionshowninfig. 7a.
texwithadoublecenter.Althoughthisdoublecentergreatly Theorangecolorregionisarrangedastridetheκ=0line.
perturbsthe fluid particle dynamics, the structure of the to- Thisregioncorrespondstotheexistenceofthreeinitialcriti-
pographicvortexcan be revealedduringa whole monopole calpoints. Thedifferencebetweenthenegativeandpositive
revolution(see fig. 5f). Duetothe existenceoftwoalways orange color region initial stream-line portraits is shown in
435 unbrokencenters, fluid particles in the vicinity of the topo- 490 fig. 7c,d. Both the corresponding half-period stream-line
graphicvortexcentermovealmostregular,however,thesur- portraits,however,appearasalmostthesameasthatshown
roundingfluidiscarriedawayveryfast(seefig. 6c). in fig. 7b. Since initially two vortex structures can be reli-
Theredcolorregioncorrespondstoa transitionalcaseof ably identified, and at half-period stage all these structures
the monopole-topographyinteraction. Initially, the stream- merge, the escaping time distribution shows very effective
440 line picture appears as a co-rotating dipole structure (see 495 and intense advection with no stagnation regions progress-
fig. 5g),although,duringamonopolerevolution,thedipole ing. Figures8c,ddepicttheescapingtimedistributioninthe
structurebreaks,so,thesingularmonopoleabsorbsthetopo- negativeandpositiveκcases,respectively.
graphicvortexellipticpointandbecomesanewcenterofthe The brown color region corresponds to the existence of
topographicvortexforacertaintime. Duringthistimespan, two initialand half-periodcriticalpoints. Themiddle-layer
445 Lagrangianadvectionwithinthetopographicvortexwiththe 500 monopole does not induce a closed region within the up-
new singular center is rather regular (see fig. 5h). How- per layer. Despite that, the middle-layer monopole does
ever,duringawholemonopolerevolution,almostallthefluid greatly perturb fluid particle advection. The corresponding
fromthetopographicvortexiscarriedaway(seefig. 6d). stream-line portrait does not change topologically during a
Thegreencolorregioncorrespondstothecapturingofthe monopole revolution and it appears as almost the same as
450 monopoletobeasatopographicallytrappedvortexwiththe 505 that shown in fig. 7b. However, on both sides of the κ=0
singular monopole’s center playing the role of a new topo- line, the advectionefficiencyis verydifferent. In the κ<0
graphic vortex center. Both at the initial and half-period zone,advectionisveryirregular(seefig. 8d)duetocounter-
stages, the stream-line portraits comprise only one regular rotation of the middle-layer monopole and the topographic
criticalpointthatcorrespondsto hyperbolicpointofthe to- vortex. On the other hand, in the κ>0 zone, advection is
455 pographicvortex.Theinitialstream-lineportraitisshownin 510 mostly regular, a big stagnation regionappearsin regionof
fig. 5i, while the half-periodstream-lineportraitappearsas thetopographicvortex(seefig. 8e),duetoco-rotationofthe
almostthesameasthatshowninfig. 5j. Thus,thiscasecan middle-layermonopoleandthetopographicvortex.
bethoughtofasthetopographictrappingofamonopolevor- Further, we study how irregular motion of the monopole
tex.Lagrangianadvection,inthiscase,differsinsignificantly toinfluenceLagrangianadvection
fromthecasepreviouslyaddressed(seefig. 6e).
Now, we consider the diagram shown in fig. 4b for the 5.3 Irregularmonopolemotion
middle-layer monopole propagationcase. The main differ-
encefromtheupper-layermonopolepropagationcase is, in In this paragraph, we analyze fluid particle advection be-
this case, no singular points appear within the upper-layer ing induced by a non-periodic perturbation consisting of
velocity field, so, the monopolevortex appearsas a regular periodic background flow oscillation and non-periodic part
one and as the regular topographic vortex also can be bro- due to monopole irregular motion within the topographic
ken. Hence,amergerofthevorticescanappearduetoboth vortex. That irregular monopole motion is due to the
vortices being regular. This regularity leads to all the half- monopole’s singular center moving as a fluid particle in
period stream-line pictures to appear almost the same with the periodically driven velocity field of the topographic
8 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
(a) initial stage for (b) half-period stage for (c) initial stage for the (d) half-period stage for
the blue color region the blue color region purple color region the purple color region
(e) initial stage for (f) half-period stage for (g) initial stage for (h) half-period stage
the grey color region the grey color region the red color region for the red color region
(i) initial stage for (j) half-period stage for
the green color region the green color region
Fig.5:Stream-linesoftheflowintheupper-layermonopolepropagationcase. Redcurvecorrespondstothemonopolemotion
trajectory.Dashedbluecurveisthetopographicvortexunperturbedseparatrix.
vortex, which is known to produce the irregular dynam- dynamics, resulting in certain number of particles to leave
ics(e.g.,Sokolovskiyetal.,1998;KozlovandKoshel,2001; the topographic vortex region. However, in our numerical
Izrailskyetal., 2004, 2008; Kosheletal., 2008). Strictly simulation, we chose a very small perturbation magnitude
speaking, if one set the background flow to oscillate peri- (µ =0.01), so there are very few such particles. So, by
odically, makinguseofsuchaconfiguration,westudyLagrangianad-
vection being mostly induced by the short-term monopole-
topographyinteraction.
whereµ , andν arethemagnitudeandfrequencyofthe Figure 9 depicts an example of fluid particle advection
backgroundflowoscillation,thensystem(13)becomesasys- being generated by the short-term interaction, while the
tem with one and a half degree of freedom permitting the monopole accomplishes a few revolutions within the topo-
chaotic dynamicsto occur. Hence, with such an oscillating graphicvortex. Figure 9a showsthe initial configurationof
backgroundflow, the monopolecan startmovingoutof the redandgreenmarkerscorrespondingtothetopographicand
topographic vortex, and then it can be trapped temporarily monopolevortexregions,respectively. The unperturbedto-
by the topography. And, on the contrary, if the monopole pographic vortex region is uniformly filled in with 104 red
starts moving within the topographic vortex, it now can be markers. Also, 1.5·10 3 green markers are placed to dis-
carriedawaybytheexteriorflow.Itshouldbementionedthat tinguish the monopole vortex region. The monopole with
thebackgroundflowoscillationalsoaffectsthefluidparticle strengthκ=0.1startsmovingoutofthetopographicvortex
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 9
Fig.6:Escapingtimedistributionintheupper-layermonopolepropagationcase.
the trajectory of the monopole’s center). A great deforma-
tioncausedbythemonopoleisclearlyseen. Figure9dillus-
trates the particle distribution after the monopolehas made
threewholerevolutionsaboutthetopography.Fewredmark-
ersfromtheinitialdistributionhavestayedwithinthetopo-
graphicregion.Lastfig.9edepictsthemonopoleleavingthe
topographicvortexregionafterfourrevolutions.
Figure 10 also depicts a series of marker scattering pat-
(a) initial stage for the (b) half-period stage for terns, but for the middle-layer monopole propagation case.
yellow color region the yellow color region Inthiscase,themonopolestartsmovingatthepositionwith
coordinates x=−1.18,y=−8 and it appears as a regular
vortexwithintheupperlayer. Itresultsinthataclosedrecir-
culationregioncorrespondingtothemonopoleceasestoex-
istatthehalf-periodstage. Hence,thegreenmarkersmostly
leave the monopole region (see fig. 10c). However, when
theclosed recirculationregionappearsagain(see fig. 10d),
the monopole captures a great deal of the red markers ini-
tially associated with the topographic vortex. Thus, during
the topographycapturing, the monopole encloses some red
(c) initial stage for the neg- (d) initial stage for the pos-
markers,thenafterbeingcarriedawayfromthetopographic
ative orange color region itive orange color region 580
vortex,itadvectsthemtotheinfinity(seefig. 10e).
Figures 9 and 10 also clearly shows that the particle ad-
vection is greatly affected to the number of monopole rev-
Fig.7:Stream-linesoftheflowinthemiddle-layermonopole olutions about the topography. The longer the monopole
propagation case. Red curve corresponds to the monopole revolvesaboutthe topographythe more effective advection
motiontrajectory. Dashedbluecurveisthetopographicvor- is. Toestimatethatshort-termmonopoleinfluence,wehave
texunperturbedseparatrix. performed a numerical simulation, in which we calculate
the number of fluid particles escaping the topographic vor-
texwithrespecttothenumberofthemonopolerevolutions.
(see fig. 9a) at the position with coordinates x=−2,y= Since the monopole motion is irregular, two initially close
−8.4. Then, the monopole vortex is captured by the topo- monopoletrajectorieswindthe topographyverydifferently,
graphic vortexdue to chaotic advection(see fig. 9b). Next withdifferentrevolutionnumbers.Hence,itisimpossibleto
fig. 9c shows the marker distribution as the monopole has predicthowmanyrevolutionscompletethe monopolestart-
passedahalfofrotationalperiod(theblackcurvepointsout ingatanewinitialposition. Thus,asinitialpositionsforthe
10 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
Fig.8: Escapingtimedistributioninthemiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase.
Fig. 9: Upper-layermonopolepropagationcase. Particle scatteringattheshort-termmonopole-topographyinteraction. Red
and green markers correspond to the topographic and monopole vortex regions, respectively, the blue dashed curve is the
unperturbedtopographicvortexseparatrix,andtheblackcurvepointsoutthetrajectoryofthemonopole’scenter. Subfigures
depictmarkersdistributionatthecorrespondinginstantintime.
monopole,we havechosentwo intervalsofinitialpositions if different initial positions correspond to equal number of
(x=−2,y∈[−8.42;−8.38]) for the upper-layer monopole monopolerevolutionsN,thenadvectionefficiencyE issuf-
propagation case, and (x=−1.18,y∈[−8.02;−7.98]) for ficientlysimilar.
themiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase.
Figure 11 depicts advection efficiency E in the upper-
Thenwehavefollowedtheevolutionofallthemonopoles layer monopole propagation case (see fig. 11a,b), and in
startingattheseinitialposition,calculatingrevolutionnum- themiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase(seefig. 11c,d).
ber N of each of those monopoles, and obtained the ad- Byanalyzingthesesubfigures,onecandrawseveralconclu-
vectionefficiencythroughexpressionE=n /n ,wheren sions. First, N =0.5 corresponds to the case of monopole
is the number of advected out of the topographic vortex passing very close to the topographic vortex but not being
markers, i.e. the markers that have crossed line x=5, and captured by it. In this case, although, if monopole is very
n =104 isthe initialmarkerdistributionnumber. Itis also weak (κ=0.01), it causes a great deal of fluid particle ad-
worth noting, that although some of these monopoles have vection. A fewmonopolerevolutionsareenoughforallthe
revolved about the topographyequal times, Lagrangianad- particles from the topographic vortex region to be carried
vectionbeinggeneratedbythesemonopolesismostlyequiv- away. Second, the signof the monopoleself-rotationisnot
alentineachcase(seefig. 11). Indeed,eachpointinfig. 11 themainreasonoftheadvectionefficiency,butthisefficiency
corresponds to one initial position of the monopole. Thus, is mostly determined by |κ|). Third, evidently, a singular
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 11
Fig.10:Thesameasinfig. 9forthemiddle-layermonopolepropagationcase.
tionthanaregularone(seefig. 11c,d). vanGeffen,J.H.G.M.andDavies,P.A.:Interactionofamonopo-
larvortexwithatopographic ridge, Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid
6 Conclusions Aref,H.: Stirringbychaoticadvection,J.FluidMech.,143,1–21,
1984.
In the frame of a three-layer geophysical flow model, La- Aref,H.: Thedevelopment ofchaoticadvection, Phys.Fluids,14,
monopole vortex interacting with a topographic vortex has Aref,H.andBrons,M.:Onstagnationpointsandstreamlinetopol-
been addressed. Two cases of the monopole propagation670
S0022112098001761,1998.
have been investigated: the upper-layermonopolepropaga-
Wang, G. H. and Dewar, W. K.: Meddy-seamount interac-
tion, and middle-layermonopolepropagation. Such advec-
635 tions: Implications for the Mediterranean salt tongue, J.
tionhasbeenshowntobedeterminedbytwomostsignificant
processes. First, chaotic advection due to the nonstationar-
033h2446:MIIFTMi2.0.CO;2,2003.
ityofthemonopole-topographyinteraction,and,second,the Dewar, W. K.: Baroclinic eddy interaction with isolated to-
time. Cooperative influence of these processes causes very 1520-0485(2002)032h2789:BEIWITi2.0.CO;2,2002.
effectiveLagrangianadvection.Twocontrollingparameters, Carton, X.: Hydrodynamical modeling of oceanic vortices, Surv.
namely, the monopole’s strength and initial position have680 Geophys.,22,179–263,2001.
beenanalyzed,and,onthebasisofthenumberofregularcrit- Carton, X., Che´rubin, L., Paillet, J., Morel, Y., Serpette, A., and
Cann, B. L.: Meddy coupling with a deep cyclone inthe Gulf
icalpointsassessment,aclassificationofdifferentregimesof
Lagrangianadvectionhasbeenpresented.
645 00028-3,2002.
By adding a nonstationary term to the background flow,
Reznik, G. and Kizner, Z.: Two-layer quasi-geostrophic singular
we have analyzed a short-term monopole-topographyinter-
vorticesembeddedinaregularflow.Part1.Invariantsofmotion
action.Ifthemonopolepassesnearlythetopographicvortex,
itstillcausesagreatdealofparticlesinitiallylocatedwithin 10.1017/S0022112007006386,2007a.
650 the topographicvortexto be carriedaway. If the monopole Reznik, G. and Kizner, Z.: Two-layer quasi-geostrophic singular
iscapturedbythetopographicvortex,thenitrotatescertain vorticesembeddedinaregularflow.Part2.Steadyandunsteady
times aboutthe topography,and, finally, is carriedaway by driftofindividualvorticesonabeta-plane,J.FluidMech.,584,
vortexalmostcompletelyrenewsitsfluid. Candon, S.andMarshall, J. S.: Vortexringdeformation, capture,
andentrainmentbyacolumnarvortex,Phys.Fluids,24,093604,
RFBR,researchprojectsNos.: 11-05-00025-A,11-01-12057-OFI- Baines, P. G.: Topographic effects in stratified flows, Cambridge
M,12-05-31011. UniversityPress,1993.
Kozlov,V.F.:Backgroundcurrentsingeophysicalhydrodynamics,
Izv.Atmos.Ocean.Phys.,31,245–250,1995.
References 700 Reznik, G.M.: Dynamics of localizedvorticesonthebetaplane,
Izv.Atmos.Ocean.Phys.,46,784–797,2010.
An, B.W.andMcDonald, N.R.: Coastalcurrentsandeddiesand Ryzhov,E.A.: Onchangingthesizeoftheatmosphereofavortex
theirinteractionwithtopography,Dyn.Atmos.Oceans,40,237– pairembedded inaperiodicexternal shear flow, Phys.Lett.A,
12 E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction
(a)upper-layerpositiveκmonopole (b)upper-layernegativeκmonopole
(c)middle-layerpositiveκmonopole (d)middle-layernegativeκmonopole
Fig.11:LagrangianadvectionefficiencyE dependingonmonopolerevolutionnumberN.
Baines,P.G.andSmith,R.B.:Upstreamstagnationpointsinstrat- mentinanoscillatorybarotropicflowoveranaxisymmetricsub-
10.1016/0377-0265(93)90005-R,1993. Ryzhov,E.A.andKoshel,K.V.:TheEffectsofChaoticAdvection
Ryzhov,E.A.,Koshel,K.V.,andCarton,X.J.: Passivescalarad- in a Three-Layer Ocean Model, Izv. Atmos. Ocean. Phys., 47,
2012.01.005,2012. regionofatopographicallytrappedvortex,Geophys.Astrophys.
boundaryonchaoticadvectioninthesimplestmodelofatopo- 2011b.
graphicvortex,Izv.Atmos.Ocean.Phys.,41,217–227,2005. ZavalaSanso´n,L.,Aguiar,A.C.B.,andvanHeijst,G.J.F.: Hori-
Koshel,K.V.,Sokolovskiy, M.A.,andDavies,P.A.: Chaoticad- zontalandverticalmotionsofbarotropicvorticesoverasubma-
fluiddyn.2008.03.001,2008. Wiggins, S.: Chaotic Transport in Dynamical Systems, Springer-
Reznik, G. M. and Kizner, Z.: Singular vortices in regular Verlag,NewYork,1992.
s00162-009-0150-5,2010. 2-levelmodeloftheatmosphere(ocean),Izvestiya,Atmospheric
Koshel, K. V. and Prants, S. V.: Chaotic advection in andOceanicPhysics,19,227–240,1983.
PU2006v049nl1ABEH006066,2006. vorticesinaN-levelmodeloftheatmosphere(ocean),Izvestiya,
Kozlov, V. F.and Koshel, K. V.: Barotropicmodel of chaotic ad- AtmosphericandOceanicPhysics,25,179–188,1989.
vectioninbackgroundflows,Izv.Atmos.Ocean.Phys.,35,638– Chelton, D. B., Schlax, M. G., and Samelson, R.M.: Global ob-
648,1999. servations of nonlinear mesoscale eddies, Prog. Oceanogr., 91,
the barotropic background flow, Izv. Atmos. Ocean. Phys., 36, Gryanik, V. M., Doronina, T. N., Olbers, D. J., and Warncke,
119–128,2000. T. H.: The theory of three-dimensional hetons and vortex-
E.A.RyzhovandK.V.Koshel:Monopole-topographyinteraction 13
dominated spreading inlocalized turbulent convection inafast
1017/S002211200000183X,2000.
Pedlosky, J.: Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 2 ed., Springer, New
York,1987.
Zaslavsky,G.: PhysicsofChaosinHamiltonianDynamics,Impe-
rialCollegePress,London,1998.
Izrailsky,Y.G.,Kozlov,V.F.,andKoshel,K.V.:Somespecificfea-
turesofchaotizationofthepulsatingbarotropicflowoverelliptic
10.1063/1.1767095,2004.
Izrailsky,Y.G.,Koshel,K.V.,andStepanov,D.V.: Determination
of theoptimal excitationfrequency range inbackground flows,
Voropayev, S. I., Smirnov, S. A., and Brandt, A.: Dipolar eddies
1416499,2001.
Filyushkin, B. N., Sokolovskiy, M. A., Kozhelupova, N. G., and
Vagina, I. M.: Reflection of Intrathermocline Eddies on the
OceanSurface,DokladyEarthSciences,439,986989,2011.
Filyushkin,B.N.andSokolovskiy,M.A.: Modelingtheevolution
ofintrathermoclinelensesintheAtlanticOcean,J.Mar.Res.,69,
191–220,2011.
Lichtenberg, A. and Lieberman, M.: Regular and Stochastic Mo-
tion,Springer-Verlag,NewYork,1983.
Sokolovskiy, M.A.: Stabilityof anaxisymmetricthree-layer vor-
tex,Izv.Atmos.Ocean.Phys.,33,19–30,1997.
Sokolovskiy, M. A., Zyryanov, V. N., and Davies, P. A.: On the
influenceofanisolatedsubmergedobstacleonabarotropictidal
03091929808245466,1998.