]hcem-tats.tam-dnoc[
1v7300130/tam-dnoc:viXra
Introduction to Statistical Physics outside Physics
Dietrich Stauffer
Institute for Theoretical Physics, Cologne University
D-50923 Ko¨ln, Euroland
Abstract: We review the possibilities and difficulties for statistical physicists if they apply their
methods to biology, economics, or sociology. WARNING: I report opinions, not simulations.
Keywords: Biophysics, econophysics, sociophysics.
1 Introduction
The basic theorem of interdisciplinary research states: Physicists not only know everything;
theyknoweverythingbetter. Thistheoremiswrong; itisvalidonlyforcomputationalstatistical
physicists like me. (Some conference speakers still seemed to believe in the theorem; they can
discuss it in their papers.) Here I present my personal view about the application of statistical
physics (simulation) methods to fields outside physics like biology, economic, sociology and
even psychology.
2 Possible criticism
Typical criticisms levelled against physicists outside physics are ”Biology is more complicated
than physics, physicists neglect details.” True; but the Earth is more complicated than a point
mass; nevertheless Kepler’s laws are quite accurate and were very useful. Physicists should try
to find the simplest model giving the desired result, and not to make the model more realistic
only for the sake of realism. Of course, Kepler knew that the Earth was not a point. He
knew of the 30-year war destroying central Europe during his later life, for he was an unlucky
astronomer advising general Wallenstein who was murdered. Kepler died when he tried to get
his astrologer’s salary from the imperial parliament. So, Kepler could have tried to build the
large size of the Earth into his description, to deal with the different countries of Europe, and
to understand the religious differences which caused the war to start. But this would have
been a hindrance, not a help, for the understanding of planetary motion. Only much later,
thanks to Newton and others, did mankind understand that a spherically extended mass has a
gravitational field equal to that caused if the whole mass would have compressed to a point in
the center of the sphere. And even later, thanks to Einstein’s General Relativity Theory, did
experts understand how the mass affects the metric of time and length through curved space.
For the planetary motion, Einstein’s theory then explained minor deviations from Kepler’s laws
like the rotation of Mercury’s perihel. Perhaps the now started century will explain how the
Higgs particle produces the mass, and bring new effects. But the basic Kepler laws fromaround
1610 are still the starting point of modern physics. Of course, if you want to be a geographer,
the assumption of a point-like Earth is dangerous for your employment: The same model may
be good for some and bad for other purposes.
”Computers know only 0 and 1.” Wrong; many shades of grey are possible, and integers
on 32-bit computers vary between -2147483648 and +2147483647. I don’t know a human
being who can distinguish anything with an accuracy of 10 . But when dealing with a new
problem, why not first assume that the state variables can only be +1 and 1 (1 and 0 for
informatics). Monte Carlo simulations with discrete Ising models can be done for thousand
times bigger systems than in molecular dynamics studies on a continuum (10 versus 10 ).
Whoever studied newspapers in the last decades came across the difficulties of defining when a
person is dead, allowing the organs to be transplanted. Our hair and nails still grow long after
our hearts stop beating; some readers of my papers claim my beer belly grew after my brain
stopped working. Nevertheless, newspapers report the death of a person, and statistical offices
prepare life tables as if life (+1) and death ( 1) are the only possibilities without anything
in between. It is animals like Caenorhabditis elegans with its ”dauer” state (some sort of
hibernation) for which intermediate states are very important, not human beings. Finally,
many social problems are connected with more than one variable, but so are many models of
physicists. Seven-dimensional percolation and five-dimensional Ising models show that physics
is not one-dimensional, and neither is immunology where a a shape space of high dimensions
was suggested already in 1979 before such models could easily be simulated. (In contrast to
widespread belief, the Ising model doesnot only allow+1 and 1 asstatevariables. Much work
has been done on Blume-Capel-Rys-Blume-Emery-Griffiths models where also zero is allowed.)
”Humans arenot numbers.” Wrong; we just don’t want to be treated as numbers, and prefer
a name tag instead of a number for identification. But reality is different: US citizens have
a social security number, I have a national identity card with a computer-readable number;
only with a computer-readable passport can I now enter the USA; my employer, my health
insurance and my bank all gave me a number. Whether I smoke, drink wo´dka in the morning,
and eat steaks every evening influences my date of death, and neither employer nor health
insurance know about it. Nevertheless, by averaging over millions of people, these personal
details cancel out. Similarly, the decision to get a child is highly private, but nevertheless I
am most likely right if I claim that in 2004 hundreds of thousands of children will be born
in Germany. If today’s pension plans are in trouble it is because the average life expectancy
increases and the average number of births per women decreased, not because of individual
fluctuations. Thus humans and atoms may be described by the same method, if we look at
averages. And besides the above rather recent examples we have astronomer Halley trying to
establish the first human life tables three centuries ago, and Greek philosopher Empedokles
claiming more than two millennia ago (according to Mimkes) that some people are like water
and wine, mixing easily, while others are like water and oil, not mixing.
”Physics is different from Sociology and/or Economy.” True; but Schelling [1] in first issue
of J. Mathematical Sociology simulated something like the dilute Ising model with Kawasaki
kinetics to explain black ghettos in USA; and Nobel laureate Stigler [2] published market
simulations in 1964 before any conference participant wrote the first simulation paper. So
why cannot we follow them? Indeed, our problem is much more than we may not know such
pioneering papers in non-physics journals, and thus erroneously believe that we bring new
concepts to such fields with our physics experience.
3 Do other fields welcome physicists?
From my own experience in bio-, econo- and socio-physics my answer depends on the field;
psychophysics [3] is too new for me.
3.1 Economics: yes
Economy Nobel laureate Harry Markowitz [4] wrote: “I believe that microscopic market simu-
lations have an important role to play in economics and finance. If it takes people from outside
economics and finance – perhaps physicists – to demonstrate this role, it won’t be for the first
time that outsiders have made substantial contributions to these fields.” Economics professor
ThomasLuxknowsalotaboutphysics; onewediscussed whether todoaGrassberger-Procaccia
analysis of some financial data and then I realized that in this case he, the economist, would
have to explain to me, the physicist, how to apply this physics method. Economics professor
Haim Levy wrote papers and a book with theoretical physicist Sorin Solomon and with his son
Moshe Levy, a doctoral student of physics who is now economics professor.
Kert´esz reported that at a recent econophysics conference the economists criticized the
physicists for re-inventing the economic wheels. This I count as acceptance, not as rejection: If
A claims do have done first what B reports now, then A regards this B problem as important.
Somewhat similarly, when in our university magazine I reported about Ehrenstein’s simulations
oftheTobintax,asenioreconomicsprofessorcriticizedme, perhapscorrectly, forhavingignored
the dangers of government currency controls, as Germany had it during the Nazi dictatorship;
again, the problem was taken serious by an economist.
3.2 Sociology: yes, if computational sociologists
A year after I started to simulate Sznajd models, I presented a review at the fifth conference
on simulating society, SIMSOC V, in Poland, organized by psychologist A. Novak. I felt quite
at home with some of the talks of non-physicists, with simple models giving clear results.
In contrast the international Physics Computing 2001 meeting two weeks earlier was full of
complicated simulations understandable to specialists only. I learned from Hegselmann’s talk
(fromaphilosophy department) aboutbounded confidence andused that inseveral later papers
of mine. Of course, for a conference on ”Simulating Society” the participating sociologists are
a highly biased selection.
An important problem is how to get data, which then should be modeled by sociophysics.
Election results, more precisely the distribution of votes among many candidates, have been
modeled successfully for both Brazil and India. This example [5] also shows the limitations:
The methods of statistical physics can predict the probability distribution functions for the
velocity of air molecules and the election votes, but they cannot predict where a specific air
molecule will be a second later or which candidate will win the election. The internet allows
physicists and computer scientists to collect lots of data on who is sending e-mail to whom,
which web site cites another web site, and which computers are directly connected to other
computers. These evolving networks yield much better statistics than the less than 100 people
at the South Pole recently investigated for social roles and leadership [6], ignoring the recent
network literature in physics.
3.3 Biology: no, but changing
Traditionally, the only good biology was experimental biology, a view also held by famous
interdisciplinary physicist H.E. Stanley (whom I had to replace by this talk) who analyzed
empirical data from biology and economics. But with billions of base pair data available now
from DNA analysis of the whole genome, the need to interpret these biological data arises.
Spin glass physics taught us that knowing all the interactions between the spins and all the
spinorientationsdoesnotyetsolvetheproblemhowthespinglassbehavesasawhole. Similarly,
bio-informatics needs to understand how to deduct from the known DNA the behaviour of the
organism. Today, nobody has as yet produced a living being out of non-living matter. Thus
biology should take modelling more serious than in past decades, and I see some changes in
the behaviour of young biologist. After all, I became a member of the advisory board of one
biological and one medical journal, never having followed a university course in these fields.
What we need in biologically motivated simulations are real successes. There are lots of
papers on theoretical immunology, but vaccination works since more than a century without
needing my excellent simulations. Ageing still cannot be prevented, in spite of experimental
and theoretical work on it. A big effect, comparable to the atomic bomb of 1945, is still lacking
in theoretical biology.
3.4 Econo-bio-socio-physics ?
Of course, even more difficult is to become accepted by work touching on all three of the above
fields, like predicting the ”age quake” around 2030 when the 70-year old people may be the
strongest agecohortinrichcountries. Shouldtheytrustexisting pensionregulationsorbuildup
their own savings for old age? Politicians debate this hotly in several countries of the European
Union. Thus far none of them asked for my advice.
4 Acceptance time
Let us assume that these interdisciplinary attempts of physicists are objectively good. How
long do we have to wait until they will be accepted by the other field? After one decade of
ageing simulations by physicists, a few biologists have started to cite them. A dozen years after
the car traffic models of Nagel and Schreckenberg as well as Biham, Middleton and Levine,
I don’t see yet applications in many cities and on many expressways, but serious application
effort exists in Duisburg (Germany), Dallas (Texas) and Portland (Oregon). In 1976 the later
Nobel laureate de Gennes was one of those who suggested that the critical exponents of three-
dimensional percolation should be found in real gelation experiments. This suggestion was far
fromrevolutionary since thelater chemistry Nobel laureateFloryinvented percolationtheoryin
1941toexplain gelation(Bethelattice, same universality class asrandomgraphsorother mean-
field approaches). Nevertheless it took more than a decade before chemistry experimentalists
widely accepted this idea. Thus, for fields much further apart, like physics and sociology, we
should measure the times for possible acceptance in decades, not in months. Similarly, people
planting trees for a forest work for future generations.
Exotic physics has become less exotic at this conference but it still rejected by many, both
within and outside physics departments. But there is some consolation: The gap between
theoretical physicists and theoretical biologists (sociologists) may be smaller than that between
the latter ones and experimental biologists (sociologists).
[1] T.C. Schelling, J. Mathematical Sociology 1 (1971) 143.
[2] G.J. Stigler, Journal of Business 37 (1964) 117.
[3] L. da Fontoura Costa, cond-mat/0309266.
[4] S. Moss de Oliveira, P.M.C. de Oliveira, and D. Stauffer, Evolution, Money, War and
Computers (Teubner, Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1999)
[5] M.C. Gonzalez, A.O. Sousa, and H.J. Herrmann, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15, (2004) issue 1.
[6] J.C. Johnson, J.S. Boster and L.A. Palinhas, J. Mathematical Sociology 27 (2003) 89