]RS.hp-ortsa[
1v5693.1190:viXra
Introduction to Nuclear Astrophysics1
Christian Iliadis
DepartmentofPhysics&Astronomy,UniversityofNorthCarolina,ChapelHill,NorthCarolina
Abstract. Inthefirstlectureofthisvolume,wewillpresentthebasicfundamentalideasregarding
nuclearprocessesoccurringinstars.Westartfromstellarobservations,willthenelaborateonsome
importantquantum-mechanicalphenomenagoverningnuclearreactions,continuewithhownuclear
reactionsproceedinahotstellarplasmaand,finally,wewillprovideanoverviewofstellarburning
stages.Attheend,thecurrentknowledgeregardingtheoriginoftheelementsisbrieflysummarized.
This lecture is directed towards the student of nuclear astrophysics. Our intention is to present
seeminglyunrelatedphenomenaofnuclearphysicsandastrophysicsinacoherentframework.
Keywords: Nuclearastrophysics,stellarevolution,nucleosynthesis,thermonuclearreactions
PACS: 24.30.-v,26.20.-f,26.30.-k
INTRODUCTION
The field of nuclear astrophysics started with basic questions regarding our Sun. It
is obvious that life on Earth depends on nuclear processes deep inside the Sun, but
how exactly the nuclear transmutations occur was not understood for some time. The
breakthroughs came at the end of the 1930’s: Bethe and Critchfield [1] uncovered a
sequential reaction sequence fusing hydrogen (H) to helium (He), now referred to as
the “pp1 chain”, while Bethe [2] and von Weizsäcker [3] proposed a cyclic reaction
sequence, now called the “CNO1 cycle”, that has the same end result of synthesizing
He from H. For this early work, the Nobel prize was awarded to Hans Bethe in 1967.
It is interesting to point out that Bethe originally thought that the Sun derives most of
its energy via the CNO1 cycle. Part of the problem was that some of the key nuclear
reaction cross sections were poorly known. When more reliable cross sections could be
estimated in the 1950’s, it became apparent that it is in fact the pp1 chain that governs
the energy production in the Sun. The important lesson is that accurate nuclear physics
informationiscrucial forourunderstandingofstars.
Some obvious questions followed immediately: how do other stars produce energy?
How do they evolveand why do some of them explode?And perhaps the key question:
where were the elements found on Earth produced? They were certainly not produced
inside the Sun and, therefore, other processes are required to explain their origin. In
thisregardthesolarsystemabundancedistributionofthenuclidesbecameofparamount
importance. It is displayed in Fig. 1 and reveals a rather complicated structure. The
different processes giving rise to the observed features were explained by Burbidge,
1 Prepared for the Proceedings of the 5th European Summer School on Experimental Nuclear Astro-
physics,SantaTecla,Italy,September21-26,2009.
0 50 100 150 200
Mass number A
FIGURE1. Abundancesofthenuclides,normalizedtothenumberofSiatoms,atthebirthofthesolar
system.DatafromRef.[6].
Burbidge, Folwer and Hoyle [4] and by Cameron [5]. These papers laid the foundation
ofthemoderntheoryofnuclearastrophysics.Forthiswork,theNobelprizewasawarded
toWillyFowlerin1983.
Briefly, H and He are the most abundant elements and are made in the Big Bang
(see contributionof T. Kajino in this volume). The abundance curve then drops sharply
by 8 orders of magnitude. The species Li, Be and B are so quickly destroyed inside
stars that their production must take place elsewhere. In fact, they are believed to be
producedbycosmic-rayspallation(seecontributionofJ.Kiener).Theabundancecurve
increases sharply at C and O. These are the most abundant elements after H and He
and, incidentally, are the species life on Earth is based on. For increasing mass number
the abundance curve decreases, but then produces a maximum near Fe, Co and Ni,
referred to as the iron peak. Interestingly, these nuclides exhibit the largest binding
energiespernucleon.Sofar,mostofthespecieshavebeenproducedbynuclearreactions
involving charged particles. To explain the origin of the nuclides located beyond the
iron peak, however, fundamentally different processes are required. Those species are
mainly produced via the capture of neutrons by the s-process and the r-process (see
contributionsofM. ElEidand K. L. Kratz, respectively).
In this lecture, we will focus on charged particle processes important for stellar nu-
cleosynthesis and energy production in stars. It will become apparent how quantum-
mechanical processes govern the evolution of large-scale objects in the Universe. This
inter-connection is fascinating and remarkable, especially in view of the complex in-
terplay of nuclear physics, hydrodynamics, atomicphysics and plasma physics in stars.
We may state without exaggerating that after several decades of research, stellar evolu-
tion and nucleosynthesis are among the most successful theories humans possess. The
account given here is based on a recently published book [7], to which the student is
referred formoredetailed information.
The single most important stellar property that determines the evolutionary fate of a
staris itsmass. Thelarger themass,thelarger thetemperature and pressurein thecore.
Thus nuclear energy must be generated at a faster pace in order to stabilize the star,
implyingalargerluminosityandafasterfuelconsumption.Consequently,thelargerthe
masstheshorterthestellarlifetime.Beforecontinuing,itisworthwhiletodiscussbriefly
afewastrophysicalphenomena,sincetheywillbementionedinthefollowing.
We start with globular clusters. These are located in a spherical space surrounding
the Galactic center, called the halo. A typical cluster consists of 104-106 stars and is
metal poor compared to the Sun, implying that it was formed during the early stages
of Galactic evolution. The stars in a single cluster were formed around the same time
from materialof verysimilarcomposition.When plottingtheluminosityversus surface
temperature for many stars in a given globular cluster (Hertzsprung-Russell diagram),
it is apparent that the stars occupy distinct regions in the diagram. This observation
must then be explained by differences in their stellar mass. It is interesting that the age
of a cluster can be determined by comparing the location of the turn-off point (i.e.,
the region in the HR diagram corresponding to those stars that have exhausted the H
fuelintheircore)withpredictionsfromstellarevolutionmodels,providedthataccurate
nuclearreactioncrosssectionsareavailable.Suchinvestigationsyieldagesfortheoldest
globularclustersof12-13Gy.Thisvaluerepresentsanimportantlowerlimitfortheage
of the Universe, demonstrating nicely how nuclear reaction cross sections connect to
questionsincosmology.
Itisilluminatingtodescribebrieflytheevolutionoflow-massstars(M/M =0.4 2),
including the Sun. For example, at present the Sun converts H to He in the⊙core vi − a the
pp1chain(seebelow).Inabout5Gy,theHfuelinthecorewillbeexhaustedandtheSun
will become a red giant star, fusing H to He via the CNO1 cycle in a shell surrounding
aninertHecore.ThetemperatureinthecoreincreasesuntilHestartstofusetoCandO
(heliumburning),whileHcontinuestoburninashellsurroundingthecore.Inthisphase,
thelow-massstarsarereferredtoashorizontalbranchstars.Atsomepoint,theHeinthe
coreisexhaustedandthestarswillburnHeinashellsurroundinganinertCandOcore,
inadditiontoburningHtoHeinashellsurroundingtheHeburningregion.Thisphase,
referred to as the asymptotic giant branch (AGB), gives rise to thermal instabilities,
where the H and He burning shells alternate as the main contributor to the luminosity.
As a result, the star will experience a significant mass loss via a strong stellar wind.
When the stellar surface becomes hot enough, the intense ultraviolet radiation ionizes
theexpandingejecta,whichbegintofluorescebrightlyasaplanetarynebula.Eventually,
the H burning shell extinguishes and the low-mass star will end its existence as a white
dwarf,consistingmainlyofCandO.Itissupportedbyelectrondegeneracypressureand
cools slowly by radiating away its thermal energy. As will be seen later, AGB stars are
believedtobethemainsources ofCand N intheUniverse(and ofthemaincomponent
ofthes-process).
Massivestars(M>11M )evolveverydifferentlyfromlow-massstars.Wewillbriefly
describe the fate of a 25M⊙ star of solar composition. After undergoing H and He
burning,thecoreexperience⊙sfurtherburningepisodes.Thesearereferred toasC-,Ne-,
O-and Si-burning(alsocalled advancedburningstages),and willbeexplainedinmore
detailbelow.Forexample,aftertheendofHeburningthecoreconsistsofCandO.The
core contracts gravitationally, while raising the temperature and pressure, in order to
stabilizethe star. At somepointthe conditionsare such that C begins to fuse, providing
asourceofnuclearenergyandhaltingtemporarilythecontractionofthestar.Thiscycle
repeats while the core experiences more such burning stages. Furthermore, each time a
givenburningphaseterminatesinthecore,itcontinuestoburninashellsurroundingthe
core.Thedurationofeachsubsequentnuclearburningphasedecreasessignificantly.For
example,whileHburningmaylastmanymillionyears,Siburningmaylastonlyoneday.
Thereasonsaretwofold.First,Hburningreleasesfarmoreenergyperunitmass(6 1024
MeV/g) compared to He and C burning. Hence, the H fuel is consumed much slower.
Second,themannerbywhichthestarradiatesenergy(or“cools”)changesdramatically.
For H and He burning, the nuclear energy generated in the core eventually reaches the
surfaceandisradiatedasphotons.BeyondHeburning,startingwithCburning,mostof
thestarsenergyisradiatedvianeutrinos.Sincethismechanismofcoolingismuchmore
efficient,thefuel consumptionincreases rapidly.
After thelast advanced burningstage, when Si is exhausted,thecore consistsmainly
of iron peak nuclides (mainly 56Fe). These nuclides exhibit the largest binding energy
per nucleon and thus no more energy can be generated via fusion reactions. In other
words, no other source of nuclear energy is available to the star. Meanwhile the mass
ofthecore grows sincetheoverlyingburningshells producemore nuclearashes. When
thecoregrowstoamassneartheChandrasekharlimit(M 1.4M )electrondegeneracy
pressure is unable to counteract gravity and the core star ≈ ts to co⊙llapse. Two important
effectsacceleratethecorecollapse.First,electronsthatcouldotherwisecontributetothe
pressure are increasingly removed by electron capture on iron peak nuclei. Second, as
will become clear later, with increasing temperature and density the compositionof the
coreshftstolighternuclei(which arelessstable), thusremovingenergy anddecreasing
the pressure. At this stage the core collapses essentially in free fall. When a density of
1014 g/cm3 is reached, the nucleons will start to feel the short-range nuclear force,
which is repulsive at very short distances. As a result, the core rebounds and produces
an outgoingshockwave. Howtheshock isprecisely generated and howit propagatesis
not well understood. These topics are subject of current nuclear astrophysics research.
For our purposes it is sufficient to state that the outgoing shock heats and compresses
theoverlyinglayersofthestar,consistingofsuccessiveshellsofSi,O,NeandC,before
moving outward. Thus the star experiences more episodes of nucleosynthesis, referred
to as explosive Si-, O-, Ne- and C-burning. It is likely that the precursor star that gave
riseto theCrab nebula(M 1) supernovaremnantunderwent all of thesehydrostaticand
explosiveburningstagesreferred to abovein connectionwithmassivestars.
Our understanding of how single massive stars explode as (core-collapse) type II
supernovae has been significantly improved after observation of supernova 1987A (the
designationmeansitwasthefirstsupernovadiscoveredin1987)intheLargeMagellanic
Cloud. It was the brightest exploding star seen in 400 years. Neutrinos from this event
were observed on Earth [8], providing direct proof of stellar nucleosynthesis. The light
curves(luminosityversustime)ofmanysupernovae,includingSN 1987A,arepowered
over an extended time period by the radioactive decay of 56Co to stable 56Fe. In fact,
g -rays from 56Co decay have even been detected directly for SN 1987A [9]. It will be
discussed later how the stellar explosion gives rise to the synthesis of large amounts of
radioactive56Ni,which istheprecursorof56Co.
Finally, we will briefly describe a few close binary stellar systems that will be of in-
teresthere. TypeIasupernovaeare amongthemostenergeticexplosionsintheuniverse
that sometimeeven outshine their host galaxies. Their light curves are also powered by
the radioactive decay of 56Co. A detailed understanding of these events is still miss-
ing. We will focus here on the most popular model, involving a C-O white dwarf in a
close binary star system that accretes matter via Roche lobe overflow from a compan-
ion main-sequence or red giant star. The rate of mass accretion must be relatively large
( 10 7M /y) in order to avoid any mass loss through a nova-like event (see below).
W ≈ hen the w⊙hite dwarf grows to a mass near the Chandrasekhar limit, C ignites under
degenerate conditions and a thermonuclear runaway occurs. The energy release from
nuclear burning is so large that it disrupts the white dwarf, without leaving behind any
remnant.Forexample,SN1572(“Tycho’ssupernova”)isbelievedtobeoftypeIa.Since
theintrinsicbrightnessoftheseeventsisknownwithinsomerange, itbecomespossible
toestimatetheirdistancebymeasuringtheapparentluminosity.TypeIasupernovaecan
be observed across billions of light years and thus are used as “standard candles” for
establishing cosmological distances. By recording both their apparent luminosity and
their redshifts, observations of very distant type Ia supernovae provide a measure for
theexpansionhistoryoftheUniverse.Theprofoundcosmologicalimplications,includ-
ing evidence for the elusive dark energy [10], provide strong motivation for improving
modelsoftypeIasupernovae.
Classical novaeare alsobelievedto occurin binarystarsystems,consistingofalow-
mass main-sequence star and a white dwarf. Contrary to type Ia supernovae, however,
the accretion rates are much smaller ( 10 10-10 9M /y). In this case, matter spirals
inward and accumulates on the white d ≈ warf surface, wh⊙ere it is heated and compressed
by the strong surface gravity. Hydrogen starts to fuse to He via the pp chains during
theaccretionphaseandthetemperatureincreasesgradually.Eventuallyathermonuclear
runaway occurs, where a significant fraction of the nuclear energy is produced by the
hotCNO cycles. The luminosityincreases by about 4 orders ofmagnitude.All classical
novae are expected to recur every 104-105 years. The observation of an overabundance
of Ne in some classical novae showed that these outbursts do not involve a C-O white
dwarf, but a more massive white dwarf of O-Ne composition. The latter objects result
from the evolution of intermediate mass stars (M/M =9 11). Other observed over-
abundances, for example of N, Si and S, are the resu⊙lt of nu − clear processing during the
explosiveburningofH.
Finally, we will discuss type I X-ray bursts. The favorite model involves a low-mass
star and a neutron star as the compact object in a binary stellar system. Neutron stars
have typical masses near 1.4M , radii of 10-15 km and densities on the order of 1014
g/cm3. H- and He-rich matter f⊙rom the low-mass companion is first accreted in a disk
and then falls onto the surface of the neutron star. Temperatures and densities are high
enough to fuse H to He via the hot CNO cycles. The accreted He is not fusing yet
but sinks deeper into the neutron star atmosphere. Eventually, He starts to fuse under
degenerate conditions, triggering a thermonuclear runaway. The burning of a H-He
mixture synthesizes elements up to - and perhaps beyond - the iron peak via the a p-
process and the rp-process. During a type I X-ray burst the X-ray luminosity increases
typically by an order of magnitude. It is unlikely that any matter synthesized during
a type I X-ray burst can escape the large gravitational potential of the neutron star.
However, these events are important for probing the properties of neutron stars, such
asmass,radius and composition.
NUCLEAR REACTIONS
The cross section of a nuclear reaction is defined as the number of interactions per
time, divided by the number of incident particles per area and time, and divided by
thenumberoftarget nucleiwithinthebeam. Theunitisbarn,where 1 barn 10 28 m2.
For example, the estimated cross section for the reaction p+p d+e+≡ +n , which
representsthefirststepintheppchains(seebelow),amountstos → =8 10 48 cm2 ata
laboratorybombardingenergyof1MeV.Supposeameasurementofthisreactionwould
be performed using an intense 1 mA beam of protons, incident on a dense hydrogen
target(1020 protonspercm2),thenoneobtainsonly1interactionin6000years!Clearly,
such a measurement is beyond present experimental capabilities and hence this cross
sectionneedsto beestimatedtheoretically.
Cross section curves (cross section versus bombarding energy) come in many vari-
eties.Inthesimplestcase,thecrosssectionofacharged-particlereactiondropsdramati-
callywithdecreasingenergy,butotherwiseexhibitsnostructure.Agoodexampleisthe
cross section for 16O(p,g )17F below a center of mass energy of 2 MeV. Sometimes the
cross section exhibits a well-defined maximum. An example for such a behavior is the
13C(p,g )14N reaction, which shows a maximum near 500 keV in the center of mass. It
is frequently stated that the Coulomb barrier is responsible for the sharp drop in cross
section with decreasing energy, while the cross section maxima are identified as reso-
nances. But how does the Coulomb barrier exactly explain the observation? And what
istheoriginofaresonance?
These questions can best be answered by considering a simple potential model for
a nuclear reaction. We need essentially two pieces: an attractive (negative) square well
potentialofdepthV insidethenucleus(r<R ),andarepulsive(positive)squarebarrier
potential of height V for distances of R r < R . The total energy of the incident
particle, E, is less than the barrier height. An example for such a potential is shown in
Fig.2.ThesolutiontotheSchrödingerequationforeachofthethreeregionsI,II,IIIare
wellknowandcanbefoundinanyintroductoryquantummechanicstextbook.Inregions
I and III, the solutions are in the form of complex exponentials, which represent a sine
function. In region II, however, the solutions are given in terms of real exponentials. In
thenextstep,thecontinuityconditionisapplied,thatis,thewavefunctionsolutionsand
their derivatives must be continuous at the two boundaries R and R . We obtain four
equationsandcan solvefortheintensityofthetransmittedwaveinregionI,normalized
to the intensity of the incident wave in region III. For relatively low energies one finds
forthisratio, alsocalled transmissioncoefficient,after somealgebra
where m denotes the reduced mass. This result, referred to as the Tunnel effect, is
remarkable and represents one of the most important quantum mechanical phenomena
for charged particle reactions: although the incoming particle is classically not allowed
to reach region I, there is in fact a finite probability for tunneling through the barrier.
Without this circumstance the world would be a very different place and life on Earth
wouldcertainlynotexist.ItisclearfromEq.(1)thatthetransmissioncoefficientdepends
very sensitively on the properties of the barrier. Its energy dependence, especially the
FIGURE2. Three-dimensionalsquare-well-plus-square-barrierpotential,representingthesimplestpo-
tentialmodelforacharged-particlenuclearreaction.Thepotentialpropertiesaredefinedinthetext.Note
thatforarealpotentialthetransmissionprobabilityisonlydefinedfortheone-dimensionalcase.Thusfor
thecalculationofthetransmissioncoefficientwewillassumethatthefigurerepresentsaone-dimensional
potentialthatextendsto ¥ .
sharp drop with decreasing energy, broadly resembles that of the 16O(p,g )17F cross
section.
We have not considered yet the full radial wave function solution of the Schrödinger
equation for the three-dimensional case. In particular, we are interested in the ratio,
R, of the wave function intensities in regions I and III. It is now of advantage to
expressthewavefunctionsolutionsintheseregionsassinefunctionsinsteadofcomplex
exponentials. Otherwise we proceed as before: we apply the continuity condition and
solve the system of four equations for the ratio R. After some tedious algebra we
find a rather lengthy analytical expression. Interestingly, when plotting this function
versus energy E for certain values of the potential depth V , a well-defined maximum
is produced, while for other values of V the resulting function closely reproduces the
structureless energy-dependence of the transmission coefficient in Eq. (1). Note that by
changing the potential depthV we are changing the wavelength in the nuclear interior
(region I), and for discrete values of V the wave function amplitude in the nuclear
interior becomes relatively large. This describes, in the simplest case, the origin of a
well-defined cross section maximum:a resonanceresults fromfavorablewave function
matchingconditionsatthenuclearboundary.
Obviously, in a more realistic situation we need to replace the simple square barrier
by the Coulomb potential (if we disregard the centripetal barrier for the moment).
The Coulomb potential has a more complicated shape, but we may approximate it by
dividing this potential into many thin square barriers. The transmission coefficient for
theCoulombpotentialisthengivenbytheproductofthetransmissioncoefficientsforall
ofthesquarebarriers.Ifweletthenumberofsquarebarriersbecomeverylarge(n ¥ ),
the transmission coefficient for the Coulomb potential can be found analytically. For
verylowenergies wefind
Tˆ exp Z Z e2 e 2ph (2)
(cid:18) r (cid:19)
whereZ andZ arethechargesoftheinteractingnucleiandeistheelementarycharge.
This function reveals a 1/√E dependence in the exponent and is referred to as the
Gamow factor. It is frequently used in nuclear astrophysics to define a rather useful
quantity, called the astrophysical S-factor, via the relation S(E) Es (E)exp(2ph ):
divisionbytheGamowfactorremovesfromthecrosssections (E) ≡ thestrongCoulomb
barrier transmission probability and produces a function S(E) that is more manageable
(forexample,intheoreticalextrapolationsto verylowenergies).
In formal reaction theory, a simple equation describing a single isolated resonance
can bederived.It isreferred toas Breit-Wignerformulaandis givenby
BW 4p (E E)2+G 2/4
where l is the de Broglie wavelength, w is a factor containing angular momenta,
E is the resonance energy, G are the resonance partial widths of entrance and exit
channel, and G is the total resonance width given by the sum of all partial widths. The
above equation is the single most important expression describing a resonance and it
is frequently used in nuclear astrophysics in many applications: (i) for fitting cross
section data to extract resonance parameters; (ii) for deriving the “narrow-resonance
reaction rate” (see below); (iii) for extrapolating cross sections to energy regions were
no measurements exist; and (iv) for calculating the experimental resonance yield when
theresonancecannot beresolvedexperimentally.
A partial widthdescribes theprobability(in energy units)perunit timefor formation
or decay of a resonance. For example, the partial width for forming a resonance via
proton absorption, or for decay of a resonance via proton emission, is given by the
expression
G l c =2 mR2 P c C2Sq p 2 c (4)
Apart from a constant factor involving the reduced mass m and the nuclear radius R,
the proton partial width is given by the product of three distinct probabilities: first, the
probabilitythat nucleons will arrange themselves in a “target-plus-single-particle”con-
figuration (spectroscopic factor,C2S); second, the probability that a proton will appear
at thenuclearboundary(dimensionlessreduced single-particlewidth,q 2 ); and, finally,
theprobabilitythat theproton willpenetrate theCoulomband centripetal barriers (pen-
etration factor, P ). The third factor, which can be computed precisely from Coulomb
wave functions, is strongly energy-dependent. The second factor can also be computed
numerically [11]. The great untility of Eqs. (3)-(4) becomes now apparent: if the spec-
troscopicfactor,C2S,whichisanuclearstructurequantity,canbeestimatedbydifferent
means, for example, using transfer reaction studies, then the partial width can be cal-
culated and the cross section be estimated in a straightforward manner, despite the fact
thatthereactioncrosssectionhasnotbeenmeasureddirectly.Clearly,inmanycasesthe
crosssectioncannotbemeasureddirectly,eitherbecausetheCoulombbarriertransmis-
sion probability is too small or perhaps because the target is short-lived. Consequently,
such indirect methods of estimating the cross section become a crucial tool in nuclear
astrophysics(see contributionsofA. Mukhamedzhanov,G.Rogachev,and L.Trache).
THERMONUCLEAR REACTIONS
In a stellar plasma, the kinetic energy for a nuclear reaction derives from the thermal
motionoftheparticipatingnuclei.Hence,theinteractionisreferredtoasthermonuclear
reaction. The thermonuclear reaction rate (the number of reactions per unit time and
unit volume) for a reaction 0+1 2+3 is given by r =N N s v , where N are
01 0 1 01 i
thenumberdensitiesoftheinterac → tingnucleiand s v isthereac h tion i rateperparticle
pair,whichisequaltotheintegralovertheproductofvelocity,crosssectionandvelocity
probabilitydensity.In mostcases ofpractical interest,thelatterfunctionisgivenby the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.Thus the reaction rate per particle pair can be written
s v = Es (E)e E/kT dE (5)
h i 01 p m 01 (kT)3/2 0 −
(cid:18) (cid:19) Z
wherem isthereducedmass,ktheBoltzmannconstantandT theplasmatemperature.
Clearly, for a given temperature the reaction rate is precisely determined if the nuclear
reactioncross section,s (E),isknown.
At this point it is worthwhile to note that a given nuclear reaction occurring in the
stellarplasmacanrarelybeconsideredasanisolatedinteraction.Consider,forexample,
the species 25Al at an elevated temperature. It may be destroyed in several different
ways:viab +-decayto25Mg,viaprotoncaptureto26Si,viaphotodisintegrationto24Mg,
and so on. On the other hand, 25Al is produced via the b +-decay of 25Si, via proton
captureon24Mg,viaphotodisintegrationof26Si,andsoon.Theabundanceevolutionof
25Al duringnucleosynthesisisthen givenbyadifferentialequationthataccountsforall
destruction and production mechanisms. Of course, such a differential equation needs
to be written for all species participating in the nuclear burning. Thus one ends up with
s system of coupled differential equations, called a nuclear reaction network. A good
introductionofhowtosolvethissystemnumericallycanbefoundinArnett’sbook[12].
It is interesting to investigate Eq. (5) in more detail by considering a few extreme
examples. We start with the simplest case, i.e., a nearly constant S-factor, S . This
situation is usually referred to as “non-resonant”, which however leads to considerable
misunderstandingssincetheformalismalsoappliestoslowlyvaryingresonance“tails”,
as will be seen below. Substitution of the S-factor definition (see above) into Eq. (5)
shows immediately that the reaction rate depends, apart from the magnitude of S , on
theintegralovertheproductofGamowandBoltzmannfactors,e 2ph e E/kT.Thisresult
is significant because it demonstrates that the star does not burn at high energies where
thecrosssectionislarge(sincethenumberofparticleswithsuchenergiesisvanishingly
small); neither does the star burn at very small energies where the number of particles
is at maximum (since the cross section is vanishingly small). Rather, in a plasma most
nuclearreactionsoccuratenergieswherethefunctione 2ph e E/kT isatmaximum.This
well-definedenergy windowisreferred toas theGamowpeak.
When the Gamow peak is plotted for a given temperature, but for different target-
projectile combinations (implying different projectile and target charges and hence
different Coulomb barrier heights), a few important observations can be made. For
increasing charges Z and Z : (i) the Gamow peak shifts to higher energies; (ii) the
Gamow peak becomes broader; and most importantly, (iii) the area under the Gamow
peak decreases dramatically. In other words, for a mixture of different nuclides in a
stellar plasma at given temperature, those reactions with the smallest Coulomb barrier
produce most of the energy and are consumed most rapidly. This is of paramount
importance for the star since it explains the occurrence of well-defined stellar burning
stages.
Next, we will consider a “narrow resonance”. Several different definitions for a
narrow resonance can be found in the literature, but none of them is without problems.
For the sake of simplicity, let us assume that a narrow resonance implies constant
partial widths over the total width of the resonance. Substitution of Eq. (3) into Eq. (5)
yieldsimmediately s v =[(2p )/(mkT)]3/2h¯2e Er/kTwg .Theproductwg w G G /G
is proportional to the area under the narrow-resonance cross section curve and thus is
called resonance strength (with units of energy). Note that the resonance energy enters
exponentially in the above reaction rate expression. It needs to be determined rather
precisely, otherwise the resulting uncertainty of the reaction rate becomes relatively
large.
In many cases the energy-dependence of the partial widths over the total width of
the resonance cannot be disregarded. Such “broad resonance” reaction rates need to be
treated with care. Although approximateexpressions exist in the literature, it is safer to
substitute Eq. (3) into Eq. (5) and evaluate the integral numerically. Depending on the
location of the broad resonance with respect to the Gamow peak, there are in general
two contributions to the total reaction rate. First, the contribution calculated from the
“narrow resonance” reaction rate, which arises only from the region near the resonance
energy (as is apparent from the factor e Er/kT). Second, from the smoothly varying tail
oftheresonance.IfthebroadresonanceislocatedoutsidetheGamowpeak,theninmost
cases theresonance tail makes afar larger contributionthan what iscalculated from the
narrowresonanceexpression.Plottingsuchreactionratesversustemperaturefrequently
reveals a “kink” because the narrow resonance and broad resonance reaction rates have
differenttemperaturedependences.
Generally, in order to evaluate the total rate of a single reaction, many different con-
tributions need to be taken into account: narrow and broad resonances, non-resonant
processes, subthreshold resonances, cross section continua, interferences between dif-
ferent amplitudes, and so on. Every single reaction represents a special case and the
evaluation process is usually tedious. Evaluations of reaction rates have been provided
by W. Fowler and collaborators for many years, with their last evaluation (covering the
A=1-30 target mass range) published in 1988 [13]. A European effort, by the NACRE
collaboration,resultedinanupdatedreactionrateevaluationin1999[14],whileanother
evaluation including for the first time radioactive target nuclei was published in 2001
[15]. As of this writing, we have submitted for publication a major new reaction rate
evaluationutilizingMonteCarlo methodsforthefirst time[16].
STELLAR BURNING STAGES
Hydrostatic hydrogen burning
Hydrostatic burning of H occurs near T = 15.6 MK in the center of the Sun, in the
range of T = 8 55 MK in the cores of other stars depending on their mass, and at
T =45 100 MK in the H burning shell of AGB stars. If only H and He are available
as fuel, withoutthe presence of heavier nuclides, then the stellarcore generates nuclear
energy via the pp chains. These are shown schematically in Fig. 3a. All chains fuse
effectivelyfourprotonstoone4Henucleusandtherebygenerateanenergyof26.7MeV.
Furthermore, at low temperatures all chains involve non-resonant reactions only. Each
chain starts with the p(p,e+n )d reaction, which has not been measured directly at the
relevantenergies(seeabove).Theabsolutemagnitudeofthiscrosssectionisinfluenced
bytheweakinteraction.Fortunately,thedifferentfactorsthatdeterminetheS-factorcan
be estimated theoretically with substantial confidence [17]. The present reaction rate
uncertaintyamountstoafewpercentonly[14],whichissignificantlysmallercompared
to rate uncertainties of most directly measured stellar fusion reactions. Several other
reactions that are part of the pp chains have been measured directly, most recently the
d(p,g )3He, 3He(3He,2p)a and 3He(a ,g )7Be reactions by the LUNA collaboration (see
contributionofG. Imbrianiin thisvolume).
Inmanysituationssmallamountsof12Cand16Owillbepresentinthestellarplasma
and thesenuclei will participatein the stellarburning.For example,12C captures apro-
ton yielding 13N, which in turn, b -decays to 13C. This nuclide captures another proton,
and then another one to yield 15O, which b -decays to 15N. At this point something
important occurs: rather than capturing another proton, 15N prefers to undergo a (p,a )
reaction,producingagain12C.Theinterestingpointhereisthatbycompletingonecycle,
four protons have fused to one 4He nucleus, while the heavy “seed” nucleus has been
recovered.Thus,12CactsasacatalystandevensmallamountsofCNOmaterialcangive
rise to a large nuclear energy generation. A small leakage of material via 15N(p,g )16O
initiates more cyclic reaction sequences. They are referred to as CNO cycles and are
showninFig.3b.Ineachcase,the(p,a )reactionisfavoredoverthe(p,g )reactionatthe
branching points 15N, 17O, 18O and 19F, which is a necessary condition for a reaction
cycleto occur. Obviously,thefirst cycle, called CNO1 cycle, is themost importantone.
It is governed by 14N(p,g )15O, since it is by far the slowest interaction among the reac-
tions and b -decays. This reaction has been measured both at the LUNA facility (deep
underground in Gran Sasso) [18], and at the LENA facility (at sea-level in our labora-
tory) [19]. It was found that the new reaction rate deviates from the previous one [14]
by about a factor of 2. As a consequence, the ages of globular clusters, obtained by fit-
tingtheturn-offpointintheHertzsprung-Russelldiagramtostellarmodelsoflow-mass
stars (see above), changed by about 1 Gy! This again emphasizes the dramatic impact
ofprecisecrosssectionmeasurementsonstellarmodelsandoncosmologicalquestions.
The solar carbon isotopic number abundance ratio is 13C/12C=0.01, while the CNO1
cycleequilibriumratioamountsto13C/12C=0.25. Manystars thatburnH viatheCNO1
FIGURE 3. The pp chains (part a) and the CNO cycles (part b) shown schematically in the chart
of the nuclides. Each arrow represents a specific interaction, connecting an initial with a final nuclide.
Stablenuclidesareshownasshadedsquares.Theprotonandneutronnumbersincreaseintheverticaland
horizontaldirections,respectively.
cyclehaveobserved ratiosbetween thesetwo values,whilea few stars evencomeclose
totheequilibriumvalue.Thisimpliesthatasignificantfractionofthesestars’hydrogen
envelope has been cycled through regions that experience equilibrium operation of the
CNO1cycle. From thelatestreaction cross sections,assumingasolarcomposition,one
finds that near T =20 MK the CNO1 cycle takes over from the pp1 chain as the main
energy-generating process. Thus it is found that about 90% of the Sun’s energy genera-
tionoriginatesfromthepp1chain.NotethattheCNOcyclesoccurringinAGBstarsare
predictedto bethemainsourceof13Cand 14N intheUniverse.
Explosive hydrogen burning
Explosive burning of H in a classical nova outbursts attains much higher peak tem-
peratures (T = 0.1 0.4 GK) compared to the hydrostatic scenarios discussed so far.
At such temperatures the character of the burning changes significantly. The major re-
actions that occur in the A < 20 mass range are referred to as the hot CNO cycles and
are displayed in Fig. 4a. Consider first the HCNO1 cycle: at these higher temperatures,
13N prefers to capture a proton, yielding 14O, instead of b -decaying to 13C, as was the
FIGURE4. ThehotCNOcycles(parta)andthebreakoutsequences(thickarrowsinpartb).
case for the (cold) CNO1 cycle (see above). Other than this change the HCNO1 cycle
in Fig. 4a looks just like the CNO1 cycle in Fig. 3b. However, the inner workings of
these cycles are entirely different. The temperatures are now so high that all reactions,
including 14N(p,g )15O, occur on much shorter time scales than the b -decays. Thus it is
the b -decays of 14O and 15O that control the energy generation rate and cause 14O and
15O to be the most abundant nuclides. For this reason the HCNO1 cycle is sometimes
referred to as “b -limited CNO cycle”. The time to complete the cycle is given by the
sum of the mean lifetimes of 14O and 15O, which amounts to about 300 s. Since a clas-
sical nova explosion only lasts for a few 100 s, it is obvious that the HCNO1 cycle in
theseeventsmustoperatefar fromequilibrium.
The other cycles, HCNO2 and HCNO3, are very important for the nucleosynthesis
since they explain the fate of the initially abundant 16O. In particular, reaction network
calculationsshowed that the17O+p and 18F+p reactions are of crucial importancesince
theyinfluenceanumberofclassicalnovaobservables,forexample,theamountoflong-
lived radioactivity produced (with the hope of measuring decay g -rays using satellite-
borneinstruments),oxygenisotopicratios(withthehopeofmeasuringtheseinpresolar
grainsthatoriginatefromclassicalnovae;seecontributionofP.Hoppe),andtheGalactic
synthesis of the species 17O. The 17O(p,g )18F and 17O(p,a )14N reactions have been
measured recently by our group [20] and by the Orsay group [21]. Curiously, it is
found that a non-resonant reaction mechanism (direct capture) determines the total
reaction rates for 17O(p,g )18F at T = 0.1 0.4 GK, despite the fact that a narrow
resonance is located inside the Gamow peak. Clearly, this represents a rather rare case.
Ameasurementofthedirectcaptureprocesshasjustbeencompletedbyourgroup[22].
A direct study of the important 18F(p,a )15O reaction requires a radioactive 18F beam.
Despite several measurements, there is still crucial information missing for calculating
reliablerates ofthisreaction.
The nucleosynthesis in classical novae not only takes place in the A < 20 mass
range, but also involves many reactions in the A 20 range. The details are rather
complex. A quantitative investigation of the importance of specific reactions to the
overallnucleosynthesiscan befoundinRef. [23], whereabout7000numerical reaction
networkcomputationshavebeen performed ina reactionrate sensitivitystudy.
Hydrostatic helium burning
Hydrostaticburningofhelium,forexample,inmassivestarstakesplaceinthetemper-
aturerangeT =0.1 0.4GK.Heliumburningstartswiththefusionoftwoa -particles.
However,thecompo − sitenucleus 8Be livesforonly 10 16 s and decays back into two
a -particles.Nevertheless,afteragiventimeatinye ≈ quilibriumabundanceof8Be builds
up,sufficienttoallowforcaptureofathirda -particletoformstable12C.Thisprocessis
referredtoastriple-a reaction.ItwaspointedoutbyHoyle[24]thatthisprocesswould
be too slow to account for the fusion of 12C, unless a resonance exists right above the
8Be+a threshold, which furthermore must be formed without inhibition by the cen-
tripetalbarrier (i.e., it has to be as-waveresonance). A few years later thislevelin 12C,
referred to sinceas theHoyle state,was experimentallyverified. The predictionand the
subsequentverificationofthisstaterepresentsamarvelousinterplayofastrophysicsand
nuclear physics. The triple-a reaction is a (sequential) three-body interaction and thus
has not been measured in the laboratory. From experimental knowledge of the nuclear
masses and partial widths involved, the reaction rate can be estimated fairly accurately.
Present uncertainties amount to about 15% [14], a remarkably small value for a pro-
cessthat hasnot bemeasureddirectly.
Helium burning continues via the 12C(a ,g )16O reaction. There is no resonance near
andabovethea -particlethresholdin16O andthusthisprocess mustproceedviabroad-
resonance tails (including subthreshold resonances) and direct mechanisms. These am-
plitudes may interfere, causing problems in the extrapolation of the S-factor to the as-
trophysicallyimportantenergy range, whichat present isnotaccessibleexperimentally.
Therateofthisreactionisofgreat importance,sinceitdeterminesthe12Cto16O abun-
danceratioattheendofheliumburning.Thisabundanceratiosensitivelyinfluencesnot
only all the subsequent hydrostatic burning stages in massive stars, but also the explo-
siveburning,andthenatureoftheremnantleftbehindafterthecorecollapse.Atpresent
the reaction rate is uncertain by 35%, to be conservative, but a more accurate rate is
highlydesirable. The status of theavailabledata and extrapolationsto relevantenergies
will be discussed in the contribution by C. Brune. The subsequent 16O(a ,g )20Ne reac-
tion is very slow, thus explaining the survival of 16O during helium burning. The main
productsattheend ofheliumburningare 12Cto16O.
If14Nispresentinthestellarplasma(fromCNOcycleoperationduringthepreceding
H burning state), then the reaction sequence 14N(a ,g )18F(b +n )18O(a ,g )22Ne can be
initiated. The subsequent 22Ne(a ,n)25Mg reaction is the major neutron source towards
the end of helium burning, and gives rise to the weak component of the s-process (see
contribution by M. El Eid). Hydrostatic helium burning is predicted to be the main
sourceof12C, 16O, 18O and 22Ne intheUniverse.
Explosive hydrogen-helium burning
So far, we only considered the burning of a pure fuel (either H or He). There are
situations, however, where the temperatures are high enough to ignite a H-He mixture
explosively.AnexamplearetypeIX-raybursts(seeintroduction)thatmayachievepeak
temperatures near T =1.5 GK. Such elevated temperatures, together with the presence
of He, change entirely thecharacter of the nuclear burning. The hot CNO cycles do not
operate any longer, but rather reaction sequences involving both proton and a -particle
induced reactions initiate a breakout from the CNO mass region to heaver nuclides.
The most likely breakout sequences (BOS) are shown in Fig. 4b as thick lines. Once
thesesequences reach nuclides beyondthe A=20 demarkation (dashed line), there is no
likely process that can return matter to the CNO mass range. Consider, for example,
the first breakout sequence, 15O(a ,g )19Ne(p,g )20Na. It is apparent that these reactions
involve short-lived target nuclei. The same is true for the other sequences (with the
exception of the 16O(a ,g )20Ne reaction in BOS3). Hence, their experimental study
requires radioactive ion beams. At present, the reactions 15O(a ,g )19Ne, 14O(a ,p)17F,
17F(p,g )18Ne and 18Ne(a ,p)21Na are subject of ongoing research (see contributions by
L.Tracheand T.Aumann).
The breakout sequences are significant because they initiate a network involving
numerous reactions on the proton-rich side of the nuclidic chart that may stretch up
to 68Se and beyond. The details are quite complex. In brief, a series of (a ,p) reactions
quickly converts matter up to the Ar region (the a p-process), where sequences of (p,g )
reactions and b +-decays take over (the rp-process). At several locations the nuclear
activityextendsalltheway,andsometimesbeyond,thelineofparticle-unstablenuclides
(the so-called proton dripline). Frequently, when this happens, a forward (A B) and
reverse(B A) reaction are in equilibrium,that is, the rates of the forward and reverse
reaction (A → B) become equal. A sequential link, B C , either reaction or b -decay,
usually provides a leak out of the equilibrium. It is very important to note that, once
equilibrium has been achieved between species A and B, the rates of the reactions
A B and B A are entirely irrelevant for the nuclear transformations. This can
be shown in a straightforward way by applying the Saha statistical equation and the
reciprocity theorem of nuclear reactions [7]. All that is needed (apart from some less
important factors) is the Q-value of the A B reaction and the reaction rate for the
“leakage” B C process. For type I X-ray bursts, the two most important equilibria
occur at 64Ge →65As 66Se and 68Se 69Br 70Kr. At present the reaction Q-valuesof
64Ge(p,g )65As ⇔ and68→ Se(p,g )69Brarer ⇔ atheru → ncertain,resultinginsignificantuncertainty
regardingtheend pointand theashesofthenucleosynthesisintypeIX-ray bursts[25].
Hydrostatic carbon, neon, oxygen and silicon burning
Aswehaveseen,aftertheendofHeburningthecoreconsistsmainlyof12Cand16O.
Thus the next most likely nuclear fuel to ignite is 12C. For the first time in the life of
thestar,aheavy-ionfusionreaction,12C+12C, isdefiningaburningstage,referred toas
carbonburning.TypicalcoretemperaturesamounttoT =0.6 1.0GK.Therearethree
possibleprimaryreactions,12C(12C,p)23Na, 12C(12C,a )20Ne − and 12C(12C,n)23Mg. The
released light particles undergo several secondary reactions involving newly formed
nuclei, among them 25Mg(p,g )26Al that will be mentioned again later. The main ashes
ofCburningare16O,whichhasnotparticipatedmuchinthenuclearactivity,and 20Ne.
Theprimaryreaction,12C+12C,populateslevelsinthecompoundnucleus24Mgnear14
MeVexcitationenergy.Thisenergyregionexhibitsaveryhighleveldensity,withmany
broadand overlappingstates.Therefore, weexpecttheS-factortobeasmoothfunction
of energy. However, experiments have uncovered many sharp maxima in the S-factor
curve, even near astrophysically important energies. A satisfactory reaction model to
explainthis structure is lacking at present. This is a problem since the availabledata do
notcovertheentireastrophysicallyimportantregionandhencewehavetorelyonrather
uncertain extrapolations. The present status of this reaction will be discussed in more
detailinthecontributionofF. Strieder.
After C burning, when the temperature in the core reaches values of T = 1.2 1.8
GK,themostlikelyprocesstooccuristhephotodisintegrationof20Neviathe(prim − ary)
20Ne(g ,a )16O reaction. For the first time in the life of the star a photodisintegration
defines a burning stage. The released a -particles (including proton and neutrons at a
slightly later time) initiate a number of secondary reactions and the evolving reaction
network is referred to as neon burning. Although the primary reaction is endothermic
(it consumes energy), togetherwith the secondary reactions there is a net production of
nuclear energy for each 20Ne nucleus destroyed. The main nuclear ash of Ne burning is
16O.
The core contracts further after Ne burning until temperatures of T = 1.5 2.7 GK
are produced. At this stage another (primary) heavy ion reaction, 16O+16O − , initiates
a burning stage, called oxygen burning. The temperatures are so high that many exit
channels are open, some of which even involve the emission of three particles. The
lightparticles then initiateanumberofsecondary reactions.It is interestingtonotethat
unlikethecaseof12C+12C,the16O+16Oreactionexhibits,asexpectedasmoothenergy-
dependence of the S-factor. Nevertheless, the S-factor data at the lowest measured
energies are in poor agreement and, furthermore, the branching ratios for the different
exit channels need also be known to better accuracy. Clearly, more laboratory work is
required.Themainashes ofO burningare28Si and, toasomewhatlesserextent,32S.
AfterOburningthecorecontractsuntiltemperaturesofT =2.8 4.1GKarereached.
At this point the photodisintegration 28Si(g ,a )24Mg initiates an − other burning stage,
called silicon burning. As was the case before, the released light particles give rise to
a network of secondary reactions, but on a much larger scale than during Ne burning.
In essence, during this photodisintegration rearrangement, less tightly bound nuclides
are photodisintegrated and the released protons, neutrons and a -particles are captured
tosynthesizemoretightlyboundspecies.ManyreactionsachieveequilibriumduringSi
burning.Infact,numericalnetworkcalculationsshowthattwomajorgroupsofnuclides
formequilibriumclusters(alsocalledquasiequilibriumclusters):oneformsaround28Si
(and extends up to A 40), the other one forms around the iron peak nuclei (starting
nearA 50). Thesetwo clusters are onlyweakly linkedby otherreactions and thus are
not in mutual equilibrium for a significant time during Si burning. One major reason
is that 40Ca is a doubly-magic nucleus (with 20 protons and 20 neutrons), so that the
capture of a light particle is energetically unfavorable. Hence, the resulting nuclides
are quickly photodisintegrated.Nevertheless, given enough time a physical system will
seek a state of most favorable energy and, via reactions in the A 40 50 range, the
abundances of the “Si cluster species” decline with time in favor of those in the “iron
peak cluster”. Clearly, a plasma composed of iron peak nuclei is energetically much
more favorable than one of silicon: binding energies per nucleon near 8.80 MeV are
achieved by the iron peak species 62Ni, 58Fe and 56Fe, while the value for 28Si is only
8.45MeV.Detailedreaction networkcalculationsshowthatat theend ofSi burningthe
mostabundantproduct is56Fe.
Nuclear statistical equilibrium
As28SidisappearsinthecoreattheendofSiburning,thetemperatureincreasesuntil
all non-equilibrated reactions come into equilibrium. Now one large cluster stretches
from protons, neutrons and a -particles all the way to the iron peak and the reaction
network attains nuclear statisticalequilibrium (NSE). The abundance of any nuclide in
nuclearstatisticalequilibriumcan becalculated from arepeated applicationoftheSaha
equation.Forspecies
AYn , withmassnumberA, p protonsand n neutrons,onefindsfor
thenumberabundance
N =N p N n Y Y GnormeB(Y)/kT (6)
Y p n q A 1 Mp Mn 2A Y
− p n !
where q is a constant [7], N and N are the number abundances of free protons and
neutrons, respectively, M is the nuclear mass of species i, g is the statistical weight
(which depends on the spin of Y), Gnorm is the normalized partition function (which
depends on energies and spins of excited levels in Y), and B(Y) is the binding energy.
Note that in the above equation reaction rates are absent, which of course is expected
sincethereaction networkhas achievedequilibrium.
Provided that the nuclear physics information on binding energies, spins and excita-
tionenergiesisavailable,theabundanceofanynuclideinnuclearstatisticalequilibrium
is determined by only three independent parameters: temperature, density and neutron
excess. The latter parameter is defined as h (cid:229) (n p )X/M, with X the mass frac-
i i i i i i
tion.Thesumrunsoverallspeciesipresentintheplasma.Theneutronexcessparameter
representsthenumberofexcessneutronspernucleonandcanonlychangeasaresultof
weakinteractions.Forexample,ifonly4He,12Cand16Oarepresentintheplasma,then
h =0.
AnumberofinterestingpropertiescanbederivedfromEq.(6).First,itcanbeshown
that, if we keep the density constant and raise the temperature, an increasing fraction
of the composition resides in the light species protons, neutrons and a -particles. The
importance of this aspect for the core collapse was already mentioned in the introduc-
tion. Second, it turns out that the neutron excess parameter influences sensitively the
compositionduringnuclearstatisticalequilibrium.Infact,NSEfavorstheabundanceof
that particular nuclide for which (i) the individual neutron excess is equal to the total
neutron excess, and (ii) the binding energy is at maximum. For example, when h 0,
then 56Ni (with 28 neutrons and 28 protons; h =0) is the most abundant species. ≈ For
h 0.04, the most abundant species becomes 54Fe (with 28 neutrons and 26 protons;
h ≈ =0.037),andsoon.Itisevidentfromthisdiscussionthattheneutronexcessmustbe
monitoredverycarefully duringall burningstages thatprecedeNSE. Thusstellar weak
interactionratesmustbeknownreliably(seecontributionbyG.Martinez-Pinedointhis
volume; these rates are also crucial for the core collapse, as already pointed out in the
introduction).
Explosive silicon, oxygen, neon and carbon burning
After the collapse of the massive star core, a shock wave is eventually generated
and moves outward. It heats and compresses first the innermost layer outside the core,
consisting of 28Si as discussed above, to high temperature and density. This matter
quickly reaches NSE and then expands and cools as the shock wave moves further
out. At this point, reactions begin to fall out of equilibrium. In many situations NSE
is terminated by an excess of a -particles, a process referred to as a -rich freezeout: the
a -particles are captured on nuclei and change the composition somewhat from what
onewould expect from NSE. The main constituentis still56Ni (since the 28Si layer has
h =0;seeabove),buttheabundancesofsomeotherironpeaknuclidesaremodified.The
a -rich freezeout is also predicted to be the major source of the important radioisotope
44Ti. It becomes now clear why the light curves of type II supernovae are powered for
longtimeperiodsbytheradioactivedecayof56Co.The56NisynthesizedintheSilayer
duringtheexplosionisejectedanddecayswithahalflifeofT =6.1dto56Co,which
itself is radioactive with a half life of T = 77.3 d. By fitting the light curve of SN
1987A, a 56Ni mass of about 0.07M has been derived, in reasonable agreement with
stellarmodelpredictions. ⊙
The outward moving shock wave subsequently reaches the O, Ne and C layers,
which were synthesized during hydrostatic burning and are located beyond the silicon
layer. Explosive burning in these regions is characterized by temperatures that are
somewhat higher than in their hydrostatic counterparts but, nevertheless, the products
of nucleosynthesis are very similar. Explosive O burning is predicted to be the main
source of the “a elements” (28Si, 32S, 36Ar, 40Ca etc.). Explosive Ne and C burning,
on the other hand, has been suggested [26] as the most probable site for the synthesis
of the important radioisotope 26Al (T = 720000 y). Gamma-rays from the decay of
this nuclide have been observed by several satellite-borne instruments. Since the half
lifeof 26Al is very short compared to the timescale of Galactic chemical evolution,the
observationof “live”26Al directly demonstrates that nucleosynthesisis currently active
intheGalaxy.
Most supernovae ( 85%) result from the core collapse of massive stars (>11M ).
A smaller fraction ( 15%) are of the type Ia variety (see introduction). As already
noted, the most popular model involves the disruption of a C-O white dwarf. Explosive
burning of C during the thermonuclear runaway produces mainly 56Ni via NSE in the
hottestzone (sinceh =0 formatter consistingof 12C and 16O). This providesa natural
explanation for the fact that light curves of type Ia supernovae are also powered by the
radioactive decay of 56Co. The outer regions attain lower temperatures and experience
explosiveSi and Oburning,thedetailsofwhichdepend ontheexplosionmechanism.
The origin of the light nuclides (A 40) is summarized in Tab. 1 (see caption for an
explanationof the symbols). As alre ≤ ady pointed out, hydrogen (1H and 2H) and helium
(3He and 4He) are produced in the Big Bang, while the volatile species 6Li, 9Be and
10B are made chiefly via cosmic ray spallation. Asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars
are the main producer of 14N and contribue significantly to the cosmic abundances of
12C, 13C, 22Ne, 25Mg and 26Mg. Classical novae are predicted to be the main source of
15N and 17O, andmay alsocontributeto theabundanceof13C. All theothernuclidesin
theA=16 40regionarepredominantlyproducedinvarioushydrostaticandexplosive
burning sta − ges of massive stars. A few of the light nuclides, most notably 7Li, 11B,
19F, 36S, 37Cl and 40Ar, are of uncertain origin. Beyond A=40, the nuclides are either
made in massive stars (via a -rich freezeout, the weak component of the s-process, the
r-process, and the p-process; see contributions by M. El Eid and K. L. Kratz), AGB
stars (themainand strongcomponentsofthe s-process), and in thermonuclear(typeIa)
supernovae(about halfofthe56Fe, which ismadeas radioactive56Ni).
Wehavenowreachedtheendofthisbriefsurveyofnuclearastrophysics.Thestudent
may note with interest the many areas of nuclear physics that are sampled in stars.
It is gratifying to see that, after many decades of research, we are in possession of
a remarkably successful theory of stellar evolution and nucleosynthesis. It is equally
exciting that there are still many unsolved questions in nuclear astrophysics, some of
whichmayholdimportantimplicationsforrelatedfieldssuchascosmology,meteoritics
andcosmochronology.Thusthefuturelooksbrightforaspiringyoungminds!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No.
DE-FG02-97ER41041.