INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
Inverted Classroom by Topic – A Study in
Mathematics for Electrical Engineering Students
I. Braun, S. Ritter and M. Vasko
Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences, Karlsruhe, Germany
Abstract—The inverted classroom is a teaching model, Studies conducted in German universities reveal that
where the students prepare for classroom by watching video students rarely prepare for classes beforehand or recap the
lectures. The classroom time is then dedicated to individual content directly after the class. Furthermore, although the
practice. We evaluated a mathematics course for electrical students regularly attend the lectures, they often
engineering students throughout three semesters, where underestimate the difficulty of the subject and the effort
20% of the topics were taught using the inverted classroom required to pass an exam. Active independent study and
model. The aim was to find out whether the model can help practice often starts only shortly before the exam [4].
to better address groups with large differences in prior
knowledge in mathematics. We report mainly positive B. Traditional Lecture
feedback from the students, although the opinions vary The most common way of teaching, the lecture, gives
greatly between the groups. The students appreciate the little time or tools for supporting heterogeneous groups.
increased amount of practice in the classroom as well as the Furthermore there is reason to believe that the reported
possibility to learn at their own pace. Exam performance problems are intrinsic to a teaching style using the
remained constant in the topics taught using the inverted traditional lecture and should not be blamed solely on the
classroom compared to previous semesters. The exam students.
performance of weaker students also remained constant.
First of all, lectures proceed at the pace set by the
instructor that all students are supposed to follow.
Index Terms—inverted classroom, flipped class,
Lectures have been described as the “one-size-fits-all”
mathematics.
model of instruction, where every student receives the
same instruction [5]. This model implicitly expects all
I. INTRODUCTION
students to begin on the same knowledge level. There is
A. The Challenges neither time nor the possibility to support students with
gaps in their prior knowledge. Missing information – due
Mathematics is a central skill for engineering students
to forgotten knowledge from school or a temporary slip of
and the skills acquired during the first-year mathematics
attention – will immediately affect understanding for the
courses are later required in many higher level classes.
rest of the section. Even very good students suffer from
Studies also reveal that the mathematics grades of
this when the thread of reasoning is lost by thoughts
engineering students strongly correlate with their later
wandering off in unchallenged times.
academic success [1].
Second, the instructor gets no reliable feedback on the
At the same time mathematics courses present a major
actual student learning during the semester. In German
hindrance for many engineering students. At universities
universities of applied sciences (in contrast to research
of applied sciences in Germany it is not unusual for 40%
universities) there is usually no culture of mid-term exams
to 60% of the students to fail a mathematics exam. Failed
or graded homework due to lack of staff. The common
mathematics exams are also one of the main reasons for
practice of developing the lecture through (leading)
university dropouts.
questions leads the students and the instructor to perceive
One of the major challenges the faculty in universities
a potentially dangerous illusion of understanding. A recent
of applied sciences in Germany faces are the great
study finds that a well-presented lecture gives the student
differences in the first year students’ prior knowledge in
an illusion of having understood the discussed topics [6].
mathematics. This derives partly from the opening of the
This seems to be the case for those students, who reported
universities of applied sciences for students who do not
that although they regularly attended the classes they still
have a high-school degree (Gymnasium), but have instead
underestimated the difficulty of the topic.
completed a vocational school supported by appropriate
Finally, students usually practice alone, or sometimes in
working experience. Differences exist not only in the skill
study groups or in guided exercise sessions offered by
levels of the students but also in the topics they have
tutors. The instructor is, however, usually not present
been taught in school [2] [3]. Linear algebra, for example,
during the exercise. This presents difficulties especially
is a topic where some students already have solid skills,
when applying knowledge to practical engineering
whereas others have never heard the topic in school.
problems, where the support from an expert would be
Further issue is the lack of continuous independent
required. Failure in solving the exercise problems may
study and practice during the semester, especially among
result in a negative self-image and lower motivation [7].
the first year students. In most mathematics courses
These points may indicate a connection between the
exercises are voluntary and are usually not graded.
issues mentioned above and the way of teaching, since the
iJEP ‒ Volume 4, Issue 3, 2014 11
INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
lecture is by far the most common method used by faculty
at many universities of applied sciences, especially in
introductory courses.
C. The Inverted Classroom Model
The inverted classroom (IC), or the flipped class, is a
teaching model, where the students prepare for the
classroom by watching video lectures at home, whereas
the classroom time is dedicated to practice, problem
solving, discussion, and individual support to the students
[8].
Although the inverted classroom has received relatively
high attention in the media, there is so far little rigorous
empirical research on the model [9] [5]. As noted by [5],
Figure 1. Inverted Classroom. The classroom time changes its role
the inverted classroom model is related to other teaching
from instruction to practice and application. Individual study takes place
strategies involving interactive engagement, such as active before class using prerecorded lecture videos, possibly supplemented by
learning or peer instruction. One could thus expect reading materials [15].
learning gains, such as those reported by [10] and [11],
also from inverted classroom. II. THE STUDY SETTING
Thus the inverted classroom is a promising teaching
A. The Research Questions
method to address the issues presented above, since it
The aim of this study is to evaluate the suitability of the
gives the instructor more freedom in arranging the
inverted classroom model for mathematics courses in a
classroom session. There are reports on the positive
university of applied sciences. We will discuss the
effects of the flipped class in mathematics courses [12].
following main research questions:
There is also some evidence that the inverted classroom
setting can help to address heterogeneous groups [13]. 1. How do students perceive and evaluate the new
model?
The inverted classroom starts from three basic
assumptions: 2. Can the learning objectives of a mathematics
course for engineering students be achieved with
1. Class time is valuable! In fact, it is so valuable it
the inverted classroom method?
should be spent with maximum engagement from
the students. 3. Can the inverted classroom help to address
heterogeneous groups better than traditional
2. Direct instruction through lecture is effective for
lectures?
presentation of knowledge, but it loses little from
videotaping. B. The Course and the Learning Objectives
3. Instruction has to precede application.
The study focuses on a mathematics course (Course I)
As a consequence, instructors using the inverted taught during the first-semester of the bachelor’s degree
classroom offer their students prerecorded video lectures, programs Electrical Engineering – Information
which the students should watch as preparation for the Technology and Electrical Engineering – Industrial
class. This allows for a self-paced preparation with the Automation at the Karlsruhe University of Applied
options to “pause and rewind” or to use additional Sciences. For comparison the inverted classroom model
resources to cover missing basics when needed. As a was also tested in a third-semester mathematics course
consequence, the differences in knowledge should (Course III) of the same degree programs.
decrease, because students have a chance to identify and
The Learning objectives for Course I are defined as:
eliminate their gaps before coming to class.
- Acquiring basic knowledge in mathematics
In class, the focus shifts from content presentation to
- Acquiring proficiency in calculations
deepening student understanding, problem solving,
discussion or other student-centered activities. The - Application of the knowledge to practical problems
presence of the instructor and support from peers during Before the onset of this study, the course with typically
this vital phase of learning helps to quickly identify and 50-70 students was taught utilizing an instructor-centered
address misconceptions and may ultimately even save but interactive lecture format using (leading) questions. It
time for the students. Reference [14] reports that students included worked examples and computer simulations as
do not spend more time studying for an IC course well as short periods of individual or group problem
compared to time used for traditional lectures. solving. Exercise problems with answers were provided
Furthermore, the instructor has the possibility to follow but not controlled. Exercise was expected to be done
the progress of individual students and thus receive a more outside the classroom.
thorough view of the current skill level in her class.
C. Topic Selection
A visualization comparing the learning sequence of IC
Instead of inverting the complete course we decided to
with traditional lectures is shown in Fig. 1. A good
pick selected topics for inverting. The reason for this was
summary of the method and previous studies can be found
to give the students the possibility to compare IC with the
traditional lectures. There are two types of topics we
consider especially suited to be taught with the inverted
classroom model:
INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
1. Topics where students have large difference in individually or teamed up with their neighbors, while the
prior knowledge. A traditional lecture on such professor went around offering support where it was
topic would either bore or overburden most welcome and needed. When most students had completed
participants. This was the reason for choosing the the tasks, a volunteer presented the solution on the
topics “functions” and “vectors” in Course I. blackboard.
2. Topics requiring a large amount of non-trivial
F. The Research Method
practice. In such topics the presence of an
The experiment involved evaluations on different
instructor during this practice can further
levels: a subjective report from the instructor, a voluntary
understanding, avoid frustration and ultimately
paper and pencil questionnaire offered to the students and
save time for the student: This consideration led us
an analysis of exam performance.
to the topic “systems of differential equations” in
Course III. In addition to the report of the instructor, the in-class
activities were documented by an independent observer.
D. Course Statistics
The observer attended both the inverted classroom and
In Course I the topic “functions” was covered in 3 traditional classroom sessions. This was necessary to
sessions of 90 min each. 14 short videos were produced perceive the concrete changes between the teaching
for the topic with the total duration of 183 minutes. The methods.
topic “vectors” was also covered in 3 sessions. The video In order to evaluate the students’ opinion of the inverted
material for “vectors” covered 143 minutes. Altogether classroom model, an anonymous paper and pencil
circa 20% of the course was taught using the inverted evaluation was conducted shortly after the inverted topics
classroom model. had been completed. Since only two topics were inverted,
The study was conducted in Course I during the the students were in a position to compare the inverted
following semesters: classroom with the traditional lecture. The 6-page
- Summer semester of 2012: 55 students enrolled, questionnaire included questions on the videos and their
34-45 participated in the inverted classroom use, on the classroom session, a comparison between the
sessions, 44 answered the questionnaire traditional lecture and the inverted classroom, as well as
on overall opinion of the teaching model.
- Winter semester of 2012/2013: 62 students
enrolled, 30-35 participants, 30 answered the We analyzed total six semesters of exam performance
questionnaire of the students: three semesters taught entirely in the
traditional lecture style and three semesters, which
- Summer semester of 2013: 73 students enrolled,
included the inverted classroom sessions. All courses were
30-40 participants, 36 answered the questionnaire
taught by the same instructor. Since inverted classroom
The students’ average age varies between 21.7 and 22.0
covered only two topics, it was necessary to look into the
years. The classes had only 6% to 10% female students,
students’ performance in solving individual exam
which is not sufficient to discuss gender differences in the
questions related to these topics.
perception of the method.
In Course III the topic “systems of differential III. RESULTS
equations” was covered in 3 sessions of 90 minutes each.
A. Instructor’s Opinion
The video material included 10 videos with total duration
of 137 minutes. Altogether circa 10% of the course was For the instructor, the inverted classroom model
taught using the inverted classroom. The inverted provides a possibility to support students individually.
classroom model was tested in the summer semester of Support and help can be given exactly at the stage where it
2012. 19 students were enrolled in the course, 17 is required by each student. Furthermore, increased
participated in the inverted classroom sessions with 15 interaction and discussion in the classroom, as well as
answering the questionnaire. coaching of individual students, gives the instructor
valuable feedback on the level of understanding and the
E. Implementation of the Model learning process of individual students in the class. This is
A motivational introduction to prepare the students for a major advantage compared to traditional lectures, where
the concept was given in advance. Students agreed with the instructor receives proper feedback only in the final
the general goals and the idea of increased practice. exams, after the course has already finished.
Pre-Class Activities: The videos were screencasts of a Due to diversified use of lecture time instead of
tablet computer, recorded with Camtasia Studio 7 and repeating similar monologue each semester, the course
supplemented with an inset video image of the instructor. becomes livelier for both the students and the instructor.
They were cut to 5-30 min length and distributed in HD We observed that in the sessions taught using the inverted
using links from the learning management system. The time explaining, the other 60% of the time being used for
videos were cut so that each video included one coherent individual practice. This is a significant change compared
topic. Voluntary guiding questions were offered to the to the traditional lectures, where 75% of the time was used
students in the learning management system to ensure by the instructor in presenting the content.
active listening. In the summer semester of 2012 in Course I the
In-Class Activities: Classes usually started with an instructor, instead of dedicating the time for practice,
introductory discussion presenting both possible problems presented additional computer simulations or applications,
and the guiding questions. The main part of the session so that the inverted classroom was in part turned back into
was spent solving practical exercise problems at a typical a traditional lecture. Based on our experience and the
homework level. Students either chose to work feedback from the students, we recommend not using
iJEP ‒ Volume 4, Issue 3, 2014 13
INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
inverted classroom as a means for squeezing in additional still did not see overall benefits in learning, nor did they
content. feel better prepared for the exam than in other topics.
The major dilemma for the instructor was how to deal Questions related to learning results received only
with students who had not watched the videos beforehand, moderately positive answers.
usually circa 20% to 25% of the students. On the one When asked, which model the students prefer, only
hand, too much recap would demotivate the other 40% preferred the inverted classroom, whereas 37% said
students, who had prepared themselves for the class. On they prefer the traditional lecture, the remaining students
the other hand, those students, who did not have a were not yet able to decide between the two models. There
possibility to watch the videos, would be unable to work were also huge differences between the different
in the classroom session. semesters, as shown in Figure 2. For example in the
The effort to produce videos for the inverted classroom summer semester of 2012 51% preferred the inverted
is significant but bearable. Support in video editing is, classroom and only 18% the traditional lecture. In the
however, highly recommended. summer semester of 2013 the number interchanged to
only 23% preferring the inverted classroom and 56%
B. Students’ Opinions preferring the traditional lecture. This indicates that group
The evaluation was conducted during three semesters dynamics could have major influence on the success of the
with 110 students who attended Course I. inverted classroom model.
Videos: Overall satisfaction on the videos was positive When asked what percentage of a course should be
with 81% of the students rating the quality of the videos inverted most students answered that the inverted
“good” or “excellent”. The students were also satisfied classroom should not be used exclusively (see Figure 3).
with the plain design of the videos, without fancy Furthermore, in the open questions some students wrote
animations or graphics. While 19% would like to see more that in their opinion the inverted classroom is not suited
graphics or animations, others wrote that animations for all topics or all courses.
would only distract them from the subject matter. 15% of
the students complained that the videos were too long.
The students also appreciated the possibility to learn at
their own pace and to watch the videos several times if
necessary. 56% of the students replayed video sequences
occasionally or often, the main reason mentioned being
difficulty to understand the content. 78% stated that they
had more control on their individual learning process
compared to the traditional lectures. Some students wrote
that they did not watch the videos, because they already
knew the topics from school.
When asked to compare the learning from the videos
with learning in a traditional lecture the opinions were
divided. Most students, however, said that through videos
they learned neither better nor worse than in a lecture.
However, 80% of the students agreed that they were well
prepared for the classroom session after watching the
Figure 2. The figure shows the high variation between the cohorts in
videos. One student even wrote that it is now easier to
their opinion on the inverted classroom. The original question was
cover content, which he/she did not have in school. These
“Alles in allem, welche Form der Veranstaltungsgestaltung würden Sie
statements support the idea that diverse learners can be bevorzugen?“ and the answer possibilities „Die neue Methode“,
addressed and supported better with the inverted „Klassische Vorlesungen“, and „Kann ich noch nicht beurteilen“.
classroom model than in traditional lectures.
Classroom Session: The classroom session received
also positive evaluation with 80% of the students agreeing
that the interactive classroom session was “fun”. The
students also felt that their individual pace of learning was
better taken into account than in traditional lectures. The
students also felt that they received more feedback than
during traditional lectures.
The students also found it positive that there was more
time to practice in the classroom and many listed this as a
major advantage of the inverted classroom model
compared to traditional lectures. This may seem puzzling
to some instructors, as the students traditionally can and
should practice at home at their own pace. Studies on
homework, however, reveal that the presence of the
instructor during practicing is very important, especially
when learning complex topics. Practice without immediate Figure 3. More than half of the students think that less than 1/3 of a
support can quickly lead to frustration [7]. course should be taught using the inverted classroom.This was an open
question with the original title “Welcher Anteil einer Lehrveranstaltung
Overall perception: Although the students recognized innerhalb eines Semesters sollte in dieser neuen Form durchgeführt
these positive effects of the inverted classroom model they werden (0% bis 100%)?“
INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
Other negative aspects mentioned by the students were course requirements (6 ECTS-credits with 90 hours
the workload required when preparing for the classroom lectures and 90 hours independent study). When using the
sessions, as well as the fact that if you do not have time to inverted classroom, there is no reason for changing the
watch the videos, the classroom session is useless. course structure or adding the required off-class learning
3rd Semester: The questionnaire was completed by 15 time.
students who attended Course III. It is worth noting that
D. Learning Gains
the third semester students in Course III evaluated the
To study the influence of the inverted classroom model
model better in all aspects than the first semester groups.
on the problem solving ability of the students we analyzed
Of these students 67% prefer the inverted classroom,
the exam results of three semesters with the inverted
whereas only 13% found the traditional lecture better (see
classroom (total 147 exams) and three preceding
Figure 3). The reasons for this could lie in the group size.
semesters without the inverted classroom (total 116
With 50 students in Course I compared to 20 in Course III
exams). The students who repeated the exam for 2nd or 3rd
the instructor was able to give more individual guidance to
time were excluded, as we cannot assume that they
each student. Further reasons could be the “maturity” of
attended the classes during the following semesters.
the students in the third semester, who see the benefits of
continuous practice, or the reduced heterogeneity of the Each exam included six questions and the topics tested
group; only the “better” students have passed the exams in remained unchanged throughout the period of study. The
the first two semesters. Furthermore, the different reason aim of the instructor was also to keep the difficulty level
for the topic selection can play a role in student of the questions constant throughout the semesters. Yet, to
satisfaction. Further research would be required to find out compensate for possible differences in the difficulty of the
the suitability of the inverted classroom for different exams and the random variation in the ability level of the
groups and students. students, we combined the results of three semesters with
the intervention into an experimental group and the
C. Student Workload
preceding three semesters without the intervention into a
Students report an increase of the total workload of control group.
inverted classroom compared to the traditional lecture. Of the two topics taught using the inverted classroom,
77% of the students said that they invested more time on the topic “vectors” was tested in a separate exam question
preparation than usually and 37% of the students throughout all exams, while the other topic, “functions”,
explicitly complained in an open text question that they was tested implicitly in several questions. We therefore
either needed to invest more time than for traditional decided to use the score on the “vector” question, varying
lectures or that they did not have the time to watch the from 0 to 4, as the experimental variable.
videos. However, circa 80% of the students who attended
Overall, there were no significant differences in the
the classroom sessions said that they had watched the
exam performance for the “vector” question between the
videos beforehand.
two groups, t(261)=0.145, p > .05. The mean score the
The questionnaire included a question asking for the students earned from the question remained constant
amount of time required for the inverted section and the (M=1.21, SD=1.34 in the experimental group, M=1.23,
amount of time students thought they would have used on SD=1.37 in the control group). The overall exam
that specific topic in a traditional lecture. On average performance also remained constant throughout the
students in Course I report an increase of 0.9 hours in period.
workload per week due to the inverted classroom (average
We also analyzed the performance of the quartile of
7.3 hours instead of 6.4 hours per week). The maximum
students with the highest total score and the quartile of
time reported for the IC model was 15 hours per week.
students with the lowest total score, excluding the
The times include 4.5 hours of lecture time each week and
“vector” question in both cases. This was done in order to
an average of 2.7 hours videos per week for the inverted
find out whether weaker students would profit from the
classroom sessions.
inverted classroom.
Almost half of the students (45%) said that the time
When comparing the quartile of students with the
they invested was profitable for learning (only 18% said it
lowest total score in the experimental group and the
wasn’t, the rest could not decide before the final exam),
control group we found no significant differences in the
and 67% agree that the effort and learning results were
performance for the “vector” question (see Figure 4),
balanced.
t(64)=0.363, p > .05. However, among the quartile of
It should be noted that the course demands 90 hours of students with the highest total score the performance for
self-study over the semester. We have to assume that most the “vector” question was for the experimental group
of this occurs close to the final exam, as shown by [4]. If (N=37, M=2.65, SD=1.16) higher than for the control
we attribute 30 hours to end-of-term studying, students group, (N=29, M=2.21, SD=1.50), though the difference
would still have to spend 4h per week with self-study. is not statistically significant, t(64)=1.35, p > .05.
Even with the reported increase due to the videos, no
We can conclude that although the exam performance
course reached these times. These numbers are self-
of the whole group remained constant throughout the
reported, the validity is to be questioned, and according to
studied period, the results give us hint of “Matthew
[4] the actual values could be even lower than the
effect”, i.e. “good” students might benefit more from the
perceived ones.
inverted classroom model.
We conclude that although the students complain about
the additional workload, it is still in agreement with the
iJEP ‒ Volume 4, Issue 3, 2014 15
INVERTED CLASSROOM BY TOPIC – A STUDY IN MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING STUDENTS
videos beforehand, the classroom session is useless. Such
students can actually suffer from the new model.
Furthermore, the exam performance hints that “good”
students might profit more from the inverted classroom
model than weaker students. Therefore, the method can
lead to a “Matthew effect”, implying that the motivated
students who are more likely to prepare for the class gain
more during the interactive sessions. Students with a low
interest in the topic or many other obligations have a
higher probability of skipping the videos and thus will not
benefit at all from the classroom sessions. At best, the
divide now acts on the dimension of diligence instead of
schooling. It is possible that this distinction is related to
the findings reported by [16]: “inexperienced learners
tended to benefit from more guided instruction.”
Further research would be required to find out effects of
the inverted classroom model on different student groups,
Figure 4. The mean score achieved in the “vector” question. Both the
experimental group and control group include the exams from three including the differences between students with good or
different semesters. The lower quartile includes the students with lowest weak prior knowledge, as well as differences between first
total score in the exam, the upper quartile the students with the highest semester and higher semester students.
total score (excluding the “vector” question).