]hp-cos.scisyhp[
1v6642.4070:viXra
Is diversity good?
Mathieu Bouville
Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Singapore 117602
Prominent ethical and policy issues such as affirmative action and female enrollment in science
and engineering revolve around the idea that diversity is good. However, even though diversity
is an ambiguous concept, a precise definition is seldom provided. We show that diversity may
be construed as a factual description, a craving for symmetry, an intrinsic good, an instrumental
good, a symptom, or a side effect. These acceptions differ vastly in their nature and properties.
The first one cannot lead to any action and the second one is mistaken. Diversity as intrinsic
good isamereopinion,which cannotbeconcretely applied;moreover, themost commonlyinvoked
forms of diversity (sexual and racial) are not intrinsically good. On the other hand, diversity as
instrumentalgood canbeevaluatedempirically andcangiverisetopolicies, butthesemaybevery
weak. Finally,symptomsandsideeffectsarenotactuallyaboutdiversity. Weconsidertheexample
of female enrollment in science and engineering, interpreting the various arguments found in the
literature in light of this polysemy.
Keywords: ethics,policy,highereducation, femalestudents, minoritystudents, affirmativeaction
I. INTRODUCTION
Diversityisatthecoreofwidelydiscussedethicalandpolicyissuessuchasaffirmativeactionin
highereducation,1,2,3femaleenrollmentinscienceandengineeringdepartments4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13
—“oneofthegreatestchallengesfacingthisnation”4—,diversityinthemedicalprofessions,14,15
workplacediversity,16,17,18 andbiodiversity.19 However,inspiteofits “kudzu-likeprogression”20
in recent years, diversity is seldom defined precisely.
As philosopher and Nobel laureate Bertrand Russell pointed out, “everything is vague to a
degree you do not realize till you have tried to make it precise.” Who does not state precisely
and explicitly why diversity should be increased cannot realize that ‘diversity’ can have several
meanings and is bound to confuse them. Believing that people who have the same name are
the same person would seem ludicrous. It is nevertheless a very common error when it comes
to diversity. For instance, to Pless and Maak18 diversity is good for business because it “can
becomeacompetitiveadvantage.” Theyconcludethat“diversityis,firstandforemost,acultural
questionand thus a question of norms, values, beliefs andexpectations. As such, it is an ethical
question and determined by some very essential founding principles of human coexistence.” As
“competitive advantage” diversity is plainly an instrumental good (see Sec. III), whereas as
“ethical”itisintrinsicallygood(Sec.II)orperhapsasymptom(Sec.IV). Thesewhollydifferent
conceptions of diversity cannot be so equated.
The source of the problem is that issues related to diversity are seen as essentially political:
peoplefirstdecidewhethertheylikediversityandthenlookforarationalization. Themeaningof
diversityis drawnfromthe conclusionratherthanthe otherwayaround. ParaphrasingBradley,
one could saythat diversity is the finding ofbad reasonsfor what we believe upon instinct. The
meritofanargumentthen comes morefromits capacityto supporta pre-establishedconclusion
than from its objective validity.
In contrast, we will first try and determine what diversity means and what its properties are
before applying the concept (to the case of female enrollment in science and engineering, in
Sec. V). This way we can talk of diversity clearly and unambiguously, and thus make sure that
any policy based on diversity is justified and consistent.
II. DIVERSITY AS INTRINSIC GOOD
It is sometimes claimed (and very often assumed) that diversity is intrinsically good. This
means thatdiversity is goodasan end, i.e.goodin andfor itself. One mayfor instance saythat
happiness, love, and friendship are intrinsically good.
A. Is diversity intrinsically good?
“Questionsofultimate ends are notamenable to directproof.”21 Indeed, whatkind of experi-
mentorobservationcouldprovediversitytobegoodinitself? Consequently,“anythingwhichis
goodasanendmustbeadmittedtobegoodwithoutproof.”22Butofcoursethereisnoobjective
reasonto leap into faith andadmit without proofthe opinionthat diversity is anintrinsic good.
In contrast, it is possible to show that diversity is not intrinsically good if the idea is incon-
sistent. What method can one use? “That of considering what value we should attach to it if it
existed in absolute isolation, stripped of all its usual accompaniments. And this is, in fact, the
only method that can be safely used, when we wish to discoverwhat degree of value a thing has
in itself.”22
If diversity were the only (or the most important) good then, if most people are smart and
healthy, we would have to promote stupidity and sickness. We would also have to increase the
number of women in prison, where they are under-represented.10,11 Clearly, diversity cannot be
the only or the supreme good: it may at most be one good amongst others. In fact, diversity
mayvery wellbe goodbut ofmarginalimportance (e.g.to be used as a tie-breakerif everything
else is absolutely the same). But then the fact that something contributes to diversity would be
a negligible detail, so that we could ignore diversity altogether. One cannot prove that diversity
is important anymore than one can prove it to be intrinsically good.
Importantnote. ‘Notgood’doesnotmeanbad: somethingmaybemorallyneutraloramoral.
‘Not intrinsically good’ does not mean not good: something may be good without being intrin-
sically good.
B. The scope of diversity
Letusassumeforthesakeofargumentthatdiversityisbothintrinsicallygoodandimportant.
For practical purposes, we need to know exactly what one means by diversity, we need to know
what kind of diversity we are talking about. If diversity is defined very broadly, everybody
contributes to it (everybody is different from the majority in at least one way), so that it is
impossible to rely upon it to choose between people (for instance when hiring).
It seems that the most natural solution is to dismiss unimportant categories. But how to tell
them apart? What makes skin color more important than hair color? Many would invoke a
historical disadvantage or anti-discrimination laws to give more importance to the former. But
if diversityis supposed to be intrinsically goodit cannotdepend on history or the law. Another
differencebetweenskinandhairisthatpeoplepaymuchlessattentiontothe latter. Thismakes
diversity essentially about countering spontaneous behavior (see ‘diversity as symptom’ below).
But then the goodness of diversity is not intrinsic either (it cannot be both intrinsic and a
reaction). The reasons why people focus on skin rather than hair are not compatible with the
idea of an intrinsic good.
Letusconsideramanandawomanwhohavehadessentiallythesamelife. Verily,thewoman
willnotcontributemuchmoretodiversitythanthemansince,apartfromhersex,sheisjustlike
him: many men are more different from him than she is. One will reply that it is very unlikely
thatamanandawomanbesosimilarbecausetheyhaveadifferent“lifeexperience.”5 Thismay
be true, but what this means is that being a man or a woman is not directly relevant, it merely
correlateswith a form of diversity that is supposed to be good. Sexual difference —“stripped of
all its usual accompaniments”22— is not good (or very marginally). Likewise racial diversity is
not intrinsically good. If sexual and racial diversities are good, they are so only indirectly.
C. From intrinsic good to policy
Since it is logically impossible to prove that one kind of diversity or another is intrinsically
good, the choice of scope is arbitrary, a personal belief. Yet, if one does not know what kind of
diversityisintrinsicallygood(ifany)onecannotknowwhatkindofdiversitytopromote(ifany).
Any choice of policy would have to be the result of the bargaining between different viewpoints.
Obviously what is supposed to be intrinsically good cannot logically be the result of a political
compromise. Hence,noconsensuscanbereachedforapolicybasedondiversityasintrinsicgood
(if there is a consensus then the consensual form of diversity is not intrinsically good): no such
policy can concretely exist.
One can also wonder how it is possible to agree that diversity is good and important without
agreeingon what diversityis. If a Britonandan Americanboth say ‘I like corn,’do they agree?
No, because ‘corn’ would not have the same meaning for the two of them. The agreement is a
semantic illusion: they refer to different things for which they simply happen to use the same
word. Likewise, without an agreement on the scope of diversity, any agreement that diversity is
good is vacuous.
As already pointed out, the idea that diversity is intrinsically good is in itself arbitrary. Con-
sequently, any policy is really based on an opinion, not on facts. It may be the opinion of the
majorityand this opinion may evenbecome law, but neither can provediversity to be a goodin
itself so that neither can justify a policy relying on diversity as intrinsic good.
III. DIVERSITY AS INSTRUMENTAL GOOD
A. Introducing a new view of diversity as good
Whatwesawintheprevioussectionisnotthatdiversitycannotbegoodbutratherthatintrin-
sic goodness is too stringent a goal. In the present section, we introduce a different conception
of diversity as good, which avoids the inconsistencies of intrinsic good.
Onesaysthatdiversityis goodasa means(instrumentalgood)ifit is conduciveto something
good. In the case of minorities in college, for instance, “diversity has been shown to result in
positive learning outcomes and positive ‘democracy outcomes’ for all students.”2 This was the
onlykindofargumentacceptedbythe SupremeCourtinRegents of the University of California
v. Bakke. More women in engineering would be good because of the greater variety of designs
whichmore diverse teams couldinvent4,5,6,18 (“the innovative andcreative potential inherentto
a diverse workforce.”)18 To decide whether one should hire a new employee who is very smart
but has the same skills as current employees or somebody who may be of average intelligence
but with an original expertise, one compares the outcomes (which alternative leads to the best
results?).
B. Is diversity good and important?
Sayingthat diversity is intrinsically goodmakes a statement about whatis good. Conversely,
in the case of instrumental good, the good is independent of diversity: one can agree on what is
goodwithoutmakinganyclaimrelatedtodiversity. Therearethentwoseparatequestions: What
isgood? andDoesdiversitycontributetoit? Inengineering,awelldesignedproductisgood. To
establishwhethermixedgroupsleadtothisgood,onecancomparetheperformancesofall-male,
all-female, and mixed groups. With sufficient data one could conclude beyond reasonable doubt
whether diversity has good and important consequences. Likewise one can find out empirically
whether diversity is important (leads to major improvement) or not (barely an improvement at
all). That sexual diversity merely correlates with something genuinely good is not an issue here
since we make no claim that sexual diversity is intrinsically good.
Anybody denying that diversity is good as means would then reject facts. With diversity
as intrinsic good no proof can exist, so that denying that diversity is good is just rejecting an
opinion. Are opponents to diversity-basedpolicies objectively wrong? Or do they simply have a
differentopinion? Thiscannotbeanswereduntilonehasmadeclearinwhatdiversityissupposed
to be good.
C. Diversity and ethics
If diversity is good because it has good consequences, it is not universal: it is not diversity in
generalbut some form of diversity that is good. Exactly what kind of diversity is good must be
determined on a case-by-case basis. It is important to notice that diversity is not necessarily a
moral concept then: if more diversity leads to more money then diversity is a business concept
for example. Diversity is ethical in nature only if it leads to a good which is itself ethical in
nature.
Animportantconsequenceisthatdiversitythencannotbeexpectedtoreceiveawidesupport.
Indeed, if diversity is morally good then anybody would be expected to contribute to increasing
it, but if diversity is only a matter of making more money for a given company then people
outside the company have no reason to try to increase diversity in this company. If one cannot
showthatdiversityis a matter ofethics, its supportwill be verylimited: only thosewho benefit
directly have a reason to contribute. This is why proponents of affirmative action try to show
that it benefits both blacks and whites:1,2 the whole population (and the courts) could not be
expected to support it if it were good for minorities only.
D. The problem of limited knowledge
As we pointed out, any form of diversity is not necessarily conducive to the good, so that
studies are needed to determine —in every particular situation— which ones are. If one then
knows that a certain kind of people would be good for engineering, one may seek to increase
their enrollment rather than that of other categories for which no benefit is known. Yet, what
oneknowsdepends onwhatone wantsto know. So thatwe favora categorybecausewe decided
to find out whether we should. What seemed neutral (favoring categories objectively conducive
to the good) may in fact be dependent on human choices.
IV. OTHER ACCEPTIONS OF DIVERSITY
We showed that diversity could be construed as an intrinsic good or as conducive to the good
and that “the nature of these two species of universal ethical judgments is extremely different;
andagreatpartofthedifficulties,whicharemetwithinordinaryethicalspeculation,aredueto
the failure to distinguish them clearly.”22 In this section we present four other ways to interpret
diversity.
A. Descriptive diversity
Diversity may be simply descriptive. One can for example say that, if this state has 3% of
blacks and that state 30%, the latter is more diverse. This greater diversity is a fact, not a
judgment. One must notice that descriptive diversity is not sufficient for action. Three steps
are necessary to decide to act. (i) Learning about a fact in the external world. (ii) Making a
judgmentonthisneutralandobjectivefactthatweknow. (iii)Decidingwhetherandhowtoact
basedonthisjudgment. Descriptivediversityisonlystepi(the otherfiveacceptionsofdiversity
are meant to be judgments, step ii): it is necessary but not sufficient.
B. Diversity as symptom
The symptoms of a disease neither are bad in themselves nor lead to anything bad: they are
simply the consequence ofsomething bad. Likewise, lackof diversitymay notbe wrong in itself,
nor does it necessarily lead to anything bad. Rather, it can be seen as a hint that something
is not right, as a symptom. Unlike when diversity is considered good, one does not purport to
actively increase diversity: rather, the argument here is that diversity should not be artificially
decreased (for instance by discrimination). Mentions of “groups that have systematically faced
discrimination and oppression”17 clearly interpret lack of diversity as a symptom.
One should notice that increasing diversity is not ipso facto good in this case: getting rid of
the symptom is not the same as treating the patient. For instance, arbitrarilyexpelling random
white college students would increase diversity but would be utterly absurd. Moreover, lack of
conception of relation to
factual specific decisive ethical drawback(s)
diversity thegood
descriptive none yes yes no no one cannot act upon it
symmetry mistaken no no by mistake no mistaken
good in itself is no no no yes mere opinion; inapplicable
good as means causes yes yes yes not in needs case-by-case proofs;
all cases may have limited support
symptom caused yes yes indirectly indirectly indirect
side effect indirect yes yes indirectly indirectly misleading
TABLEI: Summary of properties of different conceptions of diversity. Specific: is this view of diversity
different for different cases or is it rather universal? Decisive: allowing to make concrete decisions.
diversityisjust ahint,notaproof. Itis thereforenecessaryto look—beyondthe symptom—at
thegooditself. Infact,assoonasonenoticesaproblem,oneshouldgiveupthinkingintermsof
diversity (i.e. of symptom) to focus on solving the actual problem. It is quite easy to lose focus
and concentrate on a mere symptom.
C. Diversity as a side effect
According to Cohen15, “seeking diversity in the medical professions is imperative to achieve
just and equitable access to rewarding careers in the medical professions.” Here the core of the
argument is “just and equitable access,” not diversity. Diversity is merely a side effect in this
case. Making this an argument in favor of diversity is misleading. Due to the new popularity of
diversity (“it has become one of the most pious of the pieties of our age that the United States
is a society of enormouscultural diversity”),20 basing an argumenton ‘diversity’gives it weight.
For the sake of clarity one should talk of increasing diversity only when the justifications are
genuinely based on diversity, not just something correlated with it.
D. A craving for symmetry
Diversity is often construedas the idea that any subset of the population should be similar to
theoverallpopulation: agrouprepresenting,say,20%oftheoverallpopulationmusthave20%of
representativesin boardrooms, higher education, science, etc. It is quite difficult to understand
in what the same proportion in a specific context as in the overall population is supposed to be
good in itself. It rather seems a craving for symmetry. Yet, this is what most people have in
mind what they talk of diversity.
V. AN EXAMPLE — FEMALE ENROLLMENT IN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING
The six acceptions of diversity we identified (summed up in Table I) can be found in the
literature arguing for a greater female enrollment in science and engineering. As we will see,
they are seldom clearly identified, so that what the authors intended to say is often unclear.
A. Diversity-based argument bric-a-brac
“While women make up over 50% of the college-age population in the U.S., they represent a
smallminorityamongengineeringstudents.”7 Ifthis issaidfromtheviewpointofdescriptivedi-
versity,wecanonlyagreethatthisisafact. Yetitisclearthatallusionstounder-representation
cannot be meant to be purely descriptive since they are supposed to justify policies to increase
female enrollmentin scientific fields. And, unlike what Baum8 believes (“the numbers speak for
themselves,demonstrating a significantproblemin recruiting and retaining women”), a descrip-
tioncannotonitsownjustify action. Clearlytheremustbe animplicit intermediatestep,which
justifies diversity-basedpolicies.
Authorsmayvalue“diversityforitsownsake,”6yetfewactuallyexplicitlysayso. Ortheymay
cravefor symmetry. This seems to be the case of Lane4 who talks of “a workforcefor the global
economy that reflects our great diversity.” Chubin et al.6 write that engineering “must narrow
the gap between practitioners on the one hand, and their clientele on the other” but also that
“diversityfor its ownsakemay speak to moralityandfairness” andthat diversityis “anenabler
that makes teams more creative.” So they invoke diversity as intrinsic good, as instrumental
good, and as symptom and they wish for symmetry. Four different conceptions of diversity, no
less! Anderson and Northwood12 want to “increase diversityin engineering”(so saystheir title)
but never explain why diversity should be increased(they use the word ‘diversity’ a grandtotal
of twice).
B. Instrumental diversity
SomearguewithWulf5 thatmorewomeninengineeringwouldbegoodbecauseofthe greater
variety of designs which more diverse teams could invent. This is a valid argument provided
that (i) one establishes empirically that more diverse engineering teams indeed perform better,
(ii)thisimprovementwillbenefitsocietyasawholeratherthanjustsometechnologicalcompanies
(otherwiseonewouldhavenoreasontocontributetothisincreaseindiversity,asalreadypointed
out),and(iii)anyothergroupthatcancontributeasmuchaswomenistreatedinthesameway.
According to Gurin et al.1 “students who interact with diverse students in classrooms and
in the broad campus environment will be more motivated and better able to participate in a
heterogeneous and complex society.” This means that if a heterogeneous (i.e. diverse) society is
good,thendiversityincollegeisgood. Butthisbegsthequestion: itshowsthatdiversityisgood
(incollege)assumingthatdiversityis good(in general). Eventhoughtit seemsto holddiversity
tobeaninstrumentalgood,thisargumentreallyassumesthatitisintrinsicallygood. (Thisdoes
notmaketheargumentofdiversityasinstrumentalgooditselfinvalidsincetherecanbepositive
outcomes that do not assume that diversity is good in itself, e.g. “enhanced cognition.”)2
C. Lack of diversity as symptom
It is often argued that the low female enrollment in engineering is a symptom of social
pressure9,13 and that “we should of course seek to rid any biases, for instance due to a girl’s
familyorfromschoolteachers.”10When“alotofpeoplearguefordiversityintermsoffairness,”5
they likely interpret lack of diversity as a symptom of lack of fairness.
Yet many authors nevertheless talk of women as under-represented. This seems to indicate
that they would expect women to make up 50% of engineers, which is simply wishing for sym-
metry. However,if by ‘under-represented’ one means that there are fewer women in science and
engineeringthantherewouldbewithoutsocialbiases,oneisindeedarguingthatlackofdiversity
isa symptomofsomething bad.11 Butthis kindofunder-representationcannotbe measured: as
wesaidearlier,assoonaswethinkthat,throughalackofdiversity,weidentifiedsomethingbad,
we should stop talking of the symptom and focus on the actual problem. Moreover one should
makesure that lack ofdiversity as symptom—which canbe a valid argument—is not mistaken
for an irrational longing for symmetry.
D. Diversity as side effect
A common argument is that technology plays an ever-increasing role in society and economy,
so that the number of engineering graduates must increase. And women are a great potential
sourceofengineers.4,5,6,7,8,9 Obviouslythis argumentis not infavorofdiversityitself: itaims at
increasing the total number of engineers rather than change the composition of the engineering
student body. The latter may be altered in the process, but this is only a side effect.
VI. CONCLUSION
Since many different concepts have been called ‘diversity,’ one must be careful when invoking
diversity not to ring a homonym. This is of the utmost importance since some of these views
are mistakenand cannot justify any policy. We saw that diversity may be a neutral description;
but this is insufficient to act. The idea that there should be the same representation in a
specific context as in the overall population is both puzzling and arbitrary. One cannot prove
that diversity is good in itself. In fact, we showed that sexual and racial diversities are not
intrinsicallygood. Moreover,therecannotconcretelyexistpoliciesbasedondiversityasintrinsic
good. On the other hand, diversity as instrumental good can be evaluated empirically. But this
must be done in every separate context. Diversity as instrumental good can give rise to precise
policies. But,since itisnotintrinsicallyethical,thereisnoreasonforthesepoliciestobe widely
supported. While diversity as symptom and as side effect can justify actions, these arguments
arenotactuallyaboutdiversitysothatoneshouldgiveupthinkingintermsofdiversitytofocus
on what really matters. Naturally, these are not necessarily mutually exclusive, e.g. diversity
may lead to something good and the current lack of diversity may be a symptom of something
bad. But the various acceptions must be introduced as separate arguments and each must be
justified.
Electronic address: m-bouville@imre.a-star.edu.sg
1 Gurin,P.,Nagda,B.A.,&Lopez,G.E.(2004).Thebenefitsofdiversityineducationfordemocratic
citizenship. Journal of Social Issues, 60, 17–34.
2 Crosby,F. J., Iyer,A., & Sincharoen, S.(2006). Understandingaffirmative action. Annual Review of
Psychology, 57, 585–611.
3 Orfield, G. (2001). Diversity Challenged: Evidence on the Impact of Affirmative Action. Cambridge:
Harvard Education Publishing Group.
4 Lane, N.(1999). Increasing diversity in theengineering workforce. The Bridge, 29(2), 15–19.
5 Wulf, W. A.(1998). Diversity in engineering. The Bridge, 28(4), 8–13.
6 Chubin,D.E.,May,G.S.,&Babco, E.L.(2005). Diversifyingtheengineeringworkforce. Journal of
Engineering Education, 94, 73–86.
7 Chen, J. C., Owusu-Ofori, S., Pai, D., Toca-McDowell, E., Wang, S.-L., & Waters, C. K. (1996). A
studyoffemaleacademicperformanceinMechanicalEngineering.FrontiersinEducationConference.
8 Baum, E. (1990). Recruiting and graduating women — The underrepresented student. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, 28, 47–50.
9 Widnall,S.E.(1988).AAASPresidentialLecture: VoicesfromthePipeline.Science,241,1740–1745.
10 Bouville, M. (2007). Should we enrol more female studentsin physics? Physics World, 20(4), 18.
11 Bouville, M. Should there be more women in science and engineering? submitted (e-print:
12 Anderson, L. & Northwood, D. (2002). Recruitment and retention programmes to increase di-
versity in engineering. International Conference on Engineering Education. Available online at:
13 Cohoon,J.M.(2002).Recruitingandretainingwomeninundergraduatecomputingmajors.SIGCSE
Bulletin,34, 48–52.
14 Hammond, R. A. (1999). The moral imperatives for diversity. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related
Research 362, 102–106.
15 Cohen, J. J. (1997). Finishing thebridge to diversity.Academic Medicine, 72, 103–109.
16 Griggs, L. B. & Louw, L.-L. (1995). Valuing Diversity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
17 Konrad,A.M.,Prasad,P.,&Pringle,J.K.(2006).Handbook of Workplace Diversity.London: Sage.
18 Pless, N. M. & Maak, T. (2004). Building an inclusive diversity culture: principles, processes and
practice. Journal of Business Ethics, 54, 129–147.
19 Tilman, D. (2000). Causes, consequences and ethics of biodiversity.Nature, 405, 208–211.
20 Appiah,K. A.(2005). The Ethics of Identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
21 Mill, J. S.(1871). Utilitarianism.
22 Moore, G. E. (1903). Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.