Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
Amos J. Storkey a.storkey@ed.ac.uk
Jonathan J. Millin j.j.millin@sms.ed.ac.uk
Krzysztof J. Geras k.j.geras@sms.ed.ac.uk
School of Informatics,University of Edinburgh
Abstract basisofexpectedutilitytheory. Weshowthatawhole
Recently, prediction markets have shown spectrum of aggregation methods are then available,
considerable promise for developing flexible includingandextendingthoseprovidedbyα-mixtures.
mechanismsformachinelearning. Inthispa- We demonstrate the empirical benefits of these aggre-
per, agents with isoelastic utilities are con- gation methods over those discussed above.
sidered. It is shown that the costs asso- A number of authors have recently examined the pos-
ciated with homogeneous markets of agents sibilities of market mechanisms for implementing ma-
with isoelastic utilities produce equilibrium chine learning methods. Desirable properties of mar-
prices corresponding to alpha-mixtures, with kets include the fact that agents act independently,
aparticularformofmixingcomponentrelat- markets are inherently parallelisable and the fact that
ing to each agent’s wealth. We also demon- the form of models produced by markets is more
strate that wealth accumulation for logarith- general than explicitly defined probabilistic models.
micandotherisoelasticagents(throughpay- Market based machine learning approaches are be-
offsonpredictionoftrainingtargets)canim- ing shown to be consistent with standard probabilis-
plement both Bayesian model updates and tic machine learning formalisms (Storkey, 2011) as
mixtureweightupdatesbyimposingdifferent wellprovidingregretboundsformarketmakers(Chen
market payoff structures. An iterative algo- & Wortman Vaughan, 2010; Abernethy et al., 2011).
rithmisgivenformarketequilibriumcompu- Markets are also a well studied and pervasive part of
tation. We demonstrate that inhomogeneous our social and computational infrastructure.
marketsofagentswithisoelasticutilitiesout-
We envisage the possibility of setting up online pre-
perform state of the art aggregate classifiers
diction markets for large scale multivariate prediction
suchasrandomforests,aswellassingleclas-
problems in which different algorithms compete. This
sifiers (neural networks, decision trees) on a
generalises prediction markets, which usually focus on
numberofmachinelearningbenchmarks,and
disconnected discrete events, and relates to other re-
showthatisoelasticcombinationmethodsare
centworkinutilisingalgorithmcrowdsourcingforma-
generally better than their logarithmic coun-
chinelearning(Abernethy&Frongillo,2011). Itwould
terparts.
provide an alternative to, say, the current interest in
competition and challenge environments (e.g. Netflix,
1. Introduction
Kaggle,PASCAL2),whereindividualscompeteforthe
This paper addresses the problem of classifier aggre- best personal performance. Experience in these do-
gation through the use of Machine Learning Markets. mains has suggested that it is common for individual
In supervised machine learning, many algorithms use algorithms to be outperformed by competitors group-
simple averaging, weighted averaging, mixtures, mix- ing together to produce model combinations (Bell &
ing and log opinion pools for combining a variety of Koren, 2007). This mirrors the experience regarding
classifiers to form aggregate classifiers. On the other aggregation of expert predictions (Dani et al., 2006).
hand, prediction markets have been used for aggrega- The main novel contributions of this paper are:
tionofsimplebeliefsinotherfields(themarketpriceis
used as an aggregate probability). Some simple forms • Extending the set of standard agents from loga-
of theoretical prediction markets have been shown to rithmic agents and exponential agents to also in-
be equivalent to weighted averaging (Barbu & Lay, clude the various forms of isoelastic agents, and
2011; Storkey, 2011). However, more generally, we toshowsuchagentscanreproduceandextendthe
can formulate prediction market mechanisms on the α-mixtures framework (Amari, 2007).
AppearinginProceedingsofthe29th InternationalConfer- • Demonstrating that online and batch agent
enceonMachineLearning,Edinburgh,Scotland,UK,2012. wealth updates are equivalent to Bayesian pos-
Copyright 2012 by the author(s)/owner(s). teriorupdatesandmixturecoefficientupdatesre-
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
spectively. will be critical for efficiently reaching equilibrium. In
(Tsengetal.,2010)theauthorsexaminethestatistical
• Equating the multi-agent equilibrium (fixed-
properties of market agent models, whereas in (Lee &
point) market with a divergence minimisation.
Moretti,2009)theauthorsconsiderpredictionmarkets
The result is an iterative process for establishing
in the context of Bayesian learning.
the market equilibrium values.
• Demonstrating that Machine Learning Markets 3. Notation
outperformindividualstrongclassifierswhenpre-
sented with equivalent data. Showing that the Machine Learning Markets use prediction market
markets improve on state of the art classifiers, mechanisms to generate machine learning models via
such as random forests, and provide better log- themarketprice. Thebasicconceptsandnotationare
probabilityperformanceonclassificationtestsets. now introduced.
• Demonstrating that inhomogeneous sets of isoe-
3.1. Goods
lastic agents produce better performance than
logarithmic agents. Hence aggregation by simple We consider a set of market goods enumerated by k =
mixtures can be improved upon. 1,2,...N G , each corresponding to a specific outcome
of a discrete random variable, denoted k. The good k
will pay out one unit of currency in the event that the
2. Other Related Work outcomeforkisk. Themarkethasacommonlyagreed
cost c (0 < c < 1) for each good k and we collect
A number of previous papers address machine learn- k k
the costs into the cost vector c = (c ,c ,...,c )T.
ing and prediction markets. In (Lay & Barbu, 2010) 1 2 NG
The cost vector c will be interpreted as the aggregate
and (Barbu & Lay, 2011), the authors consider agents
probabilistic belief provided by the market: the prob-
endowed with betting functions, and do experimental
ability1 of k occurring is c .
tests in the context of classifiers (leaves of the trees of k
a random forest) trained on bootstrapped samples. In
3.2. Agent Actions
(Storkey, 2011) the author develops a complementary
approach, utilizing beliefs and utilities of individual A number of agents, enumerated by i = 1,2,...,N ,
agents. He shows that a variety of machine learning act in the market. Each agent has wealth W , and in-
model combination methods, including model averag- vests (or risks) an amount r in stock k. We collect
ing, product models, factor graphs etc. can be imple- r =(r ,r ,...,r )T. A no arbitrage assumption2
mented using Machine Learning Markets. In (Chen & implies that c =1, meaning a probabilistic inter-
Wortman Vaughan, 2010) the market is defined with pretation of c is reasonable. Likewise, we can require
respect to a global cost function, and they demon- allagentstospendalltheirwealth: ifanyagentwants
strate achieving ‘no regret’ learning using information tokeepitasariskfreeinvestment,thatagentcansim-
markets. From another perspective, Agrawal et al. plypurchaseoneofeachstockinstead. Hence,without
(Agrawal et al., 2010) looked at the equilibrium con- loss of generality, we have
ditions of prediction markets in various situations of (cid:88)
r =W . (1)
matching buyers and sellers. The available informa- ik i
tion is important for market conditions. This was dis- k
cussedin(Jumadinova&Dasgupta,2011),wherethey Again without loss of generality, we will measure
used a multi-agent system to examine the various de- wealth in units such that the total wealth across all
pendencies on information reliability, rate etc. It is agents is 1: (cid:80) W =1. Hence (cid:80) r =1.
the ability of prediction markets to aggregate belief
Each agent is also endowed with a utility function
that is key to their potential (Pennock & Wellman,
U (W) denoting the utility of having wealth W. For
1997; Ottaviani & Sørensen, 2007), and much of the i
the purposes of this paper we will only consider con-
experimental work on prediction markets backs that
cave utility functions. Finally, each agent has a belief
up (Ledyard & Hanson, 2008).
P , where P (k) denotes the probabilistic belief, for
The potential of prediction markets has been consid- that particular agent i, that the outcome of k will be
ered for some time. In (Arrow et al., 2008; Manski, k. Necessarily, as k enumerates all possible outcomes,
2006; Wolfers & Zitzewitz, 2004) the authors discuss (cid:80) P (k)=1 for all agents.
the capability of practical prediction markets to cap-
ture accurate probabilities. In (Dani et al., 2006) the 1Strictly, the probability is c k divided by the unit of
payout. This ensures dimensional consistency, both here
authors compared a number of different mechanisms
and elsewhere.
for expert aggregation including a simple prediction
2No arbitrage: there is no opportunity for a risk free
market approach. Different market designs have dif- (cid:80)
gain. If c (cid:54)= 1 an agent can make a risk free win
ferent features, and ensuring good prediction market by buying (o k r k selling) one of each stock which has a sure
design with sufficient fluidity (Brahma et al., 2010) return (or debt) of 1 unit.
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
3.3. Market isoelastic utility with the limiting value of η =1.
The agents jointly act in a market. The market trans-
4.2. Market Equilibrium
actions are subject to the macroscopic constraint
The Market must satisfy the market constraint (2).
r ik = (cid:88)
W =1⇒ (cid:88)
r =c (2) At the same time each agent attempts to maximise
c k i ik k theirindividualutility. Itiswellknown(Arrow&De-
i=1 i=1 i=1
where N is the number of agents. This states that breu, 1954) that, if the individual utilities are concave
wealthmustbeconservedinthemarket: thetotalpay- (as is the case in this paper), there is a unique fixed
out were that item to occur matches the total original price point for which agents all attain their maximum
wealth. Here r /c is the amount of good k bought utility and the market constraints are satisfied. This
by agent i (the amount invested divided by cost) and is called the market equilibrium. However, the exis-
so is the amount received if event k occurs. tence of a fixed point does not establish a means of
obtainingit. Thequestionofhowamarketmightequi-
3.4. Summary Table librate formed part of the early discussion regarding
i → agent k → good/outcome equilibria, and led to Walras’ concept of tˆatonnement.
N ,N → #agents/goods r → investment This idea, as communicated by Samuelson (Samuel-
W → Wealth U → Utility son, 1947), was that prices are differentially changed
c → cost vector P (k) → agent belief in the direction of the excess or deficit demand. How-
ever, the constraints on this formalism meant it was
4. Utility Maximisation not established as a general purpose procedure. The
aremanyanalysesthatinvolveformulatingconvexop-
In Machine Learning Markets the market price c de- timisation approaches or auction processes for obtain-
finesaprobabilitydistributionoverpossibleoutcomes, ingmarketequilibria,e.g. (Dengetal.,2002;Devanur
which can be used for prediction. The multiclass pre- et al., 2008; Ye, 2006) – see (Vazirani, 2007) for more
diction problem is the focus for this paper. details. These algorithms typically require a complete
optimisation procedure. Two exceptions are (Cole &
4.1. Investment Functions Fleischer, 2007; Fleischer et al., 2008) which develop
A given utility function U induces a given investment on the idea of tˆatonnement.
function r∗ i (W i ,c) via expected utility maximisation: In this paper an iterative tˆatonnement-like approach
r∗ i =r∗ i (W i ,c)=argm r a i x (cid:88) P i (k)U i (cid:18) r c i k k (cid:19) i t s he us fa ed ct f t o h r a e t s (cid:80) tab k l c i (cid:80) s k hi = ng 1 m an ar d ke (cid:80) t k e ( q (cid:80) ui i li r b i r k i ) a. = C 1 o m ns e i a d n e s r
k that both c and r take probabilistic form. At
(cid:88) k i(cid:80) ik
s.t. r ik =W i . (3) equilibrium, we have i r ik = c k (see (2)) when all
agentsareallocatedtheiroptimaldemand. Awayfrom
where we have used the fact that every agent must equilibrium there will be an excess or deficit demand
spendtheirwholewealth(1). Theinvestmentfunction in different goods, which is evident in the difference
indicates the amount an agent ideally would wish to between (cid:80) i r ik and c k . Consider the KL divergence
invest in each good, given the costs c. The market KL(c|| i r i ). This is minimised and zero only at
constraints may mean this desire cannot be satisfied: equilibrium. To minimise this KL divergence we use
the agent must find a buyer or seller to realise this Algorithm1. Thisalgorithmonlyterminateswhenthe
desire. The optimum of (3) is given by (unique) equilibrium is reached, when c is the equilib-
(cid:18) c (cid:19) rium price. In all our empirical tests the equilibrium
ik k i i P (k) was always reached. Each pass of the algorithm is
naivelyO(N ×N )–eachupdateiscomputationally
whereU(cid:48) isthederivativeofU andλ (c)isaLagrange A G
multiplier such that (cid:80) r∗ =W is satisfied. equivalent to a mixture model update. In our exper-
k ik i iments equilibria were reached in between 5 and 15
In general, the equation for λ cannot be explicitly
i iterations.
solved. However, for a number of utilities the invest-
Satisfaction of the market constraints for given
mentfunctionisanalytic. Table1listssomeimportant
buying functions, or equivalently minimisation of
utilityfunctions(exponential,logarithmicandisoelas-
KL(c|| r ), defines a fixed point that is a market
tic) and their corresponding investment functions. i i
equilibrium. These market equilibria can be explicitly
Theclassofisoelasticfunctionsareaveryusefulsetof
computed for various agent utilities. For a market of
utilities. Theisoelasticutilitiesgettheirnameasthey
identical logarithmic agents or a market of identical
all have investment functions that are linear in the
exponential agents we have
current wealth; this property is called the isoelastic
ty.
0.
= (cid:80) i
(cid:89) N
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
Exponential U( (cid:26) W)=−exp(−W) r ik (W i ,c)= N W G i +c k logPi c ( k k) − N 1 G (cid:80) k(cid:48) c k(cid:48) logPi c ( k k (cid:48) (cid:48))
log(W) for W >0
Logarithmic U(W)= r (W ,c)=W P (k)
−∞ otherwise ik i i i
Isoelastic U(W)= W1 1 − − η η i i −1 r ik =W i (cid:80) k ( (cid:48) c ( k c ) k(cid:48) ) ηi ηi η − i (P 1 ( i P (k i ( ) k )η (cid:48)) i )η 1 i 
Table 1. Various utility functions and their corresponding investment functions. For the isoelastic utilities 0<η.
Algorithm 1 Market Equilibrium 0.4
initialise c, initialise a (e.g. a=0.1) 0.3
define stopping criterion (cid:15) 0.25
repeat 0.2
0.15 Compute optimal r for each agent ignoring mar-
ket constraint
set (for normalising Z 1 ) −010 −5 0 x 5 10
(cid:18)(cid:80)
(cid:19)1−a
cnew = i ik c (5)
discard cnew and increase a.
until KL(cnew|| (cid:80) r (cnew))<(cid:15)
respectively. Forlogarithmicagentsthistakestheform
ofamodelaverageormixtureoftheagents’beliefs;for
exponential agents it is a log opinion pool of beliefs.
See (Storkey, 2011) for discussion of these. The term
homogeneous willbeusedtorefertomarketswhereall
agents have identical utility functions.
4.3. Equilibria for Isoelastic Agents
We cannot explicitly obtain the equilibrium for sets
of isoelastic agents with η (cid:54)= 1, and so the optimi-
sation procedure of the previous section needs to be
employed. However we can say something about the
form of solution we obtain for isoelastic agents. For
example we can obtain the following equilibrium for
homogeneous markets of isoelastic agents, all having
the same η. This solution is not closed form:
(cid:34) (cid:35)η
(cid:88) 1 c
where V =W /Z and Z is the implicit solution to
Z i = (cid:88)  (cid:88)W Z jP j (k)η 1  P i (k)η 1 . (8) j k j
Equation (7) is precisely the equation for α-mixtures
(Amari, 2007; Wu, 2009), but where V is defined im-
plicitly in terms of a set of weights (or wealths) W .
This particular expression for α-mixtures is interest-
ing because of the isoelastic property: if a single com-
ponent from the α-mixture is replaced by two iden-
−010 −5 0 5 10 x
Figure 1. (a) Three different components (i.e. agent be-
liefs), each given weights W of 0.4, 0.4 and 0.2 from left
to right. (b) The logarithmic (i.e. mixture) combination
of these components (dashed) and the isoelastic (η = 10)
combination (solid). Note the isoelastic combination puts
moreweightwheretheoverlapofthedifferentcomponents
are and down-weights the regions of disagreement or iso-
lated components.
tical components with weight W /2, it results in ex-
actly the same model. The precise number of compo-
nents/agentsdoesnotmatter,justthetotalwealthas-
sociated with each belief, regardless of the how many
components share it. Furthermore the influence the
agenthasontheoverallmodeldependsonthelevelof
agreement that the agent has with the overall consen-
sus. This affect the value of Z for that agent.
Figure 1 illustrates the distinction between an isoelas-
ticmarketcombinationandalogarithmiccombination
(which is equivalent to a standard mixture). In the
isolelastic market, for η >1, the individual beliefs are
‘squashed’ (raised to a fractional power) before being
mixed, and are then ‘unsquashed’ again after mixing.
The result of this is the areas of agreement between
agents are emphasised relative to a standard mixture.
As an alternative to (7), we can also write
c = W Pη(c) (9) k i ik
where Pη(c) is defined as
(cid:16) (cid:17)1/η
Pη(c)= k ck . (10) ik (cid:16) (cid:17)1/η (cid:80) c Pi(k(cid:48)) k(cid:48) k(cid:48) c k(cid:48)
Again this is not closed form, but expresses the equi-
libriumc asaweightedsumoftheeffectivebeliefs Pη
that are associated with each agent once the impact
of the combination with rest of the market is taken
into account. Each effective belief is weighted by the
agent’s wealth W before aggregation.
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
In the discussion above, all the agents have utilities each time point the outcome is then revealed and all
with the same value of η. This is a homogeneous mar- bets are cashed in. This is an online update scheme.
ketstructure. Howeverthereisnorestrictiontohomo- LetWtdenotethewealthofagentiafterthetargetfor
geneity in the context of Machine Learning Markets. data point t is known and the winnings are received.
Here an inhomogeneous market structure can be used
For isoelastic agents (including logarithmic agents
where different agents have different η values. Hence
when η = 1), at each data point t, each agent bets
the equilibria of Machine Learning Markets can im- the whole wealth Wt and gains a return of r /c ,
plement a broader set of combination processes than i ikt kt
leading to
standardα-mixtures,andsogeneralisestheα-mixture WtPη (c)
formalism. WeshowinSection6thattheuseofanin- Wt+1 = i ikt (11)
homogeneousmarketstructureprovidesimprovements i (cid:80) i(cid:48) W i t (cid:48) P i η (cid:48)kt (c)
over standard mixtures for a variety of standard ma- using (10) and (9), and r from Table 1.
chine learning benchmarks. If we equate Wt+1 with the concept P(i|D ) then
5. Training and Wealth Allocation this leads to
Pη P(i|D )
We consider a classification problem, with a train- W i t+1 =P(i|D T+1 )= (cid:80) P ikt η P(i(cid:48) T |D ) (12)
ing dataset D
consisting of covariates xn and cor- i(cid:48) i(cid:48)kt T
responding classifications kn. We wish to learn the whichgivestheBayesianupdateruleonobservationof
anewdatapointattimetforasingleagentlikelihood
relationship between variables x and classifications k,
so that given a test point x∗ we can provide a predic- P i η kt . For logarithmic agents the belief P i η kt = P i (k t )
and this just reduces to a Bayes update, treating each
tive distribution for the value that the corresponding
class label k∗ will take. A test dataset D is used to agentasanindependentprobabilisticmodel. Forisoe-
lasticagentsitisstillaBayesupdate,butwhereBayes
evaluate the final performance.
ruleusestheeffectivebeliefs Pη asthecomponentdis-
5.1. Agent Beliefs and Wealth Updates tributions,insteadoftheindividualagentbeliefP i (k t ).
The equilibrium cost ct for any item at time t after
Each agent has an individual belief P (k). In this pa-
i seeing data D is a standard Bayesian model average,
per we consider agents that have used standard ma- T
given by (9), as the weights are the posterior proba-
chine learning algorithms on a training data set D
Tr bilities associated with each agent (12).
to derive their beliefs.
The fact that these Bayesian updates occur for log-
Each agent has a specific wealth W . The wealth af-
i arithmic utilities (or equivalently log-loss) has been
fects the market influence of that agent. An agent’s
discussed in a different context in (Beygelzimer et al.,
action in the market changes the wealth of the agent:
2012). Establishing the extension of this rule for isoe-
thechangeofwealthafterasingleinvestmentr ,anda
i lastic agents is a novel generalisation.
return on that purchase is given by r /c where k∗
denotestheindexoftheeventthatoccurs. Theagents 5.1.2. Batch: Mixing Coefficient Updates
make purchases in predictions across the whole train-
Bayesian model averaging is appropriate if we inter-
ing dataset, trading with the other agents. Payouts
pret each agent as an alternative competing hypothe-
are then made and each agent makes a return on the
sis, where ultimately one agent has the correct belief.
investment. Agents that invest well (relatively) gain
However, in many, or even most situations (see e.g.
wealth,whereasagentsthatinvestingoodsthatdon’t
(Domingos, 2000; 1997; Minka, 2002) for a continued
pay out lose wealth and hence market influence. This
discussion), we may believe that the most appropriate
process can be repeated for a number of epochs.
model is a combination of beliefs rather than a single
For analytic purposes, we consider two wealth update
one. In those settings Bayesian model averaging is in-
schemes: an online and a batch scheme. All the em-
appropriate. Rather, we may believe the data is best
pirical analyses are done using the batch scheme.
described by a mixture of probabilities, and we wish
to determine optimal mixing proportions.
5.1.1. Online: Bayesian Model Updates
Consider, instead, splitting the agent wealth equally
Consider the case of all agents starting with wealth
across test cases, and requiring the agents to place
1/N ,whereN isthenumberofagents. LetT denote
A A bets on all test cases at once. In this case the wealth
the first t data items and D denote the ordered set
T updates are equivalent to a single step of the mixture
of those data items, with D being the tth item. The
t component updates. Specifically the return from con-
total number of items is N . Let k be the target for
Tr t sidering data item t is
the tth data point.
In the online setting, the agent purchases predictions P(i|t) d = ef (cid:80) W i ik P t η (c) . (13)
on the data points t=1,2,...,N one at a time. At i(cid:48) i(cid:48) i(cid:48)k
Equation (13) is precisely the form of responsibility
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
Waveform Vehicle Image Ionosphere BreastCancer Sonar LetterRecognition
21f,3c,5000d 18f,3c,946d 19f,7c,2310d 34f,2c,351d 10f,2c,699d 60f,2c,208d 16f,26c,20000d
LLR 30 7.9 21 1.9 2 1.1 190
σ(LLR) 5.9 2.4 3.1 1.9 1.9 0.8 11
p 6.8×10−23 1.1×10−17 1.9×10−26 3.4×10−6 1.2×10−6 6.4×10−9 3.9×10−38
NNosi LLR −41 −31 −8 5.6 0.5 2.2 210
σ(LLR) 15 9.8 7.9 8 3.8 5.1 29
p 1 1 1 0.00031 0.22 0.012 3.4×10−27
LLR 28 12 27 19 20 16 390
σ(LLR) 33 21 19 11 10 7.9 41
p 3.7×10−5 0.0024 5.1×10−9 5.4×10−11 4.8×10−12 6.2×10−12 1.5×10−30
TDosi LLR 28 7.3 16 2.1 3.7 1.4 12
σ(LLR) 13 5.8 8.8 3.2 3.4 2.6 28
p 5.2×10−13 6.9×10−8 2.4×10−11 0.00056 8.8×10−7 0.0035 0.01
LLR 2.3×102 42 61 6.8 14 8.8 580
σ(LLR) 30 13 18 4.2 7.2 3.6 73
p 6.5×10−28 2.7×10−17 3.9×10−18 4.4×10−10 1.4×10−11 2.8×10−14 3.1×10−28
Table 2. Comparisons against isoRF. The table uses an isoelastic market of trees from a random forest (isoRF) as a
baseline and compares this with a number of methods above (positive LLR => isoRF is better). The isoelastic market
of trees (isoRF) performs better than the other standalone classifiers and random forest aggregation which is among
state of the art on all these problems (Caruana & Niculescu-Mizil, 2006). The exception is that isoRF is beaten in some
cases by the isoelastic market of neural networks. The other methods listed are the standalone random forest (RF),
an inhomogeneous isoelastic market of neural networks (isoNN), a standalone neural network (NN), an inhomogeneous
isoelastic market of decision trees (isoDT) and a standalone decision tree (DT). LLR is the average test log likelihood-
ratio(differenceofloglikelihoods)betweentheisoRFandotherlistedmethods. σ(LLR)isthestandarderrorofthatlog
likelihood-ratio across different data samples. The p values give the sampling probability of each method being better
than isoRF using a right-tailed paired t-test with 29 degrees of freedom. The information about the dataset is displayed
belowitsname,wheref isthenumberoffeatures,c thenumberofclasses,andd thenumberofdatapoints. Comparing
test log likelihood takes into account the full prediction probabilities. It captures not just the highest probability class
but the quality of the measure of uncertainty across classes.
calculation for a mixture model, but where we have togeneratemeaningfulstatistics,withdatabeingran-
used the effective beliefs for the isoelastic agents. The domly permuted before each test. The same series of
update rule W = P(i|t), which is simply the ac- random seeds were used for each iteration of each test
cumulated return over the whole dataset, matches the in order to fairly compare different utility functions.
update rule for mixture coefficients. Wealthupdateswereperformedusingthebatchmech-
anism described in Section 5.1.2.
Hence across the whole range of isoelastic agents, ini-
tialising agents with equal wealth and repeatedly ap- Inhomogeneous isoelastic markets were created by
plying the batch update rule reproduces the usual sampling values for η using (η − 1) ∼ Γ(k,θ), with
mixture coefficient updates applied to an α-mixture shape parameter k = 3 and scale parameter θ = 1.
model. However multiple different values of α can be This produces a diverse set of η values for different
used for different agents. agents, while ensuring η > 1. More risk averse utility
functions (η > 1) were chosen as they emphasise re-
6. Results
gionsofagreementbetweenagentsratherthanregions
Machine Learning Markets with logarithmic and iso- of disagreement (see (7) and Figure 1).
elastic agents were compared with decision trees, neu- The primary purpose of this analysis is to test differ-
ral networks and random forests on a number of UCI entpossibleprobabilisticcombinationmethodsagainst
datasets3. Experimental data was split into two sets, other single classifiers. Hence, we compute test log-
with 2/3 of the data being used for training and 1/3 likelihoodsasthemainevaluationmetric. Thisisgiven
fortesting, withamaximumtotaldatasetsizeof3200 byLL= (cid:80)T log(P(k |x )),whereP(k |x )istheprob-
items. For large multiclass data, we used the Letter ability of the true value k given covariates x . For a
Recognition dataset. The markets of random forests market we have P(k |x ) = c where c is the equi-
were built using the Matlab random forest imple- librium cost from the t m t arket k g t iven all agents in the
mentation,treebagger,with20decisiontreespruned market know the covariates x. Logs of test likelihood
byrequiringaminimumoftenofobservationspertree ratios are used when different models are compared.
leaf. Individualdecision treeswereextracted fromthe
random forest after it has been trained on all of the 6.1. Relative Classifier Performance
training data, and were used to generate each of the
We compare the methods used in Machine Learning
20agents’beliefs. Inourcomparisons,marketwealths
Markets against other standard classifiers. Machine
wereadaptedonthecompletetrainingsetwith1train-
Learning Markets can utilise any probabilistic classi-
ing epoch. 30 iterations of each test were performed
fier as the beliefs for each agent, and so we compare a
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
wav veh img ion brc snr
oitaR−doohilekiL
test η but with significantly less computational cost.
Figure 2. A boxplot (the red ’x’ represents the mean, and
blackdotsrepresentonestandarddeviationfromthemean)
ofthescaledtestloglikelihood-ratiosintheisoelasticand
logarithmic markets for many iterations, scaled by the
number of data points. Note that in general, the log-
likelihood for isoelastic agents is significantly higher than
forlogarithmicagents. Letterrecognitionisexcludedasit
would be off the top of the figure.
sifiers. The exception is for random forests, which is
already an aggregate classifier, and there we compare
a random forest, against a market of trees that match
the trees in the random forest. An inhomogeneous
isoelastic market with batch updates is used for all
comparisons. Table 2 presents the results along with
standard deviations. The market approaches outper-
form all the standard approaches on all datasets, with
clear statistical significance. This includes improve-
ments over random forests. Interestingly, the market
of neural networks performed better than the market
of random trees in some settings.
6.2. Isoelastic versus Logarithmic Markets
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Figure2shows 1 log LISO ,whereN isthenum-
NTe LLOG Te
ber of test points, and L denotes the test likelihood.
This is referred to as the (scaled) log of the test
likelihood-ratio between the inhomogeneous isoelastic
market and the logarithmic market predictions.
Ingeneral,theloglikelihood-ratiosarepositive,mean-
ing that isoelastic markets have higher test perfor-
mance than logarithmic markets. Further, they are
positive to one standard deviation (the black dots in
Figure 2), implying that isoelastic markets perform
better (paired t-test p<0.01 in all cases).
6.3. Varying the Parameter of Isoelasticity
Figure 3 shows that the test log-likelihood varies
for homogeneous isoelastic markets with varying η.
Searching for a good η via a cross validation pro-
cess can be computationally expensive. An alterna-
tive approach is to randomly allocate an η to each
of the agents, producing inhomogeneous markets, and
perform market updates in order to tune the mixing
proportions for the different agents. Figure 3 demon-
strates that the inhomogeneous market provides re-
sults about as good as if we has known the optimal
01 51 02 03 05
(cid:100) value
doohilekiL−goL
Figure 3. Boxplot showing the test log-likelihoods for dif-
ferentvaluesofη(onwaveformdataset). Theredlinegives
thetestlog-likelihoodforthesamedataandaninhomoge-
neous market with (η−1)∼Γ(3,1). The inhomogeneous
market performs on par with the market with the best
η value (’best’ as assessed a posteriori on the test data),
without prior knowledge of good η values.
6.4. Batch Wealth Updates and Performance
Figure 4 shows that adapting wealth improves the
test log-likelihood. This is true for both logarithmic
and isoelastic utility functions. We have noticed that
wealth adaptation does not make a significant differ-
ence on accuracy for small multiclass datasets, how-
ever, improvements in accuracy are observed on the
large multiclass Letter Recognition data. In general,
learning is more beneficial in cases where some agents
are significantly poorer performers than others (e.g.
they overfit, or are trained on biased data etc.).
0 10 20 30
doohilkiLgoL
0 10 20 30
Figure 4. The(a)loglikelihoodsand(b)accuracyforisoe-
lastic and logarithmic utility functions, over a number of
trainingepochsfortheLetterdatasets. Valueoflogutility
attimezeroisequivalenttothevalueforarandomforest.
Theisoelasticutilityisbetterthanlogarithmicutilityand
random forest in both accuracy and log likelihood. The
gain from using an isoelastic utility is greater than the
gainfromwealthadaptation(equivalenttomixtureweight
optimisation). The wealth adaptation does provide some
benefit, but is more much more useful when spurious or
poor classifiers are also included. Here most individual
classifiers provide a similar contribution.
Isoelastic Agents and Wealth Updates in Machine Learning Markets
7. Discussion Chen,Y.andWortmanVaughan,J. Anewunderstanding
of prediction markets via no-regret learning. In Pro-
Machine Learning Markets can reflect many of the ceedingsofthe11thACMconferenceonElectroniccom-
propertiesofprincipledprobabilisticmethodsinhand- merce, 2010.
crafted probabilistic models. The design of Machine Cole, R. and Fleischer, L. Fast-converging tatonnement
algorithms for the market problem. Technical report,
LearningMarketsallowstheimplicitdefinitionofpow-
Dept. Computer Science. Dartmouth College., 2007.
erful models. We show that Baysesian model averag-
Dani, V. et al. An empirical comparison of algorithms for
ing and mixture model learning can be naturally im- aggregating expert predictions. In Proceedings of the
plemented using market mechanisms. We show that Conference on Uncertainty in AI (UAI), 2006.
different utility functions have a significant effect on Deng, X., Papadimitriou, C., Saberi, A., and Vazirani, V.
the market combination results, and that isoelastic On the complexity of equilibria. In STOC 2002, 2002.
Devanur, N.R., Papadimitriou, C.H., Saberi, A., and
utilities are more effective in a number of tests than
Vaziani, V.V. Market equilibrium via a primal–dual al-
utilitiesthatimplementstandardmixtures. Thebene-
gorithmforaconvexprogram. Journal of the ACM,55:
fitsofinhomogeneousmarketsofisoelasticagentsover 22:1–22:18, 2008.
state of the art classifiers has been demonstrated, and Domingos, Pedro. Why does bagging work? a Bayesian
the understanding of isoelastic utilities as encoding a accountanditsimplications. InProceedingsKDD,1997.
generalisation of α-mixtures has been developed. Domingos,Pedro. Bayesianaveragingofclassifiersandthe
overfitting problem. In In Proc. ICML 2000, 2000.
Therearetwoimmediateextensionstothisworktobe Fleischer, L., Garg, R., Kapoor, S., Khandekar, R., and
considered. First, the adaptability of markets means Saberi, A. A fast and simple algorithm for computing
that tests of this approach in the context of dataset market equilibria. In Proceedings of WINE, pp. 19–30,
2008.
shift, or non-stationary environments, would be valu-
Jumadinova,J.andDasgupta,P. Amulti-agentsystemfor
able. Anotherangleworthyofinvestigationisthemix-
analyzing the effect of information on prediction mar-
tureofexpertsetting. Inthecontextofthispaper, all kets. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 26:
agents had beliefs about the whole predictive dataset. 383–409, 2011.
It is likely that an agent will also learn about its own Lay, N. and Barbu, A. Supervised aggregation of classi-
fiers using artificial prediction markets. In Proceedings
performance in the market: assessing what situations
of ICML, 2010.
itislikelytogenerateapositivereturnon. Suchagents
Ledyard, J and Hanson, R. An experimental test of com-
would allocate different resources to different condi- binatorial information markets. Journal of Economic
tional situations akin to a mixture of experts. Behavior and Organization, pp. 469–483, 2008.
Lee,D.S.andMoretti,E.Bayesianlearningandthepricing