Research Article for BMC Bioinformatics
JAK/STAT signalling - an executable model assembled from
molecule-centred modules demonstrating a module-oriented
database concept for systems- and synthetic biology
Mary Ann Blätke1, Anna Dittrich2+, Christian Rohr1,3+,
Monika Heiner3§, Fred Schaper2§, Wolfgang Marwan1§*
* Correspondence: wolfgang.marwan@ovgu.de
+ Contributed equally
§ Shared senior authorship
1Lehrstuhl für Regulationsbiologie and Magdeburg Centre for Systems Biology, Otto-
von-Guericke Universität
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
We describe a molecule-oriented modelling approach based on a collection of Petri
net models organized in the form of modules into a prototype database accessible
through a web interface. The JAK/STAT signalling pathway with the extensive cross-
talk of its components is selected as case study. Each Petri net module represents
the reactions of an individual protein with its specific interaction partners. These Petri
net modules are graphically displayed, can be executed individually, and allow the
automatic composition into coherent models containing an arbitrary number of
molecular species chosen ad hoc by the user. Each module contains metadata for
documentation purposes and can be extended to a wiki-like minireview. The
database can manage multiple versions of each module. It supports the curation,
documentation, version control, and update of individual modules and the
subsequent automatic composition of complex models, without requiring
mathematical skills. Modules can be (semi-) automatically recombined according to
user defined scenarios e.g. gene expression patterns in given cell types, under
certain physiological conditions, or states of disease. Adding a localisation
component to the module database would allow to simulate models with spatial
resolution in the form of coloured Petri nets. As synthetic biology application we
propose the fully automated generation of synthetic or synthetically rewired network
models by composition of metadata-guided automatically modified modules
representing altered protein binding sites. Petri nets composed from modules can be
executed as ODE system, stochastic, hybrid, or merely qualitative models and
exported in SMBL format.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Keywords:
JAK/STAT signalling; Petri net; biomodel engineering; formal language; synthetic
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Background
Systems biology is a multidisciplinary approach to understand the complex molecular
mechanisms of life by combining systems theory and experimental approaches. For
experimentalists and theoreticians it is not easy to find a common language and this
is still a bottleneck for successful project development and cooperation. Although
systems biology has developed into an established discipline, the majority of life
scientists is still not aware of the benefits of kinetic models. Some scientists are even
skeptical about the usefulness of a model based systems view on biological
mechanisms. One obvious reason for this situation might be that life scientists
working as experimentalists are traditionally not (well) trained in mathematics,
modelling or even systems theory. This bars them from being able to access, use,
and judge kinetic models of molecular networks. Furthermore, suitable platforms
designed to facilitate productive interactions between experimentalists and
theoreticians are widely missing but would allow more experimentalists to contribute
to gain a systems view on biology.
Petri nets are a formal modelling language which, according to our experience,
is quickly learned and intuitively understood by pure experimentalists as the graphical
representation and execution of a Petri net is similar to the way of how molecular
reaction schemes are usually graphically displayed in the field of biochemistry and
molecular biology (Figure 1). In Petri nets, molecular components are represented as
places and biochemical reactions as transitions [1]. Accordingly, the translation of a
biochemical reaction scheme into a Petri net model is straightforward (Figure 1). A
Petri net can be interpreted as a qualitative or a quantitative (ODE, stochastic, or
hybrid) model while the graphical representation of its structure looks identical.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Appropriate tools make Petri nets powerful executable models [2] where the
equations required for running simulations are automatically generated in the
background while the model is drawn in a graphical user surface (Figure 1 E,F). Petri
net tools such as Snoopy provide a unifying framework for the graphical display,
computational modelling, and simulation of molecular networks [3, 4]. In Snoopy, a
Petri net graph can be interpreted as a qualitative or a quantitative model that allows
to perform continuous (ODE-based) or stochastic simulations and even hybrid
approaches [5]. In addition, colored Petri nets permit to simulate heterogeneous
populations of interacting molecules or populations of cells by automatically creating
multiple, eventually interconnected copies of a Petri net and by running them in
parallel [6]. Snoopy supports the export of models in the form of ODE's or as SBML
code in order to support the exchange with existing modelling and simulation
platforms. Together with the analysis tool Charlie and the model checking tool Marcie
[7], Snoopy contributes to a computational platform supporting advanced Petri nets
for systems biology and provides the basis for the work described here.
Kinetic models of molecular networks common to systems biology are usually
monolithic entities describing the functional interactions of a certain number of
molecular components. Up to now many models have been built based on both
literature data and experimental results. For various reasons, different models often
cannot be easily combined to more comprehensive models that still perform correctly
as the combined parts do on their own (see Discussion). Models describing the same
biological process may, for example, differ considerably due to a distinct degree of
details. Therefore enlarging as well as updating of existing models is a difficult, time-
consuming, and an error-prone task.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
We propose that computational models of molecular networks should be semi-
automatically generated or updated from a central collection of curated modules,
each reflecting the functional interactions of an individual molecule such as a specific
protein or RNA. We will discuss functional features to make such collections useful
for the expert user and the non-expert user as well.
Taking the JAK/STAT signalling pathway as example, we assemble an
executable model from a collection of Petri net encoded modules organized in
database prototype.
The JAK/STAT pathway is a prevalent intracellular signalling pathway
activated by a multitude of cytokines such as interleukins, interferons, and growth
factors [8, 9]. The canonical JAK/STAT pathway is activated by binding of a ligand to
membrane bound receptors and subsequent phosphorylation and activation of
receptor-associated JAKs. Activated JAKs phosphorylate tyrosine residues in the
cytoplasmic part of the receptors, which serve as binding sites for STATs. After
binding, STATs are phosphorylated by JAKs, dimerize, and translocate to the
nucleus where STATs act as transcription factors (Figure 2). The activation of the
JAK/STAT pathway is restricted by the transcriptional induction of feedback inhibitors
e.g. SOCS3 and constitutively expressed phosphatases e.g. SHP2. The JAK/STAT
signalling pathway can be activated in a variety of different cell types and through a
plethora of receptors resulting in the regulation of different sets of genes. Thus,
JAK/STAT signalling has a broad range of effects. This results in a complex network
of signalling events that are not yet fully understood.
JAK/STAT signalling plays a major role in development, cell proliferation, cell
migration, and inflammatory processes [10]. Dysregulation, especially constitutive
activation, of JAK/STAT signalling was found in cancerous, autoimmune, and
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
inflammatory diseases. Here we refer to the IL-6 type cytokine-induced JAK/STAT
pathway activated e.g. by IL-11, LIF (leukemia inhibitory factor) and IL-6 itself. IL-6 is
a crucial regulator of both pro- and anti-inflammatory processes [11] and
dysregulated IL-6 signalling is associated with e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis and plasmacytoma [9].
The combinatorial effects of different IL-6-type cytokines and their receptors
and the involved isoforms of signalling molecules of the JAK/STAT pathway
exemplify the usefulness of the modular modelling concept described here. All
signalling molecules are implemented individually as independent model modules in
the form of a Petri net equipped with connection interfaces representing the kinetic
mechanisms of interaction with other components. These modules can be
recombined automatically in a combinatorial manner to generate executable kinetic
models for the different scenarios of JAK/STAT signalling.
Results and Discussion
General description of the modular modelling concept
In its basic form, the modular modelling concept considers every protein as
functionally independent model, here called module. A module considers the (1)
reaction mechanisms and (2) molecular interactions of a given protein with other
proteins or low molecular weight molecules (e.g. 2nd messengers). Furthermore, a
module includes (3) conformational changes affecting functionally relevant states,
and (4) the binding of and dissociation from other proteins or other molecules (e.g.
lipids). A module also comprises (5) all known biochemical modifications that might
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
influence the activity of the protein or the probability of its interaction with proteins or
other molecules, e.g. posttranslational modifications. Technically, each module is
organized in the form of hierarchically structured submodels in Snoopy (see
Figure 1 C,D for the explanation of submodels and for further details). Where
applicable, small molecules like ions, second messengers, energy carriers,
metabolites etc. are included as intrinsic components of a module such that two or
more proteins may functionally couple with each other through their interactions with
the same (small) molecule.
We found that each module exhibits certain structural properties that influence
the dynamic behaviour of the entire module as listed in Table 1 and described in [12].
These properties can be used as criteria to validate the functional integrity of each
module. Modules validated accordingly can be automatically linked through common
parts, called common subnetworks to gain a modular network (Figures 3,5,6; for
details see below). From the technical point of view it is required that the places and
transitions of the subnetworks of a module are declared as logical nodes
(Figures 3,5) which ensure that the marking of the places shared between modules is
the same in the connected modules. Interfaces between given modules representing
interacting molecules and their interaction mechanism are defined by interface
subnetworks. We use the terms interface subnetwork and submodel differently.
According to our definition, an interface subnetwork connects modules while a
submodel refers to the hierarchical representation of parts of a network within
Snoopy. Interface subnetworks may be represented as submodels in Snoopy but by
far not all submodels are interface subnetworks.
We also found that one can predict the properties of a automatically
composed model based on the shared topological properties of the individual
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
modules (Table 1). These topological properties as revealed by the analysis tool
Charlie [12] can be understood in terms of biologically relevant molecular
mechanisms [13]. Composition by automatic coupling does neither alter the structure
nor the properties of each module, but defines the structural properties of the
composed model. Any automatically composed model is fully executable and may be
interpreted as a qualitative, stochastic, continuous, or hybrid model for running
simulations (see Figure 1 for details). In the following, we will detail the procedure of
constructing a protein module.
Constructing a module
Modules are constructed based on the domain structure and molecular
reaction mechanisms of a protein as well as its interactions with other molecules.
This includes also conformational states that are functionally relevant. For each
module, literature references are annotated as part of the module’s database entry.
Each place of a module corresponds to a specific functional state of a specific protein
domain (e.g. a phosphorylated or unphosphorylated side chain, a catalytically active
or inactive domain etc.). A place may also represent a specific status of a protein with
respect to the interaction or reaction with a small molecule (e.g. a binding site free or
occupied by a small molecule, substrate, or product etc.). In this context, a transition
as node of the Petri net represents a molecular transition between two different
states of a protein domain, any biochemical reaction of the protein, or the physical
interaction of the protein (domain) with other molecules or domains (Figure 1). Each
module fulfills the structural properties given in Table 1.
As protein modules in general describe the detailed reaction mechanism of a
protein in terms of its catalytic and regulatory reaction cycles, the underlying Petri net
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
reflects mass conservation with respect to the modeled protein. Mass conservation
results in the coverage of any protein module by one or several P-invariants. The
minimal P-invariants describe the set of all possible states of a protein domain.
These states may be involved in the interaction with small molecules or with a
second site of the same or of an interacting protein (for a brief introduction to P- and
T-invariants see the extended version of legend to Figure 1 provided as
supplemental file 1). Protein modules do always contain T-invariants. A minimal T-
invariant consists of a set of transitions that restores the initial marking of a subnet.
The minimal P-invariants of a module, on the other hand, can be classified as
strongly connected (closed) or not strongly connected (open) P-invariants. Both types
constitute a state machine (a net without forward and backward branching
transitions). A strongly connected state machine (a cycle) corresponds always to a T-
invariant, which may or may not be minimal. Thus, closed P-invariants are covered
by T-invariants and vice versa. Accordingly, the initial marking of a closed P-invariant
representing the reaction cycle of a protein domain can be restored and the
corresponding part of the Petri net hence is live. This is not true for a domain that is
represented by an open P-invariant. Those parts of a protein module that represent
the interaction with small molecules form an open P-invariant, and the corresponding
net may run into a dead state if the supply with a small molecule is exhausted.
Places representing molecular states that catalyse a reaction are connected to
the respective transition by a double arc meaning that a token respresenting the
catalyst is consumed and restored when the catalytic reaction occurs. To avoid
external sinks and sources for protein domains, a protein module is never bordered
by transitions. Instead, a protein module is always bordered by places. However,
boundary places may correspond to places in modules of other proteins or may
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
represent small molecules or other chemical components either consumed or
produced.
The principle of double entry bookkeeping is a hallmark and a necessary
consequence of the modular modelling concept, since every module must represent
all of its interactions with other molecules. Thus, modules of two interacting proteins
share exactly matching interface subnetworks describing the mechanism of
interaction (Figure 3). In Snoopy, the interface subnetworks may be implemented in
the form of a submodel (Figure 1D; Figure 3).
The described approach to generate modular, compositional models of
proteins can be extended by designing modules that model the synthesis and
degradation of RNAs and proteins. This leads to two distinct classes of modules with
distinct structural properties: (1) protein modules describing functional interactions of
proteins and (2) biosynthesis/degradation modules describing the synthesis,
degradation, and hence stability of proteins or RNAs. By including
biosynthesis/degradation modules one can model the regulation of gene expression
and translation, but also e.g. the formation of non-coding RNAs and their regulatory
influence on protein biosynthesis. Protein modules are covered with P-invariants. In
contrast, biosynthesis/degradation modules are covered by T-invariants.
The JAK/STAT signalling pathway assembled from Petri net encoded modules
In the following, we will first describe why and how the JAK/STAT signalling pathway
was organized into modules. We will explain the principles underlying the structural
organization and validation by taking the gp130 module as an example. We then
demonstrate how the modules were assembled to generate coherent models of the
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
JAK/STAT pathway. We will perform structural analyses, and run simulations to
reveal model discrimination for alternative models of JAK activation. Finally, we will
describe the design of the database for organizing modules and the composition of
the modules to executable models.
Signal transduction through the JAK/STAT pathway is induced by many
interleukins and all interferons. A limited number of specific JAK kinases, STAT
transcription factors and receptor subunits leads the redundant usage of specific
signalling components in response to specific stimuli, e.g. the different IL-6-type
cytokines signal all through receptor complexes containing at least one gp130
receptor chain. Nevertheless, the combination of individual signalling components
activated in a certain cell type by a well-defined stimulus leads to a specific biological
response. However, using identical or similar signalling molecules allows complex
cross talk mechanisms between individual signalling cascades. Thus, the information
flux through the JAK/STAT network and hence the resulting dynamical behavior of
the system depends on the stimulus, the cell type-specific expression profiles of the
individual signalling components and may also change depending on the specific
physiological conditions. Thus, models may have to be adjusted according to the
components that make up the network structure in order to obtain realistic
simulations.
To compose executable models of the JAK/STAT signalling pathway, we
designed a separate Petri net module for each individual protein including the
specific molecular interactions with other components of the pathway. All modules
were organized into a database from which they can be recombined. The modules
are automatically connected through logical places which represent shared molecular
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
components or states resulting in a single, coherent Petri net model of the entire
pathway.
In the example shown in Figure 4, we consider the combinatorial variety,
which is given by the interactions of three cytokines (IL-6, IL-11, and LIF), three
cytokine receptors (IL-6Rα, IL-11Rα and LIF-R), the common receptor chain gp130
and the two signalling proteins JAK and SHP2. The involved components are
represented by specific modules. One of these modules (gp130) will be explained in
more detail below. To allow for the discrimination of competing mechanisms, two
concurrent modules accounting for the alternative molecular reaction mechanisms
have been derived for both JAK and SHP2. To couple the modules in all possible
combinations, all potential interactions represented by coarse transitions had to be
declared as common network motifs, as illustrated in Figure 3. In case of the gp130
module, five coarse transitions represent possible (i.e. experimentally confirmed)
interactions with other signalling components (Figure 4). Competing functionally
correct and executable models can be generated by coupling appropriate modules in
arbitrary combinations. Unused coarse transitions are inactive, because the
corresponding subnet by default is not sufficiently marked (Figure 5) while it
automatically becomes sufficiently marked when the two interacting modules are
composed. The coarse transitions in a module constitute subnets for all possible
interactions with different proteins and other molecules. This ensures
compositionality of all modules without the need to adjust their structure for
assembling a composed model.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
The gp130 module as a representative example for a modular Petri net: design
principles, structural features and validation
To explain the composition of an exemplary single module, we describe the
structure of gp130. All other modules listed in Table 2 are given as graphical
representation and in the form of an executable Snoopy file as supplementary
material. The Petri net module of gp130 has been constructed according to the
functional and structural properties of the protein (ligand binding site, binding sites for
JAK1 and phosphotyrosine motifs representing binding sites for SHP2, STAT3 and
SOCS3). For the sake of a clearly readable model structure, we represent the crucial
functional entities of the gp130 by coarse transitions (Figure 6). Each
phosphotyrosine (see also Figure 2) is connected to at least three coarse transitions,
one describing the phosphorylation, another describing the dephosphorylation of the
receptor motif and the remaining coarse transitions describe the binding of an
interaction partner to the respective phosphotyrosine motif. Phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of the receptor motif, as well as binding of a specific signalling
component occur in principle through the same mechanism for each phosphotyrosine
motif within gp130. Because of these recurring motifs, the network structures
describing the detailed kinetic mechanisms are represented as submodels of the
respective coarse transitions (Figure 6, red boxes). In general, hiding recurring
mechanisms and kinetic details by coarse elements provides the following
advantages: (1) Clearly defined submodels can be easily cloned via copy-paste. (2)
Hiding recurring mechanisms and kinetic details stress the focus on functionally
important elements of the network and on their functional interactions in terms of
regulatory mechanisms. The interactions between functionally coupled sites of a
protein (resulting in e.g., allosteric effects; binding sites for an enzyme and its
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
substrates) become clearly visible in the form of arcs connecting the different
functional parts within the Petri net representation. The degree of interaction given by
this representation gives a visual impression of the functional sites where
conformational changes are triggered and the activity and functionality of the
respective protein is regulated (Figure 6).
After constructing the gp130 module, it was tested for functional integrity by
analyzing the corresponding Petri net in Charlie [12]. The analysis of the module
confirmed the expected structural properties as given in Table 1. Finally, the
predicted dynamic behavior of the module was analysed by running simulations (not
shown).
Composing and testing the modular network
To assemble the modular networksignalling, the following steps were taken:
(1) subnets of coarse transitions describing interactions with other components are
declared as shared subnets via logic places and transitions, (2) each module is
wrapped into a coarse place and (3) copied into one Snoopy file holding the modular
network (in a future version of the database the composition will be performed fully
automatically). After generating the entire modular network, the Petri net was tested
for structural integrity using Charlie. Again, the expected structural properties for the
composite network were confirmed.
The model of IL-6-induced Jak/STAT signalling was assembled accordingly
from the set of modules listed in Table 2 and tested against experimental data
(Figure 7). The model comprises the stepwise binding of IL-6 to its two receptors
subunits IL-6R and gp130 and the subsequent activation of JAKs and its feed-back
control. We analyzed if the model outputs are able to reflect experimental data.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Therefore, HEK293 cells stably expressing gp80 were stimulated with a 6 minutes
pulse of IL-6. To analyze the initial activation of the JAK/STAT pathway in detail the
cells were harvested in one minute time intervals. The dynamics of JAK1, STAT3 and
SHP2 activation were measured by quantitative immunoblotting as described
elsewhere (Dittrich et al., 2012, submitted). All three species are not phosphorylated
in the absence of IL-6. Stimulation with IL-6 induces a fast increase of
phosphorylation of JAK1, STAT3 and SHP2 within minutes. About one minute after
the initial stimulus has been removed by washing the cells, the phosphorylation of the
three proteins reaches a plateau and remains constant within the experimentally
analyzed time window. The model output qualitatively matches the experimental data
with respect to both, the stimulus-induced phosphorylation of JAK1, STAT3 and
SHP2 and the plateaus reached after removal of the IL-6 stimulus (Figure 7). The
concept of modular organization of networks offers a tool to expert modelers as well
as to non-experts to easily test the influence of locally alternative molecular
mechanisms on the behavior of the entire system.
Structure of the module database
We implemented a first version of a database for the organisation, handling, and
composition of Petri net modules and a web-interface to provide public access. In its
current version, the database allows to browse through the collection of modules
while the automatic composition of networks from modules is not implemented yet.
The relational database management system used is MySQL. We organized the
database in four parts holding information about (1) modules, (2) proteins, (3) used
literature and (4) users (Figure 8). The core part of the database is the module
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
scheme. This scheme holds tables describing all relevant information about each
module and tables connecting the other components of the database. Information
about the proteins represented, as modules are stored in the protein scheme,
including e.g. protein names, gene symbols, accession numbers, short names,
alternative names and relevant pathways. This information has been extracted from
the UniProt database via the assignment of the accession number of the proteins
modeled. The literature scheme contains bibliographic details of publications that
have been used for the design of the respective module and links via PMID to
PubMed [14]. The user scheme holds contact and login information of the user. The
structure of the database is easily extensible to adopt features to be implemented in
the near future and also to adapt to further user needs. The system is able to query
for different entities (modules, places, transitions, etc.) according to ambiguous
search terms like name or class of a protein, a gene symbol, an accession number,
or an author, etc.
Composing models by browsing through the database
While browsing through the database, the user is systematically guided through the
collection of available modules (Figure 9). Users can compose coherent models from
modules of interest interactively. Composition of an entire model may be performed
without directly touching any of the modules selected. Instead, composition of models
is solely based on the information provided in the table view of the database
(Figure 9). Viewing the graphical representation of the individual Petri net modules is
possible but not even necessary. Upon command, the executable coherent model is
composed automatically for structural analysis or simulation (this feature has not
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
been implemented in the prototype). The graphical representation of the coherent
Petri can be viewed along with the documentation of its modular components.
By entering a search term like „STAT“ into the browser window of the web
interface of the database (Figure 9), one receives a list of all modules that contain
places representing any kind of the STAT transcription factor as component. The list
includes all modules for molecules that interact with any type/state of the JAK1
protein. The user may select a specific module in the displayed list, e.g. SOCS3 to
obtain a new list of all modules that are functionally coupled to SOCS3.
Subsequently, a selection of modules (one of which represents gp130) can be
chosen for building up a coherent model by marking the appropriate check boxes.
Clicking the names of a checked module leads to a corresponding list of
interconnected modules that may be selected for being included in a composed
model, too.
Alternatively, one may enter the search term for a specific organism into the
browser window in the Advanced Search view to receive a list of all modules that
model proteins of e.g. human cells and create composed models as described. A
composition of modules across species is not supported according to the default
settings of the modules because the specific interaction sites between molecules
may differ between organisms (e.g. different serine residues may be phosphorylated
in the mouse as compared to the human protein) and thus will require specific Petri
net submodels for coupling of the modules. Nevertheless, cross species connections
for synthetic biology purposes can be introduced by defining and editing a new
version of a module which specifies the respective interaction, e.g. the
phosphorylation of a specific tyrosine side chain in a human receptor by a murine
kinase.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Each module contains its specific documentation in the form of name, version
number, link to the Uniprot accession number of the corresponding protein, organism
and cell type the module refers to, relevant Literature, supplementary information,
names of authors and curators, link to previous and alternative versions of the
module, and date of the last update. It also contains links to versions of the module
that might have been obtained by model reduction and vice versa. If authors from
different laboratories disagree on mechanistic details, they might be willing to supply
alternative versions of a module for the database along with information supporting
the proposed alternative mechanisms. This might be particularly useful for proteins
analyzed in different cell types or for proteins obtained by alternative splicing.
General benefits of the modular modelling approach for biomodel engineering
In contrast to a collection of monolithic models, the database established here
contains exclusively Petri nets in the form of modules that can be assembled to
coherent models. Working with modules seems unnecessarily complicated at first.
However in contrast to conventional monolithic models, the strict modularity together
with the organization of the components of all modules within one searchable,
relational database provides several important advantages and options.
In addition to convenient management and easy recombination of modules
within the database, the modular modelling approach provides a variety of benefits
for expert and non-expert users and encourages the development of automated
approaches to biomodel engineering:
I. Modules are reusable and exchangeable and contain metadata. Besides its
functionality as an exchangable component of a coherent Petri net model, a module
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
serves as a comprehensive graphical, wiki-like review on the functional interactions
and molecular properties of the protein it represents. The metadata are meant to
document any assumptions, simplifications, and controversies regarding the
represented molecular mechanisms and automatically become part of any composed
model. For example, composed models can be easily queried for the latest update of
each of its components.
Modules can be incorporated into different models without laborious and error-prone
reorganisation and adaptation (Figure 10). To analyse the functional consequences
of alternative mechanisms for example, one can analyze how the performance of the
model changes upon exchanging certain modules by versions considering alternative
mechanisms or by versions of a module obtained through methods of model
reduction.
Creating different versions of a module (according to alternative molecular
mechanisms) from the database should be made possible for all users. However, the
permission to edit publically available individual modules should be restricted to
authorized users to prevent uncontrolled editing.
II. Modules facilitate expert curation and updating by experimentalists from life
sciences. Many scientists in life sciences have deep knowledge on a specific protein
(or family of proteins) and its interaction partners, biochemical properties and
molecular functions. For these experts it is presumably easier and more
straightforward to survey and update an isolated module rather than to identify and to
work on the corresponding relevant parts in the context of a complex monolithic
model. Furthermore, the modular concept prevents divergence into a variety of
monolithic model versions that post synthesis are difficult to be judged with respect to
the molecular mechanisms they implement and the assumptions and simplifications
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
they make. Modules in a database encourage researches to keep an eye on their
favorite molecules.
III. Models can be composed according to gene expression patterns of certain
cell types or under certain physiological (or pathological) conditions. The
modular approach facilitates the incorporation of specifically those modules that
correspond to these genes expressed in the specific cell of interest, e.g. the
expression of the receptor subunit gp80 of the IL-6-receptor complex is restricted to a
low number of cell types (e.g. hepatozytes or leukocytes). All possible connections of
a specific module are activated during the automatic composition while all unused
connections remain inactive because the respective places do not contain any tokens
(Figure 5).
Simulation of biochemical reactions in a reaction-diffusion system with the
help of a localisation component.
Adding colour to tokens enables us to consider the spatial distribution of events
where same colours indicate identical localisation. Only components residing in the
same compartment are able to interact. In coloured Petri nets, the firing of transitions
may depend on the colour of tokens and tokens may change their colour through the
firing of transitions in a freely defined way. Coloured Petri nets as implemented in
Snoopy therefore combine the formalism of Petri nets with the expressive power of a
computer language [6]. Entering the world of coloured Petri nets, the consistently
modular design of our approach can be extended to allow the simulation of
biochemical reactions in a reaction-diffusion system with the help of a localisation
component. The localisation component, together with the other modules, may be
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
automatically assembled to generate any composed model with spatial resolution. As
all other modules, the localisation component may be provided in different versions.
In its most simple form, the location module may just indicate the cellular
compartment in which a biomolecule resides (Figure 11A). The STAT dimer, for
example, can only bind to DNA if the STAT has translocated from the cytoplasm into
the nucleus. The actual localisation of a molecule in any compartment of the cell can
be encoded by the color of the token that marks a place representing the given
molecule. The logical transitions of a submodel defining the interface between two
modules are set to fire only if the tokens in their pre-places are of the same color
(Figure 11D). Different colors indicate that two molecules are in different
compartments and accordingly cannot react with each other.
Reaction-diffusion systems with arbitrary spatial resolution may be modeled
with a version of the localisation component consisting of a three-dimensional lattice
of places that represent corresponding elements of the reaction volume (Figure 11B).
While moving through the lattice by firing of randomly chosen transitions which
connect adjacent places (Figure 11C), the tokens change their colors according to
their current position. The transitions must be programmed differently in the
localisation component as compared to the protein modules and the
biosynthesis/degradation modules. In the localisation component, the transitions
change the colour of the tokens which they switch according to a pre-defined
neighbouring rule. In the protein modules and in the biosynthesis/degradation
modules, the transitions of the interfaces are selective with respect to the colours of
the tokens they switch. However, firing of transitions does not change the color of the
switched tokens.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
By defining the token colour as a tuple with four entries (Figure 10D), one may
assign the localisation in terms of the cellular compartment to each reaction volume.
In other words, the three-dimensional lattice (Figure 11B) may be fitted with a three-
dimensional topological model of the entire cell (Figure 11A). Faithful 3-D models can
be obtained by confocal microscopy or electron tomography [15] for example. Like all
modules in the database, the localisation modules can be reused in conjunction with
the different biochemical models which keeps the programming effort to a minimum.
Following the described concept, the user will not get in direct touch with the
unfolded Petri nets or with the programming of colored Petri nets by employing the
localisation component. These nets might be generated automatically through
algorithms during the assembly of the composed models while the user only needs to
interact at the level of the Tables View of the database. The algorithmic realisation
may rely on the Petri net in the Petri net concept where each token in the Petri net
representing the localisation component is a Petri net composed of modules which
represents the dynamically interacting biomolecules. Regarding the module database
this means that the modules remain the same no matter whether they will be used for
composing a non-spatial model or for a model which considers cellular compartments
and spatial resolution. The modules are only interpreted as coloured Petri nets if a
space module is used.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Design of synthetic or synthetically rewired networks by combination of
modules representing altered binding sites
Composing computational models from modules with altered binding sites
allows to systematically change the structure of a network and to search for networks
with desired behaviour. One visionary scenario of applying the module database to
synthetic biology concerns the rational synthetic rewiring of preexisting networks
through selectively altered binding sites of proteins. The idea is illustrated in
Figure 12. Let us assume that two naturally occurring networks use two different
kinases, Kinase 1 and Kinase 2, each phosphorylating three different substrates and
that there is hardly any cross talk between the two kinases. By engineering Kinase 2,
for example, its substrate specificity might be changed to functionally couple the two
networks resulting in an altered system behaviour. Designing the new network and
exploring its predicted function in silico may be performed interactively through
structural alteration of e.g. the Kinase 2 module and reassembling the model
accordingly.
In principle, reengineering modules by deleting existing and introducing new
binding sites specific to other modules could be performed fully automatically and
systematically while making essential use of the metadata assigned to each module
in the database in order to adhere to biochemically realistic scenarios. In silico
networks with alternative wiring could be assembled, again automatically, from re-
engineered (mutated) modules and their performance queried for pre-defined
properties. This systematic exploration of the functional potential of reengineered
networks could make use of the tremendous computer power of the future.
Presumably, correspondingly systematic but merely experimental approaches will
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
remain out of reach simply because of the tremendous amount of work they would
take.
The proposed in silico approach in fact would complement experimental
random mutagenesis screens which often reveal phenotypes that are hard to fully
understand. Moreover, for ethical reasons experimental mutagenesis will remain
restricted to model organisms and is - in the case of multicellular organisms - further
narrowed by the phenomenon of embryonic lethality. Hence it seems that exhaustive
rewiring of networks in silico would definitely make sense.
We conclude that the described modular modelling approach represents a
convenient and straightforward tool to generate dynamic and spatial models of
biological processes for systems and synthetic biology.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they do not have any competing interestes.
Author’s contributions
MAB developed and implemented the modular modelling approach, created the Petri
net model of the JAK/STAT pathway, and implemented the web interface of the Petri
net module database, with supervision by WM. AD and FS provided essential input
and expertise for establishing the model of the JAK/STAT pathway. AD performed
experiments to validate the model outputs. CR and MH made essential contributions
in continuously developing Snoopy for biomodel engineering and in developing the
web interface for the graphical display and animation of Petri nets. CR and MH also
contributed ideas and technical advice for the organization and operation of a robust
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
publically accessible database and for the remote automatic composition of
executable models from modules. WM and MAB wrote the paper and MAB designed
the figures. MAB and WM jointly conceived the study and worked together in its
design and coordination. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling
Author details
1Lehrstuhl für Regulationsbiologie and Magdeburg Centre for Systems Biology, Otto-
von-Guericke Universität
2Lehrstuhl für Systembiologie and Magdeburg Centre for Systems Biology, Otto-von-
Guericke Universität
3Chair of Data Structures and Software Dependability, Brandenburg Technical
University Cottbus
Additional Material
Additional file 1: Extended Legend to Figure 1.
Additional file 2: Petri net models described in this work. Unpacking of the ZIP
file reveals XML files for the modules and the composed models listed in Table 2.
The files can be opened and executed in Snoopy.
Additional file 3: Chart of the JAK/STAT pathway in the form of Petri net
modules. The file provides the graphically displayed modules arranged according to
the scheme of Figure 2.
Acknowledgemnts
We thank Professor David Gilbert for critical reading of the manuscript and for
suggesting module based automatic biomodel engineering and its application to
synthetic biology. MAB and CR were financially supported by the International Max
Planck Research School, Magdeburg.
Blätke, M.A: et al. JAK/STAT signalling