Jan Tinbergen’s legacy for economic networks:
from the gravity model to quantum statistics
TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
Abstract Jan Tinbergen, the first recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Eco-
nomicsin1969,obtainedhisPhDinphysicsattheUniversityofLeidenunderthe
supervisionofPaulEhrenfestin1929.Amongmanyachievementsasaneconomist
afterhistrainingasaphysicist,Tinbergenproposedtheso-calledGravityModelof
internationaltrade.Themodelpredictsthattheintensityoftradebetweentwocoun-
triesisdescribedbyaformulasimilartoNewton’slawofgravitation,wheremass
is replaced by Gross Domestic Product. Since Tinbergen’s proposal, the Gravity
Modelhasbecomethestandardmodelofnon-zerotradeflowsinmacroeconomics.
However, its intrinsic limitation is the prediction of a completely connected net-
work, which fails to explain the observed intricate topology of international trade.
Recentnetworkmodelsovercomethislimitationbydescribingtherealnetworkasa
memberofamaximum-entropystatisticalensemble.Theresultingexpressionsare
formally analogous to quantum statistics: the international trade network is found
to closely follow the Fermi-Dirac statistics in its purely binary topology, and the
recently proposed mixed Bose-Fermi statistics in its full (binary plus weighted)
structure. This seemingly esoteric result is actually a simple effect of the hetero-
geneityofworldcountries,thatimposesstrongstructuralconstraintsonthenetwork.
Ourdiscussionhighlightssimilaritiesanddifferencesbetweenmacroeconomicsand
statistical-physicsapproachestoeconomicnetworks.
TizianoSquartini
Instituut-LorentzforTheoreticalPhysics,LeidenInstituteofPhysics,UniversityofLeiden,Niels
Bohrweg2,2333CALeiden,e-mail:squartini@lorentz.leidenuniv.nl
DiegoGarlaschelli
Instituut-LorentzforTheoreticalPhysics,LeidenInstituteofPhysics,UniversityofLeiden,Niels
Bohrweg2,2333CALeiden,e-mail:garlaschelli@lorentz.leidenuniv.nl
]NG.nif-q[
1v2523.4031:viXra
2 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
1.1 Introduction
Overthelastfifteenyears,therehasbeenanever-increasinginterestinthestudyof
networksacrossmanyscientificdisciplines,fromphysicstobiologyandthesocial
sciences[1].Economicsisnoexception.Empirical[2,3]andtheoretical[4,5]anal-
yses of economic networks have been growing steadily, gradually encompassing
differentscales:from‘microscopic’networksofindividualagentsandfinancialas-
sets[4,6],through‘mesoscopic’networksoffirms,banksandinstitutions[2,7,8],
to ‘macroscopic’ networks of world countries and economic sectors [9, 10, 11].
Anunprecedentedelementofcontinuityacrossthesedifferenteconomicscaleshas
beenthesearchforempiricallawscharacterizingreal-worldnetworksandthesub-
sequentintroductionofsimplemodelsaimedatreproducingtheobserved‘stylized
facts’. Placing observations, rather than theoretical postulates, at the starting point
ofscientificinvestigationsisprobablythemainpositiveoutcomeoftheinteraction
between economists and physicists, an interaction that - over the last two decades
- has given rise to the controversial field of ‘Econophysics’. The interdisciplinary
study of economic networks is another very fruitful result of this interaction. The
addedvalueofusingthenetworkapproachtoeconomicproblemsisthepossibility
to investigate indirect effects arising as the combination of many pairwise inter-
actions between economic agents or units. The prototypical example is the study
of systemic risk, i.e. the risk of a system-wide cascade of defaults of banks or in-
stitutions connected to each other in a financial network, as opposed to traditional
measuresofriskforsinglefinancialentities.
Despitethe‘networkapproach’isrelativelyrecent,muchearlierstudiesinEco-
nomics already recognized the importance of (what we now call) socio-economic
networks,evenifthisknowledgewasmoreorlessdispersedacrosssub-fieldsthat
used to be largely disjoint. An important example is the so-called Gravity Model
[12]. The name originates from a loose analogy with Newton’s law of gravitation,
whichstatesthatthegravitationalforcebetweentwoobjectsisproportionaltothe
product of their masses, and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. Strictly applying the analogy to the economic setting, the Gravity
Model(see[12]foranexcellentreview)assumesthata‘mass’S ofgoods(orser-
vices, or factors of production such as labor) supplied at an origin i is ‘attracted’
to a mass D of demand for such goods located at a destination j. This attraction
generatesaflowF ofgoods,buttheflowisreducedbythegeographicdistanced
betweenoriginanddestinationasfollows
F =K . (1.1)
where K is a global free parameter to be fitted to real data. The Gravity Model
predictslargerfluxesbetweencloserand‘bigger’(intermsofthesizeofsupplyand
demand) locations, exactly in the same way as the gravitational force is stronger
betweencloserandmoremassiveobjects.
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 3
The use of the Gravity Model was pioneered by Ravenstein [13] in studies of
migrationpatterns,whereflowsrepresentmovementsofpeople,andS andD are
mainly determined by the sizes of the two populations located at the origin and
destination. Jan Tinbergen, the first recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in eco-
nomics,wasinsteadthefirsttousetheGravityModeltoexplaininternationaltrade
flows[14].Inthiscase,flowsrepresentmovementsofgoodsamongworldcountries,
and S and D are expected to be determined by the values of the Gross Domestic
Product(GDP)ofthecountriesoforiginanddestination,i.e.S =D =GDP.
Indeed, it is precisely as the first data-driven model of trade that the Gravity
Modelacquireditsgreatpopularity,presumablybecauseoftheaccuracywithwhich
itpredictsobservedtradefluxes.Ontheotherhand,internationaltradeisalsoone
of the best examples of economic systems that have been intensively studied, us-
ing a completely different ‘network’ approach, over the last decade. This coinci-
dence makes the International Trade Network a useful example to compare tradi-
tional (economic) and recent (network) approaches when applied to the same sys-
tem,whichinthiscaseisalsoanempiricallywelldocumentedone.Forthisreason,
in what follows we will focus on Jan Tinbergen’s Gravity Model of trade, its suc-
cessesandlimitations,andthemorerecentapproachesthatovercomesomeofthese
limitations. As another curious coincidence, these very different frameworks have
a common element: the modeling of an economic network in close analogy with
physicallaws,fromgravitationtostatisticalphysicsandquantumstatistics.
1.2 JanTinbergenandtheGravityModeloftrade
In a slightly (and not fully) generalized form, the Gravity Model of international
tradestatesthattheexpectedamountoftradefromcountryitocountry jis
(cid:104)w (cid:105)=K (1.2)
where d is the geographic distance between countries, and α, β and γ are addi-
tional (besides K) free parameters. The angular brackets in eq.(1.2) denote an ex-
pected value: this means that the model is not intended to be a deterministic one,
since real data will obviously deviate from the postulated expression. So, strictly
speaking, the model predicts that the realized amount of trade is w =(cid:104)w (cid:105)+ε
whereε isanerrortermwithzeromean(ifalinearregressiontotheobservedtrade
flows is used), or alternatively w =(cid:104)w (cid:105)·η where η is an error term with unit
mean (if a linear regression to the logarithm of the observed trade flows is used).
Inbothcases,thefittedvaluesoftheparametersareusuallyaroundα ≈β ≈γ ≈1
[12]. Further extensions of eq.(1.2) include additional factors either favouring or
4 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
suppressingtrade.1Despitetheinclusionoftheseadditionalfactorsimprovesthefit,
themainfactordeterminingtradeflowsremainstheGDP,followedbygeographic
distances. So eq.(1.2), with exponents α ≈β ≈γ ≈1, captures the basic lesson
learntfromrealtradedataandmakestheGravityModelclosertotheexpressionfor
thegravitationalenergy(γ =1)thantotheoneforthegravitationalforce(γ =2).
Obviously, there is absolutely nothing fundamental in the formal analogy be-
tween the empirical laws of trade (or any other economic flux) and gravity, and
noprofoundreasonwhytheselawsshouldbearanymathematicalsimilarityatall.
Rather,thedeepsimilaritiesmustbelookedforatdifferentlevels:
• Afirstanalogyinvolvestheimplicituseofsymmetryinbothcases:botheq.(1.2)
andNewton’slaw,statethat,allelsebeingequal,onlymass/GDPanddistance
determinetheamplitudeoftheinteraction.Inphysics,thismeansthatNewton’s
law holds in vacuum, i.e. in absence of anything else that can interact gravita-
tionallywiththetwoobjects.Inmacroeconomics,thismeansthateq.(1.2)holds
in absence of other factors affecting trade, such as the additional regressors we
mentionedinfootnote1.
• A second similarity is the qualitative dependence on the key quantities: both
lawsassumethatinteractionamplitudesincreasewithincreasingmass/GDP,and
decrease with increasing distance. In principle, there is an infinity of quantita-
tiveways(functionalforms)toimplementthisqualitativeidea.Accidentally,the
functionalformsdescribinggravitationandtradeturnouttobeverysimilar,but
their qualitative analogy would have held even if the two mathematical expres-
sionsweredifferent.Insomesense,thismakesthequalitativeanalogymorefun-
damentalthanthemathematicalone.
• The above consideration leads us to a third analogy, i.e. the phenomenological
character common to eq. (1.2) and Newton’s formula. In both laws, the partic-
ular functional form that implements the previous theoretical arguments is es-
tablished on the basis of its success in reproducing real data, and thus a poste-
riori. Other functional forms, while possible a priori on the basis of the above
two points, must be discarded if they do not explain observations. Only after
they were widely accepted as powerful empirical laws explaining observations,
Netwon’s law and the Gravity Model became the ‘target’ of more general and
abstract theories. For instance, to be acceptable, Einstein’s theory of General
Relativity must reduce to Netwon’s law in the appropriate circumstances, and
micro-foundedeconomicmodelsmustgeneratetheGravityModelwhenaggre-
gatedatthemacrolevel[12].
In our view, the above epistemological analogies are even more fundamental than
the(accidental)mathematicalanalogybetweeneq.(1.2)andNetwon’slaw.Another
1Examplesoffavouringfactorsare:tradeagreements,membershiptocommoneconomicgroups,
sharedgeographicborders,commoncurrency,etc.Examplesofsuppressingfactorsare:embar-
goes,traderestrictions,andotherfactorsrepresentingatradefriction.
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 5
Fig.1.1 Ehrenfest’sstudents,
Leiden1924.Lefttoright:
Gerhard Heinrich Dieke,
SamuelAbrahamGoudsmit,
JanTinbergen,PaulEhren-
fest,RalphKronig,andEnrico
Fermi(copyright(cid:13)c Chicago
UniversityPress).
deepconnectionbetweenphysicsandeconomicsexistsatapersonallevel:JanTin-
bergen,thefounderoftheGravityModeloftrade,wasaphysicistbeforebecoming
aneconomist.
BorninDenHaag,theNetherlands,in1903,JanTinbergenstartedhisstudiesin
mathematicsandthenaturalsciencesattheUniversityofLeiden,soonaftergradu-
atingfromhighschoolin1921withthehighesthonors.InLeiden,helaterstarted
aPhDinphysicsunderthesupervisionofPaulEhrenfest,whowasthenprofessor
inTheoreticalPhysics(seefig.1.1).TinbergenbecameEhrenfest’sassistant,thepri-
vate tutor of Ehrenfest’s son, and a frequent visitor of Ehrenfest’s house, that was
regularlyvisitedalsobyEinstein,Bohr,Heisenberg,FermiandPauli.Tinbergenhad
alwaysbeenattractedbyeconomics,andEhrenfestwasinterestedintheanalogies
between economics and physics. This resulted in Tinbergen’s PhD thesis, entitled
‘MinimumProblemsinPhysicsandEconomics’anddefendedin1929.Shortlyaf-
ter, despite Ehrenfest had repeatedly tried to convince him to remain a physicist,
Tinbergen started a brilliant career as an economist. His pioneering views led him
tointroduceEconometrics,asynthesisbetweenmathematics,economictheoryand
statistics.InTinbergen’sview,economictheoryshouldformulatehypothesestrans-
latedintomathematicalrelationsthatarethenstatisticallytestedonempiricaldata.
ThisdistinctivequantitativeapproachwasalmostsurelyduetoTinbergen’sgraduate
trainingasaphysicist.Hisideaofintroducingaquantitativemodelofinternational
tradeflowsisclearlyinlinewiththisapproach.JanTinbergen’scareerculminated
in 1969 when he received the first Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in
MemoryofAlfredNobelorshortlyNobelMemorialPrizeinEconomics,oftenmis-
takenlyreferredtoasthe‘NobelPrizeinEconomics’(that,strictlyspeaking,does
notexist).
Asaphysicist,JanTinbergenofcourseknewNetwon’slawverywell,aknowl-
edge that might have facilitated making a mathematical connection to the study
of international trade. But, we believe, his idea of using the Gravity Model in his
research as an economist was most probably triggered by the deeper similarities,
6 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
discussed above, at the epistemological level. Jan Tinbergen’s familiarity with the
scientificmethoduniversallyusedinphysicsisprobablythereasonwhyhismany
achievementsasaneconomistareallcharacterizedbyastrongquantitativeapproach
andaclearfocusonempiricaldata.Withouttryingtodistortscientificandpersonal
history, we might therefore presume that Tinbergen’s view was not too far from
what, in modern jargon, are the inspiring concepts of ‘Econophysics’. His Grav-
ity Model of trade can also be regarded as the first model of the system that, in
the more recent Complex Networks literature, has been intensively studied under
the names of ‘International Trade Network’ (ITN) or ‘World Trade Web’ (WTW)
[9, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Therefore, in our view, Jan Tinbergen’s pioneering work
deserves full attention from the scientific community active in Econophysics and
NetworkScience.Alongtheselines,theGravityModelandtheITN,bothstillun-
der intense investigation, can be considered two brilliant examples of how ideas
fromphysicscanfruitfullyinteractwitheconomicproblems.
1.3 Thenetworkapproach
At the time of Tinbergen’s analyses, data about international trade flows were of
coursemuchlessaccuratethantoday.Missingdataweretheruleratherthantheex-
ception,soitwaspracticallyimpossibletodistinguishbetweentheabsenceofdata
documentinganexistingtraderelationshipanda‘true’absenceoftherelationship
itselfintherealworld.Whilethisconfusionstillcannotbecompletelyeliminated,
in modern databases [20, 21] it only affects a few percent of the data. A simple
analysisofsuchdatabasesyieldstoasystematicresult:ineachyearlysnapshotof
theITNfromthe50’suntilnow,only50-60%ofthetotalpairsofworldcountries
are found to be connected by trade relationship [9, 16]. With little error, pairs of
countriesthatdonottradeatallaretheremainingfraction.
Ifwelookagainateq.(1.2),weimmediatelyseethattheobservationofa‘half-
connected world’ is in contrast with the predictions of the Gravity Model, as it
cannotpredictzerotradeflows.2Exactlyasthegravitationalforcebetweenanytwo
masses (no matter how small or distant) is never zero according to Newton’s law,
the Gravity Model predicts that trade exchanges between any two countries (no
matter how poor or distant) are always positive. However, while any two massive
objectsareindeedfoundtobeattractedovercosmologicaldistancesinourUniverse,
the observation of an economically half-connected world implies that the Gravity
Model fails in reproducing the missing links of the world trade network.3 In other
2Strictlyspeaking,theintroductionofanerrortermintoeq.(1.2)allowstohavezeroorevenneg-
ativevalues.However,afterfittingthemodeltothedata,orsimplyinordertoavoidthegeneration
ofpreciselythoseunrealisticnegativevalues,thevarianceoftheerrortermissosmallthatzero
tradeflowshaveavanishingprobability.
3 In principle, also this limitation can be overcome if the Gravity Model is extended into the
so-calledzero-inflatedmodels[22,23]thatuseeq.(1.2)(oritsgeneralizations)inatwo-steppro-
cedure:firstinordertoestimatetheprobabilityofatradeconnection,andtheninordertoestimate
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 7
0 50 100 150
0 50 100 150
Fig.1.2 TheheterogeneoustopologyofthebinaryWorldTradeWeb.Left:averagenearestneigh-
bourdegreeknn asafunctionofthedegreek,forallvertices.Right:clusteringcoefficientcasa
functionofthedegreek.Data:UNCOMTRADEdatabase[21],year2001(N=162countries).
words,ifthesetofexistingconnections(i.e.thetopology)oftheITNispreliminarly
specified, then the Gravity Model succeeds in reproducing the magnitude of trade
connections. But in general, it fails in reproducing the observed topology of the
network.
Itisinterestingtonoticethattheawarenessoftheimportanceofthebinarytopol-
ogyofanetwork,besidesthatofweightedstructuralproperties,isarecentconquest
of Network Science – clearly absent at the time of Tinbergen. Motivated by this
awareness,theanalysesoftheITNcarriedoutoverthelastdecadehavedocumented
anintricateandheterogeneoustopology.Letusforinstanceconsidertheundirected
versionoftheITN,wheretwocountries(thenodes,orvertices,ofthenetwork)are
connectedbyalink (oredge)ifthereexistsatleastatraderelationship(inanydi-
rection) between them. In this network, the number of connections (the so-called
degree, denoted by k) of world countries is found to be very broadly distributed,
with poor countries having only one or two connections (typically including the
USA)andrichcountriesbeingconnectedtoasignificantnumberofpartners,upto
thetotalnumberofcountriesintheworld.Thisresultisveryrobust,sincethedegree
is found to systematically increase with the GDP [9]. Moreover, (anti)correlations
between the degrees of two trading partners are significant: the average degree of
tradepartners(theaveragenearestneighbourdegree,denotedbyknn)issmallerfor
countrieswithlargerdegree[9,15](seefig.1.2).Thismeansthatmoreconnected
(richer)countriestradewithcountrieshavingonaverageasmallernumberofpart-
ners,andlessconnected(poorer)countriestradewithcountrieshavingonaveragea
largernumberofpartners.Asimilarresultholdsfortheso-calledclusteringcoeffi-
cient(denotedbyc)ofacountry,definedastherealizedfractionoflinks(locallink
density)amongthepartnersofthatcountry.Justlikeknn,cisfoundtodecreaseask
increases,meaningthatmoreconnectedcountrieshavealessinterconnectedneigh-
bourhood,andlessconnectedcountrieshaveamoreinterconnectedneighbourhood
[9, 15] (see fig. 1.2). All these topological properties can be generalized to the di-
theintensityoftheconnection.However,recentanalyses[23]haveshownthatthisprocedurepro-
videsabadfittotheobservednetwork:whenusedinordertoestimatelinkprobabilitiesandlink
intensitiessimultaneously,theGravityModelturnsouttobeaverybadmodel.
8 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
1.
10(cid:45)5 10(cid:45)4 0.001 0.01 0.1 1
10(cid:45)4
10(cid:45)5
10(cid:45)6
10(cid:45)5 10(cid:45)4 0.001 0.01 0.1 1
Fig.1.3 ThenontrivialstructureoftheweightedWorldTradeWeb.Left:averagenearestneigh-
bourstrengthsnnasafunctionofthestrengths,forallvertices.Right:weightedclusteringcoeffi-
cientcwasafunctionofthestrengths.Data:UNCOMTRADEdatabase[21],year2001(N=162
countries).Thevaluesarerescaledbythetotalweight.
rectedversionofthenetwork(wherelinksfollowthedirectionof,say,exports),and
similarresultsarefound[16,18].
Evenwhenweightedpropertiesofthenetworkarestudied,theimportanceofthe
underlyingtopologyisstillmanifest,e.g.whenlocalaveragesofweightedquantities
areperformed.Forinstance,letusconsidertheweightedanalogueofthedegree,i.e.
thestrength(denotedbys)definedasthetotalweightofthelinksofacountry(the
total value of imports and exports for that country). As in the binary case, the av-
eragestrengthofthepartnersofacountry(theaveragenearestneighbourstrength,
denotedbysnn)isfoundtodecreaseasthestrengthofthatcountryincreases[17,18]
(seefig.1.3).Beingalocalaverageoverthepartnersofeachcountry,snnisstrongly
influencedbythedegree,whichisabinaryproperty.Similarly,aweightedgeneral-
izationoftheclusteringcoefficient(denotedbycw)isalsoinfluencedbythebinary
structure,sinceitisstilldefinedonthelocalneighbourhoodofcountries.Unlikeits
binarycounterpart,cwisfoundtoincreaseasthestrengthincreases[17,18](seefig.
1.3).
1.4 Statisticalphysicsandmaximum-entropymodels
Takentogether,theabovefindingshighlightthatthetopologyoftheITNisnontriv-
ialandverydifferentfromthecompletenetworkpredictedbytheGravityModel.In
theprevioussectionwediscussedsomecoincidencesanddeepersimilaritiesbehind
theuseofthegravitylawinphysicsandeconomics.Asanotherinterestingsimilar-
ity,recentresults[16,17,18,24]suggestthatthelimitationsoftheGravityModel
canonlybeovercomeafterachangeofparadigmwhichisnotdissimilarfromthe
one that accompanied two revolutions in physics, namely the advent of statistical
mechanicsandthatofquantumphysics.Thenewparadigmassumesthat,inorder
to predict the presence of a link (and not only its weight), probabilistic models of
networks need to be considered. The great conceptual jump consists in assuming
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 9
thattheobservednetworkisnotunique,butoneofmanypossiblerealizations,each
of which has a probability P to occur. This probability must be determined by es-
tablishingwhichofthepropertiesofthenetworkaresomehow‘unavoidable’,and
assumingthatallpossiblenetworksdisplayingthoseproperties(includingthereal
network) are equally probable. This change of approach is equivalent to the one
leading to the introduction of statistical physics: if the detailed microscopic con-
figuration of a large system is unknown (as is generally the case), and only a few
macroscopic quantities are known (e.g. the total energy), then some properties of
the system can be inferred by averaging over all possible configurations compati-
ble with the known macroscopic quantities. The probability of each configuration
thereforedependsonthechoiceofthemacroscopicquantitiestobereproduced.
As Jaynes pointed out in his work devoted to the connections between statisti-
cal mechanics and information theory [25], the fundamental problem of statistical
physics can be regarded as a particular case of a more general class of problems
of inference from partial information. In the general case, one looks for the prob-
abilitydistributionthatmaximizestheuncertaintyaboutthesystem,giventhepar-
tialknowledgeofthelatter.Mathematically,ifC denotesapossible(microscopic)
configuration of the system, the solution of the problem is obtained maximizing
Shannon’sentropy
subject to a set of constraints, representing what is known about the system [25].
Theresultofthisconstrainedmaximizationproblemistheprobability
where H(C) is a linear combination of the constraints (where each constraints is
coupledtoitsLagrangemultiplier)and
isthenormalizationfactor.Theensembleofconfigurationsgeneratedbyeq.(1.4)is
themaximum-entropyensemblespecifiedbythechosenconstraints.
Jaynes noticed that, if the system under consideration is a physical one, and
the only constraint is the total (macroscopic) energy E(C), then H(C)=βE(C)
where β is the Lagrange multiplier ensuring that (the ensemble average of) E(C)
can be set equal to its observed value. This leads to the identification of eq.(1.4)
withtheGibbs-Boltzmanndistribution,ifβ isidentifiedwiththeinversetempera-
ture through β =(kT)−1 (k being Boltzmann’s constant). Automatically, this also
shows that eq.(1.5) can be identified with the partition function, and eq.(1.3) with
theGibbs-Boltzmannentropy.
Comingtothecaseofnetworks,ithasbeenshown[26,27,28,29]thattheclass
of network models known in the social sciences under the name of Exponential
RandomGraphsor p∗models[26]isalsoaparticularcaseoftheabovemaximum-
10 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
entropyproblem.Inthesemodels,theconstraintsare(notnecessarilymacroscopic)
topologicalpropertiesthatonewantstocontrolfor.Considerforinstancethecaseof
binarygraphswithagivennumberN ofvertices.Inundirectedbinarygraphs,each
pairofverticesiseitherconnectedornot,withnopossiblevariationinthedirection
and intensity of the connection. Each configurationC is uniquely specified by the
adjacencymatrixAofthegraph,definedasasymmetricN×N matrixwithentries
a =1 if a link exists between the vertices i and j, and a =0 otherwise. There-
fore, we can label each configuration with A rather thanC, and the corresponding
probabilitywithP(A).Thesimplestexampleiswhentheonlyconstraintisthetotal
number L of links. It has been shown [26, 28] that this particular case reduces to
thepopularErdo˝s-Re´nyirandomgraphmodel,whereallpairsofverticesarecon-
nectedindependentlyofeachotherandwiththesameprobability p(whichcanbe
viewedastheonlyLagrangemultiplier,uniquelyspecifiedbytheobservedvalueof
L).Inthismodel,eq.(1.4)translatesintothefollowingprobabilityP(A),thatsimply
factorizesoverallpairsofverticesi,j:
This expression shows that the generation of an entire graph A is the combination
ofN(N−1)/2independentBernoullitrials4,eachcorrespondingtothecreationof
asinglelinkandcharacterizedbythesamesuccessprobability p.
The above simple example shows that individual links naturally inherit, from
themaximum-entropystructureoftheoverallmodel,thecharacterofrandomvari-
ables, to be described by probability distributions. If weighted networks are con-
sidered,maximum-entropymodelscanstillbedefined[26,28]andleadagaintoa
probabilisticdescriptionoftheweightofalllinks,includingthepossibilityofzero
weights which correspond to missing links (we will discuss explicit cases later).
Thus, in both binary and weighted descriptions, the probabilistic character of link
creationcharacterizingthemaximum-entropyapproacheliminatestheneedtospec-
ify the topology of the network as ‘given’, overcoming the limitation encountered
when using the Gravity Model. This makes maximum-entropy graph ensembles a
potentiallysuccessfulapproachtotheanalysisoftheITNandeconomicnetworks
ingeneral.However,twoaspectsremaintobediscussed:
• oneneedsofcoursetocheckwhetherasuitablechoiceofconstraintscanindeed
reproducetheempiricalpropertiesoftheITN:thisrequirestheidentificationof
4 A Bernoulli trial (or Bernoulli process) is the simplest random event, i.e. one characterized
byonlytwopossibleoutcomes.Oneofthetwooutcomesisreferredtoasthe‘success’(inthis
case,thecreationofalink)andisassignedaprobability p.Theotheroutcomeisreferredtoas
the‘failure’,andisassignedthecomplementaryprobability1−p.Equation(1.6)isindeedthe
productoftheprobability pL(A) ofL(A)successfuleventsoflinkcreationtimestheprobability
(1−p)N(N−1)/2−L(A)ofthecomplementarynumberoffailures,whereL(A)isthenumberoflinks
intheparticulargraphA.NotethatN(N−1)/2isthetotalnumberofpairsofNvertices:weare
uninterestedinself-loops,sothediagonalmatrixentriesarea
=0,whichleavesuswithonly
N(N−1)/2degreesoffreedominasymmetricN×Nadjacencymatrix.Forthesamereason,the
sumineq.(1.6)runsoverpairswithi< j,i.e.onlyovertheuppertriangleofthematrixA.
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 11
topological constraints that are both reasonable (i.e. they can be a priori justi-
fiedasameaningfulchoice)andeffective(i.e.theyareaposteriorisuccessfulin
replicatingtheITN);
• evenifthespecificationofappropriatetopologicalconstraintsturnsouttosatis-
factorilyreproducetheobservednetwork,oneneedstounderstandwhetherthis
resultcanbereconciledwith,oratleastrelatedto,themainideaoftheGravity
Model:theassumptionthattradestronglydependsonnon-topologicalquantities
suchasGDPanddistances.
Insections1.5-1.8wewilladdressthefirstpointindetail,whileinsec.1.9wewill
dealwiththesecondone.
Sofar,ourgeneraldiscussionhashighlightedthatthetransitionfromtheGravity
Model to maximum-entropy models is analogous, both conceptually and mathe-
matically, to the paradigm shift that led to the introduction of Statistical Physics
at the beginning of the twentieth century. The common aspect in both cases is the
probabilistic description of the system. As we now show, another common aspect
leadstoafurtherformalsimilarity:thediscretenessofbotheconomicquantitiesand
microscopic particles implies that, when a specific choice of constraints is made,
eq.(1.4)leadstothesamemathematicalexpressionsthatareencounteredinQuan-
tum Physics. These expressions are the so-called Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein
statistics.5
1.5 Fermi-Diracstatistics
Letusfirstconsiderbinarynetworks,i.e.letusfocusonlyonthepresence/absence
oflinks.Inordertosimplifythediscussion,letusalsoconsiderundirectednetworks
(theresultsthatfollowcanbestraighforwardlyextendedtodirectedconfigurations).
Wehavealreadymentionedtheexampleoftherandomgraphmodel,obtainedwhen
the only constraint is the total number of links. That model is very simple, but
severely limited by its complete homogeneity: all vertices have approximately the
sametopologicalproperties,narrowlydistributedaroundacommonaveragevalue.
Thisisinstarkcontrastwiththestrongheterogeneityofmostreal-worldeconomic
networks, including the ITN as we already discussed in section 1.3. If we want to
buildamaximum-entropymodeloftheITNwhosetopologyisarealimprovement
5Inquantumphysics,fundamentalparticlesarebelievedtobeoftwotypes:fermionsorbosons,
dependingonthevalueoftheirspin(anintrinsic‘angularmoment’oftheparticle).Fermionshave
half-integerspinandcannotoccupyaquantumstate(aconfigurationwithspecifiedmicroscopic
degreesoffreedom,orquantumnumbers)thatisalreadyoccupied.Inotherwords,atmostone
fermionatatimecanoccupyonequantumstate.Theresultingprobabilitythataquantumstateis
occupiedisknownastheFermi-Diracstatistics.Bosonshaveintegerspinandcanoccupystates
withnorestriction:anynon-negativeintegernumberofbosonscanoccupythesamequantumstate.
Theresultingexpectednumberofparticlesoccupyingagivenquantumstateisdescribedbythe
so-calledBose-Einsteinstatistics.
12 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
over the Gravity Model, we need to reproduce the observed heterogeneity of the
network. To this end, it is necessary to enforce different constraints that lead to
more complicated models. One of the widespread choices in network theory is to
consider an ensemble of networks where each vertex i has the same degree k as
intherealnetwork.Thischoiceisjustifiedbythefactthat,beinganentirelylocal
topologicalproperty,thedegreeisexpectedtobedirectlyaffectedbysomeintrinsic
(non-topological) property of vertices. For instance, we already anticipated that in
the ITN the degree of a country increases with the GDP of the latter [9]. It would
of course not make sense to compare the real ITN with a randomized counterpart
wherethedegreeofacountrynolongercorrespondstoarealisticvalueofitsGDP
(for instance, where the USA have only one or two connections). This leads us to
interprettheobserveddegreesofcountriesas‘unavoidable’topologicalconstraints,
inthesensethattheviolationoftheobservedvalueswouldleadtoan‘impossible’,
oratleastveryunrealistic,worldtradenetwork.
The resulting model is known as the Configuration Model, and is defined as a
maximum-entropy ensemble of graphs with given degree sequence [26, 28]. The
degreesequence,whichistheconstraintdefiningthemodel,isnothingbuttheor-
deredvectorkofdegreesofallvertices(wheretheithcomponentk isthedegree
of vertex i). The ordering preserves the ‘identity’ of vertices: in the resulting net-
workensemble,theexpecteddegree(cid:104)k(cid:105)ofeachvertexiisthesameastheempirical
valuek forthatvertex.IntheConfigurationModel,eq.(1.4)translatesintothegraph
probability
ij ij ij ij
where q (a)= pa(1−p )1−a is the probability that that particular entry of the
adjacency matrix A takes the value a =a. The above expression shows that the
creationofalinkhasstilltheformofaBernoulliprocess(seefootnote4),butnow,
unliketherandomgraphmodeldescribedbyeq.(1.6),differentpairsofverticesare
characterizedbydifferentconnectionprobabilitiesp .Theseprobabilitiesread[28]
(cid:104)a (cid:105)=p = (1.8)
wherex istheLagrangemultiplierobtainedbyensuringthattheexpecteddegreeof
thecorrespondingvertexiequalsitsobservedvalue:(cid:104)k(cid:105)=k ∀i[28].Notethat,as
always happens in maximum-entropy ensembles described by eq.(1.4), the proba-
bilisticnatureofconfigurationsimpliesthattheconstraintsarevalidonlyonaverage
(theangularbracketsindicateanaverageovertheensembleofrealizablenetworks).
Alsonotethat p isamonotonicallyincreasingfunctionofx andx .Thisimplies
that(cid:104)k(cid:105)isamonotonicallyincreasingfunctionofx.Animportantconsequenceis
that two countries i and j with the same degree k =k must have the same value
x =x .
Equation(1.8)providesaninterestingconnectionwithquantumphysics,andin
particularthestatisticalmechanicsofthemicroscopicparticlesknownasfermions
(see footnote 5). The ‘selection rules’ of fermions dictate that only one particle at
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 13
atimecanoccupyasingle-particlestate,exactlyaseachpairofverticesinbinary
networks can be either connected or disconnected. In this analogy, every pair i,j
of vertices is a ‘quantum state’ identified by the ‘quantum numbers’ i and j. So
each link of a binary network is like a fermion that can be in one of the available
states,providedthatnotwoobjectsareinthesamestate.Equation(1.8)indicatesthe
expectednumberofparticles/linksinthestatespecifiedbyiand j.Withnosurprise,
ithasthesameformoftheso-calledFermi-Diracstatisticsdescribingtheexpected
numberoffermionsinagivenquantumstate[26,28,29].Aswealreadydiscussed,
theprobabilisticnatureoflinksallowsalsoforthepresenceofemptystates,whose
occurrenceisnowregulatedbytheprobabilitycoefficients(1−p ).
We now come to the application of the model to the topology of the ITN.
Unlike the Gravity Model, the Configuration Model allows the whole degree se-
quence of the observed network to be preserved (on average), while randomizing
other(unconstrained)networkproperties[28].Inordertocheckwhetherthemodel
successfully reproduces the ITN, one needs to compare the higher-order (uncon-
strained)observedtopologicalpropertieswiththeirexpectedvaluescalculatedover
the maximum-entropy ensemble. This automatically indicates whether the degree
sequence is informative in explaining the rest of the topology. This can be done
analytically, by means of the probabilities appearing in eq. (1.8) [28]. The effec-
tiveness of the degree sequence in reproducing other topological properties of the
ITN is shown in fig. 1.4, where we compare the observed values of the average
nearestneighbourdegreeknn andclusteringcoefficientc (definedinsec.1.3)with
the corresponding expected values (cid:104)knn(cid:105) and (cid:104)c(cid:105), for all vertices. In this type of
plot,theagreementbetweenmodelandobservationscanbesimplyassessedasfol-
lows: the less scattered the cloud of points around the identity function, the better
the agreement between model and reality. In principle, a broadly scattered cloud
around the identity function would indicate the little effectiveness of the chosen
constraints in reproducing the unconstrained properties, signalling the presence of
genuinehigher-orderpatternsofself-organization,notsimplyexplainableinterms
ofthedegreesequencealone.However,theresultsinfig.1.4indicatethattheWorld
Trade Web is well reproduced by the Configuration Model. This result is very ro-
bust,asdocumentedbyrecentanalysesthathaveconfirmeditfordifferenttemporal
snapshots, different levels of aggregation (up to individual commodities), and dif-
ferent datasets [16, 18]. With the appropriate generalizations, this conclusion also
holds when the ITN is analysed as a directed network, still well described by the
Fermi-Diracstatistics[16,19].
Forcompleteness,fig.1.4alsoshowstheGravityModel’spredictionofacom-
plete network, which is dramatically different from the observed one. Thus the
maximum-entropyapproach,andinparticulartheConfigurationModel,representsa
significantadvantagewithrespecttotheGravityModel.Anunexpectedimplication
isthatthedegreesofworldcountriesaremaximallyinformativeabouttheITNasa
whole:iftheempiricaldegreesequenceoftheITNisnotreproduced,theobserved
topology of the network as a whole will not be reproduced either [16]. Unfortu-
nately,currentmicro-foundedmodelsintheeconomicsliteraturedonotattemptat
replicating or explaining the particular value of the number of trade partners of a
14 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
110 120 130 140 150 160
nnk (cid:92)
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
c (cid:92)(cid:88)
Fig.1.4 ThetopologyoftheWorldTradeWebiswellreproducedbyspecifyingthenumberof
tradepartnersofeachcountry(binaryConfigurationModel).Left:observedVSexpectedaverage
nearestneighbourdegreeknn,forallvertices.Right:observedVSexpectedclusteringcoefficient
c.Theredcurvesareidentitylines(perfectagreement).Thegreencurvesrepresenttheprediction
forthesamequantitiesundertheGravityModel,whichinsteadpredictsacompletelyconnected
networkwithallverticescharacterizedbythesamevalue.Data:UNCOMTRADEdatabase[21],
year2001(N=162countries).
country.Rather,theyaimatreproducingtheGravityModel,inspiredbythesuccess
ofthelatteratthelevelofnon-zeroflows[12].Insodoing,thesemodelsaredestined
tofailinexplainingtheheterogeneoustopologyoftheITN.Toovercomethislim-
itation, future models should aim at replicating the degree sequence explicitly. As
weanticipatedattheendofsec.1.4,oneshouldalsoinvestigatetherelationshipbe-
tweenthe‘empiricallyinformativeconstraints’inthemaximum-entropyapproach
(thedegreesequenceinthiscase)andthe‘macroeconomicexplanatoryfactors’in
theGravityModelapproach(suchasGPDanddistances).Wewilldiscussthisim-
portantpointinsec.1.9.
Weconcludethissectionbystressingagainthatthe‘fermionic’characterofthe
ITN,whentreatedasabinarynetwork,isthemereresultoftherestrictionthatno
twobinarylinkscanbeplacedbetweenanytwovertices,leadingtoamathematical
resultwhichisformallyequivalenttotheoneofquantumstatistics.Clearly,thereis
nothing really ‘quantum’in trade connections beingdescribed by the Fermi-Dirac
statistics, exactly as there is nothing really ‘gravitational’ in non-zero trade flows
being described by the Gravity Model. Still, the deep epistemological analogies
leadingtosimilarlawsinphysicsandeconomics(theoneswediscussedinsec.1.2)
remain,andarenowtranslatedintoamoresophisticatedformalismthatallowsfor
theprobabilisticanddiscretenatureofthesystem:
• In both physical and economic applications, the Fermi-Dirac statistics has the
followingsymmetry:theprobabilityp onlydependsonthecombinationxx .In
quantumphysics,xx inturndependsonlyontheenergyofthequantumstate,
while in the Configuration Model it depends only on the end-point degrees k
andk .Thismeansthat,allelsebeingequal(e.g.giventhesameenergy,orthe
samevaluesoftheend-pointdegrees),theoccupationprobabilityoftwodiffer-
entstates(i,j)and(m,n)isthesame.
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 15
• In both applications, the Fermi-Dirac statistics implements the qualitative idea
that,thelargerthevalueofxx ,thehighertheprobabilitythatthestate(i,j)is
occupied.
• Finally, the validity of the Fermi-Dirac statistics is in both cases established a
posteriori,bythefactthatitreproducesempiricalobservations.Thisphenomeno-
logical agreement confirms that the postulated quantum numbers/topological
constraints, which uniquely specify the values {x}, are indeed the (only) rele-
vantonesfortheproblemunderinvestigation.
Aswewilldiscussinsec.1.9,intheITNthevalueofxx canalsoberelatedtothe
GDPofthetwocountriesiand j,andtothegeographicdistanceseparatingthem.
This restores a tight correspondence between the three points listed above and the
threeonesdiscussedinsection1.2.
1.6 Bose-Einsteinstatistics
WestartedthischapterstressingtheimportanceoftheITNasacomplexweighted
network,whileintheprevioussectionwerestrictedourselvestothedescriptionof
itspurelybinarytopology.Fromthispointonwards,wegobacktothefullweighted
level and discuss whether it is possible to reproduce the topology and weights of
theITNsimultaneosly.Naively,theresultsshownsofarsuggestthatafirstattempt
inthisdirectioncouldbetheintroductionofatwo-stepprocesswherethetopology
isfirstestablishedusingtheConfigurationModel,andtherealizedlinkweightsare
then estimated using the Gravity Model. However, besides being disappointingly
inelegant,thisapproachwouldresultinahybridcombinationofmaximum-entropy
andeconomicallyinspiredexpectations,leavingthefinalresultswithoutaclearin-
terpretation.Amoresatisfactorywaytoproceedisexpandingthemaximum-entropy
formalismintoonevalidforweightednetworks,automaticallyclosertothemacroe-
conomicreasoning.
Tomanyeconomists,thefindingthatthenumberoftradepartnersofacountry
is a particularly informative quantity might appear weak or misleading, given the
expectationthatthemonetaryvalueofimportsandexportsisinprinciplemuchmore
informative:commonsensesuggeststhatknowinghowmuch(indollars)acountry
trades with the rest of the world should be more informative than just knowing
how many partners trade with that country. This leads to the expectation that the
strengthsshouldbemoreinformativethanthedegreek.Onemightthereforesuspect
that an even better model of the ITN, still preserving the observed heterogeneity
of countries, is one where the strengths, rather than the degrees, are enforced as
constraints.Inthissection,wetakethisapproachandshowthatitactuallyleadsto
a counter-intuitive result: unlike what we found for the degree sequence, knowing
thestrengthofeachworldcountryturnsouttobeverypoorlyinformativeaboutthe
structureoftheITNasawhole.
16 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
Thetheoreticalframeworkintroducedintheprevioussectionallowedustotreat
links as probabilistic entities in order to overcome the Gravity Model’s prediction
ofacompletelyconnectednetwork.Sincewewereonlyinterestedintheprediction
of the presence or absence of links, the selection rules were formally analogue to
thefermionicones:a =0,1.However,theformalismcanbegeneralizedinorder
toanalyzeweightednetworkswherelinkscanhavenon-negativeintegerweights.If
wekeepconsideringundirectedgraphsforsimplicity,eachnetworkisnowspecified
by a N×N symmetric weight matrixW whose entry w equals the weight of the
link between the vertices i and j. Therefore, we can now label each configuration
withW,andthecorrespondingprobabilitywithP(W).Ifwedefinethestrengthse-
quencesastheorderedvectorofstrengthvalues(withcomponentss,i=1,...,N),
the Weighted Configuration Model can be introduced as the ensemble of weighted
networkswithgivenstrengthsequence.Ifoneallowseachw totakenon-negative
integernumbers,eq.(1.4)nowbecomes[28]
ij ij ij ij
Whereq (w)= pw(1−p ),whichhasnowtheformofageometricdistribution6,
istheprobabilitythattheverticesiand j areconnectedbyalinkofweightw.The
outcome w=0, corresponding to a missing link, occurs with probability 1−p .
Therefore p stilldenotestheprobabilitythatiand jareconnected,irrespectiveof
theweightofthisconnection.Thisprobabilitynowreads
p =yy (1.10)
where y is the Lagrange multiplier required in order to ensure that the expected
strength(cid:104)s(cid:105)ofeachvertexiequalstheempiricalvalues [28].Thistime,twocoun-
tries i and j with the same strength s =s (independently of their degrees) must
havethesamevaluey =y [17].
Asinthepreviouscase,aconnectionwithanotherwell-knownquantumstatistics
emerge.The‘selectionrules’havenowallowedustotreatlinkweightsasformally
analoguetobosons(seefootnote5),admittingmultipleandunlimitedoccupations
ofthesame‘quantumstate’(w =0,1,2...+∞).Indeed,theexpectedoccupation
numberofaquantumstate,whichistheexpectedweightofthelinkbetweenvertices
iand j,isnowformallyidenticaltotheso-calledBose-Einsteinstatistics[26,28]:
(cid:104)w (cid:105)= = (1.11)
Asbefore,thereisnothingfundamentalinthemathematicalanalogywithquantum
statistics, the only common element being the postulated discreteness of the num-
6Inoneofitspossibleformulations,thegeometricdistributiondescribestheprobabilitythat,ina
sequenceofrepeatedBernoullitrials(seefootnote4)withsuccessprobability p,thefirstwtrials
areallsuccessfulandthefollowingoneisunsuccessful.Thishappenswithprobabilitypw(1−p).
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 17
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
nns (cid:92)
0 0.00005 0.0001 0.00015
wc (cid:92)
Fig.1.5 ThetopologyandweightsoftheWorldTradeWebareNOTwellreproducedbyspecifying
thetotalimportandexportvalueofeachcountry(weightedConfigurationModel).Left:observed
VSexpectedaveragenearestneighbourstrengthsnn,forallvertices.Right:observedVSexpected
weightedclusteringcoefficientcw.Theredcurvesareidentitylines(perfectagreement).Thegreen
curve represents the prediction for the same quantities under the Gravity Model, which instead
predictsacompletelyconnectednetworkwithallverticescharacterizedbythesamevalue.Data:
UNCOMTRADEdatabase[21],year2001(N=162countries).Thevaluesarerescaledbythe
totalweight.
bersw .7 Thedeepersimilarityinvolvesagaintheconceptofsymmetry,whichin
this case refers to the assumption that, all else being equal, in the Bose-Einstein
statistics the expected value (cid:104)w (cid:105) only depends on yy . Similarly, the common
qualitativeaspectsharedbythephysicalandeconomicapplicationsisthat(cid:104)w (cid:105)is
expectedtoincreasewithyy .However,aswenowshow,thistimethephenomeno-
logical analogy between the Weighted Configuration Model of trade and quantum
statistics (i.e. the agreement of both with real data) breaks down: while the Bose-
Einstein distribution describes the microscopic world of bosons remarkably well,
eqs.(1.9-1.11)failmiserablyinreproducingtheobservedITN.
To see this, one can again compare the observed and the expected values of
higher-order(unconstrained)topologicalproperties.Infig.1.5weshowtheaverage
nearestneighbourstrengthsnn andweightedclusteringcoefficientcw (seesec.1.3).
The results now indicate how bad the accordance between the Weighted Configu-
rationModelandtherealnetworkis.Interestinglyenough,themodel’sprediction
fortheaveragenearestneighborsstrengthisalmostidenticaltotheGravityModel’s
prediction for the same quantity. This unambiguously indicates that the two mod-
els suffer from the same limitation: their incapabaility to reproduce the topology
of the observed network and, in particular, the fact that the Weighted Configura-
tion Model generates an extremely dense network [17], not too different from the
completely connected topology predicted by the Gravity Model (for a fully con-
nectednetworkwhoseweightsarerescaledbythetotalweight,itiseasytoestimate
snn (cid:39)∑
/N =2/N). Similarly, even if the smaller values of the weighted clus-
teringcoefficientseemtopartiallyagreewiththemodel’sprediction,thebehaviour
forlargevaluesindicatesthatmajorrefinementsareneededinordertoimprovethe
7Inquantumphysics,thediscretenessisimpliedbythefactthatparticlescanonlyexistininteger
number.Ineconomicnetworks,thediscretenessisimpliedbythefactthatmoneycanonlyexistin
integermultiplesofafundamental,indivisibleunitofcurrency(suchasoneEurocent).
18 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
model performance [17]. The disagreement between the Weighted Configuration
Model and the real ITN has been confirmed on different data, different temporal
snapshots,anddifferentcommodities[17,18].
Theaboveresultcontradictstheintuitiveexpectationthat,bytakingaweighted
quantity (the strength sequence s) as input, the Weighted Configuration Model
shouldbemoreinformativethanitsbinarycounterpart.Indeed,whilethecomplete
knowledgeofalltheweightsofthenetworkisofcoursemoreinformativethanthe
knowledgeofthebinarytopologyalone,itturnsoutthatthepartialknowledgeof
theweightednetwork(thestrengthsequenceinthiscase)islessinformativethanthe
knowledgeofthecorrespondingbinaryquantity(thedegreesequence).Asomewhat
puzzlingconsequenceformacroeconomicmodelingisthat,evenifamicro-founded
modelofinternationaltradesuccessfullyreproducestheobservedtotalimportsand
exports of all world countries, this is definitely not enough in order to reproduce
thestructureoftheITNasawhole.Ifcombinedwiththepreviousresultaboutthe
extremeinformativenessofthedegreesequence,thisfindingstrengthenstheuncon-
ventional conclusion that satisfactory models of international trade should aim at
primarilyreproducingthebinarypropertiesofcountries(numberoftradepartners)
ratherthantheirweightedones(totalimportandexport)[16,17,18].
1.7 Generalizedquantumdistributions
OnethereforeneedstolookforabettermodeloftheInternationalTradeNetwork,
abletoreproducethebinarytopologyandtheweightedstructureofthenetworksi-
multaneously.Sincemicroscopicparticlesareeitherfermionsorbosons,theFermi-
Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions are the only two types of quantum statistics
traditionallyusedinphysics.8However,onecanformallyintroducegeneralizeddis-
tributionsthatreducetotheFermi-DiracandtheBose-Einsteinstatisticsaspartic-
ularcases.Whilethephysicallyrealizablequantumsystemsmightcorrespondonly
tothefermionicandbosonicextremes,itmightwellbethatothersystems,suchas
economicnetworks,caninsteadrealizeothernon-triviallimitsofthosegeneralized
distributions.Therefore,inthisandinthenextsectionwediscusstwopossiblegen-
eralized ‘quantum’ statistics and their relationship with the structure of economic
networks,andtheITNinparticular.
The case we consider in this section is just a pedagogical example, while the
onewediscussinthenextsectionleadstoaveryimportantmodelthatreproduces
the observed ITN in great detail. As we showed, the only mathematical ingredi-
entneededtogeneratetheFermi-Diracstatisticsinmaximum-entropynetworken-
sembles is the 0/1 character of binary links (a =0,1), while the only ingredient
needed to generated the Bose-Einstein statistics is the non-negative integer char-
acter of weighted links (w =0,...,+∞). For non-physical systems, there is no
8Excludingthecaseofanyons[30],particlesthatcanonlyexistintwodimensionsandthatcanbe
describedbyageneralized‘fractionalstatistics’[31],whichishoweverunrelatedtotheextensions
wediscussinthissectionandinthenextone.
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 19
Fig.1.6 Single-linkcumu-
lativedistributionfunctions 0.8
ofthegeneralizedstatistics,
definedineq.(1.13),rang- 0.6
ing from the Fermi-Dirac
(the blue one on the left, 0.4
=1)totheBose-
Einstein (the blue one on 0.2
theright,withw
→∞).
Thex-axisislogarithmically 0
reason why the only two allowed values for the maximum weight should be one
andinfinite.Ingeneral,wecanconsiderageneralfamilyofdistributions,obtained
when the occupation number can range from 0 to a finite maximum value w .
All the distributions within this family share the same discrete character, due to
theintegeroccupationnumbersof‘quantumstates’.However,theyonlyreduceto
theFermi-DiracandBose-Einsteindistributionsintheextremecasesw =1and
w →+∞respectively.
Inthegeneralcase,withw =0,1,2...w ,themaximum-entropyensemble
ofnetworkswithgivenstrengthsequencesischaracterizedbytheprobabilitydis-
P(W)=∏ i<j q ij (w ij )=∏ i<j  1− ij y ( i w j max i + j 1)   1−y ( i w j ma i x j +1)  (1.12)
whereforsimplicitywehavedefinedy ≡yy ,ify stilldenotestheLagrangemul-
tiplierneededtoenforcetheconstraint(cid:104)s(cid:105)=s.Likeeqs.(1.7)and(1.9),theabove
probabilityisstillaproductoversingle-linkdistributions,eachcharacterizedbythe
same, bounded range of values. In order to better visualize the functional form of
such distributions, the corresponding single-link cumulative distribution functions
canbeplotted,asshowninfig.1.6.Thelattercanbecomputedquiteeasilyas
y (1−ywmax)
As w increases from 1 to +∞, the intersections of these distributions with the
y-axisformaninterestingnumericalsuccession,whosegenerictermis
P (w >0|y =1)= = , , ... (1.14)
w +1 2 3 4
andwhoselimitwhenw →+∞is1.
The generalized distribution considered above is an example showing how it
is possible to gradually interpolate between the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein
20 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
through the introduction of an extra parameter (w ). In principle, intermediate
values of the parameter can lead to different results than the ones we showed in
sec.1.6,andpotentiallytoanimprovementoverthem.However,sincetheobserved
weightsintheITNareextremelylarge,thevalueofw requiredinordertogener-
aterealisticweightswillbesolargethattheresultsarepracticallyindistinguishable
fromthosewehavealreadydiscussedusingtheBose-Einsteindistribution.Sothis
modeldoesnotrepresentarealimprovement.
1.8 MixedBose-Fermistatistics
A fundamentally different way to unify the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distri-
butions, other than introducing an extra parameter while keeping the strength se-
quence s as the constraint, is adopting a different choice of the constraint them-
selves. Specifically, motivated by the success of the binary Configuration Model
discussedinsec.1.6,onecanintroduceamaximum-entropyensembleofnetworks
with given degree sequence k and strength sequence s, i.e. one where both con-
straintsareenforcedsimultaneously[32].Tothisend,themaximumallowedvalue
of weight is again w =+∞ as in the Bose-Einstein case. However, in terms of
theoretical models, this leads to a whole new family of probability distributions,
whosefunctionalformis[32]
(cid:20) (x
)wij−1(1−y
) (cid:21)
1−yy +xx yy
i<j i<j i j i j i j
wherea ,theelementoftheadjacencymatrix,is0ifw =0and1ifw >0.In
theaboveexpression,thexvectorcontrolsforthedegreesandtheyvectorcontrols
for the strengths. This double set of constraints implies that, while different pairs
ofverticesarestillindependent,thecreationofalinkofgivenweightbetweentwo
verticesisneitheraBernoullinorageometricprocess(seefootnotes4and6),buta
combinationofthetwo.
Asinthepreviousexample,the(nowgeneralized)‘quantum’ordiscretecharac-
terofthestatisticsbecomesevidentassoonastheexpectedoccupationnumbersare
computed[32]:
xx yy xx yy
i j i j i j i j
(cid:104)a (cid:105)= (cid:104)w (cid:105)= (1.16)
1−yy +xx yy (1−yy +xx yy )(1−y y )
i j i j i j i j i j i j j j
In this case, the unification of the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions is
achieved by combining binary and weighted constraints ‘as a block’, i.e. in a sin-
gle big step. As a result, one cannot gradually interpolate between the two ordi-
narystatistics:forinstance,inordertoretrievetheBose-Einsteindistribution,one
mustdroptheentiredegreesequencekfromthesetofconstraints(mathematically,
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 21
this corresponds to set x equal to the unit vector 1).9 The fundamental difference
with respect to the intermediate distributions defined by eq. (1.12) is that now the
occupation probability of an empty ‘single-link state’ differs from the occupation
probabilityofanalreadyoccupiedstate.Infact,thisfamilyofdistributionscanbe
intuitivelydescribedbysayingthatthe‘first’appearanceofalinkofunitweightbe-
tweentwodisconnectedverticesisregulatedbytheFermi-Diracstatistics,whilethe
‘subsequent’appearanceofunitsofweightsbetweentwoalreadyconnectedvertices
isregulatedbytheBose-Einsteinstatistics.Forthisreason,thestatisticsdefinedby
eq.(1.16)iscalledthemixedBose-Fermistatistics[32].
The Bose-Fermi statistics reproduces with great accuracy all the four higher-
orderstructuralquantities(bothbinaryandweighted)oftheITNconsideredsofar.
This is shown in fig. 1.7, where we compare the expected and observed values of
k ,c,snn,andcw forallvertices.Forthefirsttime,wefindaverycloseagreement
for all these topological properties simultaneously. This result is very robust, as it
holdsfordifferentsnapshotsanddifferentcommodities[24].Twomainconclusions
canbedrawn:
• on one hand, the addition of weighted constraints to the binary ones does not
affecttheeffectivenessofthemixedmodelinreproducingthepurelytopological
properties: the two upper panels of fig. 1.7 look approximately the same as the
twopanelsoffig.1.4;
• on the other hand, the addition of binary constraints to the weighted ones dra-
maticallyimprovestheperformanceofthemodelinpredictingpurelyweighted
quantities. This is evident by comparing fig. 1.5 with the two bottom panels of
fig. 1.7. The latter show that now both the average nearest neighbour strength
andtheweightedclusteringcoefficientcloselyfollowtheidentityfunction.Ina
sense,theadditionofpurelybinary constraintscompensatestheincapabilityof
the purely bosonic model in reproducing the network structure and brings the
modelbacktohighlevelsofperformanceatthetopologicallevel.
ThefamilyofmixedBose-Fermistatisticsnotonlyrepresentsapowerfulmodelin
ordertoexplainboththebinaryandtheweightedquantitiesofinterestofagiven,
observednetwork;italsopointsoutthestrongeffectsoftheunderlyingtopologyon
theweightedstructuralpatterns.
In economic terms, our discussion leads to the conclusion that the knowledge
of monetary/weighted structural properties (such as total imports and exports) is
informative only if in combination with non-monetary/binary properties (such as
the number of trade partners). The expectation that monetary quantities are per se
moreinformativethanthecorrespondingbinaryonesturnsouttobeincorrect.For
this reason, we believe that the Bose-Fermi statistics is a very useful tool in the
understanding of economic networks in general. The fact that both strengths and
9Notethatthedualoperation,i.e.droppingtheentirestrengthsequencesfromthesetofconstraints
(mathematicallycorrespondingtoy=1),leadstoanundefinedmodelanddoesnotcorrespondto
the Fermi-Dirac statistics. The reason is that the maximum weight is still w max =+∞ and not
=1:withoutconstraintsontheweightedproperties,theexpectedweightsbecomeinfinite.
22 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
110 120 130 140 150 160
0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00
0.01 0.015 0.02 0.03
1106 5106 2105 1104
Fig.1.7 ThetopologyandweightsoftheWorldTradeWebaresimultaneouslywellreproduced
byspecifyingthenumberofpartnersofeachcountry,aswellasthetotalimportandexportvalue
of each country (mixed Configuration Model). Top left: observed VS expected average nearest
neighbourdegreeknn,forallvertices.Topright:observedVSexpectedclusteringcoefficientc.
Bottomleft:observedVSexpectedaveragenearestneighborsstrengthsnn.Bottomright:observed
VSexpectedclusteringcoefficientcw.Theredcurvesareidentitylines(perfectagreement).The
greencurvesrepresentthepredictionforthesamequantitiesundertheGravityModel,whichin-
steadpredictsacompletelyconnectednetworkwithallverticescharacterizedbythesamevalue.
Data:UNCOMTRADEdatabase[21],year2001(N=162countries).Thevaluesarerescaledby
thetotalweight.
degreesareenforcedallowstostudytheinterplaybetweenthetopologicalandmon-
etarylevelsoforganization,whilestillkeepingthemodelparsimonious:onlylocal
(country-specific)structuralproperties,theonesthatwediscussedasthesomewhat
irreducibleand‘unavoidable’levelofheterogeneity,areenforced.
1.9 TheroleofGDPanddistance
TheresultspresentedsofarshowthattheattempttomodeltheInternationalTrade
Networkusinganalogieswithphysicallaws,initiatedbyJanTinbergenwiththein-
troduction of the Gravity Model, turns out to be extremely successful, even if the
appropriate formal expressions are very different from Tinbergen’s original idea.
However,tocompleteourdiscussion,weneedtoaddressthefinalpointanticipated
insec.1.4,i.e.howtoreconcilemaximum-entropygraphensembles(thattakestruc-
tural properties as input) with the Gravity Model’s expectation that international
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 23
trade strongly depends on non-structural macroeconomic properties, such as GDP
andgeographicdistances.
WestartwithadiscussionabouttheroleofGDP.Asweanticipatedinsections
1.3and1.5,theGDPofacountryturnsouttobehighlycorrelatedwiththedegree
ofthatcountryintheITN.Interestingly,thefunctionaldependenceofthedegreeon
theGDPcanbeadequatelycharacterizedbyeq.(1.8).Inmoredetail,itwasshown
[9]thattheconnectionprobability
p = (1.17)
(wherezisaglobalfreeparameter)definesamodelthatreproducesthepropertiesof
thebinarytopologyoftheITNverywell,justliketheConfigurationModeldefined
by eq.(1.8) does. The value of z is fitted to the data by requiring that the expected
numberoflinks(cid:104)L(cid:105)equalstheobservednumberL[9].10 Thisresultshowsthatthe
parameterx isapproximatelyproportionaltoGDP,ascanbeconfirmedexplicitly
[33].Intermsofthenetworkformationprocess,thismeansthattheresultsdiscussed
insec.1.5canbealmostentirelyrephrasedasfollows.TheGDPisfoundtodeter-
mine directly the number of trade partners of each country (because GDP has the
same role of the Lagrange multiplier x determining k), and indirectly the whole
topology of the International Trade Network (because the functional form of the
connection probability is that of the Configuration Model, where the higher-order
topological properties are entirely determined by the degree sequence). The only
topologicalquantityweneedtoknowabouttherealnetworkisthetotalnumberof
linksspecifyingtheparameterz.
Inanonlyslightlymorecomplicatedway,itisalsopossibletoincorporatedis-
tancesintoeq.(1.17)[34].Thisleadstotheprobability
p = (1.18)
where f(d )issomeincreasingfunctionofthegeographicdistancebetweencoun-
tries i and j. The simplest choice for this function is f(d )=d [35]. The model
has now two parameters, which can be fixed simultaneously by imposing (cid:104)L(cid:105)=L
and (cid:104)F(cid:105)=F, where F ≡∑
) is a measure of the filling of space by the
network[35].Avariantofthismodelhasbeenrecentlyusedtoanalysethedirected
version of the ITN [34]. The result one finds is that the addition of spatial infor-
mation moderately improves the fit to the data. However, alternative models that
include information about the reciprocity of trade [19, 36], rather than geographic
distances,systematicallyoutperformthespatialmodel[34].
We note that, along the same lines as above, it is straightfoward to introduce
GDPsanddistancesalsointheweightedmodelsdefinedbyeq.(1.11)and(1.16),by
10Thischoicefortheparameterzcorrespondstothemaximizationofthelikelihoodofthemodel
definedbyeq.(1.17)[33],exactlylikethevaluesof{x
}thatrealizetheconditions(cid:104)k
(cid:105)=k
maximizethelikelihoodoftheConfigurationModeldefinedbyeq.(1.8)[28,33].
24 TizianoSquartiniandDiegoGarlaschelli
simply replacing y
e−γf(dij). Even if these weighted
modelshavenotyetbeenusedinempricalanalyses,theabovediscussionshowsthat
maximum-entropyensemblesarenotperseincompatiblewiththeGravityModel’s
approach of explaining trade patterns in terms of macroeconomic quantities such
asGDPanddistances.Onthecontrary,webelievethatmaximum-entropymodels
are a very promising tool to understand economic networks. Identifying the most
informative properties explaining the topology and weights of real economic net-
worksisextremelyimportantinordertoidentifythemostrelevant‘targets’ofthe-
oretical models. The finding that the observed trade patterns cannot be adequately
understoodunlessoneisabletoreproducethedegreesequence,andthatthelatter
is directly determined by the GDP, could only be established using a maximum-
entropymodel.Moreingeneral,theimportantroleplayedbybinarypropertieseven
inweightedanalysesisahighlynontrivialresult.
1.10 Conclusions
In 1962, in what we would now call a pioneering attempt to model economic net-
works, the physicist and first Nobel Memorial Prize laureate Jan Tinbergen intro-
duced the Gravity Model of trade mimicking Newton’s gravitation law. This very
intuitiveandelegantproposalaimedatexplainingtradeexchangesintermsofafew
macroeconomic quantities (GDP and geographic distance) by combining them in
thesamewayasnaturecombinesgravitationalmassesandspatialdistances.
The success of the Gravity Model is due to the fact that it reproduces well the
observed(non-zero)tradeflowsbetweencountries.Minorrefinementstothemodel,
suchastheinclusionofadditionalfactorseitherfavouringorsuppressingtrade,are
relativelysimpletomakeandfurtherimprovethefittothedata.Therefore,forhalf
acenturytheGravityModelhasbeenusedmoreandmoreextensivelyinmacroe-
conomic analyses, and it has become the standard model of international trade in
theeconomicsliterature.However,themostseriousandinsomesenseirreducible
limitation of the Gravity Model emerged only relatively recently, after the publi-
cationofseveralempiricalanalysesdocumentingthetopologyoftheInternational
TradeNetworkinthestatisticalphysicsliterature.WhiletheGravityModelpredicts
acompletelyconnectednetworkwhereeverycountrytradeswithallothercountries,
theobservedITNismuchmoreheterogeneousandhierarchical.
We have shown that this limitation can be overcome by adopting a probabilis-
tic view, in exactly the same way as classical physics escaped its crisis at the end
ofXIXcenturybyadoptingthequantum-mechanicalparadigm.Innetworktheory,
this amounts to consider the adjacency matrix entries as probabilistic entities and
thenodepairsassingle-linkstateswhoseoccupationnumbersareregulatedbythe
sameselectionrulesthatapplytofermionsandbosonsinquantumphysics.Inthis
way,variousprobabilitydistributionscanbedefinedinordertoexplaintheobserved
structuralpatterns.Ononehand,purelyfermionicselectionrulesexcellentlyrepro-
duce the binary topology of the ITN, but are intrinsically limited by the fact that
1 JanTinbergen’slegacyforeconomicnetworks 25
they give no information about the weights of links in the network. On the other
hand,bosonicselectionrulesaresuitableforweightedanalysesbutsufferfromthe
samelimitationsoftheGravityModel,sincetheyleadtothepredictionofanalmost
completelyconnectednetwork.Interestinglyenough,themosteffectiveprobabilis-
ticmodelsarethosecombiningfermionicandbosonicselectionrules.Inthiscombi-
nation,thelimitationsencounteredwhenthetwoquantumstatisticsareconsidered
asseparateareovercomesimultaneously,andboththetopologyandweightsofthe
observedITNarenicelyreproduced.
Themainconclusionwecandrawisthefundamentalroleplayedbytopologyin
explainingtheobservedpatternsofrealworldnetworks:incontrastwiththe‘main-
stream’economicthinking,purelyweightedinformation(suchasthatencodedinto
thestrengthsequence)isnotenoughtoreproducealltheobservedpropertiesand,in
particular,thepurelybinaryones(suchasthedegreesequence).Agenuine,purely
binary information is also needed from the very beginning, as confirmed by the
successfulfamilyofmixedBose-Fermiprobabilisticdistributions.Thisshowsthat
thenaiveexpectationthatweighted/monetaryquantitiesarepersemoreinformative
thanthecorrespondingbinary/non-monetaryonesisincorrect.Thecounter-intuitive
natureofthisfindingshowsthatitisveryimportanttofurtherdevelopanappropriate
information-theoreticformalism,basedonmaximum-entropystatisticalensembles,
aimedatidentifyingthekeystructuralpropertiesofeconomicnetworks.
Curiously,theroadtakenbyJanTinbergenappearstoleadto‘physical’lawsthat
arequitedifferentfromtheonesoriginallypostulated,andmoresimilartoquantum
statistics than gravitation. However, the deep epistemological reasons underlying
Tinbergen’sideaofintroducingtheGravityModeloftradeappeartobeveryappro-
priate, and persist throughout the more recent approaches. This is, we believe, the
most important legacy that Jan Tinbergen left us for the modern understanding of
economicnetworks.
Acknowledgements D. G. acknowledges support from the Dutch Econophysics Foundation
(StichtingEconophysics,Leiden,theNetherlands)withfundsfrombeneficiariesofDuyfkenTrad-
ingKnowledgeBV,Amsterdam,theNetherlands.