1v2385.9031:viXra
Joint Optimization of Hybrid Energy Storage
and Generation Capacity with Renewable
Peng Yang, Student Member, IEEE, and Arye Nehorai, Fellow, IEEE
In an isolated power grid or a micro-grid with a small carbon footprint, the penetration of renewable energy is
usuallyhigh.Insuchpowergrids,energystorageisimportanttoguaranteeanuninterruptedandstablepowersupplyfor
endusers.Differenttypesofenergystoragehavedifferentcharacteristics,includingtheirround-tripefficiency,power
and energy rating, energy loss over time, and investment and maintenance costs. In addition, the load characteristics
and availability of different types of renewable energy sources vary in different geographic regions and at different
timesof year. Therefore joint capacity optimization for multiple types of energy storage and generation isimportant
when designing this type of power systems. In this paper, we formulate a cost minimization problem for storage
and generation planning, considering both the initial investment cost and operational/maintenance cost, and propose
a distributed optimization framework to overcome the difficulty brought about by the large size of the optimization
problem. The results will help in making decisions on energy storage and generation capacity planning in future
decentralized power grids with high renewable penetrations.
Index Terms
energy storage, capacity planning, renewable energy sources, micro-grid, distributed optimization
NOMENCLATURE
R Set of different renewable generators
r Types of renewable generators
rr Renewable generation per unit generation capacity during time period t
Cr Renewable energy cost during time period t
Rr Renewable generation during time period t
Rr Maximum generation capacity
TheauthorsarewiththePrestonM.GreenDepartmentofElectricalandSystemsEngineering,WashingtonUniversityinSt.Louis,St.Louis,
MO,63130USA.E-mail:yangp@ese.wustl.edu, nehorai@ese.wustl.edu.
ThisworkwassupportedbytheInternationalCenterforAdvancedRenewableEnergyandSustainability(I-CARES)atWashingtonUniversity
inSt.Louis.
June7,2018 DRAFT
S Set of different energy storage types
s Types of energy storage
δs Rated power/energy ratio
ηs One-way energy efficiency
Ss Energy storage capacity
ξs Energy loss ratio per unit time
Cs Energy storage cost during time period t
Charged energy during time period t
Discharged energy time period t
H Set of different of diesel generators
h Types of diesel generators
Cs Diesel energy cost during time period t
Hh Diesel generation during time period t
Hh Maximum generation capacity
Hh,+ Ramp up constraint
Hh,− Ramp down constraint
T Set of time periods in planning horizon
D Energy demand from users during time period t
G Energy shortage or energy drawn from main grid during time period t
a Amortization factor per time period
c Investment cost per unit storage or generator
c Operational/maintenancecost of energy storage or generator
f Objective function for planning problem
α Maximal energy shortage probability allowed
G Energy shortage threshold
Cj Feasible set for the jth scenario
xj Boundary parameters for the jth scenario
xj Design parameters for the jth scenario
z Global boundary parameters
z Global design parameters
B Group index mapping for boundary conditions
B Element-wise index mapping for boundary conditions
ρ Dual variable update step-size
τ, µ Parameters for adaptive dual variable step-size
r Maximum diesel generation capacity ratio
r Shortfall-to-demandratio
June7,2018 DRAFT
I. INTRODUCTION
Renewable energy sources [1], including solar and wind energy, provide only about 3% of the electricity in
the United States. However, high penetration of renewable energy is becoming the trend for various reasons.
The projected future shortage in fossil fuels, environmentalconcerns, and advances in smart grid [2] technologies
stimulatetheincreasingpenetrationofrenewableenergy.Researchershaveshownthatsupplyingalltheenergyneeds
of the United States from renewable energy is realizable in the future [3]. According to the National Renewable
EnergyLaboratory(NREL),renewableenergypotentiallywillsupportabout80%ofthetotalelectricityconsumption
in the U.S. in 2050[4]. The high penetrationof renewable energy is especially commonin (remote) isolated grids,
or micro-grids with small carbon footprints [5], which are self-sustained most of the time.
Mostrenewableenergysources,includingwindandsolar,arehighlyintermittent.Theavailabilityofsuchenergy
sources varies significantly in different geographical locations. In the same location, the amount of generation
also fluctuates depending on the time of day, season, and weather conditions. A grid with high renewable energy
penetrationneedstobuildsufficientenergystoragetoensureanuninterruptedsupplytoendusers[6],[7].Thereare
differenttypesofenergystorages,includingsuper-capacitors,flywheels,chemicalbatteries,waterpumps,hydrogen,
and compressed air [8]-[13]. Differenttypes of energystorage have differentcharacteristics, e.g., round-tripenergy
efficiency, maximum capacity/power rating, energy loss over time, and investment/operationalcosts. For example,
flywheelenergystorage hashigh energyefficiencyand charge/dischargerates, butthe rate of energyloss overtime
is relatively high.Chemicalbatteries have relativelyhighenergyefficiencyand low energyloss overtime, however
their maintenance cost is high due to their low durability, which is quantified by cycling capacity1. Water pumps
and hydrogen energy storages have low energy efficiency, but their energy loss over time is small. Therefore they
are often used for longer-term energy storage.
Although there has been research on planning and/or operating a specific type of energy storage system for
isolated electricity grids [14]-[17], few works consider exploiting the different characteristics of multiple types of
energystorageandthedifferentavailabilitiesofmultipletypesofrenewableenergysources,formingahybridenergy
generation and storage system. Nevertheless, jointly planning for energy storage along with renewable generation
capacity potentially results in a more economical and efficient energy system.
Since the future grid is becoming decentralized, we consider the scenario of an isolated grid, or a micro-grid
with a small carbon footprint, whose energy is generated mainly from renewable energy sources. To make the
scenario more practical, we assume the grid also has traditional diesel generators. The diesel generator on its own
isinsufficienttosupplythedemandofthegrid,asitsgenerationcapacityissignificantlylessthanthepeakload.We
formulateanoptimizationproblemwiththeobjectiveofminimizingtheinvestmentcostandoperational/maintenance
costofenergystorageandgenerators,byfindinganoptimalcombinationofdifferentenergystoragesandgenerators
(which we refer to as design parameters) and optimizing their operations.
Therenewablegenerationanduserdemandschangewithtime,andhavedifferentcharacteristicsatdifferenttimes
1Themaximumnumberofcharging cycles (fullchargeanddischarge).
June7,2018 DRAFT
of dayanddifferentdaysofthe year. Itis oftendifficultto obtainan accurateprobabilitydensityfunctionto reflect
thesecomplexcharacteristics.Therefore,severalyearsofhistoricaldatamaybeneededtoobtainbetteroptimization
results. As the size of historical database increases, the design horizon of the optimization problem increases, and
the problem becomes increasingly difficult to solve. To resolve this problem, we reformulate the original problem
as a consensus problem. The entire design horizon is divided into multiple shorter horizons, and thus the design
parametersbecome the consensusparameters, which should be consistent across all sub-problems.This framework
can also be extended to the case of solving chance-constrained optimization using scenario approximations, as
we will elaborate later. We propose to solve the consensus problem in a parallel distributed manner based on
the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [18], which mitigates the curse of dimensionality due to
increased number of scenarios.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we briefly review some relevant works. In Sec. III we
describe the system model, including the energy storage and generators. In Sec. IV we formulate the optimization
problem and solve it in a distributed manner. We provide numerical examples in Sec. V, and conclude the paper
in Sec. VI.
Notations: We use italic symbols to denote scalars, bold italic symbols to denote vectors, calligraphic symbols
to denote sets, card(·) to denote the cardiality of a set, and superscript ⊤ to denote matrix or vector transpose.
We use {aj} to denote a collection of all aj’s for j ∈ J, and (a) to denote the jth element of vector a. The
concatenation of two vectors [a;b] is equivalent to [a⊤,b⊤]⊤.
II. RELATEDWORK
There have been several works on optimization with energy storages and renewable generation, and we briefly
reviewsomeofthemhere.In[8],the authorsinvestigatedthe combinedoptimizationofa windfarmanda pumped
storage facility from the perspective of a generation company, using a two-step stochastic optimization approach.
The optimization produces optimal bids for the day-ahead spot market, and optimal operation strategies of the
facilities. The optimal planning of generation and energy storage capacity was not considered. Zhou et al. [10]
proposeda compositeenergystorage system thatcontainsbothhigh energydensitystorageand highpowerdensity
storage. The proposedpower converter configurationenables actively distributing demands among different energy
storages. Brown et al. provided an economical analysis of the benefits of having pumped storage in a small island
system with abundant renewable energy, and proposed to find the optimal pumped storage capacity through linear
programming.In[16], theauthorsconsideredoptimizingthe ratingof energystoragein a wind-dieselisolatedgrid,
and demonstrated that high wind penetration potentially results in significant cost savings in terms of fuel and
operating costs.
The main contributions of our work are two fold. First, instead of a single type of energy storage or renewable
energy source, we consider a hybrid system with multiple types of energy storage and renewable energy sources,
andjointlyoptimizetheircapacitiesandoperation.Thisjointoptimizationexploitsthebenefitsfromeachindividual
element, and therefore is more cost efficient. Second, we propose a distributed optimization framework,so that the
June7,2018 DRAFT
capacity design problem becomes scalable when the number of scenarios increases.
III. SYSTEMMODEL
A. Energy storage model
Assume there is a set S of differenttypes of energystorages. We use superscripts∈S to denote the type of the
storage. Each type of energy storage is characterized by a group of parameters. We use ηs to denote the one-way
energy efficiency of energy storage type s; δs to denote the ratio between the rated power and rated energy; ξs to
denote the energy loss ratio per unit time period. The cost of energy storage includes the initial investment cost
cs and operational/maintenancecost cs . We use as to denote the amortization factor.
Let Ss denote the energy in storage s at the beginning of time period t, satisfying the following equation:
Ss− Ps−ξsSs if Ps ≥0,
t ηs t t t
Ss−ηsPs−ξsSs if Ps <0,
where positive P
s denotes discharge from s torage s during time period t, and negative P
s denotes charge to the
storage. Make the following substitution:
Ps =Ps,+−Ps,− , Ps,+ ≥0, Ps,− ≥0, (2)
and we can then rewrite (1) as
t+1 t ηs t t t
An interpretationof (3) is that the energystored in a specific energystorage type equals the stored energyat the
beginning of the previous time point, minus (plus) the discharge (charge) during the previous time period, minus
the energy loss due to the nature of the storage.
The amount of stored energy and the charge/discharge power is constrained by the capacity of the storage, i.e.,
0≤Ss ≤Ss , (4)
t max t max
In this work we use δs to denote the ratio between the rated power and the rated storage capacity. Therefore
Ps,+ = ηsδsSs and Ps,− = δsSs . If the ratio is not fixed, we can introduce another design variable for the
max max max max
rated power, and modify the investment cost so that it depends on both Ss and {Ps,+,Ps,−}.
max max max
The cost of each type of energy storage during time period t, denoted by Cs, includes the amortized investment
cost and the operational/maintenancecost, i.e.,
Cs =ascs Ss +cs (Ps,+,Ps,− ). (6)
t inv max o/m t t
In this equation, the operational/maintenance cost depends on the amount of charge and discharge, and any fixed
cost can be included as a constant term in this cost function.
June7,2018 DRAFT
Note that we made substitution (2), and therefore constraints (1) and (3) are equivalent if only one element of
{Ps,+,Ps,−
} is non zero for all s,t. Theorem 1 (in Sec. IV-A) guaranteesthat this condition is satisfied,
and therefore the two constraints are indeed equivalent.
B. Generator model
The generators are classified into traditional diesel generators and renewable generators. For diesel generators,
the constraints include the generation capacity and generator ramp constraints. Let H denote the set of all diesel
generators, and Hh denote the generation of generator type h∈H during time period t. We then have
0≤Hh ≤Hh , (7)
Hh,− ≤Hh −Hh ≤Hh,+ , (8)
ramp t+1 t ramp
where Hh denotes the maximum generation capacity, and Hh,− and Hh,+ denote ramp down and ramp
max ramp ramp
up constraints, respectively. The cost of diesel generators consists of the amortized investment cost and the
operational/maintenancecost, denoted by
Ch =ahch Hh +ch (Hh). (9)
t inv max o/m t
Usually a second-order quadratic function or piece-wise linear function is used for ch (Hh). Any environmental
tax can also be included in this cost function.
We employ multiple types of renewable generators, including wind and solar, which are considered as non-
dispatchable generations. Let Rr denote the renewable generation from type r∈R generator during time period t,
and Rr denote the installed capacity. Then the generation can be written as
Rr =rrRr , (10)
whererr isarandomvariabledenotingtherenewablegenerationperunitgenerationcapacity.Thecostforrenewable
energy during time period t is then
Cr =arcr Rr +cr (Rr). (11)
t inv max o/m t
In addition to the generator types we discuss here, other types of generators, e.g., hydro and nuclear generators
can also be modeled similarly and included in the planning problem.
C. Load balance constraint
Thetotalgenerationshouldequalthetotaldemandinapowergridatalltimes.LetG denotetheenergyshortage
for an isolated grid, or the energy drawn from the main grid for a micro-grid. The total generation and discharge
from the energy storages should be equal to the total consumption and charge to the energy storages. We can then
write the load balance constraint as follows:
D = Rr+ Hh+ Ps,+−Ps,− +G ,∀t, (12)
t t t t t t
r∈R h∈H s∈S
X X X(cid:0) (cid:1)
where D denotes the demand from users. Note that G can be negative, which denotes energy injection to the
main grid from a micro-grid, or dumped energy in an isolated grid.
June7,2018 DRAFT
IV. STORAGE AND RENEWABLEGENERATIONPLANNING
A. Optimal planning problem
The planning goalis to find the optimalportfolio of differenttypes of energystorage and generators,so that the
totalcost(includinginvestmentandoperational/maintenance)isminimized,whilemostoftheneedsofthegridcan
be satisfied. Let T denote the planning horizon, and the objective function can then be written as
f(S ,R ,H )=
max max max
Cs+ Cr+ Ch .
!
t∈T s∈S r∈R h∈H
Duetotheintermittencyofrenewableenergysources,itispossiblethatinextremecases,thetotallocalgeneration
will not meet the total demand. We write the grid reliance constraint (for micro-grids) or the energy shortage
constraint (for isolated grids) as
Gj ≤G , (14)
where G is a threshold which can be a function of current time and demand. There are also constraints on the
minimum and maximum capacity for each type of storage and generator, which are denoted as
Ss,cap ≤Sh ≤Ss,cap,∀s,
min max max
Rr,cap ≤Rh ≤Rr,cap,∀r, (15)
min max max
Hh,cap ≤Hh ≤Hh,cap,∀h.
min max min
We then formulate the optimization problem for energy planning as
min f(S ,R ,H )
max max max
Smax,Rmax,Hmax
subject to Storage const. (3)−(5), ∀s,t
Generator const. (7)−(10), ∀r,h,t
Load balance const. (12), ∀t
Energy shortage const. (14), ∀t
Capacity const. (15).
One problem with this formulation is whether constraints (1) and (3) are equivalent. Based the problem setup,
we have the following theorem.
Theorem 1. In a cost minimization context, given an increasing positive operational cost function for charging
and discharging, by making the substitution (2), we have that Ps,+Ps,− = 0 for all t, i.e., only one of Ps,+ and
can be non-zero for any given time period t.
Proof: See Appendix A.
June7,2018 DRAFT
Additional costs and constraints can also be easily included in this formulation. For example, an environmental
tax for traditional diesel generators, and government incentives for renewable generations can be included in the
correspondingcostfunctions.Themaximumalloweddieselgenerationcapacityspecifiedbycertainenergypolicies
can be included in the generator constraints.
Remark 1: The problem formulation can be slightly modified into a chance-constrained problem. Instead of the
deterministic constraint (14), we can use the following probabilistic constraint:
where α ∈ [0,1] is the maximal energy shortage probability allowed. Constraint (17) means that local generators
and storages have a probability less than or equal to α to be short of energy greater than G . In this case, using
the results from [19], [20], the probabilistic constraint can be approximated by a set of deterministic constraints,
sampled from the probability distribution of the random parameters from the probabilistic constraint. To be more
specific,leteachscenariobearandomrealizationofload,renewablegeneration,andinitialconditionsoftheenergy
storages. The number of required scenarios J = card(J) is determined by the number of design parameters and
the probability measure. Let N denote the number of design parameters. If the number of scenarios J is no less
than ⌈2Nα−1ln(2α−1)+2α−1ln(ǫ−1)+2N⌉, then the solution to the scenario approximation problem has a
probability at least 1−ǫ to satisfy the original chance constrained problem. The problem formulation and method
of solving the problem are very similar to (16). We will point out the difference in Remark 2.
B. Formulation of consensus problem
Therenewablegenerationanduserloadsin(16)areallrandom.Inpractice,historicaldataisusedintheproblem
formulation.Witha largenumberofrealizationsoftherandomparametersfromhistoricdata,theproblembecomes
increasingly difficult to solve due to the increase of dimensionality. In the rest of this section, we will reformulate
the original problem (16) as a consensus problem, which can be solved in a distributed manner.
We divide the entire planning horizon T into sub planning horizons Tj, which we call scenarios for simplicity.
Let J denote the set of all horizons, and we have that T = ∪ j∈JTj. For convenience, we assume Tj’s are
arranged in the order of time. Let xj = [Sj ;Rj ;Hj ] denote the design parameters for the jth scenario,
d max max max
z =[S ;R ;H ] denotethe globaldesignparameters,Cj denotethefeasibleset forthejth scenariowith
d max max max
C = ∩ j∈JCj. In practice, the energy in storages at the beginning of each time period is not random, but rather
depends on the energy from the previous time period. Assuming the energy stored at the beginning of a scenario
should be equal to the energy stored at the end of the previous scenario, we need additional constraints to ensure
thisconditionis satisfied. LetSj denotethe energystorageatthe beginningof the jth scenario,and Sj denotethe
energystorage at the end of the jth scenario. In [21], we followed the approachin [15], and imposedan additional
assumption that the energy in each energy storage at the end of the optimization horizon should be equal to that
at the beginning of the optimization horizon, i.e., Sj = Sj,j ∈ J. However, this assumption makes the solution
suboptimal. In this work, we eliminate this assumption and add additional consensus constraints across scenarios.
June7,2018 DRAFT
Let xj = [Sj;Sj] denote the boundary parameters for the jth scenario, and z denote the global boundary
parameters. Let B(j) denote the mapping for the indices of the boundary conditions for the jth scenario, and thus
z denotesthe correspondingboundaryparametersforthe jthscenario.We alsouse the scalar functionB(j,i)
todenoteelement-wiseindexmapping,i.e.,(xj) correspondsto(z ) .TheconstraintsSj =Sj−1,j ∈J can
b i b B(j,i) 0 T
then be written as xj = z ,j ∈ J. Using the notations xj = [xj;xj], z = [z ;z ], and z˜j = [z ;z ],
b b,B(j) d b d b d b,B(j)
we then formulate the original optimization problem (16) as follows:
min fj(xj)
subject to xj =z˜j, j ∈J.
The solution z from solving (18) will satisfy that z ∈C.
Remark 2: If the probabilistic constraintis considered, and scenario approximationapproach is used, the formu-
lationhavetobeslightlyrevised.Accordingto[19],therandomsamplesforeachscenariohastobegeneratedfrom
independent identical distributions. Note that the starting energy stored in the storages also has to be drawn from
certain probabilitydistributions.Theconsensusformulationfor the energystorageboundaryconditionscan then be
removed. The number of generated scenarios has to be greater than or equal to the minimum number described in
Remark 1.
C. Distributed Optimization
The challenge in solving (18) is that as the number of scenarios increases, the problem becomes increasingly
difficult due to high time complexity. We propose to solve the problem in a distributed manner based on the
alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [18], which mitigates the time complexity issue and makes
the problem scalable.
To enforce the equality (consensus) constraint in (18), an additional quadratic term is added to the original
Lagrangian, forming the augmented Lagrangian which can be written as
(cid:0) fj(xj) (cid:1) +vj⊤(xj −z)+ kxj −zk2 ,
j X ∈J(cid:16) (cid:17)
where {vj} denote the dual variables, and ρ is a pre-defined parameter which is the dual variable update step
size. The quadraticterm penalizesthe differencebetween the local variables{xj} and correspondingentriesof the
global variable z, denoted by z˜j.
The ADMM algorithm iterates among the following steps, with subscript k denoting the iteration number.
1) x-minimization step: For each j ∈J, the following local minimization problems are solved in parallel:
argminf(xj)+vj⊤(xj −z˜j)+ kxj −z˜jk2.
xj∈Cj k 2 k 2
June7,2018 DRAFT
2) z-minimization step:
argmin vj⊤(xj −z˜j)+ kxj −z˜jk2 .
z ∈C k+1 k 2 k+1 k 2
k j X ∈J(cid:16) (cid:17)
To solve for the z-minimization step, we consider z and z separately. Decompose vj = [vj;vj], and we then
rewrite (21) as
argmin vj⊤ (xj −z )+ kxj −z k2 +
z d d,k+1 d 2 d,k+1 d 2 (22)
j X ∈J (cid:16)
vj⊤ (xj −z )+ kxj −z k2 .
b b,k+1 b,B(j) 2 b,k+1 b,B(j) 2
Solving (22), we obtain that
z = xj + vj , (23)
d,k+1 J k+1 ρ k
j∈J(cid:18) (cid:19)
(z ) = B(j,i)=g b,k+1 i b i . (24)
b,k+1 g P (cid:16) B(j,i)=g 1 (cid:17)
When the algorithm converges,the resulting zj has to Psatisfy the constraints of each sub-problem,i.e., z˜j ∈Cj.
Therefore we have that z ∈C =∩ j∈JCj.
3) Dual-variable update: For each j ∈J, the dual variables are updated in parallel:
k+1 k k+1 k+1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Since (20) and (25) can be parallelized, the problem is scalable as the number of scenarios increases. The
convergence of this approach is guaranteed, as proved in [18]. For faster convergence, we use an adaptive dual
update stepsize ρ. The primal residual rp and dual residual rd are defined as
rp = xj −z˜j , (26)
X(cid:0) (cid:1)
As larger ρ penalizes more on the primal residual, and smaller ρ penalizes on the dual residual, the parameter ρ is
updated following the rule below:
τρ if krpk>µkrdk,
ρ otherwise,
where τ > 1, µ > 1. The algorithm converge
s when both the primal and dual residual are less than a certain
threshold.
June7,2018 DRAFT
TABLE I: Parameters for energy storage and generators.
Round-trip Fullcharge time Energyloss Investment Cost Lifespan
Category Type O/Mcost
Efficiency (hours) Ratio† (M$/MWh) (years)
S1:Flywheel 0.92 0.25 0.05 7.800 20 linear
Energystorage S2:Li-ionbattery 0.88 4.00 0.01 1.700 15 linear
S3:Pumpedstorage 0.80 10.00 0.00 0.450 50 linear
R1:Solarpanel – – – 5.284 30 linear
Renewable generator
R2:Windturbine – – – 2.414 20 linear
Traditional generator H1:Dieselgenerator – – – 0.400 5 quadratic
† Thisparameter wasnotprovidedin[22].
V. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
In this section, we provide a series of numerical examples using real data from online databases, to showcase
how the proposed framework can help in making decisions on renewable generation and energy storage planning.
A. Data and parameters
1) Renewable generation data: We consider two types of renewable generation, wind and solar, and simulate
renewablegenerationdatafromNationalSolarRadiationDataBase (NSRDB) fromNREL[23],[24].Thedatabase
provideshourlysolar radiation data as well as wind speed data. The solar generationis calculated using the hourly
“modeled direct normal” radiation measurements and the hourly mean zenith angle. Denote the normal radiation
measurement as Rs, the longitude of the target location as θ, and the solar panel tilt angle as θ . The power
received on panel Rs is then calculated by
whereµ isthepanelefficiencyandRs istheratedpoweroutput.Theoptimaltiltangleforsolarpanelisdetermined
according to [25].
The wind power output is calculated using the following equation:
µ ρ V3 if V ≤V ≤V ,
r air in rated
0 otherwise,
is the density of air, d is t
diameter of the wind turbine, and µ
is the wind turbine efficiency. The
generation output is zero when the wind speed is lower than the cut-in speed V or higher than the cut-out speed
V .
Boththesolarandwindgenerationsarenormalizedbytheratedpoweroutputs.Thecostsforrenewablegenerators
are obtained from [26] and included in Table I.
June7,2018 DRAFT
2) Load data: We use the ERCOT hourly load data from [27]. The data is normalized by the average hourly
demand.
3) Energystorageparameters: Weselectthreetypesofenergystorageasprototypesforoursimulations,including
flywheel storage, Li-ion battery, and pumped storage. The correspondingparameters are determined based on [22]
and included in Table I.
4) Definitions: To quantify G and the maximum capacity of diesel generator Hcap, we define two quantities:
the shortfall-to-demand ratio, r , and the diesel generation capacity ratio, r . We define the threshold G at
time t as G = r D , and therefore the shortfall-to-demand ratio is the ratio between the threshold G and
th SD t th
the current demand. The maximum diesel generator capacity Hcap is determined by Hcap = r max(D ), and
max max DC t
therefore the diesel generation capacity ratio is the ratio between the maximum diesel generator capacity and the
peak demand.
B. Result of storage and generation planning
In this subsection we perform a case study using the setup described in Sec. V-A. The solar panel tilt angles
are adjusted twice a year according to [25]. Solar panel efficiency is set to be 20%, with rated power output to be
150W/m2. Wind turbine cut-in and cut-out wind speeds are set to be 3m/s and 20m/s, with rated power output
achievedatthewindspeedof10m/s.Thewindturbineefficiencyissettobe50%.Inthefollowingsimulations,we
considerthe averagehourlyloadto beunitmegawatt(1MW)forillustrativepurposes,while a micro-gridisusually
on the scale of 5-10MW. We use the ERCOT hourly load data from years 2008-2010 to generate the load data,
and the NSRDB data to generate the renewable generation data. The maximum hourly load is 1.8050 MWh, and
the minimumhourlyloadis 0.5557MWh. TheaveragehourlygenerationsfromperunitMW ofwind turbinesand
solar panelsare 0.1217MWh and0.2366MWh, respectively.The normalizeddata (in heatmap)and corresponding
box plots are shown in Fig. 1.
We set r = 0.50 and r = 0.05, meaning that the maximum allowed diesel generation capacity is half of
the peak load, and the maximum energy shortfall to demand from local generators is 5%. The CVX toolbox [28]
is used to solve for the x-updates. The optimization results are available in Table II. All costs are for a thee-year
design horizon. The investment costs are amortized for three years.
We notice that although the planned diesel generation capacity is high (equivalent to the upper limit, which is
half of the peak load), the actual averagegenerationfromthese generatorsare relativelylow. Overall, only 18.22%
of the consumed energy is from diesel generators, i.e., renewable energy constitutes 81.78% of the total consumed
energy2.
The hourly energy shortage distribution is plotted in Fig. 2. For most of the time, the energy shortage G is
closeto zero,meaningthatthe totalgeneration(includingstoragedischarge)isclose tothe totaldemand(including
2Weassumetherenewable generators aregenerating as muchenergy as they can, andthus there isexcess generation oncertain occasions.
Onlytheactual energyconsumedbytheendusersiscounted here.
June7,2018 DRAFT
0:00 3:00 6:00 9:00 12:00 15:00 18:00 21:00
Hour of day
0:00 3:00 6:00 9:00 12:00 15:00 18:00 21:00
noitareneG
Hour of day
0:00 3:00 6:00 9:00 12:00 15:00 18:00 21:00
noitareneG
Hour of day
Fig. 1: Plots for normalized load, solar generation,and wind generation data. The plots on the left show box plots,
and the plots on the right show raw data.
TABLE II: Results for r =0.50, r =0.05 over a three-year design horizon.
Plannedcapacity Investment cost O./M.cost Totalcost
S1 0.5855 0.6851 0.0019 0.6870
S2 3.2595 1.1082 0.0274 1.1356
S3 4.3051 0.1162 0.0390 0.1553
R1 2.4985 1.3202 0.1554 1.4755
R2 5.5192 1.9985 0.0883 2.0868
H1 0.9025 0.2166 0.5336 0.7502
Total – 5.4448 0.8456 6.2904
Energy Shortage (MW)
ytilibaborP
Fig. 2: Hourly energy shortage distribution. Negative value denotes that generation is greater than demand.
June7,2018 DRAFT
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Diesel Generator Capacity Ratio
egatnecreP
noitareneG
Fig. 3: Total cost and percentage of renewable generation as a function of diesel generation capacity ratio.
TABLE III: Geographic locations and climates.
City GPSCoordinates Climate type
SanAntonio 29◦25’N98◦30’W humidsubtropical /hotsemi-arid
St.Louis 38◦37’N90◦11’W humidcontinental /subtropical
SanFrancisco 37◦47’N122◦25’W cool-summerMediterranean
storage charge).There are also occasionswhen there is excess generation,which is either dumpedin isolated grids
or injected to the main grid in grid-connected micro-grids.
C. Result with different diesel generation capacities
The maximum allowed diesel generation capacity affects the planning for renewable generation and energy
storages. Intuitively, the lower the allowed diesel generation capacity, the more renewable generators and energy
storagesare requiredto ensureanuninterruptedenergysupply.Inthissection, we considerdifferentdieselcapacity
ratios r while keeping other parameters fixed. The diesel capacity ratio r is changed from 0 to 1, with
increments of 0.1. The resulting total cost and average renewable generation percentage over the three planning
years are illustrated in Fig. 3.
It can be observed that when r is smaller then 0.5 and decreases, the total cost increases rapidly, whereas
the percentage of renewable energy do not increase much. This potentially provides guidelinesfor determining the
capacity of diesel generators in an micro-grid, when balancing financial cost and environmentalcost.
D. Results with data from different geographic locations
The geographic location has a significant effect on the availability of different renewable energy sources. We
consider the case of three cities in the United States, described in Table III, using a similar setup as described in
Sec. V-B. The hourly data is not available for all the locations, and therefore we use the same hourly load data for
allthreeregions.ItcanbeobservedfromTableIVthattheavailabilityofdifferentresourcessignificantlyaffectsthe
June7,2018 DRAFT
TABLE IV: Comparison of optimization results for different geographic locations.
SanAntonio St.Louis SanFrancisco
S1 (MWh) 0.5855 0.1078 0.0013
S2 (MWh) 3.2595 3.1140 3.8601
S3 (MWh) 4.3051 4.5006 5.3880
R1 (MWh) 2.4985 2.3587 5.2976
R2 (MWh) 5.5192 4.8909 3.2458
H1 (MWh) 0.9025 0.9020 0.9025
Totalcost(M$) 6.2904 5.5331 6.5856
Renewable (%) 81.78 75.32 83.06
plannedcapacity of differentrenewablegenerators.Since San Francisco has more wind resources, only a relatively
smallcapacity ofwind generatoris neededto satisfy the energydemands.Forsimilar reasons, San AntonioandSt.
Louis require less solar panel installation. Other characteristics, e.g., the variability of renewable energy sources,
also affect the planned capacity for different types of energy storages.
Remark3: Inthispaperweconsiderrelativelyisolatedgrids.Tomakebetteruseofrenewablegeneration,itwould
bemoreefficienttoconsideraninterconnectednetworkofmultiplemicro-grids,withinter-gridenergytransmission.
In this way, less renewablegenerationand energystorage capacitywould be neededto satisfy the energydemands.
The optimization problem will more complicated, and new issues, e.g., long-distance power transmission, need to
be considered.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We considered the problem of jointly optimizing multiple energy storage, renewable generator, and diesel
generator capacities, in the context of an isolated grid, or a micro-grid with a small carbon footprint. The joint
optimization exploits the different characteristics of multiple energy storage types, as well as the availability of
different sources of renewable energy. To mitigate the large dimensionality of the optimization problem due to the
use of large volumes of historical data, we formulated the original optimization problem as a consensus problem,
which can be solved in a parallel distributed manner. We provided a series of numerical examples to illustrate
how the proposed framework can be used for planning purposes in practice. To be more specific, we considered
scenarios with different maximum diesel generation capacities, and also compared the different planning results
in different geographic regions. The proposed work will be helpful in designing renewable generation and energy
storagesystemsforfuturedecentralizedpowergridswithlargerenewablepenetration,andhelppolicymakersmake
decisions related to renewable energy and sustainability.
In our future work we will consider the problem of optimally operating a given hybrid energy storage and
generation system, taking into account the stochastic nature of demand and renewable generation. We will also
study the case of an interconnected network of multiple micro-grids, each with local energy generation and inter-
June7,2018 DRAFT
grid energy transmission, which potentially makes better use of renewable energy.
A. Proof of Theorem 1
Proof: Let
{Ps,+,Ps,−
} denote two pairs of charge/discharge satisfying
Ps,+−Ps,− =Ps, Ps,+Ps,− =0,
We then have
t t t t t t
Since Ps,+−Ps,− =Pˆs,+−Pˆs,− , we then have Ps,+ <Ps,+, and Ps,− <Ps,− . Because the operational cost is
t t t t t t t t
an increasing function of
{Ps,+,Ps,−
}, we obtain that
(Ps,+,Ps,−
o/m t t o/m t t
Therefore the optimal pair
{Ps,+,Ps,−
} must satisfy that
= 0, i.e., only one of
t t t t t t
non-zero.