]hp-tnauq[
1v4126.1031:viXra
Knot Logic and Topological Quantum Computing with
Majorana Fermions
Louis H. Kauffman
Department of Mathematics, Statistics
and Computer Science (m/c 249)
851 South Morgan Street
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, Illinois 60607-7045
<kauffman@uic.edu>
This paper is an introduction to relationships between quantum topology and quantum comput-
ing. We show how knots are related not just to braidingand quantum operators, but to quantum
set theoretical foundations, algebras of fermions, and we show how the operation of negation
in logic, seen as both a value and an operator, can generate the fusion algebra for a Majorana
fermion. We call negation in this mode the mark, as it operates on itself to change from marked
to unmarked states. The mark viewed recursively as a simplest discrete dynamical system natu-
rallygeneratesthefermionalgebra,thequaternionsandthebraidgrouprepresentationsrelated
to Majorana fermions. The paper begins with these fundamentals. It then discusses unitary so-
lutions to the Yang-Baxter equation that are universal quantum gates, quantum entanglement
and topological entanglement, and gives an exposition of knot-theoretic recoupling theory, its
relationshipwith topologicalquantumfieldtheoryandappliesthesemethodsto produceunitary
representations of the braid groups that are dense in the unitary groups. These methods are
rooted in the bracket state sum model for the Jones polynomial. A self-contained study of the
quantumuniversalFibonaccimodelisgiven. Resultsareappliedtogivequantumalgorithmsfor
thecomputationofthecoloredJonespolynomialsforknotsandlinks,andtheWitten-Reshetikhin-
Turaev invariant of three manifolds. Two constructions are given for the Fibonacci model, one
based in Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory, the other quite elementary and also based on the
Temperley-Lieb algebra. This paper begins an exploration of quantum epistemology in relation
to the structure of discrimination as the underpinning of basic logic, perception and measure-
ment.
1 Introduction
Thispaperisanintroductiontorelationshipsbetweenquantumtopologyandquantumcomputing.
Wetakeafoundationalapproach,showinghowknotsarerelatednotjusttobraidingandquantum
operators,buttoquantumsettheoreticalfoundationsandalgebrasoffermions. Weshowhowthe
operation of negation in logic, seen as both a value and an operator, can generate the fusion
algebra for a Majorana fermion, a particle that is its own anti-particle and interacts with itself
either to annihilate itself or to produce itself. We call negation in this mode the mark, as it
operates on itself to change from marked to unmarked states. The mark viewed recursively as
a simplest discrete dynamical system naturally generates the fermion algebra, the quaternions
and the braid group representations related to Majorana fermions. The paper begins with these
fundmentals. Theyprovideaconceptualkeytomanyofthemodelsthatappearlaterinthepaper.
In particular, theFibonacci model for topologicalquantum computingis seen to be based on the
fusion rules for a Majorana fermion and these in turn are the interaction rules for the mark seen
as a logical particle. It requires a shift in viewpoint to see that the operator of negation can also
be seen as a logical value. This is explained in Sections 3, 4 and 5. The quaternions emerge
naturally from the reentering mark. All these models have their roots in unitary representations
oftheArtinbraidgroup tothequaternions.
An outlineoftheparts ofthispaperisgivenbelow.
1. Introduction
2. Knotsand Braids
3. KnotLogic
4. Fermions,MajoranaFermionsand AlgebraicKnotSets
5. LawsofForm
6. QuantumMechanicsand QuantumComputation
7. BraidingOperators and UniversalQuantumGates
8. A Remark aboutEPR,Entanglementand Bell’sInequality
9. TheAravindHypothesis
10. SU(2) RepresentationsoftheArtinBraid Group
11. TheBracket Polynomialand theJones Polynomial
12. QuantumTopology,CobordismCategories,Temperley-LiebAlgebraandTopologicalQuan-
tumField Theory
13. Braidingand TopologicalQuantumField Theory
14. SpinNetworks and Temperley-LiebRecoupling Theory
15. Fibonacci Particles
16. TheFibonacci RecouplingModel
17. Quantum Computation of Colored Jones Polynomials and the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev
18. A Direct ConstructionoftheFibonacci Model
Much of what is new in this paper proceeds from thinking about knots and sets and distinc-
tions. The Sections 3, 4 and 5 are self-contained and self-explanatory. These sections show how
a formal system discovered by Spencer-Brown [100], underlying Boolean logic, is composed of
a “logical particle”, the mark , that interacts with itself to either produce itself or to cancel
itself.
In this sense the mark is a formal model of a Majorana fermion. The oirginal formal structure
of the mark gives the fusion algebra for the Majorana fermion. In Section 5 we show that this
iconic representation of the particle is directly related to modeling with surface cobordisms and
this theme occurs throughout the paper. In Section 5 we also show that the mark, viewed as a
generator of a discrete dynamical system, generates the Clifford algebra associated with a Ma-
jorana fermion and we end this section by showing how this iterant viewpoint leads naturally to
theDiracequationusingtheapproach of[94]. Thisispart ofthecontentsoftheSections3, 4,5.
In thesesectionswe examinerelationshipswith knotsas modelsof non-standardset theory. The
algebra of fermions is directly relevant to this knot set theory and can be formulated in terms of
theCliffordalgebraofMajoranafermions.
We weave this material with the emergence of unitary braid group representations that are
significantforquantuminformationtheory. Inparticularweweavethetopologywiththealgebra
of fermions and in order to clarify this development, we give a quick summary of that algebra
and aquicksummaryoftopologicalquantumcomputingintherest ofthisintroduction.
FermionAlgebra. Recall fermion algebra. One has fermion creation operators ψ and theircon-
jugateannihilation operators ψ . One has ψ2 = 0 = (ψ )2. There is a fundamental commutation
Ifyou havemorethanoneofthemsay ψ andφ, thentheyanti-commute:
ψφ = φψ.
TheMajoranafermionscthatsatisfyc = csothattheyaretheirownanti-particles. Thereisalot
of interestin these as quasi-particles and they are related to braiding and to topologicalquantum
computing. Agroupofresearchers[76]claims,atthiswriting,tohavefoundquasiparticleMajo-
rana fermions in edge effects in nano-wires. (A lineof fermions could have a Majorana fermion
happennon-locallyfromoneendofthelinetotheother.) TheFibonaccimodelthatwediscussis
also based on Majorana particles, possibly related to collecctive electronic excitations. If P is a
Majoranafermion particle, then P can interact with itselfto eitherproduceitselforto annihilate
itself. This is the simple“fusion algebra” for this particle. One can write P2 = P +1 to denote
the two possibleself-interactions the particle P.The patterns of interaction and braiding of such
aparticleP giveriseto theFibonacci model.
Majoranas are related to standard fermions as follows: The algebra for Majoranas is c = c
and cc = cc ifc and c are distinctMajoranafermionswithc2 = 1 and c2 = 1.Onecan make
astandard fermionfromtwo Majoranasvia
SimilarlyonecanmathematicallymaketwoMajoranasfromanysinglefermion. Nowifyoutake
aset ofMajoranas
c ,c ,c , ,c
then there are natural braiding operators that act on the vector space with these c as the basis.
Theoperatorsare mediatedby algebraelements
τ 1 = (1 c c )/2.
Then thebraidingoperators are
T : Span c ,c , ,,c Span c ,c , ,,c
k 1 2 n 1 2 n
Thebraidingissimply:
T (c ) = c ,
T (c ) = c ,
and T is the identity otherwise. This gives a very nice unitary representaton of the Artin braid
groupand itdeserves betterunderstanding.
It is worth noting that a triple of Majorana fermions say a,b,c gives rise to a representation
ofthequaterniongroup. Thisisageneralization ofthewell-knownassociationofPaulimatrices
andquaternions. Wehavea2 = b2 = c2 = 1andtheyanticommute. LetI = ba,J = cb,K = ac.
I2 = J2 = K2 = IJK = 1,
givingthequaternions. Theoperators
braid oneanother:
ABA = BAB,BCB = CBC,ACA = CAC.
This is a special case of the braid group representation described above for an arbitrary list of
Majorana fermions. These braiding operators are entangling and so can be used for universal
quantum computation, but they give only partial topological quantum computation due to the
interactionwithsinglequbitoperatorsnot generated bythem.
In Section 5 we show how the dynamics of the reentering mark leads to two (algebraic)
Majorana fermions e and η that correspond to the spatial and temporal aspects of this recursive
process. The corresponding standard fermion creation and annihilation operators are then given
by theformulasbelow.
Thisgivesamodelofafermioncreationoperatorasapointinanon-commutativespacetime. This
suggestivepoint of view, based on knot logic and Laws of Form, will be explored in subsequent
publications.
Topological quantum computing. This paper describes relationships between quantum topol-
ogy and quantum computing as a modified version of Chapter 14 of the book [13] and an ex-
panded version of [67] and an expanded version of a chapter in [81]. Quantum topology is,
roughly speaking, that part of low-dimensionaltopology that interacts with statistical and quan-
tumphysics. Many invariantsofknots, linksand threedimensionalmanifoldshavebeen born of
thisinteraction,andtheformoftheinvariantsiscloselyrelatedtotheformofthecomputationof
amplitudes in quantum mechanics. Consequently, it is fruitful to move back and forth between
quantumtopologicalmethodsand thetechniquesofquantuminformationtheory.
Wesketchthebackgroundtopology,discussanalogies(suchastopologicalentanglementand
quantumentanglement),showdirectcorrespondences betweencertain topologicaloperators(so-
lutions to the Yang-Baxter equation) and universal quantum gates. We describe the background
for topological quantum computing in terms of Temperley–Lieb (we will sometimes abbrevi-
ate this to TL) recoupling theory. This is a recoupling theory that generalizes standard angu-
lar momentum recoupling theory, generalizes the Penrose theory of spin networks and is inher-
ently topological. Temperley–Liebrecoupling Theory is based on the bracket polynomialmodel
[32, 45] for the Jones polynomial. It is built in terms of diagrammatic combinatorial topology.
The same structure can be explained in terms of the SU(2) quantum group, and has relation-
shipswithfunctionalintegrationandWitten’sapproachtotopologicalquantumfieldtheory. Nev-
ertheless, the approach given here is elementary. The structure is built from simple beginnings
and this structure and its recoupling language can be applied to many things including colored
Jones polynomials, Witten–Reshetikhin–Turaevinvariants of three manifolds, topological quan-
tumfield theoryand quantumcomputing.
In quantum computing, the simplest non-trivial example of the Temperley–Lieb recoupling
Theory givesthe so-called Fibonacci model. The recoupling theory yields representations ofthe
Artin braid group into unitary groups U(n) where n is a Fibonacci number. These representa-
tions are dense in the unitary group, and can be used to model quantumcomputationuniversally
intermsofrepresentationsofthebraidgroup. Hencetheterm: topologicalquantumcomputation.
In thispaper, we outlinethe basics oftheTemperely–Lieb Recoupling Theory, and show explic-
itly how the Fibonacci model arises from it. The diagrammatic computations in the sections 12
to 18are completelyself-contained andcan beused by areader who has justlearned thebracket
polynomial, and wants to see how these dense unitary braid group representations arise from it.
In the final section of the paper we give a separate construction for the Fibnacci model that is
based on 2 2 complex matrix representations of the Temperley–Lieb algebra. This is a com-
pletely elementary construction independent of the recoupling theory of the previous sections.
Westudiedthisconstructionin [70] andaversionofithas been used in[101].
The relationship of thework here with themathematics of Chern-Simons theory and confor-
mal field theory occurs through the work of Witten, Moore and Seiberg and Moore and Read
[86]. One can compare themathematical techniques of the present paper with thephysics of the
quantum Hall effect and its possibilities for topological quantum computing. This part of the
storywillawaitasequel tothepresent exposition.
Here is a very condensed presentation of how unitary representations of the braid group are
constructedviatopologicalquantumfield theoreticmethods,leadingto theFibonaccimodeland
its generalizations. These representations are more powerful, in principle, than the representa-
tions we have just given, because they encompass a dense collection of all unitary transforma-
tions, including single qubit transformations needed for universal quantum computing. One has
a mathematical particle with label P that can interact with itself to produce either itself labeled
P or itself with the null label . We shall denote the interaction of two particles P and Q by the
expression PQ, but it is understood that the “value” of PQ is the result of the interaction, and
this may partake of a number of possibilities. Thus for our particle P, we have that PP may be
equal to P or to in a given situation. When interacts with P the result is always P. When
interacts with the result is always . One considers process spaces where a row of particles
labeledP cansuccessivelyinteract,subjecttotherestrictionthattheendresultisP.Forexample
thespaceV[(ab)c]denotesthespaceofinteractionsofthreeparticleslabeledP.Theparticlesare
placed in the positionsa,b,c. Thus we begin with (PP)P.In a typical sequence of interactions,
thefirst twoP’sinteractto producea ,andthe interactswithP to produceP.
In another possibility, the first two P’s interact to produce a P, and the P interacts with P to
produceP.
It follows from this analysis that the space of linear combinations of processes V[(ab)c] is two
dimensional. Thetwoprocesseswehavejustdescribedcanbetakentobethequbitbasisforthis
space. OneobtainsarepresentationofthethreestrandArtinbraidgrouponV[(ab)c]byassigning
appropriate phase changes to each of thegenerating processes. One can think of these phases as
corresponding to the interchange of the particles labeled a and b in the association (ab)c. The
otheroperatorfor thisrepresentation correspondsto theinterchangeof band c. Thisinterchange
isaccomplishedby aunitarychangeofbasismapping
is the first braiding operator (corresponding to an interchange of the first two particles in the
association)thenthesecondoperator
isaccomplishedviatheformulaB = F 1RF wheretheRinthisformulaactsinthesecondvec-
tor space V[a(bc)] to apply the phases for the interchangeof b and c. These issues are illustrated
inFigure1,wheretheparenthesizationoftheparticlesisindicatedbycirclesandbyalsobytrees.
The trees can be taken to indicate patterns of particle interaction, where two particles interact at
the branch of a binary tree to produce the particle product at the root. See also Figure 50 for an
illustrationofthebraidingB = F 1RF
In this scheme, vector spaces corresponding to associated strings of particle interactions are
interrelatedbyrecouplingtransformationsthatgeneralizethemappingF indicatedabove. Afull
representationoftheArtinbraid grouponeach spaceisdefined intermsofthelocalinterchange
phase gates and the recoupling transformations. These gates and transformations have to sat-
isfy a number of identities in order to produce a well-defined representation of the braid group.
Figure1: Braiding Anyons
These identities were discovered originally in relation to topological quantum field theory. In
ourapproachthestructureofphasegatesandrecouplingtransformationsarisenaturallyfromthe
structure of the bracket model for the Jones polynomial. Thus we obtain a knot-theoretic basis
fortopologicalquantumcomputing.
InmodelingthequantumHalleffect[105,20,10,11],thebraidingofquasi-particles(collec-
tive excitations) leads to non-trival representations of the Artin braid group. Such particles are
called Anyons. The braiding in these models is related to topological quantum field theory. It
is hoped that the mathematics we explain here will form a bridge between theoretical models of
anyonsandtheirapplicationsto quantumcomputing.
Acknowledgement. Much of this paper is based upon joint work with Samuel J. Lomonaco
in the papers [55, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 70, 81]. I have woven this work into the
present paper in a form that is coupled with recent and previous work on relations with logic
and with Majorana fermions. The relations with logic stem from the following previous papers
of the author [35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 52, 53, 54, 71, 48, 49, 72, 73, 74]. These previous papers are
an exploration of the foundations of knot theory in relation to Laws of Form, non-standard set
theory,recursion and discretedynamicalsystems. At thelevelofdiscretedynamicalsystemsthe
papers arerelated to foundationsofphysics. Morework needsto bedonein allthesedomains.
Tworecentbookscontainmaterialrelevanttothecontextofthispaper. Theyare[97]and[94].
The interested reader should examine these approaches to fundamental physics. It is planned to
use this paper and other joint work as a springboard for a book [75] on topological quantum
information theory and for a book that expands on the foundational issues raised in this paper
and thepreviouspapers oftheauthor.
Figure2: A knot diagram
2 Knots and Braids
The purpose of this section is to give a quick introduction to the diagrammatic theory of knots,
links and braids. A knot is an embedding of a circle in three-dimensional space, taken up to
ambient isotopy. The problem of deciding whether two knots are isotopic is an example of a
placementproblem,aproblemofstudyingthetopologicalformsthatcanbemadebyplacingone
spaceinsideanother. Inthecaseofknottheoryweconsidertheplacementsofacircleinsidethree
dimensionalspace. Therearemanyapplicationsofthetheoryofknots. Topologyisabackground
forthephysicalstructureofreal knotsmadefromropeofcable. Asaresult,thefield ofpractical
knot tying is a field of applied topology that existed well before the mathematical discipline of
topologyarose. ThenagainlongmoleculessuchasrubbermoleculesandDNAmoleculescanbe
knottedandlinked. Therehavebeen anumberofintenseapplicationsofknottheorytothestudy
ofDNA[99]andtopolymerphysics[40]. Knottheoryiscloselyrelatedtotheoreticalphysicsas
wellwithapplicationsinquantumgravity[104,95,58]andmanyapplicationsofideasinphysics
tothetopologicalstructureofknotsthemselves[45].
Quantumtopologyisthestudyandinventionoftopologicalinvariantsviatheuseofanalogies
and techniques from mathematical physics. Many invariants such as the Jones polynomial are
constructedviapartitionfunctionsandgeneralizedquantumamplitudes. Asaresult,oneexpects
toseerelationshipsbetweenknottheoryandphysics. Inthispaperwewillstudyhowknottheory
can beused to produceunitary representationsof thebraid group. Such representations can play
afundamentalroleinquantumcomputing.
That is, two knots are regarded as equivalent if one embedding can be obtained from the other
through a continuous family of embeddings of circles in three-space. A link is an embedding of
a disjoint collection of circles, taken up to ambient isotopy. Figure 2 illustrates a diagram for a
knot. Thediagram is regarded both as a schematicpictureof theknot, and as a plane graph with
extra structure at the nodes (indicating how the curve of the knot passes over or under itself by
standardpictorialconventions).
Figure3: The Reidemeister Moves
1 2 Braid Generators
= s-1s = 1
= s 1 s 2 s 1 = s 2 s 1 s 2
= s s = s s
Figure4: Braid Generators
Trefoil Knot
Figure Eight Knot
Figure5: ClosingBraids to form knots and links.
Ambient isotopy is mathematically the same as the equivalence relation generated on dia-
grams by the Reidemeister moves. These moves are illustrated in Figure 3. Each move is per-
formed on a local part of the diagram that is topologically identical to the part of the diagram
illustrated in this figure (these figures are representative examples of the types of Reidemeister
moves) without changing the rest of the diagram. The Reidemeister moves are useful in doing
combinatorial topology with knots and links, notably in working out the behaviour of knot in-
variants. A knot invariantis afunctiondefined from knotsand linksto someothermathematical
object (such as groups or polynomials or numbers) such that equivalent diagrams are mapped
to equivalentobjects (isomorphicgroups, identical polynomials,identical numbers). TheReide-
meistermovesare of great use for analyzing the structureof knot invariantsand they are closely
related totheArtinbraidgroup,which wediscussbelow.
A braid is an embedding of a collection of strands that have their ends in two rows of points
that are set one above the other with respect to a choice of vertical. The strands are not individ-
ually knotted and they are disjoint from one another. See Figure 4, Figure 5 and Figure 6 for
illustrationsofbraidsandmovesonbraids. Braidscanbemultipliedbyattachingthebottomrow
of one braid to thetop row of the otherbraid. Taken up to ambient isotopy,fixing the endpoints,
the braids form a group under this notion of multiplication. In Figure 4 we illustrate the form
of the basic generators of the braid group, and the form of the relations among these generators.
Figure 5 illustrates how to close a braid by attaching the top strands to the bottom strands by
a collection of parallel arcs. A key theorem of Alexander states that every knot or link can be
representedasaclosedbraid. Thusthetheoryofbraidsiscriticaltothetheoryofknotsandlinks.
Figure 6 illustrates the famous Borromean Rings (a link of three unknotted loops such that any
twooftheloopsareunlinked)as theclosureofabraid.
Let B denote the Artin braid group on n strands. We recall here that B is generated by
elementary braids s , ,s withrelations
Figure6: Borromean Ringsas aBraid Closure
1. s s = s s for i j > 1,
2. s s s = s s s fori = 1, n 2.
i i+1 i i+1 i i+1
See Figure 4 for an illustration of the elementary braids and their relations. Note that the braid
group has a diagrammatic topological interpretation, where a braid is an intertwining of strands
that lead from one set of n points to another set of n points. The braid generators s are repre-
sented by diagrams where the i-th and (i + 1)-th strands wind around one another by a single
half-twist (the sense of this turn is shown in Figure 4) and all other strands drop straight to the
bottom. BraidsarediagrammedverticallyasinFigure4,andtheproductsaretakeninorderfrom
top to bottom. The product of two braid diagrams is accomplished by adjoining the top strands
ofonebraidto thebottomstrandsoftheotherbraid.
In Figure 4 we have restricted the illustration to the four-stranded braid group B . In that
figure the three braid generators of B are shown, and then the inverse of the first generator
is drawn. Following this, one sees the identities s s 1 = 1 (where the identity element in B
consistsin fourverticalstrands),s s s = s s s ,andfinally s s = s s .
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 3 3 1
Braids are a key structure in mathematics. It is not just that they are a collection of groups
with a vivid topological interpretation. From the algebraic point of view the braid groups B
are important extensions of the symmetric groups S . Recall that the symmetric group S of all
permutationsofndistinctobjects haspresentationas shownbelow.
1. s2 = 1 fori = 1, n 1,
2. s s = s s for i j > 1,
3. s s s = s s s fori = 1, n 2.
i i+1 i i+1 i i+1
Figure7: Membership
Thus S is obtained from B by setting the square of each braiding generator equal to one. We
haveanexact sequenceofgroups
exhibitingtheArtinbraid groupas an extensionofthesymmetricgroup.
In the next sections we shall show how representations of the Artin braid group are rich
enoughtoprovideadensesetoftransformationsintheunitarygroups. Thusthebraidgroupsare
inprinciplefundamentaltoquantumcomputationand quantuminformationtheory.
3 Knot Logic
Weshalluseknotandlinkdiagramstorepresentsets. Moreaboutthispointofviewcanbefound
intheauthor’spaper”Knot Logic”[34].
Set theory is about an asymmetric relation called membership. We write a S to say that a
isamemberofthesetS.InthissectionweshalldiagramthemembershiprelationasinFigure 7.
The entities a and b that are in the relation a b are diagrammed as segments of lines or
curves, with the a-curve passing underneath the b-curve. Membership is represented by under-
passageofcurvesegments. Acurveorsegmentwithnocurvespassingunderneathitistheempty
set.
IntheFigure8,weindicatetwosets. Thefirst(lookinglikearight-anglebracketthatwerefer
toas themark)istheemptyset. Thesecond,consistingofamark crossingoveranothermark, is
thesetwhoseonlymemberistheemptyset. We can continuethisconstruction,buildingthevon
Neumannconstructionofthenatural numbersinthisnotationasin Figure9
Figure8: VonNeumann 1
Figure9: VonNeumann 2
Figure10: Omegaisa member ofOmega.
Figure11: Mutual Membership
Figure 12: Cancellation
Thisnotationallowsus toalsohavesetsthatare membersofthemselvesasin Figure10, and
and sets can be members of each other as in Figure 11. This mutuality is diagrammed as topo-
logical linking. This leads to the question beyond flatland: Is there a topological interpretation
forthisway oflookingat set-membership?
Consider the example in Figure 12, modified from the previous one. The link consisting of
a and b in this example is not topologically linked. The two components slide over one another
and come apart. The set a remains empty, but the set b changes from b = a,a to empty. This
examplesuggeststhefollowinginterpretation.
Regard each diagram as specifying a multi-set (where more than one instance of an element
can occur), and the rule for reducing to a set with one representative for each element is: Ele-
ments of knot sets cancel in pairs. Two knot sets aresaid to beequivalentif one can beobtained
fromtheotherbya finitesequenceof paircancellations.
Figure13: Reidemeister 2
Figure14: Reidemeister Moves
This equivalence relation on knot sets is in exact accord with the first Reidemeister move as
showninFigure13.
There are other topological moves, and we must examine them as well. In fact, it is well-
known that topological equivalence of knots (single circle embeddings), links (mutltiple circle
embeddings)and tangles (arbitrary diagrammaticembeddings with end pointsfixed and the rule
that you are not allowed to move strings over endpoints) is generated by three basic moves (the
Reidemeistermoves)as shownin Figure14. See [45].
It is apparent that move III does not change any of the relationships in the knot multi-sets.
The line that moves just shifts and remains underneath the other two lines. On the other hand
movenumberonecanchangetheself-referentialnatureofthecorrespondingknot-set. Onegoes,
in the first move, between a set that indicates self-membership to a set that does not indicate
self-membership(at thesiteinquestion). See Figure15Thismeansthat inknot-settheory every
set has representatives (the diagrams are the representatives of the sets) that are members of
Figure15: Reidemeister I:Replacing Self-Membership withNoSelf-Membership
Figure16: Trefoilis anempty knotset.
themselves, and it has representatives that are not members of themselves. In this domain, self-
membershipdoes notmean infinitedescent. Wedonot insistthat
impliesthat
a = .
Rather, a = a just means that a has a little curl in its diagram. The Russell set of all sets that
are notmembersofthemselvesismeaninglessinthisdomain.
We can summarizethisfirst levelofknot-settheoryin thefollowingtwo equivalences:
1. Self-Reference:
a = b,c, a = a,b,c,
2. PairCancellation:
S = a,a,b,c, S = b,c,
Figure17: Chain
a a = { b, b }
b = { c, c }
c = { a, a }
Figure18: Borromean Rings
With this mode of dealing with self-reference and multiplicity, knot-set theory has the interpre-
tation in terms of topological classes of diagrams. We could imagine that the flatlanders felt the
need to inventthree dimensionalspace and topology,just so theirset theory would havesuch an
elegantinterpretation.
But how elegant is this interpretation, from the point of view of topology? Are we happy
that knots are equivalent to the empty knot-set as shown in Figure 16? For this, an extension
of the theory is clearly in the waiting. We are happy that many topologically non-trivial links
correspondtonon-trivialknot-sets. IntheFigure17,achainlinkbecomesalinkedchainofknot-
sets. But considerthelinkshown inFigure 18. Theserings are commonlycalled theBorromean
Rings. The Rings have the property that if you remove any one of them, then the other two are
topologicallyunlinked. Theyformatopologicaltripartiterelation. Theirknot-setisdescribedby
thethreeequations
c = a,a .
Thus we see that this representative knot-set is a ”scissors-paper-stone” pattern. Each com-
ponent of the Rings lies over one other component, in a cyclic pattern. But in terms of the
equivalence relation on knot sets that we have used, the knot set for the Rings is empty (by pair
cancellation).
In order to go further in the direction of topological invariants for knots and links it is nec-
essary to use more structure than the simple membership relation that motivates the knots-sets.
Viewedfromthepointofviewofthediagramsforknotsandlinksthereareanumberofpossible
directions. Forexample,onecanlabelallthearcsofthediagramandintroducealgebraicrelations
ateachcrossing. Thisleadstothefundamentalgroupandthequandle[45]. Onecanalsolabelall
thearcs of thediagram from an indexset and view thislabeling as a state in analogousto astate
ofaphysicalsysteminstatisticalmechanics. Thenevaluationsofthesestatesandsummationsof
the evaluations over all the states give the class of knot invariants called quantum invariants for
knots and links [45]. These include the Jones polynomial and its generalizations. In this paper
we will explain and use the Jones polynomial and the so-called colored Jones polynomials. See
Section 17forthisdevelopment. Thepurposeofthissectionhas been tointroducethesubjectof
knot and link diagrams in the context of thinking about foundations of mathematics. However,
it is worthwhileadding structure to the knot set theory so that it can at least see the higher order
linkingof theBorommean rings. We do this in thenext subsectionby keeping track ofthe order
in which sets are encountered along the arc of a given component, and by keeping track of both
membershipand co-membershipwhere weshallsay that Ais co-memberofB ifB isa member
ofA. As onemovesalong an arconesequentiallyencounters membersand co-members.
Figure19: An ordered knot set.
Figure20: Borromean Rings asOrdered KnotSet.
3.1 Ordered Knot Sets
Takeawalkalongagivencomponent. Writedownthesequenceofmembershipsandbelongings
thatyou encounteron thewalkas showninFigure19.
In this notation, we record the order in which memberships and “co-memberships” ( a is a
co-member of b if and only if b is a member of a) occur along the strand of a given component
of the knot-set. We do not choose a direction of traverse, so it is ok to reverse the total order of
the contents of a givencomponent and to take this order up to cyclic permutation. Thus we now
havetherepresentationoftheBorromean Rings asshowninFigure20.
With this extrainformationin front ofus, it is clear that we shouldnot allowthe paircancel-
lations unless they occur in direct order, with no intervening co-memberships. Lets look at the
revisedReidemeistermovesas inFigure21.
As is clear from the above diagrams, the Reidemeister moves tell us that we should impose
somespecificequivalencesontheseordered knotsets:
1. Wecan erase anyappearance ofa[a]orof[a]a insidetheset fora.
2. Ifbb occurs inaand [a][a] occurs inb, thentheycan bothbeerased.
Figure21: Reidemeister Moves forOrdered KnotSets.
3. If bc is in a, ac is in b anda[b] is in c, then we can reverse the order of each of these two
elementstrings.
Wetakethesethreerules(andacoupleofvariantssuggestedbythediagrams)asthenotionof
equivalence of ordered knot-sets. One can see that the ordered knot-set for the Borromean rings
is non-trivial in this equivalence relation. In this sense we have a a proof that the Borromean
rings are linked, based on their scissors, paper, stone structure. The only proof that I know for
the non-triviality of the Borommean ordered knot set uses the concept of coloring discussed in
thenextsubsection.
Knots and links are represented by the diagrams themselves, taken up the equivalence rela-
tion generated by the Reidemeister moves. This calculus of diagrams is quite complex and it is
remarkable, the number and depth of different mathematical approaches that are used to study
this calculus and its properties. Studying knots and links is rather like studying number theory.
Theobjectsofstudythemselvescan beconstructeddirectly,andformacountableset. Theprob-
lemsthatseemtoemanatenaturallyfromtheseobjectsarechallengingandfascinating. Formore
aboutknot-sets,see[39]
3.2 Quandles and Colorings of Knot Diagrams
There is an approach to studying knots and links that is very close to our ordered knot sets, but
starts from a rather different premise. In this approach each arc of the diagram receives a label
Figure22: The QuandlefortheTrefoil Knot.
or “color”. An arc of the diagram is a continuous curve in the diagram that starts at one under
crossing and ends at another under crossing. For example, the trefoil diagram is related to this
algebraas showninFigure22.
Each arc corresponds to an element of a “color algebra” IQ(T) where T denotes the trefoil
knot. We have thatIQ(T) is generated by colors a,b and c with the relations c b = a,a c =
b,b a = c,a a = a. Each of these relations is a description of one of the crossings in T.
These relations are specific to the trefoil knot. If we take on an algebra of this sort, we want
its coloring structure to be invariant under the Reidemeister moves. This implies the following
globalrelations:
(x y) y = x
for any x, y and z in the algebra (set of colors) IQ(T). An algebra that satisfies these rules is
called an Involutory Quandle (See [45]), hence the initials IQ. These global relations are really
expressions of the concept of self-crossing and iterated crossing in the multiplicity of crossings
that are available in a calculus of boundaries where the notation indicates the choice of interpre-
tation, where one boundary is seen to cross (over) the other boundary. If we adopt these global
relations for the algebra IQ(K) for any knot or link diagram K, then two diagrams that are re-
lated by the Reidemeister moveswill have isomorphicalgebras. They will also inherit colorings
of their arcs from one another. Thus the calculation of the algebra IQ(K) for a knot or link K
has thepotentialityforbringingforthdeep topologicalstructurefrom thediagram.
In the case of the trefoil, one can see that the algebra actually closes at the set of elements
a,b,c. Wehavethecompletesetofrelations
c b = a,a c = b,b a = c,a a = a,a a = a,b b = b,c c = c,
forming the three-color quandle. Three-coloring turns out to be quite useful for many knots and
links. Thus we have seen that the trefoil knot is knotted due to its having a non-trivial three-
coloring. By the same token, one can see that the Borommean rings are linked by checking that
theydonothaveanon-trivialthree-coloring! Thisfactiseasytocheckbydirectlytryingtocolor
therings. Thatuncolorabilityimpliesthattheringsarelinkedfollowsfromthefactthatthereisa
non-trivialcoloringofthreeunlinkedrings(coloreachringbyaseparatecolor). Thiscoloringof
theunlinked rings would then inducea coloring of theBorommean rings. Since there is no such
coloring,theBorommeanringsmustbelinked.
Theorderedknotsetcorrespondingtoalinkcanbecoloredornotcoloredinthesamemanner
as a link diagram. The spaces between the letters in the ordered code of the knot set can be
assigned colors in the same way as the arcs of a link diagram. In this way, the coloring proofs
can be transferred to ordered knot sets in the case of links. We leave the details of this analysis
oflinksetsto anotherpaper.
Knot theory can be seen as a natural articulation not of three dimensional space (a perfectly
good interpretation) but of the properties of interactions of boundaries. Each boundary can be
regarded as that boundary transgressed by another boundary. The choice of who is the trans-
gressedandwhotransgressesisthechoiceofacrossing,thechoiceofmembershipinthecontext
ofknot-settheory.
4 Fermions, Majorana Fermions and Algebraic Knot Sets
Inthelastpartofourdiscussionofknotsetsweaddedorderandco-membershiptothestructure.
Inthiswayofthinking,theknotsetisanorderedsequenceofmembershipsandco-memberships
thatare encountered asonemovesalongthestrandofthatpart oftheweave. Lets takethisview,
butgobacktotheordinaryknotsetsthatjustcatalogmemberships. Thentheknotsetisaordered
listofthemembershipsthatareencounteredalongtheweave. Forexample,inFigure17wehave
a = b ,b = a,c ,c = b,d ,c = c , and this would become the algebraic statements
a = b ,b = ac ,c = bd ,c = c , where we removethe parentheses and write the contents
ofeach set as a algebraicproduct. We retain the brackets in order to continueto differentiatethe
set from its contents. Then we would have that bccd = bd since repetitions are eliminated,
and weseethattherulex2 = 1 shouldbeobeyedby thisalgebraofproductsofsetmembers.
What shallwe doabout a = bcdc ?we coulddecidethat xy = yxfor allx and y ina given
knot set. This commutative law would disregard the ordering, and we would have bcdc =
bccd bd . The simplest algebraic version of the knot sets is to have a commutative algebra
with x2 = 1 for all members. Then we can define X∆Y for sets X = α and Y = β by the
whereαβ representstheproductofthemembersofX andY takentogether. TheoperationX∆Y
represents theunionofknotsets andcorresponds toexclusiveorinstandard settheory.
Forexample,suppose
A = yx ,B = zy ,C = xz .
Then we have A2 = B2 = C2 = 1 where it is understood that 1 = represents the empty
{ } { } {}
set. (Thatis, inthealgebra1 represents theemptyword.) FurthermorewehaveAB = C,BC =
A,CA = B. The relations in this example are very close to the quaternions. This example
suggeststhatwecouldchangethealgebraicstructuresothatmemberssatisfyxy = yx,adding
a notion of sign to the algebraic representation of the knot sets. We then get the pattern of the
quaterniongroup: A2 = B2 = C2 = ABC = 1 where 1 denotes the“negative”emptyset.
By introducing the Clifford algebra with x2 = 1 and xy = yx for generators, we bring the
knot sets into direct correspondence with an algebra of Majorana fermions. The generators of
this Clifford algebra represent fermions that are their own anti-particles. For a long time it has
beenconjecturedthatneutrinosmaybeMajoranafermions. Morerecently,ithasbeensuggested
thatMajoranafermionsmay occurincollectiveelectronicphenomena[84, 28,8, 27,80].
Thereisanaturalassociationoffermionalgebratoknotsets. Inordertoexplainthisassocia-
tion, wefirst giveashort expositionof thealgebraof fermion operators. In a standard collection
of fermion operators m , ,m one has that each m is a linear operator on a Hilbert space
withanadjointoperatorm†i (correspondingtotheanti-particlefortheparticlecreatedbym
m†i +m†i m
m m +m m = 0
when i = j.
There is another brand of Fermion algebra where we have generators c , c and c2 = 1
whilec c = c c foralli = j.ThesearetheMajoranafermions. Thereisaalgebraictranslation
betweenthefermionalgebraandMajoranafermionalgebra. GiventwoMajoranafermionsaand
bwitha2 = b2 = 1 and ab = ba, define
It is then easy to see that a2 = b2 = 1 and ab = ba imply that m and m form a fermion in
the sense that m2 = (m )2 = 0 and mm +m m = 1. Thus pairs of Majorana fermions can be
construed as ordinary fermions. Conversely, if m is an ordinary fermion, then formal real and
imaginary parts of m yield a mathematical pair of Majorana fermions. A chain of electrons in
a nano-wire, conceived in this way can give rise to a chain of Majorana fermions with a non-
localized pair corresponding to the distant ends of the chain. The non-local nature of this pair is
promisingforcreatingtopologicallyprotectedqubits,andthereisatthiswritinganexperimental
search forevidencefortheexistenceofsuchend-effect Majoranafermions.
We now see that it is exactly the Majorana fermion algebra that matches the properties of
the knot sets. Here is an example that shows how the topology comes in. Let x,y,z be three
Majorana fermions. Let A = yx,B = zy,C = xz. We have already seen that A,B,C represent
thequaternions. Nowdefine
It is easy to see that s and s satisfy thebraiding relation for any i = j. Forexample, here is the
verificationfori = 1,j = 2.
Similarly,
s s s = s s s ,
1 2 1 2 1 2
and so a natural braid group representation arises from theMajorana fermions. This braid group
representationissignificantforquantumcomputingasweshallseeinSection7. Forthepurpose
ofthisdiscussion,thebraidgrouprepresentationshowsthattheCliffordalgebraicrepresentation
for knot sets is related to topology at more than one level. The relation x2 = 1 for genera-
tors makes the individual sets, taken as products of generators, invariant under the Reidemeister
moves (up to a global sign). But braiding invariance of certain linear combinations of sets is a
relationship with knotting at a second level. This multiple relationship certainly deserves more
thought. Wewillmakeonemoreremarkhere,andreservefurtheranalysisforasubsequentpaper.
These braiding operators can be seen to act on the vector space over the complex numbers
thatis spannedby thefermionsx,y,z. To seehowthisworks,consider
T(y) = - x
Figure23: Braiding Action onaPairofFermions
and verify that T(x) = y and T(y) = x. Now view Figure 23 where we have illustrated a
topological interpretation for the braiding of two fermions. In the topological interpretation the
two fermions are connected by a flexible belt. On interchange, the belt becomes twisted by 2π.
In the topological interpretation a twist of 2π corresponds to a phase change of 1. (For more
information on this topological interpretation of 2π rotation for fermions, see [45].) Without a
further choice it is not evident which particle of the pair should receive the phase change. The
topologyalonetells us only therelativechangeof phase between thetwo particles. TheClifford
algebra for Majorana fermions makes a specific choice in the matter and in this way fixes the
representationofthebraiding.
Finally, we remark that linear combinations of products in the Clifford algebra can be re-
garded as superpositions of the knot sets. Thus xy + xz is a superposition of the sets with
members x,y and x,z .Superpositionofsetssuggeststhatwearecreatingaspeciesofquan-
tum set theory and indeed Clifford algebra based quantum set theories have been suggested (see
[19])byDavidFinkelsteinandothers. Itmaycomeasasurprisetoaquantumsettheoristtofind
that knot theoretic topology is directly related to this subject. It is also clear that this Clifford
algebraic quantum set theory should be related to our previous constructions for quantum knots
[60, 61, 62, 63, 64]. This requires more investigation, and it suggests that knot theory and the
theoryofbraids occupya fundamentalplace inthefoundationsofquantummechanics.
Figure24: Insideand Outside
5 Laws of Form
In this section we discuss a formalism due the G. Spencer-Brown [100] that is often called the
“calculusofindications”. Thiscalculusisastudyofmathematicalfoundationswithatopological
notationbased on onesymbol,themark:
.
Thissinglesymbolrepresentsadistinctionbetweenitsowninsideandoutside. Asisevidentfrom
Fgure24,themarkisregardedas ashorthandforarectangledrawnintheplaneanddividingthe
planeintotheregionsinsideand outsidetherectangle.
The reason we introduce this notation is that in the calculus of indications the mark can
interact with itselfin two possibleways. The resultingformalism becomes a version of Boolean
arithmetic, but fundamentally simpler than the usual Boolean arithmetic of 0 and 1 with its two
binary operations and one unary operation (negation). In the calculus of indications one takes
a step in the direction of simplicity, and also a step in the direction of physics. The patterns of
thismarkanditsself-interactionmatchthoseofaMajoranafermionasdiscussedintheprevious
section. A Majorana fermion is a particle that is its own anti-particle. [84]. We will later see, in
thispaper,thatbyaddingbraidingtothecalculusofindicationswearriveattheFibonaccimodel,
thatcan inprinciplesupportquantumcomputing.
In the previous section we described Majorana fermions in terms of their algebra of creation
and annihilation operators. Here we describe the particle directly in terms of its interactions.
Thisis part ofageneral schemecalled “fusionrules”[86]that can beapplied todiscreteparticle
interacations. A fusion rule represents all of the different particle interactions in the form of
a set of equations. The bare bones of the Majorana fermion consist in a particle P such that
P can interact with itself to produce a neutral particle or produce itself P. Thus the possible
interactionsare
PP P.
Figure25: Boxes andMarks
Thisisthebareminimumthatweshallneed. Thefusionruleis
P2 = 1+P.
Thisrepresentsthefact thatP caninteractwithitselftoproducetheneutralparticle(represented
as 1 in the fusion rule) or itself (represented by P in the fusion rule). We shall come back to the
combinatoricsrelated to thisfusionequation.
Is therealinguisticparticlethatis itsownanti-particle? Certainly wehave
foranypropositionQ(in Boolean logic). And sowemightwrite
where isa neutrallinguisticparticle,an identityoperatorsothat
for any proposition Q. But in the normal use of negation there is no way that the negation sign
combines with itself to produce itself. This appears to ruin the analogy between negation and
the Majorana fermion. Remarkably, the calculus of indications provides a context in which we
can say exactlythat acertain logicalparticle, themark, can act as negationandcan interact with
itselfto produceitself.
In thecalculusofindicationspatternsofnon-intersectingmarks(i.e. non-intersectingrectan-
gles) are called expressions. For example in Figure 25 we see how patterns of boxes correspond
topatterns ofmarks.
InFigure25,wehaveillustratedboththerectangleandthemarkedversionoftheexpression.
In an expression you can say definitively of any two marks whether one is or is not inside the
other. The relationshipbetween two marks is either that one is insidethe other, or that neither is
inside the other. These two conditions correspond to the two elementary expressions shown in
Figure26.
Figure26: Translationbetween Boxes and Marks
The mathematics in Laws of Form begins with two laws of transformation about these two
basicexpressions. Symbolically,theselawsare:
1. Calling:
2. Crossing:
= .
The equals sign denotes a replacement step that can be performed on instances of these patterns
(two empty marks that are adjacent or one mark surrounding an empty mark). In the first of
theseequationstwo adjacent markscondenseto a singlemark, orasinglemark expands toform
two adjacent marks. In the second equation two marks, one inside the other, disappear to form
the unmarked state indicated by nothing at all. That is, two nested marks can be replaced by
an empty word in this formal system. Alternatively, the unmarked state can be replaced by two
nested marks. These equations give rise to a natural calculus, and the mathematics can begin.
Forexample,anyexpressioncanbereduceduniquelytoeitherthemarkedortheunmarkedstate.
Thehefollowingexampleillustratesthemethod:
= = .
Thegeneralmethodforreductionistolocatemarksthatareatthedeepestplacesintheexpression
(depth is defined by counting the number of inward crossings of boundaries needed to reach the
givenmark). Suchadeepest markmustbeemptyand itiseithersurroundedbyanothermark,or
it is adjacent to an empty mark. In either case a reduction can be performed by either calling or
crossing.
LawsofFormbeginswiththefollowingstatement. “Wetakeasgiventheideaofadistinction
and the idea of an indication, and that it is not possibleto make an indication without drawing a
distinction. We take therefore the form of distinction for the form.” Then the author makes the
followingtwostatements(laws):
1. Thevalueofa callmadeagainisthevalueofthecall.
2. Thevalueofa crossingmadeagainisnotthevalueofthecrossing.
The two symbolic equations above correspond to these statements. First examine the law of
calling. It saysthat thevalueofarepeated nameis thevalueofthename. In theequation
one can view either mark as the name of the state indicated by the outside of the other mark. In
theotherequation
= .
the state indicated by the outside of a mark is the state obtained by crossing from the state in-
dicated on the inside of the mark. Since the marked state is indicated on the inside, the outside
mustindicatetheunmarkedstate. TheLawofCrossingindicateshowoppositeformscanfitinto
oneanotherandvanishintonothing,orhownothingcanproduceoppositeanddistinctformsthat
fit oneanother,hand inglove. Thesameinterpretationyieldstheequation
where the left-hand side is seen as an instruction to cross from the unmarked state, and the right
handsideisseenas anindicatorofthemarked state. Themarkhas adoublecarry ofmeaning. It
can be seen as an operator, transforming the state on its inside to a different state on its outside,
and it can be seen as the nameof the marked state. That combinationofmeanings is compatible
inthisinterpretation.
From thecalculusofindications,onemovestoalgebra. Thus
standsforthetwopossibilities
In allcases wehave
A = A.
By thetimewearticulatethealgebra, themark can taketheroleofaunary operator
A A .
But it retains its role as an element in the algebra. Thus begins algebra with respect to this non-
numericalarithmeticofforms. TheprimaryalgebrathatemergesisasubtleprecursortoBoolean
algebra. Onecan translateback and forth between elementarylogicand primaryalgebra:
5. A B A B
6. A B A B
The calculus of indications and the primary algebra form an efficient system for working with
basicsymboliclogic.
By reformulating basic symbolic logic in terms of the calculus of indications, we have a
ground in which negation is represented by the mark and the mark is also interpreted as a value
(a truth value for logic) and these two intepretations are compatible with one another in the for-
malism. The key to this compatibility is the choice to represent the value “false” by a literally
unmarked statein thenotationalplane. Withthis theemptymark (a mark with nothingon itsin-
side)canbeinterpretedasthenegationof“false”andhencerepresents“true”. Themarkinteracts
withitselftoproduceitself(calling)andthemarkinteractswithitselftoproducenothing(cross-
ing). We have expanded the conceptual domain of negation so that it satisfies the mathematical
pattern ofan abstract Majoranafermion.
Another way to indicate these two interactions symbolically is to use a box,for the marked
state and a blank space for the unmarked state. Then one has two modes of interaction of a box
withitself:
1. Adjacency:
2. Nesting: .
With this convention we take the adjacency interaction to yield a single box, and the nesting
interactiontoproducenothing:
We take the notational opportunity to denote nothing by an asterisk (*). The syntatical rules for
operatingtheasteriskare Thustheasterisk isastand-inforno markat all andit can beerased or
placed whereverit isconvenienttodo so. Thus
= .
At this point the reader can appreciate what has been done if he returns to the usual form of
symboliclogic. In that formwethat
foralllogicalobjects(propositionsorelementsofthelogicalalgebra)X.Wecansummarizethis
by writing
as a symbolic statement that is outside the logical formalism. Furthermore, one is committed to
the interpretation of negation as an operator and not as an operand. The calculus of indications
providesaformalismwherethemark (theanalogofnegationinthat domain)isbotha valueand
an object,and socan act onitselfin morethan oneway.
TheMajoranaparticleisitsownanti-particle. Itisexactlyatthispointthatphysicsmeetslog-
icalepistemology. Negationaslogicalentityisitsownanti-particle. Wittgensteinsays(Tractatus
[107]4.0621)“ thesign‘ ’correspondstonothinginreality.”Andhegoesontosay(Tracta-
tus 5.511) “ How can all-embracing logic which mirrors the world use such special catches and
manipulations? Only because all these are connected into an infinitely fine network, the great
mirror.” For Wittgenstein in the Tractatus, the negation sign is part of the mirror making it pos-
siblefor thoughtto reflect reality through combinationsof signs. Theseremarks of Wittgenstein
are part of his early picture theory of the relationship of formalism and the world. In our view,
theworldandtheformalismweusetorepresenttheworldarenotseparate. Theobserverandthe
mark are(formally)identical. A path isopened between logicand physics.
The visual iconics that create via the boxes of half-boxes of the calculus of indications a
modelfor alogical Majoranafermioncan also beseen in termsof cobordismsof surfaces. View
Figure 27. There the boxes have become circles and the interactions of the circles have been
displayed as evolutions in an extra dimension, tracing out surfaces in three dimensions. The
condensationoftwocirclestooneisasimplecobordismbetweemtwocirclesandasinglecircle.
Thecancellationoftwocirclesthatareconcentriccanbeseenastheright-handlowercobordism
in this figure with a level having a continuum of critical points where the two circles cancel. A
simpler cobordism is illustrated above on the right where the two circles are not concentric, but
neverthelessarecobordanttotheemptycircle. Anotherwayofputtingthisisthattwotopological
closedstringscaninteractbycobordismtoproduceasinglestringortocanceloneanother. Thus
asimplecirclecan beatopologicalmodelfora Majoranafermion.
In Sections 15 and 16 we detail how the Fibonacci model for anyonic quantum computing
[78, 90] can be constructed by using a version of the two-stranded bracket polynomial and a
generalization of Penrose spin networks. This is a fragment of the Temperly-Lieb recoupling
theory[34].
Figure27: Calling,Crossing andCobordism
5.1 The Square Root of Minus One is an Eigenform and a Clock
So far we have seen that the mark can represent the fusion rules for a Majorana fermion since
it can interact with itself to produce either itself or nothing. But we have not yet seen the anti-
commuting fermion algebra emerge from this context of making a distinction. Remarkably, this
algebradoes emergewhen onelooksat themarkrecursively.
Considerthetransformation
F(X) = X .
Ifweiterateitand takethelimitwefind
an infinitenest ofmarks satisfyingtheequation
G = G .
WithG = F(G),IsaythatGisaneigenformforthetransformationF.See[]formoreaboutthis
pointofview. SeeFigure28foranillustrationofthisnestingwithboxesandanarrowthatpoints
insidethereentering mark toindicateits appearance insideitself. Ifonethinksof themark itself
as a Boolean logical value, then extending the language to include the reentering mark G goes
beyond the boolean. We will not detail here how this extension can be related to non-standard
logics,butreferthereaderto[39]. Takenatfacevaluethereenteringmarkcannotbejustmarked
orjustunmarked,forbyitsverydefinition,ifitismarkedthenitisunmarkedandifitisunmarked
then it is marked. In this sense the reentering mark has the form of a self-contradicting paradox.
Figure28:
There is no paradox since we do not have to permanently assign it to either value. The simplest
interpretation of the reentering mark is that it is temporal and that it represents an oscillation
between markedness and unmarkedness. In numerical terms it is a discrete dynamical system
oscillatingbetween +1(marked)and 1 (not marked).
Withthereentering mark inmindconsidernowthetransformationon real numbersgivenby
This has the fixed points i and i, the complex numbers whose squares are negative unity. But
lets take a point of view more directly associated with the analogy of the recursive mark. Begin
by starting with a simpleperiodic process that is associated directly with the classical attemptto
solveforiasasolutiontoaquadraticequation. Wetakethepointofviewthatsolvingx2 = ax+b
isthesame(when x = 0)as solving
x = a+b/x,
and henceisamatteroffindingafixed point. Inthecaseofiwe have
and sodesireafixed point
x = 1/x.
Therearenorealnumbersthatarefixedpointsforthisoperatorandsoweconsidertheoscillatory
process generated by
Thefixedpointwouldsatisfy
and multiplying,wegetthat
ii = 1.
On theotherhand theiterationofT yields
... +1, -1, +1, -1, +1, -1, +1, -1, ...
Figure29:
Thesquarerootofminusoneisaperfectexampleofaneigenformthatoccursinanewandwider
domain than the original context in which its recursive process arose. The process has no fixed
pointintheoriginaldomain.
Looking at the oscillation between +1 and 1, we see that there are naturally two phase-
shiftedviewpoints. Wedenotethesetwoviewsoftheoscillationby[+1, 1]and[ 1,+1].These
viewpoints correspond to whether one regards the oscillation at time zero as starting with +1 or
with 1. See Figure 29. We shall let the word iterant stand for an undisclosed alternation or
ambiguitybetween +1 and 1. Thereare twoiterant views: [+1, 1] and [ 1,+1]forthebasic
process weare examining. Givenan iterant [a,b], wecan thinkof[b,a] as thesameprocess with
a shift of one time step. The two iterant views, [+1, 1] and [ 1,+1], will become the square
rootsofnegativeunity,iand i.
We introduceatemporalshiftoperatorη such that
foranyiterant [a,b],sothatconcatenatedobservationscanincludeatimestepofone-halfperiod
oftheprocess
abababab .
Wecombineiterant viewsterm-by-termas in
Wenowdefine iby theequation
Thismakesi bothavalueand an operatorthattakes intoaccountastep intime.
We calculate
Thus we haveconstructed asquare root of minusoneby usingan iterant viewpoint. In this view
i represents a discrete oscillating temporal process and it is an eigenform for T(x) = 1/x,
participatinginthealgebraicstructureofthecomplexnumbers. Infactthecorrespondingalgebra
structureoflinearcombinations[a,b]+[c,d]ηisisomorphicwith2 2matrixalgebraanditerants
can beused toconstructn nmatrixalgebra. We treat thisgeneralization elsewhere[72, 73].
Now we can makecontact with the algebra ofthe Majorana fermions. Let e = [1, 1]. Then
wehavee2 = [1,1] = 1 and eη = [1, 1]η = [ 1,1]η = eη. Thuswehave
eη = ηe.
We can regard e and η as a fundamental pair of Majorana fermions. This is a formal corre-
spondence, but it is striking how this Marjorana fermion algebra emerges from an analysis of
the recursive nature of the reentering mark, while the fusion algebra for the Majorana fermion
emerges from the distinctiveproperties of the mark itself. We see how the seeds of the fermion
algebralivein thisextendedlogicalcontext.
Notehowthedevelopmentofthealgebraworksat thispoint. We havethat
and so regard this as a natural constructionof thesquare root of minusone in terms of thephase
synchronizationoftheclockthatistheiterationofthereenteringmark. Oncewehavethesquare
rootofminusoneitisnaturaltointroduceanotheroneandcallthisonei,lettingitcommutewith
theotheroperators. Thenwehavethe(ieη)2 = +1andsowehaveatripleofMajoranafermions:
a = e,b = η,c = ieη
and wecan constructthequaternions
I = ba = ηe,J = cb = ie,K = ac = iη.
Withthequaternionsinplace, wehavethebraidingoperators
and can continueas wedidin Section4.
There is one more comment that is appropriate for this section. Recall from Section 4 that a
pair of Majorana fermions can be assembled to form a single standard fermion. In our case we
have the two Marjorana fermions e and η and the corresponding standard fermion creation and
annihilationoperators arethen givenbytheformulasbelow.
Since e represents a spatial view of the basic discrete oscillation and η is the time-shift operator
for this oscillation it is of interest to note that the standard fermion built by these two can be
regardedasaquantumofspacetime,retrievedfromthewaythatwedecomposedtheprocessinto
space and time. Since all this is initially built in relation to extending the Boolean logic of the
mark to a non-boolean recursive context, there is further analysis needed of the relation of the
physicsand thelogic. Thiswillbetakenup inaseparate paper.
5.2 Relativity and the Dirac Equation
Starting with the algebra structure of e and η and adding a commuting square root of 1, i, we
have constructed fermion algebra and quaternion algebra. We can now go further and construct
the Dirac equation. This may sound circular, in that the fermions arise from solving the Dirac
equation, but in fact the algebra underlying this equation has the same properties as the creation
and annihilation algebra for fermions, so it is by way of this algebra that we will come to the
Dirac equation. If the speed of light is equal to 1 (by convention), then energy E, momentum p
and massmare related bythe(Einstein)equation
E2 = p2 +m2.
Diracconstructedhisequationbylookingforanalgebraicsquarerootofp2+m2 sothathecould
havealinearoperatorforE thatwouldtakethesameroleas theHamiltonianintheSchrodinger
equation. We will get to this operator by first taking the case where p is a scalar (we use one
dimension of space and one dimension of time. Let E = αp+βm where α and β are elements
ofaapossiblynon-commutative,associativealgebra. Then
Hence we will satisfiy E2 = p2 + m2 if α2 = β2 = 1 and αβ + βα = 0. This is our familiar
Cliffordalgebrapatternandwecanusetheiterantalgebrageneratedbyeandηifwewish. Then,
becausethequantumoperatorformomentumis i∂/∂xandtheoperatorforenergyisi∂/∂t,we
havetheDiracequation
sothat theDirac equationtakestheform
Nownotethat
and thatif
U2 = E2 +p2 +m2 = 0,
from whichitfollowsthat
ψ = Uei(px Et)
isa(planewave)solutionto theDiracequation.
In fact, this calculation suggests that we should multiply the operator by βα on the right,
obtainingtheoperator
and theequivalentDirac equation
ψ = 0.
In fact for the specific ψ above we will now have (Uei(px Et)) = U2ei(px Et) = 0. This way
of reconfiguring the Dirac equation in relation to nilpotent algebra elements U is due to Peter
Rowlands [94]. We will explore this relationship with the Rowlands formulation in a separate
paper.
Return nowto theoriginalversionoftheDiracequation.
Wecan rewritethisas
Weseethatifiβ isreal,thenwecanwriteafullyrealversionoftheDiracequation. Forexample,
wecan taketheequation
wherewerepresent
!
!
as matrix versions of the iterants associated with the reentering mark. For the case of one di-
mension of space and one dimension of time, this is the Majorana representation for the Dirac
equation(compare[48]). Sincetheequationcanhaverealsolutions,thesearetheirowncomplex
conjugatesand correspond to particles that are theirown anti-particles. As thereader can check,
thecorrespondingRowlandnilpotentU is givenby theformula
U = iηE +ieηp+em.
For effective application to the topics in this paper, one needs to use two dimensions of space
and one dimensionof time. This willbe explored in anotherpaper. In thepresent paper wehave
given a picture of how, starting with the mark as a logical and recursive particle, one can tell a
storythat reaches theDiracequationand itsalgebra.
6 Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Computation
We shall quickly indicate the basic principles of quantum mechanics. The quantum information
contextencapsulatesaconcisemodelofquantumtheory:
The initialstateof a quantum processis a vector v in a complex vector space H. Measure-
ment returnsbasiselements β of H with probability
β v 2/ v v
where v w = v w with v the conjugate transpose of v. A physical process occurs in steps
v U v = Uv where U isa unitarylineartransformation.
Note that since Uv Uw = v U U w = v w = when U is unitary, it follows that
h | i h | | i h | i
probabilityis preserved inthecourseof aquantumprocess.
One of the details required for any specific quantum problem is the nature of the unitary
evolution. This is specified by knowing appropriate information about the classical physics that
supportsthephenomena. ThisinformationisusedtochooseanappropriateHamiltonianthrough
which the unitary operator is constructed via a correspondence principle that replaces classical
variables with appropriate quantum operators. (In the path integral approach one needs a Lan-
grangian to construct the action on which the path integral is based.) One needs to know certain
aspects ofclassicalphysicsto solveany specificquantumproblem.
A key concept in the quantum information viewpoint is the notion of the superposition of
states. If a quantum system has two distinct states v and w , then it has infinitely many states
of the form a v + b w where a and b are complex numbers taken up to a common multiple.
States are “really” in the projective space associated with H. There is only one superposition of
a singlestate v with itself. On the other hand, it is most convenientto regard the states v and
w asvectorsin avectorspace. Wethantakeitas partoftheprocedureofdealingwithstatesto
normalizethemto unitlength. Onceagain,thesuperpositionofastatewithitselfisagain itself.
Dirac [17] introduced the “bra -(c)-ket” notation A B = A B for the inner product of
complexvectors A,B H. Healso separated theparts ofthebracket intothe bra< A and the
ket B .Thus
h | i h | | i
In this interpretation, the ket B is identified with the vector B H, while the bra < A is
regarded as the element dual to A in the dual space H . The dual element to A corresponds to
the conjugate transpose A of the vector A, and the inner product is expressed in conventional
language by the matrix product A B (which is a scalar since B is a column vector). Having
separated the bra and the ket, Dirac can write the “ket-bra” A B = AB . In conventional
notation, the ket-bra is a matrix, not a scalar, and we have the following formula for the square
ofP = A B :
P2 = A B A B = A(B A)B = (B A)AB = B A P.
| ih || ih | h | i
The standard example is a ket-bra P = A A where A A = 1 so that P2 = P. Then P is a
| ih | h | i
projection matrix, projecting to the subspace of H that is spanned by the vector A . In fact, for
anyvector B wehave
P B = A A B = A A B = A B A .
| i | ih || i | ih | i h | i| i
If C , C , C is an orthonormalbasisforH, and
thenfor anyvector A wehave
A = C A C + + C A C .
B A = B C C A + + B C C A
h | i h | ih | i ··· h | ih | i
One wants the probability of starting in state A and ending in state B . The probability
for this event is equal to B A 2. This can be refined if we have more knowledge. If the
intermediate states C are a complete set of orthonormal alternatives then we can assume that
C C = 1 for each i and that Σ C C = 1. This identity now corresponds to the fact that 1
h | i | ih |
is thesumoftheprobabilitiesof an arbitrary statebeing projectedinto oneoftheseintermediate
states.
If there are intermediate states between the intermediate states this formulation can be con-
tinued until one is summingoverall possiblepaths from A to B. This becomes thepath integral
expressionfortheamplitude B A .
6.1 What is a Quantum Computer?
Aquantumcomputeris,abstractly,acompositionU ofunitarytransformations,togetherwithan
initialstateand achoiceofmeasurement basis. Oneruns thecomputerbyrepeatedly initializing
it,andthenmeasuringtheresultofapplyingtheunitarytransformationU totheinitialstate. The
results of these measurements are then analyzed for the desired information that the computer
was set to determine. The key to using the computer is the design of the initial state and the
design of the composition of unitary transformations. The reader should consult [88] for more
specificexamplesofquantumalgorithms.
Let H bea givenfinitedimensionalvectorspaceoverthecomplexnumbersC.Let
W ,W ,...,W
beanorthonormalbasisforH sothatwith i := W denotingW and i denotingtheconjugate
| i | i h |
transposeof i , wehave
where δ denotes the Kronecker delta (equal to one when its indices are equal to one another,
and equal to zero otherwise). Given a vector v in H let v 2 := v v . Note that i v is the i-th
coordinateofv.
An measurement of v returns one of the coordinates i of v with probability i v 2. This model
| i |h | |
ofmeasurementisasimpleinstanceofthesituationwithaquantummechanicalsystemthatisin
a mixed state until it is observed. The result of observation is to put the system into one of the
basisstates.
When thedimensionof thespace H is two (n = 1), a vectorin the space is called a qubit. A
qubitrepresentsonequantumofbinaryinformation. Onmeasurement,oneobtainseithertheket
0 ortheket 1 . Thisconstitutesthebinarydistinctionthatisinherent inaqubit. Notehowever
thattheinformationobtainedis probabilistic. Ifthequbitis
| i | i | i
then the ket 0 is observed with probability α 2, and the ket 1 is observed with probability
β 2.Inspeakingofanidealizedquantumcomputer,wedonotspecifythenatureofmeasurement
process beyondtheseprobabilitypostulates.
In the case of general dimension n of the space H, we will call the vectors in H qunits. It
is quite common to use spaces H that are tensor products of two-dimensionalspaces (so that all
computations are expressed in terms of qubits) but this is not necessary in principle. One can
startwitha givenspace, and laterworkout factorizationsintoqubittransformations.
A quantumcomputationconsistsintheapplicationofaunitarytransformationU toaninitial
qunitψ = a 0 +...+a n with ψ 2 = 1,plusanmeasurementofUψ.AmeasurementofUψ
returnstheket i withprobability i Uψ 2. Inparticular,ifwestartthecomputerinthestate i ,
thentheprobabilitythat itwillreturn thestate j is j U i 2.
It is the necessity for writing a given computation in terms of unitary transformations, and
the probabilisticnature of the result that characterizes quantum computation. Such computation
could be carried out by an idealized quantum mechanical system. It is hoped that such systems
can bephysicallyrealized.
7 Braiding Operators and Universal Quantum Gates
A class of invariants of knots and links called quantum invariants can be constructed by using
representations of the Artin braid group, and more specifically by using solutions to the Yang-
Baxter equation[7], first discoveredinrelation to1+1 dimensionalquantumfield theory,and 2
dimensional statistical mechanics. Braiding operators feature in constructing representations of
theArtinbraid group,and intheconstructionofinvariantsofknotsand links.
A key concept in the construction of quantum link invariants is the association of a Yang-
Baxter operator R to each elementary crossing in a link diagram. The operator R is a linear
R: V V V V
defined on the 2-fold tensor product of a vector space V, generalizing the permutation of the
factors (i.e., generalizing a swap gate when V represents one qubit). Such transformations are
not necessarily unitary in topological applications. It is useful to understand when they can be
replaced by unitary transformations for the purpose of quantum computing. Such unitary R-
matricescan beusedto makeunitaryrepresentationsoftheArtinbraid group.
A solution to the Yang-Baxter equation, as described in the last paragraph is a matrix R,
regardedasamappingofatwo-foldtensorproductofavectorspaceV V toitselfthatsatisfies
theequation
From the point of view of topology, the matrix R is regarded as representing an elementary bit
of braiding represented by one string crossing over another. In Figure 30 we have illustrated
the braiding identity that corresponds to the Yang-Baxter equation. Each braiding picture with
its three input lines (below) and output lines (above) corresponds to a mapping of the three fold
tensorproductofthevectorspaceV toitself,asrequiredbythealgebraicequationquotedabove.
The pattern of placement of the crossings in the diagram corresponds to the factors R I and
I R. This crucial topological move has an algebraic expression in terms of such a matrix R.
Our approach in this section to relate topology, quantumcomputing, and quantum entanglement
isthroughtheuseoftheYang-Baxterequation. Inordertoaccomplishthisaim,weneedtostudy
solutionsoftheYang-Baxterequationthatareunitary. ThentheRmatrixcanbeseeneitherasa
braidingmatrixoras aquantumgatein aquantumcomputer.
Figure30: The Yang-Baxterequation
The problemof finding solutionsto the Yang-Baxter equationthat are unitary turns out to be
surprisingly difficult. Dye [18] has classified all such matrices of size 4 4. A rough summary
of her classification is that all 4 4 unitary solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation are similarto
oneofthefollowingtypesofmatrix:
 0 0 0 d 
 d 0 0 0 
wherea,b,c,d are unitcomplexnumbers.
Forthepurposeofquantumcomputing,oneshouldregardeach matrixasactingonthestam-
dard basis 00 , 01 , 10 , 11 of H = V V, where V is a two-dimensionalcomplex vector
space. Then, forexamplewehave
| i | i | i
| i | i | i
The reader should note that R is the familiar change-of-basis matrix from the standard basis to
theBell basisofentangledstates.
In thecaseofR,wehave
R 00 = a 00 ,R 01 = c 10 ,
| i | i | i | i
R 10 = b 01 ,R 11 = d 11 .
| i | i | i | i
NotethatR can beregarded as adiagonalphasegateP,composedwithaswap gateS.
 0 0 0 d 
 0 0 0 1 
Compositionsofsolutionsofthe(Braiding)Yang-BaxterequationwiththeswapgateS arecalled
solutionsto the algebraicYang-Baxter equation. Thus the diagonal matrix P is a solution to the
algebraicYang-Baxter equation.
Remark. Another avenue related to unitary solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation as quantum
gatescomesfromusingextraphysicalparametersinthisequation(therapidityparameter)thatare
related to statistical physics. In [110] we discovered that solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation
withtherapidityparameterallowmanynewunitarysolutions. Thesignificanceofthesegatesfor
quatnumcomputingisstillunderinvestigation.
7.1 Universal Gates
A two-qubit gate G is a unitary linear mapping G : V V V where V is a two complex
dimensional vector space. We say that the gate G is universal for quantum computation (or just
universal)ifGtogetherwithlocalunitarytransformations(unitarytransformationsfromV toV)
generates all unitary transformations of the complex vector space of dimension 2n to itself. It is
well-known [88] that CNOT is a universal gate. (On the standard basis, CNOT is the identity
when thefirst qubit is 0 , and it flipsthe secondqbit, leavingthefirst alone, when thefirst qubit
A gateG, as above,issaidto beentanglingifthereisavector
such that G αβ is not decomposable as a tensor product of two qubits. Under these circum-
stances, onesays thatG αβ isentangled.
In [12], the Brylinskis givea general criterion of G to be universal. They prove that a two-qubit
gateG is universalif andonlyif itisentangling.
Remark. A two-qubitpurestate
φ = a 00 +b 01 +c 10 +d 11
| i | i | i | i | i
isentangledexactlywhen(ad bc) = 0.Itiseasytousethisfacttocheckwhenaspecificmatrix
is,oris not,entangling.
Remark. There are many gates other than CNOT that can be used as universal gates in the
presence of local unitary transformations. Some of these are themselves topological (unitary
solutions to the Yang-Baxter equation, see [65]) and themselves generate representations of the
Artin braid group. Replacing CNOT by a solution to the Yang-Baxter equation does not place
the local unitary transformations as part of the corresponding representation of the braid group.
Thussuchsubstitutionsgiveonlyapartialsolutiontocreatingtopologicalquantumcomputation.
In this paper we are concerned with braid group representations that include all aspects of the
unitary group. Accordingly, in the next section we shall first examine how the braid group on
threestrandscan berepresented as local unitarytransformations.
Theorem. LetDdenotethephasegateshownbelow. DisasolutiontothealgebraicYang-Baxter
equation(seetheearlierdiscussionin thissection). ThenD isa universalgate.
 0 0 0 1 
Proof. It follows at once from the Brylinski Theorem that D is universal. For a more specific
proof, note that CNOT = QDQ 1, where Q = H I, H is the 2 2 Hadamard matrix. The
conclusion then follows at once from this identity and the discussion above. We illustrate the
matricesinvolvedinthisproofbelow:
H = (1/√2)
!
 0 0 1 1 
 0 0 0 1 
QDQ 1 = QDQ =   = CNOT
 0 0 1 0 
ThiscompletestheproofoftheTheorem. //
Remark. We thank Martin Roetteles [93] for pointing out the specific factorization of CNOT
used inthisproof.
Theorem. The matrix solutions R and R to the Yang-Baxter equation, described above, are
universalgates exactly when ad bc = 0 for their internal parameters a,b,c,d. In particular, let
R denotethesolutionR (above)to theYang-Baxter equationwitha = b = c = 1,d = 1.
 0 0 0 d 
 0 0 0 1 
Then R is auniversalgate.
Proof. The first part follows at once from the Brylinski Theorem. In fact, letting H be the
Hadamard matrixas before, and
! !
µ = − .
!
This gives an explicit expression for CNOT in terms of R and local unitary transformations
(forwhich wethankBen Reichardt). //
Remark. Let SWAP denotetheYang-Baxter SolutionR witha = b = c = d = 1.
SWAP =  
 0 0 0 1 
SWAP is the standard swap gate. Note that SWAP is not a universal gate. This also follows
fromtheBrylinskiTheorem,sinceSWAP isnotentangling. NotealsothatR isthecomposition
ofthephasegateD withthisswap gate.
Theorem. Let
be theunitary solutionto the Yang-Baxter equationdiscussed above. Then R is a universalgate.
TheproofbelowgivesaspecificexpressionforCNOT interms ofR.
Proof. ThisresultfollowsatoncefromtheBrylinksiTheorem,sinceRishighlyentangling. For
a direct computational proof, it suffices to show that CNOT can be generated from R and local
unitarytransformations. Let
!
!
!
!
Let M = α β andN = γ δ. Then itis straightforwardtoverify that
CNOT = MRN.
Thiscompletestheproof. //
Remark. See [65]formoreinformationaboutthesecalculations.
7.2 Majorana Fermions Generate Universal Braiding Gates
Recall that in Section 4 we showedhowto construct braid group representationsby using Majo-
ranafermionsinthespecialcaseofthreeparticles. Herewegeneralizethisconstructionandshow
how the Marjorana fermions give rise to universal topological gates. Let c ,c , c denote n
Majoranafermioncreation operators. Thuswe assumethat
foreach k = 1 nand wheneveri = j.Then defineoperators
fork = 1 n 1.ThenbythesamealgebraasweexploredinSection4itiseasytoverifythat
s s s = s s s and that s s = s s whenever i j > 1. Thus the s give a represen-
k+1 k k+1 k k+1 k i j j i i
tationofthen-strandbraid groupB . Furthermore,it iseasy to seethataspecific representation
is given on the complex vector space V with basis c ,c , c via the linear transformations
T : V V defined by
T (v) = s vs 1.
Notethats 1 = 1 (1 c c ).It isthen easy toverify that
T (c ) = c ,
T (c ) = c
and thatT istheidentityotherwise.
For universality, take n = 4 and regard each T as operating on V V where V is a single
qubitspace. ThenthebraidingoperatorsT eachsatisfytheYang-Baxterequationandsowehave
universalgates(inthepresenceofsinglequbitunitaryoperators)fromMajoranafermions. Ifex-
perimentalworkshowsthatMajoranafermionscanbedetectedandcontrolled,thenitispossible
thatquantumcomputersbased onthesetopologicalunitaryrepresentationswillbeconstructed.
In thelater sectionsof thispaper we will describethe Fibonacci model, which also uses Ma-
jorana fermions, and a different subtler representation of the braid groups that is also promising
fortopologicalquantumcomputing.
8 A Remark about EPR, Engtanglement and Bell’s Inequal-
A state ψ H n, where H is the qubit space, is said to be entangled if it cannot be written as
a tensor product of vectors from non-trivial factors of H n. Such states turn out to be related to
subtle nonlocality in quantum physics. It helps to place this algebraic structure in the context of
a gedanken experiment to see where the physics comes in. Thought experiments of the sort we
areabouttodescribewerefirstdevisedbyEinstein,PodoloskyandRosen,referredhenceforthas
EPR.
Considertheentangled state
S = ( 0 1 + 1 0 )/√2.
In an EPR thought experiment, we think of two “parts” of this state that are separated in space.
Wewant anotationfortheseparts andsuggestthefollowing:
L = ( 0 1 + 1 0 )/√2,
R = ( 0 1 + 1 0 )/√2.
In the left state L, an observer can only observe the left hand factor. In the right state R, an
observer can only observe the right hand factor. These “states” L and R together comprise the
EPR stateS, but they are accessibleindividuallyjust as are the two photons in theusual thought
experiement. Onecan transportLand R individuallyand weshallwrite
todenotethattheyare the“parts”(but nottensorfactors)ofS.
The curious thing about this formalism is that it includes a little bit of macroscopic physics
implicitly,and so it makes ita bitmoreapparent what EPR were concerned about. Afterall, lots
ofthingsthatwecandotoLorRdonotaffectS.Forexample,transportingLfromoneplaceto
another,asintheoriginalexperimentwherethephotonsseparate. Ontheotherhand,ifAlicehas
L and Bob has R and Alice performs a local unitary transformation on “her” tensor factor, this
applies to both L and R since the transformation is actually being applied to the state S. This is
also a “spooky action at a distance” whose consequence does not appear until a measurement is
made.
To go a bit deeper it is worthwhile seeing what entanglement, in the sense of tensor inde-
composability, has to do with the structure of the EPR thought experiment. To this end, we
look at the structure of the Bell inequalities using the Clauser, Horne, Shimony, Holt formalism
(CHSH) as explained in the book by Nielsen and Chuang [88]. For this we use the following
observableswitheigenvalues 1.
!
!
!
T = − /√2.
!
The subscripts 1 and 2 on these matrices indicate that they are to operate on the first and second
tensorfactors, repsectively,ofaquantumstateoftheform
φ = a 00 +b 01 +c 10 +d 11 .
| i | i | i | i
To simplify the results of this calculation we shall here assume that the coefficients a,b,c,d are
real numbers. Wecalculatethequantity
h | | i h | | i h | | i−h | | i
findingthat
Classical probability calculation with random variables of value 1 gives the value of QS +
RS+RT QT = 2(witheachofQ,R,S andT equalto 1). Hencetheclassicalexpectation
satisfiestheBell inequality
That quantum expectation is not classical is embodied in the fact that ∆ can be greater than 2.
Theclassiccase isthatoftheBell state
In general weseethat thefollowinginequalityis needed inorderto violatetheBell inequality
Thisisequivalentto
Sinceweknowthatφisentangledexactlywhenad bc isnon-zero,thisshowsthatanunentan-
gledstatecannotviolatetheBellinequality. Thisformulaalsoshowsthatitispossibleforastate
tobeentangled andyet notviolatetheBell inequality. Forexample,if
φ = ( 00 01 + 10 + 11 )/2,
then ∆(φ) satisfies Bell’s inequality, but φ is an entangled state. We see from this calculation
that entanglement in the sense of tensor indecomposability, and entanglement in the sense of
Bell inequalityviolationfor agivenchoiceof Bell operators are not equivalentconcepts. On the
other hand, Benjamin Schumacher has pointed out [96] that any entangled two-qubit state will
violate Bell inequalities for an appropriate choice of operators. This deepens the context for our
question of the relationship between topological entanglement and quantum entanglement. The
Bell inequality violation is an indication of quantum mechanical entanglement. One’s intuition
suggeststhatitis thissort ofentanglementthat shouldhaveatopologicalcontext.
9 The Aravind Hypothesis
Link diagrams can be used as graphical devices and holders of information. In this vein Ar-
avind [4] proposed that the entanglement of a link should correspond to the entanglement of a
state. Measurement of a link would be modeled by deleting one component of the link. A key
example is the Borromean rings. See Figure 18. Deleting any component of the Boromean
rings yields a remaining pair of unlinked rings. The Borromean rings are entangled, but any
two of themare unentangled. In this sensetheBorromean rings are analogous to theGHZ state
GHZ = (1/√2)( 000 + 111 ). MeasurementinanyfactoroftheGHZ yieldsanunentangled
| i | i | i
state. Aravind points out that this property is basis dependent. We point out that there are states
whose entanglement after an measurement is a matter of probability (via quantum amplitudes).
Considerforexamplethestate
ψ = 001 + 010 + 100 .
| i | i | i | i
Measurementinanycoordinateyieldsprobabilisticallyanentangledoranunentangledstate. For
ψ = 0 ( 01 + 10 )+ 1 00 .
| i | i | i | i | i| i
sothatprojectingto 1 inthefirstcoordinateyieldsanunentangledstate,whileprojectingto 0
yieldsan entangledstate.
New ways to use link diagrams must be invented to map the properties of such states. One
direction is to consider appropriate notions of quantum knots so that one can formlate superpo-
sitions of topological types as in [60]. But one needs to go deeper in this consideration. The
relationship of topology and physics needs to be examined carefully. We take the stance that
topological properties of systems are properties that remain invariant under certain transforma-
tions that are identified as “topological equivalences”. In making quantum physical models,
theseequivalencesshouldcorrespond tounitarytransformationsofan appropriateHilbertspace.
Accordingly, we have formulated a model for quantum knots [61, 62, 63, 64] that meets these
requirements. Aquantumknotsystemrepresentsthe“quantumembodiment”ofaclosedknotted
physical piece of rope. A quantum knot (i.e., an element K lying in an appropriate Hilbert
space H , as a state of this system, represents the state of such a knotted closed piece of rope,
i.e., the particular spatial configuration of the knot tied in the rope. Associated with a quantum
knotsystemisagroupofunitarytransformationsA ,calledtheambientgroup,whichrepresents
all possible ways of moving the rope around (without cutting the rope, and without letting the
rope pass through itself.) Of course, unlike a classical closed piece of rope, a quantum knot can
exhibit non-classical behavior, such as quantum superposition and quantum entanglement. The
knot type of a quantum knot K is simply the orbit of the quantum knot under the action of the
ambientgroupA . Thisleads tonew questionsconnectingquantumcomputingandknottheory.
10 SU(2) Representations of the Artin Braid Group
The purpose of this section is to determine all the representations of the three strand Artin braid
group B to the special unitary group SU(2) and concomitantly to the unitary group U(2). One
regardsthegroupsSU(2)andU(2)asactingonasinglequbit,andsoU(2)isusuallyregardedas
thegroupoflocal unitarytransformationsinaquantuminformationsetting. Ifoneislookingfor
a coherent way to represent all unitary transformations by way of braids, then U(2) is the place
to start. Here we will show that there are many representations of the three-strand braid group
that generate a dense subset of U(2). Thus it is a fact that local unitary transformations can be
”generated by braids”inmanyways.
We beginwiththestructureofSU(2). Amatrixin SU(2) hastheform
!
wherez and w are complexnumbers,and z¯denotes thecomplexconjugateofz. Tobein SU(2)
it is required that Det(M) = 1 and that M = M 1 where Det denotes determinant, and M is
theconjugatetransposeofM.Thusifz = a+biandw = c+diwherea,b,c,darerealnumbers,
and i2 = 1,then
!
witha2 +b2 +c2 +d2 = 1.Itis convenientto write
1 0 i 0 0 1 0 i
M = a +b +c +d ,
0 1 0 i 1 0 i 0
! ! ! !
and toabbreviatethisdecompositionas
M = a+bI +cJ +dK
1 0 i 0 0 1 0 i
1 ,I ,J ,K
≡ 0 1 ! ≡ 0 i ! ≡ 1 0 ! ≡ i 0 !
I2 = J2 = K2 = IJK = 1
IJ = K,JK = I,KI = J
JI = K,KJ = I,IK = J.
Thealgebraof1,I,J,K iscalledthequaternionsafterWilliamRowanHamiltonwhodiscovered
thisalgebrapriortothediscoveryofmatrixalgebra. Thustheunitquaternionsareidentifiedwith
SU(2) in this way. We shall use this identification, and some facts about the quaternions to find
theSU(2) representationsofbraiding. First werecall somefacts aboutthequaternions.
1. Note that if q = a + bI + cJ + dK (as above), then q = a bI cJ dK so that
qq = a2 +b2 +c2 +d2 = 1.
2. A general quaternion has the form q = a + bI + cJ + dK where the value of qq =
a2 +b2 +c2 +d2,is notfixed tounity. Thelengthofq isby definition qq .
3. AquaternionoftheformrI+sJ+tK forrealnumbersr,s,tissaidtobeapurequaternion.
We identify the set of pure quaternions with the vector space of triples (r,s,t) of real
numbersR3.
4. Thus a general quaternion has the form q = a + bu where u is a pure quaternion of unit
length and a and b are arbitrary real numbers. A unit quaternion (element of SU(2)) has
theadditionpropertythat a2 +b2 = 1.
5. Ifuisapureunitlengthquaternion,thenu2 = 1.Notethatthesetofpureunitquaternions
formsthetwo-dimensionalsphereS2 = (r,s,t) r2+s2 +t2 = 1 in R3.
6. Ifu,v are purequaternions,then
uv = u v +u v
whreu v isthedotproductofthevectorsuandv,andu v isthevectorcrossproductof
uand v. In fact, onecan takethedefinitionofquaternionmultiplicationas
and all theabovepropertiesare consequences ofthisdefinition. Notethat quaternion mul-
tiplicationisassociative.
7. Letg = a+bubeaunitlengthquaternionsothatu2 = 1anda = cos(θ/2),b = sin(θ/2)
for a chosen angle θ. Define φ : R3 R3 by the equation φ (P) = gPg , for P any
pointinR3,regardedasapurequaternion. Thenφ isanorientationpreservingrotationof
R3 (hencean element oftherotationgroupSO(3)). Specifically, φ isa rotationaboutthe
axisu bytheangleθ.Themapping
is a two-to-one surjective map from the special unitary group to the rotation group. In
quaternionic form, this result was proved by Hamilton and by Rodrigues in the middle of
thenineteethcentury. Thespecificformulaforφ (P)as shownbelow:
φ (P) = gPg 1 = (a2 b2)P +2ab(P u)+2(P u)b2u.
We want a representation ofthe three-strand braid group in SU(2). This means that wewant
a homomorphism ρ : B SU(2), and hence we want elements g = ρ(s ) and h = ρ(s ) in
SU(2)representingthebraidgroupgeneratorss ands .Sinces s s = s s s isthegenerating
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2
relation for B , the only requirement on g and h is that ghg = hgh. We rewrite this relation as
h 1gh = ghg 1,and analyzeitsmeaningin theunitquaternions.
Suppose that g = a + bu and h = c + dv where u and v are unit pure quaternions so that
a2 + b2 = 1 and c2 + d2 = 1. then ghg
1 = c + dφ
1gh = a + bφ h−1(u). Thus it
follows from the braiding relation that a = c, b = d, and that φ
(v) = φ h−1(u). However, in
thecasewherethereisaminussignwehaveg = a+buand h = a bv = a+b( v). Thuswe
can nowprovethefollowingTheorem.
Theorem. Let u and v be pure unit quaternions and g = a + bu and h = c + dv have unit
length. Then (without loss of generality), the braid relation ghg = hgh is true if and only if
h = a + bv, and φ
(v) = φ h−1(u). Furthermore, given that g = a + bu and h = a + bv, the
condition φ
(v) = φ h−1(u) is satisfied if and only if u
= v. If u = v then
g = handthebraid relationistriviallysatisfied.
Proof. We have provedthe first sentence ofthe Theorem in thediscussionprior to its statement.
Thereforeassumethatg = a+bu,h = a+bv,andφ
(v) = φ h−1(u).Wehavealreadystatedthe
formulaforφ (v) inthediscussionaboutquaternions:
φ (v) = gvg 1 = (a2 b2)v+2ab(v u)+2(v u)b2u.
By thesametoken, wehave
− ×− · − −
Hencewerequirethat
Thisequationisequivalentto
Ifu = v, thenthisimpliesthat
u v = − .
ThiscompletestheproofoftheTheorem. //
The Majorana FermionExample. Notethecaseofthetheoremwhere
g = a+bu,h = a+bv.
Supposethatu v = 0.Thenthetheoremtellsusthatweneeda2 b2 = 0andsincea2+b2 = 1,
we conclude that a = 1/√2 and b likewise. For definiteness, then we have for the braiding
generators (sinceI,J and K are mutuallyorthogonal)thethreeoperators
A = (1+I),
B = (1+J),
C = (1+K).
EachpairsatisfiesthebraidingrelationsothatABA = BAB,BCB = CBC,ACA = CAC.We
have already met this braiding triplet in our discussion of the construction of braiding operators
from Majorana fermions in Section 4. This shows (again) how close Hamilton’squaternions are
totopologyandhowbraidingis fundamentaltothestructureoffermionicphysics.
The Fibonacci Example. Let
g = eIθ = a+bI
wherea = cos(θ)and b = sin(θ).Let
where c2 + s2 = 1 and c2 s2 =
. Then we can rewrite g and h in matrix form as the
matricesGandH.InsteadofwritingtheexplicitformofH,wewriteH = FGF whereF isan
elementofSU(2) as shownbelow.
− !
!
This representation of braiding where one generator G is a simple matrix of phases, while the
other generator H = FGF is derived from G by conjugation by a unitary matrix, has the
possibilityforgeneralization to representations ofbraid groups(on greater than three strands)to
SU(n) or U(n) for n greater than 2. In fact we shall see just such representations constructed
later in this paper, by using a version oftopological quantumfield theory. The simplestexample
g = e7πI/10
where τ2 +τ = 1. Then g and h satisfy ghg = hgh and generate a representation of the three-
strand braid group that is dense in SU(2). We shall call this the Fibonacci representation of B
toSU(2).
Density. ConsiderrepresentationsofB intoSU(2)producedbythemethodofthissection. That
is consider the subgroup SU[G,H] of SU(2) generated by a pair of elements g,h such that
ghg = hgh.WewishtounderstandwhensucharepresentationwillbedenseinSU(2).Weneed
thefollowinglemma.
Lemma. eaIebJecI = cos(b)eI(a+c)+sin(b)eI(a c)J.HenceanyelementofSU(2)canbewritten
in the form eaIebJecI for appropriate choices of angles a,b,c. In fact, if u and v are linearly
independentunitvectorsinR3,thenany elementofSU(2) can bewrittenin theform
forappropriatechoicesofthereal numbersa,b,c.
Proof. See [66]forthedetailsofthisproof. //
ThisLemmacan beused toverifythedensityofarepresentation,by findingtwo elementsA
and B in the representation such that the powers of A are dense in the rotations about its axis,
and the powers of B are dense in the rotations about its axis, and such that the axes of A and B
are linearly independent in R3. Then by the Lemma the set of elements Aa+cBbAa c are dense
in SU(2). It follows for example, that the Fibonacci representation described above is dense in
SU(2), and indeed the generic representation of B into SU(2) will be dense in SU(2). Our
next task is to describe representations of the higher braid groups that will extend some of these
unitaryrepresentationsofthethree-strandbraid group. Forthisweneed moretopology.
11 The Bracket Polynomial and the Jones Polynomial
We now discuss the Jones polynomial. We shall construct the Jones polynomial by using the
bracketstatesummationmodel[32]. Thebracketpolynomial,invariantunderReidmeistermoves
IIandIII,canbenormalizedtogiveaninvariantofallthreeReidemeistermoves. Thisnormalized
invariant,withachangeofvariable,istheJonespolynomial[30, 31]. TheJonespolynomialwas
originallydiscoveredbya differentmethodthantheonegivenhere.
The bracket polynomial , < K >=< K > (A), assigns to each unoriented link diagram K
aLaurent polynomialinthevariableA, such that
1. IfK and K are regularlyisotopicdiagrams,then < K >=< K >.
2. IfK O denotesthedisjointunionofK withanextraunknottedandunlinkedcomponent
O (also called‘loop’or‘simpleclosed curve’or‘Jordancurve’), then
δ = A2 A 2.
3. < K > satisfiesthefollowingformulas
where the small diagrams represent parts of larger diagrams that are identical except at the site
indicated in the bracket. We take the convention that the letter chi, χ, denotes a crossing where
thecurved lineis crossingover thestraightsegment. The barred letterdenotes the switchof this
crossing,wherethecurvedlineisundercrossingthestraightsegment. SeeFigure31foragraphic
illustrationofthisrelation,andanindicationoftheconventionforchoosingthelabelsAandA 1
at agivencrossing.
It is easy to see that Properties 2 and 3 define the calculation of the bracket on arbitrary link
diagrams. Thechoices of coefficients (A and A 1) and the valueofδ make thebracket invariant
under the Reidemeister moves II and III. Thus Property 1 is a consequence of the other two
properties.
In computingthebracket, onefindsthefollowingbehaviourunderReidemeistermoveI:
Figure31: Bracket Smoothings
Figure32: CrossingSigns and Curls
whereγ denotesacurlofpositivetypeasindicatedinFigure32,andγ indicatesacurlofnegative
type, as also seen in this figure. The type of a curl is the sign of the crossing when we orient it
locally. Our convention of signs is also given in Figure 32. Note that the type of a curl does not
depend on the orientation we choose. The small arcs on the right hand side of these formulas
indicatetheremovalofthecurl fromthecorrespondingdiagram.
The bracket is invariant under regular isotopy and can be normalized to an invariant of ambient
isotopyby thedefinition
where we chose an orientation for K, and where w(K) is the sum of the crossing signs of the
oriented link K. w(K) is called the writhe of K. The convention for crossing signs is shown in
Figure32.
Oneusefulconsequenceoftheseformulasisthefollowingswitchingformula
Figure33: Trefoil andTwo Relatives
Note that in these conventions the A-smoothing of χ is , while the A-smoothing of χ is )(.
Properlyinterpreted,theswitchingformulaabovesaysthatyoucanswitchacrossingandsmooth
it either way and obtain a three diagram relation. This is useful since some computations will
simplify quite quickly with the proper choices of switching and smoothing. Remember that it is
necessary to keep track of thediagrams upto regularisotopy(theequivalencerelation generated
by thesecond and thirdReidemeistermoves). Here isan example. ViewFigure33.
Figure 33 shows a trefoil diagram K, an unknot diagram U and another unknot diagram U .
Applyingtheswitchingformula, wehave
A 1 < K > A < U >= (A 2 A2) < U >
and < U >= A3 and < U >= ( A 3)2 = A 6.Thus
A 1 < K > A( A3) = (A 2 A2)A 6.
A 1 < K >= A4 +A 8 A 4.
< K >= A5 A 3 +A 7.
Thisisthebracket polynomialofthetrefoil diagramK.
Sincethetrefoildiagram K haswrithew(K) = 3,wehavethenormalizedpolynomial
f (A) = ( A3) 3 < K >= A 9( A5 A 3 +A 7) = A 4 +A 12 A 16.
Thebracket modelfortheJonespolynomialis quiteusefulboththeoreticallyand in termsof
practical computations. One of the neatest applications is to simply compute, as we have done,
f (A) forthetrefoilknotK anddeterminethatf (A)isnotequaltof (A 1) = f (A).This
shows that the trefoil is not ambient isotopic to its mirror image, a fact that is much harder to
provebyclassical methods.
TheStateSummation. Inordertoobtainaclosedformulaforthebracket,wenowdescribeitas
astatesummation. LetK beanyunoriented linkdiagram. Define astate,S, ofK tobe achoice
of smoothingfor each crossing ofK. There are two choices for smoothinga givencrossing, and
thusthereare2N statesofadiagramwithN crossings. InastatewelabeleachsmoothingwithA
or A 1 according to the left-right convention discussed in Property 3 (see Figure 31). The label
is called a vertex weight of thestate. There are two evaluationsrelated to a state. The first one is
theproductofthevertexweights,denoted
< K S > .
Thesecondevaluationis thenumberofloopsin thestateS, denoted
S .
Define thestatesummation,< K >,by theformula
< K >= < K S > δ S 1.
It followsfrom thisdefinitionthat < K > satisfiestheequations
< O >= 1.
The first equation expresses the fact that the entire set of states of a given diagram is the union,
withrespecttoagivencrossing,ofthosestateswithanA-typesmoothingandthosewithanA 1-
type smoothing at that crossing. The second and the third equation are clear from the formula
defining the state summation. Hence this state summation produces the bracket polynomial as
wehavedescribedit atthebeginningofthesection.
Remark. ByachangeofvariablesoneobtainstheoriginalJonespolynomial,V (t),fororiented
knotsand linksfrom thenormalized bracket:
(t −4).
Remark. The bracket polynomial provides a connection between knot theory and physics, in
thatthestatesummationexpressionforitexhibitsitasageneralizedpartitionfunctiondefinedon
the knot diagram. Partition functions are ubiquitousin statistical mechanics, where they express
the summation over all states of the physical system of probability weighting functions for the
individual states. Such physical partition functions contain large amounts of information about
thecorrespondingphysicalsystem. Some ofthisinformationisdirectly present in theproperties
ofthe function,such as thelocationof critical pointsand phase transition. Some oftheinforma-
tion can be obtained by differentiating the partition function, or performing other mathematical
operationsonit.
There is much more in this connection with statistical mechanics in that the local weights
in a partition function are often expressed in terms of solutions to a matrix equation called
the Yang-Baxter equation, that turns out to fit perfectly invariance under the third Reidemeis-
ter move. As a result, there are many ways to define partition functions of knot diagrams that
give rise to invariants of knots and links. The subject is intertwined with the algebraic structure
of Hopf algebras and quantum groups, useful for producing systematic solutions to the Yang-
Baxter equation. In fact Hopf algebras are deeply connected with the problem of constructing
invariants of three-dimensional manifolds in relation to invariants of knots. We have chosen, in
this survey paper, to not discuss the details of these approaches, but rather to proceed to Vas-
siliev invariants and the relationships with Witten’s functional integral. The reader is referred to
[32, 33, 34, 41, 44, 45, 6, 30, 31, 46, 91, 92, 102, 103] for more information about relationships
of knot theory with statistical mechanics, Hopf algebras and quantum groups. For topology, the
keypointisthat Liealgebras can beused toconstructinvariantsofknotsandlinks.
11.1 Quantum Computation of the Jones Polynomial
Can the invariants of knots and links such as the Jones polynomial be configured as quantum
computers? This is an important question because the algorithms to compute the Jones polyno-
mialareknowntobeNP-hard,and socorrespondingquantumalgorithmsmayshedlightonthe
relationshipofthislevelofcomputationalcomplexitywithquantumcomputing(See [23]). Such
models can be formulated in terms of the Yang-Baxter equation [32, 33, 45, 68, 69]. The next
paragraph explainshowthiscomesabout.
In Figure 34, we indicate how topological braiding plus maxima (caps) and minima (cups)
can be used to configure the diagram of a knot or link. This also can be translated into algebra
by the association of a Yang-Baxter matrix R (not necessarily the R of the previous sections) to
each crossing and other matrices to the maximaand minima. There are models of very effective
invariants of knots and links such as the Jones polynomial that can be put into this form [?].
In this way of looking at things, the knot diagram can be viewed as a picture, with time as the
verticaldimension,ofparticlesarisingfromthevacuum,interacting(inatwo-dimensionalspace)
andfinallyannihilatingoneanother. Theinvarianttakestheformofanamplitudeforthisprocess
that is computed through the association of the Yang-Baxter solution R as the scattering matrix
atthecrossingsandtheminimaandmaximaascreationandannihilationoperators. Thuswecan
writetheamplitudeintheform
Z = CUP M CAP
where CUP denotes the composition of cups, M is the composition of elementary braiding
matrices, and CAP is the composition of caps. We regard CUP as the preparation of this
state, and CAP as the measurement of this state. In order to view Z as a quantum compu-
tation, M must be a unitary operator. This is the case when the R-matrices (the solutions to the
Yang-Baxter equation used in the model) are unitary. Each R-matrix is viewed as a a quantum
gate(orpossiblyacompositionofquantumgates),andthevacuum-vacuumdiagramfortheknot
<CAP| (measurement)
M (unitary braiding)
|CUP> (preparation)
Z K = <CAP| M |CUP>
Figure34: A KnotQuantum Computer
isinterpretedasaquantumcomputer. Thisquantumcomputerwillprobabilistically(viaquantum
amplitudes)computethevaluesofthestatesinthestatesumforZ .
Weshouldremark,however,thatitisnotnecessarythattheinvariantbemodeledviasolutions
to the Yang-Baxter equation. One can use unitary representations of the braid group that are
constructed in other ways. In fact, the presently successful quantum algorithms for computing
knot invariants indeed use such representations of the braid group, and we shall see this below.
Nevertheless,itisusefultopointoutthisanalogybetweenthestructureoftheknotinvariantsand
quantumcomputation.
QuantumalgorithmsforcomputingtheJonespolynomialhavebeendiscussedelsewhere. See
[68, 65, 1, 69, 2, 108]. Here, as an example, we give a local unitary representation that can be
usedtocomputetheJonespolynomialforclosuresof3-braids. Weanalyzethisrepresentationby
makingexplicithowthebracket polynomialis computedfrom it, and showinghowthequantum
computationdevolvesto findingthetrace ofaunitarytransformation.
The idea behind the construction of this representation depends upon the algebra generated
by two single qubit density matrices (ket-bras). Let v and w be two qubits in V, a complex
vector space of dimension two over the complex numbers. Let P = v v and Q = w w be
thecorrespondingket-bras. Notethat
P2 = v 2P,
Q2 = w 2Q,
PQP = v w 2P,
QPQ = v w 2Q.
P and Q generate a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra (See Section 12 of the present
paper). Onecanadjustparameterstomakearepresentationofthethree-strandbraidgroupinthe
where I is the identity mapping on V and r,s,t,u are suitably chosen scalars. In the following
we use this method to adjust such a representation so that it is unitary. Note also that this is a
local unitary representation ofB to U(2). Weleave it as an exersisefor thereader to verify that
it fits into our general classification of such representations as given in section 10 of the present
paper.
Here isaspecific representationdependingontwo symmetricmatrices U and U with
U = = d w w
1 " 0 0 # | ih |
d 1 √1 d 2
U = − − − = d v v
2 " √1 d − 2 d d − 1 # | ih |
where w = (1,0), and v = (d 1,√1 d 2), assuming the entries of v are real. Note that
U2 = dU and U2 = dU . Moreover, U U U = U and U U U = U . This is an example of
1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 2 1
a specific representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra [32, 68]. The desired representation of
theArtin braid group is givenon thetwo braid generators forthethree strand braid group by the
equations:
Φ(s ) = AI +A 1U ,
Φ(s ) = AI +A 1U .
HereI denotes the2 2identitymatrix.
For any A with d = A2 A 2 theseformulas define a representation of the braid group. With
A = eiθ, we have d = 2cos(2θ). We find a specific range of angles θ in the following disjoint
unionofangularintervals
thatgiveunitaryrepresentationsofthethree-strandbraidgroup. Thusaspecializationofamore
generalrepresentionofthebraidgroupgivesrisetoacontinuousfamilyofunitaryrepresentations
ofthebraidgroup.
Lemma. Note that the traces of these matrices are given by the formulas tr(U ) = tr(U ) = d
whiletr(U U ) = tr(U U ) = 1.Ifbisanybraid,letI(b)denotethesumoftheexponentsinthe
braid wordthat expressesb. Forbathree-strand braid, itfollowsthat
whereI isthe2 2identitymatrixandΠ(b) isasumofproductsintheTemperley-Liebalgebra
involvingU and U .
WeomittheproofofthisLemma. Itisacalculation. Toseeit,consideranexample. Suppose
thatb = s s 1s .Then
1 −2 1 1 −2 1
(AI +A 1U )(A 1I +AU )(AI +A 1U ).
− 1 − 2 − 1
The sum of products over the generators U and U of the Temperley–Lieb algebra comes from
expandingthisexpression.
SincetheTemperley-LiebalgebrainthisdimensionisgeneratedbyI,U ,U ,U U andU U ,
1 2 1 2 2 1
it follows that the value of the bracket polynomial of the closure of the braid b, denoted < b >,
can be calculated directly from the trace of this representation, except for the part involving the
identitymatrix. Theresultis theequation
where b denotes the standard braid closure of b, and the sharp brackets denote the bracket poly-
nomial. Fromthisweseeat oncethat
Itfollowsfromthiscalculationthatthequestionofcomputingthebracketpolynomialforthe
closure of the three-strand braid b is mathematically equivalent to the problem of computing the
traceoftheunitarymatrixΦ(b).
The HadamardTest
Inorderto(quantum)computethetraceofaunitarymatrixU,onecanusetheHadamardtest
to obtain the diagonal matrix elements ψ U ψ of U. The trace is then the sum of these matrix
elementsas ψ runs overan orthonormalbasisforthevectorspace. We first obtain
+ Re ψ U ψ
2 2 h | | i
as an expectationbyapplyingtheHadamard gateH
H 0 = ( 0 + 1 )
| i √2 | i | i
H 1 = ( 0 1 )
tothefirst qubitof
C (H 1) 0 ψ = ( 0 ψ + 1 U ψ .
Here C denotes controlled U, acting as U when the control bit is 1 and the identity mapping
whenthecontrolbitis 0 .Wemeasuretheexpectationforthefirstqubit 0 oftheresultingstate
Thisexpectationis
2 h | h | | i | i 2 2 h | | i
Theimaginarypart isobtainedbyapplyingthesameprocedure to
( 0 ψ i 1 U ψ
This is the method used in [1], and the reader may wish to contemplate its efficiency in the
context of this simple model. Note that the Hadamard test enables this quantum computation
to estimate the trace of any unitary matrix U by repeated trials that estimate individual matrix
entries ψ U ψ .We shallreturn to quantumalgorithmsfor theJones polynomialand otherknot
polynomialsinasubsequentpaper.
12 Quantum Topology, Cobordism Categories, Temperley-Lieb
Algebra and Topological Quantum Field Theory
Thepurposeofthissectionistodiscussthegeneralideabehindtopologicalquantumfieldtheory,
and to illustrateits applicationto basicquantummechanics and quantummechanical formalism.
Itisusefulinthisregardtohaveavailabletheconceptofcategory,andweshallbeginthesection
by discussingthisfar-reaching mathematicalconcept.
Definition. AcategoryCat consistsin tworelated collections:
1. Obj(Cat), theobjectsofCat, and
2. Morph(Cat), themorphismsofCat.
satisfyingthefollowingaxioms:
1. Each morphism f is associated to two objects of Cat, the domain of f and the codomain
off. LettingAdenotethedomainoff and B denotethecodomainoff, it iscustomaryto
denotethemorphismf bythearrow notationf : A B.
2. Given f : A B and g : B C where A, B and C are objects of Cat, then there
existsan associated morphismg f : A C called thecompositionoff and g.
3. To each object A of Cat there is a unique identity morphism 1 : A A such that
1 f = f foranymorphismf withcodomainA,andg 1 = g foranymorphismg with
domainA.
4. Giventhree morphismsf : A B, g : B C and h : C D, then compositionis
associative. Thatis
(h g) f = h (g f).
If Cat and Cat are two categories, then a functor F : Cat Cat consists in functions
F : Obj(Cat ) Obj(Cat ) and F : Morph(Cat ) Morph(Cat ) such that identity
O 1 2 M 1 2
morphismsand compositionofmorphismsare preserved under thesemappings. That is (writing
justF for F and F ),
1. F(1 ) = 1 ,
2. F(f : A B) = F(f) : F(A) F(B),
AfunctorF : Cat Cat isastructurepreservingmappingfromonecategorytoanother.
It is often convenient to think of the image of the functor F as an interpretation of the first
category in terms of the second. We shall use this terminology below and sometimes refer to an
interpretationwithoutspecifyingall thedetailsofthefunctorthat describesit.
The notionof category is a broad mathematical concept, encompassing manyfields of math-
ematics. Thus one has the category of sets where the objects are sets (collections) and the mor-
phismsaremappingsbetweensets. Onehasthecategoryoftopologicalspaceswheretheobjects
are spaces and the morphismsare continuousmappings of topologicalspaces. One has thecate-
gory of groups where the objects are groups and the morphisms are homomorphismsof groups.
Functorsarestructurepreservingmappingsfromonecategorytoanother. Forexample,thefunda-
mentalgroupisafunctorfromthecategoryoftopologicalspaceswithbasepoint,tothecategory
ofgroups. Inalltheexamplesmentionedsofar, themorphismsinthecategoryarerestrictionsof
mappings in the category of sets, but this is not necessarily the case. For example, any group G
canberegardedasacategory,Cat(G), withoneobject .Themorphismsfrom toitselfarethe
elements of the group and composition is group multiplication. In this example, the object has
no internalstructureand all thecomplexityofthecategoryisin themorphisms.
The Artin braid group B can be regarded as a category whose single object is an ordered
row of points [n] = 1,2,3,...,n . The morphisms are the braids themselves and composition
is the multiplicationof the braids. A given ordered row of points is interpreted as the starting or
ending row of points at the bottom or the top of the braid. In the case of the braid category, the
morphismshave both external and internal structure. Each morphismproduces a permutation of
the ordered row of points (corresponding to the begiinning and ending points of the individual
braidstrands),andweavingofthebraidisextrastructurebeyondtheobjectthatisitsdomainand
codomain. Finally, for this example, we can take all the braid groups B (n a positive integer)
under the wing of a single category, Cat(B), whose objects are all ordered rows of points [n],
and whose morphisms are of the form b : [n] [n] where b is a braid in B . The reader
may wish to have morphisms between objects with different n. We will have this shortly in the
Temperley-Liebcategoryand inthecategoryoftangles.
Then-CobordismCategory,Cob[n],hasasitsobjectssmoothmanifoldsofdimensionn,and
as its morphisms, smooth manifolds Mn+1 of dimension n+1 with a partition of the boundary,
∂Mn+1, into two collections of n-manifolds that we denote by L(Mn+1) and R(Mn+1). We
regardMn+1 as amorphismfrom L(Mn+1) toR(Mn+1)
As we shall see, these cobordism categories are highly significant for quantum mechanics, and
the simplest one, Cob[0] is directly related to the Dirac notation of bras and kets and to the
Temperley-Lieb algebara. We shall concentrate in this section on these cobordism categories,
and theirrelationshipswithquantummechanics.
One can choose to consider either oriented or non-oriented manifolds, and within unoriented
manifolds there are those that are orientable and those that are not orientable. In this section we
will implicitly discuss only orientable manifolds, but we shall not specify an orientation. In the
next section, with the standard definition of topologicalquantum field theory, themanifolds will
be oriented. The definitions of the cobordism categories for oriented manifolds go over mutatis
mutandis.
Lets begin with Cob[0]. Zero dimensional manifolds are just collections of points. The sim-
plestzerodimensionalmanifoldisasinglepointp. Wetakeptobeanobjectofthiscategoryand
also ,where denotestheemptymanifold(i.e. theemptysetinthecategoryofmanifolds). The
object occurs inCob[n] forevery n, sinceitis possiblethat eithertheleft set ortheright set of
amorphismisempty. AlinesegmentS withboundarypointspand q isamorphismfromptoq.
See Figure35. In thisfigurewehaveillustratedthemorphismfrom p top. Thesimplestconven-
tionforthiscategoryistotakethismorphismtobetheidentity. Thusifwelookatthesubcategory
of Cob[0] whose only object is p, then the only morphism is the identity morphism. Two points
occur as the boundary of an interval. The reader will note that Cob[0] and the usual arrow no-
tation for morphisms are very closely related. This is a place where notation and mathematical
structure share common elements. In general the objects of Cob[0] consist in the empty object
and non-emptyrowsofpoints,symbolizedby
p p p p.
Figure35: Elementary Cobordisms
Figure35 alsocontainsamorphism
and themorphism
p p.
Thefirstrepresentsacobordismoftwopointstotheemptyset(viatheboundingcurvedinterval).
Thesecondrepresents acobordismfromtheemptyset totwopoints.
In Figure 36, we have indicated more morphisms in Cob[0], and we have named the mor-
phismsjustdiscussedas
| i ⊗ −→ ∗
Θ : p p.
h | ∗ −→ ⊗
The point to notice is that the usual conventions for handling Dirac bra-kets are essentially the
sameas thecompostionrules inthistopologicalcategory. Thusin Figure36wehavethat
represents a cobordism from the empty manifold to itself. This cobordism is topologically a
circle and, in the Dirac formalism is interpreted as a scalar. In order to interpret the notion
of scalar we would have to map the cobordism category to the category of vector spaces and
linearmappings. We shalldiscussthisafter describingthesimilaritieswithquantummechanical
formalism. Nevertheless, the reader should note that if V is a vector space over the complex
numbers , then a linear mapping from to is determined by the image of 1, and hence is
characterized by the scalar that is the image of 1. In this sense a mapping can be
regarded as a possible image in vector spaces of the abstract structure Θ Ω : . It is
therefore assumed that in Cob[0] the compositionwith the morphism Θ Ω commutes with any
other morphism. In that way Θ Ω behaves like a scalar in the cobordism category. In general,
an n+1 manifold without boundary behaves as a scalar in Cob[n], and if a manifold Mn+1 can
bewrittenas aunionoftwosubmanifoldsLn+1 and Rn+1 sothatthat an n-manifoldWn istheir
commonboundary:
Mn+1 = Ln+1 Rn+1
Figure36: Bras, KetsandProjectors
Ln+1 Rn+1 = Wn
then,wecan write
Mn+1 = Ln+1 Rn+1 = Ln+1 Rn+1 ,
h i h ∪ i h | i
and Mn+1 willbeascalar(morphismthatcommuteswithallothermorphisms)inthecategory
Cob[n].
GettingbacktothecontentsofFigure36,notehowthezerodimensionalcobordismcategory
has structuralparallelsto theDirac ket–braformalism
| ih | ih | h | i| ih | h | i
In the cobordism category, the bra–ket and ket–bra formalism is seen as patterns of connection
oftheone-manifoldsthatrealize thecobordisms.
NowviewFigure37. ThisFigureillustratesamorphismS inCob[0]thatrequirestwocrossed
line segmentsfor its planar representation. Thus S can be regarded as a non-trivial permutation,
andS2 = I whereI denotestheidentitymorphismsforatwo-pointrow. Fromthisexample,itis
clearthatCob[0]containsthestructureofallthesyymmetricgroupsandmore. Infact,ifwetake
the subcateogry of Cob[0] consistingof all morphismsfrom [n] to [n] for a fixed positiveinteger
n, then this gives the well-known Brauer algebra (see [9]) extending the symmetric group by
allowing any connections among the points in the two rows. In this sense, one could call Cob[0]
theBrauercategory. Weshallreturn tothispointofviewlater.
SU = US = U
Figure37: Permutations
Figure38: Projectors inTensor Lines and Elementary Topology
In this section, we shall be concentrating on the part of Cob[0] that does not involve permu-
tations. This part can be characterized by those morphisms that can be represented by planar
diagramswithoutcrosssingsbetweenanyofthelinesegments(theone-manifolds). Weshallcall
this crossingless subcategory of Cob[0] the Temperley-Lieb Category and denote it by CatTL.
In CatTL we have the subcategory TL[n] whose only objects are the row of n points and the
emptyobject ,andwhosemorphismscanallberepresentedbyconfigurationsthatembedinthe
plane as in the morphisms P and Q in Figure 38. Note that with the empty object , the mor-
phism whose diagram is a single loop appears in TL[n] and is taken to commute with all other
morphisms.
TheTemperley-LiebAlgebra,AlgTL[n]isgeneratedbythemorphismsinTL[n]thatgofrom
[n] to itself. Up to multiplicationby the loop, the product (composition)of two such morphisms
isanotherflatmorphismfrom[n]toitself. Foralgebraicpurposestheloop istakentobe
ascalaralgebraicvariableδ thatcommuteswithall elementsinthealgebra. Thustheequation
UU = Θ Ω U.
inthealgebra. Inthealgebraweareallowedtoaddmorphismsformallyandthisadditionistaken
to be commutative. Initially the algebra is taken with coefficients in the integers, but a different
commutative ring of coefficients can be chosen and the value of the loop may be taken in this
ring. For example, for quantum mechanical applications it is natural to work over the complex
numbers. The multiplicativestructureof AlgTL[n] can be described by generators and relations
asfollows: LetI denotetheidentitymorphismfrom[n]to[n].LetU denotethemorphismfrom
[n] to[n] that connectsk withk fork < iand k > i+1 from onerow to theother, and connects
i to i + 1 in each row. Then the algebra AlgTL[n] is generated by I ,U ,U , ,U with
U U = U U : i j > 1.
TheserelationsareillustratedforthreestrandsinFigure38. Weleavethecommutingrelationfor
the reader to draw in thecase where n is four or greater. For a proof that these are indeed all the
relations,see[57].
Figure 38 and Figure 39 indicate how the zero dimensional cobordism category contains
structure that goes well beyond the usual Dirac formalism. By tensoring theket–bra on one side
or another by identity morphisms, we obtain the beginnings of the Temperley-Lieb algebra and
the Temperley-Lieb category. Thus Figure 39 illustrates the morphisms P and Q obtained by
such tensoring,and therelationPQP = P which isthesameasU U U = U
Note the composition at the bottom of the Figure 39. Here we see a composition of the
identity tensored with a ket, followed by a bra tensored with the identity. The diagrammatic for
this association involves “straightening” the curved structure of the morphism to a straight line.
InFigure40wehaveelaboratedthissituationevenfurther,pointingoutthatinthiscategoryeach
of the morphisms Θ and Ω can be seen, by straightening, as mappings from the generating
object to itself. We have denoted these corresponding morphisms by Θ and Ω respectively. In
thisway thereisacorrespondencebetween morphismsp p and morphimsp p.
InFigure40wehaveillustratedthegeneralizationofthestraighteningprocedureofFigure39.
InFigure39thestraighteningoccursbecausetheconnectionstructureinthemorphismofCob[0]
does not depend on the wandering of curves in diagrams for the morphisms in that category.
Nevertheless,onecanenvisageamorecomplexinterpretationofthemorphismswhereeachone-
manifold (line segment) has a label, and a multiplicity of morphisms can correspond to a single
line segment. This is exactly what we expect in interpretations. For example, we can interpret
thelinesegment[1] [1] as a mappingfrom avectorspaceV to itself. Then [1] [1] isthe
diagrammaticabstraction for V V, and thereare manyinstances of linearmappingsfrom V
toV.
At the vector space level there is a duality between mappings V V and linear maps
V V. Specifically,let
beabasisforV. ThenΘ : V V is determinedby
(wherewehaveusedtheEinsteinsummationconventionontherepeatedindexj)correspondsto
h | ⊗ −→ C
defined by
Θ ij = Θ .
Given Θ : V V ,weassociateΘ : V V inthisway.
Comparing with the diagrammatic for the category Cob[0], we say that Θ : V V is
obtainedby straighteningthemapping
Θ : V V .
h | ⊗ −→ C
Note that in this interpretation, the bras and kets are defined relative to the tensor product of V
withitselfand [2] is interpretedas V V. If weinterpret [2] as asinglevectorspace W,then the
usualformalismsofbras and ketsstillpassoverfrom thecobordismcategory.
Figure39: The BasicTemperley-Lieb Relation
Figure40: The Keyto Teleportation
Figure40illustratesthestaighteningof Θ and Ω ,andthestraighteningofacompositionof
theseappliedto ψ ,resultingin φ .Intheleft-handpartofthebottomofFigure40weillustrate
the preparation of the tensor product Θ ψ followed by a successful measurement by Ω
in the second two tensor factors. The resulting single qubit state, as seen by straightening, is
From this, we see that it is possibleto reversibly,indeed unitarily, transform a state ψ via a
combinationofpreparationandmeasurementjustsolongasthestraighteningsofthepreparation
and measurement (Θ and Ω) are each invertible (unitary). This is the key to teleportation [56,
15, 16]. In the standard teleportation procedure one chooses the preparation Θ to be (up to
normalization) the 2 dimensional identity matrix so that θ = 00 + 11 . If the successful
| i | i | i
measurement Ω is also theidentity,then thetransmitted state φ will be equal to ψ .In general
wewillhave φ = Ω ψ .Onecanthenchooseabasisofmeasurements Ω ,eachcorresponding
| i | i | i
to a unitarytransformationΩ so that therecipient of thetransmissioncan rotatetheresult by the
inverseofΩtoreconsitute ψ ifheisgiventherequisiteinformation. Thisisthebasicdesignof
theteleportationprocedure.
There is much more to say about the category Cob[0] and its relationship with quantum me-
chanics. We will stop here, and invite the reader to explore further. Later in this paper, we shall
usetheseideas in formulatingourrepresentationsofthebraid group. Fornow,wepointouthow
things look as we move upward to Cob[n] for n > 0. In Figure ?? we show typical cobordisms
(morphisms) in Cob[1] from two circles to one circle and from one circle to two circles. These
areoftencalled“pairsofpants”. Theircompositionisasurfaceofgenusoneseenasamorphism
from two circles to two circles. The bottom of the figure indicates a ket-bra in this dimension
in the form of a mapping from one circle to one circle as a composition of a cobordism of a
circle to the empty set and a cobordism from the empty set to a circle (circles bounding disks).
As we go to higher dimensions the structure of cobordisms becomes more interesting and more
complicated. It is remarkable that there is so much structure in the lowest dimensions of these
categories.
13 Braiding and Topological Quantum Field Theory
The purpose of this section is to discuss in a very general way how braiding is related to topo-
logicalquantumfieldtheory. Inthesectiontofollow,wewillusetheTemperley-Liebrecoupling
theoryto producespecficunitaryrepresentationsoftheArtinbraid group.
Theideasinthesubjectoftopologicalquantumfieldtheory(TQFT)arewellexpressedinthe
book[5]by MichaelAtiyahand thepaper[106] byEdward Witten. Hereis Atiyah’sdefinition:
Definition. A TQFT in dimension d is a functor Z(Σ) from the cobordism category Cob[d] to
thecategoryVectofvectorspaces and linearmappingswhichassigns
Figure41: Corbordisms of1-ManifoldsareSurfaces
1. a finite dimensionalvector space Z(Σ) to each compact, oriented d-dimensionalmanifold
2. a vector Z(Y) Z(Σ) for each compact, oriented (d + 1)-dimensional manifold Y with
boundaryΣ.
3. a linear mappingZ(Y) : Z(Σ ) Z(Σ ) when Y is a (d+1)-manifoldthat is a cobor-
dismbetweenΣ and Σ (whencetheboundaryofY istheunionofΣ and Σ .
Thefunctorsatisfies thefollowingaxioms.
1. Z(Σ ) = Z(Σ) whereΣ denotesthemanifoldΣwiththeoppositeorientationandZ(Σ)
isthedualvectorspace.
2. Z(Σ Σ ) = Z(Σ ) Z(Σ )where denotesdisjointunion.
3. IfY isacobordismfromΣ toΣ ,Y isacobordismfromΣ toΣ andY isthecomposite
1 1 2 2 2 3
cobordismY = Y Y ,then
isthecompositeofthecorrespondinglinearmappings.
4. Z(φ) = ( denotesthecomplexnumbers)fortheemptymanifoldφ.
5. With Σ I (where I denotes the unit interval)denoting the identity cobordism from Σ to
Σ, Z(Σ I) istheidentitymappingon Z(Σ).
Note that, in this view a TQFT is basically a functor from the cobordism categories defined
in the last section to Vector Spaces over the complex numbers. We have already seen that in the
lowest dimensional case of cobordisms of zero-dimensional manifolds, this gives rise to a rich
structure related to quatum mechanics and quantum information theory. The remarkable fact is
thatthecase ofthree-dimensionsisalsorelated toquantumtheory,and tothelower-dimensional
versions of the TQFT. This gives a significant way to think about three-manifold invariants in
termsoflowerdimensionalpatterns ofinteraction. Herefollowsabriefdescription.
Regardthethree-manifoldasaunionoftwohandlebodieswithboundaryanorientablesurface
S of genus g. The surface is divided up into trinions as illustrated in Figure 42. A trinion is a
surface with boundary that is topologically equivalent to a sphere with three punctures. The
trinion constitutes, in itself a cobordism in Cob[1] from two circles to a single circle, or from
a single circle to two circles, or from three circles to the empty set. The pattern of a trinion
is a trivalent graphical vertex, as illustrated in Figure 42. In that figure we show the trivalent
vertex graphical pattern drawn on the surface of the trinion, forming a graphical pattern for this
combordism. ItshouldbeclearfromthisfigurethatanycobordisminCob[1]canbediagrammed
by a trivalent graph, so that the category of trivalent graphs (as morphisms from ordered sets of
points to ordered sets of points) has an image in the category of cobordisms of compact one-
dimensionalmanifolds. Givena surfaceS (possiblywithboundary)and adecompositionof that
surface into triions, we associate to it a trivalent graph G(S,t) where t denotes the particular
triniondecomposition.
In this correspondence, distinct graphs can correspond to topologicallyidentical cobordisms
ofcircles,asillustratedinFigure44. Itturnsoutthatthegraphicalstructureisimportant,andthat
itisextraordinarilyusefultoarticulatetransformationsbetweenthegraphsthatcorrespondtothe
homeomorphisms of the corresponding surfaces. The beginning of this structure is indicated in
thebottompart ofFigure44.
In Figure 45 we illustrate another feature of the relationship betweem surfaces and graphs.
At the top of the figure we indicate a homeomorphism between a twisted trinion and a standard
trinion. The homeomorphism leaves the ends of the trinion (denoted A,B and C) fixed while
undoing the internal twist. This can be accomplished as an ambient isotopy of the embeddings
in three dimensional space that are indicated by this figure. Below this isotopy we indicate the
corresponding graphs. In the graph category there will have to be a transformation between a
braided andan unbraided trivalentvertexthatcorrespondsto thishomeomorphism.
Fromthepointofviewthatweshalltakeinthispaper,thekeytothemathematicalstructureof
three-dimensional TQFT lies in the trivalent graphs, including the braiding of grapical arcs. We
can thinkofthesebraidedgraphs as representingidealized Feynmandiagrams,withthetrivalent
Figure 42: Decompositionofa Surface into Trinions
a b e f V( )
Figure43: TrivalentVectors
Figure44: Trinion Associativity
Figure45: Tube Twist
vertex as the basic particle interaction vertex, and the braiding of lines representing an interac-
tion resulting from an exchange of particles. In this view one thinks of the particles as moving
in a two-dimensional medium, and the diagrams of braiding and trivalent vertex interactions as
indications of the temporal events in the system, with timeindicated in the direction of the mor-
phismsin the category. Adding such graphs to the category of knotsand links is an extensionof
thetanglecategorywhereonehasalreadyextendedbraidstoallowanyembeddingofstrandsand
circles that start in n ordered points and end in m ordered points. The tangle category includes
the braid category and the Temperley-Lieb category. These are both included in the category of
braided trivalentgraphs.
Thinkingofthebasictrivalentvertexastheformofaparticleinteractiontherewillbeasetof
particlestatesthatcanlabeleacharcincidenttothevertex. InFigure??weillustratethelabeling
of the trivalent graphs by such particle states. In the next two sections we will see specific rules
for labeling such states. Here it suffices to note that there will be some restrictions on these
labels, so that a trivalent vertex has a set of possible labelings. Similarly, any trivalent graph
will have a set of admissible labelings. These are the possible particle processes that this graph
can support. We take the set of admissible labelings of a given graph G as a basis for a vector
space V(G) over the complex numbers. This vector space is the space of processes associated
with the graph G. Given a surface S and a decompositiont of the surface into trinions, we have
the associated graph G(S,t) and hence a vector space of processes V(G(S,t)). It is desirable
to have this vector space independent of the particular decomposition into trinions. If this can
be accomplished, then the set of vector spaces and linear mappings associated to the surfaces
can consitute a functor from the category of cobordisms of one-manifolds to vector spaces, and
hencegivesrisetoaone-dimensionaltopologicalquantumfieldtheory. Tothisendweneedsome
propertiesoftheparticleinteractionsthat willbedescribedbelow.
A spin network is, by definition a lableled trivalentgraph in a category of graphs that satisfy
Figure46: Creationand Fusion
thepropertiesoutlinedin thepreviousparagraph. Weshalldetail therequirementsbelow.
ThesimplestcaseofthisideaisC.N.Yang’soriginalinterpretationoftheYang-Baxterequa-
tion[109]. Yangarticulatedaquantumfieldtheoryinonedimensionofspaceandonedimension
of timein which the R-matrix giving the scattering ampitudes for an interaction of two particles
whose(letussay)spinscorrespondedtothematrixindicessothatRcd istheamplitudeforparti-
clesofspinaandspinbtointeractandproduceparticlesofspincandd.Sincetheseinteractions
are between particles in a line, onetakes the conventionthat theparticlewith spin ais to theleft
of the particle with spin b, and the particle with spin c is to the left of the particle with spin d. If
one follows the concatenation of such interactions, then there is an underlying permutation that
is obtained by following strands from the bottom to the top of the diagram (thinking of time as
movingupthepage). YangdesignedtheYang-BaxterequationforRsothattheamplitudesfora
compositeprocess depend only on the underlyingpermutationcorresponding to the process and
noton theindividualsequences of interactions.
In takingovertheYang-Baxter equationfortopologicalpurposes,wecan usethesameinter-
pretation, but think of the diagrams with their under- and over-crossingsas modeling eventsin a
spacetimewithtwodimensionsofspaceandonedimensionoftime. Theextraspatialdimension
is taken in displacing thewoven strands perpendicularto thepage, and allows us to use braiding
operators R andR 1 as scatteringmatrices. Taking thispictureto heart, onecan add otherparti-
clepropertiestotheidealizedtheory. Inparticularonecanaddfusionandcreationverticeswhere
in fusion two particles interact to become a single particle and in creation one particle changes
(decays) into two particles. These are the trivalent vertices discussed above. Matrix elements
correspondingtotrivalentvertices can represent theseinteractions. See Figure46.
Onceoneintroducestrivalentverticesforfusionandcreation,thereisthequestionhowthese
interactionswillbehaveinrespecttothebraidingoperators. Therewillbeamatrixexpressionfor
thecompositionsofbraidingandfusionorcreationasindicatedinFigure25. Herewewillrestrict
ourselves to showing the diagrammatics with the intent of giving the reader a flavor of these
structures. It is natural to assume that braiding intertwines with creation as shown in Figure 49
Figure47: YangBaxter Equation
Figure48: Braiding
(similarly with fusion). This intertwining identity is clearly the sort of thing that a topologist
will love, since it indicates that the diagrams can be interpreted as embeddings of graphs in
three-dimensional space, and it fits with our interpretation of the vertices in terms of trinions.
Figure 47 illustrates the Yang-Baxter equation. The intertwining identity is an assumption like
theYang-Baxterequationitself,that simplifiesthemathematicalstructureofthemodel.
It is to be expected that there will be an operator that expresses the recoupling of vertex
interactions as shownin Figure 50 and labeled by Q. This corresponds to the associativityat the
level oftrinion combinationsshownin Figure 44. The actual formalism of such an operator will
parallel the mathematicsofrecoupling for angularmomentum. See for example[34]. If onejust
considerstheabstractstructureofrecouplingthenoneseesthatfortreeswithfourbranches(each
with a single root) there is a cycle of length five as shown in Figure 51. One can start with any
pattern of three vertex interactions and go through a sequence of five recouplings that bring one
back to the same tree from which one started. It is a natural simplifying axiom to assume that
thiscompositionistheidentitymapping. Thisaxiomiscalled thepentagonidentity.
Figure 49: Intertwining
Figure50: Recoupling
Figure51: PentagonIdentity
Figure52: HexagonIdentity
Finally there is a hexagonal cycle of interactions between braiding, recoupling and the inter-
twiningidentityasshowninFigure52. Onesaysthattheinteractionssatisfythehexagonidentity
ifthiscompositionis theidentity.
Remark. It is worth pointing out how these identities are related to the braiding. The hexagon
identitytellsus that
R 1FRF 1RF = I
whereI istheidentitymappingon theprocess spacefortrees withthreebranches. Letting
B = F 1RF,
weseethat thehexagonidentityis equivalenttothestatement
B = R 1F 1R.
ABA = R(R 1F 1R)R = F 1R2 = (F 1RF)F 1R = (R 1F 1R)F 1R
= (R 1F 1R)R(R 1F 1R) = BAB.
Thusthehexagonrelationinthiscontext,impliesthatAand B satisfythebraidingrelation. The
combination of the hexagon and pentagon relations ensures that the braid group representations
that are generated are well-defined and fit together as we include smaller numbers of strands in
largernumbersofstrands. We omitthefurtherdetailsoftheverification ofthisstatement.
A graphicalthree-dimensionaltopologicalquantum field theory is an algebra of interactions
that satisfies the Yang-Baxter equation, the intertwining identity, the pentagon identity and the
hexagonidentity. Thereisnotroominthissummarytodetailthewaythatthesepropertiesfitinto
the topology of knots and three-dimensional manifolds, but a sketch is in order. For the case of
topologicalquantumfieldtheoryrelatedtothegroupSU(2)thereisaconstructionbasedentirely
on the combinatorial topology of the bracket polynomial (See Sections 11 to 18 of this paper.).
See [45,34]formoreinformationon thisapproach.
Now return to Figure 42 where we illustrate trinions, shown in relation to a trivalent vertex,
and a surface of genus three that is decomposed into four trinions. It turns out that the vector
space V(S ) = V(G(S ,t)) to a surface with a trinion decompositionas t described above, and
defined in terms of the graphical topological quantum field theory, does not depend upon the
choice of trinion decomposition. This independence is guaranteed by the braiding, hexagon and
pentagonidentities. Onecanthenassociateawell-definedvector M inV(S )whenenverM isa
threemanifoldwhoseboundaryisS .Furthermore,ifaclosedthree-manifoldM3 isdecomposed
along a surface S into the union of M and M where these parts are otherwise disjoint three-
manifolds with boundary S , then the inner product I(M) = M M is, up to normalization,
aninvariantofthethree-manifoldM .Withthedefinitionofgraphicaltopologicalquantumfield
theory given above, knots and links can be incorporated as well, so that one obtains a source of
invariants I(M3,K) of knots and links in orientable three-manifolds. Here we see the uses of
the relationships that occur in the higher dimensional cobordism categories, as descirbed in the
previoussection.
TheinvariantI(M3,K) can beformallycompared withtheWitten[106]integral
It can beshownthat upto limitsoftheheuristics,Z(M,K) andI(M3,K) areessentiallyequiv-
alent forappropriatechoiceofgaugegroup andcorrespondingspinnetworks.
Bythesegraphicalreformulations,athree-dimensionalTQFT is,atbase,ahighlysimplified
theory of point particle interactions in 2+1 dimensional spacetime. It can be used to articulate
invariants of knots and links and invariants of three manifolds. The reader interested in the
SU(2) case of this structure and its implications for invariants of knots and three manifolds can
consult [34, 45, 79, 14, 87]. One expects that physical situations involving 2 + 1 spacetime
will be approximated by such an idealized theory. There are also applications to 3+1 quantum
gravity [?, 3, 58]. Aspects of the quantum Hall effect may be related to topological quantum
field theory [105]. One can study a physics in two dimensional space where the braiding of
particles or collective excitations leads to non-trival representations of the Artin braid group.
Such particles are called Anyons. Such TQFT models would describe applicable physics. One
can thinkaboutapplicationsofanyonstoquantumcomputingalongthelinesofthetopoological
modelsdescribedhere.
Figure53: A MoreComplex Braiding Operator
A key point in the application of TQFT to quantum information theory is contained in the
structure illustrated in Figure 53. There we show a more complex braiding operator, based on
the composition of recoupling with the elementary braiding at a vertex. (This structure is im-
plicit in the Hexagon identity of Figure 52.) The new braiding operator is a source of unitary
representations of braid group in situations (which exist mathematically) where the recoupling
transformations are themselves unitary. This kind of pattern is utilized in the work of Freedman
and collaborators [21, 22, 23, 24, 25] and in the case of classical angular momentum formalism
hasbeendubbeda“spin-networkquantumsimlator”byRasettiandcollaborators[82,83]. Inthe
next section we show how certain natural deformations [34] of Penrose spin networks [89] can
be used to produce these unitary representations of the Artin braid group and the corresponding
modelsforanyonictopologicalquantumcomputation.
14 Spin Networks and Temperley-Lieb Recoupling Theory
In this section we discuss a combinatorial construction for spin networks that generalizes the
originalconstructionofRogerPenrose. Theresultofthisgeneralizationisastructurethatsatisfies
all the properties of a graphical TQFT as described in the previous section, and specializes to
classicalangularmomentumrecouplingtheoryinthelimitofitsbasicvariable. Theconstruction
is based on the properties of the bracket polynomial (as already described in Section 11). A
completedescriptionofthistheorycanbefoundinthebook“Temperley-LiebRecouplingTheory
and InvariantsofThree-Manifolds”byKauffman andLins[34].
The “q-deformed” spin networks that we construct here are based on the bracket polynomial
relation. ViewFigure54 and Figure55.
= A + A -1
...
Figure54: BasicProjectors
n 1 1 n 1 1
= -D /D n n+1 n
D -1 = 0 D 0 = 1
D = d D -D
Figure55: TwoStrand Projector
Figure56: Vertex
In Figure 54 we indicate how the basic projector (symmetrizer, Jones-Wenzl projector) is
constructed on the basis of the bracket polynomial expansion. In this technology a symmetrizer
isasumoftanglesonnstrands(for achosenintegern). Thetanglesaremadebysummingover
braid lifts of permutations in the symmetric group on n letters, as indicated in Figure 54. Each
elementary braid is then expanded by the bracket polynomial relation as indicated in Figure 54
so that the resulting sum consists of flat tangles without any crossings (these can be viewed as
elementsintheTemperley-Liebalgebra). Theprojectorshavethepropertythattheconcatenation
of a projector with itself is just that projector, and if you tie two lines on the top or the bottom
of a projector together, then the evaluation is zero. This general definition of projectors is very
useful for this theory. The two-strand projector is shown in Figure 55. Here the formula for that
projector is particularly simple. It is the sum of two parallel arcs and two turn-around arcs (with
coefficient 1/d, with d = A2 A 2 is the loop value for the bracket polynomial. Figure 55
alsoshowstherecursionformulaforthegeneralprojector. ThisrecursionformulaisduetoJones
andWenzlandtheprojectorinthisform,developedasasumintheTemperley–Liebalgebra(see
Section 12ofthispaper), is usuallyknownas theJones–Wenzlprojector.
The projectors are combinatorial analogs of irreducible representations of a group (the orig-
inal spin nets were based on SU(2) and these deformed nets are based on the corresponding
quantum group to SU(2)). As such the reader can think of them as “particles”. The interactions
oftheseparticlesaregovernedbyhowtheycanbetiedtogetherintothree-vertices. SeeFigure56.
InFigure56weshowhowtotiethreeprojectors,ofa,b,cstrandsrespectively,togethertoforma
three-vertex. Inordertoaccomplishthisinteraction,wemustsharelinesbetweenthemasshown
inthatfiguresothattherearenon-negativeintegersi,j,k sothata = i+j,b = j +k,c = i+k.
This is equivalent to the condition that a + b + c is even and that the sum of any two of a,b,c
is greater than or equal to the third. For example a + b c. One can think of the vertex as a
possibleparticle interaction where [a] and [b] interact to produce [c]. That is, any two of the legs
a = a = D a
c d a = Q( ,a ,c )d
c d = Q( ,a ,c )d d a
Figure57: OrthogonalityofTrivalentVertices
ofthevertexcan beregardedas interactingtoproducethethirdleg.
There is a basic orthogonality of three vertices as shown in Figure 57. Here if we tie two
three-verticestogethersothattheyforma“bubble”inthemiddle,thentheresultingnetworkwith
labelsaand bonitsfreeends isamultipleofana-line(meaningalinewithan a-projectoronit)
orzero (ifais notequal tob). Themultipleis compatiblewith theresultsofclosingthediagram
in the equation of Figure 57 so the two free ends are identified with one another. On closure, as
shown in the figure, the left hand side of the equation becomes a Theta graph and the right hand
side becomes a multipleof a “delta” where ∆ denotes the bracket polynomialevaluationof the
a-strandloopwithaprojectoronit. TheΘ(a,b,c)denotesthebracketevaluationofathetagraph
madefromthreetrivalentvertices andlabeled witha,b,c onits edges.
There is a recoupling formula in this theory in the form shown in Figure 58. Here there are
“6-j symbols”, recoupling coefficients that can be expressed, as shown in Figure 58, in terms
of tetrahedral graph evaluations and theta graph evaluations. The tetrahedral graph is shown
in Figure 59. One derives the formulas for these coefficients directly from the orthogonality
relations for the trivalent vertices by closing the left hand side of the recoupling formula and
using orthogonality to evaluate the right hand side. This is illustrated in Figure 60. The reader
shouldbeadvisedthat thereare specificcalculationalformulas forthethetaand tetrahedral nets.
These can be found in [34]. Here we are indicating only the relationships and external logic of
theseobjects.
Finally,thereisthebraidingrelation,as illustratedin Figure36.
Figure58: Recoupling Formula
Figure59: Tetrahedron Network
= a b i Q( ,a ,b )j Q( ,c ,d )j D d k
c d j D D j j
Q( ,a ,b )k Q( ,c ,d )k
{ a b i } = Tet [a c b d k i ] D k
c d k Q( ,a ,b )k Q( ,c ,d )k
Figure60: Tetrahedron FormulaforRecoupling Coefficients
Figure61: Local Braiding Formula
Withthebraidingrelationinplace,thisq-deformedspinnetworktheorysatisfiesthepentagon,
hexagon and braiding naturality identities needed for a topological quantum field theory. All
theseidentitiesfollownaturallyfromthebasicunderlyingtopologicalconstructionofthebracket
polynomial. Onecan applythetheoryto manydifferent situations.
14.1 Evaluations
In this section we discuss the structure of the evaluations for ∆ and the theta and tetrahedral
networks. We refer to [34] for the details behind these formulas. Recall that ∆ is the bracket
evaluation of the closure of the n-strand projector, as illustrated in Figure 57. For the bracket
variableA, onefinds that
A2n+2 A 2n 2
Onesometimeswritesthequantuminteger
− − n − 1 A2 A − 2
A = eiπ/2r
wherer isapositiveinteger,then
− sin(π/r)
Herethecorrespondingquantumintegeris
[n] = .
Notethat[n+1] is apositivereal numberforn = 0,1,2,...r 2 and that[r 1] = 0.
Theevaluationofthethetanet isexpressedin termsofquantumintegersby theformula
a = m+p,b = m+n,c = n+p.
When A = eiπ/2r, the recoupling theory becomes finite with the restriction that only three-
vertices(labeledwitha,b,c)are admissiblewhen a+b+c 2r 4.Allthesummationsinthe
formulasforrecouplingare restrictedto admissibletriplesofthisform.
14.2 Symmetry and Unitarity
TheformulafortherecouplingcoefficientsgiveninFigure60haslesssymmetrythanisactually
inherent inthestructureofthesituation. By multiplyingall theverticesby an appropriatefactor,
we can reconfigure the formulas in this theory so that the revised recoupling transformation is
orthogonal, in the sense that its transpose is equal to its inverse. This is a very useful fact. It
means that when the resulting matrices are real, then the recoupling transformations are unitary.
Weshallseeparticularapplicationsofthisviewpointlaterin thepaper.
Figure62illustratesthismodificationofthethree-vertex. LetVert[a,b,c]denotetheoriginal
3-vertex of the Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory. Let ModVert[a,b,c] denote the modified
vertex. Thenwehavetheformula
ModVert[a,b,c] = Vert[a,b,c].
Lemma. Forthebracket evaluationat theroot ofunityA = eiπ/2r thefactor
f(a,b,c) =
isreal,andcanbetakentobeapositiverealnumberfor(a,b,c)admissible(i.e. a+b+c 2r 4).
Proof. By theresultsfrom theprevioussubsection,
whereΘˆ(a,b,c) ispositivereal, and
where the quantum integers in this formula can be taken to be positivereal. It follows from this
f(a,b,c) = v ,
showingthatthisfactorcan betakento bepositivereal. //
In Figure 63 we show how this modification of the vertex affects the non-zero term of the
orthogonality of trivalent vertices (compare with Figure 57). We refer to this as the “modified
bubbleidentity.”Thecoefficient inthemodifiedbubbleidentityis
s ∆ a − v u [a+1]
where(a,b,c)form anadmissibletriple. Inparticularb+c aisevenand hencethisfactorcan
betaken tobereal.
We rewrite the recoupling formula in this new basis and emphasize that the recoupling co-
efficients can be seen (for fixed external labels a,b,c,d) as a matrix transforming the horizontal
“double-Y”basis to averticallydisposeddouble-Y basis. In Figure64, Figure 65 and Figure66
wehaveshowntheformofthistransformation,usingthematrixnotation
M[a,b,c,d]
for the modified recoupling coefficients. In Figure 64 we derive an explicit formula for these
matrix elements. The proof of this formula follows directly from trivalent–vertex orthogonality
(See Figure 57 and Figure 60.), and is given in Figure 64. The result shown in Figure 64 and
Figure65 isthefollowingformulafortherecouplingmatrixelements.
M[a,b,c,d] = ModTet / ∆ ∆ ∆ ∆
ij c d j a b c d
!
where√∆ ∆ ∆ ∆ isshort-handfortheproduct
s ∆ j s ∆ j
In this form, since (a,b,j) and (c,d,j) are admissible triples, we see that this coeffient can be
taken to be real, and its value is independent of the choice of i and j. The matrix M[a,b,c,d] is
real-valued.
c Q( , , )
Figure62: Modified Three Vertex
= Q( ,a ,b )c
b c = D a D D b c b c
Q( ,a ,b )c
Figure63: Modified Bubble Identity
It followsfrom Figure58(turn thediagrams byninetydegrees)that
M[a,b,c,d] 1 = M[b,d,a,c].
In Figure67we illustratetheformula
M[a,b,c,d]T = M[b,d,a,c].
It followsfrom thisformulathat
M[a,b,c,d]T = M[a,b,c,d] 1.
HenceM[a,b,c,d] isan orthogonal,real-valued matrix.
i j = a b k j
= a b D aD b D cD d D d k
c d ik D j D j j j
= a b D aD b D cD d D
c d ij D j D j j
a b [a b i ]
a b = i j = ModTet c d j
c d ij c d
D a D D b D c d
D aD b D cD d D
Figure64: DerivationofModified Recoupling Coefficients
Figure65: Modified Recoupling Formula
c d ij c d
M[a,b,c,d] =
Figure66: Modified Recoupling Matrix
D D D D D D D D
a b c d a b c d
= a b = a b
Figure67: Modified Matrix Transpose
Theorem. In the Temperley-Lieb theory we obtain unitary (in fact real orthogonal) recoupling
transformations when the bracket variable A has the form A = eiπ/2r for r a positive integer.
Thus we obtain families of unitary representations of the Artin braid group from the recoupling
theoryat theserootsofunity.
Proof. Theproofisgiventhediscussionabove. //
In Section 16 we shall show explictly how these methods work in the case of the Fibonacci
modelwhereA = e3iπ/5.
15 Fibonacci Particles
In this section and the next we detail how the Fibonacci model for anyonic quantum computing
[78, 90] can be constructed by using a version of the two-stranded bracket polynomial and a
generalization of Penrose spin networks. This is a fragment of the Temperly-Lieb recoupling
theory [34]. We already gavein thepreceding sectionsa general discussionof thetheory ofspin
networksand theirrelationshipwithquantumcomputing.
The Fibonacci model is a TQFT that is based on a single “particle” with two states that we
shall call the marked state and the unmarked state. The particle in the marked state can interact
with itself either to produce a single particle in the marked state, or to produce a single particle
in the unmarked state. The particle in the unmarked state has no influence in interactions (an
unmarked state interacting with any state S yields that state S). One way to indicate these two
interactionssymbolicallyistouseabox,forthemarkedstateandablankspacefortheunmarked
state. Then onehas twomodesofinteractionofaboxwithitself:
Figure68: Fibonacci ParticleInteraction
1. Adjacency:
2. Nesting: .
With this convention we take the adjacency interaction to yield a single box, and the nesting
interactiontoproducenothing:
We take the notational opportunity to denote nothing by an asterisk (*). The syntatical rules for
operatingtheasteriskare Thustheasterisk isastand-inforno markat all andit can beerased or
placed whereverit isconvenienttodo so. Thus
= .
We shall make a recoupling theory based on this particle, but it is worth noting some of its
purely combinatorial properties first. The arithmetic of combining boxes (standing for acts of
distinction)accordingtotheseruleshasbeenstudiedandformalizedin[100]andcorrelatedwith
Boolean algebra and classical logic. Here within and next to are ways to refer to the two sides
delineated by the given distinction. From this point of view, there are two modes of relationship
(adjacency and nesting)thatariseat onceinthepresenceofadistinction.
From here on we shall denote the Fibonacii particle by the letter P. Thus the two possible
interactionsofP withitselfare as follows.
dim(V ) = 1
P P P P P P P
dim(V ) = 2
Figure69: Fibonacci Trees
In Figure 69 we indicate in small tree diagrams the two possible interactions of the particle P
with itself. In the first interaction the particle vanishes, producing the asterix. In the second
interactiontheparticleasinglecopyofP isproduced. Thesearethetwobasicactionsofasingle
distinctionrelativeto itself,and theyconstituteourformalismforthisveryelementary particle.
InFigure69,wehaveindicatedthedifferentresultsofparticleprocesseswherewebeginwith
aleft-associatedtreestructurewiththreebranches,allmarkedandthenfourbranchesallmarked.
In each case we demand that the particles interact successively to produce an unmarked particle
in the end, at the root of the tree. More generally one can consider a left-associated tree with n
upward branches and one root. Let T(a ,a , ,a : b) denote such a tree with particle labels
a , ,a onthetopandrootlabelbatthebottomofthetree. Weconsiderallpossibleprocesses
(sequences of particle interactions) that start with the labels at the top of the tree, and end with
thelabelsatthebottomofthetree. Eachsuchsequenceisregardedasabasisvectorinacomplex
vectorspace
associated with the tree. In the case where all the labels are marked at the top and the bottom
label isunmarked,weshalldenotethistreeby
V111 11 = V (n)
where n denotes the number of upward branches in the tree. We see from Figure 69 that the
dimensionofV (3) is1,and that
dim(V ) = 2.
Thismeansthat V (4) isanatural candidatein thiscontextforthetwo-qubitspace.
P P P* * P
PPP PP* P* P * PP * P*
Tree of squences with no occurence of **
Figure70: Fibonacci Sequence
Given the tree T(1,1,1, ,1 : 0) (n marked states at the top, an unmarked state at the
bottom), a process basis vector in V (n) is in direct correspondence with a string of boxes and
asterisks (1’s and 0’s) of length n 2 with no repeated asterisks and ending in a marked state.
See Figure69foran illustrationofthesimplestcases. Itfollowsfromthisthat
dim(V ) = f
wheref denotesthek-th Fibonaccinumber:
f = 1,f = 1,f = 2,f = 3,f = 5,f = 8,
0 1 2 3 4 5
f = f +f .
The dimension formula for these spaces follows from the fact that there are f sequences of
lengthn 1ofmarkedandunmarkedstateswithnorepetitionofanunmarkedstate. Thisfact is
illustratedin Figure70.
16 The Fibonacci Recoupling Model
WenowshowhowtomakeamodelforrecouplingtheFibonacciparticlebyusingtheTemperley
Liebrecouplingtheoryandthebracketpolynomial. Everythingwedointhissectionwillbebased
on the 2-projector, its properties and evaluations based on the bracket polynomial model for the
Jones polynomial. While we have outlined the general recoupling theory based on the bracket
polynomial in earlier sections of this paper, the present section is self-contained, using only
Figure71: The 2-Projector
basic information about the bracket polyonmial, and the essential properties of the 2-projector
as shown in Figure 71. In this figure we state the definition of the 2-projector, list its two main
properties(theoperatorisidempotentandaself-attachedstrandyieldsazeroevaluation)andgive
diagrammaticproofsoftheseproperties.
InFigure72,weshowtheessenceoftheTemperley-LiebrecouplingmodelfortheFibonacci
particle. TheFibonaccieparticleis,inthismathematicalmodel,identifiedwiththe2-projectorit-
self. AsthereadercanseefromFigure72,therearetwobasicinteractionsofthe2-projectorwith
itself, one giving a 2-projector, the other giving nothing. This is the pattern of self-iteraction of
theFibonacci particle. There is athird possibility,depicted in Figure 72, where two 2-projectors
interact to producea 4-projector. Wecould remark at theoutset,that the4-projectorwillbe zero
if we choose the bracket polynomialvariable A = e3π/5. Rather than start there, we will assume
thatthe4-projectorisforbiddenanddeduce(below)thatthetheoryhastobeatthisrootofunity.
NotethatinFigure72wehaveadoptedasinglestrandnotationfortheparticleinteractions,with
a solid strand corresponding to the marked particle, a dotted strand (or nothing) corresponding
to the unmarked particle. A dark vertex indicates either an interaction point, or it may be used
to indicate the single strand is shorthand for two ordinary strands. Remember that these are all
shorthandexpressionsforunderlyingbracket polynomialcalculations.
In Figure 73, Figure 74, Figure 75, Figure 76, Figure 77 and Figure 78 we have provided
complete diagrammatic calculations of all of the relevant small nets and evaluations that are
useful in the two-strand theory that is being used here. The reader may wish to skip directly to
Figure 79 where we determine the form of the recoupling coefficients for this theory. We will
discusstheresultingalgebrabelow.
For the reader who does not want to skip the next collection of figures, here is a guided tour.
Figure 73 illustrates three three basic nets in case of two strands. These are the theta, delta and
Figure72: Fibonacci Particleas2-Projector
tetrahedron nets. In this figure we have shown the decomposition on the theta and delta nets
in terms of 2-projectors. The Tetrahedron net will be similarly decomposed in Figure 77 and
Figure78. Thethetanetis denotedΘ,thedeltaby∆, and thetetrahedron by T.In Figure74 we
illustrate how a pedant loop has a zero evaluation. In Figure 75 we use the identity in Figure 74
to show how an interiorloop (formed by two trivalentvertices) can be removed and replaced by
a factor of Θ/∆. Note how, in this figure, line two proves that one network is a multiple of the
other, whilelinethreedeterminesthevalueofthemultiplebyclosingbothnets.
Figure 76 illustrates the explicit calculation of the delta and theta nets. The figure begins with a
calculation of the result of closing a single strand of the 2-projector. The result is a single stand
multipliedby (δ 1/δ) where δ = A2 A 2,and A is thebracket polynomialparameter. We
thenfind that
Figure 77 and Figure 78 illustrate the calculation of the value of the tetrahedral network T. The
reader should notethe first lineof Figure 77 where thetetradedral net is translated into a pattern
of 2-projectors, and simplified. The rest of these two figures are a diagrammatic calculation,
using the expansion formula for the 2-projector. At the end of Figure 78 we obtain the formula
forthetetrahedron
Figure73: Theta, Delta and Tetrahedron
Figure74: LoopEvaluation–1
= = = Q D/
= x +y = x = x
Figure75: LoopEvaluation–2
Figure76: CalculateTheta, Delta
Figure77: CalculateTetrahedron – 1
Figure78: CalculateTetrahedron – 2
= a a = 1/D
Q = b Q /D
= b b= D/Q
= c c = Q/D 2
= d d = T D/Q 2
Figure79: Recoupling for2-Projectors
Figure 79 is the key calculation for this model. In this figure we assume that the recoupling
formulasinvolveonly0and2strands,with0correspondingtothenullparticleand2correspond-
ingtothe2-projector. (2+2 = 4isforbiddenasinFigure72.) Fromthisassumptionwecalculate
thattherecouplingmatrixisgivenby
! !
Figure 80 and Figure 81 work out the exact formulas for the braiding at a three-vertex in this
theory. When the 3-vertex has three marked lines, then the braiding operator is multiplication
by A4, as in Figure 58. When the 3-vertex has two marked lines, then the braiding operator is
multiplicationby A8,as showninFigure81.
Notice that it follows from the symmetry of the diagrammatic recoupling formulas of Figure 79
thatthesquareof therecouplingmatrixF isequal totheidentity. Thatis,
! ! !
.
!
Thusweneed therelation
= A -1 = =
A -1 = -A 3 = -A 4
Figure80: Braiding atthe Three-Vertex
= A 8 ( - 1/d ) = A 2
Figure81: Braiding atthe Null-Three-Vertex
Thisisequivalentto sayingthat
aquadraticequationwhosesolutionsare
Furthermore, weknowthat
from Figure76. Hence
Weshallnowspecializetothecasewhere
leavingtheothercases fortheexplorationofthereader. Wethen take
A = e3πi/5
Notethatδ 1/δ = 1.Thus
T = Θ2/∆2,
from whichitfollowsimmediatelythat
F2 = I.
Thisprovesthatwecan satisfythismodelwhen ∆ = δ = (1+√5)/2.
Forthisspecializationwesee thatthematrixF becomes
! ! !
This version of F has square equal to the identity independent of the value of Θ, so long as
∆2 = ∆+1.
The Final Adjustment. Our last version of F suffers from a lack of symmetry. It is not a
symmetric matrix, and hence not unitary. A final adjustment of the model gives this desired
symmetry. Consider theresult ofreplacing each trivalentvertex (with three2-projectorstrands)
by a multiple by a given quantity α. Since the Θ has two vertices, it will be multiplied by α2.
Similarly, the tetradhedron T will be multiplied by α4. The ∆ and the δ will be unchanged.
Other properties of the model will remain unchanged. The new recoupling matrix, after such an
adjustmentis made,becomes
α2Θ/∆2 1/∆
!
Forsymmetrywerequire
Withthischoiceofα we have
HencethenewsymmetricF isgivenby theequation
where ∆ is thegolden ratio and τ = 1/∆. This givestheFibonacci model. UsingFigure 80 and
Figure 81, we have that the local braiding matrix for the model is given by the formula below
withA = e3πi/5.
A4 0 e4πi/5 0
R = − = .
0 A8 0 e2πi/5
! !
The simplest example of a braid group representation arising from this theory is the repre-
sentation of the three strand braid group generated by S = R and S = FRF (Remember that
F = FT = F 1.). The matrices S and S are both unitary, and they generate a dense subset
of the unitary group U(2), supplying the first part of the transformations needed for quantum
computing.
17 Quantum Computation of Colored Jones Polynomials and
the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev Invariant
In this section we make some brief comments on the quantum computation of colored Jones
polynomials. Thismaterial willbeexpandedinasubsequentpublication.
= = B(x,y) x y
= = B(x,y) x y
0 0 = B(0,0) 0 0
a = 0 if b =0
Figure82: Evaluationofthe PlatClosureofa Braid
First, consider Figure 82. In that figure we illustrate the calculation of the evalutation of the
(a) - colored bracket polynomial for the plat closure P(B) of a braid B. The reader can infer
thedefinitionoftheplatclosurefromFigure82. Onetakesabraidon anevennumberofstrands
and closes the top strands with each other in a row of maxima. Similarly, the bottom strands are
closed with a row of minima. It is not hard to see that any knot or link can be represented as the
plat closure of some braid. Note that in this figure we indicate the action of the braid group on
theprocessspaces correspondingto thesmalltrees attached belowthebraids.
The (a) - colored bracket polynonmial of a link L, denoted < L > , is the evaluation of
that link where each single strand has been replaced by a parallel strands and the insertion of
Jones-Wenzl projector (as discussed in Section 14). We then see that we can use our discussion
ofthe Temperley-Liebrecouplingtheory as insections 14,15and 16 to computethevalueofthe
colored bracket polynomialfor theplat closurePB.As shownin Figure 82, we regard thebraid
asactingonaprocessspaceV
,a andtakethecaseoftheactiononthevectorv whoseprocess
spacecoordinatesare allzero. Thentheactionofthebraid takestheform
Bv(0, ,0) = Σ B(x , ,x )v(x , ,x )
whereB(x , ,x )denotesthematrixentriesforthisrecouplingtransformationandv(x , ,x )
runs overa basis for thespace V 0 a,a, ··· ,a. Here n is even and equal to thenumberof braid strands.
In the figure we illustrate with n = 4. Then, as the figure shows, when we close the top of the
braid action to form PB, we cut the sum down to the evaluationof just one term. In the general
casewewillget
Figure83: Dubrovnik PolynomialSpecializationatTwo Strands
The calculation simplifies to this degree because of the vanishing of loops in the recoupling
graphs. ThevanishingresultisstatedinFigure82,anditisprovedinthecasea = 2inFigure74.
The colored Jones polynomialsare normalized versionsof the colored bracket polymomials,
differingjustbya normalizationfactor.
In order to consider quantumn computation of the colored bracket or colored Jones polyno-
mials, we therefore can consider quantum computation of the matrix entries B(0, ,0). These
matrixentriesinthecaseoftherootsofunityA = eiπ/2r andforthea = 2Fibonaccimodelwith
A = e3iπ/5 arepartsofthediagonalentriesoftheunitarytransformationthatrepresentsthebraid
group on the process space V 0 a,a, ··· ,a. We can obtain these matrix entries by using the Hadamard
test as described in section 11. As a result we get relatively efficient quantum algorithms for
the colored Jones polynonmials at these roots of unity, in essentially the same framework as we
described in section 11, but for braids of arbitrary size. The computational complexity of these
models is essentially the same as the models for the Jones polynomial discussed in [1]. We
reservediscussionoftheseissuestoasubsequentpublication.
Itisworthremarkingherethatthesealgorithmsgivenotonlyquantumalgorithmsforcomput-
ing the colored bracket and Jones polynomials, but also for computing the Witten-Reshetikhin-
Turaev (WRT) invariants at the above roots of unity. The reason for this is that the WRT
invariant,inunnormalizedformis givenas afinitesumofcoloredbracket polynomials:
and so the same computation as shown in Figure 82 applies to the WRT. This means that we
have, in principle, a quantum algorithm for the computation of the Witten functional integral
[106]viathisknot-theoreticcombinatorialtopology. Itwouldbeveryinterestingtounderstanda
moredirectapproach to suchacomputationviaquantumfield theoryand functionalintegration.
Figure84: The Fibonacci ParticleP
Finally, we note that in the case of the Fibonacci model, the (2)-colored bracket polynomial
is a special case of the Dubrovnik version of the Kauffman polynomial [42]. See Figure 83 for
diagammatics that resolve this fact. The skein relation for the Dubrovnik polynomial is boxed
in this figure. Above the box, we show how the double strands with projectors reproduce this
relation. This observation means that in the Fibonacci model, the natural underlying knot poly-
nomialisaspecialevaluationoftheDubrovnikpolynomial,andtheFibonaccimodelcanbeused
toperform quantumcomputationforthevaluesofthisinvariant.
18 A Direct Construction of the Fibonacci Model
In section 10 of this paper, we give elementary constructions for unitary representations of the
three strand braid group in U(2). In section 11 we show how to use unitary representations of
the three strand brand group to devise a quantum computation for the Jones polynomial. In this
section we return to these considerations, and show how to construct the Fibonacci model by
elementary means, without using the recoupling theory that we have explained in the previous
sectionsofthepaper. Thisfinalapproachissignificantinthatitshowsanevencloserrelationship
oftheFibonaccimodelwiththeTemperleyLiebalgebrarepresentationassociatedwiththeJones
polynomial.
The constructions in this section are based on the combinatorics of the Fibonacci model.
Whilewedonotassumetherecouplingtheoryoftheprevioussections,weessentiallyreconstruct
itspatternsfortheparticularpurposesoftheFibonaccimodel. RecallthatintheFibonaccimodel
wehavea(mathematical)particleP thatinteracts withitselfeitherto produceP orto producea
neutral particle . If X is any particle then interacts with X to produce X. Thus acts as an
identitytrasformation. TheserulesofinteractionareillustratedinFigure68,Figure69,Figure70
and Figure84.
The braiding of two particles is measured in relation to their interaction. In Figure 85 we
illustrate braiding of P with itself in relation to the two possible interactions of P with itself. If
Figure85: Local Braiding
P interacts to produce , then the braiding gives a phase factor of µ. If P interacts to produce
P, then the braiding gives a phase factor of λ. We assume at the outset that µ and λ are unit
complexnumbers. Oneshouldvisualizetheseparticlesasmovinginaplaneandthediagramsof
interaction are either creations of two particles from one particle, or fusions of two particles to a
single particle (depending on the choice of temporal direction). Thus we have a braiding matrix
forthese“local”particleinteractions:
!
writtenwithrespect to thebasis , P forthisspaceofparticleinteractions.
We want to make this braiding matrix part of a larger representation of the braid group. In
particular,wewantarepresentationofthethree-strandbraidgroupontheprocessspaceV illus-
trated in Figure 6. This space starts with three P particles and considers processes associated in
thepatttern(PP)P withthestipulationthattheendproductisP. Thepossiblepathwaysareillus-
tratedinFigure86. Theycorrespondto(PP)P ( )P P and(PP)P (P)P P.
Thisprocessspacehasdimensiontwoandcansupportasecondbraidinggeneratorforthesecond
two strands on the top of the tree. In order to articulate the second braiding we change basis to
theprocess space corresponding to P(PP)as shown in Figure 87 and Figure 88. Thechange of
basis is shown in Figure 88 and has matrix F as shown below. We want a unitary representation
ρofthree-strandbraidssothatρ(σ ) = Randρ(σ ) = S = F 1RF.SeeFigure88. Wetakethe
form ofthematrixF as follows.
!
wherea2+b2 = 1withaandbreal. Thisformofthematrixforthebasischangeisdeterminedby
therequirement thatF is symmetricwith F2 = I. Thesymmetryofthechangeofbasis formula
essentially demands that F2 = I. If F is real, symmetric and F2 = I, then F is unitary. Since
R is unitary we see that S = FRF is also unitary. Thus, if F is constructed in this way then we
obtainaunitaryrepresentation ofB .
Figure86: Three Strands atDimensionTwo
P P P P P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P
P b * + -a P
Figure87: Recoupling Formula
NowwetrytosimultaneouslyconstructanF andconstructarepresentationoftheTemperley-
Lieb algebra. Webeginbynotingthat
µ 0 λ 0 µ λ 0 λ 0 δ 0
0 λ 0 λ 0 0 0 λ 0 0
! ! ! ! !
where δ = λ(µ λ). Thus R = λI + λ 1U where U = so that U2 = δU. For
− − 0 0 !
the Temperley-Lieb representation, we want δ = λ2 λ 2. Hence we need λ2 λ 2 =
λ(µ λ),whichimpliesthatµ = λ 3.Withthisrestrictionon µ,wehavetheTemperley-Lieb
representation and the corresponding unitary braid group representation for 2-strand braids and
the2-strandTemperley-Liebalgebra.
Now we can go on to B and TL via S = FRF = λI + λ 1V with V = FUF. We must
examineV2, UVU andVUV. Wefind that
V2 = FUFFUF = FU2F = δFUF = δV,
as desired and
a b δ 0 a b a2 ab
V = FUF = = δ .
b a 0 0 b a ab b2
! ! ! !
P P P R l (x) x
P P P P P P
S = F RF R
P P P P P P
Figure88: Change ofBasis
Thus V2 = V and sinceV = δ v v and U = δ w w with w = (1,0)T and v = Fw = (a,b)T
(T denotestranspose),wesee that
VUV = δ3 v v w w v v = δ3a2 v v = δ2a2V.
| ih | ih | ih | | ih |
Similarly UVU = δ2a2U. Thus, we need δ2a2 = 1 and so we shall take a = δ 1. With this
choice, we have a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra TL so that σ = AI + A 1U
and σ = AI + A 1V gives a unitary representation of the braid group when A = λ = eiθ and
b = √1 δ 2 is real. Thislastreality conditionisequivalentto theinequality
cos2(2θ) ,
whichis satisfiedforinfinitelymanyvaluesofθ intheranges
Withthesechoiceswe have
a b 1/δ √1 δ 2
b a √1 δ 2 1/δ
real and unitary,andfortheTemperley-Liebalgebra,
δ 0 a2 ab a b
U = ,V = δ = .
0 0 ab b2 b δb2
! ! !
Two Dimensional Process Space
Braiding Temperley-Lieb
Use m. Multiply by d.
Use l. Multiply by 0.
Use F. Use V.
Use F. Use V.
Figure89: Algebra fora TwoDimensional Process Space
P P P P P |xyz>: |PPP>
Figure90: A FiveDimensionalProcess Space
NowexamineFigure89. HereweillustratetheactionofthebraidingandtheTemperley-Lieb
Algebra on the first Fibonacci process space with basis , P . Here we have σ = R,σ =
FRF and U = U,U = V as described above. Thus we have a representation of the braid
group on three strands and a representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra on three strands with
no furtherrestrictionson δ.
Sofar,wehavearrivedatexactlythe3-strandbraidrepresentationsthatweusedinourpapers
[68,69]givingaquantumalgorithmfortheJonespolynomialforthree-strandbraids. Inthispaper
weareworkinginthecontextoftheFibonacciprocessspacesandsowewishtoseehowtomake
arepresentationoftheTemperley-Liebalgebratothismodelasawhole,notrestrictingourselves
toonlythreestrands. ThegenericcasetoconsideristheactionoftheTemperley-Liebalgebraon
process spaces of higher dimension as shown in Figure 90 and Figure 91. In Figure 91 we have
illustrated the triplets from the previous figure as part of a possibly larger tree and have drawn
thestringshorizontallyratherthandiagonally. Inthisfigurewehavelistedtheeffectsofbraiding
theverticalstrands3and4. WeseefromthisfigurethattheactionoftheTemperley-Liebalgebra
Five Dimensional Process Space
Braiding Temperley-Lieb
|P * P> Use F. Use V.
|PPP> Use F. Use V.
|* P *> Use m. Multiply by d.
|* P P> Use l. Multiply by 0.
|P P *> Use l. Multiply by 0.
Figure91: Algebra foraFiveDimensionalProcess Space
mustbeas follows:
U P P = a P P +b PPP ,
U PPP = b P P +δb2 PPP ,
U P = δ P ,
U PP = 0.
Here we have denoted this action as U because it connotes the action on the third and fourth
vertical strands in the sequences shown in Figure 91. Note that in a larger sequence we can
recognize U by examining the triplet surrounding the j 1-th element in the sequence, just as
the pattern above is governed by the elements surrounding the second element in the sequence.
For simplicity, we have only indicated three elements in the sequences above. Note that in a
sequence for the Fibonacci process there are never two consecutive appearances of the neutral
element .
Weshallrefertoasequenceof andP asaFibonaccisequenceifitcontainsnoconsecutive
appearances of . Thus PP P P P is a Fibonacci sequence. In working with this repre-
sentationofthebraidgroupandTemperley-Liebalgebra,itisconvenienttoassumethattheends
of the sequence are flanked by P as in Figure 90 and Figure 91 for sequences of length 3. It is
convenienttoleaveouttheflankingP’swhennotatingthesequence.
Using these formulas we can determine conditions on δ such that this is a representation of
theTemperley-Liebalgebra forallFibonacci sequences. Considerthefollowingcalculation:
U U U PPPP = U U (b PP P +δb2 PPPP )
= U (bU PP P +δb2U PPPP )
= U (0+δb2(b P PP +δb2 PPPP )
= δb2(bU P PP +δb2U PPPP )
= δ2b4U PPPP .
Thusweseethat inorderforU U U = U ,weneed that δ2b4 = 1.
It is easy to see that δ2b4 = 1 is the only remaining condition needed to make sure that the
actionoftheTemperley-Lieb algebraextends toallFibonacciModelsequences.
Notethatδ2b4 = δ2(1 δ 2)2 = (δ 1/δ)2.Thuswerequirethat
δ 1/δ = 1.
When δ 1/δ = 1, we have the solutions δ = 1 √5. However, for the reality of F we require
that 1 δ 2 0, ruling out the choice δ = 1 √5. When δ 1/δ = 1, we have the solutions
δ = 1 √5. This leaves only δ = φ where φ = 1+√5 (the Golden Ratio) as possiblevalues for
δ that satisfy the reality condition for F. Thus, up to a sign we have arrived at the well-known
value of δ = φ (the Fibonacci model) as essentially the only way to have an extension of this
formoftherepresentationoftheTemperley-Liebalgebrafornstrands. Let’sstatethispositively
as aTheorem.
Fibonacci Theorem. Let V be the complex vector space with basis x x x where
each x equals either P or and there do not occur two consecutive appearances of in the
sequence x , x .WerefertothisbasisforV asthesetofFibonaccisequencesoflengthn.
Then the dimension of V is equal to f where f is the n-th Fibonacci number: f = f = 1
n n+1 n 0 1
and f = f + f . Let δ = φ where φ = 1+√5. Let a = 1/δ and b = √1 a2. Then
n+1 n n − 1 ± 2 −
theTemperley-Liebalgebraon n+2strandswithloopvalueδ actsonV viatheformulasgiven
below. First wegivetheleft-end actions.
U x x x = δ x x x ,
1 2 3 n 2 3 n
U Px x x = 0,
U Px x = a Px x +b PPx x ,
2 3 n 3 n 3 n
U P x x = 0,
U PPx x = b Px x +δb2 PPx x .
2 3 n 3 n 3 n
Then wegivethegeneral actionforthemiddlestrands.
U x x P Px x = a x x P Px x
i 1 i 3 i+1 n 1 i 3 i+1 n
+b x x PPPx x ,
1 i 3 i+1 n
U x x PPPx x = b x x P Px x
i 1 i 3 i+1 n 1 i 3 i+1 n
+δb2 x x PPPx x ,
1 i 3 i+1 n
U x x P x x = δ x x P x x ,
i 1 i 3 i+1 n 1 i 3 i+1 n
U x x PPx x = 0,
i 1 i 3 i+1 n
U x x PP x x = 0.
i 1 i 3 i+1 n
Finally,wegivetheright-endaction.
U x x P = 0,
U x x P = 0,
| ··· − ∗i
U x x PP = b x x P +δb2 x x PP .
n+1 1 n 2 1 n 2 1 n 2
Remark. NotethattheleftandrightendTemperley-Liebactionsdependonthesamebasicpattern
as the middle action. The Fibonacci sequences x x x should be regarded as flanked left
andrightbyP’sjustasinthespecialcasesdiscussedpriortotheproofoftheFibonacciTheorem.
Corollary. With the hypotheses of Theorem 2, we have a unitary representation of the Artin
Braid group B toTL , ρ : B TL givenbytheformulas
n+2 n+2 n+2 n+2
where A = e3πi/5 where the U connote the representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra on the
spaceV ofFibonacci sequences asdescribed in theTheorem above.
Remark. The Theorem and Corollary give the original parameters of the Fibonacci model and
showsthatthismodeladmitsaunitaryrepresentationofthebraidgroupviaaJonesrepresentation
oftheTemperley-Liebalgebra.
In theoriginalFibonacci model[67], thereis abasicnon-trivialrecouplingmatrixF.
where δ = 1+√5 is the golden ratio and τ = 1/δ. The local braiding matrix is given by the
formulabelowwithA = e3πi/5.
A8 0 e4πi/5 0
R = = .
0 A4 0 e2πi/5
! !
This is exactly what we get from our method by using δ = 1+√5 and A = e3πi/5. Just as we
haveexplained earlier in thispaper, thesimplestexampleof a braid group representation arising
from this theory is the representation of the three strand braid group generated by σ = R and
σ = FRF (RememberthatF = FT = F 1.). Thematricesσ andσ arebothunitary,andthey
generateadensesubsetofU(2),supplyingthelocalunitarytransformationsneededforquantum
computing. The full braid group representation on the Fibonacci sequences is computationally
universal for quantum computation. In our earlier paper [67] and in the previous sections of the
present work, we gave a construction for the Fibonacci model based on Temperely-Lieb recou-
plingtheory. In thissection,wehavereconstructed theFibonacci modelon themoreelementary
grounds of the representation of the Temperley-Lieb algebra summarized in the statement of the
Fibonacci Theoremand itsCorollary.