Knowledge Representation for Robots through
Human-Robot Interaction
E.Bastianelli,D.Bloisi,R.Capobianco,G.Gemignani,L.Iocchi,D.Nardi
Dept.Computer,ControlandManagementEngineering
SapienzaUniversityofRome,Italy
<lastname>@dis.uniroma1.it
Abstract. The representation of the knowledge needed by a robot to perform
complextasksisrestrictedbythelimitationsofperception.Onepossiblewayof
overcomingthissituationanddesigning“knowledgeable”robotsistorelyonthe
interactionwiththeuser.Weproposeamulti-modalinteractionframeworkthat
allowstoeffectivelyacquireknowledgeabouttheenvironmentwheretherobot
operates.Inparticular,inthispaperwepresentarichrepresentationframework
that can be automatically built from the metric map annotated with the indica-
tionsprovidedbytheuser.Sucharepresentation,allowsthentherobottoground
complexreferentialexpressionsformotioncommandsandtodevisetopological
navigationplanstoachievethetargetlocations.
Keywords: KnowledgeRepresentation,Robotics,Human-RobotInteraction
1 Introduction
Robots are expected to become consumer products. However, there is still a gap in
termsofuserexpectationsandrobotfunctionality.Akeylimitingfactoristhelackof
knowledge and awareness of the robot on the problem to be solved and on the opera-
tionalenvironment.Thedifficultiesarisefromseveralsources:thecurrentcapabilities
ofperceptionsystems,thedifficultyofcommunicatingwithhumans,and,arguably,the
abilitytoacquire,maintainandusesymbolicknowledge.
Our long term research goal is to improve the performance of robotic systems
by addressing the above three limitations, and, specifically to devise “Knowledgeable
Robots” [1]. Many researchers are addressing the above challenges. For example, re-
cently,therehasbeenasignificantprogressinnewsensingdevicesandimprovedper-
ceptioncapabilities.Atthesametime,severalresearchershaveaddressedformsofcol-
laborationbetweenhumansandrobots,andvoiceinteractioninparticular,thatprovides
anaturalapproachtocommunicatewithusers.Indeed,speechinterfaceshavereacheda
levelofperformancethatmakesthemdeployableonhandhelddevicesforapplications
thatgobeyondthebasictelephonefunctionality.
Still,fewworksaddresstheuseofclassicalsymbolicmethodsforknowledgerepre-
sentationandreasoningonrobots.Moreover,whenthisisaddressed,therepresentation
ofsymbolicknowledgeistypicallybasedonastaticrepresentationofgeneralknowl-
edge(i.e.foractionplanning),whichisdisconnectedfromboththeperceptionsystem
andtheinteractionwiththeuser.
Fig.1.Exampleofhuman-robotcollaboration:speech-guidedtaggingoftheenvironment.
We propose to address the challenge of knowledgeable robots by embracing the
paradigm of symbiotic autonomy [2], which relies on the interaction with the user in
ordertoovercomethelimitationsoftherobotinperceptionandactioncapabilities.
Akeyissueintheinteractionwithrobotstoestablishaproperrelationshipbetween
the symbols used in the representation and the corresponding elements of the oper-
ational environment. This process is usually referred to as symbol grounding and, in
thecaseofrobots,requiresto“closetheloop”withperception.Consequently,symbol
grounding characterizes one of the most critical design issues in the interaction with
robots,namelytheconnectionbetweennumericandsymbolicrepresentation.
Specifically,ourworkaddressestheproblemofbuildinghigh-levelrepresentations
oftheenvironmentthatembodybothmetricandsymbolicknowledgeaboutit.Tothis
aim,amulti-modalinteraction(includingaspeechinterface)canbeusedintheprocess
ofbuildingaveryrichrepresentation,byacquiringinformationinasuitableandnatural
way.
In order to obtain a representation that the robotic system can effectively use to
perform complex tasks, such as “go near the fridge” or “check whether the TV set
is on”, metric and semantic information need to be suitably merged. The resulting,
integrated representation should enable the system to perform topological navigation,
understandingtargetlocationsandthepositionofobjectsintheenvironment.
The approach that we present in this paper aims at building a rich representation
of the robot’s knowledge about the environment, comprising a suitable integration of
metricandsemanticinformation.Morespecifically,wedescribetherepresentationand
the acquisition of the robot’s knowledge about a specific environment with the use of
amulti-modalhuman-robotinteractionsystem.Wealsoconsiderthepossibilityofex-
tendingtheapproachtoanon-lineconstructionandmaintenanceofthesemanticmap
throughacontinuouslong-standinginteractionwiththeuser.
Asageneraldifferencewithpreviousworkinproducinghumanaugmentedmaps,
aswellasinrepresentingtheknowledgeoftherobotabouttheenvironment,weaimata
richanddetailedrepresentationofaspecificenvironment,asopposedtotryingtoembed
intherobottheknowledgethatallowsittooperateinanykindofenvironment,without
any previous interaction with the user and the actual operational environment. This is
currentlypossibleonlythroughanadequateuseofmulti-modalnaturaluserinteraction
(notrequiringspecificroboticexpertise)and,specificallyontheuseofvoiceinteraction
tocreateacommonreferenceforthesymbolsrepresentingtheknowledgeoftherobot.
Theapproachdescribedinthispaperbuildsonpreviousworkforoff-linebuilding
ofasemanticmap[3],basedontwobasiccomponents:1)asubsystemforSimultaneous
LocalizationAndMapping,thatprovidesametricmapoftheenvironment;2)amulti-
modal interface, including speech, that allows the user to point at the elements of the
environment and to assign their semantic role (see Figure 1). The novel contribution
here is the definition of a richer representation of the environment, including a Cell
Map and a Topological Graph, and of the corresponding procedures for knowledge
construction,thatincreasethecapabilityoftherobottoperformcomplexreasoningfor
executingcomplextasks.
Thepaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2describesthebackgroundandasuitable
context for our work with respect to state of the art. The representation of the robot’s
knowledgeispresentedinSection3,whilethemethodforitsconstructionisdescribed
inSection4.Conclusionsaredrawninthelastsection.
2 RelatedWork
HertzbergandSaffiotti[4]characterizesemanticknowledgeinroboticsbytwoproper-
ties: (i) the need for an explicit representation of knowledge inside the robot; and (ii)
theneedforgroundingthesymbolsusedinthisrepresentationinrealphysicalobjects,
parameters,andevents.Manyroboticsystemsnowadaysembodysomesortofseman-
ticknowledge,butitisoftenhard-codedintheirimplementation.Thisgreatlyreduces
its reuse, the possibility to reason on it, or to share it with other entities (e.g. robots,
hardware devices, or humans). Several works have addressed symbolic representation
of knowledge for complex robot tasks. For example, Schiffer et al. [5] describe the
implementation of an intelligent service robot whose knowledge about the task to be
executedisrepresentedwiththelogiclanguageREADYLOG(avariantofGolog).Aker
etal.[6]useAnswerSetProgrammingforrepresentingandreasoningabouttheactions
to be accomplished by a housekeeping robot. De Giacomo et al. [7] present a knowl-
edgerepresentationandreasoningframeworkbasedonDescriptionLogicsforaservice
robot. In all these works the knowledge base is assumed to be given to the robot and
themethodsusedtoactuallyacquirethisknowledgearenotdiscussed.Inthispaperwe
focusontheconstructionofasemanticrepresentationofknowledge,morepreciselyon
semanticmapping.
“Asemanticmapforamobilerobotisamapthatcontains,inadditiontospatialin-
formationabouttheenvironment,assignmentsofmappedfeaturestoentitiesofknown
classes”[8].Twopropertiescomeoutfromthisdefinition:1)semanticmapsareinde-
pendentfromtheadoptedrepresentationforthegeometricmapbehindit:2Dmaps,3D
maps,topologicalmaps,texture-basedmaps;2)semanticmapsalsoincludecommon-
senseknowledgeaboutgenericpropertiesofthelabeledentities.
Theworksonsemanticmappingcanbegroupedintotwomaincategories,bydis-
tinguishingautomaticprocessingfromapproachesinvolvingahumanusertohelpthe
robotinthesemanticmappingprocess.
Inthefirstcategory,weconsiderworksdescribingfullyautomaticmethodsinwhich
humaninteractionisnotconsideredatall.Afirstsetoftechniquesaimatextractingfea-
turesoftheenvironmentfromlaserbasedmetricmapstosupportlabelingandextract
high-levelinformation.Theseworksincludedeterminingattributesofrooms[9],door-
ways detection [10], etc. Moreover, in Galindo et al. [11], environmental knowledge
is represented by augmenting a topological map (extracted with fuzzy morphological
operators)withsemanticknowledgeusinganchoring.Asecondsetoftechniquesmake
use of classification and clustering for automatic segmentation and labeling of metric
maps. For example, in Nu¨cther et al. [12], environmental knowledge is extracted by
labeling3Dpointsthroughthegradientdifferencebetweenneighboringpoints;points
are then classified into floor-points, object-points, or ceiling-points. While generation
of 2D topological maps from metric maps has been described in [13] and [14] (using
AdaBoost), in Brunskill et al. [15] (using spectral clustering), in [16] (using Voronoi
random fields), etc. Finally, a third set of techniques for object recognition and place
categorizationusevisualfeatures,suchasin[17],oracombinationofvisualandrange
information, provided from an RGB-D camera, such as in [18]. Although significant
progresshasbeenmadeinfullyautomatedsemanticmapping,theapproachstillsuffers
fromerrorsandlackofgenerality.
In the second category, we consider approaches for human augmented mapping
wheretheuseractivelysupportstherobottoacquiretherequiredknowledgeaboutthe
environment. In particular, the user role is in grounding symbols to objects that are
still autonomously recognized by the robotic platform. In this case, the human-robot
interaction is uni-modal, and typically achieved through speech. In Diosi et al. [19]
an interactive SLAM procedure and a watershed segmentation are employed to cre-
ate a contextual topological map. In Zender et al. [20] a system to create conceptual
representations of human-made indoor environments is described. A robotic platform
owns a priori knowledge about spatial concepts, and through them builds up an inter-
nalrepresentationoftheenvironmentacquiredthroughlow-levelsensors.Theuserrole
throughout the acquisition process is to support the robot in place labeling. However,
once achieved, the conceptual representation is also useful for effective human-robot
dialogue. Pronobis and Jensfelt [21] present a multi-layered semantic mapping algo-
rithmthatcombinesinformationabouttheexistenceofobjectsandsemanticproperties
about the space, such as room size, share and appearance. These properties decouple
low-level information from high-level room classification. The user input, whenever
provided, is integrated in the system as additional properties about existing objects.
Finally, Nieto-Granda et al. [22] adopts human augmented mapping based on a mul-
tivariate probabilistic model to associate a spatial region to a semantic label. A user
guide supports a robot in this process, by instructing the robot in selecting the labels.
Few approaches aim at a more advanced form of human-robot collaboration, where
theuseractivelycooperateswiththerobottobuildasemanticmap,notonlyforplace
categorization and labeling, but also for object recognition and positioning. Such an
interaction is more complex and requires natural paradigms, not to result in a tedious
effortforanon-expertuser.Forthisreason,multi-modalinteractionispreferred,tonat-
urallydealwithdifferenttypesofinformation.Forexample,Kruijffetal.[23]introduce
asystemtoimprovethemappingprocessbyclarificationdialoguesbetweenhumanand
robot,usingnaturallanguage;Randellietal.[3]proposearichmulti-modalinteraction,
includingspeech,gesture,andvisionenablingforasemanticlabelingofenvironment
landmarksthatmakestheknowledgeabouttheenvironmentactuallyusable,butwithout
creatingasuitablerepresentation.
Theapproachpresentedinthispaperaimsatimprovinghuman-robotcollaboration
byallowingnon-expertoperatorstogeneraterichsemanticinformationaboutanenvi-
ronment. To this end, we adopt a multi-modal natural interaction framework to build
semantic maps, where the acquired knowledge can effectively support the execution
ofcomplextasks.Themaindifferenceswithpreviousworkonsemanticmappingare:
1)amuchricherrepresentationoftheenvironmentincludingsemanticdescriptionsof
places,objectsandfunctionalitiesoftheobjects;2)anincreasedflexibilityofthesys-
temthatcanbeeffectivelyusedindifferentkindsofenvironmentswithoutrequiringa
substantialtrainingtobuildaprioriknwowledge.
3 RepresentationoftheRobot’sKnowledge
In this section we describe the representation of the robot’s knowledge, while the de-
scriptionofhowthisknowledgeisacquiredandhowtherepresentationisactuallybuilt
isprovidedinthenextsection.
Therobot’sknowledgeisdividedintwolayers:1)thespecificknowledgethatthe
system acquires about the environment, denoted as world knowledge; 2) the general
knowledgeaboutthedomainanditsuse,thatwedenoteasdomainknowledge.
Itisimportanttopointoutthat,whilethetwocomponentsmayresembletheexten-
sionalandintensionalcomponentsofaclassicalknowledgebase,heretheyareindepen-
dentofeachother.Infact,theworldknowledgemaybeinconsistentwiththedomain
knowledge(e.g.,therobotmayhavediscoveredafridgeinthelivingroom,ratherthan
orinadditiontotheoneinthekitchen,whilethedomainknowledgestatesthat“fridges
areinthekitchen”).Generallyspeaking,domainknowledge(whichrepresentsanapri-
ori knowledge about the environment) is used to support the action of the robot, only
whenspecificworldknowledgeisnotavailable.Forexample,therobotisabletoreach
an object (e.g., the fridge in the living room) , because it has been previously discov-
ered; if there is no specific knowledge about the position of an object (e.g., a fridge),
the system will refer to the general domain knowledge to find out a possible location
(e.g.,thekitchen).
Morespecifically,therobot’sknowledgeisdefinedbythefollowingstructures:
– WorldKnowledge
InstanceSignatureDataBase
TopologicalGraph
– DomainKnowledge
ConceptualKnowledgeBase
3.1 Knowledgeabouttherobot’sworld
Asalreadymentioned,asemanticmapistypicallycharacterizedasalow-levelrepre-
sentationofthe2Dmap(i.e.agrid),thatislabelledwithsymbols(e.g.[21],[20],[22]).
Suchsymbolsdenoteforexample,theareacorrespondingtoakitchen(orsimplytoa
room)orthepresenceofstructuralelementsoftheenvironmentandobjects.Ourrepre-
sentationbuildsonasimilarstructure,butitsupportsamuchmoredetaileddescription,
basedontheinteractionandhintsprovidedbytheuser.
In the following definitions we use the term Concept to refer to a set of symbols
used in the conceptual KB to denote general concepts (i.e., abstraction of objects or
locations).Forexample,FridgeandKitchenareconceptnamesofthegeneralDomain
Knowledge discussed in the next subsection. While the term Label is used to refer
to a set of symbols indicating specific instances of objects or locations. For example,
fridge1 is a label denoting a particular fridge and kitchen1 is a label denoting a par-
ticular kitchen. In the notation used in this paper, concept names have the first letter
capitalized,whilelabelsaredenotedwithalllowercaseletters,typicallyfollowedbya
digit. The associations between labels and concepts are denoted as label Concept.
Forexample, fridge1 Fridgedenotesthatthelabel fridge1isrelatedtotheconcept
Fridge (i.e., fridge1 is a fridge). Notice that the meaning of the labels is simply that
ofapointertotheconceptthatinthedomainknowledgerepresentsthegeneralknowl-
edgeabouttheobjectorlocation,anditisnotaninstanceoftheconcept.Inthisway,
alabeledobjectcanbeenrichedwithgeneraldomaininformation,butitisnotrequired
tobeconsistentwiththedomainKB.
TherepresentationformalismoftheWorldKnowledgecontainsthefollowingele-
ments.
Metric Map. The Metric Map is represented as an occupancy grid generated by a
SLAMmethod.Thismaphasusuallyafinediscretization(e.g.,5cm)andisusedfor
low-levelrobottasks,suchaslocalizationandnavigation.
Instancesignatures. Theinstancesignaturesarerepresentedasadatabaseofstruc-
tureddata,whereeachinstancehasauniquelabel(l Label),anassociatedconcept
(C Concept)suchthatl C,andasetofproperties(includingforexamplethepo-
sitionintheenvironment)expressedasattribute-valuepairs.
CellMap. TheCellMapisrepresentedasadiscretizationoftheenvironmentincells
ofvariablesize.Eachcellrepresentsaportionofaphysicalareaandisanabstraction
oflocationsthatarenotdistinguishablefromthepointofviewofrobothigh-levelbe-
haviors.TheCellMapalsoincludesafunction f :Cell 2Label,thatmapseachcell
to a set of labels associated to concepts in the conceptual KB of the Domain Knowl-
edge,andaconnectivityrelationConnect Cell Cell,thatdescribestheconnectivity
betweenadjacentcells.
TopologicalGraph. TheTopologicalGraphisagraphwherenodesarelocationsas-
sociated to cells in the Cell Map and edges are connections between these locations.
Locations are distinguished in two types: static and dynamic. For the static locations,
the corresponding positions (i.e., the correspondences with the metric map) are fixed,
whileinthedynamiclocations,thecorrespondingpositionsarevariablewithinagiven
areaoftheenvironment.SincetheTopologicalGraphisusedbytherobotfornavigation
purposes, the edges also contains the specific navigation behavior that is required for
therobottomovefromonelocationtoanother.Inthiswaythetopologicalmapisalso
used to generate appropriate sequences of behaviors to achieve the robot’s navigation
goals.
Fig.2.AnexampleofWorldKnowledge.
Inordertobetterexplaintheserepresentations,intheremainingofthissectionwe
provide an example of World Knowledge for a home environment, while in the next
sectionwedescribehowthisrepresentationhasbeenbuiltandhowtheknowledgehas
beenacquired.
Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the World Knowledge as described
above. The Metric Map with a resolution of 5 cm generated by the SLAM method is
shownasbackgroundoftheimage,whereblackpixelsrepresentoccupiedcells.
Every object and location reported in the figure has an entry in the data base of
instance signatures. In particular, each instance is determined by a unique label rep-
resenting an entity within the mapped environment, (e.g. fridge1), the corresponding
conceptaccordingtotheconceptualKB(e.g. f Fridge),andasetofproperties(e.g.,
position=<x,y,θ >,color=white,open= false,...).
The Cell Map is shown in the same image. Cells are delimited by solid borders;
colorsandtextinthecellspecifythelabelsassociatedtoeachcell.ThelabelsintheCell
Maprefertoatypicalareaofahome(kitchen,livingroom,bathroom,bedroom,etc.)
andtotypicalobjects(tables,chairs,heaters,doors,etc.).Eachcellcanhavemorethan
one label, thus representing that the same area can be associated with more concepts.
Inparticular,eachcolorcorrespondstoalabelindicatedinthelegendtotherightand
text(wherepresent)correspondstoadditionallabelsforthatcellcorrespondingtothe
objects reported on the right side of the figure. For example, the green cells labeled
with f (top-rightcornerofthekitchenarea)aremappedtothelabels f ,kitchen and
theselabelsareassociatedwiththeconceptsFridgeandKitchen,i.e. f Fridgeand
kitchen Kitchen,respectively.Thus,thecorrespondingareaischaracterizedasbeing
occupied by a fridge and as belonging to the kitchen. Connectivity relations between
cellsarenotexplicitlyshowninthefigure,buttheycanbederivedbyadjacentcells.
TheTopologicalGraph,thatestablishestherelationshipbetweenthemetricandthe
symbolicrepresentation,isshowninthefigureasagraphconnectingovalnodes.Dark
nodesarestaticlocations,whilelightnodesaredynamiclocations,thatareassociatedto
themainareas(labels)oftheenvironment.Thestaticlocationsdenotespecificpositions
thatareofinterestfortherobottasks(e.g.,thepositiontoenterinaroom),whilethe
dynamiclocationsareusedtodenoteareas,whereinstantiationoftheposition(i.e.,the
mappingtothemetricmap)foranavigationbehaviorisexecutedatrun-time,depending
onthecurrentstatusoftherobotandonitsgoals.
3.2 Generalknowledgeaboutthedomain
Inpreviouswork,domainknowledgehastypicallybeencharacterizedasaconceptual
knowledge base, representing a hierarchy of concepts, including their properties and
relations,aprioriassertedasrepresentativeofanyenvironment.Theconceptualknowl-
edgebasecontainsataxonomyoftheconceptsinvolvedintheenvironmenttiedbyan
is-arelation,aswellastheirpropertiesandrelations(see[11],[13]).Theseconceptsare
usedintheWorldKnowledgetocharacterizethespecificinstancesoftheenvironment,
asexplainedintheprevioussection.Inatypicalrepresentationthreetop-mostclasses
have been considered: Areas, Structural Elements, and Objects. Areas denote places
in the environment (corridors, rooms, etc.), Structural Elements are static entities that
formtheenvironmentandthattopologicallyconnectareas(windows,doors,etc.),while
Objectsareelementsintheenvironmentnotrelatedtoitsstructureandlocatedwithin
areas(printers,tables,etc.).Asnapshotoftheconceptualknowledgebaseusedinthe
experimentsisreportedinFigure3.
Theknowledgebasecontainsalsoenvironmentalpropertiesofthedefinedconcepts,
likesizeandfunctionalitiesofobjects,typicalconnectionsamongplaces,etc.,thatare
useful to describe the general knowledge about an environment and to support robot
taskexecution.Forexample,thegeneralknowledgeinahomeenvironmentthatfridges
are in kitchens helps the robot to perform tasks related with a fridge even when the
exactlocationofafridgeisnotknown.Anoticeabledifferencewithrespecttoprevious
worksisthatthepurposeofthiscomponentisnottoclassifyspacesandobjects;rather,
we focus on the inheritance of properties to support the map acquisition, as well as
differentactionsoftherobotintheenvironment.
TheusesoftheDomainKnowledgebasearemanifold.Spatialpropertiesofobjects
can be used to build metric representations of objects (see next section); functional
propertiescanbeusedtodeterminelocationofobject(e.g.,fordevisingaplantosearch
for an object); physical properties can be used to check preconditions for executing
transportation,etc.
Fig.3.Afragmentoftheconceptualknowledgebaseusedintheexperiments.
Asamatteroffact,anysourceofdomainknowledgemaybeaccessedandusedby
therobot,suchasforexampleinqueryingtheweb,(e.g.RoboEarth[24]andOpenEval[25]),
orevenqueryingotherrobotsoperatinginsimilarenvironments.
4 Acquisitionofthe Robot’sKnowledge
Theprocessofbuildingtherepresentationoftherobot’sknowledgeiscomposedoftwo
phasesthattakeplace,withthehelpoftheuser,aftertheexplorationoftheenvironment:
1) Metric Map and Instance Signatures Construction. A 2D metric map is generated
through a SLAM module and the set of instance signatures is created; 2) Cell Map
and Topological Graph Generation. Starting from the 2D metric map, a grid-based
topologicalrepresentation(cellmap)isobtained.Then,thetopologicalgraphneededby
therobottoperformhighlevelbehavioursisbuiltbyprocessingtheinstancesignatures
andthecellmap.
4.1 MetricMapandInstanceSignatures
Inthefirstphaseoftheknowledgeacquisitionprocedure(seeFig.4),therobotisused
tonavigatetheenvironmentinordertocreatethe2Dmapandtoregisterthepositionsof
thedifferentobjectsofinterest.Theusercantagaspecificobjectbyusingacommercial
laserpointer(Fig.5a).
While the object is pointed through the laser, the user has to name the object, so
thatthelabelcanbeassignedtoit.Theimagesegmentationmoduleisresponsiblefor
extracting the 3D shape of the pointed object by exploiting the RGB-D data coming
fromtheKinect,sensor[26].ThelaserdotisdetectedintheRGBimage(Fig.5b)by
searchingforthecolorofthelightemitted(greeninourcase).Then,alltheplanesin
the scene are extracted from the 3D point cloud and those that do not contain the dot
Fig.4.Inputdataareobtainedfromahumanuserandarobotinordertoproducethemetricmap
andtheinstancesignatures.
arediscarded.Theremainingpointsareanalysedtosegmenttheshapeoftheobjectof
interest(Fig.5c).
Itisworthnoticingthattheimagesegmentationmoduleexploitsboththeinforma-
tionprovidedbythedatabase(height,width,andlength)andthelaserdotpositionin
theKinectview(usedasseedpointoftheexpansion).Iftheextractedshapeiscoherent
with the dimensional attributes of the corresponding instance signature stored in the
data base (i.e., the one with the same label recognized by the vocal interface), then a
correct acquisition message is sent to the user in order to acknowledge the successful
association.
Fig.5.Objecttagging.a)Theobjectistaggedwiththelaserpointer.b)TheRGBimagefrom
theKinectisusedtolocatethelaserdot.c)The3Dpointcloud(left)isanalysedtofindallthe
planes,theonesdonotcontainingthelaserdotarediscarded(center)andthedotisusedasseed
pointtosegmentthetaggedobject(right).
The pose estimation module outputs the 2D position x,y and the bearing θ of the
taggedobject.Thepose(x,y,θ)iscalculatedbytakingintoaccountthenormalcorre-
sponding to the surface of the segmented object in reference frame of the Kinect and
thenapplyingatransformationtothereferenceframeoftherobot.
When the acquisition run is terminated all the recorded data (i.e., laser scans and
objectposes)areprocessed.Thelaserscansareusedastheinputforgeneratingthe2D
metricmap.AGraph-basedSLAMapproach,aspresentedin[27],isusedtoestimate
the2Dmapoftheenvironmentandthetrajectoryoftherobot.Thenodesinthegraph
representtheposesoftherobot,whiletheedgesexpressspatialconstraintsarisingfrom
odometrymeasurements.Inordertoobtaintheobjectmapthatintegratestheinstance
signatures into the SLAM generated map, new edges are added to the graph together
withthepreviousones(givenbylaserscansandrobotodometry).Eachregisteredobject
pose is considered as a new edge of the graph, embodying the pose and the label of
the object. When the new expanded graph is complete, a least-square minimization
algorithm [28] is performed to obtain the optimized final 2D metric map. The final
poses of the tagged objects (coherent with the optimized map) are stored as instance
signaturestogetherwithcorrespondinglabels.
4.2 CellMapandTopologicalGraph
Inthesecondphaseoftheknowledgeacquisitionprocedurethecellmapandthetopo-
logicalgrapharegenerated(seeFig.6).
Fig.6. Cell map and topological graph generation. The metric map is enriched with semantic
informationtoobtainthecellmap.Theinstancesignaturesandthecellmapareusedtocreatea
topologicalgraph.
The cell map contains a high-level description about the regions, structural ele-
ments,andobjectscontainedintheenvironment.Itisgeneratedusingboththeinstance
signatures and the 2D topological map. The algorithm to generate such a map can be
furtherdecomposedintothefollowingsteps:1)rasterizingthemetricrepresentationof
the map into a grid-based topological representation (grid computation); 2) including
in this new map representations of the objects and structural elements tagged in the
environment (object addition); 3) automatically labeling the areas of the environment
(labelingareas),usingcontourclosureandregionfillingtechniques.
Grid computation is accomplished by applying the Hough Transform at different
resolution levels to identify the lines passing through the walls. In such a way, it is
possibletofindallthemainwallsinthemap.Thecellsofthegridhavedifferentsizes
withrespecttotheamountofrelevantfeaturesintheconsideredarea(forexample,the
cellsinthecorridorarewiderthentheonesintheoffices).
Objectadditionconsistsinplacingthetaggedobjectsintothegridmap.Forthiswe
useobjects’pose,shapeandsize,presentintheinstancesignaturedatabase.
Finally,labelingareasisappliedtosegmenttheenvironmentintodifferentrooms.
The algorithm is enhanced by considering the tagged objects and structural elements
previouslyincludedintheenvironment.Forexample,asimpleheuristicusestheknowl-
edgeaboutdoorstoseparatedifferentareas.
Inthefinalstepofourknowledgebuildingprocess,atopologicalgraphiscreated
byusingtheknowledgecontainedbothinthecellmapandintheinstancesignatures.
Such graph embodies the information needed to the robot for navigating and acting
in the environment. The constituting nodes of this graph are locations associated to
cells in the cell map, while the edges are connections between these locations. For
eachroom,twokindsofnodesareproduced:staticanddynamic.Staticnodesrepresent
locations that have a fixed position on the map and they are used to deal with critical
pathwaysinthemap(i.e.doors),whereaspecificbehaviorisrequired.Dynamicnodes
represent,instead,variablepositionswithinagivenareaoftheenvironment.Thus,for
eachroommappedinthecellmap,adynamicnodeiscreatedwhile,foreachdoorway
thatconnectssucharoomtoanother,astaticnodeiscreatedwithitsfixedpositionset
in front of the considered door. Finally, each static node is connected to the dynamic
nodeoftheroomitbelongstoandtothestaticnodethatrepresentsthelocationinfront
oftheothersideofitsrelateddoor.Theconstructionofthetopologicalgraphhighlights
atwofoldaspectofoursystem:boththeknowledgeprovidedthroughuserinteraction
anda-priorihigh-levelknowledgecontributetorefinetheoverallmappingprocess.
5 Conclusions
Inthispaper,weproposeanapproachtobuildaneffectiverepresentationoftheknowl-
edgeabouttheenvironmentwheretherobotoperates,byrelyingonmulti-modalhuman-
robotinteraction,includingnaturallanguage.Theproposedframeworkmakesitpossi-
bletobridgethegapbetweenthenumericalandthesymbolicknowledgeneededbythe
robot,bygroundingthesymbolsontotheobjectsrepresentedinthemetricmap.Asa
result,theproposedsettingforrepresentingtheknowledgeoftherobotissignificantly
richer than previous approaches in the literature; in particular, it supports better per-
formanceandgreatergeneralitywithrespecttofullyautomaticmethods.Throughthe
acquiredrepresentationtherobotcanexecutecomplextasks.Forexample,therobotcan
execute complex commands such as “check whether in the corridor the third window
on the left is open”, retrieve its metric position in the map, plan a path and reach the
specifiedlocationandexecutethetask.
Theproposedapproachcanbefurtherdevelopedinatleasttwofundamentaldirec-
tions, that we are currently investigating. First, the generation of the map is currently
done off-line. A more general setting should enable the robot to grow and update the
representation through a continuous interaction with the user. While the proposed ap-
proachtosymbolgroundingcanbenaturallyextended,thenewframeworkwouldre-
quiretoensuretheconsistencyoftherepresentationandtodealwiththechangesinthe
environment and the dynamics of objects. Second, currently the robot can only learn
knowledgeabouttheenvironment,butnotknowledgeabouttaskstobeaccomplished
in response to user commands. This extension would require a representation of the
robot’sactionsandanextendeddialoguetoacquireinputfromtheuser.
In conclusion, in our view, the proposed approach brings about a new perspective
andnewdevelopmentsfortherepresentationoftherobot’sknowledge.