Known Structure, Unknown Function:
An Inquiry-based Undergraduate Biochemistry Lab Course
Cynthia Gray†, Carol W. Price†, Christopher T. Lee‡, Alison H. Dewald§, Matthew A. Cline,
Charles E. McAnany, Linda Columbus*, Cameron Mura*
Author affiliations & correspondence
Department of Chemistry
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
†Equally contributing authors
‡Current address: Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry; Univ of California San Diego; La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
§Current address: Department of Chemistry; Salisbury University; Salisbury, MD 21801, USA
* Correspondence can be addressed to LC or CM:
LC: 1 434 243 2123 (tel); columbus@virginia.edu
CM: 1 434 924 7824 (tel); cmura@muralab.org
Document information
Last modified: 13 April 2015 [v15cm]
Running title: Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Keywords: biochemistry lab; protein function; functional genomics; inquiry-based learning; active learn-
ing; curriculum; undergraduate research
Abbreviations: 3D, three-dimensional; GM, group meeting; IMAC, immobilized metal affinity chromatog-
raphy; JCSG, Joint Center for Structural Genomics; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MSA, multiple
sequence alignment; MW, molecular weight; PDB, Protein Data Bank; POI, protein of interest;
SALG, student assessment of their learning gains; TOPSAN, The Open Protein Structure Anno-
tation Network; UVa, University of Virginia
Additional notes: The main text is accompanied by 8 figures, 2 tables and 7 items of Supplemental Information.
Journal information: Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education (BAMBEd); the author guide is at
3429/homepage/ForAuthors.html
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Undergraduate biochemistry lab courses often do not provide students with an authentic research expe-
rience, particularly when the express purpose of the lab is purely instructional. However, an instructional
lab course that is inquiry- and research-based could simultaneously impart scientific knowledge and fos-
ter a student’s research expertise and confidence. We have developed a year-long undergraduate bio-
chemistry lab curriculum wherein students determine, via experiment and computation, the function of a
protein of known 3D structure. The first half of the course is inquiry-based and modular in design; stu-
dents learn general biochemical techniques while gaining preparation for research experiments in the
second semester. Having learned standard biochemical methods in the first semester, students inde-
pendently pursue their own (original) research projects in the second semester. This new curriculum has
yielded an improvement in student performance and confidence as assessed by various metrics. To dis-
seminate teaching resources to students and instructors alike, a freely-accessible Biochemistry Laboratory
Introductory Overview
The undergraduate biochemistry laboratories at the University of Virginia (UVa) have been redesigned as
inquiry-/research-based lab courses taught across two semesters (Chem4411/4421, Biological Chemistry
Labs I/II). This redesign was spurred by the need to have students engage in novel research in the context
of an otherwise typical undergraduate lab course. The first semester of the new curriculum is dedicated
to instruction in modern biochemical concepts and methods, including computational biology, while the
second semester focuses on an authentic (publication-grade) research question. Students apply the
methods and concepts from the first semester to design and execute a functional assay of their protein of
interest (POI) in the second semester. Each student’s ultimate goal is to biochemically determine the
function of their POI, for which the three-dimensional (3D) structure has been determined and a putative
function bioinformatically annotated (based on structure), but for which no experimental functional data
exist. The year-long course concludes with groups of students preparing a manuscript akin to a scientific
paper and orally presenting a scientific poster that details their findings. If appropriate, the students’ pro-
tein characterization results are disseminated as annotated entries in The Open Protein Structure Annota-
oped into new TOPSAN entries and, in ideal cases, student work has culminated in publications in the
primary literature (e.g., [2]).
While the students focus on a well-defined research goal, centered on functional characterization of
their protein, our goals as instructors include teaching students (i) how to design and execute their own
experiments, (ii) how to analyze data critically, (iii) how to work in a group towards a common goal, and
Gray et al. (2014) 1 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
(iv) how to communicate their work both orally and in writing (Fig 1 and below). A further aim has been
to create a modular curriculum that can be adopted by instructors at any college or university; a modular
design affords instructors the option to focus on discrete portions of the curriculum, versus wholly im-
plementing all of it. In addition to assessment of the new curriculum, our final goal has been broad dis-
semination of the course materials. A freely-accessible Biochemistry Laboratory Education (BioLEd) re-
Motivation
Published reports and peer-reviewed studies indicate that undergraduate science education must change
from traditional, memorization-based instruction to a more experience-based form of learning [3-7].
These studies find that students who engage in inquiry-based learning develop better reasoning skills and
more deeply enjoy research and laboratory work, versus students taught using traditional methods [8].
While traditional lab courses often utilize the same conceptual learning style [9] that is typically used in
lecture courses, this instructional style rarely encourages students to be independent/critical thinkers. In
short, there is a demand for robust and accessible undergraduate science education curricula that pro-
vide more experience-based learning, in a more active environment. To stimulate student autonomy and
independence, such as would be required in a ‘real’ research environment, lab courses must focus on
teaching more procedural knowledge [9] — including laboratory skills, experimental design, and data
analysis and interpretation. Our new BioLEd curriculum employs both conceptual and procedural learn-
ing via guided instruction in the first semester (in the form of basic concepts, tools and protocols), and
self– and peer–driven learning in the second semester (in the form of open-ended experimental investi-
gations, using the concepts, tools and methods from the first semester).
Historically, UVa’s Biological Chemistry Lab courses had been taught in a conventional format: struc-
tured, single-session lab exercises focused on teaching one technique via a procedure that had been vali-
dated by countless generations of prior classes. In Spring 2009, the traditional laboratory format for the
second semester (Biochemistry Lab II) was abandoned in favor of a research-based curriculum, taking as a
starting point the myriad proteins of unknown function that have been structurally characterized in the
past decade via structural genomics initiatives [10-12]. Successive course modifications and adjustments
to the curriculum followed, leading to our current year-long course design. As the course has evolved,
BioLEd’s curricular design and logistics have been refined in accord with national calls for changes in un-
dergraduate science education [3, 13, 14, 5]. Across all iterations and refinement cycles, the goals of the
lab course continue to be the same: to develop students’ critical thinking skills, via hands-on research,
and to train them in methods used in the biochemistry workforce (Table I). Students in the BioLEd curric-
ulum engage in research from the point of inception onward. In the opening weeks of the first term, they
Gray et al. (2014) 2 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
learn bioinformatic methods and literature tools to enable them to formulate questions and hypotheses
about their assigned target POI and its potential function (including what the word ‘function’ can mean in
various contexts). Throughout the second semester, students design and execute experimental plans;
they perform enzyme kinetics studies and other experiments; they collect, process and interpret data;
and they communicate their findings in oral and written form (their end-of-term manuscript is in the style
of a scientific research article). The role of the instructors in this course, particularly during the research-
intensive second term, is to provide guidance and serve as a resource, and not to dictate the research
steps directly. Here, we describe the new BioLEd initiative, which is inquiry-based (first term) and re-
search-based (second term). We have defined precise learning gains for our modules (Fig 1 and Supp Info
1) in order to guide curricular design and refinement, and to assess student performance.
BioLEd builds upon educational principles and best practices gleaned from other efforts over the past
decade. For example, the merits of a modular approach have been recognized [15], as have the benefits
of group-based learning [16] and the necessity of introducing computational approaches into undergrad-
uate biochemistry and molecular biology curricula [17]. Also, other lab curricula that utilize both the ex-
pository- and inquiry-based approaches have been recently developed (e.g., [18]), and we are not alone
in suggesting protein functional annotation as a means by which to introduce undergraduates to research
[19]. Appealing features of the BioLEd curriculum include: (i) its functional genomics framework, which
leverages established biochemical methods to pursue open research questions of each POI’s function; (ii)
its fundamentally modular and transferable curriculum design, enabling facile adoption by other institu-
tions/instructors; (iii) its active learning approaches, which pervade every aspect of the curriculum; (iv) its
inclusion of computational biology, both informatics-based and molecular (e.g., docking).
Description of the Course
Throughout the year-long course, students are charged with purifying and characterizing a protein for
which the crystal structure was determined by the Joint Center for Structural Genomics (JCSG; [20]) and a
putative function was annotated but never experimentally investigated. In order to optimize the chances
of success and orchestrate course logistics, the experienced (PhD-level) instructors select proteins of in-
terest (POI) with presumed enzymatic functions and assign these to students (see the Target Selection
section for sample criteria). Students learn a wide variety of techniques to study their assigned POI in the
first semester, including bioinformatic and computational methods, extensive literature surveys, and la-
boratory experiments in which they over-express, purify and quantify their recombinant POI. In addition,
students learn how to determine enzyme kinetics via spectrophotometric assays, using the well-
characterized and commercially available enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Apart from the LDH as-
Gray et al. (2014) 3 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
say, each experiment represents truly unique and original research because each student POI group (Fig
3) is working with a different, hitherto unexplored protein.
Students continuing in the second semester of the lab are already familiar with the techniques need-
ed to study their POI. And, because of their literature mining and bioinformatic work, they possess much
background knowledge about their unique protein. This preparation allows the second semester to be
less rigidly structured than the first, which is also a necessity because each POI is unique; as is true of any
scientific research, a “one size fits all” approach is not feasible across the entire class. While there is a
timeline for the second semester to help guide the students (Table II), much of the scientific discovery is
driven directly by the students and their investment in discovering the function of their POI.
First semester modules and assignments
Modularity and flexibility were major aims of our curricular design, such that the research and/or instruc-
tional components of BioLEd can be implemented equally easily at predominantly undergraduate institu-
tions or PhD-granting research (R1) universities. In other words, we sought to create a course that could
be comprehensive, but also amenable to only partial implementation—e.g., at institutions which do not
devote a full semester or two to protein biochemistry, or if instructors wish to implement only portions of
the curriculum. By creating a modular curriculum, instructors at any institution can choose to incorporate
discrete elements of BioLEd into their preexisting courses.
The first-semester curriculum consists of seven experimental and five computational/discussion-
based modules (Table I). Students work with their assigned POI for all modules except those involving
LDH kinetics (Modules 4, 5). Modules 1a and 2 are designed to introduce students to the literature and
online/web resources, and to guide them in finding articles in both the primary and secondary (review)
literature that may be relevant to investigating their POI. Using a modification of the C.R.E.A.T.E. method
[21], students are guided in reading and critically analyzing research articles related to their POI.
Modules 1b (pipetting) and 3 (buffers) are fairly basic types of lab activities, and students are provid-
ed with intentionally brief experimental descriptions rather than detailed protocols or specific instruc-
tions for a given task. For instance, students might be instructed to “prepare 100 mL of 1 M Tris pH 8”,
versus “to prepare a 10x stock of Tris buffer, begin by adding 121.14 g of Tris to a clean beaker and…”. In
our experience, for many students this may be their first experience with stock solutions and careful buff-
er/solution calculations. Students determine the detailed protocols for making the solutions they need,
and they are individually tasked with making any necessary calculations as a pre-lab assignment. This ap-
proach helps instill the self-reliance and proficiency that becomes increasingly important in later stages of
the BioLEd curriculum.
Gray et al. (2014) 4 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Modules 4 and 5 focus on kinetics assays using the enzyme LDH. This activity prepares students for
the second-semester experiments, where they conduct kinetic assays on their own POIs. Module 4 re-
quires students to determine (i) the optimal concentration of LDH enzyme for detecting signal in their
spectrophotometric assays, as well as (ii) a suitable range of substrate concentrations for determining
LDH kinetics parameters. Students learn how to select proper substrate concentrations to enable deter-
mination of Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters, including the initial reaction velocity (v ), maximal ve-
locity (v ), and the Michaelis constant (K ). Sometimes, a partner pair discovers that they cannot calcu-
late reliable kinetic parameters because the substrate concentration range initially settled upon did not
sufficiently span the hyperbolic v versus [substrate] curve. An entire lab session is dedicated to pro-
cessing and analyzing the kinetics data that have been acquired (from raw absorbance measurements, to
progress curves, to Michaelis-Menten plots) and, in some cases, students can repeat the experiment if
they realize they did not have an appropriate range of substrate concentrations.
In Modules 7–9, students learn to transform the DNA plasmid encoding their POI into chemically
competent Escherichia coli, over-express the recombinant POI via induction with IPTG or arabinose (de-
pending on the plasmid), harvest and then lyse their E. coli cell culture, and finally purify their POI using
three types of chromatography (below). These key labs introduce students to the recombinant DNA
technology that was used to clone the gene for their POI, as well as the methods used to over-express
and purify proteins both for this and subsequent labs (e.g., second semester). A sample protein expres-
sion/purification workflow, as executed by one of our BioLEd student groups, is shown in Fig 4.
All POIs used in our course were cloned by JCSG into either pBAD-derived (pMH4) or pSpeedET bacte-
rial expression vectors. These protein constructs feature an Nʹ-terminal His6× tag, enabling immobilized
metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) purification on a Ni2+–charged resin. By having students purify
their POIs via affinity, gel-filtration, and ion-exchange chromatographies, they can both learn these types
of chromatography and also conclude—on their own—that, in general, IMAC affords the greatest purity
and yield [22]. Students also learn electrophoretic protein separation (SDS-PAGE) during these modules,
and use it extensively in both semesters to monitor their protein expression and purification. Students
use these methods to purify their POI in Module 9, and then learn how to quantify samples in Module 10.
Students are taught the bases of two common quantitation techniques (dye-binding and A ), as well as
the caveats of each approach (e.g., the possibility of spuriously high concentrations when using the Coo-
massie dye-binding method, if the POI has a disproportionately high fraction of basic residues relative to
the calibration standards). Students learn the advantages/disadvantages of each approach, how to exe-
cute the technique, and how to analyze the data (standard curves), all while determining the concentra-
tion of their POI samples. Module 10 also leverages the dye-binding quantification method to introduce
Gray et al. (2014) 5 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
the concept of protein–ligand binding assays. Ligand-binding experiments that are tailored to each stu-
dent’s POI are not easily performed because (i) each group works with a unique POI, (ii) the potential lig-
ands to each POI are unknown, and (iii) data for binding isotherms are not readily acquired (at least not
with the detection methods and equipment found in most undergraduate biochemistry labs). Rather, the
topic of ligand-binding equilibria is introduced by quantifying the binding of Coomassie to bovine serum
albumin, as described by Sohl & Splittgerber [23]. Given suitable equipment and available materials, stu-
dents may propose similar POI–specific experiments in the second semester.
The computational biology components (Modules 6 and 11) guide students in using both informatics–
based (Module 6) and chemistry–based (Module 11) computational methodologies as a way to quantita-
tively explore the sequence/function and structure/function relationships for their POI. These modules
rely on the deep sequence ↔ structure ↔ function paradigm at the heart of biochemistry (Fig 5). We in-
troduce students to both families of approaches for inferring protein function: (i) the statistical/data-
driven approach of bioinformatics (Module 6; Fig 5B) and (ii) the chemical/structure-based approach, as
exemplified by molecular docking (Module 11; Fig 5C). A key lesson taught here is the comparative ap-
proach in biology: Students learn that they can use systematic comparisons at the levels of sequence and
structure, between their POI and proteins of well-characterized function, to predict potential functions of
their POIs (e.g., substrate specificities). Then, they design experiments to test those predictions in the
second semester. Throughout these Modules, students are taught structural bioinformatics concepts and
jargon (‘homology’, ‘domain’, ‘superfamily’, ‘fold family’, etc. [24]), as well as the principles of sequence-
based bioinformatics (e.g., BLAST expectation values). Students learn, for instance, that being able to
classify their POI into a particular fold family does not necessarily provide sufficiently detailed information
to allow meaningful (specific and testable) hypotheses for a POI’s substrate specificity.
In Module 6, students employ bioinformatic servers, databases, and literature-search methods to
help identify potential enzymatic activities, substrate specificities, and any function-related motifs in their
POI. This is done at the levels of sequence and structure (Fig 5A). This module demands a highly immer-
sive learning approach and, because this material is new to many students, a more planned approach
may be necessary at this stage (e.g., we have had students pattern their workflows after Mazumder &
Vasudevan’s approach [25] to structure-guided comparative analysis of protein function). We first intro-
duce basic concepts, including PDB file manipulation [26], sequence alignments, and phylogenetic trees.
We then introduce students to powerful bioinformatic tools for (i) structure comparison, both pairwise
(e.g., in the PYMOL molecular visualization environment [27]) and against structural databases (e.g., VAST
[28], DALI [29]); (ii) integrated structure analysis services (e.g., PDBSUM [30]); (iii) comprehensive se-
quence/function databases such as UNIPROT [31]; and (iv) databases and knowledge-bases with a specific
Gray et al. (2014) 6 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
focus on enzyme function (e.g., BRENDA [32]) or pathways (e.g., KEGG [33]). This Module should empha-
size to students that knowledge gleaned from database searches and analyses can be integrated with
careful study of any primary literature that might be available for functional characterization of close
homologs of their POI.
Module 11 introduces students to what can be learned by detailed analysis of the 3D structure of
their POI. Molecular visualization [34], modeling approaches (e.g., homology modeling), and pro-
tein/ligand docking [35] form the core of this module (Fig 5C). Students examine the features of their
structure using PYMOL, which they are introduced to early in the semester and which we then revisit in
class (e.g., Supp Info 2). Students optionally build homology models using SWISS-MODEL [36], and conduct
docking experiments with PATCHDOCK [37]. We recently developed a standalone (non–web-based) educa-
tional workflow for docking that uses the high-performance AUTODOCK-VINA software [38]. In this work-
flow (Supp Info 3), students learn docking as a powerful in silico tool for exploring the ligand-binding
properties (and hence function) of their POI, and the students also learn basic usage of the Linux operat-
ing system (this is an exciting first for many students). We have found that students need close guidance
in order to learn to distinguish less relevant small molecules in a PDB file (e.g., glycerol from crystallization
conditions) from more promising cofactors, metals or other ligands that might be bound, and to learn
how to navigate and interpret the vast information content of a PDB file. Similarly, we find that most un-
dergraduates must be carefully introduced to the notion of protein packing in a crystal lattice, and how
such packing may relate to the biologically functional oligomeric state; this is an especially important
point as regards students’ structural analyses of POIs that are suspected to act as multimers.
Another lesson regarding the computational biology modules is that BioLEd is generally the first lab
course encountered by biochemistry students (at least at UVa) that does not expect specific, preordained,
‘right-or-wrong’ answers. Indeed, we have found that a difficulty in facilitating the bioinformatic labs is
that many students expect questions to have a single ‘right’ answer; thus, a common pitfall is that many
students are tempted to mechanically ‘plug and chug’ data into bioinformatic servers, rather than ex-
plore, critically analyze, and ruminate about the results for their POI. Instructors and TAs can preempt
this difficulty by repeatedly emphasizing that active investigation and digging (data mining) will yield in-
teresting discoveries and putative leads about possible POI functions. During all computational biology
sessions, the instructional staff should engage the students about their findings in ‘real time’. For in-
stance, as students are conducting sequence similarity searches for homologs, TAs can question them
about the total number of ‘hits’ detected beyond the statistical threshold, how the number of new hits
changes after 1, 5, 10, … iterations of PSI-BLAST [39, 40], and so on.
Second Semester: Summary
Gray et al. (2014) 7 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Unlike the first-semester biochemistry lab, a pre-set syllabus of laboratory modules and associated proto-
cols/guides is not provided to students in the second semester. Instead, the students are charged with
planning their work: They formulate a strategy and timeline in consultation with the instructors. We pro-
vide a general outline of experimental progress, as an idealized plan for students to follow (Table II), but
they are free to propose deviations from it. As with ‘real’ biochemical research, students often find that
they must adapt their second-semester plans based on the outcomes of their individual experiments and
the general behavior (solubility, etc.) of their POI.
Students over-express and purify their POI using the knowledge they gained in the first semester—
namely, the chromatographic purification method that gave the best results with their POI. (In general,
most students proceed via IMAC with their (His) –tagged POIs.) Next, the purified POI has to be ex-
changed into a buffer in which the protein is soluble at their working concentrations, and which is com-
patible with the planned enzymatic assays. The students must discover what types of buffer conditions
others have used to study homologous proteins, and what conditions work with those homologs that
have been confirmed as having the same enzymatic activity that the POI is thought to have. Designing
this experiment requires students to use the literature skills that they developed in the first semester.
Determining a suitable buffer, both for enzyme storage and enzyme assays, can be challenging and
time-consuming. General guidelines, including a discussion of the importance of salts, ionic strength, pH
and protein concentration, help the students get started in selecting buffers, and also provides a starting
point for troubleshooting solubility issues; nevertheless, suitable buffers typically must be determined by
empirical trial-and-error. Because each POI has already successfully traversed the typical structural ge-
nomics cloning → over-expression → purification → crystallization pipeline, in principle students should
be able to obtain high yields of pure, soluble protein for each POI target. Regardless, roughly one-quarter
of our POIs over the past few years have proven exceptionally challenging, and simply obtaining condi-
tions which allow the protein to remain soluble might be judged as being sufficient (in terms of student
grades).
After obtaining pure protein in a suitable buffer, students must optimize the POI concentration that
will be used in enzymatic assays throughout the semester. We define an ‘optimal’ amount of POI as
enough protein to obtain a reliable kinetics signal, but as little protein as possible so that many assays can
be performed with one preparation; in addition to maximizing throughput, this strategy reduces the vari-
ation between sample preparations. Optimizing the POI concentration requires certain concepts to be
understood. The spectrophotometer ‘blank’ and the ‘negative control’ (for background rate subtraction)
are especially confusing to students, partly because there is not a standard/well-defined terminology in
the literature. The ‘blank’ for the spectrophotometer can be confused with an ‘enzyme blank,’ which ac-
Gray et al. (2014) 8 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
tually is more accurately considered a ‘negative control,’ ‘blank rate,’ or ‘background rate.’ For example,
for the LDH assays we teach students that the spectrophotometer blank consists of all assay solution
components except for the enzyme and any light-absorbing cofactors being monitored (NADH); the blank
is used to set the absorbance of the spectrophotometer to zero. The background rate is the change in
absorbance signal of the full assay solution—minus enzyme—over the same length of time that enzymat-
ic activity is monitored. Establishing the background rate is important because the next step is to discern
a significant signal versus background noise. Concepts such as the instrument’s detection limit and the
background signal must be thoroughly discussed in order to ensure that students can discern when their
data reveal authentic activity, as opposed to data that differ only insignificantly from the background rate.
Some target POIs are almost certainly misannotated [41] or annotated at only low functional resolu-
tion in public databases. This means that the substrate(s) the students chose to test might be inappropri-
ate for the POI, yielding negative results. Distinguishing true negative results from student error requires
a positive control. However, a true positive control is impossible because the POI functions are unknown.
When coupled reactions [42] are used, we provide students with the substrate of the coupling enzyme,
allowing them to observe and measure the activity of the coupling enzyme alone. Finding activity for the
coupling enzyme(s) alone reassures students that their reaction conditions are favorable for the planned
assay. In the case of a direct assay, a commercial enzyme (if available) is used as a positive control, again
providing assurance that assay conditions are compatible with enzymatic activity. In addition to planning
suitable controls, students should plan to test alternative substrates in the event that their putative func-
tion is not supported; selection of viable alternative substrates can be guided by bioinformatics, docking
results, and the literature.
Upon initial detection of activity and optimization of POI concentration, students determine the kinet-
ic parameters with one substrate. Doing the experiment in triplicate to obtain standard deviations is im-
portant—students are typically intrigued by the variation they find, and they become more critical of arti-
cles in the primary literature that do not report standard deviations or other statistical estimates of error.
Once students have acquired and processed the kinetic data, they are encouraged to systematically vary
the assay to begin investigating the catalytic mechanism, protein stability, and/or substrate specificity.
Students often choose to vary the pH, temperature, available metal cofactors, or test the effects of inhibi-
tors that they chose based on bioinformatic analyses.
Second Semester Assignments
This research-based curriculum involves assignments that are atypical for a standard lab course. For the
first assignment of the second semester, student teams prepare lists of required chemicals and an outline
of their planned experimental (kinetic) assays. Next, independently written assignments require each
Gray et al. (2014) 9 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
student to detail the materials and methods used in their work (week 6), and to write a report with intro-
duction, figures, and future goals (week 9). Both of these assignments prepare students to write a POI
manuscript that is due at the end of the semester (week 13). Students benefit by having the final, large-
scale assignment consist of these sub-tasks distributed throughout the semester, and they are also able
to incorporate the feedback they receive on the smaller assignments into the final manuscript. Having
these assignments earlier in the semester also ensures that students are sufficiently immersed in their
POI. In addition to the final manuscript, each POI group (Fig 3) creates a poster for an end-of-term poster
session, simulating the experience at a scientific conference; while the poster is prepared as a group ef-
fort, individual students take turns presenting the poster to the instructors and teaching assistants. In the
past few years, dozens of BioLEd students have presented their results as posters at a local meeting of
the American Chemical Society; this late-April event is opportunely timed just before the end of each
Spring term, and similar regional events likely can be found near other institutions considering a BioLEd-
based curriculum.
Two group meetings (GM) per POI are held in the second semester, as detailed in the Teaching Com-
munication & Critical Thinking section (below). These meetings mimic group meetings held in research
labs, our aim being to encourage interactions among students and between students/instructors, and to
train students in effective scientific communication. To help students prepare for their final poster and
manuscript, instructors should provide discussion and feedback on student figure preparation, how data
are presented (types of plots, etc.), and the overall quality of the GM presentation. Instructors also ana-
lyze and discuss the scientific content of these presentations, so as to fully grasp the data that students
are generating as well as the overall progress of each POI project. The GMs are spaced roughly ⅓ and ⅔
of the way through the semester, giving milestones to help students remain focused on the ultimate goal
of characterizing the enzyme kinetics of their POI.
Second Semester Grading
Group-based projects, which are at the level of an entire POI group rather than individual students or
partner-pairs (Fig 3), comprise a relatively large share (≈30%) of a student’s final grade in the second se-
mester. This group work includes making GM presentation slides, collaborating on the end-of-term post-
er, and writing the final POI manuscript. Non-group components of the second-semester grade include
an individual student’s performance on the GM presentations (≈15%); their weekly quizzes, notebook,
and effort grades (≈8%, 7%, 10% respectively); and other individual lab reports during the term (≈30%).
Because the BioLEd curriculum is one of real research, the grades for the final project and presenta-
tions are based not on ‘positive’ results, but rather on criteria such as students’ use of the scientific
method (e.g., systematic controls), scientific inquisitiveness, problem-solving efforts, resourcefulness, and
Gray et al. (2014) 10 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
overall effort. Some of our past POI targets have been difficult in vitro, generally due to protein solubility
issues or because no enzymatic activity was detected. In such cases, little to no kinetics data were ob-
tained by students. A lack of ‘results’ from such POI groups does not insure a low grade; instead, it is
made clear to students that they would be expected to (i) use the primary literature to investigate poten-
tial reasons for difficulties, (ii) develop troubleshooting scenarios, and (iii) rely more heavily on computa-
tional biology to investigate the putative function of their POI. In this way, students learn that they are
engaged in very real scientific research; we have found that many students embrace these challenges.
Infrastructure
As implemented at UVa, the BioLEd-based course meets for a one-hour class and four-hour laboratory
session per week. On occasion, less formal review sessions or office-hours are also offered (e.g., a session
dedicated to the Michaelis-Menten and related kinetics equations). Two research-active faculty, one full-
time instructional laboratory support specialist, and six graduate student TAs serve the third- and fourth-
year undergraduates enrolled in the year-long course. Notably, the BioLED approach scales well: Of our
100+ chemistry graduates per year, typically ≈80-90 have enrolled in our biochemistry lab (predominantly
chemistry majors with a biochemistry focus). There are six lab sections per week, each led by one gradu-
ate TA. Each TA/lab section is assigned two POIs; each POI typically has 5-9 students, working in pairs or
triples (Fig 3). In total, 12 POIs are studied each year, distributed across the six laboratory sections.
Lab sections meet in one of two laboratory spaces. Each laboratory is equipped with, for every 2-3
students, a UV/Vis spectrophotometer, a gel electrophoresis setup, and a stir plate. Each laboratory also
has shaker-incubators for cell growth and protein expression, a standard centrifuge, pH meter, scales, as-
sorted chromatography columns, and other typical biochemistry laboratory equipment.
Teaching assistants
The course described above requires six teaching assistants; thus far, we have accommodated student:TA
ratios as high as 18:1. TA preparation is vital to the success of this laboratory. Most graduate students in
the department teach in their first two years. Because most of the TAs are new to research themselves,
several hours are scheduled to train them before the Fall term begins. TAs are introduced to the peda-
gogical principles, best practices, and instructional strategies underlying the BioLEd curriculum. During
the semester, TAs are expected to perform all of the computational labs and create the keys used in grad-
ing those assignments. Each lab protocol is discussed in detail (at a TA meeting near the start of each
week) in order to identify thin areas in a TA’s knowledge-base. Also, novice TAs who teach a Wednesday
or Thursday section are encouraged to observe at least part of a lab earlier in the week. Because we find
that TAs often hesitate to reveal when something is new or unfamiliar to them, the TA training module is
evolving to include an actual dry-run of each laboratory technique (rather than simply a discussion).
Gray et al. (2014) 11 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Content Delivery, Active Learning
The limited time for instructor–student interaction is a difficulty in implementing the BioLEd curriculum in
a typical (3-credit) undergraduate biochemistry lab. In one hour of lecture per week, the instructor may
seek to cover the theory of the method(s) being used in lab that week, practical aspects of implementing
a method, various aspects of statistical data analysis/interpretation, and so on. All the necessary content
cannot be covered in a one-hour lecture. In addition, data analysis/interpretation is more effectively
learned actively, rather than by lecture. Thus, the typical lecture has been replaced with an inverted lec-
ture style [43-45]. Lecture content was recorded as brief (<15 minutes) slideshow videos and supple-
mented with reading assignments. Practical execution of lab methods was also provided as videos, either
found online or created in-house. The weekly lecture hour was thereby freed so the instructor could ac-
tively work through sample calculations, describe anticipated data/graphs, interpret data, demonstrate
the usage of software and databases, and answer any troubleshooting questions.
Interactive teaching [46-48, 43, 49-51] is an effective tool for delivering most of the lab course con-
tent. For instance, for the lecture on ion-exchange chromatography, students are asked to draw a puta-
tive chromatogram on the board. One student volunteer might draw the axes (A and ionic strength as
y-axes), while others may make changes based on feedback from the class and instructor. Further stu-
dent volunteers will then draw a typical A trace and ionic-strength trace. A final student might then be
asked to sketch the expected SDS-PAGE gel of specific fractions from the chromatogram; this is an espe-
cially valuable exercise for gel-filtration chromatography, where any oligomeric POI that elutes should mi-
grate at the mass of a monomer on a denaturing gel. The class is encouraged to add or otherwise edit
what is drawn on the chalkboard, and especially to ask questions. This interactive format engages stu-
dents and encourages active participation. Those students not actively participating at any given moment
are nevertheless thinking about what they would draw, and are able to work through their ideas via dis-
cussion. During some lecture times, the class works through problems in pairs or small groups; repre-
sentatives from each group volunteer to share their answers. This format is particularly helpful for the
Buffers & Solutions module (Module 3, Supp Info 1), as the concepts of stock solutions and dilutions are
cemented via calculations and the practice of making the solutions.
Another active learning strategy—concept mapping—is introduced in week two (Module 2). First,
the instructor shares a concept map about a topic that should be familiar to students from past course-
work (e.g., hemoglobin). The instructor explains how the hemoglobin map was created, and that each
concept map is unique. Another familiar topic is then chosen, and individual students begin creating a
concept map on the chalkboard, connecting ideas, facts and concepts related to the new topic. The rela-
Gray et al. (2014) 12 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
tionship between the concept map and literature search keywords is easily introduced by having students
combine words from the map, use these as literature search queries, and then compare the results.
Active learning can also be used to teach data analysis. A data figure can be projected, and the stu-
dents can be asked questions that are either factual (e.g., what method was used to generate the data?
what controls are present/missing?) or interpretative (e.g., what hypothesis might these data address?
what conclusions can be drawn?). For each type of question, multiple answers are heard, compared, and
discussed amongst the students and instructors (including TAs). This instructional mode is especially im-
portant in the second semester, when some student groups start generating potentially large amounts of
kinetics data for their POIs. In the second semester, those lecture hours that are not scheduled for activi-
ties such as group meetings can be used to reinforce important concepts (e.g., analyzing progress curves
to extract Michaelis-Menten kinetic parameters), address any recurring troubleshooting issues, etc.
All of these active and interactive learning methods have been highly effective in the BioLEd curricu-
lum, based on our initial assessment results (described below). In general, the instructional tools and
best-practices to be deployed in a specific course will vary with the exact concepts, sets of students, and
instructors involved; this aspect of curriculum design should be researched by an instructor to identify
what are likely to be the most suitable styles for a given course [44]. Numerous active learning options
exist for teaching different types of concepts (e.g., [44] and [52]).
Target Selection & Preparation
The proteins selected for students as target POIs generally meet certain criteria: (i) a 3D structure of the
protein is available; (ii) the protein function is unknown/unreported; (iii) the putative function is likely en-
zymatic (as inferred from bioinformatics); (iv) the enzymatic reaction can be monitored via spectropho-
tometric assays (either directly or via coupling reactions); and (v) all substrates, cofactors, and coupling
enzymes are commercially available and are affordable. Before the term begins, a PhD-level instructor
evaluates each POI candidate against these criteria. As targets are selected, corresponding clones are re-
quested from collaborators at the JCSG or are purchased from Arizona State University’s Plasmid Reposi-
prepare materials for the students for Module 7, plasmid DNAs are mini-prepped/sequenced by the in-
structional staff before the term begins.
Based on our experiences with over 40 POI targets, we recommend avoiding dehydrogenases with
vague annotations (e.g., an ‘alcohol dehydrogenase’) unless the operon structure or other bioinformatic
data strongly suggest a specific substrate. As an example, we have had a student group who surveyed
over 20 substrates for one POI with no positive results, implying that ‘dehydrogenase’ is an insufficiently
Gray et al. (2014) 13 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
precise descriptor for this class of enzymes. Though negative outcomes do not affect the students’
course grades (see above), confidence and morale can become diminished in these POI groups.
Facilitating Group Work
Along with the call for science to be taught in a more experiential manner, there has been a call for teach-
ing in a more collaborative and cooperative way [53]: “The collaborative nature of scientific and techno-
logical work should be strongly reinforced by frequent group activity in the classroom. Scientists and engi-
neers work mostly in groups… Similarly, students should gain experiences sharing responsibility for learn-
ing with each other.” In addition to learning the skills of working within a group, students often learn and
retain more when they work in small groups on projects (e.g. cooperative learning [54, 55]) versus other
instructional formats [54, 56, 57, 55]. BioLEd students experience cooperative learning, the characteristics
of which include (i) students working in small groups, (ii) students experiencing shared learning goals (and
tasks that may differ from those of other groups), and (iii) grades that are based on both individual work
and group work.
Group work can be difficult to implement, largely because of the personality and aptitude differences
inherent to any collection of human beings. More than three years of experience in implementing the Bi-
oLEd curriculum reveals that many challenges directly stem from intra-group dynamics. Common issues
include (i) a student feels that the workload/contributions in their group are unequal; (ii) a lack of com-
munication, electronically and in person; and (iii) irresponsibility on the part of one group member ham-
pers the entire group (e.g., someone forgets to come into lab to start an overnight culture, thus delaying
their entire group by at least a day). These types of issues are common to cooperative learning, and can
be addressed by incorporating the following practices:
i) positive interdependence: students learn that their success is tightly coupled to the contributions and
success of others in the group
ii) face-to-face positive interaction: students must be encouraged to directly interact, both during discus-
sions (such as the group meetings) and by sharing information
iii) individual and group accountability: students are held accountable both for their individual work and
for contributing sufficiently to the group project; thus, both individual and group grades factor into the
overall grade
iv) group processing: students are given opportunities to ‘grade’ their group’s functionality, and to discuss
what have been positive and negative aspects of their experience working in their POI group
In the first semester, students have a strong incentive (individual grades) to stay on-task and be pre-
pared each week (quizzes, pre-labs). This intentional course structure helps reinforce student independ-
ence. In contrast, the second semester leaves preparedness and time management to the students. Al-
so, grading methods are required that specifically address the issues associated with group work. A bal-
Gray et al. (2014) 14 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
ance of group and individual grades was found to be crucial in order for students to appreciate that their
grade does incorporate their personal effort and intellect, regardless of the effort and performance level
of their peers. For example, the overall grade for the second-semester GM presentations includes group
and individual subtotals. Effort reports are prepared by each student and turned-in with select assign-
ments (Supp Info 4 is a sample). These reports are vital for an instructor’s evaluation of the group, and
also for students to pause and consider the contributions of each group member. Though students tend
to be generous with one another in scoring overall effort, students who do not contribute are easily iden-
tified by this mechanism. Questions pertaining to what each individual student brought to the group, and
what the student learned from the group, help students appreciate the benefits of working together co-
hesively.
Teaching Communication & Critical Thinking
Group meetings
Group meetings occur twice in the second semester, at weeks 7 and 10. Each GM is attended by the in-
structors and TAs for that POI. The meeting format mimics that in most research labs. Students present a
collaboratively-prepared slide presentation in a small group setting; presentations are followed by discus-
sions. In advance, students are given an outline of what sort of information should be included in their
presentation slides. To ensure that each person is familiar with all of their group’s work, students are told
to be prepared to present any segment of the presentation; slides are assigned to individual students at
the start of the GM. These meetings are kept intentionally informal and interactive, and it is useful to
bear in mind that many undergraduates will be nervous about speaking in front of their professors.
The GMs are valuable on many levels. First, science majors are rarely expected to present their work
in class, and therefore they do not gain experience in articulating and defending their ideas ‘on their feet’.
The BioLEd curriculum affords opportunities for students to gain confidence in communicating their work
via scientific/technical speaking, in a low-key and welcoming environment. Second, the GMs help instruc-
tors track the students’ progress with each POI, individually and as a group. In classes with large numbers
of students and sections, instructors likely will be unable to stay abreast of each POI project without such
meetings. The GMs also allow for interactive brainstorming and troubleshooting. Because much of this
course entails group work, a student’s individual turn in presenting part of the GM is a key opportunity to
demonstrate their mastery and ownership of the work (i.e., apart from the group work to prepare the
slides); also, the instructors can gain a sense of how the group is functioning. An important result of the
GMs is enhanced faculty-student interactions in an intimate setting. Studies indicate that such environ-
ments are especially important for novice students, whose needs differ from students with research ex-
Gray et al. (2014) 15 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
perience [58-60]. Personal interactions with research mentors can address some of the differences, by
providing guidelines and orientation, as well as socialization in the traits of scientific researchers.
Final Manuscript
The BioLEd students’ research culminates in a manuscript prepared in the style of a scientific publication.
Students work towards this final report throughout the semester in discrete stages, corresponding to the
sections of a typical scientific article (Introduction, Methods, etc.). For the final report assignment, stu-
dents merge their adapted Materials & Methods (from week 6) and Introduction, together with figures
and future work (from week 9) and newly written Abstract, Discussion, and Results sections. Much of this
final paper involves bioinformatics, which students were introduced to in the first semester and urged to
revisit since then. For instance, the Introduction contains the students’ hypothesis about the function of
their POI (e.g., substrate specificity of a putative aminotransferases), which forms the starting point for
the second semester’s group work. Students learn that their hypotheses have to be justified, largely via
bioinformatic results with their POI and by analysis of the salient literature for any homologs.
The manuscript is a group project. There are many reasons for this. First, there are several facets to
the manuscript, and each student brings different strengths to bear on the research and writing; this re-
flects how research groups actually work in academia, national labs, industry, etc. Second, students work
throughout the semester to study a single POI in groups of up to 6-8 students (Fig 3). Early on, we prod
students to consider working on different aspects of the POI (i.e., as a synergistic group rather than just a
collection of individuals); this way, they accomplish more than they thought possible. However, only one
manuscript per POI is accepted. Thus, students are made to work together to craft their findings into a
cohesive description. Achieving this goal teaches students efficient scientific communication. Finally, be-
cause peer review and critical data analysis are important skills for scientists, groups are encouraged to
hash through a series of drafts and edits. We also require a breakdown of each individual’s contribution
to the manuscript; this accountability helps promote a fair division of labor towards the manuscript. The
final manuscript may develop into a line of further work: If the final results for a given POI are definitive,
demonstrating either (i) the annotated enzyme activity, (ii) absence of the predicted activity/substrate
specificity or (iii) some other activity/specificity, then the instructor can work with any interested students
from the POI group to draft a new annotation entry for submission to TOPSAN (see above). And, if the
POI results are publishable, then instructors can recruit students from the POI group towards such efforts.
At least some further experiments (beyond those in the final project report) are generally required before
being able to publish, and such work can be pursued the next summer or academic year (e.g., for re-
search credit); indeed, one recent student developed their BioLEd project into an MSc thesis in our own
(research) laboratories.
Gray et al. (2014) 16 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Poster Preparation and Presentation
Most undergraduates are unfamiliar with the ways scientists present and share their work at meetings.
Preparing a scientific poster requires students to mine their data and results (which are reported in detail
in the final manuscript), distilling the work into only the most compelling results and effective figures. In
addition, students must be prepared to lead an audience through the contents of their poster. Students
who do this well typically possess a deep knowledge of both their POI as well as each group members’
contributions towards characterizing the POI. The poster exercise gauges student familiarity with what
work was done as well as their grasp of why particular sets of experiments were pursued.
The poster presentation is also an opportunity for students to practice scientific speaking. Unlike the
GMs, each student walks the instructors and TAs through the poster and explains the entire project on
their own. So, while the poster is generated as a group effort, the posters are presented individually.
Some students who do not do well on written work are found to shine during oral presentation, with their
depth of knowledge more readily apparent in these real-time interactions. Thus, student performance is
optimally assessed by not limiting the graded work to only written assignments.
Assessment
Our approach to course assessment was multi-pronged, the overall goal being to gauge the effectiveness
of the new BioLEd curriculum. We evaluated the curriculum in three ways: (i) student gains in scientific
content were assessed by us via pre–/post–course tests; (ii) student performance and content gain were
self-assessed with pre–/post–course surveys; and (iii) university-wide course evaluations were used. (All
assessment activities were approved by the UVa Institutional Review Board for the Social & Behavioral
Sciences [#2010041200] and were in compliance with their policies.) We also surveyed past students on
their opinions of the course; specifically, we questioned BioLEd alumni on whether this course gave them
a deeper understanding of biochemistry and enabled them to approach scientific problems more effec-
tively.
Assessment of Student Performance on Assignments
For purposes of both grading and course assessment, we defined the four learning gains shown in Fig 1:
(i) Aims & Concepts, (ii) Experimental Design, (iii) Data Processing, and (iv) Broader Context. These four
learning gains are further defined by eight focal areas: (i) laboratory skills, (ii) broad biochemical
knowledge, (iii) reading/comprehending scientific articles, (iv) written and oral communication, (v) group
dynamics skills, (vi) investigative skills, (vii) critical thinking, and (viii) problem-solving skills. Each learning
gain and focal area can be evaluated by specific outcomes (examples are given in Fig 1). Outlining learn-
ing gains—and using detailed grading rubrics based on these gains and focal areas—are important steps
Gray et al. (2014) 17 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
in assessing student performance in a newly developed curriculum. In the first semester, the TAs grade
assignments using rubrics that we developed for two purposes: to enable assessment of students in our
four learning gains, and to help focus a TA’s grading efforts on those concepts specific to each assign-
ment; a sample rubric is shown in Supp Info 5. Though necessarily detailed, BioLEd rubrics cannot be too
specific because each report may be quite unique (reflecting the properties that are unique to each POI).
By having TAs complete rubrics when grading student assignments, the scores become more reliable
and consistent for students within one section and also among different sections (different POIs, different
TAs). When graded assignments are returned, students can see what they did well and what areas might
require improvement. Furthermore, because the rubrics are based on our learning gains, TAs and in-
structors can refer to the rubrics for the main focus of a given assignment. If many students seem to
struggle on particular assignments, then TAs/instructors can begin to detect patterns, such as a particular
learning gain that may require more attention in the classroom or laboratory. In addition to assessing
student performance via well-defined assignments, we also used concept inventory tests to assess con-
tent gain and retention at the start of the first term, end of the first term, and end of the second term.
The initial results of these studies (outlined below) indicate that most students in the BioLEd curriculum
demonstrate sustained learning gains in almost all topics, across the entire year.
Student Self–assessment of Learning
An assessment mechanism using pre- and post-course surveys, created with the web-based Student As-
sessment of their Learning Gains (SALG) program [61], was used to examine student confidence levels and
self-reported learning gains. The surveys use five-point Likert–scale questions, wherein students self-
rated their understanding, skills, and attitudes for various topics that were covered in the course (Supp
Info 6 provides sample questions). Answers ranged from “A Great Deal” to “Not at All,” with a “Not Ap-
plicable” option also available. To facilitate calculation of scores, possible answers were given numerical
values as follows: “Not Applicable” = 1, “Not at All” = 2, “Just a Little” = 3, “Somewhat” = 4, “A Lot” = 5,
and “A Great Deal” = 6. The surveys also include free-response questions, enabling participants to offer
suggestions for course improvement.
A chief goal of our assessments was to determine if students were learning—and felt that they were
learning—the concepts we hoped to teach. As a representative example, we gave surveys at the start of
the Fall 2011 term, at the end of Fall 2011, and at the end of the Spring 2012 term; these results are de-
noted ‘pre-term-1’, ‘post-term-1’, and ‘post-term-2’, respectively, and are shown in Fig 6. (There are
generally no new students in our Spring terms, as completion of the Fall course is required, so a ‘pre-
term-2’ pre-survey is unnecessary.) In the pre-term-1 survey, students rated their understanding of the
conceptual topics we covered at a mean value of 3.62 (SD=1.16); the average was 4.78 (SD=0.84) in the
Gray et al. (2014) 18 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
post-term-1 survey, and 5.22 (SD=0.76) in the post-term-2 survey. When asked about their understand-
ing of the presented topics in pre-term-1, only 23% of the students answered positively (Fig 6, left-most
bar), while the means rose to 60% for post-term-1 and 84% for the post-term-2 survey. This represents
an increase of 61% from the start of the course (i.e., pre-term-1). The students self-assessed their
lab/research skills at a mean of 4.48 (SD=1.00) in the pre-term-1 survey, 5.00 (SD=0.77) in the post-term-
1 survey and 5.33 (SD=0.68) in the post-term-2 survey. Half of the students rated their laboratory skills
positively (“A Lot” or “A Great Deal”) in the pre-term-1 survey, 71% in post-term-1, and 90% in the post-
term-2 survey, giving an increase of 40% from the start of the course (Fig 6, middle bars). With respect to
their attitudes and enthusiasm for the subject of biochemistry (Fig 6, right bars), students reported an av-
erage of 4.65 (SD=1.06) in pre-term-1; 4.73 (SD=1.02) in the post-term-1 survey and 5.00 (SD=0.95) in the
post-term-2 survey. Sixty percent of students reported positive attitudes in pre-term-1, 57% in post-
term-1, and 77% in post-term-2 (an increase of 17% from pre-term-1); though there was an increase in
the averages for this category, the magnitude was significantly less than in the other two categories.
These SALG data can be separated into the learning gain categories used in our rubrics (i.e., Aims &
Concepts, Experimental Design, Data Processing, and Broader Context). The SALG data reveal that stu-
dents rate their abilities in Aims & Concepts increasingly positively throughout the course: 28% in pre-
term-1, 64% in post-term-1, and 91% in the post-term-2 surveys. In the Experimental Design category,
26% of students reported positive ratings in the pre-term-1 survey, 41% in the post-term-1, and 85% in
the post-term-2 surveys. Similarly, Data Processing demonstrated an upward trend, with students self-
reporting positive ratings of 29%, 77% and 93% in pre-term-1, post-term-1 and post-term-2, respectively.
Finally, 27% of students positively rated their grasp of Broader Context aim in the pre-term-1 survey, 53%
in the post-term-1, and 83% in the post-term-2. Overall, the fraction of students who consider BioLEd as
having improved their skills and knowledge in biochemistry increased throughout the year-long course.
Student Experiences: A Retrospective Survey
A major aim in BioLEd’s development and implementation has been to teach undergraduate biochemistry
majors how to conduct scientific research in a realistic setting. Were this achieved, a direct consequence
should be a sustained increase in student confidence levels in their scientific knowledge and abilities, as
well as a positive overall experience. A post-course survey was created (using QuestionPro) and was
emailed to students who had completed both semesters of BioLEd; sample survey questions are given in
Supp Info 7. The survey was conducted anonymously, and a monetary lottery was used to incentivize
participation. The survey largely used four-point Likert–scale questions, ranging from “Strongly Agree” to
“Strongly Disagree,” and also included free-response questions.
Gray et al. (2014) 19 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Of the 128 students initially contacted, 56 completed the survey. Of these, 92% reported that they
had earned a cumulative grade of ‘B’ or better in the two semesters; this is consistent with the typical av-
erage course grade over two semesters (an 84.6%, SD=6.75). Though some participants did not complete
the entire survey, those portions that were completed were factored into the statistics for individual
questions; surveys with an incomplete state were assumed to be due to testing fatigue rather than inac-
curate answers. These retrospective surveys are summarized in Fig 7, and some of the findings are de-
scribed in the remainder of this section.
The survey primarily aimed to address two questions: (i) did the course (or specific parts of the
course) increase student confidence in their research, and (ii) did students feel that the course (or specific
parts of the course) provided a deeper knowledge of biochemistry? Sixty percent of the students report-
ed that they “Agree” or “Strongly Agree” that poster presentations gave them more confidence in their
research and gave them a deeper understanding of biochemistry (Fig 7A). Seventy-two percent reported
an increase in overall biochemical confidence, and 75% attested to a deeper understanding of biochemis-
try as a result of their collaborative manuscript writing (Fig 7A, B). Similarly, 71% of participants reported
that the group meetings gave them constructive feedback to improve their research, and 67% felt that
they had a deeper understanding of biochemistry because of these GM presentations (Fig 7A, B).
Many of the above aspects of the course evaluation reflect group work, which measures the ability of
an individual to cohesively work together with others to generate a final product. Though group work can
be difficult for students to manage, many reported it as a positive experience (Fig 7C): 85% of students
testified to learning how to better communicate with their group members and to work with them pro-
fessionally, and 78% of the participants reported that they learned how to better delegate tasks within
their group. Overall, 76% reported a deeper understanding of biochemistry because of the group work
inherent to BioLEd (Fig 7C, right-most bars).
Recent student participants were also asked to rate the BioLEd-based course in relation to other lab
courses that they had taken (Fig 7D). Students overwhelmingly “Strongly Agreed” or “Agreed” that the
BioLEd course (i) encouraged more independent thinking (97%); (ii) taught better time-management skills
(87%); (iii) taught more effective scientific communication skills (88%); (iv) better prepared them to pre-
sent scientific information (88%); and (v) encouraged greater confidence in their scientific knowledge
(78%), versus other laboratory courses completed during their undergraduate studies.
The above results substantiate BioLEd’s goals, design, and implementation, at least in terms of the
confidence levels and deeper understanding of biochemistry that students can achieve by being taught
via activities that typify research environments—group meetings, compiling research results into manu-
scripts, collaborating on poster presentations, and so on. These elements of the BioLEd curriculum ap-
Gray et al. (2014) 20 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
pear to be vital in developing the communication and critical thinking skills necessary in science. The sur-
vey that we administered was rather thorough in order to allow detailed assessment of student learning
and hints for future course refinements. The level of detail, however, possibly resulted in testing fatigue;
also, a four-point Likert system can be too coarse (e.g., how ‘strongly’ a participant may agree/disagree
with a statement varies somewhat, and is not readily controlled for). Future assessment efforts may con-
sider finer (5- or 6-point) scales, and perhaps dividing the one monolithic survey into two discrete com-
ponents.
Assessing Content Gain via Pre- and Post-course Tests: A Vignette
A 20-question ‘concept inventory’ test was administered at the start of the first term, at the end of the
first term, and at the end of the second term. These time-points in a year-long curriculum are labeled
‘pre-term-1’, ‘post-term-1’, and ‘post-term-2’, respectively (as above for Fig 6). As incentive, students re-
ceived five points extra-credit for completing these quizzes. The questions were designed to address our
learning gains (described above), and varied in complexity from highly practical (e.g. read the volume de-
livered from a pipette image) to the higher-level skills required to critically interpret kinetics data results;
a control question was used that concerned material not included in the course. As shown in Fig 8, stu-
dents demonstrated substantial learning gains over the year-long course. The class mean improved from
52% to 77% to 79% (Fig 8) of the questions being answered correctly, with a concomitant decrease in the
standard deviation (4.49, 3.02 and 2.65 for pre-term-1, post-term-1 and post-term-2, respectively).
Summary of Assessment Findings
Our initial assessment and evaluation of BioLEd indicates that this inquiry-driven curriculum provides a
sound education in biochemical research, and that student learning is sustained throughout a full year.
Students excel in each learning gain over time, as measured both objectively (pre-/post-course tests) and
more subjectively (student SALGs). In addition to the assessments, feedback and anecdotal comments via
the UVa course evaluation system have led to many curricular improvements. Past students have recog-
nized the benefits of this type of curriculum, having rated the BioLEd course as more beneficial than any
other lab course they have taken. Future work could include identifying sets of comparison groups for
more thorough and systematic assessments of the BioLEd curriculum; for instance, control groups could
be utilized, both at other institutions and as implemented at UVa (e.g., in a parallel lab section taught us-
ing a more traditional format).
Dissemination
Developing, updating, and maintaining the instructional material for inquiry-based courses is necessarily
more time-consuming than for other types of courses. For instance, laboratory manuals and bioinformat-
Gray et al. (2014) 21 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
ic questions must be updated each year to reflect frequent changes in electronic resources (databases
change, merge with others, etc. [62]). Also, to improve the curriculum’s content and student experience,
constructive feedback from students and TAs is taken into account at the end of each term. These modi-
fications occur both in our in-house laboratory manual (heavily relied on in the first semester) and in the
general instructional materials that we develop (both semesters).
To disseminate BioLEd materials to both students and faculty/staff, a publically accessible resource is
Interest, and Collaborators (Fig 2). The Instructors portal offers three resources: Instruction Modules,
Spectrophotometric Assays, and Assessment & Evaluation Tools. (This region of the site is password-
protected; login credentials are available upon request.) The Instruction Modules section contains the
eleven modules listed in Table I, each of which provides educational materials such as lecture slides, vide-
os, readings, sample quizzes, grading rubrics (Supp Info 5), excerpts from our in-house laboratory manual,
and additional resources (often from the primary literature). Through the Assessment & Evaluation por-
tal, users can access the various assessment tools we distribute to students, as well as the results of those
assessments; past assessments are also available, annotated with commentary to describe changes made
to the curriculum based on the assessments. These resources are intended to assist current BioLEd in-
structors (at UVa) as well as external faculty/staff who wish to implement some (or all) of the BioLEd lab
curriculum at their own institution. All BioLEd materials are freely available either via the website or upon
request.
Conclusions
The biochemistry lab curriculum at UVa has been revamped to provide students with an authentic re-
search experience. Because this lab course is required for chemistry majors specializing in biochemistry,
and because over 70% of our 100+ chemistry degree recipients specialize in biochemistry each year, the
revamped curriculum must be scalable to large numbers of students. (The fraction of students focusing
in biochemistry has steadily climbed in recent years, and may well continue to do so.) With the newly de-
veloped BioLEd curriculum described here, a vast majority of UVa’s new BS Chemistry graduates will have
had a genuine research experience before graduating. Perhaps most importantly, the experience that
students gain in a curriculum such as this is deeply relevant to the ‘real-world’ situations they will face af-
ter graduation, such as the need to work effectively in a group of individuals, towards a common goal,
and without a detailed protocol or rubric. The lessons that students learn in a BioLEd-like curriculum are
general and transferable: whether they pursue graduate school, medical school, volunteer work, industry,
or another calling, students can draw upon the resourcefulness and skills that they developed when
learning how to search the primary literature for relevant information, effectively utilize web servers and
Gray et al. (2014) 22 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
other computational tools, logically design experiments, quantitatively analyze data and interpret results,
and present their findings in a broader context and to a large audience of peers.
Importantly, we note that the research experiences gained in the BioLEd curriculum do not come at
the expense of ‘traditional’ learning: Pre- and post-course tests, as well as participant self-assessments,
indicate that students are learning in our four main focus areas (Fig 1). In addition, student grades im-
proved in nearly all areas with each successive assignment. Finally, though developing the inquiry-based
BioLEd curriculum was a major undertaking, its modular design allows for facile implementation by other
institutions that may be interested in adopting a research-based model for undergraduate biochemistry
education. To aid this, our BioLEd website provides course materials to all students and instructors.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by UVa (Dept of Chemistry, and College and Graduate School of Arts & Sciences),
an RCSA Cottrell Scholar Award (LC), NSF DUE-1044858 (LC and CM), and NSF CAREER awards MCB-
0845668 (LC) and MCB-1350957 (CM). We thank the JCSG for providing clones for many of the POIs in-
vestigated by BioLEd students in recent years, and we thank Jennifer Doudna (UC Berkeley) for helpful
discussion about a year-long biochemistry lab. We also thank the many early generations of BioLEd stu-
dents, TAs and other contributors, including Sarah Elkin, Jeong Hyun Lee, Lauren Lee, Elleansar Okwei,
Colin Price, and Ana Wang.
Gray et al. (2014) 23 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Figure Legends
Fig 1: The four learning gains assessed as part of the BioLEd curriculum (bold font in each quadrant) en-
compass eight focal areas, with some level of redundancy. Asterisks denote those learning foci that are
addressed most intensely in the second half of the full year-long course.
Fig 2: The BioLEd website, shown in this screenshot (A), features distinct portals (red boxes) for Students,
Instructors, Collaborators, and Proteins of Interest. The Proteins tab (B; yellow arrow) opens a list of
POIs, arranged by enzyme class, that have been investigated by students in current or past BioLEd labs.
This resource has been built and maintained using a standards-compliant content management system
(WordPress), providing a modern and easily navigable framework for the BioLEd resource.
Fig 3: Group work is a core element of BioLEd’s design and implementation. This schematic shows the
relationship between an individual student and their lab partner (inner shell), other pairs (middle shell),
and the higher-order association of groups who work on the same POI in a lab section (outer shell); the
two distinct POI groups in a typical ≈20-student lab section are indicated. Within one full term, various
assignments occur at either the individual level, partner level, or POI-group level (work at the POI-group
level is chiefly in the second semester).
Fig 4: Experimental biochemistry is the core of the BioLEd curriculum. To obtain pure protein samples for
kinetics assays, students learn standard techniques of protein induction and over-expression, cell harvest-
ing/lysis, chromatographic purification, etc., as illustrated by this SDS-PAGE gel (and associated caption)
from one of our lab section’s POIs.
Fig 5: Computational biology is integrated into BioLEd in the context of protein functional annotation.
Students learn that both informatics-based and physicochemical-based methodologies can be used to in-
vestigate the biomolecular sequence/structure/function relationships underlying biochemistry and mo-
lecular biology (A). For instance, students learn methods such as sequence analysis (B) and molecular
docking (C). Together, these complementary approaches can help elucidate the function of their POI.
Fig 6: SALG surveys reveal positive response rates for three criteria: understanding of biochemical con-
cepts (left), lab/research skills (middle), and attitude/enthusiasm for biochemical research (right). In each
triad, representative data are shown for pre–term-1 (light grey), post–term-1 (medium gray), and post–
term-2 (dark gray); in a year-long course, these terms correspond to the start of Fall semester, end of Fall,
and end of Spring, respectively. Numerical values and further details are discussed in the text.
Fig 7: Retrospective surveys of recent BioLEd students show improvements in student scientific confi-
dence (A), biochemical knowledge (B), and ability to work in a group (C); the curriculum also compares
favorably to other lab courses taken by the students, based on the criteria listed in (D). Numerical details
and further discussion are in the text.
Fig 8: Pre– and post–course concept inventory tests were used to assess student learning and retention
of scientific content. This histogram plots data for pre–term-1 (light grey), post–term-1 (medium gray),
and post–term-2 (dark gray); numerical values and further details are presented in the text.
Gray et al. (2014) 24 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab
Table I: First-semester course modules
Week Module Assignment type
1a Literature searches; electronic resources and tools (e.g., PYMOL) Problem set
1b Basics of pipetting with the micropipette Practical (wet-lab)
2 Critically reading the primary literature (in-lab discussion) Problem set
3 Making biochemical buffers and solutions Calculations
4 Enzyme kinetics (using LDH as a test system)
Lab report
5 Analyzing enzyme kinetics data (computer lab)
6 Computational biology, I: Bioinformatic tools, web/database resources Problem set
7a General molecular cloning and transformation
7b Recombinant protein expression and SDS-PAGE
Lab report
8 Protein purification, I: Gel-filtration and ion-exchange chromatography
9 Protein purification, II: Affinity chromatography
10 Quantitative protein concentration determination; ligand-binding Lab report
11 Computational biology, II: Molecular visualization, modeling, docking POI report
Table II: Second-semester timeline
Week Module Assignment type
1 Organize reagents and buffers and finalize protocol for assay —
Revised POI report; chemical or-
2-3 Express, purify, and quantify POI
der request (reagent inventory)
Find workable solution/buffer conditions, optimize protein concentration
for enzyme kinetics assays, establish controls for these assays
Group meeting preparation; evaluation of assay; begin determining ki- Draft of Materials & Methods
netics parameters (K , k , etc.) section of final POI report
7-8 Experimental determination of kinetic parameters for each POI Group meeting presentation 1
Present group meeting 1; begin systematic variation/perturbations of Drafts of Introduction, figures,
kinetics assays (e.g., substrate variation) and Future Directions sections
Group meeting presentation 2;
Repeat assays for statistical replicates or troubleshooting; final refine-
10-12 poster presentation; final POI
ments and kinetics data-collection
report (manuscript format)
Gray et al. (2014) 25 of 28
Known Structure, Unknown Function: A New Biochemistry Lab