LAF-Fabric: a data analysis tool for Linguistic Annotation
Framework with an application to the Hebrew Bible
Dirk Roorda∗ ∗∗ dirk.roorda@dans.knaw.nl
Gino Kalkman∗∗∗ g.j.kalkman@vu.nl
Martijn Naaijer∗∗∗ m.naaijer@vu.nl
Andreas van Cranenburgh∗∗∗∗ ∗∗∗∗∗ andreas.van.cranenburgh@huygens.knaw.nl
∗Data Archiving and Networked Services - Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Anna van
Saksenlaan 10; 2593 HT Den Haag, Netherlands
∗∗The Language Archive - Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1; 6525 XD Nijmegen,
Netherlands
∗∗∗EepTalstraCentreforBibleandComputing-VUUniversity,FaculteitderGodgeleerdheid;DeBoelelaan
1105; 1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands
∗∗∗∗HuygensInstitutefortheHistoryoftheNetherlands-RoyalNetherlandsAcademyofArtsandSciences,
P.O. box 90754; 2509 LT; Den Haag, Netherlands
∗∗∗∗∗Institute for Logic Language and Computation - University of Amsterdam, FNWI ILLC Universiteit
van Amsterdam; P.O. Box 94242; 1090 GE Amsterdam, Netherlands
The Linguistic Annotation Framework (LAF) provides a general, extensible stand-off markup
system for corpora. This paper discusses LAF-Fabric, a new tool to analyse LAF resources in
general with an extension to process the Hebrew Bible in particular. We first walk through the
history of the Hebrew Bible as text database in decennium-wide steps. Then we describe how
LAF-Fabric may serve as an analysis tool for this corpus. Finally, we describe three analytic
projects/workflows that benefit from the new LAF representation:
1) the study of linguistic variation: extract cooccurrence data of common nouns between the
booksoftheBible(MartijnNaaijer);2)thestudyofthegrammarofHebrewpoetryinthePsalms:
extract clause typology (Gino Kalkman); 3) construction of a parser of classical Hebrew by Data
Oriented Parsing: generate tree structures from the database (Andreas van Cranenburgh).
1. The Hebrew Bible
The Hebrew Bible is written in old forms of Hebrew and Aramaic, which are dead languages now.
Written manuscripts are our only source for studying these languages. The study of such a body
of historical texts involves research questions from different disciplines. Linguistic analysis is a
stepping stone which must be followed by questions at higher levels of abstraction, such as literary
questions: how did authors use the system of the language to craft their design: i.e. style, literary
effect, focus, and all those features of the text that are not dictated by the language system (van
Peursenetal.2010)? Anotherlineofquestionsfallsintohistoricallinguistics: systematicallycharting
linguistic variation in the biblical linguistic corpus can help addressing the question as to whether
the variation reflects diachronic development (van Peursen and van Keulen 2006).
1.1 Bible and Computer
Naturally, a research program as mentioned above seeks to employ digital tools. In fact, a group of
researchersinAmsterdamstartedcompilingatextdatabaseinthe1970s: theWerkgroepInformatica
Vrije Universiteit (WIVU). This resulted in a database of text and markup, the so-called WIVU
1v6820.0141:viXra
database (Talstra and Sikkel 2000), which became widely known because it became incorporated
in Bible study software packages. The WIVU markup is based on observable characteristics of the
texts and refrains from being committed to a particular linguistic theory or framework. There is no
explicit grammar to which the marked-up text material has to conform. One of the consequences
is that the data cannot conveniently be described in one hierarchical structure, although hierarchy
plays a role. There are several, incompatible hierarchies implicit in the data.
In the 1990s the ground work has been laid for an analytical tool operating on the WIVU data.
In his PhD. thesis, Doedens (1994) defined a database model and a pair of query languages to deal
with text databases, i.e. databases in which the essential structural characteristics of text, sequence
andembedding, arecateredforinanaturalway. Oneofthequerylanguages, QL1,hecharacterised
astopographicmeaningthataqueryinstructionisisomorphictoitsresultswithrespecttosequence
and embedding (Doedens 1994, pp. 108).2 QL has been turned into an efficient implementation by
Petersen(2004,2006), allbeitinasomewhatrestrictedform, namedMQL(Mini-QL).Theresulting
databasesystem,EMDROS(Petersen2002-2014),hasbecomepartoftheWIVUtoolsetandisstill
maintained by its author.
Between the initial work of the WIVU group then and the activities of the ETCBC group
now3, the web has arrived and the practice of information sharing and standardizing has changed
dramatically. Now, inthe2010s, theneedisincreasinglyfelttopreserveandsharetheresultsofthe
ETCBC with not only theologians but also with linguists and researchers in the digital humanities.
Conversely, the methods developed in the sphere of computational linguistics hold promises for new
kinds of studies of the Hebrew texts. A first step has been the deposition of the database in its
EMDROS form at DANS (Talstra et al. 2012).
1.2 Text, markup, and annotation
In 2013 the CLARIN-NL4 project SHEBANQ5 started to convert the Hebrew Text Database from
its EMDROS representation into Linguistic Annotation Framework (LAF) (Ide and Romary 2012).
Linguistic Annotation Framework defines a fairly generic data model for annotated data. The
assumption is that there is an immutable data resource with identifiable regions in it. Regions can
be attached to nodes, nodes can be linked with edges, and both nodes and edges can be the targets
of annotations, which contain feature structures. This annotated graph, anchored to primary data,
can be expressed in XML, by means of the GrAF6 schemas, suggested by the LAF standard.
ThismodelhasturnedouttobeaverygoodfitfortheEMDROSdata,whichconsistsofobjects
carrying features, where features define properties or point to other objects. In EMDROS, objects
arelinkedtoarbitrarysubsetsofwords,andtheconcatenationofallwordsisthetextoftheHebrew
Bible according to the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia Edition (Kittel 1968-1997), which can be
regarded as an immutable resource in practice. Figure 1 shows the mapping in a nutshell.
Note that this kind of markup is stand-off markup, as opposed to inline markup, of which TEI7
is the prime example.
1. QLjustmeansQuery Language.
2. Theotherquerylanguage,LL,isalogicalone,introducedfortheoreticalpurposes(Doedens1994,pp.199).
3. With the retirement of founding father Eep Talstra in 2013, WIVU has been rebaptized as Eep Talstra Centre
for Bible and Computing.
nieuws-en-agenda/nieuwsarchief/2013/jan-mrt/clarin-subsidie-voor-hebreeuwse-database-op-internet.
sentence Linguistic Annotation Framework
clause_atom_number=1 clause
clause_atom_relation=0 <node xml:id="n_88917">
clause_atom_type=xQtl <link targets="r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 r8 r9 r10 r11"/>
indentation=0 </node>
<edge xml:id="e1" from="n88917" to="n84383"/>
<a xml:id="ae1" label="parents" ref="e1" as="link"/>
annotations
(features)
<a xml:id="af22" label="ft" ref="n3" as="utf8"><fs>
determination=determined <f name="surface_consonants_utf8" value="תישׁאר"/>
phrase_function=Objc phrase </fs></a>
phrase_type=PP
<region xml:id="r_2" anchors="6 23"/>
parents <node xml:id="n_3"><link targets="r_2"/></node>
labeled <a xml:id="a_3" label="word" ref="n_3" as="monads"/>
regions r11 r10 r9 lexeme_utf8=תישׁאר
surface_consonants_utf8=תישׁאר
annotations word
n3 n2 nodes
r11 r10 r9 92 72-91 6-23 0-5 regions
Figure 1: The Hebrew text database in LAF
2. LAF-Fabric
TheprimaryresultoftheconversionoftheHebrewTextDatabasetoLAF(vanPeursenandRoorda
2014) is the fact that now a standard representation of the data can be archived. Moreover, we can
preserve queries on the database as well, following an idea expressed in (Roorda and Heuvel 2012).
But as soon as one turns to the LAF representation, the question comes to mind: are there tools
with which this LAF resource can be processed?
2.1 LAF tools
Thereareemergingtoolstodealwithstand-offannotationsandmarkup. Butheretheversatilityof
stand-off markup must be paid for: there are no tools that are applicable to all stand-off resources.
Even if we restrict to LAF, there are no mature tools that deal with LAF in full generality. There
are candidates, though. Here are some options and experiences.
1. The eXist database engine8. Initial experiments showed clearly that eXist is not designed to
handlelargeLAFresourceswellinitsdefaultconfiguration. Apartfromaninitialloadtimeof
more than an hour, even simple queries took dozens of minutes. Surely this could have been
improved by setting up indexes, but it is by no means obvious which indexes are needed for
all possible queries. We decided not to pursue this path.
2. ELAN9 is a tool for annotating audio and video material. In theory it could also be used for
annotating plain text streams, but it is not designed for that. There are modelling issues, and
probably performance issues as well. Discussions with the ELAN people at the The Language
Archive10 made clear that ELAN works well with big primary data (audio and video) and
sparse annotation data. Our case is the exact opposite: small primary data (plain text) and
very rich annotation data.
3. Graf-python(Bouda2013-2014)(componentofPOIO(Boudaetal.2012))isaPythonlibrary
designed to analyse generic LAF resources, such as the Open American National Corpus11.
However,initscurrentformitdoesnotscaleuptomatchthesizeoftheHebrewTextDatabase.
The load time is half an hour, the memory footprint is 20 GB, and these costs are incurred
everytimebeforeyouruneventhesimplestanalysisscript. However,graf-pythonisappealing,
andthefirstauthordecidedtoimplementitinanewwaywithperformanceinmind. Whereas
graf-python is a clean translation of the LAF concepts into object-oriented Python code, an
efficient processor would need to compile LAF concepts into efficient data structures, such as
Python arrays, which have C-like performance.
2.2 Computing with LAF-Fabric
A new, graf-python-like library was needed, one that could handle the full size of the Hebrew text
database (>400K words, >1.4M nodes, >1.5M edges, >33M features) with ease. This is not, by
today’s standards, a large corpus, but as it represents a fixed cultural artefact, it is all the data we
have got and we want to examine all of them very closely. That is why have invested in a system
that allows us to manipulate the full data in main memory: LAF-Fabric (Roorda 2013-2014), a
Python package that compiles LAF into a compact, binary form that loads fast. It has an API that
supports walking over the node set along edges or in various orders, absorbing the features of the
nodes in passing.
This kind of processing could also be done with a graph database, such as NEO4J12. The ad-
vantages of LAF-Fabric are the ease of installation, compactness of the compiled data, and the
integration in the Python world of scientific computing, e.g. the IPython notebook13 (P´erez and
Granger 2007).
The baseline mode of data access is to walk over node sets and use edges to explore the neigh-
bourhoodofnodes. Eachnodeisloadedwithfeatures,fromwhichtheirtextandlinguisticproperties
may be read off. From this graph one can populate tables, vectors, trees and graphs with the data
onewantstofocuson. Then,leavingLAF-Fabric,butstillintheIPythonnotebook,onecanusethe
facilities of the Python ecosystem to do data analysis and visualization. All these steps are shown
in a tutorial notebook that charts the frequency of masculine and feminine gender for all chapters
in the Hebrew Bible14.
LAF-Fabric does not introduce a new query language, so the user of LAF-Fabric does not have
to learn the ins and outs of a new formalism. Instead, it offers programmatic access to the nodes,
edges and features in a LAF resource, in such a way that the programmer is not burdened with the
technicalitiesoftheLAFdatarepresentationinXML.ButLAF-Fabricisnotanendusertool. End
user tools are usually built on the basis of a relatively fixed concept of what results users typically
9. EudicoLinguisticANnotatorisanannotationtoolthatallowsthecreation,editing,visualizingandsearchingof
annotationsforvideoandaudiodata. SoftwaredevelopedatMaxPlanckInstituteforPsycholinguistics,Nijmegen.
org/OANC/index.html
want to achieve, and those results are then offered by the tool in a user-friendly manner. As soon
as the user’s needs move outside the scope of the tool in question, the user-friendliness is over. In
contrast, the approach of LAF-Fabric is that it just makes the data available, leaving it to the user
how to extract that data and what to do with it.
Clearly, LAF-Fabric is not a tool for the non-programming end user, it is best used by a team in
alaboratorycontext,wheresomemembersdefinetheresearchneedsandanothermembertranslates
those needs into working IPython notebooks.
2.3 Beyond pure LAF
LAF is a rather loose standard. There are many ways to model specific language resources, and it
is not obvious which choices will work out best for data processing. In particular, the semantics of
edges in LAF is completely open.
SpecificresourcesmayhavemorestructurethancanbeexploitedbyagenericLAFtool. Thatis
why LAF-Fabric has hooks for third-party modules to exploit additional regularities. We ourselves
developed a package called etcbc that provides extra functionality for the Hebrew Text Database in
its LAF representation:
1. Node ordering: the Hebrew Bible data has object types by which nodes can be ordered more
extensively than on the basis of the generic LAF data only. LAF-Fabric can be instructed to
use the etcbc sorting instead of its default sorting.
2. Data entry: etcbc contains facilities to generate forms for data entry, read them back and
convert the results to proper LAF files, which can then be added to the original resource.
3. MQL queries: etcbc has a facility to run queries on the EMDROS version of the data, and
collect the results as node sets in LAF. This gives the best of two worlds: topographic queries
intermixed with node walking.
The github repository laf-fabric-nbs15 contains quite a few examples of Hebrew-LAF data pro-
cessing in various degrees of maturity.
2.4 Notes on the choice for LAF
When the SHEBANQ project was submitted, CLARIN required that a standard format be selected
fromalist16. LAFwastheonlyobviouschoicefromthatlist. Buthasitbeenagoodchoice? FoLiA
(van Gompel 2013), which is not on the CLARIN list, comes to mind.
Sofar,LAFisservinguswell. Becausethedatamodelisverygeneral,wecaneasilytranslateour
data into LAF, even where they are organized in multiple hierarchies or no hierarchy at all. There
are also features that do not represent linguistic information, but e.g. orthographic information17
and numbering information, some of which are clearly ad-hoc.
All this data can be represented easily in LAF without introducing tricks and devices to work
around the specifics of the LAF data model. We are confident that we will be able to represent the
future data output of biblical scholars as well.
It must be said, however, that because of the very abstractness of LAF, it was not obvious at
firsthowtochoosebetweenthenumerouswaysinwhichonecanrepresentannotationdatainLAF.
FoLiA has the characteristics of an attractive ecosystem of data, formats and tools for linguistic
analysis of corpora. There are, however, a few things to be wary about when making a choice:
17. The Hebrew script poses complexities: the basic information is in the consonants, the vowels have been added
later as diacritics, and there are also prosodic diacritics present. The database provides a number of different
representationsforeachword: withandwithoutdiacritics,inUNICODEHebreworinLatintranscription.
1. the ETCBC data is not the product of main-stream linguists, and there are other concerns
than linguistic ones;
2. biblicalscholarsarecontinuouslyproducingnewdata,intheformofnewannotations. Within
the stand-off paradigm it is easy to incorporate these data in a controlled way, indicating the
provenance. Any format that relies on inline markup is at a disadvantage here;
3. the ETCBC data is essentially one document, and must fit in memory, together with a large
subset of its annotations. It seems that FoLiA is geared to corpora with multiple, smaller
documents.
Nevertheless,itisaninterestingexercisetoconverttheLAFversionoftheHebrewBibleintoFoLiA,
but we leave it to one of our readers.
Graf-python has an advantage over LAF-Fabric: it can deal with feature structures in full gen-
erality. LAF-Fabric only deals with feature structures that are sets of key-value pairs.
2.5 Preprocessing for research
The next sections describe several lines of research that benefit from the incarnation of the data
in LAF and from LAF-Fabric as a preprocessing tool. They are examples of historical, literary
and linguistic research lines and in that way they serve to indicate the breadth of the landscape of
biblical scholarship. Rather than pursuing those lines in full depth, the purpose of this paper is to
convey the importance of having good preprocessing tools, based on a standard format. If that is in
place, research efforts and results get a boost.
3. Linguistic variation: extracting cooccurrences
For a long time scholars have held the consensus that most of the linguistic variation in Biblical
Hebrewcanbeexplainedbyassumingthatthereisanearlyvariety(EarlyBiblicalHebreworEBH,
inusebeforetheBabylonianexileinthe6thcenturyBCE)andalatevariety(LateBiblicalHebrew,
or LBH, in use after the exile)18. EBH can be found mainly in the books of the Pentateuch and the
Former Prophets, whereas LBH can be found mainly in the undisputed late books (Esther, Daniel,
Ezra, Nehemiah and Chronicles). To this diachronic model some have added dialectical variation
(Rendsburg 1990b) and other kinds of variation (Rendsburg 1990a). However, in the past two
decades serious challenges have been brought forward by several scholars. Biblical Hebrew seems to
be pretty homogeneous in general and several of the methods used by scholars to study linguistic
variation in Biblical Hebrew have become questionable now it has been shown that many linguistic
features of which it was thought earlier that they are characteristic of LBH occur throughout the
Hebrew Bible. An important methodological problem is the linguistic-literary circularity involved
in many studies applying the diachronic model: a feature occurs mainly in late texts, therefore the
featureislateandthisprovesthatthetextsinwhichitoccursarelateandsoon(Youngetal.2008,
vol. 1, ch. 3,4). These issues have led some to propose a new model, namely that the variation in
Biblical Hebrew fits a situation in which two styles were used, a more conservative one (formerly
called EBH) and a freer one (formerly called LBH). According to this model, both styles were used
before and after the exile (Young et al. 2008, vol. 2, ch. 2).
In the NWO-funded project Does Syntactic Variation reflect Language Change? Tracing Syn-
tactic Diversity in Biblical Hebrew Texts19, another approach is advocated. Instead of starting with
assumptionsaboutwhereorwhenaspecificbiblicaltextwaswritten,firstthedistributionofalarge
quantity of syntactic features and the way they vary throughout the Hebrew Bible will be mapped
18. AnearlyvoicepropagatingthisviewisGesenius(1813); nowadaysoneofthemostinfluentialauthorsusingthe
diachronicmodelisAviHurvitz,forinstance(Hurvitz1974,pp.17-34).
andonlyafterthisisdonethequestionarisestowhathistorical,geographicalorculturalfactorsthe
resulted variation may be related.
Using LAF-Fabric, the first and third authors did a pilot to get a general impression of the
linguistic variation in Biblical Hebrew. First a list was made of the lexemes of all the verbs and
common nouns in the Hebrew Bible and with this list a table was made in which the presence or
absence of these lexemes in the separate biblical books is registered. With the data in this table a
graph was made using the Force Atlas algorithm20 implemented in Gephi. The result is shown in
figure2. Thefigureshowsseveralexpectedlinguisticresults,suchastherelativelycloserelationship
between the LBH books21.
Althoughthisisonlyapreliminaryresult,withthehelpofLAF-Fabricincombinationwithhigh
level tools for statistical analysis and visualization like Gephi or Matplotlib (an implementation
of various visualization algorithms in Python) it is possible to analyse the use and distribution of
large quantities of data, instead of focusing exclusively on details in separate features, as is usual in
biblical studies. It may be expected that in the coming years such an approach will lead to many
new results, insights and research ideas in the study of Biblical Hebrew.
Ezechiel Leviticus
Iob Deuteronomium
Threni Psalmi Jesaia Exodus
Proverbia Genesis Judices Josua
Chronica_II Esra
Habakuk Samuel_I Esther
Samuel_II Reges_II Nehemia
Sacharia Chronica_I Ruth
Zephania Ecclesiastes
Obadia Haggai Jona
Figure 2: Gephi force atlas of distribution of common nouns and verbs in the books of the Hebrew
4. Grammar of Hebrew Poetry: extracting clause typology
ForcenturiesHebraistshavebeenstudyingtheverbalformsusedinBiblicalHebrew. Thoughmany
havetriedtoprovideacoherentdescriptionofverbalfunctionsinHebrew,consensushasneverbeen
reached. This is especially true for the functioning of the verbal forms in the poetic parts of the
20. This is a so called force-directed algorithm, which assigns attractive and repulsive forces to the edges. The
algorithmperformsasimulationofaphysicalsystem,resultinginintuitivelyunderstandablegraphs.
21. Thisapproachisderivedfromtheauthor’sMAthesis(Naaijer2012).
Hebrew Bible, which has repeatedly been characterized as completely irregular. Illustrative in this
regardisthecommentmadebythegrammarianBergstr¨asser(1926,1986,pp.29-35),whospeaksof
a v¨olligen Verwischung der Bedeutungsunterschiede der Tempora (’a complete blurring of functional
distinctions between the tenses’) in Hebrew poetry and identifies the poetic use of verbal forms as
regellos (’random’) and ohne ersichtlichen Grund (’without apparent motivation’).
In a PhD-research project by the second author started in 2011, this rather desperate view
on the verbal system of Hebrew poetry is considered unacceptable and the search for a linguistic
system regulating the poetic use of verbal forms has been taken up again. A central assumption in
the project is that the meaning of verbal forms in Hebrew is not to be described in terms of the
traditionalcategoriesoftense,aspectandmood,buthasmoretodowiththestructuringofdiscourse.
Therefore, one should not focus on the bare verbal forms, but rather on the clauses in which they
are embedded and the position of these clauses in the whole of the text. In this type of approach,
which is usually defined as text-linguistic, special attention is paid to the patterns constituted by
subsequent verbal forms (and their clauses). Our research has shown that the connection of mother
and daughter clause, in particular, has a strong influence on the exact functions adopted by the
verbalformsinHebrew. Thoughtheformscanbeassignedcertaindefaultfunctionalities, theexact
concretization of these basic functions can only be determined on the basis of a detailed analysis of
the broader clause patterns in which a specific clause takes its position.
InthisresearchprojectwerejectthetendencyamongHebraiststoassumeagapbetweentheuse
ofverbalformsinproseandpoetry. Insteadofidentifyingdifferentverbalsystemsforthetwogenres
or even characterizing the use of verbs in Hebrew poetry as being devoid of any system, we claim
that the two genres make use of a single verbal system, but differ in their preferences for certain
parts of that system. More specifically, we assume that all types of clauses and clause patterns
known in Biblical Hebrew can be used (with the same functionalities) in both prose and poetry, but
that different clause types and patterns are dominant in the two genres.
LAF-Fabric offers an excellent opportunity to test these assumptions as it provides direct access
to the ETCBC database from which the clause patterns attested in the Hebrew texts can be easily
extracted, as it contains syntactic hierarchies for each chapter of the Hebrew Bible.
As an initial experiment we have created an IPython Notebook in which we have sorted and
countedallasyndeticsequencesofamotherclauseandadaughterclauseattestedinselectedprosaic,
poetic and prophetic sections of the Hebrew Bible. LAF-Fabric enables us to iterate over all clauses
in the preselected texts. For each clause, we have retrieved the value of its clause atom relation22
feature,whichiscodedasathree-digitvalueidentifyingthetypeofrelationbetweenthatclauseand
its mother (i.e.: asyndetic, parallel, syndetic, coordinate, subordinate, etc.), the tense of the verbal
predicateoftheclause(i.e.: imperfect,perfect,imperative,etc.),andthetenseoftheverbalpredicate
of the mother. Further details on the use of specific functionalities provided by LAF-Fabric and the
Python code written for this task can be found in the notebook entitled AsyndeticClauseFunctions
by Kalkman (2013).
Intable1,wepresentatop-10ofmostfrequentlyattestedasyndeticclausepatternsinthecurrent
ETCBC data analysed by our LAF-Fabric task.
As the table shows, these ten patterns account for over 70% of all 11,111 patterns that have
beenfoundintheprosaic, poeticandprophetictexts. Severalinterestingobservationscanbemade.
First of all, this top-10 does not contain patterns that are strongly attested in one genre, while
being virtually absent in another. Instead, all of the types of sequences do have quite a number of
occurrences in each of the three genres. (though the rather low number of patterns analysed for
poetry forces us to adopt a cautious attitude at this point).
Ontheotherhand,thedifferencesshouldnotbeoverlooked. Anothervisualizationoftheresults
may help us in this regard. In fig 3, the same statistical data are presented in a bar graph. As the
graph shows, the pattern perfect (cid:32) perfect, imperative (cid:32) nominal clause, and, to a lower extent,
latest/features/index/code.html.
CARnumber Prose % Poetry % Prophecy % Totals %
nominal (cid:32) nominal 429 14.64 493 12.07 328 8.01 1250 11.25
imperfect (cid:32) imperfect 371 12.66 544 13.32 332 8.11 1247 11.22
perfect (cid:32) perfect 120 4.09 392 9.6 555 13.55 1067 9.60
nominal (cid:32) imperfect 232 7.92 250 6.12 244 5.96 726 6.53
perfect (cid:32) nominal 161 5.49 213 5.21 340 8.3 714 6.43
imperfect (cid:32) nominal 116 3.96 328 8.03 249 6.08 693 6.24
perfect (cid:32) imperfect 145 4.95 187 4.58 273 6.67 605 5.45
nominal (cid:32) perfect 145 4.95 204 4.99 242 5.91 591 5.32
imperative (cid:32) nominal 54 1.84 270 6.61 212 5.18 536 4.82
nominal (cid:32) imperative 128 4.37 123 3.01 74 1.81 325 2.93
Totals 1901 64.86 3004 73.54 2849 69.57 7754 69.79
Table 1: FrequencytableofattestationsofasyndeticclausepatternsinBiblicalHebrewprose,poetry
andprophecy. ThepercentagecolumnisthefractionfortheClause-Atom-Relation-number
within the genre.
0 prophecy
Figure 3: BargraphoffrequenciesofasyndeticclausepatternsinBiblicalHebrewprose,poetryand
prophecy.
the pattern imperfect (cid:32) nominal clause, are far better attested in poetry and prophecy than in
prose. Conversely, sequences of two nominal clauses play an important role in each of the genres,
but are most strongly attested in prosaic texts. These observations can be explained by referring
to the important claim made by several text linguists studying the Hebrew verbal system that the
marking of the mode of communication, which can be either narrative or discursive (i.e. direct
speech) is an important function of verbal forms in Hebrew (Weinrich 1964, pp. 45-48, 51-52, 55),
(Schneider 1974, pp. 182-183), (Niccacci 1990, pp. 29-34). Narrative discourse is hardly attested
in poetry and prophecy, while it is a dominant mode of communication in prose. It is therefore
not surprising that the patterns perfect (cid:32) perfect, imperfect (cid:32) nominal clause and imperative (cid:32)
nominalclause,whicharecharacteristicofdirectspeech(insteadofnarrative)discourse,havehigher
relative frequencies in poetry and prophecy than in prose.
All in all, we can draw the preliminary conclusion that, while certain patterns are more strongly
attested in one genre than in the others, the differences between the genres in the relative numbers
of occurrences of the asyndetic patterns are not extreme. This suggests that indeed one linguistic
system underlies the functioning of verbal forms and clause types in the different genres attested in
the Hebrew Bible. Moreover, the main criterion on the basis of which the forms and constructions
belongingtotheHebrewverbalsystemcanbefurthercategorizedisnotsomuchthatofgenre(prose
vs. poetry vs. prophecy), but rather that of mode of communication (narrative vs. discursive). To
summarize, the use of verbal forms in Hebrew poetry may not at all be as chaotic as grammars,
commentaries and Bible translations seem tot suggest.
This type of experiments conducted with the help of LAF-Fabric has constituted the basis for
moreprofoundresearchintotheBiblicalHebrewverbalsystem(Kalkmantoappear2014,Kalkman
to be published 2015). As part of our research project, we have developed a Java program in which
use is made of the current (May 2014) version of the data included in the ETCBC database. By
concentratingonthesyntacticpatternsthatareidentifiedintheactualdata,theprogramcalculates
thedefaultandinheritedfunctionsthataretobeassignedtoeachverbalforminthebookofPsalms.
Based on these calculations, the program also offers a translation of the verbal forms (and other
basicconstituents,suchassubjectsandobjects)attestedineachofthe150Psalms. Thetranslations
and the results of the calculations made by our program are presented on a website (Kalkman to be
published 2015). This website also provides a description of our methodology and theories.
All in all, LAF-Fabric proves itself to be an indispensable tool for obtaining new insights in
the grammar of the Biblical Hebrew verb, as it enables us to systematically extract and collect for
furtheranalysisthelinguisticpatternsthathaveadecisiveimpactonthefunctioningofverbalforms
in Biblical Hebrew.
5. Data Oriented Parsing of classical Hebrew: generating trees
There are many unresolved questions concerning the history of composition and transmission of the
Hebrew Bible. One line of research in this area is to compare and cluster the texts with a view to
classifying them along the dimensions of historical time, geography, and religious context. Often
these classifications are based on intuition and implicit characteristics. The comparison of syntactic
trees could provide this method with a more objective underpinning and deliver stronger results.
For a start, the LAF data has been exported to syntactic trees, in effect turning the Hebrew
Bible into a treebank for natural language processing (NLP).23 This has led to two applications:
1. extraction of recurring syntactic patterns (tree fragments)
2. construction and evaluation of a Data-Oriented Parsing grammar from said patterns.
SinceclassicalHebrewhasarelativelyfreewordorder,wemakeuseofdiscontinuousconstituents
in the syntactic trees, inspired by the Negra corpus annotation (Skut et al. 1997). See figure 4 for
an example of a sentence with such a discontinuous constituent. Table 2 describes the syntactic
categories and Part-of-Speech tags that appear in the trees.
Itispossibletoextractrecurringpatternsfromacollectionoftreestructuresusinganalgorithm
firstdescribedinSangatietal.(2010);weuseafastermethodthatisalsoabletohandlediscontinuous
constituents (van Cranenburgh 2014). The algorithm compares each pair of tree structures and
extracts the largest fragments they have in common, along with their occurrence counts. Tree
fragments may consist of phrases with or without words, and the words do not have to form a
contiguous phrase. Since the fragments are found in pairs of trees, this count will always be at least
two. In this way idioms and linguistic constructions can be detected in syntactic corpora. Figure 5
shows a sample of fragments extracted in this way.
//nbviewer.ipython.org/github/ETCBC/laf-fabric-nbs/blob/master/trees_bhs.ipynb
Syntactic categories Part-of-Speech tags
S sentence cj conjunction
C clause vb verb
CP conjunctive phrase aj adjective
VP verbal phrase n noun
SU subphrase pp personal pronoun
NP nominal phrase dt determiner
PrNP proper noun phrase
PP prepositional phrase
Attr attributive clause
Table 2: The syntactic categories and Part-of-Speech tags used in the Hebrew Bible trees.
CP VP PP CP PP CP PP CP PP
cj vb n dt n cj pp n pp dt n cj n dt n cj pp pp pp dt n
and-he-dividedbetween the-waters REL under the-expanse and-betweenthe-waters REL above the-expanse
Figure 4: A sentence with a discontinuous constituent. Genesis chapter 1 verse 7.
Asidefromcorpusanalysisandstylometry,theextractedfragmentscanalsobeusedasagrammar
that assigns a syntactic analysis to a given sentence (parsing). Since classical Hebrew is a dead
language, this may at first sight appear to be a pointless exercise. However, training a probabilistic
grammar and evaluating it gives an impression of how well statistical patterns in a corpus can be
exploited to extrapolate the syntactic structure of new sentences.
The use of tree fragments as grammar was first proposed in the Data-Oriented Parsing (DOP)
framework (Scha 1990, Bod 1992). We evaluate the performance of parsing classical Hebrew by
taking the first 50,000 sentences as training data, and evaluate the resulting grammar on a held-
out set containing the next 2,000 sentences. In this experiment, the parser is supplied with both
words and part-of-speech tags. We use the implementation presented in van Cranenburgh and Bod
(2013), which supports trees with discontinuous constituents. For the results, see Table 3. In the
evaluation, the f-measure is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall of correctly identified
constituents (Collins 1997); the exact match is the percentage of trees where all constituents are
correct.
The results are encouraging, although it should be noted that the sentences in this held-out set
are short.
number of sentences: 2,000
longest sentence: 19
labelled f-measure: 90.0
exact match: 75.3
Table 3: DOP parsing results with the Hebrew Bible.
NP PP Attr
CP VP SU SU CP VPPrNP SU SU CP VP
cj vb aj cj vb n NP pp n n C cj vb
andsaid theelders and Israel REL you-have-made
CP SU SU CP VP SU SU
cj pp n dt n cj vbPrNPpp dt n dt pr PP
REL over handthe and on day this
Figure 5: Some example fragments extracted from the Old Testament annotations.
Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to Wido van Peursen and Rens Bod for setting the scene for the meeting
between theology and computational linguistics, and to Constantijn Sikkel for enlightening conver-
sations about the ETCBC data.