Accepted- Molecular Biology and Evolution
Landscape of standing variation for tandem duplications
in Drosophila yakuba and Drosophila simulans
Rebekah L. Rogers1, Julie M. Cridland1,2, Ling Shao1, Tina T. Hu3,
Peter Andolfatto3, and Kevin R. Thornton1
Research Article
1) Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine
2) Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Davis
3) Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and the Lewis Stigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University
Running head: Tandem duplications in non-model Drosophila
Key words: Tandem duplications, Deletions, Drosophila yakuba, Drosophila simulans,
evolutionary novelty
Corresponding author: Rebekah L. Rogers, Dept. of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
5323 McGaugh Hall, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697
Phone: 949-824-0614
Fax: 949-824-2181
Email: rogersrl@uci.edu
]NG.oib-q[
2v1737.1041:viXra
We have used whole genome paired-end Illumina sequence data to identify tandem
duplications in 20 isofemale lines of D. yakuba, and 20 isofemale lines of D. simulans and
performed genome wide validation with PacBio long molecule sequencing. We identify 1,415
tandem duplications that are segregating in D. yakuba as well as 975 duplications in D.
simulans, indicating greater variation in D. yakuba. Additionally, we observe high rates
of secondary deletions at duplicated sites, with 8% of duplicated sites in D. simulans and
17% of sites in D. yakuba modified with deletions. These secondary deletions are consistent
with the action of the large loop mismatch repair system acting to remove polymorphic
tandem duplication, resulting in rapid dynamics of gain and loss in duplicated alleles and
a richer substrate of genetic novelty than has been previously reported. Most duplications
are present in only single strains, suggesting deleterious impacts are common. D. simulans
shows larger numbers of whole gene duplications in comparison to larger proportions of gene
fragments in D. yakuba. D. simulans displays an excess of high frequency variants on the X
chromosome, consistent with adaptive evolution through duplications on the D. simulans X
or demographic forces driving duplicates to high frequency. We identify 78 chimeric genes in
D. yakuba and 38 chimeric genes in D. simulans, as well as 143 cases of recruited non-coding
sequence in D. yakuba and 96 in D. simulans, in agreement with rates of chimeric gene
origination in D. melanogaster. Together, these results suggest that tandem duplications
often result in complex variation beyond whole gene duplications that offers a rich substrate
of standing variation that is likely to contribute both to detrimental phenotypes and disease,
as well as to adaptive evolutionary change.
Introduction
Gene duplications are an essential source of genetic novelty that can be useful in adaptation
and in the origins of developmental complexity across phyla (Conant and Wolfe 2008).
Additionally, duplicate sequences are commonly found in mammalian stem cells (Liang et al.
2008), cancer cell lines (Inaki and Liu 2012), and are associated with autoimmune disease,
HIV susceptibility, Crohn’s disease, asthma, allergies, and autism (Ionita-Laza et al. 2009).
Distinguishing the propensity with which gene duplications serve as causative disease factors
as opposed to a source of favorable variation depends heavily on accurate ascertainment of
their occurance and frequencies in the population.
In the Drosophila there is substantial variation in the number and types of duplicate
genes that are present in the sequenced reference genomes (Hahn, Han and Han 2007),
though the extent to which selection might drive rapid fixation of duplicate genes or whether
mutation rates differ across species remains uncertain. Furthermore, these surveys of single
strains from each species may not be representative of the variation present in populations
and offer only limited opportunities to study their role in adaptation. The advent of
Illumina sequencing has made population genomics of complex mutations in non-model
Drosophila readily tractable. Paired-end Illumina sequencing offers the opportunity to
survey copy number variation using definitive sequence-based comparisons that are free
from complications related to sole use of coverage or hybridization intensities. Through
the identification of paired-end reads that map in abnormal orientations, we can identify
a high-confidence dataset describing tandem duplications in sample populations (Cridland
and Thornton 2010, Korbel et al. 2007, Tuzun et al. 2005).
D. yakuba and D. simulans offer the opportunity to compare the role of tandem
duplications in species that have high levels of nucleotide diversity and large effective
populationsizesofN ≈ 106 (Bachtrogetal.2006,SawyerandHartl1992,Eyre-Walkeretal.
2002), allowing us to compare mutational and adaptive processes in independent systems
where neutral forces of genetic drift should be minimal.
If different chromosomes produce tandem duplications at different rates, we may expect
themtocontributedifferentiallytoadaptivechanges. InD. melanogaster, theXchromosome
contains greater repetitive content (Mackay et al. 2012), displays different gene density
(Adams et al 2000), has potentially smaller population sizes (Wright 1931, Andolfatto
2001), lower levels of background selection (Charlesworth 2012), and an excess of genes
involved in female-specific expression (Ranz et al. 2003) in comparison to the autosomes.
Furthermore, the X chromosome is hemizygous in males, exposing recessive mutations to
the full effects of selection more often than comparable loci on the autosomes (Charlesworth,
Coyne and Barton 1987). Hence, the incidence of duplications on the X and the types of
genes affected may differ from the autosomes, and thereby produce different impacts on
phenotypic evolution.
Many copy number variants are thought to be non-neutral (Emerson et al. 2008,
Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011, Hu and Worton 1992), especially when they capture partial
gene sequences or create chimeric gene structures (Rogers and Hartl 2012) or result in
recruitment of non-coding sequences (Lee and Reinhardt 2012). Such modifications are
likely to change gene regulatory profiles (Rogers and Hartl 2012), increasing the likelihood
of non-neutral phenotypes. Surveys in D. melanogaster have identified large numbers of such
variants (Emerson et al. 2008, Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011, Cardoso-Moreira, Arguello and
Clark 2012, Lee and Reinhardt 2012, Rogers, Bedford and Hartl 2009). Establishing profiles
of partial gene duplication, whole gene duplication, chimera formation, and recruitment of
non-codingsequenceareessentialtoacompleteunderstandingoftherolestandemduplicates
play in beneficial and detrimental phenotypic changes across species.
Here we describe the number, types, and genomic locations of tandem duplications
segregating in 20 strains of D. yakuba and in 20 strains of D. simulans and discuss differences
across species and across chromosomes, as well as their potential to create novel gene
constructs.
We have sequenced the complete genomes of 20 isofemale lines of D. yakuba and 20 isofemale
lines D. simulans each inbred in the lab for 9-12 generations to produce effectively haploid
samples, as well as the reference genome stocks of each species (as a control for genome
quality and false positives) (Drosophila Twelve Genomes Consortium 2007, Hu et al. 2012).
Genomesaresequencedtohighcoverageof50-150Xforatotalof42completegenomes(Table
S1-S5, see Methods). We have used mapping orientation of paired-end reads to identify
recently-derived, segregating duplications in these samples less than 25 kb in length that are
supported by 3 or more divergently-oriented read pairs (see Methods, Text S1, Table S6-S7).
We limit analysis to regions of the genome which can be assayed with coverage depth of 3
or more reads across all strains, corresponding to the detection limit for tandem duplicates.
We identify 1,415 segregating tandem duplications in D. yakuba and 975 segregating tandem
duplications in D. simulans (Figure 1), including large numbers of gene duplications (Table
1) with a low false positive rate (Table S8). We assess the numbers and types of gene
duplications, differences in duplication rates and sizes across chromosomes, and describe
evidence of secondary modification through deletions, which will influence the extent to
which these variants can serve as a source of genetic novelty.
Genotyping and Quality Control
Divergently-oriented paired-end reads are effective indicators of tandem duplications
(Cridland and Thornton 2010, Zichner et al. 2013, Mills et al. 2011, Tuzun et al. 2005).
We have used paired-end read orientation (Figure 2) combined with increased coverage
in genomic sequencing (Figure 3) to identify tandem duplications in population samples
of D. yakuba and D. simulans. Divergently-oriented reads indicative of putative tandem
duplications were clustered within a single strain, with three or more divergently-oriented
read pairs within the strain required to define each tandem duplication (see Methods).
Duplications were then clustered across strains with coordinates defined as the maximum
span of divergent reads across all strains. The distribution of supporting read pairs is
highly skewed, with 3-4 supporting read pairs for many calls (Figure S1). To account
for duplications which may be undetected, we additionally included variants that showed
two-fold increases (Figure 3) in quantile normalized coverage (Figure S2-S3) and which are
supported by one or more divergently-oriented read pairs were also identified as having
duplications if the duplicate was present in a second strain, thereby correcting sample
frequency estimates for false negatives (see Methods, Text S1). We retained only those
tandem duplicates which are not present in outgroup reference genomes of D. melanogaster,
D. erecta, and D. yakuba or D. simulans as defined in a BLAST search (see Methods)
suggesting recent origins.
Using divergently-oriented paired-end reads, we have identified 1,415 segregating tandem
duplications across 20 sample strains of D. yakuba, in comparison to 975 segregating tandem
duplications in 20 lines of D. simulans, with significantly more duplicates identified in D.
yakuba than in D. simulans (one-sided t-test t = −3.8126, df = 24.593, P = 0.0004089).
More variants are identified in D. yakuba in spite of higher coverage in D. simulans (Table
S4), suggesting that the difference is likely to be biological rather than technical. In fact,
the number of variants identified is only weakly correlated with coverage per strain (Figure
4) a product of sequencing to the saturation point of coverage (Table S9). Downsampling
reads from D. yakuba CY17C, which was sequenced to 151X, we find that the portion of the
genome covered with 3 or more reads (the detection limit of our assay) plateaus at roughly
45X (Table S9), though lower coverage data used in previous studies (Sudmant et al. 2010,
Zichner et al. 2013, Mills et al. 2011, Alkan et al. 2009) will be far from this plateau. The
tandem duplications identified across these sample strains cover 2.574% of the assayable
genome of the X and 4 major autosomes in D. yakuba and 1.837% of the assayable genome
of the X and 4 major autosomes in D. simulans. We are able to identify tandem duplications
as small as 66 bp in D. yakuba and 78 bp in D. simulans.
We have successfully PCR amplified 23 randomly chosen variants in D. yakuba and 35
variants in D. simulans. The rate of PCR confirmation in D. simulans is not significantly
different from previous studies of CNVs, but we observe significant differences between D.
yakuba and all other confirmation rates (Table S10). In view of this disparity, combined
with difficulties of PCR primer design for variants whose precise structures are unknown, we
generated PacBio long molecule sequencing data for 4 strains of D. yakuba in order to more
reliably estimate the false positive rate (Table S11). PacBio long molecule sequencing has
recently been used to validate targeted duplications in human genome data (Huddleston
et al. 2014). We extend this approach to genome-wide identification and validation of
tandem duplications, and have generated PacBio reads for four different sample strains of D.
yakuba. Across these four strains, we observe confirmation of 661 out of 688 mutations, for a
maximum false-positive rate of 3.9% (Table S8), though some variants may be unconfirmed
due to low clone coverage in a region. Hence, the duplicates identified with paired-end reads
in high coverage genomic sequence data are extremely accurate and comparable to or better
than previous methods or attempts to identify and validate duplicates using lower coverage
genomic sequences or microarrays (Mills et al. 2011, Alkan et al. 2009, Cardoso-Moreira
et al. 2011, Zichner et al. 2013, Sudmant et al. 2010). Split read mapping with short
Illumina reads performed poorly in comparison and failed to confirm 88.3% of variants,
and breakpoint assembly was possible for less than 60% of variants in spite of high rates
of confirmation with PacBio (See SI Text). Thus, requiring these criteria would exclude
the majority of variant calls and would likely be biased against duplicates with formation
facilitated by repetitive sequences. Where duplicate breakpoints contain repetitive or low
complexity sequences, or where subsequent modification of alleles through deletion has
alteredsurroundingsequence,PCRsarelikelytofail, andwewouldsuggestthatconfirmation
using long molecule sequencing is far more reliable in the face of complex structures. Further
description of genomic sequences, tandem duplications, and discussion of paired-end read
performance in high coverage genomic sequencing data in comparison to other methods is
available in Text S1.
Complex variation
Weidentifieddeletionsthathaveoccurredinduplicatedallelesusinglong-spanningreadpairs
600 bp or longer, corresponding approximately to the 99.9th percentile of fragment lengths
in the reference genomes (Table S5). Out of 880 duplications ≥600 bp in length in D. yakuba
which could be surveyed for deletions within duplications using long-spanning reads, 151
(17%)containlongspanningreadpairscovering50%ormoreoftheduplicatesequenceinone
or more strain, indicative of subsequent deletion, multiple independent short-range dispersed
duplications, or incomplete duplication (Figure 5). In D. simulans, 39 (8%) duplications ≥
600 bp contain long-spanning reads covering 50% or more of duplicated sequence in one or
more strains. Among 69 such modified variants in D. yakuba that are present in multiple
strains, 66 have at least one strain that lacks these long-spanning reads, whereas 12 out of 14
variants in D. simulans lack long spanning reads in one or more strains. Given large numbers
of unaltered duplicates the most parsimonious explanation is that deletions are most often
secondary modification and that the majority of these constructs form through full length
duplication and subsequent deletion rather than independent dispersed duplications.
In one well-characterized example, we have identified a duplication which spans the
chimeric retrogene jingwei (jgw) (Long and Langley 1993), which houses a deletion upstream
from jgw (Figure 6). The duplication is defined by 10 divergent read pairs and confirmed by
split read mapping in PacBio long molecule sequencing, whereas the deletion is supported by
20 long-spanning read pairs in line NY66-2 and gapped alignment in PacBio reads (Figure
6). The same duplication and deletion are independently confirmed with PacBio sequences
in line CY21B3. The duplication spanning jgw is found at a frequency of 5 strains, while
the deletion shown is observed only in CY21B3 and NY66-2, suggesting that the deletions
is a secondary modification. A second independent duplication spans jgw in 4 strains and
is confirmed in PacBio data, indicating that the region has been modified multiple times in
different strains.
Deletions are exceptionally common in Drosophila (Petrov, Lozovskaya and Hartl 1996),
and several genetic mechanisms might offer means of excision in a short time frame after
duplication. The large loop mismatch repair system can facilitate deletions of duplicated
sequence to modify duplicated sequence as long as variants are polymorphic. The presence
of unpaired duplicated DNA during meiosis or mitosis would commonly invoke the action
of the large loop mismatch repair system, which if resolved imprecisely, could result in the
construct observed (Figure 7). Deletions lying within a duplication have a median size of 3.6
kb in D. yakuba and 1.8 kb in D. simulans. Such large deletions are well outside the norm
for genome wide large deletions in mutation accumulation lines of D. melanogaster, which
show an average 409 bp and maximum of 2.6 kb (Schrider et al. 2013). Deletions of this
size however are consistent with the size of excised fragments in large loop mismatch repair
of several kilobases (Kearney et al. 2001). Deletion during non-homologous end joining or
homology mediated replication slippage might produce deletions as well though it is unclear
whether mutation rates are naturally high enough to operate in short time frames. Thus,
we would expect modification of duplicated alleles to be extremely common, especially in
deletion-biased Drosophila.
Differences in gene duplications across species
Duplicated coding sequences can diverge to produce novel peptides, novel regulatory profiles,
or specialized subfunctions (Conant and Wolfe 2008). In order to determine the extent
to which genes are likely to be duplicated and whether particular categories of gene
duplicationsaremorelikelytobefavored, weidentifiedcodingsequencescapturedbytandem
duplications. We find large numbers of segregating gene duplications in both D. yakuba and
D. simulans includinghundredsofwholegeneduplications(Table1). Weusedthemaximum
span of divergently-oriented reads across all strains to identify tandem duplications that
capture gene sequences in D. yakuba or D. simulans and to determine their propensity to
capture whole and partial gene sequences.
We find that 47.3% of tandem duplications in D. yakuba and 40.8% in D. simulans
capture coding sequences. The average duplicated gene in D. yakuba covers 45.9% of the
genesequenceand60.5%ofthegenesequenceinD. simulans. Thereare670duplicationsthat
capture gene sequences, spanning 845 different genes in D. yakuba, while 398 duplications
span 478 genes in D. simulans. Some 103 genes in D. yakuba and 65 genes in D.
simulans are captured in multiple independent duplications, with some genes falling in
as many as 6 independent putative duplications as defined by divergently-oriented reads
in D. yakuba and 32 independent putative duplications in D. simulans. Such high rate of
independentduplicationsinD. simulans isconsistentwithpreviousstudiesusingmicroarrays
(Cardoso-Moreira, Arguello and Clark 2012). In total 993 gene fragments in D. yakuba
and 758 gene fragments in D. simulans exist as segregating copy number variants in the
population, and 56 genes are duplicated in both species.
Assuming that unmodified duplications without deletions represent the original mutated
state, in D. yakuba, 274 (27.6%) of duplicated gene fragments span more than 80% of gene
sequence and capture the translation start site while 65 (7.7%) capture 20% or less and the
translation start site. In D. simulans 317 (66.3%) duplicated gene sequences capture 80% or
more of the gene sequence and the translation start, and 34 (7.1%) capture 20% or less and
include the translation start. Based on a resampling of gene duplications in D. yakuba, D.
simulans houses an overabundance of whole or nearly whole gene duplications (P < 10−7)
and an underrepresentation of small fragments (P = 0.00291), suggesting differences in the
occurrence of whole gene duplications across species due either to mutational pressures or
selection.
Duplicate genes and rapidly evolving phenotypes
Biases in the rates at which duplications form in different genomic regions or a greater
propensity for selection to favor duplications in specific functional classes can result in a bias
in gene ontology categories among duplicated genes. We used DAVID gene ontology analysis
software to identify overrepresented functions among duplicate genes in D. yakuba and D.
simulans. In D. yakuba we observe 678 duplicated genes with orthologs in D. melanogaster.
Overrepresented functional categories include immunoglobulins, extracellular matrix, chitins
and aminoglycans, immune response and wound healing, drug and hormone metabolism,
chorion development, chemosensory response and development and morphogenesis (Table
S13). In D. simulans we observe 478 duplicated genes with orthologs in D. melanogaster.
Overrepresented gene ontology categories include cytochromes and oxidoreductases plus
toxin metabolism, immune response to microbes, phosopholipid metabolism, chemosensory
processing, carboxylesterases, glutathion transferase and drug metabolism, and sarcomeres
(Table S13). In D. simulans 65 genes were involved in multiple independent duplications
that have distinct breakpoints. Overrepresented gene ontology categories include immune
response to bacteria, chorion development and oogenesis, chemosensory perception, and
organic cation membrane transport (Table S14). In D. yakuba among 72 genes duplicated
independently, chorion development and oogenesis, cell signaling, immune response, sensory
processing, and development are overrepresented (Table S14).
There are 25 high frequency variants found at a sample frequency of 17 or greater
in D. simulans, including lipases and endopeptidases expressed in male accessory glands
and several genes involved in immune response to microbes (Table S15). One gene arose
independentlyandhasreachedhighfrequencytwiceinD. simulans. InD. yakuba, weobserve
13 high frequency variants, including endopeptidases and AMP dependent ligases (Table
S15). Both male reproductive proteins (Wong and Wolfner 2012) and immune response
to pathogens (Lazarro and Clark 2012) are known for their rapid evolution, and therefore
these genes are strong candidates to search for evidence of ongoing selective sweeps. Though
mutational biases can produce similarities in gene ontology categories, the overabundance
of toxin metabolism genes and immune response peptides in both species as well as the
overrepresentation of chemoreceptors, chitin cuticle genes, and oogenesis factors suggests
that duplications are likely key players in rapidly evolving systems.
Chimeric Genes and Altered Coding Sequences
If only one boundary of a tandem duplication falls within a coding sequence and thereby
copies the 5(cid:48) end of a gene, the resulting construct will recruit formerly non-coding
sequence to form the 3(cid:48) end of the coding sequence (Figure 8A). We observe 143 cases of
recruitmentofnon-codingsequenceinD. yakuba (TableS16-S17)and96casesinD. simulans
(Table S18-S19). Several of these are found at moderate frequencies greater than 50%.
Overrepresented GO categories among genes in D. simulans include immune defense and
sarcomeres, whereas genes with recruited sequence in D. yakuba show an overrepresentation
of genes involved in locomotory behavior. We observe one high frequency variant in D.
yakuba at a sample frequency of 17, an Adenylate cyclase involved in locomotor rhythm as
well as two high frequency variants in D. simulans LysB, an antimicrobial humoral response
gene and a gene of unknown function. These high frequency chimeras are strong candidates
for selective sweeps.
If both boundaries fall within different coding sequences, tandem duplications can create
chimeric genes (Figure 8B) (Rogers, Bedford and Hartl 2009). We find 130 tandem
duplications in D. yakuba, and 76 in D. simulans where both breakpoints fall within
non-overlapping coding sequences. Some 11 of the 130 duplications in D. yakuba and 30
of 76 in D. simulans with both breakpoints in gene sequences face one another and as such
are not expected to create new open reading frames, as the constructs will lack promoters.
Another 40 of the 130 duplications in D. yakuba and 8 of 76 in D. simulans with both
breakpoints in gene sequences, and will have promoters that can potentially transcribe
sequences from both strands of DNA (Figure 9, Table S20-S21). Only 78 chimeric coding
sequences in D. yakuba (Table S22-S23) and 38 chimeric genes in D. simulans (Table S24)
have parental genes in parallel orientation. Among the parental genes of these chimeras,
cytochromes and genes involved in drug metabolism are overrepresented in D. yakuba. Other
functional categories which are present but not overrepresented include endopeptidases,
signaling glycopeptides, and sensory signal transduction peptides. Among parental genes
in D. simulans, Cytochromes and insecticide metabolism genes, sensory perception genes,
and endopeptidase genes are overrepresented. Additional categories present include signal
peptides, endocytosis genes, and oogenesis genes. Several such constructs are found at
moderate frequencies above 10/20, suggesting that they are at least not detrimental.
However, two chimeras in D. yakuba are found at high frequency. One formed from a
combination of GE12441 and GE12442 is at a frequency of 16/20, and one formed from
GE12353 and GE12354 is at a frequency of 19/20. In D. simulans one chimera, formed
from CG11598 and CG11608, is at a frequency of 20/20. All of these genes are lipases or
endopeptidases. These high frequency variants are strong candidates for selective sweeps.
Compared to the number of tandem duplications that capture coding sequences, the
number of duplications which form chimeric genes indicates that chimeric constructs derived
from parental genes in parallel orientation form as a result of 10.4% of tandem duplications
that capture genes in D. yakuba and 9.5% of tandem duplications that capture coding
sequences in D. simulans. These numbers are in general agreement with rates of chimeric
genes formation estimated from a within-genome study of D. melanogaster of 16.0%
compared to the rate of formation of duplicate genes (Rogers, Bedford and Hartl 2009).
Association with transposable elements and direct repeats
Repetitive sequences are known to facilitate ectopic recombination events that commonly
yield tandem duplications (Lim and Simmons 1994). In D. yakuba, 179 (12.7%) tandem
duplications fall within 1 kb of a TE in at least one sample strain that has a duplication
and 52 (3.7%) fall within 100 bp of a TE (Table S25). In D. simulans, 122 (12.5%) lie
within 1 kb of a TE and 53 (5.4%) fall within 100 bp of a TE (Table S25). Additionally,
125 (8.8%) of duplications in D. yakuba have 100 bp or more of direct repeated sequence
in the 500 bp up and downstream of duplication boundaries and 237 (16.7%) have 30 bp
or more in the reference sequence as identified in a BLASTn comparison of regions flanking
divergently-oriented read spans at an E-value ≤ 10−5 (Table S25). In D. simulans, 56
(5.7%) have 100 bp or more of direct repeated sequence in the 500 bp up and downstream
of duplication boundaries in the reference and 150 (14.4%) have 30 bp or more of repeated
sequence (Table S25). In total 371 duplications in D. yakuba and 243 duplications in D.
simulans either lie within 1 kb of a transposable element in at least one strain or are flanked
by 30 bp or more of direct repeated sequence. Hence, a maximum of 26.2% of duplications
identified in D. yakuba and 24.9% of duplications identified in D. simulans may have been
facilitatedbyectopicrecombinationbetweenlargerepeats,consistentwithpreviousestimates
from single genome studies of 30% in D. melanogaster but somewhat higher than those in
D. yakuba of 12% (Zhou et al. 2008).
In D. yakuba, 14.4% of duplications with 100 bp or more of repetitive sequence and
21.1% of duplications with 30 bp or more are located on the X. In contrast, 46.4% of
duplications in D. simulans with 100 bp or more of direct repeated sequence in the reference
and 44.7% with more than 30 bp of repeated sequence in the D. simulans reference lie on
the X chromosome. Based on a resampling of randomly chosen duplications, duplications on
the X chromosome are overrepresented among duplications with direct repeats (P < 10−7)
but the same is not true of duplicates with direct repeats in D. yakuba (P = 0.248). A
genome wide blastn comparison shows that direct repeats are not overrepresented on the
D. simulans X chromosome and cannot explain the observed association (Table S26) Hence,
duplication via ectopic recombination may be exceptionally common on the X chromosome
in D. simulans.
Excess of duplications on the D. simulans X
The distribution of duplication sizes was calculated for each major chromosomal arm in
each species. Average duplicate size is 2,518 bp, in close agreement with that observed in
mutation accumulation lines in D. melanogaster (Schrider et al. 2013) but somewhat larger
than that observed using microarrays in D. simulans (Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011). The X
chromosome in D. yakuba displays an overabundance of small duplications in comparison to
each of the autosomes in a Tukey’s HSD test after correction for multiple testing with 27%
of duplicates 500 bp or less (P ≤ 6.8×10−5, Figure 1, Figure 10A, Table S27). Chromosome
2Risalsosignificantlydifferentfromtheotherthreemajorautosomalarms(P ≤ 2.95×10−3,
Figure 10A, Table S27). However, in D. simulans there is no significant difference between
the X and 2R, 2L and 3R, even though the X houses a greater density of duplications (Figure
10B). The D. simulans chromosome 3L is different from 2L (P = 0.029, Figure 10B, Table
S27).
We observe a significant effect in the number of duplications per mapped base pair
by chromosome in both D. yakuba (F(5,109) = 8.321, P = 1.09 × 106) and D. simulans
(F(5,113) = 36.74, P < 2 × 10−16) . In a post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test with correction for
multiple testing, the D. simulans X chromosome contains more duplications per mapped
base pair than any of the autosomes, with 316 duplications (P ≤ 1.0537×10−4, Table S28,
Figure 1, Figure 11). Chromosome 2R contains an excess of duplicates in comparison to
chromosome 3R (P = 0.032), but all other pairwise comparisons of the four major autosomes
are not significant. Chromosome 4 contains an excess of duplications per mapped base pair
in comparison to all other chromosomes in both D. simulans and D. yakuba. In D. yakuba
the X is different from 3L (P = 0.039) but not from any other autosome. Some 11 of the 25
duplicates in D. simulans are at a frequency of 17 strains or greater (44%) on the X (Figure
1). In comparison, only 2 of the 13 high frequency duplications in D. yakuba (15.4%) are
located on the X, nor do we see a comparable overabundance of duplications on the D.
yakuba X. These results point to a clear excess of duplications on the X chromosome in D.
simulans in comparison to the autosomes, as well as an overabundance of duplications on
the fourth chromosome in both species.
Given the excess of duplications associated with repetitive content on the D. simulans
X, repetitive elements may be an important factor in forming the observed overabundance
of duplications on the D. simulans X. While mutational and selective processes can lead
to a bias in the number of duplications that form on different chromosomes, the excess of
high frequency variants on the D. simulans X at a frequency of 20 out of 20 would suggest
that at least some of the overabundance on the D. simulans X is due to selective forces or
demography resulting in duplicates spreading through the population.
Discussion
We have used paired-end reads to describe tandem duplications in sample strains of D.
yakuba and D. simulans, their sample frequencies, and the genes that they affect. We use
high coverage Illumina genomic sequencing data of 50X or greater to successfully identify
tandem duplications among individually sequenced isofemale lines derived from natural
populations. We have filtered tandem duplications to include recently-derived segregating
tandem duplicates that are not present in the reference genome of each species for genomic
regions that have coverage of three or more read pairs across all sequenced strains. We show
high rates of confirmation using long molecule PacBio sequences with 96.1% of variants
showing evidence of confirmation.
We identify 1415 tandem duplicates in D. yakuba and 975 in D. simulans, indicating
that there is substantial standing variation segregating in populations that may contribute
adaptive evolution and the instance of detrimental phenotypes. We identify hundreds of
chimeric genes and cases where genes recruit formerly non-coding sequence. We have shown
an excess of duplications on the D. simulans X chromosome as well as an overabundance of
whole gene duplications in D. simulans, suggestive of selection acting on duplications.
Rapid modification of duplicated alleles
Standing variation is expected to play a major role in adaptation and evolutionary change
(Barrett and Schluter 2008). If the span of standing variation in populations is limited, the
dynamics, genomic content, and variability of standing variation in populations is likely to
play a defining role in evolutionary outcomes. The observed span of tandem duplications
acrossstrainsislimited,with2.574%oftheassayablegenomeoftheXand4majorautosomes
in D. yakuba and 1.837% of the assayable genome of the X and 4 major autosomes in D.
simulans. Yet, the variation that is observed portrays a dynamic picture of gains and losses
withevidencethatduplicationscaninducesubsequentdeletionsthroughlargeloopmismatch
repair, suggesting that regions that are duplicated create genomic instability. The resulting
expansion and contraction of genomic sequences will contribute to greater variability in
these limited regions than has been suggested to date, offering wider variation upon which
selection can act. Up to 17% of duplications in D. yakuba and 8% of duplications in D.
simulans show long spanning reads in one or more strains, indicative of complex changes
such as subsequent deletion, insertion of foreign sequence, or incomplete or short-range
dispersed duplication (Figure 5). These results are consistent with complex breakpoints
previously observed in D. melanogaster (Cridland and Thornton 2010). Moreover, coverage
changes for certain variants are consistent with duplication followed by subsequent deletion
in one or both copies (Figure S4). Hence, the current pool of genetic diversity will in fact
be far greater than simple interpretation of divergently-oriented reads or split read mapping
might indicate. The majority of such changes have one or more strains with no signs of
modification, suggesting that these variants are primarily duplications followed by deletions.
Secondary deletions of recently duplicated alleles may be exceptionally common,
especially in deletion-biased genomes like Drosophila. Deletion of excess unpaired DNA
for polymorphic duplicates during large loop mismatch repair, excision of transposable
elements, replication slippage, and deletion during non-homologous end joining all offer
common mechanisms that are likely to remove portions of duplicated alleles. Among these
mechanisms, the large loop mismatch repair system specifically targets newly added DNA
and is likely to be a driving force in the rapid modification of duplicated alleles. In the ideal
case, precise excision would simply return the construct to singleton state resulting in a rapid
cycleofmutationsandreversions. However,whensuchremovalisimprecise,thesesubsequent
deletionsarelikelytomodifyduplicatedsequencesleavingincompletelyduplicatedsegments.
The average distance spanned by these putative deletions is over 2 kb, well above the mean
for deletions observed in mutation accumulation lines of D. melanogaster (Schrider et al.
2013), but in agreement with the amount of DNA that can be efficiently removed by large
loop mismatch repair (Kearney et al. 2001).
Duplications have the potential to induce secondary deletions quickly, while variants
remain polymorphic, thereby offering mechanisms for rapid and potentially drastic genomic
change that can potentially alter gene content, dosage, and regulation. Variation in
populations, whilelimitedinitsgenomicscope, mayoffermultiplevariantformsatindividual
duplication sites. Thus, the substrate that is present for selection and adaptation will be far
richer than a simple duplication or single copy, but rather can take on these complex forms of
modifiedvariantsthatremainlargelyunexploredintermsoftheirmolecularandevolutionary
impacts. Thus, although the observed amount of variation is limited to only a fraction of the
genome, the level of variation at these duplicated sites portrays an exceptionally dynamic
flux of duplications and deletions at these sites that will result in changes in the content
and organization of the genome and therefore is expected to have a strong influence on
evolutionary outcomes.
D. yakuba displays 1.5 times as many duplications in comparison to D. simulans, as well
as a two-fold enrichment in the percentage of variants with signals of deletion in one or more
copy and higher population level mutation rates. The rapid flux of duplication and deletion
observed in D. yakuba has produced a wider array of standing variation, which is expected to
have a significant effect on evolutionary trajectories. D. yakuba will likely display a greater
tendency toward pathogenic phenotypes associated with tandem duplicates (Emerson et al.
2008, Hu and Worton 1992) but also a greater source of standing variation that can be useful
in adaptation and the development of novel traits (Conant and Wolfe 2008). Estimates of
N in D. yakuba are higher than in D. simulans. We would thus expect greater instances of
detrimental duplicates to be higher in D. simulans than in D. yakuba, but neutral mutations
will collect more quickly across populations of D. yakuba due to high N . Hence, we suggest
that the overabundance of duplicates in D. yakuba is not due to drift. Neither do we observe
an excess of high frequency variants in D. yakuba that might be suggestive of selection,
especially with respect to polymorphic variants.
Based on birth-death models of gene families, D. simulans is suggested to have high
rates of duplication, whereas D. yakuba showed only moderate rates of gene family evolution
(Hahn, Han and Han 2007). This may in fact be influenced by the overabundance of
whole gene duplicates in D. simulans and not a reflection of genome wide mutation rates.
The dichotomy between reference genomes and genome wide polymorphic variants might
putatively be driven by selection for whole gene duplicates in D. simulans or mutational
biases toward whole gene duplications.
Chimeric genes
Chimeric genes are a known source of genetic novelty that are more likely to produce
regulatorychanges, alterationsincellulartargetingandmembranebounddomains, aswellas
selectivesweepsincomparisontowholegeneduplications(RogersandHartl2012). Chimeric
genes have been known to produce peptides with novel functions in Drosophila (Long and
Langley 1993, Zhang et al. 2004, Ranz et al. 2003) and in humans (Zhang et al. 2009,
Ohshima and Igarashi 2010) and many are associated with adaptive bursts of amino acid
substitutions (Jones and Begun 2005, Jones, Custer and Begun 2005). We observe large
numbers of recently-derived chimeric constructs within populations, with 222 chimeric genes
or genes that recruit non-coding sequence in D. yakuba and 134 in D. simulans, even in a
limited sample of 20 strains per species.
In spite of their known role in adaptation, the majority of copy number variants are
thought to be detrimental (Emerson et al. 2008, Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011, Hu and
Worton1992). Chimericgenesareassociatedwithhumancancers,andthemolecularchanges
associated with chimera formation may contribute to their role as causative factors in human
disease. The molecular changes that are facilitated by chimera formation (Rogers and Hartl
2012) likely contribute to their detrimental impacts on organisms and their role in disease
as well as their potential for adaptation. We observe large numbers of chimeric genes that
are identified as single variants in the population. Thus, chimeras may play the dual role
of key players in adaptation to novel environments and as agents of detrimental phenotypic
changes. The large amounts of standing variation observed may therefore contribute to
disease alleles in populations, and proper identification is likely to be important for studies
in human health.
Breakpoint determination
Many variants have breakpoints that cannot be assembled de novo from Illumina sequences
(Table S30). Yet, we observe a 96.1% confirmation rate using PacBio reads. These
results imply that breakpoints are often repetitive, low-complexity sequence or contain novel
insertions and secondary events that are difficult to determine from paired-end read mapping
alone or current naive de novo assembly methods. Hence, although paired-end Illumina read
mapping is highly accurate, it cannot ascertain breakpoints to single base pair resolution
in the majority of cases. Moreover, requiring breakpoint assembly to identify duplications
will produce a strong ascertainment bias against up to 50% of all variants. This bias is
more severe for small variants, even in Drosophila, which have compact genomes and few
repeats in comparison to plants or vertebrates. Thus, short high-throughput Illumina reads
orientation mapping offers an accurate but incomplete picture of variation present in the
population, which can now be clarified with low coverage long read sequencing data.
Microarrays and coverage are subject to affects of mis-probing, mis-mapping, and large
amounts of noise relative to signal (Figure S4). However, where accurate, arrays may reflect
the span of duplicated segments more accurately than divergent reads alone, as they would
accurately reflect deletion after duplication. However, the presence of complex events such
as subsequent deletions may, if not properly identified and accounted for, overestimate of
the mutation rate of duplications and underestimate their frequency in the population by
claiming a modified variant as an independent duplication. Here, the directional nature
and spatial relationships of read pair mapping shows advantages: divergently-oriented reads
distinguishduplicationwhereas longspanningproperly oriented readscanindicate adeletion
with greater clarity and properly identify subsequent modification. Identifying putative
deletions in duplicated sequences requires a tight distribution of insert sizes during library
preparation (Table S5) but offers a far more complete picture of variation that is segregating
in populations and more accurate estimation of variant frequencies that is well worth the
effort.
The X chromosome
The D. simulans X chromosome appears to be unusual in that it contains an excess of
duplications per mapped base pair in comparison to the autosomes, and an overabundance
of duplications associated with long repeats. Within-genome surveys of non-synonymous
mutations in the D. simulans reference (Andolfatto, Wong and Bachtrog 2011) and large
numbers of high frequency derived variants among non-synonymous sites and UTRs in D.
simulans (Haddrill, Bachtrog and Andolfatto 2008) indicate widespread selective sweeps
acting on the X chromosome. Similarly, we identify an excess of variants identified at
high frequency on the D. simulans X, consistent with previous work using microarrays
(Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011). In D. melanogaster, the X chromosome contains greater
repetitive content (Mackay et al. 2012), displays different gene density (Adams et al 2000),
has potentially smaller population sizes (Wright 1931, Andolfatto 2001), lower levels of
background selection (Charlesworth 2012), and an excess of genes involved in female-specific
expression (Ranz et al. 2003) in comparison to the autosomes. Moreover, X chromosomes
are subject to selfish genetic elements and often play a role in speciation (Presgraves 2008).
Thus, the X chromosome may be exceptionally subject to widespread selection, and the role
of tandem duplicates as responders to selective pressures deserves future exploration.
Similar patterns of high frequency variation have not been observed in D. yakuba,
suggesting that evolution proceeds differently across the different species. The D. yakuba X
chromosome has an excess of small duplications, which might potentially indicate selection
acting against large duplications on the D. yakuba X. Tandem duplications are known to be
detrimental, and given the hemizygous state of the X chromosome in males, we would expect
purifying selection to act quickly on the X. The extent to which these patterns observed in
D. yakuba may be driven by selection or demography remains to be seen, and is an important
open question deserving of future study.
Methodological approach
Originally, high throughput detection of copy number variation relied on microarrays or
SNP chips available at the time (Emerson et al. 2008, Dopman and Hartl 2007, Ionita-Laza
et al. 2009, Conrad et al. 2010), and therefore suffers from problems of mis-probing, variable
hybridization intensities, and dye effects, producing large amounts of noise relative to signal
(Ionita-Laza et al. 2009). More recent studies have focused solely on changes in Illumina or
454 coverage analogous to changes in hybridization intensity (Sudmant et al. 2010). We have
used coverage changes in combination with divergently oriented reads to identify variants
using comparisons to a resequenced reference and quantile normalized coverage data to
correct for stochastic coverage changes, repetitive content, GC bias and low complexity
sequence, resulting in robust variant calls. Furthermore, the common practice of retaining
only variants that are present in multiple samples or at particular genotype frequencies
(Conrad et al. 2010), detected by multiple independent methods (Mills et al. 2011, Zichner
et al. 2013, Alkan et al. 2009), or that are larger than several kilobases (Alkan et al. 2009,
Xie and Tammi 2009, Sudmant et al. 2010) can lead to severe ascertainment bias both
with respect to the types of variants that are present, the estimation of their prevalence
within populations and contribution to disease phenotypes, and the evolutionary impacts of
duplicated sequences.
With more recent improvements in Illumina sequencing technology, we have been able
to sequence strains individually to 50X or greater coverage. The use of paired-end reads in
extremely high coverage data provides clear advantages over previous work using roughly
3.6X-25X with subsets sequenced to 30-42X (Sudmant et al. 2010, Zichner et al. 2013, Mills
et al. 2011), or 16X (Alkan et al. 2009). The high coverage data presented here covers the
majorityoftheassayablegenomeandweexcludeonlyafewpercentofvariantcallsduetolow
coverage across strains (Table S9). Thus, we are able to identify hundreds of events that have
3 or more supporting divergent read pairs that might be missed at lower coverage (Figure
S1). We have additionally filtered sequences to exclude ancestral duplications, similarly to
previous work in humans (Mills et al. 2011) allowing for identification of derived mutations.
The result is a high confidence dataset for recently-derived tandem duplications in data that
effectively surveys the majority of the assayable genome. This high coverage is essential in
ensuring valid results from the sole use of paired-end read orientation. However, the types of
duplications that can be detected is highly dependent on sequencing library insert size. For
breakpoints with large amounts of repetitive sequence, reads separated by 300 bp may not be
sufficient to overcome difficulties of read mapping. Additionally, the minimum duplication
size is also limited by insert size. Capturing these types of constructs using paired-end
reads, especially in organisms with large amounts of repetitive content, including nested
transposable elements, will require a more diverse range of library insert sizes, a factor that
is likely to be important for surveys of larger, more repetitive genomes.
We are able to identify copy number variants as small as 66 bp using divergently-oriented
paired-end reads, even in cases where nucleotide divergence between paralogs or partially
repetitive sequence might otherwise complicate their discovery through coverage changes or
split read mapping using short reads. Divergently-oriented reads are additionally reliable to
detect duplications in regions where distributions of coverage are too irregular to allow for
automated detection of duplicates. We observe a high 96.1% confirmation rate of variants
among four sample strains of D. yakuba using PacBio reads up to 24 kb in length, suggesting
that paired-end reads in high coverage genomic sequencing will grossly outperform previous
methods which show high false positive and false negative rates. Moreover, the use of
the newly annotated D. simulans genome (Hu et al. 2012) based on a single isofemale
line will result in improved accuracy in comparison to previous studies in D. simulans
(Cardoso-Moreira et al. 2011). The general principles of the paired-end approach should
be broadly applicable and similar methods already have been used to identify chromosomal
inversions in natural populations (Corbett-Detig, Cardeno and Langley 2012). PacBio reads
can confirm structural variants with high rates of success, even given low coverage and
nucleotide high error rates (Huddleston et al. 2014) and we have extended this approach
to our genome wide survey. However, the ambiguity of split read mapping in the face of
repetitive elements can still complicate de novo duplicate discovery using split read mapping
of long reads. Furthermore, for the present, generating high coverage genomic sequencing
equivalent to that of our paired-end Illumina data is not cost-effective. However, this
technology and similar long read approaches are likely to offer advantages in confirming
or discovering structural variants such as tandem duplications, as well as de novo assembly,
that is worth future exploration.
We are able to identify and confirm a large number of complex gene structures such
as chimeric genes, recruitment of adjacent non-coding sequence, potential coding sequence
disruption, andpotentialselectivesilencingofexpression. Thesecomplexmutationsareoften
associatedwithcancerandotherdiseases(Ionita-Lazaetal.2009,InakiandLiu2012)andare
most likely to cause pathogenic outcomes. Hence the methods described here will be broadly
applicable in GWAS and clinical studies as well as in evolutionary genetics of non-model
systems where next generation sequencing has so recently made population genomics readily
tractable.
Conclusions
Here, we have described the landscape of standing variation for tandem duplications in
isofemale lines derived from natural populations of D. yakuba and D. simulans with high
accuracy. The resulting portrait of hundreds to thousands of variants, including large
numbersofcomplexbreakpoints,modifyingdeletions,casesofrecruitednon-codingsequence,
and dozens of chimeric genes per species reveals a rich substrate of segregating variation
across populations. We show that although the span of duplications across the genome is
quite limited, duplicates can induce secondary mutations and result in dynamic changes,
resulting in greater variation across mutated sites that offers more abundant variation for
use in adaptation than has been previously portrayed. The ways in which this variation
influences adaptive evolution and produces molecular changes will clarify the extent to which
mutational profiles define evolutionary outcomes and the ways in which molecular changes
associated with tandem duplications serve as causative factors in disease.
Materials and Methods
Population Samples
We surveyed variation in 10 lines of D. yakuba from Nairobi, Kenya and 10 from Nguti,
Cameroon (collected by P. Andolfatto 2002) as well as 10 lines of D. simulans from
Madagascar (collected by B. Ballard in 2002) and 10 strains from Nairobi, Kenya (collected
by P. Andolfatto in 2006). Flies from these isofemale lines (i.e. descendants from a
single wild-caught female) were inbred in the lab for 9-12 generations of sibling mating.
These should provide effectively haploid samples of allelic variation representative of natural
populations.
In addition to the 20 inbred lines derived from wild-caught flies, we also sequenced the
reference strains for each species. For D. simulans, the reference strain is the w501 stock
(UCSD stock center 14021-0251.011), whose sequence is described in (Hu et al. 2012). For
D. yakuba,thereferencestrainisUCSDstockcenter14021-0261.01,andthegenomesequence
is previously described in (Drosophila Twelve Genomes Consortium 2007). The majority of
the wild-caught strains and the D. yakuba reference stock were sequenced with three lanes
dmaf.biochem.uci.edu). The sequencing of the D. simulans reference strain was described
in (Hu et al. 2012). The number of lanes and read lengths per lane are summarized in Tables
S2 and S1.
Alignment to reference
The sequencing reads were aligned to the appropriate reference genome (Drosophila Twelve
GenomesConsortium2007,Huetal.2012)using bwaversion0.5.9(LiandDurbin2009)with
the following parameters, bwa aln -l 13 -m 50000000 -R 5000. The resulting paired-end
mappings were resolved via the “sampe” module of bwa (bwa sampe -a 5000 -N 5000 -n
500), and the output was sorted and converted into a “bam” file using samtools version
0.1.18 (Li et al. 2009). In the alignment and resolution commands, -l is the hash sized used
for seeding alignments, and the -R,-a,-N and -n refer to how many alignments are recorded
for reads mapping to multiple locations in the reference. After the paired-end mapping
resolution, the bam files from each lane of sequencing were merged into a single bam file
sorted according to position along the reference genome. A second bam file, sorted by read
name, was then created for use as input into our clustering software.
Clustering abnormal mapping events
Tandem duplications should be readily apparent among mapped reads as sequenced read
pairs that map in divergent orientations (Cridland and Thornton 2010, Zichner et al. 2013,
Mills et al. 2011, Tuzun et al. 2005), provided that tandem duplications with respect to
a reference genome result in a single novel junction. Figure 2 shows a putative genomic
sample that contains a tandem duplication of a gene that was used to generate paired-end
sequencing reads. We allowed for up to two mismatches within mapped reads in order to
capture divergent read calls in sample strains that have moderate numbers of nucleotide
differences. Reads were required to map uniquely, and so if duplication breakpoints contain
entirely repetitive sequences with no divergence across copies in the genome, they will not
be found. These limitations will, however, have minimal effects (see Text S1).
Sets of read pairs in the same strain that are located within the 99.9th quantile of the
mapping distance between properly mapped pairs from one another were clustered together
into a single duplication. In practice, this threshold distance is roughly 1 kb. Tandem
duplicationswereidentifiedasregionswhere3ormoredivergently-orientedreadpairscluster
tothesamelocationinasinglestrain. Allowingfewerdivergentreadsleadstoalargenumber
of false positive duplication calls due to cloning and sequencing errors. Further detail is
offered in Text S1.
PacBio alignment and analysis
FASTQ files of PacBio reads were aligned to the D. yakuba reference (Drosophila Twelve
//github.com/PacificBiosciences/blasr, with default options and storing the resulting
alignments in a bam file. Alignments from regions within 1 kb of putative tandem
duplications called using short read data (divergent read orientation plus an increase in
coverage) were extracted from the bam files using samtools 0.1.18 (Li et al. 2009). Reads
falling within these regions were then pulled and realigned to the reference using a BLASTn
(Altschul et al. 1990) with low-complexity filters turned off (-F F) at an E-value cutoff of 0.1
toallowforshortalignmentsgiventhehigherrorrateofPacBiosequencing. Alignmentusing
blastn proved important because it revealed cases where the bam files resulting from blasr
alignments failed to record secondary hits for a read, especially in cases where alignments are
ontheorderofhundredsofbasepairs. Here, confirmationbenefitsfromlongsequenceswhich
can anchor reads uniquely to a region, producing greater confidence in split-read alignments.
Variants were considered confirmed if two segments of a single PacBio subread which do not
overlap by more than 20% align to overlapping sections of the reference (Figure S5B) or if
a single read aligns in split formation with the downstream end of the read aligning to an
upstream region of the reference (Figure S5A,C-E). An event was considered not confirmed
if there were no long reads showing any of the alignment patterns in Figure S5 within 1 kb
of the variant. Variants were considered definite false positives if clearly contradicted by at
least one read spanning the entire putatively duplicated region as defined by Illumina read
mapping and adjacent reference. Some of these unconfirmed variants may be due to low
clone coverage in the region or lack of sufficient read lengths rather than false positives.
HMM and coverage changes
To detect increases and decreases relative to reference resequencing, we quantile normalized
coverage for each strain in R so that coverage displayed an equal median and variance across
all strains (Bolstad et al. 2003). Such normalization renders tests of differing coverage robust
inthefaceofdifferingsequencedepthacrosssamplesoracrosssitesandisessentialforreliable
confirmation of tandem duplicate calls (Bolstad et al. 2003).
We developed a Hidden Markov Model to identify statistically significant increases in
coverage at duplicated sites. In the HMM, hidden states are defined by copy number and
they act to effect differential emission probabilities for the observed outcomes of coverage
depth at duplicated or non duplicated sites. We modeled differences in coverage for sample
strains relative to the reference as the difference in two normal distributed random variables
each with a mean and variance corresponding to the observed mean and variance in the
reference in the given window. Detailed methods of the HMM and decoding are provided in
Text S1.
Deletions and complex duplication events
In order to determine the extent to which secondary deletions, incomplete duplications, or
short range dispersed duplicates result in complex structures that are not representative
of classic duplications, we identified long-spanning read pairs that lie within tandem
duplications . We identified read-pairs with an estimated template length of ≥ 600 bp,
corresponding to roughly the 99.9th percentile of fragment lengths in the reference genome
(Table S5). Long spanning reads whose end points lie within 200 bp of one another and
which are fully contained within the duplication endpoints were clustered together. Clusters
supported by five or more read pairs (corresponding to a putative P-value of 10−15) were
recorded as signs of deletion or other complex rearrangement.
Sample frequency of variants
Complex mutations that are present in two different strains and have divergent reads
spanning regions on both the 5(cid:48) and 3(cid:48) ends that fall within 100 bp of one another in the
two strains are considered to be equivalent duplications. While divergently-oriented reads
reliably identify duplications, the true boundaries of the duplication may differ from the
divergent read spans by several bases, especially in cases where repetitive or low complexity
sequence lies at breakpoints, a complication which is not addressed in recent work (Zichner
et al. 2013, Mills et al. 2011). For each duplication the minimum of divergent read starts and
the maximum of divergent read stops across all strains was recorded to indicate the span of
the duplication. These breakpoints were assembled and confirmed in silico using phrap and
lastz (Text S1).
In order to correct frequencies for the effects of false negatives, we used a combination of
coverage and divergently-oriented reads to identify tandem duplicates in additional strains.
For each duplication present based on three or more pairs divergent reads in at least one
strain, a different strain which had at least one divergently-oriented read-pair and displayed
two-fold or greater coverage increases as determined by the HMM across at least 75% of the
duplication’s span was also recorded as having that particular duplication as well.
We retained tandem duplicates with divergent read pairs where the minimum start
and the maximum stop after clustering were less than 25 kb apart. While there may be
some tandem duplications larger than 25 kb, divergent read pairs at a greater distance
are substantially less likely to display two-fold coverage changes across the entire span
and are therefore more consistent with translocations within chromosomes (Table S31).
Unannotated duplications in the reference are likely to be biased towards specific sizes,
GO classes, or genomic locations and are likely to artificially influence statistical tests. We
removed duplications that were also identified in the reference, and did not include these
in downstream analyses of duplication sizes or numbers, gene ontology, or site frequency
spectra.
Polarizing ancestral state
Alltandemduplicationsidentifiedarepolymorphicinpopulationsandarethereforeexpected
to be extremely young. However, tandem duplications may be identified in sample strains
relative to the references if they are new mutations in the sample or if they represent
ancestral sequence that has returned to single copy in the reference through deletion.
In order to identify duplications that represent the ancestral state, we pulled reference
sequence corresponding to the maximum duplicate span and ran a BLASTn comparison of
the sequence against the D. melanogaster, D. erecta, and D. yakuba or D. simulans reference
genomes at an E-value cutoff of 10−5.
Ancestral tandem duplications were defined as any segment that has two hits on the
same chromosome of the given reference that lie within 200 kb of one another, excluding
unlocalized sequence and heterochromatin annotations where assembly and annotations are
uncertain. Ancestral duplications that are shared across species should be separated by
moderate numbers of nucleotide differences, and therefore are expected to be correctly
assembled across outgroups. Hits must have at least 85% nucleotide identity and must
span at least 80% of the contig spanned by divergently-oriented reads in the sample. Based
on these requirements, we removed 8.1% of duplications in D. simulans and 3.3% in D.
yakuba, suggesting that the vast majority of duplicates identified are recently derived, as
expected.
Transposable Element Annotation and Repetitive Content
Transposable elements were initially identified in the D. simulans and D. yakuba reference
sequences by identifying all read pairs where one member of the pair aligned uniquely to
the reference and the other member of the pair aligned multiply. This has been previously
demonstrated to be an indication of a TE breakpoint (Mackay et al. 2012, Cridland et al.
2013) All locations to which these multiply aligning reads align were recorded and a fasta file
oftheseputativeTElocationswasgenerated. PutativeTEsequenceswerethenalignedtothe
set of annotated TEs in version 5 of the D. melanogaster reference downloaded from flybase
(www.flybase.org) using tblastx (Altschul et al. 1990) with the following parameters (-f 999
-F ”” -e 10−4 -m 8). Regions of the reference sequence that aligned to a D. melanogaster
TE with an E-value of ≤ 10−9 were kept and annotated as TEs. We then extracted 500 base
pairs to either side of the annotated regions of the reference and aligned these regions to the
set of D. melanogaster TEs, as above. This procedure was performed twice to capture the
full length of TE sequence in the reference genomes.
Once transposable elements were annotated in the reference genomes, TEs were detected
in the 20 sample genomes (Mackay et al. 2012) which includes both TE presence and TE
absence calls. Briefly, initial TE detection was done by identifying all read pairs where
one member of the pair aligned uniquely to the reference and the other member aligned to
any known TE sequence were identified. Unique reads were clustered if they aligned to the
same strand of the same chromosome, within a given threshold distance. This threshold
was defined as the 99th quantile of mapping distances observed for uniquely mapping read
pairsthat are properly paired and lie in the expected orientation on opposite strands. At
least three read pairs from each of the left and right estimates, in the correct orientation and
correct strand, were required to indicate a TE. Phrap (version 1.090518) (Ewing and Green
1998) with the following parameters (-forcelevel 10 -minscore 10 -minmatch 10) was used
to reassemble the local area around the TE insertion breakpoint. Contigs were classified
according to TE family based on alignments in a BLASTn search (Altschul et al. 1990).
Following the initial TE detection phase we examined each position where a TE was
identified, including TEs identified in the appropriate reference, in each other line in that
species. At this stage we were able to both identify TEs which had previously been missed
by our pipeline as well as to make absence calls by reconstructing a contig that spans
the TE insertion location. Repetitive content independent of transposable elements was
defined using an all-by-all BLASTn comparison (Altschul et al. 1990) of sequence 500 bp
upstream and downstream of duplication coordinates in the D. yakuba and D. simulans
references at an E-value ≤ 10−5 with no filter for low complexity or repetitive sequences. We
used a resampling approach to identify overrepresentation of duplications associated with
direct repeats. We performed 10,000,000 replicates choosing the same number of tandem
duplications at random and determining whether an equal or greater number were identified
on the X chromosome.
Tandem repeats which might putatively facilitate ectopic recombination may hinder
identification of tandem duplicates if repeat sequences are identical. We performed an
all-by-all blastn of all chromosomes for each of the reference genomes at an E-value of 10−5
with low complexity filters turned off (-F F). Ignoring identical self hits, we identified all
directly repeated sequences with greater than 99.5% nucleotide identity which are greater
than 300 bp in length and which lie within 25 kb of one another, in accordance with the
criteria for identifying duplicates.
Identifying duplicated coding sequence
Gene duplications were defined as any divergent read calls whose maximum span across all
lines overlaps with the annotated CDS coordinates. D. yakuba CDS annotations were based
on flybase release D. yakuba r.1.3. Gene annotations for the recent reassembly of the D.
simulans reference were produced by aligning all D. melanogaster CDS sequences to the
D. simulans reference in a tblastx. Percent coverage of the CDS was defined based on the
portion of the corresponding genomic sequence from start to stop that was covered by the
maximum span of divergent read calls across all strains.
Gene Ontology
Mar2013)todeterminewhetheranyfunctionalcategorieswereoverrepresentedatduplicated
genes. Functional data for D. yakuba and D. simulans are not readily available in many
cases, and thus we identified functional classes in the D. melanogaster orthologs as classified
in Flybase. Gene ontology clustering threshold was set to Low and significance was
defined using a cutoff of EASE ≥ 1.0. The DAVID clustering software uses Fuzzy Heuristic
Partitioning to identify genes with related functional terms at all levels of Gene Ontology
from cellular processes to known phenotypes.
Differences among chromosomes
We calculated the size of duplications that span less than 25 kb in each sample strain,
excluding duplications identified in the reference, as incorrectly assembled duplicates are
likely be biased toward repetitive and low complexity sequence. Significant differences in
duplication sizes were identified using ANOVA and Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference
test on the log normalized distribution of duplication sizes by chromosome.
We calculated the number of duplications that span less than 25 kb on each major
chromosomal arm for each sample strain, excluding duplications identified in the reference.
The number of duplications was then normalized by the number of mapped bases in the
reference to adjust for different chromosome sizes and coverage. Differences in the number
of duplications per base pair were identified using ANOVA and Tukey’s Honestly Significant
Difference test. There was no significant difference in the number of duplications present
across lines.
Supporting Files
Extended methods as well as detailed description of sequence data and confirmation is
provided in Text S1. All data files are available at molpopogen.org/Data. Aligned bam
files were deposited in the National Institutes of Health Short Read Archive under accession
numbers SRP040290 and SRP029453. Sequenced stocks were deposited in the University of
California,SanDiego(UCSD)stockcenterwithstocknumbers14021-0261.38-14021-0261.51
and 14021-0251.293- 14021-0251.311.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Elizabeth G. King, Anthony D. Long, and Alexis S. Harrison,
and Trevor Bedford for helpful discussions, as well as Portola Coffee Labs for a supportive
writing environment. J. J. Emerson gave valuable advice on the use of lastz and the UCSC
toolkit. B. Ballard shared D. simulans fly stocks collected from Madagascar. We would
also like to thank several anonymous reviewers whose comments substantially improved the
manuscript. This work is supported by a National Institute of General Medical Sciences
at the National Institute of Health Ruth Kirschtein National Research Service Award
F32-GM099377 to RLR. Research funds were provided by National Institute of General
Medical Sciences at the National Institute of Health grant R01-GM085183 to KRT and
R01-GM083228 to PA. All sequencing and PacBio library preparations were performed
at the UC Irvine High Throughput Genomics facility, which is supported by the National
Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P30CA062203.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of the National Institutes of Health. The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.