]NM.oib-q[
1v47420.5051:viXra
Landauer in the age of synthetic biology: energy consumption and information
processing in biochemical networks
Pankaj Mehta and Alex H. Lang
Dept. of Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215
David J. Schwab
Dept. of Physics, Northwestern, Evanston, IL
(Dated: October11, 2018)
A central goal of synthetic biology is to design sophisticated synthetic cellular circuits that can
performcomplexcomputationsandinformationprocessingtasksinresponsetospecificinputs. The
tremendous advances in our ability to understand and manipulate cellular information processing
networks raises several fundamental physics questions: How do the molecular components of cellu-
lar circuits exploit energy consumption to improve information processing? Can one utilize ideas
from thermodynamics to improve the design of synthetic cellular circuits and modules? Here, we
summarize recent theoretical work addressing these questions. Energy consumption in cellular cir-
cuits serves fivebasic purposes: (1) increasing specificity, (2) manipulating dynamics, (3) reducing
variability,(4)amplifyingsignal,and(5)erasingmemory. Wedemonstratetheseideasusingseveral
simple examples and discuss the implications of these theoretical ideas for the emerging field of
syntheticbiology. We conclude by discussing how it may be possible to overcome these limitations
using “post-translational” syntheticbiology that exploits reversible protein modification.
Cellsliveincomplexanddynamicenvironments. They mayalsoinfluencethedesignofcellularinformationpro-
sense and respond to both external environmental cues cessing networks. As the field of synthetic biology seeks
and to each other through cell-to-cell communication. to assemble increasingly complex biochemical networks
Adaptingtochangingenvironmentsoftenrequirescellsto that exhibit robust, predictable behaviors, natural ques-
perform complex information processing, and cells have tions emerge: What are the physical limitations (ther-
developed elaborate signaling networks to accomplish modynamic and kinetic) on the behavior and design of
this feat. These biochemical networks are ubiquitous in these biological networks? How can one use energy con-
biology, ranging from the quorum-sensing1 and chemo- sumption to improve the design of synthetic circuits?
taxis networks2 in single-celled organisms to develop- In a classic paper written at the advent of modern
mental networks in higher organisms3. Inspired by both computing18,Landaueraskedanalogousquestionsabout
these natural circuits and physical computing devices, physical computing devices. He argued that a central
synthetic biologistsare designing sophisticatedsynthetic componentofany generalpurpose computing device is a
circuits that can perform complicated “computing-like” memorymodulethatcanbe“reset”toapredefinedstate,
behaviors. Synthetic biologists have designed gene cir- and pointed out that such a device must obey certain
cuits executing a wide range of functionalities includ- thermodynamic and kinetic constraints. In particular,
ingswitches4,oscillators5,counters6,andevencell-to-cell
heconvincinglyarguedthatresettingmemorynecessarily
communicators7.
leadstopowerdissipation,implyingthatheatgeneration
Despitethesesuccesses,manychallengestoharnessing and energy consumption are unavoidable consequences
the full potential of synthetic biology persist8–15. While of the computing process itself. The paper also outlined
there are guiding principles to synthetic biology16, ac- three general sources of error resulting from kinetic and
tual construction of synthetic circuits often proceeds in thermodynamicconsiderations: incompleteswitchingbe-
an ad-hoc manner through a mixture of biological intu- tweenmemorystatesduetolongswitchingtimes,thede-
ition and trial-and-error. Furthermore, the functional- cay of stored information due to spontaneous switching,
ity and applicability is limited by a dearth of biological and what he called a “Boltzmann” error due to limited
components17. For this reason, it would be helpful to energy supplies. Furthermore, the paper showed that
identifygeneralprinciplesthatcanimprovethedesignof there exist fundamental trade-offs between these types
synthetic circuits and help guide the search for new bio- of errors and energetic costs in these memory devices.
logical parts. One promising direction along these lines These considerationssuggested generalstrategies for de-
is recent work examining the relationship between the signingnew devicesandpartsforphysicalmemorymod-
information processing capabilities of these biochemical ules.
networksandtheirenergeticcosts(technicallythisisusu- The goalof this review is to synthesize recenttheoret-
ally a cost in free energy, but for the sake of brevity we ical work on thermodynamics and energy consumption
will refer to this as energy). Energetic costs place im- in biochemical networks and discuss the implications of
portant constraints on the design of physical computing this work for synthetic biology. Theoretical papers in
devices18 aswellasonneuralcomputingarchitecturesin this field are often highly technical and draw on new re-
the brain and retina19, suggesting that thermodynamics sults in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. For this
reason, our goal is to organize the insights contained in mechanisms are also thought to underlie the exquisite
these papers20–43 into a few simple, broadly applicable specificity of eukaryotic pathways such as the TCR sig-
principles. We find that energy consumption in cellular naling network57, in which a few-fold difference in the
circuits tends to servefive basic purposes: (1) increasing affinities between molecules can lead to several orders of
specificity,(2)manipulatingdynamics,(3)reducingvari- magnitudedifferenceinresponse. Afullreviewofkinetic
ability, (4) amplifying signal, and (5) erasing memory. proofreading and all its applications is beyond the scope
Furthermore,foreachofthese categories,there existim- of this review, but we highlight some important lessons
plicit tradeoffs between power consumption and dynam- for synthetic biology.
ics. The first general principle that emerges from kinetic
In the future, energetic costs are likely to become an proofreading is that greater specificity requires greater
increasinglyimportantconsiderationinthedesignofsyn- energy consumption. In particular, the error rate in ki-
thetic circuits. Presently, synthetic biology is adept at netic proofreadingdepends exponentially on the amount
making circuits that can be controlled and manipulated ofenergyconsumedineachstepofthe proofreadingcas-
by external users by, for example, adding or removing cade. Thisincreasedspecificitycomesattheexpenseofa
small signaling molecules. A major challenge facing the more sluggishdynamic response (see38,58 for an interest-
fieldistomovebeyondsuchexternallycontrolledcircuits ingexplorationofthistradeoff). Thishighlightsasecond
to autonomouscircuitsthatcanfunction indiverseenvi- theme about energy consumption: there generally exist
ronmentsforextendedperiodsoftime. Suchautonomous trade-offsbetween greaterspecificity and other desirable
circuitsmustbe abletoaccuratelysensetheexternalen- properties such as a fast dynamical response or sensitiv-
vironment,amplifysmallsignals,andstoreinformation– ity to small signals.
processesthatrequireorcanbeimprovedthroughenergy The latter trade-off is clearest in the context of non-
consumption. Energyconsumptionnecessarilyimposesa specificactivationofanoutputinasyntheticcircuit. For
fitness cost on cells harboring the synthetic circuit, and example, in a transcriptionalsynthetic circuit an output
overmanygenerations,evenasmallfitnesscostcancause protein may be produced at low levels even in the ab-
synthetic circuits to be lost due to competition. For this sence of an input signal. A common strategy for dealing
reason, understanding how the information processing with such background levels of activation is to place a
capabilities of a biochemical network are related to its strong degradation tag on the protein that increases its
energy consumption is an important theoreticalproblem degradation rate59. This ensures that in the absence of
in synthetic biology. anactivatingsignal,proteinsarequicklydegraded. How-
Beyond synthetic biology, biochemical networks of- ever, increasing the degradation rate clearly comes at a
fer a unique setting to explore fundamental physics steepenergeticcostasmoreproteinshavetobeproduced
questions in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics. Re- to reach the same steady-state. At the same time, the
cently there has been a surge of interest among genecircuitlosessensitivitytosmallinputsignalsdueto
physicists in the relationship between information and their fast degradation.
thermodynamics44,45. For example, using sophisticated
optical traps groups have recently experimentally tested
Landauers principle46,47, and there is an active de- II. MANIPULATING DYNAMICS
bate on how to extend Landauers principle to quantum
regimes48. A flurry of recent work has focused on ex-
Another generalrolefor energyconsumptionis to ma-
tending concepts like entropy and free-energy to non-
nipulate dynamics. By coupling a chemical reaction to
equilibrium regimes, often using information theoretic
energysourcessuchATPorGTP,itispossibletochange
concepts49–55. Livingsystemsareperhapsthemostinter-
the dynamics of a biochemical network. One of the
esting exampleof non-equilibriumsystems,andthinking
mostinterestingrecentexamplesofhowenergyconsump-
about information and thermodynamics in the context
tion can be used to change dynamics is the recent work
of cells is likely to yield new general insights into non-
of retroactivity60–62. The central problem addressed in
equilibrium physics.
these papers is the observation that biochemical signal
transductioncircuitsoftenhavetheirdynamicalbehavior
alteredupon coupling to externaloutputs due to seques-
I. INCREASING SPECIFICITY
tration of proteins, a property dubbed “retroactivity”.
Such coupling is particularly undesired when there are
One common role of energy consumption in biochemi- a number of downstream outputs. These works demon-
cal circuits is to increase the specificity of an enzyme or strate, both theoretically and experimentally, that it is
signaling pathway. The most famous example of this is possibletointroduceinsulating elementsthatreducethe
kinetic proofreading. In a landmark paper56, John Hop- magnitude of this retroactivity and thereby restore the
fieldshowedhowitispossibletoincreasethespecificityof modular dynamicalbehaviorof synthetic circuits. A key
anenzymebeyondwhatwouldbeexpectedfromequilib- property of these insulating elements is that they uti-
rium thermodynamics by consuming energy and driving lize enzymatic futile cycles and hence actively consume
thesystemoutofequilibrium. Kineticproofreading-type energy. Moreover, a detailed theoretical analysis shows
complex C, one couples Z to C indirectly through an
intermediary insulating element with fast kinetics. Sim-
ilar analysis of this more complex network shows that
this dramatically decreases the amount of retroactiv-
ity. In practice, the insulating element is a phosphoryla-
tion/dephosphorylationcycle with fast kinetics (see Fig-
B ure 1). The faster the intermediary kinetics, and hence
the more energyconsumedby the futile cycle,the better
thequasi-staticapproximationandthemoreeffectivethe
insulator (see61,62 for details).
III. REDUCING VARIABILITY
Biochemicalcircuitscanalsoconsumeenergytoreduce
variability and increase reproducibility. One of the best
studiedexamplesofthisistheincrediblyreproduciblere-
sponse of mammalian rod cells in response to light stim-
ulation(see63 andreferencestherein). Thisreproducibil-
FIG. 1. Consuming energy to increase modularity. ity of the rod cell response is especially surprising given
(A) A transcription factor regulates downstream promot- that the response originatesfrom the activation of a sin-
ers. Sequestration of the transcription factor upon binding gle rhodopsinmolecule. A simple biophysicallyplausible
to promoters can lead to “retroactivity”, i.e. a change in modelforanactiverhodopsinis thatits lifetime is expo-
the dynamics of the transcription factor levels as a result of nentially distributed (i.e. the deactivation of rhodopsin
coupling to outputs. (B) Coupling the transcription factor is a Poisson process). In this case, the trial-to-trial vari-
through an insulating element consisting of a phosphoryla- ability, measured by the squared coefficient of variation,
tion/dephosphorlyation cycle with fast dynamicsreduces the CV2 = σ2/µ2, would be equal to 1. Surprisingly, the
effect of retroactivity.
actual variability is much smaller than this naive expec-
tation.
Experiments indicate that discrepancy is at least par-
that the effectiveness of an insulating element is directly
tially explained by the fact that the shut-off of ac-
related to its energy consumption61.
tive rhodopsin molecules proceeds through a multi-step
To demonstrate these concepts, we will consider the
cascade63–66 (i.e the active rhodopsin molecule starts in
simple example of a protein Z that is produced at a
state 1, then transitions to state 2, etc. until it reaches
time-dependentratek(t)andisdegradedatarateδ (see
state L). If each of these steps were identical and inde-
Figure 1). In addition, Z regulates a family of promot-
pendent, then from the central limit theorem the coeffi-
ers,withconcentrationp ,bybinding/unbindingtothe
cientofvariationofthe Lstepcascadewouldbe Ltimes
promoter to form a complex C at rates k . The ki-
on/off smaller than that of a single step, i.e. σ2/µ2 =1/L.
netics of this simple network is described by the set of
Noticethatinorderforsuchamulti-stepcascadetore-
ordinary differential equations
ducevariabilityitisnecessarythateachofthetransitions
dZ =k(t)−δZ−τ −1[k Z(p −C)+k C], between the L states be irreversible. If they were not,
dt on tot off then one could not treat the L-steps as independent and
dC the progression of the rhodopsin molecule through the
dt on tot off variousstateswouldresemblearandomwalk,greatlyin-
creasingthe variability63. For this reason,reducing vari-
where we have introduced an overall dimensionless
abilitynecessarilyconsumesenergy. Consistentwiththis
timescale τ for the binding/unbinding dynamics. Notice
idea is the observation that the variability of rhodopsin
that if τ −1 ≫ 1, then the timescale separation between
seems to depend on the number of phosphorylationsites
the Z and C dynamics means that the Z dynamics are
present on a rhodopsin molecule66.
well approximated by setting dC =0 so that
dt In fact, it is possible to directly compute the coeffi-
cient of variation67,68 as a function of the ratio of the
≈k(t)−δZ. (2) forward and backward rates at each step, θ. The loga-
rithm ofthis ratio is simply the free-energyconsumedat
Thus,whenZ iscoupledtoasystemwithextremelyfast each step, ∆G = logθ. Figure 2 shows that the coeffi-
dynamics, the retroactivity term, τ −1[k Z(p −C)+ cient of variation is a monotonically decreasing function
k C], is negligible. of ∆G and hence the energy consumed by the cascade.
This basic observation motivates the idea behind ki- Note that this decrease in the variability comes at the
netic insulators. Instead of coupling Z directly to the expense of a slower dynamic response, since the mean
0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
G (per step)
tneiciffeoC
...
A to detect small changes in input such as the phototrans-
1 2 3 L-1 L duction pathway in the retina71 or the T cell receptor
signaling pathway in immunology. In these pathways, a
ATP ADP ATP ADP ATP ADP smallchangeinthesteady-statenumberofinputmessen-
B ger molecules, dI, leads to a large change in the steady-
statenumberofoutputmolecules,dO. Theratioofthese
changes is the number gain, often just called the gain,
with g > 1 implying the ratio of output to input 0
molecules is necessarily greater than 1.
Before proceeding further, it is worth making the dis-
tinction between the number gain, which clearly mea-
sures changes in absolute number, with another com-
monly employed quantity used to describe biochemical
Δ pathways called logarithmic sensitivity71. The logarith-
mic sensitivity, dlog[O], measuresthe logarithmicchange
FIG. 2. Reducing variability in a multi-step cascade dlog[I]
in the concentration of an output signal as a function of
through energy consumption. (A)Aprotein(blueovals)
is repeatedly phosphorylated L times. (B) The coefficient of the logarithmic change in the input concentrationand is
variation,definedasthevarianceoverthemeansquaredofthe a measure of the fractionalor relative gain. Thoughlog-
time it takes to complete L phosphorylations, as a function arithmic sensitivity and gainare often used interchange-
of thefree-energy consumed duringeach step in the cascade, ably in the systems biology literature, the two measures
∆G, for L=1,4,16,64. are very different71. To see this, consider a simple sig-
naling element where a ligand, L binds to a protein X
and changes its conformation to X . The input in this
completion time scales linearly in the cascade length. case is L and the output is X ∗ . To have g >1, a small
Recent calculations have applied these ideas to the changeinthenumberofligands,dLmustproducealarge
problem of a non-equilbrium receptor that estimates the change in the number of activated X ∗ . Notice that by
concentrationof an externalligand69. It was shownthat definition, in equilibrium, dX∗ <1 since each ligand can
by forcing the receptor to cycle through a series of L bindonlyonereceptor. Ifinsteadnligandsbindcoopera-
states,onecanincreasethesignal-to-noiseratioandcon- tivelytoeachX,thenonewouldhave
<1/n. Thus,
struct a biochemical network that performs Maximum cooperatively in fact reduces the number gain. In con-
Likelihood Estimation (MLE) in the limit of large L. trast, the logarithmic sensitivity increases dramatically,
Since MLE is the statistically optimal estimator, this dlog[X] = n. An important consequence of this is that
work suggest that it should be possible to improve the
amplification of input signals (as measured by number
performance of synthetic biology based biodetectors by
gain) necessarily requires a non-equilibrium mechanism
actively consuming energy.
that consumes energy.
Moreover, this trade-off between variability and en-
The fact thatenergyconsumptionshouldbe naturally
ergy consumption is likely to be quite general. Analyti-
relatedto the number gainand not logarithmic gain can
calargumentsandnumericalevidencesuggesttheremay
be seen using both biological and physical arguments.
exist a general thermodynamic uncertainty relation re-
The fundamental unit of energy is an ATP molecule.
lating the variance, of certain quantities in biochemical
Sinceenergyconsumptionisjustafunctionoftotalnum-
networks and the energy consumption70. In particular,
ber of ATP molecules hydrolyzed, it is natural to mea-
achieving an uncertainty, σ2, in a quantity such as the
suregainusingchangesin the absolute numbersandnot
numberofconsumed/producedmoleculesinageneticcir-
concentrations. From the viewpoints of physics, this is
cuitorthenumberofstepsinamolecularmotor,requires
simplythestatementthatenergyisanextensivequantity
an energetic cost of 2k T/σ2. This suggest that any
B and hence depends on the actual number of molecules.
strategy for reducing noise and variability in synthetic
In biochemical networks, this signal amplification is
circuits will require these circuits to actively consume
accomplishedthroughenzymatic cascades,where the in-
energy.
put signal couples to an enzyme that can catalytically
modify (e.g. phosphorylate) a substrate. Such basic
enzymatic “push-pull” amplifiers are the basic building
IV. AMPLIFYING SIGNAL block of many eukaryoticbiochemical pathways,and are
a canonical example of how energy consumption can be
Biochemicalnetworkscanalso consumeenergy to am- used to amplify input signals (see Figure 3). A push-
plify upstream input signals. Signal amplification is ex- pull amplifier consists of an activating enzyme E and
tremelyimportantinmanyeukaryoticpathwaysdesigned a deactivating enzyme E that interconvert a substrate
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
As discussedabove,a key element of this enzymatic am-
.
tween the states X 7→ X ∗ 7→ X is coupled to a futile
cycle (e.g. ATP hydrolysis) and hence dissipates an en-
ergy ∆G . At steady-state, the power consumption
X X* τ=2 cycle
of the enzymatic amplifier is
τ=1 P =k a [E a ]X¯∆G cycle =k d [E d ]X¯∗∆G cycle . (8)
P Ed τ=0.5 The input of the enzymatic amplifier is the number of
activating enzymes E and the output of the amplifier
τ=0.2 is the steady-state number of active substrate molecules
X . This is natural in many eukaryotic signaling path-
ways where E is often a receptor that becomes enzy-
matically active upon binding an external ligand. Using
(8), one can calculate the static gain and find
−1.
FIG.3. Amplifying signals in a push-pull amplifier by 0 a cycle
consumingenergy. Schematicillustratesasimplepush-pull
Thisexpressionshowsthatthegainofanenzymaticcas-
amplifier where a kinase, Ea, modifies a protein from X to
X∗ and a phosphatase, Ed, catalyzing the reverse reaction. cade is directly proportional to the power consumed per
The plot illustrates that larger gain can be accomplished at enzymemeasuredinthenaturalunitsofpowerthatchar-
theexpense of a slower response timeτ. acterize the amplifier: ∆G cycle /τ. This is shown in Fig-
ure 3 where we plot the gain as a function of power con-
sumption for different response times.
between two forms, X and X ∗ . Importantly, the post- Notice that the gain can be increased in two ways, by
translationalmodificationofX iscoupledtoafutilecycle eitherincreasingthepowerconsumptionorincreasingthe
such as ATP hydrolysis. The basic equations governing response time. Thus, at a fixed power consumption, in-
a push-pull amplifier are creasinggaincomesatthecostofaslowerresponse. This
is an example of a general engineering principle that is
dX =Γ (E )X −Γ (E )X ∗ , (4) likelyto be importantformanyapplicationsinsynthetic
dt a a d d biology: the gain-bandwidth tradeoff71. In general, a
gaininsignalcomesattheexpense ofareducedrangeof
whereΓ a (E a )istherateatwhichenzymeE a convertsX response frequencies (bandwidth). If one assumes that
to X and Γ d (E d ) is the rate at which enzyme E d con- there is a maximum response frequency (ie a minimal
verts X back to X. This rate equation must be supple- timerequiredforaresponse,anaturalassumptioninany
mentedbytheconservationequationonthetotalnumber practicalengineeringsystem),thegain-bandwidthtrade-
of X molecules, off is equivalent to tradeoff between gain and response
time. For this reason, energy consumption is likely to
X +X =X . (5) be animportantconsiderationforsynthetic circuits such
asbiosensorsthatmustrespondquicklytosmallchanges
In the linear-responseregime where the enzymes work inanexternalinput. Moregenerally,thegain-bandwidth
farfromsaturation,onecanapproximatetheratesin(4) tradeoffhighlightsthegeneraltensionbetweensignalam-
as Γ (E ) ≈ k [E ] and Γ (E ) ≈ k [E ], with k = plification,energyconsumption,andsignalingdynamics.
a a a a d d d d a
kcat/K and k = kcat/K the ratios of the catalytic
activity,k ,totheMichaelis-Mentenconstant,K ,for
the two enzymes. It is straightforward to show that the V. ERASING MEMORY
steady-state concentration of activated proteins is
Memory is a central component of all computing de-
X tot k a [E a ]
vices. In a seminal 1961 paper18, Landauer outlined the
k [E ]+k [E ] fundamentalthermodynamicandkineticconstraintsthat
must be satisfied by memory modules in physical sys-
Furthermore, one can define a “response time”, τ, for tems. Landaueremphasizedthe physicalnatureofinfor-
the enzymatic amplifier to be the rate at which a small mation and used this to establish a connection between
perturbation from steady-state δX
decays. energy dissipation and erasing/resetting memory mod-
This yields (see71 for details) ules. This was codified in what is now known as Lan-
dauersprinciple: anyirreversiblecomputingdevicemust
−1.
(7) consume energy.
state-independent rate. Interestingly, one can explicitly
map components and functional operations in the net-
work onto traditional computational tasks (see Figure
4). Furthermore,itwasshownthatwithinthecontextof
this network, computing the Berg-Purcell statistic nec-
essarily required energy consumption. The underlying
reasonfor this is that erasing/resettingmemory requires
energy (we note that while Landauer emphasized that
erasing and not writing requires energy18, a recent pa-
per argues energyconsumption is bounded by writing to
memory41). These results seem to be quite general and
similarconclusionshavebeenreachedbya varietyofau-
thors examining other biochemical networks32–34.
These ideas have important implications for synthetic
biology. Much as memory is central to the function of
moderncomputers,biologicalmemorymodulesareacru-
cialcomponentofmanysyntheticgenecircuits75,76. Any
reusable synthetic circuit must possess a memory mod-
FIG. 4. A two-component network as a computa- ule that it can write and erase. Currently, synthetic cir-
tional module. (A) Cellular network that calculates the cuitsusetwogeneralclassesofreusablememorymodules
Berg-Purcell statistic for estimating the concentration of an that are commonly used: protein-based bistable genetic
external-ligand. (B) Table summarizing the relationship be- switches4 and recombinase-basedDNA memory75,76 (we
tweenthenetworkandstandardcomputationalelementsand
are ignoring DNA mutation-based memories that can
techniques.
only be used once77). In both cases, resetting the mem-
oryinvolvesconsumingenergybyexpressinganddegrad-
ingproteins(proteinsinvolvedinbistabilityandrecombi-
Thebestunderstoodexampleofacellularcomputation
nases, respectively). Although this energy consumption
from the perspective of statistical physics is the estima-
is fundamental to any reusablememory module, it is de-
tion of a steady-state concentration of chemical ligand
sirabletofindlessenergeticallycostlyreusablememories
in the surrounding environment by a biochemical net-
that can still be stable over many generations such as
work. This problem was first considered in the seminal
chromatin-based memory module13,78. As synthetic cir-
paper72 by Berg and Purcell who showed that the in-
cuits become increasingly complex, these energetic costs
formation a cell learns about its environment is limited
are likely to be ever more important.
by stochastic fluctuations in the occupancy of the recep-
tors that detect the ligand. In particular, they consid-
ered the case of a cellular receptor that binds ligands
at a concentration-dependent rate and unbinds particles VI. USING ENERGY CONSUMPTION TO
IMPROVE SYNTHETIC CIRCUITS
at a fixed rate. They argued that cells could estimate
chemical concentrations by calculating the average time
a receptor is bound during a measurement time. Energy consumption is a defining feature of most in-
Inthesestudies,thebiochemicalnetworksdownstream formation processing networks found in living systems.
of the receptors that perform the desired computations Thetheoreticalworkreviewedhereprovidesnewinsights
were largely ignored because the authors were inter- into biochemical networks. The greatest difference be-
ested in calculating fundamental limits on how well cells tweenequilibriumandnon-equilibriumsystemsisthatin
can estimate external concentrations. However, calcu- equilibrium,theenergydifferencesbetweenstatesfunda-
lating energetic costs requires an explicit model of the mentally determines the dynamics of the system, while
downstream biochemical networks that implement these in a non-equilibrium system the energy differences and
computations. As Feynman emphasized in his book on dynamics become decoupled. This can be utilized in a
computation73, “Information is physical.” variety of ways by biochemical networks and we broadly
Recently, we considered a simple two-component bio- divided up the useful cases into relatively independent
chemical network that directly computes the Berg- roles: increasing specificity, manipulating dynamics, re-
Purcell estimator74. Information about external ligand ducing variability, amplifying signals, and erasing mem-
concentrationisstoredinthelevelsofadownstreampro- ory. We believe that focusing on examples of each
tein (shown in Figure 4). Such two-component networks rolewillallowtheoristsandexperimentaliststo establish
arecommoninbacteriaandareoftenusedtosenseexter- a common language and further both non-equilibrium
nalsignalswithreceptorsphosphorylatingadownstream physics and synthetic biology. One beautiful outcome
responseregulator. Receptorsconvertadownstreampro- oftheinterplaybetweentheoryandexperimentisthere-
tein from an inactive form to an active form at a state- cent work showing that a kinetic insulator that actively
dependent rate. The proteins are then inactivated at a consumes energy can restore modularity and eliminate
retroactivity in a simple synthetic circuit62. We will end by focusing on one specific example that
The theoretical results reviewed here can be summa- we believe is especially timely for synthetic biology. In
rized into several broad lessons on energy consumption naturally occurring biochemical networks, the primary
thatmayproveusefulforsyntheticbiologyaswellaspro- source of energy for biochemical networks are futile cy-
viding theorists with future connections to experiments. clesassociatedwithpost-translationalmodificationssuch
as phosphorylation and methylation of residues. In con-
• Fundamental Trade-Offs. The ultimate limits trast, energy dissipation in most synthetic circuits takes
ofresponsespeed,sensitivity,andenergyconsump- the form of the production and degradation of proteins.
tion are in direct competition. From the viewpoint of both energy and dynamics, pro-
teindegradationisanextremelyinefficientsolutiontothe
• Saturation of Trade-Offs. Current works sug- problem. Proteins are metabolically expensive to syn-
gestthatsaturationeffectsareubiquitous38,52,58 in thesize, especially when compared to post-translational
energy consumption of biochemical networks and modifications. This may be one reason that most of the
therefore only a few ATP may be enough69 to information processing and computation in eukaryotic
nearly achieve the fundamental limits. signaling pathways is done through enzymatic cascades.
Designingsyntheticcircuitsthatcanreapthefullben-
• Futile Cycles are NOT Futile. Futile cycles efits of energy consumption requires developing new bi-
appear to be useless when only considering energy ological parts based around post-translational modifi-
costs, but can provide benefits in terms of the fun- cations of proteins. Such a “post-transcriptional” syn-
damental trade-offs. thetic biology would allow to harness the manifold gains
in performance that come from actively consuming en-
• Reusable Logic Must Consume Energy. This ergy without the extraordinary metabolic costs associ-
isjustthe biologicalrealizationofLandauer’sprin- ated with protein synthesis. Currently,the power of this
ciple. Memory is especially important for circuits approach is limited by the dearth of circuit components
that function in stochastic environments where it that act at the level of post-translational modifications
is necessary to time-average over stochastic input of proteins. Two promising directions that are seeking
signals. to overcomethese limitations are phosphorylation-based
synthetic signaling networks79–82 and chromatin-based
• ChainsareUseful. Whileitmayseemredundant synthetic biology13 that exploits reversible chromatin
to have long chains of identical parts, if the chain marks such as acetylation and methylation. In both
consumes energy this can improve specificity and cases, synthetic biologists are starting to engineer mod-
reduce variation. ular libraries of enzymes (kinases, phosphatases, chro-
matinreader-writers)topost-translationallymodifyspe-
• Time Reversal Symmetry. While equilibrium cific protein substrates in response to particular signals.
systems respect time reversal symmetry (forward Thiswillallowsyntheticbiologytotakeadvantageofthe
and backwards flows are equivalent), energy con- increased information processing capabilities that arise
sumption and non-equilibrium systems necessarily from energy consumption.
break this symmetry. This is especially impor-
tant for synthetic circuit that seek to time-average
stochastic inputs. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
• Manipulate Time Scales. Consuming energy We would like to thank Caleb Bashor and Mo Khalil
canbe usefultochangethetime scaleofdynamics, for many useful conversations and comments on the
as illustrated by the example of retroactivity and manuscript. PMwassupportedbyaSimonsInvestigator
the introduction of energy consuming insulators. in the Mathematical Modeling of Living Systems grant
and a Sloan Fellowship. AHL was supported by a Na-
• Information is Physical. Theorists should heed tionalScienceFoundationGraduateResearchFellowship
Feynman’s advice and attempt to translate theo- (NSF GRFP) under Grant No. DGE-1247312. DJS was
retical advances into physical/biologicaldevices. supported by NIH Grant K25GM098875.
1 M. B. Miller and B. L. Bassler, Annual Review of Micro- 4 T. S. Gardner, C. R. Cantor, and J. J. Collins, Nature
biology 55, 165 (2001). 403, 339 (2000).
2 V. Sourjik and N. S. Wingreen, Current Opinion in Cell 5 M. B. Elowitz and S. Leibler, Nature 403, 335 (2000).
Biology 24, 262 (2012). 6 A. E. Friedland, T. K. Lu, X. Wang, D. Shi, G. Church,
3 C. Y. Logan and R. Nusse, Annual Review of Cell and and J. J. Collins, Science 324, 1199 (2009).
Developmental Biology 20, 781 (2004). 7 T. Danino, O. Mondragon-Palomino, L. Tsimring, and
J. Hasty,Nature463, 326 (2010). 39 A. C. Barato, D.Hartich, and U. Seifert, New Journal of
8 S.MukherjiandA.vanOudenaarden,NatRevGenet 10, Physics 16, 103024 1367 (2014).
859 (2009). 40 S. Ito and T. Sagawa, arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.5810
9 P.E.M.PurnickandR.Weiss,NatRevMolCellBiol10, (2014).
410 (2009). 41 P. Sartori, L. Granger, C. F. Lee, and J. M. Horowitz,
10 A. S. Khalil and J. J. Collins, Nat Rev Genet 11, 367 PLoS Comput Biol 10, e1003974 EP (2014).
(2010). 42 T.E.Ouldridge,C.C.Govern, andP.R.t.Wolde,arXiv
11 N. Nandagopal and M. B. Elowitz, Science 333, 1244 preprint arXiv:1503.00909 (2015).
(2011). 43 D. Hartich, A. C. Barato, and U. Seifert, arXiv preprint
12 W. C. Ruder,T. Lu, and J. J. Collins, Science 333, 1248 arXiv:1502.02594 (2015).
(2011). 44 C.H.Bennett,InternationalJournalofTheoreticalPhysics
13 A. J. Keung, J. K.Joung, A. S.Khalil, and J. J. Collins, 21, 905 (1982).
Nat RevGenet 16, 159 (2015). 45 C. Bennett, Studies In History and Philosophy of Sci-
14 D. E. Cameron, C. J. Bashor, and J. J. Collins, Nat Rev encePartB:StudiesInHistoryandPhilosophyofModern
Micro 12, 381 (2014). Physics 34, 501 (2003).
15 A. A. Cheng and T. K. Lu, Annual Review of Biomedical 46 A.Berut,A.Arakelyan,A.Petrosyan,S.Ciliberto,R.Dil-
Engineering 14, 155 (2012). lenschneider, and E. Lutz, Nature483, 187 (2012).
16 J. C. Way, J. J. Collins, J. D. Keasling, and P. A. Silver, 47 Y.Jun,M. Gavrilov, and J. Bechhoefer, Physical Review
Cell 157, 151 (2014). Letters 113, 190601 (2014).
17 R. Kwok, NatureNews 463, 288 (2010). 48 V. Vedral,Nat Phys10, 256 (2014).
18 R. Landauer, IBM Journal of Research and Development 49 S. Vaikuntanathan and C. Jarzynski, Physical Review E
5, 183 (1961). 83, 061120 (2011).
19 S. B. Laughlin, Current opinion in neurobiology 11, 475 50 C.Jarzynski,AnnualReviewofCondensedMatterPhysics
(2001). 2, 329 (2011).
20 H.QianandD.A.Beard,BiophysicalChemistry114,213 51 D. Mandal and C. Jarzynski, Proceedings of the National
(2005). Academy of Sciences 109, 11641 (2012).
21 H. Qian, Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 58, 113 52 S. Vaikuntanathan, T. R. Gingrich, and P. L. Geissler,
(2007). Physical Review E 89, 062108 (2014).
22 X.-J.Zhang,H.Qian, andM.Qian,PhysicsReports510, 53 M. C. Diamantini and C. A. Trugenberger, Physical Re-
1 (2012). view E 89, 052138 (2014).
23 H. Ge, M. Qian, and H. Qian, Physics Reports 510, 87 54 M. Das, Physical Review E 90, 062120 (2014).
(2012). 55 J. M. R. Parrondo, J. M. Horowitz, and T. Sagawa, Nat
24 A.Barato, D.Hartich, and U.Seifert, PhysicalReviewE Phys11, 131 (2015).
87, 042104 (2013). 56 J. J. Hopfield, Proceedings of the National Academy of
25 G. Lan, P. Sartori, S. Neumann, V. Sourjik, and Y. Tu, Sciences 71, 4135 (1974).
Nat Phys8, 422 (2012). 57 T. W.Mckeithan, Proceedings of thenational academy of
26 C.C.GovernandP.R.tenWolde,PhysicalReviewLetters sciences 92, 5042 (1995).
109, 218103 (2012). 58 A. Murugan, D. A. Huse, and S. Leibler, Proceedings of
27 T. Sagawa and M. Ueda, Physical Review E 85, 021104 theNational Academy of Sciences 109, 12034 (2012).
(2012). 59 D. E. Cameron and J. J. Collins, Nat Biotech 32, 1276
28 S.Still,D.A.Sivak,A.J.Bell, andG.E.Crooks,Physical (2014).
Review Letters 109, 120604 (2012). 60 D.DelVecchio,A.J. Ninfa, and E.D.Sontag,Molecular
29 A.C.Barato,D.Hartich, andU.Seifert,PhysicalReview SystemsBiology 4 (2008), 10.1038/msb4100204.
E 87, 042104 (2013). 61 J. P. Barton and E. D. Sontag, Biophysical journal 104,
30 C. C. Govern and P. R. t. Wolde, arXiv preprint 1380 (2013).
arXiv:1308.1449 (2013). 62 D. Mishra, P. M. Rivera, A. Lin, D. Del Vecchio, and
31 N. B. Becker, A. Mugler, and P. R. t. Wolde, arXiv R.Weiss, Naturebiotechnology 32, 1268 (2014).
preprint arXiv:1312.5625 (2013). 63 W.Bialek,Biophysics: SearchingforPrinciples(Princeton
32 S.Bo,M.D.Giudice, andA.Celani,JournalofStatistical University Press, 2012).
Mechanics: TheoryandExperiment2015,P01014(2015). 64 F. Rieke and D. A. Baylor, Biophysical Journal 71, 2553
33 C.C.GovernandP.R.tenWolde,PhysicalReviewLetters (1996).
113, 258102 (2014). 65 F.RiekeandD.A.Baylor,ReviewsofModernPhysics70,
34 C. C. Govern and P. R. ten Wolde, Proceedings of the 1027 (1998).
National Academy of Sciences (2014). 66 T. Doan, A. Mendez, P. B. Detwiler, J. Chen, and
35 K. Kaizu, W. de Ronde, J. Paijmans, K. Takahashi, F. Rieke, Science313, 530 (2006).
F. Tostevin, and P. R. ten Wolde, Biophysical Journal 67 B. Munsky, I. Nemenman, and G. Bel, The Journal of
106, 976 (2014). Chemical Physics 131, (2009).
36 G. Iyengar and M. Rao, Proceedings of the National 68 G. Bel, B. Munsky, and I. Nemenman, Physical Biology
Academy of Sciences 111, 12402 (2014). 7, 016003 (2010).
37 J. Selimkhanov, B. Taylor, J. Yao, A. Pilko, J. Albeck, 69 A.H.Lang,C.K.Fisher,T.Mora, andP.Mehta,Physical
A.Hoffmann,L.Tsimring, andR.Wollman,Science346, Review Letters 113, 148103 (2014).
1370 (2014). 70 A.C.BaratoandU.Seifert,PhysicalReviewLetters114,
38 A.Murugan,D.A.Huse, andS.Leibler,PhysicalReview 158101 (2015).
X 4, 021016 (2014). 71 P. B. Detwiler, S. Ramanathan, A. Sengupta, and B. I.
Shraiman, Biophysical Journal 79, 2801 (2000). 31, 448 (2013).
72 H.C.BergandE.M.Purcell,BiophysicalJournal20,193 77 F. Farzadfard and T. K. Lu, Science346 (2014).
(1977). 78 A.J. Keung, C. J. Bashor, S.Kiriakov, J. J. Collins, and
73 R. P. Feynman, J. Hey, and R. W. Allen, Feynman lec- A. S.Khalil, Cell 158, 110 (2014).
tures on computation (Addison-WesleyLongman Publish- 79 W. A.Lim, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11, 393 (2010).
ing Co., Inc., 1998). 80 C. J. Bashor, N. C. Helman, S. Yan, and W. A. Lim,
74 P. Mehta and D. J. Schwab, Proceedings of the National Science 319, 1539 (2008).
Academy of Sciences 109, 17978 (2012). 81 P. Wei, W. W. Wong, J. S. Park, E. E. Corcoran, S. G.
75 J. Bonnet, P. Subsoontorn, and D. Endy, Proceedings of Peisajovich, J. J. Onuffer,A. Weiss, and W. A. Lim, Na-
the National Academy of Sciences 109, 8884 (2012). ture488, 384 (2012).
76 P. Siuti, J. Yazbek, and T. K. Lu, Nature biotechnology 82 E.Valk,R.Venta,M.O¨rd,I.Faustova,M.K˜oivoma¨gi, and
M. Loog, Molecular Biology of theCell 25, 3456 (2014).