Language Without Words: A Pointillist Model
for Natural Language Processing
Peiyou Song∗, Anhei Shu†, David Phipps‡, Mohit Tiwari§,
Dan S. Wallach†, Jedidiah R. Crandall∗, George F. Luger∗
∗Univ. of New Mexico, Dept. of Computer Science, Email: {peiyou, crandall, luger}@cs.unm.edu
†Rice Univ., Dept. of Computer Science, Email: {as43, dwallach}@rice.edu
‡Bowdoin College, Email: dphipps@bowdoin.edu
§Univ. of California, Berkeley, Dept. of EECS, Email: tiwari@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract—This paper explores two separate questions: it has been dubbed the “Martian Language.” [1], [2].
Canweperformnaturallanguageprocessingtaskswithout To evade censorship, convey special meaning, or simply
a lexicon?; and, Should we? Existing natural language
for creative reasons it is common for Chinese speakers
processing techniques are either based on words as units
to invent completely new ways to reference a topic
or use units such as grams only for basic classification
tasks. How close can a machine come to reasoning about or current event whenever they post content. This not
the meanings of words and phrases in a corpus without only makes it difficult to build a lexicon that contains
using any lexicon, based only on grams? all possible terms, but it also exacerbates the already
Ourownmotivationforposingthisquestionisbasedon
difficult task of Chinese text segmentation and means
our efforts to find popular trends in words and phrases
that the co-occurrences of words or grams alone may
from online Chinese social media. This form of written
Chineseusessomanyneologisms,creativecharacterplace- not be enough information to link posts about the same
ments, and combinations of writing systems that it has topic.
beendubbedthe“MartianLanguage.”Readersmustoften Figure 1 contrasts a typical traditional approach to
use visual queues, audible queues from reading out loud,
trend analysis with the pointillism approach. In a tradi-
and their knowledge and understanding of current events
tional method, a lexicon is used to break the corpus up
to understand a post. For analysis of popular trends, the
specificproblemisthatitisdifficulttobuildalexiconwhen into words and then the trends of words and sequences
the invention of new ways to refer to a word or concept of words are analyzed. This requires a lexicon and a
is easy and common. For natural language processing in good way to divide the text into words. An example
general, we argue in this paper that new uses of language
of the pointillism approach might begin with trend
insocialmediawillchallengemachines’abilitiestooperate
analysis of trigrams. Then for trigrams that appear to
with words as the basic unit of understanding, not only in
Chinese but potentially in other languages. have an interesting trend an analysis phase uses external
information, such as correlations in trigram frequency
I. INTRODUCTION
over time, to build trending words and phrases out
Weproposethepointillismmodelfornaturallanguage of overlapping trigrams. The main advantage of the
processing. In the proposed model, a corpus is divided pointillismapproachisthatwordsegmentationandother
intograms(e.g.,bigramsandtrigramsintheapplications tasks that require a lexicon are not necessary, meaning
of this model we have developed for Chinese so far), that even corpuses with many unknown words can be
and words and phrases are constructed from grams analyzed. A disadvantage of the pointillism approach
usingexternalinformation(e.g.,temporalcorrelationsin is that external information is needed, in this case the
the appearance of grams). In painting, pointillism is a frequencyoftheappearanceoftrigramswitharelatively
technique where complex scenes can be represented by high resolution on the time scale. For these reasons,
arrangementsofjustafewprimarycolorsintodots.This while a more traditional trend analysis may be more
iscontrastedwithdetailedstrokesusingthefullpalletof appropriate for, for example, analysis of blog posts in
colors. For machines, understanding a corpus as a time English [3], we assert that the pointillism approach is
sequence of grams may be more tractable than trying more effective in a different context such as the analysis
to maintain an accurate lexicon for many applications of microblog posts in Chinese.
andcontexts.Thus,weproposethepointillismmodelas In contrast to other approaches based on grams [4],
an alternative to natural language processing based on [5], the pointillism approach uses external information:
words. detailed timing information that contains correlations
As a specific case study, in Section II we consider based on human diurnal patterns and current events.
the analysis of topical trends in Chinese social media. Microblogpostshaveatimestampthatisaccuratetothe
The written form of Chinese that is used for social minuteorsecond(though,inthispaper,webinpostsby
media contains so many neologisms, creative character the hour). This timing information enables us to build
placements, and combinations of writing systems that words and phrases out of trigrams and then group those
Fig.1. ChangeofOrder.
words and phrases into topical clusters. out a lexicon. Then, in Section III, we give examples
from several languages where the pointillism approach
Figure 2 shows an example of the temporal patterns
may be applicable. Then we conclude with some open
thatweexploit.Thisisfromadatasetthatwearecollect-
questions and final remarks.
ing from Weibo, a Chinese-language microblogging site
that is similar to Twitter. The word we are analyzing II. TRENDANALYSISINCHINESESOCIALMEDIA
in this figure is 中华人民共和国 (People’s Republic
In another paper [6], we describe the detailed algo-
of China). This is neither a neologism nor an unknown
rithms we used to build a system that connects trigrams
word that cannot be found in the dictionary, but it is a
of Chinese characters from Weibo together into longer
good example of a word that can create ambiguities for
wordsandphrasesbasedonfrequencycorrelations.Here
wordsegmenters.Substringsofthiswordarethemselves
we give an example from that paper where these fre-
words: 中华 (alternate formal name for China), 华人
quencycorrelationscanhelppiecetogetherthedetailsof
(ethnic Chinese), 人民 (the people), 中华人民 (the
atrendingstoryeventhoughonlyameaninglesstrigram
Chinesepeople),and共和国(republic).Mostindividual
showed a strong trend and posts about the event shared
charactersinChinesearethemselveswords,aswell,e.g.
onlyverycommonwords.On4August2011thetrigram
人(person)or和(and).Thetemporalcorrelationsshown
万为开 showed a strong trend. Running the algorithms
inFigure2existforunknownanduncommonwords,but
described in Song et al. [6] to find overlapping trigrams
weuseacommonterminthefiguresothatthetemporal
withfrequencycorrelationsgivesasetofcandidatesthat
correlations we refer to are illustrated for the reader.
a human can use tounderstand the event that lead to the
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. First trend:
we present some preliminary results from an application
of the pointillism approach in Section II, to demonstrate
that natural language processing tasks that go beyond (Wan made a TV program about the first
simple document classifications can be carried out with- immigrants)
(The statue was ... by the police) (Diesel fuel 370.00 yuan diesel fuel price)
(The statue was splashed ...) 0.7128173787969483}
万为开拓团纪念碑被泼红漆, (Diesel fuel 370.00 yuan diesel fuel price
(The statue was splashed with red paint) above}
(The statue was splashed with red oil (Diesel fuel 370.00 yuan price)
(The statue was ... by 5 men) (Diesel fuel 370.00 yuan gas 390)
(The statue was defaced by 5 men) (Diesel fuel 390)
(The statue was ... by 5 men who have Thealgorithmsandcompleteresultswillbepublished
left) in a future paper.
(The statue was smashed) III. SOCIALMEDIAEXAMPLES
In this section, we give some examples in various
(The first immigrant people)
languageswhereapproachesbasedonlexiconsmayfail.
万为开isatrigramwhichhasnomeaninginChinese.
A. An example from Japan
We caught this particular trigram out of the 323 million
trigrams in our database because it appeared 100 times The following example of a post from Twitter is
more frequently than average on 4 August 2011. After a mixture of English, Kanji (Chinese characters), and
we fed this trigram into a trigram connector and set the Hiragana (a Japanese syllabary):
connectiontimefrom5daysbeforeto5daysafterward, 三日更衣室で今北postしますね
we found the phrase: 万为开拓团拍电视 (Wan made
A rough translation of the post is, “I have been in
a TV program about the first immigrants). This is still
the dressing room for three days, can you make a post
not clear enough to tell us why making a TV program to explain in three lines what has been going on?” “三
created a trend. However, if you read the candidate 日更衣室で” is relatively straightforward Japanese text
results, the whole story becomes clear. It tells us that
that translates to, “I have been in the dressing room for
5 men smashed and splashed red oil paint on the statue threedays.”“今北”isaneologismthatisexplainedina
of “The First Immigrants.” blogpostbyMaggieSensei[7].“今北”isthenameofa
In this event, there are many trigram words, such as
company(Imakita),butinthiscaseservesasaneologism
纪念碑 (statues), 开拓团 (immigrants), 红油漆 (red oil for “今、来た 三行”, which translates to “I just got
paint)andsoon.However,theonlytrigramwithastrong
here, explain in three lines what has been going on.” “
trend was, 万为开, a meaningless trigram. In general,
” in Japanese is pronounced “Sangyou,” but sounds like
these three characters did not appear together before “三行”, or “sanggyou”, meaning “three lines.” “します
thisevent.Thesuddenfrequencyincreaseofthistrigram ね” is Japanese Hiragana for “make”, and “post” is an
from 0 helps our system notice this trigram, which lead
English word.
us to this event. Other trigrams did not increase in rate
This example demonstrates the ability of Japanese
as much as 万为开 because of this event. This may be
social media users to mix different character systems,
because they already exist and are common words and
playwithsounds,andcombinedifferentlanguages.This
thusitisdifficultforthemtohaveaprecipitousincrease
gives microblog posters great freedom of expression in
in one day.
how they use written language to express their meaning.
Asanexampleofsuchaconnection,withanimproved
When the posters are using this freedom while posting
algorithm based on term frequency—inverse document
about current events and hot trends, natural language
frequency (tf-idf), we were able to make the connection
processing based on a lexicon may not be able to
betweenoilpricesanddieselpricesintwoWeibotrends
categorize the topic of the post based only on the words
that were related:
in the lexicon.
B. An example from India
(Tomorrow oil prices will again rise)
{明天油价又要涨了,0.9359352855815268} It is very common in India to mix languages in social
(Tomorrow oil prices will again swell)
mediaposts,suchasthisexamplefromTwitterthatuses
{明天油价上涨,0.8963352077911995}
a mixture of Hindi and English:
(Tomorrow oil prices rise)
{明天油价上涨(的),0.5048456523116667} #saale government ki #maakiaankh #kutteke bac-
(The rise of oil prices tomorrow) che social networking sites bandh karega ek ek
{明天油价要,0.8970978381471049}
#madharchod ka #gaand maro #bhenchod
(Tomorrow oil prices will)
This translates to:
#Bad-boy government’s #eye-of-mother #son-of- asituation(“现在的形势”),andcircumstancesthathave
dogswantsocialnetworkingsitesshutdowneachand not changed (“复读机”). Other authors will have other
every #motherfucker’s #ass be raped #sisterfucker methods for expressing these concepts. An advantage
of the pointillism approach is that external information,
A topical analysis of social media aimed at sentiment
such as frequency correlations in trigrams, can help to
analysis would be concerned with the topic of the post
link together similar concepts that are expressed in very
that the sentiment is being directed at. In this case it
different ways.
is an alleged government proposal to shut down social
Humansareabletousetheirunderstandingofcurrent
mediasites.Inthispost,“government”and“socialmedia
events to understand the meaning of a blog post such as
sites” are in English but the words expressing the desire
the example above. For natural language processing, a
to ban these sites and the author’s sentiment towards
machine lacks this contextual information but is able to
this are in Hindi. Indian social media also contains
perform calculations on how the trigrams that might be
many regional languages, so any sentiment analysis of
parts of words or phrases correlate over time in terms
Indiansocialmediasiteswouldhavetoincorporatemany
of the frequency of their usage. This information can
different ways of mixing languages. Can the pointillism
serve as proxy information for context and may enable
approach help in this case, or is it better to build build
natural language processing tasks to make connections
a comprehensive lexicon that incorporates these many
that go beyond co-occurrences and get closer to the
languages? We leave this as an open question.
actual meaning of social media content.
C. An example from China
IV. CONCLUSION
ThefollowingisanexcerptfromablogpostinChina: In conclusion, we have given supporting evidence to
雅青别说我粗暴，这样说也是没法子的事，现在 suggest that carrying out a natural language processing
的形势就是复读机，都可以填上平仄: 中南海管得了 task, specifically trend analysis, is possible without a
南海，钓鱼台管得了钓鱼岛 lexicon is possible. We have also given examples in
several languages where removing the dependence on
The author is using poetry and creatively pointing
a lexicon could be beneficial. Thus we propose the
out character similarities in different words to make
pointillism approach to natural language processing as
a point without explicitly writing their meaning. The
being particularly suitable for certain languages and
phrase is a poem and translates to, “Yaqing don’t call
contexts.
me rude, this kind of talk is also at a loss for meaning,
the circumstances now are a broken record, that can ACKNOWLEDGMENT
be expressed with a poem: Zhongnanhai has authority We sould like to thank the anonymous reviewers for
over the South China Sea, Diaoyutai State Guesthouse valuable feedback. This material is based upon work
has authority over the Diaoyu islands.” Zhongnanhai is supported by the National Science Foundation under
the central headquarters of China’s State Council, and Grant Nos. #0844880, #0905177, #1017602. Jed Cran-
Diaoyutai State Guesthouse is a hotel where leaders of dallisalsosupportedbytheDefenseAdvancedResearch
foreign nations stay when they visit Beijing. The author ProjectsAgencyCRASHprogramundergrant#P-1070-
is expressing an opinion about a recent event in which 113237.
ChinademandedanapologyfromJapanovertheDiaoyu
island dispute rather than demanding compensation. “雅