1v1535010/hp-ortsa:viXra
Large Surveys in Cosmology: The Changing
Ofer Lahav, Institute of Astronomy, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK
E-mail: lahav@ast.cam.ac.uk
October 30, 2018
Abstract Galaxy redshift surveys and Cosmic Microwave Background ex-
perimentsareundertakenwithlargerandlargerteams,inafashionreminiscent
of particle physics experiments and the human genome projects. We discuss
the role of young researchers, the issue of multiple authorship, and ways to
communicate effectively in teams of tens to hundreds of collaborators. 1
1 Introduction
The field of Observational Cosmology is going through an ‘inflationary phase’.
Galaxy redshift surveys will soon register millions of galaxies, imaging surveys
willsoonrecordTerabytesperobservingnight,andtheCosmicMicrowaveBack-
ground experiments will map the sky at very high resolution and sensitivity.
These technological developments have immediate effects on the human in-
teraction. We commonly hear at conferences statements like “to make a big
impact in Astronomy,a new survey must be 10-1000times better in sensitivity
and/orresolutionand/orthenumberofobjects”,and“ittakesatleast2-3times
the most pessimistic estimate to begin/complete/analyse a survey”. This indi-
cates that conducting large surveys in this competitive field is becoming more
demanding, and that the new technology heavily relies on human resources.
While improving the technology of the big surveys, the human aspects should
not be neglected. This raises some questions about the changing sociology of
doing researchin modern Astronomy:
•Whatistheindividual’scontributioninabigcollaboration(cf. theparticle
physics experiments and the human genome project ) ?
• How to communicate effectively (via e-mail, web, meetings) in a team of
20-200 collaborators?
• What skills should be acquired by the next generation of Astronomers ?
• Will the increase in projects and data sets be followed by more jobs for
young astronomers ?
1Invitedarticlefor‘OrganizationsandStrategies inAstronomyII’,Ed. AndreHeck
• How should the community deal with public domain data (e.g. HDF and
the proposed Virtual Observatories)?
• How to communicate the knowledge resulting from the surveys to the
tax-payer ?
Here we examine some of these issues. I happen to be involved in several
largecollaborations,and I have chosento illustrate some ofthe points by using
as an example the ongoing 2-degree-Field Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS).
Needless to say, the points made below are my own views, and they do not
necessarily represent a ‘party line’.
2 Large surveys, large collaborations
Astronomy has been unique among the sciences in allowing small teams (of 3-8
people) to compete for time on world-class telescopes. Although the telescopes
are built by hundreds of people, time is allocated (via competition) among
the community at large, and only those involved in the science appear on the
resulting paper (with the facility acknowledged and the instrument builders
referenced). This made Astronomy more attractive to some young researchers
than say particle physics, where papers include hundreds of authors. However,
the new big surveys in Astronomy require many more participants.
We shall first discuss the big redshift surveys. Multi-fibre technology now
allows us to measure redshifts of millions of galaxies. Two major surveys are
underway. The US Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS 2) will measure redshifts
of about 1 million galaxies over a quarter of the sky. The Anglo-Australian 2
degree Field (2dF) survey 3 will measure redshifts for 250,000 galaxies selected
from the APM catalogue. Over 150,000 2dF redshifts have been measured so
far (as of April 2001).
By the standards of the new millennium the 2dFGRS is a medium-sized
collaboration (20-30 people). For reference, the QSO 2dF survey 4 has only
6 collaborators. On the other hand, the ambitious Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(SDSS) involves a formal list of roughly 100 ‘builders’, people who have put at
least 2 years effort into the project (York et al. 2000). The SDSS home page
on collaboration 5 mentions 150 scientists at the 11 participating institutions,
but there are about 400 people with data rights. The SDSS is coordinated
by a Collaboration Council (‘CoCo’) which helps to manage the affairs of the
collaboration. Examplesofotherlarge‘ground-based’collaborationsaremicro-
lensing experiments (e.g. Machos) and imaging surveys (e.g. Vista, which
involves 18 universities in the UK).
The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) experiments also require large
collaborations with new management strategies. While recent and ongoing ex-
periments like Boomerang 6, Maxima 7 and MAP 8 have ‘only’ 20-40 collabo-
rators each, the Planck project is of a different order of magnitude.
In the Planckproject9 (to be launched in2007)there areseveraldegreesof
involvement (without counting the people involved from industry). There are
50-100people onthe managementlevel, some 100-200people involvedwith the
instrumentation, and at least 30 people who are involvedwith data analysis on
a day-to-day basis 10.
When itcomesto consideringthe optimalsize ofacollaboration,itis worth
recalling some remarks from the autobiography of Fred Hoyle (1994): “The
essential point - the overriding point- is that the number of people with whom
weneedto interactinourdailylivesshouldnotexceedaboutonehundred,and
preferably, on any enterprise of difficulty, not more than twenty-five. This is
becausetwenty-fivewasthetypicalsizeofthehuntingpartiesofpre-history. Itis
thescaleofthemedievalvillage,thescaleofthemoderncabinetingovernment,
... Moreorlesseverythingthatlieswithinitwillbesuccessful,andmoreorless
everything that lies outside it will not”.
3 2dFGRS as a test case
The 2dFGRS (e.g. Folkes et al. 1999; Peacock et al. 2001) includes about 20
coremembers andinadditionabout 10students andpost-docs who areheavily
involved in the survey. Most of the collaborators are in various institutions in
the UK and in Australia, so there are in fact two sub-teams, with principal
investigators in each of the countries. This geographical distribution has led
to regular ‘half-team’1-day meetings (about 2-3 per year)in the two countries,
andtoregularEmail/WWWexchange. The2dFRGSgroupweb-sitehasproved
useful for exchanging data, results, and minutes of meetings among the team
members.
Sincethetimethe2dFGRSteamformed(around1995),somemembershave
left and others have joined. Also, the scientific goals have somewhat changed
given the rapid progress in other areas of Cosmology (e.g. the CMB). This
requires frequent updates on ‘who is doing what’, with careful attention to
protecting the work of PhD students and post-docs.
The 2dFGRS is not complete yet, so it is too early to assess its overall
performance, but on the whole one can make the following observations:
* It has taken some time for all involved to get used to the ‘loss of individ-
uality’ and to the structure of the big collaboration, to agree on the division of
labour, and to develop appropriate communication channels.
*TheregularmeetingsintheUKandinAustraliaareveryusefulinfocusing
attention on technical issues and progress with papers.
10For the big projects like SDSS and Planck it was actually difficult to find accurate esti-
matesforthenumberofpeopleinvolved. Thisisbyitselfaninterestingfact.
* The Email/WWW exchange is quite efficient, even if daunting at times
(see below).
*Decisionsonpapersandauthorshiphaveusuallyreachedreasonableagree-
ment after iterations among the relevant people.
* Requests for external collaborators have been dealt with in a democratic
way, by consulting the entire team.
4 The role of PhD students and Post-Docs
Young researchers may find themselves in big collaborations, co-authoring pa-
perswithtensofauthors,andwithcollaboratorstheyhavenevermet. Although
there is adangerthatindividuals (junior as wellassenior)mightbe ‘lostin the
crowd’, there are some benefits for a young person to be involved in a collab-
oration at the forefront of research. However, it is crucial to identify a niche,
whichis notalreadytakenby other seniormembers ofthe collaborations,orby
otherstudents. WhenaPhDstudentorapost-dochassuchaterritory,his/her
work,if of high quality, is recognizedby a large number of people well aheadof
publication. There is also a constant exchange of ideas and cross-fertilization
with collaboratorswho are leaders of the field. This means that the youngper-
soncangetexposureandcanformainternational‘network’atanearlystageof
his/her career. Being appreciated by a number of senior people also improves
the chances of getting post-doctoral and faculty positions.
Thereishowever,atleastoneproblematicissuerelatedtolongtermprojects.
Some post-docs are employed for a period of 2-3 years primarily to develop
algorithmsandpipe-linesoftwareforfutureexperiments. Thismeansthatwhen
theynextapplyforjobs,itwouldbedifficultforthemtopresent‘real’scientific
output. The ‘reward system’ for those who put in several years of hard work
ontechnicalaspectsofthe surveysvariesfromcountrytocountryandfromone
institution to another. Is some places more can be done to improve it.
Thereareanumberofsolutionstothisproblem(heardoccasionallyinCam-
bridge pubs):
* To assign some of the development task to national laboratories, where
PhDs with permanent positions can develop long term projects without the
worry of ‘publish or perish’.
* To enable post-docs who are working on software development etc. to
spend say 50 % of their time on science of their choice.
*Tochangetherulesofassessmentforpositionsfrombeingbasedentirelyon
listedjournalpaperstootherproductssuchassoftwarepackagesormanagement
achievements. Thereshouldbe careerpathsforsuchpeople whichareashighly
regarded as the standard academic university track. This assessment would of
course heavily depend on references from senior members of the collaboration.
Anotheraspectofthelargesurveysisthattheskillsrequiredforsomeofthe
tasksarequite differentfromthe PhDqualificationsofthe previousgeneration.
While there is still great need for post-docs and students with analytic skills
anddeepknowledgeofthe Landau&Lifshitz volumes,we seeanew generation
ofsuccessfulpost-docs who havestrongeremphasis onnumericalandcomputa-
tional work. The group dynamic of the large collaborations also suggests that
those with good communication skills have better chances of succeeding.
Itremainstobeseenifthegrowthinprojectsand‘soft-money’positionswill
eventually lead to more tenured positions in Astronomy. This issue is beyond
thescopeofthisarticle,butitisclearthattheprobabilityofayoungresearcher
eventuallygettingapermanentpositionalsoaffectstheresearchpatternsinthe
large collaborations.
5 Email traffic and the WWW
JoiningbigteamsalsomeansspendingalargefractionofthedayonEmail. The
Email and the World Wide Web (WWW) media make the interaction between
people in different institutions and countries easier, but it consumes time and
energy. The ethics of using Email have not yet been structured in the society
(see e.g. Wallace 1999), and one can experience daily different style of Email
communications.
In a large collaboration most of the Email messages circulated are relevant
toonly asubsetofthe team. One maychooseto sendanemailonlyto asubset
of the team, but then others may get upset about not being informed ! I found
it helpful when a message circulated to the entire team gives in 1-2 sentences
at the top a summary of the main point, with clear indication of who might be
directly interested in it, and who is expected to act upon it. It is also helpful if
thesenderpointstomaterialsuchastablesandplotsinhis/herwebhomepage,
instead of sending huge files to the Email-boxes of numerous collaborators.
In the SDSS collaboration there are different (about 40 in total) of Email
exploders for all aspects of SDSS (e.g. photometric pipeline, galaxy science,
etc.), which are archived on the web. This allows people to choose to pay
attention to just those aspects they find important.
Other problematic issues related to email are well known, e.g. misunder-
standing over language,style and terminology. For example, from time to time
messages with sensitive ‘political’ issues make it (by chance or by design !) to
those who were not supposed to see them. In certain circumstances it is worth
remembering to use, instead of Email, the good old telephone !
6 Multiple Authorship
We examined the number of authors in volumes of the Astrophysical Journal
(ApJ). Of the 32 papers published in the first volume of the ApJ in 1895, 31
(97 %) were written by a single author. On the other hand, in the first volume
of ApJ 2000, only 15% were written by a single author, 70% written by 2-5
authors, and 15 % written by 6 and more authors.
Therecent2dFGRSpapers(e.g. Folkesetal. 1999;Peacocketal. 2001)have
about 25-30 authors. This long list of authors attempts to reflect the division
oflabour regardinginstrumentation, observations,data reduction, analysisand
theory. Theauthor-listisusuallyledbythe5-6authorswhocontributedmostto
thatparticularpaper,andtherestarelistedbyalphabeticorder. Thecreditfor
people is complicated even more by the fact that the big surveys are stretched
over many years, so some participants leave the project (or quit Astronomy)
and others join in.
In the SDSS collaboration there are formal rules about authorship, e.g. a
firstlistofpeoplewhodidtheimmediateworkonagivenpaper,andeverybody
else alphabetically (similar to 2dFGRS), but also that no-one is automatically
put as a co-author on a paper; one must explicitly request co-authorship.
Paczynski(2000)raisedthequestion(inthecontextofmonitoringthewhole
sky for variability of objects) “should the whole effort be combined in a very
large team, with all papers having several dozen authors listed alphabetically,
and no way to find out whom to credit and whom to blame for different parts
of the project ?”.
This problemarisesasthe big projectsinvolveindividuals who workedhard
on the instrumentation and data reduction, and they deserve credit for their
efforts. However, one alternative would be to have technical papers (or web
sites) written by those who contributed to the infra-structure of the project,
which will later be quoted by any paper resulting from the survey. The same
holds for more scientific aspects of the collaboration, i.e. apart from core pa-
pers, to break the publications down into specific studies with the authorship
ofthose whodirectly contributed. Inthe casethattwo(ormore)groupswithin
the team attempt to address the same question by analysing the data differ-
ently, it seems most logical to simply publish two separate papers. Another
possible solution for large collaborative papers is to have authorship by section
as well as a global author list of the paper. This would allow a more precise
assignmentof credit/blame to be apportioned. It will no doubt take some time
for the Astronomical community to develop ‘rules’ regarding authorship and
publications.
7 Public Release, Virtual Observatories and Data
Time allocation committees oblige survey teams to release the data within a
given period. Perhaps the most successful example is that of the Hubble Deep
Field(Williams et al. 1996),where the data weremadeavailableto alloverthe
WWW,andresultedinaremarkablescientificoutputbygroupsnotnecessarily
involved in conducting the survey. We shall no doubt see similar trends with
future publically available data sets such as 2dF, SDSS, 2MASS 11 and 6dF
12. There are in fact plans to establish Virtual Observatories and Astro-grid
(distributed CPU) facilities. This is an interesting concept where the data
producedbylargeteamsgoeventuallytotheindividual,andallowsmallgroups
todotheirowndata-miningandanalysis. Theexactnatureofthesenewdigital
research facilities still needs to be defined (e.g. Heck 2001). Another aspect
of these public domain data is of course that anyone else in world, not only
professional Astronomers, can access the data, or at least enjoy some pretty
pictures.
8 Discussion
Inrecentyearstheastronomicalcommunityhasexperiencedanenormousgrowth
inthe number ofprojectsandphotons collectedby ground-basedandspaceob-
servatories. Thishasledto anew styleofworkinlargeteams,andcompetition
between big projects. As discussed above, these trends could be positive if the
large projects are divided into smaller tasks that allow the individuals (in par-
ticularyoungresearchers)toidentifytheirniche. TheAstronomicalcommunity
will have to define rules and ethics related to authorship of papers, and Email
andothercommunicationchannelsincollaborationsoftensto hundredsofpeo-
ple. While these issues are occasionally discussed informally, a more open and
frank discussion could help to shape the sociology of the new Astronomy.
Acknowledgments
I thank A. Heck for suggesting to me to write this article, to S. Bridle, A.
Bunker, M. Colless, M. Diemling, F. van Leeuwen, J. Nicholas and M. Strauss
for providing informationand suggestions,and to the participants of the round
table tea at the IoA for helpful discussions.