Lattice-Boltzmann Method for Geophysical
Plastic Flows
Alessandro Leonardi Falk K. Wittel Miller Mendoza
Hans J. Herrmann
ETH Zurich, Institute for Building Materials, Schafmattstrasse 6, 8093, Zurich
We explore possible applications of the Lattice-Boltzmann Method for the simula-
tion of geophysical flows. This fluid solver, while successful in other fields, is still
rarely used for geotechnical applications. We show how the standard method can be
modified to represent free-surface realization of mudflows, debris flows, and in gen-
eral any plastic flow, through the implementation of a Bingham constitutive model.
The chapter is completed by an example of a full-scale simulation of a plastic fluid
flowing down an inclined channel and depositing on a flat surface. An application
is given, where the fluid interacts with a vertical obstacle in the channel.
Key words: mudflow, debris flow, non-Newtonian, Bingham, Lattice-Boltzmann
Preprint submitted to Elsevier 12 August 2021
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
1v90010.9051:viXra
1 Introduction
Geophysical flows are dangerous natural hazards occurring mostly in moun-
tainous terrain. The most apparent phenomena of this category are debris
flows, which originate when heavy rainfall mobilizes a large amount of debris
[10]. The resulting mixture comprises water, cohesive sediments, organic mat-
ter, silt, sand and in many cases also stones of different sizes The resulting
rheological behavior is known to have a wide variability[24], which makes nu-
merical studies an essential tool to support experimental investigations [9].
Full-scale simulations of geophysical flows are very scarce, since they require a
framework that efficiently manages complicated boundary conditions, as well
as a powerful and flexible fluid solver. Moreover, the non-Newtonian nature
of the material, and in some cases its multiple phases, pose more challenges.
Traditional solvers are known to have troubles in tackling this problem, and
nowadays alternative solution are sought by the community.
The Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) [23] is becoming increasingly popu-
lar and is today considered a valid alternative for categories of flows where
traditional solvers exhibit disadvantages, like multiphase fluids, flows through
porous media [18], irregular geometries [17], and free-surface realizations [12].
After reviewing the most commonly used rheological model for flowing geoma-
terialsinSec.2,weofferanessentialoverviewofthemethodinSec.3,together
with a simple but effective formulation for the simulation of geophysical flows.
In Sec. 4 and 5 examples are given.
2 Rheology of geophysical flows and simulation
The rheology of geophysical flow materials is a debated issue in the field, due
to the extreme variability in natural material parameters and the presence of
multiple phases, complicating the classification. Most models therefore adopt
simplified solutions based on single-phase descriptions. This can either be a
frictional material [21,16] or a viscoplastic fluid [7,26]. The former is used for
rock and snow avalanches, while the latter is preferred for mudflows and vis-
cous debris flows [2]. For certain categories of geophysical flows, however, a
single-phase approach is insufficient to capture the physics of the phenom-
ena. Debris flows are a typical example of this, because granular and viscous
behavior interact, giving rise to unexpected structures and a localization of
rheological properties [11]. A continuum-continuum coupling for granular and
fluid phase is possible, but is incapable of capturing the localization of flow
properties, which is widely recognized to be a key feature of debris flows.
A discrete-continuum approach would of course be able to provide a detailed
description, but development of this sort of coupling has been slowed by its
demanding computational cost. This is currently challenged, however, by the
maturity reached by alternative solvers like Smoothed Particle Hydrodynam-
ics, the Material Point Method, or LBM, which are more flexible in managing
complex boundary conditions than traditional tools like Finite Differences and
Finite Volumes. In such methods, the granular phase is treated by a separate
solver and, for this reason, the fluid model can focus on the nature of the
material. This is the reason behind our choice to adopt LBM with a purely
viscoplastic rheological law, an approach that can offer:
• An efficient framework for the simulation of geophysical flows of plastic
nature, where the complexity of the boundary does not influence the per-
formance.
• A convenient environment for the coupling with a discrete method. This
option opens future chances for full realizations of multiphase flows [13].
Regarding the specific rheological law, we adopt the Bingham model, which is
widely used to describe plastic fluids due to its conceptual simplicity. It reads:
 γ˙ = 0 if fluid does not yield (σ < σ
γ˙ if fluid flows (σ > σ
where σ and µ denote yield stress and plastic viscosity. An analogous way
to write the law is through an analogy with Newtonian flow. One defines a
parameter, the apparent viscosity µ , which proportionally relates stress and
rate of strain and is treated as a variable. In the case of a Bingham fluid, µ
takes the form
app app pl
where the apparent viscosity µ (from now on, for simplicity, called viscosity
µ), diverges when γ˙ → 0, which will require special care in the solver. We
are now ready to introduce LBM in the next section, and to incorporate this
constitutive law in Sec. 3.1.
3 Lattice-Boltzmann Formulation
LBMhaslatelyemergedasanattractivealternativetotraditionalfluidsolvers,
mainly due to its high-level performance and the predisposition to paral-
lelization. LBM is also suitable to the solution of problems involving com-
plex boundary conditions [1]. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to give a
complete description of the method. The reader can refer to Refs. [5,23] for
a comprehensive review. We will focus on the aspects of the formulation that
need to be modified in order to successfully reproduce debris flows.
In LBM, the fluid is described using a distribution function f and a set of
discrete velocities c . Density ρ and velocity u of the fluid are computed as
the first two moments of the distribution function
(cid:88) (cid:88)
The evolution of f is governed by the Lattice-Boltzmann equation
whereΩ istheoperatorthatrepresentstheeffectsofinter-particlecollisionsin
the fluid. A common way to approximate the otherwise complex expression of
Ω is the Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook operator [3], which relaxes the distribution
function to a thermodynamic equilibrium feq. It can be written as
(cid:32) feq −f (cid:33)
andfeaturesaconstant,therelaxationtimeτ,whichisrelatedtothekinematic
viscosity of the fluid µ as
Withthisformulation,andwiththesettingofacoherentlattice[22],LBMcan
produce realizations of fluid dynamics in analogy to the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions. The method is accurate in the limit of small Mach number, practically
u < 0.01c with c denoting the lattice speed of sound. We will now de-
scribe two additions to the model necessary for the simulation of geophysical
flows: a non-Newtonian rheology and a free-surface treatment.
3.1 Non-Newtonian rheology
The LBM described in the previous section yields, after the Chapman-Enskog
expansion [4], the Navier-Stokes equation for Newtonian fluids. A simple way
to upgrade the method to more general formulations is offered by a local
Bingham model Range of LBM
acceptable μ
Shear rate γ
Fig. 1. Representation of the rheology model employed for plastic fluids. The ap-
proximationoftheBinghammodelislimitedbythemaximumandminimumvalues
for the relaxation time τ imposed by the method. Therefore, also the viscosity µ
is limited.
treatment of the relaxation time τ [14,25]. Any rheological law that can be
approximated as
with µ = µ(γ˙), is suitable for this approach. The relaxation time can in fact
be directly related to the viscosity through Equation 6, obtaining ad hoc
formulations for different rheological laws. The Bingham fluid, for example,
can be written as
(cid:32) (cid:33)
y pl 2 c2 pl γ˙
This type of formulation requires the computation of the shear rate tensor,
which can be done easily in LBM directly form the distribution functions
ab 2τc2 i,a i,b i i
and the magnitude can be extracted as
(cid:88)(cid:88)
The limitation of this approach lies in the range of values given to the re-
laxation time τ by Equation 8. Accuracy in LBM is guaranteed as long as
τ < τ < τ . Reasonable values for these limits are τ = 0.501 and
min max min
τ = 1.0. Therefore, also the viscosity µ, which is linearly linked to the
relaxation time, is subjected to the same restrictions: µ < µ < µ . The
following considerations are thus necessary:
• The fluid that reaches the maximum allowed value of µ is considered to be
in a plastic state. However, with the proposed scheme, the fluid never stops
its motion, but rather flows at a much slower rate. The ratio between µ
and µ determines the effectiveness of this approach. With the proposed
limit values for τ, µ = 500µ .
• The best approximation of a Bingham fluid is obtained when µ ≤ µ ,
because the lower limitation on µ has no effect. However, an eventual tran-
sition to turbulent regime can happen when simulating diluted flows, and
therefore the value of µ must be raised to avoid instabilities. In case
µ ≥ µ , the approximation of the Bingham constitutive model becomes
less accurate.
3.2 Implementation of the free-surface technique
In order to simulate geophysical flows on realistic geometries, we need to in-
clude the boundary conditions given by the channel bed and the interface of
the flow with air. While the former can be implemented as a standard no-
slip boundary condition, as in Ref. [19], the latter is a less common practice
in LBM. The free-surface is represented through a classification of the lat-
tice nodes in three categories: liquid, interface and gas nodes. The governing
parameter is the liquid fraction λ:
 λ = ρ if the node is liquid,
0 < λ < ρ if the node is interface, (11)
λ = 0 if the node is gas.
The liquid fraction of a node evolves according to the streaming of the distri-
bution function given by Equation 4 as
where f and f represent the distribution function streaming respectively
in and out of the node, and α is a parameter that depends on whether the
distributions are exchanged with a fluid node or another interface node. This
method conserves mass exactly, and ensures a smooth evolution of the surface.
Further details are found in Ref. [12].
4 Simulation of mudflow
Fig.2.Geometryofthesimulation.Thefluidmassliesatthetopofalongcylindrical
chute. The deposition area at the bottom is flat and features a vertical obstacle.
0 10 20 30
Time t [s]
noitazicitsalP
0 10 20 30
Time t [s]
Fig. 3. Evolution of the maximum velocity of the fluid and of the flow plasticization
level,computedasratiobetweencellsthathavereachedthemaximumviscosityand
the total number of cells.
The full-scale simulation of a plastic geophysical flow is shown in this sec-
tion. Mimicking the real geometry of a small valley, the simulation features a
cylindrical channel inclined at 5◦ with respect to the horizontal, and a flat de-
position area at its bottom (Fig. 2). The total volume of the flowing material
is 500 m3 and is fixed, i.e. neither entrainment nor deposition are modeled.
While very big events can be of the order of 106 m3, the size of the most fre-
quent type of geophysical flows lies in the range of 103 m3, which is big enough
to endanger humans and infrastructures. Therefore our simulation proposes
a realistic scenario, even though not a particularly dangerous one. The fluid
has density ρ = 2000 kg/m3 and follows a Bingham-like rheological law, like
the one proposed in Sec. 3.1. Yield stress and kinematic plastic viscosity are
respectively σ = 150 Pa and µ = 10 textrmm2/s, relating the simulated
system to a very dense mudflow or to a debris flow whose granular phase has
been homogenized into the fluid, therefore increasing the bulk viscosity [20,6].
Fig. 4 shows how the fluid free surface evolves in time. The fluid is quickly
sheared by the effect of gravity and moves until an equilibrium is reached in
the deposition area, where the viscosity increases. This technique can be used
to estimate the deposition area of the material after an event, and to support
the design of hazard maps on real terrain. Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the
maximum velocity in the fluid and of the plasticization level of the material,
which are the useful parameters to determine the status of the flow.
Vt i=s c0o.s0i tsy [m/s] t = 1.0 s t = 3.0 s t = 6.0 s
Viscosity [m/s]
ν = 8.33x100
ν = 3.33x10-2
t = 12.0 s t = 20.0 s t = 24.0 s t = 50.0 s
Fig. 4. Evolution of the geometry of the flow. Intensities show the viscosity at the
surface, therefore indicating the rate of shearing of the fluid: low (dark) or high
(light).
5 Obstacle Interaction
ToshowthepossibilitiestouseLBMtodesignprotectionstructures,werepeat
the simulation of the previous section, this time featuring an obstacle. LBM
caninfactbeusedtocalculatethehydrodynamicinteractionsonsolidobjects,
computing all momentum transfers between the distribution function and the
solid boundaries. The procedure, which is found in Ref. [15], does not change
significantly the overall efficiency of the method.We add a retaining wall, fixed
at the bottom of the channel and of size H×L×S = 3.0 m ×2.0 m ×0.25 m,
as in Fig. 2. The shape of the free surface after the impact is shown in Fig. 5,
with insight into the longitudinal cross section of the flow.
Velocity [m/s]
(b) u min = 0.0
Fig. 5. Image of the flow splashing on the retaining wall, at t = 14.0 s. The color
contour shows the velocity at the free surface (a) and in the longitudinal section
(b).
Estimation
12 16 20 24
Time t [s]
Fig. 6. Force exerted on the obstacle by the flow. The estimation is obtained with
the hydrodynamic formula in Eq. 13
.
The force on the wall can be estimated with a hydrodynamic formula [8] as
F = kAρv2 , (13)
wall front
where A is the area of the obstacle impacted by the flow. The value of the
coefficientk isgivenbythecomparisonwithexperimentsandvaries,according
to different authors, from 2 to 5. In the simulation, when the flow hits the
wall, the depth is 0.5m and the front speed is v (cid:39) 5m/s, which leads to
an estimated force of F = 300÷750 kN. Fig. 6 shows the hydrodynamic
force as calculated by the solver, highlighting the importance of the dynamic
load due to the initial impact. The maximum values match the prediction of
the hydrodynamic formula.
In this chapter we showed how a model based on LBM can be used to simulate
geophysical flows and provide a new tool for the rational design of mitigation
and protection structures. The model inherits the advantages of the local
solutionmechanismofLBM,andextendsthestandardsolverwiththeaddition
ofaBinghamfluidformulationandofthefree-surfacetechnique.Theresulting
framework can be used to simulate homogeneous plastic flows, and provides
an optimal environment for the coupling with discrete method, thus opening
future chances for the full simulation of multiphase geophysical flows.
7 Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European
Union (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n. 289911. We acknowledge fi-
nancial support from the European Research Council (ERC) Advanced Grant
319968-FlowCCS.TheauthorsaregratefulforthesupportoftheEuropeanre-
search network MUMOLADE (Multiscale Modelling of Landslides and Debris
Flows).