International Scientific and Technological Conference
EXTREME ROBOTICS
October 8-9, 2015, Saint-Petersburg, Russia
LEARNING MOBILE ROBOT BASED ON ADAPTIVE
CONTROLLED MARKOV CHAINS
V.Ya. Vilisov
University of Technology, Energy IT LLP, Russia, Moscow Region, Korolev
vvib@yandex.ru
Abstract. Herein we suggest a mobile robot-training algorithm that is based on the preference
approximation of the decision taker who controls the robot, which in its turn is managed by the Markov
chain. Set-up of the model parameters is made on the basis of the data referring to the situations and
decisions involving the decision taker. The model that adapts to the decision taker's preferences can be
set up either a priori, during the process of the robot's normal operation, or during specially planned
testing sessions. Basing on the simulation modelling data of the robot's operation process and on the
decision taker's robot control we have set up the model parameters thus illustrating both working
capacity of all algorithm components and adaptation effectiveness.
Key words: mobile robot, learning, adaptation, controlled Markov chains.
Introduction the article, the work concentrates only on teaching
There are many ways to increase the independent mobile robots (IMR) preferences of the
effectiveness of the robotic system (RS). Thus, we decision taker and estimating effectiveness of the
either can provide a high effectiveness of the sensor task performance within the selected configuration
systems (SS) and/or maximum possible of the SS. As an RS we take an IMR possessing two
independence of the RS. contact (or other functionally similar) sensors and a
Within the framework of the first method, it is pair of driving wheels. The task of the robotic
possible to increase the informativeness and a system lies in scanning some area (room, territory
number of data collection channels. However, it etc.). Typical example of such IMR is a robotic
may also require increasing the productivity of the vacuum cleaner (RVC) or a robotic lawn mower.
on-board computer. SS effectiveness can also be RS can perform this task by scanning the room
increased by using effective algorithms for data using one of the stored programs that is chosen by
processing that are received from them (for the decision taker. At that, the effectiveness of the
example, we can do it by applying different task performance shall vary according to the
filtration models: Kalman filtration, Bayesian program selection. It depends on both the program
filtration, POMDP etc., as well as using an effective and the room's shape. The logic of the RS is the
solution of SLAM problem etc.). Within the first following: by using different behavior modes
approach, the task of one of the problems is to applied for similar situations (activation of specific
discover the structure and composition of the SS sensors), it makes different decisions. For example,
that would possess a minimum sufficiency for the when the left sensor is activated, the RS shall decide
performance of RS's tasks. to move back taking a right turn etc. In order to
The second approach is closely related to the simplify the presentation of this work’s materials
necessity of providing a special behavior of the RS we shall consider the simplest variant of IMR
that would correspond to the objectives and containing two sensors (states) and two decisions
preferences of the decision taker that controls the (variant actions). In particular, the sensor area is
RS. This direction is closely related to the research presented by two front (left and right)
undergone in the field of training RS to behave crash/proximity transducers with the two
adequately and to interconnect more effectively actions/decisions being the crash reactions (states).
with the decision taker [1, 2, 3]. Here we make a The decisions take form of moving back by turning
good use of the Bayesian education tools and left and moving back by turning right. The increase
Markov processes including POMDP. of the multitude of states and decisions will boost
The solutions that were obtained when up the variety and effectiveness of IMR behavior
implementing these approaches quite often can not influencing in any way the content of the
complement and/or compensate each other's suggested algorithm. All main mathematical
disadvantages. constructions shall be performed for the case with
The purpose of this work is to solve the two states and two decisions.
problem of selecting the minimum composition of This class of problems is often solved with
SS that would be sufficient for RS to execute tasks discrete Markov Decisions Processes (MDP). The
independently. However, due to the limited size of suggested algorithm of adapting RS to the objective
preferences of the decision taker is founded on the compactedness. Optimal strategy provides a
reverse problem for the Markov payoff chain maximum of one-step accumulated or mean
(RPMDP). The problem to be studied here observes profits/payoffs. Within the strategy structure, 𝑘𝑠 is
effective actions of the decision taker thus the decision that should be made according to 𝑠-
computing the estimate of the payoff/objective strategy should the process at the current stage 𝑛 is
function of MDP. Therefore, when solving a direct in state 𝑖.. The structure of the specific strategy that
problem for MDP (DPMDP), the optimal controls is applied for usage (decision making) within the
shall be adapted to the objective preferences of the current presentation leads to the fact that instead of
decision taker. the multitude of 𝑃𝑘 and 𝑅𝑘 matrices we shall see
Markov Models Applied in RS the generation of single working matrices,
Management correspondingly 𝑃𝑠 and 𝑅𝑠.
Markov payoff chains or Markov profit chains, Solution of Direct Problem MDP (DPMDP)
which are also called controlled Markov chains are the When solving MDP we usually apply [10, 11]
developments of Markov chains, whose description is
a recurrent algorithm based on the principle of
complemented with the control element, i.e. the
Richard Bellman or iteration algorithm of Ronald
decision of the decision taker made when locating
Howard [11] that allows to improve the solution
Markov chain in one of its states. The decision is
stepwise. Should the spaces of states and solutions
presented as a multitude of alternatives and their
be not large, the optimal solution of the problem
corresponding multitude of transition probability
may be found with the brute-force search for
matrices.
strategies. We used brute-force search method for
A large group is comprised by the Partially
the model calculations below.
Observable Markov Decisions Processes
Brute-Force Search for Strategies suggests
(POMDP). In comparison with MDP its additional
comparing the competing strategies using the value
element is the multitude of dimensions. These
of one-step mean payoff that is existing within the
models contain all components that are inherent to
steady-state conditions. The search is performed
the traditional models of dynamic controlled
within the class of stationary strategies. Let us
systems [12], which, in their turn, contain equations
define mean payoff value calculated for one step of
of process/system, control and dimensions. This
𝑉𝑠 for the random 𝑠-strategy within the steady-state
presentation allows us to solve three main groups of
conditions. Let us construct 𝑃𝑠 and 𝑅𝑠 work
management problems: filtration, identification and
matrices for the 𝑠-strategy. They are formed from
optimal control.
the original transition matrices where we use a
When using MDP in RS management
specific strategy configuration 𝑓𝑠 =
problems [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], we consider payoff
[𝑘𝑠 𝑘𝑠 ⋯ 𝑘𝑠 ]𝑇 as the key. Thus, the first row
functions (PF) be known and a priori set up when 1 2 𝑚
the system or controlling algorithms were of 𝑃𝑠 is moved from the first row of 𝑃𝑘 1 𝑠 matrix, the
developed. Structure and parameters of PF second row is moved from the second row of 𝑃𝑘 2 𝑠
influence the specific value of the optimal decision. matrix and so on. 𝑅𝑠 matrix is constructed in the
If PF does not correspond to the value hierarchy and same manner. Thus, for the purposes of 𝑠-strategy
preference system of the decision taker that controls referring to the multitude of 𝑃𝑘 and 𝑅𝑘 matrices, we
the RS, the computed solution shall be optimal for can build a single one-step transition matrix 𝑃𝑠 and
the specific PF at the same time being non-optimal a single one-step payoff matrix 𝑅𝑠. Therefore, on
for the objective preferences of the decision taker. condition that the process was in i-state, the one-
Therefore, the optimal controlled influence that is step mean payoff shall be defined as:
obtained by any method is optimal to the PF. 𝑚
MDP is considered to be set up if we know its 𝑟𝑠 = ∑𝑝𝑠𝑟𝑠
such elements as multitude of states 𝑖 = 1̅̅̅,̅𝑚̅̅, start 𝑗=1
state probability vector 𝑝̅ = ‖𝑝 ‖ , multitude of In order to calculate the undoubted mean
solutions 𝑘 = 1̅̅,̅̅𝐾̅,, one-step process transition payoff we shall define the state probability vector
conditional probability matrix 𝑃𝑘 = ‖𝑝𝑘‖ 𝐾 , one- within 𝑓̅𝑁 = [𝑝 1 𝑁 𝑝 2 𝑁 ⋯ 𝑝 𝑚 𝑁]𝑇 steady-state
𝑚𝑚 conditions, where 𝑁 stands for the fact that
step conditional payoff matrix 𝑅𝑘 = ‖𝑟𝑘‖ 𝐾 . The probabilities correspond to the large step numbers
solution of MDP is the optimal strategy 𝑓∗ being accounting for the steady-state process character. In
one out of many 𝑆-strategies. The random strategy this case, the mean payoff of 𝑉𝑠-step shall be
that possesses 𝑠 = 1̅̅̅,̅𝑆̅ index can be presented as the defined as the following value for the 𝑠-stationary
following column vector: 𝑓𝑠 = strategy:
[𝑘𝑠 𝑘𝑠 ⋯ 𝑘𝑠 ]𝑇. Here 𝑇 is the conjugation
symbol. Hereinafter we shall record column vector 𝑖 𝑖 𝑖 𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑗
as a conjugated row vector for the purposes of 𝑖=1 𝑖=1 𝑗=1
Should the payoff have a meaning of profit, the is a conditional one (i.e. it is applied when we select
optimal strategy selection criterion is: the solution that corresponds to the upper index of
𝑠∗ = 𝑎𝑟𝑔 max 𝑉𝑠 the matrix). Similar to the 1st stage, we separately
compute the frequencies of transitioning from one
Limited probability vector of states referring
state to another per each presentation (using the
to Markov 𝑝̅𝑁-process complies with the following
pairs of steps of Markov chain) taking into account
matrix equation:
the made decision (conditions of the transition). The
frequencies that are obtained in this manner are the
At that, the condition of normalization should be
estimates of one-step MDP conditional transition
performed for the probabilities of states:
probabilities. Afterwards these probabilities are put
into the corresponding places of the transition
𝑖 probability matrices.
𝑖=1 3rd Stage. The purpose of constructing the
The solution of the system comprised of two
payoff estimates is the following: to calculate the
last equations allows obtaining coordinate values of
estimates of the payoff vector 𝑟𝑠 on the basis of the
observed parameters (estimates) of the transition
Solution of Reverse Problem MDP
probability matrices and according to the payoffs in
each observation (presentation). For this we shall
Let us consider what data is included into the
use the least square method, whose recurrent form
observations and what should be found as a result
[11] that connects the previous (𝑞) estimates of the
of RPMDP solution. A multitude of presentations is
observations with the current ones, (q+1) is the
available to the observations. At each 𝑛-step we can
following:
see 𝑖 chain conditions and 𝑘 decisions that are
end of presentation, the v value of the received
where:
payoff shall be computed. Within the context of the
𝑄 = (𝑃𝑇𝑃 ) ; 𝑣 is the payoff within the
example under consideration (IMR scanning robot), 𝑞 𝑞 𝑞 𝑞+1
the condition is the actuation of the left or right (q+1)-numbered observation; 𝑃 𝑞 is the transition
sensor while the decision shall be its moving back matrices that are obtained on the 2nd stage within
making a left or right turn. A useful (without 𝑞-numbered observation.
consideration of wastes) duration of the path that Within the recurrent estimation equations, the
was made by the robot during the certain period of MDP presentation is the observation step while the
time (which is proportional to the scanned area) can MDP step is actually one step of Markov chain
serve as each presentation's payoff. Thus, the made within the framework of the specific
component of the observation that is considered presentation.
within the reverse problem solution algorithm is one With the appearance of each new 𝑞-numbered
presentation, i.e. the totality of the alternating presentation of the payoff vector, its estimates are
conditions, made decisions and presentation's total refined recurrently. This is the formal
payoffs. characterization of the decision taker's positive
The result of RPMDP solution is the elements experience made with the help of MDP. Here we
that are necessary for the direct problem (DPMDP) can also say that current preferences of the decision
solving, i.e. probability and payoff matrices. taker are approximated by the Markov chain of
RPMDP solution scheme can be presented decision making.
with 3 stages. The recurrent estimation algorithm not only
1st Stage. Each presentation contains the 𝑓𝑠 ∈ removes the prior doubt, but also allows adapting to
{𝑓1,𝑓2,𝑓3,𝑓4} strategy, which was chosen by the the drift of payoffs, objectives and preferences of
decision taker. The complete set of strategies is the the decision taker by correcting the strategies on the
following: 𝑓1 = [1 1]𝑇; 𝑓2 = [1 2]𝑇; 𝑓3 = basis of the payoff vectors, which are adjusted
[2 1]𝑇; 𝑓4 = [2 2]𝑇. Referring to each according to the current observations of the decision
taker's actions.
presentation, we estimate the frequencies of some
decisions made within some condition. Afterwards, Model Example
In order to check the working capacity and
on the basis of these frequencies, we define the
effectiveness of the suggested scheme of the reverse
closest strategy, which later corresponds to the
problem solution (which is the nucleus of the
given presentation.
mobile robot adaptive control procedure) we have
2nd Stage. The whole multitude of transition
conducted the simulation experiment. The given
probability matrices is estimated in relation to each
presentation: 𝑃1, 𝑃2, 𝑃3, 𝑃4. Each of these matrices data was formed randomly. One of the parameter
variants of the modelled MDP is provided in the mode. Using the Games Theory terminology, this
table below. solution corresponds to the decision taker's pure
Solving direct problem by the brute-force strategy. As a rule, when the operator (decision
strategy search showed that the 2nd strategy is the taker) controls the robot in reality, he/she takes into
optimal one: 𝑓2 =[1 2]𝑇. According to its logic, account a multitude of performance targets (and not
we should choose the first solution for the first only a single one). At that he/she does not "feel" the
process state with the second being chosen for the strategy, whose optimality is based on many
second one. In this case, the one-step mean payoff criteria, therefore the decision taker may often use
shall constitute 71 units within the steady-state his/her own subjective and mixed control strategy.
Table 1. Parameters of Modelled MDP
Solutions Conditions T
n One-Step Payoffs
Probabilities r P
k i p ij n a 40
j=1 j=2 j=1 j=2
1 0.05 0.95 45 79
2 0.19 0.81 44 31 0
1 0.27 0.73 25 23 Strategy, f
2 0.48 0.52 93 45
Pic. 1. Mean Payoffs
In order to solve the reverse problem we have This is caused by the fact that each research
simulated 100 presentations, with each of them considered a fully observable MDP.
containing 30 points. It means that the modelled At the second state we have computed
decision taker made 30 decisions in relation to the subsequently refined estimations of one-step
appearing values of the current states per each transition matrices. At that, within the iteration
presentation. One out of four pure strategies was process of the estimate refinement, each of 100
applied during each presentation. This data was presentations was used as another observation. On
processed in accordance with three stages of the Picture 2 you can see step-by-step changes of the
reverse problem solution algorithm that are estimates referring to 4 probabilities (the total
provided above. number of matrix probabilities is 8, but 4 of them
According to the statistics of made decisions, are independent while the rest 4 are computed as
we have definitely identified the pure strategies that one's complement).
were applied by the decision taker at the first stage.
r P 0.7 P40
0.3 p12(2) p22(2)
0.2 p12(1)_model p22(1)_model 0
0.1 p12(2)_model p22(2)_model 0 20 40 60 80 Steps100
0.0 r11(1) r12(1) r21(1)
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 r22(1) r11(2) r12(2)
Steps r21(2) r22(2)
Pic. 2. Convergence of MDP's Probability Estimates Pic. 3. Convergence of MDP's Payoff
Modelled probability values (provided in are calculated on each step (i.e. that refer to each
Table 1) are marked separately on Picture 2. new presentation) and the payoff that corresponds
𝑟𝑘 estimates of the elements that are folded to the performed presentation according to the
into the vectors of payoff matrices are computed at recurrent correlations. Their sufficient number for
the third stage with the help of the observations that the purposes of the considered dimensionalities is
four (similar to the probability estimates). The
estimate convergence of these values is shown step-by-step estimates. It is clearly shown on Pic. 4
graphically on Pic. 3, while Pic. 4 contains solutions that the adaptation process is converging quickly.
of the direct problem MDP made on the basis of the
0 20 40 60 80 100 Steps 120
Pic. 4. Convergence of MDP Solutions According to its Parameter Estimates
Conclusions [3] A.A. Zhdanov. Independent Artificial Intellect. -
The research that was made for other Moscow: BINOM Publishing House - 2008. - 359
dimensionalities of state space (capacity of the pp.
sensor field) referring to the solution space showed [4] S. Koenig, R.G. Simmons. Xavier: A Robot
that the solution convergence in relation to the Navigation Architecture Based on Partially
considered class of models stays high. Moreover, Observable Markov Decision Process Models.-
Carnegie Mellon University. - [Web-version]. -
the experiment optimal planning tools that are used
during the RS education process allow shortening
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.130.5088&rep=re
the time that is usually used to adjust the decision
p1&type=pdf. - [Last access date: 21. 05. 2015]
taker's preferences.
[5] M.E. Lopez, R. Barea, L.M. Bergasa. Global
The preference model that is adjusted and pre-
Navigation of Assistant Robots using Partially
built within the RS is highly adequate to the
Observable Markov Decision Processes. - [Web-
preferences and objectives of the decision taker,
version]. -URL:
while the quality of decisions that are made by the
RS are not inferior to the quality of the decisions
Global_navigation_of_
made by the "teacher" of MDP-model. Should the
assistant_robots_using_partially_observable_mar
signs of the environment non-stationarity appear or kov_decision_processes.pdf. - [Last access date:
should the decision taker's preferences change, the 21. 05. 2015]
model can be re-adjusted and reloaded into the RS. [6] S. Ong, S.W. Png, D. Hsu, W.S. Lee. POMDPs for
The process of setting up/educating the model can Robotic Tasks with Mixed Observability. -
be made using a separate model or a special testing Robotics: Science & Systems. - 2009. - [Web-
device, while the MDP-model that was adjusted for version]. -
without interrupting normal operation of the RS. rss09.pdf. - [Last access date: 21. 05. 2015]
Further development of the suggested [7] R.S. Sutton, A.G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning:
approach can unfold in several directions. In An Introduction. Cambridge: The M.I.T. Press,
particular, we can extend the considered spectrum 1998.
[8] V.Ya. Vilisov. Robot Training Under Conditions
of the robotic system’s sensor field variants and/or
of Incomplete Information. - [Web-version]. -
use POMDP-models.
URL:
pdf. - [Last access date: 21. 05. 2015]
[1] M.P. Woodward, R.J. Wood Framing. Human-
[9] H. Mine, S. Osaki. Markovian Decision Processes,
Robot Task Communication as a POMDP. - [Web-
NY: American Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc.,
version]. -URL:
1970, p. 176.
[10] V.Ya. Vilisov. Adaptive Models Used for
date: 21. 05. 2015]
Researching Economic Operations - Moscow: Enit
[2] M.P. Woodward, R.J. Wood. Using Bayesian
Publishing House - 2007. - 286 pages.
Inference to Learn High-Level Tasks from a
[11] R.A. Howard. Dynamic Programming and
Human Teacher. - Web-version. Conf. on
Markov Processes. - NY-London: The M.I.T.
Artificial Intelligence and Pattern Recognition,
Press. - 1960.
Orlando, FL, July 2009, pp. 138-145, 2009.
[12] G.F. Franklin, J.D. Powell, M. Workman. Digital
Control of Dynamic Systems. - NY: Addison
Wesley Longman. - 1998.