Learning Structural Kernels for Natural Language Processing
DanielBeck TrevorCohn
DepartmentofComputerScience ComputingandInformationSystems
UniversityofSheffield,UnitedKingdom UniversityofMelbourne,Australia
debeck1@sheffield.ac.uk t.cohn@unimelb.edu.au
ChristianHardmeier LuciaSpecia
DepartmentofLinguisticsandPhilology DepartmentofComputerScience
UppsalaUniversity,Sweden UniversityofSheffield,UnitedKingdom
christian.hardmeier@lingfil.uu.se l.specia@sheffield.ac.uk
Abstract behaves, as we can more readily define a similarity
metricbetweeninputsinsteadoftryingtocharacter-
Structural kernels are a flexible learning izewhichfeaturesarethebestforthetaskathand.
paradigmthathasbeenwidelyusedinNatural
Kernels are a very flexible framework: they can
Language Processing. However, the problem
be combined and parameterized in many different
of model selection in kernel-based methods
is usually overlooked. Previous approaches ways. Complex kernels, however, lead to the prob-
mostly rely on setting default values for ker- lem of model selection, where the aim is to obtain
nel hyperparameters or using grid search, the best kernel configuration in terms of hyperpa-
which is slow and coarse-grained. In con- rametervalues. Theusualapproachformodelselec-
trast,Bayesianmethodsallowefficientmodel
tioninfrequentistmethodsistoemploygridsearch
selection by maximizing the evidence on the onsomedevelopmentdatadisjointfromthetraining
trainingdatathroughgradient-basedmethods.
data. This approach can rapidly become impracti-
In this paper we show how to perform this
cal when using complex kernels which increase the
in the context of structural kernels by using
Gaussian Processes. Experimental results on numberofmodelhyperparameters. Gridsearchalso
tree kernels show that this procedure results requires the user to explicitly set the grid values,
inbetterpredictionperformancecomparedto making it difficult to fine tune the hyperparameters.
hyperparameter optimization via grid search. Recent advances in model selection tackle some of
Theframeworkproposedinthispapercanbe
theseissues, buthaveseverallimitations(see§6for
adaptedtootherstructuresbesidestrees, e.g.,
details).
stringsandgraphs,therebyextendingtheutil-
ityofkernel-basedmethods. Our proposed approach for model selection re-
lies on Gaussian Processes (GPs) (Rasmussen and
Williams,2006),awidelyusedBayesiankernelma-
1 Introduction
chine. GPs allow efficient and fine-grained model
Kernel-basedmethodsareastaplemachinelearning selectionbymaximizingtheevidenceonthetraining
approach in Natural Language Processing (NLP). datausinggradient-basedmethods,droppingthere-
Frequentist kernel methods like the Support Vector quirementfordevelopmentdata. AsaBayesianpro-
Machine (SVM) pushed the state of the art in many cedure, GPs also naturally balance between model
NLP tasks, especially classification and regression. capacity and generalization. GPs have been shown
One interesting aspect of kernels is their ability to toachievestateoftheartperformanceinvariousre-
bedefineddirectlyonstructuredobjectslikestrings, gressiontasks(Hensmanetal.,2013;CohnandSpe-
treesandgraphs. Thisapproachhasthepotentialto cia,2013). Therefore,webaseourapproachonthis
move the modelling effort from feature engineering framework.
to kernel engineering. This is useful when we do While prediction performance is important to
not have much prior knowledge about how the data consider (as we show in our experiments), we are
1v13120.8051:viXra
mainly interested in two other significant aspects solutionfortheposterior,namely
thatareenabledbyourapproach:
• Gradient-basedmethodsaremoreefficientthan
grid search for high dimensional spaces. This ∗ ∗ ∗ n ∗
allowsustoeasilyproposenewrichkernelex-
where x and y are respectively the test input
tensions that rely on a large number of hyper-
and its response variable, K is the Gram matrix
parameters, which in turn can result in better
corresponding to the training inputs and k =
modellingcapacity.
[(cid:104)x ,x (cid:105),(cid:104)x ,x (cid:105),...,(cid:104)x ,x (cid:105)] is the vector of
1 ∗ 2 ∗ n ∗
• Since the model selection process is now fine- kernel evaluations between the test input and each
traininginput.
grained,wecaninterprettheresultinghyperpa-
rametervalues,dependingonhowthekernelis A key property of GP models is their ability to
defined. perform efficient model selection. This is achieved
by employing gradient-based methods to maximize
Inthisworkwefocusontreekernels,whichhave themarginallikelihood,
been successfully used in a number of NLP tasks
(see§6). Inmostcases,thesekernelsareusedasan
SVMcomponentandmodelselectionisnotconsid-
ered an important issue. Hyperparameters are usu-
whereθrepresentsthevectorofmodelhyperparam-
ally set to default values, which work reasonably
eters and y is the vector of response variables from
well in terms of prediction performance. However,
thetrainingdata. ForaGaussianlikelihood,wecan
this is only possible due to the small number of hy-
take the log of the expression above to obtain in
perparametersthesekernelscontain.
closed-form1,
We perform experiments comprising synthetic
data (§4) and two real NLP regression tasks: Emo-
tionAnalysis(§5.1)andTranslationQualityEstima-
tion(§5.2). Ourfindingsshowthatourapproachout- − yTG−1y − log|G| − log2π
performsSVMsusingthesamekernels.
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
datafit complexitypenalty constant
2 GaussianProcessRegression
whereG = K+σ I. Thedatafittermisdependent
Our definition of GPs closely follows that of
on the training response variables, while the com-
Rasmussen and Williams (2006). Consider
plexity penalty term relies only on the kernel and
a setting where we have a dataset X =
training inputs. Since the first two terms have con-
{(x ,y ),(x ,y ),...,(x ,y )}, where x is a d-
1 1 2 2 n n i flictingobjectives,optimizingthelogmarginallike-
dimensional input and y the corresponding out-
i lihoodwillnaturallyachieveacompromiseandthus
put. Our goal is to infer an underlying function
limitoverfitting(withouttheneedforanyvalidation
f : Rd → R to explain this data, i.e. f(x ) ≈ y .
i i steporadditionaldata).
Formally,f isdrawnfromaGPprior,
Toenablegradient-basedoptimizationweneedto
derivethegradientsw.r.t. thehyperparameters:
where µ(x) is the mean function, which is usually logp(y|X,θ) = yTG−1 G−1y
the0constant,andk(x,x(cid:48))isthekernelfunction. j j
(cid:18) (cid:19)
In a regression setting, we assume that the res- − trace G−1 .
ponsevariablesarenoisylatentfunctionevaluations, j
i.e., y = f(x ) + η, where η ∼ N(0,σ2) is
i i n 1SeeRasmussenandWilliams(2006,pp. 113-114)forde-
added white noise. We assume a Gaussian likeli-
tailsonthederivationofthisformulaandalsoitscorrespondent
hood, which allows us to obtain a closed formula gradientcalculation.
ThegradientsofGdependontheunderlyingker- Tree Fragments
nel. Therefore we can employ any kind of valid S A B S S S S
kernel in this procedure as long as its gradients can
be computed. This not only allows for fine-tuning
A B a b A B A B A B A B
ofhyperparametersbutalsoallowsforkernelexten-
sionswhicharerichlyparameterized.
a b a b a b
3 TreeKernels
Figure 1: An example tree and the respective set of tree
fragmentsdefinedbyaSSTK.
TheseminalworkonConvolutionKernelsbyHaus-
sler (1999) defines a broad class of kernels on dis-
cretestructuresbycountingandweightingthenum- hyperparameter λ. The original goal of λ is to act
berofsubstructurestheyshare. ApplyingHaussler’s as a decay factor that penalizes contributions from
formulation to trees we reach a general formula for larger fragments cf smaller ones (and therefore, it
atreekernelbetweentwotreest 1 andt 2 ,namely should be in the [0,1] interval). Without this factor,
the resulting distribution over tree pairs is skewed,
1 2 1 2 giving extremely large values when trees are equal
f∈F and rapidly decreasing for small differences over
fragment counts. The decay factor helps to spread
where F is the set of all tree fragments, c (f) and
this distribution, effectively giving smaller weights
c (f)returnthecountsforfragmentf intreest and
tolargerfragments.
t , respectively, and w(f) assigns a weight to frag-
Thefunction∆canbedefinedrecursively,
ment f. In other words, we can consider the ker-
nelaweighteddotproductovervectorsoffragment 
counts. The actual fragment set F is deliberately   0 pr(n 1 ) (cid:54)= pr(n 2 )
left undefined: different concepts of tree fragments λ pr(n 1 ) = pr(n 2 )∧
∆(n ,n ) =
definedifferenttreekernels.   preterm(n 1 )
In this paper, we will focus on Subset Tree Ker- 
λg(n ,n ) otherwise,
nels (henceforth SSTK), first introduced by Collins
and Duffy (2001). This kernel considers tree frag- where pr(n) is the grammar production at node n
ments that contains complete grammar rules (see and preterm(n) returns true if n is a pre-terminal
Figure1foranexample). Considerthesetofnodes node. Thefunctiong isdefinedasfollows:
in the two trees as N and N respectively. We de-
fine I (n) as an indicator function that returns 1 if |n1|
i (cid:89)
fragment f i ∈ F has root n and 0 otherwise. A g(n 1 ,n 2 ) = (α+∆(ci n1 ,ci n2 )), (3)
SSTKcanthenbedefinedas: i=1
(cid:88) (cid:88) where |n| is the number of children of node n and
1 2 1 2 ci is the ith child of node n. This recursive defini-
n1∈N1n2∈N2 n
tion is calculated efficiently by employing dynamic
(cid:88) s(i) programmingtocacheintermediate∆results.
where ∆(n 1 ,n 2 ) = λ 2 I i (n 1 )I i (n 2 )
Equation 3 also adds another hyperparameter, α.
This hyperparameter was introduced by Moschitti
ands(i)isthenumberoffragmentsiniwithatleast (2006b)3 as a way to select between two differ-
onechild2.
ent tree kernels. If α = 1, we get the original
The formulation in Equation 2 is the same as the SSTK,ifα = 0,thenweobtaintheSubtreeKernel,
one shown in Equation 1, except that we are now whichonlyallowsfragmentswithterminalsymbols
restricting the weights w(f) to be a function of a
3Inhisoriginalformulation,thishyperparameterwasnamed
2SeePighinandMoschitti(2010)fordetailsandaproofon σbuthereweuseαtonotconfuseitwiththeGPnoisehyper-
thisderivation. parameter.
as leaves. We can also interpret the Subtree Kernel λ S = 1 λ S = .5 λ S = 2
as a “sparse” version of the SSTK, where the “non- λ A = 1 λ A = 1 λ A = 1
subtree”fragmentshavetheirweightsequaltozero. λ B = 1 λ B = 1 λ B = 1
Even though fragment weights are affected by A→a 1 1 1
bothkernelhyperparameters,previousworkdidnot B→b 1 1 1
discusstheireffects. Theusualprocedurefixesαto S→AB 1 0.5 2
1 (selecting the original SSTK) and sets λ to a de- S→(Aa)B 1 0.5 2
faultvalue(around0.4). Asexplainedin§2,theGP S→A(Bb) 1 0.5 2
model selection procedure enables us to learn fine- S→(Aa)(Bb) 1 0.5 2
grainedvaluesforthesehyperparameters,whichcan k(t,t) 6 3 18
leadtobetterperformingmodelsandaidinterpreta-
tion. Furthermore, it also allows us to extend these Table1: Resultingfragmentweightedcountsfortheker-
nelevaluationk(t,t),fordifferentvaluesofhyperparam-
kernels by adding new hyperparameters. We pro-
eters,wheretisthetreeinFigure1.
poseonesuchkernelinthenextSection.
3.1 Symbol-awareSubsetTreeKernel
3.2 KernelGradients
While varying the SSTK hyperparameters can lead
Toenablehyperparameteroptimizationviagradient
to different weight schemes, they do that in a very
descent we must provide gradients for the kernels.
coarse way. For some applications, it may be nec-
InthisSectionwederivethegradientsforSASSTK.
essary to give more weight to specific fragments
FromEquation2weknowthatthekernelisadou-
or set of fragments (e.g., NPs being more impor-
ble summation over the ∆ function. Therefore all
tant than ADVP in an information extraction set-
gradients are also double summations, but over the
ting). TheSymbol-awareSubsetTreeKernel(hence-
gradients of∆. We can obtain these in a vectorized
forth, SASSTK),whichweintroducehere, allowsa
way, by considering the gradients of the hyperpa-
more fine-grained control over the weights by em-
rametervectorsλandαover∆. Letk bethenum-
ploying one λ and one α hyperparameter for each
ber of symbols considered in the model and λ and
non-terminalsymbolinthetrainingdata. Thecalcu-
α be k-dimensional vectors containing the respec-
lationusesasimilarrecursiveformulatotheSSTK,
tivehyperparameters.
namely:
In the following, we use the notation ∆ as a
 shorthand for ∆(ci ,ci ) and we also omit the pa-
  0 pr(n 1 ) (cid:54)= pr(n 2 ) n1 n2
  λ pr(n ) = pr(n )∧ rametersofg x . Westartwiththeλgradient:
∆(n ,n ) =
    λ x g x (n 1 ,n 2 ) o p th r e e r te w r i m se ( , n 1 ) ∂∆       0 u p p r r ( ( n n 1 1 ) ) (cid:54)= = p p r r ( ( n n 2 2 ) )∧
wherexisthesymbolatnoden 1 and ∂λ  preterm(n 1 )
|n1|    x x otherwise,
x 1 2 x n1 n2
i=1 where x is the symbol at n 1 , g x is defined in Equa-
The SASSTK can be interpreted as a generaliza- tion 4 and u is the k-dimensional unit vector with
tionoftheSSTK:wecanrecoverthelatterbytying the element corresponding to symbol x equal to 1
all λ and setting all α = 1. By employing different and all others equal to 0. The gradient in the third
hyperparametervaluesforeachspecificsymbol,we caseisdefinedrecursively,
can effectively modify the weights of all fragments
∂(λ g ) ∂g
wherethesymbolappears. Table1showsanexam- = ug x +λ x
plewhereweunrolledakernelcomputationintoits
corresponding feature space, showing the resulting (cid:88)
= ug +λ .
weightedcountsforeachfeature. α x +∆ i ∂λ
Theαgradientisderivedinasimilarway, on the SSTK (and our proposed SASSTK), our ap-
proachcaneasilybeextendedtotheseotherkernels,
  0 pr(n 1 ) (cid:54)= pr(n 2 )∨ aslongasallthecorrespondingrecursivedefinitions
= preterm(n 1 ) aredifferentiable.
   ∂(λ x g x ) otherwise,
∂α 4 SyntheticDataExperiments
and the gradient at the second case is also defined
A natural question that arises in the proposed
recursively,
method is how much data is needed to accurately
∂(λ g ) ∂g learn the kernel hyperparameters. To answer this
∂α x ∂α question,werunasetofexperimentsusingsynthetic
(cid:19) data. We generate this data by using a set of 1000
= λ u+ . naturallanguagesyntactictrees,wherewefixaran-
i=1 x i dom subset of 200 instances for testing and use the
remaining800instancesastraining. Foreachtrain-
Gradients can be efficiently obtained using dy-
ingsetsizewedefineaGPoverthefulldataset,sam-
namicprogramming. Infact,theycanbecalculated
pleafunctionfromitandusethefunctionoutputas
atthesametimeas∆toimproveperformancesince
the response variable for each tree. We try two dif-
they all share many terms in their derivations. Fi-
ferent GP priors, one using the SSTK and another
nally,wecaneasilyobtainthegradientsfortheorig-
oneusingtheSASSTK.
inalSSTKbylettingu = 1.
The conditions above provide a controlled envi-
3.3 KernelNormalization ronmenttocheckthemodellingcapacitiesofourap-
proach since we know the exact distribution where
Itiscommonpracticewhenusingtreekernelstonor-
the data comes from. The reasoning behind these
malizethekernel. Thishelpsreducetherandomef-
experiments is that to be able to provide benefits in
fect of tree size. Normalization can be achieved us-
ingthefollowing,wherekˆ
isthenormalizedkernel:
real tasks, where the data distribution is not known,
our models have to be learnable in this controlled
kˆ(t ,t ) = 1 2 . settingaswellusingareasonableamountofdata.
1 2 (cid:112)
k(t 1 ,t 1 )k(t 2 ,t 2 ) Finally, we also provide an empirical evaluation
comparing the speed performance between our ap-
Toapplythisnormalizedversionintheoptimiza-
proachandgridsearch.
tionprocedurewemustalsoderivegradientsforthe
normalization function. In the following equation,
4.1 SSTKPrior
we use k and kˆ as a shorthand for k(t ,t ) and
kˆ(t ,t ),respectively: OurfirstexperimentsuseaSSTKasthekernelwith
λ = 0.001,α = 1 and σ2 = 0.01. After obtaining
∂k 12 ∂k 11 ∂k 22 theinputtreesandtheirsampledlabels,wedefinea
∂kˆ k 22 +k 11
12 = √ ∂θ −kˆ ∂θ ∂θ . new GP model using only the training data plus the
∂θ k 11 k 22 2k 11 k 22 obtainedresponsevariables,thistimeusingaSSTK
with randomized hyperparameter values. Then we
optimize the GP and check if the learned hyperpa-
3.4 OtherExtensions
rametersareclosetotheoriginalones,using10ran-
Many other structural kernels rely on recursive def- dom restarts to limit the effect of local optima. We
initionsanddynamicprogrammingtoperformtheir also use the optimized GP to predict response vari-
calculations. Examples include other tree kernels ablesonthetestsetandmeasureRootMeanSquared
like the Partial Tree Kernel (Moschitti, 2006a) and Error(RMSE).Ourhypothesisisthatwithareason-
string kernels like the ones defined on character n- able sample size we can retrieve the original hyper-
grams(Lodhietal.,2002)orwordsequences(Can- parameter values and obtain low RMSE. For each
cedda et al., 2003). While in this paper we focus trainingsetsize,werepeattheexperiment20times.
Figure 2 shows the results of these experiments. 4.2 SASSTKPrior
Forsmallsizesthevarianceintheresultinghyperpa-
rameter values is large but as soon as we reach 200 The large number of hyperparameters of the
instances we are able to retrieve the original values SASSTK makes it more prone to optimization and
withhighconfidence. Inotherwords,inanidealset- overfittingissueswhencomparedtotheSSTK.This
ting200instancesareenoughtolearnthekernel. It raises the question of how much data is needed to
isalsointerestingtonotethattestRMSEafteropti- justifyitsuse. Toaddressthisquestion,werunsim-
mization steadily decreases as we increase training ilarexperimentstothoseabovefortheSSTK,except
data size. This shows that if one is more interested that now we sample from a GP using a SASSTK as
inpredictionsthemselves,itisstillworthoptimizing thekernel.
hyperparametersevenifthetrainingdataissmall. Instead of optimizing all hyperparameters freely
we use a simpler version where we tie λ and α for
each symbol to the same value, except for the sym-
bol ’S’. Effectively this version has one extra λ and
oneextraα(henceforthλ andα )whencompared
to the SSTK. The GP prior hyperparameter values
are set to λ = 0.001,λ = 0.5,α = 0.1,α = 1
and σ2 = 0.01. For each training set size, we train
two GPs, one using this SASSTK and one using
the original SSTK, optimize them using 10 random
restartsandmeasureRMSEonthetestset.
ResultsareshowninFigure3. Foralltrainingset
sizestheSASSTKreacheslowerRMSEthanSSTK,
with a substantial difference after reaching 100 in-
stances. Thisshowsthatevenforsmalldatasetsour
proposed kernel manages to capture aspects which
cannotbeexplainedbytheoriginalSSTK.Notethat
thisisanidealsetting,andrealdatasetsmayneedto
be larger to realize gains from SASSTK. Neverthe-
less,thesearepromisingresultssincetheygiveevi-
denceofasmalllowerboundonthedatasetsizefor
SASSTKtobeeffective.
Figure 2: Results of synthetic experiments optimizing
SSTK. The x axes correspond to different training set
Figure3: Resultsfromsyntheticexperimentscomparing
sizes and the the y axes are the obtained hyperparame-
SSTKandSASSTK.Thexaxisistrainingsetsizewhile
ter values in the first three plots and RMSE in the last
theyaxiscorrespondstoRMSE.
plot. Dashedlinesshowtheoriginalhyperparameterval-
ues. PointsareoffsetinRMSEchartforlegibility.
4.3 PerformanceExperiments timetoachievethesamepredictionsobtainedbythe
GP model. In real settings, SVMs predictions tend
To provide an overview of how efficient is the
to be more on par with the ones provided by a GP
gradient-based method compared to grid search we
(asshownin§5)butneverthelessthesefiguresshow
also run a set of experiments measuring wall clock
that the GP can be much more time efficient when
training time vs. RMSE on a test set. For both GP
optimizinghyperparametersofatreekernel.
andSVMmodelsweemploytheSSTKasthekernel
Animportantperformanceaspecttotakeintoac-
and we use the same synthetic data from the previ-
ousexperiments4. Weperform20runs,keepingthe count is parallelization. Grid search is embarass-
ingly parallelizable since each grid point can run in
test set as the same 200 instances for all runs and
a different core. However, the GP optimization can
randomly sampling 200 instances from the remain-
alsobenefitfrommultiplecoresbyrunningeachker-
inginstancesastrainingdata.
nel computation inside the Gram matrix in parallel.
Figure 4 shows the curves for both GP and SVM
To keep the comparisons simpler, the results shown
models. TheGPcurveisobtainedbyincreasingthe
inthissectionuseasinglecorebutallexperimentsin
maximumnumberofiterationsofthegradient-based
§5 employ parallelization in the Gram matrix com-
method (in this case, L-BFGS) and the SVM curve
putationlevel(forbothSVMandGPmodels).
is obtained by increasing the granularity of the grid
size.
5 NLPExperiments
OurexperimentswithNLPdataaddresstworegres-
sion tasks: Emotion Analysis and Quality Estima-
tion. For both tasks, we use the Stanford parser
(Manning et al., 2014) to obtain constituency trees
forallsentences. Also,ratherthanusingdataofficial
splits,weperform5-foldcross-validationinorderto
obtainmorereliableresults.
5.1 EmotionAnalysis
ThegoalofEmotionAnalysisistoautomaticallyde-
tect emotions in a text (Strapparava and Mihalcea,
2008). This problem is closely related to Opinion
Figure4: Resultsfromperformanceexperiments. Thex
Mining (Pang and Lee, 2008), with similar appli-
axiscorrespondstowallclocktimeinsecondsanditisin
log scale. The y axis shows RMSE on the test set. The cations,butitisusuallydoneatamorefine-grained
bluedashedlinecorrespondstotheRMSEvalueobtained levelandinvolvesthepredictionofasetoflabelsfor
afterL-BFGSconverged.Errorbarsareobtainedbymea- each text (one for each emotion) instead of a single
suring one standard deviation over the 20 runs made in
label.
eachexperiment.
Beck et al. (2014a) used a multi-task GP for this
task with a bag-of-words feature representation. In
We can see that optimizing the GP model is con-
theory,itispossibletocombinetheirmulti-taskker-
sistently much faster than doing grid search on the
nelwithourtreekernels,buttokeepthefocusofthe
SVM model (notice the logarithmic scale), even
experiments on testing tree kernel approaches, here
thoughitshowssomevariancewhenlettingL-BFGS
we use independently trained models, one per emo-
runforalargernumberofiterations. TheGPmodel
tion.
also is able to better predictions in general. Even
when taking the variances into account, grid search Dataset We use the dataset provided by the “Af-
wouldstillneedaround10timesmorecomputation fective Text” shared task in SemEval2007 (Strap-
parava and Mihalcea, 2007), which is composed of
4ForspecificdetailsontheSVMmodelsusedinallexperi-
1000newsheadlinesannotatedintermsofsixemo-
mentsperformedinthispaperwereferthereadertoAppendix
A. tions: Anger, Disgust, Fear, Joy, Sadness and Sur-
prise. Foreachemotion,ascorebetween0and100 even though the optimized marginal likelihood was
is given, 0 meaning total lack of emotion and 100, higher. This is evidence that the SASSTK model
maximally emotional. Scores are mean-normalized is overfitting the training data, probably due to its
beforetrainingthemodels. largenumberofhyperparameters.
Models Weperformexperimentsusingthefollow-
ingtreekernels:
SVMBOW 0.5690
SVMSSTK 0.5254
• SSTK: the SSTK formulation introduced by
Moschitti(2006b); GPBOW 0.5891
• SASSTK full : our proposed Symbol-Aware GPSSTK 0.5713
SSTK; GPSASSTK 0.5118
GPSASSTK 0.5710
• SASSTK : sameasbefore,butusingonlytwo
S (fixedα = 1)
λ and two α hyperparameters: one for sym-
GPSSTK 0.5093
bols corresponding to full sentences5 and an-
GPSASSTK 0.5435
other for all other symbols. This configuration
GPSASSTK 0.5225
issimilartothatinSection4.2.
Table 2: Pearson’s correlation scores for the Emotion
For all kernels, we also use a variation fixing the α
Analysistask(higherisbetter).
hyperparametersto1toemulatetheoriginalSSTK.
Another interesting finding in Table 2 is that fix-
Baselines and evaluation Our results are com-
ing the α values often harms performance. Inspect-
paredagainstthreebaselines:
ing the free α models showed that the values found
• SVMSSTK:aSVMusinganSSTKkernel. by the optimizer were very close to zero. This in-
dicates that the model selection procedure prefer
• SVMBOW:sameasbefore,butusinganRBF
towards giving smaller weights to incomplete tree
kernelwithabag-of-wordsrepresentation.
fragments. We can interpret this as the model se-
lecting a more lexicalized feature space, which also
• GPBOW:sameasSVMBOWbutusingaGP
explains why the GP RBF model on bag-of-words
instead.
performedthebestinthistask.
The SVM models are trained using a wrapper for Finally, to understand how the optimized kernels
LIBSVM6 (Chang and Lin, 2001) provided by the could provide more interpretability, Table 3 shows
scikit-learntoolkit7 (Pedregosaetal.,2011)andop- the top 15 λ values obtained by the SASSTK full
timized via grid search. Following previous work, (fixed α variant) with their corresponding symbols.
we use Pearson’s correlation coefficient as evalua- Inthisspecificcasethekerneldoesnotgivethebest
tion metric. Pearson’s scores are obtained by con- performance so there are limitations in doing a full
catenatingallsixemotionsoutputstogether. linguisticanalysis. Nevertheless,webelievethisex-
Table 2 shows the results. The best GP model ample shows the potential for developing more in-
with tree kernels outperforms the SVMs, showing terpretablekernels. Thisisespeciallyinterestingbe-
thatthefine-grainedmodelselectionprocedurepro- cause these models take into account a much richer
videdbytheGPmodelsishelpfulwhendealingwith feature space than what it is allowed by parametric
tree kernels. However, using the SASSTK models models.
donothelpinthecaseoffreeαandtheSASSTK
5.2 QualityEstimation
actually performs worse than the original SSTK,
ThegoalofQualityEstimationistoprovideaqual-
5Inthisdataset,symbolsareS,SQ,SBARQandSINV.
6www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/˜cjlin/libsvm ity prediction for new, unseen machine translated
JJR 0.8333 WHADVP 0.5004 VBP 0.4653 Models Since our data consists of pairs of trees,
PRP$ 0.6933 QP 0.5001 WHNP 0.4508
our models in this task use a pair of tree kernels.
WDT 0.6578 JJS 0.4996 NN 0.4274
We combine these two kernels by either summing
RBR 0.5445 NNS 0.4961 JJ 0.4021
VBG 0.5163 . 0.4777 SQ 0.4000 or multiplying them. As for underlying tree ker-
nels, we try both SSTK and SASSTK . As in the
Table 3: Top 15 symbols sorted according to their ob-
Emotion Analysis task, we also experiment with a
tained λ values in the SASSTK model with fixed α.
full setofkernelconfigurationswiththeαhyperparam-
The numbers are the corresponding λ values, averaged
eters fixed at 1. We also test models that combine
overallsixemotions.
our tree kernels with an RBF kernel on a set of 17
featuresextractedusingtheQuEstframework(Spe-
ples of applications include filtering machine trans-
cia et al., 2013). These features are part of a strong
latedsentencesthatwouldrequiremorepost-editing
baselinemodelusedbytheWMT14sharedtask.
effort than translation from scratch (Specia et al.,
2009), selecting the best translation from different Baselinesandevaluation Wecompareourresults
MTsystems(Speciaetal.,2010)orbetweenanMT withanumberofSVMmodels:
system and a translation memory (He et al., 2010),
• SVMSSTK:sameasintheEmotionAnalysis
and highlighting segments that need revision (Bach
task,usingeitherasum(+)oraproduct(×)of
et al., 2011). While various quality metrics exist,
SSTKs.
herewefocusonpost-editingtimeprediction.
Tree kernels have been used before in this task
• SVM RBF: this is an SVM trained on the 17
(with SVMs) by Hardmeier (2011) and Hardmeier
featuresextractedbyQuest.
et al. (2012). While their best models combine tree
kernelswithasetofexplicitfeatures,theyalsoshow • SVM RBF SSTK: a combination of the two
goodresultsusingonlythetreekernels. Thismakes modelsabove.
Quality Estimation a good benchmark task to test
For further comparison, we also show results ob-
ourmodels.
tained using a GP model and an RBF kernel on the
Datasets We use two publicly available datasets QuEst-only features. Following previous work, we
containingpost-editedmachinetranslatedsentences. measure prediction performance using both Mean
Botharecomposedofasetofsourcesentences,their AbsoluteError(MAE)andRMSE.
machine translated outputs and the corresponding The prediction results are given in Table 4. They
post-editingtime. indicateanumberofinterestingfindings:
• Forthefr-endataset,theGPmodelscombining
• French-English (fr-en): This dataset, de-
treekernelswithanRBFkerneloutperformall
scribedin(Specia,2011),contains2524French
other models. Results for the en-es dataset are
sentences translated into English and post-
less consistent, probably due to the small size
editedbyanovicetranslator.
of the dataset, but on average they are better
thantheirSVMcounterparts.
• English-Spanish (en-es): This dataset was
usedintheWMT14QualityEstimationshared • The SVMs using a combination of kernels
task (Bojar et al., 2014), containing 858 sen- performs worse than using the RBF kernel
tencestranslatedfromEnglishintoSpanishand alone. Inspecting the models, we found that
post-editedbyanexperttranslator. grid search actually harms performance. For
instance,forthefr-endataset,MAEandRMSE
For each dataset, post-editing times are first di- for the RBF + SSTK × model before grid
videdbythetranslationoutputlength(obtainingthe searchare0.4681and0.6016,respectively. On
post-editing time per word) and then mean normal- the other hand, for this dataset all GP models
ized. achievebetterresultsafteroptimization.
• Unlike in the Emotion Analysis task, fixing α λ src λ tgt
results in better performance, even though the GPSSTK+ 0.1394 0.3108
resulting models have lower marginal likeli- GPSSTK× 0.1405 0.2641
hoodthantheoneswithfreeα. Thesameeffect
Table5:LearnedhyperparametersfortheGPSSTKmod-
happened when comparing the SASSTK mod-
els in the fr-en dataset, with α fixed at 1. λ and λ
els with the SSTK ones for the en-es dataset.
arethehyperparameterscorrespondingtothekernelson
Bothcasesareevidenceofmodeloverfitting. thesourceandtargetparsetrees,respectively. Thevalues
shownareaveragedoverthecross-validationresults.
French-English English-Spanish
MAE RMSE MAE RMSE
tion for the marginal likelihood does help limiting
overfitting, it does not prevent it completely. Small
RBF 0.4610 0.5944 0.7831 1.0238
SSTK+ 0.4710 0.6006 0.7777 1.0820 datasets or invalid assumptions about the Gaussian
SSTK× 0.4681 0.6016 0.7884 1.1044 distributionofthedatamaystillleadtopoorlyfitting
RBFSSTK+ 0.5146 0.6267 0.8077 1.0295
models. Anothermeansofreducingoverfittingisby
RBFSSTK× 0.5186 0.6299 0.8367 1.0427
takingafullyBayesianapproachinwhichhyperpa-
GPRBF 0.4555 0.5830 0.7842 1.0735
(GPfreeα) rametersareconsideredasrandomvariablesandare
SSTK+ 0.4789 0.5912 0.7551 1.0281 marginalizedout(Osborne,2010);thisisaresearch
SSTK× 0.4804 0.5843 0.7440 1.0008 directionweplantopursueinthefuture.8
SASSTK + 0.4756 0.5889 0.8096 1.0754
SASSTK × 0.4797 0.5868 0.7484 1.0102
S 5.4 ExtensionstoOtherTasks
SSTK+ 0.4694 0.5808 0.7614 1.0019 The GP framework introduced in Section 2 can
SSTK× 0.4708 0.5733 0.7205 0.9870 be extended to non-regression problems by chang-
SASSTK + 0.4758 0.5888 0.8242 1.0912
S ing the likelihood function. For instance, models
SASSTK × 0.4699 0.5751 0.7469 1.0280
for classification (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006,
RBFSSTK+ 0.4408 0.5651 0.7591 1.0469 Chap. 3), ordinal regression (Chu and Ghahramani,
RBFSSTK× 0.4443 0.5659 0.7389 1.0302 2005) and structured prediction (Altun et al., 2004;
RBFSASSTK + 0.4406 0.5648 0.7692 1.0682
S Bratie`res et al., 2013) were proposed in the liter-
RBFSASSTK × 0.4440 0.5658 0.7682 1.0628
S ature. Since the likelihood is independent of the
Table 4: Error scores for the Quality Estimation task kernel, a natural future step is to apply the kernels
(lowerisbetter). Resultsareintermsofpost-editingtime andmodelsintroducedinthispapertodifferentNLP
perword. Boldscoresarethebestonesforeachdataset. tasks.
Inlightofthat,wedidinitialexperimentsincon-
We also inspect the resulting hyperparameters to
stituency parsing reranking9. The first results were
obtaininsightsaboutthefeaturesusedbythemodel.
inconclusive but we do believe this is because we
Table 5 shows the optimized λ values for the GP
employed naive approaches using classification (1-
SSTKmodelswithfixedαforthefr-endataset. The
bestresultvs. all)andregression(usingPARSEVAL
λ values obtained are higher for the target sentence
metrics as the response variable) models. A more
kernels than for the source sentence ones. We can
appropriatewaytotacklethistaskisbyemployinga
interpret this as the model giving preference to fea-
reranking-basedlikelihoodandthisisadirectionwe
turesfromthetargettreesinsteadofthesourcetrees,
plantopursueinthefuture.
whichiswhatwewouldexpectforthistask.
6 RelatedWork
5.3 Overfitting
Both NLP tasks show evidence that the GP models Interest in model selection procedures for kernel-
withlargenumberofhyperparameters(SASSTK based methods has been growing in the last years.
inthecaseofEmotionAnalysisandthefreeαmod-
8SeealsoRasmussenandWilliams(2006,Chap. 5)foran
els in Quality Estimation) are overfitting the cor-
in-depthdiscussiononthisissue.
responding datasets. While the Bayesian formula- 9Wethanktheanonymousreviewersforthissuggestion.
One widely used approach for that is Multiple Ker- representations,previousworkfocusedonthevecto-
nel Learning (MKL) (Go¨nen and Alpaydın, 2011). rialinputsandappliedwell-knownkernelsforthese
MKL is based on the idea of using combinations inputs, e.g. the RBF kernel. As shown on §5.2, our
of kernels to model the data and developing algo- approachisorthogonaltothesepreviousones,since
rithms to tune the kernel coefficients. This is dif- kernelscanbeeasilycombinedindifferentways.
ferentfromourmethod,wherewefocusonlearning Itisimportanttonotethatwearenotthefirstones
thehyperparametersofasinglestructuralkernel. An to combine GPs with kernels on structured inputs.
approachsimilartoourswasproposedbyIgeletal. Driessens et al. (2006) employed a combination of
(2007). They combine oligo kernels (a kind of n- GPs and graph kernels for reinforcement learning.
gram kernel) with MKL, derive their gradients and However, unlike our approach, they did not attempt
optimize towards a kernel alignment metric. Com- modelselection,evaluatingonlyafewhyperparam-
pared to our approach, they restrict the length of etervaluesempirically.
the n-grams being considered, while we rely on dy-
7 Conclusions
namic programming to explore the whole substruc-
ture space. Also, their method does not take into
ThispaperdescribesaBayesianapproachforstruc-
accounttheunderlyinglearningalgorithm. Another
tural kernel learning, based on Gaussian Processes
recentapproachproposedformodelselectionisran-
foreasymodelselection. Experimentsapplyingour
dom search (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012). Like grid
models to synthetic data showed that it is possible
search, it has the drawback of not employing gra-
to learn structural kernel hyperparameters using a
dient information, as it is designed for any kind of
fairly small amount of data. Furthermore we ob-
hyperparameters(includingcategoricalones).
tained promising results in two NLP tasks, includ-
Structural kernels have been successfully em-
ing Quality Estimation, where we beat the state of
ployed in a number of NLP tasks. The original
the art. Finally, we showed how these rich parame-
SSTK proposed by Collins and Duffy (2001) was
terizationscanleadtomoreinterpretablekernels.
used to rerank the output of syntactic parsers. Re-
Beyond empirical improvements, an important
cently, this reranking idea was also applied to dis-
goal of this paper is to present a method that en-
course parsing (Joty and Moschitti, 2014). Other
ables new kernel developments through the exten-
tree kernel applications include Semantic Role La-
sionofthenumberofhyperparameters. Wefocused
belling(Moschittietal.,2008)andRelationExtrac-
on the Subset Tree Kernel, proposing an extension
tion (Plank and Moschitti, 2013). String kernels
and then deriving its gradients. This approach can
were mostly used in Text Classification (Lodhi et
beappliedtoanystructuralkernel,aslongasgradi-
al., 2002; Cancedda et al., 2003), while graph ker-
ents are available. It is our hope that this work will
nels have been used for recognizing Textual Entail-
serve as a starting point for future developments in
ment (Zanzotto and Dell’Arciprete, 2009). How-
theseresearchdirections.
ever, these previous works focused on frequentist
methods like SVM or voted perceptron while we