arXiv:0903.3246 [hep-th]
Lectures on holographic methods for
condensed matter physics
Sean A. Hartnoll
Jefferson Physical Laboratory, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
hartnoll@physics.harvard.edu
These notes are loosely based on lectures given at the CERN Winter School on
Supergravity, Strings and Gauge theories, February 2009 and at the IPM String School
in Tehran, April 2009. I have focused on a few concrete topics and also on addressing
questions that have arisen repeatedly. Background condensed matter physics material
is included as motivation and easy reference for the high energy physics community.
The discussion of holographic techniques progresses from equilibrium, to transport and
to superconductivity.
3v6423.3090:viXra
1 Why holographic methods for condensed matter? 2
1.1 Why condensed matter? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Quantum criticality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2.1 Example: The Wilson-Fisher fixed point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.2.2 Example: Spinons and emergent photons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.2.3 Connection to nonconventional superconductors. . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2 Applied AdS/CFT methodology 13
2.1 Geometries for scale invariant theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1.1 Aside: So what is z in the real world? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2 Finite temperature at equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.3 Finite chemical potential and magnetic field at equilibrium . . . . . . . . . 26
2.4 Relevant operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.5 Expectation values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2.6 Dissipative dynamics close to equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
2.7 Example: How to compute electrical and thermal conductivities . . . . . . . 39
2.8 Comparison to experiments in graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
3 The physics of spectral functions 46
3.1 Relation to two point functions and symmetry properties . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.2 Causality and vacuum stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.3 Spectral density and positivity of dissipation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.4 Quantum critical dynamics with particle-hole symmetry . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.5 Quantum critical transport with a net charge and magnetic field . . . . . . 53
3.6 A simple treatment of impurities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4 Holographic superconductivity 60
4.1 What is a superconductor? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.2 Minimal ingredients for a holographic superconductor . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.3 Superconducting phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.3.1 Condensate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.3.2 Conductivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.3.3 Magnetic fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5 Potential and limitations of the holographic approach 73
1 Why holographic methods for condensed matter?
1.1 Why condensed matter?
Why, on the eve of the LHC, should high energy and gravitational theorists be thinking
about phenomena that occur at energy scales many orders of magnitude below their usual
bandwidth? Three types of answer come to mind.
Firstly, the AdS/CFT correspondence [1] is a unique approach to strongly coupled field
theoriesinwhichcertainquestionsbecomecomputationallytractableandconceptuallymore
transparent. Incondensedmatterphysicstherearemanystronglycoupledsystemsthatcan
be engineered and studied in detail in laboratories. Some of these systems are of significant
technological interest. Observations in materials involving strongly correlated electrons
are challenging traditional condensed matter paradigms that were based around weakly
interacting quasiparticles and the theory of symmetry breaking [2]. It seems reasonable to
hope, therefore, that the AdS/CFT correspondence may be able to offer insight into some
of these nonconventional materials.
Secondly, condensed matter systems may offer an arena in which many of the fascinat-
ing concepts of high energy theory can be experimentally realised. The standard model
Lagrangian and its presumptive completion are unique in our universe. There will or will
not be supersymmetry. There will or will not be a conformal sector. And so on. In con-
densed matter physics there are many effective Hamiltonians. Furthermore, an increasing
number of Hamiltonians may be engineered using, for instance, optical lattices [3]. As well
asnovelrealisationsoftheoreticalideas, ultimatelyonemighthopetoengineeranemergent
field theory with a known AdS dual, thus leading to experimental AdS/CFT (and reversing
the usual relationship between string theory and the standard model).
Thirdly, and more philosophically, the AdS/CFT correspondence allows a somewhat
rearranged view of nature in which the traditional classification of fields of physics by
energy scale is less important. If a quantum gravity theory can be dual to a theory with
many features in common with quantum critical electrons, the question of which is more
‘fundamental’ is not a meaningful question. Instead, the emphasis is on concepts that have
meaning on both sides of the duality. This view has practical consequences. For instance,
seeking a dual description of superconductivity one realises that there might be loopholes
in black hole ‘no-hair’ theorems and one is led to new types of black hole solutions.
These lectures will be about the first type of answer. We shall explore the extent to
which the AdS/CFT correspondence can model condensed matter phenomena.
1.2 Quantum criticality
Although quantum critical systems are certainly not the only condensed matter systems to
which holographic techniques might usefully be applied, they are a promising and natural
place to start. Quantum critical points have a spacetime scale invariance that provides
a strong kinematic connection to the simplest versions of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
Furthermore, a lack of weakly coupled quasiparticles often makes quantum critical theories
difficult to study using traditional methods. Outside of AdS/CFT there are no models
of strongly coupled quantum criticality in 2+1 dimensions in which analytic results for
processes such as transport can be obtained.1
Quantum critical theories arise at continuous phase transitions at zero temperature. A
zero temperature phase transition is a nonanalyticity in the ground state of an (infinite)
system as a function of some parameter such as pressure of applied magnetic field. The
quantumcriticalpointmayormaynotbethezerotemperaturelimitofafinitetemperature
phase transition. Note in particular that the Coleman-Mermin-Wagner-Hohenberg theorem
[4] prevents spontaneous breaking of a continuous symmetry in 2+1 dimensions at finite
temperature, but allows a zero temperature phase transition. In such cases the quantum
phase transition becomes a crossover at finite temperature.2
Typically, as the continuous quantum critical point is approached, the energy of fluctu-
ations about the ground state (the ‘mass gap’) vanishes and the coherence length (or other
characteristic lengthscale) diverges with specific scaling properties. In a generic nonrela-
tivistic theory, these two scalings (energy and distance) need not be inversely related, as we
will discuss in detail below. The quantum critical theory itself is scale invariant.
Quantumcriticalpointscandominateregionsofthephasediagramawayfromthepoint
atwhichtheenergygapvanishes. Forinstance, inregionswherethedeformationawayfrom
criticality due to an energy scale ∆ is less important than the deformation due to a finite
temperature T, i.e. ∆ < T, then the system should be described by the finite temperature
quantumcriticaltheory. Thisobservationleadstothecounterintuitivefactthattheimprint
of the zero temperature critical point grows as temperature is increased. This phenomenon
is illustrated in figure 1.
To get a feel for quantum critical physics and its relevance, we now discuss several
1An example of a solvable 1+1 dimensional model with a quantum critical point is the Ising model in a
transverse magnetic field, see e.g. chapter 4 of [5].
2Incertain2+1dimensionalsystemsthequantumcriticalpointcanconnectontoaBerezinksy-Kosterlitz-
Thouless transition at finite temperature. Also, strictly infinite N evades the theorem as fluctuations are
suppressed.
Figure 1: Typical temperature and coupling phase diagram near a quantum critical point.
The two low temperature phases are separated by a region described by a scale-invariant
theory at finite temperature. The solid line denotes a possible Kosterlitz-Thouless transi-
tion. Figure taken from reference [6].
examplesofsystemsthatdisplayquantumcriticality. Thesewillincludebothlatticemodels
and experimental setups. Our discussion will be little more than an overview – the reader
is encouraged to follow up the references for details. We shall focus on 2+1 dimensions,
as we often will throughout these lectures. In several cases we will explicitly write down
an action for the quantum critical theory. Typically the critical theory is strongly coupled
and so the action is not directly useful for the analytic computation of many quantities
of interest. Even in a large N or (for instance) d = 4 − (cid:15) expansion, which effectively
make the fixed point perturbatively accessible, time dependent processes, such as charge
transport, are not easy to compute. This will be one important motivation for turning
to the AdS/CFT correspondence. The correspondence will give model theories that share
feature of the quantum critical theories of physical interest, but which are amenable to
analytic computations while remaining strongly coupled.
1.2.1 Example: The Wilson-Fisher fixed point
Let Φ be an N dimensional vector. The theory described by the action
(cid:90) (cid:16) (cid:17)
becomes quantum critical as r → r (in mean field theory r = 0 but the value gets
renormalised) and is known as the Wilson-Fisher fixed point. At finite N the relevant
coupling u flows to large values and the critical theory is strongly coupled. The derivative
in (1) is the Lorentzian 3-derivative (i.e. signature (–,+,+)) and we have set a velocity
v = 1. This will generally not be the speed of light.
We now briefly summarise two lattice models in which the theory (1) describes the
vicinity of a quantum critical point, as reviewed in [6, 5].
The first model is an insulating quantum magnet. Consider spin half degrees of freedom
S living on a square lattice with the action
H = J S ·S , (2)
(cid:104)ij(cid:105)
where (cid:104)ij(cid:105) denotes nearest neighbour interactions and we will consider antiferromagnets,
i.e. J > 0. Now choose the couplings J to take one of two values, J or J/g as shown in
figure 2. The parameter g takes values in the range [1,∞).
Figure 2: At large g, the dashed couplings are weaker (J/g) than the solid ones (J). This
favours pairing into spin singlet dimers as shown. Figure taken from reference [6].
The ground state of the model (2) is very different in the two limits g → 1 and g → ∞.
At g = 1 all couplings between spins are equal, this is the isotropic antiferromagnetic
Heisenberg model, and the ground state has N´eel order characterised by
where (−1)i alternates in value between adjacent lattice sites. We can na¨ıvely picture this
state as the classical ground state in which neighbouring spins are anti-alligned. Here Φ
is a three component vector. The low energy excitations about this ordered state are spin
waves described by the action (1) with N = 3 and Φ2 fixed to a finite value. Spin rotation
symmetry is broken in this phase.
In the limit of large g, in contrast, the ground state is given by decoupled dimers. That
is, each pair of neighbouring spins with a coupling J (rather than J/g) between them forms
aspinsinglet. Atfinitebutlargeg,thelowenergyexcitationsaretriplons. Thesearemodes
in which one of the spin singlet pairs is excited to a triplet state. The triplons have three
polarisations and are again described by the action (1) with N = 3 but about a vacuum
with Φ = 0.
These two limits suggest that the low energy dynamics of the coupled-dimer antiferro-
magnet (2) is captured by the action (1) across its phase diagram and that there will be a
quantum critical point at an intermediate value of g described by the N = 3 Wilson-Fisher
fixed point theory. This indeed appears to be the case, with g ≈ 1.91 found numerically.
For further details and references, including applications of this model to the compound
TlCuCl , see [6].
A second lattice model realising the Wilson-Fisher fixed point is the boson Hubbard
model with filling fraction one (i.e. with the same number of bosons as lattice sites). This
model describes bosons b on a square lattice with Hamiltonian
H = −t (cid:88)(cid:16) b†b +b†b (cid:17) +U (cid:88) n (n −1) . (4)
BH i j j i i i
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) i
Here n = b†b is the site occupation number. The total boson number commutes with the
Hamiltonianandweareconsideringthecaseinwhichthenumberofbosonisconstrainedto
equal the number of lattice sites (canonical ensemble). The first term in (4) allows hopping
between adjacent sites while the second is an on-site repulsive interaction between bosons.
The −1 in the last term ensures there is no penalty for single occupancy. The Hamiltonian
has a U(1) = SO(2) symmetry: b → eiφb .
Once again, the ground state is very different in two limits. When U/t → ∞ the sites
decouple, there is one boson per site and no fluctuations. A mean field analysis [5] is then
sufficient to determine that the ground state has (cid:104)b (cid:105) = 0. In the opposite limit, U/t → 0
the model becomes quadratic in the b and can be solved exactly. Passing to a grand
canonical ensemble, the (necessarily nonzero) chemical potential is easily seen to imply that
the ground state now has a condensate (cid:104)b (cid:105) =(cid:54) 0.
The two limits considered suggest that there is a superfluid-insulator transition at an
intermediate value of U/t. This is indeed the case. The U(1) symmetry is spontaneously
brokenononesideofthetransitionandthecriticaltheoryisgivenintermsoftheGinzburg-
Landau order parameter (cid:104)b (cid:105) which we can rewrite as a two-component vector Φ. The
symmetries of the problem are then almost enough to conclude that the theory at the
transition is the Wilson-Fisher fixed point (1) with N = 2. In fact, having integer filling is
necessary to nontrivially eliminate a term in the quantum critical action that is first order
in time derivatives: more details and references can be found in [5], chapter 10, the original
work is [7]. This model arises in the description of bosonic atoms in optical lattices, see e.g.
[8] for a review.
1.2.2 Example: Spinons and emergent photons
Let A be an (emergent 2+1 dimensional) photon and z a complex spinor described by
(cid:90) (cid:18) (cid:19)
where F = dA. As before, derivatives are Lorentzian and we have set a velocity to one.
This theory becomes quantum critical as r → r . In fact, in the phase r < r , this theory
is equivalent to our previous example (1), with N = 3, via the mapping
where σ are the Pauli matrices. The photon must be introduced to gauge the phase redun-
dancy of the z parametrisation and the Maxwell term is generated upon renormalisation.
However, the change to spinon and photon variables leads to an inequivalent path integral.
The new formulation turns out to allow the theory to capture different quantum critical
points that mediate transitions between two distinct ordered phases (i.e. a different sym-
metry is broken on each side of the transition). Generically second order phase transitions
separate an ordered and a disordered phase and the critical theory describes fluctuations of
the order parameter. This was the case for the examples we discussed in the previous sub-
section. At ‘deconfined’ quantum critical points, this ‘Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson paradigm’
does not hold and instead the quantum critical theory is described in terms of degrees of
freedom that are not present in either of the ordered phases [9, 10, 6].
Wewillnowbrieflydiscusstwodistinctlatticemodelsinwhichthespinon-photonaction
(5) describes the system at quantum criticality, closely following [6].
The first model is again an insulating quantum magnet. Similarly to the previous
subsection, we wish to induce a phase transition from a N´eel ordered antiferromagnetic
phase to a phase in which the spin rotation symmetry is unbroken. The difference will be
that we will start with a model which is invariant under the Z rotational symmetry of
a square lattice. This symmetry will be spontaneously broken in the spin singlet phase,
leading to a ‘valence-bond solid’ (VBS) state.
Consider the square lattice spin half model
(cid:88) (cid:0)
1(cid:1)(cid:0)
VBS i j i j 4 k l 4
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) (cid:104)ijkl(cid:105)
with J,Q > 0 and (cid:104)ijkl(cid:105) denotes the sites on a plaquette. Recall that S ·S = −3/4 in a
spin singlet state and S ·S = 1/4 in a spin one state. The second term in the Hamiltonian
(7) therefore favours states in which the four spins on a plaquette pair up into two spin
singlets. The Hamiltonian does not pick out any particular pair of adjacent spins in the
plaquette, however, and is therefore Z invariant.
The ground states in differing limits are characterised as follows. In the limit Q/J → 0,
we are once again back at the isotropic Heisenberg antiferromagnet and the ground state
will have N´eel order (3). Spin wave fluctuations of Φ can be expressed in terms of the
spinon variables via (6), leading to the action (5) in a phase with (cid:104)z(cid:105) (cid:54)= 0. The manifest
U(1) symmetry of the action (5) is Higgsed in this phase.
As Q/J → ∞ the model develops an expectation value for the operator
This is called VBS order. The operator Ψ can be thought of as measuring the tendency of
neighbouring spins to pair into singlets. It is not obvious that Ψ will condense, although
it is plausible given the second term in (7). The precise form of (8) is chosen so that
Ψ transforms by a phase under Z lattice rotations. Therefore a condensate (cid:104)Ψ(cid:105) (cid:54)= 0
spontaneously breaks lattice rotation symmetry while preserving spin rotation symmetry.
An obvious excited state above the VBS ground state is when a singlet breaks into a pair of
independent spin half modes that can now move freely, these are the spinons z in (5). Note
that spinons did not exist in the coupled dimer model of the previous subsection because
thelocationsofthedimersingletswerefixed; thusthespinhalvescouldnotmovefreelyand
instead one had triplon excitations. The gauge boson A can be thought of in the following
way.3 Firstly recall that in 2+1 dimensions we can dualise A to a scalar ζ
(cid:63) F = dζ. (9)
3Thegaugebosoncanbedirectlyrelatedtotherelativephasesofthedifferentspinpairingsintheground
state wavefunction. This connection reveals that the spinons are charged. The gauge field is a spin singlet
excitation.
This operation reveals a ‘dual’ global U(1) symmetry ζ → ζ + δζ. This symmetry is to
be identified with the space rotational symmetry that is spontaneously broken in the VBS
phase. The operator Ψ can then be identified with the ‘monopole operator’
wheresquiggledenotesthepresenceofnon-universalfactorsthatdependonthemicroscopic
model. This identification is determined by matching the transformation under the U(1)
shift symmetry.
Now, the rotation symmetry of the lattice model (7) was Z , not U(1). The breaking
U(1) → Z can be achieved by adding terms to the action (5), such as
∆S = d3xλcos . (11)
Thisinteraction, describingtheinsertionofmonopoledefects, willmanifestlygivetheGold-
stone boson ζ a mass. The claim of [9, 10] is that as the critical point is approached from
theVBSphase, termslike(11)becomeirrelevant, theZ symmetryisenhancedtoU(1)and
the Goldstone boson becomes a massless, quantum critical, excitation. This is the emergent
gauge field at the quantum critical point.
The upshot of the preceding (necessarily superficial) discussions is that the action (5)
describes the quantum critical point separating phases with N´eel and VBS order, respec-
tively. The description is in terms of gapless spinons and a photon which are not the order
parameters of either phase. See [6] for further details and references on this model, and to
referencesforexperimentalsystemsshowingVBSorder,includingtheunderdopedcuprates.
We should also note that the ‘particle-vortex duality’ underlying the deconfined criticality
we are describing is formally very similar to the mirror symmetry of supersymmetric 2+1
dimensional gauge theories [11].
A second lattice model realising the critical theory (5) is a boson Hubbard-like model
with filling fraction 1, i.e. with half as many bosons as lattice sites. We will be very brief,
for details and references see [6]. With a non-integer filling fraction it is more difficult to
obtain insulating phases, that is, to suppress fluctuations into empty neighbouring sites,
and so one needs to supplement the boson Hubbard Hamiltonian (4) with off-site repulsive
interactions such as Λ n n , with Λ > 0. In the hard-core boson limit, in which
(cid:104)ij(cid:105) ij i j ij
double occupancy of sites is forbidden, there is a direct map between the Hilbert space
of the half filled boson model and the antiferromagnetic models we have considered: One
simply maps vacant sites to spin up and filled sites to spin down. This shows that hard-
core boson models admit (under this map) states with both N´eel and VBS order. The
superfluid phase maps onto a N´eel ordered phase. Tuning the relative strength of hopping
and repulsive interactions, these models can exhibit superfluid/N´eel to VBS transitions in
the same universality class as the antiferromagnetic lattice models we have just discussed.
1.2.3 Connection to nonconventional superconductors
The phenomenology of conventional superconductors is extremely well explained by BCS
theory and its extensions, see e.g. [12]. In these theories a charged fermion bilinear oper-
ator condenses due to an attractive interaction between fermionic quasiparticles (dressed
electrons) that becomes strong at low energies [13]. These bilinears are called Cooper pairs
and in BCS theory the attractive interaction is mediated by phonons (lattice vibrations).
It is now clear that there exist superconductors in nature that are not described by BCS
theory. There are several meanings that ‘non-BCS’ might have. One is that the attractive
interaction between the fermionic quasiparticles is not due to phonons. An example is
a spin-spin interaction mediated by, for instance, ‘paramagnons’. Another, more radical,
departure from BCS theory would be if the normal state of the system, at temperatures
just above the onset of superconductivity, were inherently strongly interacting and did not
admit a weakly interacting quasiparticle description at all. Natural circumstances under
which this latter possibility might arise are if the onset of superconductivity occurs in the
vicinity of a quantum critical point. We will now discuss two classes of systems in which
superconductivityandquantumcriticalitymayoccurincloseproximity: the‘heavyfermion’
metals and (more speculatively) the cuprate ‘high-T ’ superconductors.
The heavy fermion metals are compounds in which the effective charge carrying quasi-
particle has a mass of the order of hundreds of times the bare (‘standard model’) electron
mass. The large mass arises due to the Kondo effect: hybridisation between conducting
electrons on the one hand and fixed strongly correlated electrons that behave as a lattice
of magnetic moments (the Kondo lattice) on the other. This setup can be described by the
model (e.g. [14])
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
H = t c† c +J S ·s + I S ·S . (12)
K.L. ij iα jα K i i ij i j
Here S is the fixed magnetic moment at the site i, c† creates a conduction electron at
the site i with spin α (i.e. spin up or down) and s is the spin operator for the conduction
electrons: s = c† σ c . The first term allows the conduction electrons to hop from site
tosite,thesecondtermistheKondoexchangeinteractionbetweenconductionandmagnetic
electrons and the third describes the magnetic interactions between the fixed electrons.
Thelast,magneticinteraction,terminthemodel(12)isoftheformthatwereviewedfor
insulating systems in the previous sections. We might expect therefore that heavy fermion
metals will exhibit quantum critical behaviour as the various couplings are tuned. This
is indeed the case: quantum critical points in heavy fermion metals have been extensively
studied, with detailed measurements of the onset of magnetic order and the associated
quantum critical scaling of various observables. The zero temperature phase transitions are
realised by tuning the pressure, external magnetic field or chemical composition (doping).
For a review see [15]. The dynamics of the quantum critical points is very rich in these
systems. As well as magnetic ordering one must take into account a crossover in which the
local moments become screened by the conduction electrons. See for instance [14, 15].
Usually magnetic order competes with superconductivity because there is a free energy
cost in screening the resulting magnetic field inside a superconductor. It might appear
surprising,therefore,thatseveralheavyfermionmetals,suchasCeIn andCePd Si [16,17],
are found to have the following phase diagram as a function of temperature and pressure.
Figure 3: Phase diagram of CePd Si as a function of temperature and pressure. The
bottom left phase is antiferromagnetically ordered whereas the bottom middle phase is
superconducting. Figure taken from reference [16].
In these materials superconductivity develops right at the edge of antiferromagnetic
order. Various properties of the materials are found to be consistent with a simple picture
of magnetically mediated superconductivity (see e.g. [16, 17]) in which there is an effective
interaction between two electronic quasiparticles
Here s,s(cid:48) are spins, g is a coupling and χ is the magnetic susceptibility. The susceptibility
becomes large at the onset of antiferromagnetism. When s and s(cid:48) form a singlet it turns
out that (13) is repulsive near the origin but then oscillates in sign with a period of order
the lattice spacing. Thus there is an attractive interaction between the quasiparticles when
a finite distance apart. This forces the resulting ‘Cooper pair’ operator to have a nonzero
angular momentum ((cid:96) = 2), leading to a d-wave superconductor, as is observed.
The interaction (13) only makes sense if there are weakly interacting quasiparticles.
This picture seems to work at some level for the materials at hand. However, given the
nearby quantum critical point and the associated non-Fermi liquid behaviour, observed in
many heavy fermion compounds, it might be instructive to have a more nonperturbative
approach [17].
The cuprate high-T superconductors typically have the following phase diagram as a
function of temperature and hole doping (that is, reducing the number of conducting elec-
tronsperCuatominthecopperoxideplanesbychemicalsubstitution, e.g. La Sr CuO )
Figure 4: Schematic temperature and hole doping phase diagram for a high-T cuprate.
There are antiferromagnetic and a superconducting ordered phases. Figure taken from [18].
This phase diagram is obviously similar to that of the heavy fermion compounds in
figure 3. One important difference is that the antiferromagnetic phase is separated from
the superconducting dome by the still mysterious ‘pseudogap’ region. The precise role of
criticalmagneticfluctuationsinmediatingsuperconductivityinthesematerialsiscontested,
althoughattheveryleastitcorrectlyanticipatedthed-wavenatureoftheCooperpairs[19].
The similarity of phase diagrams along with the many observed non-Fermi liquid properties
of the pseudogap region may suggest that, as with the heavy fermion metals, there is
a quantum critical point beneath the superconducting dome in the high-T compounds.
Some, as yet inconclusive, evidence for such a quantum critical point is reviewed in [20].
Even if there is a quantum phase transition under the dome, one then has to confirm
that it is continuous and important for the dynamics of the pseudogap region and the
superconducting instability more generally.
It is also possible that there are distinct quantum phase transitions located in an ex-
tended phase diagram (in which one adds a new axis to figure 4 that may or may not be
accessible experimentally) that nevertheless influence pseudogap physics. See figure 10 in
[6]. Evidence for this picture includes experimental indications of a ‘stripped’ insulating
phase at hole doping x = 1 in the cuprates. Stripes arise in the insulating VBS phases
that we discussed in previous sections, in which the charge density is spatially inhomoge-
neous and the lattice rotation symmetry is broken. If one imagines the holes pairing to
form bosons, then, as we briefly mentioned above, such a VBS state could emerge from a
superfluid-insulator transition in a boson Hubbard-type model with filling fraction f = 1 .
For further experimental and theoretical references see [6].
The upshot of the above discussions is that quantum critical points are certainly present
in heavy fermion superconductors and may be present in the high temperature cuprate
superconductors. It is possible that in these materials quantum critical physics has a role
to play in understanding the onset of superconductivity.
2 Applied AdS/CFT methodology
2.1 Geometries for scale invariant theories
There many different paths to the AdS/CFT correspondence. Rather than motivate or
support the correspondence at this point (see e.g. [21]) let us take the correspondence as
given and ask what it achieves.
Firstly, the AdS/CFT correspondence makes manifest the semiclassical nature of the
large N limit in certain gauge theories. It allows us to compute field theory quantities at
largeN usingsaddlepointmethods.4 Theremarkablefactisthattheactionfunctionalthat
we have to use, and the corresponding classical saddles, appear completely unrelated to the
gauge theory degrees of freedom. We are instructed to expand around classical solutions
to a ‘dual’ gravitational theory with at least one more spatial dimension than the original
gauge theory. The first principles emergence of spacetime geometry from field theory is
far from understood (preliminary ideas can be found in, for instance, [23]). In the applied
AdS/CFT business we shall take this, extremely useful, phenomenon for granted.
Secondly, the AdS/CFT correspondence geometrises the field theory energy scale. The
fact that the renormalisation group is expressed in terms of differential equations hints at
a notion of locality in energy scale. In the dual gravitational description arising in the
AdS/CFT framework, the energy scale is treated geometrically on an equal footing to the
spatialdirectionsofthefieldtheory. Thisisthe‘extra’spatialdimensionofthegravitational
theory, and allows scale dependent phenomena such as confinement and temperature to be
conceptualised in new ways.
The absolute minimal structure that we need for an applicable AdS/CFT duality will
therefore be the following correspondence:
Large N gauge theory Classical gravitational theory
d spacetime dimensions d+1 spacetime dimensions.
There is much more structure than this in fully fledged examples of the AdS/CFT corre-
spondence. These lectures will concentrate instead on the minimal properties necessary for
the whole construction to be possible at all. The logic and hope is that these will be the
mostrobustaspectsofthecorrespondenceandthereforeagoodstartingpointforcomparing
with real world systems.
In a Wilsonian approach to field theory, the theory is (most commonly) defined either
at an ultraviolet cutoff or via an ultraviolet fixed point which renders the theory valid at
all scales. A fixed point is the simplest place to start for the AdS/CFT correspondence. At
the fixed point itself, the theory is scale invariant. The scaling symmetry need not act the
same way on space (momentum) and time (energy). Assuming spatial isotropy, in general
we can have the scaling action
t → λzt, (cid:126)x → λ(cid:126)x. (15)
4 This has been a long term goal for gauge field theories. For vector field theories, large N limits are
often soluble directly within field theory. Gauge theories, in contrast, have more complicated interactions,
as manifested in the necessity of the ’t Hooft double line notation to count the N dependence of Feynman
diagrams, see e.g. [22].
Here z is called the dynamical critical exponent, first introduced as an anisotropic space
andtimescalingoftherenormalisationgroupin[24]. Aprioriz cantakeanypositivevalue.
Atthefixedpointthesymmetryalgebraofthefieldtheorywillcontainthegeneratorsof
rotations{M },translations{P },timetranslationsH anddilatationsD. Thesegenerators
satisfy the standard commutation relations for {M ,P ,H} together with the action of
dilatations
[D,M ] = 0, [D,P ] = iP , [D,H] = izH. (16)
ThissymmetryalgebraissometimescalledaLifshitzalgebra,asitgeneralisesthesymmetry
of Lifshitz fixed points, which have z = 2 and describe tricritical points in which one nearby
phase is inhomogeneous (see e.g. [25]), to general z.
TheAdS/CFTlogicsuggeststhatwelookforaspacetimemetricinonehigherdimension
than the field theory in which these symmetries are realised geometrically. One is lead to
the following metric
(cid:18) dt2 dxidxi dr2(cid:19)
ds2 = L2 − + + . (17)
The Killing vectors generating the algebra are
ij j i i i t t i r
The metric (17) was first written down in [26]. The claim of the AdS/CFT correspondence
is that the physics of a strongly coupled scale invariant theory is captured in the large N
limit by classical dynamics about the background metric (17). At this point we have said
nothingaboutthetwodualtheoriesinquestion,beyondthefactthatthe‘bulk’gravitational
dynamics includes a metric g . The metric (17) is robust: independently of the dynamics
of the theory, the only effect of bulk quantum corrections (i.e. 1/N corrections) are to
renormalise the values of the radius L and the dynamical critical exponent z [27].
Various comments should be made about the background (17) . All curvature invariants
are constant, with a curvature scale 1/L. However, the metrics all have pp curvature
singularities at the ‘horizon’ at r → ∞, unless z = 1. Recall that a pp singularity means
thatthetidalforcesdivergeinaparallelpropagatedorthonormalframe.5 Thesearegenuine
singularities, as infalling observers are not able to continue through the r = ∞ surface
(which is reached in a finite proper time). They are rather mild null singularities, however,
and likely to be resolved at finite temperature and to be acceptable within a string theory
5Specifically, take the radially ingoing null geodesic with tangent T = r2z∂ + r1+z∂ . A parallely
propagatednull-orthonormalframeiscompletedwiththevectorsN =∂ −r1−z∂ andX =∂ . Thetidal
force R TµXνTρXσ =(z−1)r2z diverges as r→∞ unless z=1.
framework, cf. [28]. Indeed they may be indicative of interesting physics. However, it does
mean that one should be careful in using these spaces for z (cid:54)= 1 and that a global geodesic
completion of the space does not exist.
The case z = 1 is nothing other than Anti-de Sitter space. In this case the symmetry
of the spacetime, and hence of the dual scale-invariant theory is substantially enhanced.
Besides rotations, spacetime translations and dilatations, the theory enjoys Lorentz boost
symmetryandspecialconformalsymmetries. Aswellasbeingregular, Anti-deSitterspace-
timehasthevirtueofbeingasolutiontoasimpled+1dimensionaltheoryofgravity,namely
general relativity with a negative cosmological constant
1 (cid:90) √ (cid:18) d(d−1) (cid:19)
S = dd+1x −g R+ . (19)
Partly for this reason, much of these lectures will use examples with z = 1. Lifshitz
invariant spacetimes with z (cid:54)= 1 can also be obtained from more complicated actions (see
e.g. [26, 27, 29]).
For z > 1 these spaces are candidate duals to nonrelativistic field theories. Besides the
absence of Lorentz boost symmetry, this fact is reflected in their causal structure. As we
move towards the ‘boundary’ r = 0 (the boundary is in the direction in which g diverges
and should more properly be thought of as a conformal boundary, as the spacetime itself is
infinite in extent), the metric component g diverges faster than g . This means that the
lightcones are flattening out and so the effective speed of light is diverging, as one would
expect for a nonrelativistic theory. The technical expression of this fact is that arbitrarily
near to the boundary, the spacetime is not causally distinguishing. That is to say, at r → 0
distinct spatial points x (cid:54)= y at some time t = t have identical causal futures and pasts.
We have seen how the Poincar´e group can emerge geometrically at the special value of
z = 1 (together with its additional conformal symmetries). A different important structure
that can be added to the basic algebra of rotations and space and time translations are
Galilean boosts. The Galilean boosts are vectors K that in classical mechanics generate
the transformation {x → x +v t,t → t} and satisfy the algebra
ij k ik j jk i j i i i
Inquantummechanics, however, ithasbeenarguedthatphysicallyrelevantsystemsrequire
a central extension of this algebra [30]6
[P ,K ] = 0 (cid:32) [P ,K ] = −iδ N . (21)
j i j i ij
6More precisely, [30] show that irreducible representations of the Galilean algebra in which translations
and boosts commute do not admit states with definite position or velocity. We will see shortly that a dual
For instance, in the action of the Galilean group on the Schr¨odinger equation for a free
particle, N = m is the mass. In general N can be interpreted as a number operator that
counts particles with a certain fixed mass. The operator N commutes with the whole
Galilean algebra (in particular [H,N] = 0), and therefore the system has a conserved
particle number.
The Galilean algebra can be extended to include an action of dilatations. As well as
the operations of equation (16) above, dilatations act on the Galilean boosts and particle
These relations are determined by all the previous commutation relations considered to-
getherwiththeJacobiidentity. Thefinalsymmetryalgebra,involving{M ,P ,H,D,K ,N}
isanalgebraforaGalileanandscaleinvariantfieldtheory. ItisoftencalledtheSchr¨odinger
algebra, asitgeneralisesthesymmetryoftheSchr¨odingerequationforafreeparticle, which
has z = 2 [32, 33]. We should note that the case z = 2 allows for an extra ‘special confor-
mal’ generator to be added to the algebra. A modern field theoretic discussion of the z = 2
Schr¨odinger algebra can be found in [34] .
IfwewishtostudystronglycoupledGalilean-invariantconformalfieldtheoriesusingthe
AdS/CFT correspondence we need to realise the Schr¨odinger algebra geometrically. The
extrageneratorsN andK , ontopoftheLifshitzalgebra, areproblematic. Itisnotpossible
to arrange for the whole algebra of a d dimensional Schr¨odinger invariant field theory to act
as the isometries of a d+1 dimensional spacetime. This lead [35, 36] to push the rules of
AdS/CFT slightly and consider a candidate dual spacetime in d+2 dimensions, namely:
(cid:18) dt2 2dtdξ dxidxi dr2(cid:19)
r2z r2 r2 r2
As with the Lifshitz symmetry metric (17), it was shown in [27] that 1/N corrections can
only renormalise the values of z and L. The generators of the Schr¨odinger algebra are
geometrically given by
i i ξ ξ t i ξ r
while M , P and H are the same as in equation (18). Note that while the Lifshitz met-
ric (17) was time reversal invariant (t → −t), the Schro¨dinger metric (23) is not. The
Schr¨odinger metric for z = 2 was first embedded into string theory in [37, 38, 39].
geometric realisation of the Galilean algebra automatically includes a number operator symmetry. The
conclusion of [30] however may be too strong, see e.g. [31] for a ‘massless’ (non-extended) Galilean algebra
that may be of physical interest.
We see in (23) and (24) that the extra extra dimension of the spacetime (i.e. beyond
the holographic direction of scale) is directly related to the particle number N. The particle
number is given by the momentum in the ξ direction. It is common in the AdS/CFT corre-
spondence for global symmetries in field theory to appear in this way as extra dimensions
in the gravitational dual. What is unusual in the present case is firstly that the ξ direction
is null, ||∂ ||2 = 0, and secondly that the N generator arises in the commutator of two
spacetime symmetries.
It is clear from the commutator of dilatations with the number operator (22) that z = 2
isspecial. Atthisvalueofthedynamicalcriticalexponent,thedilatationscommutewiththe
numberoperator. Henceoperatorsinthealgebracanbesimultaneouslylabelledbyascaling
dimension and a particle number. The commutator (22) is a mathematical expression of
the fact that mass is dimensionless at z = 2 (having already set (cid:126) = 1), which is why the
free Schr¨odinger equation can be scale invariant with this particular time and space scaling.
In many systems of physical interest the spectrum of the particle number operator (the
spectrum of masses) is quantised. To implement this fact in the bulk geometry we need to
periodically identify the ξ direction
This identification introduces a mass scale 1/L . We can see from (24) that dilatations do
notpreservethelengthL unlessz = 2andhencearenolongerisometriesofthebackground.
This is a reflection of exactly the same phenomenon we noted in the previous paragraph:
mass is only dimensionless if z = 2. The conclusion is that we cannot have a scale invariant
Galilean theory with a nontrivial discrete mass/particle number spectrum unless z = 2.
One must either dispense of scale invariance or discreteness of particle number.
A further complication with these backgrounds, relevant for all z, is that periodically
identifying a null circle is a potentially dangerous thing to do. This has been emphasised
in [39]. For instance, in a string theory embedding, strings winding the circle become light.
This concern may be less acute if one is thinking of the spacetime as primarily providing
a geometric realisation of scale invariant kinematics, as opposed to a precise string theory
dual of a particular field theory (i.e. if one is taking a more ‘phenomenological’ approach to
the AdS/CFT correspondence). The problem is also ameliorated by considering the theory
at a finite number density [39], which is indeed a physically sensible thing to do.
Themetric(23)hasLorentziansignatureforeithersignofthedt2 term. Thesignofthis
term has at least three physical consequences, however. Firstly, it seems that if the sign is
reversed with the orientation of ξ kept fixed (i.e. with a certain direction corresponding to
positive mass), then the space can become unstable to modes with a large particle number
[40]. Secondly, if g is taken to have a positive sign, opposite to (23), then the dual theory
may no longer be causally non-relativistic. This is because the dtdξ term in (23) grows at
the same rate as the dxidxi term as we go towards the boundary r → 0; we need the dt2
term to be negative and large in order for the lightcones to flatten.7 Finally, if z (cid:54)= 2 and
z (cid:54)= 1, changing the sign of this term can lead to geodesic incompleteness at the boundary
r → 0 and pp singularities in the spacetime [40].
Despite this lengthly introduction to various possible gravity duals for general dynam-
ical critical exponents, in the rest of these lectures we will focus on the ‘relativistic’ case
z = 1. We will do this firstly because the holographic description of the other cases is
still under development at the time of writing; conceptual uncertainties remain and basic
computations remain to be done. Secondly, the z = 1 case admits a rather universal and
minimal gravitational description, in terms of d+1 dimensional Einstein gravity (19).
2.1.1 Aside: So what is z in the real world?
Beforelistingthevaluesofthedynamicalcriticalexponentz insomeexamplequantumcrit-
ical systems, we should emphasise one physical consequence of the value of z: It determines
the critical dimension of interactions. For simplicity we can consider an N component vec-
tor Φ with a (Φ2)2 interaction. See e.g. [42] for a discussion of gauge theories with gauge
group of rank N. In this subsection we will work in Euclidean time τ, as the real time
description of actions which are non-analytic in frequencies is subtle. All frequencies that
appear in this subsection are similarly Euclidean frequencies.
Recall that the renormalisation group maps field theories to field theories by a two step
process. StartwithafieldtheorywithUVcutoffΛonbothmomentaandenergies. Suppose
for instance we had a free field theory of the form
(cid:90) {Λ,Λ} dd−1kdω (cid:16) (cid:17)
For z = 2 one can also have −iω instead of |ω|. Firstly one integrates out modes with
momenta and energies between some lower cutoff Λ(cid:48) and the original cutoff Λ. In this
free theory the integration does not generate any new interactions. With the benefit of
7In fact, the ‘nonrelativistic’ (nondistinguishing) causality properties of (23) are more dramatic than in
the Lifshitz spacetime (17). With the sign of g as in (23) all points at some fixed t = t share the same
causal future and past! [37, 41]
hindsight, we will lower the position and momentum cutoffs by different amounts:
for some l > 0. The action becomes
The second step is to rescale the momenta, energies and field Φ in order to restore the
action to its original form with a rescaled value of the ‘coupling’ r. If we let
then the action becomes
(cid:90) {Λ,Λ} dd−1k(cid:48)dω(cid:48) (cid:16) (cid:17)
What this exercise shows us is that the theory can be renormalised to lower energies and
momenta by the scalings (29). Now suppose we add a quartic interaction
int.
We would like to know whether this interaction becomes stronger or weaker as we flow
to lower energies. From (29), noting that a Fourier transform implies that Φ(cid:48)(τ(cid:48),x(cid:48)) =
e(z+d−3)l/2Φ(τ,x), we have that u → u(cid:48) with
It follows that the coupling u is irrelevant (becomes weaker at low energies) if
d > d = 5−z. (33)
Setting z = 1 we recover the well known result that the critical spacetime dimension of
relativistic Φ4 theory is d = 4. However if z > 1, we see that the critical dimension is
lowered. Thus for instance if we are interested in d = 2+1 dimensional theories we see
that the interaction is irrelevant if z = 3 and marginal if z = 2. This fact was first noted
in [24] and implies that ‘nonrelativistic’ (z > 1) quantum critical points are increasingly
amenable to a perturbative treatment. This observation provides another motivation for
concentrating on z = 1 critical points in these lectures; in 2+1 dimensions and in this class
of models, at least, they are the most difficult to study by other means!
We now give a sampling of values of z that arise in models of physical interest:
(cid:63) z = 1: All of the explicit examples we gave in sections 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 had z = 1.
Recall that these included N´eel to VBS order transitions in insulating quantum magnets
and superfluid to insulating transitions in boson Hubbard models with integer filling. We
noted that these transitions were of interest for physical systems including the cuprate
superconductorsandatomsinopticallattices.8 Forsomemoretheoreticalandexperimental
examples, see [43].
(cid:63)z = 2: An example of a transition with z = 2 is the onset of antiferromagnetism in
clean ‘itinerant’ (as opposed to localised) fermion systems. For details see chapter 12 of [5],
as we will be brief. These transitions are relevant for the quantum critical physics of the
heavy fermion metals that we discussed in section 1.2.3 above. One starts with a model for
magnetically interacting itinerant spin half fermions c†:
(cid:90) dd−1k 1 (cid:90)
where µ is the chemical potential, (cid:15)(k) the free quasiparticle energy, J(x−x(cid:48)) an effective
exchangeinteractionands(x) = c†(x)σ c (x)isthespinofthequasiparticle. Neartheon-
set of antiferromagnetism one derives an effective action for a spin density wave condensate
Φ (with N = 3 components):
where K is the ordering wavevector. In the limit of long wavelengths and small fluctuations
one finds the one loop effective action for fluctuations of Φ:
(cid:90) dωdd−1k
iA.F. (2π)d x
Here γ is a damping timescale due to interactions with gapless quasiparticles at the Fermi
surface that are coupled to Φ. The necessity of z = 2 scaling is manifest in this action.
Following our discussion at the start of this section, as one approaches the critical point
r → r , the quartic coupling is irrelevant if d = 3 and marginal if d = 2.
A Fourier transform of the kinetic term in the action (36) leads to the long range in
time interaction − (cid:82) dτ dτ Φ(τ )Φ(τ )/(τ −τ )2. Note that although this theory has z = 2
1 2 1 2 1 2
classically, itisnotGalileaninvariant. Thusthereisnosymmetrypreventingz fromgetting
corrections due to higher order loops in the quartic coupling u.
8The theories in sections 1.2.1 and 1.2.2 were furthermore Lorentz invariant. A priori, z = 1 does not
implyLorentzinvarianceasonecouldimaginehavingseveralmodespropagatingwithlineardispersionbut
differentvelocities. InallknownstronglycoupledIRquantumcriticalpointstherenormalisationflowdrives
the velocities to be equal and this believed to be a general phenomenon. Similarly, setting z = 1 in the
metric (17) automatically lead to Lorentz symmetry.
(cid:63)z = 3: This case arises in the onset of ferromagnetism in clean itinerant fermion sys-
tems. Ferromagnetism also occurs in, for instance, heavy fermions metals [17]. For some
closely related z = 3 quantum critical points see e.g. [44, 45]. The setup is similar to
the antiferromagnetic case just discussed except that now the order parameter is simply
Φ = (cid:104)s(x)(cid:105). One again computes a one loop effective action for Φ to obtain, see e.g. [24] or
[46] problem 6.7.8,
Noting that the first term has an inverse wavevector appearing in the time derivative term,
we see that this theory requires z = 3. The quartic interaction is thus irrelevant in both
d = 2 and d = 3. There is a nice physical interpretation of the factor of the inverse
wavevector that appears. Ferromagnetic order, unlike antiferromagnetism, carries a net
spin and so is a conserved quantity in this model. Therefore the relaxation timescale must
diverge in the homogeneous limit k → 0.
(cid:63)z = nonuniversal: There is no restriction that z be integer. As well as the z = 2
itinerant antiferromagnetic transitions we have just discussed, the Kondo lattice model (12)
for the heavy fermion metals also admits ‘locally critical’ quantum phase transitions. At
these transitions Kondo screening of the localised impurities vanishes simultaneously with
theonsetofN´eelordering. Thistransitionisnotunderstoodatthelevelofthepreviouscases
we have considered. An uncontrolled self-consistent computation of the Green’s function in
[14] obtain that near such critical points the dynamical spin susceptibility satisifies
Here K is the ordering wavevector (as in (35)) and α depends on microscopic lattice prop-
erties. These critical points have z = 2/α that is nonuniversal and has to be measured in
experiment. For CeCu Au at critical doping one finds α ≈ 0.75 and hence z ≈ 2.6 [14].
2.2 Finite temperature at equilibrium
The various spacetimes we have just considered admitted a dilatation symmetry, corre-
sponding to the scale invariance of the dual field theory. Thinking of the scale invariant
theory as describing the high energy (UV) physics we can consider deforming the theory
by relevant operators or by considering ensembles such as finite temperature or chemical
potential.9 We expect these effects to break the dilatation symmetry of the spacetime. As
9Of course, the scale invariant theory may itself be the low energy limit of a different field theory or
lattice system. At energies well below the lattice cutoff, for instance, we are free to take the critical theory
scale invariance is recovered at energies well above the characteristic scale of the deforma-
tion, we expect that the spacetime should also recover scaling invariance as we go towards
the ‘boundary’. In the case of z = 1 (which we shall restrict to without comment from now
on) this is the technical requirement that the spacetime be ‘asymptotically Anti-de Sitter’.
We shall shortly see how this works in practice.
For concreteness, let us write out Anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetime explicitly in some
convenient coordinates
(cid:18) dt2 dr2 dxidxi(cid:19)
ds2 = L2 − + + . (39)
If we wish to break the scale invariance of this metric, while preserving rotations and
spacetime translations, we should consider spacetimes of the form
(cid:18) f(r)dt2 g(r)dr2 h(r)dxidxi(cid:19)
ds2 = L2 − + + . (40)
We have introduced three nontrivial functions of the radial coordinate: f(r),g(r) and h(r).
There is clearly a certain gauge freedom in parameterising this metric; g(r) can be chosen
freely by changing variables r → rˆ(r). If f (cid:54)= h then this metric also breaks Lorentz
invariance, as would be expected for finite temperature or finite chemical potential physics.
If we were describing a renormalisation group flow triggered by a Lorentz scalar operator,
then we should set f = h. To recover scale invariance at high energies we should impose,
for instance, that f,g,h → const. (sufficiently quickly) as r → 0.
To find specific solutions for f,g and h, we need some equations of motion. Let’s see
what follows from the simplest theory that has the AdS metric (39) as a solution, namely
the Einstein gravity action (19). The equations of motion are
R = − g . (41)
Plugging the metric ansatz (40) into these equations, one finds the Schwarzschild-AdS
L2 (cid:18) dr2 (cid:19)
ds2 = −f(r)dt2+ +dxidxi , (42)
We see that this solution introduces one dimensionless parameter r /L, which we now need
to interpret in field theory. We can see that f → 1 as r → 0 and hence this spacetime is
asymptotically AdS as required. However, as we go into the spacetime, to the infrared (IR)
as our starting point: this is the phenomenon of universality.
region of large r, we find that there is a horizon at r = r . That is, g vanishes and hence
the surface at r = r is infinitely redshifted with respect to an asymptotic observer. The
appearance of a black hole (with a planar horizon, the horizon is R2) immediately suggests
that the IR physics we have just found corresponds to placing the scale invariant theory at
a finite temperature [47].
An elegant and robust argument showing that horizons correspond to thermally mixed
states can be found, for instance, in chapter 3 of [48]. We shall follow a closely related
Euclideanargumentthatissufficientforourpurposes[49]. Withinasemiclassicalregimewe
can think of the partition function of the bulk theory (which, together with asymptotically
AdS boundary conditions, is to be equivalent to the partition function of the large N field
theory) as a path integral over metrics. Mimicking instanton computations in field theory,
one looks for Euclidean saddle points of the bulk theory. Given the dominant saddle g , the
partition function is
where S [g ] is the Euclidean action evaluated on the saddle. In the path integral, the
E (cid:63)
action must include the Gibbons-Hawking boundary term to give the correct (Dirichlet)
variational problem and furthermore a constant boundary counterterm in order to render
the action finite (e.g. [50, 51])
(cid:90) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:90) (cid:18) (cid:19)
S = − dd+1x g R+ + ddx γ −2K + , (45)
E 2κ2 L2 2κ2 L
where γ is the induced metric on the boundary r → 0, nµ is an outward pointing unit
normal vector to the boundary and K = γµν∇ n is the trace of the extrinsic curvature.
We have omitted intrinsic curvature terms in the boundary action in (45). See e.g. [52].
One such saddle is obtained by analytic continuation of the Schwarzschild-AdS metric;
setting τ = it. That is
L2 (cid:18) dr2 (cid:19)
ds2 = f(r)dτ2+ +dxidxi . (46)
(cid:63) r2 f(r)
The fact that f vanishes at r = r now places a constraint on this Euclidean signature
spacetime. In order for the space to be regular at r = r (and hence, to be a genuine
stationary point of the action) we must periodically identify τ with periodicity
Thisconditionismosteasilyobtainedbyintroducingcoordinatesρ2 = α(r−r )andφ = βτ
and choosing the constants α and β such that as r → r the {ρ,φ} part of the metric looks
like dρ2+ρ2dφ2. Absence of a conical singularity requires φ to have period 2π.
We can now deduce the consequence of the identification of imaginary time τ for the
dual field theory. The basic object in our bulk theory is the metric g . This metric tends
to a certain value g on the boundary
It is very natural to interpret g as the background metric of the field theory (pulling
back to the boundary, of course, so that there is no g component). The metric is not
dynamical in field theory, but the field theory can be defined in any fixed background
metric. In (48) we have factored out the overall scaling with the holographic direction r
and furthermore factored out an L2 so that the boundary metric is dimensionful. There is
an ambiguity in this definition of the boundary metric, g , which corresponds to the fact
thataconformallyinvarianttheoryisonlysensitivetotheconformalclassofitsbackground
metric (in particular, it is not sensitive to the overall scale of the metric).
From(46)and(48)weseethatthebackgroundmetricforthefieldtheoryisds2 = dτ2+
dxidxi, with τ periodically identified by (47). It is a well known fact10 that studying field
theory with a periodically identified Euclidean time corresponds to considering the theory
in equilibrium at a finite temperature. The temperature is the inverse of the periodicity.
Thus we find that the physics of the Schwarzschild-AdS black hole is dual to field theory at
a finite temperature give by
T = . (49)
In a scale invariant theory at finite temperature and in equilibrium there is no other scale
with which to compare the temperature. Therefore, all nonzero temperatures should be
equivalent. We can see this in the Schwarzschild-AdS metric (42): the scaling (r,t,xi) →
r (r,t,xi) eliminates r from the metric. In a scale invariant theory there are only two
inequivalent temperatures: zero and nonzero.
Given the temperature, we can obtain other thermodynamic quantities by evaluating
the partition function (44). The action (45) evaluated on the Euclidean Schwarzschild-AdS
metric is found to be
E 2κ2rd T 2κ2dd d−1
where V is the spatial volume in field theory units (i.e. with no factors of L). From (50)
we see that in order to be in the semiclassical gravity regime we need that the spacetime is
weakly curved in Plank units, namely Ld−1/κ2 (cid:29) 1. Given that we expect the semiclassical
gravityregimetobetiedtoalargeN limitinfieldtheory, wecananticipatethatLd−1/κ2 ∼
N#, where # is some positive power. The AdS radius L is not a lengthscale in the dual
field theory, which is scale invariant. For this reason L is often set to 1, although we shall
not do so. In expressions that have a field theory meaning, L will always appear divided by
Planck lengths, giving a dimensionless constant that is proportional to N to some power.
From the value of the action (50) we obtain the free energy
F = −T logZ = TS [g ] = − V Td, (51)
E (cid:63) 2κ2dd d−1
and the entropy
S = − = V Td−1. (52)
∂T 2κ2dd−1 d−1
As a check of our computation we can note that this expression for the entropy is equal
to the area of event horizon divided by 4G , where in our conventions Newton’s constant
is G = κ2/8π. This area-entropy relation is universally expected to be true for event
horizons.
Tosummarisethestorysofar: wehavearguedthatAdSspaceprovidesageometricdual
forscaleinvarianttheorieswithz = 1. ThemostuniversaldeformationawayfrompureAdS
is the Schwarzschild-AdS black hole. The black hole is dual to a finite temperature. The
free energy and other thermodynamic quantities are computed in terms of the temperature
and radius of curvature of AdS in Planck units (equivalently N#). In terms of static and
isotropic backgrounds there is not much more to be done with pure Einstein gravity. In
order to describe more features of the dual field theory, we need to add structure to the
bulk theory.
2.3 Finite chemical potential and magnetic field at equilibrium
A common additional structure that arises in condensed matter systems (and elsewhere)
is a U(1) symmetry. This could be, for instance but not necessarily, the electromagnetic
U(1) symmetry. In this section we will consider the gravitational dual of theories with a
global U(1) symmetry. The electromagnetic U(1) symmetry in nature is of course gauged.
However, there are at least two reasons why photons can be correctly neglected in many
condensed matter processes. Firstly the electromagnetic coupling is observed to be small.11
Secondly, the electromagnetic interaction is screened in a charged medium. Of course,
11This statement is not always true. For instance, 3+1 dimensional photons can mediate an effectively
strong interaction in a 2+1 theory. See e.g. [53]. However, the higher dimensional Coulomb interaction is
marginally irrelevant in the 2+1 dimensional theory and so becomes weak at low temperatures [54].
almost all of condensed matter physics is ultimately due to electromagnetism (and the
Pauliexclusionprinciple). Whentalkingaboutneglectingphotonswemeanthatthereisan
effective field theory description of the dynamics involving effective degrees of freedom and
that in this description there are charged fields but no gauge bosons for the U(1) symmetry
(i.e. no photons). In such processes in which ‘virtual photons’ are not important, the
electromagnetic symmetry can be treated as a global symmetry. If we wish to consider the
response of the theory to an electromagnetic source it is sufficient to consider a background
electromagnetic field. Indeed, this is a standard procedure throughout condensed matter
theory; for example one computes the conductivity by considering electrons, or particular
collective modes thereof, in background fields.
SowhatisthedualtoaglobalU(1)symmetryinfieldtheory? Wecantakeourcuefrom
the symmetries we have already discussed in previous sections. Another global symmetry
the field theory possesses (in a fixed Minkowski background metric, say) is SO(d − 1)
rotational invariance. In the bulk this symmetry symmetry also appears, but it is gauged.
Namely, it is part of the diffeomorphism invariance of general relativity: we can act on
our AdS spacetime with a local SO(d−1) rotation and we simply obtain AdS again in a
different coordinate system. This observation suggests the general correspondence
Global symmetry (field theory) Gauged symmetry (gravity)
d spacetime dimensions d+1 spacetime dimensions.
Anotherfactthatmakestheabovecorrespondencenaturalisthatgaugesymmetriesinclude
the subgroup of ‘large’ gauge symmetries, that is, symmetries which act nontrivially as
global symmetries on the boundary of spacetime. In an AdS/CFT framework we can
preciselyidentifythisglobalsubgroupofthebulkgaugedsymmetryastheglobalsymmetry
group of the dual field theory.
To describe the physics of the global U(1) symmetry we should therefore add a Maxwell
field to our bulk spacetime. The minimal bulk action is thus Einstein-Maxwell theory12
(cid:90) √ (cid:20) 1 (cid:18) d(d−1) (cid:19) 1 (cid:21)
S = dd+1x −g R+ − F2 . (54)
2κ2 L2 4g2
Here F = dA is the electromagnetic field strength. At this point, without any charged
matter in the bulk, the Maxwell coupling g2 could be absorbed in the Maxwell field. We
introduce the coupling now for future convenience.
12ThereisaninterestingverysimpleextensionofEinstein-Maxwelltheory,whichistoincludeacoupling
between the field strength and the Weyl tensor, e.g. [55].
In thermal equilibrium there are two new background scales we can now introduce in
the field theory in a way that preserves rotational symmetry. One is a chemical potential
µ = A and the other, which only preserves rotational symmetry in 2+1 dimensions, is
a background magnetic field B = F . As we saw previously with the temperature, T,
these new scales must cause deformations away from a pure AdS spacetime as we move
away from the boundary and into the IR region. Also as with the metric in (48), the
background Maxwell potential of the field theory is read off from the boundary value of the
bulk Maxwell potential
As with the metric, we are pulling back to the boundary so that there is no A component
WenowneedtosearchforsolutionstoEinstein-Maxwelltheoryoftheform(40)together
with a nonvanishing Maxwell field
The second term in this expression will break the isotropy of the field theory unless there
are only two spatial dimensions (i.e. d = 3). We will firstly consider the case of no magnetic
field in arbitrary dimensions and then will consider the d = 3 case separately. The Einstein
equations of motion are
R d(d−1) κ2 (cid:18) 1 (cid:19)
R − g − g = 2F F σ − g F Fσρ , (57)
while the Maxwell equation is
Looking for solutions to these equations of the form (40) and (56) one finds the Reissner-
Nordstrom-AdS black hole
L2 (cid:18) dr2 (cid:19)
ds2 = −f(r)dt2+ +dxidxi , (59)
(cid:18) r2µ2(cid:19)(cid:18) r (cid:19)d r2µ2 (cid:18) r (cid:19)2(d−1)
In this expression we defined
which is a dimensionless measure of the relative strengths of the gravitational and Maxwell
forces. The scalar potential is
(cid:34) (cid:35)
(cid:19)d−2
The constant term in A cannot be chosen arbitrarily. This is because there is a bifurcate
Killing horizon of the Killing vector ∂/∂ at r = r , and so the one form A will not be well
defined there unless A vanishes [56].
By comparing with (55) we see that the chemical potential is µ. The temperature can
befoundaspreviouslybyanalyticcontinuationtoaEuclideansignaturesolution(notethat
A becomes pure imaginary under this process). The periodicity of imaginary time is again
given by the first relation in (47) and hence we obtain the temperature
Periodically identifying the time coordinate gives another reason to enforce that A vanish
at r = r . If A (r ) were finite one could obtain a finite Wilson loop A around the
vanishing Euclidean time circle, indicating that the gauge connection is singular.
An important feature of (63) relative to the zero chemical potential case (49) is that the
temperaturecanbecomezerocontinuously. Recallthatwithnochemicalpotentialwecould
scale out r and hence all nonzero temperatures were equivalent. Here we can again scale
out r , but we are left with the scale set by µ and therefore with the dimensionless ratio
T/µ, which can be continuously taken to zero. In a scale invariant theory all dimensionless
equilibrium quantities can only depend on temperature and chemical potential through this
ratio – there are no other scales.
The thermodynamic potential is obtained from evaluating the Euclidean action on the
analytically continued solution, just as in the previous section. The action is again (45)
together with the Maxwell F2 term (which appears with a + sign in the Euclidean action
S ). NoadditionalcountertermsarenecessarybecausetheMaxwellfieldfallsoffsufficiently
quickly near the boundary in the dimensions of interest (d ≥ 3). We are working in the
grand canonical ensemble13, with µ fixed, and thus use the notation Ω = −T logZ where Z
is the partition function defined by the gravitational path integral (44). One finds
Ld−1 (cid:18) r2µ2(cid:19) (cid:18) T (cid:19)
Ω = − 1+ + V = F V Td, (64)
2κ2rd γ2 d−1 µ d−1
where the function F is easily obtained by solving (63) for r . This function is a nontrivial
outputfromAdS/CFT.AtlowtemperatureswehaveΩ ∼ aµd+bµd−1T+cµd−2T2+···. In
13To work instead in the canonical ensemble, fixed charge density ρ, we should add a boundary term to
the Euclidean action: ∆S = 1 (cid:82) ddx √ γnaF Ab. This term changes the variational problem so that
E g2 r→0 ab
one must keep the field strength naF fixed at the boundary rather than the potential A . It can be seen
to imply the standard thermodynamic relation F =Ω+µQ. Here Q=ρV is the total charge.
particular,theleadingnontrivialtemperaturedependenceofthethermodynamicpotentialis
linear14,asistheleadinglowtemperaturedependenceoftheheatcapacityc = T∂S/∂T. At
high temperatures one finds Ω ∼ µ2(d−1)/Td−2+···. Recall that Ld−1/κ2 is dimensionless
(the AdS radius in Planck units) and scales like a positive power of N. We can again check
that the entropy following from (64) is 2π/κ2 times the area of the event horizon.
Adding a magnetic field in the case d = 3 is straightforward. Taking the ansatz (56) one
finds the dyonic Reissner-Nordstrom-AdS solution. The metric is again of the form (59)
but the function appearing is now
(cid:18) (r2µ2+r4B2) (cid:19)(cid:18) r (cid:19)3 (r2µ2+r4B2) (cid:18) r (cid:19)4
and the gauge potential is
(cid:20) (cid:21)
A = µ 1− dt+Bxdy. (66)
Note that whereas the chemical potential µ has mass dimension one in field theory, the
background magnetic field has mass dimension 2.
It is clear from (65) that the temperature will simply be given by (63) with the replace-
ment: r2µ2 → r2µ2+r4B2. That is
1 (cid:18) r2µ2 r4B2(cid:19)
The thermodynamic potential on the other hand is found to depend more asymmetrically
on the chemical potential and magnetic field
L2 (cid:18) r2µ2 3r4B2(cid:19)
2κ2r3 γ2 γ2
Two quantities of immediate interest are the charge density
1 ∂Ω 2L2 µ
14 It follows that the entropy remains finite at zero temperature. This is disturbing from a field theory
perspective. We have made no assumptions about the theory being supersymmetric and furthermore these
blackholeswouldnotbesupersymmetricatextremalityinanycase. Ithasbeenarguedthattheentropyof
Reissner-Nordstrom black holes is not continuous in the zero temperature limit and that strictly extremal
black holes have zero entropy, contradicting the area-entropy relation [57, 58]. Discussion of this tension
can be found in [59, 60]. A (putative) discontinuity as T → 0 does not evade the field theory discomfort,
as arbitrarily low temperatures would still have macroscopic entropy. One possible resolution is that this
macroscopic entropy is a consequence of the semiclassical (large N) limit. Perhaps tunneling interactions
between the degenerate ground states, lifting the degeneracy, are suppressed at large N? Alternatively,
perhapsextremalReissner-Nordstromblackholesareneverstablegroundstatesofconsistentgravitytheories
[61].
and the magnetisation density
1 ∂Ω 2L2r B
V ∂B κ2 γ2
In all three of these expressions, r should be thought of as a function of µ,B and T via
(67). By scale invariance of the dual theory, dimensionless quantities can only depend on
the ratios T/µ and T2/B. As noted in [62], the absence of other scales or small couplings
in the field theory will imply that the magnetic susceptibility χ = ∂2Ω/∂B2 will typically
be of order 1/T. This is very large compared to many ‘standard’ systems such as a free
electron gas. One can therefore expect quantum critical theories to be strongly magnetic.
We conclude this section with a comment concerning conformal field theories with back-
ground magnetic fields. The Ward identity implementing conformal invariance implies a
modified version of the usual tracelessness of the energy momentum tensor:
−(cid:15)+2P = 2mB, (71)
where (cid:15) is the energy density and the pressure is related to the thermodynamic potential by
PV = −Ω. The thermodynamic pressure differs from the expectation value of the energy
momentum tensor by (cid:104)Txx(cid:105) = P −mB. One can check that the thermodynamic quantities
obtained from the black hole satisfy the required relation
E +PV = ST +µQ, (72)
with the total charge Q = ρV .
2.4 Relevant operators
The last two sections have discussed deformations away from scale invariance due to tem-
perature, chemical potential and a background magnetic field. This section will consider
another way to deform the low energy physics: perturb the critical action by a relevant
operator. In fact we will see that within AdS/CFT such deformations are treated in exactly
the same way as the cases we have just studied (i.e. temperature, chemical potential,...),
providing a conceptual unification that is not immediately apparent in standard field the-
ory treatments. While there is a very large literature on renormalisation group flows in
AdS/CFT, this technology has not at the time of writing been brought to bear on questions
of condensed matter interest. We shall therefore make some more formal developments
here.
To see how to introduce relevant operators, it is useful to recast our discussion of finite
temperature and chemical potential in terms of sources in the field theory. Recall that in
discussing the temperature, we argued that the boundary value of the bulk metric gave the
(nondynamical) background metric of the field theory, as in (48). A background metric can
be thought of as a source for the energy-momentum tensor of the field theory, Tµν. Recall
that the (field theory) energy momentum tensor is defined as
Suppose we perturb the bulk metric so that its boundary value, as defined in (48), becomes
g +δg . ThechangeinthefieldtheoryactionisδS = (cid:82) ddx (cid:112) −g δg Tµν. Requiring
thattheequalityofbulkandfieldtheorypartitionfunctionsremainsvalidasthebackground
metric is shifted therefore leads to
(cid:18) (cid:90) (cid:19)
Z [g → g +δg ] = (cid:104)exp i ddx (cid:112) −g δg Tµν (cid:105) . (74)
This equation is a useful re-expression of the statement that the boundary value of the bulk
metric gives the background field theory metric.
The second case we encountered was the statement that the boundary value of a bulk
Maxwell field gave the (nondynamical) background field for a global U(1) symmetry of the
boundary. Let us call this the electromagnetic U(1) for verbal convenience. A background
electromagnetic field is a source for the current Jµ. As with the energy momentum tensor,
the current is defined by the change in the action due to a background field
Therefore the change in the field theory action upon introducing a small background field
δA is δS = (cid:82) ddx (cid:112) −g δA Jµ. Imposing the identification of bulk and field theory
partition functions, with the boundary value for the bulk gauge field giving the background
field in the dual field theory, as defined in (55), requires
(cid:18) (cid:90) (cid:19)
Z [A → δA ] = (cid:104)exp i ddx (cid:112) −g δA Jµ (cid:105) . (76)
Once again, this last equation is simply a re-expression of the identification of A as a
background field in the field theory.
The results (74) and (76) indicate a correspondence between specific operators in field
theory, {Jµ,Tµν}, and certain fields in the bulk spacetime, {A ,g }. The correspondence
states that the boundary value of the bulk field gives a background source for the corre-
sponding dual field theory operator. This statement suggests the following generalisation
operator O dynamical field φ
(field theory) (bulk),
(cid:18) (cid:90) (cid:19)
Z [φ → δφ ] = (cid:104)exp i ddx (cid:112) −g δφ O (cid:105) . (78)
bulk (0) (0) (0) F.T.
This relationship is usually taken as the backbone of the AdS/CFT correspondence [63, 64].
We will define δφ shortly in terms of the boundary behavior of the bulk field φ. First, we
should note that (78) describes nothing other than the perturbation of the scale invariant
field theory Lagrangian by the coupling δφ O. If the operator O is relevant than this
perturbation will generate a renormalisation group flow into the IR.
Assume for simplicity that the operator O is a Lorentz scalar. Then we expect the
spacetime description of the renormalisation group flow to break scale but not Lorentz
invariance. This constrains the geometry more than in the cases of finite temperature and
chemical potential. We are lead to the metric
(cid:18) dr2 h(r)(−dt2+dxidxi) (cid:19)
ds2 = L2 + , (79)
together with a profile for the scalar field
We have set g(r) = 1 and f(r) = h(r) in (40), using Lorentz invariance and a choice of
radial coordinate. To find solutions of this form we need equations of motion for the scalar
field. A minimal Einstein-scalar action is
(cid:90) √ (cid:20) 1 (cid:18) d(d−1) (cid:19) 1 (cid:21)
There is a large ambiguity in this action for a scalar field, namely the form of the potential.
Unfortunately,theexistenceandnatureofsolutionsdodependsignificantlyonthepotential
V(φ). It is also something of a simplification to assume that the flow driven by the operator
O does not generate other relevant operators in the action. These would appear in the bulk
as further (scalar and other) fields coupling to φ(r). Of course, renormalisation flow can
also be combined with finite temperature and chemical potential by using the full Einstein-
Maxwell-scalar action.
We will not consider explicit examples of V(φ) and the corresponding solutions for
{h(r),φ(r)} here. A nice discussion with analytic solutions for cases with one scalar field,
in which the renormalisation group flow leads to a new IR fixed point, can be found in, for
example, [65]. It is also possible for the flow to lead to a singularity in the IR region of the
spacetime. Such singularities are discussed in [66].
If the scalar field falls off sufficiently quickly (i.e. goes to zero or a constant) near the
boundary, then its equation of motion can be linearised and the backreaction on the metric
becomes negligible. The spacetime is therefore asymptotically AdS, so that h(r) → 1 as
r → 0, and at small r we have
where m2 is the mass squared of the field, V(φ) = 1m2φ2 +···. It follows that the near
boundary behaviour of the scalar field is
(cid:16)r(cid:17)d−∆
where ∆ is one of the solutions of
In general this equation will have two solutions: ∆ and d−∆. We can now show [63] that
the scaling dimension of the dual operator is
This follows from the action of scaling on the spacetime: {r,t,xi} → λ{r,t,xi} and φ →
λ∆−dφ ,togetherwiththebasicrelation(78). Theexpression(85)placesaconstrainton∆
because the scaling dimension must be greater than the CFT unitary bound, ∆ ≥ (d−2)/2.
We can choose either solution to (84) to be ∆ subject to this constraint [67]. Equation (83)
then defines φ as appearing in (78). Note that the term shown in (83) may not be the
leading term as r → 0, depending on the choice of solution to (84).
The operator O will be a relevant or marginal deformation of the theory if its dimension
∆ ≤ d. From (85) we see that this implies that d−∆ ≥ 0, and therefore the bulk field φ
indeed goes to a constant or zero at the boundary r → 0. This is precisely the condition
we required in order for our linearised analysis about an asymptotically AdS space to
be consistent. To rephrase: relevant operators can be turned on in the theory without
destroyingtheasymptoticallyAdSregionofthemetric. Thisisdualtothefactthatrelevant
operators do not destroy the UV fixed point of the field theory. In contrast, deforming the
theory by irrelevant operators will change the UV structure of the field theory and of the
bulk gravity solution, taking us outside the best understood AdS/CFT framework (one
might still attempt to define the theory at a UV cutoff, which would correspond to ending
the bulk spacetime at some finite r = (cid:15)).
2.5 Expectation values
A deformation of the critical theory by any of the processes we have just considered will
generically result in expectation values for the operators involved. We can compute expec-
tation values using the basic relation (78). That relation implies
(cid:104)O(cid:105) = −i = , (86)
where we are dropping factors of Z [0] and we have taken the semiclassical (large N)
limit Z = eiS. It is useful to formally manipulate this expression further. There is
a certain flavour of Hamilton-Jacobi theory in (86), with the radial direction of the bulk
spacetime playing the role of time (see e.g. [68]). Recall that, on shell, the derivative of the
action with respect to an endpoint value of a coordinate is the corresponding momentum.
We should also take into account the possibility of boundary terms in the action, so that
With a slight abuse of the notation introduced in (83), we mean ∂ φ = ∂ [(r/L)∆−dφ].
The minus sign in the first term is because the boundary is at r = 0, the lower limit of
integration.
For the bulk metric and Maxwell field we have already discussed the boundary terms
that are needed to obtain a finite on shell action. For scalars fields dual to operators with
conformal dimension ∆ boundary terms must also be added. A clear and more detailed
discussion than we will give can be found in [69] for the range of masses in which both
falloffs are allowed. There are two cases. If the falloff in (83) is the slower of the two falloffs
near the boundary (i.e. d−∆ < ∆), then the scalar boundary action to be added to (81) is
S = ddx γφ2. (88)
bdy.
If instead the falloff defining the boundary value of the field is the faster falloff (this is only
possible if d/2 ≥ ∆ ≥ (d−2)/2, the second restriction coming from the CFT unitary bound
as we mentioned above) then the boundary action must be taken to be
(cid:90) (cid:18) (cid:19)
With these expressions at hand we can obtain a general result for the expectation value.
Write the full behaviour of the scalar field near the boundary as
(cid:16)r(cid:17)d−∆ (cid:16)r(cid:17)∆
We are assuming that there are no terms in the power series expansion in between the two
shown. This holds for several cases of interest, but not in general. If such terms do arise,
the renormalisation of the action is more complicated than what we are doing here, see e.g.
[70] for a systematic treatment. Substituting the expansion (90) into the formulae we have
given for the action and expectation value, one straightforwardly derives that
(cid:104)O(cid:105) = φ . (91)
This is often summarised as saying that the ‘non-normalisable’ falloff φ gives the source
whereas the ‘normalisable’ falloff φ gives the expectation value. The result (91) can be
applied to other fields such as components of the metric and Maxwell fields. It is necessary
to firstly make sure that the kinetic term is written in the same form as that of the scalar
field in (81).
As an example we can (re-)compute the charge density of the field theory placed at a
finitechemicalpotential. Thechemicalpotentialµ = A isasourceforthechargedensity
Jt. Defining φ = rA one can obtain an action for an effective scalar field from the Maxwell
action. The conformal dimension of the charge density is ∆ = d−1. It follows from (62),
(91) and comparing the overall normalisation of the actions (54) and (81) that
µ(d−2)Ld−3
(cid:104)Jt(cid:105) = . (92)
Putting d = 3 in this expression recovers our previous result (69).
One can similarly obtain directly the energy density and pressure as the expectation
values of (cid:104)Ttt(cid:105) and (cid:104)Ttx(cid:105). In later sections we will use (91) to obtain expectation values for
currents and scalar condensates.
2.6 Dissipative dynamics close to equilibrium
Sofarwehavediscussedtimeindependent, homogeneousbackgrounds. Wehaveseenhowa
solution to the classical bulk equations of motion determines the thermodynamic variables
of a dual field theory. In particular, given time independent sources (e.g. temperature,
chemicalpotential,relevantdeformationsoftheaction)theAdS/CFTdictionarydetermines
the response of the theory (e.g. energy density, charge density, vacuum expectation values).
The next step is to consider small space and time dependent perturbations about equi-
librium. This is the domain of linear response theory and relates directly to important
experimental processes such as transport and spectroscopy. The basic object we wish to
computeistheretardedGreen’sfunction, whichisdefinedtolinearlyrelatesourcesandcor-
respondingexpectationvalues. Ingeneraltherewillbecouplingbetweendifferentoperators,
so we can write (in frequency space)
A OAOB B(0)
We will review some basic aspects of the theory of retarded Green’s functions in a later
section. In this section we will discuss how to compute the Green’s function appearing in
(93) via the AdS/CFT correspondence.
In the geometry dual to the field theory at equilibrium there will be profiles for the
various bulk fields of interest, φ (r), with corresponding boundary values φ . If we wish
to perturb the boundary value, then in order to satisfy the bulk equations of motion we will
need to perturb the entire bulk field:
The equation of motion for δφ (r) is obtained by substituting the perturbation (94) into
the bulk equations of motion and linearising. We will give an example shortly. As well as
the equation we need boundary conditions. Asymptotically we impose
We must then turn to the boundary condition in the interior, which is more involved.
We will consider circumstances in which the interior boundary condition is imposed at a
regular future horizon in the spacetime. This is always the case at finite temperature and is
oftentrueatzerotemperaturealso(e.g. pureAdSspacehassuchahorizonintheconformal
frameweareusing). Afuturehorizonisdefinedforusasanullsurfacebeyondwhichevents
cannotcausallypropagatetotheasymptoticallyAdSregionofthespacetime(theboundary
region). For the types of spacetime we are considering, the horizon is characterised by
g → 0. For instance, in the black hole metric (42) the horizon is at r = r while in AdS
space the horizon is at r → ∞. On a future horizon, regularity requires that modes are
ingoing. For a horizon at r = r with a nonzero temperature this means15
15There is a linguistic convention here: ‘ingoing’ means into the horizon, not into the spacetime. To see
that ingoing is necessary for regularity, transform to Kruskal coordinates {ρ,τ} near the horizon: ρ±τ =
e(8πlog(r−r+)±2πTt). The metric in Kruskal coordinates is regular on the future (ρ=τ) and past (ρ=−τ)
horizons. On the future horizon an ingoing mode behaves as (ρ+τ)−iω/(2πT) and so is regular as ρ → τ
whereasanoutgoingmodebehavesas(ρ−τ)iω/(2πT) whichoscillateswithunboundedincreasingfrequency
as the future horizon is approached.
In this expression T is the temperature defined by the inverse of the length of the Euclidean
time circle needed to make the Euclidean geometry regular, as in (47) above, and C are
constants. Clearly (96) will break down at zero temperature. For a zero temperature
horizon, ingoing solutions satisfy
In this expression L is the radius of the AdS near horizon region and r is such that the
{t,r} part of the near horizon metric is
(r−r )2 L2
ds2 = − + dt2+ 2 dr2. (98)
{t,r}N.H. L2 (r−r )2
Note that in (97) the coefficient C may have r dependence that is subleading as r → r .
In both the finite and zero temperature cases, the choice of ingoing boundary condition
breakstimereversalsymmetry. Thisishowwecanobtaintheretardedratherthan, say, the
advanced propagator. Time reversal symmetry breaking was forced onto us by regularity
because we are setting the boundary conditions on the future rather than past horizon.
See figure 5. This is a sensible thing to do because an initial spacelike slice ending on the
!
Figure 5: Eternal black hole in AdS together with an initial spacelike slice for evolution in
the right asymptotic region. Straight blue lines denote the asymptotically AdS boundaries
and the future and past event horizons. Black lines are singularities. The red line denotes
a possible time slice ending on the future event horizon.
past horizon does not provide a good Cauchy surface from which to evolve initial data; we
would furthermore need to specify what is coming out of the ‘white hole’. Furthermore,
the presence of a future horizon in the spacetime is directly connected to the possibility of
dissipation. Energyfluxacrossthehorizonislosttoanasymptoticobserver. Theconnection
between (future) horizons and dissipation was at the heart of the ‘membrane paradigm’ for
black holes, see [71] for a review of the original work.
Given a mode δφ satisfying the required boundary conditions and linearised equations
of motion, we immediately obtain from (93) that
GR = δ(cid:104)O A (cid:105) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) = lim δΠ A (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) = 2∆ A −dδφ A(1) . (99)
Here the δs denote functional derivatives, with φ extended into the space via φ (r) =
(r/L)∆B−dφ
(r). We have dropped the explicit ω,k dependence. The ‘momentum’ Π
was defined in (87), φ was defined in (90) and we have further used various results
from the previous subsection in a hopefully obvious way. The final term in (99) is the
most transparent: the retarded Green’s function is given directly by how the coefficient of
the ‘normalisable’ falloff depends (linearly) on the ‘non-normalisable’ falloff. The middle
expression, however, is more robust and would apply also to modes which could not be
written as an effective scalar field. Furthermore, by considering the quantity δΠ /δφ as
a function of r and moving away from the boundary (in particular, taking r right up to the
horizon) it is possible to make direct contact with results from the black hole membrane
paradigm. This leads to easy proofs of universality results [72].
A prescription to compute retarded Green’s functions in AdS/CFT was first introduced
in [73]. This prescription was subsequently shown to emerge from an AdS/CFT implemen-
tation of the Schwinger-Keldysh double contour formalism for finite temperature quantum
fieldtheoryin[74]andmoreformallyin[75]. TheseapproachesviewedtheGreen’sfunction
as a two point function. More recent works have viewed the Green’s function as a ratio of
a one point function (expectation value) and a source; this allows the Green’s function to
be computed directly from the basic relation (78) and avoids subtleties with analytic con-
tinuation and contact terms. We have followed this approach here. The equivalence with
the two point function prescription was recently emphasised in [72] and we have adopted
some notation from that paper.
2.7 Example: How to compute electrical and thermal conductivities
In this subsection we shall illustrate the above concepts by describing electric and heat
currents in a theory with a gravity dual. We shall work in a 2+1 dimensional theory (with
z = 1) and for simplicity stay at zero momentum: k = 0.
We will consider the theory at a finite chemical potential, and hence finite charge den-
sity. It is this fact which allows the heat (energy) and electric currents to mix, as any
equation relating these two currents needs a proportionality factor carrying units of charge.
Therefore, Ohm’s law must be generalised to
    
(cid:104)J (cid:105) σ αT E
where the heat current Q = T −µJ . We will explain the difference between Q and T
x tx x x tx
shortly. There are three conductivities: electrical (σ), thermal (κ¯) and thermoelectric (α).
The absence of a background magnetic field (or any other source of time reversal sym-
metry breaking) implies, as we prove below, that GR = GR , and similarly for the heat
currents. Isotropy implies that an off diagonal (Hall) conductivity would be antisymmetric
in spatial indices, e.g. σH ∼ (cid:15) . Given that conductivities are proportional to Green’s
functions, as we will also see shortly, it follows that Hall conductivities vanish in time sym-
metric configurations. This is why we have taken all the currents and sources to point in
the x direction in (100).
We now need to relate the sources E and ∇ T to background values for a vector
potential δA and a metric fluctuation δg . The former case is straightforward. At
x(0) tx(0)
zero momentum, in terms of the background gauge potential
A short argument will now show that furthermore a thermal gradient leads to
tj(0) T j(0) T
Recall that the period of Euclidean time is 1/T. In order to keep track of all the factors
of the temperature, let us rescale the time so that there is no T dependence in the period:
t = t¯/T. With the new dimensionless time coordinate, the metric has g = − 1 . We are
t¯t¯(0) T2
taking the original metric to be Minkowski space. It follows that a small constant thermal
gradient, T → T +x∇ T, implies
We can endow all quantities with a time dependence
. Recall that diffeomorphisms
acting on the background fields give the fluctuations
ab(0) a b b a a(0) b(0) a b a(0)
The field theory is invariant under background gauge transformations, this is precisely
the content of field theory Ward identities. We can add such pure gauge modes to our
perturbation (103). Taking ξ = ix∇ T/ω¯T3 and ξ = 0, one obtains that after the gauge
transformation δg = 0, δg = i∇ T/ω¯T3 and δA = −iµ∇ T/ω¯T3. Scaling back
to the original dimensionful time t, we obtain (102).
Combining (101) and (102) we can see that the the source term in the action becomes
δS = dd−1xdt (cid:112) −g (cid:0) Ttxδg +JxA (cid:1)
(cid:90) (cid:18) (cid:19)
= dd−1xdt (cid:112) −g (Ttx−µJx) x +Jx x . (105)
(0) iωT iω
ThusweseethatthecurrentsourcedbyathermalgradientisQ = T −µJ , asweclaimed
above. Substituting (101) and (102) into (100) gives
    
(cid:104)Q (cid:105) αT κ¯T iωδg
This linear relation between a source and an expectation value makes it clear that the
conductivities are nothing other than the retarded Green’s functions
From our previous discussion we know that in order to compute the response of the
theory to these small background fields via AdS/CFT we need to solve the equations of
motion of perturbations δA and δg in the bulk. These perturbations do not source any
other fields (this simplification occurs because we have set the momentum k = 0). The bulk
action we will use is the Einstein-Maxwell action (54). The background solution is given
by the 4 dimensional Reissner-Nordstrom-AdS black hole, discussed around (59). Linearis-
ing the Einstein-Maxwell equations of motion (57) about this background one obtains the
following two independent equations
δg(cid:48) + δg + A(cid:48)δA = 0, (108)
tx r tx γ2 t x
ω2 r2A(cid:48) (cid:18) 2 (cid:19)
x f x L2 tx r tx
withf,A andγ2 givenbelow(59)above. NoteinparticularthatA(cid:48) = −µ/r isaconstant.
We can easily obtain a decoupled equation for δA
x f x γ2r2 x
It is straightforward to check that solutions to this equation behave near the boundary as
Because this is a linear equation of one variable, we know that A will depend linearly
on A . We will need to find the (ω dependent) coefficient of proportionality numerically.
However, the fact that the equation for δg is first order means that we can obtain two of
the three conductivities in (100) without solving any differential equations.
We are going to implement equation (99) in order to compute the Green’s functions.
Ratherthanmappingtheequationsontoaproblemforscalars,letuscomputethe‘momenta’
(87) directly from the full action. Using the Einstein-Maxwell action (54) together with the
gravitational counterterms in (45) one finds
gtx δg x(0) κ2r3 tx(0)
fδA(cid:48)
Ax δA g2 tx(0)
A few comments are in order. Firstly, we have introduced the charge density ρ as defined
in (69). Secondly, in computing the derivatives of the action with respect to g one
should be careful to first eliminate second derivative terms in the action by integrating by
parts. The resulting first derivative terms on the boundary are precisely cancelled by the
Gibbons-Hawking boundary term in (45). We also used (108) to simplify Π . Finally, as
above, we defined g at finite r by g = r2/L2g and A = A .
tx(0) tx(0) tx x(0) x
In the limit r → 0 and using (99) and (111), in particular δA(cid:48) → δA /L, we find
    
(cid:104)J (cid:105) 1 δA x(1) −ρ δA
(cid:104)T (cid:105) −ρ −(cid:15) δg
whereweintroducedtheenergydensity(cid:15) = −L2(1+r2µ2/γ2)/κ2/r3. Theenergydensityis
obtainedbythefact,mentionedinsection2.3above,thatconformalityimplies(cid:15) = −2Ω/V .
Comparing (106) and (114) gives the conductivities
g2LωδA ω ω
We have not explained one step here: in the numerator in κ¯(ω) we added a P. This
originates from a contact term that must be present due to translation invariance [76].
All that is left is to solve the differential equation (110) in order to obtain the electrical
conductivity in (115). For numerical stability it is convenient to explicitly remove the
near-horizon oscillations from A by defining
where the temperature T was defined in (63) above. Substituting into (110) we obtain a
differential equation for S. Ingoing boundary conditions now amount to the requirement
that near the horizon: S = 1+α (r−r )+α (r−r )2 +···. The overall normalisation
is not important as the equation is linear. Indeed we see in (115) that the conductivity is
a ratio of two coefficients in the near-boundary expansion, so the overall normalisation will
drop out. The coefficients α are easily found by looking for Taylor series expansions of
(110) at the horizon. We wish to numerically integrate the equation (110) from the horizon
to the boundary. The Taylor expansion at the horizon is necessary because the horizon is
a singular point of the differential equation, so we cannot set the initial data exactly at the
horizon. Therefore we must set the initial conditions a little away from the horizon. The
essential lines of Mathematica code computing the conductivity will look something like
Here (cid:15) is small number setting the initial distance from the horizon and η is a small number
determining the distance from the boundary at which the conductivity (115) is evaluated.
The functions Ser and SerPrime are the Taylor series expansion at the horizon and the
derivative thereof, respectively. In performing numerics it is generally convenient to set
L = 1 and furthermore to scale the horizon to r = 1. However, one then needs to undo
this scaling to recover physical units.
ReΣ 0.6 ImΣ
(cid:64) (cid:68)0.4 (cid:64) (cid:68)
(cid:45)0.5
0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25
(cid:144) (cid:144)
Figure6: Thereal(left)andimaginary(right)partsoftheelectricalconductivitycomputed
viaAdS/CFTasdescribedinthetext. Theconductivityisshownasafunctionoffrequency.
Differentcurvescorrespondtodifferentvaluesofthechemicalpotentialatfixedtemperature.
The gap becomes deeper at larger chemical potential. We have set g = 1 in (115).
Numerical results for the real and imaginary parts of the electrical conductivity are
shown in figure 6 above. These plots have not appeared elsewhere. We comment on the
physical interpretation of these plots in the following subsection. Particularly suggestive is
the depletion of the real part at frequencies below a scale set by the chemical potential.
2.8 Comparison to experiments in graphene
It is amusing and instructive to compare our results for the conductivity in figure 6 to some
recent experimental data in graphene. Graphene is a natural material to compare to, as
at low energies it is described by a 2+1 dimensional relativistic theory with a chemical
potential determined by the gate voltage (see e.g. [46]). It therefore has precisely the same
kinematics as the AdS/CFT system we are studying. Graphene has been subjected to
intense study recently following the isolation of single layered samples [77].
Figure7: Experimentalplotsofthereal(top)andimaginary(bottom)partsoftheelectrical
conductivity in graphene as a function of frequency. The different curves correspond to
differentvaluesofthegatevoltage. Theinsetintheupperplotshowsaninterbandtransition
that is accessible at energies above 2E . Plots taken from [78].
Figure 7 above shows experimental results for the real and imaginary parts of the con-
ductivity at different values of the chemical potential, taken from [78].
The similarity with the AdS/CFT plots of figure 6 is striking. Let us focus on the real
part of the conductivity, the imaginary part can be determined from the real part through
the Kramers-Kronig relations as we discuss below. There are three features in data. At
large frequencies the conductivity tends to a constant; at low frequencies the (real part
of the) conductivity is depleted below a scale set by the chemical potential; at very small
frequencies the conductivity starts to rise again. All of these features are straightforward
to explain and bring out the similarities and differences with the AdS/CFT results.
The fact that the conductivity tends to a constant at large frequencies in both figures 6
and 7 is consistent with the fact that the conductivity is dimensionless in 2+1 dimensions.
This statement does not rely on relativistic invariance (i.e. one only needs set (cid:126) = 1).
A depletion in the real part of conductivity below frequencies set by the chemical po-
tential occurs in both figures 6 and 7. As we will see in the following section, the real part
of the conductivity is the dissipative part of the conductivity and measures the presence
of charged states as a function of energy. The drop in the real part of the conductivity
therefore corresponds to a drop in the density of excitations at energies below the chemical
potential. In graphene there is a simple explanation for this fact. The chemical potential
sets the size of the Fermi surface. At zero momentum (we are computing the conductiv-
ity at zero momentum) the only available single particle excitations are when an electron
jumps between different bands. This is illustrated in the inset of figure 7. In graphene,
such an excitation has energy 2E , where E is the Fermi energy and is proportional to the
chemical potential µ. Therefore, the dissipative conductivity will be Boltzman suppressed
up to an energy scale set by µ, as observed in figure 7. Given that the same structure is
observed in figure 6, in AdS/CFT, one is lead to wonder if there may also be an effective
Fermi surface in the strongly coupled theories studied via AdS/CFT.
Theincreaseintheconductivityatverysmallfrequenciesappearsasthemaindifference
between figures 6 and 7. In fact, the results are closer than they might seem. In the
AdS/CFT results there is a delta function in the real part of the conductivity at ω = 0.
The delta function cannot be resolved numerically, but we know it is there because the
imaginary part of the conductivity has a pole as ω → 0. The Kramers-Kronig relations (see
(129) below) imply that the real part must therefore have a delta function. The divergence
of the conductivity at low frequencies is directly related to conservation of momentum, as
we shall discuss below. In graphene, momentum conservation is broken by the presence of
impurities and the ionic lattice. These effects introduce a momentum relaxation timescale
τ so that at low frequencies one has a Drude peak described by
This formula (from [79]) will be discussed in more detail in a later section. Letting τ → ∞
we recover the pole (and hence delta function) of the translationally invariant AdS/CFT
case. In short: the increase in the conductivity at low frequencies in figure 7 is a smoothed
out version of the delta function in figure 6. We will discuss the addition of impurities to
AdS/CFT computations in section 3.6 below.
3 The physics of spectral functions
In this section we will review the physical interpretation of retarded Green’s functions, and
in particular the spectral density. Most of this material can be found in more detail in, e.g.
[25] chapter 7.6 or [46] chapter 7. We go on to illustrate the concepts with examples from
AdS/CFT computations.
3.1 Relation to two point functions and symmetry properties
The retarded Green’s function for two observables O and O is given in terms of the
expectation value of their commutator as follows
where θ(t) is the Heaviside step function: nonzero and equal to one for t > 0. This repre-
sentation of the Green’s function is very useful to establish several important properties. A
proof of this result goes as follows.
We wish to compute an expectation value in the presence of a time dependent pertur-
bation to the Hamiltonian
This is given by
where ρ(t) is the time dependent density matrix, satisfying i∂ ρ = [H +δH,ρ]. Passing to
aninteractionpicture(sothatthetimedependenceduetoH isabsorbedintotheoperators
O ) one obtains
= e−H0/T, say, and as usual U is the time ordered exponential
(cid:82)tδH(t(cid:48))dt(cid:48)
Expanding to first order in the perturbation of the Hamiltonian gives
(cid:90) t
(cid:90) t
= −i dd−1x(cid:48)dt(cid:48)(cid:104)[O (t,x),O (t(cid:48),x(cid:48))](cid:105)φ (t(cid:48),x(cid:48)). (123)
Taking a Fourier transform of this result (using spacetime translation invariance) and com-
paring with the definition of the Green’s function in (93) leads to (118).
From (118) we can show that if the system is time reversal invariant and if the operators
O satisfy TO (t,x)T−1 = (cid:15) O (−t,x), with (cid:15) = ±1, then the Green’s function has the
following symmetry property
OAOB A B OBOA
Thisresultfollowsfromrecallingthattimereversalisananti-unitaryoperatorandtherefore
(cid:104)[O (t,x),O (0,0)](cid:105) = (cid:104)T[O (t,x),O (0,0)]T(cid:105)∗
= (cid:15) (cid:15) (cid:104)[O (0,0),O (−t,x)](cid:105) = (cid:15) (cid:15) (cid:104)[O (t,−x),O (0,0)](cid:105). (125)
A B B A A B B A
If time reversal is broken by, say, the presence of a background magnetic field16, then
the symmetry property (124) continues to hold except that one of the Green’s function is
evaluated in a time reversed background (i.e. B → −B).
One consequence of this symmetry, noted above, is that the thermoelectric conductivity
determining how an electric field generates a heat flow (related to the Peltier effect) is
the same as the thermoelectric conductivity determining how a heat gradient generates an
electric current (the Seebeck effect).
3.2 Causality and vacuum stability
In (123) and (118) we see explicitly that the retarded Green’s function is causal. Namely,
the expectation value at time t only depends on the source at times t(cid:48) < t. Consider taking
the inverse Fourier transform of the Green’s function
OAOB 2π OAOB
16That a background magnetic field breaks time reversal follows from the Lorentz force: mx¨=qx˙ ×B.
For t < 0 we can evaluate this integral by closing the ω contour in the upper half plane.
Causality implies that we must obtain zero for the Green’s function at t < 0. Therefore
GR (ω,k) is analytic in ω for Imω > 0. (127)
If a computation of the Green’s function leads to, say, a pole in the upper half frequency
plane it is a signal that something is wrong. It is possible to be precise about the pathology.
Suppose that GR (ω,k) has a single pole at some ω = ω in the upper half plane. Then
OAOB (cid:63)
from (126) we will have for t < 0 that
GR (t,k) ∼ e−iω(cid:63)t ∼ e|Imw(cid:63)|t. (128)
This is an exponentially growing mode indicating that the vacuum in which the Green’s
function has been computed is unstable.
The analyticity property (127) leads to several physically useful results, simply from
contour integration. Firstly one has the Kramers-Kronig relation between the real and
imaginary parts of any function satisfying (127) and vanishing as |ω| → ∞
where P denotes principal value of the integral, as usual. These results follow from
with Γ running along the real axis and closing in the upper half plane, and then taking
z = ω + i0. One obtains (129) if the contribution from the semicircle at infinity in the
upper half plane gives a vanishing contribution. If GR(ω) does not vanish asymptotically,
one should subtract the nonvanishing behaviour and hence obtain the Kramers-Kronig
relations for the subtracted function.
One can also obtain sum rules from (131). The simplest one is
(cid:90) ∞ dω(cid:48)ImGR (ω(cid:48),x)
χ ≡ lim GR (ω,x) = OAOB . (132)
This is called the thermodynamic sum rule because χ = ∂(cid:104)O (cid:105)/∂φ is the static, ther-
modynamic, susceptibility. This is a real quantity. The sum rule thus has rather nontrivial
physical content: it relates an equilibrium thermodynamic quantity to an integral over all
frequencies of a dissipative process. The integral in (132) is well defined because by acting
on (118) by complex conjugation one finds
It follows that if the Green’s function is even under k → −k, as is typically the case (from
(124),itisnecessarilythecaseifO = O ),thentheimaginarypartoftheGreen’sfunction
is an odd function of ω and therefore vanishes as ω → 0. If the Green’s function is odd
under k → −k then the imaginary part of the Green’s function is a symmetric function of
ω and the sum rule (132) does not contain useful information.
3.3 Spectral density and positivity of dissipation
The spectral representation of the Green’s function follows from (118) by inserting a com-
plete basis of energy eigenstates in between the two operators. Assuming for simplicity that
we are in the canonical ensemble, so that the density matrix ρ
= e−H0/T, one obtains
(cid:32) (cid:33)
GR (ω,k) = (cid:88) e−En/T A nm B mn δ(d)(k nm −k) − A mn B nm δ(d)(k mn −k) , (134)
where E are energy eigenvalues, H |m(cid:105) = E |m(cid:105), k = k −k with k momentum
m 0 m nm n m m
eigenvalues, A = (cid:104)m|O (0,0)|n(cid:105) and B = (cid:104)m|O (0,0)|n(cid:105). We are dropping factors of
the partition function (i.e. Z = 1). The +i0s are important, they remind us that the poles
are in the lower half frequency plane, and also to correctly use the identity
The spectral representation allows us to show that iω times the anti-hermitian part of
the retarded Green’s function satisfies a positivity property, namely, given a vector v
A OAOB OBOA B
This property is obtained by manipulations showing that (134) implies
2 OAOB OBOA
ω (cid:88)
nm n m nm mn
where one uses (135). This property leads to an interpretation of the meaning of the anti-
hermitian part of the Green’s function, as we will now see.
The time-varying external source φ does work on the system. The rate of change of
the total energy due to this source is
= TrρH = Trρ = dd−1x((cid:104)O (cid:105)+δ(cid:104)O (cid:105))∂ φ . (138)
dt dt ∂t A A t A(0)
In the second equality we used the Schr¨odinger equation i∂ ρ = [H,ρ] and the fact that
[H,H] = 0. For the third equality recall that we are in the Schr¨odinger picture so that
operators are time-independent.
Thepositivityoftheanti-hermitianpartoftheGreen’sfunctiontimesiωhasthephysical
consequence that the time average over a cycle of the rate of work done is positive. Taking
a mode of a particular frequency
and using the definition of the Green’s function in (123) and (118), then to leading order
in the external source φ one obtains
dW ω (cid:90) 2π/ω dW
(0)A 2 OAOB OBOA (0)B
≥ 0. (140)
That is, dissipation is captured precisely by the anti-hermitian part of the Green’s function
times iω. In the derivation of the above result one uses the fact, evident from (118) and
mentioned already above, that GR (ω,k)∗ = GR (−ω,−k).
In the case that O = O and there are no other operators involved, then one can
introduce the spectral function
The positive property (136) clearly reduces to
The spectral function directly measures the degrees of freedom in the theory that have an
overlap with the operator O . Even if there is more than one operator, one can diagonalise
theGreen’sfunctionanddefineaspectralfunctionforeachofthedecoupledeigenoperators.
If the Green’s function is even under time reversal, (cid:15) = (cid:15) in (124), and also even under
k → −k, then one can easily obtain from our above results that
ωχ (ω,k) ≡ −ωImGR (ω,k) ≥ 0, [with evenness conditions] (143)
for each component separately. The statement we derived previously about the anti-
hermitian part of the Green’s function is more general, however.
3.4 Quantum critical dynamics with particle-hole symmetry
Particle-hole symmetry means that µ = 0. That is, there is no net charge density carried
by say, ‘electrons’ rather than ‘holes’. In this section we will discuss, largely following [80],
somegeneralfeaturesofchargedynamicsinrelativisticquantumcriticalsystemsind=2+1
dimensions with µ = 0. In such theories, the finite temperature retarded Green’s function
for a current Jµ is constrained by rotational invariance and charge conservation to take the
JµJν µν µν
where PL = η − pµpν − PT , PT = δ − kikj and PT = 0. In these expressions the
3-momentum pµ = (ω,k). Thus the charge dynamics is parametrised by two functions of
frequency and momentum: KT(ω,k) and KL(ω,k). Scale invariance implies that these
functions are functions of ω/T and k/T, there can be no independent temperature depen-
dence.
The dynamic simplifies considerably in the limits when the temperature is large or
small compared to the frequency and momentum. We will focus on the charge correlation
function for concreteness: GR (ω,k). When ω/T (cid:28) 1 one is in the hydrodynamic or
‘collision-dominated’ regime. This regime includes the DC (ω = 0) limit that is often
taken in experiments. In this low frequency (and momentum) limit one expects a diffusive
JtJt −iω+Dk2
This form of the Green’s function is completely fixed by hydrodynamics. See for instance
[25] or, for the brave, [81]. There are two constant parameters, the diffusion constant D
and the susceptibility χ. The electrical conductivity is a constant σ(0) = χD. Recall again
that conductivity is dimensionless in 2+1 dimensions.
Intheoppositelimit,ω/T (cid:29) 1onespeaksof‘collisionless’orcoherenttransport. Thisis
effectively the zero temperature limit. At zero temperature, scale invariance, Lorentz sym-
metry and charge conservation completely determine the Green’s function up to a constant.
In particular
The conductivity in this limit is again a constant σ(∞) = K. For general theories, the two
conductivitiesσ(0)andσ(∞)arenotrelated, anddescribeverydifferentphysicalprocesses.
Thus the T → 0 and ω → 0 limits do not commute. As we mentioned, experiments at low
frequencies and temperatures typically correspond to taking the ω → 0 limit first [82].
The two limits are characterised by different dispersion relations for the dominant pole.
At low frequencies ω ∼ k2 whereas at high frequencies ω ∼ k. Clearly there should be a
crossover between these behaviours as a function of ω/T and k/T. While such a crossover
is anticipated on purely kinematic grounds, as we have just shown, prior to an AdS/CFT
computation there was no 2+1 system for which the crossover could be exhibited in a direct
computation. Using the Einstein-Maxwell action (54) about the Schwarzschild background
(42)onenumericallycomputestheGreen’sfunctionforthecurrents(144)inmuchthesame
way as we did in section 2.7 above, but generalised to allow for a finite momentum. Figure
8, which is taken from [80], shows how the dispersion relation changes from quadratic to
linear as function of ω/T.
Figure 8: Solid curve shows the location of the peak in the density-density spectral function
at real frequencies ω as a function of momentum k (q in the figure). The dispersion relation
is quadratic at small momenta and linear at large momenta. Figure taken from [80].
In performing the bulk gravitational computation one finds that σ(0) = σ(∞). In
fact, at k = 0 the conductivity is exactly constant and independent of ω/T. This non-
generic fact is interpreted in field theory as a self-duality under particle-vortex duality, and
can be traced to the self-duality of the Maxwell equations in the bulk [83, 80]. It is not
surprising, perhaps, that the simplest theories in which the general feature of a coherent to
hydrodynamic crossover can be shown explicitly also have special symmetries.
We close this section with two comments. Firstly, there is no coherent to hydrodynamic
crossover in 1+1 dimensions. In 1+1 dimensions conformal invariance completely fixes the
retardedGreen’sfunctionofthechargetotakeaformanalogousto(146)atalltemperatures.
There is no hydrodynamic regime.
Finally, the formulae just given for the current and charge density Green’s functions
omit an important piece of physics. Due to fact that the zero momentum (k = 0) modes
are closely related to conserved charges, using hydrodynamics one finds that the Green’s
functions must decay like a power law at late times rather than exponentially, see e.g.
[84]. Technically this arises because at k = 0 the spatial derivative terms appearing in the
hydrodynamical equations become less important than terms which are nonlinear in the
hydrodynamical variables. These nonlinear terms give rise to the power law tails. In 2+1
dimensions,theFouriertransformofthepowerlawtailsgivesalog|ω|divergenceinresponse
functions such as the conductivity as ω → 0. That nonlinear terms in hydrodynamics are
required to see this effect immediately explains why no such divergence was observed in our
gravitational computations: nonlinearities involve one loop corrections to the fluctuation
equations in the bulk and are therefore suppressed by inverse powers of N. Indeed, the
suppression of power law tails at large N was seen at weak coupling in [84]. In a real life
system, effects outside of a simple hydrodynamic approach, such as impurities or long range
Coulomb interactions, will typically become important before the logarithmic divergence
kicks in [54].
3.5 Quantum critical transport with a net charge and magnetic field
It is of interest, for instance with a view to graphene [54] or to the high-T cuprates [79], to
extendtheanalysisoftheprevioussectiontoincludeanetchargedensityandabackground
magneticfield. ThestructureoftheGreen’sfunctionsbecomessignificantlylessconstrained.
Among the important new effects is that the charge current and the heat current can now
mix,duetothepresenceofabackgroundchargedensity. ThisleadstothegeneralisedOhm’s
law of equation (100) above. In a magnetic field we need to generalise the law further, to
allow for off-diagonal elements in the conductivities (due to the background magnetic field)
    
(cid:104)J (cid:105) σ α T E
As in section 2.7, we would like to study these conductivities as a function of frequency ω
at zero momentum, k = 0. We shall work in d = 2+1 dimensions for concreteness.
In section 2.7 we found that thermoelectric and thermal conductivities could be com-
puted in terms of the electrical conductivity alone. This is a general property of relativistic
theories at a finite charge density (and/or magnetic field) and follows from Ward identities
[76, 85]. We will not give the full argument here, the essential point is the following. Re-
call from section 2.7 that the conductivities were given in terms of the Green’s functions
GR (ω), GR (ω) and GR (ω). We saw in section 3.1 that the retarded Green’s func-
JiJj JiQj QiQj
tions are given by two point functions of the operators in question. One way of thinking
about Ward identities is that they impose invariance of the partition function and cor-
relation functions under gauge transformations acting on background gauge fields for all
global symmetries of the field theory (see e.g. [86] for uses of Ward identities in this man-
ner). Gauge coordinate transformations (104) act on background chemical potentials and
magnetic fields, and this action in turn mixes the two point functions of the electric and
thermal currents. In 2+1 dimensions, the end result is most cleanly expressed in terms of
the following ‘complexified’ conductivities
± xy xx ± xy xx ± xy xx
The relationship between the conductivities is found to be [76]
(cid:18) (cid:19)
We will therefore only present results for the electrical conductivity in the following. For
expressions for all the transport coefficients as well as for applications to the Nernst effect
(closely related to α ), see [87, 79, 88].
In discussing the electrical response of the system, it is useful to distinguish two length-
scales. Firstlythereisthehydrodynamiclengthscalel = 1/T. Atscalesl (cid:29) l oneexpects
a description in terms of conserved quantities. In the presence of a background magnetic
field B there is another lengthscale, l = 1/ B. At scales l (cid:29) l , momentum is not a lo-
cally conserved quantity, due to the Lorentz force from the background magnetic field. The
limit l (cid:29) l ,l was studied in [89] using hydrodynamics, without conserved momentum.
Otherstudiesofhydrodynamicsinabackgroundmagneticfieldinclude[90,91,92,93]. Here
we will start with the case in which the magnetic field is small so that we can study inter-
mediate lengthscales l (cid:28) l (cid:28) l . In this regime momentum is approximately conserved
and leads to a rich (‘magneto’)hydrodynamics [79], including a cyclotron resonance.
The conductivity σ(ω) can be computed analytically in the regime l (cid:28) l (cid:28) l using
either hydrodynamic methods [79] or the AdS/CFT correspondence [76]. The result is
In these expressions
(cid:15)+P (cid:15)+P
Thereisaresonanceatthefrequencyω = ω withawidthγ. Thecoefficientσ istheunique
transport coefficient necessary to describe current dynamics in this regime. Hydrodynamics
does not fix σ , which depends on the microscopic theory. Using a bulk Einstein-Maxwell
theory (54) one finds [76]
Q ((cid:15)+P)2g2
Anexpressionfortheenergydensity(cid:15)wasgiveninsection2.7whilethepressureisinsection
2.3. In a neutral background with no magnetic field sT = (cid:15)+P and hence σ = 1/g2.
There are various pieces of physics contained in the above expressions for σ and
σ . The most immediate is the cyclotron resonance at ω = ±ω −iγ (consistently with
xy (cid:63) c
the general theory of section 3.2, this pole is in the lower half plane). This is a collective
cyclotronmotion,itisnotthe‘microscopic’cyclotronmotionofindividualelectrons. Indeed
the value of ω is an interesting prediction for future experiments on graphene [94]. The
damping of the cyclotron motion can be thought of loosely as due to the fact that the
positively and negatively charged modes of the system are undergoing cyclotron orbits in
opposite directions and colliding.
It is instructive to take the strict DC limit (ω = 0) of (151) and (152) in which one
immediately obtains
This result was first obtained from AdS/CFT in [95] and gives the Hall conductivity of the
system. There is a simple physical interpretation of the fact that the Hall conductivity is
proportional to the charge density. Under applied magnetic and electric fields, positively
and negatively charged particles move in the same direction and therefore their currents
cancel. In order to obtain a net Hall conductivity, there needs to be a surplus of either
positive or negative charge.
Another instructive limit of (151) and (152) is to set B = 0. One obtains
Here we recover the divergence of conductivity, discussed in section 2.8 above, as ω → 0 if
there is a nonzero charge density. Indeed (156) is the same as equation (117) in the absence
of impurity scattering. There is again a simple intuitive picture for this divergence. In a
medium with no net charge, currents can relax while preserving momentum. Consider a
head on collision between an electron and a hole such that they are both at rest afterwards.
Before the collision there is a net current (the currents add) while afterwards there is none.
Momentum is clearly conserved in this process but the current is eliminated. If there
is a net (positive say) charge density, in contrast, then on average the positive charges
cannot cancel all their momentum with negative charges. A collision between two positive
chargesconservesbothmomentumandcurrent. Thusconservationofmomentumcombined
with a net charge prevents current from relaxing. Therefore, in the presence of a constant
electricfield,thepositivechargeswillaccelerateindefinitely,givingadivergentconductivity.
Consistentlywiththispicture, wesawthatinthepresenceofamagneticfield, whichlocally
violates conservation of momentum at long timescales, the DC conductivity (155) does not
diverge. The finite conductivities obtained in the probe limit of AdS/CFT computations,
e.g. [96, 97], arise because the coefficient of the 1/ω term in (156) is effectively taken to
zero.
The hydrodynamic formulae discussed so far in this subsection can be obtained without
any AdS/CFT input. An example of a microscopic question that cannot be addressed
by hydrodynamics is: what is the fate of the cyclotron resonance at large magnetic fields?
WithinAdS/CFTthisquestioncanbeansweredbyidentifyingthecyclotronresonancepole
in a (numerically computed) Green’s function. The dependence of the pole on the magnetic
fieldisshowninfigure9belowtogetherwiththedeviationfromthehydrodynamicresult. A
qualitatively similar plot was obtained recently in a weakly coupled microscopic description
of graphene [98].
Finally, wenotethatelectromagneticdualityinthebulkleadstoaninterestingrelation-
ship between the conductivity of the theory when the charge density and magnetic fields
are swapped around [76]. In particular under the action
S : B → ρ, ρ → −B, σ → , (157)
the complexified conductivity (148) built from the hydrodynamic expressions (151) and
(152) transforms as
This can be thought of as the transformation of the conductivity under particle-vortex
Figure 9: The dots show the location of the cyclotron pole in the retarded Green’s function
in the complex frequency plane as a function of the magnetic field and at a fixed charge
density. These points are obtained numerically using AdS/CFT. The curves show the
hydrodynamic result (153). It is clear that the hydrodynamic expression is only correct at
small magnetic fields. The x-axis is a dimensionless magnetic field h = r2B. Figure taken
from [76].
duality [79]. This action can be somewhat trivially extended to a full SL(2,Z) acting in
the standard way on the conductivity σ [99, 83, 76].
3.6 A simple treatment of impurities
In the previous sections we have seen that various quantities, such as the electrical conduc-
tivity at a finite charge density, diverged in the ω → 0 limit due to translation invariance.
In most physical condensed matter systems, translation invariance is broken by explicitly
space-dependent potentials. Two examples are the regular ionic lattices of solids and ran-
dom impurities. Both of these effects are modeled by adding an explicitly space-dependent
coupling V(x) to the Hamiltonian
Here O is some operator in the theory that couples to the impurities or lattice.
From the basic AdS/CFT formula (78) we know how to implement (159) in a gravita-
tional dual. One should add a field φ, dual to the operator O, into the bulk and impose
the boundary condition that φ(r,x,t) → φ (x) = V(x). Solving the bulk equations of mo-
tion subject to this boundary condition will give the geometry dual to the quantum critical
theory in the presence of the potential V(x).
The full problem appears daunting, as one will need to solve PDEs for the field φ(r,x)
and the other bulk fields to which it couples. In this section we will treat impurities only
and make the simplifying assumptions that the impurities are random, dilute and weak.
WeaknessmeansthatweexpandquantitiestolowestnontrivialorderinV(x). Randomand
dilute means that we will then average over the impurity potential assuming no correlations
Note that the field theory path integral must be done with a fixed background V(x), oth-
erwise the averaging over impurity potentials will restore translation invariance.17 The
impurities are thus characterised by a single quantity: the strength of the impurity poten-
tial V¯. The scaling dimension of V¯ is (d+1)/2−∆ , where ∆ is the scaling dimension
of O. Impurities are a relevant perturbation of the dynamics if the scaling dimension of V¯
is positive. This is called the Harris criterion.
Because the impurities break translation invariance, they should cause momentum to
relax at late times. This will be reflected in the momentum density two point function. It
is useful to parametrise the retarded Green’s function for the momentum density in terms
of the ‘memory function’ M(ω):
Inatranslationallyinvariantsystem, thezeromomentum(k = 0)retardedGreen’sfunction
vanishes, GR (ω) = 0, at all nonzero frequencies.18 In the presence of impurities this
will no longer be the case. Therefore we expect M(ω) = O(V¯2). In particular, the zero
frequency limit of the memory function will give a pole in the Green’s function very close
to (just below) the real axis which sets the timescale for momentum relaxation
ω→0 τ imp.
The time dependence is computed by doing the inverse Fourier transform of the frequency
space Green’s function (161). At positive times we should close the contour in the lower
half frequency plane. The pole at ω = −i/τ is by assumption close to the real axis (the
17ThefieldtheorypathintegraldoesnotcommutewiththeintegraloverV(x)becausethecorrelatorsare
normalised by the partition function including V(x), see e.g. [46].
18This follows from the fact that for any operator A, the Heisenberg equations of motion imply that
ω2GR (ω) = −GR (ω)+GR (0). At zero spatial momentum, using the definition of the
Green’s function (118), the right hand side of this equation vanishes if (cid:82) dd−1xA(x) commutes with the
Hamiltonian. That is, if A is a conserved charge density, such as the momentum.
impurities are weak) and therefore dominates the late time behaviour
(cid:104)Ttx(cid:105)(t) ∼ GR (t) ∼ e−t/τimp.. (163)
The momentum relaxation (163) can be directly incorporated into a hydrodynamic
approach by adding a term to the hydrodynamic equations that imposes late time non-
conservation of momentum
imp.
where uµ is the local fluid 3-velocity. The effect of the last term in this equation upon the
hydrodynamic expressions for the conductivity (151) and (152) is to let ω → ω+i/τ [79].
This leads to, for instance, equation (117) in which we see that the conductivity at ω → 0
is finite in the presence of impurities, as we anticipated.
The overall scale of the momentum relaxation timescale τ is set by the phenomeno-
imp.
logicalparameterV¯2. Animportantquestion, however, iswhetherτ hasastrongdepen-
imp.
dence on the magnetic field and charge density. This requires a microscopic computation.
It was shown in [100] that to leading order in V¯ the relaxation timescale, starting from
(162), can be given in terms of the dissipative part of the retarded Green’s function of the
operator O coupling to the impurity
1 V¯2 (cid:90) dd−1k ImGR (ω,k)
= lim k2 OO . (165)
This expression is general for any quantum field theory. At the quantum critical points we
are primarily interested in here, conformal invariance requires that this expression has the
scaling form
1 V¯2 (cid:18) ρ B (cid:19)
= F , . (166)
imp.
Td−2∆O Td−1 T2
The expression (165) can be straightforwardly evaluated via AdS/CFT if we start with an
action for the bulk field φ dual to the operator O. The computation was performed in [100]
in 2+1 dimensions using a bulk scalar and a pseudoscalar field that were nonminimally
coupled to the background field strength. The results are shown in figure 10 below.
Both of these plots show that there is indeed a strong dependence on the magnetic
field and charge density. In the right hand plot, the relaxation timescale goes to zero at
a phase transition in which the operator O condenses. This transition is closely related
to the Gubser-Mitra instability [101]. The left hand plot may provide a prototype for the
charge and magnetic field dependence of τ near stable quantum critical points. This
imp.
dependence appears to match the scaling of the Nernst effect in an organic superconductor
close to a Mott transition [102, 100, 103].
Figure 10: The inverse relaxation timescale as a function of the magnetic field and charge
density for two choices of the operator O arising via AdS/CFT in d=2+1 dimensions. The
resultonlydependsonthecombinationB2+ρ2/σ2 (withσ = 1/g2)duetoelectromagnetic
self-duality in the bulk. Figure taken from [100].
4 Holographic superconductivity
4.1 What is a superconductor?
Sofarwehavedescribed,fromtheviewpointofagravitationaldual,theequilibriumandlin-
ear response physics of quantum critical theories subjected to a finite temperature, external
electromagneticfieldsandimpurities. Itishopedthatthisframeworkwillhaveapplications
to strongly coupled condensed matter systems in the vicinity of quantum phase transitions
(and indeed more generally). We noted in section 1.2.3 that such systems include non-
conventional superconductors. However, the theories we have discussed so far have not in
themselves been superconducting.
Much of the richness of condensed matter physics concerns the dynamics behind the
onset of ordered phases at low temperatures. Ordered phases appear as instabilities of
the na¨ıve vacuum towards the formation of a symmetry breaking condensate. In this final
section we want to put our strongly coupled theories to work and see if their dynamics can
induce symmetry breaking phase transitions.
Superconductivityisamongthemostphenomenologicallyspectacularofsymmetrybreak-
ings. Two of the most important consequences, an infinite DC (ω = 0) conductivity and
the expulsion of magnetic fields (the Meissner effect), follow directly from electromagnetic
gauge invariance. We now review this fact, see for instance the discussion in [104] or [46].
Itisusefultoconsiderfirstlythetheorywithoutdynamicalphotons. Wenotedinsection
2.3abovethatphotonscancorrectlybetreatedasanexternalelectromagneticfieldformany
purposes in condensed matter systems. We therefore have a global U(1) symmetry which
weassumetobespontaneouslybroken. ThisbreakingresultsinamasslessGoldstoneboson
θ which transforms under U(1) by the shift θ → θ+Λ. Gauge invariance of the theory in
an electromagnetic background A means that the free energy can be written as
F = ddx(cid:112)g F[A−dθ] , (167)
forsomefunctionF. StabilityofthetheoryintheabsenceofGoldstonemodeexcitationsor
background fields implies that F should have a minimum at A = dθ. The current generated
by a small electromagnetic field is then
J i = − δ δ A F i (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) = −F(cid:48)(cid:48)[0]δA i . (168)
The minus sign arises because F is the Euclidean action which differs from the Lorentzian
action by a minus sign. For simplicity we are working in a gauge with δA = 0. Equation
(168) is the (second) London equation. The electric field in this gauge is just δE = iωδA ,
in frequency space. Therefore from (168)
iF(cid:48)(cid:48)[0]
We see that the conductivity diverges as ω → 0, as advertised. We can also note at this
point that stability of the theory (167) requires F(cid:48)(cid:48)[0] to be positive.
The Meissner effect follows from taking the curl of (168), whence
We can now see that this current J is diamagnetic, that is, it acts to expel the external
magnetic field δB that we have applied. If we are considering static fields, then (170) can
be combined with the Maxwell equation ∇×δB = µ J to obtain
This relation is called the first London equation and implies that the photon is massive and
hence exponentially suppressed inside a superconductor. The inverse of the mass, µ F(cid:48)(cid:48)[0],
is the London penetration depth squared. We should emphasise that although a dynamical
photon is necessary in order to see the expulsion of magnetic fields, the essential physics
underlying the Meissner effect is the generation of diamagnetic currents (170), which are
computed within a theory without dynamical photons in a background magnetic field.
There is a further important fact to be learnt from (167). The momentum conjugate to
the Goldstone boson θ is the charge density
It follows that we have the commutator
This shows that states in which the ‘phase’ θ has a definite value are maximally distinct
from states with a definite charge. Of course a generic state can have an expectation value
for both θ and ρ simultaneously. The relation (173) is useful to emphasise that a finite
charge density ρ does not break the U(1) symmetry. After all, ρ is a neutral operator which
commutes with the charge operator (itself!). In order to break the U(1) symmetry, we need
an expectation value for the phase θ.
Beyond the generalities above, one needs a microscopic theory to actually determine
whetherornotasymmetrybreakingcondensateformsinagivenmaterial. Aswementioned
in section (1.2.3) above, most traditional theories describing the onset of superconductiv-
ity, BCS theory being the canonical example, introduce charged ‘quasiparticles’ (dressed
electrons) that are then ‘paired’ into bosonic operators by a ‘gluing’ interaction which is
mediated by another quasiparticle such as phonons. The composite charged bosonic op-
erator is then shown to condense. While this picture has been extremely successful for
conventional superconductors [12], one can argue that various experimental ‘anomalies’ of
the high-T superconductors indicate that these materials cannot be accommodated into
the framework just outlined [13].
Onemotivationforbuildingaholographicsuperconductoristohaveamicroscopic(that
is,firstprinciplesratherthaneffective)descriptionoftheonsetofsuperconductivityinwhich
there are no quasiparticles whatsoever: there are no ‘electrons’ and no ‘glue’. Instead,
there is a strongly coupled theory in which a charged operator condenses below a critical
temperature. That is, holographic superconductors provide a (unique) computationally
tractable model for the onset of what one might call ‘superconductivity without electrons’.
Time will determine the extent to which such models are useful for real life nonconventional
superconductors such as the cuprates. In that regard, it is promising that recent theories
of the cuprate superconductors do involve s-wave superconductivity in a strongly coupled
theory with an emergent gauge field [105].
The holographic superconductors we are about to describe have a deceptive similarity
to the Landau-Ginzburg description of superconductivity [106]. One should bear in mind
that AdS/CFT is not a low energy effective field theory, but rather a dual description of
the microscopic theory. The classical nature of the gravitational description arises because
of the large N limit, not because one is working at long wavelengths or low energies.
4.2 Minimal ingredients for a holographic superconductor
We have already seen that in order to discuss charge transport in field theory one is lead
to Einstein-Maxwell theory (54) in the bulk. The dynamics of the current operator Jµ is
captured by the classical dynamics of the bulk photon field A . We have furthermore just
recalled that superconductivity is due to spontaneous breaking of the electromagnetic U(1)
symmetry. Spontaneoussymmetrybreakingoccursifachargedoperatoracquiresavacuum
expectation value. The basic relation (78) implies that such charged operators will be dual
to charged fields in the bulk. Thus we need to augment the Einstein-Maxwell action by
additional charged fields.
In a strongly coupled theory one might expect the symmetry broken phase to have
condensates of many operators. This would involve considering many coupled charged
fields in the bulk. A simplification we will make from the outset is to consider the minimal
case of only a single charged field in the bulk. The next question is what type of charged
field to consider. The operators that condense do not a priori need to be scalars. If the
condensate carries angular momentum one can talk about p-wave ((cid:96) = 1) or d-wave ((cid:96) = 2)
superconductors, as opposed to s-wave superconductors with (cid:96) = 0. We will focus here on
the simplest case of s-wave superconductors in which the charged operator is a scalar. For
AdS/CFT work on p-wave superconductors see for instance [107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112].
TheupshotoftheprevioustwoparagraphsisthatweneedtoconsiderEinstein-Maxwell
theory together with a charged (complex) scalar field. A minimal Lagrangian (in d + 1
dimensions) for such a system is
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 d(d−1) 1
2κ2 L2 4g2
WewillimmediatelyspecialisetothecaseV(|φ|) = 0,againforsimplicity. Wealsospecialise
for concreteness to the case of d = 3 dimensions for the boundary field theory. Several
interesting nonconventional superconductors in nature, such as the cuprates, are layered
and hence effectively d = 2+1 = 3 dimensional. Qualitatively similar behaviour to what
we shall find also occurs for d = 4 dimensional holographic superconductors [113].
The first step is to specify the normal, i.e. non-superconducting, state of the theory.
This will be dual to a solution to the equations of motion following from (174) with φ = 0.
The simplest background we might consider is simply the Schwarzschild-AdS metric (42),
corresponding to a scale invariant theory at finite temperature. However, this will not
work. We noted previously that in a scale-invariant theory all nonzero temperatures are
equivalent. In particular, there cannot be a preferred critical temperature, T , at which
something special happens. In order to have a critical temperature, another scale must be
introduced. If we wish to avoid adding any new ingredients into our theory, the simplest
way to introduce a scale is to work at a finite chemical potential µ. By dimensional analysis
this allows T ∝ µ.19 A chemical potential appears in describing, for instance, the cuprate
superconductors, as a measure of the doping away from critical doping [6, 79]. A chemical
potential also describes graphene held at a finite gate voltage, as we noted in section 2.8
above. We have argued above that the theory at a finite chemical potential is dual to the
Reissner-Nordstrom-AdS black hole solution (59). This is the desired gravitational dual to
the normal state.
Given our background, the second step is to ask whether this phase can be unstable
to the formation of a charged condensate. A charged condensate will be a nonvanishing
expectation value (cid:104)O(cid:105) for the charged operator dual to the bulk scalar field φ. In section
2.5 we saw that an expectation value requires the scalar field φ to be nonzero in the bulk,
with the expectation value itself given by (91). In order for the bulk scalar field to turn on
continuously below a critical temperature, there should be an instability of the Reissner-
Nordstrom black hole against perturbations by the scalar field.
To search for instability at a critical temperature one perturbs the Reissner-Nordstrom
background (59) by the scalar field φ = φ(r)e−iωt. The equation of motion for φ(r) is
(cid:18) f (cid:19)(cid:48) r2 (cid:18) (cid:18) r (cid:19)(cid:19)2
The spacetime is unstable if there is a normalisable solution to this equation (175) with
ingoing boundary conditions at the horizon such that ω has a positive imaginary part. Such
amodeisgrowingexponentiallyintime. Moreformally, andconnectingwithourdiscussion
in section 3.2 above, we can note from (99) that this mode would lead to a (pathological)
poleintheretardedGreen’sfunctionforO intheupperhalffrequencyplane,becauseatthe
particular frequency at which the mode is normalisable, the denominator of (99) vanishes.
19We will prefer to work in terms of the chemical potential rather than the (equivalent) charge density ρ
because the chemical potential is directly in units of energy whereas to convert the charge density to units
of energy squared one needs to employ a preferred velocity (the ‘speed of light’) which introduces an extra
ambiguity when comparing to experimental systems.
At this point we are only interested in determining the critical temperature at which at
instabilityfirstappears. Atthecriticaltemperature,therateofgrowthoftheunstablemode
will go to zero and therefore we can put ω = 0 in (175). That is, at the critical temperature
we expect to find a static normalisable mode. In the following section we will see that this
mode exponentiates into a new branch of static ‘hairy black hole’ solutions which describe
the superconducting phase. Allowing ourselves to rescale the radial coordinate, one can
check that equation (175) with ω = 0 only depends on three dimensionless parameters
γq, ∆ and . (176)
Recall that we defined the dimensionless number γ in (61) above. It is a free parameter
within our phenomenological approach to the AdS/CFT correspondence but would be fixed
by an embedding into string theory [114]. With d = 3,
∆ is the scaling dimension (84) of the operator O which in d = 3 becomes
Thechargeqofthescalarfieldisaninteger,q ∈ Z,ifthesymmetrygroupisU(1)ratherthan
R, as we shall assume.20 That γ appears multiplying q in (176) is consistent with the fact
that it parameterises the relative importance of the bulk electromagnetic and gravitational
forces.
One therefore scans through values of ∆ and γq, and for each value determines numer-
ically whether equation (175) admits a normalisable solution with ω = 0 for some critical
value of γT/µ. The result of this scan, from reference [114], is shown in figure 11 below.
Figure 11 shows that there is a range of charges and masses for the bulk field φ in
which the normal phase becomes unstable as the temperature is lowered. These are the
holographic superconductors. Note however that even neutral scalar fields (q = 0) can
become unstable. The criterion for instability can be read off from figure 11:
This criterion can be understood analytically by combing the following two facts [115, 106,
116, 114]. Firstly, at zero temperature the background Reissner-Nordstrom black hole has
an AdS geometry (98) close to the horizon. The radius of this AdS region is (from (60)
20Note that a condensate (cid:104)O(cid:105) does not break the symmetry completely, but rather breaks U(1)→Z .
(cid:68) 3 0.05
2.
1. 10.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Figure11: ThecriticaltemperatureT asafunctionofchargeγqanddimension∆. Contours
are labeled by values of γT /µ. The BPS line ∆ = γq is shown in red. The top boundary
(179) is a line of quantum critical points separating normal and superconducting phases
at T = 0. The bottom boundary of the plot is the unitarity bound ∆ = 1/2 at which T
diverges. Figure taken from [114].
and (63)) L2 = L2/6. Secondly, the effective mass of the scalar field at the horizon is not
m2 but rather m2 = m2−γ2q2/2L2. This can be seen by taking r → r in the equation of
motion (175) and again using (60) and (63). Thus the background electric field has given
an extra negative contribution to the mass squared of the scalar field, making it more likely
to be unstable. This contribution comes from the gauge covariant derivative. In fact we
can now ask precisely whether the scalar field is stable in the near horizon region. The
criterion for stability in any AdS space is the Breitenlohner-Freedman bound. This bound
requiresthatthemasssquaredofthefieldissufficientlylargethatthecorrespondingscaling
dimension ∆ in (84) is real. For AdS the bound becomes (L m )2 ≥ −1/4. Using the
relations just discussed we obtain that the field will be unstable if
1 L2 (cid:18) γ2q2(cid:19)
4 2 + 6 2L2
Rearranging this expression leads to the criterion (179).
To summarise, there are two distinct mechanisms causing a superconducting instability
in the Reissner-Nordstrom background:
• At low temperatures an AdS near-horizon throat appears in which an asymptot-
ically stable negative mass squared scalar field can become unstable (because the
Breitenlohner-Freedman bound is different for the near horizon AdS and the asymp-
totic AdS ).
• Inthepresenceofabackgroundelectricfield,achargedscalarfieldacquiresaneffective
negative mass squared which can drive the field unstable. This is closely related to
superradiance instabilities and to pair production.
The combined effects of these two mechanisms is encapsulated in the criterion (179) and
in figure 8. We did not put this physics in by hand, rather it emerged from the minimal
kinematic ingredients we introduced. This is the bulk ‘microscopic’ dynamics behind super-
conductivity. An interesting open question is to rephrase these processes in terms of more
field-theoretic concepts.
4.3 Superconducting phase
4.3.1 Condensate
If we continue to cool the theory down below the critical temperature T at which the bulk
scalar field becomes unstable, we must switch to a different spacetime background. As the
low temperature phase has a condensate for the operator O, the bulk scalar field φ will be
nonvanishing. This leads to the following ansatz, describing a charged ‘hairy’ black hole
L2 (cid:18) dr2 (cid:19)
together with
The hairy black holes are then found by plugging this ansatz into the Einstein-Maxwell-
scalar equations, following from the action (174), and solving numerically. We will not spell
outtheequationsorthenumericalmethodindetail, theymaybefoundin[106]. Theearlier
work [62] considered the probe limit, γq → ∞, in which one can set χ = 0 in (181) and f
equal to its value for the Schwarzschild-AdS metric (43). In this limit one only has to solve
a simpler set of equations for {A (r),φ(r)}.
Giventhesolutionφ(r)onecanreadofftheexpectationvalue(cid:104)O(cid:105)using(91). Theresult
for several values of q and for a particular value of the mass squared is shown in figure 12,
taken from [106].
Figure 12: The condensate as a function of the temperature for the case ∆ = 1 (left) and
∆ = 2 (right). In curve (a), from bottom to top, γq = 1,3,6,12. In curve (b), from top to
bottom, γq = 3,6,12. Figure taken from [106] (q in the figure is γq).
In figure 12 we see how the condensate turns on at T = T and tends towards a finite
value as T → 0. The numerics become unreliable at very low temperatures and unfortu-
nately do not let us determine, for instance, the fate of the increase of the condensate at
low temperature in the left hand plot at large q. Some analytic results at low temperatures
were obtained for a closely related system in [117]. An important open question is to gain
a better handle on the zero temperature limit of these hairy black holes.
Theplotsinfigure12showtheclassicformforasecondorderphasetransitionandindeed
onecancheck(numerically)thatthecondensatevanisheslike(T−T )1/2 andthatacrossthe
transition the second derivative of the free energy is discontinuous. We recalled in section
1.2 that second order transitions are forbidden in 2+1 dimensions at finite temperature,
because the goldstone boson in the putative symmetry broken phase has large fluctuations
which destroy the expectation value. We also noted in that section that taking a large N
limit, as we are doing, evades this result because fluctuations are suppressed in the large N
limit. At finite N, the phase transition we have just described will become a crossover. In
3+1 dimensions it would remain a genuine phase transition.
4.3.2 Conductivity
Using essentially the same procedure as in section 2.7 we can compute the electrical con-
ductivity in the hairy black hole background.21 The result for the real (dissipative) part
of the conductivity at low temperatures for several values of q and for a particular value
21A full treatment of transport at finite momentum in the superconducting phase will have to allow for
mixing of the conserved currents with excitations of the superfluid order parameter [118, 119].
of the mass squared is shown in figure 13, again taken from [106]. Computations for some
different values of the mass squared can be found in [113].
Figure 13: The real (dissipative) part of the electrical conductivity at low temperature in
the presence of a ∆ = 1 (left) and ∆ = 2 (right) condensate. The temperature taken was
T = 0.03γq(cid:104)O(cid:105) and T = 0.03 γq(cid:104)O(cid:105), respectively, and the charges were γq = 1,3,6,12.
The curves with steeper slope correspond to larger γq. Figure taken from [106] (q → γq).
There are three features of note in this plot: a delta function at the origin, ω = 0, a
gap at low frequencies ω < ω and the fact that the conductivity tends to the normal state
value at large frequencies. We will address the first two of these observations in more detail.
Thedeltafunctionattheoriginwasanticipatedongeneralgroundsin(4.1). Numerically
one detects this delta function by observing a pole in the imaginary part of the conductivity
and appealing to the Kramers-Kronig relations (129). We noted in sections (2.7) and (3.5)
abovethattheDC(ω = 0)conductivityalsodivergedinthenormalstate,duetotranslation
invariance. In the absence of impurities it is difficult to distinguish these two (distinct)
physical effects. However, it was shown in [106] that the first derivative of the coefficient of
the delta function is discontinuous across the phase transition. Furthermore, in the probe
limit γq → ∞, we noted in (3.5) that the delta function in the normal state disappears,
because momentum can be dissipated into the neutral metric (‘gluon’) degrees of freedom,
whereas it was shown in [62] that the superconducting delta function persists in this limit.
The coefficient of the delta function can be determined numerically [106, 113] and is one
definition of the superfluid density. From our general discussion in (4.1) we see that it will
also give us the magnetic penetration depth.
Theabsenceofelectriccurrentdissipationforfrequenciesω < ω isindicativeofagapin
the spectrum of charged excitations. Figure 13 seems to indicate that the gap is becoming
exact at low temperatures, at least for sufficiently large charge γq. We also found a gap
at low temperatures in the normal state conductivity in section 2.7 and suggested that
that gap might indicate the presence of a Fermi surface and inter-band excitations. The
superconducting gap in contrast appears to be tied to the presence of a condensate, with
ω ≈ (q(cid:104)O(cid:105)) . (183)
Thisrelationisexactintheprobelimit[62],atleastforthevaluesof∆studiedin[62]. Agap
in the conductivity is typical of superconducting systems although, unlike the infinite DC
conductivity, it does not follow from symmetry breaking alone. For instance, an important
prediction of weakly coupled BCS theory is that ω /T ≈ 3.5, which is indeed roughly
observedinmanyconventionalsuperconductors[12]. Therelation(183)allowsustoidentify
theverticalaxisinfigure9withthegapandthereforeobtainvaluesforω /T inholographic
superconductors. We can see that a range of values is possible, although in the probe limit
the value ω /T ≈ 8 appears to be fairly robust [62, 113]. It is amusing that this value
is close to that reported in some measurements of the high-T cuprates [120]. It is worth
emphasising that ω /T is a dimensioness order one quantity (i.e. it does not have a scaling
with N) and is therefore a natural quantity to compare with experiment. It would be
interesting to determine whether there are bounds on the values that this ratio can take in
holographic superconductors.
In weakly coupled superconductors, the conductivity gap ω = 2E , where E is the
energy gap in the charged spectrum. This is because the Cooper pairs have a negligible
bindingenergy(infact,theyarenotbound)andsotheenergyatwhichconductionbecomes
dissipative is the energy needed to produce a pair of electrons from the condensate, which
is simply twice the energy of a single electron. Thus ω = 2E is essentially the optical
theorem, as illustrated in figure 14.
! !
(cid:12) (cid:12)2
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Onshell(cid:12) (cid:12) g
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Figure 14: At weak coupling the lowest order contribution to the conductivity involves two
electrons appearing from the (nontrivial, with condensate) vacuum. For this process to
contribute to the imaginary part of the Green’s function, the virtual electrons must be on
shell. Thus the energy in the background field (ω) must at least equal twice the energy
need to produce an electron (E ).
At strong coupling however there is no need for this relation to hold. The energy gap in
thechargedspectrumcanbedetecteddirectlyfromlookingattheconductivityatfinitebut
small temperature and at very small frequencies. One will find the Boltzmann suppression
The gap E can be computed for holographic superconductors [106, 113] and indeed is not
equal to ω /2 in general. An exception are the cases ∆ = 2 and ∆ = 1 in the probe limit,
in which indeed ω = 2E [62]. It is not yet clear whether this is a coincidence or indicative
of an underlying weakly coupled ‘pairing’ mechanism in this case.
There is in fact a slight puzzle in the observation of the gaps (183) and (184), namely
that holographic superconductors are not gapped! There is a Goldstone boson arising from
the breaking of a global U(1) symmetry. The Goldstone boson can run in loops in figure
14 and produce a nonvanishing imaginary conductivity all the way down to zero frequency.
In weakly coupled BCS theory, this effect is higher order in a weak coupling expansion and
therefore negligible. However, in strongly coupled holographic superconductors one would
have anticipated a power law tail in the dissipative conductivity down to zero frequency.
The puzzle is made sharper by the fact that such tails are observed in isotropic p-wave
holographic superconductors [109] which are in some ways similar to the s-wave models we
are discussing (this shows that it is not purely a large N effect). The existence of an exact
gap may depend on the potential V(|φ|) in (174). However, a clean argument for when
one expects the Goldstone boson to be important, and when not, is lacking at present.
For instance, perhaps the Goldstone boson is responsible for the fact that the free energy
appears to decrease like a power law at low temperatures in holographic superconductors
[106], rather than exhibiting the exponential suppression expected for gapped systems.
4.3.3 Magnetic fields
There are two reasons why application of a magnetic field B suppresses superconductivity.
The first is that the Meissner effect (171) causes magnetic fields to be expelled from the
superconducting region. This costs free energy of order B2 integrated over the volume from
which the magnetic field is expelled. For a sufficiently large magnetic field, this energy
cost is greater than the free energy gained by being in the superconducting state ∆F =
F (B)−F (0) and so the system will revert to the normal state above some critical
norm. SC.
field B . Such a transition will generically be first order and if it occurs the superconductor
is called type I.
Different physics is observed if the magnetic field is not fully expelled from the su-
perconducting phase. Instead, part of the flux forms vortices within the superconducting
condensate. Vortices start to form at some B and then at a larger magnetic field B
become sufficiently dense to destroy superconductivity. Both of these transitions are con-
tinuous and one now speaks of a type II superconductor.
While we can compute B by comparing the free energy difference between the normal
and superconducting states to B2, the first order transition cannot occur dynamically in
holographic superconductors as the photon is not dynamical (effectively, the coefficient of
B2 has been sent to infinity). This is called the extreme type II limit. The extreme type II
limit is appropriate for 2+1 dimensional superconductors embedded into 3+1 dimensions
in any case [106]: while the free energy gain from superconductivity scales like the area L2
of the sample, the magnetic field needs to be expelled from a volume of size L3. Therefore
in the large volume limit it is never favourable to expel the magnetic field.
Given that holographic superconductors are (extreme) type II, we should be able to
compute B , the magnetic field above which there is no superconductivity. The supercon-
ducting state in the presence of a penetrating magnetic field is difficult to study, as the bulk
Einstein-Maxwell-scalar equations become PDES [106]. It would be very interesting to find
solutions in this phase, corresponding to black holes with magnetic charge forming a flux
lattice at the horizon. What we can do more easily is to approach B from above. To do
this we consider the normal phase in a background magnetic field and look for the onset of
superconductivity.
Similarly to the case with no magnetic field, one takes the dyonic black hole back-
ground (65) and (66) and perturbs by the scalar field φ. Because the equations of mo-
tion for a charged scalar depend explicitly on the gauge potential (66), and this potential
now depends explicitly on the coordinate x we have to separate variables more carefully:
φ = φ(r)e−iωt+ikyX (x). Upon separating variables in the φ equations of motion, it is
straightforward to check (for details see [121, 106]) that the X (x) are given by a Gaussian
multiplied by Hermite polynomials, with eigenvalues 2qB((cid:96)+ 1), with (cid:96) ∈ Z+ ∪{0}, and
that the spectrum does not depend on k (this is the degeneracy of the Landau levels). The
equation for φ(r) becomes
−r4 (cid:18) f φ(cid:48) (cid:19)(cid:48) − r2 (cid:18) ω+qµ (cid:18) 1− r (cid:19)(cid:19)2 φ+ (cid:0) 2qB((cid:96)+ 1)r2+(Lm)2(cid:1) φ = 0. (185)
TofindthecriticalB onenowsimplyputsω = 0inthisequation,becauseweareinterested
in the threshold unstable mode, and then scans for the magnetic field B, with (cid:96) = 0, such
that there is a normalisable solution. The result is shown in figure 15, taken from [106], for
a couple of values of ∆ and several values of the charge q.
Figure 15: (a) ∆ = 1 and, from right to left, γq = 12,6,3,1; (b) ∆ = 2 and from right to
left, γq = 12,6,3,1. In the lower left region there is a superconducting condensate. The
critical magnetic field B is the limit of the curve as T → 0. For B > B there is no
superconductivity. Figure taken from [106] (q → γq).
Although any one of the unstable modes is localised into a strip in the x direction, with
exponential suppression of the condensate beyond the width (qB)−1/2, the center of the
strip is in fact at x = k/qB. The degeneracy with respect to the momentum k means that
the condensate will form everywhere at once. This point was not appreciated in [121, 106].
5 Potential and limitations of the holographic approach
The application of holographic methods to condensed matter phenomena is in its infancy.
It is useful to assess what appear to be the strengths and weaknesses of the program.
There are various formidable obstacles to making direct theoretical or experimental
contactwith‘realworld’systems. Onthetheoreticalside,animportantissueisthatthetype
oftheoriesthathaveweaklycurvedgeometricaldualsarelikelytohavesignificantdifferences
withthefieldtheoriesthattypicallyariseincondensedmatterphysics. Althoughthereisnot
as yet a precise characterisation of which field theories admit weakly coupled (i.e. classical)
gravitational dual descriptions, the only properly understood cases are all supersymmetric
largeN gaugetheories. WhileemergentU(1)fieldsarebynowwellunderstoodandrelevant
forcondensedmattersystems, seee.g. [43]forsomeexamplesalongthelinesofsection1.2.2
above, even emergent SU(2)s are rather exotic and speculative [122].
On the experimental side one problematic point is that many of the most precise ex-
perimental probes (such as tunneling microscopy) directly measure the electron densities.
From a field theory point of view this corresponds to measuring the expectation values of
‘bare’ or ‘UV’ operators rather than operators that are natural in an effective field theory.
In the holographic approach we only have access to the low energy observables (i.e. low
energy compared to the lattice spacing etc.) and so we cannot compute these quantities.
Themicroscopicdifferencesbetween(currentlyavailable)realexperimentalsystemsand
theories with gravitational duals suggest that in the immediate future it is unlikely that
valuesforexperimentalquantitiesobtainedholographicallycouldrealisticallyaspiretomore
than being useful benchmarks.22 Also important in this regard is the necessity of taking the
largeN limitinholographiccomputations. Forinstance, itisnowclearthatwhilethevalue
oftheratioofshearviscositytoentropydensity, η/s = 1/4π, isuniversalinclassicalgravity
[123, 72], there are controlled 1/N corrections to this result that can be both positive and
negative and which for realistic values of N give significant changes to the numerical value
of the ratio [124, 125, 126].
The strongest case for the usefulness of AdS/CFT for condensed matter physics rests on
twopillarswhichweconsiderinturn. Thefirstisthatwhiletheorieswithholographicduals
may have specific exotic features, they also have features that are expected to be generic
of strongly coupled (for instance, but not necessarily, quantum critical) theories. Insofar as
theorieswithgravitationaldualsarecomputationallytractableexamplesofgenericstrongly
coupledfieldtheories, thenwecanusethem tobothtestourgenericexpectationsand guide
us in refining these expectations. We can recall four examples of this approach considered
in these lectures. All four examples are special cases of the fact that finite temperature
real time transport is much easier to compute via AdS/CFT than in almost any other
microscopic theory: as we saw most explicitly in section 2.7 it reduces to solving ODEs:
Firstly, we saw in section 3.4 that AdS/CFT provided the first explicitly computable
example of the anticipated hydrodynamic to collisionless crossover in spectral densities
of a CFT. Secondly, although we did not give details here, the magnetohydrodynamic
results of section 3.5 were simultaneously derived using general hydrodynamic methods and
AdS/CFTtechniques. Giventhatthehydrodynamicsissomewhatsubtleinthiscase,itwas
extremely useful to have a computationally tractable microscopic model at hand. Thirdly,
alsoinsection3.5,weobtainedresultsforthecyclotronresonancebeyondthehydrodynamic
regime. Fourthly, in section 3.6 we computed the dependence of a momentum relaxation
22Alternatively, the string landscape might suggest approaching these values statistically [114].
timescale due to weak impurities on the magnetic field and charge density.
Asecondpromisingaspectoftheholographicapproachisthatitprovides(uniquein2+1
and higher dimensions?) explicit examples of theories without a quasiparticle description in
which computations are nonetheless feasible. This will hopefully force a certain conceptual
re-evaluation which should ultimately clarify which commonly assumed properties of states
of matter fail when there is not a weakly coupled description. For instance, it is highly
unusual from a weakly coupled perspective that a theory with charged bosons can be stable
against condensation at zero temperature in the presence of a chemical potential. Yet in
figure 11 above we see that AdS/CFT provides strongly coupled theories in which there is
a nontrivial criterion (179) for the stability of the vacuum in the presence of a chemical
potential. A perhaps more obvious example already discussed, cf. figure 14, is that we
can have theories for the onset of superconductivity in which the mass gap and gap in the
conductivity are not related: ω (cid:54)= 2E .
To rephrase the previous paragraph: theories with gravitational duals are well defined
exotic theories against which the arsenal of condensed matter concepts can be tested. This
must be done without recourse to a weak coupling language: one can ask questions about
charges and currents and order parameters, but not about ‘electrons’ or ‘phonons’. Two
clear challenges for the immediate future are firstly to properly understand the dynamics
of the ground state of holographic theories at finite chemical potential (is there a fermi
surface?23 what is the correct strong coupling characterisation of a fermi surface? why can
the bosons be stable?) and secondly to understand the dynamics behind the emergence of
superconductivity from such a state. This second question will require an answer to the
first. In the best of all possible worlds, the answers to these questions may shed light on
nonconventional superconductors.
Acknowledgements
Much of the material in these lectures I have learnt with or from my collaborators and
colleagues. I’d like to mention in particular many helpful discussions with Frederik Denef,
ChrisHerzog, GaryHorowitz, PavelKovtun, PremKumar, JohnMcGreevy, MarkusMu¨ller
and Subir Sachdev.
23Recent works in this direction include [127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134]. The last two of these
shows strong evidence of Fermi-surface related behaviour.