Leveraging Sociological Models
for Predictive Analytics
Richard Colbaugh Kristin Glass Travis Bauer
Sandia National Laboratories New Mexico Tech Sandia National Laboratories
Albuquerque, NM USA Socorro, NM USA Albuquerque, NM USA
colbaugh@comcast.net kglass@icasa.nmt.edu tlbauer@sandia.gov
Abstract—There is considerable interest in developing techniques es (e.g., social movements, cultural and financial markets, pro-
for predicting human behavior, for instance to enable emerging test events, political elections, and economic activity). Alterna-
contentious situations to be forecast or the nature of ongoing but tively, the papers [14-20] derive ML techniques for predicting
“hidden” activities to be inferred. A promising approach to this the present, for instance enabling the existence of hidden links
problem is to identify and collect appropriate empirical data and in social networks to be inferred, the sentiment of informal
then apply machine learning methods to these data to generate communications to be estimated, and the spread of various
the predictions. This paper shows the performance of such learn-
health-related phenomena to be remotely monitored.
ing algorithms often can be improved substantially by leveraging
sociological models in their development and implementation. In Existing ML methods, although very useful, face at least
particular, we demonstrate that sociologically-grounded learning two challenges. First, the prediction accuracy obtainable even
algorithms outperform gold-standard methods in three im- with state-of-the-art algorithms is sometimes insufficient for
portant and challenging tasks: 1.) inferring the (unobserved) the task at hand, such as when the predictions are to be used to
nature of relationships in adversarial social networks, 2.) predict- inform high-consequence decisions (e.g., pertaining to national
ing whether nascent social diffusion events will “go viral”, and 3.) security or human health). Second, applying ML techniques
anticipating and defending future actions of opponents in adver- typically requires that significant quantities of data be collected
sarial settings. Significantly, the new algorithms perform well
and “labeled”. For example, deriving an ML scheme for esti-
even when there is limited data available for their training and
mating the sentiment polarity of blog posts usually involves
execution.
collecting, processing, and manually labeling hundreds of ex-
ample posts expressing positive and negative sentiment [15].
Keywords—predictive analysis, sociological models, social networks,
Employing ML for forecasting ordinarily entails assembling
empirical analysis, machine learning.
extensive time series traces, implying that such methods may
not be responsive enough to generate useful predictions about
I. INTRODUCTION
rapidly emerging events [13]. Additionally, realizing good per-
There is great interest in developing techniques for accurately formance with standard ML usually necessitates frequent re-
predicting human behavior. For example, forecasting the even- training to permit algorithms to adapt to evolving conditions,
tual outcomes of social processes is a central concern in do- which limits usefulness in many domains (e.g., in adversarial
mains ranging from popular culture to public policy to national settings in which opponents adapt their behaviors expressly to
security [1]. The task of inferring the existence and nature of defeat learning algorithms [21]).
activities which are presently underway but not directly ob-
This paper proposes that the challenges of predicting hu-
servable, sometimes referred to as “predicting the present” [2],
man behavior using ML often can be overcome by leveraging
is also of crucial importance in many applications. A promising
sociological models in the development and implementation of
approach to obtaining such predictions is to identify and collect
the learning algorithms. This proposal is motivated by our re-
empirical data which appropriately characterize the phenome-
cent research showing that including sociologically-meaningful
non of interest and then to analyze these data using machine
measures of network dynamics as features in ML algorithms
learning (ML) methods [3]. Roughly speaking, ML algorithms
permits predictions regarding social dynamics which are sub-
automatically “learn” relationships between observed variables
stantially more accurate than those based on standard features
from examples presented in the form of training data; the
[22]. The present paper initiates a more systematic exploration
learned relationships are then used to generate predictions in
of the utility of combining ML with sociological models for
new situations. ML’s capacity to learn from examples, scale to
social prediction. In particular, we consider three important and
large datasets, and adapt to new or changing conditions make
challenging tasks: 1.) inferring the “signs” (i.e., friendly or an-
this an attractive approach to predictive analysis.
tagonistic) of relationship ties in social networks, 2.) predicting
The work reported in [4-13] illustrates some of the ways whether a nascent social diffusion event of interest will ulti-
ML can be used for forecasting, and in particular how these mately propagate widely or will instead quickly dissipate, and
techniques can be applied to online (Web) data in order to pre- 3.) anticipating and countering the future actions of opponents
dict the outcomes of a broad range of social dynamics process- in adversarial settings.
The paper makes four primary contributions. First, we con- II. PREDICTING LINK-SIGNS
sider the problem of predicting edge-signs in social networks,
where positive/negative edges reflect friendly/antagonistic so- A. Problem Formulation
cial ties, and derive a novel ML algorithm for edge-sign predic-
Social networks may contain both positive and negative rela-
tion which leverages structural balance theory [23-25]. The
tionships – people form ties of friendship and support but also
proposed algorithm outperforms a “gold-standard” method in
of animosity or disapproval. These two types of social ties can
empirical tests with two large-scale online social networks,
be modeled by placing signs on the links or edges of the social
with the boost in prediction accuracy being especially signifi-
network, with 1 and 1 reflecting friendly and antagonistic
cant in situations where only limited training data are available.
relationships, respectively. We wish to study the problem of
Interestingly, the inferred edge-signs are also shown to be use-
predicting the signs of certain edges of interest by observing
ful when predicting the way adversarial networks will fracture
the signs and connectivity patterns of the neighboring edges.
under stress. Second, we examine the problem of forecasting
More specifically, for a directed social network G = (V, E)
the ultimate reach of “complex contagion” events [26,27]. A s
with signed edges, where V and E are the vertex and edge sets,
predictability assessment of complex contagion dynamics indi-
respectively, we consider the following edge-sign prediction
cates that metrics which should be predictive of a contagion’s
problem: given an edge (u,v)E of interest for which the edge-
reach are fairly subtle measures of the network dynamics asso-
sign is “hidden”, infer the sign of (u,v) using information con-
ciated with very early diffusion activity. These results are used
tained in the remainder of the network.
to derive an ML algorithm for predicting which complex con-
tagion events will ultimately “go viral” and which won’t, and it It is natural to suspect that structural balance theory (SBT)
is demonstrated that the algorithm outperforms standard meth- may be useful for edge-sign prediction. Briefly, SBT posits that
ods in an empirical investigation of online meme propagation if wV forms a triad with edge (u,v), then the sign of (u,v)
[28]. Significantly, the new algorithm performs well even when should be such that the resulting signed triad possessing an odd
only limited time series data are available for analysis, permit- number of positive edges; this encodes the common principle
ting reliable predictions early in the contagion lifecycle. It is that “the friend of my friend is my friend”, “the friend of my
also shown that the proposed algorithm enables effective early enemy is my enemy”, and so on [23,24]. Thus SBT suggests
warning analysis for an important class of cyber threats. that knowledge of the signs of the edges connecting (u,v) to its
neighbors may be useful in predicting the sign of (u,v).
Third, we consider the problem of predicting the actions of
opponents in adversarial settings [21], and combine ML with a
B. Prediction Algorithm
game-theoretic model [29,30] to a design predictive defense
system which is capable of countering current and future ad- We approach the task of predicting the sign of a given edge (u,
versary behaviors. An empirical study employing an extensive v) in the social network G as an ML classification problem.
set of cyber attack data shows that the proposed predictive de- The first step is to define, for a given edge, a collection of fea-
fense is much more effective than existing defense systems. For tures which may be predictive of the sign of that edge. To al-
instance, compared with standard cyber defenses, the predictive low a comparison with the (gold-standard) prediction method
method is better able to distinguish malicious attacks from le- given in [25], we adopt the same two sets of features used in
gitimate behaviors, allows successful defense against complete- that study. For a given edge (u,v), the first set of features de-
ly new attacks, and requires significantly less retraining to fined in [25] characterize the various triads to which (u,v) be-
maintain good performance in evolving threat conditions. longs. Because triads are directed and signed, there are sixteen
distinct types (e.g., the triad composed of positive edge (u,w)
Finally, and more generally, the set of results presented in
and negative edge (w,v), together with (u,v), is one type). Thus
this paper suggests that incorporating even simple concepts and
the first sixteen features for edge (u,v) are the counts of each of
models from sociology can substantially improve the perfor-
the various triad types to which (u,v) belongs. Including these
mance of ML prediction algorithms. These “sociology-aware”
features is directly motivated by SBT. For example, if (u,v)
algorithms outperform gold-standard methods, particularly
belongs to many triads with one positive and one negative
when there is limited data available for training and implement-
edge, it may be likely that the sign of (u,v) is negative, since
ing the methods, and can be applied at no additional cost. Thus
then these triads would possess an odd number of positive edg-
this initial investigation provides compelling support for the
es and therefore be “balanced”.
proposal that sociological models can be usefully leveraged in
the design and implementation of predictive analytics methods. The second set of features defined in [25] measure charac-
teristics of the degrees of the endpoint vertices u and v of the
We now present our results on inferring edge-signs (Section
given edge (u,v). There are five of these features, quantifying
II), forecasting contagion events (Section III), and designing
the positive and negative out-degrees of u, the positive and
proactive defenses (Section IV). For each application we begin
negative in-degreed of v, and the total number of neighbors u
by stating the prediction problem of interest and briefly review-
and v have in common (interpreted in an undirected sense).
ing the sociological model we use in its solution. We then de-
Combining these five measures with the sixteen triad-related
rive an ML prediction algorithm which is based, in part, on this features results in a feature vector x21 for each edge of in-
sociological model, and evaluate the performance of the pro-
terest (see [25] for a more thorough discussion of these features
posed algorithm through an empirical case study. Additionally,
and the motivation for selecting them). The feature vector x
it is shown how these analysis algorithms can be applied to key
associated with an edge (u,v) will form the basis for predicting
security informatics challenges.
the sign of that edge.
We wish to learn a vector c21 such that the classifier ori- the polarity of both edges and features. Note that the quantity
ent  sign(cTx) accurately estimates the sign of the edge whose c aug is introduced for notational convenience and is not directly
features are encoded in vector x. Vector c is learned, in part, employed for classification. More specifically, in the proposed
from labeled examples of positive and negative edges. Addi- methodology we learn c aug , and therefore c, by solving an opti-
tionally, the proposed learning algorithm leverages the insights mization problem involving the labeled and unlabeled training
of SBT. A simple way to incorporate SBT is to assemble sets data, and then use c to estimate the sign of any new edge of
V and V of positive and negative features, that is, sets of fea- interest with the simple classifier orientsign(cTx). Assume for
tures which according to SBT ought to be associated with posi- ease of notation that the edges and features are indexed so that
tive and negative edges, respectively. The triads to which (u,v) the first n l elements of d est and |V l | elements of c correspond to
belongs in which the other two edges are positive are predicted the labeled data.
by SBT to “contribute” to (u,v) being positive; thus the four
We wish to learn an augmented classifier c with the fol-
features corresponding to triads with two positive labeled edges aug
lowing three properties: 1.) if an edge is labeled, then the corre-
are candidates for membership in V (there are four such fea-
sponding entry of d should be close to this 1 label; 2.) if a
tures because G is directed). Analogously, SBT posits that the est
s feature is in the set V  VV, then the corresponding entry
eight features indexing triads in which exactly one of the two l
of c should be close to this 1 polarity; and 3.) if there is an
edges that neighbor (u,v) is positive are candidates for mem-
edge X of G that connects an edge x and a feature f and X
bership in V. (Note that the remaining four triad features index ij b ij
possesses significant weight, then the estimated polarities of x
triads in which both of the edges neighboring (u,v) are nega-
and f should be similar. These objectives are encoded in the
tive, and as there is less empirical support for SBT in this case
following optimization problem:
[25] these features are not assigned to either V or V.)
whi W ch e i s n c o a w p a d b e le ri v o e f l a e n v e M ra L gi n a g lg S o B rit T h m in f it o s r le e a d r g n e i - n s g ig p n r o p c r e e s d s i . c T tio h n e min cT Lc   n l (d  d )2 V l (c  w )2 (2)
aug aug 1 est,i i 2 i i
development begins by modeling the problem data as a bipar- c aug i1 i1
tite graph G of edge-sign instances and features (see Figure 1).
If there are n edges and 21 features, it can be seen that the adja- where L  D  A is the graph Laplacian matrix for G , with D
cency matrix A for graph G b is given by the diagonal degree matrix for A (i.e., D ii   j A ij ), and  1 ,  2
are nonnegative constants. Minimizing (2) enforces the three
 0 X properties we seek for c aug , with the second and third terms
A  XT 0   (1) penalizing “errors” in the first two properties. To see that the
first term enforces the third property, observe that this expres-
sion is a sum of components of the form X (d  c)2. The
where matrix Xn21 is constructed by stacking the feature constants  ,  are used to balance the relati i v j e e i s m t,i port j ance of
vectors x i as rows, and each ‘0’ is a matrix of zeros. the three properties. The c aug which minimizes objective func-
tion (2) can be obtained by solving the following set of linear
equations:
iinnssttaanncceess L 11  1 I nl L 12 L 13 L 14   1 d
 21 22 23 24c   (3)
 L L L I L  aug w
31 32 33 2 V 34 2
 L 41 L 42 L 43 L 44  0 
ffeeaattuurreess
where the L are matrix blocks of L of appropriate dimension.
We summarize this discussion by sketching an algorithm
Figure 1. Cartoon of bipartite graph data model G, in which
for learning the proposed edge-sign prediction (ESP) classifier:
edge-instances (red vertices) are connected to the features (blue
Algorithm ESP
vertices) they contain, and link weights (black edges) reflect the
magnitudes taken by the features in the associated instances. 1. Construct the set of equations (3).
2. Solve equations (3) for c  [ d T cT ]T (for instance
using the Conjugate Gradient method).
Assume the initial problem data consists of a set of n edges,
3. Estimate the sign of any new edge x of interest as: orient
of which n l  n are labeled, and a set of labeled features V l   sign(cTx).
VV, and suppose this label information is encoded as vec-
tors dnl and w|Vl|, respectively. Let d n be the vector The utility of Algorithm ESP is now examined through a case
of estimated signs for the edges in the dataset, and define the study involving edge-sign estimation for two social networks
“augmented” classifier c  [d T cT]Tn21 that estimates extracted from the Wikipedia online encyclopedia.
C. Wikipedia Case Study
This case study examines the performance of Algorithm ESP
for the problem of estimating the signs of the edges in two so-
cial networks extracted from Wikipedia (WP), a collectively-
authored online encyclopedia with an active user community.
We consider the following WP social networks: 1.) the graph
of 103,747 edges corresponding to votes cast by WP users in
elections for promoting individuals to the role of ‘admin’ [25],
and 2.) the graph of 740,397 edges characterizing editor inter-
actions in WP [31]. In each network, the majority of the edges
(80) are positive. Thus we follow [25] and create balanced
datasets consisting of 20K positive and 20K negative edges for
the “voting” network [25], and 50K positive and 50K negative
edges for the “interaction” network [31].
This study compares the edge-sign prediction accuracy of
Algorithm ESP with that of the impressive gold-standard lo-
Figure 3.Results for WP “interaction network” case study.
gistic regression classifier given in [25]. The gold-standard
The plot shows how edge-sign prediction accuracy (vertical
algorithm is applied exactly as described in [25]. Algorithm axis) varies with the number of available labeled training
ESP is implemented with parameter values 
 0.1 and 
 instances (horizontal axis) for two classifiers: gold-standard
0.5, and with the vector w constructed using the four “positive (red) and Algorithm ESP (blue).
triad” features V and eight “negative triad” features V noted
above. As a focus of the investigation is evaluating the extent
to which good prediction performance can be achieved even D. Network Fracture Case Study
when only a limited number of labeled edges are available for Recently it has been proposed that structural balance theory can
training, we examine training sets which incorporate a range of be used to predict the way a network of entities (e.g., individu-
numbers of labeled edges: n  0, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200. als, countries) will split if subjected to stress [32], a capability
of relevance in many security applications. Briefly, [32] models
Sample results from this study are depicted in Figures 2 and
the polarity and intensity of relationships between the entities
3. Each data point in the plots represents the average of ten
of interest as a completely connected network with weighted
trials. In each trial, the edges are randomly split into equal-size
adjacency matrix ZZTnn, where matrix element z repre-
training and testing sets, and a randomly selected subset of the ij
sents the strength of the friendliness or unfriendliness between
training edges of size n is “labeled” (i.e., the labels for these
l entities i and j. Note that this network model is somewhat more
edges are made available to the learning algorithms). It can be
general than the one introduced above, in that each edge relat-
seen that Algorithm ESP outperforms the gold-standard method
ing two individuals possesses both a sign and an intensity.
on both datasets, and that the improved accuracy obtained with
the proposed “SBT-informed” algorithm is particularly signifi- SBT is a “static” theory, positing what a stable configura-
cantly when the number of labeled training instances is small. tion of edge-signs in a social network should look like. Howev-
er, underlying the theory is a dynamical idea of how unbal-
anced network triads ought to resolve themselves to become
balanced. A model which captures this underlying dynamics is
given by the simple matrix differential equation [32]
dZ/dt  Z2, Z(0)Z . (4)
To see the connection between these dynamics and SBT, ob-
serve that (4) specifies the following dynamics for entry z :
dz /dt  z z .
ij k ik kj
Thus if triad {i,j,k} is such that z and z have the same sign,
the participation of z in this triad will drive z in the positive
direction, while if they have opposite signs then z will be driv-
en in the negative direction. These dynamics therefore favor
triads with an odd number of positive edge-signs, consistent
with SBT [23].
Figure 2. Results for WP “voting network” case study. The The paper [32] proves that, for generic initial conditions Z 0 ,
plot shows how edge-sign prediction accuracy (vertical system (4) evolves to a balanced pattern of edge-signs in finite
axis) varies with the number of available labeled training time; the balanced configuration is guaranteed to be composed
instances (horizontal axis) for two classifiers: gold-standard of either all positive edges or two all-positive cliques connected
(red) and Algorithm ESP (blue). entirely by negative edges. These configurations can be inter-
preted as predictions of the way a social network described by
Z 0 will fracture if subjected to sufficient stress. More precisely, III. EARLY WARNING FOR COMPLEX CONTAGIONS
given a model Z for a signed social network, model (4) can be
used as the basis for the following two-step procedure for pre- A. Problem Formulation
dicting the way the network will fracture: 1.) integrate (4) for-
There is significant interest in developing predictive capabili-
ward in time until it reaches singularity Z (this singularity will
s ties for social diffusion processes, for instance to permit early
be reached in finite time), and 2.) interpret Z as defining a split
s identification of emerging contentious situations or accurate
of the network into two groups, where each group has all posi-
forecasting of the eventual reach of potentially “viral” behav-
tive intra-group edges and the inter-group edges are all nega-
iors. This section considers the diffusion early warning prob-
tive (and where one of the groups could be empty). See Figure
lem: we suppose some sort of triggering event has taken place
4 for an illustration of the dynamics of system (4).
and wish to determine, as early as possible, whether this event
Remarkably, [32] shows that predictions obtained in this will ultimately generate a large, self-sustaining reaction, in-
manner are in excellent agreement with two real-world cases of volving the propagation of behavioral changes through a sub-
group fracture for which there is empirical data: the division of stantial portion of a population, or will instead quickly dissi-
countries into Allied and Axis powers in World War II [33], pate. Of particular interest is the propagation of behaviors that
and the split of the well-studied Zachary Karate Club into two are costly or controversial, or about which there is uncertainty,
smaller clubs [34]. However, the analysis presented in [32] as the diffusion of such activities often have significant societal
requires that matrix Z be completely known, that is, that all of impact [13].
the “initial” relationships z (0) between entities be measurable.
ij Recent research has shown that such behaviors may spread
Such comprehensive data are not always available in practical
as complex contagions, requiring social affirmation or rein-
applications.
forcement from multiple sources in order to propagate [26,27].
We have found that the requirement that relationship matrix Because the diffusion dynamics for complex contagions are
Z be perfectly known can be relaxed through the use of Algo- different than those of “simple” contagions like disease epi-
rithm ESP. More specifically, given a subset of the relationship demics, it is natural to suspect that developing effective early
data, the remaining weighted edge-signs can be estimated using warning algorithms for complex contagions may require care-
Algorithm ESP, and these estimates Z can be used in place of ful consideration of these more complex dynamics. In this sec-
Z when initializing (4). We have tested this procedure using tion we explore this possibility by deriving an early warning
the relationship network proposed in [33] for 17 key countries method for complex contagions which explicitly leverages a
involved in World War II. This investigation demonstrates that mathematical model for these diffusion events. We adopt the
accurate prediction of which countries would eventually join contagion model proposed in [27], implemented on a class of
the Allied forces and which would become Axis members can social networks which possess realistic topologies, and analyze
be made with less than 15% of the edge-signs known in ad- this model to identify features of the contagion that are likely to
vance. For example, data for only the relationships maintained be predictive of diffusion reach. These features are then used as
by Germany and the USSR is sufficient to enable correct pre- the basis for an ML algorithm which distinguishes complex
diction of the ultimate alignment of all countries except Portu- contagions that will propagate widely from those which will
gal (see Figure 4). Similar results hold for analysis of the split quickly dissipate.
of the Zachary Karate Club [34].
B. Predictability Assessment
Here we briefly describe the results of applying the predictabil-
ity assessment procedure presented in [1,13] to the task of iden-
tifying measurables that should be predictive of complex con-
tagion success. The discussion begins with short, intuitive re-
views of our predictability assessment process and network
diffusion modeling framework, and then summarizes the main
results obtained via this theoretical analysis.
Predictability. The basic idea behind the proposed approach to
predictability analysis is simple and natural: we assess predict-
ability by answering questions about the reachability of diffu-
sion events. To obtain a mathematical formulation of this strat-
egy, the behavior about which predictions are to be made is
used to define the system state space subsets of interest (SSI),
while the particular set of candidate measurables under consid-
eration allows identification of the candidate starting set
(CSS), that is, the set of states and system parameter values
which represent initializations that are consistent with, and
Figure 4. SBT dynamics. The evolution of model (4) initial-
equivalent under, the presumed observational capability. As a
ized at the (scaled) “propensity” matrix given in [33] (hori-
simple example, consider an online market with two products,
zontal axis is time and vertical axis is edge-weight).
A and B, and suppose the system state variables consist of the
current market share for A, ms(A), and the rate of change of
this market share, r(A) (ms(B) and r(B) are not independent
state variables because ms(A)  ms(B)  1 and r(A)  r(B)  0); discrete and continuous dynamics within a unified, computa-
let the parameters be the advertising budgets for the products, tionally tractable framework offers an expressive, scalable
b(A) and b(B). The producer of A might find it useful to define modeling environment that is amenable to formal mathematical
the SSI to reflect market share dominance by A, that is, the analysis. In particular, S-HDS models can be used to efficiently
subset of the two-dimensional state space where ms(A) exceeds represent and analyze social contagion on large-scale networks
a specified threshold. If only market share and the advertising with the four topological properties listed above [13].
budgets can be measured then the CSS is the one-dimensional
subset of state-parameter space consisting of the initial magni-
tudes for ms(A), b(A), and b(B), with r(A) unspecified.
iiinnnpppuuutttsss
dddiiissscccrrreeettteee
Roughly speaking, the approach to predictability assess-
sssyyysssttteeemmm
ment proposed in [1,13] involves determining how probable it
mmmooodddeee
is to reach the SSI from a CSS and deciding if these reachabil- ooouuutttpppuuutttsss
ity properties are compatible with the prediction goals. If a sys- cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuooouuusss
sssyyysssttteeemmm
tem’s reachability characteristics are compatible with the pre-
iiinnnpppuuutttsss
diction objectives the situation is deemed predictable (and oth-
erwise it is unpredictable). This setup permits the identification
of candidate predictive measurables: these are the measurable
states and/or parameters which most strongly affect the predict-
ability properties [1]. Continuing with the online market exam-
ple, if trajectories with positive early market share rates r(A)
are much more likely to yield market share dominance for A
than are trajectories with negative early r(A), independent of
the early values for ms(A), then the situation is unpredictable
(because r(A) is not measured). Adding the capacity to measure iiiinnnntttteeeerrrr----ccccoooommmmmmmmuuuunnnniiiittttyyyy
ddddyyyynnnnaaaammmmiiiiccccssss
r(A) would then increase system predictability, and depending
upon the task requirements this new measurement ability could iii
result in a predictable situation. A quantitative, mathematically-
rigorous presentation of this predictability assessment frame-
work can be found in [1,13]. jjj
Model. In complex contagion events, the probability of adopt-
ing a controversial or unproven behavior or idea increases with
the number of other adopting individuals, and not merely the
number of exposures to the contagion (so that multiple interac-
tions with the same adopting individual do not increase the
likelihood of adoption, as it does in simple contagions) [26,27].
Recently the authors of [27] proposed an empirically-grounded
model for complex contagions in which individuals interact via iiinnntttrrraaa---cccooommmmmmuuunnniiitttyyy
dddyyynnnaaammmiiicccsss
a social network of arbitrary topology, and the probability that
individual A adopts a given activity or idea is a function of the
number of A’s adopting neighbors; the functional form of this
Figure 5. Modeling complex contagion on networks with
adoption “influence curve” is obtained empirically (see [27] for
community structure via S-HDS. The cartoon at top left
a detailed description of the model).
depicts a network with three communities. The cartoon at
The dynamics of contagion may depend upon the topologi- bottom illustrates contagion within a community k and
between communities i and j. The schematic at top right
cal structure of the underlying social network. This dependence
shows the basic S-HDS feedback structure.
suggests that, in order to identify the features of complex con-
tagions which have predictive power, it is necessary to assess
predictability using social network models with realistic topol-
As an intuitive illustration of the way S-HDS enable effec-
ogies. Therefore in this study we implement the complex con-
tive, tractable representation of complex contagion phenomena,
tagion model [27] with social networks that possess four topo-
consider the task of modeling contagion on a network pos-
logical properties which are ubiquitous in the real-world [13]:
sessing community structure. As shown in Figure 5, the conta-
right-skewed degree distribution, transitivity, community struc-
gion proceeds in two ways: 1.) intra-community diffusion, in-
ture, and core-periphery structure.
volving frequent interactions between individuals within the
It is shown in [1] that stochastic hybrid dynamical systems same community and the resulting gradual change in the con-
(S-HDS) provide a useful mathematical formalism with which centrations of adopting (red) individuals, and 2.) inter-
to represent social contagions on realistic networks (see Figure community diffusion, in which the “infection” jumps from one
5). An S-HDS is a feedback interconnection of a discrete-state community to another, for instance because an adopting indi-
stochastic process, such as a Markov chain, with a family of vidual encounters a new community. S-HDS models offer a
continuous-state stochastic dynamical systems [1]. Combining natural framework for representing these dynamics, with the S-
HDS continuous system modeling the intra-community dynam- degree two or higher; the removed vertices constitute the 1-
ics (e.g., via stochastic differential equations), the discrete sys- shell. Continuing in the same way, all vertices with degree two
tem capturing inter-community dynamics (e.g., using a Markov (or less) are recursively removed, creating the 2-shell. This
chain), and the interplay between these dynamics being encod- process is repeated until all vertices have been assigned to a k-
ed in the S-HDS feedback structure (e.g., the transition proba- shell, and the shell with the highest index, the k -shell, is
bilities of the discrete system Markov chain may depend upon deemed to be the core of the network. This definition permits
the state of the continuous system) [13]. us to state the second candidate predictive feature nominated
via theoretical predictability assessment: early contagion activi-
Results. We applied the predictability assessment methodology
ty within the network k -shell should be a reliable predictor
summarized above to a “realistic network” version of the com- max
that the reach of the diffusion will be significant (see Figure 7).
plex contagion model given in [27] (i.e., the model obtained by
implementing the dynamics specified in [27] on a class of net-
works possessing the four topological properties summarized
above). The main finding of this study is that the predictability
of the reach of complex contagions depends crucially upon the
social network’s community and core-periphery structures.
These findings are now summarized more quantitatively.
We adopt a modularity-based definition for network com-
munity structure [35], whereby a good partitioning of a net-
work’s vertices into communities is one for which the number
of edges between putative communities is smaller than would
be expected in a random partitioning. To be concrete, a modu-
larity-based partitioning of a network into two communities
Figure 7.Early diffusion within the core is predictive. The
maximizes the modularity Q  sT B s / 4m, where m is the total cartoon illustrates the predictive feature associated with k-
number of edges in the network, the partition is specified with shell structure: contagions initiated with three “seed” indi-
the elements of vector s by setting s  1 if vertex i belongs to viduals are much more likely to propagate widely if the
community 1 and s
 1 if it belongs to community 2, and the seeds reside within the network’s core (left) rather than at
its periphery (right).
matrix B has elements B  A  kk / 2m, with A and k de-
ij ij i j ij i
noting the network adjacency matrix and degree of vertex i,
respectively. Partitions of the network into more than two
communities can be constructed recursively [35]. This defini- C. Prediction Algorithm
tion enables the specification of the first candidate predictive Consider the problem of predicting, very early in the lifecycle
feature nominated by our predictability assessment: early dis- of a complex contagion event, whether or not the contagion
persion of a complex contagion process across network com- will propagate widely. We adopt an ML approach to this early
munities should be a reliable predictor that the ultimate reach warning task: given a triggering incident, one or more infor-
of the contagion will be significant (see Figure 6). mation sources which reflect the reaction to this trigger by a
population of interest, and a specification for what constitutes
an “alarming” reaction, the goal is to learn a classifier that ac-
curately predicts, as early as possible, whether or not reaction
to the event will eventually become alarming. The ML classifi-
er used in this investigation is the Avatar ensembles of decision
trees (A-EDT) algorithm [37]; qualitatively similar results were
obtained in tests with other, less sophisticated classifiers [3].
A key step in early warning analysis is determining which
characteristics of the phenomenon of interest, if any, possess
exploitable predictive power. Based on the results of the pre-
ceding predictability assessment study, we consider three gen-
eral classes of features: 1.) intrinsics-based features – measures
Figure 6. Early dispersion across communities is predictive. of the inherent properties and attributes of the “object” being
The cartoon illustrates the predictive feature associated with diffused, 2.) simple dynamics-based features – metrics which
community structure: contagions initiated with five “seed” capturing simple properties of the diffusion dynamics (e.g., the
individuals are much more likely to propagate widely if the
rate at which the diffusion is propagating), 3.) network dynam-
seeds are dispersed across multiple communities (left) rather
ics-based features – measures that characterize the way the
than concentrated within a single community (right).
early diffusion is progressing relative to the network’s commu-
nity and core-periphery structures. Precise definitions for the
features in these classes are, of course, application dependent.
We characterize network core-periphery structure in terms
of the k-shell decomposition [36]. To partition a network into The proposed approach to early warning analysis is to iden-
its k-shells, one first removes all vertices with degree one, re- tify and collect features from these classes for the event of in-
peating this step if necessary until all remaining vertices have terest, input the feature values to the A-EDT classifier, and then
run the classifier to generate a warning prediction (i.e., a fore- tagion, [27] shows that political memes appear to propagate in
cast that the event is expected to become ‘alarming’ or remain this way. Our main source of data on meme dynamics is the
procedure in general terms, and illustrative instantiations of the authors of [28]. Briefly, the archive [39] contains time series
procedure are given in the discussions of the case studies. In data characterizing the online diffusion of ~70,000 memes dur-
what follows it is assumed that social media data form the pri- ing the period between 1 August and 31 December 2008. We
mary source of information concerning the event of interest are interested in using Algorithm EW to distinguish successful
[38]. However, the analytic process is similar when alternative and unsuccessful political memes early in their lifecycle. More
sources of data are employed [13]. precisely, the prediction task is to classify memes into two
groups – those which will ultimately be successful (acquire
Consider the following early warning algorithm:
more than S posts) and those that will be unsuccessful (attract
fewer than U posts) – very early in the meme lifecycle.
Algorithm EW
To support an empirical evaluation of the utility of Algo-
Given: a triggering incident, a definition for what constitutes an
rithm EW for this problem, we downloaded from [39] the time
‘alarming’ reaction, and a set of social media sites (e.g., blogs)
series data for slightly more than 70,000 memes. These data
B which are relevant to the early warning task.
contain, for each meme M, a sequence of pairs (t , URL ) , (t ,
Initialization: train the A-EDT classifier on a set of events that URL ) , …, (t , URL ) , where t is the time of appearance of
2 M T T M k
are qualitatively similar to the triggering event of interest and the kth blog post or news article that contains at least one men-
are labeled as ‘alarming’ or ‘not alarming’. tion of meme M, URL is the URL of the blog or news site on
which that post/article was published, and T is the total number
Procedure:
of posts that mention meme M. From this set of time series we
1. Assemble a lexicon of keywords L that pertain to the trig- randomly selected 100 “successful” political meme trajectories,
gering event under study. defined as those corresponding to memes which attracted at
2. Conduct a sequence of Web crawls and construct a time least 1000 posts during their lifetimes, and 100 “unsuccessful”
series of blog graphs G (t). For each time period t, label political meme trajectories, defined as those whose memes
each blog in G (t) as ‘active’ if it contains a post mention- acquired no more than 100 total posts.
ing any of the keyword in L and ‘inactive’ otherwise.
Two other forms of data were collected for this study: 1.) a
3. Form the union G B =  t G B (t), partition G B into network large Web graph which includes websites (URLs) that appear
communities and into k-shells, and map the partition ele- in the meme time series, and 2.) samples of the text surround-
ment structure of G B back to each of the graphs G B (t). ing the memes in the posts which contain them. More specifi-
4. For each graph G (t), compute the values for all features cally, we sampled the URLs appearing in the time series for our
(intrinsics, simple dynamics, and network dynamics). set of 200 successful and unsuccessful memes and performed a
Web crawl that employed these URLs as “seeds”. This proce-
5. Apply the A-EDT classifier to the time series of features,
dure generated a Web graph, denoted G , that consists of ap-
i.e., the features obtained for the sequence of blog graphs B
proximately 550,000 vertices (websites) and 1.4 million edges
{G (t ), …, G (t )}, where t and t are the triggering event
B 0 B p 0 p (hyperlinks), and includes essentially all of the websites which
time and present time, respectively. Issue a warning alert if
appear in the meme time series. To obtain samples of text sur-
the classifier output is ‘alarming’.
rounding memes in posts, we randomly selected ten posts for
We now offer a few remarks concerning Algorithm EW. each meme and then extracted from each post the paragraph
The keywords in Step 1 can be identified with the help of sub- which contains the first mention of the meme.
ject matter experts and also through computational means (e.g.,
Algorithm EW employs three types of features: intrinsics,
via meme analysis [28]). Step 2 is by now standard, and a vari-
simple dynamics-based, and network dynamics-based. We now
ety of tools exist which can perform these tasks [38]. In Step 3,
describe the instantiation of each of these feature classes for the
the blog network can be partitioned into communities and k-
meme problem. Consider first the intrinsics features, which for
shells using modularity-based community extraction [35] and
the meme application become language-based measures. Each
standard k-shell decomposition [36], respectively. The particu-
“document” of text surrounding a meme in its (sample) posts is
lar choices of metrics for the intrinsics, simple dynamics, and
represented by a simple “bag of words” feature vector x|V|,
network dynamics features computed in Step 4 tend to be prob-
where the entries of x are the frequencies with which the words
lem specific, and typical examples are given in the case studies
in the vocabulary V appear in the document. A language-based
below. Finally, in Step 5 the feature values obtained in Step 4
feature which might reasonably be expected to be predictive of
serve as inputs to the A-EDT classifier, and the output of the
meme propagation is the sentiment or emotion of documents
classifier is used to decide whether an alert should be issued.
containing the meme. A simple way to quantify a document’s
sentiment/emotion is through the use of appropriate lexicons.
D. Meme Case Study
Let s|V| denote a lexicon vector, in which each entry of s is a
The goal of this case study is to apply Algorithm EW to the
numerical “score” quantifying the sentiment/emotion intensity
task of predicting whether or not a given meme (i.e., short tex-
of the corresponding word in vocabulary V. The aggregate sen-
tual phrase which propagates relatively unchanged online) will
timent/emotion score of document x can then be computed as
“go viral”. Although it may seem that meme diffusion is not score(x)  sTx / sT1, where 1 is a vector of ones. Thus score(.)
sufficiently costly or controversial to qualify as a complex con-
estimates document sentiment or emotion as a weighted aver-
age of the sentiment or emotion scores for the words compris- can be seen from Figure 8 that Algorithm EW outperforms the
ing the document. (Note that if no sentiment or emotion infor- gold-standard method, especially in the important situation in
mation is available for a particular word in V then the corre- which it is desired to form predictions soon after the meme is
sponding entry of s is set to zero.) detected. Indeed, these results show that useful predictions can
be obtained with Algorithm EW within the first twelve hours
To characterize the emotion content of a document we use
after a meme is detected (this corresponds to 0.5% of the aver-
the Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) lexicon [40],
age meme lifespan). Interestingly, analysis of feature predictive
while positive or negative sentiment is quantified via the “IBM
power [3] shows that the most predictive features are, in de-
lexicon” [41]. This approach generates four language features
creasing order, 1.) community dispersion, 2.) #k-core blogs, 3.)
for each meme: the happiness, arousal, dominance, and posi-
#posts, and 4.) post rate, which supports the conclusions of the
tive/negative sentiment of the sample text surrounding that
complex contagion-based predictability assessment.
meme. As a preliminary test, we computed the mean emotion
and sentiment of text surrounding the 100 successful and 100
unsuccessful memes in our dataset. On average the text sur-
rounding successful memes is happier, more active, more dom-
inant, and more positive than that surrounding unsuccessful
memes (p0.0001), so it is at least plausible that the language
features may possess some predictive power.
Consider next two simple dynamics-based features, defined
to capture basic characteristics of the early evolution of meme
post volume: 1.) #posts() – the cumulative number of posts
mentioning the given meme by time  (where  is small relative
to the typical meme lifespan), and 2.) post rate() – a simple
estimate of the rate of accumulation of these posts at time .
Recall that predictability assessment suggests that both early
dispersion of contagion activity across network communities
and early contagion activity within the network core ought to
be predictive of meme success. These insights motivate the
definition of two network dynamics-based features for meme
prediction: 1.) community dispersion() – the cumulative num- Figure 8. Results for meme early warning case study. The
ber of network communities in the blog graph G that, by time plot shows how prediction accuracy (vertical axis) varies
, contain at least one post which mentions the meme, and 2.) with the length of time that has elapsed between meme de-
#k-core blogs() – the cumulative number of blogs in the k - tection and meme prediction (horizontal axis) for the two
classifiers: gold-standard (red) and Algorithm EW (blue).
shell of blog graph G that, by time , contain at least one post
which mentions the meme.
This case study compares the meme early warning accuracy E. Early Warning Case Study
of Algorithm EW, as applied to meme prediction, with that of
This case study explores the ability of Algorithm EW to pro-
two other prediction methods: a language-based (LB) strategy
vide reliable early warning for politically-motivated distributed
and a standard-dynamics (SD) scheme. The LB predictor uses
denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks, an important class of cyber
the four language features noted above with the A-EDT classi-
threats. In particular, we are interested in exploring the utility
fier to try to distinguish successful and unsuccessful memes,
of Algorithm EW when using social media as an information
and achieves a prediction accuracy of 66.5% (ten-fold cross-
source. Toward this end, we first identified a set of Internet
validation). Since simply guessing ‘successful’ for all memes
disruptions which included examples from three distinct classes
gives an accuracy of 50%, it can be seen that the language
of activity: 1.) successful DDoS attacks (the events for which
intrinsics, when used alone, possess relatively limited predic-
we seek early warning; 2.) natural events which disrupt Internet
tive power.
service (disturbances, like earthquakes, that impact the Internet
Next we compare the predictive performance of the SD but for which it is known that no early warning signal exists in
classifier with that of Algorithm EW. The SD predictor com- social media); 3.) quiet periods (periods during which there is
bines the four language features with the two simple dynamics social media “chatter” concerning impending DDoS attacks but
features, #posts() and post rate(), within the A-EDT classifi- no successful attacks occurred). Including events selected from
er. Because this is representative of state-of-the-art prediction these three classes is intended to provide a fairly comprehen-
schemes [e.g., 5-8], this approach is referred to as the gold- sive test, as these classes correspond to 1.) the domain of inter-
standard algorithm. The application of Algorithm EW to meme est, 2.) a set of disruptions which impact the Internet but have
prediction combines the language features with four network no social media warning signal, and 3.) a set of “non-events”
dynamics measures: #posts(), post rate(), community disper- which do not impact the Internet but do possess putative social
media warning signals.
sion(), and #k-core blogs(). Sample results from this empiri-
cal test are depicted in Figure 8. Each data point represents the We selected twenty events from these three classes:
average accuracy over ten trials (ten-fold cross-validation). It
Politically-motivated DDoS attacks:
▪ Estonia event in April 2007; In this evaluation, Algorithm EW achieves perfect accura-
cy, correctly identifying all ‘attack’ and ‘non-attack’ events. If
▪ CNN/China incident in April 2008;
the test is made more difficult, so that the blog data made
▪ Israel/Palestine conflict event in January 2009; available to Algorithm EW for attack events is limited to a four
▪ DDoS associated with Iranian elections in June 2009; week period that ends two weeks before the attack, the pro-
posed approach still achieves 95% accuracy, An examination
▪ WikiLeaks event in November 2010;
of the predictive power of the four features used as inputs to the
▪ Anonymous v. PayPal, etc. attack in December 2010; A-EDT classifier reveals that community dispersion is the most
▪ Anonymous v. HBGary attack in February 2011. predictive measure.
Natural disturbances:
IV. PREDICTIVE DEFENSE
▪ European power outage in November 2006;
▪ Taiwan earthquake in December 2006; A. Problem Formulation
▪ Hurricane Ike in September 2008; Coevolving adversarial dynamics are present in many applica-
tion areas, including national security, public policy, business,
▪ Mediterranean cable cut in January 2009;
and economics. There is significant interest to develop proac-
▪ Taiwan earthquake in March 2010; tive approaches to dealing with adversarial behavior, in which
▪ Japan earthquake in March 2011. opponents’ future strategies are anticipated and these insights
are incorporated into defense designs. Recent work suggests
Quiet periods:
that previous hostile actions and defender responses provide
Seven periods, from 2005 through 2011, during which there predictive information about future attacker behavior because
were discussions in social media of DDoS attacks on various of the coevolving relationship that exists between adversaries
U.S. government agencies but no successful attacks occurred. [44,21]. However, little is known about how to systematically
exploit this predictability to design effective countermeasures.
We collected two forms of data for each of these twenty
This section considers the following concrete instantiation of
events: cyber data and social data. The cyber data consist of
the proactive defense problem: given some (possibly limited)
time series of routing updates which were issued by Internet
history of attacker actions, design a predictive defense system
routers during a one month period surrounding each event.
which performs well against both current and future attacks.
More precisely, these data are the Border Gateway Protocol
(BGP) routing updates exchanged between gateway hosts in It is reasonable to expect that concepts and techniques from
the Autonomous System network of the Internet. The data were game theory [29,30] might be useful in designing predictive
downloaded from the publicly-accessible RIPE collection site defense systems, and indeed such approaches have been at-
[42] using the process described in [43] (see [43] for additional tempted in different domains (see [21,45] for relevant back-
details and background information on BGP routing dynamics). ground). These investigations, although useful, have not tended
The temporal evolution of the volume of BGP routing updates to produce practically-implementable results. While there are
(e.g., withdrawal messages) gives a coarse-grained measure of several challenges to successfully applying game-theoretic
the timing and magnitude of large Internet disruptions and thus methods to adversarial dynamics of real-world scale and com-
offers a simple and objective way to characterize the impact of plexity, we mention two that have been particularly daunting.
each of the events in our collection. The social data consist of First, the space of possible attacker actions is typically very
time series of social media mentions of cyber attack-related large in realistic environments. Because the complexity of
keywords and memes detected during a one month period sur- game models usually increases exponentially with the number
rounding each of the twenty events. These data were gathered of actions available to the players [29,45], this has made game
using the procedure specified in Algorithm EW. models intractable in practice. And second, it has proved diffi-
cult to develop models that capture evolving attacker behavior
We apply Algorithm EW to the task of distinguishing the
in any but the most idealized (and unrealistic) situations.
seven DDoS attacks from the thirteen other events in the event
set. For simplicity, in this case study we do not use any In this section we overcome these challenges by approach-
intrinsics-based features (e.g., language metrics) in the A-EDT ing the task of developing game-based models for adversarial
classifier, and instead rely upon the four dynamics-based fea- interactions from a sociological perspective [30]. More specifi-
tures defined in the meme study. Because the event set in this cally, we develop a simple game model which explicitly lever-
study includes only twenty incidents, we apply Algorithm EW ages empirical data directly within an ML framework, enabling
with two-fold cross-validation. In the case of DDoS events, the adversary behavior to be predicted and countered in realistic
blog data made available to Algorithm EW is limited to posts settings. Crucially, the proposed approach derives the optimal
made during the five week period which ended one week be- defense for the predicted attacks, rather than attempting to ob-
fore the attack. For the six natural disturbances, the blog data tain perfect predictions, and therefore enjoys robust perfor-
includes all posts collected during the six week period immedi- mance in the presence of (inevitable) prediction errors. (See,
ately prior to the event, while in the case of the seven non- for instance, [30] for an argument for the need to explicitly
events, the blog data includes the posts gathered during a six connect game models with data if game theory is to impact the
week interval which spans discussions of DDoS attacks on U.S. empirically-oriented science of sociology, and for suggestions
government agencies. concerning some ways sociology might contribute to an empir-
ical game theory.)
We approach the task of countering adversarial behavior as imply that the values of the individual elements of x approach
an ML classification problem, in which the objective is to dis- those of x monotonically.
tinguish innocent and malicious activity. Each instance of ac-
To permit convenient examination of the evolution of fea-
tivity is represented as a feature vector x|F|, where entry x
i ture vectors x and x during the 30 month period under study,
of x is the value of feature i for this instance and F is the set of S NS
the emails are first binned by quarter. Next, the average values
instance features. In what follows, F is a set of “reduced” fea-
for each of the 20 (reduced dimension) features are computed
tures, obtained by projecting the original feature vectors into a
for all Spam emails and all non-Spam emails (separately) for
lower-dimensional space. While feature reduction is standard
each quarter. Figure 9 illustrates the feature space dynamics of
practice in ML [3], we show below that aggressive reduction
Spam and non-Spam messages for one representative element
allows us to efficiently manage the complexity of our game
(F1) of this reduced feature space. As seen in the plot, the value
models. Behavior instances x belong to one of two classes:
of feature F1 for Spam approaches the value of this feature for
positive/malicious and negative/innocent (generalizing to more
non-Spam, and this increasing similarity is a consequence of
than two behavior classes is straightforward [3]). The goal is to
changes in the composition of Spam messages (the value of F1
learn a vector w|F| such that classifier orient  sign(wTx)
for non-Spam emails is essentially constant). The dynamics of
accurately estimates the class of behavior x, returning 1 (1)
the other feature values (not shown) are analogous.
for malicious (innocent) activity.
B. Predictability Assessment
As indicated in Section III, it is useful to assess the predictabil-
ity of a phenomenon before attempting to predict its evolution,
for example to identify measurables which possess predictive
power [1,13]. There has been limited theoretical work assessing
predictability of adversarial dynamics, but existing studies sug-
gest attack-defend coevolution often generates predictable dy-
namics. For instance, although [46] finds that, in some repeated
games, certain player strategies lead to chaotic dynamics, [22]
shows a large range of player strategies in repeated two-player
and multi-player games result in predictable adversarial behav-
ior. Here we supplement this theoretical work by conducting an
empirical investigation of predictability, and select as our case
study a cyber security problem – Spam filtering – which pos-
sesses attributes that are representative of many adversarial
domains.
To conduct this investigation, we first obtained a large col-
lection of emails from various publicly-available sources for
Figure 9.Spam/non-Spam evolution in feature space. The
plot depicts evolution of feature F1 for Spam (red) and
the period 1999-2006, and added to this corpus a set of Spam
non-Spam (blue) during the ten quarters of the study.
emails acquired from B. Guenter’s Spam trap for the same time
period. Following standard practice, each email is modeled as a
“bag of words” feature vector x|F|, where the entries of x are
Observe that the Spam dynamics illustrated in Figure 9 re-
the frequencies with which the words in vocabulary F appear in
flect sensible adaptation on the part of Spammers: the features
the message. The resulting dataset consists of ~128,000 emails
of Spam email messages evolve to appear more like those of
composed of more than 250,000 features. We extracted from
non-Spam email and therefore to be more difficult to identify.
this collection of Spam and non-Spam emails the set of mes-
Additionally, this evolution is regular, with feature values for
sages sent during the 30 month period between January 2001
Spam approaching those for non-Spam in a nearly-monotonic
and July 2003 (other periods exhibit very similar behavior).
fashion. Thus this empirical analysis indicates that coevolving
Finally, the dimension of the email feature space is reduced via
Spammer-Spam filter dynamics possesses some degree of pre-
singular value decomposition (SVD) analysis [3], yielding a
dictability, and that the features employed in Spam analysis
reduction in feature space dimension |F| of four orders of mag-
may have predictive power; this result is in agreement with the
nitude (from ~250K to 20).
conclusions of the theoretical predictability analysis reported in
We wish to examine, in an intuitive way, the predictability [22]. Moreover, because many of the characteristics of Spam-
of Spammer adaptation, and propose two simple but reasonable Spam defense coevolution are also present in other adversarial
criteria with which to empirically evaluate predictability: sen- systems, this result suggests these other systems may have ex-
sibility and regularity (a more systematic and mathematically- ploitable levels of predictability as well.
rigorous frameworks for defining and assessing predictability is
derived in [1,13] and summarized in Section III). More specifi- C. Predictive Defense
cally, and in the context of Spam, it would be sensible for
The proposed approach to designing a predictive defense sys-
Spammers to adapt their messages over time in such a way that
tem which works well against both current and future attacks is
Spam feature vectors x become more like feature vectors x
S NS to combine ML with a simple game-based model for adversary
of legitimate emails, and regularity in this adaptation might
behavior. In order to apply game-theoretic methods, it is neces- Algorithm PD
sary to overcome the complexity and model-realism challenges
1. Collect historical data {y, x}n which reflects past be-
mentioned above. We address problem complexity by model- i i i=1
havior of the attacker and past legitimate behavior.
ing adversary actions directly in an aggressively-reduced fea-
ture space, so that the (effective) space of possible adversary 2. Optimize objective function (5) to obtain the predicted
actions which must be considered is dramatically decreased. actions a|F| of the attacker and the optimal defense
The difficulty of deriving realistic representations for attacker w|F| to counter this attack.
behavior is overcome by recognizing that the actions of attack- 3. Estimate the status of any new activity x as either mali-
ers can be modeled as attempts to transform data (i.e., feature cious (1) or innocent (1) via orient  sign(wTx).
vectors x) in such a way that malicious and innocent activities
are indistinguishable. (This is in contrast to trying to model the Observe that Step 2 of this algorithm can be interpreted as first
attack instances “from scratch”). It is possible to model attacker predicting the attacker strategy through computation of attack
actions as transformations of data because, within an empirical vector a, and then learning an appropriate countermeasure w by
ML problem formulation, historical attack data are available in applying ML to the “transformed” data {y, xa}n .
the form of training instances.
D. Spam Case Study
We model adversarial coevolution as a sequential game, in
which attacker and defender iteratively optimize the following This case study examines the performance of Algorithm PD for
objective function: the Spam filtering problem. We use the Spam/non-Spam email
dataset introduced above, consisting of ~128,000 messages that
   were sent during the period 1999-2006. The study compares
min max a 3 w 3 lossy
the effectiveness of Algorithm PD, implemented as a Spam
w a  i  filter, with that of a well-tuned naïve Bayes (NB) Spam filter
[21]. Because NB filters are widely used and work very well in
In (5), the loss function represents the misclassification rate for
the defense system, where {y, x}n denotes pairs of activity Spam applications, this filter is referred to as the gold-standard
algorithm. We extract from our dataset the 1000 oldest legiti-
instances x and labels y, and vector w parameterizes the de-
mate emails and 1000 oldest Spam messages for use in training
fense (recall that the defense attempts to distinguish malicious
and innocent activity using the classifier orient  sign(wTx)). both Algorithm PD and the gold-standard algorithm. The email
messages sent during the four year period immediately follow-
The attacker attempts to circumvent the defense by transform-
ing the data through vector a|F|, and the defender’s goal is to ing the date of the last training email are used as test data. More
specifically, these emails are binned by quarter and then ran-
counter this attack by appropriately specifying classifier vector
domly sub-sampled to create balanced datasets of Spam and
w|F|. The terms ||a||3 and ||w||3 define “regularizations”
legitimate emails for each of the 16 quarters in the test period.
imposed on attacker and defender actions, respectively, as dis-
cussed below. Recall that Algorithm PD employs aggressive feature space
dimension reduction to manage the complexity of the game-
Observe that (5) models the attacker as acting to increase
based modeling process. This dimension reduction is accom-
the misclassification rate with vector a, subject to the need to
plished here through SVD analysis, which reduces the dimen-
limit the magnitude of this vector (large a is penalized via the
sion |F| of feature vectors from ~250K to 20) [3]. (The orthog-
term ||a||3). This model thus captures in a simple way the fact
onal basis used for this reduction is derived by performing
that the actions of the attacker are in reality always constrained
SVD analysis using the 1000 non-Spam and 1000 Spam train-
by the goals of the attack. For instance, in the case of Spam
ing data.) We remark that good classification accuracy can be
email attacks, the Spammer tries to manipulate message x in
obtained with a wide range of (reduced) feature space dimen-
such a way that it “looks like” legitimate email and evades the
sions. For example, a Spam filter accuracy of ~97% is achieved
Spam filter w. However, transformed message xa must still
with the training data when using an NB classifier implemented
communicate the desired information to the recipient or the
with a feature space dimension ranging from |F|100,000 to |F|
attacker’s goal will not be realized, and so the transformation
5 (accuracy is estimated via two-fold cross-validation).
vector a cannot be chosen arbitrarily.
The gold-standard strategy is applied as described in [21].
The defender attempts to reduce the misclassification rate
Algorithm PD is implemented with parameter values   0.001
with an optimal choice for vector w, and avoids “over-fitting”
through regularization with the ||w||3 term [3]. Notice that the and   0.1, and with a sum-of-squares loss function. As dis-
cussed above, motivations for developing predictive defenses
formulation (5) permits the attacker’s goal to be modeled as
include the capability to perform well against new attacks and
counter to, but not exactly the opposite of, the defender’s goal,
the possibility to maintain an effective defense without the
and this is consistent with many real-world settings. Returning
need for frequent retraining, which is ordinarily expensive and
to the Spam example, the Spammer’s objective of delivering
time-consuming. To explore these issues, in this case study we
messages which induce profitable user responses is not the
train Algorithm PD and the gold-standard algorithm once, us-
inverse of an email service provider’s goal of achieving high
ing the 1000 legitimate/1000 Spam dataset, and then apply the
Spam recognition with a very low false-positive rate.
filters without retraining on the first four years of emails that
The preceding development can be summarized by stating follow these 2000 emails.
the following predictive defense (PD) algorithm:
Sample results from this study are depicted in Figure 10. from set F; the resulting classifier vectors are denoted w and
Each data point in the plots represents the average accuracy {w , w }. (1) is then employed to compute the optimal attack
over ten trials (two-fold cross-validation). It can be seen that against classifier vector w , denoted a , and to compute the
the filter based upon Algorithm PD significantly outperforms optimal attack for the defense consisting of randomly alternat-
the gold-standard method: the predictive defense experiences ing classifiers w and w , designated a .
almost no degradation in filtering accuracy over the four years
Applying this evaluation process to the 2000 email training
of the study, while the gold-standard method suffers a substan-
dataset described in Section IVD suggests randomized feature
tial drop in accuracy during this period. These results suggest
leaning may be an effective way to reduce the efficacy of ad-
that the combination of ML and game theory-based adversary
versary reverse engineering methods. We define F to be the set
model offers an effective means of defending against new at-
of 20 features with largest singular values, and build sets F1
tacks. Additionally, the results indicate that predictive defense
and F2 by randomly sampling F (with replacement) until each
permits good performance to be realized with much less re-
subset contains 10 features. The classification accuracy of w
training than is usually required. F
against nominal data (i.e., with a0) is superior to that provided
by a classifier which randomly alternates between classifiers
w and w , but the difference is modest – the accuracies are
98.4% and 96.2%, respectively, for w and {w ,w } (two-fold
cross-validation). Crucially, however, the randomized feature
classifier is substantially more robust against attack data (i.e.,
data for aa or aa ). Indeed, the accuracy of classifier w is
only 66.1% against attack data, while the accuracy of random-
ized feature classifier {w ,w } drops less than 10%, to 86.8%,
in this setting (two-fold cross-validation). Figure 11 summariz-
es these results.
Figure 10. Results for Spam filtering case study. The plot
shows how filter accuracy (vertical axis) varies with time
(horizontal axis) for the gold-standard classifier (red) and
Algorithm PD (blue).
ooppttiimmaall rraannddoommiizzeedd ffeeaattuurree
lleeaarrnniinngg lleeaarrnniinngg
E. Randomized Feature Learning
An important consideration when applying ML techniques in
adversarial settings is the extent to which adversaries can “re- Figure 11. Results for randomized feature learning case
verse-engineer” the learning algorithm and use these insights to study. Bar charts show Spam-non-Spam classification
circumvent the classifier. One way to increase the difficulty of accuracy for classifiers w (left bars) and {w , w }
the adversary’s reverse engineering task is to employ “random- (right bars) for nominal Spam (blue) and “attack” Spam
ized feature” learning [47]. Here we explore in a preliminary (red) (two-fold cross-validation).
way the following three-step implementation of this idea: 1.)
divide the set of available features into randomly-selected, pos-
sibly overlapping subsets; 2.) train one classifier for each sub- V. SUMMARY
set of features; and 3.) alternate between classifiers in a random
This paper proposes that predictive analysis techniques can be
fashion during operation. The fact that good classifier perfor-
improved by leveraging sociological models, and explores this
mance is often obtainable with only a few features (see the
possibility by considering three challenging prediction tasks:
Spam example above) suggests the feasibility of employing
1.) inferring the signs (friendly or antagonistic) of ties in social
multiple small subsets of randomly-selected features in a classi-
networks, 2.) predicting whether an emerging social diffusion
fier.
event will propagate widely or quickly dissipate, and 3.) antic-
To test the effectiveness of this strategy, we use a variant of ipating and defending future actions of opponents in adversar-
the optimization process specified in (1). More specifically, we ial settings. In each case, we derive a novel machine learning-
first use training data {y, x}n to computed the classifier vec- based prediction algorithm which incorporates a sociological
tor w in two ways: 1.) using the full set of (reduced-dimension) model in its development and show that the new algorithm
features F, 2.) using two subsets of features randomly selected outperforms a “gold-standard” method in empirical tests. Tak-
en together, the collection of results presented in this paper in Web forums”, ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
indicate that incorporating simple models from sociology can Vol. 26, pp. 1-34, 2008.
substantially improve the performance of prediction methods, [17] Lampos, V., T. De Bie, and N. Cristianini, “Flu detector –
Tracking epidemics on Twitter, ECML PKDD 2010, Springer
particularly in applications in which there is only limited data
LNAI 6323, 2010.
available for training and implementing the algorithms.
[18] Christakis, N. and J. Fowler, “Social network sensors for early
detection of contagious outbreaks”, PLoS ONE, Vol. 5, e12948,
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 2010.
[19] Ayers, J., K. Ribisi, and J. Brownstein, “Tracking the rise in
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Defense,
popularity of electronic nicotine delivery systems using search
The Boeing Company, and the Laboratory Directed Research query surveillance”, American J. Preventative Medicine, Vol.
and Development Program at Sandia National Laboratories. 41, pp. 1-6, 2011.
We thank Chip Willard of the U.S. Department of Defense, [20] Glass, K. and R. Colbaugh, “Estimating the sentiment of social
Curtis Johnson of Sandia National Laboratories, and Anne Kao media content for security informatics applications”, Security
Informatics, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 1-16, 2012.
of Boeing for numerous helpful discussions on aspects of this
research. [21] Colbaugh, R. and K. Glass, “Proactive defense for evolving
cyber threats”, Proc. 2011 IEEE International Conference on
Intelligence and Security Informatics, Beijing, China, July 2011.
REFERENCES [22] Colbaugh, R., “Arctic ice, George Clooney, lipstick on a pig,
and insomniac fruit flies: Combining kd and m&s for predictive
[1] Colbaugh, R. and K. Glass, “Predictive analysis for social
analysis”, Proc. ACM KDD ’11, San Diego, CA, August 2011.
processes I: Multi-scale hybrid system modeling, and II:
Predictability and warning analysis”, Proc. 2009 IEEE Multi- [23] Heider, F., “Attitude and cognitive organization”, J. Psychology,
Conference on Systems and Control, Saint Petersburg, Russia, Vol. 21, pp. 107-112, 1946.
July 2009. [24] Cartwright, D. and F. Harary, “Structural balance: A
[2] Choi, H. and H. Varian, “Predicting the present with Google generalization of Heider’s theory”, Psychological Review, Vol.
Trends”, SSRN Preprint, April 2009. 63, pp. 277-293, 1956.
[3] Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of [25] Leskovec, J., D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg, “Predicting
Statistical Learning, Second Edition, Springer, New York, 2009. positive and negative links in online social networks”, Proc
WWW 2010, Raleigh, NC, April 2010.
[4] Colbaugh, R., K. Glass, and P. Ormerod, “Predictability of
‘unpredictable’ cultural markets”, 105th Annual Meeting of the [26] Centola, D., “The spread of behavior in an online social network
American Sociological Association, Atlanta, GA, August 2010. experiment”, Science, Vol. 329, pp. 1194-1197, 2010.
[5] Asur, S. and B. Huberman, “Predicting the future with social [27] Romero, D., B. Meeder, and J. Kleinberg, “Differences in the
media”, Proc. IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on mechanics of information diffusion across topics: Idioms,
Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, Toronto, political hashtags, and complex contagion on Twitter”, Proc
Ontario, Canada, September 2010. WWW 2011, Hyderabad, India, March 2011.
[6] Goel, S., J. Hofman, S. Lahaie, D. Pennock, and D. Watts, [28] Leskovec, J., L. Backstrom, and J. Kleinberg, “Meme-tracking
“Predicting consumer behavior with Web search”, Proc. and the dynamics of the news cycle”, Proc. ACM KDD ‘09,
National Academy of Sciences USA, Vol. 107, pp. 17486-17490, Paris, France, June 2009.
2010. [29] von Neumann, J. and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and
[7] Lerman, K. and T. Hogg, “Using stochastic models to describe Economic Behavior, Princeton University Press, 1944.
and predict social dynamics of Web users”, arXiv preprint, [30] Swedberg, R., “Sociology and game theory: Contemporary and
October 2010. historic perspectives”, Theory and Society, Vol. 30, pp. 301-335,
[8] Bollen, J., H. Mao, and X. Zeng, “Twitter mood predicts the 2001.
stock market”, J. Computational Science, Vol. 2, pp. 1-8, 2011. [31] Maniu, S., B. Cautis, and T. Abdessalem, “Building a signed
[9] Colbaugh, R. and K. Glass, “Detecting emerging topics and network from interactions in Wikipedia”, Proc. DBsocial ’11,
trends via predictive analysis of ‘meme’ dynamics”, Proc. 2011 Athens, Greece, June 2011.
AAAI Spring Symposium Series, Palo Alto, CA, March 2011. [32] Marvel, S., J. Kleinberg, R. Kleinberg, and S. Strogatz,
[10] Lui, C., P. Metaxas, and E. Mustafaraj, “On the predictability of “Continuous-time model of structural balance”, Proc. National
the U.S. elections through search volume activity”, Proc. IADIS Academy of Sciences USA, Vol. 108, pp. 1771-1776, 2011.
e-Society Conference, Avila, Spain, March 2011. [33] Axelrod, R. and D. Bennett, “Landscape theory of aggregation”,
[11] Guman, G., “Internet search behavior as economic forecasting British J. Political Science, Vol. 23, pp. 211-233, 1993.
tool: The case of inflation expectations”, J. Economic and Social [34] Zachary, W., “Information flow model for conflict and fission”,
Measurement, Vol. 36, pp. 119-167, 2011. J. Anthropological Research, Vol. 33, pp. 452-473, 1977.
[12] Amodea, G., R. Blanco, and U. Brefeld, “Hybrid models for [35] Newman, M., “Modularity and community structure in
future event prediction”, Proc. CIKM ’11, Glasgow, Scotland, networks”, Proc. National Academy of Sciences USA, Vol. 103,
October 2011. pp. 8577-8582, 2006.
[13] Colbaugh, R. and K. Glass, “Early warning analysis for social [36] Carmi, S., S. Havlin, S. Kirkpatrick, Y. Shavitt, and E. Shir, “A
diffusion events”, Security Informatics, Vol. 2, 2012, in press. model of Internet topology using the k-shell decomposition”,
[14] Clauset, A., C. Moore, and M. Newman, “Hierarchical structure Proc. National Academy of Sciences USA, Vol. 104, pp. 11150-
and the prediction of missing links in networks”, Nature, Vol. 11154, 2007.
[15] Pang, B. and L. Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis”, [38] Glass, K. and R. Colbaugh, “Web analytics for security
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, Vol. 2 , pp. 1- informatics”, Proc. IEEE European Intelligence and Security
135, 2008. Informatics Conference, Athens, Greece, September 2011.
multiple languages: Feature selection for opinion classification
[40] Bradley, M. and P. Lang, “Affective norms for English words [44] Bozorgi, M., L. Saul, S. Savage, and G. Voelker, “Beyond
(ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual, and affective ratings”, heuristics: Learning to classify vulnerabilities and predict
Technical Report C1, University of Florida, 1999. exploits”, Proc. ACM KDD ‘10, Washington DC, July 2010.
[41] Ramakrishnan, G., A. Jadhav, A. Joshi, S. Chakrabarti, and P. [45] Colbaugh, R. and K. Glass, “Predictive defense against evolving
Bhattacharyya, “Question answering via Bayesian inference on adversaries”, SAND Report, Sandia National Laboratories,
lexical relations”, Proc. Annual Meeting of the Association for December 2011.
Computational Linguistics, Sapporo, Japan, July 2003. [46] Sato, Y., E. Akiyama, and J.D. Farmer, “Chaos in learning a
[43] Glass, K., R. Colbaugh, and M. Planck, “Automatically USA, Vol. 99, pp. 4748-4751, 2002.
identifying the sources of large Internet events”, Proc. IEEE [47] Johnson, C., Personal communication, December 2011.
International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics, Vancouver, Canada, May 2010.