Linguistically Grounded Models of Language Change
Thierry Poibeau (thierry.poibeau@lipn.univ-paris13.fr)
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris-Nord – CNRS and Université Paris 13 – 99 avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément
93430 Villetaneuse, France
Keywords: language evolution; language change; weight of different factors in language evolution, they are
historical linguistics not prospective (they are not intended to predict the future
of current languages) and can hardly be proven to be correct
Introduction or wrong, except if they were applied to larger sets of data.
Questions related to the evolution of language have recently
Linguistically grounded models
known an impressive increase of interest (Briscoe, 2002).
This short paper aims at questioning the scientific status of Several studies have already stressed the need for more
these models and their relations to attested data. We show realistic models, based on attested facts. Previous studies in
that one cannot directly model non-linguistic factors Historical linguistics may give a part of these data and
(exogenous factors) even if they play a crucial role in provide a way to better validate existing models. Compared
language evolution. We then examine the relation between to existing models, grounding studies on attested facts is
linguistic models and attested language data, as well as their then crucial, since facts integrate external evolution causes.
contribution to cognitive linguistics. This domain is still at its very beginning (see Niyogi, 2002
for an application to the change of English word order).
Endogenous and exogenous factors Rastier (1999) presents a study in diachronic lexical
semantics, using a morpho-dynamic model (the study
of language evolution
concerns the evolution of the meaning of the noun face in
Languages are complex systems, whose evolution is due to French since the 15th century). The author demonstrates that
a large number of exogenous and endogenous factors,
“semantics, be it cognitive or not, can only have an
similar to complex ecological entities (Haugen, 1972)
anthropological foundation, articulated upon ethnology and
(Mulhausler, 1996).
history”. For example, the precise study of the semantics of
Exogenous factors – Exogenous factors include historical, words through history allows determining how semantic
political, social and geographical facts. For example, during prototypes are born, grow and disappear in a given
invasions, dominant tribes may impose their language upon language. The same kind of approach can be applied to
their neighbourhood; People willing to integrate another other parts of linguistics, to phonology as well as to syntax.
community may use the other community language; isolated Frameworks like Optimality Theory or Game Theory
languages like Icelandic tend to be more stable than contact (Jaeger, 2003) can easily model attested facts. Previous
languages; etc. work in Historical Linguistics may give a part of these data
and provide a way to better validate linguistic hypotheses.
Endogenous factors – Part of a language may undergo
profound changes due to analogy and linguistic instability. References
Following the influence of exogenous factors, linguistic
Briscoe, T. (2002). Linguistic evolution through language
structures may become instable, which can bring new
acquisition. Cambridge: CUP.
dynamics in the evolution of a linguistic system,
Haugen, E. (1972). The ecology of language. Stanford:
independently from any external influence. Phonetic
Stanford University Press.
evolution is full of such examples, where the evolution of a
Jaeger, G. (2003). “Simulating language change with
single sound makes the whole system unstable and quickly
Functional OT”. In S. Kirby (ed.), Language Evolution
suffers major changes.
and Computation. Vienna: ESSLLI Workshop.. (52-61).
Among these factors, exogenous ones have a major impact Livingstone, D. (2003) Computer Models of the Evolution of
on linguistic evolution. They can bring profound changes in Language and Languages. PhD thesis, Univ. of Paisley.
a very short period of time. However, they are rarely taken Müllhäusler, E. (1996). Linguistic ecology. New York:
into considerations by evolution models since these factors Routledge.
are hard to model, if even possible (the same phenomenon Niyogi, P. (2002). “Theories of culture evolution and their
can be observed for economic models). Most language application to language change”. In T. Briscoe (ed.) (205–
models are inspired by population models (Living- 234). Cambridge: CUP.
stone, 2003): they represent the context as a set of random Rastier, F. (1999). “Cognitive semantics and diachronic
variables, since context is for a large part unpredictable. semantics”. In A. Blank and P. Koch (eds.), Historical
Thus, language evolution models are largely abstract Semantics and Cognition. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter
models. Even if they provide an aid to understand the (109–144).