Mössbauer Characterization of an Unusual High-spin Side-on Peroxo-Fe3+
Species in the Active Site of Superoxide Reductase from Desulfoarculus
baarsii. Density Functional Calculations on Related Models‡
Olivier Horner,*,¶ Jean-Marie Mouesca,# Jean-Louis Oddou,¶ Claudine Jeandey,¶ Vincent
Nivière,§ Tony A. Mattioli,± Christelle Mathé,±,§ Marc Fontecave,§ Pascale Maldivi,& Pierre
Bonville,|| Jason A. Halfen,┴ and Jean-Marc Latour*,¶
¶Laboratoire de Physicochimie des Métaux en Biologie, UMR CEA/CNRS/Université Joseph
Fourier 5155, Département Réponse et Dynamique Cellulaires, CEA/Grenoble, 17 rue des
Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9, France, #Laboratoire de Spectroscopie des Systèmes
Biologiques, Service de Chimie Inorganique et Biologique, Département de Recherche
Fondamentale sur la Matière Condensée, 17 rue des Martyrs, CEA/Grenoble, 38054
Grenoble Cedex 9, France, §Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie des Centres Redox
Biologiques, UMR CEA/CNRS/Université Joseph Fourier 5047, Département Réponse et
Dynamique Cellulaires, 17 rue des Martyrs, CEA/Grenoble, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9,
France, ±Laboratoire de Biophysique du Stress Oxydant, Service de Bioénergétique,
Département de Biologie Joliot-Curie, URA CNRS 2096, CEA/Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette
Cedex, France, &Laboratoire de Reconnaissance Ionique, Service de Chimie Inorganique et
Biologique, Département de Recherche Fondamentale sur la Matière Condensée, 17 rue des
Martyrs, CEA/Grenoble, 38054 Grenoble Cedex 9, France, ||Service de Physique de l’Etat
Condensé, Département de Recherches sur l’Etat Condensé, les Atomes et les Molécules,
CEA/Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France, ┴Department of Chemistry, University of
Wisconsin-Eau Claire, 105 Garfield Avenue, Eau Claire, Wisconsin 54702 USA.
‡This work was supported in part by the Regional Council of the Ile-de-France (S.E.S.A.M.E.
equipment grant to T.A.M.) and the National Science Foundation grant (CHE-0078746 to
J.A.H.).
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS1
1 Cys : cysteine.
DFT : Density Functional Theory.
Dfx : the enzyme from the sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio desulfuricans.
EDTA : Ethylene Diamine Tetraacetate.
EFG : Electric Field Gradient.
EPR : Electron Paramagnetic Resonance.
EXAFS : Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure
[FeII(SMe2N (tren))]+ : this complex is prepared by combining 2 equivalents of 3-methyl-3-
mercapto-2-butanone with FeCl in methanol, adding 1 equivalent of tren.
HOMO : Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital
ICSD : Inorganic Crystal Structure Database.
LCAO : Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals
L8py : 5-bis-(2-pyridylmethyl)-1,5-diazacyclooctane.
LUMO : Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital
MCD : Magnetic Circular Dichroism
Nlr : the enzyme from the archae Pyrococcus furiosus.
N Py : N,N-bis(2-pyridylmethyl)-N-bis(2-pyridyl)methylamine)
PDB : Protein Data Bank.
Py : pyridine
RR : Resonance Raman.
SOR : Superoxide reductase.
SQUID : Superconducting Quantum Interference Device
TpivPP : meso--tetrakis(o-pivalamidophenyl)porphyrin
Tris : tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
tren : tris(1-aminoethyl)amine.
ZFS : Zero Field Splitting
Superoxide reductase (SOR) is an Fe protein that catalyzes the reduction of superoxide
to give H O . Recently, the mutation of the Glu47 residue into alanine (E47A) in the active
site of SOR from Desulfoarculus baarsii has allowed the stabilization of an iron-peroxo
species when quickly reacted with H O (Mathé, C.; Mattioli, T. A.; Horner, O.; Lombard, M.
; Latour, J.-M.; Fontecave, M.; Nivière, V. (2002) Identification of iron(III) peroxo species in
the active site of the superoxide reductase SOR from Desulfoarculus baarsii, J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 124, 4966-4967). In order to further investigate this non-heme peroxo-iron species, we
have carried out a Mössbauer study of the 57Fe enriched E47A SOR from D. baarsii reacted
quickly with H O . Considering the Mössbauer data, we conclude, in conjunction with the
other spectroscopic data available and with the results of density functional calculations on
related models, that this species corresponds to a high-spin side-on peroxo-Fe3+ complex. This
is one of the first example of such a species in a biological system for which Mössbauer
parameters are now available :  = 0.54 (1) mm/s, E = - 0.80 (5) mm/s and the asymmetry
parameter  = 0.60 (5) mm/s. The Mössbauer and spin-Hamiltonian parameters have been
evaluated on a model from the side-on peroxo complex (model 2) issued from the oxidized
iron center in SOR from Pyrococcus furiosus, for which structural data are available in the
literature (Yeh, A. P., Yonglin, Y. , Jenney, Jr., F. E., Adams, M. W. W., Rees, D. C. (2000)
Structures of the superoxide reductase from Pyrococcus furiosus in the oxidized and reduced
states, Biochemistry 39, 2499-2508). For comparison, similar calculations have been carried
out on a model derived from 2 (model 3), where the [CH -S]1- group has been replaced by the
neutral [NH ]0 group (Neese, F., Solomon, E. I. (1998) Detailed spectroscopic and theoretical
studies on [Fe(EDTA)(O )]3-: electronic structure of the side-on ferric-peroxide bond and its
relevance to reactivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 12829-12848). Both models 2 and 3 contain a
formally high-spin Fe3+ ion (ie with empty minority spin orbitals). We found however a
significant fraction (~ 0.6 for 2, ~ 0.8 for 3) of spin (equivalently charge) spread over two
occupied (minority spin) orbitals. The quadrupole splitting value for 2 is found negative and
match quite well the experimental value. The computed quadrupole tensors are rhombic in the
case of 2, and axial in the case of 3. This difference originates directly from the presence of
the thiolate ligand in 2. A correlation between experimental isomer shifts for Fe3+
mononuclear complexes with computed electron densities at the iron nucleus has been built
and used to evaluate the isomer shift values for 2 and 3 (0.56 mm/s and 0.63 mm/s,
respectively). A significant increase of isomer shift value is found upon going from a
methylthiolate to a nitrogen ligand for the Fe3+ ion, consistent with covalency effects due to
the presence of the axial thiolate ligand. Considering that the isomer shift value for 3 is likely
to be in the 0.61 – 0.65 mm/s range (Horner, O., Jeandey, C.; Oddou, J.-L.; Bonville, P. ;
McKenzie, C. J., Latour, J.-M. (2002) Hydrogenperoxo [(bztpen)Fe(OOH)]2+ and its
deprotonation product peroxo [(bztpen)Fe(O )]+ studied by EPR and Mössbauer
spectroscopies. Implication on the electronic structure of peroxo model complexes, Eur. J.
Inorg. Chem., 3278-3283. ), the isomer shift value for a high-spin 2-O Fe3+ complex with an
axial thiolate group can be estimated to be in the 0.54 – 0.58 mm/s range. The occurrence of a
side-on peroxo intermediate in SOR is discussed in relation to the recent data published for a
side-on peroxo-Fe3+ species in another biological system (Karlsson, A.; Parales, J. V.; Parales,
R. E.; Gibson, D. T.; Eklund, H.; Ramaswamy, S. (2003) Crystal structure of naphthalene
dioxygenase: side-on binding of dioxygen to iron, Science 299, 1039-1042).
Superoxide Reductase (SOR) is an iron enzyme that catalyzes the one electron
reduction of superoxide O -° to give H O according to the reaction :
and which is involved in the mechanism of oxygen detoxification in anaerobic and
microaerophilic microorganisms (1,2). The enzymes from the sulfate-reducing bacterium
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans (Dfx) and that from the archae Pyrococcus furiosus (Nlr) have
been structurally characterized (3,4). Their active site comprises in the reduced state an
atypical [Fe2+(N-His) (S-Cys)] site. The penta-coordinated Fe2+ ion is in a square pyramidal
environment constituted by four equatorial histidine and an apical cysteinate ligands. It
therefore possesses a vacant axial coordination site available to bind superoxide. In the
oxidized state, this site is occupied by a glutamate residue which binds as a sixth ligand (4,5).
The D. desulfuricans, Desulfovibrio baarsii and Desulfovibrio vulgaris enzymes possess an
additional iron site (center I, as opposed to the active site called center II) which consists of a
mononuclear Fe3+ ion coordinated by four cysteinate residues in a distorted rubredoxin-type
environment and is separated by ca 20 Å from center II (3). This center I is absent in the
SORs from P. furiosus and Treponema pallidum and its biological role is still unknown
(2,4,6).
Spectroscopic techniques (EPR, MCD, EXAFS) have been used extensively to
characterize the SOR iron centers (7). In particular, the oxidized centers I and II have been
widely studied by EPR spectroscopy. Oxidized centers II possess similar UV-visible and
redox properties. Nevertheless, their EPR properties differ. Indeed, the enzymes which
possess a center I (eg SOR from D. desulfuricans) exhibit a rhombic EPR signal (8) while this
EPR signal is axial in the enzymes which lack center I (eg SOR from T. pallidum or P.
furiosus) (7). Mössbauer spectroscopy was also used to characterize the as-isolated and
oxidized SOR from D. desulfuricans (8,9). Indeed, Mössbauer parameters (isomer shifts and
quadrupole splittings) have been determined for oxidized center I and center II (high-spin Fe3+
ions), and reduced center II (high-spin Fe2+ ion).
The reaction of the SORs from different origins with superoxide has been studied by
pulse radiolysis methods (10-14). It is now generally assumed that the reaction of O -° with
the Fe2+ ion of reduced center II proceeds through an inner-sphere mechanism. The first step
of the reaction is an extremely fast bi-molecular reaction of SOR with superoxide in a nearly
diffusion-controlled process (~ 109 M-1 s-1). In all enzymes studied, a first intermediate is
formed that exhibits a broad absorption band at  ~ 600 nm, ( ~ 3000 – 4700 M-1 cm-1) and
was proposed to be a peroxo-Fe3+ species. However, depending on the enzymes studied, the
following steps of the catalytic cycle differ. In the SORs from Archaeglobus fulgidu and D.
vulgaris, the first intermediate becomes protonated to give directly the final products of the
reaction, oxidized center II (Fe3+) and H O (13,14). In the SORs from D. baarsii and T.
pallidum, an additional reaction intermediate has been identified, resulting from a single
protonation process of the first intermediate, to give presumably an hydroperoxo-Fe3+ species
(11,12,15). This second intermediate is then transformed into the final product of the reaction
H O . This occurs by a still uncharacterized protonation process with the help of the strictly
conserved glutamate 47 (Glu47) residue which becomes a ligand of the Fe3+ ion in the
oxidized center II (16).
Mutation of Glu47 into alanine (E47A), which does not affect the binding of
superoxide to the SOR from D. baarsi (12, 15), results in the stabilization of a peroxo-iron
species when the enzyme is reacted with an excess of H O (16). This species was shown to
be in the S = 5/2 ground state by EPR spectroscopy. Trapping of this species by the E47A
mutation permitted a RR characterization and the observed O-O and Fe-O vibrations were
found to be consistent with a side-on peroxo-Fe3+ species (16). Nevertheless, this conclusion
was recently questioned from RR studies of model complexes (17) and DFT calculations
which eventually advanced a hydroperoxo form as the most likely (18).
In order to further investigate this non-heme peroxo-iron species, we have carried out
extensive Mössbauer studies of the 57Fe enriched E47A SOR from D. baarsii reacted with
H O . Indeed, recent Mössbauer studies of peroxo-iron complexes have shown that the side-
on peroxo and hydroperoxo forms exhibit different spectroscopic signatures owing to their
different spin states and geometries (17,19). The value of the Mössbauer isomer shift deduced
in the present study for the purported side-on peroxo-Fe3+ species departs slightly from that
expected from model complexes. We reasoned that the unusual presence of a cysteinate iron
ligand might be responsible for the observed value. This prompted us to investigate in detail
the effect of thiolate ligation on the Mössbauer parameters by i) studying model complexes of
reduced center II (Fe2+) in SOR by Mössbauer spectroscopy, ii) evaluating the Mössbauer
(isomer shift excluded) and spin-Hamiltonian parameters by DFT calculations for a structural
model of oxidized center II in E47A SOR reacted with H O , iii) establishing a correlation
between experimental isomer shifts for mononuclear ferric complexes and computed electron
densities at the iron nucleus, in order to estimate the isomer shift value for the model of
oxidized center II. From our Mössbauer data and the results of DFT calculations, we conclude
that the peroxo-iron species in E47A SOR is a high-spin side-on peroxo-Fe3+ species in
agreement with the RR study (16). The occurrence of a 2-O Fe3+ intermediate in SOR will
be discussed in relation to the experimental data already published and the recent proposal for
the catalytic mechanism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of 57Fe SOR E47A from D. baarsii Samples and Model Complexes. The
purified 57Fe SOR E47A sample was prepared as already described (12) except that 98 % 57Fe
instead of natural Fe was used to complement the Escherichia coli DH5 pMLE47A culture
medium. For isotopic enrichment, the 57FeCl .6H O starting compound was obtained by
dissolving 57Fe O (AMT Ltd.) in 20 equivalents of concentrated HCl (Carlo Erba) under
reflux and then by evaporating to dryness.
Three Fe2+ complexes of the L8py ligand of the general formula [L8py FeII(X)]+ (X =
SC H -m-CH (4), SC H (5) and CH CO (6) were prepared according to the literature
6 4 3 6 11 3 2
procedure (Scheme 1) (20).
Spectroscopic Methods. All Mössbauer measurements were performed as already
described (19). One home-made sample holder able to generate an external magnetic field of
50 mT applied parallel to the Mössbauer -beam was also used (21). The samples for
Mössbauer spectroscopy contained ca 1.5 mM or 4 mM 57Fe in a 200 L nylon cell. The
analysis of the Mössbauer data was made as already described (19). In order to determine an
accurate value of the isomer shifts, a special procedure was followed when fitting the spectra.
Indeed, the contribution of the oxidized center I in SOR from D. baarsii was first at all
subtracted from the experimental data. This difference spectrum was then fitted by
considering only the contribution of the oxidized center II in SOR from D. baarsii. This
theoretical spectrum was then subtracted from the experimental spectrum, and this new
difference spectrum was further fitted by considering only the contribution of oxidized center
I. This procedure was repeated until a convergence of the Mössbauer parameters was
observed (7 or 8 cycles), which allowed an accurate determination of the isomer shift values.
The Euler angles ,  and  define the orientation of the [A] tensor relative to the EFG tensor
(the [A] and [g] tensors are assumed here to be colinear).
Magnetization measurements were performed with a SHE SQUID 700 magnetometer
operating at six magnetic fields in the range 0.5 T – 5 T over the temperature domain 5 K –
200 K. After concentration in a deuterated buffer, the sample (5.1 mM) was de-aerated under
argon and 115 L was transferred into a quartz sample bucket within a glovebox under argon.
Upon immediate removal from the glovebox the sample (under argon in a small container)
was frozen in liquid nitrogen and introduced in the magnetometer. The magnetization of the
protein was obtained by subtraction of the buffer magnetization measured in the same
conditions according to the general procedure outlined by Day (22). Simultaneous fitting of
the six isofield curves was performed with a home-made FORTRAN program (23). EPR
spectra were recorded as already described (19). Resonance Raman spectra were recorded and
analyzed as already described, with a laser excitation at 647.1 nm and at 15 K (16). The
intermediate Fe3+-peroxo species was prepared by mixing 6 eq. of H O with ferrous SOR and
rapidly freezing in liquid nitrogen within 3 seconds of mixing. The same Fe3+-peroxo could
be prepared (as determined by RR spectroscopy) by mixing 6 eq. of H O to ferric SOR which
was previously oxidized with 3 eq. of K IrCl and then washed to remove excess K IrCl
(Mathé, Nivière, Mattioli, unpublished results). Possible Fenton chemistry and •OH-related
protein damage at the Fe3+ sites (as monitored by UV-visible absorption and RR
spectroscopies) were not observed on the time-scale of the Fe3+-peroxo species formation. It
is known that treatment of some Fe2+ complexes with H O results in the formation of
metastable Fe3+-peroxo species (52); the mechanism is not completely understood but has
been addressed experimentally (55,56). Furthermore, Tris buffer is a good •OH scavenger (57)
which further minimizes the risks of protein damage.
Computational Methods. All calculations have been performed with the Amsterdam
LCAO Density-Functional Programs (ADF 2.3) developed by Baerends et al (24-28). We
considered there only the potential refered to as «VBP» (Vosko, Wilk and Nusair’s exchange
and correlation energy (30,31) completed by non local gradient corrections to the exchange by
Becke (32) as well as to the correlation by Perdew (33). We used triple-zeta (plus
polarization) basis sets for for all atoms.
Models Used and Choice of Geometries. Figure 1 shows the models used in this study
:
The crystal structure of Fe3+ SOR from P. furiosus has been determined by X-ray
crystallography at 1.70 Å resolution (PDB entry 1DQI) (4). The coordinates are therefore
readily available in order to build structural models suitable for Density Functional LCAO
calculations. Model 1 corresponds to a simplified structure of the oxidized center II issued
from the oxidized iron center of SOR (P. Furiosus), where residues His 16, His 41, His 47
and His 114 of the equatorial plane have been replaced by four neutral imidazole rings
[N C H ]0, and where the axial residues Cys 111 and Glu 14 have been replaced by the
charged [CH -S]1- and [CH -CO ]1- groups, respectively (Table S6). In such a model, the z
axis has been set along the Fe-S(Cys) bond. The x axis is then roughly defined along the Fe-
N(His16,47) bonds and the y axis along the Fe-N(His41,114) bonds, with the projected S-C
bond of the [CH -S]1- group along the (Fe-S) z axis being closer to the Fe-N x axis.
From model 1, we then derived model 2, obtained by replacing the [CH -CO ]1- group
(located along the z axis) by a side-on peroxo group O 2- (Table S7). The O-O and Fe-O bond
lengths have been set to the values used by Neese et al for high-spin O 2 2- - Fe3+ models that
they built for their calculations on [Fe(EDTA)(O )]3- (1.41 and 2.05 Å, respectively) (34).
These distances are consistent with those determined very recently for a side-on peroxo
adduct crystallographically characterized for a naphthalene dioxygenase (35). Considering
now the Fe-S bond, an EXAFS study of oxidized center II in SOR from P. furiosus yielded a
bond length of 2.36 Å (7). Recently, Schearer et al structurally characterized two model
complexes of the reduced and oxidized center II in SOR, [FeII(SMe2N (tren))]1+ and the
hexacoordinate [FeIII(SMe2N (tren))(CH CN)]2+ complexes (36). They measured the Fe-S
bond lengths to be 2.31 and 2.33 Å, respectively. Upon reaction of [FeII(SMe2N (tren))]1+ with
superoxide, an Fe3+-hydroperoxo intermediate that possesses a Fe-S bond length of 2.33 Å, as
determined by EXAFS, was isolated (36). Moreover, 4, 5 and [L8py FeII(SC H -p-CH )]1+
exhibit an average Fe-S bond length of 2.30 Å (20). Therefore, we decided to set the initial
value of the Fe-S bond length in 2 to 2.30 Å. We finally constructed model 3, starting from
model 2, by further replacing the [CH -S]1- group by the neutral [NH ]0 group, with a Fe-
N(NH ) bond length value of 2.10 Å (Table S8) (34).
Full geometry optimization was performed on models 2 and 3 (and 2’ and 3’ were
imidazoles were replaced by NH ). It is noteworthy that the optimized geometry for 2
matched very well that of model 5 from Kurtz et al. (18). These calculations allowed us to
estimate the respective electron densities at the iron nucleus for all optimized structures which
were converted to the respective isomer shifts (using the correlation of figure 7) 0.63 and 0.70
mm/s for 2 and 3 (0.68 and 0.74 mm/s for 2’ and 3’). The value for 3 (and 3’) is definitely out
of the range observed for peroxoferric complexes of N donors which is confined to 0.60 –
0.65 mm/s. The reason for this discrepancy must be found in the constraints imposed by the
protein backbone and the polydentate ligands used in biomimetic compounds. These
observations led us to calculate the electronic structure for 2 and 3 by imposing the geometry
of the metal and of the protein ligands to their positions deduced by X-ray crystallography in
the oxidized SOR from P. furiosus as detailed above. The peroxo ligand was added at a
chemically reasonable distance, as done by Neese et al. (34) in their calculation of the
complex [Fe(O )(edta)]3-. A geometry optimization of the angle between the (FeOO) plane
and the Fe-N axis was carried out by rotating the O-O bond around z by steps of 15°. This led
to the O-O bond being oriented along y for both 2 and 3. The calculation of the electronic
structure of 3 performed for this model led to an isomer shift value of 0.60 mm/s within the
experimental range. Calculation of 2 gave an isomer shift value of 0.55 mm/s, again in
agreement with the experimental value 0.54(1) mm/s. It is worth noting that all calculations
point to a reduction of the isomer shift value of ca 0.08 - 0.10 mm/s when an axial amine
ligand is replaced by a thiolate.
Spectroscopic Parameters. The EPR and Mössbauer parameters (isomer shift
excluded, see below) were evaluated by first determining the electronic structures
corresponding to models 2 and 3 using DFT electronic structures as provided by the ADF
code. We then relied on a home-made code in order to compute the [g] and ZFS tensors [D] as
well as the quadrupole tensor [Q]. In order to compute the [g] and ZFS tensors, we relied on
the following expression :
2  o L i n n L j o
with {i,j}={x,y,z}, the spin-orbit coupling constant = 404 cm-1 and S=5/2 for the d5 Fe3+
ion. The labels "" and "" stand for the five filled majority and the five empty minority spins
of the high-spin Fe3+ ion, respectively. |o> stands for an occupied molecular orbital whereas
|n> represents an empty one. The E - E energy gaps, when promoting an electron from and
to mainly Fe molecular orbitals (as would usually be the case for a Fe2+ ion-containing
complex within the minority spin set of orbitals) can be computed as Slater transition state
energies ascribing half an electron to both |o> and |n>. The difference in the corresponding
half-occupied molecular orbital energies is then taken as a good estimate of the total energy
difference En-Eo between the two electronic structures (o)1(n)0 and (o)0(n)1. We will show
below how this point is relevant for the oxidized (ie Fe3+) models 2 and 3.
The ZFS tensor [D] is obtained from Equation 4 by replacing  with -2. The D and E
ZFS parameters are then defined by :
E  D D /2
 xx yy (5)
= Tr([D])/3. We also computed the quadrupole tensor [Q] as (37) :
where  = <|LL+LL-(2/3) L(L+1)|>. Q is the quadrupole moment and (1-R ) the
ij i j j i ij 0
Sternheimer factor. Numerically, Q = 0.925[] mm.s-1.
Isomer Shift Correlation. A number of small mononuclear Fe3+ and biomolecules that cover
the full range of 57Fe shifts were selected for calibrating the relationship between the
experimental isomer shifts and the calculated electron densities at iron nuclei. The calibration
process consisted of three steps. First, the structures of the complexes were obtained from the
X-ray data available at the ICSD ([Fe(NO )(Py)(TpivPP)] and [Fe(CN) ]3-) or from some
atomic coordinates already published elsewhere ([FeCl ]1- and [Fe(EDTA)(O )]3-, the latter
corresponding to a computational model complex, see below). The structures of the
biomolecules were constructed from the X-ray data available at the PDB, Oxidized center II
in SOR and [Fe(SR) ]1-), after simplification of the biological residues ligated to the iron
center ( R = -CH CH ). Second, all previous structures were directly used for Density
Functional LCAO calculations (see above) in order to compute electron densities at the 57Fe
nuclei. Third, the calculated electron densities at iron nuclei were plotted vs the experimental
isomer shifts, and the resulting graph was subjected to a linear regression analysis. All the
experimental isomer shifts reported in this work are reported relative to an Fe metal standard
at room temperature and refer to a sample temperature of 4.2 K.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The oxidation of E47A SOR from D. baarsii by K IrCl or H O is almost complete
(see below) but a few percent of the unreacted enzyme containing reduced center II (Fe2+) was
still present (Scheme 2).
Therefore, we decided to characterize the reduced center II both in the as-isolated and
in the dithionite-reduced enzymes. Indeed, the spin-Hamiltonian parameters of reduced center
II in SOR were extracted more easily in the latter case as detailed below.
As-isolated and Dithionite-reduced E47A SOR from D. baarsii. In the as-isolated
E47A SOR from D. baarsii, center I contains a Fe3+ ion, whereas center II contains a Fe2+ ion
(Scheme 2). The as-isolated E47A SOR from D. baarsii was investigated by magnetization
measurements to quantify the ZFS parameters of the reduced center II (Fe2+). Figure 2 shows
the temperature dependence of the molar magnetization in the as-isolated enzyme with the
B/kT ratio for different magnetic fields (isofield experiments) :
The data were simultaneously fitted within the spin-Hamiltonian formalism. Oxidized
center I is characterized in EPR spectroscopy by resonances at g = 7.7, 5.7, 4.1 and 1.8
(6,12,16), which correspond to D > 0 and E/D ~ 0.08. These data are close to those obtained
for the oxidized desulforedoxin from Desulfovibrio gigas (38). Indeed, oxidized center I has a
distorted tetrahedral sulfur coordination very similar to that found in the desulforedoxin from
D. gigas (39). The magnetic contribution of oxidized center I (Fe3+) was estimated by fixing
the D value in the fitting procedure to the value (D = 2.2 cm-1) determined for the oxidized
desulforedoxin from D. gigas (38). The best fit of the molar magnetization (solid line in
Figure 2) gave for the reduced center II (high-spin Fe2+ ion) the following parameters: g =
2.15, |D| = 5.2 cm-1 and E/D = 0.28  0.03.
Figure 3 shows the 4.2 K Mössbauer spectrum of the as-isolated E47A SOR from D.
baarsii recorded with a magnetic field of 50 mT applied parallel to the beam.
Two distinct spectral components are clearly distinguishable: a dominant central
quadrupole doublet ((a) in Figure 3) and a magnetic spectral component extending from -5.0
to 5.0 mm/s ((b) in Figure 3). The quadrupole doublet accounts for 53 ± 3 % of the total
absorption, whereas the magnetic component accounts for 47 ± 3 % of the total absorption.
The Mössbauer parameters obtained for the quadrupole doublet ( = 1.06 (1) mm/s and 
= 2.82 (3) mm/s) are characteristic of a high-spin Fe2+ ion and correspond to the reduced
center II of SOR from D. baarsii. These parameters are comparable to those published for the
reduced center II of wild-type SOR from D. desulfuricans ( = 1.04 mm/s and  = 2.80
mm/s) (9). The magnetic component corresponds to the oxidized center I and has been fitted
with a unique set of parameters shown in Table 1, the D and E/D values being fixed in the
fitting procedure to 2.2 cm-1 and 0.08, respectively (see above) :
The isomer shift and quadrupole splitting values obtained for the magnetic spectral
component ( = 0.29 (2) mm/s and  = - 0.79 (4) mm/s) are characteristic of the high-
spin Fe3+ ion in center I and compare well with the parameters obtained for the oxidized
desulforedoxin from D. gigas ( = 0.25 (6) mm/s and  = - 0.75 (5) mm/s) (38).
Reduction of E47A SOR from D. baarsii with 1.1 equivalent of sodium dithionite
occurs with immediate loss of the red color of the sample. In this case, both center I and
center II contain a Fe2+ ion (Scheme 2). The zero-field Mössbauer spectrum of the dithionite-
reduced E47A SOR from D. baarsii consists of two quadrupole doublets (Figures S1, A) that
have been fitted with the parameters in Table 1. Moreover, the spectrum of the dithionite-
reduced enzyme was measured at 200 K in a parallel field of 7.0 T, and the reversed patterns
of triplet and doublet structures show that E is positive and that  is less than 0.5 for both
reduced sites (Figure S1, B) (38,40). Mössbauer spectra of the dithionite-reduced enzyme
were also recorded at 4.2 K in variable fields (Figure S2). The Mössbauer data were fitted
simultaneously within the spin-Hamiltonian formalism using the set of parameters shown in
Table 1. In the fitting procedure, the ZFS parameters for reduced center I were fixed to the
values published for reduced desulforedoxin from D. gigas (38).
Oxidation of E47A SOR from D. baarsii by K IrCl . In the oxidized enzyme, both center I and
center II contain a Fe3+ ion (Scheme 2). Indeed, center II in the E47A SOR from D. baarsii
can be oxidized by a slight excess of K IrCl . The 4.2 K EPR spectrum of the oxidized
enzyme consists of a large rhombic derivative signal at g = 4.3, which is characteristic of a
high-spin Fe3+ ion (oxidized center II) in a rhombic ligand field (8,16). The Mössbauer spectra
of the E47A SOR from D. baarsii oxidized with K IrCl recorded at 4.2 K in various
magnetic fields applied parallel to the -rays are shown in Figure 4 :
43 ± 2 % of the experimental spectra obtained for the oxidized enzyme are accounted
for by the contribution of the Fe3+ ion from center I ((a) in Figure 4). In addition, 4 ± 2 % of
the spectra ((c) in Figure 4) are accounted for by the contribution of Fe2+ ion from center II
showing that the oxidation is essentially quantitative. The major part of the spectra (53 ± 2 %)
corresponds to the oxidized center II ((b) in Figure 4). It was satisfactorily fitted with
Mössbauer and spin-Hamiltonian parameters ( = 0.47 (1) mm/s and E = - 0.53 (5) mm/s
with  = 0.00 (5)) close to those published for the oxidized center II (gray form) in the wild-
type SOR from D. desulfuricans ( = 0.50 (2) mm/s and E = - 0.53 (3) mm/s with  =
0.14) (8). This similarity suggests that the Fe3+ ion in the oxidized center II of the mutated
enzyme (for which no Glu47 ligand is available) is likely to be hexa-coordinated. Moreover,
the Fe3+ environments of the oxidized center II in both enzymes should be similar making
water a plausible sixth ligand in the mutated enzyme. Indeed, in the zero-field Mössbauer
study (T =77 K) of some dinuclear Fe3+ complexes with some N/O ligands, the following
Mössbauer parameters were obtained :  = 0.55 (1) mm/s and E = 0.60 (1) mm/s for a
hexa-coordinated Fe3+-OH center, and  = 1.51 (1) mm/s and E = 0.60 (1) mm/s for a
hexa-coordinated Fe3+-OH center (41). These latter parameters (in particular when
considering the quadrupole splitting value) are close to those determined for the E47A SOR
from D. baarsii oxidized by K IrCl .
Oxidation of E47A SOR from D. baarsii by H O . In order to form peroxo-Fe3+ species, the
as-isolated 57Fe SOR E47A from D. baarsii was reacted with 6 equivalents of H O at pH =
8.4 and immediately frozen within 5 seconds in liquid nitrogen, as already reported (16). An
aliquot of this sample was analyzed by RR spectroscopy (Figure S3). The RR spectrum
exhibits bands at 850 cm-1 (no 57Fe isotopic shift) and 436 cm-1 (57Fe isotopic downshift of 2
cm-1) which correspond to the (O-O) and (Fe-O) stretching modes of the iron-peroxo
species, respectively, as previously reported (16). This control measurement clearly shows
that the Mössbauer cell contains the peroxo-iron species under study. An aliquot of the
Mössbauer sample was also studied in X-band EPR spectroscopy at 4.2 K and shows a large
derivative signal at g = 4.3, which is characteristic of a high-spin Fe3+ ion in a rhombic ligand
field (data not shown) and is not due to oxidized center I (see above). Mössbauer spectra of
the sample recorded in several magnetic fields applied perpendicular to the -rays, which
allows a better separation of center I and oxidized center II contributions, are shown in Figure
5 :
The solid lines correspond to the best fit obtained with the parameters reported in
Table 1. Fe3+ ion from center I contributes for 52 ± 2 % of the total spectra and its
contribution ((a) in Figure 5) was simulated with the Mössbauer and spin-Hamiltonian
obtained for center I in the as-isolated enzyme (Table 1). 45 ± 2 % of the experimental spectra
is accounted for by a second component with a large magnetic splitting ((b) in Figure 5) and
which differ from the one observed in the spectra of the K IrCl -oxidized enzyme (see above).
It can be assigned to a high-spin Fe3+ site whose parameters are reported in Table 1. We
assign this Fe3+ ion site to the peroxo-iron species. The associated contributions in Figure 5
were fitted by allowing some anisotropy of the [A] tensor (A /g  = -21 T). Moreover, these
fits were improved by intoducing three Euler angles ( = 17° ;  = 80° ;  = 60°) between the
[A] and the EFG tensors. The isomer shift and quadrupole splitting values of the peroxo-iron
species ( = 0.54 (1) mm/s and E = - 0.80 (5) mm/s, respectively, with  = 0.60 (5)) are
clearly different from those obtained for center II oxidized by K IrCl , in particular
concerning the isomer shift and the quadrupole splitting values ( = 0.47 (1) mm/s and E
= - 0.53 (5) mm/s with  = 0.00 (5)). It must be noticed that the Mössbauer parameters of the
peroxo-iron species are typical for high-spin Fe3+ complexes and therefore are not unique for
the peroxo complex. Finally, a minor contribution ((c) in Figure 5) is also discerned (3 ± 1 %)
that corresponds to reduced center II of SOR E47A ( = 1.06 (2) mm/s and  = 2.82 (2)
mm/s) and that has been simulated with the parameters of Table 1. It must be noted that this
complex is remarkably stable in the E47A mutant since it is still present almost quantitatively
within 5 seconds (90 ± 4 % of center II is in the peroxo-iron form).
Evaluation of the Mössbauer and Spin-Hamiltonian Parameters for a Fe3+-peroxo Species
with an Axial Thiolate Ligand. The set of Mössbauer and spin-Hamiltonian parameters that
we have obtained for the peroxo-iron species of the E47A mutant of the SOR from D. baarsii
match the properties reported for side-on peroxo-Fe3+ model compounds (eg [(2-
O )Fe(EDTA)]3- or [(2-O )Fe(N Py)]+) except for its isomer shift value which is slightly
lower :  = 0.54 mm/s vs 0.61 - 0.65 mm/s for complexes with nitrogen ligands (17,19,42,43).
Obviously, the SOR active site differs from these model compounds by the presence of an
axial thiolate ligand. This ligand is expected to lower the isomer shift by covalency effects.
However, to the best of our knowledge no high-spin 2-O Fe3+ complexes mimicking the
peculiar [N S] SOR environment have been characterized so far in the literature by
Mössbauer spectroscopy. Therefore, it appeared important to us to quantify the effect of a
thiolate ligand on the values of the Mössbauer parameters, and in particular on the isomer
shift, when going from a (N/O) to a (N/O)/S side-on peroxo-iron species. We approached this
question by combining experimental studies of model compounds and DFT calculations.
(a) Model compounds. First, we decided to obtain zero-field Mössbauer data (T = 4.2 K) for
model compounds of reduced center II in SOR 4 ( = 0.93 (1) mm/s) and 5 ( = 0.93 (1)
mm/s (Scheme 1 and Figure S4). For the sake of comparison, the zero-field Mössbauer
spectrum of 6 (Scheme 1), where no axial thiolate ligand is present, has also been recorded
( = 1.06 (1) mm/s, Figure S4). It appears that replacement of the carboxylate ligand in 6 by
a the thiolate ligand in 4 and 5 results in a decrease of the isomer shift value of ~ 0.13 mm/s
(Table S5). This difference is explained by covalency effects associated to the thiolate ligand
in complexes 4 and 5 (44). Taking these covalency effects into consideration for thiolato-
bound peroxo-Fe3+ species would lower the expected isomer shift value from the 0.61 – 0.65
mm/s range (17,19,42,43) to ca to 0.55 mm/s, indeed close to the experimentally determined
value of the SOR peroxo-iron species.
(b) DFT calculations. We have evaluated by computational methods the Mössbauer (except
for the isomer shift, see below) and the spin-Hamiltonian parameters of model 2, a side-on
Fe3+-peroxo complex (S = 5/2) with a [CH -S]1- group in axial position (Figure 1 and Table
S7). For comparative purpose, similar calculations have been performed on model 3 derived
from 2 by replacing the [CH -S]1- group by the neutral [NH ]0 group (Figure 1 and Table S8).
Let us start by some general considerations concerning the electronic structures computed for
both models 2 and 3, for which a description of the electronic structures is available in Figure
6 (the spectroscopic parameters – [g], ZFS and quadrupole tensors - computed in this paper
are essentially determined by the minority spin orbitals, hence the choice of representing
some of them here) :
Both models 2 and 3 contain a formally high-spin Fe3+ ion (ie with empty minority
spin orbitals). We found however a significant fraction (~ 0.6 for model 2, ~ 0.8 for model 3)
of spin spread over two occupied (minority spin) orbitals. The first of these molecular orbitals
( ) results from the interaction of the Fe d atomic orbital (~ 30 - 40%) with a peroxo Op -
Op linear combination (~ 50%) and is similar for 2 and 3. The second one ( ) which results
from the interaction of Fe d (~ 30 - 40%) with a peroxo Op - Op linear combination differs
between both models. In the case of model 3,  contains a large peroxo contribution (~
40%). By contrast, in model 2,  contains a large sulfur p contribution (~ 30%) and the
peroxo contribution is reduced (~20 %). The HOMO-LUMO gaps are 0.8 eV for model 2 and
0.7 eV for model 3. We have verified that the Slater transition energies (see the Experimental
Section) do not differ much from the d (occupied) to d (empty) transitions derived directly
from the ground state electronic structures (such is not the case for formal Fe2+ ions, in our
experience). As the deviations from the free electron value g = 2.0023 are very small indeed
for a Fe3+ ion (because of the rather large d-d gaps involved), and in spite of the slight "Fe2+"
character resulting from the Fe-(O ) interaction, the computation of [g] and [D] tensors is
tentative only. The numerical results and the ZFS parameters D and E/D, as well as the largest
(in magnitude) principal values of the quadrupole tensors for 2 and 3 are reported in Table 2 :
Within such limits, both [g] tensors are very similar for 2 and 3, as far as the principal
values (cf Table 3) and axes (not shown) are concerned. Models 2 and 3 exhibit small D
values (0.50 and 0.56 cm-1, respectively) that are consistent with a high-spin Fe3+ ion. Both
quadrupole splittings values for 2 and 3 are found negative (E = - 1.04 mm/s and - 1.40
mm/s, respectively). The computed quadrupole tensors are rather rhombic in the case of 2 (
= 0.65) and axial in the case of 3 ( = 0.13). This difference originates directly from the
relative weights of dxy and dyz in xy and yz due to the presence of the thiolate ligand in 2.
(c) Isomer shift prediction. Unlike the quadrupole splitting, the direct calculation of the
isomer shift is not straightforward (45). It is possible to estimate it by establishing a
correlation between experimental isomer shifts and theoretical electron densities at the iron
nucleus (0), as previously done in the literature (45-49). Since the computed electron
densities depend on the used DFT exchange-correlation potential, we built a new correlation
following this procedure. The mononuclear Fe3+ complexes and biomolecules used for
establishing the linear correlation are shown in Table 3 :
The electron densities at the 57Fe nuclei were plotted vs the experimental isomer
shifts, and the resulting graph was subjected to a very satisfactory linear regression analysis,
as shown in Figure 7 :
Linear regression analyses of these data gave (mm/s) = 7.34 – 0.270(0) (r = 0.992)
for the Fe3+ series. By varying the Fe-S distance from 2.46 Å to 2.30 Å in the model of
oxidized center II in SOR from D. Desulfuricans (model 2, key : 2 in Figure 7), the associated
point in Figure 7 remains close to the Fe3+ linear correlation (data not shown). When using the
Fe3+ correlation of Figure 7 to estimate the isomer shift values for 2 and 3, three main features
are noticeable : i) the calculated value for model 2 compares favorably (0.56 mm/s vs 0.54 (1)
mm/s) with the experimental value of the peroxo-Fe3+ species in E47A SOR from D. baarsii,
ii) replacing an axial nitrogen (model 3) by an axial thiolate (model 2) ligand for the Fe3+ ion
brings about a significant decrease (- 0.07 mm/s) of the isomer shift value, in line with that
observed when going from 6 to 4 and 5 (see above) iii) the isomer shift value of 0.63 mm/s
estimated for 3 is consistent with experimental data available in the literature for similar
species (17,19).
DISCUSSION
Our initial experiments on the peroxo-Fe3+ species of E47A SOR from D. baarsii
reacted with H O led us to propose, on the basis of RR, that it is a side-on peroxo-Fe3+
species (16). Such species possess specific signatures in Mössbauer spectroscopy which
distinguish them clearly from the alternative end-on hydroperoxo form (see below).
Therefore, to further characterize this peroxo-Fe3+ species, we have obtained in the present
study a complete set of Mössbauer and spin-Hamiltonian parameters.
Recent spectroscopic and magnetic studies have established that the vast majority of
mononuclear hydroperoxo-Fe3+ complexes with only N/O ligands exhibit: (i) a low-spin
ground state S = ½ (52), (ii) isomer shift values within the range 0.16 - 0.19 mm/s
(17,19,42,53), (iii) (Fe-O) vibrations in the range 615 - 645 cm-1 and (iv) (O-O) vibrations
in the range 780 - 810 cm-1 with a deuterium isotopic shift (17,52). A single hydroperoxo-Fe3+
compound departs from this behavior, being high-spin with a (O-O) vibration at 830 cm-1
(54). In contrast, mononuclear side-on peroxo-Fe3+ complexes of N/O ligands exhibit: (i) a
high-spin ground state S = 5/2 (52), (ii) isomer shift values within the range 0.61 - 0.65 mm/s
(17,19,41), (iii) (Fe-O) vibrations in the range 450 - 500 cm-1 and (iv) (O-O) vibrations in
the range 815 - 830 cm-1 insensitive to hydrogen/deuterium exchange (17,52).
The parameters obtained in this work for the peroxo-iron species in E47A SOR from
D. baarsii are consistent with a high-spin ground state S = 5/2. In addition, it appears that
both the isomer shift and the asymmetry parameter values of the peroxo species are higher
than those determined for the center II oxidized with K IrCl (Table 1). This observation is in
agreement with the presence of the peroxo ligand. However, the value of the isomer shift
(0.54 (1) mm/s) appears outside the range observed for complexes of N/O ligands (see above).
We reasoned that this might be caused by the presence of the axial cysteinate ligand in SOR
which is absent in the side-on peroxo-Fe3+ complexes reported so far. This hypothesis was
validated by several lines of evidence (i) the experimental observation that replacing a
carboxylate ligand by a thiolate ligand in Fe2+ model complexes lowers the isomer shift value
by ca 0.1 mm/s, (ii) the results of DFT calculations showing a similar decrease of the isomer
shift value ( = - 0.07 mm/s) when an axial NH ligand of the Fe3+ ion in model 3 is
replaced by a methylthiolate ligand in model 2, (iii) the axial ZFS, the quadrupole splitting
and the asymmetry parameter values that have been evaluated by DFT calculations for the 2-
O Fe3+ model 2 (D = 0.5 cm-1, E = -1.04 mm/s and  = 0.65) match reasonably well the
experimental values obtained for the peroxo-Fe3+ species in E47A SOR (D = 0.8 (2) cm-1,
E = -0.80 (5) mm/s and  = 0.60 (5)). It is worth noting that the calculated value of the
isomer shift of 3 falls within the experimental range expected for 2-O Fe3+ complexes with
nitrogen ligands (see above), what supports the validity of the calculations. Therefore, the
isomer shift value for a high-spin 2-O Fe3+ complex with a thiolate ligand can be estimated
to be in the 0.54 – 0.58 mm/s range. The isomer shift value determined here for the E47A
SOR peroxo species fits this range.
It follows then that all spectroscopic features of the E47A SOR peroxo species from
D. baarsii are consistent with a side-on peroxo-Fe3+ formulation and that a hydroperoxo-Fe3+
formulation must be rejected. This would imply an hepta-coordination of the Fe3+ ion in the
peroxo complex. Indeed, the RR band at 743 cm-1, which corresponds to a C-S stretching
mode of the CysS-Fe3+ active site, is still observed in the peroxo species. This indicates that
the cysteinate ligand is still coordinated to the iron center. In addition, there is no evidence for
a His(N)-Fe rupture upon addition of an extra ligand in SOR from P. furiosus (7). In this
respect, it is of interest that a seven-coordinated 2-O Fe3+complex has been very recently
reported in the literature (17).
CONCLUSION
The E47A mutation in SOR from D. baarsii allows the stabilization of a peroxo-iron
species in the second time scale when reacted with H O . We were able to prepare a sample of
this peroxo species by manual freezing in liquid nitrogen and to study it by spectroscopic
methods. All the experimental and theoretical evidences presented here show that this peroxo
complex is a high-spin side-on peroxo-Fe3+ species and clearly rule out a hydroperoxo-Fe3+
species. Therefore, a mutant of SOR from D. baarsii (E47A mutant) is able to accommodate a
side-on peroxo complex without severe disruption of its protein matrix (18). It is of interest
that very recently a similar side-on peroxo-Fe3+ adduct has been crystallographically
characterized for the first time in a protein in the case of naphthalene dioxygenase (35). The
kinetic and UV-visible analyses of the peroxo intermediates detected in the reaction of
superoxide with the SOR of various origins (11-14) suggest that the same species is formed
initially in all cases. Its decomposition, probably following a protonation process, varies with
the origin of the enzyme. Therefore, a 2-O Fe3+ species may be considered as a candidate for
an intermediate involved in the catalytic cycle of SORs. Experiments are presently underway
in our laboratories to further characterize these intermediates.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. C. Philouze (Université Joseph Fourier), Dr T. Kent (Web Research) and Prof. L.
Noodleman (Scripps Research Institute) are gratefully acknowledged for useful discussions.
N. Genand-Riondet (CEA/Saclay) is gratefully thanked for assistance in the in-field
Mössbauer experiments.
SUPPORTING INFORMATION AVAILABLE
Zero-field Mössbauer spectra and high-field and high-temperature Mössbauer
spectrum of 57Fe SOR E47A from D. baarsii after reduction by sodium dithionite (Figure S1),
high-field Mössbauer spectra of 57Fe SOR E47A from D. baarsii treated with sodium
dithionite (Figure S2), Resonance Raman spectrum of 57Fe SOR E47A treated with H O
(Figure S3), zero-field Mösbauer spectra (T = 4.2 K) of complexes 4, 5 and 6 (Figure S4),
zero-field Mössbauer parameters of complexes 4, 5 and 6 (Table S5), coordinates in Å for the
model of oxidized center II in SOR, the models 2 and 3, and the model of reduced center II in
SOR used for DFT calculations (Tables S6–S9). This material is available free of charge via