Machine Learning that Matters
Kiri L. Wagstaff kiri.l.wagstaff@jpl.nasa.gov
JetPropulsionLaboratory, CaliforniaInstituteofTechnology, 4800OakGroveDrive, Pasadena, CA91109USA
Abstract tively solved spam email detection (Zdziarski, 2005)
and machine translation (Koehn et al., 2003), two
Much of current machine learning (ML) re-
problems of global import. And so on.
search has lost its connection to problems of
import to the larger world of science and so- And yet we still observe a proliferation of published
ciety. Fromthisperspective,thereexistglar- ML papers that evaluate new algorithms on a handful
ing limitations in the data sets we investi- of isolated benchmark data sets. Their “real world”
gate, the metrics we employ for evaluation, experiments may operate on data that originated in
and the degree to which results are commu- therealworld,buttheresultsarerarelycommunicated
nicated back to their originating domains. back to the origin. Quantitative improvements in per-
What changes are needed to how we con- formance are rarely accompanied by an assessment of
ductresearchtoincreasetheimpactthatML whether those gains matter to the world outside of
has? WepresentsixImpactChallengestoex- machine learning research.
plicitlyfocusthefield’senergyandattention,
This phenomenon occurs because there is no
and we discuss existing obstacles that must
widespread emphasis, in the training of graduate stu-
beaddressed. Weaimtoinspireongoingdis-
dentresearchersorinthereviewprocessforsubmitted
cussion and focus on ML that matters.
papers, on connecting ML advances back to the larger
world. Eventherichassortmentofapplications-driven
ML research often fails to take the final step to trans-
1. Introduction
late results into impact.
At one time or another, we all encounter a friend, Manymachinelearningproblemsarephrasedinterms
spouse, parent, child, or concerned citizen who, upon ofanobjectivefunctiontobeoptimized. Itistimefor
learning that we work in machine learning, wonders ustoaskaquestionoflargerscope: whatisthefield’s
“What’s it good for?” The question may be phrased objective function? Do we seek to maximize perfor-
moresubtlyorelegantly,butnomatteritsform,itgets mance on isolated data sets? Or can we characterize
atthemotivationalunderpinningsoftheworkthatwe progress in a more meaningful way that measures the
do. Why do we invest years of our professional lives concrete impact of machine learning innovations?
in machine learning research? What difference does it
This short position paper argues for a change in how
make, to ourselves and to the world at large?
weviewtherelationshipbetweenmachinelearningand
Much of machine learning (ML) research is inspired science (and the rest of society). This paper does not
by weighty problems from biology, medicine, finance, contain any algorithms, theorems, experiments, or re-
astronomy, etc. The growing area of computational sults. Instead it seeks to stimulate creative thought
sustainability (Gomes, 2009) seeks to connect ML ad- andresearchintoalargebutrelativelyunaddressedis-
vances to real-world challenges in the environment, sue that underlies much of the machine learning field.
economy,andsociety. TheCALO(CognitiveAssistant Thecontributionsofthisworkare1)theclearidentifi-
thatLearnsandOrganizes)projectaimedtointegrate cation and description of a fundamental problem: the
learningandreasoningintoadesktopassistant,poten- frequent lack of connection between machine learning
tially impacting everyone who uses a computer (SRI research and the larger world of scientific inquiry and
International,2003–2009). Machinelearninghaseffec- humanity, 2) suggested first steps towards addressing
thisgap,3)theissuanceofrelevantImpactChallenges
AppearinginProceedingsofthe29th InternationalConfer-
to the machine learning community, and 4) the iden-
enceonMachineLearning,Edinburgh,Scotland,UK,2012.
tification of several key obstacles to machine learning
Copyright 2012 California Institute of Technology.
Machine Learning that Matters
impact, as an aid for focusing future research efforts. viewers do not inquire as to which classes were well
Whether or not the reader agrees with all statements classified and which were not, what the common er-
inthispaper,ifitinspiresthoughtanddiscussion,then ror types were, or even why the particular data sets
its purpose has been achieved. were chosen. There is no expectation that the au-
thors report whether an observed x% improvement in
performance promises any real impact for the original
2. Machine Learning for Machine
domain. Even when the authors have forged a col-
Learning’s Sake
laboration with qualified experts, little paper space is
ThissectionhighlightsaspectsofthewayMLresearch devoted to interpretation, because we (as a field) do
is conducted today that limit its impact on the larger not require it.
world. Ourgoalisnottopointfingersorcritiqueindi-
The UCI archive has had a tremendous impact on the
viduals,butinsteadtoinitiateacriticalself-inspection
field of machine learning. Legions of researchers have
andconstructive,creativechanges. Theseproblemsdo
chased after the best iris or mushroom classifier. Yet
nottroubleallMLwork,buttheyarecommonenough
this flurry of effort does not seem to have had any im-
to merit our effort in eliminating them.
pactonthefieldsofbotanyormycology. Doscientists
The argument here is also not about “theory versus in these disciplines even need such a classifier? Do
applications.” Theoretical work can be as inspired by they publish about this subject in their journals?
realproblemsasappliedworkcan. Thecriticismshere
There is not even agreement in the community about
focus instead on the limitations of work that lies be-
what role the UCI data sets serve (benchmark? “real-
tween theory and meaningful applications: algorith-
world”?). They are of less utility than synthetic data,
mic advances accompanied by empirical studies that
since we did not control the process that generated
are divorced from true impact.
them, and yet they fail to serve as real world data
due to their disassociation from any real world con-
2.1. Hyper-Focus on Benchmark Data Sets text (experts, users, operational systems, etc.). It is
as if we have forgotten, or chosen to ignore, that each
Increasingly,MLpapersthatdescribeanewalgorithm
data set is more than just a matrix of numbers. Fur-
follow a standard evaluation template. After present-
ther, the existence of the UCI archive has tended to
ing results on synthetic data sets to illustrate certain
over-emphasizeresearcheffortonclassificationandre-
aspects of the algorithm’s behavior, the paper reports
gression problems, at the expense of other ML prob-
results on a collection of standard data sets, such as
lems (Langley, 2011). Informal discussions with other
thoseavailableintheUCIarchive(Frank&Asuncion,
researchers suggest that it has also de-emphasized the
2010). A survey of the 152 non-cross-conference pa-
need to learn how to formulate problems and de-
pers published at ICML 2011 reveals:
fine features, leaving young researchers unprepared to
148/152 (93%) include experiments of some sort tackle new problems.
57/148 (39%) use synthetic data
55/148 (37%) use UCI data This trend has been going on for at least 20 years.
34/148 (23%) use ONLY UCI and/or synthetic data Jaime Carbonell, then editor of Machine Learning,
1/148 (1%) interpret results in domain context wrote in 1992 that “the standard Irvine data sets are
used to determine percent accuracy of concept clas-
Thepossibleadvantagesofusingfamiliardatasetsin-
sification, without regard to performance on a larger
clude 1) enabling direct empirical comparisons with
external task” (Carbonell, 1992). Can we change that
other methods and 2) greater ease of interpreting
trend for the next 20 years? Do we want to?
the results since (presumably) the data set properties
have been widely studied and understood. However,
2.2. Hyper-Focus on Abstract Metrics
in practice direct comparisons fail because we have
no standard for reproducibility. Experiments vary in
There are also problems with how we measure per-
methodology(train/testsplits,evaluationmetrics,pa-
formance. Most often, an abstract evaluation metric
rameter settings), implementations, or reporting. In-
(classification accuracy, root of the mean squared er-
terpretations are almost never made. Why is this?
ror or RMSE, F-measure (van Rijsbergen, 1979), etc.)
First, meaningful interpretations are hard. Virtually is used. These metrics are abstract in that they ex-
none of the ML researchers who work with these data plicitly ignore or remove problem-specific details, usu-
setshappentoalsobeexpertsintherelevantscientific allysothatnumberscanbecomparedacrossdomains.
disciplines. Second,andmoreinsidiously,theMLfield Does this seemingly obvious strategy provide us with
neithermotivatesnorrequiressuchinterpretation. Re- useful information?
Machine Learning that Matters
Phrase problem Collect Select or Necessary
as a machine generate
data preparation
learning task features
Choose or develop Choose metrics, The "machine
algorithm conduct experiments learning contribution"
Interpret Publicize results to Persuade users to
results relevant user community adopt technique
Figure 1. Three stages of a machine learning research program. Current publishing incentives are highly biased towards
the middle row only.
It is recognized that the performance obtained by Methods from statistics such as the t-test (Student,
trainingamodelMondatasetX maynotreflectM’s 1908) are commonly used to support a conclusion
performance on other data sets drawn from the same about whether a given performance improvement is
problem, i.e., training loss is an underestimate of test “significant” or not. Statistical significance is a func-
loss (Hastie et al., 2001). Strategies such as splitting tionofasetofnumbers;itdoesnotcomputereal-world
X into training and test sets or cross-validation aim significance. Of course we all know this, but it rarely
to estimate the expected performance of M0, trained inspires the addition of a separate measure of (true)
on all of X, when applied to future data X0. significance. How often, instead, a t-test result serves
asthefinalpunctuationtoanexperimentalutterance!
However, these metrics tell us nothing about the im-
pact of different performance. For example, 80% ac-
2.3. Lack of Follow-Through
curacy on iris classification might be sufficient for the
botany world, but to classify as poisonous or edible It is easy to sit in your office and run a Weka (Hall
a mushroom you intend to ingest, perhaps 99% (or et al., 2009) algorithm on a data set you downloaded
higher)accuracyisrequired. Theassumptionofcross- from the web. It is very hard to identify a problem
domaincomparabilityisamiragecreatedbytheappli- for which machine learning may offer a solution, de-
cationofmetricsthathavethesamerange,butnotthe termine what data should be collected, select or ex-
same meaning. Suites of experiments are often sum- tractrelevantfeatures,chooseanappropriatelearning
marized by the average accuracy across all data sets. method,selectanevaluationmethod,interpretthere-
This tells us nothing at all useful about generalization sults, involve domain experts, publicize the results to
or impact, since the meaning of an x% improvement the relevant scientific community, persuade users to
maybeverydifferentfordifferentdatasets. Arelated adopt the technique, and (only then) to truly have
problem is the persistence of “bake-offs” or “mind- made a difference (see Figure 1). An ML researcher
lesscomparisonsamongtheperformanceofalgorithms mightwellfeelfatiguedordauntedjustcontemplating
that reveal little about the sources of power or the ef- this list of activities. However, each one is a necessary
fects of domain characteristics” (Langley, 2011). componentofanyresearchprogramthatseekstohave
arealimpactontheworldoutsideofmachinelearning.
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves are
used to describe a system’s behavior for a range of Our field imposes an additional obstacle to impact.
threshold settings, but they are rarely accompanied Generally speaking, only the activities in the middle
byadiscussionofwhichperformanceregimesarerele- rowofFigure1areconsidered“publishable”intheML
vanttothedomain. Thecommonpracticeofreporting community. The Innovative Applications of Artificial
the area under the curve (AUC) (Hanley & McNeil, Intelligence conference and International Conference
1982) has several drawbacks, including summarizing onMachineLearningandApplicationsareexceptions.
performance over all possible regimes even if they are The International Conference on Machine Learning
unlikelyevertobeused(e.g.,extremelyhighfalsepos- (ICML) experimented with an (unreviewed) “invited
itiverates),andweightingfalsepositivesandfalseneg- applications” track in 2010. Yet to be accepted as a
atives equally, whichmay be inappropriate for agiven mainstream paper at ICML or Machine Learning or
problem domain (Lobo et al., 2008). As such, it is in- the Journal of Machine Learning Research, authors
sufficientlygroundedtomeaningfullymeasureimpact. must demonstrate a “machine learning contribution”
thatisoftennarrowlyinterpretedbyreviewersas“the
Machine Learning that Matters
developmentofanewalgorithmortheexplicationofa system perfectly solves a sub-problem of little interest
novel theoretical analysis.” While these are excellent, to the relevant scientific community, or where the ML
laudableadvances,unlessthereisanequalexpectation system’sperformanceappearsgoodnumericallybutis
forthebottomrowofFigure1,thereislittleincentive insufficiently reliable to ever be adopted.
to connect these advances with the outer world.
We could also solicit short “Comment” papers, to ac-
Reconnecting active research to relevant real-world company the publication of a new ML advance, that
problems is part of the process of maturing as a re- are authored by researchers with relevant domain ex-
search field. To the rest of the world, these are the pertisebutwhowereuninvolvedwiththeMLresearch.
only visible advances of ML, its only contributions to They could provide an independent assessment of the
the larger realm of science and human endeavors. performance, utility, and impact of the work. As
an additional benefit, this informs new communities
about how, and how well, ML methods work. Rais-
3. Making Machine Learning Matter
ing awareness, interest, and buy-in from ecologists,
Rather than following the letter of machine learning, astronomers, legal experts, doctors, etc., can lead to
can we reignite its spirit? This is not simply a matter greater opportunities for machine learning impact.
of reporting on isolated applications. What is needed
is a fundamental change in how we formulate, attack, 3.3. Eyes on the Prize
and evaluate machine learning research projects.
Finally, we should consider potential impact when se-
lecting which research problems to tackle, not merely
3.1. Meaningful Evaluation Methods
how interesting or challenging they are from the ML
The first step is to define or select evaluation meth- perspective. How many people, species, countries, or
ods that enable direct measurement, wherever possi- square meters would be impacted by a solution to the
ble, of the impact of ML innovations. In addition to problem? Whatlevelofperformancewouldconstitute
traditional measures of performance, we can measure a meaningful improvement over the status quo?
dollars saved, lives preserved, time conserved, effort
Warricketal. (2010)providesanexampleofMLwork
reduced, quality of living increased, and so on. Focus-
that tackles all three aspects. Working with doctors
ingourmetricsonimpactwillhelpmotivateupstream
andclinicians, theydevelopedasystemtodetectfetal
restructuring of research efforts. They will guide how
hypoxia (oxygen deprivation) and enable emergency
we select data sets, structure experiments, and define
intervention that literally saves babies from brain in-
objective functions. At a minimum, publications can
juries or death. After publishing their results, which
reporthowagivenimprovementinaccuracytranslates
demonstrated the ability to have detected 50% of fe-
to impact for the originating problem domain.
tal hypoxia cases early enough for intervention, with
Thereadermaywonderhowthiscanbeaccomplished, anacceptablefalsepositiverateof7.5%, theyarecur-
if our goal is to develop general methods that ap- rently working on clinical trials as the next step to-
ply across domains. Yet (as noted earlier) the com- wards wide deployment. Many such examples exist.
mon approach of using the same metric for all do- This paper seeks to inspire more.
mains relies on an unstated, and usually unfounded,
assumption that it is possible to equate an x% im- 4. Machine Learning Impact Challenges
provement in one domain with that in another. In-
stead, if the same method can yield profit improve- One way to direct research efforts is to articulate am-
ments of $10,000 per year for an auto-tire business as bitious and meaningful challenges. In 1992, Carbonell
well as the avoidance of 300 unnecessary surgical in- articulated a list of challenges for the field, not to in-
terventions per year, then it will have demonstrated a creaseitsimpactbutinsteadto“putthefunbackinto
powerful, wide-ranging utility. machine learning” (Carbonell, 1992). They included:
1. Discovery of a new physical law leading to a pub-
3.2. Involvement of the World Outside ML
lished, referred scientific article.
ManyMLinvestigationsinvolvedomainexpertsascol- 2. Improvement of 500 USCF/FIDE chess rating
laborators who help define the ML problem and label points over a class B level start.
data for classification or regression tasks. They can
3. Improvementinplanningperformanceof100fold
also provide the missing link between an ML perfor-
in two different domains.
manceplotanditssignificancetotheproblemdomain.
ThiscanhelpreducethenumberofcaseswhereanML 4. Investment earnings of $1M in one year.
Machine Learning that Matters
5. Outperforming a hand-built NLP system on a 5. Obstacles to ML Impact
task such as translation.
Let us imagine a machine learning researcher who is
6. Outperforming all hand-built medical diagnosis
motivated to tackle problems of widespread interest
systemswithanMLsolutionthatisdeployedand
andimpact. Whatobstaclestosuccesscanweforesee?
regularly used at at least two institutions.
Can we set about eliminating them in advance?
Because impact was not the guiding principle, these
Jargon. This issue is endemic to all specialized re-
challenges range widely along that axis. An improved
searchfields. OurMLvocabularyissofamiliarthatit
chessplayermightarguablyhavethelowestreal-world
is difficult even to detect when we’re using a special-
impact, whileamedicaldiagnosissysteminactiveuse
ized term. Consider a handful of examples: “feature
could impact many human lives.
extraction,”“bias-variancetradeoff,”“ensemblemeth-
We therefore propose the following six Impact Chal- ods,” “cross-validation,” “low-dimensional manifold,”
lenges as examples of machine learning that matters: “regularization,” “mutual information,” and “kernel
methods.” These are all basic concepts within ML
1. Alawpassedorlegaldecisionmadethatrelieson
that create conceptual barriers when used glibly to
the result of an ML analysis.
communicate with others. Terminology can serve as
2. $100M saved through improved decision making a barrier not just for domain experts and the general
provided by an ML system. public but even between closely related fields such as
3. A conflict between nations averted through high- MLandstatistics(vanItersonetal.,2012). Weshould
quality translation provided by an ML system. explore and develop ways to express the same ideas in
4. A 50% reduction in cybersecurity break-ins more general terms, or even better, in terms already
through ML defenses. familiar to the audience. For example, “feature ex-
5. A human life saved through a diagnosis or inter- traction” can be termed “representation;” the notion
vention recommended by an ML system. of “variance” can be “instability;” “cross-validation”
6. Improvementof10%inonecountry’sHumanDe- is also known as “rotation estimation” outside of ML;
velopment Index (HDI) (Anand & Sen, 1994) at- “regularization”canbeexplainedas“choosingsimpler
tributable to an ML system. models;” and so on. These terms are not as precise,
but more likely to be understood, from which a con-
These challenges seek to capture the entire process
versation about further subtleties can ensue.
of a successful machine learning endeavor, including
performance, infusion, and impact. They differ from Risk. Even when an ML system is no more, or less,
existing challenges such as the DARPA Grand Chal- prone to error than a human performing the same
lenge(Buehleretal.,2007),theNetflixPrize(Bennett task, relying on the machine can feel riskier because
& Lanning, 2007), and the Yahoo! Learning to Rank it raises new concerns. When errors are made, where
Challenge (Chapelle & Chang, 2011) in that they do do we assign culpability? What level of ongoing com-
not focus on any single problem domain, nor a par- mitment do the ML system designers have for adjust-
ticular technical capability. The goal is to inspire the ments, upgrades, and maintenance? These concerns
field of machine learning to take the steps needed to are especially acute for fields such as medicine, space-
matureintoavaluablecontributortothelargerworld. craft, finance, and real-time systems, or exactly those
settings in which a large impact is possible. An in-
No such list can claim to be comprehensive, including creased sphere of impact naturally also increases the
this one. It is hoped that readers of this paper will associated risk, and we must address those concerns
be inspiredtoformulateadditionalImpactChallenges (through technology, education, and support) if we
that will benefit the entire field. hope to infuse ML into real systems.
Much effort is often put into chasing after goals in Complexity. Despite the proliferation of ML tool-
whichanMLsystemoutperformsahumanatthesame boxes and libraries, the field has not yet matured to
task. The Impact Challenges in this paper also differ a point where researchers from other areas can simply
fromthatsortofgoalinthathuman-levelperformance applyMLtotheproblemoftheirchoice(astheymight
is not the gold standard. What matters is achieving do with methods from physics, math, mechanical en-
performancesufficienttomakeanimpactontheworld. gineering, etc.). Attempts to do so often fail due to
As an analogy, consider a sick child in a rural setting. lack of knowledge about how to phrase the problem,
A neighbor who runs two miles to fetch the doctor what features to use, how to search over parameters,
neednotachieveOlympic-levelrunningspeed(perfor- etc. (i.e., the top row of Figure 1). For this reason, it
mance),solongasthedoctorarrivesintimetoaddress has been said that ML solutions come “packaged in a
the sick child’s needs (impact). Ph.D.”;thatis,itrequiresthesophisticationofagrad-
Machine Learning that Matters
uate student or beyond to successfully deploy ML to Chapelle, Olivier and Chang, Yi. Yahoo! Learning to
solverealproblems—andthatsamePh.D.isneededto Rank Challenge overview. JMLR: Workshop and
maintain and update the system after its deployment. Conference Proceedings, 14, 2011.
It is evident that this strategy does not scale to the Frank, A. and Asuncion, A. UCI machine learning
ing, and robustifying ML algorithms and tools, while edu/ml.
itself an abstract activity, can help erode this obstacle
Gomes, Carla P. Computational sustainability: Com-
and permit wider, independent uses of ML.
putational methods for a sustainable environment,
economy,andsociety. The Bridge,39(4):5–13,Win-
6. Conclusions ter 2009. National Academy of Engineering.
Hall,M.,Frank,E.,Holmes,G.,Pfahringer,B.,Reute-
Machine learning offers a cornucopia of useful ways to
mann, P., and Witten, I. H. The WEKA data min-
approach problems that otherwise defy manual solu-
ingsoftware: Anupdate. SIGKDD Explorations,11
tion. However,muchcurrentMLresearchsuffersfrom
(1):10–18, 2009.
agrowingdetachmentfromthoserealproblems. Many
investigators withdraw into their private studies with Hanley, J. A. and McNeil, B. J. The meaning and use
a copy of the data set and work in isolation to perfect of the area under a receiver operating characteristic
algorithmicperformance. PublishingresultstotheML (ROC) curve. Radiology, 143:29–36, 1982.
communityistheendoftheprocess. Successesusually Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. The El-
are not communicated back to the original problem ements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Infer-
setting, or not in a form that can be used. ence, and Prediction. Springer, 2001.
Yettheseopportunitiesforrealimpactarewidespread. Koehn, Philipp, Och, Franz Josef, and Marcu, Daniel.
The worlds of law, finance, politics, medicine, edu- Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proc. of the
cation, and more stand to benefit from systems that Conf. of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
can analyze, adapt, and take (or at least recommend) ationforComputationalLinguisticsonHumanLan-
action. This paper identifies six examples of Impact guage Technology, pp. 48–54, 2003.
Challenges and several real obstacles in the hope of Langley, Pat. The changing science of machine learn-
inspiring a lively discussion of how ML can best make ing. Machine Learning, 82:275–279, 2011.
a difference. Aiming for real impact does not just
Lobo, Jorge M., Jimnez-Valverde, Alberto, and Real,
increase our job satisfaction (though it may well do
Raimundo. AUC: a misleading measure of the per-
that); it is the only way to get the rest of the world to
formance of predictive distribution models. Global
notice, recognize, value, and adopt ML solutions.
Ecology and Biogeography, 17(2):145–151, 2008.
SRI International. CALO: Cognitive assistant that
Acknowledgments
We thank Tom Dietterich, Terran Lane, Baback
com, 2003–2009.
Moghaddam, David Thompson, and three insightful Student. The probable error of a mean. Biometrika, 6
anonymous reviewers for suggestions on this paper. (1):1–25, 1908.
Thisworkwasperformedwhileonsabbaticalfromthe vanIterson,M.,vanHaagen,H.H.B.M.,andGoeman,
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. J.J. Resolvingconfusionoftonguesinstatisticsand
machinelearning: Aprimerforbiologistsandbioin-
References formaticians. Proteomics, 12:543–549, 2012.
van Rijsbergen, C. J. Information Retrieval. Butter-
Anand, Sudhir and Sen, Amartya K. Human develop-
worth, 2nd edition, 1979.
ment index: Methodology and measurement. Hu-
man Development Report Office, 1994. Warrick, P. A., Hamilton, E. F., Kearney, R. E., and
Precup, D. A machine learning approach to the de-
Bennett,JamesandLanning,Stan. TheNetflixPrize.
tectionoffetalhypoxiaduringlaboranddelivery. In
InProc. of KDD Cup and Workshop,pp.3–6,2007.
Proc. of the Twenty-Second Innovative Applications
Buehler, Martin, Iagnemma, Karl, and Singh, Sanjiv
ofArtificialIntelligenceConf.,pp.1865–1870,2010.
(eds.). The 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge: The
Zdziarski, Jonathan A. Ending Spam: Bayesian Con-
Great Robot Race. Springer, 2007.
tent Filtering and the Art of Statistical Language
Carbonell,Jaime. Machinelearning: Amaturingfield.
Classification.NoStarchPress,SanFrancisco,2005.
Machine Learning, 9:5–7, 1992.