]NG.nif-q[
1v4003.4090:viXra
Macroeconomic Phase Transitions Detected from the
Dow Jones Industrial Average Time Series
WONG JianChenga, LIAN Henga, CHEONG Siew Ann ,b
aDivisionofMathematicalSciences,SchoolofPhysicalandMathematicalSciences,Nanyang
TechnologicalUniversity,21NanyangLink,Singapore637371,RepublicofSingapore
bDivisionofPhysicsandAppliedPhysics,SchoolofPhysicalandMathematicalSciences,
NanyangTechnologicalUniversity,21NanyangLink,Singapore637371,RepublicofSingapore
In this paper, we perform statistical segmentation and clustering analysis of the
DowJonesIndustrialAveragetimeseriesbetweenJanuary1997andAugust2008.
Modelingtheindex movementsand log-indexmovementsas stationaryGaussian
processes, we find a total of 116 and 119 statisticallystationary segmentsrespec-
tively. These can then be grouped into between five to seven clusters, each rep-
resenting a different macroeconomic phase. The macroeconomic phases are dis-
tinguished primarily by their volatilities. We find the US economy, as measured
by the DJI, spends most of its time in a low-volatility phase and a high-volatility
phase. The former can be roughly associated with economic expansion, while
the latter contains the economic contraction phase in the standard economic cy-
cle. Both phases are interrupted by a moderate-volatility market, but extremely-
high-volatility market crashes are found mostly within the high-volatility phase.
From the temporal distribution of various phases, we see a high-volatility phase
from mid-1998 to mid-2003, and another starting mid-2007 (the current global
financial crisis). Transitions from the low-volatility phase to the high-volatility
phase are preceded by a series of precursor shocks, whereas the transition from
the high-volatility phase to the low-volatility phase is preceded by a series of in-
vertedshocks. Thetimescaleforbothtypesoftransitionsisaboutayear. Wealso
identify the July 1997 Asian Financial Crisis to be the trigger for the mid-1998
transition, and an unnamed May 2006 market event related to corrections in the
Chinesemarketstobethetriggerforthemid-2007transition.
Correspondingauthor
Emailaddress: cheongsa@ntu.edu.sg(CHEONGSiewAnn)
PreprintsubmittedtoElsevier October29,2018
Keywords: DJI, macroeconomiccycle,phasetransitions,segmentation,
clustering
PACS:05.45.Tp,89.65.Gh,89.75.Fb
1. Introduction
Most people remember the most recent economic recession as short (lasting
only eight months from March 2001 to November 2001 [1]) and mild (affect-
ing mostly high-tech companies). Against this backdrop, there have been many
sensationalist claims that the current global financial crisis is the deepest (broad
spectrum of economic sectors affected) and longest (peak in December 2007 [1],
and a potential trough in March 2009). According to other sources (see, for ex-
ample, Ref. [2]), however, the Subprime Crisis surfaced around July 2007 with a
slew of bad news from subprime lenders, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average
(DJI) dipping roughly 1,000 points going from July 2007 to August 2007. Since
then,billionsofdollarshavebeensunkintoreliefandstimuluspackages,andgov-
ernmentsaroundtheworldareplanningfurtheraidtotallinginexcessofatrillion
US dollars. There are hardly any positive results to show for the effort thus far,
andthereasonscanbestbesummedupas“toolittle,toolate”. Inmedicine,early
intervention is generally more effective and less costly compared to a late cure.
The same is probably true for economies and financial markets. Clearly, even if
we are not sure what kind of interventionmeasures will be effective, acting early
isstillmoredesirabletoactinglater. Toaccomplishthis,itisimportanttobeable
to unambiguouslydetect the onsetofa financial crisis, so that wecan at thesame
timeavoidover-reactingwhen themarkethas merelycaught a‘cold’.
Sinceeconometricdatasuch as thegross nationalproduct(GNP) arereleased
quarterly, and are adjusted monthly, they are not useful for timely detection. We
thuslooktohigher-frequencyfinancialtimeseriesforthissleuthwork. Giventhat
eachandeveryfinancialcrisismayhavetheirownuniqueandesotericcharacters,
weneedafinancialtimeseriesthatissufficientlyrepresentativeofthebroadspec-
trum of industries to be able to detect the starting point of these crises. Indices
such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJI), Dow Jones Composite Average
(DJA), and the Standards & Poors 500 (INX) are most suitable for this purpose.
Clearly, detecting the onset of a financial crisis is a change point problem [3, 4].
In their seminal works, Goldfeld et al, Hamilton and Kim et al fitted a Markov-
switching model to local trends in the US GNP time series to detect transitions
betweenamacroeconomicphase(orregime)withhighgrowthrateandamacroe-
conomic phase with low growth rate [5, 6, 7]. Unlike econometric time series,
which evolve fairly slowly with time, it is well known that financial time series
exhibit dynamics on multiple time scales. To avoid potential complications aris-
ingfromsuchmultiscaledynamics,weanalyzestatisticalfluctuationsintheindex
time series, instead of looking merely at the local trend, as is done for deciding
the duration of an economic recession. For the different macroeconomic phases
the economy and financial market can be found in, these statistical flucutations
shouldalso bequalitativelydifferent.
In thispaper, wedescribeinSection 2amodel-basedapproach to statistically
segmentingthe DJI timeseries, which is assumed to consist of a large number of
statisticallystationarysegments. Withindifferentsegments,theindexmovements
(or log index movements) are assumed to follow stationary Gaussian processes
with different means and variances. We then discover these segments using a
recursive segmentation scheme based on the relative entropy between them. Fol-
lowingthis,wedeterminethesmallnumberofmacroeconomicphasesrepresented
inthetimeseries byperformingagglomerativehierarchical clusteringon theseg-
ments. In Section 3, we report findings from our statistical segmentation and
clustering analyses. Segments obtained using the two models are in good agree-
ment with each other, and also with the dates of major market events, suggesting
thatthesegmentboundariesdiscoveredarerobustandmeaningful. Dependingon
the model, and the level of granularity we choose, we find between six to seven
macroeconomicphases after clustering thesegments. These six to sevenmacroe-
conomic phases are distinguished primarily by their variances, which represent
market volatilities. While the clusters appear to be less robust compared to the
segments, their temporal distributions do tell a fairly consistent story: the US
market, as measured by the DJI, is found predominantlyin a low-volatilityphase
and a high-volatility phase, corresponding roughly to economic expansion and
economic contraction respectively. Both phases are interrupted by a moderate-
volatility market correction phase, while the high-volatility phase is also inter-
ruptedbyanextremely-high-volatilitymarketcrashphase. Moreinterestingly,our
results suggest that the mid-1998 transition into the high-volatility phase (which
lasted five years) was triggered by the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, whereas the
mid-2007 transition into the high-volatility phase (the global financial crisis we
find ourselves in right now) was triggered by a 2006 correction in the Chinese
markets. As we have guessed, the world is very tightly coupled economically,
perhaps even more so than we would like to admit. We then conclude in Section
4,and describefurtherwork wearecurrently undertaking.
2. Data, Models andMethods
2.1. Dataand Models
While it is not as comprehensive as the S&P 500, the Dow Jones Industrial
Average (a price-weighted index consisting of 30 of the largest and most widely
heldpubliccompaniesinUS)isnonethelessaveryimportantindexmeasuringthe
performance of the US market. Tic-by-tic data for this index between 1 January
1997 and 31 August 2008 was downloaded from the Taqtic database [8], and
processed to give a half-hourly time series X = (X ,X ,...,X ), where X is
the index value at the tth half-hour, and N is the total number of trading half-
hoursbetween1January1997to31August2008. Thehalf-hourlyfrequencywas
chosensothatthereissufficient statisticstoidentifysegmentsas shortas asingle
day. From the index time series X, we obtain the index movement time series
x = (x ,...,x ), where x = X X , as well as the log-indexmovement time
1 N 1 t t t 1
series y = (y ,...,y ), where y = logX logX . We assume that x and
1 N 1 t t t 1
y consist of M and M statistically stationary segments respectively, where the
numbers of segments M and M , and where the segments are, are unknown and
mustbedetermined througha segmentationprocedure.
To do thissegmentation,weassumethemovements x withinstatisticallysta-
tionary segment m are drawn from a Gaussian (normal) distribution with mean
µ and variance σ2. Similarly, the movements y within statistically stationary
segment m are assumed to be drawn from a Gaussian distributionwith mean µ
and variance σ 2. The log-normal index movement model is popular in the fi- ′
nanceliterature,wheretradersareassumedtobeinfluencedmainlybypercentage
changes rather than absolute changes, because of their constant mental reference
to arisk-free interestrate. In thisstudy,wealso considerthenormal indexmove-
ment model, in case traders in the real world also pay attention to actual changes
in the index. In both models, the movements from one half-hour to the next are
uncorrelated, in contrast to real-world financial time series, which are known to
exhibitcorrelationsonmultipletimescales. Forthepurposeoffindingstatistically
robust change points in the time series, we believe that the details of the models
usedwillnotbeimportant,andthedifferencebetweenanuncorrelatedmodelver-
susacorrelated modelwillmerelybeadifferencebetweenstatisticalsignificance
and signal-to-noiseratio.
2.2. Methods
Time series segmentation schemes can be very broadly classified into those
based on pattern recognition,and thosebased on information-theoreticmeasures.
In pattern-based segmentation schemes, features within the time series are ab-
stractedintosymbols,asisfrequentlydoneinthetechnicalanalysisofstockmar-
kets[9]. Segmentationdecisionsarethenbasedontherelativeabundanceofsym-
bols, or their context trees [10, 11, 12, 13]. Information-theoretic segmentation
methods are popular in image segmentation [14], biological sequence segmenta-
tion [15], and also in medical time series analysis [16], but not widely used for
financial timeseries segmentation[17, 18].
To determine the location of the M segments, we employ the recursive seg-
mentation scheme introduced by Bernaola-Galva´n et al [19, 20] for biological
sequence segmentation. In this scheme, we first identify a cursor position t in
the sequence z = (z ,z ,...,z ) with length N, and compute the Jensen-Shannon
divergence
∆ = log 2 , (1)
which measures the statistical divergence between the left subsequence z =
(z ,z ,...,z)and therightsubsequencez = (z ,z ,...,z ). Here,
1 2 t R t+1 t+2 N
N 1 (z µ)2
P = exp i − (2)
is the likelihood for observing the sequence z = (z ,z ,...,z ), assuming that
the entire sequence is generated by a single Gaussian process with mean µ and
varianceσ2,and
t 1 (z µ )2 N 1 (z µ )2
P (t) = exp i − L exp j − R (3)
Y i=1 2πσ2 L j Y=t+1 2πσ2 R
isthelikelihoodforobservingthesequencez, assumingthattheleftsubsequence
z = (z ,z ,...,z)isgenerated byaGaussianprocess withmeanµ and variance
σ2, and the right subsequence z = (z ,z ,...,z ) is generated by a Gaussian
L R t+1 t+2 N
processwith meanµ and varianceσ2.
Since the parameters µ, µ , µ , σ2, σ2, and σ2 are not given, we can replace
them with their maximum-likelihoodestimates µˆ, µˆ , µˆ , σˆ2, σˆ2, and σˆ2. These
estimates maximizes P and P (t) relative to the data, and the Jensen-Shannon
divergence,whichsimplifiesto
tells us how much better the best two-segment model fits the observed data over
the best one-segment model. If we now vary t, and identify t = t for which
∆ = ∆ = max ∆,thiswouldtellusthebestplacetosegmentthegivensequence
z = (z ,z ,...,z ). The Jensen-Shannon divergence maximum ∆ gives us an
indicationofhowsignificantthesegmentboundaryat t isstatistically.
Wethenrepeatthisone-into-twosegmentationproceduretorecursivelycutthe
given sequence up into shorter and shorter segments. As this recursive segmen-
tation progresses, the divergence maxima for the new cuts will generally become
smallerandsmaller. Atsomepoint,newcutswillnolongerbestatisticallysignif-
icant, and the segmentation process must be terminated. There are several ways
to do this: through hypothesistesting[19, 20], through model selection, [21, 22],
orthroughexaminationoftheintrinsicstatisticalfluctuationswithinthesequence
tobesegmented[23]. Inthiswork,weadoptedasemi-automatedapproachtoter-
minate the recursive segmentation. First, we recursively segment the time series
untilthedivergencemaximaofthenewcutsfallbelowagiventhreshold,selected
byinspectiontobe∆ = 10. Wethenscreenthesesegmentsmanually,byvisually
inspecting the Jensen-Shannon divergence spectrum ∆, to decide whether very
short segments should be eliminated, and very long segments should be further
segmented.
At each stage of the recursive segmentation, we also perform segmentation
optimization, to overcome the context sensitivity problem identified in Ref. [24].
For this, we use thealgorithm described in Ref. [23], where we start with M seg-
ment boundaries t ,...,t obtained after new cuts have been introduced by the
recursive segmentation. To optimize the position of the mth segment boundary,
wecomputetheJensen-Shannondivergencespectrum∆ withinthesupersegment
(x ,...,x ) bounded by the segments boundaries t and t , and replace
tm 1 +1 tm+1 m 1 m+1
t b−yt , wherethesupersegmentJensen-Shannondiverge − nceismaximized. This
is done for all M segment boundaries, and iterated until all segment boundaries
converge to their optimal positions. We then continuethe recursive segmentation
with this optimized set of segments, introducing new cuts, optimizethe new seg-
mentboundariesalongwiththeoldsegmentboundaries,untilthesegmentationis
terminated.
Finally, after we are satisfied that the final segmentation is optimal, and the
segment boundaries are all statisticallysignificant, we perform agglomerativehi-
erarchical clusteringonthesegmentstodeterminethenumberofmacroeconomic
phases represented in the time series. This is done with the complete link al-
gorithm [25], using the Jensen-Shannon divergences between segments as their
statistical distances. Clustering of different periods within a financial time series
has been previously investigated [26, 27, 28], but we believe we are the first to
incorporatea rigoroussegmentationanalysisintosuch astudy.
3. Results and Discussions
3.1. StatisticalSegmentation
From the DJI time series between January 1997 and August 2008, we found
a total of 116 segments using the normal index movement model, and a total of
119 segments for the log-normal index movement model. Most of the optimized
segment boundaries found are either mid-days or end-of-days, in agreement with
the start-of-day and end-of-day buzz, and mid-day lull observed in practically all
financial markets [29, 30]. We say that a segment boundary is common between
the two sets if its positions in the two models differ by at most one day. A total
of 85 common segment boundaries are found, out of which 37 are at the same
exact half-hour. This tells us that most of the segment boundaries discovered are
extremely robust. As shown in Figure 3, these robust segment boundaries agree
very well with the dates of important market events. In Table 1, we also show
the intervals where the segmentations from the the two models disagree. These
intervalsareboundbyveryrobustsegmentboundaries,andmostoftheseintervals
correspondtohighlyvolatileperiodsintheDJItimeseries. Withintheseintervals,
disagreementbetweenthetwomodelsisprimarilyintheformofdifferentnumber
of segment boundaries. We surmise that the statistical fluctuations within these
intervals are highly nonstationary, and thus not well described by a collection of
stationary models. Even so, we find many common segment boundaries within
theseintervals.
3.2. StatisticalClustering
In their classic studies [5, 6], Goldfeld et al and Hamilton assumed only two
macroeconomic phases for the US GNP. More recently, Sims and Zha assumed
four phases in their analysis of the history of US monetary policy [31]. In gen-
eral, economists believe in the existence of only a small number of macroeco-
nomic phases. On the large scale, the textbook economic cycle consists of recur-
rentswitchesbetweenaneconomicexpansionphaseandaneconomiccontraction
phase. On a smaller scale, economists also acknowledge the existence of a mar-
ket correction phase and a market crash phase. Based on our clustering analysis
of the segments, we find indeed a small number of clusters, as shown in Figure
1. For the normal index movement model, we find between five to seven clus-
ters of segments, depending on the level of granularity we choose. Similarly, the
Table 1: Intervals within the January 1997 to August 2008 period where segmentations of the
normalindexmovementmodelandlog-normalindexmovementmodeldisagree.
numberofsegments common
startdate enddate
normalindex log-normalindex boundaries
movementmodel movementmodel
Nov3,1997 Mar31,1998 4 5 0
Aug26,1998 Oct20,1998 3 2 0
Jan13,1999 Nov5,1999 3 7 0
Mar9,2001 Jun3,2002 18 10 6
Oct16,2002 Aug6,2003 9 6 2
Mar10,2004 Oct18,2005 3 8 1
Jul28,2006 Aug15,2006 1 2 0
Sep5,2006 Dec27,2006 4 1 0
Jul25,2007 Mar10,2008 7 14 4
hierarchicalclusteringtreeofthelog-indexmovementmodelsuggestssevenclus-
ters ofsegments. For both models, the coarsest descriptionthat is reasonable and
informativeisinterms ofthreeclustersofsegments.
When we plot a scatter diagram of the segment means and standard devia-
tions, as shown in Figure 2, we see that the clusters are distinguished primarily
through their standard deviations, i.e. their market volatilities. Adopting a heat-
map-likecolourschemefortheclusters,wecolourthelow-volatilityclustersdeep
blue and blue, the moderate-volatility clusters cyan and green, the high-volatility
clusters yellow and orange, and the extremely-high-volatilityclusters red. Using
this colour scheme, we plot the temporal distributions of clustered segments for
the two models as Figure 3. The two temporal distributions agree qualitatively
on the existence of a low-volatility phase between mid-2003 to end-2006, and a
high-volatilityphase within 2008. However, we find the log-normal index move-
ment model exaggerates small statistical divergences, at the same time playing
down large statistical divergences. As such, there is higher temporal contrast at
lowmarket volatilities,and lowertemporalcontrast at highmarket volatilities. In
comparison,thenormalindexmovementmodel,withitsuniformcontrastbetween
marketvolatilities,tellsusamuchmoreinterestingstory: overtheperiodJanuary
1997 to August 2008, the US market, as measured by the DJI, is found predom-
inantly in the low-volatility (deep blue and blue) and high-volatility (yellow and
orange) phases. By visual inspection of the DJI time series, we see that the low-
volatilityphase has a natural interpretation as the economic expansion phase, but
whilethehigh-volatilityphase containstheeconomiccontraction phase, itsdura-
(normalindexmovementmodel)
.
(log-normalindexmovementmodel)
5 9 88289778
0 3 37351791
8.
57.
1 0 5 6 24627135
9 4 3 2 8 81651299
4.
Figure1: Thecomplete-linkhierarchicalclusteringtreesofthesegmentsobtainedusingthenor-
malindexmovementmodel(top)andthelog-normalindexmovementmodel(bottom). Thedif-
ferentiatedclustersarecolouredaccordingto theirmarketvolatilities: low(deepblueandblue),
moderate(cyanandgreen),high(yellowandorange),andextremelyhigh(red).Alsoshownatthe
majorbranchesaretheJensen-Shannondivergencevaluesatwhichsubclustersaremerged.
−40 −20 0 20 40
−20 −10 0 10 20
µ′ (× 104)
Figure2: Meansandstandarddeviationsofthesegmentsobtainedusingthenormalindexmove-
mentmodel(left)andthelog-normalindexmovementmodel(right). Aswecansee,theclusters
aredifferentiatedprimarilybytheirstandarddeviations.
tion is significantly longer. From this point on, we will limit our discussions to
thenormal indexmovementmodel.
As we can see from Figure 3, both the low-volatility phase and the high-
volatility phase are interrupted by a moderate-volatility market correction phase
(green). In the normal index movement model, segments within this phase have
very consistent standard deviations of about 20 index points. The length distri-
bution of these market correction segments, however, is bimodal, with one group
lasting between 100–200 half-hours (1–2 weeks), and another group lasting be-
tween700–900half-hours(1.5–2months). Ingeneral, wefind moreshortcorrec-
tionsegmentswithinthelow-volatilityphase,and morelongcorrectionsegments
within the high-volatilityphase. The high-volatility phase is also interrupted fre-
quentlyby an extremely-high-volatilitymarket crash phase, which sports a broad
range of standard deviationsfrom 50 to 150 index points. Crash segment lengths
were also found to fall into three groups: between 10–40 half-hours (1–3 days),
around100 half-hours(1 week), and between 200–300half-hours (2–3weeks).
3.3. TemporalDistributionofClustered Segments
Mostimportantly,thetemporaldistributionoftheclusteredsegmentsbetween
January 1997 and August 2008 indicates the US market made a transition from
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
1 2 3 45 6 78 9 10
7991 8991 9991 0002 1002 2002 3002 4002 5002 6002 7002 8002
1 2 3 45 6 78 9 10
Figure3: Temporaldistributionsoftheclusteredsegmentsforthenormalindexmovementmodel
(top),andthelog-normalindexmovementmodel(bottom). Theredsolidlinesindicatethedates
ofimportantmarketevents: (1)July1997AsianFinancialCrisis; (2)October1997MiniCrash;
(3) August 1998 Russian Financial Crisis; (4) DJI 2000 High; (5) NASDAQ Crash; (6) start of
2001recession; (7)Sep11 Attack; (8)endof2001recession; (9)DJI 2002Low; (10)February
2007ChineseCorrection.
thelow-volatilityphasetothehigh-volatilityphaseinmid-1998,wentbacktothe
low-volatility phase in mid-2003, and again switched back to the high-volatility
phase in mid-2007. The first high-volatility phase observed in this period lasted
five years, within which we find not only the official March–November 2001 re-
cession, but also the 2000 high in the DJI. It is generally believed that the DJI
2000 high is the result of the Dot-Com Bubble, even though the March 2000
NASDAQCrashdidnotevenregisteredontheDJI.Veryinterestingly,apartfrom
more or less isolated market corrections, we find a series of market corrections
whichgetsmoreandmoreseverepriortothemid-1998phasetransition. Wereal-
izedthattheseareprecursorshockssimilarinnaturetothosefoundbySornetteet
al preceding market crashes [32, 33, 34, 35]. From Figure 3, we see that the first
precursor shock appeared right after the July 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. This
suggests, at least on face value, that the mid-1998 transition was triggered by the
Asian Financial Crisis. Looking at the end of this first high-volatility phase, we
find a series of inverted shocks, starting shortly after the DJI 2002 low. Just like
theprecursorshocksprecedingthelow-to-hightransition,theselow-tomoderate-
volatily inverted shocks went on for about a year before the US market made the
high-to-lowphasetransition. Thoughwedonotyetunderstandthenatureofthese
shocksandinvertedshocks,itislikelythattheyaregenericfeaturesinthedynam-
icsofstockmarkets.
Thesecondhigh-volatilityphaseobservedintheDJItimeseries isnoneother
than the present global financial crisis. Depending on the sources, the Subprime
Crisis,whichcatalyzed thecurrentglobalfinancialcrisis,isdated asearlyas July
2007. Onthesurface,thereseemstobenoconnectionbetweenthisgradualdown-
turn, and the Feb 2007 market crash known as the Chinese Correction. However,
wefindtheChineseCorrectionsittinginthemiddleofayear-longprecursorshock
period starting in May 2006, marked by a less severe market event that also had
to do with corrections in the Chinese markets. Again, on face value, the US fi-
nancial crisis appears to be triggered by structural upheavals in a foreign market.
However, given that US has substantial investment interests in China, it is not
clear from our observations what the true causes and effects might be. Between
September 2008 and April 2009, we have yet to detect any inverted shocks, al-
thoughitislikelytheDJIhasseenitslowestpointofthiscrisisinMarch2009. In
themostoptimisticscenario that westart findinginverted shocksinApril orMay
2009, and assumingthefundamental dynamicsunderlying theseentitieshavenot
changedfromthepreviouscrisistothepresentcrisis,wecanexpecttheUSmarket
tocompletethehigh-to-lowphasetransition(effectivelyaneconomicrecovery)in
mid-2010.
Finally,afterlearningsomuchfromtheDJItimeseries,itisnaturaltoaskifit
is possible to avert an impending financial crisis, if early detection based on pre-
cursor shocks is reliable. To answer such a question, we will need to understand
theinterplaybetween factors thatcaused theprecursorshocks. At theveryworst,
if we cannot understand the nature of these precursor shocks, they would remain
useful as early warning indicators of the financial crisis. Our hope then would be
that intervention measures meted out early may be able to soften the crisis, and
perhaps even shorten it. Equally important, if we can understand what we did
in the previous crisis that culminated in the inverted shocks, we might be able to
developmoresystematicmeasures toaid recoveryfrom thecurrent crisis.
4. Conclusions
We performed statistical segmentation of the DJI time series between Jan-
uary 1997 and August 2008, using an optimized recursive segmentation scheme
derived from that introduced by Bernaola-Galva´n et al. We assumed normal as
wellaslog-normalindexmovementsineachunknownstatisticallystationaryseg-
ment of the time series, and used the Jensen-Shannon divergence as the statisti-
cal distance between segments. Adopting the termination heuristic described in
Section 2, we found 116 segments for the normal index movement model, and
119 for the log-normal index movement model. These two segmentations agree
very well with each other, suggesting that the segment boundaries discovered are
statistically robust. We then performed agglomerative hierarchical clustering of
the segments using the complete-link algorithm, to find that the large number of
segments can be assigned to between five and seven clusters. These clusters are
distinguishedprimarilybytheirvariances,andrepresentlow-volatility,moderate-
volatility,high-volatility,and extremely-high-volatilitymacroeconomicphases.
Based on the temporal distribution of the clustered segments, we saw that
the US economy, as measured by the DJI, is found predominantly in the low-
volatilityphaseorthehigh-volatilityphase. Thelow-volatilityphasecorresponds
very roughly to the economic expansion phase of the standard economic cycle.
In contrast, the accepted economic contraction phase is completely nested within
the much longer high-volatility phase. Both phases are interrupted frequently
by the week-long or month-long moderate-volatility market correction phases.
Marketcrashes,whichformadistinctmacroeconomicphasewithextremelyhigh
volatility,occurwithdurationsrangingfromonedaytothreeweeks,andisalmost
exclusivelyfound within the high-volatilityphase. Within the period studied, we
found the high-volatility occuring only twice. The first such interval was from
mid-1998 to mid-2003. The second interval is the ongoing global financial crisis
which,according toourresults,startedin mid-2007.
From the temporal distribution of clustered segments, we found a series of
moderate-volatility precursor shocks preceding the mid-1998 low-to-high phase
transition, and also a series of moderate-volatility inverted shocks preceding the
mid-2003high-to-lowphasetransition,whichisassociatedwitheconomicrecov-
ery that started with the DJI 2002 low. There is also a series of precursor shocks
preceding the mid-2007 low-to-highphase transition that brought many financial
giantsaroundtheworldtotheirknees. Thetimescaleforalltransitionsidentified
from the DJI timeseries is about a year. We suspect inverted shocks would again
appear roughly a year before the end of the current financial crisis. The impli-
cation of this finding is that, if we do find inverted shocks trailing the the March
2009 low, and take these as the start of the economic recovery, the US economy
mightfind itselfback inthelow-volatilityphasesometimein themiddleof2010.
Shouldthisoptimisticscenariopanout,thecurrenthigh-volatilityglobalfinancial
crisiswouldhavelastedaboutthreeyears,comparedtofiveyearsfortheprevious
high-volatilityphase.
From the DJI time series data alone, we see at face value that the mid-1998
transitionwas triggered bytheJuly1997Asian FinancialCrisis. Thisassessment
runs contrary to most accounts, because the US market actually went on to scale
new heights in 2000. However, because of the high volatility between 1998 and
2000, the upward trend within this period must be interpreted very carefully. In
comparison, the local trend between 2004 to 2007 is statistically much more sig-
nificant,becauseofthelowvolatilitywithinthisperiod. WhiletheFebruary2007
market crash known as the Chinese Correction might have played an important
role, we see that there are earlier signs for the start of global economic decline
in mid-2007. This is an unnamed market event in May 2006, also related to cor-
rection within the Chinese markets. All in all, the story that unfolded from our
analysisoftheDJItimeseriestellsushowtheglobaleconomiesaresocoupledto
each other, thatstructural transitionsin onemarket eventuallypropagatesto most
marketsaround theworld.
Presently,wehaveinitiatedacomparativestudyoftheNikkei225andtheDJI
overthesameperiod(January1997toAugust2008),toseewhethertherearesta-
tisticalsignaturesthatpointtocausallinksbetweentheUSandJapanesemarkets.
At thesametime, we are replicating theanalysis forthe DowJones family ofUS
economicsectortimeseries,tosearchforcausallinksbetweendifferenteconomic
sectors. Wehopethismoreextensiveanalysiswilltelluswhicheconomicsectors
follow which other economic sectors into decline during a financial crisis. We
also hope to see which economic sectors lead the economic recovery, and which
economic sectors are lifted up by others as the economy recovers. Ultimately,
a better understanding of the causal relationships between economic sectors will
hinttomoreeffective,andless costlystimulusmeasures.
Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Nanyang Technological University startup
grant SUG 19/07. We have had helpful discussions with Low Buen Sin, Charlie
Charoenwong, GeraldCheang HockLye, andChris KokJun Liang.