Macro-trends in research on the central dogma of molecular biology
Sepehr Ehsani
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, and Tanz Centre for Research in
Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H2, Canada
Present address: Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and MIT Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, United States
ehsani@csail.mit.edu
10 January 2013; revised 7 October 2013
The central dogma of molecular biology, formulated more than five decades ago, compartmentalized
information exchange in the cell into the DNA, RNA and protein domains. This formalization has served
as an implicit thematic distinguisher for cell biological research ever since. However, a clear account of
the distribution of research across this formalization over time does not exist. Abstracts of >3.5 million
publications focusing on the cell from 1975 to 2011 were analyzed for the frequency of 100 single-word
DNA-, RNA- and protein-centric search terms and amalgamated to produce domain- and subdomain-
specific trends. A preponderance of protein- over DNA- and in turn over RNA-centric terms as a
percentage of the total word count is evident until the early 1990s, at which point the trends for protein
and DNA begin to coalesce while RNA percentages remain relatively unchanged. This term-based
census provides a yearly snapshot of the distribution of research interests across the three domains of
the central dogma of molecular biology. A frequency chart of the most dominantly-studied elements of the
periodic table is provided as an addendum.
The central dogma of molecular biology, consisting of the tripartite alignment of DNA, RNA and protein,
was formalized in 1970 [1] (although first put forth in 1958) and has encapsulated the main domains of
focus in biological research. Although the boundaries between these domains have become ever more
intangible with discoveries such as DNA-protein complexes in the form of nucleosomes [2] or RNA-protein
entities such as the ribosome [3], a given research project in the molecular biology laboratory can still be
categorized as mainly emphasizing or at least partially involving one of the components of the central
dogma more than the remaining two constituents.
It would be informative to determine the extent to which the field of molecular biology has
emphasized DNA, RNA and protein as its focus of attention and how the emphasis might have changed
over time in the form of a census. Text-mining could be a suitable approach to analyze such patterns in
the published literature [4,5]. To that end, 3,767,522 abstracts of all articles containing the word “cell” or
“cells” in any field or as a Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) were extracted from the Medical Literature
Analysis and Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE) database for a 37-year period from 1975 to 2011,
inclusive. Publications indexed prior to 1975 do not necessarily reflect the expected trajectory of
increasing annual publication numbers and were not included for the purpose of this study. An in-house
word-frequency Java program was used to determine the annual occurrence of a total of 100 DNA-, RNA-
and protein-centric terms and their plural/adjectival derivatives, in addition to the total yearly word counts
(Table S1). Although some of the selected search terms will inevitably capture minor aspects of a domain
other than the one assigned, such crossovers will be negligible in the scale and theme of the current
search. Moreover, to ensure consistency across different abstracts, the search terms were single words
only, and referred to biological entities (e.g., genome) rather than techniques, processes or phenomena
(e.g., sequencing, transcription, etc.).
The total number of words, after adjustments for the abstract number and PubMed ID line, was
939,309,404, equalling approximately 250 words per abstract across the 37-year period (Fig. 1). The
slope of the total word count, however, is greater than that of the total publications per year, indicating a
general trend towards longer abstracts. Whereas the average abstract length from 1975 to 1979 is 180, it
increases to 271 words between 2007 and 2011.
The cumulative percentage of protein-centric terms relative to the total annual word count in
abstracts from 1975 is 0.52%, whereas it is 0.32% for DNA-centric and 0.13% for RNA-centric terms (Fig.
2A). Protein and DNA terms show an increase until the early 1990s, followed by a decline in the late
1990s for protein and mid-2000s for DNA. The trend for RNA shows a relatively slighter variation in the
37-year period. In 2011, the relative percentages for protein, DNA and RNA had changed to 0.47%,
0.46% and 0.16%, respectively. It should be noted that although the number of publications in each
domain has increased substantially every year, the percentage of search terms per total words indicates
the relative focus of the field of molecular biology on each part of the central dogma. Overall, it is evident
that the protein component of the central dogma of molecular biology received greater attention in
research in the 1970s, followed by DNA and RNA. With a gradual decline in protein-centric percentages
and relatively constant increase in DNA terms, the protein and DNA domains appear to have garnered
equal focus in the 2000s. The relative attention on the RNA domain seems to have remained less
fluctuating.
It will be useful to determine if the trend observed for each domain is mainly carried by one or
more subdomains. ‘Gene’ and related terms are the predominant trendsetters for DNA-centric words (Fig.
2B). Other than ‘genome’ and ‘epigenetics’ (and related terms), which show a slow rise from early-2000s
onward, all other terms have a negative or near-zero slope. The trend for RNA-centric words seems to be
mainly carried in phases by three different subcategories: from 1975 to the mid-1980s by ‘RNA’, from the
mid-1980s to the early 2000s by ‘mRNA’ (messenger RNA), and from then on by ‘siRNA’ (small
interfering RNA) and ‘miRNA’ (microRNA) (Fig. 2C). The main term in the protein-centric trend is,
unsurprisingly, ‘protein’ and related terms (Fig. 2D). However, the key contributors to the shape of the
trend in the 1970s and 1980s are ‘enzyme’ and ‘antibody’, respectively, both of which demonstrate a
steady decline in subsequent decades. The ‘proteome’ subdomain shows a relatively small rise in the
past decade.
All 100 search terms account for an average of 1.15% of the total words in the abstracts with a
standard deviation of 0.11%. If the three constituents of the central dogma encompass the principal
avenues of information flow in the cell, it might then be plausible to assume that the cumulative
percentage of all DNA-, RNA- and protein-related terms should be constant on a year-by-year basis, even
in cases of new discoveries within the dogma which spawn new research directions and publications.
Although the current census appears to corroborate this assumption to an extent, the sums of all
percentages span a minimum of 0.95% in 1977 and a maximum of 1.32% in 1995 (Fig. S1). It is possible
to speculate that publications analyzed in this study have at different times relied on biological
phenomena outside of the tripartite axis (e.g., phospholipids) to complement their explanation of a given
aspect of the cell’s information system.
To control for the accuracy of the search algorithm, the frequency of the articles ‘a’, ‘an’ and ‘the’
were calculated (Fig. S2). The indefinite articles show a consistent percentage throughout the search
period, with ‘a’ and ‘an’ representing 1.5% and 0.3% of the total words, respectively. Interestingly, the
usage of the definite article ‘the’ shows a negative linear trend, with a decrease from 6.0% in 1975 to
3.8% in 2011.
Finally, to determine the relative focus of the field of molecular and cellular biology on the natural
elements, the frequencies of occurrence of the 118 elements in the periodic table were calculated (Fig.
S3). Calcium, oxygen, lead, iron, sodium, carbon, zinc, hydrogen, gold, copper and potassium
represented the most frequently mentioned elements at present, respectively (Fig. S3A). Relative to other
elements, calcium and sodium demonstrate a decrease in occurrence from the late 1980s to 2011 (Fig.
S3B).