2v4525.0111:viXra
TheAnnalsofAppliedStatistics
2013,Vol.7,No.3,1362–1385
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2013
MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS ON MORTALITY REVEALED BY
PANEL ANALYSIS WITH NONLINEAR TRENDS
By Edward L. Ionides, Zhen Wang and Jos´e A. Tapia Granados
University of Michigan
Many investigations have used panel methods to study the re-
lationships between fluctuations in economic activity and mortality.
A broad consensus has emerged on the overall procyclical nature of
mortality:perhapscounter-intuitively,mortalitytypicallyrisesabove
its trend during expansions. This consensus has been tarnished by
inconsistent reports on the specific age groups and mortality causes
involved.Weshowthattheseinconsistenciesresult,inpart,fromthe
trend specifications used in previous panel models. Standard econo-
metricpanelanalysisinvolvesfittingregressionmodelsusingordinary
least squares, employingstandard errors which arerobust to tempo-
ral autocorrelation. The model specifications include a fixed effect,
and possibly a linear trend, for each time series in the panel. We
proposealternativemethodologybasedonnonlineardetrending.Ap-
plying our methodology on data for the 50 US states from 1980 to
2006, we obtain more precise and consistent results than previous
studies.Wefindprocyclicalmortalityinallagegroups.Wefindclear
procyclical mortality due to respiratory disease and traffic injuries.
Predominantlyprocyclicalcardiovasculardiseasemortalityandcoun-
tercyclical suicide are subject to substantial state-to-state variation.
Neither cancer nor homicide have significant macroeconomic associ-
ation.
1. Introduction. Theimpactoffluctuationsineconomicactivityonmor-
tality hasbeenalong-runningdebate.Early evidenceforprocyclical mortal-
ity (i.e., increased mortality during economic booms) was presented by Og-
burn and Thomas (1922). Subsequently, Harvey Brenner made determined
efforts to support the hypothesis of counter-cyclical mortality [e.g., Bren-
ner (1979)], although his controversial statistical methods were eventually
discredited [Gravelle, Hutchinson and Stern (1981), Wagstaff (1985)]. There
Received October 2011; revised December 2012.
1Supportedby NIH/NICHDGrant HD057411-02.
Key words and phrases. Mortality, health economics, model misspecification, panel
data.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2013,Vol. 7, No. 3, 1362–1385. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
2 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
is now evidence for procyclical mortality in many developed and develop-
ing countries [reviewed by Tapia Granados and Ionides (2011)]. Mortality is
the most clear-cut measure of population health, but may be the tip of an
iceberg of procyclical morbidity. Indeed, corresponding patterns have been
foundforother health-related outcomes [Ruhm(2003,2005b)], thoughthese
are complicated both by the scope of available data and by the possibility
of macroeconomic influences on data collection.
Cyclical mortality is distinct from the debated relationship between long-
term economic development and long-term improvements in public health.
Nevertheless, the two debates are related: inasmuch as cyclical mortality is
observed for macroeconomic fluctuations at all time scales, it plays a role
in determining the long time scale variations which are identified as trends.
Certainly,manyfactorsotherthanmacroeconomicconsiderationscontribute
to population mortality levels [Cutler, Deaton and Lleras-Muney (2006)].
Population level associations are distinct from the health consequences
of economic fluctuations on specific vulnerable groups, such as those who
become unemployed. Adverse health outcomes are certainly associated with
unemployment, with evidence for causation in both directions [McDonough
and Amick (2001)]. The present investigation concerns aggregate effects,
which may include both beneficial and harmful consequences for different
subpopulations.
Alandmarkintheinvestigationofcyclicalmortalitywastheapplicationof
panelmethodsby Ruhm(2000),allowing theconsideration of extensive spa-
tiotemporal data. Ruhm (2000) analyzed annual statistics for 50 US states
over 20 years and found predominantly procyclical mortality. This conclu-
sion has been largely confirmed by subsequent panel investigations [Ruhm
(2003, 2006, 2007), Neumayer (2004), Tapia Granados (2005b), Gerdtham
and Ruhm (2006), Buchmueller, Grignon and Jusot (2007), Miller et al.
(2009), Gonzalez and Quast (2010, 2011)]. The spatial units in these studies
vary (states, countries, regions, French departments), but we will consis-
tently refer to them as states. These panel studies were typically carried
out in the spirit of difference-in-difference analysis [Bertrand, Duflo and
Mullainathan (2004)]. In this paradigm, temporal variations in mortality
are controlled by taking a difference between state mortality and national
mortality, interpreted in regression models as a fixed year effect; spatial
variations in mortality are controlled by including state-specific mortality
effects. The resulting relationships identified between macroeconomic vari-
ables and mortality are therefore resistant to bias from either strictly spa-
tial or strictly temporal additive omitted variables. By removing national
mortality effects, difference-in-difference panel analysis is complementary to
time series analysis [Ruhm (2005a)], though the two approaches have led to
broadly consistent results [Tapia Granados (2005a)]. Individual-level data
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 3
have also revealed predominantly procyclical effects [Edwards (2008)]. Sam-
ple size issues limit the scope of individual-level analyses; macroeconomic
impact on mortality is an effect of small size (for any given individual),
which nevertheless has a considerable overall effect on entire populations.
A critical question for the proper understanding of procyclical aggregate
mortality is to what extent different age groups and mortality causes are
involved in the procyclical phenomenon. Problematically, different analyses
have previously led to different answers. We argue that these inconsisten-
cies can be explained by the use of misspecified state-specific trend models.
Previous analyses have typically employed linear or constant state-specific
trends and have performed statistical regression techniques which are in-
efficient or biased for the data under consideration. The methodological
limitations of these analyses have had severe consequences for investigat-
ing age and cause-specific mortality, without being large enough to interfere
with the results for total mortality. To support our argument, we will show
how removal of nonlinear trendsallows appropriate statistical analysis using
standard regression methods.
In this investigation, we study data from the US states in the years
1980–2006. Thus, our data updates the 1972–1991 analysis of Ruhm (2000)
and overlaps the 1978–2004 analysis of Miller et al. (2009). Whereas Miller
et al. (2009) extended Ruhm (2000) by breaking down the data more exten-
sively by age and mortality cause, here we focus instead on the specification
of the model and its consequences for the conclusions reached. We find that
some estimates of interest are fragile to changes in the specification. Results
which are sensitive to the model specification should be treated with ad-
ditional caution and also raise the question of which specification is most
appropriate. To resolve existing ambiguities, and to make further progress,
there is a need for objective evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of
alternative analyses. Assessing the model specification via analysis of the
regression residuals can provide such a tool. The constant or linear state-
specific trend specifications used in previous work, including Ruhm (2000)
and Miller et al. (2009), entail substantial violations of the standard as-
sumptions that justify the use of ordinary least squares (OLS). Combin-
ing OLS point estimates with state-clustered standard errors is a standard
econometric technique in this situation [Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan
(2004), Petersen (2009)], however, this only partially alleviates the adverse
consequencesofthemodelviolations.Ourmethodologicalremedyistoapply
nonlinear detrending methods in this spatiotemporal setting. We show that
our method has many of the advantages of feasible generalized least squares
(FGLS) while avoiding some of the difficulties inherent in using data to
estimate a large covariance matrix [Hausman and Kuersteiner (2008)].
Our results confirm the finding of Ruhm (2000) that general mortality
fluctuates procyclically and this procylical phenomenon is stronger in young
4 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
adults (ages 20–44), though it is present also in mid-age adults (45–64)
and individuals at retirement ages (65+). The conclusion of Miller et al.
(2009) that mid-age adults are not subject to procyclical mortality may
be a consequence of model misspecification. Since Miller et al. (2009) and
Ruhm (2000) used similar model formulations, it is fortuitous that many of
theresultsofRuhm(2000)happentoagreewiththeconclusionsfromamore
statistically principled analysis of recent data. We find that the procyclical
oscillationofgeneralmortalityismainlymediatedbyincreasesinrespiratory
disease mortality, cardiovascular disease mortality and traffic mortality, all
of which oscillate procyclically. Suicide differs by being countercyclical; we
find cancer and homicide to be acyclical.
Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows.Section2describesthe
data. Section 3 introduces the panel models under consideration. Section 4
discussesthemethodologicalissuesinvolvedinfittingthesemodels.Section5
carries out a data analysis, focusing on issues of methodological relevance.
Section 6 investigates goodness of fit for the models under consideration.
Section 7 discusses these results in the context of the current understanding
of cyclical mortality.
2. Data. We analyzed annual data from the 50 US states over the years
1980–2006.Crude,age-specific,sex-specificandcause-specificmortalityrates
werecomputedusingdatapubliclyavailablefromtheUSCentersforDisease
Control and Prevention (wonder.cdc.gov). Data on annual unemployment
rates were obtained from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.bls.gov).
Age-specific mortality rates were calculated for three age groups: 20–44,
45–64 and 65+. We analyzed cause-specific mortality rates for eight major
causes of death, defined via (ICD9; ICD10) codes as follows: cardiovascu-
lar disease (390–459; I00–I99), ischemic heart disease (410–414; I20–I25),
cancer (140–165, 170–175, 179–203; C00–C97), respiratory disease (460–
519; J00–J98), other infectious disease (001–139; A00–B99), traffic injuries
(E810–E819; V01–V79), suicide (E950–E959; X60–X84), homicide (E960–
E969; X85–Y09).
Inspection of the plotted series of mortality rates for the 50 states re-
vealed a jump in the series for ischemic heart disease and cancer mortality
between the years 1998 and 1999 (results not shown) which corresponds to
thetransition indisease codingfromthe9th tothe10th edition of theInter-
national Classification of Diseases (i.e., from ICD9 to ICD10). The annual
change in ischemic heart disease mortality took its largest value at this time
for 48 states. For cancer, the largest annual change occurred at this time for
20 states, with the times of the biggest jump being scattered for the other
states. Tocorrect forthepotential error introducedby achange inmortality
codes for these two categories, we replaced the log mortality increment for
1998–1999 by the average value of the remaining increments (a simple way
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 5
to remove the effect of the jump while keeping the temporal structureof the
time series intact). This data correction made no qualitative difference to
our conclusions.
3. Models. Weconsiderpanelmodelspecificationsextendingthechoices
of Ruhm (2000). Our general model is
where Mit is a measure of mortality for state i in year t; Uit is a measure of
state-level unemployment; Nt is a measure of national unemployment; Ait is
a column vector representing population age-structure,2 with γ being a row
vector of corresponding size; δt are year-specific state-invariant effects; φi
are state-specific time-invariant effects; the term ψit corresponds to state-
specific linear trends; εit is an error term. The mortality rate measure, Mit,
may correspond to total mortality, age-specific mortality or cause-specific
mortality. When Mit is an age-specific mortality measure, we do not include
the term γAit.
To define our mortality and unemployment measures, we introduce nota-
tion for the raw data. The mortality rate data are denoted by mit, state-
specific unemployment rate by uit and national unemployment rate by nt.
A vector with population proportions of children under 5 and of persons
over 65 is written as ait. We consider four types of model, corresponding to
four different ways to work with state-specific levels and trends:
(B) TheBasic modelisthefoundationfortheanalysisofRuhm(2000).
It has dependent variable Mit =logmit and fits a constant level effect for
each state (i.e., it has a constraint ψi = 0). The remaining variables are
untransformed (Uit=uit, Nt=nt, Ait=ait).
(L) The Linear model includes linear state-specific trends. The linear
model differs from the basic model only by the inclusion of the term ψit.
(D) The Differenced model includes all time-dependent variables in
first temporal differences. Specifically, Mit=∆logmit=mit+1 −mit, Uit=
∆uit, Nt=∆nt, and Ait=∆ait.
(HPλ) The Hodrick–Prescott model includes the time-dependent vari-
ables after subtracting trends computed via a Hodrick–Prescott filter with
smoothing parameter λ. In this case, we write Mit = Hλ(logmit), Uit =
Hλ(uit), Nt=Hλ(nt), and Ait=Hλ(ait). Here, Hλ(xt) denotes the residual
component of the time series xt after removing a trend computed by the
2Age-adjusted state mortality rates are available. However, Rosenbaum and Rubin
(1984) have pointed out the potential biases introduced byusing age-adjusted rates. Fol-
lowing these authors, we prefer to regress crude rates on a set of covariates including
age-structure variables.
6 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
Models under consideration, written as special cases of equation (1). (a) The mortality
variable and time-dependent explanatory variables for the different model types. (b)
Model subtypes, including differing subsets of the explanatory variables
Mortality State National Age Fixed Linear
Model measure economy economy structure effect trend
B (Basic) logm u n a yes no
it it t it
L (Linear) logm u n a yes yes
it it t it
D (Difference) ∆logm ∆u ∆n ∆a no no
it it t it
HP (HP-detrended) H (logm ) H (u ) H (n ) H (a ) no no
λ λ it λ it λ t λ it
Model State National Year
subtype economy economy effects
1 yes no yes
2 yes no no
3 no yes no
4 yes yes no
method of Hodrick and Prescott (1997). As discussed in Section 4, and at
greater length by Ionides, Wang and Tapia Granados (2013), λ can be cho-
sen to approximately prewhiten the mortality measure rather than aiming
specifically toisolate businesscycle fluctuations.Thechoice λ=100 satisfies
this requirement [Ionides, Wang and Tapia Granados (2013), Figure S-2].
The model types are summarized in Table 1(a). All regression models
were weighted by the square root of the state population to account for
heteroskedasticity; this has become a standard formulation [Ruhm (2000),
Tapia Granados (2005b), Miller et al. (2009), Gonzalez and Quast (2011)].
State-specific fixed effects and linear trends are removed by the Hodrick–
Prescott filter and so are not included in models of type HPλ. The linear
trends in models of type L correspond to fixed effects after temporal differ-
encing; we therefore include state-specific fixed effects in models of type D.
Weconsiderfoursubtypesofeach modeltype,correspondingtotheinclu-
sion of differing sets of covariates. The national economy covariate, Nt, can
beexpressedasalinearcombinationoftheyeareffects,{δt},andsowenever
include both in the model simultaneously. Model B1 has β =0, excluding
an explicit role for the national economy; model B2 excludes both national
unemployment and year effects (β =δt =0); model B3 excludes state un-
employment and year effects (α=δt =0); model B4 excludes year effects
(δt =0). These model subtypes were considered by Ruhm (2000), with the
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 7
goal of disentangling the effects of state-level unemployment and national-
level unemployment on mortality. Subtypes of the other model types are
defined in an identical way, as summarized in Table 1(b).
4. Methodology. In a panel study such as ours, many variables are mea-
sured at many geographical locations across many time points. This wealth
of data leads to challenges in building graphical representations. Neverthe-
less, plotting the data or regression residuals in various ways can play an
important role in model development and diagnostics. We demonstrate this
in Sections 5 and6.By contrast, previouspanelstudies relating mortality to
macroeconomics have not shown any graphical representations of the data
below national levels of aggregation.
A classical approach to regression analysis is to present estimates and
standard errors based on OLS methodology, after checking that thorough
investigation of the residuals does not reveal any major violations of the
corresponding model assumptions. When serious violations are discovered
one seeks to remove them by respecifying the model, for example, by using
transformations of variables or appropriately weighting the error terms. An
alternative approach to inference is to employ nonparametric error models
whichoperateunderweakerassumptions,asdiscussedinthecontextofpanel
analysis by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004) and Petersen (2009).
A hidden cost of nonparametric error models is that the finite-sample prop-
erties can be undesirable despite demonstrably good asymptotic properties
[Kauermann and Carroll (2001)]. In numerical experiments, a sample size
of 50 independent time series has sometimes been found sufficient to vali-
date the asymptotic justification of robust standard errors for panel models
[Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004), Petersen (2009)]. However, the
numerical validation is dependent on the data and models under considera-
tion andsoshouldberechecked onacase-by-case basis.Ifarelatively simple
respecification justifies standard OLS techniques, the additional complexi-
ties ofemployingandvalidatingnonparametricerrormodelscanbeavoided.
Inthecontextoftimeseriesanalysis,regressionwithautocorrelatederrors
can be handled by a procedure called prewhitening [Shumway and Stoffer
(2006)]. One looks for a transformation which provides approximately un-
correlated residualswhenthetransformeddependenttimeseries isregressed
on the transformed independent series. If the transformation has a linearity
property, then the resulting OLS estimates of the regression coefficients re-
mainunbiased.Thelinearitypropertyoftransformationsisdistinctfromthe
use of the word linear to describe the term βit in equation (1). Transforma-
tionshavingthislinearitypropertyincludetemporaldifferencing,detrending
by computing the residuals from fitting an auto-regressive moving-average
model, and detrending using the Hodrick–Prescott filter. If application of
8 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
the Hodrick–Prescott filter with a particular choice of smoothing parame-
ter leads to effective prewhitening, this gives a data-driven justification of
the resulting analysis. Thus, the extensive literature on the value of the
smoothing parameter appropriate to study business cycle fluctuations in
annual data [Ravn and Uhlig (2002)] is not directly relevant to our method-
ology. Additional material on the interpretation and consequences of the
choice of smoothing parameter is given in the supplement [Ionides, Wang
and Tapia Granados (2013)].
Much of the development of econometric panel analysis (both in the-
ory and practice) has focused on the standard errors. OLS standard errors
can considerably underestimate the actual variability of the parameter es-
timates, leading to great potential for the “discovery” of spurious effects
[Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004)]. A variety of methods, including
clustered error estimates and bootstrap methodology, have been proposed
to amend this problem [Petersen (2009)]. Even once the standard errors are
appropriately corrected, there is a remaining difficulty that OLS point es-
timates can also be unreliable in these situations. Feasible generalized least
squares (FGLS) aims to improve OLS by using an estimated covariance ma-
trix for the error terms [Hansen (2007)]. However, the use of FGLS in panel
analysis is rare, amounting to just 3% of the panel analyses surveyed by Pe-
tersen(2009)and1%ofthosesurveyedbyBertrand,DufloandMullainathan
(2004).ApplyingFGLSusingsimplemodelsforthecovariance structurecan
be ineffective [Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004)]. Difficulties arise
incomplex,flexiblemodelsofthecovariance structureduetothepotentially
large number of parameters to be estimated [Hansen (2007), Hausman and
Kuersteiner (2008)]. Our method of applying a detrending linear transform
to both sides of the regression equation (1) is formally similar to the appli-
cation of FGLS, with detrending playing the role of covariance estimation.
From this perspective, nonlinear detrending is a variant of FGLS which is
readily interpretable and has favorable numerical properties.
Granger and Newbold (1974) encouraged analyzing temporal differences
as apractical resolution tothedifficulties of jointly estimating regression co-
efficients and autocovariance structures in the presence of substantial long-
range autocorrelation. However, a relationship between differences does not
readily imply a relationship between trends: in practice, fluctuations around
a trend can have entirely different relationships to those of the trends them-
selves [Hodrick and Prescott (1997)]. Temporal differencing was the only
linear data transformation explored by Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan
(2004). This transformation performed excellently in their numerical ex-
periment [Table IIA, line 8 of Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan (2004)].
However, the authors commented that differencing was seldom used in their
survey of current practice and gave the method no further consideration.
A concern with differencing is that it can result in substantial negative
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 9
autocorrelation of residuals (and it does so for our data). In this case, differ-
encing is not ideal as a prewhitening filter; it over-enthusiastically removes
the positive autocorrelation. The typical consequences of the negative au-
tocorrelation are inefficient OLS effect estimates and conservative standard
errors.
If trends are considered as fixed effects, rather than zero mean random
effects, then OLS and FGLS models which fail to account for these trends
incur bias. Panel model implementations of FGLS typically assume that the
error terms are independent between states, so that only temporal autocor-
relations are substantial. Nonlinear trends which show similarities between
states are not appropriately modeled under this assumption. By contrast,
inasmuch as these phenomena are effectively removed by a detrending op-
eration, the corresponding prewhitened regression is protected from bias.
The statistical evidence in the data (Sections 5 and 6) suggests that there
are unmodeled sources of spatiotemporal dependence which can largely be
removed by employing national year effects in combination with nonlinear
detrending.
Interpreting the results of observational studies requires care because of
the possible consequences of omitted variables. Another hazard is the pos-
sibility that an association between two variables which is interpreted as
causal in one direction in fact has a causal mechanism in the opposite direc-
tion. In the context of cyclical mortality, two uncontroversial assertions can
assist the causal interpretation of observed associations:
(A1) It has been generally accepted that mortality fluctuations could not
plausibly be a substantial cause of recent US booms and busts.
(A2) There is a lack of plausible noneconomic phenomena which could
simultaneously have substantial effects on civilian mortality and macroeco-
nomic fluctuations in recent years in the US. Perhaps the best candidates
are wars, natural disasters, climate variation, or epidemic diseases; none
of these have been previously considered as plausible omitted variables to
explain procyclical mortality.
An alternative to (A2) is to employ a broad definition of macroeconomic
phenomena, including macroeconomic effects of variables external to the
economy as well as interacting variables within the economy, by assuming
the following:
(A3) Anyphenomenonwithmacroeconomicconsequencesisitselfamacroe-
conomic phenomenon.
If there is adequate statistical evidence for an association, then either (A1),
(A2)or(A1),(A3)impliesthattheassociationcanbeinterpretedasacausal
effect of macroeconomic fluctuationson mortality. Thisfollows directly from
a basic principle of inductive reasoning, that an association between two
10 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
variables must be explained by either a direct causal effect or by each vari-
able responding to some third variable [Mill (1853)]. From (A2) or (A3) one
can deduce that any such third variable is itself a macroeconomic variable.
This argument does not allow us to infer a specific causal mechanism. In
particular, we cannot infer that unemploymentoperates causally to produce
an observed association; its role in our analysis is as a proxy for the multi-
tudeofeconomic variables (measurableandnonmeasurable)which fluctuate
synchronously.
5. Results. Figure 1 displays national annual series of total mortality
rates and the unemployment rate. Thenational death rate declined dramat-
icallyduringtherecessionsoftheearly1980s,andthenincreasedthroughout
much of the expansion of the mid-1980s. In general, the evolution of mortal-
ity tends to mirror the evolution of the unemployment rate, suggesting an
inverse relation between unemployment and mortality. The long-run behav-
ior of the crude mortality rate (unadjusted for age, as shown in Figure 1)
is affected by changes in the age-structure of the population; it is much
less likely, however, that changes in the age-structure cause short term os-
cillations of the mortality rate. When attempting to interpret the data in
Figure 1, the strength of the statistical evidence for the association is more
criticalthantheissuesofcausaldirectionandomittedvariablebias.Assump-
tions (A1)–(A3) can justify interpreting statistically significant associations
as macroeconomic effects on mortality, without being able to pin down spe-
cific mechanisms. Securing the statistical evidence in sub-categories, broken
Fig. 1. National mortality and unemployment. (a) Mortality per 1000 per year, shown
as a dashed line corresponding to the left axis scale; unemployment rate, shown as a solid
line corresponding to the right axis scale. (b), (c), (d) The data in (a) detrended using a
linear trend, first difference and Hodrick–Prescott filter (λ=100), respectively.
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 11
Fig.2. Mortalityandunemploymentforfourstates.Mortalityper1000peryearisshown
as a dashed line corresponding to the left axis scale. The unemployment rate is shown as
a solid gray line corresponding to the right axis scale.
down by demographic group and cause of mortality, then gives a foundation
forthediscussionofcausalmechanismsconsistentwiththeresultingpattern
of associations. Unfortunately, the association at the 27 annual time points
in Figure 1 does not give statistically conclusive evidence. Disaggregating
mortality and unemployment rates from the national level to the state level
has potential to reinforce the evidence, as long as the states show sufficient
variationfromthenationalpattern.Figure2plotsmortalityratesandunem-
ployment rates for four states, revealing quite different patterns in different
states. Some of these time series, such as mortality in Alaska, are clearly not
well modeled by variation around a linear trend.
Table 2summarizes ourresults in modelsthat have beenrepeatedly used,
following Ruhm(2000),toestimate theeffect ofmacroeconomic fluctuations
on mortality. The models with linear trends (L1–L4) give similar results to
thecorrespondingresultsfor1972–1991 [Ruhm(2000),TableI].Inaddition,
inspection of the Akaike information criterion (AIC)values inTable 2shows
that L1–L4 provide a considerably superior statistical explanation of the
dataoverB1–B4.AICisonlyoneofmanypossiblemeasuresforquantitative
modelcomparison[BurnhamandAnderson(2002)].However,thedifferences
between the AIC values in Table 2 are entirely unambiguous. Differences of
order 1 unit of AIC are considered small, and so alternative methodologies
might be expected to disagree; differences of order 100 or 1000 units of AIC
are compelling evidence. The comparisons provided by these AIC values are
therefore, presumably,insensitive to the measure of model comparison used.
Differences in AIC are useful for detecting issues of model misspecification,
12 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
Fixed-effects panel regressions with state mortality modeled as a function of economic
conditions for the 50 US states
Basic model Linearstate-specifictrends
B1 B2 B3 B4 L1 L2 L3 L4
unemployment (0.07) (0.07) (0.09) (0.05) (0.04) (0.06)
unemployment (0.08) (0.11) (0.05) (0.07)
Year effects Yes No No No Yes No No No
AIC −5818.3 −5027.5−5114.7 −5165.0 −7569.6 −6938.5 −6917.7 −6945.0
Themodelspecificationsareasdescribedinequation(1)andTable1,andwereestimated
using least squares, with states weighted by the square root of the state population. The
stateunemploymenteffect isreportedas theestimateof 100α, thepercentageincrease in
mortality dueto a unit increase in unemployment.Similarly, the national unemployment
effect is given as the estimate of 100β. Corresponding OLS standard errors [as used by
Ruhm (2000)] are in parentheses. ∗∗∗P <0.001, ∗∗P <0.01, ∗P <0.05, †P <0.1.
but they cannot, by themselves, explain how and why this misspecification
manifests itself.
Ruhm (2000) found that B1–B4 provided qualitatively similar results to
L1–L4 and therefore proceeded to use the simpler basic specification for
subsequent analysis. For our analysis, B1 is qualitatively consistent with
L1–L4 and, indeed, the effect estimate for this model (−0.52) happens to be
identical to the estimate of Ruhm (2000). Problematically, B2–B4 suggest
conclusions which are inconsistent both with Ruhm (2000) and with the
other specifications in Table 2. Since B2–B4 also provide poor fits to the
data (as judged by AIC and diagnostic plots), this could be explained by
model misspecification bias. Model subtypes 2–4 aim to investigate the con-
textual role of unemployment, addressing whether national macroeconomic
conditions continue to play a role given state-level variables. However, our
objective here is not to interpret the results from fitting B2–B4 or L2–L4,
but to observe how standard methodology can lead to apparent contradic-
tions. TheAIC values in Table 2suggest thatyear effects play a statistically
important role. We therefore focus henceforth on models of subtype 1.
Table 3 shows that the results for age-specific mortality are also sensi-
tive tomodelspecification.ModelB1demonstrates considerableconsistency
with the1972–1991 results of Ruhm(2000),TableIII,indicatingstrongpro-
cyclicalmortalityinallagegroupsandespeciallyinyoungadultsandmiddle
age adults. Our model L1, which corresponds to a supplementary model for
Ruhm (2000) and the primary model structure for Miller et al. (2009), is in
close agreement with the 1978–2004 results of Miller et al. (2009). In partic-
ular, L1 suggests that procyclical mortality is weak or nonexistent in young
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 13
Percentage increase in mortality associated with a unit increase in the state
unemployment rate, using different model specifications
Model B1 L1 D1 HP16.25 HP1100
Total −0.52 −0.31 −0.16 −0.24 −0.33
20–44 −1.15 0.14 −0.54 −0.73 −0.47
45–64 −0.72 −0.01 −0.13 −0.14 −0.22
65+ −0.43 −0.16 −0.03 −0.16 −0.25
∗∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗∗
Cardiovascular disease −0.38 −0.20 −0.06 −0.14 −0.24
+ ∗∗ + ∗∗∗
Ischemic heart disease −0.33 −0.35 −0.14 −0.28 −0.58
Cancer −0.20 0.21 0.13 0.05 0.04
Respiratory disease −1.04 −0.39 −0.37 −0.69 −0.71
Otherinfectious disease −0.35 0.37 −1.14 −1.72 −0.89
Traffic injury −3.76 −3.48 −1.48 −1.44 −2.11
∗∗∗ ∗ ∗ ∗∗
Suicide 0.25 1.06 0.94 0.80 0.77
Homicide −1.71 −1.20 −1.02 −0.74 −0.41
Columns represent models, as described in equation (1) and Table 1. Rows represent
mortality categories. Table entriesare estimatesof 100α, usingOLSwith states weighted
bythesquarerootofthestatepopulation.Statisticalsignificanceisshownusingstandard
OLS errors (black symbols, top row), error estimates clustered by state (gray symbols,
middlerow)anderrorestimatesofCameron,GelbachandMiller(2011),Section2.2,with
two-wayclusteringbystateandyear(graysymbols,bottomrow;redinelectronicversion).
∗∗∗P <0.001, ∗∗P <0.01, ∗P <0.05, +P <0.1.
adultsandmiddleageadults,andisthereforeinconflictwiththeconclusions
suggested by B1. Model D1 suggests effect estimates which are relatively
small, while being broadly indicative of procyclical mortality across age
groups. Model HP1 suggests consistent procyclical mortality across age
groups, with smaller effect sizes than B1. Ionides, Wang and Tapia Grana-
dos (2013) show that a Hodrick–Prescott smoothing parameter of λ=100
has superior prewhitening properties to λ = 6.25, and the corresponding
regression therefore has more statistical power to identify cyclical effects.
14 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
From a methodological perspective, the cause-specific mortality results
in Table 3 tell a similar story to the age category results. Traffic fatalities,
typically themostclearly procyclicalmortality cause,arehighlystatistically
significant in all analyses. Procyclical cardiovascular mortality is identified
by all models, but is insignificant for D1 and HP1 6.25 . Model D1 typically
estimates small effect sizes, relative to the other models in Table 3 and rela-
tive to previous reports in the literature: we propose an explanation for this
later. For cancer, models B1 and L1 detect a cyclical effect, with opposite
signs! Model B1 also fails to find a cyclical pattern for suicide, which has
been considered countercyclical in the US [Luo et al. (2011), Eyer (1977),
Ruhm (2000), Tapia Granados (2005a)]. When methodologies disagree on
detection of accepted relationships, they do not provide a firm foundation
for investigating new phenomena. For example, the cyclical behavior of res-
piratory disease mortality has previously received relatively little attention,
perhaps because it is somewhat unexpected.Table 3 agrees with other stud-
ies [such as Miller et al. (2009)] in detecting a clear procyclical pattern of
mortality due to respiratory disease.
The state clustered standard errors in Table 3 generally produce similar
conclusions to the OLS standard errors, with some important exceptions.
For models D1, HP1 6.25 and HP1 100 , state clustered standard errors are
generally similar in magnitude to OLS standard errors (results not shown).
Thisistobeexpectedwhenresidualautocorrelationissmall,andinthiscase
state clusteredstandarderrorsmaybelessreliablethantheusualOLSstan-
dard errors [Kauermann and Carroll (2001)]. For models B1 and L1, many
large effect sizes remain significant despite substantially inflated clustered
standard errors. Conclusions about the effects on suicide and cardiovascular
disease are noticeably sensitive to the use of state clustered standard errors.
These two mortality categories are also identified in Section 6 as having
inconsistent effects between states. Inconsistency between states leads to
relatively large state clustered standard errors, since these error estimates
assess uncertainty by quantifying variability between states rather than be-
tween time points.
The five models in Table 3 emphasize relationships at different ranges
of frequencies. The synchronous fluctuations of many macroeconomic vari-
ables aroundtheirtrends,knownasbusinesscycles,areofirregularduration
and have a power spectrum spread broadly over a wide range of frequencies
[Canova (1998)]. It need not be the case that all frequencies of macroeco-
nomic fluctuations are equally associated with population health. Therange
of frequencies at which the statistical evidence for cyclical associations is
greatest could, potentially, differ from the range at which the public health
consequences are greatest. Oneway to study these issues is through spectral
analysis [Tapia Granados and Ionides (2008)], but here we simply interpret
the frequency-domain behavior of the specified regression models [Ionides,
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 15
Wang and Tapia Granados (2013), Section S3]. Model B1 performsthe least
detrending and therefore places the most emphasis on low frequency asso-
ciations. This leads to some large effect estimates, matched with increased
uncertainty (which can be viewed as larger standard errors or unknown
biases). Model HP1 6.25 emphasizes a range of frequencies intermediate be-
tween D1andHP1 100 ,andtheresultsforHP1 6.25 aregenerally intermediate
between these two analyses. Model D1 emphasizes the highest frequencies,
tosuchanextent thatsomecyclical relationship becomesobscured.Macroe-
conomic fluctuations involve complex relationships between many variables
[Canova (1998)] and so it may be unreasonable to expect any single eco-
nomic measure to capture reliably, at high frequencies, the relationship to
healthoutcomes.Trafficinjuriesmightbeexpectedtohavearelatively clean
high-frequency relationship to economic activity (proxied by unemployment
in our models), as there is an obvious and immediate causal mechanism.
However, even for traffic mortality, the parameter estimates for models D1
and HP1 6.25 are smaller than for the other models.
Inasmuch as equation (1) is valid, all the estimation methods result in
unbiasedeffect estimates: theweighting of frequencies intheestimation pro-
cedure affects the variability of the OLS estimate but not its bias. However,
in practice, one cannot expect any model to be equally appropriate over
all time scales. Investigating the time scales at which the model applies is
therefore an integral part of data analysis. Model HP1 emphasizes an in-
termediate range of frequencies and is seen to providethe clearest statistical
evidence for cyclical mortality.
Ifcyclicalmortalityweretoexistonlyinthecontextoffluctuationsaround
a trend, then it would have no long term consequences, since above-trend
and below-trend fluctuations necessarily cancel out in the long run. Alter-
natively, if cyclical mortality were present in macroeconomic fluctuations
occurring over a decade or longer, one should consider the cyclical effects at
least partly responsible for observed health trends on these time scales. The
indications from model B1 that procyclical mortality may be even stronger
at low frequencies support this second interpretation.
6. Diagnosticanalysis. Thespatiotemporaldependenceoftheregression
residuals affects the appropriate choice of model specification, the suitabil-
ity of parameter estimation methodologies andtheevaluation of uncertainty
in the resulting estimates. Figure 3 shows the temporal autocorrelation of
the residuals for each state at each lag. We see that there is strong positive
autocorrelation for model B1, at short lags. This positive autocorrelation is
reduced, but still substantial, for model L1. The autocorrelation for model
D1 becomes significantly negative at lag 1, as might be expected from ap-
plying a differencing operation. There is some indication of mild negative
autocorrelation afterlag1formodelHP1 ,butthismodelshowsrelatively
minor deviation from the expected behavior of uncorrelated residuals.
16 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
Fig. 3. Autocorrelation of the residual in four models for total mortality. Points
show the sample autocorrelation for each state at each lag. The dashed lines are at
±t n−2 {n−2+t2 n−2 }−1/2, where t n−2 is the 97.5 percentile of the t distribution on n−2
degrees of freedom and n is the number of pairs of time points available to compute the
sample autocorrelation at each lag. If the residual series were temporally uncorrelated,
approximately 95% of the points should lie between the dashed lines [Moore and McCabe
(1999), Section 10.2]. The gray solid line graphs the mean sample autocorrelation at each
lag.
Similar patterns emerge when investigating spatial correlation. Figure 4
shows the sample correlations between the time series of residuals for all
1225(=50×49/2)pairsofstates.ModelsB1andL1showconsiderablymore
variability inthesamplecorrelation thatis consistent with spatiotemporally
uncorrelated residuals.Thesampleautocorrelations of theresiduals arenec-
essarily centered near zero, due to the inclusion of year effects. The lack of
a substantial spatial pattern suggests that dependence between neighboring
states is not a major concern. The increased spread is another indication
of temporal correlation: independent sequences which each have positive
marginal temporal autocorrelation typically have sample cross-correlation
with mean zero but greater variability than temporally uncorrelated se-
quences. Models D1 and HP1 have a spread of sample cross-correlations
which is approximately consistent with spatiotemporally uncorrelated resid-
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 17
Fig. 4. The cross-correlation between residuals for each pair of states, plotted against
distance between population-weighted state centers (from the 2000 census) in four models
for total mortality. The dashed lines are at ±t n−2 {n−2+t2 n−2 }−1/2, where t n−2 is the
97.5 percentile of the t distribution on n−2 degrees of freedom, and n=27 (for B1, L1,
HP1 ) or n=26 (for D1). If the residual series were spatiotemporally uncorrelated,
approximately 95% of the points should lie between the dashed lines [Moore and McCabe
(1999), Section 10.2]. The actual percentages for models B1, L1, D1 and HP1 are
46.1%, 79.3%, 90.9% and 91.3%, respectively. The gray solid line shows a local linear
regressionfittothesecross-correlations, implementedusingtheloessfunctionin R2.15.0,
with the default parameter settings.
uals. The lower variability for models D1 and HP1 reveals a small pat-
tern of positive correlations between residuals of states in close proximity. It
would besurprisingif no such phenomenonexisted, butwe see herethat the
effect is rather weak. Most of the cross-correlation of fluctuations in mortal-
ity between states is removed by the inclusion of the national year effect δt.
If these year effects are not included (i.e., in models of subtype 2, 3 or 4),
a plot analogous to Figure 4 shows consistently positive cross-correlations
across all geographic distances (results not shown).
Residuals can also be investigated by examination of the time plots for
each state. Somerepresentative timeplots areshowninFigure5.Thisfigure
reinforces the conclusion that OLS estimation of the basic model is a ques-
18 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
Fig. 5. Residual time plotsfor fourstates. Thetop row graphs total state mortality, and
subsequent rows graph residuals for each of four models.
tionable practice, since the underpinning model assumptions are violated
for almost all states. The linear trend model is sometimes adequate (e.g.,
Hawaii andOklahoma) andsometimes not(e.g., Maineand Ohio).Both dif-
ferencing and HP detrending remove systematic trends from the time series
of residuals.
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 19
The conclusion from these diagnostic investigations is that, among these
alternatives, model HP1 unambiguously comes closest to satisfying the
model assumptions for a standard linear model analysis. As another crite-
rion to compare model specifications, we compared the consistency of the
estimated cyclical mortality effects between states. A robust relationship
between macroeconomic fluctuations and mortality might be expected to
demonstrate consistent results in separate state-by-state time series anal-
yses. We explored the stability of the panel model effect estimates across
states by estimating the unemployment effect on mortality using data for
one state only, that is, the model in equation (1) for a single fixed value of
thestatelabeli.Forastate-by-state analysis,onecannotestimatefixedyear
effects,butonecanstillestimatemodelsofsubtypes2–4.Theresultsforsub-
type 2 are plotted in Figure 6, from which we observe that HP2 provides
thegreatestconsistencybetweenstates,closelyfollowed byD2.Forexample,
the standard error of the 50 state-specific estimates of 100α for total mor-
tality is 0.53 for L2, 0.45 for D2, and 0.43 for HP2 . National fluctuations
in mortality unrelated to the economy, perhaps due to infectious disease or
climate, are not controlled for in model subtype 2. Some mortality cate-
gories nevertheless demonstrate consistent state-by-state effects, especially
for the larger states. As might be expected, there is typically greater varia-
tion in the estimated effects for smaller states. From Figure 6, we see that
the effects for total mortality, respiratory disease, traffic injuries and ages
65+ have consistent signs in all (or almost all) of the larger states. Perhaps
surprisingly, suicide and cardiovascular disease show only weak patterns in
the state-by-state analysis despite the evidence for overall cyclical behavior
from the full panel analysis (Table 3, column HP1 ).
7. Conclusions. We have seen that the choice of model can have consid-
erable influence on panel analysis of the associations between fluctuations
in mortality and macroeconomic variables. These influences are simultane-
ously a concern, a challenge and an opportunity. The concern is that, unless
a methodological consensus is found, scientific claims which are sensitive to
choice of methodology mustremain unresolved.Thechallenge is to establish
statistical procedures which objectively assess the strengths and weaknesses
of different analyses, and so disambiguate the conclusions. Overcoming this
challenge will give an opportunity to improve understanding of the phe-
nomenon of procyclical mortality. A historical precedent for methodological
introspection in this research area is the examination and eventual rejec-
tion of the methods employed by Harvey Brenner. Indeed, panel analyses
have played an important role in clarifying the evidence for overall pro-
cyclical mortality. However, we have shown that previous panel approaches
have limited capability to identify more subtle components of the cyclical
effect.
20 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
Fig.6. State-specific effectsofunemploymentonmortality.Columnscorrespondtomod-
els, as specified inTable1 and equation (1). Rows correspond to mortality categories. The
estimate of 100α from fitting the model to a single state is plotted against the population
of the state. Each state is represented either by its two letter abbreviation or by an open
circle.
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 21
It is well known that positive temporal autocorrelation [Bertrand, Du-
flo and Mullainathan (2004)] and positive spatial cross-correlation [Layne
(2007)] typically cause OLS standard errors for panel models to be anti-
conservative (i.e., inappropriately small). Underestimated standard errors
lead to overestimated statistical significance, and hence the detection of
spurious relationships. Clustering standard errors by state helps to resolve
this issue,buttheserobuststandarderrorsfailtocorrect fordependencebe-
tween states. Clustering standard errors by state and year gains additional
robustness, with the cost being increased variability in the standard error
estimates. In addition, the OLS regression coefficient estimates remain inef-
ficient (if unmodeled trends are considered random variables) or biased (if
unmodeled trends are considered as fixed effects). We have shown that non-
linear detrending can be employed to fix these methodological shortcomings
in the context of investigating cyclical mortality.
The study of cyclical mortality fluctuations is sensitive to these method-
ological issues because relatively small effects, which are hard to unravel
from other background sources of variability, can nevertheless have substan-
tial consequences at the population level. The larger and clearer the effect,
the less sensitive its detection should be to the details of the statistical
methodology used to investigate it. However, understandingthe overall pat-
tern requires investigating which subpopulations and mortality causes are
involved. Inevitably, one seeks to press to the limits of the available data
and statistical methodology.
Wehaveproposedaresolutiontothedifferingaccountsofage-dependency
forprocyclicalmortality.Ourpreferredspecification(Table3,columnHP1 )
suggeststhattheeffectisrelativelyuniformacrossages,whichhasattractive
conceptual simplicity. There may be no reason a priori to expect age unifor-
mity. In particular, individuals in the 65+ age category are predominantly
out of the workforce: they are therefore largely unaffected by some potential
mechanisms such as extra hours of work, or fewer hours of sleep, duringeco-
nomic expansions. The 20–44 age category has the largest estimated effect
for modelHP1 ,yet, according tothespatiotemporal clustered errors,this
age group is the only one in which the association is statistically insignifi-
cant. Other lines of reasoning, including the spatiotemporal clustered errors
for other choices of the Hodrick–Prescott smoothing parameter, and other
choices of standard error for model HP1 , suggest adequate statistical ev-
idence for this association.
Our results for cause-specific mortality (Table 3, column HP1 ) give a
single set of figures consistent with previous analyses but without the occa-
sional peculiarities that are a hallmark of misspecified models. For example,
the models B1 and L1 suggest macroeconomic associations for cancer with
differingsigns. Thestatistical significance of cancer for modelB1 disappears
when usingclustered standard errors; for L1, the countercyclical association
22 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
remains significant. Miller et al. (2009) found a countercyclical association
with cancer (with unspecified statistical significance) consistent with the
similarity of their model specification to L1. Tapia Granados (2005a) found
a procyclical association in the US for 1945–1970, but not in other time
intervals. The long lag times involved in the chronic development of cancer
are hard to reconcile with an unlagged cyclical relationship. However, it is
entirely possiblethatexternalfactorscouldbeassociated withacutecompli-
cations resulting in death of cancer patients. This possibility is self-evident
for cardiovascular disease, whereacute cardiovascular failures are associated
both with chronic disease development and external stress.
Cardiovascular disease and cancer are the two foremost causes of death
in developed countries, and the cyclical behavior of cardiovascular mortality
has therefore attracted considerable attention [Ruhm (2007)]. Cardiovascu-
lar disease mortality has a relatively small procyclical signature over the
23 developed countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) studied by Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006). In some
countries, such as Japan [Tapia Granados (2008)], the procyclical signature
of cardiovascular disease mortality seems to be strong; in others, such as
Germany [Neumayer (2004)], it seems to be negligible. In Sweden there is
some evidence for a countercyclical effect [Svensson (2008), Tapia Granados
and Ionides (2011)]. In the US, Table 3 reconfirms the conclusions of Ruhm
(2000) and Miller et al. (2009) that the dominant behavior of cardiovascular
disease is procyclical. However, we found in Figure 6 that this result is not
strongly consistent at the level of individual states.
The unambiguous evidence for procyclical respiratory mortality requires
further investigation. This phenomenon has been noted in other studies of
developed countries [Eyer (1977), Ruhm (2000), Neumayer (2004), Tapia
Granados (2005b), Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006), Miller et al. (2009)], but it
has become further clarified by the statistical methods we have employed.
Specifically,wehaveshownthestrongconsistencybetweenindividualstates,
and we have employed methods that minimize the risk of identifying spu-
rious relationships. Our data cannot readily reveal how mechanisms such
as air quality (pollution) and weakened immune status (increased infectious
disease transmission) may combine to produce this procyclical effect. Res-
piratory disease, as categorized in ICD9/10, is not necessarily infectious
but does include influenza and pneumonia, which are responsible for sub-
stantial mortality in old age. Infectious diseases provide a potential avenue
by which those outside the workforce suffer procylical mortality, since col-
lective resistance plays a substantial role in controlling disease spread [an
effect known as herd immunity in epidemiology; Bonita, Beaglehole and
Kjellstro¨m (2006)]. Overwork and a reduction in healthy behaviors dur-
ing economic booms could lead to a population with weaker overall health
andthereforegreater transmissionofpathogens.Increasedtravel, associated
MACROECONOMICEFFECTS ON MORTALITY 23
with increased economic activity, provides another potential mechanism for
increased transmission of pathogens.
Previousstudies[Ruhm(2000),Milleretal.(2009)]havefoundthathomi-
cides oscillate procyclically. This result may appear counterintuitive and, to
our knowledge, it has not been fully explored. According to our specifica-
tion HP1 100 (and also D1 and HP1 6.25 ) in Table 3, there is noclear evidence
that homicides are correlated with the business cycle. Inasmuch as the data
support procyclical homicide, this is based on the models B1 and L1 which
place more emphasis than HP1 on longer-term variation.
Our analyses provide weak support for an overall countercyclical na-
ture of suicide in the US, consistent with the conclusions of Luo et al.
(2011). A cyclical effect on suicide might be intuitively unsurprising, but
the direction of the effect is not consistent between countries. For exam-
ple, suicide in Japan is strongly countercyclical [Tapia Granados (2008)],
whereas in Germany and Finland there is evidence for procyclical suicide
[Neumayer (2004), Hintikka, Saarinen and Viinam¨aki (1999)]. No dominant
pattern was found in a study of OECD data [Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006)].
Figure 6 suggests that the cyclical behavior of suicide is inconsistent be-
tween states. This conclusion is supported by the diminished significance of
the overall countercyclical effect once the standard errors are clustered by
state.
Debate about individual components of cyclical mortality, and remain-
ing uncertainty about specific causal mechanisms, should not obscure the
main achievement of recent research in this area. There is now overwhelm-
ing evidence that downturns in economic activity have not had overall ad-
verse health consequences at the population level, in the recent past of de-
veloped countries with market economies. Groups of individuals adversely
affected by phenomena associated with economic booms and busts deserve
assistance. Atearlier stages ofsocioeconomic development,economic growth
may have substantial health benefits above and beyond other factors such
as public health programs and education [Pritchett and Summers (1996)].
However, the government’s responsibility to consider the net public health
consequences of its actions [Childress et al. (2002)] cannot be used as a
moral argument for pro-growth economic policies in the US and similar
countries. Other moral obligations relevant to macroeconomic policy in-
clude the protection of individual liberties, environmental stewardship and
homeland security. Future public policies will require trade-off between eco-
nomic growth and other objectives, and evidence-based assessment of the
positive and negative consequences of economic growth should inform this
debate.
Acknowledgments. Helpful suggestions were provided by the Editor, an
Associate Editor and an anonymous referee.
24 E. L. IONIDES,Z. WANG ANDJ. A. TAPIA GRANADOS
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplement to “Macroeconomic effects on mortality revealed by panel
Wepresentsupplementarymaterialon:(i)interpretationofdetrendingchoices;
(ii) data analysis for additional detrending choices; (iii) prewhitening as a
goal for selecting the Hodrick–Prescott smoothing parameter.