Mahotas: Open source software for scriptable
computer vision
Luis Pedro Coelho
Lane Center for Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University
Instituto de Medicina Molecular
January 2013
MahotasisacomputervisionlibraryforPython. Itcontainstraditionalimageprocessing
functionality such as filtering and morphological operations as well as more modern
computer vision functions for feature computation, including interest point detection
and local descriptors.
The interface is in Python, a dynamic programming language, which is very appro-
priate for fast development, but the algorithms are implemented in C++ and are tuned
for speed. The library is designed to fit in with the scientific software ecosystem in this
language and can leverage the existing infrastructure developed in that language.
Mahotas is released under a liberal open source license (MIT License) and is available
Keywords: computer vision, image processing.
1 Introduction
Mahotas is a computer vision library for the Python Programming Language (versions
2.5 and up, including version 3 and up). It operates on numpy arrays (van der Walt
et al., 2011). Therefore, it uses all the infrastructure built by that project for storing
informationandperformingbasicmanipulationsandcomputations. Inparticular,unlike
libraries written in the C Language or in Java (Marcel and Rodriguez, 2010), Mahotas
does not need to define a new image data structure, but uses the numpy array structure.
Many basic manipulation functionality that would otherwise be part of a computer vi-
sion library are handled by numpy. For example, computing averages and other simple
statistics, handling multi-channel images, converting between types (integer and float-
ing point images are supported by mahotas) can all be performed with numpy builtin
2v7094.1121:viXra
functionality. For the user, this has the additional advantage that they do not need to
learn yet another set of functions.
It contains over 100 functions with functionality ranging from traditional image fil-
tering and morphological operations to more modern wavelet decompositions and local
feature computations. Additionally, by integrating into the Python numeric ecosystem,
users can use other packages in a seamless way. In particular, mahotas does not im-
plement any machine learning functionality, but rather advises the user to use another,
specialised package, such as scikits-learn or milk.
Python is a natural “glue” language: it is easy to use state-of-the-art libraries written
in multiple languages (Oliphant, 2007). Mahotas itself is a mix of high-level Python and
low-level C++. This achieves a good balance between speed and ease of implementation.
Version1.0ofmahotashasbeenreleasedrecentlyandthisisnowamature, well-tested
package (the first versions were made available over 4 years ago, although the package
was not named mahotas then). 1 Mahotas runs and is used on different versions of Unix
(including Linux, SunOS, and FreeBSD), Mac OS X, and Windows.
2 Implementation and Architecture
2.1 Interface
The interface is a procedural interface, with no global state. All functions work inde-
pendently of each other (there is code sharing at the implementation level, but this is
hidden from the user).
The main functionality is grouped into the following categories:
Surf Speeded-up Robust Features (Bay et al., 2008). This includes both keypoint de-
tection and descriptor computation.
Features Global feature descriptors. In particular, Haralick texture features, Zernike
moments, local binary patterns, and threshold adjacency statistics (both the origi-
nal (Hamilton et al., 2007) and the parameter-free versions (Coelho et al., 2010b)).
Wavelet Haar and Daubechies wavelets. Forward and inverse transforms are supported.
Morphological functions Erosion and dilation, as well as some more complex operations
built on these. There are both binary and grayscale implementations of these
operators.
Watershed seeded watershed and distance map transforms (Felzenszwalb and Hutten-
locher, 2004).
Filtering Gaussian filtering, edge finding, and general convolutions.
1Note for reviewers: the version currently available (0.9.6) implements all functionality described in
this manuscript. I will release it as version 1.0 when this manuscript is accepted to coincide with
publication. Naturally, any bugs that are found and reported in the meanwhile will be addressed.
Polygon operations convex hull, polygon drawing.
Numpy arrays contain data of a specific type, such unsigned 8 bit integer or
floating point numbers. While natural colour images are typically 8 bits, scientific data
is often larger and processing can result in floating point images. Mahotas works on
all datatypes. This is performed without any extra memory copies. Mahotas is heavily
optimised for both speed and memory usage (it can be used with very large arrays).
There are a few interface conventions which apply to many functions. When mean-
ingful, a structuring element is used to define neighbourhoods or adjacency relationships
(morphological functions, in particular, use this convention). Generally, the default is
to use a 3×3 cross as the default if no structuring filter is given.
Whenanewimageistobereturned,functionstakeanargumentnamedoutwherethe
outputwillbestored. Thisargumentisoftenmuchmorerestrictedintype. Inparticular,
it must be a contiguous array.2 Since this is a performance feature (its purpose is to
avoid extra memory allocation), it is natural that the interface is less flexible (accessing
a contiguous array is much more efficient than a non-contiguous one).
2.2 Example of Use
Code for this and other examples is present in the mahotas source distribution under
the demos/ directory. In this example, we load an image, find SURF interest points,
and compute descriptors.
We start by importing the necessary packages, including numpy and mahotas. We
also use milk, to demonstrate how the mahotas output can integrate with a machine
learning package.
import numpy as np
import mahotas
from mahotas.features import surf
import milk
The first step is to load the image and convert to 8 bit numbers. In this case, the
conversion is done using standard numpy methods, namely astype:
f = mahotas.imread('luispedro.jpg', as_grey=True)
f = f.astype(np.uint8)
We can now compute SURF interest points and descriptors.
spoints = surf.surf(f, 4, 6, 2)
The surf.surf function returns both the descriptors and their meta data. We
use numpy operations to retain only the descriptors (the meta data is in the first five
positions):
descrs = spoints[:,6:]
2Numpy supports non-contiguous arrays, which are most often slices into other, larger, contiguous
arrays (e.g., given a 128×128 contiguous array, one can build a 64×128 non-contiguous array by
taking every other row).
Using milk, we cluster the descriptors into five groups:
values, _ = milk.kmeans(descrs, 5)
Finally, we can show the points in different colours.
colors = np.array(
[ 255, 25, 1],
[203, 77, 37],
[151, 129, 56],
[ 99, 181, 52],
[ 47, 233, 5]])
f2 = surf.show_surf(f, spoints[:64], values, colors)
The show surf only builds the image as a multi-channel (one for each colour) image.
Using matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), we finally display the image as Figure 1.
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
plt.subplot(1,2,1)
plt.imshow(f)
plt.subplot(1,2,2)
plt.imshow(f2)
The easy interaction with matplotlib is another way in which we benefit from the
numpy-basedecosystemasmahotasdoesnotneedtosupportinteractingwithagraphical
system to display images.
2.3 Implementation
Mahotas is mostly written in C++, but this is completely hidden from the user as there
are hand-written Python wrappers for all functions. Automatically generated wrappers
inevitably lead to worse error messages and are less flexible.
The main reason that mahotas is implemented in C++ (and not in C, which is the
language of the Python interpreter) is to use templates. Almost C++ functionality is
split across 2 functions:
1. A py function which uses the Python C API to get arguments and check them.
2. A template function<dtype> which works for the type dtype performing the
actual operation.
So, for example, this is how erode is implemented.3 py erode consists mostly of
boiler-plate code:
PyObject* py_erode(PyObject* self, PyObject* args) {
PyArrayObject* array;
PyArrayObject* Bc;
PyArrayObject* output;
3This is the generic version of the code. Erode, like a few other functions, has two versions, a fast
version, limited to two-dimensional, contiguous, images and a generic one presented here. The
selection between the two implementations is done automatically for the user.
Figure 1: Example of Usage. On the left, the original image is shown, while on the right
SURF detections are represented as rectangles of different colours.
if (!PyArg_ParseTuple(args, "OOO", &array, &Bc, &output) ||
!numpy::are_arrays(array, Bc, output) ||
!numpy::same_shape(array, output) ||
!numpy::equiv_typenums(array, Bc, output) ||
PyArray_NDIM(array) != PyArray_NDIM(Bc)
PyErr_SetString(PyExc_RuntimeError, TypeErrorMsg);
return NULL;
holdref r_o(output);
#define HANDLE(type) \
erode<type>(numpy::aligned_array<type>(output), \
numpy::aligned_array<type>(array), \
numpy::aligned_array<type>(Bc));
SAFE_SWITCH_ON_INTEGER_TYPES_OF(array);
#undef HANDLE
...
This functions retrieves the arguments, performs some sanity checks, performs a bit
of initialisation, and finally, switches in the input type with the help of the SAFE -
SWITCH ON INTEGER TYPES macro, which call the right specialisation of the template
that does the actual work. In this example erode implements erosion:
template<typename T>
void erode(numpy::aligned_array<T> res,
numpy::aligned_array<T> array,
numpy::aligned_array<T> Bc) {
gil_release nogil;
const int N = res.size();
typename numpy::aligned_array<T>::iterator iter = array.begin();
filter_iterator<T> filter(array.raw_array(), Bc.raw_array(),
ExtendNearest, is_bool(T()));
const int N2 = filter.size();
T* rpos = res.data();
for (int i = 0;
++i, ++rpos, filter.iterate_both(iter)) {
T value = std::numeric_limits<T>::max();
for (int j = 0; j != N2; ++j) {
T arr_val = T();
filter.retrieve(iter, j, arr_val);
value = std::min<T>(value, erode_sub(arr_val, filter[j]));
*rpos = value;
The template machinery makes the functions that use it very simple and easy to
read. The only downside is that there is some expansion of code size when the compiler
instantiatesthefunctionfortheseveralintegerandfloatingpointtypes. Giventhesmall
size of these functions, the total size of the compiled library is reasonable (circa 6MiB
on an Intel-based 64 bit system for the whole library).
In the snippet above, you can see some other C++ machinery:
gil release This is a “resource-acquisition is object initialisation” (raii)4 object that
releases the Python global interpreter lock (gil)5 in its constructor and gets it
back in its destructor. Normally, the template function will release the gil after
the Python-specific code is done. This allows several mahotas functions to run
concurrently.
array This is a thin wrapper around PyArrayObject, the raw numpy data type,
which has iterators which resemble the C++ standard library. It also handles type-
casting internally, making the code type-safer. This is also a raii object in terms
of managing Python reference counts. In mahotas debug builds, this object addi-
tionally adds several checks to all the memory acesses.
filter iterator Thiswasadaptedfromcodeinthescipy.ndimagepackagesand
it is useful to iterate over an image and use a centered filter around each pixel (it
keeps track of all of the boundary conditions).
The inner loop is as direct an implementation of erosion as one would wish for: for
each pixel in the image, look at its neighbours, subtract the filter value, and compute
the minimum of this operation.
2.4 Efficiency
Table 1 shows timings for different operations. These were normalized to multiples
of the time it takes to go over the image and find its maximum pixel value (this was
done using numpy.max(image)). The measurements shown were obtained on an Intel
64bitsystem,runningUbuntuLinux. However,duetothenormalization,measurements
obtained on another system (Intel 32 bits running Mac OS) were qualitatively similar.
The comparison is against Pymorph (Dougherty and Lotufo, 2003), which is a pure
Python implementation of some of the same functions; scikits-image, which is a sim-
ilar project to mahotas, but with a heavier emphasis on the use of Cython (Behnel
et al., 2011); and OpenCV, which is a C++ library with automatically generated Python
wrappers.
OpenCVisthefastestlibrary,butthiscomesatthecostofsomeflexibility. Arguments
to its functions must be of the exact expected type and it is possible to crash the
4RaiiisadesignpatterninC++,orotherlanguageswithscopelinkeddeterministicobjectdestruction,
such as D, where a resource is represented by an object, whose constructor acquires it and whose
destructor releases it. This guarantees that the object is correctly released even if the scope is left
through an exception (Stroustrup, 1994).
5IntheCPythoninterpreter,themostcommonlyusedimplementationofPython,thereisagloballock
for many Python related functionality, which limits parallelism.
Operation mahotas pymorph scikits-image OpenCV
erode 1.6 15.1 7.4 0.4
dilate 1.5 9.1 7.3 0.4
open 3.2 24.3 14.8 NA
median filter (2) 226.9 NA 2034.0 NA
median filter (10) 2810.9 NA 1877.1 NA
center mass 5.0 NA 3611.2 NA
sobel 34.1 NA 62.5 6.2
cwatershed 174.8 58440.3 287.3 44.9
daubechies 18.8 NA NA NA
haralick 233.1 NA 7760.7 NA
Table 1: Efficiency Results for mahotas, pymorph, scikits-image, and openCV (through
Python wrappers). Shown are values as multiples of the time that
numpy.max(image) takes to compute the maximum pixel value in the image
(all operations are over the same image). For scikits-image, features on the
grey-scale cooccurrence matrix were used instead of Haralick features, which it
does not support. In the case of median filter, the radius of the structuring
element is shown in parentheses. NA stands for “Not Available.”
interpreteriftypesdomatchtheexpectedtype(intheotherlibraries,includingmahotas,
all types are checked and an exception is generated which can be caught by user code).
Thisisparticularlyrelevantforinteractiveuseastheuserisoftenexploringandiswilling
to pay the speed cost of a few extra type checks and conversions to avoid a hard-crash.
Among the other libraries, mahotas is the fastest. Pymorph, even though it is im-
plemented in Python only, intelligently uses arithmetic operations for morphological
operation and can be very fast. However, for more complex methods, such as watershed;
its pure Python approach is very inefficient. The one exception is that median filtering
with a large structuring element is faster in scikit-image. In fact, that library uses an
algorithm with better asymptotic behavior for this operation.
2.5 Distribution and Installation
In keeping with the philosophy of blending in with the ecosystem, Mahotas uses the
standard Python build machinery and distribution channels. Building and installing
from source code is done using
python setup.py install
Alternatively, Python based package managers (such as easy install or pip) can be
used (mahotas works well with these systems).
2.6 Quality Control
Mahotas includes a complete automated suite of unit tests, which tests all functionality
and include several regression tests. There are no known bugs in version 1.0. In fact, no
releases have ever been performed with known bugs. Naturally, bugs were, occasionally,
discovered in released versions, but corrected before the next release.
The development is completely open-source and development versions are available.
Many users have submitted bug reports and fixes.
3 Availability
Operating system
Mahotas runs and is used on different versions of Unix (including Linux, SunOS, and
FreeBSD), Mac OS X, and Windows.6
Programming language
Mahotas works in Python (minimal version is 2.5, but mahotas works with all more
recent versions, including version in the Python 3 series).
Additional system requirements
None at runtime. Compilation from source requires a C++ compiler.
Dependencies
It requires numpy to be present and installed.
List of contributors
Luis Pedro Coelho (Carnegie Mellon University and Instituto de Medicina Molecular),
Zachary Pincus (Stanford University), Peter J. Verveer (European Molecular Biology
Laboratory), DavisKing(NorthropGrummanES),RobertWebb(CarnegieMellonUni-
versity),MatthewGoodman(UniversityofTexasatAustin),K.-MichaelAye(University
of Bern), Rita Sim˜oes (University of Twente), Joe Kington (University of Wisconsin),
Christoph Gohlke (University of California, Irvine), Lukas Bossard (ETH Zurich), and
Sandro Knauss (University of Bremen).
3.0.1 Software location
Code repository
Name: Github
Licence: MIT
Date published: Since 2010 as mahotas. Some of the code had been previously made
available under other names.
6Christoph Gohlke has been instrumental in providing Windows packages as well as several fixes for
that platform.
4 Reuse Potential
Originally, this code was developed in the context of cellular image analysis. However,
none of the functionality is specific to this context and many computer vision pipelines
can make use of it.
This package (and earlier versions of it) have been used by myself (Coelho et al., 2009,
2010a) and close collaborators in several publications (Cho et al., 2012). Other groups
have used in published work, both in cell image analysis (Mashburn et al., 2012) and in
other areas (Machlek and Oleviov, 2013).
5 Discussion
Python is an excellent language for scientific programming because of the inherent prop-
erties of the language and because of the infrastructure that has been built around the
numpy project. Mahotas works in this environment to provide the user with image
analysis and computer vision functionality.
Mahotas does not include machine learning related functionality, such as k-means
clustering or classification methods. This is the result of an explicit design decision.
Specialised machine learning packages for Python already exist (Pedregosa et al., 2011;
Demar et al., 2004; Schaul et al., 2010; Sonnenburg et al., 2010). A good classification
system can benefit both computer vision users and others. As these projects all use
Numpy arrays as their data types, it is easy to use functionality from the different
project seamlessly (no copying of data is necessary).
Mahotas is implemented in C++, as the standard Python interpreter is too slow for
a direct Python implementation. However, all of the Python interface code is hand-
written, as opposed to using automatic interface generators like Swig (Beazley, 2003).
This is more work initially, but the end result is of much higher quality, especially
when it comes to giving useful error messages (e.g., when a type mismatch occurs, an
automatic system will often be forced to resort to a generic message as it does not have
any knowledge of what the arguments mean besides their automatically inferred types).
Mahotas has been available in the Python Package Index since April 2010 and has
been downloaded over 40,000 times. This does not include any downloads from other
sources. Mahotas includes a full test suite. There are no known bugs.
Acknowledgements
Mahotas includes code ported and incorporated from other projects. Initially, it was
usedinreproducingthefunctionalityintheSubcellularLocationImageClassifier(SLIC)
tool from Robert F. Murphy’s Lab (Zhao and Murphy, 2006) and the initial versions of
mahotasweredesignedexplicitlytosupportthatfunctionality. Thesurf implementation
is a port from the code from dlib,7 a very good C++ library by Davis King. I also
gleaned some insight into the implementation of these features from Christopher Evan’s
OpenSURF library and its documentation (Evans, 2009).8 The code which interfaces
with the FreeImage library, was written by Zachary Pincus and some of the support
code was written by Peter J. Verveer for the scipy.ndimage project. All of these
contributions were integrated while respecting the software licenses under which the
original code had been released. Robert Webb, a summer student at Carnegie Mellon
University, worked with me on the initial local binary patterns implementation. Finally,
I thank the several users who have reported bugs, submitted fixes, and participated on
the project mailing list.
St´efan van der Walt and Andreas Mu¨ller offered helpful comments on a draft version
of this manuscript.
Funding: I was supported in my work by the Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e Tecnolo-
gia(grantsSFRH/BD/37535/2007andPTDC/SAU-GMG/115652/2008), byNIHgrant
GM078622(toRobertF.Murphy), byagrantfromtheScaifeFoundation, bytheHHMI
Interfaces Initiative, and by a grant from the Siebel Scholars Foundation.