]noc-rpus.tam-dnoc[
1v7360.4041:viXra
MIT-CTP-4542
Majorana and Condensed Matter Physics
Frank Wilczek
April 3, 2014
EttoreMajoranacontributedseveralideasthathavehadsignificant,last-
ing impact in condensed matter physics, broadly construed. In this chapter
I will discuss, from a modern perspective, four important topics that have
deep roots in Majorana’s work.
1. Spin Response and Universal Connection: In [1], Majorana considered
the coupling of spins to magnetic fields. Thepaper is brief, but it con-
tains two ingenious ideas whose importance extends well beyond the
immediate problem he treated, and should be part of every physicist’s
toolkit. The first of those ideas, is that having solved the problem for
spin 1, one can deduce the solution for general spins by pure algebra.
Majorana’s original construction uses a rather specialized mathemat-
ical apparatus. Bloch and Rabi, in a classic paper [2], brought it
close to the form discussed below. Rephrased in modern terms, it is
a realization – the first, I think, in physics – of the universality of
non-abelian charge transport (Wilson lines).
2. LevelCrossing and Generalized Laplace Transform: Inthesamepaper,
Majorana used an elegant mathematical technique to solve the hard
part of the spin dynamics, which occurs near level crossings. This
technique involves, at its center, a more general version of the Laplace
transform than its usual use in constant-coefficient differential equa-
tions. Among other things, it gives an independent and transparent
derivation of the celebrated Landau-Zener formula for non-adiabatic
transitions. (Historically, Majorana’s work on problem, and also that
of Stueckelberg [3], was essentially simultaneous with Landau’s[4]and
Zener’s[5].) Majorana’smethodissmoothandcapableofconsiderable
generalization. It continues to be relevant to contemporary problems.
∗Chapter for “The Physics of Majorana”, to be published by Cambridge University
Press.
3. Majorana Fermions, From Neutrinos to Electrons: Majorana’s most
famous paper [6] concerns the possibility of formulating a purely real
version of the Dirac equation. In a modern interpretation, this is the
problem of formulating equations for the description of spin-1 parti-
cles that are their own antiparticles: Majorana fermions. Majorana’s
original investigation was stimulated in part by issues of mathemat-
ical esthetics, and in part by the physical problem of describing the
then hypothetical neutrino. As described elsewhere in this volume [7],
the immediate issue it raised – i.e., whether neutrinos are their own
antiparticles – has become a central issue in modern particle theory,
that still remains unresolved experimentally. Here I will show that
Majorana’s basic idea is best viewed within a larger context, where
we view it as a tool for analyzing unusual, number-violating forms of
mass. Within that larger conception we find, notably, that electrons
withinsuperconductors,whentheirenergyisneartothefermisurface,
behave as Majorana fermions.
4. Majorinos and Emergent Symmetry: A very special and unusual kind
ofMajoranafermion–which,indeed,stretchesthenotionof“fermion”
–hasbeenthefocusof muchrecentattention, boththeoretical andex-
perimental. Thesearezeroenergyexcitationsthatarelocalizedaround
specific points, such as the ends of wires, or nodes within circuits of
specially designed superconducting materials. Regarded as particles,
they represent0+1 dimensional (0 space, 1 time) versions of the more
familiar 3 +1 dimensional Majorana fermions, and in addition they
have zero mass. Sincethey areso smallboth in extent and inweight, I
have proposed [8] to call them Majorinos. Majorinos have remarkable
properties, including unusual quantum statistics, and might afford an
important platform for quantum information processing [9].
1 Spins Response and Universal Connection
The time-dependent Hamiltonian
governs the interaction between a spin J~ and a time-dependent magnetic
field B~(t). The dynamical evolution implied by Eqn.(1),
i = Hψ (2)
forthespinwave-function ψisthemostbasicbuilding-blockforallthemany
applications of magnetic resonance physics. Its solution [1] is foundational.
The J~ matrices obey the commutation relations of angular momentum.
Applied to a particle (which may be a nucleus, or an atom or molecule) of
spin j, they obey the algebra
[J ,J ] = iǫ J
which is realized in a 2j +1 dimensional Hilbert space. The representation
is essentially unique, up to an overall unitary transformation.
In the simplest case, j = 1, we have a two-dimensional Hilbert space,
we can take J~= ~σ, with the Pauli matrices
!
σ 2 = i − 0
!
!
The differential equation Eqn.(2) becomes a system of two first-order equa-
tions, thatisreasonably tractable. (See, forexample, thefollowing Section!)
For larger values of j we need to organize the calculation cunningly, lest
it spin out of control. As Majorana recognized, group theory comes to our
rescue. Here I will rephrase his basic insight in modern language.
We can write the solution of Eqns.(1,2) as a time-ordered exponential
Now if we call Bj A j , and view it as the scalar potential associated with
an SU(2) symmetry, we recognize that the ordered exponential in Eqn.(5)
is an example of a Wilson line, which implements parallel transport accord-
ing to the nonabelian potential A. In the context of gauge theories, it is
a familiar and basic result that if one knows how to parallel transport the
basic representation (vectors), then one can construct the parallel trans-
port of more complicated representations (tensors) uniquely, by algebraic
manipulations, without solving any additional differential equations. This
is a consequence – in some sense it is the essence – of the universality of
nonabelian gauge couplings.
In the present case, we can carry the procedure out quite explicitly. The
mostconvenientwayistorealizethespin-j objectasasymmetricspinor[10].
Thus we write
where the α are two-valued indices, and ψ is invariant under their permu-
tation. Then if U(1 2 ) = V β α is the Wilson line for spin 1 2 , the Wilson line for
spin j will be
U(j) = (U(j)) α1...α2j = Vα1...V α2j V ... V (7)
where the tensor product contains 2j copies. This follows from the under-
lying realization of the algebra of J~(j) for spin j as
J~(j) = J~(1 2 ) 1 ... 1 + ... + 1 ... 1 J~(1 2 ) (8)
including 2j summands. From this point on, starting from Eqn.(7), the
algebra required to develop concrete formulae, ready for use, is straight-
forward. For Majorana to have exploited nonabelian symmetry in such a
sophisticated way, already in 1932, was not only useful, but visionary.
2 Level Crossing and Generalized Laplace Trans-
Having emphasized the value of solutions of Eqns.(1,2) for spin-1, we turn
to the the task of obtaining them. The general problem can only be solved
numerically. There is, however, a powerful approximate result available
when the evolution is slow and smooth, namely the adiabatic theorem. It
states, roughly speaking, that if the magnetic field varies slowly on the scale
set by the (inverse) energy splittings γB −1, states initially occupying an
energy eigenstate will remain within that energy eigenstate, as it evolves
continuously – there are no “quantum jumps”. (One can refine this further,
to make statements about the phase of the wave functions. This leads into
interesting issues connected with the geometric or Berry phase, but I will
notpursuethat linehere.) Theconditions for theadiabatic theorem willfail
when levels energy levels approach one another, so it is important to have a
bridging formula, to interpolate through such episodes.
The discussion that follows is basically an unpacking of Majorana’s ex-
tremely terse presentation in [1].
As an interesting, experimentally relevant situation, which captures the
essence of the problem, let us consider the Schro¨dinger equation describing
a situation where the field-induced splitting between two nearby levels goes
through a zero. We suppose that during the crucial time, when the total
splitting is small, the we can take the field to behave linearly. This leads us
to analyze the Schro¨dinger equation
≡ β !
In terms of components, we have
By differentiating the first member of Eqn.(10), using the second member
to eliminate β˙ in terms of α,β, and finally using the first member again to
eliminate β in favor of α,α˙ we derive a second-order equation for α alone:
In order to use the generalized Laplace transform in a simple way, it is
desirable to have t appear only linearly. We can achieve this by introducing
In this way we find
For later use, note that
so that we can obtain both β, and of course α, from γ.
Now we express γ(t) in the form
overanintegrationcontourtobedetermined. Operatingformally,wethereby
re-express Eqn.(13) as
eststf(s) = (estsf) est (sf) (17)
we cast Eqn.(16) into the tractable form
Z (cid:16) (cid:17)
undertheassumptionthatestsf vanishesattheendsofthecontour (ifany).
This leads to a simple differential equation for f(s), which is solved by
f(s) = As−1−i 2 ε ∆ 2 e−i 2 s ∆ 2 (19)
for constant A, which we will choose to be A = 1. We will also assume
∆ > 0.
As τ the levels are highly split, and the adiabatic theorem comes
into play, forbiddingfurthertransitions. Sothemostinteresting problem,to
compute the probability for transitions which violate the adiabatic theorem
– “quantum jumps” – can be investigated by studying the asymptotics as
τ . Inthoselimitsourcontourintegralcontainsaparametricallylarge
exponential, and we can try to exploit the stationary phase approximation.
The stationary phase points, in those limits, occur at
A short calculation reveals that we should orient our contour with s s
(1 i) near these points, to achieve steepest descent. This suggests that we
use the contours
with p real. One verifies that estsf vanishes rapidly for large p , so these
contours satisfy our consistency condition.
There is a subtlety here that proves crucial. In defining s−1−i 2 ε ∆ 2
elns(−1−i 2 ε ∆ 2 ) we must choose a branch of the logarithm. Let us take its prin ≡ -
cipal value, maintaining a cut along the negative real axis. The candidate
contours of Eqn.(21) cross the real axis at s = p = i∆τ. We see – noting
∆ > 0 – that for negative t the contour avoids the cut, but for positive t we
must deform the contour to avoid the cut. We do this by allowing it to run
above just above the cut from s = iǫ i∆τ to s = iǫ and the back below the
cut from s = iǫ to s = iǫ i∆τ, where it rejoins its original trajectory.
For τ < 0 (and τ large) the saddle point saturates the integration, and
Let us review the origin of the various factors. The first arises from the
final Gaussian integral over p. The second is the value of the exponential at
the stationary phase point. The third and fourth come, respectively, from
inserting the two terms of the logarithm
We see that γ vanishes for large t while, according to Eqn.(14), β has a
finite limit.
For τ > 0 we still have a saddle point contribution, very similar to
Eqn.(22),butwiththeexponentialfactore
. Thedifferencearise
from the change in sign of the imaginary part of the complex logarithm in
Eqn.(23)Wewillalsohaveacontributionfromtheintegraloverthecut. Itis
not impossible to evaluate that integral, but we can get the most important
result without it. We need only to observe that the contour integral is non-
oscillatory, soitdoesn’tcontributetoβ. Thusinthelimitτ thewave
function contains only a lower (β) term, and is proportiona → l to − e ∞ π 4 ε ∆ 2 , while
in the limit τ the β term is proportional to e−π 4 ε ∆ 2 , with the other
factors either in common or pure phases. We conclude that the probability
for the state to evolve from negative to positive energy, making a quantum
jump, is the square of the ratio, or
– which is the classic “Landau-Zener” result.
Majorana’smethodisverywelladaptedtogeneralizationsinvolvingmul-
tiple level crossings. By keeping track of the phases, one can also find useful
analogues of the geometric phase; and by applying group theory, also ana-
lyze multiplet crossings systematically [11]. It is interesting to contemplate
an ambitious program, where one might infer the time-dependence of states
from the time-dependent energy levels to, by patching together integral rep-
resentations of the type we’ve just discussed, using these sorts of linear
models to interpolate between adiabatic evolution.
3 Majorana Fermions and Majorana Mass: From
Neutrinos to Electrons
3.1 Majorana’s Equation
In 1928 Dirac [12] proposed his relativistic wave equation for electrons, to-
day of course known as the Dirac equation. This was a watershed event
in theoretical physics, leading to a new understanding of spin, predicting
the existence of antimatter, and impelling – for its adequate interpretation
– the creation of quantum field theory. It also inaugurated a new method
in theoretical physics, emphasizing mathematical esthetics as a source of
inspiration. Indeed, when we venture into the depths of the quantum world,
“physical intuition” derived from the common experience of humans inter-
acting with the world of macroscopic objects is of dubious value, and it
seems inevitable that other, more abstract principles must take its place to
guide us. Majorana’s most influential work [6] builds directly on Dirac’s,
both in content and in method. By posing, and answering, a simple but
profound question about Dirac’s equation, Majorana expanded our concept
of what a particle might be, and, on deeper analysis, of what mass is. For
many years Majorana’s ideas appeared to be ingenious but unfulfilled spec-
ulations; recently, however, they have come into its own. They now occupy
a central place in several of the most vibrant frontiers of modern physics
including – perhaps surprisingly – condensed matter physics.
To appreciate the continuing influence of Majorana’s famous “Majorana
fermion” paper [6] in contemporary condensed matter physics, it will be
helpful first to review briefly its central idea within its original context of
particle physics. I will do this in modern language, but with an unusual
emphasis that leads naturally into the generalizations we’ll be considering.
Thecompanion chapter [7]contains a much moreextensive discussion of the
particle physics around Majorana fermions.
Dirac’s equation connects the four components of a field ψ. In modern
(covariant) notation it reads
The γ matrices must obey the rules of Clifford algebra, i.e.
where ηµν is the metric tensor of flat space. Spelling it out, we have
(I have adopted units such that h¯ = c = 1.) Furthermore we require that
γ0 be Hermitean, the others anti-Hermitean. These conditions insure that
the equation properly describes the wave function of a spin-1 particle with
mass m.
Dirac found a suitable set of 4 4 γ matrices, whose entries contain
both real and imaginary numbers. For the equation to make sense, then,
ψ must be a complex field. Dirac, and most other physicists, regarded this
as a good feature, because electrons are electrically charged, and the de-
scription of charged particles requires complex fields, even at the level of the
Schro¨dinger equation. Another perspective comes from quantum field the-
ory. In quantum field theory, if a given field φ creates the particle A (and
destroys its antiparticle A¯), then the complex conjugate φ∗ will create A¯
and destroy A. Particles that are their own antiparticles must be associated
with fields obeying φ = φ∗, that is, real fields. The equations for particles
with spin 0 (Klein-Gordon equation), spin 1 (Maxwell equations) and spin
2 (Einstein equations, derived from general relativity) readily accommodate
real fields, since the equations are formulated using real numbers. Neutral
π mesons π0, photons, and gravitons are their own antiparticles, with spins
0,1,2 respectively. But since electrons and positrons are distinct, the asso-
ciated fields ψ and ψ∗ must be distinct; and this feature appeared to be a
natural consequence of Dirac’s equation.
Inhis1937paperMajoranaposed,andanswered,thequestionofwhether
equations for spin-1 fields must necessarily, like Dirac’s original equation,
involve complex numbers. Considerations of mathematical elegance and
symmetry both motivated and guided his investigation. Majorana discov-
ered that, to the contrary, there is a simple, clever modification of Dirac’s
equation that involves only real numbers. Indeed, once having posed the
problem, it is not overly difficult to find a solution. The matrices
γ˜1 = iσ 1
γ˜2 = iσ 1
or, in expanded form:
 i 0 0 0 
 0 i 0 0 
 0 0 0 i 
 i 0 0 0 
satisfy the same algebra Eqn.(27) as Dirac’s, and are purely imaginary.
Majorana’s version of the Dirac equation
therefore has the same desirable symmetry properties, including Lorentz
invariance. But since the γ˜µ are pure imaginary the iγ˜µ are real, and so
Majorana’s equation can govern a real field ψ˜.
With this discovery, Majorana made the idea that spin-1 particles could
be their own antiparticles theoretically respectable, that is, consistent with
the general principles of relativity and quantum theory. In his honor, we
call such hypothetical particles Majorana fermions.
3.2 Analysis of Majorana Neutrinos
Majorana speculated that his equation might apply to neutrinos. In 1937,
neutrinos were themselves hypothetical, and their properties unknown. The
experimental study of neutrinos commenced with their discovery [13] in
1956, but their observed properties seemed to disfavor Majorana’s idea.
Specifically, there seemed to be a strict distinction between neutrinos and
antineutrinos. In recent years, however, Majorana’s question has come back
to life.
The turning point came with the discovery of neutrino oscillations [14].
Neutrino oscillations provide evidence for mass terms. Indeed, it is non-
diagonal mass terms, connecting neutrinos with different lepton numbers,
that cause freely propagating neutrinos to mix. Mass terms, diagonal or
not,areincompatiblewithchiralprojections. Thusthefamiliar“left-handed
neutrino”, which particle physicists worked with for decades, can only bean
approximation to reality. The physical neutrino must have some admixture
of right-handed chirality.
Thereby a fundamental question arises: Are the right-handed compo-
nents of neutrinos something entirely new – or could they involve the same
degrees of freedom we met before, in antineutrinos? (Usually these ques-
tions are phrased in the historically appropriate but cryptic form: Are neu-
trinosMajoranaparticles?) Atfirsthearingthatquestionmightsoundquite
strange, since neutrinos and anti-neutrinos have quite different properties.
How could there be a piece of the neutrino, that acts like an antineutrino?
But of course if the size of the unexpected piece is small enough, it can
be compatible with observations. Quantitatively: If the energy of our neu-
trinos is large compared to their mass, the admixture of opposite chirality
will be proportional to m/E. To explain the phenomenology of neutrino
oscillations, and taking into account cosmological constraints, we are led to
masses m < eV, and so in most practical experiments m/E is a very small
parameter. These considerations raise the possibility that neutrinos and
antineutrinos the same particles, just observed in different states of motion.
The observed distinctions might just represent unusual spin-dependent (or,
more properly, helicity-dependent) interactions.
To pose the issues mathematically, we must describe a massive spin-1
particle using just two – not four – degrees of freedom. We want the an-
tiparticle to involve the same degrees of freedom as the particle. Concretely,
we want to investigate how the hypothesis
might be compatible with non-zero mass. Eqn.(33) embodies, in precise
mathematical form, the idea that antineutrinos are simply neutrinos in a
different state of motion, i.e. with different helicity.
Ifψ isarealfield,describedbyMajorana’s versionoftheDiracequation,
since γ iγ0γ1γ2γ3 is pure imaginary. Conversely, if Eqn.(33) holds, we
can derive both ψ and ψ by projection from a single four-component real
field, i.e.
This is the link between Majorana’s mathematics and modern neutrino
physics.
3.3 Majorana Mass
With that background and inspiration, wecan distill the essential novelty in
the Majorana equation, which is a bit more subtle than is commonly stated.
What is distinctive is not merely the use of real fields. After all, a complex
field can always be written in terms of two real ones, as ψ = Reψ+iImψ,
and so any system of equations involving the complex field ψ can be written
as a larger system of equations involving only the real fields Reψ and Imψ.
Rather,whatisdistinctiveisthepossibilityofpassing,inthedescriptionofa
massive spin 1 particle, from a Dirac field with eight real degrees of freedom
(four complex components) to a Majorana field with four real degrees of
freedom. As we shall see, this requires an unusual, symmetry-breaking form
of mass: Majorana mass.
3.3.1 Broken Symmetry Aspect
Tohighlighttheinnovationthisrequires,letusconsiderthechiralprojection
of the Majorana equation. In general, applying a chiral projection to the
Dirac equation gives us
Both ψ and ψ naturally contain two complex components. But in the
Majorana specialization, ψ is not independent, for it satisfies Eqn.(33).
We have, therefore,
Inthisformulation, weseethatthemasstermisofanusualform. Itinvolves
complex conjugating the field, and thus reads differently – by a minus sign
– for its real and imaginary components. It is naturally associated with
breaking of the phase symmetry
or, of course, the corresponding number symmetry.
3.3.2 Formal Aspect: Grassmann Variables
The appearance of Eqn.(37) is unusual, and we may wonder, as Majorana
did, how it could arise as a field equation, following the usual procedure of
varying a Lagrangian density. That consideration led Majorana to another
major insight. The unprojected mass therm
becomes, if we write everything in terms of ψ (using Eqn.(33)
L M ∝ 0 → L 0 L L 0 L
where T denotes transpose.
Inverifyingthatthesetermsarenon-trivial,whereastheremainingcross-
terms vanish, it is important to note that γ is antisymmetric, i.e., that it
changes sign under transpose. That is true because γ is both Hermitean
and pure imaginary. Thus we have, for example,
L 0 R L 0 R
(If we do not adopt Majorana’s hypothesis Eqn.(33), the mass term takes
L conventional ∝ R L L R
which supports number symmetry ψ eiλψ .)
The survival of the remaining terms in Eqn.(40) is, as Majorana noted,
also non-trivial. In components, we have
L 0 L 0 L j L k
Now γ , like γ , is antisymmetric (for the same reasons). So in order for
this term to survive, we must assume that the fields ψ are anticommuting
variables. Majorana’s boldinvocation of such“Grassmannnumbers”,which
have become ubiquitous in the modern field theory of fermions, was ahead
of its time.
With this understanding, variation of the mass term, together with the
conventional kinetic term
L ∝ L 0 µ L
will give us Eqn.(37).
3.3.3 Majorana Mass as Symmetry-Breaking Perturbation
Eqn.(40) affords an instructive perspective on the Majorana mass term,
which, we have argued, is a central innovation of [6]. This perspective will
be helpful in assessing the “shocking” result of our next section.
By stripping away all kinematic details, we can define a faithful, trans-
parent analogue of “Majoranization” through mass acquisition, for spin 0
bosons.
Let φ and ∆ be two complex boson fields, supporting a global U(1)
Ourfocuswillbeonhow thepropertiesof theφquanta–inparticular, their
masses – change as ∆ acquires a symmetry-breaking vacuum expectation
value.
The relevant Lagrangian is
mass conventional Majorana
conventional
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(taking, for convenience, κ real).
If the vacuum expectation value ∆ = 0, then we have only the con-
ventional mass term. The quanta of φ are a degenerate pair – particle and
antiparticle – with opposite charge but common mass M. The states of
definite charge are produced by φ and φ∗.
If the vacuum expectation value ∆ =v = 0 (assumed, for convenience,
real), then the quadratic terms in φ read
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
In this case, the quanta of definite mass are associated with the real fields
Reφ,Imφ, and have masses
m = M2+2κ∆
These particles with definite mass are “Majorana” particles, in the sense
that they are their own antiparticles. On the other hand, if κ∆ is small, the
practical effect of the splitting might be quite limited. For example, let us
suppose that other interactions (besides the mass) are more nearly diagonal
in terms of φ and φ∗, not Reφ and Imφ, as will occur if the symmetry
breaking is small. Then the typical φ quantum produced in an interaction
will evolve (in its rest frame) as
| i √2 | i | i
(e−imRet Reφ +ie−imImt Imφ )
= e−i(mRe+mIm)t/2 cos Re − Im φ sin Re − Im φ∗
2 | i− 2 | i
in an evident notation. The oscillation time
will be very long. For shorter times, and considering the dominant interac-
tions, it will be a good approximation to work with the “non-eigenstates”
φ , φ∗ , wherein the underlying Majorana structure is hidden.
These considerations, which of course have their parallel for fermions,
show that the concept “Majorana particle” should not be regarded as a
binary, yes-or-no predicate. For, as we have just seen, particles can be their
own antiparticles and yet behave, for practical purposes (with arbitrary
accuracy), as if they were not. Rather the physically meaningful issues are
the magnitude of Majorana mass terms, and the circumstances in which
such mass term induce significant physical effects.
3.4 Majorana Electrons
AfterthesepreliminarieswearepreparedtodiscusstheconceptofMajorana
electrons, which might otherwise sound absurd.
Electrons and antielectrons have opposite electric charge, and electric
charge is most definitely an observable quantity, which might seem to pre-
clude that electrons might be their own antiparticles. Inside superconduc-
tors, however, the situation is different. Inside a superconductor, we have
a condensate of Cooper pairs. Heuristically: A hole, in this environment,
can be “dressed” by a Cooper pair, and come to look like a particle. More
formally: Insideasuperconductor,thegaugesymmetryassociated tocharge
conservationisspontaneouslybroken,andelectricchargeisnotagoodquan-
tum number, so one cannot invoke it to distinguish particles from holes.
To connect superconductivity with Majorana mass, consider how the
formation ofanelectron paircondensateeffects theambient electrons. From
the electron-electron interaction term e¯e¯ee – suppressing spin indices, and
considering only simple s-wave ordering – we derive an effective interaction
between electrons and the ambient condensate
electron−condensate
that precisely mirrors the Majorana mass term!
Famously, theinteractionEqn.(51)ofelectrons(andholes)withthecon-
densatebothmixeselectronswithholesopensagapintheelectronspectrum
at the fermi surface. A close analogy between the opening of that gap and
thegenerationofmass,bycondensation,forrelativisticfermionswasalready
noted in Nambu’s great work on spontaneously broken symmetry in rela-
tivistic particle physics [15]. Indeed, that analogy largely inspired his work.
We are emphasizing here, that in superconductors the mass in question is
actually mass of Majorana’s unusual, number-violating form.
The induced Majorana mass, according to Eqn.(51), is 10K = 10−3
eV, which is minusculeon thescale of theelectron’s intrinsic(normal) mass,
and even small on the scale of ordinary Fermi energies. It will dominate
only for quasiparticles within a narrow range of the nominal Fermi surface.
Nevertheless, most of the phenomena of superconductivity follow from the
existence of the gap and therefore, implicitly, from this Majorana mass.
VeryrecentlyBeenakkerhasproposedamorepointedexperimentaldemon-
stration of the Majorana nature of electrons in superconductors [16]. While
thedetailsarecomplicated,theessentialideaisthattheMajoranamassterm
depends on the phase eiδ of ∆, and the relative phase of the particle and
hole components of the Majorana quasiparticle will reflect that phase. Thus
if we bring together quasiparticles from two different superconductors, their
overlap, and therefore their annihilation probability, will be proportional to
cos2 δ1−δ2.
4 Majorinos
As we have just discussed, inside superconductors the near-Fermi surface
quasiparticle excitations have a Majorana character. Another interesting
theme in recent condensed matter physics is the importance of zero modes –
roughly speaking, mid-gap states – in quasiparticle spectra. They are typi-
cally associated with topological features, such as domain walls, vortices, or
boundaries. (Mathematical aside: Theexistenceofthesemodesisconnected
to index theorems.)
The conjunction of these two ideas leads us Majorana zero modes. In
a particle interpretation, the quanta associated to these modes are zero-
mass Majorana particles. Since they are localized on specific points, they
can be considered as particles in 0+1 (0 space, 1 time) dimension. They
are in many respects the most extreme Majorana (self-conjugate) particles,
consistent with their origin as mid-gap states in superconductors, where the
electron Majorana mass is most dominant. They are not quite fermions, as
weshallsee,butobeyaninterestinggeneralization ofFermistatistics. Itwill
be convenient to have a name for such particles. In view of their smallness
bothinmassandinspatialextension,andtheirextremeMajoranacharacter,
the name Majorino suggests itself, and I shall adopt it here.
TheexistenceofMajoranamodesincondensedmatter systems[17–22]is
intrinsically interesting, in that it embodies a qualitatively new and deeply
quantum mechanical phenomenon [23]. It is also possible that such modes
might have useful applications, particularly in quantum information pro-
cessing [24,25]. One feature that makes Majorana modes useful is that
they generate a doubled spectrum. When we have several Majorana modes,
each produces an independent doubling. Such repeated doubling generates
a huge Hilbert space of degenerate states. If we can control the dynamics of
Majorinos, we can navigate throughthat Hilbertspace. Thatvision inspires
research to enable quantum information processing using Majorinos.
This section is structured as follows. We first discuss the occurrence of
Majorinos in a simple, discrete one dimensional model, following Kitaev’s
simple but profound analysis [9]. We then generalize to a more realistic
model wire (still following Kitaev), and then to circuits. In that context
we identify a remarkable algebraic structure, that allows us to identify the
Majorinos, to show that their existence is robust against interactions, and
to exhibit the doubling phenomenon, in a transparent fashion. Finally, we
discuss a continuum field theory approach to Majorinos.
4.1 Kitaev Chain
4.1.1 Schematic Hamiltonian
Let us briefly recall the simplest, yet representative, model for such modes,
Kitaev’s wire segment. We imagine N ordered sites are available to our
electrons, sowehavecreationanddestructionoperatorsa ,a ,1 j,k N,
with a ,a = a ,a = 0 and a ,a = δ . The same commutation
{ j k } { j k} { j k } jk
relations can be expressed using the hermitean and antihermitean parts of
the a , leading to a Clifford algebra, as follows:
Now let us compare the Hamiltonians
Since iγ γ = 2a a 1, H simply measures the total occupancy. It
− 2j−1 2j j j − 0
is a normal, if unusually trivial, electron Hamiltonian.
H strongly resembles H but there are three major differences.
1. One difference emerges, if we re-express H in terms of the a . We
find that it is local in terms of those variables, in the sense that only
neighboring sites are connected, but that in addition to conventional
hopping terms of the type a a we have terms of the type a a ,
j j+1 j j+1
and their hermitean conjugates. The aa type, which we may call
superconductive hopping, does not conserve electron number, and is
characteristic of a superconducting (pairing) state.
2. Aseconddifferencegrowsoutofasimilarity: sincethealgebraEqn.(52)
of the γ is uniform in j, we can interpret the products γ γ
that appear in H in the same fashion that we interpret the prod-
ucts γ γ that appear in H , that is as occupancy numbers. The
effective fermions that appear in these numbers, however, are not the
original electrons, but mixtures of electrons and holes on neighboring
sites.
3. The third and most profound difference is that the operators γ ,γ
do not appear at all in H . These are the Majorana mode operators.
They commute with the Hamiltonian, square to the identity, and an-
ticommute with each other. The action of γ and γ on the ground
state implies a degeneracy of that state, and the corresponding modes
have zero energy. Kitaev [9] shows that similar behavior occurs for
a family of Hamiltonians allowing continuous variation of microscopic
parameters, i.e. fora universality class. (We willreproducethecore of
that analysis immediately below, and extend it in a different direction
subsequently.) Withinthatuniversalityclassonehashermiteanopera-
torsb ,b onthetwoendsofthewirewhoseactionisexponentially(in
N) localized and commute with the Hamiltonian up to exponentially
small corrections, that satisfy the characteristic relations b2 =b2 = 1.
In principle there is a correction Hamiltonian,
H ib b , (55)
that will encourage us to re-assemble b ,b into an effective fermion
creation-destruction pair, and to realize H as its occupation number,
by inverting the construction of Eqn.(52). But for a long wire and
weak interactions we expect the coefficient of H to be very small,
since the modes excited by b ,b are spatially distant, and for most
physical purposes it will be more appropriate to work with the local
variables b ,b , since these respond independently to spatially uncor-
related perturbations.
4.1.2 Parametric Hamiltonian
H involved a very particular choice of parameters. Here we show that can
arisewithaclassofHamiltoniansofaphysicallyplausibleform,thatcontain
continuous parameters, yet shareits central qualitative feature– that is, the
emergence of Majorinos at the ends of the wire.
Indeed, consider
− j j+1 j+1 j − j j − 2 j j+1 j+1 j
with the understanding a = a = 0. It describes a superconducting
wire, with N sites. The first term, with coefficient w, is a conventional hop-
ping term; the second term, proportional to µ, is a chemical potential, and
the remaining terms represent residual interactions with the superconduct-
ing gap parameter ∆ eiθ ∆ , here regarded as a given external field.
The crucial issue, for us is the existence (or not) of zero energy modes.
So we look for solutions of the equation
H, c γ = 0 (57)
With the understanding that γ 0 when k falls outside the allowed range
1 k 2N, we have, for j even
j j−1 j+1 j−3
∝ | | −| |
while for j odd
j j+1 j−1 j+3
Gathering terms proportional to γ in Eqn. (57), we have
l+1 l−1 l+3
l−1 l+1 l−3
with the understanding that c 0 unless 1 j 2N.
Eqn. (60) is a three-term recurrence relation, that connects coefficients
whosesubscriptsdifferbytwounits. Atfirstneglectingboundaryconditions,
we construct candidate solutions in the form of power series, which contain
only even or only odd terms. Putting c = αx(l+1)/2, for all odd l, we get a
quadratic equation for x (from the second line of Eqn. (60) ):
± 2(w+ ∆ )
This leads us to look for zero modes in the form
The zero-mode condition Eqn. (57) is then satisfied, by construction, in
bulk.
Now we must attend to the boundaries. In our formal manipulations
we’ve ignored the prescriptions c ,γ 0 for l outside the physical range.
To have a legitimate solution at the ends, we must also impose
We reach different conclusions depending upon whether our candidate
solutions are both growing (i.e., x , x > 1), both shrinking(x , x <
1) or we have one with each behavior. If both are growing, then after
imposing Eqn. (63), and normalizing the coefficient α xN+1 = 1, we find
so that Eqn. (64) is satisfied approximately, up to quantities that are ex-
ponentially small in N. For a half-infinite wire we can take the limit, and
we have exact normalizable zero modes, concentrated on the (right-hand)
boundary. For large but finite N we will need another small parameter in
order to satisfy the second boundary condition. Such a parameter is avail-
able: the energy. So we will not get an exact zero-energy mode, but rather
a normalizable mode with exponentially small energy, concentrated on the
right-hand boundary.
If both of our candidate solutions are shrinking, then a similar analysis
reveals a normalizable near-zero energy mode concentrated on the left-hand
boundary. Note that our earlier H correspondsto x = x = 0, so we have
solutions concentrated on one site!
If one candidate solution is growing, while the other is shrinking, the
construction fails, for upon imposing one boundary condition we are forced
into gross violations of the other.
Thatcompletes ouranalysis of thecandidate zeromodesassociated with
linearcombinationsofγ ,i.e. concentratedonoddsites. Wecanofcourse
perform a parallel analysis of candidate zero modes concentrated on even
sites. Due to the re-sequencing of terms appearing in the two lines of Eqn.
(60) the quadratic equation for the factor x is reversed, so that it is solved
instead by x−1. Thus candidate zero modes concentrated on even sites take
We find that a normalizable near-zero mode of this even type occurs in
precisely the same circumstances where we have a near-zero mode of the
odd type; and that when both solutions exist, they are localized at opposite
ends of the wire.
4.2 Junctions and the Algebraic Genesis of Majorinos
Now let us consider the situation where multiple Majorana modes come to-
gether to form a junction, as might occur in a network of superconducting
wires of the sort analyzed above. Several experimental groups are devel-
oping physical embodiments of Majorana modes, for eventual use in such
quantumcircuits. (For ausefulsamplingofrecentactivity, seethecollection
of abstracts from the July 12-18 2013 Erice workshop: [26].)
A fundamental issue, in analyzing such circuits, is the behavior at junc-
tions. Pairs of Majorana modes can be organized into fermion creation and
destruction operators, and their are allowed interaction terms which make
that appropriate, but we can anticipate that general principles might be
enough to give us one surviving Majorana mode at an odd junction. We
will, in fact, identify a remarkably simple, explicit non-linear operator Γ
that can be considered the creator/destroyer of Majorinos. Γ obeys simple
algebraic relations with the Hamiltonian, and implements a general dou-
bling of the spectrum. Its existence and properties are tightly connected
to fermion number parity. The emergent algebraic structure, in its power
and simplicity, seems encouraging for further analysis and development of
Majorana wire circuits.
Thefollowingconsiderations willappearmorepointedifweexplaintheir
origin in the following little puzzle. Let us imagine we bring together the
ends of three wires supporting Majorana modes b ,b ,b . Thus we have the
b ,b = 2δ . (67)
Theb donotappearintheirseparatewireHamiltonians, butwecan expect
to have interactions
int. 1 2 2 3 3 1
which plausibly arise from normal or superconductive inter-wire electron
hopping. We assume here that the only important couplings among the
wires involve the Majorana modes. This is appropriate if the remaining
modes are gapped and the interaction is weak – for example, if we only
include effects of resonant tunneling. We shall relax this assumption in due
course.
Wemightexpect, heuristically, thattheinteractions causetwoMajorana
degrees of freedom to pair up to form a conventional fermion degree of free-
dom, leaving one Majorana mode behind. On the other hand, the algebra
in Eqn.(67) can be realized using Pauli σ matrices, in the form b = σ . In
that realization, we have simply H = ασ +βσ +γσ . But that Hamilto-
nian has eigenvalues α2+ β 2+ γ 2, with neither degeneracy nor zero
mode. In fact a similar problem arises even for “junctions” containing a
single wire, since we could use b = σ (and b = σ ).
The point is that the algebra of Eqn.(67) is conceptually incomplete. It
does not incorporate relevant implications of electron number parity, or in
other words electron number modulo two, which remains valid even in the
presence of a pairing condensate. The operator
that implements electron number parity should obey
P2 = 1 (70)
eff.
P,b = 0. (72)
Eqn.(70) follows directly from the motivating definition. Eqn.(71) reflects
the fundamental constraint that electron number modulo two is conserved
in the theories under consideration, and indeed under very broad – possibly
universal – conditions. Eqn.(72) reflects, in the context of [9], that the
b are linear functions of the a ,a , but is more general. Indeed, it will
persist under any “dressing” of the b operators induced by interactions
that conserve P. Below we will see striking examples of this persistence.
The preceding puzzle can now be addressed. Including the algebra of
electron parity operator, we take a concrete realization of operators as b =
σ I, b = σ I, b = σ σ and P = σ σ . This choice represents
1 2 3 3 2 1 2 3
the algebra Eqns.(67, 70-72). The Hamiltonian represented in this enlarged
space contains doublets at each energy level. (Related algebraic structures
are implicit in [27]. See also [28–31] for additional constructions.)
Returning now to the abstract analysis, consider the special operator
Γ ib b b . (73)
It satisfies
eff.
Eqns.(74, 75) follow directly from the definition, while Eqn.(76) follows,
givenEqn.(75),fromtherequirementthatH shouldcontainonlytermsof
eff.
evendegreeintheb s. Thatrequirement,inturn,followsfromtherestriction
of the Hamiltonian to terms even under P. Finally Eqn.(77) is a direct
consequence of Eqn.(72) and the definition of Γ.
This emergent Γ has the characteristic properties of a Majorana mode
operator: It is hermitean, it squares to one, and it has odd electron number
parity. Most crucially, it commutes with the Hamiltonian, but is not a
function of the Hamiltonian. We can bring the relevant structure into focus
by going to a basis where H and P are both diagonal. Then from Eqn.(77),
we see that Γ takes states with P = 1 into states of the same energy with
P = 1. This doubling applies to all energy eigenstates, not only to the
ground state. It is reminiscent of, but differs from, Kramers doubling. (No
antiunitary operation appears, nor is T symmetry assumed.)
One also has a linear operator
that commutes with the Hamiltonian. But this w is not independent of Γ,
since we have
and it is Γ, not w, which generalizes smoothly.
Thesameconsiderations applytoajunctionsupportinganyoddnumber
p of Majorana mode operators, with
Γ i 2 γ j . (80)
For even p, however, we get a commutator instead of an anticommutator
in Eqn.(77), and the doubling construction fails. For odd p 5 generally
there is no linear operator, analogous to the w of Eqn.(78), that commutes
withH. (IftheHamiltonian isquadratic,theexistenceofalinear zeromode
followsfromsimplelinearalgebra–namely,theexistenceofazeroeigenvalue
of an odd-dimensional antisymmetric matrix, as discussed in many earlier
analyses. But for more complex, realistic Hamiltonians, including nearby
electron modes as envisaged below, that argument is insufficient, even for
p = 3. The emergent operator Γ, on the other hand, always commutes with
the Hamiltonian (Eqns. (76)), even allowing for higher order contributions
such as quartic or higher polynomials in the b s.)
Now let us revisit the approximation of keeping only the interactions of
the Majorana modes from the separate wires. We can in fact, without diffi-
culty, include any finite number of “ordinary” creation-annihilation modes
from each wire, thus including all degrees of freedom that overlap signifi-
cantly with the junction under consideration. These can be analyzed, as in
Eqn.(52), intoanevennumberofadditionalγ operators, toincludewiththe
odd number of b . But then the product Γ′ of all these operators, including
both types (and the appropriate power of i), retains the good properties
Eqn.(74) of the Γ operator we had before.
If p 5, or even at p = 3 with nearby electron interactions included
effects, the emergent zero mode is highly non-linear entangled state involv-
ing all the wires that participate at the junction. The robustness of these
conclusions results from the algebraic properties of Γ we identified. If we
haveacircuitwithseveraljunctionsj,theemergentΓ willobeytheClifford
This applies also to junctions with p = 1, i.e. simple terminals; nor need
the circuit be connected.
ThealgebraicstructuredefinedbyEqns.(70-72)isfullynon-perturbative.
It may be taken as the definition of the universality class supporting Majo-
rana modes. The construction of Γ (in its most general form) and its con-
sequences Eqns.(74-77) reproduces that structure, allowing for additional
interactions, with Γ playing the role of an emergent b. The definition of Γ,
the consequences Eqns.(74-77), and the deduction of doubling are likewise
fully non-perturbative. It is noteworthy that our construction of emergent
Majorinos is at the opposite extreme from a single-particle operator: The
mode it excites is associated with the product wave function over the modes
associated with the b , rather than a linear combination. In this sense we
haveextremevalence-bond(Heitler-London)asopposedtolinear(Mulliken)
orbitals. The contrast is especially marked, of course, for large p.
When there are several junctions k, each has its own Γ operator, and
together they define a Clifford algebra
as is easily demonstrated. Thus Majorinos at different junctions anticom-
mute, similar to fermions. But the square of each Γ is unity, not zero, so
they do not obey the Pauli exclusion principle. They are neither bosons
nor fermions, but a type of nonabelian anyon, whose quantum statistics is
effectively defined by Eqn.(82).
The simple, explicit construction of emergent Majorinos in terms of the
underlying microscopic variables might be helpful in the design of useful
circuit operations, based on their response to variation of the Hamiltonian
parameters, which could be controlled by applying external fields.
4.3 Continuum Majorinos
We can also define a simple continuum construction, based directly on the
Majorana equation, that supports Majorinos. It is a modification of the
classic Jackiw-Rebbi [32] model, where in place of ordinary mass the back-
ground field imparts Majorana mass to an electron, and is closely related to
considerations in [33].
To describe it in a self-contained manner, let us consider a 1+1 dimen-
sional version of Majorana’s equation Eqn.(37), allowing both for Majorana
mass M and conventional mass m
whereweallowtheMajoranamassM(x)todependonx. Forourγ matrices,
we take simply
The equation for a zero-energy solution is then
or, in terms of the real and imaginary parts ψ = φ+iη,
Now writing the spinors in terms of σ eigenspinors (i.e., up and down
components) φ ,η we find the formal solutions
Thesesolutionswillbenormalizableonlyiftheintegrandisnegativeforlarge
positive y and positive for large negative y. It is not difficult to construct
monotonic profiles for M(y) and values for m such that exactly one of the
candidate solutions is normalizable. In that case one will have a single
Majorana mode localized, after an appropriate shift, around x = 0.