Material Science for Quantum Computing with Atom Chips
Ron Folman∗
Department of Physics, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be’er Sheva 84105, Israel
(Dated: October 26, 2018)
In its most general form, the atom chip is a device in which neutral or charged particles are
positioned in an isolating environment such as vacuum (or even a carbon solid state lattice) near
the chip surface. The chip may then be used to interact in a highly controlled manner with the
quantum state. I outline the importance of material science to quantum computing (QC) with
atom chips, where the latter may be utilized for many, if not all, suggested implementations of
QC. Material science is important both for enhancing the control coupling to the quantum system
for preparation and manipulation as well as measurement, and for suppressing the uncontrolled
couplinggivingrisetolowfidelitythroughstaticanddynamiceffectssuchaspotentialcorrugations
and noise. As a case study, atom chips for neutral ground state atoms are analyzed and it is
shown that nanofabricated wires will allow for more than 104 gate operations when considering
spin-flipsanddecoherence. TheeffectsoffabricationimperfectionsandtheCasimir-Polderforceare
also analyzed. In addition, alternative approaches to current-carrying wires are briefly described.
Finally, an outlook of what materials and geometries may be required is presented, as well as an
outline of directions for further study.
PACSnumbers: 37.10.Gh,32.70.Cs,05.40.-a,67.85.-d
Whatevertheeventualphysicalrealizationis,quantum Our definition of the atom chip is therefore broadened
computing (QC) will most probably require fabrication to include all quantum objects close to a ”classical” sur-
technology,analogousbutnotidenticaltowhathasbeen face. This somewhat arbitrary division does not include,
done for classical computers. This is so also for the neu- for example, quantum dots and superconducting qubits
tral particles described in this special issue. which are an inherent part of the surface. The main fo-
Scalabilitywillrequirehighlyrepeatablearchitectures. cus of this paper will be on an atom chip having a room
Fidelity will require extremely low levels of DC fluctua- temperature surface.
tions(e.g. electronorphotonscatteringduetoimperfec- When discussing a quantum system close to a macro-
tions such as surface roughness of wires and waveguides) scopic body one should think of a classical environment
andACfluctuationsintheformofelectro-magneticnoise which is continuously attempting to lower the fidelity
(the eventual numbers would be determined by the al- of the quantum operations by all means at its disposal.
lowed infidelity or error rate, e.g. [1, 2]). The variety Hence, while the controlled coupling between this envi-
of essential technologies for the different operations of ronmentandourquantumsystemshouldbesufficientto
a quantum computer such as isolation through vacuum, enable necessary operations, we must suppress the un-
trapping, cooling, transporting, state preparation, ma- controlled coupling. The eventual figure of merit would
nipulation, measurement and electronic readout, will re- then be the ratio between the controlled and the uncon-
quire the accurate and complex integration capabilities trolled coupling, or more simply put, how many logic
whichonlymonolithicfabricationmethodsexhibit. More gate operations may be done with high fidelity. Due to
so, itisplausiblethattheeventualrealizationwillneces- thenecessityofchiptechnology,asexplainedabove,Ibe-
sitate hybrid systems in which atoms serve, for example, lieve that material science and technology will have just
as memory while superconducting circuits make up the asmucheffectonthisratioaswilltheactualphysicalna-
logic gates. This integration between different quantum tureofthechosenquantumsystemandtheexperimental
systemswillmostprobablyagainrequirechiptechnology. tools used to interact with it.
We may then talk of an atom chip for QC hosting any As the nature of the quantum system used changes,
eventual desired particle and interaction, and where the so does the nature of the coupling with the chip. For
atom chip may be very different from its form today [3– example, charged particles have exhibited a very strong
5]. Indeed, already now diverse fabrication techniques dependenceoftheheatingrateonthedistancetothechip
are advancing at a rate which allows us to assume that [6–8] (most probably caused by contaminations or inho-
any eventual scheme for the quantum computer may be mogeneities on the surface [15]). Polar molecules [9] and
put on an atom chip. This may include on one extreme Rydberg atoms [10–14], while exhibiting advantageous
cold atoms in an optical lattice within a miniature vac- features concerning logic gates due to strong coupling,
uum chamber inside a substrate, and on the other ex- will also have enhanced atom-surface interaction relative
treme, solid-state atoms or atom-like systems (e.g. NV to neutral atoms, as their permanent or induced dipole
centersindiamondnanocrystals)embeddedinameshof is much stronger.
guides for photons and electrons fabricated on a surface. In this paper we shall focus on ground state neutral
]hp-tnauq[
2v3083.8011:viXra
atoms as a case study which should be followed for any Waals forces) and this will be discussed to some extent
system eventually used. The current-carrying wire will in the following. Near every lattice site there will be an-
beusedasaspecificexampleoftheproblemofcontrolled other field source, such as a charged dot, or optical sub
vs. uncontrolled coupling. A brief discussion of an alter- wavelength aperture (including plasmonics for enhanced
native atom chip in the form of an optical chip ends this transmissionandfocus),inordertofacilitatesinglequbit
paper. rotations with single site addressability.
Tofacilitaterapidadvancesinthefieldofmaterialsci-
ence for atom chips, and with the aim of providing re-
ADVANCES IN FABRICATION search and development services to the quantum optics
community, we have constructed a fabrication facility at
Beforediscussingasacasestudythefundamentallim- Ben-Gurion University with emphasis on quantum op-
itations of the current-carrying wire, let us briefly note tics. This facility with a resolution of 10 nm and with
the state of the art in fabrication. theabilitytointegratenumerousmaterialsandprocesses,
Since its conception, the vision of the atom chip has has already given services to numerous laboratories in
been to create a platform for any required atomic and Europe and the United-States. Projects include current-
molecular optics tool. In Fig. 1, a general view of such carrying chips, permanent magnet chips, ion chips, chips
a vision is presented. forcoldelectrons,chipsfordiamondNVcenters,photon-
Advances in this direction have recently been made. ics chips and so on. In Fig. 2, an ion chip developed for
For example, in the group of Dana Anderson, miniature theMainzgroupofFerdinandSchmidt-Kalerispresented
vacuumchambersinsidesubstratesarealreadyfunction- as an example.
ing, and are poised to enable one of the best, if not To conclude, these and other examples from the atom
the best, optical resolution to date; in the group of Ed chip community [16], as well as overwhelming advances
Hinds an integrated pyramid magneto optical trap has in fabrication techniques in general, allow us the opti-
been etched into the substrate; in the group of Robert mistic point of view that any eventual realization of a
Spreeuw, permanent magnet lattices have been fabri- quantum computer may be put in the future on an atom
cated; and in the group of Philipp Treutlein, multi-layer chip. Themainchallengewillbetomaximizetheratioof
chips,includingmicro-waveguides,havebeendeveloped. controlled to uncontrolled coupling, and in the following
Thevisionforaquantumcomputerwouldbetocreate the current-carrying wire is analyzed as a case study.
a dense lattice of traps which may be individually ad-
dressed and between which controlled coupling may be
initiated. Such a lattice may have an optical periodicity ATOM-SURFACE DISTANCE
if optical far fields are used, or sub-optical periodicity
if near fields are used, or field sources such as current-
For any system eventually used, it seems reasonable
carryingwiresorpermanentmagnets,wherethesizelim-
to assume that small system-environment distances will
itation comes from e-beam lithography resolution, which
today stands at a few tens of nano-meters. A procedure
to optimize the chip design for such lattices has been de-
fined [17]. Another limitation comes from the smallest
sustainable particle-surface distance (e.g. due to van der
FIG. 1: (Color Online) A futuristic vision of the atom chip
(courtesy of Tim Freegarde). Here all the concepts of minia-
ture vacuum, miniature light and particle sources, photonics
and micro magnetic traps, all come as an integrated device
on top of one substrate. Eventually, also readout and pre-
amplification electronics could be put on the same chip. Ma- FIG.2: (ColorOnline)IonChipproducedinBen-GurionUni-
chines such as wafer bonders enable such structures. Taken versitybeforeitisputintothevacuumchamberinMainz. In-
from[16]. CopyrightWiley-VCHVerlagGmbH&Co. KGaA. set: firsttwoionstrappedonthechip. CourtesyofFerdinand
Reproduced with permission. Schmidt-Kaler.
eventuallyberequired. Thisisduetophysicalneedssuch Control of Atom-Atom distance
as resolution and density of traps, as well as technical
needs such as low power consumption. As mentioned earlier, small atom-surface distances
In the neutral atom example, decreasing the atom- may be advantageous to QC devices because of differ-
surface distance should increase trap gradients suffi- ent reasons such as power consumption. However, as
cientlytoconstructtunnelingbarrierswithwidthsonthe noted, one of the most important features of a small
orderoftheatomicdeBrogliewavelength. Inthecontext atom-surface distance are the high potential gradients
of QC, this will allow for higher fidelity gates when they made available [3]. These will enable not only high den-
arepotentialdependent. Theeffectofsmallatom-surface sity lattices for atoms - as required by the demand for
distanceswillbequantifiedinthefollowingsection. High scalability, and a high degree of alignment - as required
gradients also mean that qubits are better localized and for single qubit rotations, but also high fidelity in the
thiswouldbeimportantforany2-qubitinteractionwhich control of barriers between atom trap sites, as required
issensitivetothedistance. Betterlocalizationisalsoim- forexamplebythecollisiongate(seefirstchapterofthis
portant for single qubit rotation, as fixed elements con- special issue).
tributing to such a rotation (e.g. charged dots) will be Asanexampleofthefidelityawardedbyasmallatom-
better spatially aligned with the qubit. Such high trap surface distance, let us briefly examine the technical sta-
gradientsmayalsoallowforimprovedatom-lightinterac- bility of a single barrier between two qubit sites. Tun-
tionssuchasprobingwithoutheatingintheLamb-Dicke neling may be used as a figure of merit for this stability.
regime, or side-band cooling. As noted previously, stable control of high gradients will
most likely be relevant at some level to any QC scheme
At small atom-surface distances, interactions with the
with isolated particles, and so let us examine in the fol-
nearby surface become important. For example, spatial
lowing the stability of a barrier, not only with the colli-
andtemporalmagneticfieldfluctuations,duetoelectron
sion gate in mind.
scatteringandJohnsonnoise,respectively,determinethe
To quantify such tunneling, let us construct a simple
minimal atom-surface distance, as they cause potential
potentialwhichhasnodirectconnectiontoQC.Consider
corrugations, spin-flips, and decoherence. There have
a waveguide formed by a single atom chip wire (in the
been several experiments utilizing cold atoms to study
xˆ−direction) and an external bias field; current through
these interactions [18–23], and many suggestions on how
a second atom chip wire in the yˆ−direction, namely in a
to overcome their damaging effects [24–29]. Also becom-
right-angle “X” wire configuration [45], is added to gen-
ing prominent for small atom-surface distances is the
erate a simple potential barrier. The configuration used
Casimir-Polder (CP) force [30]; being attractive, it re-
here is, incidentally, exactly opposite to the “dimple”
duces the magnetic barrier and allows atoms to tunnel
configuration recently used for compressing atom chip
to the surface, as already observed [31, 32]. Several ac-
traps [46, 47].
curate measurements of the van der Waals, Casimir and
For a specific atom-surface distance z, the magnetic
CP forces between atoms and surfaces have been made
potential in the xˆ−direction, generated by the crossing
[33, 34]. These topics will be elaborated upon in the
wire, is given by:
following.
As atom-surface proximity grows so will the need for V(x)=µ B + µ A µ 0 I z , (1)
suppressing hindering surface effects by material science A 0 2π z2+x2
and engineering. The final accepted levels of material
where µ is the permeability constant, µ is the atomic
infidelity would be defined by the final allowed gate infi-
magnetic dipole moment along the direction of the trap
delity which in turn depends on error correction thresh-
bottom (Ioffe-Pritchard) field B , and I is the current in
olds.
the crossing wire. A 1D single-particle tunneling prob-
Finally, let us note that from the above it is evident ability through the barrier can then be calculated in
that achieving small atom-surface distances would not the WKB approximation as
onlybeadvantageousforatomopticsandQC,butwould
(cid:18) 1 (cid:90) xE (cid:112) (cid:19)
alsocontributetothefundamentalstudyofatom-surface P =exp − dx 2m[V(x)−E] , (2)
and surface phenomena. However, the topic of the atom −xE
as a probe is beyond the scope of this chapter (see for whereE isthekineticenergyoftheatomandV(±x )=
example [22, 27, 35, 36]). E. Assuming a kinetic energy of E = 1µK for a 87Rb
Let me also note that there are numerous ideas aimed atom (corresponding to a free-particle de Broglie wave-
at bringing atoms closer to a surface or a macroscopic length of ≈ 0.33µm) in the |F =2,m =2(cid:105) state, we
object[37–44],allofwhichare,however,notbasedonthe maytheneasilycalculatethechangerequiredinthecur-
current-carrying wire, the latter being the focus of this rent I in order to cause a given proportional change in
chapter. Some additional ideas for small atom-surface the tunneling probability, as a function of the atom-
distances will be noted in the photonics section. surface distance z. The results of this calculation are
shown in Fig. 3 for changing the tunneling probability ofmagnetictrappingpotentialsbyengineeringwireedge
from 0.001 to some higher probability. The calculation profiles. Usingagaintunnelingasafigureofmeritforthe
suggests that control over the tunneling probability re- purposes of this brief demonstration, we are particularly
quires a distance z on the order of 1−2µm for exper- interested in potentials with sufficient variation so that
imentally reasonable values of current control. In the tunnelingbarrierscanbecontrolled. Wemaynowwishto
simple model of Eq. (1), this corresponds to a barrier determinethehighest“potentialresolution”,namely,the
half-width of 2−4µm, comparable to experiments that smallest distinguishable distance between adjacent wells
have observed interference between adjacent wells with separatedbystatictunnelingbarriers, asafunctionofd.
the addition of non-static fields [49, 50]. Thus, the de- As a test case for quantifying this potential resolu-
sired static magnetic potentials can be generated only tion, let us consider a configuration in which a thin
if atoms can be brought down to micron or sub-micron wire is curved with a certain periodicity λ that corre-
distances above the wires on the atom chip surface, at sponds to a wave-vector k = 2π/λ. If the amplitude of
which point the tunneling rate can be tuned over a sig- this curvature is small with respect to the wavelength,
nificant dynamic range by adjusting the current in the then, as will be explained in the next section, the mag-
crossing wire, or in other words the high gradient poten- netic field above the wire is given by a single |k| com-
tial is much more stable against current noise. ponent in Eq. (18), and then V(x) = V coskx, where
V = µ µ Ik2δy K (kz) (see Appendix A for de-
0 A 0 center 1
tails).
FIG. 3: (Color Online) Tunneling probability through a bar-
rieratseveralheightsdasafunctionofthechangeinthecur-
rent∆I throughthecontrolwire,relativetothecurrentI
for a probability P(I) = 0.001. A kinetic energy of 1µK is
assumed for a single atom of 87Rb. For this X-trap model,
changingthecurrentbyafewpercentcausesadrasticchange FIG.4: (ColorOnline)Potentialspatialresolutionachievable
in the tunneling probability for d = 10µm. Good control withwirecurrentsintherange0.05−50mA.Presentedisthe
over the tunneling probability requires the trap height to be maximumatom-surfacedistancedforwhichthelongitudinal
about d (cid:46) 1−2µm. The inset shows the potential barrier barrierbetweentwoadjacentminimainaperiodicpotentialis
required to maintain a tunneling probability of 0.001 as a atleasttwicetheenergyofthelongitudinalgroundstate. Ob-
function of the atom-surface separation d: for smaller d, a tainingstaticmagneticpotentialfeatureswitharesolutionon
higher barrier is required so better tunneling control is at- theorderofthedeBrogliewavelength,i.e. forapotentialpe-
tained. Taken from [48] Copyright IOP Publishing Ltd. Re- riodicity on the order of λ≈1µm, requires the atom-surface
produced with permission. distance to be d (cid:46) 2µm. Wire currents of 0.5 and 5 mA
are the maximum currents that can be sustained through 20
As another brief example of the enhanced trapping and 100 nm atom chip wires, respectively [Fig. 15(c)]. In-
potential engineering resolution as the atom-surface dis- creasing the current by three orders of magnitude to 50 mA
serves to increase the required height by just a factor of two,
tance is decreased, let us examine the creation of a 1D
despite being well beyond a safe atom chip current even for
lattice by a ”snake”-shaped current-carrying wire.
a 200 nm nanowire. As explained in the following section on
Shaping the wire edges may be used for creating po-
corrugations,thespatialresolutionachievedwithsuchawire
tential variations desired for manipulating atoms near goes down exponentially with atom-surface distance. Taken
the atom chip surface. In the following section we shall from [48] Copyright IOP Publishing Ltd. Reproduced with
characterize the dependence of magnetic field variations permission.
onwireedgeimperfections. Basedonthisdependencewe
maynowdiscussquantitativelythedeliberate“tailoring” Attheminimaofsuchaperiodicpotential,thelongitu-
dinal frequency is ω = V k2/m, where m is the atomic CP polder are manipulated efficiently, atom-surface dis-
mass. Inordertoengineerpotentialbarriersbetweenad- tancesmaybecomeontheorderofhundredsoreventens
jacent minima higher than the single-atom ground state of nano-meters, and to exploit the full potential of this,
energy by a factor of say η, we require 2V > 1η(cid:126)ω, state-of-the-art fabrication will have to be utilized.
or V > (η2/16)(cid:126)2k2/m. In Fig. 4 we plot the maxi-
mumatom-surfacedistanceforwhichalongitudinalbar-
rier with η = 2 can be obtained. These curves show POTENTIAL CORRUGATIONS
that the maximum atom-surface distance still allowing
tunneling control is on the order of the potential peri- From the early days of atom chips and to this day, the
odicity λ. Designing the edges of a wire as the sum of current-carrying wire has been the ’work-horse’ of this
differentmodulationsthereforeallowsengineeringofany apparatus. It is therefore fitting that we use it as a case
periodic potential up to a resolution determined by the study in order to present how conducting research into
atom-surface distance. Consequently, atom-surface dis- material science and material engineering in the context
tancesof1−2µm(orsub-microndistancesinsomecases) of any required coupling, may result in the suppression
will be required to fully exploit the potential of an atom of unwanted effects.
chip based on static magnetic fields. Every field source has its inherent inhomogeneities,
Let us note that it stands to reason that a quantum whetherACorDC,whichareboundtocauseinfidelities.
informationprocessingdevicebasedongroundstateneu- Whenconsideringacurrent-carryingwireasthetrapping
tral atoms and current-carrying wires will also require potential,letusfirstnotetheeffectofstaticpotentialcor-
static electric fields (e.g. for Stark shifts useful for sin- rugationscausedbyinhomogeneouselectrontrajectories,
gle site addressability or barrier control), RF fields and i.e. fluctuatingcurrentdirections[54,55]. Suchpotential
MW fields (e.g. for controlling barriers, see for example corrugations may warp the potential and cause infidelity
[51, 52]). All these forms of radiation address the atom in potential dependent qubit rotations and logic gates.
in the near field and so they may all be viewed as static Such current irregularities are produced by wire im-
fields. Hence the above discussion of a static barrier is perfections, namely, geometrical properties (wire edge
relevant also to these fields. Namely, the closer the atom roughness and surface roughness), and internal bulk in-
to the radiation source, the higher the gradients and the homogeneities. Sinceatomchiptrapsareformedbycan-
possibility to act locally and with greater immunity to celing the magnetic field B generated by the current
instabilities. density J0 at a specific distance from the wire d, the
As an example of quantitative considerations concern- minimum of the trapping potential lies along the wire
ing gradients, let us utilize a square cross section wire. direction xˆ. Variations in this potential δB (x) are then
Ifdistheatom-surfacedistanceandwewanttoincrease directly related to changes in the direction of the mag-
the lattice density by decreasing the trap-trap distance netic field generated by the wire imperfections.
linearlywithd,tomaintainthesametrapdepththegra- In previous work [22, 27], we concluded that in-
dients will obviously need to grow as 1/d. However, to ternal bulk inhomogeneities play a minor role in thin
avoid finite size effects, the wire width should also go wires (thickness h < 250 nm). For wide wires, surface
down linearly with d. This means that that the cross roughnessdominatesthepotentialcorrugation,butaswe
sectionwillgodownas1/d2. Maintainingaconstantcur- show, edge roughness dominates for narrow wires. Con-
rent density, this also means that the current goes down sequently,asweareinterestedinnarrowwiresinorderto
as 1/d2 canceling the natural gradient growth which is avoid finite size effects as discussed above, here we need
proportionaltod2. Wethusseethatinordertoreapthe to consider only current deviations due to edge rough-
benefitsofasmallatom-surfacedistanceintermsofhigh ness since the wires considered are thinner and narrower
density lattices, one requires growing current densities, than h ≈ w < 250 nm. In Appendix A the theory for
and indeed it has been shown that smaller cross section narrow wires is detailed. A general theory for all wire
wires enable higher current densities [53] (see also Fig. dimensions is presented in [27].
15c). InFig.5,onemayviewthecalculateddirectionalvari-
Finally, it is noted above that in order to avoid fi- ations of the magnetic field |δB x /B 0 |, generated by the
nitesizeeffectswhichdegradethetrapgradient,thewire trapping wire, as a function of the atom-surface dis-
width should be on the same scale as the atom-surface tance d for several wire cross-sections. The edge rough-
distance, i.e. fortheabovenotedheightsofd(cid:46)1−2µm ness amplitude is measured from our fabricated wires
(see Fig. 3) one requires a micron-scale wire. As will be and was found to be frequency-independent [α = 0 in
shown in the following, it is advantageous to utilize even Eq. (20)] with a measured root-mean-square deviation
smaller wire dimensions, namely nanowires. This will of 2 nm between 100−800 nm [Let us note that in the
enable improving operational parameters at the above case of edge roughness with 1 power spectrum (α = 1),
heights,ordecreasingtheatom-surfacedistanceevenfur- the directional variations of the magnetic field δB /B
therwithouthinderingeffects. If,inthefuture,vdWand willbeanorderofmagnitudehigher(8×10−3 compared
to 7 × 10−4 at d = 0.6µm), and will lead to signifi- Material engineering for potential corrugations
cantlylargerdensityperturbations.]. Inaccordancewith
Eq. (20), we see that, for a given edge roughness δyrms
c One way to solve the problem is through better fabri-
(wherey isthepositionofthecenterofthewire),smaller
c cationofthestandardgoldwires. InFig. 6,comparative
wiresproduceonlyslightlylargermagneticcorrugations.
dataispresentedshowingthatdifferentmethodsmayde-
We also see that the influence of the surface rough-
liver very different corrugation magnitudes. The lift-off
nessδz (x,y)isnegligibleforthenarrowwiresdiscussed
± methodusedbyBGUseemstobethebesttodate. How-
in this work due to the suppression of long wavelengths
ever, more work is required to improve edge roughness.
in the magnetic corrugations [27].
Another route to minimizing static corrugations is by
different choices of wire material. An example of a class
materials that may reduce electron scattering are elec-
trically anisotropic materials [27]. Here, low transverse
conductance will suppress scattering into the transverse
direction. One should remember that it is exactly this
kind of scattering which causes potential corrugations.
In Fig. 7 a calculation is presented showing that not
FIG. 5: (Color Online) Directional variation of the magnetic
fields|δB /B |,calculatedfromEq.(16)asafunctionofthe
atom-surfacedistanced. Weconsiderwireswithsquarecross-
sections of 50−200 nm and the narrow-wire approximation
presented in Eq. (20). The same edge roughness is used for
calculating the magnetic variations for all the wires. The
small differences amongst the wires, despite relatively higher
edgeroughnessofthenarrowerwires,correspondstoEq.(20) FIG. 6: (Color Online) Comparison of different atom chip
in which only the absolute quantity δyrms appears. These magnetic potential roughness measurements. Data is taken
differences are smallest for d (cid:29) w and become larger as d from figures in the published literature and PhD theses, and
approaches w. The inset shows the directional variation of displayed with color codes according to the experimental
the magnetic field at a fixed height of d = 0.6µm and for group. Filledsymbolsdenoterms values, anddatadisplayed
a fixed wire thickness of h = 0.1µm, where we plot the in- as open symbols are peak to valley maximum height of the
fluenceofedgeroughness(solidcurve)andsurfaceroughness roughness. Sussex: datafromagoldcoatedcopperwire[19];
(dashedcurve)overawiderangeofwirewidthsw. Theeffect Orsay: data from an electro plated wire [20], and data from
of the surface roughness drops strongly for narrower wires, a 5 wire setup on an evaporated gold chip; Tu¨bingen: data
since long wavelengths of the magnetic corrugations are sup- fromelectroplatedwires(PhDthesis,J.Fortagh);Melbourne:
pressed [27]. Hence, for nanowires magnetic variations are data from a permanent magnet atom chip [56]; MIT: data
completely dominated by edge roughness. Taken from [48] from electro plated wires; WIS/Heidelberg (HD): chips fab-
CopyrightIOPPublishingLtd. Reproducedwithpermission. ricated at the Weizmann Institute of Science (WIS): a 100
µm wire [57], 2003 data from various 10 µm wires [58, 59].
The open triangles give the peak to valley of the worst ever
roughnessobservedinHD:a10µmwire(PhDthesis,L.Della
Pietra). BGU/HD: Data from 3 different wires fabricated at
We thus find that as the atom-surface distance be-
Ben-GurionUniversity(BGU)andanalyzedinHD[22]. The
comes closer, the corrugation amplitude increases. Fur-
lines show the limits of maximal roughness allowed in order
thermore, as the distance decreases shorter and shorter tobeabletoreachtheone-dimensionalregimeofµ<(cid:126)ω for
wavelengths affect the potential, and hence on the scale different wire widths [57]. Taken from [16] Copyright Wiley-
ofasinglequbitsiteorinthedistancebetweentwoqubit VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permis-
sites, significant potential changes may arise. sion.
µ , and ω are the electrical conductivity, permeability
of free space, and the radiation frequency, respectively)
is much larger than both the atom-surface distance d
and the wire thickness h. At room-temperature the skin
depth of Au at 1 MHz is on the order of 70 µm. The
electricallyanisotropicmaterials,whichwillbediscussed
in the following, usually have a much higher resistivity,
and their skin depths are orders of magnitude larger at
the same frequencies (e.g. for graphite δ ≈ 1 mm). The
quasi-static approximation thus applies even better to
the latter. This approximation has been corroborated
to a high degree of accuracy in experiment [24, 31] and
theory [66].
Let us briefly review the basic theory. The thermal
radiationcouplestotheatoms’magneticmomentbythe
FIG.7: (ColorOnline)Foracurrentflowingthroughanelec-
ZeemaninteractionV ((cid:126)x,t)=−µ·B(cid:126) ((cid:126)x,t),whereµisthe
trically anisotropic wire, the perturbation wavefront angle θ,
magnetic dipole moment operator. This operator can be
giving rise to maximum transverse electron scattering, will
depend on the ratio r between the transverse and longitu- written for convenience as µ = µ B g F F, with µ B Bohr’s
dinal resistivities. The two-dimensional maps show the pre- magneton,g theLand´efactoroftheappropriatehyper-
dictedatomicdensityaboveawireintheextremecasesθ=0 fine level, and F the total spin operator. As the mag-
(r (cid:28) 1), θ = 90 (r (cid:29) 1), and the isotropic case θ = 45 netic field noise is random in time and space it averages
(r = 1). Bottom inset: the magnetic corrugation amplitude
to zero, and its effect is expressed through its two-point
asafunctionofθ,whichissuppressedwhenr isgreaterthan
correlation function (cid:104)V ((cid:126)x ,t)V ((cid:126)x ,t(cid:48))(cid:105), between differ-
one. Taken from [27]. See Ref. [28] for additional details. 1 2
ent points in time t,t(cid:48) and space (cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x .
The field and magnetic moment being vectors, one ac-
only do these materials change the pattern of scattering, tually needs the cross-correlations between their compo-
but they also suppress their amplitude considerably. nents to characterize the different processes induced by
the noise (spin-flips, heating, and decoherence). It fol-
lows from time-dependent perturbation theory that the
JOHNSON NOISE rate for a transition from an initial state |0(cid:105) to a final
state |f(cid:105) of the system is given by [67]
Letusnowcontinuewiththeanalysisofourcasestudy
concerning the benefits awarded by material science and Γ
engineering. As current-carrying wires require metallic
layers, let us analyze possible sources for AC fluctua- × (cid:104)(cid:104)0|µ B ((cid:126)x,t)|f(cid:105)(cid:104)f|µ B ((cid:126)x,t(cid:48))|0(cid:105)(cid:105)
tions, i.e. noise. Such fluctuations can arise from tech-
nical noise in the wires or thermally activated electron where the indices i,j label the Cartesian components of
currents, and may cause trap loss (spin-flip), climbing themagneticfield. Theargument(cid:126)xofthemagneticfield
the vibrational level ladder (heating) and dephasing (de- in Eq. (3) is the atomic position. The matrix elements
coherence). thus involve spatial (overlap) integrals over the spatial
The theory describing the affect of thermal noise wavefunctionandmagneticfield(e.g.seeEq. (9)below).
[60, 61] on ultra cold atoms is now well established for These integrals can be written in terms of the two-point
isotropicmaterials(e.g. [3,62–65]). Muchoftheexisting correlationfunctionofthemagneticfield. Theintegralof
theory was developed and explained by Carsten Henkel. this correlation function over the time difference (t−t(cid:48))
Other models, based for example on non-local electrody- is related to the cross-spectral density Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω ) of
namics, have also been developed [6]. the magnetic fluctuations at positions (cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x , and at the
The method typically used, incoherently adds up ele- transition frequency ω [62, 68]. This is defined as
mentarycurrentsourcesinthematerial,withinthequasi-
static approximation [63]. Although approximate (up to Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω)≡ (4)
corrections on the order of a factor 2), this approach can (cid:90) ∞
beusedtoobtainclosed-formsolutionsformanywirege- ≡ d(t−t(cid:48))e−iω(t−t(cid:48))(cid:104)B i ((cid:126)x 1 ,t)B j ((cid:126)x 2 ,t(cid:48))(cid:105),
ometries. This is in contrast to methods based on Green −∞
functions, which are accurate but limited to simple ge- or equivalently by
ometries such as a half-space or a laterally infinite layer.
It should be noted that the quasi-static approximation (cid:104)B∗((cid:126)x ,ω)B ((cid:126)x ,ω(cid:48))(cid:105)=2πδ(ω−ω(cid:48))Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω).
(cid:112) i 1 j 2 B 1 2
is valid when the skin depth δ = 2/σ µ ω (where σ , (5)
In cases where the spatial degrees of freedom can be spin decoherence rate can thus be written as
consideredclassically,(cid:126)xinEq. (3)canbetakenastheco-
ordinateoftheatoms,givingrisetoaposition-dependent (cid:107)
transition rate between spin states. Instead of the wave spin decoherence 2(cid:126)2 (cid:107)
functionoverlapintegrals,thecoordinatesarethentaken (cid:10) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:11)
as (cid:126)x =(cid:126)x . For calculating at the trap center one takes
= 2(cid:12)µ (cid:107)(cid:12)2 − 1(cid:12)µ (cid:107)(cid:12)1 being the differential
1 2 magneticmomentofthetwotrappedstates,andS ((cid:126)x;0)
(cid:126)x =(cid:126)x =(cid:126)x [69]. (cid:107)
1 2 the low-frequency limit parallel component of the noise
The noise power spectrum Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω ) is quite flat
B 1 2 0f spectrum,atthetrapcenter(cid:126)x. Thisdecoherenceratecan
at all relevant frequencies which correspond for exam-
be measured from the reduced contrast of interference
ple to transitions between Zeeman magnetic sub-levels
fringes in a series of Ramsey spectroscopy experiments,
(radio-frequency), or the trap vibrational states (Hz to
performed as a function of the atom-surface distance. In
kHz range). Hence a low-frequency limit ω → 0 can
0f fact, long coherence times have already been measured
be taken. If this spectrum is not flat in the relevant fre-
close to the surface [73]. This measurement puts an up-
quency range, the time dependence of loss and decoher-
per limit on the decoherence rate as other processes may
ence processes is more complicated and does not reduce
mask the dephasing due to Johnson noise (e.g. inhomo-
to a simple rate [62].
geneous magnetic field) [74].
Spin-flips are transitions from trapped (|0(cid:105)) to un-
For the case of a spatially separated superposition
trapped(|f(cid:105))internalstates. Thesestatesareeigenstates
state, therateofdecoherenceoftherelativephaseofthe
of the spin operator component parallel to the quanti-
atomic states between two points(cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x involves the cor-
zation axis, defined by the static trapping field at the
relation function of the difference in the magnetic fields
bottom of the trap (we neglect the magnetic field direc-
B ((cid:126)x ,t)−B ((cid:126)x ,t(cid:48)), and can be written as
(cid:107) 1 (cid:107) 2
tion deviations at the edges of the trap). Due to the
form of the dipole moment operator µ i , the Zeeman in- µ2
teraction can induce a spin-flip only when the direction γ = [S +S −2S ], (8)
spatial decoherence 2(cid:126)2 11 22 12
of the magnetic field fluctuation is perpendicular to the
quantizationaxis. Hence,inthiscase,wecanrewrite(3) wherewedenoteforconvenienceS =S ((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω →0),
ij (cid:107) i j
as and assume a correlation spectrum symmetric in (cid:126)x , (cid:126)x
and flat in frequency. We again take only the field com-
γ = (cid:88) µ l µ mSlm((cid:126)x;ω ), (6) ponents parallel to the quantization axis, that shift the
spin flip (cid:126)2 B 0f
l,m=⊥ relative phase between the two parts of the wave func-
tion. In Eq. (8) µ is the magnetic moment matrix ele-
where we sum over the perpendicular components l,m mentofthesingleinternalstate. Thelow-frequencylimit
only, and take the matrix elements µ l = µ B g F (cid:104)0|F l |f(cid:105) is valid here as the “scattering cross section” for transi-
of the dipole moment between the states |0(cid:105) and |f(cid:105). tions involved in the decoherence process is in practice
The spin-flip rate can be measured from the lifetime of independent of the frequency [62, 65].
a magnetic micro-trap, and by varying the trap distance Thisdecoherenceratecanbemeasuredbystudyingthe
onecandiscriminatelossduetosurfaceinducedmagnetic interferencepatterncontrastreductionindouble-wellex-
fieldfluctuations, againsttraplossofdifferentorigin[19, periments [49, 75], where the atom cloud is separated in
31, 70–72]. twoparts,whicharethenheldatafixedseparationfora
Decoherence or dephasing of a quantum superposition giventime. Theinterferencepatternisobtainedbyover-
state can occur without changing the occupation of the lapping the cloud parts upon release from the trap. The
states involved in the superposition, affecting only the interference contrast is directly related to the product
phase. Wedistinguishbetweenspindecoherenceandspa- of split time and decoherence rate; it can be measured
tial decoherence. The former involves the change of the as a function of the atom-surface distance by repeating
relative phase of two internal states (|1(cid:105) and |2(cid:105)) in a the measurement at different heights. It is interesting
superposition at the same spatial location (cid:126)x, while the to note that while quite a lot of theory has been done,
latter involves the change of the relative phase of two spatialdephasingonatomchipshasnottothisdaybeen
spatially separated components of the atom cloud (posi- measured. This is probably due to the fact that most
tions(cid:126)x and(cid:126)x ),trappedinthesameinternalstate. Here cold atom experiments utilize a BEC, and in this system
we shall consider only ‘classical dephasing’ in which the phasediffusionduetoatom-atominteractionisveryfast.
phase change arises from the fluctuations in the Zeeman This measurement is of great interest as the correlation
shift. Such shifts occur, to lowest order, for magnetic lengths of the noise need to be examined carefully. This
field fluctuations parallel to the atom’s magnetic dipole numbermayhaveadominanteffectonwhattheN-qubit
moment. Hence for both types of decoherence processes dephasing time would be [76–79].
we need only the parallel component of the same power Finally, heating of the trapped atoms (as a result of
spectrum appearing in the spin-flip case (Eq. (6)). The exciting external degrees of freedom while retaining the
sameinternalstate)canalsobecausedbythecouplingto crystaldefectsandimpuritiesandaphononcontribution
the thermal radiation. The transition rate of atoms ini- ρ [24]. By manipulating the relative strength of these
tially in the ground vibrational state |0(cid:105) to higher states two terms we may engineer the ratio T/ρ as a function
|f(cid:105) with energy splitting (cid:126)ω is of the form [62] of temperature. In Fig. 10 this ratio is presented as
a function of the amount of defects introduced into the
µ2 (cid:90) material.
Γ = (cid:107) d(cid:126)x d(cid:126)x M∗ ((cid:126)x )M ((cid:126)x )S ((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω ),
0→f (cid:126)2 1 2 f0 1 f0 2 (cid:107) 1 2 0f To conclude this first example of how material engi-
(9) neering may alter the hindering effect of Johnson noise,
where we find once more the spin operator matrix ele- the expected lifetime as a function of atom-surface dis-
mentµ inthedirectionparalleltothequantizationaxis, tance for different temperatures is presented in Fig. 11.
and now also the wave functions of the levels involved in Toverifythetheoreticalcalculation, acomparisontoex-
the transition M ((cid:126)x) = ψ∗((cid:126)x)ψ ((cid:126)x). The spatial inte- perimental results is also made. As can be seen, more
gration here provides a probe of the spatial correlation thananorderofmagnitudeimprovementinlifetimemay
of the magnetic field noise. In practice, it is enough to beachievedbysimplyintroducingdefectsintothemate-
consider transitions from the ground state to either of rial.
the first two excited levels [3]. As a second example for the potential advantages of
Thus, we see that the important term common to all materialengineeringforQCletusnowcalculatethepos-
rates is the spectral density of the magnetic field fluctu- sible suppression of the qubit dephasing by utilizing an
ations or power spectrum Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω). This quantity anisotropicmaterialinsteadofanormalmetal. Although
holds all of the relevant information about the magnetic realistic hyperfine qubits will most likely use states be-
field fluctuations leading to the harmful processes, while tween which only second-order Zeeman shifts and higher
theothertermsineachoftheratesdescribethecoupling exist, for simplicity we shall use two qubit states differ-
ofthenoisetotheatomsthroughthemagneticdipolemo- entiated by a first-order Zeeman shift.
ment. Furthermore, we see that a measurement of either As presented in the previous section, the noise power
the spin or spatial decoherence rates, or of the heating spectrumisrelatedtothecrosscorrelationfunctionofthe
rate, will give strong indications to any of the other two magnetic field fluctuations [Eqs. (4),(5)]. Before calcu-
of these three processes, as they all depend on the noise lating this correlation function, we define the coordinate
power of the same field component. system such that the wire length L is along the xˆ direc-
One may summarize these results with an example, as tion, its width w along the yˆdirection, and its thickness
presented in Fig. 8, showing the increasing spin-flip rate h along zˆ. As in typical Ioffe-Pritchard magnetic traps,
asafunctionofdecreasedatom-surfacedistance. Aqual- a non-zero field at the trap bottom polarizes the atoms
itatively similar behavior is found for heating and deco-
herence,asthenoiseamplitudeincreaseswithdecreasing
distance.
Material engineering for Johnson noise
Typically, the noise spectrum S is proportional to the
ratio T/ρ of the surface temperature and the surface re-
sistivity [62]. This seems to indicate that cooling the
surface would not be advantageous as typically resistiv-
ity is linear with temperature. In fact, as is shown in
Fig. 9, cooling of normal metals even worsens the sit-
uation. Although the eventual goal should be to utilize
materialsciencesoastorealizeanoperationalQCdevice FIG. 8: (Color Online) Rate of spin-flips in a microtrap
at room temperature, cooling down to 4K should still be above a planar metal substrate. The black solid lines are
considered as technologically feasible. Let us therefore due to the near field noise generated by thermally excited
currents (Johnson noise) in the substrate. The dots are an
analyze the situation at low temperatures for standard
exact numerical calculation from [64]. Larmor frequencies
conductors.
To avoid complications of magnetic permeability and
chosen. The red dash-dotted lines describe the noise due to
hysteresis of the chip, let us consider here only nonmag- technical fluctuations in the electric current of a side guide.
neticmetals(havingnolong-rangemagneticorder). The The current noise is assumed at shot noise level (0 dB) or 20
resistivityofthesemetalsisessentiallyasumoftwocon- dBaboveshotnoise. Theguideheightdisloweredbyramp-
tributionsρ=ρ +ρ : atemperatureindependentresid- ingdownthewirecurrentI withaconstantratioI/dandat
fixed bias field B =100G. Taken from [62].
ual resistivity ρ , due to scattering of charge carriers by b
along the wire, and so the quantization axis in our anal- the conductivity anisotropy σ /σ actually does not
ysis is along the xˆ axis. enter. With the other choice, having the badly conduct-
We can make a distinction between two types of ing axis along the wire width (dashed-dotted blue), we
anisotropic materials. Materials with a ‘layered conduc- get a reduction of about one order of magnitude for a
tance’ are relativelygood conductorsalong twoaxes and smallwiregeometry. Materialsthatarequasi-1Dconduc-
have one axis of bad conductance: σ (cid:28) σ ∼ σ . tive have a much larger potential for noise suppression:
We always assume that the wire is aligned to one axis for comparable ‘bad axes’, σ ∼ σ (cid:28) σ , Eq. (10)
of good conductance, so that current may flow easily scales inversely with the anisotropy ratio r = σ /σ
and create a magnetic trap. Materials that have only which may be very large. The suppression is somewhat
one direction of good conductance, σ ∼ σ (cid:28) σ or more pronounced in the extreme case σ (cid:28)σ (cid:28)σ .
yy zz xx zz yy xx
σ (cid:28) σ (cid:28) σ , will be denoted as ‘quasi-1D conduc- The reduction of the decoherence and heating rates
tors’. A detailed treatment of the anisotropic material is illustrated in Fig. 12 for the cases discussed above.
and the noise it induces, is presented in Appendix B. We plot the spin decoherence rate (7) for a superposi-
In contrast to the case of spin-flips, the decoherence tion state of the hyperfine levels |F =2,m =2(cid:105) and
andheatingrates,Eqs. (7,8,9),dependonlyonthenoise |F =2,m =1(cid:105) in the ground state of 87Rb. The
intheparallelfieldcomponentB . Thiscomponentmay anisotropicconductorischosensuchthatthelargestcon-
be strongly reduced for highly anisotropic materials. To ductivity value σ coincides with the one for Au, an
quantify this, consider the ratio isotropic conductor taken as reference. The calculated
rates for some specific materials are also given. It can
B x an x iso = σ zz X yy +σ yy X zz, (10) be seen that quasi-1D materials are much more appeal-
Biso σ (X +X ) ingtosuppressheatinganddecoherence,althoughabout
xx xx yy zz
one order of magnitude can already be gained with lay-
where σ ii are the conductivities and X ii the geometry- ered materials, even at a relatively small anisotropy. In
dependent factors (see Appendix B), and where the ref- addition, for most anisotropic materials, even the best
erence level is an isotropic conductivity set to the ‘good direction conducts worse than Au; therefore the rates
axis’, σ 0 = σ xx . The possible improvements depend on presented in this graph even for layered materials are
therelativemagnitudesoftheanisotropicconductivities. smaller than for Au.
Fourcasescanbedistinguished,asillustratedinFig. 12.
To conclude, heating and decoherence may be sup-
Formaterialswithlayeredconductance,theworstchoice
pressed by several orders of magnitude even at room
is to have the second good conducting axis in the chip
temperature, by using electrically anisotropic materials
plane, along the wire’s width: σ ∼σ (cid:29)σ (dashed
yy xx zz for current-carrying structures on atom chips.
red line). The ratio (10) then tends to (1+X /X )−1
yy zz It is interesting to note that the anisotropic material
which is not significantly smaller than unity and where
FIG. 10: Temperature dependence of the ratio T/ρ (normal-
FIG.9: Temperaturedependenceofthenormalizedmagnetic ized to its value for gold at 300 K) for silver and its alloys
noiseforwiresmadeofcopper(circles),silver(triangles)gold withgold: puresilver(squares),andwith0.1%gold(circles),
(crosses) and niobium (squares). The noise is normalized to 0.25% (triangles), 0.5% (inverted triangles), 1% (diamonds),
the value for gold at T =300 K. Inset: temperature depen- 2% (stars), and 5% (crosses). Note the difference compared
denceoftheresistivity(extractedfrom[80]). Takenfrom[24]. to Fig. 9. Taken from [24].
hardlyhelpswiththespin-fliprateasforthetwoperpen-
dicular components B and B , which are responsible
for spin-flips, we find that both mix the highly conduct-
ingσ andthelowconductivityterms. Thegeometrical
factors X have been analyzed in detail (see appendix
A in [24]) for the case of rectangular wires. From this
analysis it emerges that for any reasonable wire geome-
try, one cannot obtain the necessary situation in which
the X and X factors are small relative to X [see
Eq. (30)]. This is presented in Fig. 13. Thus the main
difference in the noise components is due to the differ-
ence in conductivity terms, where the conductivity σ
is dominant. Consequently, the improvement to the trap
lifetimeusinganisotropicmaterialsatroomtemperature
is expected to be at most on the order of ∼2.
Let us now briefly review some additional alternatives
to normal metals:
Carbon Nano Tubes (CNTs) are an example of such
FIG. 12: (Color Online) Lines: Spin decoherence rate
a conductor. CNTs are able to hold a current density
γ as a function of electrical anisotropy r =
which is 2-3 orders of magnitude higher than that for spin decoherence
σ /σ ,forlayeredandquasi-1Dconductingmaterials. Trap
gold. Consequently, although they have a very small xx yy
andwireparametersared=5µm,w=10µm,h=2.15µm,
cross section, they may hold enough current to create and a surface temperature of T =300 K. For these lines, the
stable atom traps [26, 85, 86]. As they are crystalline goodconductivityalongthewirewasassumedtobeidentical
tothatofAu. Forlayeredmaterialshavingthebadlyconduct-
ing axis along the wire thickness (dashed red), only a slight
improvementisgained,andthedependenceontheanisotropy
isnegligible. Ifthebadlyconductingaxisisalongthewidthof
the wire (dashed-dotted blue), the improvement is more pro-
nounced, but still saturates at relatively low anisotropy. For
quasi-1D materials (dotted green - quasi-1D with both low
conductivity terms of the same order; solid black - the more
extreme case having σ (cid:28) σ (cid:28) σ , where we assumed
σ ≈ σ /r), the suppression is much more significant. For
high anisotropy the decoherence rate scales as 1/r with the
anisotropy. Points: Examples of specific materials, not nor-
malized to Au. Taken from [28].
in nature, they may also reduce the static corrugation.
Following from their small amount of material the CP
force may also be suppressed, especially if the tubes are
made to be suspended. In addition, contrary to normal
metals, CNTs do not have a broad absorption spectrum
FIG. 11: (Color Online) Comparison of trapping lifetimes of and so they may be put close to optical high finesse ele-
87Rb atoms above a copper wire on an atom chip [31] with a
mentswithouthinderingtheirqualities. Letusnotethat
theoreticalcalculation(solidline). Predictedlifetimesarealso
CNTsmayalsobeusedforotherpurposesinthecontext
shown for a similar wire made of an alloy of Ag with 6% Au
of atom optics [87, 88]. See [16] for additional details.
content, cooled down to T =77 K (dashed) and 4.2 K (dash-
dotted). Inbothcasestheresistivitywastakenequaltogold Another material potentially advantageous for QC is
resistivityatT=300K,ρ Au =2.21µΩ·cm(samepenetration the superconductor [23, 89–94]. These materials are
depth). The needed gold concentrations are estimated by
expected to give rise to orders of magnitude less static
x=5.4%andx=6%,respectively. Notethatthecalculation
scattering and noise. The drawbacks of superconductors
presented here differs from the one made in [31]. Van der
include the cooling itself, the sensitivity to fabrication
Waals forces are not taken into account. Let us also mention
thatthemaximumnoisereductionfactorof70expectedfrom (e.g. the transition temperature is very sensitive to con-
thecalculationsisnotvisibleduetotheeffectofthetechnical taminations), DC fields and noise created by vortices,
noise and/or background gas collisions limiting the lifetime and current inhomogeneity (most of the current is in the
in this experiment to a maximum of τ tech =2.5s [81]. Taken wires edges). As trapping atoms in the field of vortices
from [24].
hasbeenachieved[95,96],onemayevencontemplatethe
loadingofalatticeoftrapsabovealatticeofvortices. For arefeasible. Themainadvantagesofpermanentmagnets
more details of the state-of-the-art the reader is referred arethelackofcorrugationsduetoelectronscatteringand
to Ref. [16]. As noted previously, the greatest challenge the suppressed Johnson noise due to the low conductiv-
to materialengineering is to enablelong coherence times ity of the material, as well as technical noise due to the
at room temperature, while maintaining a fast enough lack of current. The main drawback is the demagnetiza-
computer clock time. tionwithtemperatureandtime,andtheweakerdynamic
Othermetalliclayersgobeyondcurrent-carryingstruc- control of the fields.
tures and may include permanent magnets (which may Additional metallic structures not carrying current
alsobemadeofnonmetallicorhighresistivitymaterials) may include charged dots where the attractive poten-
[97–99]. Recentwork[98],alsodescribedinthisissue,has tial is balanced by magnetic fields [100], a magnetic mir-
realized a dense two dimensional array of trapped atoms ror [101] or evanescent waves [102]. As an example of
anditseemsreasonabletoassumethatcontrollablegates suchalattice,anarrayoftrapsmadeoflocalizedelectric
fieldsbalancedbyanevanescentfieldispresentedinFig.
14. While this example evokes fabricated electrodes, an
advanced chip may utilize self assembled charged dots,
where the limiting factor would be the charge diffusion
rate.
Finally, we have not touched upon the issue of techni-
calnoise,namely,thecurrentfluctuationsinthecurrent-
carrying wire. The noise spectrum of the most funda-
mental noise limit, i.e. shot noise, increases as one over
the distance square [3, 62]. This of course implies that
goingclosetothesurfacemayposeaseriousproblem, in
FIG.14: (ColorOnline)Thechargedotschip: (a)twolayers
of crossing wires will provide a 2D array of point capacitors,
each layer connected to an opposite voltage. In our simula-
tion the wires are 1 µm apart while the layers are also 1 µm
apart. The wires are made of ITO and the insulating mate-
rial between the wires and between the layers is Si N (the
similarindexofrefractionwillsuppressdiffractionpatterns).
A prism is located below these two layers and the atoms are
above. This particular simulation assumes that each capac-
itor is charged with one electron in the top layer and one
positive hole in the bottom layer. (b-c) Trap potentials cal-
culatedwithabeamwaistof100µm,anincidentangleof65
degrees (the critical angle is 43.45), and λ = 778 nm (2 nm
detuning); the decay length of the evanescent wave is 72 nm.
The CP force is included. (b) A 2D contour plot of the trap
FIG. 13: (Color Online) Dependence of the geometrical fac- array(z=644nm). Thesurfacelaserpoweris28Wandthe
tors X ii on wire width and thickness. Top: Varying the wire frequencies are about 15 kHz in all directions. The depth is
widthw,whiled=5µm,andthewirethicknessish=1µm. 1.6 µK. The spontaneous emission rate at the center of the
Only X yy is reduced. Bottom: Varying h, while d = 5 µm, trap is 1 Hz. The number of atoms per trap is limited to 20
and w = 5 µm. All three factors are reduced. It can be (TF approximation). (c) The trap as a function of surface
seen that a situation where both X yy and X zz become much lightintensity(bluetoyellow): 20,25,30,40,50and60W(the
smaller than X xx is not obtained. This is because all three actual laser power needed will be much smaller as close to
X ii factorshavesimilarscalingonthewirethickness,thusre- the critical angle there is an enhancement of up to an order
ducing thickness does not lead to the desired situation. The ofmagnitude. Acavityconfigurationmayalsobeemployed).
trends are the same also for sub-µm atom-surface distances Exceptforthe20Wcurve,thetunnelingratesarenegligible.
(not shown). Taken from [84]. Simulation made by Yonathan Japha.
which case techniques aimed at achieving sub-shot noise are not analytically solvable and we will therefore carry
may have to be employed i.e. creating correlations be- out a separate examination of the CP potential emerg-
tween electrons (the mesoscopic community uses termi- ing from the Si+SiO planar wafer, as discussed also in
nology such as ”distribution function of current”). How- Ref.[85],andfromasimplifiedmodelthattakesthewire
ever,longbeforethislimitisreached,”normal”technical asaperfectlyconductingcircularcylinderofacertaindi-
noise,namelynoiseoriginatingfromthepowersupplyor ameter. We then take the sum of the two contributions
”picked-up” by the cables that feed the atom chip [103], as an estimate for the combined potential as a sort of
will need to be suppressed. The effect of this noise may pairwiseadditiveapproximation(PAA).Basedonearlier
beverydifferentfromthatoftheJohnsonnoisediscussed experiencefromtheplanartwo-layersystem,wemayan-
earlier. For example, contrary to the ”white noise” sce- ticipate that this approach should at least give the right
nario utilized for Johnson noise, technical noise may be order of magnitude for the CP potential.
”colored”. Such noise may, for example, cause asymmet- In general, the CP potential may be written in the
ric population transfers between the qubit states, if the form
potential is state dependent, as it is in the case of the
(cid:90) ∞
collisiongate[104]. Infact,ifthecenterfrequencyorthe U ((cid:126)x)=i(cid:126) dω α(ω)[Γ((cid:126)x,(cid:126)x,ω)−Γ ((cid:126)x,(cid:126)x,ω)],
shape of the noise are time dependent, this may cause −∞
population fluctuations, i.e. random walks on the z-axis
where α(ω) is the frequency-dependent atomic polariz-
oftheBlochsphere(contrarytotheequilibriumwhichis
ability and Γ(r,r,ω) is the trace over the Green’s tensor
reachedwithwhitenoise). Tothebestofourknowledge,
of the electromagnetic field at the same point r, with Γ
only one measurement compared Johnson and technical 0
being the Green’s tensor in empty space, responsible for
noise on the same chip [23].
a space-independent Lamb shift. For distances from the
dielectric or conducting object much larger than λ /2π,
where λ is the wavelength corresponding to the lowest
NANOFABRICATED WIRES 0
optical transition frequency, the CP potential generated
by a planar structure made from a layer of thickness t
Let us finalize the discussion concerning current-
with a dielectric constant (cid:15) atop an infinitely thick di-
carrying wires by analyzing the case of nanofabricated 1
electric layer of dielectric constant (cid:15) has the form (see
wires. Analyzing such wires is important when one 2
Refs. [48, 85])
wishes to answer the question of what is the smallest
possible atom-surface distance. The answer to this ques- (cid:126)cα 1
tionmayrevealthefidelitylimitsinducedbythecurrent- CP 2π z4 1 2
carryingwire onthesingle qubitand2-qubit operations.
In this context, nanofabricated wires are important, for where α 0 is the static atomic polarizability. The di-
example, asnotedpreviously, inordertoavoidfinitesize mensionless function F takes the single-layer limiting
effectswhichdegradetheproducedgradients. Smallerdi- value F ∼ 4 3 (cid:15) (cid:15) − +1 1 φ((cid:15)) with (cid:15) = (cid:15) 1 when z (cid:28) t, and
mensions are also advantageous for reducing the amount
of Johnson noise. In the following analysis we will also
take into account the CP force.
First,letusfamiliarizeourselveswithhowananofabri-
cated wire looks like and behaves. A test wire fabricated
at our facility and the calculated features of such a wire,
are present in Fig. 15.
Next, let us take into consideration the CP force. The
CP potential between a polarizable atom and dielectric
orconductingobjects[105]isoneofthefundamentalout-
comesofzero-pointvacuumfluctuations. Itemergesfrom
the fact that a dielectric or conducting object modifies
the modes of the electromagnetic (EM) field in its vicin- FIG. 15: (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of
ity, modes which interact with the atomic polarization. a1µmlong,20nmthickand50nmwidegoldwire. (b)Cal-
In our case, an attractive CP potential arises from the culated dependence of resistivity on wire dimensions (square
cross sections), based on the Fuchs-Sondheimer surface scat-
conducting gold nanowire and from the Si wafer coated
tering model. (c) Maximum current considered safe for
with a 100 nm thick SiO layer (used to prevent elec-
2 atomchip wire operation, calculated for different wire cross-
trical shorts). The CP potential reduces the potential
sections,assumingthenanowireresistivityρshownin(b)and
barrier for tunneling to the surface, thereby limiting the the temperature coefficient α for bulk gold. Taken from [48]
possibility of trapping atoms near the surface. CopyrightIOPPublishingLtd. Reproducedwithpermission.
The EM modes of the combined surface+wire system
from frequencies on the order of ω ∼ c/R. In our case,
where R < 1µm, the skin depth for a gold wire with
resistivity ρ = 2.2×10−8Ω·m is δ = (cid:112) 2ρ/µ ω (cid:46) 10
nm, which is much smaller than the width or thickness
of the nanowires considered. We can therefore use a
model where the wire is perfectly conducting (impene-
trable for EM waves), such that the EM Green’s tensor
ismuchsimplerthaninthegeneralcase. TheCPpoten-
tial is then given by
FIG. 16: (Color online) (a) F factor (∝ U CP (z) z4, see U (R)=− (cid:126)cα 0 1 F(a/R). (13)
text for details) for the bilayer system of thick Si coated CP 2π (R−a)4
by a 100 nm layer of SiO , similar to the system studied
in Ref. [85]. The exact calculation (solid curve) is compared For a/R>0.2 the function F is nearly linear, F(a/R)≈
tothesum(dashed)oftwoseparatesystems–theSiO 2 layer 0.53(a/R)+0.22, tending to F = 3 as R→a, where the
alone(dashed-dotted)andtheSilayeralone(dotted). Forthe surface of the cylinder is similar to a planar conducting
contribution of the Si layer the factor F would be constant
surface. In the opposite limit a/R(cid:28)0.1 the function F
forasystemofcoordinatesstartingatitstop(z=−100nm),
drops to zero as F(a/R) ∼ − 2 (see appendix in
but here it is rescaled to the coordinate system where z = 0 3log(a/R)
is at the top of the SiO layer (see text). The sum of the [48]).
twoseparatecontributionsover-estimatestheexactresultby Figure 16(b) again shows the factor F for the CP po-
about 8-15% over the relevant range. (b) F factor (again tentialfromtheplanar(i.e. Si+SiO )surfaceincompar-
rescaled to z = 0 at the top of the SiO 2 layer) for the pla- ison to F for cylindrical wires of different diameters 2a.
narwafer(solidcurve)reproducedfrom(a)andforperfectly
It is evident that the contribution of the wire is dom-
conducting cylindrical wires of diameters 2a = 50−200 nm
inant when the distance from the wire is less than 5-7
(broken curves) lying on the wafer surface. Two important
times the diameter of the wire. For larger distances the
reasonsforthedifferencesbetweenthewiresarethedifferent
atom-wiredistancesz−2a,whichissmallerforthickerwires, contributionofthewirefallstohalforlessthanthecon-
and the larger solid angle subtended by the wider wire. tribution of the surface. Given our experience with the
bilayersystem[85],weexpecttheexactcalculationofthe
wire+surface to deviate by the same order as we observe
with (cid:15) = (cid:15) 2 when z (cid:29) t, where φ((cid:15)) is on the order for the bilayer, namely, less than 20%. This degree of
of unity. F = 3 is obtained in the vicinity of a perfectly inaccuracy may also follow from the fact that the wires
conductingthicklayer. Inourcaseα 0 =47.3×10−24cm3 do not have circular cross-sections but square or rectan-
isthegroundstatestaticpolarizabilityofthe87Rbatom,
gular ones. Therefore we believe that taking the sum of
(cid:15) 1 =4 for the SiO 2 layer, and (cid:15) 2 =12 for the Si wafer. the two models can be expected to give at least an order
As stated above, we wish to compare contributions to of magnitude estimation of the CP potential.
the CP potential from the three different components Let us now calculate the tunneling to the surface. As
comprising the surface: the Si chip, the SiO 2 layer of a result of the CP potential, the magnetic barrier be-
thickness t, and the gold nanowire of thickness h. For tween the surface and the atoms is lowered, and atoms
this comparison to be meaningful, we require a common can tunnel through the barrier to the atomchip surface
reference for the distance variable z, which we define as or wire. Calculated tunneling lifetimes are presented in
the distance from the top of the SiO 2 surface. Then Fig. 17, where we use a weighted average of the tun-
the distance from the Si chip is z + 100 nm and the neling rate over all points in the (x,y) plane. For each
distance from the top of the gold nanowire is z − h. point(x,y)weusetheWKBapproximationfortunneling
To factor out the strong z−4 dependence, we plot the through a one-dimensional potential barrier along the z
quantity F(z) ≡ −U CP (z) (cid:126) 2 cα π 0 z4 in Fig. 16(a) for direction [85]:
the Si+SiO bilayer. This is compared to a sum of two
2 (cid:90) (cid:90)
models (shown separately in the figure): one where the Γ = dx dy P(x,y) ω (x,y)
half space for z < −100 nm is full of Si while the other
half is empty; and another in which only a 100 nm thick (cid:32) (cid:90) z2 (cid:114) 2m (cid:33)
SiO 2 layer exists, with empty space for z < −100 nm. (cid:126)2
The figure shows that simply summing the two poten-
tials over-estimates the exact result by 8-15% over the whereµisthechemicalpotentialinthecaseofensembles
relevant range, but it gives the right order of magnitude. ortheenergyinthecaseofsingleatoms,andtheintegra-
Next let us consider the CP potential for an atom at tionoverz isbetweentheclassicalturningpointsz (x,y)
a distance R from the center of a cylindrical conducting and z (x,y) defined by U(x,y,z ) = U(x,y,z ) = µ.
wire of radius a where we set a = h/2. It appears that Theweightedtunnelingprobabilityappearingintheinte-
the main contribution to the integral in Eq. (11) comes grandisgivenatanypointbyP(x,y)= 1 (cid:82) dzn(x,y,z),
wheren(x,y,z)istheparticledensityandthetransverse
frequencyω (x,y)= (cid:104)v2(cid:105)/2L(x,y)istheinverseofthe
average round-trip time for a particle moving between
the turning points [L(x,y) = z (x,y)−z (x,y)]. In our
example,thesequantitiesareallcalculatedbysolvingthe
Gross-Pitaevskii equation for 1000 atoms of 87Rb. In a
typical trap generated by a Z-shaped wire, most of the
tunneling occurs either at the center of the trap (where
the atoms are closest to the wire) or at the trap ends
(where the potential curves down towards the surface).
Because of the much higher atom density directly above
the wire, the lifetime is governed mostly by tunneling to
the wire rather than to the surface.
FIG. 18: (Color online) Trap lifetimes due to thermal noise-
inducedspin-flips,calculatedforatomstrappedatdistancesd
above wires with square cross sections of 25−200 nm. For
comparison, the lifetime 1 µm above a very wide wire would
be <10 ms.
transverse currents [106]. This is so because transverse
currents charge the edges and the induced potential acts
to suppress the currents. As surface induced decoher-
ence is dominated by transverse Johnson noise currents,
this may suppress decoherence by up to several orders of
magnitudeevenatroomtemperature(inthesamewayas
with anisotropic materials). For example, in Ref. [106] a
FIG. 17: (Color online) Tunneling lifetimes calculated for decoherence rate of Γ=0.03 s−1 is calculated for a typ-
a BEC of 1000 atoms in traps generated at different dis- ical magnetic trap at 10 µm atom-surface distance while
tances d, assuming a current of 40 µA passing through in Fig. 8 one finds for the spin-flip rate (which is very
a 50×50 nm trapping wire. This current is more than an similar to the decoherence rate) Γ=3−30 s−1.
order of magnitude below the maximum for such a nanowire
Letusalsobrieflymentiontheissueofmagneticpoten-
[Fig. 15(c)]. The solid and dashed curves are calculated as-
tialcorrugations. Onewouldexpectthatpotentialcorru-
suming surface-only and wire-only contributions to the CP
force respectively. Even though these CP forces are of the gations produced by edge roughness would grow consid-
same order of magnitude [Fig. 16(b)], the atomic density is erably as the edges come in close proximity to the atom.
muchhigherdirectlyabovethewire,sotunnelingtothewire However, as shown in Fig. 5, the rise is actually quite
ismuchfasterthantunnelingtotheSi+SiO 2 surface;thelat- moderate(forsquarecrosssections)asthesefluctuations
tertunnelingproceedsmostlyfromthecloudedges,wherethe
depend only on the variation of the center of the wire.
atomicdensityismuchlower. Thedottedcurveiscalculated
Furthermore, the increase in potential corrugations due
forapotentialcombiningthewireandsurfaceCPforces;the
to edge roughness for narrower wires is somewhat bal-
corresponding tunneling lifetime is shorter yet because the
trapbarrierisreducedalongtheentirewireandatthecloud anced by the decrease of the other two sources: in Ref.
edges. A typical Majorana lifetime of 2 s is drawn for refer- [27] and in Fig. 5 it has been shown that narrower wires
ence. Usinghighercurrentsforsuchwireswouldincreasethe will induce less surface (or bulk inhomogeneity) induced
tunneling lifetime. potential corrugations. This is so due to the discreteness
of the resistance wave numbers k ,k when the random
Next, let us also utilize the theory of Johnson noise as resistance fluctuations are analyzed as waves by Fourier
described previously, and present in Fig. 18 the spin-flip transformingthem. ForawirewithafinitelengthLand
lifetime expected in a trap formed by a nano wire. One width W, these wave numbers are integer products of
may clearly observe the much longer spin-flip lifetimes 2π/L and 2π/W. As a consequence of this discreteness,
due to the smaller cross sections. the corrugations at long wavelengths k W < 1 are sup-
It is quite interesting to note that narrow wires are pressed when the wire becomes narrower: the density of
expected to give rise to much less decoherence, not only k states becomes lower and no corresponding values of
becauseofthesmallamountofmaterial. Ithasbeenhy- k exist along the maximum scattering amplitude line of
pothesizedthatnarrowwiressuppressthermallyinduced k ∼k .
2.3.Discussionoftraplifetime 29
2.3.3 Dependence on skin depth
Fig.2.6 illustrates how the lifetime depends on the skin depth of the material, The atom is
trapped at 60µm away from the surface, and the spin loss is due to the transition F ,m =
| !
2,2 to F ,m = 2,1 . The solid curve corresponds to the bulk substrate (half space),
| ! | ! | !
the dashed lines and circles both correspond to a 1µm thick layer. The dashed lines show the
lifetime in the different regions as listed in Table 2.2. The circles are computed numerically.
The approximations are in a good agreement with the exact results, they only slightly under-
estimate the lifetime in the transition region. When the skin depth is less than the thickness
1µm, the bulk metal and the thin layer produce almost the same noise, because the source of
the noise mainly lies within one skin depth of the metal. In this region, the lifetime scales as
1/δ. Increasing the skin depth but keeping it less than √hz for the thin layer and less than z
for the bulk metal, the lifetime above the bulk metal still scales as 1/δ, whereas the lifetime
above the thin layer is proportinal to h/δ2, shorter than above bulk maetal. Similar result is
observed by Varpula & Poutanen (1984); Scheel et al. (2005). The asymptotic formula for the
regionδ √hz (thethirdcolumeinTable2.2),hasnotbegivenbefore,toourknowledge. In
the region √hz δ for the thin layer and z δ for the bulk metal, both lifetimes inrease as
δ2. The thin layer gives a longer lifetime than the bulk metal by a factor of z/h. The minimal
lifetimeisobtainedatδ √hz aboveathinlayerorδ = z aboveabulkmetal. Whenanatom
is trapped above a thin layer, we should avoid the atom-surface distance z = δ2/h. For a bulk
metal, we should avoid the atom-surface distance z = δ. The atom suffer the strongest noise
inthesetwocases.
Finally, let us note the possible affect of anisotropic
materials, mentioned previously, in the context of
nanowires. Metallic nanowires have limited maximum
current densities due to the increase in their wire resis-
tivity (Fig. 15) from diffusive scattering at the wire sur-
faces. However,surfacescatteringforananisotropicwire 1000
(where the surfaces are parallel to the good conductivity
axis) may be significantly smaller and will have less ef-
fectonthewireresistivity,henceenablinghighercurrent
densities than discussed above. One may even speculate
that at small dimensions the resistance relevant for the 10
current density and that relevant for the Johnson noise
may become decoupled.
Obviouslyitshouldbenotedthatnano-sizedwiresmay 0.1 1 10 100 1 mm
skin depth
havenumerouslimitationsnotpresentedherewhichneed
tobeconsideredaccordingtothespecificimplementation
in mind. For example, introducing RF or MW currents
into such wires may require more input power due to
reduced impedance matching.
Letussummarize: Wehavediscussedtopicsrelevantto
current-carrying wires including static and time depen-
dentfluctuationsandtheCPforce. Beyondthemethods
discussed above to suppress the hindering effects, one
may speculate that additional methods may be found.
Asanoutlookforfutureresearch,letusbrieflygivesome
examples of what these methods may be [107].
• CPforce: Therehavebeenseveralexperimentsand
theorypapersshowingthatvdWandCPforcescan
bemanipulatedbychoiceofmaterialandgeometry,
and may even change sign [108–116].
Whileitiscompletelyunclearhowthiscouldbeim-
plemented in atom chips, the wealth of work done
on this topic justifies an in depth look. Could, for
example, the engineering of surface plasmons or of
meta-materialsachievesomekindofstealthcoating
that would cover a broad enough range of frequen-
cies, so as to suppress reflection by absorbtion or
perfect matching of the dielectric constants?
• Johnson noise: The issue of Johnson noise seems
to have several subtleties. Some of these may be
viewedinFig. 19. Atlargeskindepthsthelifetime
behaves as expected and goes up with skin depth
simply because large skin depth mean small con-
ductance and therefore a low level of noise. At
medium skin depths, it is quite counterintuitive
that a thin layer would enable smaller lifetimes
than bulk. At small skin depths the situation is
also not completely trivial. At very small skin
depths,thelifetimeofathinlayerbehavesasahalf
space and goes up simply because no noise beyond
athinlayeratthesurfaceofthemetalvolumeman-
ages to reach the atom. The latter is hinting that
if one manages to engineer a material that has a
verysmallskindepthattherelevantfrequenciesfor
Figure 2.6: Lifetime vs. skin depth. The atom-surface distance is 60µm. Solid line: bulk
FIG. 19: (Color Online) Lifetime vs. skin depth. The atom-
substrate (half spacseu)r.faDceasdhisetadnlcieneiss6a0nµdmc.ircSloelisd: l1inµem: btuhlkicksublasytreart.eT(hhaelfdashed lines show the
approximationsinTsapbaclee).2.D2a,sthheedlcinirecslaensdacrierccleos:m1pµumtetdhicnkulmayeerr.icTahlleyd.ashed
lines show approximations (Table 2.2 in [117]). The circles
arecomputednumerically. Takenwithpermissionfrom[117].
Similarresultswereobtainedin[118]. Moreonlayervs. half
space may be found in [119].
spin-flips, thiscouldsignificantlysuppressJohnson
noise. If we cover our metal structures with such a
”cut-off”low-passfiltermaterialforwhichtheskin
depth is larger than the ”filter” coating thickness
for frequencies close to zero (so that DC magnetic
fieldsorslowrampscouldreachtheatom), andfor
which the skin depth is much smaller than the ”fil-
ter”coatingthicknessforhigherfrequencies(start-
ing from say 1 MHz, the typical Zeeman splitting
in atom traps), this would indeed manage to solve
the problem of Johnson noise. It remains to be
seen if meta-materials may be designed with these
characteristics.
In addition, what is the origin of the ”kink” at a
skindepthof1µmwhichisalsothethicknessofthe
wire? Aplausibleexplanationisthatsomeeffectof
the bottom surface of the metallic layer comes into
play. This may hint at the fact that the bottom
surface, or the interface between two materials at
that surface, or some interference between the top
andbottomsurfaceofthemetallicwire, hassignif-
icant importance. Such effects have been discussed
in [120–122]. Let us note that Fig. 13 was made
withoutincludingsuchapossibleeffectofthethick-
ness. Understanding this effect may help think of
ways to utilize it for a reduction of the noise.
To conclude the discussion on current-carrying wires,
wemaynotethatwhileconductinglayers,wiresanddots,
offersignificantpotentialforQCintheirversatility,they
also pose, as we have seen, significant challenges. It is
FIG. 21: (Color Online) An ultra low mode volume Fabry-
P´erot configuration. The stable mode is achieved with two
FIG.20: (ColorOnline)Anexampleofacombinedelectrical-
2D mirrors. This configuration (presented in the figure in
photonicchip. a)Simulationofthecavitymodeinahexago-
an exaggerated manner in terms of mirror lengths) enables
nallatticephotoniccrystal. Thecavitymodeiscenteredand
verycloseproximitybetweenthemirrorsbeforemirror-mirror
well-localized about the defect hole. b) Sketch of a Photonic
contact is made. A clean path for atoms to enter the cavity
Band Gap (PBG) cavity with an integrated Ioffe microwire
is maintained (along the diagonal). The mode length is two
trap. The red dot shows the location of the trapped atom
optical half-wavelengths. Simulation carried out by Michael
within the defect hole. The PBG hole size is about 100 nm,
Rosenblit.
and the wire diameter and width would be about 10 and 1
µm, respectively. c) Cross-section of PBG cavity and Ioffe
trap through a line intersecting the defect hole. The trapped
atom depicted as a red dot in the center of panels (b) and atomsveryclosetothesurfaceofafibergivingrisetothe
(c) would be located inside the cavity field maximum at the possibility of fiber lattices on chips [126]. However, it is
center of the defect hole. Taken with permission from [124]. hardtoimaginethatfiberswillenablescalability. Letus
therefore focus in the following on monolithic schemes.
Monolithicschemesmaydealwithnearandfarpropa-
therefore fitting to also briefly speculate upon a com- gating fields as well as evanescent waves. Numerous im-
pletely different type of atom chip which is all optical, pressiveworksaredescribedin[16]andinthisissue. Our
i.e. completely made of dielectrics. ownwork[127]dealsmainlywithmicrodisksandtoroids
ashigh-Qdevicesforastronglight-atomcoupling. These
devices may simultaneously trap, manipulate and mea-
PHOTONICS sure atoms and so it may indeed be feasible to construct
all optical atom chips. First experiments with these de-
Although current-carrying elements are well poised to vices were done in 2006 by the groups of Vahala, Kimble
enable further advances (at room temperature or be- and Mabuchi [16]. Other ideas for all optical chips have
low), one may wish to look at alternatives even further also been made (e.g. [128]). The first real integration of
thanthechargedelectrodesorpermanentmagnets,both monolithic photonics with trapped atoms was made in
mentioned previously. One such alternative are all opti- the group of Ed Hinds [129].
cal chips. Recent advances in Cavity-QED experiments Material engineering may bring about the ability for
[123] clearly show that the control of light and atoms in completely novel geometries and functionalities. For ex-
the context of high quality optical elements is advanc- ample,astheabilitytoperform3Dfabricationadvances,
ing quickly. The technological challenge of miniaturiza- thepresentlyplanarchips,mayenjoy3Dstructuressuch
tion and monolithic fabrication, as well as integration, is as 3D stable mode light cavities (see Fig. 21). Another
nottobeunderestimated, butseemstohavenoinherent futuristic element would be curved blue detuned light
limits (beyond the fact that a minimal number of atoms mirrors enabling a stable cavity mode for matter-waves
is required in order to define a smooth index of refrac- [130]. Could this ”dark” trap turn out to be the least
tion). Indeed, photonics is an extremely fast advancing perturbing for the qubit?
field which will most probably be incorporated in most Material engineering may also bring about a photon-
scenarios as a tool supplementing the main technique of ics revolution in atom chips via sub-wavelengths optics
a future QC chip (an example of a combined photonic- and plasmons. The control of plasmons and plasmon-
electrical chip is presented in Fig. 20). As an in-depth emitted/absorbed/guided light by surface material and
analysis of the topic of photonics is beyond the scope of geometry engineering is quickly advancing [131]. Here,
this paper, let us in the following briefly speculate on very thin metallic layers or wires would control light
where this field may be headed. beams with high accuracy and in small volumes. One
Many advances have already been made. Outstanding may also think of utilizing voltage gates, as is done in
experiments with fibers integrated on atom chips have directing and constricting the flow of 2D electron gases
been realized [16, 125]. Other experiments have trapped in mesoscopic physics, to dynamically control the shape
ofplasmons. Suggestionsonhowtouseplasmonstotrap achieve an all optical chip (e.g. by changing the index of
atoms have already been made (albeit not on a flat sur- refraction with a pump beam).
face) [44]. Metallic surfaces may also be needed when reflecting
If dielectric atom chips are to be considered as a seri- surfaces are required, as high reflectivity dielectric mir-
ouscandidateforQC,onewillofcoursehavetoreturnto rorsarehardertomake. Suchasituationmayarisewhen
the figure of merit discussed in the introduction, which somehigh-QdevicessuchasFabry-P´erotcavitiesarecon-
is the ratio between the controlled and the uncontrolled structed(orevensimplyforareflectionMagneto-Optical
coupling, or more simply put, how many logic gate op- Trap). As metallic surfaces give rise to Johnson noise,
erations may be done with high fidelity. Here a similar oneshouldstrivetofind,bywayofmaterialengineering,
analysis to that presented above for ’electron carrying high reflectivity - low conductance materials. Finding
structures’, would have to be done to the ’photon carry- suchmaterialsisnottrivialespeciallyifonerequiresthin
ingstructures’. Forexample,inanalogytothehindering layers, in which case, these materials should be suitable
processesdescribedaboveforacurrent-carryingwireone for deposition by some evaporation or sputter method.
would need to analyze in detail the following issues: To conclude, the communication revolution of the last
twodecadesandthedevelopmentoftheconceptofaLab-
• Internal dynamic noise: In analogy to Johnson on-a-chip in the life science field, have brought about
noise in current-carrying wires, changes in power, immense capabilities in the solid state miniaturization
modes and polarization due to stress (e.g. due to and integration of photonic elements. This gives rise to
vibrations) and temperature changes, or even fre- thehopethatindeedmonolithicdielectricdevicesforQC
quencydependentindexofrefraction,aretobeex- maybeformed. However,justasinthecaseofthemetal-
pected and should be analyzed. These fluctuations liclayers,newfiguresofmeritswillhavetobeformedand
would create fluctuating level shifts in the qubit as much higher quality standards will have to be achieved.
well as possible excitations.
• Internal corrugations: In analogy to magnetic po- CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
tential corrugations due to static electron scatter-
ing in current-carrying wires, light scattering from
The atom chip has come to life in the beginning of
surfaceroughnessandbulkinhomogeneitieswillbe-
the 21st century and now, about a decade later, is the
come a dominating factor. Light scattering does
topic of intensive development in dozens of laboratories
not only create intensity loss but changes light
and fabrication facilities around the world. Analyzing
modes and may even reverse the light direction.
the requirements of QC, such as accuracy, integration
For example, in [127] we have analyzed the feasi-
and scalability, it is likely that any implementation of a
bility of maintaining small light scattering.
quantumcomputerwillrequirechiptechnologyandvery
advanced levels of material science and engineering.
• Technical noise: In analogy to technical noise in
As an example of the promise of material science
current-carryingwires,laserlightintensityandfre-
and engineering, the case of current-carrying wires and
quency fluctuations will have to be taken into ac-
ground state atoms was analyzed. Specifically, I have
count.
shownthatforgroundstateatoms, nanofabricatedwires
Another issue is that of tunability. If high-Q devices enablethefollowingadvantagesatroomtemperatureand
are required, tunability will be necessary [127]. If fast at an atom-surface distance below one micron:
tunability is required, materials with a good Electro-
• coherence time of tens of seconds
Optical response need to be used. However, typically
suchmaterialshaveacrystallineform(e.g. LiNbO 3 )and • spin-flip lifetime of tens of seconds
may not be deposited easily. More so, achieving very
good surface roughness is challenging for these materi- • tunnelinglifetime(tothesurface)oftensofseconds
als. Newtypesofnon-crystallineEOmaterialsarebeing
• small static corrugation (δB/B ∼10−3)
developed and should be studied in this context. Piezo
materials may also be considered but again may suffer • strong immunity of magnetic lattice barriers
fromthesameproblems. Thestate-of-the-artintunabil- againsttechnicalinstabilities(above10%changeof
ityhasbeenachievedinthegroupofDanStamper-Kurn current to change tunneling probability from 0.001
and utilizes temperature control [132]. to 0.1).
Most, if not all, of the above tunability implementa-
tionsrequiresomeelectricalconnectionandthisrequires The above means that considering Johnson noise and
metal structures. Here one may again be forced to deal spin-flips, and for mili-second gate time scales [51, 133],
with some of the problems discussed above concerning ground state atoms may be able to award us with more
current-carrying wires and an effort should be made to than the threshold of 104 gate operations. It is not the
purposeofthispapertopromoteaspecificschemeforQC order of the wire width or thickness and consider only
but rather to emphasize by way of example, the promise corrugation terms with m = 0 and n = 0, namely, we
of material science and engineering for any type of par- may assume that δy and δz depend only on x.
ticle or interaction used. Corrugationsofthemagneticfieldalongthemaintrap-
Extrapolating from the advances made so far with ping axis x above the center of a wire with geometrical
atom chips, and taking into account the new micro and perturbations are given by the Biot-Savart law as
nanotechnologiesbeingcontinuouslydeveloped,onemay µ (cid:90) (cid:20) ∂ ∂ (cid:21) 1
assume that any eventual implementation of QC will in- δB (r)= 0 d3r(cid:48) δJ (r(cid:48)) −δJ (r(cid:48)) ,
x 4π y ∂z(cid:48) z ∂y(cid:48) |r−r(cid:48)|
deed be possible on future atom chips. While we wait
for such an optimal implementation to be realized, the
where δJ , δJ are the transverse current fluctuations
coupling between quantum information processing and y z
in the wire. At the point exactly above the center of a
material engineering, promises to bring about novel in-
nominally symmetric wire, it follows that only the sym-
sights in both quantum optics and material science.
metric components of δJ [δJ (y) = δJ (−y)] and the
anti-symmetric components of δJ [δJ (y) = −δJ (−y)]
contribute to the magnetic field. The fabrication pro-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
cesstypicallyprovideswireswhoseedgecorrugationsare
much larger than their top or bottom surface corruga-
I am sincerely thankful to Yonathan Japha and
tions, so that the symmetric part of δJ is the major
Carsten Henkel for many enlightening discussions and y
contribution to the magnetic field fluctuations.
for their contributions over the years. I am also grateful
Ohmic theory, which is adequate when the width and
to the members of the Ben-Gurion University atom chip
thickness of the wire are much larger than the electron
groupfortheirlongstandingeffortsinthisfield. Finally,
mean free path and whose use we justify below, pre-
many thanks to the team of the fabrication facility for
dicts that for wavelengths longer than the wire width
sharing my interest in building a bridge between mate-
or thickness the symmetric y-current fluctuations in the
rial science and quantum optics, and for numerous chips
wire have the form
they have so professionally fabricated for our lab and for
labs around the world. (cid:88) (δy++δy−)e−|k|w/2
δJsym(x,y)=iJ0 keikx k k cosh(ky),
k(cid:54)=0
APPENDIX A: MAGNETIC CORRUGATION
such that in the limit where |k|w (cid:28) 1, δJ (x,y) ∼
ABOVE A NARROW WIRE y
J ∂y /∂x, where δy = (δy + δy )/2 is the position
of the actual center of the wire at a given point x
Let us consider a fabricated metal wire carrying a to-
(y =y ). Substituting this limit into Eq. (16) while
tal current I. It extends along the xˆ direction and has c center
assuming small deviations of the wire edges from their
a width w along yˆ and thickness h along zˆ. The bound-
nominalposition,andassumingthatw (cid:28)z, namely, the
aries of the wire are located at y = ±w/2+δy (x,z)
± width of the wire is much smaller than the distance of
and z =±h/2+δz (x,y). The corrugations of the wire
± the atom to the wire, we obtain the following expression
boundaries δy and δz can be expanded as
± ± for the magnetic field corrugations above the wire
δy (x,z)= (cid:88) ∞ e2πinz/h (cid:88) eikxδy±(k) and δB (x,0,z)= iIµ 0 (cid:88) eikx k2 δy (k) K (|k|z), (18)
± n x 2π c 1
δz (x,y)= (cid:88) ∞ e2πimy/w (cid:88) eikxδz±(k). (15) where I = (cid:82) dy (cid:82) dz J(y,z) is the total current in the
± m wire and K (kz) is the modified Bessel function, which
m=−∞ k 1 (cid:112)
may be approximated by K (u) ≈ (e−u/u) 1+πu/2.
A linear theory for small corrugations predicts that the Our model for the fluctuation spectrum assumes that
effectofeachspectralcomponentofthecorrugationisre- δy (k) = δy (k /k)αeiϕ, where δy is the edge fluctua-
sponsibleforacorrugationofthemagneticfieldnearthe tion at some wavevector k and then δyrms can be ob-
atomic trap center with a similar wavelength 2π/k along tainedbysummingthisspectrumoverallk. Typically,α
the x direction. However, the effect of components with is a number between 0 (“white-noise spectrum”) and 1
wavelength much shorter than the distance d between (“1/f spectrum”), while ϕ is a random phase. It follows
the wire and the atomic trap (on the order of hundreds that the root-mean-square value of the field fluctuations
of nanometers or more) drops exponentially as e−|k|d so is given by
thatherewewillonlybeinterestedincorrugationswhose
wavelengthsareafewhundrednanometersorlonger. We (cid:104)δB2(cid:105)=
Iµ 0 δy 0 k 0
α(cid:19)2
maythenneglecttheeffectofspectralcomponentsonthe x 2π 1
If we assume that the distance |z| is much shorter than aligned with the wire, the latter is diagonal,
the length L of the measured wire, we obtain
δBrms δyrms 
where B = Iµ /2πz is the unperturbed magnetic field
of a wire in the y direction. Here A(α) has units of Thispropertywillbeusedbelow. Weassumeherethat
(length)1/2−α and is given by the current in the material responds locally to the elec-
tric field (Ohm’s law), j (x) = σ (x)E (x). The vector
L/π (cid:104) π (cid:105) potential and its correlation function in the quasi-static
(cid:80) k−2α 4 approximation are given by
where the sum is over k values taking integer multiples A(cid:126)((cid:126)x,ω)= µ0 (cid:82) dx(cid:126)(cid:48) (cid:126)j(x(cid:126)(cid:48),ω) (25)
of 2π/L up to a cutoff k = 2π/λ . Typical values
4π |(cid:126)x−x(cid:126)(cid:48)|
a o n f d th (cid:80) is s k u − m 2 = for L α 2/2 = 4 r 0 es a p n e d cti α vel = y, 1 wh a e r n e k (cid:80) k = → L ∞ /λ . min (cid:104)A∗ i ((cid:126)x 1 ,ω)A j ((cid:126)x 2 ,ω(cid:48))(cid:105)∝ (cid:82) V d(cid:126)x(cid:48) |(cid:126)x1− σ (cid:126)x i (cid:48) j | ( | (cid:126)x (cid:126)x (cid:48) 2 ) −(cid:126)x(cid:48)| . (26)
The same result should be obtained if we consider dif- Here(cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x denotethetwospatiallocationsforwhichwe
fusive surface scattering. As presented in Ref. [48], in take the correlation function, whereas (cid:126)x(cid:48) is the integra-
nano-sized wires the conductivity near the boundary is tion variable, such that we sum the contribution from
reducedbydiffusivesurfacescattering(withatypicalex- all points within the material volume V, which are at
ponential decay length l from the wire edge, on the scale distances |(cid:126)x −(cid:126)x(cid:48)| (i = 1,2) from the locations (cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x .
ofthemeanfreepath). Thismeansthatdiffusivescatter- Note that this formula neglects jumps in A(cid:126) due to sur-
ing is limited to a region of dimension smaller than l. At face currents at the metal-vacuum interface. In order to
thesametime,thecorrugationwavelengths2π/krelevant calculate the correlation function of the magnetic field
at the atom position, e.g. similar to or larger than the fluctuations, we take the curl of the vector potential cor-
atom-surfacedistance,inducecurrentdensitydirectional relation function, once with respect to (cid:126)x and once with
deviationsawayfromtheedgewithanexponentialdecay respect to (cid:126)x . Writing this in tensor form we get,
lengthof1/k. As1/k (cid:29)l mostofthecurrentwillfollow
the corrugationsof the boundary even inthe case ofsur- (cid:104)B i ∗((cid:126)x 1 ,ω)B j ((cid:126)x 2 ,ω(cid:48))(cid:105)∝
facediffusivescattering,suchthattheresultingy-current 1(cid:90) σ
fluctuationswillagaingeneratetransversecomponentsof 2 dx(cid:126)(cid:48)(cid:15) ilm (cid:15) jnp ∂ 1,l ∂ 2,n(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:126)x −x(cid:126)(cid:48) (cid:12) (cid:12) m (cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:126) p x −x(cid:126)(cid:48) (cid:12) (cid:12) ≡B ij (,27)
the current proportional to the derivative ∂δy /∂x. We (cid:12) 1 (cid:12)(cid:12) 2 (cid:12)
thususetheohmictheorywhosegeneralformwasdevel-
using the Levi-Civita symbol (cid:15) and summing over re-
oped in Ref. [27] to calculate the magnetic field corruga- ijk
peated indices. We defined the integral holding the con-
tions above the wire.
ductivitytensorandthegeometrytermsasB forconve-
nience,andthesymbol∂ (α=1,2)meansaderivative
with respect to x(cid:126) in the direction of its lth-component.
APPENDIX B: JOHNSON NOISE ABOVE AN
Performing the derivatives we obtain
ANISOTROPIC MATERIAL
B =(cid:15) (cid:15) σ X , (28)
ij ilm jnp mp ln
Turningnowtomagneticfieldfluctuations, weusethe
expression for the current cross correlation function [82, where the geometry of the system enters through the
83], quantity X :
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:104)j i ∗((cid:126)x 1 ,ω)j j ((cid:126)x 2 ,ω(cid:48))(cid:105)= 1(cid:90) (cid:126)x 1 −x(cid:126)(cid:48) (cid:126)x 2 −x(cid:126)(cid:48)
4π(cid:126)(cid:15) 0 ω2n(ω)δ(ω−ω(cid:48)) Im(cid:15) ij ((cid:126)x 1 ;ω)δ((cid:126)x 1 −(cid:126)x 2 )(2,2) X ij = 2 dx(cid:126)(cid:48) (cid:12) (cid:12)3 i (cid:12) (cid:12)3 j. (29)
V (cid:12)(cid:126)x −x(cid:126)(cid:48)(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:126)x −x(cid:126)(cid:48)(cid:12)
(cid:12) 1 (cid:12) (cid:12) 2 (cid:12)
(cid:126)ω
wheren(ω)=1/(ekBT −1)istheBose-Einsteinoccupa-
We assume here a homogeneous medium (i.e., the com-
tion number, and where the dielectric tensor
ponents σ are spatially constant within the material
iσ volume V).
ij (cid:15) ω Againlimitingthediscussiontothe’aligned’case(24),
Eq. (28) is simplified, and in fact for every pair of i,j
is proportional to the conductivity tensor for homoge- we need to sum only two integrals. Considering the wire
neous media. When the anisotropic crystal axes are geometrytobesuchthattheatomsarelocatedabovethe
center of a very long wire (L (cid:29) h,d), the only non-zero [7] R. Dubessy, T. Coudreau, L. Guidoni, Electric field
elementsareB (i=x,y,z)duetosymmetry. Hencewe noise above surfaces: A model for heating-rate scaling
obtain law in ion traps, Phys. Rev. A 80, 031402(R) (2009).
[8] N. Daniilidis, S. Narayanan, S. A. Mo¨ller, R. Clark, T.
B =σ X +σ X E. Lee, P. J. Leek, A. Wallraff, St. Schulz, F. Schmidt-
xx zz yy yy zz
Kaler, H. Ha¨ffner, Fabrication and heating rate study
yy zz xx xx zz ofmicroscopicsurfaceelectrodeiontraps,NewJ.Phys.
B =σ X +σ X 13, 013032 (2011).
zz yy xx xx yy
[9] S. A. Meek, H. Conrad, and G. Meijer, Trapping
and it is convenient to define Molecules on a Chip, Science 324, 1699 (2009).
[10] A. Tauschinsky, R. M. T. Thijssen, S. Whitlock, H. B.
Y˜ ij ≡B ij /σ xx , (31) vanLindenvandenHeuvell,andR.J.C.Spreeuw,Spa-
tiallyresolvedexcitationofRydbergatomsandsurface
assuming the good conductivity to be along xˆ.
effectsonanatomchip,Phys.Rev.A81,063411(2010).
Weseethatincontrasttotheisotropiccase,whereone [11] H.Ku¨bler,J.P.Shaffer,T.Baluktsian,R.Lo¨w,andT.
has a single conductivity σ for all field components B , Pfau, Coherent Excitation of Rydberg Atoms in Ther-
here the conductivities σ give different weights to the mal Vapor Microcells, Nature Photonics 4, 112 (2010).
geometry-dependent factors X . [12] J. A. Crosse, S. A. Ellingsen, K. Clements, S. Y. Buh-
mann, and S. Scheel, Thermal Casimir-Polder shifts in
We can now write the full expression for the power
Rydbergatomsnearmetallicsurfaces,Phys.Rev.A82,
spectrum, using (5) and collecting all of the prefactors
010901 (2010).
omitted in (26),(27) as
[13] J. D. Carter and J. D. D. Martin, Energy shifts of Ry-
dberg atoms due to patch fields near metal surfaces,
Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω)=Sbb(ω) Im(cid:15) Y˜ , (32) Phys. Rev. A 83 (2011) 032902.
B 1 2 B 4πω/c xx ij
[14] M. M. Mu¨ller, H. R. Haakh, T. Calarco, C. P. Koch,
and C. Henkel, Prospects for fast Rydberg gates on an
where,following[63],wehavenormalizedthepowerspec-
atom chip, paper in this issue, arXiv:1104.2739 (2011).
trum to Planck’s blackbody formula
[15] S. X. Wang, Y. Ge, J. Labaziewicz, E. Dauler, K.
(cid:126)ω3n¯(ω) Berggren, Isaac L. Chuang, Superconducting microfab-
Sbb(ω)= . (33) ricated ion traps, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 244102 (2010).
B 3π(cid:15) c5
0 [16] R. Folman, P. Treutlein, J. Schmiedmayer, Fabrication
ofAtomChips,in”AtomChips”(BookbyWiley-VCH),
As the relevant frequencies are low, the high tempera-
Eds. Vladan Vuletic and Jakob Reichel.
ture limit of the Planck function is applicable, and thus
[17] R. Schmied, D. Leibfried, R. J. C. Spreeuw, S. Whit-
the expression for the power spectrum approaches
lock, Optimized magnetic lattices for ultracold atomic
ensembles, New J. of Phys. 12, (2010).
Sij((cid:126)x ,(cid:126)x ;ω)= B σ Y˜ . (34) [18] J. Forta´gh, H. Ott, S. Kraft, A. Gu¨nther, C. Zimmer-
B 1 2 4π2(cid:15)2c4 xx ij
0 mann, Surface effects in magnetic microtraps, Phys.
Rev. A 66, 041604 (2002).
Thisexpressionhasthesameformastheresultforthe
[19] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, E.
isotropic case [63], however here the tensor Y˜ holds the
ij A. Hinds, Spin Coupling between Cold Atoms and the
anisotropic terms B in it.
ij Thermal Fluctuations of a Metal Surface, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 080401 (2003).
[20] J. Est`eve, C. Aussibal, T. Schumm, C. Fig, D. Maill,
I. Bouchoul, C. I. Westbrook, A. Aspect, Role of wire
imperfections in micromagnetic traps for atoms, Phys.
∗ Electronic address: folman@bgu.ac.il Rev. A 70, 043629 (2004).
[1] A. M. Steane, Overhead and noise threshold of fault- [21] S.Wildermuth,S.Hofferberth,I.Lesanovsky,E.Haller,
tolerant quantum error correction, Phys. Rev. A 68, L.M.Andersson,S.Groth,I.Bar-Joseph,P.Kru¨ger,J.
042322 (2003). Schmiedmayer,Bose-Einsteincondensates: Microscopic
[2] E. Knill, Scalable quantum computing in the presence magnetic-field imaging, Nature 435, 440 (2005).
of large detected-error rates, Phys. Rev. A 71, 042322 [22] S. Aigner, L. Della Pietra, Y. Japha, O. Entin-
(2005). Wohlman,T.David,R.Salem,R.Folman,J.Schmied-
[3] R. Folman, P. Kru¨ger, J. Schmiedmayer, J. Denschlag mayer, Long-Range Order in Electronic Transport
andC.Henkel,Controllingcoldatomsusingnanofabri- Through Disordered Metal Films, Science 319, 1226
cated surfaces: Atom Chips, Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys. (2008).
48, 263 (2002). [23] A. Emmert, A. Lupa¸scu, G. Nogues, M. Brune, J.-M.
[4] J.Reichel,MicrochiptrapsandBoseEinsteincondensa- Raimond,S.Haroche,Measurementofthetrappinglife-
tion, Appl. Phys. B 75, 469 (2002). timeclosetoacoldmetallicsurfaceonacryogenicatom-
[5] J. Fort´agh and C. Zimmermann, Magnetic microtraps chip, Eur. Phys. J. D 51, 173 (2009).
for ultracold atoms, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 235 (2007). [24] V. Dikovsky, Y. Japha, C. Henkel, R. Folman, Reduc-
[6] C.HenkelandB.Horovitz,Noisefrommetallicsurfaces: tion of Magnetic Noise in Atom Chips by Material Op-
Effects of charge diffusion, Phys. Rev. A 78, 042902 timization, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 87 (2005).
(2008). [25] J.-B. Trebbia, C. L. Garrido Alzar, R. Cornelussen, C.
I. Westbrook, I. Bouchoule, Roughness Suppression via (2009).
Rapid Current Modulation on an Atom Chip, Phys. [43] J. I. Gillen, W. S. Bakr, A. Peng, P. Unterwaditzer, S.
Rev. Lett. 98, 263201 (2007). Fo¨lling,M.Greiner,Two-dimensionalquantumgasina
[26] R. Fermani, S. Scheel, P. L. Knight, Trapping cold hybridsurfacetrap,Phys.Rev.A80,021602(R)(2009).
atoms near carbon nanotubes: Thermal spin flips and [44] D. E. Chang, J. D. Thompson, H. Park, V. Vuleti´c, A.
Casimir-Polder potential, Phys. Rev. A 75, 062905 S. Zibrov, P. Zoller, and M. D. Lukin, Trapping and
(2007). Manipulation of Isolated Atoms Using Nanoscale Plas-
[27] Y. Japha, O. Entin-Wohlman, T. David, R. Salem, S. monicStructures,Phys.Rev.Lett.103,123004(2009).
Aigner, J. Schmiedmayer, R. Folman, Model for Orga- [45] W. Ha¨nsel, J. Reichel, P. Hommelhoff, T. W. Ha¨nsch,
nizedCurrentPatternsinDisorderedConductors,Phys. Trapped-atom interferometer in a magnetic microtrap,
Rev. B 77, 201407(R) (2008). Phys. Rev. A 64, 063607 (2001).
[28] T. David, Y.Japha, V. Dikovsky, R.Salem, C. Henkel, [46] M. Horikoshi and K. Nakagawa, Atom chip based fast
R. Folman, Magnetic interactions of cold atoms with production of Bose-Einstein condensate, Appl. Phys. B
anisotropicconductors,Eur.Phys.J.D48,321(2008). 82, 363 (2006).
[29] G. Sinuco-Leo´n, B. Kaczmarek, P. Kru¨ger, and T. M. [47] D. Z. Anderson, private communication (2009).
Fromhold, Atom chips with two-dimensional electron [48] R. Salem, Y. Japha, J. Chab´e, B. Hadad, M. Keil, K.
gases: Theory of near-surface trapping and ultracold- A.MiltonandR.Folman,Nanowireatomchiptrapsfor
atom microscopy of quantum electronic systems, Phys. sub-micron atom-surface distances, New J. Phys. 12,
Rev. A 83, 021401(R) (2011). 023039 (2010).
[30] K. A. Milton, Resource Letter VWCPF-1: Van der [49] T. Schumm, S. Hofferberth, L. M. Andersson, S. Wil-
Waals and Casimir-Polder forces, arXiv:1101.2238v2 dermuth, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph, J. Schmiedmayer, P.
(2011). Kru¨ger,Matter-waveinterferometryinadoublewellon
[31] Y. J. Lin, I. Teper, C. Chin, V. Vuleti´c, Impact of the an atom chip, Nature Physics 1, 57 (2005).
Casimir-Polder Potential and Johnson Noise on Bose- [50] G. B. Jo, J.-H. Choi, C. A. Christensen, Y. R. Lee, T.
EinsteinCondensateStabilityNearSurfaces,Phys.Rev. A.Pasquini,W.Ketterle,D.E.Pritchard,Matter-Wave
Lett. 92, 050404 (2004). Interferometry with Phase Fluctuating Bose-Einstein
[32] J.M.ObrechtandR.J.WildandM.AntezzaandL.P. Condensates, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 240406 (2007).
PitaevskiiandS.StringariandE.A.Cornell,Measure- [51] P.Treutlein,T.W.Ha¨nsch,andJ.Reichel,A.Negretti,
ment of the Temperature Dependence of the Casimir- M.A.Cirone,andT.Calarco,Microwavepotentialsand
Polder Force, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 063201 (2007). optimal control for robust quantum gates on an atom
[33] V.Sandoghdar,C.I.Sukenik,E.A.Hinds,Directmea- chip, Phys. Rev. A 74, 022312 (2006).
surement of the van der Waals interaction between an [52] P. Bo¨hi, M. F. Riedel, J. Hoffrogge, J. Reichel, T.
atomanditsimagesinamicron-sizedcavity,Phys.Rev. W. H¨ansch, and P. Treutlein, Coherent manipulation
Lett. 68, 3432 (1992); C. I. Sukenik, M. G. Boshier, D. of BoseEinstein condensates with state-dependent mi-
Cho, V. Sandoghdar, E. A. Hinds, Measurement of the crowave potentials on an atom chip, Nature Physics 5,
Casimir-Polder force, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 560 (1993). 592 (2009).
[34] S. Lepoutre, V. P. A. Lonij, H. Jelassi, G. Tr´enec, M. [53] S. Groth, P. Krueger, S. Wildermuth, R. Folman, T.
Bu¨chner, A. D. Cronin and J. Vigu´e, Atom interferom- Fernholz, D. Mahalu, I. Bar-Joseph and J. Schmied-
etry measurement of the atom-surface van der Waals mayer, Atom Chips: Fabrication and Thermal Proper-
interaction, Eur. Phys. J. D (2011). ties, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2980 (2004).
[35] M. Gierling, P. Schneeweiss, G. Visanescu, P. Federsel, [54] D. W. Wang, M. D. Lukin, and E. Demler, Disordered
M.Ha¨ffner,D.P.Kern,T.E.Judd,A.Gu¨nther,andJ. Bose-Einstein Condensates in Quasi-One-Dimensional
Forta´gh,Cold-atomscanningprobemicroscopy,Nature Magnetic Microtraps, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 076802
Nanotechnology 6, 446 (2011). (2004).
[36] H. R. Haakh and C. Henkel, Magnetic near fields as a [55] M. P. A. Jones, C. J. Vale, D. Sahagun, B. V. Hall, C.
probeofchargetransportinspatiallydispersiveconduc- C. Eberlein, B. E. Sauer, K. Furusawa, D. Richardson,
tors, arXiv:1107.2268v1 (2011). and E. A. Hinds, Cold atoms probe the magnetic field
[37] Yu. B. Ovchinnikov, S. V. Shulga, V. I. Balykin, An near a wire, J. Phys B 37, L15 (2004).
atomic trap based on evanescent light waves, J. Phys. [56] S. Whitlock, B. V. Hall, T. Roach, R. Anderson, M.
B 24, 3173 (1991). Volk, P. Hannaford, A. I. Sidorov, Effect of magnetiza-
[38] J.Schmiedmayer,Quantumwiresandquantumdotsfor tion inhomogeneity on magnetic microtraps for atoms,
neutral atoms, Eur. Phys. J. D 4, 57 (1998). Phys. Rev. A 75, 043602 (2007).
[39] A.Shevchenko,T.Lindvall,I.TittonenandM.Kaivola, [57] P. Kru¨ger, L. M. Andersson, S. Wildermuth, S. Hoffer-
Microscopicelectro-opticalatomtraponanevanescent- berth, E. Haller, S. Aigner, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph, J.
wave mirror, Eur. Phys. J. D 28, 273 (2004). Schmiedmayer, Potential Roughness near Lithographi-
[40] M.RosenblitandY.JaphaandP.Horak,R.Folman,Si- cally Fabricated Atom Chips, Phys. Rev. A 76, 063621
multaneous optical trapping and detection of atoms by (2007).
microdisk resonators, Phys. Rev. A 73, 063805 (2006). [58] P. Kru¨ger, L. M. Andersson, S. Wildermuth, S. Hoffer-
[41] L.RicciandD.Bassi,A.Bertoldi,Combinedstaticpo- berth, E. Haller, S. Aigner, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph,
tentials for confinement of neutral species, Phys. Rev. J. Schmiedmayer, Disorder Potentials near Litho-
A 76, 023428 (2007). graphically Fabricated Atom Chips, eprint arXiv:cond-
[42] H.Bender,P.Courteille,C.Zimmermann,S.Slama,To- mat/0504686 (2004).
wards surface quantum optics with Bose-Einstein con- [59] P.Kru¨ger,PhDthesis,Coherentmatterwavesnearsur-
densates in evanescent waves, Appl. Phys. B 96, 275 faces, University of Heidelberg (2004).
[60] C. Henkel and M. Wilkens, Heating of trapped atoms phys. Lett. 76, 547 (2006).
near thermal surfaces, Europhys. Lett. 47, 414 (1999). [80] M. P. Malkov, I. B. Danilov, A. G. Zeldovich, and A.
[61] J. A. Sidles, J. L. Garbini, W. M. Dougherty, and S. B. Fradkov. Handbook on Physical and Technical Basis
H. Chao, The classical and quantum theory of ther- of Cryogenics, Energiya, Moskwa (1973).
mal magnetic noise, with applications in spintronics [81] Yu-Ju Lin, Private communications.
and quantum microscopy, Proc. IEEE 91, 799 (2003), [82] S.M.Rytov,Y.A.Kravtsov,andV.I.Tatarskii,Princi-
preprint quant-ph/0004106. plesofStatisticalRadiophysicsIII:ElementsofRandom
[62] C.Henkel,P.Kru¨ger,R.Folman,andJ.Schmiedmayer, Fields, Springer, Berlin (1989).
Fundamental limits for coherent manipulation on atom [83] E. M. Lifshitz, Sov. Phys. JETP 2, 73 (1956) ; J. Exp.
chips, Appl. Phys. B 76, 174 (2003). Theor. Phys. USSR 29, 94 (1955).
[63] C.HenkelandS.Po¨tting,Coherenttransportofmatter [84] Tal David, PhD thesis, Ben-Gurion University (2009).
waves, Appl. Phys. B 72, 73 (2001). [85] P. G. Petrov, S. Machluf, S. Younis, R. Macaluso, T.
[64] C.Henkel,S.P¨otting,andM.Wilkens,Lossandheating David, B. Hadad, Y. Japha, M. Keil, E. Joselevich and
ofparticlesinsmallandnoisytraps,Appl.Phys.B69, R. Folman, Trapping cold atoms using surface-grown
379 (1999). carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. A 79, 043403 (2009).
[65] R. Fermani, S. Scheel, and P. L. Knight, Spatial deco- [86] V. Peano, M. Thorwart, A. Kasper and R. Egger,
herencenearmetallicsurfaces,Phys.Rev.A73,032902 Nanoscale atomic waveguides with suspended carbon
(2006). nanotubes, Appl. Phys. B 81, 1075 (2005).
[66] B.ZhangandC.Henkel,Magneticnoisearoundmetallic [87] B.Gru¨ner,M.Jag,A.Stibor,G.Visanescu,M.Ha¨ffner,
microstructures, J. Appl. Phys. 102, 084907 (2007). D. Kern, A. Gu¨nther and J. Forta´gh, Integrated atom
[67] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics: detector based on field ionization near carbon nan-
Non-Relativistic Theory, 3rd ed., Pergamon (1977). otubes, Phys. Rev. A 80, 063422 (2009).
[68] L.MandelandE.Wolf,Optical coherence and quantum [88] Brian Murphy and Lene Vestergaard Hau, Electro-
optics, Cambridge (1995). OpticalNanotrapsforNeutralAtoms,Phys.Rev.Lett.
[69] Itshouldbenotedthatconsideringthenoiseonlyatthe 102, 033003 (2009).
trapcenter(asusuallydone)maynotbesufficient,asby [89] C. Roux, A. Emmert, A. Lupa¸scu, T. Nirrengarten, G.
doingsooneneglectsthefactthatthetrapiscommonly Nogues,M.Brune,J.-M.RaimondandS.Haroche,Bose
spatiallyinhomogeneous(e.g.harmonic).Theatomsare Einsteincondensationonasuperconductingatomchip,
distributedinthetrapwithacertaindensityprofile,and Europhys. Lett. 81, 56004 (2008).
move as they have finite temperature. Taking this into [90] V.Dikovsky,V.Sokolovsky,B.Zhang,C.HenkelandR.
account introduces corrections to the theory which in Folman, Superconducting atom chips: advantages and
some cases may be important. challenges, Eur. Phys. J. D 51, 247 (2009).
[70] D. M. Harber, J. M. McGuirk, J. M. Obrecht, and E. [91] T. Mukai, C. Hufnagel, A. Kasper, T. Meno, A.
A.Cornell,Thermallyinducedlossesinultra-coldatoms Tsukada, K. Semba and F. Shimizu, Persistent super-
magnetically trapped near room-temperature surfaces, current atom chip, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 260407 (2007).
J. Low Temp. Phys. 133, 229 (2003). [92] D.Cano,B.Kasch,H.Hattermann,R.Kleiner,C.Zim-
[71] J. Forta´gh, H. Ott, S. Kraft, A. Gu¨nther, and C. Zim- mermann, D. Koelle and J. Forta´gh, Meissner Effect
mermann,Surfaceeffectsinmagneticmicrotraps,Phys. in Superconducting Microtraps, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
Rev. A 66, 041604 (2002). 183006 (2008).
[72] B.Zhang,C.Henkel,E.Haller,S.Wildermuth,S.Hof- [93] B. Kasch, H. Hattermann, D. Cano, T. E. Judd, S.
ferberth,P.Kru¨ger,andJ.Schmiedmayer,Relevanceof Scheel, C. Zimmermann, R. Kleiner, D. Koelle, and J.
sub-surface chip layers for the lifetime of magnetically Forta´gh, New J. Phys. 12, 065024 (2010).
trapped atoms, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 97 (2005). [94] D. Cano, H. Hattermann, B. Kasch, C. Zimmermann,
[73] P. Treutlein, P. Hommelhoff, T. Steinmetz, T. W. R. Kleiner, D. Koelle and J. Forta´gh, Experimental
Ha¨nsch, J. Reichel, Coherence in Microchip Traps, system for research on ultracold atomic gases near su-
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 203005 (2004). perconducting microstructures, Eur. Phys. J. D, DOI
[74] C.Deutsch,F.Ramirez-Martinez,C.Lacrouˆte,F.Rein- 10.1140/epjd/e2011-10680-8 (2011).
hard, T. Schneider, J. N. Fuchs, F. Pi´echon, F. Lalo¨e, [95] B. Zhang, R. Fermani, T. Mu¨ller, M. J. Lim, and R.
J.Reichel,andP.Rosenbusch,SpinSelf-Rephasingand Dumke, Design of magnetic traps for neutral atoms
Very Long Coherence Times in a Trapped Atomic En- with vortices in type-II superconducting microstruc-
semble, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 020401 (2010). tures, Phys. Rev. A 81, 063408 (2010).
[75] K. Maussang, G. E. Marti, T. Schneider, P. Treutlein, [96] T. Mu¨ller, B. Zhang, R. Fermani, K. S. Chan, Z. W.
Y. Li, A. Sinatra, R. Long, J. Est´eve, and J. Reichel, Wang,C.B.Zhang,M.J.Lim,andR.Dumke,Trapping
Enhanced and Reduced Atom Number Fluctuations in of ultra-cold atoms with the magnetic field of vortices
a BEC Splitter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 080403 (2010). in a thin-film superconducting micro-structure, New J.
[76] N.G. van Kampen, A Soluble Model for Quantum Me- Phys. 12, 043016 (2010).
chanical Dissipation, J. Stat. Phys. 78, 299 (1995). [97] C. D. J. Sinclair, E. A. Curtis, I. Llorente Garcia, J.
[77] G. M. Palma, K.-A. Suominen, A. K. Ekert, Quantum A. Retter, B. V. Hall, S. Eriksson, B. E. Sauer, E.
computers and dissipation, Proc. R. Soc. Lon. A 452, A. Hind, Bose-Einstein condensation on a permanent-
567 (1996). magnetatomchip,Phys.Rev.A72,031603(R)(2005).
[78] B.J.Dalton,Scalingofdecoherenceeffectsinquantum [98] S. Whitlock, R. Gerritsma, T. Fernholz, R. J. C.
computers, J. mod. Optics 50, 951 (2003). Spreeuw, Two-dimensional array of microtraps with
[79] R.Doll,M.Wubs,P.H¨anggiandS.Kohler,Limitation atomicshiftregisteronachip,NewJ.Phys.11,023021
of entanglement due to spatial qubit separation, Euro- (2009).
[99] S. Ghanbari, P. B. Blakie, P. Hannaford, T. D. Kieu, [118] S. Scheel, P. K. Rekdal, P. L. Knight and E. A. Hinds,
Superfluid to Mott insulator quantum phase transition Atomicspindecoherencenearconductingandsupercon-
ina2Dpermanentmagneticlattice,Eur.Phys.J.B70, ducting films, Phys. Rev. A 72, 042901 (2005).
305 (2009). [119] C. Henkel, Magnetostatic field noise near metallic sur-
[100] P.Krueger,X.Luo,M.W.Klein,K.Brugger,A.Haase, faces, Eur. Phys. J. D 35, 59 (2005).
S. Wildermuth, S. Groth, I. Bar-Joseph, R. Folman, [120] S. Bauer, Optical properties of a metal film and its ap-
J. Schmiedmayer, Trapping and manipulating neutral plicationasaninfraredabsorberandasabeamsplitter,
atoms with electrostatic fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, Am. J. Phys. 60, 257 (1992).
233201 (2003). [121] S. A. Biehs, D. Reddig, and M. Holthaus, Thermal ra-
[101] J.Schmiedmayer,Quantumwiresandquantumdotsfor diation and near-field energy density of thin metallic
neutral atoms, Eur. Phys. J. D 4, 57 (1998). films, Eur. Phys. J. B bf 55, 237 (2007).
[102] A.ShevchenkoT.Lindvall,I.TittonenandM.Kaivola, [122] S. A. Biehs, Thermal heat radiation, near-field energy
Microscopicelectro-opticalatomtraponanevanescent- density and near-field radiative heat transfer of coated
wave mirror, Eur. Phys. J. D 28, 273 (2004). materials, Eur. Phys. J. B 58, 423 (2007).
[103] A.Leanhardt,Y.Shin,A.Chikkatur,D.Kielpinski,W. [123] H.P. Specht, C. No¨lleke, A. Reiserer, M. Uphoff, E.
Ketterle, and D. Pritchard, Bose-Einstein Condensates Figueroa, S. Ritter, G. Rempe, A Single-Atom Quan-
near a Microfabricated Surface, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, tum Memory, ArXiv 1103.1528 (2011).
100404, (2003). [124] Benjamin Lev, Ph.D. Thesis, Magnetic Microtraps for
[104] S.Machluf,J.Coslovsky,P.G.Petrov,Y.JaphaandR. Cavity QED, Bose-Einstein Condensates, and Atom
Folman, Coupling between internal spin dynamics and Optics, Caltech (2005).
external degrees of freedom in the presence of colored [125] J. Volz, R. Gehr, G. Dubois, J. Est´eve and J. Reichel,
noise, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 203002 (2010). Measurementoftheinternalstateofasingleatomwith-
[105] H. B. G. Casimir and D. Polder, The Influence of Re- out energy exchange, Nature 475, 210 (2011).
tardation on the London-van der Waals Forces, Phys. [126] E. Vetsch, D. Reitz, G. Sague’, R. Schmidt, S. T.
Rev. 73, 360 (1948). Dawkins,andA.Rauschenbeutel,OpticalInterfaceCre-
[106] C. Schroll, W. Belzig, and C. Bruder, Decoherence of atedbyLaser-CooledAtomsTrappedintheEvanescent
coldatomicgasesinmagneticmicrotraps,Phys.Rev.A Field Surrounding an Optical Nanofiber, Phys. Rev.
68, 043618 (2003). Lett. 104, 203603 (2010).
[107] IamgratefultoCarstenHenkelformanybrainstorming [127] M. Rosenblit, P. Horak, S. Helsby and R. Folman,
encounters, whether in person or by e-mail. Single-atomdetectionusingwhisperinggallerymodesof
[108] F. Intravaia and C. Henkel and A. Lambrecht, Role of microdisk resonators, Phys. Rev. A 70, 053808 (2004);
surfaceplasmonsintheCasimireffect,Phys.Rev.A76, M. Rosenblit, Y. Japha, P. Horak and R. Folman, Si-
033820 (2007). multaneous optical trapping and detection of atoms by
[109] U.LeonhardtandT.G.Philbin,Quantumlevitationby microdisk resonators, Phys. Rev. A 73, 063805 (2006);
laft-handedmetamaterials,NewJ.Phys.9,254(2007). M. Rosenblit, P. Horak, E. Fleminger, Y. Japha and
[110] J. N. Munday, F. Capasso and V. A. Parsegian, Mea- R. Folman, Design of microcavity resonators for single-
sured long-range repulsive Casimir-Lifshitz forces, Na- atom detection, J. Nanophoton. 1, 011670 (2007), Spe-
ture 457, 170 (2009). cial issue; US Patent 7,466,889B1 (2008).
[111] V. Yannopapas and N. V. Vitanov, First-Principles [128] E. H. Lapasar, K. Kasamatsu, Y. Kondo, M. Naka-
Study of Casimir Repulsion in Metamaterials, Phys. hara, and T. Ohmi, Selective Application of Two-
Rev. Lett. 103, 120401 (2009). Qubit Gate in Neutral Atom Quantum Computer,
Polder Force Reversal with Metamaterials, [129] M. Kohnen, M. Succo, P. G. Petrov, R. A. Nyman, M.
[113] A. Sambale, S. Y. Buhmann, H. T. Dung, D. G. photon junctions, Nature Photonics 5, 3538 (2011).
Welsch,ResonantCasimir-Polderforcesinplanarmeta- [130] M.Wilkens,E.Goldstein,B.Taylor,P.Meystre,Fabry-
materials, Phys Scripta T 135, 014019 (2009). P´erot interferometer for atoms, Phys. Rev. A 47, 2366
[114] A.Milling,P.Mulvaney,I.Larson,Directmeasurement (1993).
of repulsive van der Waals interactions, Journal of Col- [131] J.B.Pendry,Mart´ın-Moreno,F.J.Garcia-Vidal,Mim-
loid and Interface Science 180, 460 (1996). icking Surface Plasmons with Structured Surfaces, Sci-
[115] S.Lee,W.M.Sigmund,RepulsivevanderWaalsforces ence 305, 847 (2004).
for silica and alumina, Journal of Colloid and Interface [132] T.P.PurdyandD.M.Stamper-Kurn,Integratingcav-
Science 243, 365 (2001). ity quantum electrodynamics and ultracold-atom chips
[116] R.F.Tabor,R.Manica,D.Y.C.Chan,F.Grieser,and with on-chip dielectric mirrors and temperature stabi-
R.R.Dagastine,RepulsivevanderWaalsforcesinsoft lization, Appl. Phys. B 90, 401 (2008).
matter: why bubbles do not stick to walls, Phys. Rev. [133] E. Charron, M. A. Cirone, A. Negretti, J. Schmied-
Lett. 106, 064501 (2011). mayer, and T. Calarco, Theoretical analysis of a realis-
[117] Bo Zhang, Ph.D. Thesis, Magnetic Fields near micro tic atom-chip quantum gate, Phys. Rev. A 74, 012308
structuredsurfaces: applicationtoatomchips,Potsdam (2006).
(2008).