]ics-lrtm.tam-dnoc[
1v3440120/tam-dnoc:viXra
Materials Science and Protein Crystallography
Using the MX Beamline Control Toolkit
W. M. Lavender
Biological, Chemical, and Physical Sciences Department,
Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois 60616
(Dated: November6, 2018)
MXisaportablebeamlinecontrolsystemthathasbeendescribedatpreviousNOBUGSmeetings.
ThispaperwillbrieflyreviewMXandthendiscussimportantchangesandimprovementsmadesince
thelast meeting in 2000.
Formaterials science, work hasfocused on extendingthesupportfor multichannelanalyzers and
for fast data acquisition using quick scans. MX MCA support has focused on the development of
interfaces to the X-Ray Instrumentation Associates DXP-2X and X10P (Saturn) MCAs. The MX
DXP-2XsupporthasbeenusedbyMR-CATattheAdvancedPhotonSourcetoreadouta13-element
Ge detector at input count rates of up to 1.5∗106 counts per second per detector channel. The
other major addition is support for quick scans using multichannel scalers. Quick scanning is now
routinely used for XAFS and diffraction measurements at MR-CAT and will soon be implemented
on some MX crystallography beamlines as well. We have also begun work to allow XIA MCAs to
beread out duringquick scans.
For protein crystallography, we have primarily focused on implementing MX for new beamlines,
namely, SER-CAT at the APS and GCPCC at CAMD, with others pending at the APS. Progress
has also been made on the integration of MX with vendorCCD and robotics software.
I. INTRODUCTION Group Experiment Type Beamline Equipment
MR-CAT Material Science EPICS motor, scaler, MCS,
The MX beamline control toolkit is a general package (APS) McLennan, Compumotor,
for control of synchrotronradiation beamlines and labo- Newport, XIAMCAs, etc.
ratory X-ray generator systems that is being jointly de-
IMCA-CAT Crystallography EPICS motor, scaler,
veloped by the MR-CAT[1][2], IMCA-CAT[3][4][5], and
(APS) McLennan, Compumotor,
SER-CAT[6] sectors at the Advanced Photon Source. It
Newport, etc. hasbeendescribedatpreviousNOBUGSmeetings[7][8]
and elsewhere[9]. This paper will focus on changes and SER-CAT Crystallography Delta Tau PMAC,
additions to MX made since the last NOBUGS meeting (APS) Struck VMEMCS
in 2000. DND-CAT Crystallography SCIPE motor, counter,
(APS) timer support, XIAMCA
GCPCC Crystallography Compumotor 6K,
II. REVIEW OF MX
(CAMD) Ortec counter/timer,
MX is a portable beamline control toolkit available
Current users of MX are listed in Table I. The primary
goalof MX is to make it possible to write beamline con-
trol system software that can be reused in almost any • MX localizes dependencies on particular network
environment. This goal was conceived based on the au-
protocols to relatively small areas of the code.
thor’s frustration with several previous control systems
Thus, while MX comes with its own network pro-
he had worked with that paid little or no attention to
tocol, it is designed to make it easy to use other
transportability of the code.
network protocols instead. For example, it is easy
MX attempts to achieve this goal in several ways:
touse MXonabeamline thatusesonlyEPICS[10]
• MX is designed to be easily ported to new operat- network protocols.
ing systems. It already runs on Linux, Microsoft
• ThecoreofMXisdesignedasmiddlewarethatcan
Win32, MacOS X, Solaris, Irix, HP/UX, and Cyg-
be inserted into other systems as necessary. This
winwithlegacysupportforSunOS4,andMSDOS.
is done by providing a high level application pro-
• MXiswritteninANSI Ctomaximizeitsabilityto gramminginterface(API)toapplicationsorservers
be invokedfromother packages. Mostapplications whichtriestoavoidmakingassumptionsaboutthe
and scripting languages that support an external nature of those applications and servers. At the
calling interface can easily invoke code written in low end, a device driver API is provided that tries
C. to avoid making assumptions about the nature of
the hardware underneath.
MX has been under development since 1995 and has
developed a relatively large number of device drivers.
Currently there are 34 drivers for various motor con-
trollers,devicesthatcanbetreatedasmotors,andforac-
cesstomotorscontrolledbyothercontrolsystemssuchas
EPICS. There are also 17 pseudomotor drivers for items
like X-ray energy, monochromator control and goniostat
table control. In addition, there are a variety of drivers
for other devices such as scalers, timers, MCAs, MCSs,
and so forth with over 250 drivers in all.
WhileMXcanbeviewedasasetofcomponents,itcan
also be used as a complete beamline control system. It
providesanMXserverthatcanbeusedtomanagebeam-
line hardware and a set of graphical user interface tools.
At present, MX supports developing GUI programs via
its Python and Tcl/Tk scripting interfaces. The most
important of these include:
• Imcagui - A primary user interface for crystallog-
raphy seen in Figure 1. It provides support for
monochromator,slit,andfiltercontrol. Italsopro-
vides a way of executing fluorescence and absorp-
tion scans for multiwavelength anomalous diffrac-
tion(MAD) experiments as seen in Figure 2 which FIG. 1: The Imcagui protein crystallography program.
arethenprocessedbyChoochtocomputef′ andf′′
values. It was originally developed for IMCA-CAT
but is now used at other beamlines as well.
• Optimize and optimize auto - Automatic beamline
intensityoptimizationprogramsthatgivebeamline
users a simplified interface for maximizing X-ray
intensity on their own initiative.
• Mxgui - A more staff-oriented GUI for performing
motor moves and executing arbitrary scans.
There are also a number of command line programs and
utilities for MX. The most important of these is motor
whichisroutinelyusedatMR-CATformaterialsscience
experiments.
Most of our existing GUI programs are written in
Tcl/Tk. However, we now plan to write most new GUIs
in Python instead. Our experience has been that the
syntax of Python seems more natural to scientists than
that of Tcl. There also appears to be a groundswell of
support for Python at synchrotronradiation facilities as
well, given Python’s extensive support for scientific and
numerical programming. With that in mind, we have
now created an MX interface to Python called MP and
have begun writing applications using it. FIG. 2: Imcagui MAD experiment control window.
III. XIA MULTICHANNEL ANALYZERS ontheDXP-2XandtheSaturn,formerlycalledtheDXP-
X10P.
A major task has been the development of software TheDXP-2XisaCAMACbasedsystemthatcontains
to interface with the new high performance multichan- four MCA channels per CAMAC module. The existing
nel analyzers (MCAs) from X-Ray Instrumentation As- MXinterfaceusestheXerxeslibraryprovidedbyXIAto
sociates in Newark, California. Our efforts have focused control the DXP-2X. The Xerxes library provides direct
access to many of the low level features of the MCA. Quick scans are designed as a direct replacement for
Since the DXP-2X is a very powerful and complicated many types of step scans. The problem with step scans
system,ittookasubstantialamountofefforttocorrectly isthatthereisalargedelayassociatedwithslowingdown
program the MX software interface. XIA now provides the motor to a stop to take the data point and then ac-
a new high-level software library called Handel, but this celerating back to speed. Quick scans avoid this issue
wasnotavailableatthetime ofthe originaldevelopment by acquiring data continuously while the motors are in
of our software. motion. Quickscansareavailableformostmotordrivers
There were a number of problems encountered in get- andformanyofthepseudomotordriversaswell. Forex-
tingtheDXP-2Xtorunreliably,butthesewerepartially ample,itispossibletoquickscanmonochromatorenergy
duetothefactthattheDXP-2Xfirmwarewasstillunder pseudomotors.
development at the time. Most of the problems we en- Of course, quick scans need a place to store the data
counteredhavebeen solvednowandthe DXP-2Xowned as it is acquired. This role is normally played by a
by MR-CAT has been reliably used with a 13-element multichannelscaler(MCS).Amultichannelscalercounts
GedetectorfromCanberraforseveralexperimentalruns pulsesfromasetofinputsandthen,onreceiptofachan-
now. Ithasprovedtobecapableofhandlingmuchhigher nel advance pulse, writes the counter values to a buffer
inputcountratesthantheothercompetingsystemsthat and then starts acquiring again. This is then repeated
wereavailableatthetimeofpurchase. TheDXP-2Xwas foreachdatapointandattheendofthe scan,the buffer
recentlyusedatMR-CAT to acquiredata froma sample containing all of the measurements is read out.
of Pu(VI) adsorbed on MgO at input count rates of up Forthe datato be useful, wemust alsorecordthe mo-
to 1.5∗106 counts per second per MCA channel. tor positions for each point in the scan. This is most
MR-CAT currently controls the DXP-2X via an MX easily done by recording some signal that depends on
server running on a Windows 98 computers. Since the the motor position. The most obvious candidate is a
XIA staff currently do all of their development and test- quadratureencodersignalfromthemotorcontrollerthat
ing on Windows platforms, it was regarded as desirable is slaved to the position of the motor. At MR-CAT, this
to use the vendor libraryas providedto maximize XIA’s ishandledbytakingtheencodersignalsintoasmallelec-
ability to diagnose problems. Most of the rest of the tronics module that converts the signals into two pulse
beamlinerunsunderLinux,soweanticipatemovingcon- trains. Onepulsetraincorrespondstomotionintheposi-
trol of the XIA MCAs over to Linux at some point. If tivedirection,whilethesecondpulsetraincorrespondsto
it is moved to the Linux user interface computer, this motion in the negative direction. If the motor controller
will also improve performance by eliminating a network starts the move a few measurements after the MCS has
transfer that must otherwise be done. started acquiring data, then the absolute position of the
Another XIA multichannel analyzer that we are inter- motor can be determined by taking the difference be-
ested in is the Saturn, which was formerly known as the tweenthepulsecountinthepositivemotionchanneland
DXP-X10P. This is a single channel MCA that is con- the pulse count in the negative motion channel.
trolled via a PC parallel port. The Xerxes library used
This mode of quick scanning is currently only possi-
withtheDXP-2XalsosupportstheSaturn. Thus,aftera
ble for motors that have associated encoder outputs. At
few initial difficulties, we were able to getthe MX driver
MR-CAT, only two motors have this capability, namely
to work with the Saturn as well. An optional feature of
the monochromatorBraggangle and the 8-circle diffrac-
the Saturn that is not available for the DXP-2X is 16
tometer’s primary two theta angle. However, SER-CAT
TTL output connectors that are associated with the 16
plans to make this possible for almost all motors on the
regions of interest (ROIs) of the Saturn. In this configu-
beamline. For SER-CAT, this is practical because they
ration, when a detector pulse falls within the boundary
areusingtheTurboPMAClineofmotorcontrollersfrom
of a region of interest, a TTL pulse is synthesized on
Delta Tau. The Turbo PMAC is an up to 32 axis mo-
the corresponding output channel. Thus, in this mode
tor controller capable of driving both stepper and servo
one canthink of the Saturnas a set of 16 programmable
motors, although SER-CAT is using only servo motors.
single channel analyzers whose output can be fed into
Turbo PMAC controllers are able to slave one of its mo-
conventional pulse-counting scaler/timer systems. This
tor axes to any of the other 31 motors controlled by it.
is the mode that DND-CAT currently uses.
Theslaveaxiscanthenbecommandedtogenerateastep
anddirectionoutputwhichcanbe convertedbyexternal
electronics into the same kind of positive and negative
IV. QUICK SCANS pulse trains as are used by MR-CAT. Since the associa-
tionofmasterandslaveaxescanbechangedatruntime,
Another major effort over the last two years has been this makes it possible to quick scan any of the other 31
the developmentof software to support quick scans, also motors controlled by this PMAC. While SER-CAT does
knownasslewscansorfastscans. Thiswasunderinitial not yet routinely operate in this mode, a prototype of
development at the time of the last NOBUGS meeting this configuration has already successfully been tested.
and has been routinely used now for two years at MR- At present, most of the support for multichannel
CAT. scalersin MX is for the Struck SIS3801MCS. There is a
smallamountofsupportforalternateMCSsystems,but V. PERFORMANCE
themainfocushasbeenontheSIS3801. TheSIS3801isa
VME-basedMCSthatcanhaveupto32inputchannels. The most important current task in MX development
The SIS3801 acts as an MCS by transferring its mea- is improvement in the performance of pieces of MX that
surements into a FIFO that can hold up to 128K scaler areperceivedtobeslow. Whenexaminedindetail,most
values upon receipt of a channel advance pulse. If all 32 oftheseissuesrevolvearoundperformanceproblemswith
channels are in use, this allows up to 4K measurements the default MX network protocol. We are currently ad-
per channel. However, the SIS3801 can be programmed dressing this issue in more than one way.
to ignore some or even most of its input channels, which
First of all, one possible solution is to use a differ-
then leaves more space for the remaining channels. For
ent network protocol. In an APS environment, the most
example, if only 4 channels are used, then up to 32K
obvious alternative is the EPICS Channel Access pro-
measurements per channel can be taken.
tocol. The author originally was concerned about its
dependence on VME crates and an expensive real time
operating system. However, recent changes in EPICS li-
Currently, MX has two drivers for the SIS3801. The
censing and the porting of the server side of EPICS Ioc-
first, called epics mcs, is for SIS3801s controlled by the
Core to Linux, Solaris, Win32, and RTEMS have gone a
EPICS MCA record written by Mark Rivers of the Uni-
long way toward mitigating these concerns. MX can al-
versityof Chicago [11]. The second, calledsis3801, talks
readybeusedasanEPICSclientviaMXdriverssuchas
directly to the module via MX VME I/O. This configu-
epics motor, epics scaler, and epics mcs. We have also
rationis intended for use with VME cratesthat are con-
begunworkonmaking the MX driversandtoolkitavail-
trolled via PCI-to-VME bus interfaces or by MX servers
able from the EPICS IocCore server which is described
running directly on a VME crate controller. The exis-
further in Section VII.
tence of two drivers allows MX to support both VME
WearealsopursuingimprovementstotheexistingMX
crates controlled by EPICS and VME crates that are
network protocol. It has been suggested that much of
not controlled by EPICS. At a higher level, the two MX
the overhead may be due to the formatting and parsing
drivers behave similarly. The primary difference is that
of data sent over the network and due to the lack of
theepics mcs driveriscurrentlyrestrictedtoamaximum
caching of the identity of remote records. The author
of4000measurementsper channeldue toarestrictionin
will be focusing his efforts on this and similar ideas for
themaximumlengthofEPICSChannelAccessmessages.
therestof2002andoninto2003. Someofthetestingwill
revolvearoundimprovingthe performancespecificallyof
networkXIAMCAreadout,sincethismakesparticularly
TheSIS3801canbetriggeredtomovetothenextmea-
heavy use of the network.
surement by either an internal or an external channel
Perceivedresponsivenessisalsoimportantforusersat-
advance. Use of the built-in 10 MHz clock with the in-
isfaction [12]. Early versions of Imcagui, the main user
ternal channel advance allows the SIS3801 to run in a
GUI for crystallography, had a beamline status update
stand alone fashion. However, sometimes it is desirable
routine that could take around a second to run. This
to synchronize measurements by an SIS3801 with exter-
meant that if the user typed or clicked something on the
naldevices. Forthisreason,MXalsosupportstheuseof
screen, it might take up to a second for the GUI to ac-
the external channel advance signal. Consequently, MR-
knowledge this. When the status update routine was
CATandSER-CAThavebothpurchasedStruckSIS3807
modified to force frequent updates of the screen, the de-
pulsegeneratormodulestoserveasmasterclocksforthe
lay in responding to user input dropped down to a small
beamline. Theoretically,onecouldsynchronizethe oper-
fraction of a second. The users were much happier with
ation of multiple SIS3801s in this fashion.
this version of the GUI even though it was really doing
work at about the same rate as before.
A more interesting use of the external channel ad-
vance support is for synchronizationwith the MultiSCA
firmware for the XIA DXP-2X MCA. With this special VI. NEW AND UPGRADED BEAMLINES
firmware, the DXP-2X acts similarly to a multichannel
scaler in that each channel buffers a new set of 16 ROI A significant amount of the recent work in MX has
integralmeasurements upon receipt of an externalchan- been in porting the software to new beamlines. Table I
nel advance signal. With a common external clock such lists the beamlines where MX is currently in routine use
as the SIS3807, it will be possible to implement quick and highlights of the equipment used there. One thing
scansthatalsorecordMCAmeasurementsforeachpoint that should be apparent from Table I is that MX is able
of the quick scan. Although some preliminary work has to support a heterogeneous mix of equipment.
been done, this mode of operationhas not yet been fully Much of the new work has been in support of the
implementedbyMXyet. However,wehopetobeableto SER-CAT sector (Sector 22) at the Advanced Photon
provide this mode of operation at MR-CAT by the end Source. SER-CAT uses almost exclusively Delta Tau
of 2003. Turbo PMACs for motion control which are controlled
and aligned, followed by CCD data acquisition and pro-
cessing. The plans for how this will be implemented are
not complete yet, but SER-CAT plans to begin working
dv_dn dv_up
on this very soon. In fact, some early steps have already
been taken such as the purchase of x-y sample position-
ing stages from Oceaneering Space Systems that are to
be used as part of automatic crystal alignment.
ThefirstphaseforSER-CATwillinvolvedevelopment
of a standard interface for interaction with the remote
experimenter, including a method for transmitting im-
offset ages of diffraction patterns for remote evaluation. At
first, the staff will do the work, and then transmit the
distance results. Later, more real-time interaction will be devel-
detector oped. ThiswillprobablyneedtobeintheformofaCGI
horiz. angle X rays to allowthe interactionandauthentication. Controlwill
comelater,andisactuallyeasier. Theotherpushwillbe
FIG. 3: The A-framedetector support for SER-CAT. the developmentof roboticsfor automationof alignment
and sample changing, which will require motion control
programming.
via RS-422 by several Linux-based MX servers. Struck Another aspect of the automation is the develop-
SIS3801 multichannel scalers are used for counter/timer ment of automatic beamline alignment andoptimization
support. They are controlled from a National Instru- scripts, further automation of the fluorescence measure-
ments PCI-to-VME bus interface via MX drivers. ment, automation of data collection strategy for multi-
axis diffractometry, and automated data reduction.
SER-CAT beamline specific workhas included the de-
velopment of pseudomotors to handle A-frame detector
supports of the type originally developed for SBC-CAT
VII. MX AS DEVICE SUPPORT FOR EPICS
as shown in Figure 3. These pseudomotors transform
the vertical and horizontal motions of the detector into
detector two-theta angle, detector distance, and detec- A recent major development in the EPICS world has
tor offset. Other work has included the development of been the porting of the EPICS server software, called
software to control the PMAC-based beamline goniostat IocCore, to Linux, Solaris, Win32, and RTEMS. This is
fromtheMarCCDandBrukerProteusCCDsystemsvia inbetareleasesofwhatistobecomeEPICSrelease3.14.
MX. PreviousversionsofIocCoreonlyranonVxWorks. How-
ever, the device drivers for previous versions of IocCore
At IMCA-CAT, a recent development has been sup-
were generally also VxWorks specific and most have not
portfortheRigaku/MSCsamplechangingrobotderived
been ported. This means that the workstation version
from the original Abbott design. This task and support
ofIocCorehasrelativelyfew device driversatthis point.
of the Bruker Proteus system at SER-CAT has moti-
One of the design goals for MX has been to make it eas-
vated the development of a simplified server controlled
ily embeddable in other packages. Thus, an interesting
via ASCII commands. The idea here is to make it as
idea would be to embed MX inside of EPICS IocCore.
easy as possible for vendors to interface their systems to
The EPICS motor record now has a partially finished
the beamline.
port to EPICS 3.14, so it is an ideal test case for this.
A recent addition has been the new DND-CAT pro-
Correspondingly, I am now working with Ron Sluiter to
teincrystallographybeamlineatAPSSector5-BM.This
develop such an interface.
beamline implements low level hardware control using
Since MX presents the same abstract high level API
their own protocol called SCIPE [13]. MX applications
forallofits motordrivers,myplanis toessentiallytreat
are supported on this beamline via a set of MX devices
MX as an EPICSdriversupport package. Then, all that
drivers such as scipe motor, scipe scaler, and so forth
remains to be done is to create a device support module
thatareanalogoustotheonesusedtocommunicatewith
fortheEPICSmotorrecordthattranslatesrequestsfrom
EPICS controlled devices. Another new user of MX is
EPICS into a form that MX can understand and then
the Gulf Coast Protein Crystallography Consortium at
translate MX’s responses back into a form that EPICS
CAMD. They are operating their beamline with Com-
can understand. I believe that there is a good chance
pumotor6Kmotorcontrollers,Ortec974counter/timers,
that this can be completed quickly and hope to have a
and XIA Saturn MCAs.
working version by the end of 2002.
One task that will become important in the near fu-
The benefits of implementing such an interface are:
ture will be more complete automation of crystallogra-
phy data collection. The ideal will be to make it so that 1. The EPICSMEDMprogramis agoodstatic inter-
crystals can be shipped to the beamline in standardized face builder. This would allow MEDM to be used
containers. These will then be automatically mounted with MX-controlled motors.
2. This would allow Spec to operate MX-controlled automation and new experimental techniques.
motors.
3. MX has a fairly large motor driver library which TheauthorwouldliketothankMR-CAT,IMCA-CAT,
currentlycontains34motordriversand17pseudo- and SER-CAT for the support they have provided dur-
motor drivers. These would all then be available ing the development of this software. MR-CAT related
more or less immediately to the rest of EPICS. development was supported in part by funding from
the U. S. Department of Energy under grant number
The initial development work for this will be done on DEFG0200ER45811. IMCA-CAT related development
Linux. Once it works well, it will then be ported to wassupportedbythecompaniesoftheIndustrialMacro-
Solaris, Win32, and maybe even RTEMS. molecular Crystallography Association through a con-
tractwithIllinoisInstituteofTechnology(IIT),executed
through the IIT’s Center for Synchrotron Radiation Re-
VIII. CONCLUSIONS search and Instrumentation. SER-CAT related develop-
ment was supported by the institutes of the South East
In summary, much progress has been made in the last Regional Collaborative Access Team through a contract
couple ofyears. MX is nowa full featuredbeamline con- with the University of Georgia. Use of the Advanced
trolsystemformaterialsscience,proteincrystallography, Photon Source was supported by the U. S. Department
andotherexperiments. Itisexpectedthatmanynewfea- ofEnergy,BasicEnergySciences,OfficeofScience,under
tureswillbeaddedasneededtosupportbetterbeamline Contract No. W-31-109-Eng-38.
Lavender, P. W. Plag, A. S. King, A. J. Kropf, B. A. anl.gov/xfd/bcda/nobugs/welcome.new1.html.
Bunker, P. Dutta, R. S. Duran, J. Kaduk, “The MR- [8] W. M. Lavender, “MX: A Portable Toolkit for Dis-
CAT Insertion Device Beamline at the Advanced Pho- tributedDataAcquisition andControl”, NOBUGS2000
EleventhUSNationalConference,AIPConf.Proc. 521, dl.ac.uk/nobugs/nobugs3/.
419 (2000). [9] W. M. Lavender, “MX: A Beamline Control Sys-
[4] J. F. Fait, W. M. Lavender, “Data Collection at the EleventhUSNationalConference,AIPConf.Proc. 521,
IMCA Beamlines”, American Crystallographic Associa- 332 (2000).
W. Lavender, K. J. Kim, A. J. Howard, “The User Pro- [12] J.Johnson,GUIBloopers,MorganKaufmannPublishers
gram of the Industrial Macromolecular Crystallography (2000).
Association CAT”, American Crystallographic Associa- [13] J. P. G. Quintana, “SCIPE - A simple control interface
tion AnnualMeeting, (2001). protocol for experimenters”, J. Synchrotron Rad. 5, 600
[7] W.M.Lavender,“MX: APortable Toolkit for DataAc-