Materials Science in Ancient Rome
Amelia Carolina Sparavigna
Dipartimento di Fisica,
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy
Two books, the “De Architectura” by Vitruvius and the “Naturalis Historia” by Pliny the Elder,
give us a portrait of the Materials Science, that is, the knowledge of materials, in Rome at the
beginning of the Empire. Here, I am reporting some very attractive contents that we can find in
these books. The reader will see the discussion proposed in fours case studies: concretes, coatings,
amorphous materials and colloidal crystals, to describe them in modern words.
The American Chemical Society defines the Materials Science as an applied science studying the
relationship between the structure and properties of materials. "Chemists who work in the field
study how different combinations of molecules and materials result in different properties. They use
this knowledge to synthesize new materials with special properties". The web page goes on
remarking the fact that this science has a strong increasing impact on our society [1]. In fact, the
Materials Science is an interdisciplinary field which, besides chemists, involves several researchers,
mainly physicists and engineers, engaged to study the properties of matter, ranging from theoretical
studies to technological applications, from the atomic scales to the macroscopic structures.
Since the interest of media is strongly attracted by nanoscience and nanotechnology, which are the
most recent research fields of Materials Science, we have a tendency to forget that this science had
always accompanied our life from quite ancient times. Nanoscience is its last development.
Science is coming from the Latin scientia, meaning “knowledge” [2], and then, if we want to find
the Materials Science in the past, we need to investigate its “knowledge of materials“. Let us then
try to analyse the case of Ancient Rome. There are several studies on the roman technology (a quite
impressive list is reported in Ref.3): my aim is to propose a research on available ancient texts of
those parts which are devoted to the knowledge of materials. Of course, this is a huge task, needing
help from scholars working on ancient Greek and Latin sources. Nevertheless, an initial
investigation is possible on the books of Vitruvius and Pliny the Elder [4], giving quite interesting
results.
Marcus Vitruvius Pollio lived in the 1st century BC. He was a Roman architect and engineer, best
known as the author of the “De Architectura” [5]. Gaius Plinius Secundus, known as Pliny the
Elder, died on 25 August, 79 AD during the eruption of Mount Vesusius. He was a Roman
naturalist as well as naval commander of the Roman Empire. He wrote an encyclopaedic work, the
“Naturalis Historia” [6]. These two books give us a portrait of knowledge in Rome, at the beginning
of the Empire, and deserve a longer study. For instance, the “Naturalis Historia” contains several
detailed descriptions of metals, pigments and precious stones. Here, I am reporting some contents
that we can find in these books, which attracted my personal interest. In the following, the reader
will find the discussion organized in some case studies on concretes, coatings, amorphous materials
and colloidal crystals, to define them in modern words.
1. From dust to stone
Let us start to discuss the building materials, in particular, concretes.
Vitruvius devoted a chapter of his book to the pozzolana [5]. He is telling the following. “There is a
species of sand which, naturally, possesses extraordinary qualities. It is found about Baiae and the
territory in the neighbourhood of Mount Vesuvius; if mixed with lime and rubble, it hardens as
well under water as in ordinary buildings. This seems to arise from the hotness of the earth under
these mountains and the abundance of springs under their bases”. Vitruvius is talking about
pozzolana which is derived from unconsolidated pyroclastic materials erupted by the Campi
Flegrei, a volcanic field, near Vesuvius. Vitruvius continues telling the “it seems certain that the
moisture is extracted from the sand-stone and earth in their neighbourhood, by the strength of the
fire, as from limestone in a kiln. Dissimilar and unequal actions thus concentrated towards the same
end, the great want of moisture quickly supplied by water binds and strongly cements them, and
also imparts a rapid solidity”. But he notes that in Tuscany, where there are several hot springs too,
“we do not there find a powder, which, for the same reason, would harden under water … All lands
do not possess similar qualities; nor is stone universally found. Some lands are earthy, others
gravelly, others gritty, others sandy: in short, the quality of land, in different parts of the earth,
varies as much as even the climate itself.”
What was written by Vitruvius is the precise description of, probably, the first “hydraulic cement”.
This cement hardens because of hydration, in reactions that occur independently of the mixture's
water content. This cement is hence hardening underwater or exposed to wet weather. The results
obtained when the anhydrous cement powder is mixed with water are not water-soluble [7].
Pozzolana is one of the components of the roman hydraulic concrete. The name pozzolana is
derived from the "pulvis", that is dust of Puteoli and it is coming from pyroclastic materials. It was
during the third century BC, that this hydraulic concrete was discovered by mixing pozzolanic
materials with lime produced by heating limestone [8]. And in fact the harbour works at Puteoli
were constructed (c.199 BC) with pozzolana cement. As reported in [8], the pozzolans are used as
additives in modern portland cements too, improving the mechanical strength and providing
resistance to weathering. It is necessary to note that deposits of pozzolans are not restricted to the
Campi Flegrei or Vesuvius [8].
Pliny in his Natural History describes cements too. First of all, he starts to discuss the Opus
signinum [9] and its manufacture, as follows. “What is there that human industry will not devise?
Even broken pottery has been utilized; it being found that, beaten to powder, and tempered with
lime, it becomes more solid and durable than other substances of a similar nature; forming the
cement known as the "Signine" composition, so extensively employed for even making the
pavements of houses. But there are other resources also, which are derived immediately from the
earth. Who, indeed, cannot but be surprised at finding the most inferior constituent parts of it,
known as "dust" (“pulvis“) only, on the hills about Puteoli, forming a barrier against the waves of
the sea, becoming changed into stone the moment of its immersion, and increasing in hardness from
day to day — more particularly when mixed with the cement of Cumae? There is an earth too, of a
similar nature found in the districts about Cyzicus; but there, it is not a dust, but a solid earth, which
is cut away in blocks of all sizes, and which, after being immersed in the sea, is taken out
transformed into stone. The same thing may be seen also, it is said, in the vicinity of Cassandrea;
and at Cnidos, there is a spring of fresh water which has the property of causing earth to petrify
within the space of eight months. Between Oropus and Aulis, every portion of the land upon which
the sea encroaches becomes transformed into solid rock”. As we can see, Pliny is also reporting
information on the loci where it is possible to find this component of hydraulic cement or where
similar phenomena can be observed, in a certain mythological fashion.
He continues “And then, besides, have we not in Africa and in Spain walls of earth, known as
"formaceoan" walls? from the fact that they are moulded, rather than built, by enclosing earth
within a frame of boards, constructed on either side. These walls [10] will last for centuries, are
proof against rain, wind, and fire, and are superior in solidity to any cement. Even at this day, Spain
still beholds watch-towers that were erected by Hannibal, and turrets of earth placed on the very
summits of her mountains.” He is probably referring to the tapias [10-12], created with a mixture of
lime, sand and gravel. This lime–cemented material was used, during the 1520s, to build the first
palace of Cortés in Mexico City [12].
2. Quicksilver and amalgams
In his book, besides the history of metals, Pliny reports a huge quantity of minerals and pigments,
mixing the description of their properties with history and mythology. Vitruvius is not so detailed in
his description: let me start this section with his discussion on vermilion. We will end with a
coating technique.
The vermilion is an opaque red pigment, similar to scarlet [13]. As a natural mineral pigment, it's
known as Cinnabar, in particular from cinnabar mined in China. The chemical structure of the
pigment is HgS mercuric sulfide. Vitruvius writes: “I shall now speak of vermilion … the manner
of procuring and preparing it is very curious. A clod of earth is selected, which, before it is
manufactured into vermilion, is called Anthrax, wherein are veins resembling iron, but of a red
colour, and having a red dust round them. When dug up, it is beaten with iron bars till a great
number of drops of quicksilver exude from it; these are immediately collected by the excavators.
The clods, when collected in the laboratory, on account of their great dampness, are thrown into a
furnace to dry; and the fumes that rise from them through the action of the fire fall condensed on
the floor of the furnace, and are found to be quicksilver. But as, from the smallness of the drops
which thus remain, they cannot be gathered up, they are swept into a vessel of water, in which they
run together and re-unite. ... If quicksilver be placed in a vessel, and a stone of a hundred pounds
weight be placed on it, it will swim at the top, and will, notwithstanding its weight, be incapable of
pressing the liquid so as to break or separate it. If this be taken out, and only a single scruple of gold
be put in, that will not swim, but immediately descend to the bottom. This is a proof that the gravity
of a body does not depend on its weight, but on its nature.”
Quite interesting this discussion, linked to the density of materials. Iron, quicksilver and gold have
in fact increasing densities. We have not to be surprised: in the chapter on the method of detecting
silver when mixed with gold, Vitruvius is reporting the tales on Archimedes discovering his
principle during a bath. King Hiero was puzzled whether a crown was of pure gold or made of an
alloy and he asked Archimedes to solve the problem. Archimedes found how to compare the
densities of gold and silver, discovering a fraud.
Let us continue with the words of Vitruvius on quicksilver. “Quicksilver is used for many purposes;
without it, neither silver nor brass can be properly gilt. When gold is embroidered on a garment
which is worn out and no longer fit for use, the cloth is burnt over the fire in earthen pots; the ashes
are thrown into water, and quicksilver added to them: this collects all the particles of gold, and
unites with them. The water is then poured off, and the residuum placed in a cloth: which, when
squeezed with the hands, suffers the liquid quicksilver to pass through the pores of the cloth, but
retains the gold in a mass within it.”
And now, let us see what Pliny is writing. “There is a mineral also found in these veins of silver,
which yields a humour that is always liquid, and is known as "quicksilver." It acts as a poison upon
everything, and pierces vessels even, making its way through them by the agency of its malignant
properties (capillarity?). All substances float upon the surface of quicksilver, with the exception of
gold, this being the only substance that it attracts to itself.” Here we have a new information on the
knowledge of materials at ancient times: gold was the material with the highest specific gravity
because platinum was unknown in Rome [6,14].
Quicksilver “it is such an excellent refiner of gold; for, on being briskly shaken in an earthen vessel
with gold, it rejects all the impurities that are mixed with it. When once it has thus expelled these
superfluities, there is nothing to do but to separate it from the gold: to effect which, it is poured out
upon skins that have been well tawed, and so, exuding through them like a sort of perspiration, it
leaves the gold in a state of purity behind.”
As written in a footnote in [6], “the first use of quicksilver is commonly reckoned a Spanish
invention, discovered about the middle of the sixteenth century; but it appears from Pliny (and let
us add, from Vitruvius too), that the ancients were acquainted with amalgam and its use, not only
for separating gold and silver from earthy particles, but also for gilding". And in fact, Pliny tells that
“when copper has to be gilded, a coat of quicksilver is laid beneath the gold leaf, which it retains in
its place with the greatest tenacity: in cases, however, where the leaf is single, or very thin, the
presence of the quicksilver is detected by the paleness of the colour.” We have then seen an ancient
technique, for coating metals: in my opinion, a careful reading of Pliny’s book can discover several
other coating techniques.
3. Glass and fire
Here the amorphous material of Rome, the glasses Archaeological studies tell that probably the first
man-made glass was created in coastal north Syria, Mesopotamia or Old Kingdom Egypt [15].
According to Pliny, Phoenician traders were the first to make the serendipitous discovery of the
glass manufacturing technique. The episode is reported in the following manner. Pliny tells that in
Syria there is a river, the Belus, which provides the pure sands good for produce glasses. The sand
of this river was disclosed at the reflux of the tides. A ship, laden with nitre (a mineral alkali, [16])
was moored at its mouths. The Phoenician merchants, while cooking upon the sea-shore, "finding
no stones at hand for supporting their cauldrons, employed for the purpose some lumps of nitre
which they had taken from the vessel. Upon its being subjected to the action of the fire, in
combination with the sand of the sea-shore, they beheld transparent streams flowing forth of a
liquid hitherto unknown: this, it is said, was the origin of glass." As told in [15], this episode
reflects the fact that probably, in the glass production, the white silica sand from this area was used
because of its low impurity levels.
During the 1st century BC, glass blowing was discovered in the Syro-Palestinian area and the glass
vessels became less expensive. The conquest of Judea by the Romans in 63 BC, prepared the
growth of the use of glass products and their spread in the Roman world [15]. In the same reference,
it is reported that the discovery of clear glass, through the use of manganese dioxide in the mixture,
was made by the Jewish glass blowers in Alexandria, in the first century CE. The item is continuing
telling that cast glass windows, albeit with poor optical qualities, began to appear in the most
important buildings in Rome, Herculaneum and Pompeii. Let us remember that these two cities
were buried by the Vesuvius volcanic eruption in AD 79. During this eruption Pliny died.
Pliny is telling in his book the following. "In process of time, as human industry is ingenious in
discovering, it was not content with the combination of nitre, but magnet-stone (that is the Magnes
lapis, Manganese, [16]) began to be added as well; from the impression that it attracts liquefied
glass as well as iron. In a similar manner, too, brilliant stones of various descriptions came to be
added in the melting, and, at last, shells and fossil sand." Assuming that Beckmann was right in
considering that the name “Magnes lapis” comprehended manganese too [17], it means that the use
of manganese dioxide in glass manufactures is surely antecedent 79 AD. The fact that Vitruvius
does not discuss glasses seems to confirm that clear glasses were not available at his times.
Pliny continues in his description. "In fusing it, light and dry wood is used fur fuel, Cyprian copper
and nitre being added to the melting, nitre of Ophir more particularly. It is melted, like copper, in
contiguous furnaces, and a swarthy mass of an unctuous appearance is the result. ... This mass is
again subjected to fusion in the furnace, for the purpose of colouring it; after which, the glass is
either blown into various forms, turned in a lathe, or engraved like silver. Sidon was formerly
famous for its glass-houses, for it was this place that first invented mirrors. Such was the ancient
method of making glass: but, at the present day, there is found a very white sand for the purpose, at
the mouth of the river Volturnus, in Italy. It spreads over an extent of six miles, upon the sea-shore
that lies between Cumae and Liternum, and is prepared for use by pounding it with a pestle and
mortar; which done, it is mixed with three parts of nitre, either by weight or measure, and, when
fused, is transferred to another furnace. Here it forms a mass of what is called ''hammonitrum";
which is again submitted to fusion, and becomes a mass of pure, white, glass.
At his time, according to Pliny, “the highest value is set upon glass that is entirely colourless and
transparent, as nearly as possible resembling crystal, in fact. For drinking-vessels, glass has quite
superseded the use of silver and gold (see Fig.1); but it is unable to stand heat unless a cold liquid is
poured in first. And yet, we find that globular glass vessels, filled with water, when brought in
contact with the rays of the sun become heated to such a degree as to cause articles of clothing to
ignite.” From this part of the text, it seems that he had not well understood that, in such case, the
glass vessel acts as convex burning-glass. But this phenomenon was known. And probably glasses
with water were used as magnifying glass.
Pliny is continuing his book, discussing the fire. “Submit to its action some sandy soil, and in one
place it will yield glass, in another silver, in another minium, and in others, again, lead and its
several varieties, pigments, and numerous medicaments. It is through the agency of fire that stones
are melted into copper; by fire that iron is produced, and subdued to our purposes; by fire that gold
is purified; by fire, too, that the stone is calcined, which is to hold together the walls of our houses.
Some materials, again, are all the better for being repeatedly submitted to the action of fire; and the
same substance will yield one product at the first fusion, another at the second, and another at the
third. Charcoal, when it has passed through fire and has been quenched, only begins to assume its
active properties; and, when it might be supposed to have been reduced to annihilation, it is then
that it has its greatest energies.” Is this the description of the production of activated charcoal, a
form of carbon? I suppose so. Heating the charcoal is a process to make it extremely porous.
Having a very large surface, the activated charcoal has enhance adsorption properties [18,19].
4. Play of colour of opals
Of course, several descriptions of precious stones are included in the "Natural History". Looking at
their list, I found immediately some stones that attracted my interest, the opals. I asked myself if, in
the Pliny’s description, it was possible to find any mark of the modern vision of colloidal crystals.
Pliny is telling "Of all precious stones, it is opal that presents the greatest difficulties of description,
it displaying at once the piercing fire of carbuncle, the purple brilliancy of amethyst, and the sea-
green of emerald, the whole blended together and refulgent with a brightness that is quite
incredible. Some authors have compared the effect of its refulgence to that of the colour known as
Armenian pigment, while others speak of it as resembling the flame of burning sulphur, or of flame
fed with oil. ... There is no stone that is imitated by fraudulent dealers with more exactness than
this, in glass, the only mode of detecting the imposition being by the light of the sun. For when a
false opal is held between the finger and thumb, and exposed to the rays of that luminary, it presents
but one and the same transparent colour throughout, limited to the body of the stone: whereas the
genuine opal offers various refulgent tints in succession, and reflects now one hue and now another,
as it sheds its luminous brilliancy upon the fingers."
For Pliny, the difficulty in describing this gemstone is due to the changing pattern of its colours.
Gemmologists use the term "play of colour" to describe this effect, which is directly correlated by
them to the value of the stone. Besides the play of colours, another part of the Pliny's description is
quite attractive. It is the discussion on how to test the stone against frauds. At Pliny's times, as he is
telling, the false opal was created from glass, probably with addition of some metal particles. Glass
is an amorphous material: when we observe a piece of it by means of a light normally incident,
without dispersion then, the object is transmitting just a colour. The behaviour of opal is different,
and Pliny is remarkably describing: it has "refulgent tints in succession", reflecting different hues
and shedding its colours upon the fingers.
In opal, the play of colour is caused by tiny sphere formations of silicon which make up the
structure of opal [20,21]. The silica spheres have diameters ranging from 150 to 300 nm, arranged
in a hexagonal or cubic close-packed lattice; they form colloidal crystals, quite attractive structures
to create photonic crystals [21]. It is the regularity of the sizes and the packing of these spheres that
determines the quality of precious opal (the arrangement of the spheres is shown in [22]).
The spheres arranged in a lattice structure create a diffraction grating for light [23]. The diffraction
is controlled by the size of spheres and distances in the lattice. If the distance between the planes of
the regularly packed spheres is approximately half the wavelength of a component of light, the light
of that wavelength may be subject to diffraction. The spacing between the planes and their
orientation with respect to the incident light determines the colours observed. The process can be
described by Bragg's Law of diffraction. To imagine what happens, let us observe the reflecting
surface of a compact disc: we see a play of colour, that is, a coloured appearance in succession from
its surface. It is a diffraction of light again: the tracks of the compact disc act as a diffraction
grating, separating the colours of white light. As told in Ref.23, the nominal track separation on a
CD is 1.6 micrometers, giving about 625 tracks per millimeter. This corresponds to the range of
laboratory diffraction gratings.
In the case of opals, as Pliny is telling, if the stone is thin enough, we see the diffraction patterns.
Since the diffracted light cannot pass through large thicknesses of the opal, to display the play of
colour the stone is often cut quite thin. This fact has given rise to an unusual method of preparing
the stone as a gem: a thin layer of opal is backed by a swart mineral such as ironstone, basalt, or
obsidian. This darker backing emphasizes the play of colour.
In this paper I have discussed just fours case studies, that I defined in modern words as: concretes,
coatings, amorphous materials and colloidal crystals. I am confident that further readings of these
books can provide further information on the knowledge of material in ancient Rome.