Mathematical frameworks for oscillatory network dynamics in
neuroscience
Peter Ashwin Stephen Coombes
Centre for Systems, Dynamics and Control School of Mathematical Sciences
Harrison Building University of Nottingham
University of Exeter University Park
Exeter EX4 4QF, U.K. Nottingham NG7 2RD, U.K.
Rachel Nicks
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Birmingham
Watson Building
Birmingham B15 2TT, U.K.
June 22, 2015
The tools of weakly coupled phase oscillator theory have had a profound impact on the
neuroscience community, providing insight into a variety of network behaviours ranging from
central pattern generation to synchronisation, as well as predicting novel network states such
as chimeras. However, there are many instances when this theory is expected to break down,
say in the presence of strong coupling, or must be carefully interpreted, as in the presence of
stochastic forcing. There are also surprises in the dynamical complexity of the attractors that
can robustly appear - for example, heteroclinic network attractors. In this review we present
a set of mathematical tools that are suitable for addressing the dynamics of oscillatory neural
networks, broadening from a standard phase oscillator perspective to provide a practical frame-
work for further successful applications of mathematics to understanding network dynamics in
neuroscience.
1 Introduction 3
2 Neurons and neural populations as oscillators 5
2.1 The Hodgkin-Huxley model and its planar reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 The cortical model of Wilson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3 Morris-Lecar with homoclinic bifurcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.4 Integrate-and-fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.5 Neuronal coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6 Neural mass models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1v82850.6051:viXra
3 Dynamical systems approaches to collective behaviour 13
3.1 Synchrony and asynchrony. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2 Networks, motifs and coupled cell dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3 Weak and strong coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4 Clusters, exact and generalised synchrony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.5 Synchrony, dynamics and time delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.6 A short introduction to symmetric dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.7 Permutation symmetries and oscillator networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.8 Invariant subspaces and symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.9 Bifurcations with symmetry and genericity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.10 Robust heteroclinic attractors, cycles and networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.11 Groupoid and related formalisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4 Coupled limit cycle oscillators 23
4.1 Stability of the synchronised state for complex networks of identical systems . . . . . 24
4.2 Pulse-coupled oscillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3 Synaptic coupling in networks of IF neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5 Reduction of limit cycle oscillators to phase-amplitude and phase models 31
5.1 Isochronal coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.2 Phase-amplitude models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.3 Dynamics of forced oscillators: shear-induced chaos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.4 Phase oscillator models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.5 Phase response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
6 Weakly coupled phase oscillator networks 42
6.1 Phase, frequency and mode locking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.2 Dynamics of general networks of identical phase oscillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2.1 Synchrony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.2.2 Asynchrony . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2.3 Clusters for globally coupled phase oscillators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2.4 Generic loss of synchrony in globally coupled identical phase oscillators . . . 49
6.3 Phase waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.3.1 Phase turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
7 Heteroclinic attractors 56
7.1 Robust heteroclinic attractors for phase oscillator networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.2 Winnerless competition and other types of heteroclinic attractor . . . . . . . . . . . 62
8 Stochastic oscillator models 63
8.1 Phase reduction of a planar system with state-dependent Gaussian white noise . . . 63
8.2 Phase reduction for noise with temporal correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
9 Low dimensional macroscropic dynamics and chimera states 66
9.1 Ott-Antonsen reduction for the Winfree model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
9.2 Chimera states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
10 Applications 71
10.1 Functional and structural connectivity in neuroimaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
10.2 Central Pattern Generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
10.3 Perceptual rivalry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
11 Discussion 75
1 Introduction
Coupledoscillatortheoryisnowapervasivepartofthetheoreticalneuroscientist’stoolkitforstudy-
ing the dynamics of models of biological neural networks. Undoubtedly this technique originally
arose in the broader scientific community through a fascination with understanding synchronisa-
tion in networks of interacting heterogeneous oscillators, and can be traced back to the work of
Huygenson“anoddkindofsympathy”betweencoupledpendulumclocks”[143]. Subsequentlythe
theory has been developed and applied to the interaction between organ pipes [268], phase-locking
phenomena in electronic circuits [257], the analysis of brain rhythms [346], chemical oscillations
[173], cardiac pacemakers [218], circadian rhythms [199], flashing fireflies [98], coupled Josephson
junctions [347], rhythmic applause [230], animal flocking [131], fish schooling [246], and behaviours
in social networks [33]. For a recent overview of the application of coupled phase oscillator theory
to areas as diverse as vehicle coordination, electric power networks, and clock synchronisation in
decentralised networks see the recent survey article by D¨orfler and Bullo [93].
Given the widespread nature of oscillations in neural systems it is no surprise that the science
of oscillators has found such ready application in neuroscience [334]. This has proven especially
fruitful for shedding light on the functional role that oscillations can play in feature binding [293,
329], cognition [341], memory processes [110], odour perception [345, 187], information transfer
mechanisms [59], inter-limb coordination [132, 157], and the generation of rhythmic motor output
[304]. Neural oscillations also play an important role in many neurological disorders, such as
excessive synchronisation during seizure activity in epilepsy [220, 76], tremor in patients with
Parkinson’s disease [324] or disruption of cortical phase synchronisation in schizophrenia [46]. As
such it has proven highly beneficial to develop methods for the control of (de)synchronisation in
oscillatory networks, as exemplified by the work of Tass et al. [315, 316] for therapeutic brain
stimulation techniques. From a transformative technological perspective, oscillatory activity is
increasingly being used to control external devices in brain-computer interfaces, in which subjects
can control an external device by changing the amplitude of a particular brain rhythm [267].
Neural oscillations can emerge in a variety of ways, including intrinsic mechanisms within in-
dividual neurons or by interactions between neurons. At the single neuron level, sub-threshold
oscillations can be seen in membrane voltage as well as rhythmic patterns of action potentials.
Both can be modelled using the Hodgkin-Huxley conductance formalism, and analysed mathemat-
ically with dynamical systems techniques to shed light on the mechanisms that underly various
forms of rhythmic behaviour, including tonic spiking and bursting (see e.g. [73]). The high dimen-
sionality of biophysically realistic single neuron models has also encouraged the use of reduction
techniques, such as the separation of time-scales recently reviewed in [272, 172], or the use of
phenomenological models, such as FitzHugh-Nagumo (FHN) [113], to regain some level of mathe-
matical tractability. This has proven especially useful when studying the response of single neurons
to forcing [75], itself a precursor to understanding how networks of interacting neurons can behave.
When mediated by synaptic interactions, the repetitive firing of pre-synaptic neurons can cause
oscillatory activation of post-synaptic neurons. At the level of neural ensembles, synchronised ac-
tivityoflargenumbersofneuronsgivesrisetomacroscopicoscillations, whichcanberecordedwith
a micro-electrode embedded within neuronal tissue as a voltage change referred to as a local field
potential (LFP). These oscillations were first observed outside the brain by Hans Berger in 1924
[40] in electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings, and have given rise to the modern classification of
brain rhythms into frequency bands for alpha activity (8-13 Hz) (recorded from the occipital lobe
duringrelaxedwakefulness), delta(1-4Hz), theta(4-8Hz), beta(13-30Hz)andgamma(30-70Hz).
The latter rhythm is often associated with cognitive processing, and it is now common to link large
scale neural oscillations with cognitive states, such as awareness and consciousness. For example,
from a practical perspective the monitoring of brain states via EEG is used to determine depth of
anaesthesia [336]. Such macroscopic signals can also arise from interactions between different brain
areas, the thalamo-cortical loop being a classic example [286]. Neural mass models (describing
the coarse grained activity of large populations of neurons and synapses) have proven especially
usefulinunderstandingEEGrhythms[356], aswellasinaugmentingthedynamiccausalmodelling
framework(drivenbylargescaleneuroimagingdata)forunderstandinghowevent-relatedresponses
result from the dynamics of coupled neural populations [83].
Oneveryinfluentialmathematicaltechniqueforanalysingnetworksofneuraloscillators,whether
they be built from single neuron or neural mass models, has been that of weakly coupled oscilla-
tor theory, as comprehensively described by Hoppensteadt and Izhikevich [142]. In the limit of
weak coupling between limit cycle oscillators invariant manifold theory [111] and averaging theory
[128] can be used to reduce the dynamics to a set of phase equations in which the relative phase
between oscillators is the relevant dynamical variable. This approach has been applied to neural
behaviour ranging from that seen in small rhythmic networks [161] up to the whole brain [60].
Despite the powerful tools and wide-spread use afforded by this formalism, it does have a number
of limitations (such as assuming the persistence of the limit cycle under coupling) and it is well
to remember that there are other tools from the mathematical sciences relevant to understanding
network behaviour. In this review we wrap the weakly coupled oscillator formalism in a variety of
other techniques ranging from symmetric bifurcation theory and groupoid formalisms through to
more “physics-based” approaches for obtaining reduced models of large networks. This highlights
the regimes where the standard formalism is applicable, and provides a set of complementary tools
when it does not. These are especially useful when investigating systems with strong coupling, or
ones for which the rate of attraction to a limit cycle is slow.
In § 2 we review some of the key mathematical models of oscillators in neuroscience, ranging
from single neuron to neural mass, as well as introduce the standard machinery for describing
synaptic and gap junction coupling. We then present in § 3 an overview of some of the more
powerful mathematical approaches to understanding the collective behaviour in coupled oscillator
networks, mainly drawn from the theory of symmetric dynamics. We touch upon the master
stability function approach and the groupoid formalism for handling coupled cell systems. In § 4
we review some special cases where it is either possible to say something about the stability of the
globally synchronous state in a general setting, or that of phase-locked states for strongly coupled
networks of integrate-and-fire neurons. The challenge of the general case is laid out in § 5, where
we advocate the use of phase-amplitude coordinates as a starting point for either direct network
analysis or network reduction. To highlight the importance of dynamics off cycle we discuss the
phenomenon of shear-induced chaos. In the same section we review the reduction to the standard
phase-only description of an oscillator, covering the well known notions of isochrons and phase
responsecurves. Theconstructionofphaseinteractionfunctionsforweaklycoupledphaseoscillator
networks is covered in § 6, together with tools for analysing phase-locked states. Moreover, we go
beyond standard approaches and describe the emergence of turbulent states in continuum models
withnon-localcoupling. Anotherexampleofsomethingmorecomplicatedthanaperiodicattractor
isthatofaheteroclinicattractor, andthesearethesubjectof§7. Thesubtletiesofphasereduction
in the presence of stochastic forcing are outlined in § 8. The search for reduced descriptions of very
large networks is the topic of § 9, where we cover recent results for Winfree networks that provide
an exact mean-field description in terms of a complex order parameter. This approach makes use
of the Ott-Antonsen ansatz that has also found application to chimera states, and which we discuss
in a neural context. In § 10 we briefly review some examples where the mathematics of this review
have been applied, and finally in § 11 we discuss some of the many open challenges in the field of
neural network dynamics.
We will assume the reader has familiarity with the following:
• The basics of nonlinear differential equation descriptions of dynamical systems such as linear
stability and phase-plane analysis.
• Ideas from the qualitative theory of differential equations/dynamical systems such as asymp-
totic stability, attractors and limit cycles.
• Generic codimension-one bifurcation theory of equilibria (saddle-node, Hopf) and of periodic
orbits (saddle-node of limit cycles, heteroclinic, torus, flip).
There are a number of texts that cover this material very well in the context of neuroscience
modelling, for example [146, 105]. At the end we include a glossary of some abbreviations that are
introduced in the text.
2 Neurons and neural populations as oscillators
Nonlinear ionic currents, mediated by voltage-gated ion channels, play a key role in generating
membrane potential oscillations and action potentials. There are many ordinary differential equa-
tion (ODE) models for voltage oscillations, ranging from biophysically detailed conductance-based
modelsthroughtosimpleintegrate-and-fire(IF)caricatures. Thisstyleofmodellinghasalsoproved
fruitful at the population level, for tracking the averaged activity of a near synchronous state. In
all these cases bifurcation analysis is especially useful for classifying the types of oscillatory (and
possibly resonant) behaviour that are possible. Here we give a brief overview of some of the key
oscillator models encountered in computational neuroscience, as well as models for electrical and
chemical coupling necessary to build networks.
2.1 The Hodgkin-Huxley model and its planar reduction
The work of Hodgkin and Huxley in elucidating the mechanism of action potentials in the squid
giant axon is one of the major breakthroughs of dynamical modelling in physiology [137], and see
[271] for a review. Their work underpins all modern electrophysiological models, exploiting the
observation that cell membranes behave much like electrical circuits. The basic circuit elements are
1) the phospholipid bilayer, which is analogous to a capacitor in that it accumulates ionic charge as
the electrical potential across the membrane changes; 2) the ionic permeabilities of the membrane,
which are analogous to resistors in an electronic circuit; and 3) the electrochemical driving forces,
which are analogous to batteries driving the ionic currents. These ionic currents are arranged in
a parallel circuit. Thus the electrical behaviour of cells is based upon the transfer and storage of
ions such as K+ and Na+.
Our goal here is to illustrate, by exploiting specific models of excitable membrane, some of the
concepts and techniques which can be used to understand, predict, and interpret the excitable and
oscillatory behaviours that are commonly observed in single cell electrophysiological recordings.
We begin with the mathematical description of the Hodgkin-Huxley model.
The standard dynamical system for describing a neuron as a spatially isopotential cell with
constant membrane potential V is based upon conservation of electric charge, so that
C V = I +I,
where C is the cell capacitance, I the applied current and I represents the sum of individual
ionic currents:
ion K K Na Na L L
In the Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) model the membrane current arises mainly through the conduction of
sodiumandpotassiumionsthroughvoltagedependentchannelsinthemembrane. Thecontribution
from other ionic currents is assumed to obey Ohm’s law (and is called the leak current). The g ,
g and g are conductances (conductance=1/resistance).
The great insight of Hodgkin and Huxley was to realise that g depends upon four activation
gates: g = g n4, whereas g depends upon three activation gates and one inactivation gate:
g = g m3h. Here the gating variables all obey equations of the form
X = , X ∈ {m,n,h}.
TheconductancevariablesdescribedbyX takevaluesbetween0and1andapproachtheasymptotic
values X (V) with time constants τ (V). These six functions are obtained from fits with experi-
mentaldata. Itiscommonpracticetowriteτ (V) = 1/(α (V)+β (V)), X (V) = α (V)τ (V),
X X X ∞ X X
where α and β have the interpretation of opening and closing channel transition rates respectively.
ThedetailsoftheHHmodelareprovidedinAppendixAforcompleteness. Anumericalbifurcation
diagram of the model in response to constant current injection is shown in Fig. 1, illustrating that
oscillations can emerge in a Hopf bifurcation with increasing drive.
The mathematical forms chosen by Hodgkin and Huxley for the functions τ and X , X ∈
{m,n,h},arealltranscendentalfunctions. Boththisandthehighdimensionalityofthemodelmake
analysis difficult. However, considerable simplification is attained with the following observations:
(i) τ (V) is small for all V so that the variable m rapidly approaches its equilibrium value m (V),
and (ii) the equations for h and n have similar time-courses and may be slaved together. This has
been put on a more formal footing by Abbott and Kepler [1], to obtain a reduced planar model
for (V,U) obtained from the full Hodgkin-Huxley model under the replacement m → m (V) and
X = X (U) for X ∈ {n,h} with a prescribed choice of U. The phase-plane and nullclines for this
system are shown in Fig. 2.
For zero external input the fixed point is stable and the neuron is said to be excitable. When a
positive external current is applied the low-voltage portion of the V nullcline moves up whilst the
0 40 80 120 I 160
Figure 1: Bifurcation diagram of the Hodgkin-Huxley model as a function of the external drive I.
The green circles show the amplitude of a stable limit cycle and the blue circles indicate unstable
limit cycle behaviour. The solid red line shows the stable fixed point and the black line shows the
unstable fixed point. Details of the model are in Appendix A.
-80 -40 0 V 40
Figure 2: Nullclines (red for V and green for U) of the reduced HH neuron mode, obtained using
the reduction technique of Abbott and Kepler [1], for the oscillatory regime (I = 10) capable of
supporting a periodic train of spikes. The periodic orbit is shown in blue.
high-voltage part remains relatively unchanged. For sufficiently large constant external input the
intersection of the two nullclines falls within the portion of the V nullcline with positive slope. In
thiscasethefixedpointisunstableandthesystemmaysupportalimitcycle. Thesystemissaidto
be oscillatory as it may produce a train of action potentials. Action potentials may also be induced
in the absence of an external current for synaptic stimuli of sufficient strength and duration. This
simple planar model captures all of the essential features of the original HH model yet is much
easier to understand from a geometric perspective. Indeed the model is highly reminiscent of the
famous FHN model, in which the voltage nullcline is taken to be a cubic function. Both models
show the onset of repetitive firing at a non-zero frequency as observed in the HH model (when
an excitable state loses stability via a subcritical Hopf bifurcation). However, unlike real cortical
neurons they cannot fire at arbitrarily low frequency. This brings us to consider modifications of
the original HH formalism to accommodate bifurcation mechanisms from excitable to oscillatory
behaviours that can respect this experimental observation.
2.2 The cortical model of Wilson
Many of the properties of real cortical neurons can be captured by making the equation for the
recoveryvariableoftheFHNequationsquadratic(insteadoflinear). Wearethusledtothecortical
model of Wilson [348]:
where 0 < a < 1 and b,γ,µ > 0. Here v is like the membrane potential V, and w plays the role of a
gatingvariable. InadditiontothesinglefixedpointoftheFHNmodelitispossibletohaveanother
pair of fixed points, as shown in Fig. 3 (right). As I increases two fixed points can annihilate at
a saddle node on an invariant curve (SNIC) bifurcation at I = I [146]. In the neighbourhood of
this global bifurcation the firing frequency scales like I −I . For large enough I there is only one
fixed point on the middle branch of the cubic, as illustrated in Fig. 3 (left). In this instance an
oscillatory solution occurs via the same mechanism as for the FHN model.
2.3 Morris-Lecar with homoclinic bifurcation
A SNIC bifurcation is not the only way to achieve a low firing rate in a single neurone model.
It is also possible to achieve this via a homoclinic bifurcation, as is possible in the Morris-Lecar
(ML) model [225]. This was originally developed as a model for barnacle muscle fiber. Morris
and Lecar introduced a set of coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) incorporating two
ionic currents: an outward going, non-inactivating potassium current and an inward going, non-
inactivating calcium current. Assuming that the calcium currents operate on a much faster time
scale than the potassium current one they formulated the following two dimensional system:
L L K K Ca ∞ Ca
-1 0 w 1 -1 0 w 1
Figure 3: Phase portrait for cortical neuron model with quadratic recovery variable, a = 0.1,
β = γ = 0.5, v = 0,v = 0.2. The voltage nullcline is shown in red and that of the recovery
variable in green. Left: I = 0, showing a stable fixed point (black filled circle), a saddle (grey filled
circle) and an unstable fixed point (white filled circle). Right: I = 0.1, where there is an unstable
fixed point (white filled circle) with a stable limit cycle (in blue) for C = 0.01.
∞ 1 2 ∞ 3 4
φcosh[(V −V )/(2V )]. Here w represents the fraction of K+ channels open, and the Ca2+ channels
respond to V so rapidly that we assume instantaneous activation. Here g is the leakage conduc-
tance, g ,g are the potassium and calcium conductances, V ,V ,V are corresponding reversal
K Ca L K Ca
potentials,m (V),w (V)arevoltage-dependentgatingfunctionsandλ(V)isavoltage-dependent
rate. Referring to Fig. 4, as I decreases the periodic orbit grows in amplitude, it comes closer to
a saddle point and slows down such that near the homoclinic bifurcation, where the orbit collides
with the saddle at I = I , the frequency of oscillation scales as −1/log(I −I ).
2.4 Integrate-and-fire
Although conductance-based models like that of Hodgkin and Huxley provide a level of detail that
helps us to understand how the kinetics of channels (with averaged activation and inactivation
variables) can underlie action-potential generation their high dimensionality is a barrier to studies
at the network level. The goal of a network-level analysis is to predict emergent computational
propertiesinpopulationsandrecurrentnetworksofneuronsfromthepropertiesoftheircomponent
cells. Thus simpler (lower dimensional and hopefully mathematically tractable) models are more
appealing - especially if they fit single neuron data.
A one-dimensional nonlinear IF model takes the form
τ v = f(v)+I if v < v , (1)
such that v(t) is reset to v just after reaching the value v . In other words we seek a piecewise
discontinuous solution v(t) of (1) such that
lim v(t ) = v implies that lim v(t) = v .
Firing times are defined iteratively according to
T = inf{t |v(t) ≥ v ; t ≥ T }.
-0.4 -0.2 0 wv 0.2
Figure4: PhaseportraitoftheMorris-LecarmodelatI = 0.075withC = 1,V = −0.7,V = −0.5,
V = 1, g = 2, g = 0.5, V = −0.01, V = 0.15, g = 1.33, V = 0.1, V = 0.145 and φ = 1/3.
Ca K L 1 2 Ca 3 4
The voltage nullcline is shown in red and that of the gating variable in green. The filled black circle
indicates a stable fixed point, the grey filled circle a saddle and the filled white circle an unstable
fixed point. The periodic orbit is shown in blue.
Real cortical data can be very accurately fit using:
with v = −68.5 mV, τ = 3.3 ms, v = −61.5 mV and κ = 4 mV [36]. There are many varieties
of nonlinear IF model, with the quadratic one [185] being well known as a precursor for the planar
Izhikevichspikingmodel[148],itselfcapableofgeneratingawidevarietyoffiringpatterns,including
bursting and chattering as well as regular spiking. For a more thorough discussion of IF models
and the challenges of analysing non-smooth dynamical systems we refer the reader to [77].
2.5 Neuronal coupling
At a synapse presynaptic firing results in the release of neurotransmitters that cause a change in
the membrane conductance of the postsynaptic neuron. This postsynaptic current may be written
I (t) = g s(t)(V −V(t)) where V(t) is the voltage of the postsynaptic neuron, V is the membrane
reversal potential and g is a constant conductance. The variable s corresponds to the probability
that a synaptic receptor channel is in an open conducting state. This probability depends on the
presence and concentration of neurotransmitter released by the presynaptic neuron. The sign of V
relative to the resting potential (which without loss of generality we may set to zero) determines
whether the synapse is excitatory (V > 0) or inhibitory (V < 0).
The effect of some synapses can be described with a function that fits the shape of the postsy-
napticresponseduetothearrivalofactionpotentialatthepre-synapticreleasesite. Apostsynaptic
potential (PSP) s(t) would then be given by s(t) = η(t−T), t ≥ T where T is the arrival time of
a pre-synaptic action potential and η(t) fits the shape of a realistic PSP (with η(t) = 0 for t < 0).
A common (normalised) choice for η(t) is a difference of exponentials:
(cid:19)−1
or the alpha function α2te−αt obtained from (2) in the limit β → α. The PSP arising from a train
of action potentials is given by
where T denotes the arrival time of the mth action potential at a synapse.
Interestingly even purely inhibitory synaptic interactions between non-oscillatory neurons can
create oscillations at the network level, and can give rise to central pattern generators of “half-
center” type [56]. To see this we need only consider a pair of (reduced) Hodgkin-Huxley neurons
with mutual reciprocal inhibition mediated by an α-function synapse with a negative reversal
potential. The phenomenon of anode break excitation (whereby a neuron fires an action potential
in response to termination of a hyperpolarising current) can underlie a natural anti-phase rhythm,
and is best understood in terms of the phase plane shown in Fig. 2. In this case inhibition will
effectively move the voltage nullcline down, and the system will equilibrate to a new hyperpolarised
state. Upon release of inhibition the fixed point will move to a higher value, though to reach this
new state the trajectory must jump to the right hand branch (since now dV/dt > 0). An example
is shown in Fig. 5.
-80 -40 0 40
Figure 5: A Half Center oscillator built from two (reduced) Hodgkin-Huxley neurons with mutual
reciprocal inhibition modelled by an α-function synapse and a negative reversal potential. The
inset shows the voltage traces (solid and dashed lines) for the two neurons. The solid blue line in
the (V,U) space shows the common orbit of the two neurons (though each neuron travels half a
period out of phase with the other). Parameters: α = 1 ms, V = −100 mV, g = 100 mS cm−2.
Spike times determined by a voltage threshold at V = −35 mV.
Gapjunctionsdifferfromchemicalsynapsesinthattheyallowfordirectcommunicationbetween
cells. They are typically formed from the juxtaposition of two hemichannels (connexin proteins)
and allow the free movement of ions or molecules across the intercellular space separating the
plasma membrane of one cell from another. As well as being found in the neocortex, they occur in
many other brain regions, including the hippocampus, inferior olivary nucleus in the brain stem,
the spinal cord, and the thalamus [70]. Without the need for receptors to recognise chemical
messengers, gap junctions are much faster than chemical synapses at relaying signals. The synaptic
delay for a chemical synapse is typically in the range 1–100ms, while the synaptic delay for an
electrical synapse may be only about 0.2ms.
It is common to view the gap-junction as nothing more than a channel that conducts current
according to a simple ohmic model. For two neurons with voltages v and v the current flowing
into cell i from cell j is given by I (v ,v ) = g(v −v ), where g is the constant strength of the
gap i j j i
gap junction conductance. They are believed to promote synchrony between oscillators (e.g. see
[325]), though the story is more subtle than this as we shall discuss in § 4.
2.6 Neural mass models
As well as supporting oscillations at the single neuron level, brain tissue can also generate oscilla-
tions at the tissue level. Rather than model this using networks built from single neuron models, it
is has proven especially useful to develop low dimensional models to mimic the collection of thou-
sands of near identical interconnected neurons with a preference to operate in synchrony. These
are often referred to as neural mass models, with state variables that track coarse grained measures
of the average membrane potential, firing rates or synaptic activity. They have proven especially
useful in the description of human EEG power spectra [193], as well as resting brain state activity
[84] and mesoscopic brain oscillations [360].
In many neural population models, such as the well known Wilson-Cowan model [349], it is
assumed that the interactions are mediated by firing rates rather than action potentials (spikes)
per se. To see how this might arise we rewrite (3) in the equivalent form using a sum of Dirac
δ-functions
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 d 1 d (cid:88)
Identifying the right hand side of (4) as a train of pre-synaptic spikes motivates the form of a
phenomenological rate model in the form
Qs = f, (5)
with f identified as a firing rate and Q identified as the differential operator (1+α−1d/dt)(1+
β−1d/dt). At the network level it is then common practice to close this system of equations by
specifying f to be a function of pre-synaptic activity. A classic example is the Jansen-Rit model
[149], which describes a network of interacting pyramidal neurons (P), inhibitory interneurons (I)
and excitatory interneurons (E), and has been used to model both normal and epileptic patterns
of cortical activity [326]. This can be written in the form
Q s = f(s −s ), Q s = C f(C s )+A, Q s = C f(C s ),
E P E I E E 2 1 P I I 4 3 P
which is a realisation of the structure suggested by (5), with the choice
andQ = (1+β−1d/dt)2β /A fora ∈ {E,I}. HereAisanexternalinput. Whenthisisaconstant
we obtain the bifurcation diagram shown in Fig. 6. Oscillations emerge via Hopf bifurcations and it
is possible for a pair of stable periodic orbits to coexist. One of these has a frequency in the alpha
band andthe other is characterised by a lower frequency andhigher amplitude. Recently a network
of such modules, operating in the alpha range and with additive noise, has been used to investigate
mechanisms of cross-frequency coupling between brain areas [150]. Neural mass models have also
previously been used to model brain resonance phenomena [300], for modelling of epileptic seizures
[45, 319, 65], and are very popular in the Neuroimaging community for model driven EEG/fMRI
fusion [330].
-100 0 100 200 300 A 400
Figure6: BifurcationdiagramfortheJansen-Ritmodelwithβ = 100s−1, β = 50s−1, A = 3.25
mV,A = 22mV,ν = 5s−1,v = 6mV,r = 0.56mV−1,C = 135,C = 0.8C ,C = 0.25C = C .
I 0 1 2 1 3 1 4
Solid red (black) lines represent stable (unstable) fixed points. Green (blue) points denote the
amplitude of stable (unstable) periodic orbits that emerge via Hopf bifurcations. The inset shows
the co-existence of two stable periodic orbits at A = 125 Hz.
Now that we have introduced some oscillator models for neurons and neural populations it is
appropriate to consider the set of tools for analysing their behaviour at the network level.
3 Dynamical systems approaches to collective behaviour
We give a brief overview of some dynamical systems approaches, concepts and techniques that
can be used to understand collective behaviour that spontaneously appears in coupled dynamical
system models used for neuroscience modelling. We do not give a complete review of this area but
try to highlight some of the approaches and how they interact; some examples of applications of
these to neural systems are given in later chapters.
3.1 Synchrony and asynchrony
A set of N coupled nonlinear systems represented by ODEs can be written
x = g (x ;x ,...,x ), (6)
where x ∈ Rd represent the state space of the individual systems whose evolution g is affected
both by the current state of the system and by the states of those coupled to that system. In
the mathematics literature, the x are often called “cells” though we note that the x may include
degrees of freedom in the coupling as well as variables such as membrane potential that reflect the
state of the “biological cell”. Note there is potential for notational confusion here: to clarify this
x ∈ RNd, x ∈ Rd, x (j) ∈ R.
Oneofthemostimportantobservationsconcerningthecollectivedynamicsofcouplednonlinear
systems relates to whether the collection behaves as one or not - whether there is an attracting
synchronous state, or whether more complex spatio-temporal patterns such as clustering appear.
There is a very large literature, even restricting to the case of applications of synchrony, and one
where we cannot hope to do the whole area justice. We refer in particular to [13, 255]. Various
applications of synchrony of neural models are discussed, for example, in [52, 57, 63, 86, 237, 248,
256, 258, 276] while there is a large literature (e.g. [329]) discussing the role of synchrony in
neural function. Other work looks for example at synchronisation of groups of networks [299] and
indeed synchrony can be measured experimentally [270] in groups of neurons using dynamic patch
clamping.
We discuss some of the types of behaviour that can emerge in the collective dynamics and
the response of partial synchronised states to external forcing. Clearly, any system of N coupled
dynamical systems can be written in the form
x = f (x )+(cid:15)g (x ;x ,...,x ), (7)
i i i i i 1 N
where each system is parametrised by x ∈ Rd; (cid:15) = 0 corresponds to decoupling the systems and
the functions g represent drive from other systems on the ith system. Many approaches start with
the less general case
d (cid:88)
x = f (x )+(cid:15) w G (x ,x ), (8)
i i i ij ij i j
which can be justified for system where the collective interaction between systems can be broken
into “pairwise” interactions G that are summed according to some linear weights w (some of
which may be zero) that represent the strength of the couplings and (cid:15) the strength of coupling
of the network. Note that there is clearly no unique way to write the system in this form; more
specifically, one can without loss of generality choose (cid:15) = 1, w = 1 by suitable choice of G . On
the other hand it can be useful to be able to e.g. modulate the strength of the coupling across the
whole network independently of changing individual coupling strengths. Similarly it is often useful
to specialise to a case such as G = G and have similar interactions.
3.2 Networks, motifs and coupled cell dynamics
We focus now on the dynamics of pairwise coupled networks such as (8) as this form is assumed
in most cases. Under an additional assumption that the coupling between the oscillators is of the
same type and either present or absent, one can consider uniformly weighted coupling of the form
where g is fixed and A is an adjacency matrix of the graph of interactions, i.e. A = 1 if there is
a link from j to i and 0 otherwise, or more generally
where g > 0 represents the strength of coupling and A the adjacency matrix. It is clear that the
coupling structure as represented in A will influence the possible dynamics on the network and
to make further progress it is useful to restrict to particular network structures. Some important
literature on network structures is reviewed for example in [234], while [13] reviews work on syn-
chrony in complex networks up to the time of their publication; recent work includes for example
[92]. For a recent review of the application of complex networks to neurological disorders in the
brain, see [303].
It is interesting to try and understand the effect of network structure on synchrony, so we
briefly outline some basic measures of network structure. The in-degree of the node i is the number
of incoming connections (i.e. d (i) = A ), while the out-degree is the number of outgoing
connections(i.e. d (i) = A )andthedistributionofthesedegreesisoftenusedtocharacterise
a large graph. A scale-free network is a large network where the distribution of in (or out) degrees
scales as a polynomial. This can be contrasted with highly structured homogeneous networks (for
example on a lattice) where the degree may be the same at each node. Other properties commonly
examined include the clustering properties and path lengths within the graph. There are also
various measures of centrality that help one to determine the most important nodes in a graph -
for example the betweenness centrality is a measure of centrality that is the probability that a given
node is on the shortest path between two uniformly randomly chosen nodes [234]. As expected, the
more central nodes are typically most important if one wishes to achieve synchrony in a network.
Other basic topological properties of networks that are relevant to their dynamics include, for
example, the following, most of which are mentioned in [13, 234]: The network is undirected if
A = A for all i,j, otherwise it is directed. We say nodes j and i in the network A are path-
connected if for some n there is a path from j to i, i.e. (An) (cid:54)= 0 for some n. The network is
strongly connected if for each i,j is path connected in both directions while it is weakly connected
if we replace A by max(A ,A ) (i.e. we make the network undirected) and the latter network is
strongly connected. N.B. There may be some confusion in that strong and weak connectivity are
properties of a directed network - while strong and weak coupling are properties of the coupling
strengths for a given network! The diameter of a network is the maximal length of a shortest
path between two points on varying the endpoints. Other properties of the adjacency matrix
are discussed for example in [34] where spectral properties of graph Laplacians are linked to the
problem of determining stability of synchronised states. Other work we mention is that of Pecora
et al. [252, 250] on synchronisation in coupled oscillator arrays (and see § 4.1), while [274] explores
the recurrent appearance of synchrony in networks of pulse-coupled oscillators (and see § 4.2).
Finally, we mention network motifs - these are subgraphs that are “more prevalent” than others
within some class of graphs. More precisely, given a network one can look at the frequency with
which a small subgraph appears relative to some standard class of graphs (for example random
graphs)andifacertainsubgraphappearsmoreoftenthanexpected,thischaracterisesanimportant
property of the graph [219]. Such analysis has been used in systems biology (such as transcription
or protein interaction networks) and has been applied to study the structure in neural systems (see
for example [302, 301]) and the implications of this for the dynamics. The have also been used to
organise the analysis of the dynamics of small assemblies of coupled cells, see for example [151, 39].
3.3 Weak and strong coupling
Continuing with systems of the form (7) or (8), if the coupling parameter (cid:15) is, in some sense, small
we refer to the system as “weakly coupled”. Mathematically, the weak coupling approximation is
very helpful because it allows one to use various types of perturbation theory to investigate the
dynamics [142]. For coupling of limit cycle oscillators it allows one to greatly reduce the dimension
of phase space. Nonetheless, many dynamical effects (e.g. “oscillator death” where the oscillations
inoneormoreoscillatorsarecompletelysuppressedbytheactionofthenetwork[103])cannotoccur
in the weak coupling limit and moreover real biological systems that often have “strong coupling”.
We will return to this topic to discuss oscillator behaviour. One can sometimes use additional
structure such as weak dissipation and weak coupling of the oscillators to perform a semi-analytic
reduction to phase oscillators; see for example [18, 283].
3.4 Clusters, exact and generalised synchrony
If one has a notion of synchrony between the systems of (7), it is possible to discuss clustering
according to mutual synchrony. Caution needs to be exercised whenever discussing synchrony -
there are many distinct notions of synchrony which may be appropriate in different contexts and,
in particular, synchrony is typically a property of a particular solution at a particular point in time
rather than a property of the system as a whole.
An important case of synchrony is exact synchrony: we say x (t) and x (t) are exactly synchro-
nised if x (t) = x (t) for all t. Generalised synchrony is, as the name suggests, much more general
and corresponds to there simply being a functional relationship of the form x (t) = F(x (t)). For
oscillators, phases can be used to define additional notions such as phase and frequency synchrony:
see § 6.1.
Although we focus mostly on individual units with simple (periodic) dynamics, if the units have
more complex dynamics (such as “chaotic oscillators”) one can understand synchrony of the cells
by analysis of the linearised differences between oscillators, and there is a sizeable literature on
this; see the review [43], or [231] for clusters in a system of globally coupled bistable oscillators. In
the case of two linearly coupled identical chaotic oscillators
1 1 2 1 2 2 1 2
where (x ,x ) ∈ R2d, if the individual oscillator dx/dt = f(x) has a chaotic attractor A ⊂ Rd then
the coupled system will have an attracting exactly synchronised attractor A˜ = {(x,x) : x ∈ A}
only if the coupling (cid:15) is sufficiently large in relation to the maximal Liapunov exponent of the
synchronous state [43].
3.5 Synchrony, dynamics and time delay
Anareaofintenseinterestistheroleoftimedelayinthecollectivedynamicsofcoupledsystems. In
the neural context it is natural to include propagation delay between neurons explicity, for example
in models such as
d (cid:88)
i i i ij ij i j
where the delay time τ > 0 represents the time of propagation of the signal from one neuron to
another. This presents a number of serious mathematical challenges, not least due to the fact that
delay dynamical systems are infinite dimensional: one must specify the initial condition over a time
interval t ∈ [t −τ,t ] in order to have any chance of uniquely defining the future dynamics; this
means that for a state to be linearly stable, an infinite number of eigenvalues need to have real part
less than zero.
Nonetheless, much can be learned about stability, control and bifurcation of dynamically syn-
chronous states in the presence of delay; for example [61, 138, 87, 258, 191], and the volume [35]
includes a number of contributions by authors working in this area. There are also well-developed
numerical tools such as DDE-BIFTOOL [94, 291] that allow continuation, stability and bifurcation
analysis of coupled systems with delays. For an application of these techniques to the study of a
Wilson-Cowan neural population model with two delays we refer the reader to [74].
3.6 A short introduction to symmetric dynamics
Although no system is ever truly symmetric, in practise many models have a high degree of sym-
metry.1 Indeed many real world networks that have grown (e.g. giving rise to tree-like structures)
are expected to be well approximated by models that have large symmetry groups [205].
Symmetric (more precisely, equivariant) dynamics provides a number of powerful mathematical
tools that one can use to understand emergent properties of systems of the form
with x ∈ RN. We say (9) is equivariant under the action of a group Γ if and only if f(gx) = gf(x)
for any g ∈ Γ and x ∈ RN. There is a well developed theory of dynamics with symmetry; in
particular see [121, 125, 122]. These give methods that help in a number of ways:
• Description: one can identify symmetries of networks and dynamic states to help classify
and differentiate between them
• Bifurcation: there is a well-developed theory of bifurcation with symmetry to help un-
derstand the emergence of dynamically interesting (symmetry broken) states from higher
symmetry states
• Stability: bifurcation with symmetry often gives predictions about possible bifurcation sce-
narios that includes information about stability
• Generic dynamics: symmetries and invariant subspaces can provide a powerful structure
with which one can understand more complex attractors such as heteroclinic cycles
• Design: one can use symmetries to systematically build models and test hypotheses
The types of symmetries that are often most relevant for mathematical modelling of finite networks
ofneuronsarethepermutationgroups,i.e. thesymmetricgroupsandtheirsubgroups. Nonetheless,
continuum models of neural systems may have continuous symmetries that influence the dynamics
and can be used as a tool to understand the dynamics; see for example [50].
1Indeed, the human brain consists of the order of 1011 neurons, but of the order of 100 − 1000 types
different by their location and exact morphology.
Name Symbol Comments
Full permutation S Global or all-to-all coupling [23, 54]
Undirected ring D Dihedral symmetry [23, 54]
Directed ring Z Cyclic symmetry [23, 54]
Polyhedral networks G [244]
Lattice networks G ×G G and G could be D or Z
1 2 1 2 k k
Hierarchical networks G (cid:111)G G is the local symmetry, G the
globalsymmetry,and(cid:111)isthewreath
product [91].
Table 1: Some permutation symmetry groups that have been considered as examples of symmetries
of coupled oscillator networks.
3.7 Permutation symmetries and oscillator networks
Wereviewsomeaspectsoftheequivariantdynamicsthathaveprovenusefulincoupledsystemsthat
are relevant to neural dynamics - see for example [23, 48]. In doing so we mostly discuss dynamics
thatrespectssomesymmetrygroupofpermutationsofthesystems. Thefullpermutationsymmetry
group (or simply, the symmetric group) on N objects, S , is defined to be the set of all possible
permutations of N objects. Formally it is the set of permutations σ : {1,...,N} → {1,...,N}
(invertible maps of this set). To determine effects of the symmetry, not only the group must be
known but also its action on phase space. If this action is linear then it is a representation of
the group. The representation of the symmetry group is critical to the structure of the stability,
bifurcations and generic dynamics that are equivariant with the symmetry.
For example, if each system is characterised by a single real variable, one can view the action
of the permutations on RN as a permutation matrix
σ ij 0 otherwise
for each σ ∈ Γ; note that M M = M for any σ,ρ ∈ Γ. Table 1 lists some commonly considered
examples of symmetry groups used in coupled oscillator network models.
More generally, for (7) equivariance under an action of Γ means that for all σ ∈ Γ, x ∈ RNd
and i = 1,...,N we have
f (x )+(cid:15)g (x ;x ,...,x ) = f (x )+(cid:15)g (x ;x ,...,x ).
A simple consequence of this is: if Γ acts transitively on {1,...,N} (i.e. if for any i and j there is a
σ ∈ Γ such that σ(j) = i) then all oscillators are identical, i.e. f (x ) = F(x ) for some function F.
The presence of symmetries means that solutions can be grouped together into families - given
any x the set Γx := {gx : g ∈ Γ} is the group orbit of x and all points on this group orbit will
behave in dynamically the same way.
3.8 Invariant subspaces and symmetries
Given a point x ∈ RNd we define the isotropy subgroup (or simply the symmetry) of x under the
action of Γ on RNd to be
2 g2v=g2gv
Figure 7: Suppose the six-element group Γ = D of symmetries of the equilateral triangle acts on
R2, generated by a rotation g and a reflection g in the x-axis. The group orbit of the point u
that is not fixed by any symmetries also has six elements (shown by filled circles), while any group
orbit of a point v that is fixed by a symmetry (e.g. g ) has correspondingly fewer points (shown
by open circles) in the group orbit. Bifurcation of equilibria with more symmetry typically leads
to several equilibria with less (“broken”) symmetry.
ThisisasubgroupofΓ, andthesetofthesegroupsformsalattice(theisotropy lattice)byinclusion
ofsubgroups. Theyaredynamicallyimportantinthatforanytrajectoryx(t)wehaveΣ = Σ
for all t. A converse problem is to characterise the set of all points with a certain symmetry. If H
is a subgroup (or more generally, a subset) of Γ then the fixed point space of H is defined to be
Fix(H) := {x ∈ RNd : gx = x for all g ∈ H}.
Because all x ∈ Fix(H) have symmetry H these subspaces are dynamically invariant. See Fig. 7
that illustrates this principle. Typical points x ∈ Fix(H) have Σ = H, however some points may
have more symmetry; more precisely, if H ⊂ K are isotropy subgroups then Fix(H) ⊃ Fix(K); and
the partial ordering of the isotropy subgroups corresponds to a partial ordering of the fixed point
subspaces.
One can identify similar types of isotropy subgroup as those that are conjugate in the group,
i.e. we say H and H are conjugate subgroups of Γ if there is a g ∈ Γ such that gH = H g. If
this is the case, note that
gFix(H ) = g{x ∈ RNd : hx = x for all h ∈ H }
= {x ∈ RNd : hg−1x = g−1x for all h ∈ H }
= {x ∈ RNd : ghg−1x = x for all h ∈ H }
= {x ∈ RNd : hx = x for all h ∈ H } = Fix(H ),
meaning that the fixed point spaces of conjugate subgroups (and the dynamics on them) are in
some sense equal.
By identifying symmetries up to conjugacy allows for a considerable reduction of the number
of cases one nes to consider; note that conjugate subgroups must have fixed point subspaces of the
same dimension where essentially the same dynamics will occur.
The fixed point subspaces are often used (implicitly or explicitly) to enable one to reduce the
dimensionofthesystemandtomakeitmoreanalysable. Asanexample,todeterminetheexistence
of a fully exact synchrony solution one only need to suppose x (t) = x(t) and determine whether
there is such a solution x(t) for the system (7).
For periodic orbits, the symmetry of points on the orbit to symmetries of the orbit as an
invariant set are as follows. Suppose P is a periodic orbit (which can be viewed as a “loop” in
phase space RN). Let K denote the symmetries that fix all points on P (the “spatial symmetries”)
and H denote the symmetries that fix P as a set (the “spatio-temporal symmetries”); note that K
will be a subgroup of H. Finally, let
g(cid:54)∈K
be the set of points in phase space that have strictly more symmetry than K.
Theorem 3.1 [122, Theorem 3.4] Consider ODEs on Rn with a given finite symmetry group Γ.
There is a periodic orbit P with spatial symmetries K and spatio-temporal symmetries H if and
• H/K is cyclic
• K is an isotropy subgroup
• dimFix(K) ≥ 2
• H fixes a connected component of Fix(K)/L , where L is defined as above.
One way of saying this is that the only possible spatio-temporal symmetries of periodic orbits
are cyclic extensions of isotropy subgroups. Further theory, outlined in [122], shows that one can
characterise possible symmetries of chaotic attractors; these may include a much wider range of
spatio-temporal symmetries (H,K) including some that do not satisfy the hypotheses of Theo-
rem 3.1. This means that the symmetries of attractors may contain dynamical information about
the attractor.
3.9 Bifurcations with symmetry and genericity
Bifurcations of ODEs can be classified and analysed by codimension according to methods for
example in texts [180, 128]. This involves the following steps:
(a) Identification of the marginally unstable modes (the directions that are losing stability).
(b) Reduction to a centre manifold parametrised by the marginally unstable modes (generically
this is one or two dimensional when only one parameter is varied).
(c) Study of the dynamics of the normal form for the bifurcation under generic assumptions on
the normal form coefficients.
Indeed,theonlygenericcodimensiononelocalbifurcations(i.e. theonlyone-parameterbifurcations
of equilibria that will not split into a number of simpler bifurcations for some small perturbation on
thesystem)arethesaddle-node(alsocalledfold,orlimitpoint)andtheHopf(alsocalledAndronov-
Hopf) bifurcation. Additional more complicated bifurcations can appear at higher codimension.
This classification by codimension has enabled development of a powerful set of numerical tools
to help analysis of such systems, not just for local bifurcations of equilibria but also some global
bifurcations (in particular, periodic orbit and homoclinic bifurcations). Particular packages to do
this include AUTO [169], MatCont [88], CONTENT [179] and XPPAUT [99] (which includes an
implementation of AUTO).
If we restrict to symmetry preserving perturbations, a much wider range of bifurcations can
appear at low codimension - this is because the symmetry can cause a marginal mode of instability
in one direction to appear simultaneously in many other directions meaning that
(a’) Identification of the marginally unstable modes (symmetry means there can generally be
several of these that will go unstable at the same time).
(b’) Reduction to a centre manifold parametrised by the marginally unstable modes (these are
preserved by the action of the symmetries and may be of dimension greater than two even
for one parameter bifurcations).
(c’) Study of the dynamics of the normal form for the symmetric bifurcation under generic as-
sumptions on the normal form coefficients (the symmetries mean that some coefficients may
be zero, some are constrained to be equal while others may be forced to satisfy nontrivial and
sometimes obscure algebraic relationships).
These factors conspire to make symmetric bifurcations rich and interesting in behaviour - even
in codimension one it is possible for heteroclinic cycles or chaos to bifurcate from high symmetry
solutions. However, the same factors mean that many features cannot be caught by numerical
path-following packages such as those listed above - the degeneracies mean that many branches
may coming out of the bifurcation; it is generally a challenge to identify all of these. Essentially,
bifurcation theory needs to be developed in the context of the particular group action. Examples
of some consequences of this for weakly coupled oscillator networks with symmetries are considered
in § 6.
3.10 Robust heteroclinic attractors, cycles and networks
The presence of symmetries in a dynamical system can cause highly nontrivial dynamics even away
from bifurcation points. Of particular interest are robust invariant sets that consist of networks of
equilibria (or periodic orbits, or more general invariant sets) connected via heteroclinic connections
that are preserved under small enough perturbations that respect the symmetries [170]. These
structures may be cycles or more generally networks. They can be robust to perturbations that
preservethesymmetriesandindeedtheycanbeattracting[171,122]. Weareparticularlyinterested
intheattractingcaseinwhichcasewecalltheseinvariantsetsheteroclinicattractorsandtrajectories
approaching such attractors show a typical intermittent behaviour - periods that are close to the
dynamics of an unstable saddle-type invariant set, and switches between different behaviours.
Inhigherdimensionalsystems,heteroclinicattractorsmayhavesubtlestructuressuchas“depth
two connections” [28], “cycling chaos” where there are connections between chaotic saddles [85,
122, 31] and “winnerless competition” [263, 261]. Related dynamical structures are found in the
literatureinattractorsthatshow“chaoticitinerancy”or“slowswitching”. Suchcomplexattractors
can readily appear in neural oscillator models in the presence of symmetries and have been used to
model various dynamics that contribute to the function of neural systems; we consider this, along
with some examples, in § 7.
3.11 Groupoid and related formalisms
Some less restrictive structures found in some coupled dynamical networks also have many of
the features of symmetric networks (including invariant subspaces, bifurcations that appear to be
degenerate, and heteroclinic attractors) but without necessarily having the symmetries.
Oneapproach[307]hasbeentouseastructureofgroupoids-thesearemathematicalstructures
that satisfy some, but not all, of the axioms of a group and can be useful in understanding the
constraints on the dynamics of coupled cell systems of the form (6). A groupoid is similar to a
group except that the composition of two elements in a groupoid is not always defined, and the
inverse of a groupoid element may only be locally defined. This formalism can be used to describe
the permutations of inputs of cells as in [307, 123].
Suppose that we have (6) with cells C = {1,...,N} and suppose that there are connections E,
i.e. are pairs of cells (i,j) in C such that cell i appears in the argument of the dynamics of cell j.
is the input set of cell j and there is a natural equivalence relation ∼ defined by j ∼ k if there is
a bijection (an input automorphism)
with β(j) = k such that for all i ∈ I(j) we have (i,j) ∼ (β(i),k). The set B(j,k) of input
automorphisms of this type and the set of all such input automorphisms has the structure of a
groupoid [307].
Given a coupling structure of this type, an admissible vector field is a vector field on the
product space of all cells that respects the coupling structure, and this generalises the idea of an
equivariantvectorfieldinthepresenceofasymmetrygroupactingonthesetofcells. Thedynamical
consequences of this have a similar flavour to the consequences one can find in symmetric systems
except that fewer cases have been worked out in detail, and there are many open questions.
To illustrate, consider the system of three cells
x = g(x ,x ,x ),
x = g(x ,x ,x ),
x = h(x ,x ),
where g(x,y,z) = g(x,z,y); this is discussed in [123, §5] in some detail. This has a coupling
structure as shown in Fig. 8. In spite of there being no exact symmetries in the system there is a
nontrivial invariant subspace where x = x . In the approach of [123] the dynamically invariant
subspaces that can be understood in terms of the balanced colourings of the graph where the cells
are grouped in such a way that the inputs are respected - this corresponds to an admissible pattern
of synchrony.
The invariant subspaces that are forced to exist by this form of coupling structure have been
called polydiagonals in this formalism, which correspond to clustering of the states. For every
polydiagonal one can associate a quotient network by identifying cells that are synchronised, to
give a smaller network. As in the symmetric case the existence of an invariant subspace does
Figure 8: Left: a system of three coupled cells with two cell types (indicated by the circle and
square) coupled in a way that there is no permutation symmetry but there is an invariant subspace
corresponding to cells 1 and 2 being synchronised. The different line styles show coupling types
that can potentially be permuted (after [307, Fig. 3]). Middle: the quotient two-cell network
corresponding to cells 1 and 2 being synchronised. Right: The same network structure shown using
the notation of [9].
not guarantee that it contains any attracting solutions. Some work has been done to understand
genericsymmetrybreakingbifurcationsinsuchnetworks-seeforexample[10],orspatiallyperiodic
patterns in lattice networks [89]. Variants of this formalism have been developed to enable different
coupling types between the same cells to be included.
Periodicorbitsinsuchnetworkscanalsohaveinterestingstructuresassociatedwiththepresence
of invariant subspaces. The so-called rigid phase conjecture [308, 123], recently proved in [120],
states that if there is a periodic orbit in the network such that two cells have a rigid phase relation
between (i.e. one that is preserved for all small enough structure-preserving perturbations) then
this must be forced by either a Z symmetric perturbation of the cells in the network, or in some
quotient network.
An alternative formalism for discussing asymmetric coupled cell networks has been developed
in [112, 9, 7, 8] that also allows one to identify invariant subspaces. Each cell has one output and
several inputs that may be of different types. These papers concentrate on the questions: (a) When
are two cell networks formally equivalent (i.e. when can the dynamics of one cell network be found
in the other, under suitable choice of cell)? (b) How can one construct larger coupled cell systems
with desired properties by “inflating” a smaller system S, such that the larger system has S as a
quotient? (c) What robust heteroclinic attractors exist in such systems?
4 Coupled limit cycle oscillators
In addition to variants on the systems in § 2, we mention that some nonlinear “conceptual” planar
limit cycle oscillators are also studied in neural models. These include:
x+(a +a x2) x+ω2x = 0 van der Pol,
dt2 0 1 dt
x+(a +a x2) x+ω2x+a x3 = 0 van der Pol-Duffing,
dt2 0 1 dt 2
z = (λ+iω)z+(a +ia )|z|2z Stuart-Landau oscillator,
where x is real, z is complex and the coefficients λ,ω and a are real constants.
If the coupling between two or more limit cycle oscillators is relatively large, it can affect not
only the phases but also the amplitudes, and a general theory of strongly interacting oscillators
is likely to be no more or less complicated than a general theory of general nonlinear systems.
However, the theory of weak-coupling is relatively well developed (see § 5 and § 6) and specific
progress can sometimes be made for the special choice of neuron model. Examples where one can
dothisincludeIF(see§4.3),piece-wiselinearmodelssuchasMcKean[71],caricaturesofFHN,ML
[72] and singularly perturbed relaxation oscillators with linear [311] or fast threshold modulation
coupling [298].
For linear coupling of planar oscillators, much is known about the general case [15, 177]. If
the linear coupling is proportional to the difference between two state variables this is referred to
as “diffusive”, and otherwise it is called “direct”. The difference between the two cases is most
strongly manifest when considering the mechanism of oscillator death (see § 3.3). The diffusive
case is more natural in a neuroscience context as it can be used to model electrical gap junction
coupling (which depends on voltage-differences). The existence of synchronous states in networks
of identical units is inherited from the properties of the underlying single neuron model since in
this case coupling vanishes, though the stability of this solution will depend upon the pattern of
gap-junction connectivity.
Gap junctions are primarily believed to promote synchrony, though this is not always the case
andtheycanalsoleadtorobuststableasynchronousstates[285],aswellas“bursting”generatedby
cyclic transitions between coherent and incoherent network states [134]. For work on gap junctions
and their role in determining network dynamics see for example [260, 254, 96, 82, 208, 72].
4.1 Stability of the synchronised state for complex networks of identical systems
There is one technique specific to the analysis of the synchronous state in a quite large class of
network models that is valid for strongly coupled identical systems, namely the master stability
function (MSF) approach. For networks of coupled systems or oscillators with identical compo-
nents the MSF approach of Pecora and Carroll [253] can be used to determine the stability of
the synchronous state in terms of the eigenstructure of the network connectivity matrix. To in-
troduce the MSF formalism it is convenient to consider N nodes (oscillators)2 and let x ∈ Rd
be the d dimensional vector of dynamical variables of the ith node with isolated (uncoupled) dy-
namics dx /dt = F(x ), with i = 1,...,N. The output for each node is described by a vector
function H ∈ Rd (which is not necessarily linear). For example for a three dimensional system with
x = (x(1),x(2),x(3)) and linear coupling only occurring through the x(3)-component then we would
set H(x) = (0,0,x(3)). For a given adjacency matrix A and associated set of connection strengths
g ≥ 0 and a global coupling strength σ the network dynamics of coupled identical systems, to
which the MSF formalism applies, is specified by
d (cid:88) (cid:88)
i i ij ij j i i ij j
Here the matrix G with blocks G has the graph-Laplacian structure G = −A g +δ A g .
ij ij ij ij ij k ik ik
The N −1 constraints x (t) = x (t) = ... = x (t) = s(t) define the (invariant) synchronisation
manifold, with s(t) a solution in Rd of the uncoupled system, namely ds/dt = F(s). Although we
will not discuss in detail here, we assume that the asymptotic behaviour s(t) is such that averages
along trajectories converge, i.e. the behaviour of s(t) for the uncoupled system is governed by a
natural ergodic (SRB) measure for the dynamics.
2In this section we assume little about the dynamics of the nodes - they may be “chaotic oscillators”.
To assess the stability of this state we perform a linear stability analysis expanding a solution
as x (t) = s(t)+δx (t) to obtain the variational equation
d (cid:88)
Here DF(s) and DH(s) denote the Jacobian of F(s) and H(s) around the synchronous solution
respectively. The variational equation has a block form that can be simplified by projecting δx
into the eigenspace spanned by the (right) eigenvectors of the matrix G. This yields a set of N
decoupled equations in the block form
where ξ is the lth (right) eigenmode associated with the eigenvalue λ of G (and DF(s) and
DH(s) are independent of the block label l). Since G = 0 there is always a zero eigenvalue,
say λ = 0, with corresponding eigenvector (1,1,...,1), describing a perturbation parallel to the
synchronisation manifold. The other N −1 transverse eigenmodes must damp out for synchrony
to be stable. For a general matrix G the eigenvalues λ may be complex, which brings us to
consideration of the system
Forgivens(t),theMSFisdefinedasthefunctionwhichmapsthecomplexnumberαtothegreatest
Lyapunov exponent of (10). The synchronous state of the system of coupled oscillators is stable if
the MSF is negative at α = σλ where λ ranges over the eigenvalues of the matrix G (excluding
λ = 0).
For a ring of identical (or near identical) coupled periodic oscillators in which the connections
have randomly heterogeneous strength Restrepo et al. [269] have used the MSF method to deter-
minethepossiblepatternsatthedesynchronisationtransitionthatoccursasthecouplingstrengths
are increased. Interestinglythey demonstrate Anderson localisation of themodes ofinstability, and
show that this could organise waves of desynchronisation that would spread to the whole network.
For a further discussion about the use of the MSF formalism in the analysis of synchronisation of
oscillators on complex networks we refer the reader to [13, 259], and for the use of this formalism
in a non-smooth setting see [320]. This approach has recently been extended to cover the case
of cluster states by making extensive use of tools from computational group theory to determine
admissible patterns of synchrony [251] (and see also § 3.11) in unweighted networks.
4.2 Pulse-coupled oscillators
Another example of a situation in which analysis of network dynamics can be carried out without
the need for any reduction or assumption is that of pulse coupled oscillators, in which interactions
between neurons are mediated by instantaneous “kicks” of the voltage variable.
NetworksofN identicaloscillatorswithglobal(all-to-all)strongpulsecouplingwerefirststudied
by Mirollo and Strogatz [222]. They assumed that each oscillator is defined by a state variable v
and is of integrate–and–fire type with threshold v = 1 and reset value v = 0. When oscillator
i in the network fires the instantaneous pulsatile coupling pulls all other oscillators j (cid:54)= i up by a
fixed amount (cid:15) or to firing, whichever is less, i.e.
If v (t) = 1 then v (t+) = min(1,v (t)+(cid:15)) for all j (cid:54)= i.
Mirollo and Strogatz assume that the coupling is excitatory ((cid:15) > 0). If m oscillators fire simulta-
neously then the remaining N −m oscillators are pulled up by m(cid:15), or to firing threshold.
In the absence of coupling each oscillator has period ∆ and there is a natural phase variable
φ(t) = t/∆ mod 1 such that φ = 0 when v = 0 and φ = 1 when v = 1. Mirollo and Strogatz
further assume that the dynamics of each (uncoupled) oscillator is governed by v(t) = f(φ) where
f is a smooth function satisfying f(0) = 0, f(1) = 1, f(cid:48)(φ) > 0 and f(cid:48)(cid:48)(φ) < 0 for all φ ∈ [0,1].
Because of these hypotheses on f, it is invertible with inverse φ = g(v).
Note that for the leaky (linear) integrate–and–fire model (LIF) where
we have f(φ) = I(1 − e−∆φ/τ) where ∆ = τ ln(I/(I − 1)), for I > 1, which satisfies the above
conditions. However, quadratic IF models do not satisfy the concavity assumption.
If an oscillator is pulled up to firing threshold due to the coupling and firing of a group of m
oscillators which have already synchronised then the oscillator is ‘absorbed’ into the group and
remains synchronised with the group for all time. (Here synchrony means firing at the same time).
Since there are now more oscillators in the synchronised group, the effect of the coupling on the
remaining oscillators is increased and this acts to rapidly pull more oscillators into synchronisation.
Mirollo and Strogatz [222] proved that for pulsatile coupling and f satisfying the conditions above,
thesetofinitialconditionsforwhichtheoscillatorsdonotallbecomesynchronisedhaszeromeasure.
Here we briefly outline the proof for two pulse coupled oscillators. See Mirollo and Strogatz [222]
for the generalisation of this proof to populations of size N.
Consider two oscillators labelled A and B with φ and v denoting respectively the phase and
state of oscillator A and similarly for oscillator B. Suppose that oscillator A has just fired so that
φ = 0 and φ = φ as in Fig. 9 (a). The return map R(φ) is the phase of B immediately after A
next fires. It can be shown that the return map has a unique, repelling fixed-point:
Oscillator B reaches threshold when φ = 1−φ and an instant later B fires and the pulsatile
coupling makes v = min(1,(cid:15) + f(1 − φ)). If v = 1 then the oscillators have synchronised.
Assuming that v = (cid:15)+f(1−φ) < 1 then φ = g((cid:15)+f(1−φ)) and after one firing the system has
moved from (φ ,φ ) = (0,φ) to (h(φ),0) where h(φ) = g((cid:15)+f(1−φ)) is the firing map (see Fig. 9
(c)). ThereturnmapisgivenbyafurtherapplicationofthefiringmapsothatR(φ) = h(h(φ)). The
assumptionthat(cid:15)+f(1−φ) < 1issatisfiedwhen(cid:15) ∈ [0,1)andφ ∈ (δ,1)whereδ = 1−g(1−(cid:15)). Thus
the domain of h is (δ,1) and the domain of R is (δ,h−1(δ)). Since h is monotonically decreasing,
δ < h−1(δ) for (cid:15) < 1 and the interval is nonempty. Thus on the whole of [0,1) the return map is
defined as
 0 φ < δ.
Since the points 0 and 1 are identified, if φ < δ or φ > h−1(δ) then the two oscillators will become
synchronised.
Figure 9: A system of two oscillators governed by v = f(φ), and interacting by pulse coupling. (a)
The state of the system immediately after oscillator A has fired. (b) The state of the system just
before oscillator B reaches the firing threshold. (c) The state of the system just after B has fired.
B has jumped back to zero, and the state of A is now min(1,(cid:15)+f(1−φ)).
It can be shown that almost all initial conditions eventually become synchronised since (i) R
has a unique fixed point φ ∈ (δ,h−1(δ)) and (ii) this fixed point is unstable (i.e. |R(cid:48)(φ)| > 1). To
see that R has a unique fixed point, observe that fixed points φ are roots of F(φ) ≡ φ−h(φ). Now
unique since F(cid:48)(φ) = 1−h(cid:48)(φ) > 2.
Extensions to the framework of Mirollo and Strogatz include the introduction of a time delay in
the transmission of pulses and the consideration of inhibitory coupling. It has been observed that
delays have a dramatic effect on the dynamics in the case of excitatory coupling. Considering first
a pair of oscillators, Ernst et al. [108] demonstrate analytically that inhibitory coupling with delays
gives stable in-phase synchronisation while for excitatory coupling, synchronisation with phase lag
occurs. As the number of globally coupled oscillators increases, so does the number of attractors
which can exist for both excitatory and inhibitory coupling.
In the presence of delays many different cluster state attractors can coexist. The dynamics
settle down onto a periodic orbit with clusters reaching threshold and sending pulses alternately
[108, 109, 322]. Under the addition of weak noise when the coupling is inhibitory, the dynamics
stay near this periodic orbit indicating that all cluster state attractors are stable [322]. However,
the collective behaviour shows a marked difference when the coupling is excitatory. In this case,
weak noise is sufficient to drive the system away from the periodic orbit and results in persistent
switching between unstable (Milnor) attractors.
These dynamics are somewhat akin to heteroclinic switching and the relationship between
networks of unstable attractors and robust heteroclinic cycles has been addressed by a number
of authors [32, 53, 159]. In particular, Broer et al. [159] highlight a situation in which there
is a bifurcation from a network of unstable attractors to a heteroclinic cycle within a network
of pulse coupled oscillators with delays and inhibitory coupling. They note that the model used
in previous work [108, 109, 322] is locally noninvertible since the original phase of an oscillator
cannot be recovered once it has received an input which takes it over threshold causing the phase
to be reset. Kirst and Timme [159] employ a framework in which a reset function R(ζ) = cζ,
c ∈ [0,1] is introduced which ensures that the flow becomes locally time invertible when c > 0.
They demonstrate that for c = 0 (where the locally noninvertible dynamics are recovered), the
system has a pair of periodic orbits A and A which are unstable attractors enclosed by the basin
of each other. When c > 0, A and A are non-attracting saddles with a heteroclinic connection
from A to A . Furthermore, there is a continuous bifurcation from the network of two unstable
attractors when c = 0 to a heteroclinic two cycle when c > 0.
For an interesting dynamical systems perspective on the differences between “kick” synchroni-
sation (in pulsatile coupled systems) and “diffusive” synchronisation [306] and the lack of mathe-
matical work on the former problem see [213]. For example, restrictions on the dynamics of sym-
metrically coupled systems of oscillators when the coupling is time-continuous can be circumvented
for pulsatile coupling leading to more complex network dynamics [158].
In the real world of synaptic interactions, however, pulsatile kicks are probably the exception
rather than the rule, and the biology of neurotransmitter release and uptake is better modelled
with a distributed delay process, giving rise to a post synaptic potential with a finite rise and fall
time. For spike-time event driven synaptic models, described in § 2.5, analysis at the network level
ishardforageneralconductancebasedmodel(giventheusualexpectationthesingleneuronmodel
will be high dimensional and nonlinear), though far more tractable for LIF networks, especially
whenthefocusisonphase-lockedstates[337,333,332]. Indeedinthisinstancemanyresultscanbe
obtained in the strongly coupled regime [49], without recourse to any approximation or reduction.
4.3 Synaptic coupling in networks of IF neurons
The instantaneous reaction of one neuron to the firing of another, as in the pulse-coupled neurons
above, does not account for the role of synapses in the transmission of currents. Bressloff and
Coombes [49] consider a network of N identical, LIF neurons that interact via synapses by trans-
mitting spike trains to one another. Let v (t), the state of neuron i at time t, evolve according to
where I is a constant external bias and X (t) is the total synaptic current into the cell. As before,
we supplement this with the reset condition that whenever v = 1 neuron i fires and is reset to
v = 0. The synaptic current X (t) is generated by the arrival of spikes from other neurons j and
can be taken to have the form
(cid:88) (cid:88)
X (t) = (cid:15) w J(t−Tm),
where (cid:15)w represents the weight of the connection from the jth neuron to the ith neuron with (cid:15)
characterising the overall strength of synaptic interactions, Tm denotes the sequence of firing times
of the jth neuron and J(t) determines the course of postsynaptic response to a single spike. A
biologically motivated choice for J(t) is
where Θ(t) = 1 if t > 0 and zero otherwise. Here η is an alpha function (see also § 2.5) and the
maximum synaptic response occurs at a nonzero delay t = α−1. Note that in the limit of large
inverse rise time α, J(t) approximates a delta function (more like pulse-coupling).
Bressloff and Coombes [49] show that the behaviour of the network of oscillators differs depend-
ing on the strength of the coupling. This is another instance in which information is lost through
making weak-coupling assumptions. To see this one may integrate (11) between Tn and Tn+1,
exploiting the linearity of the equations and solving with variation of parameters, to obtain a map
ofthefiringtimes. SincethedriveX (t)dependsuponallpreviousfiringeventsoftheotherneuron
this is an implicit map that relates all the network firing events to one another. It is convenient to
introduce the set of inter-spike intervals (ISIs) ∆n,m = Tn −Tm, so that we may write the firing
map in the convenient form
I i (1−e−∆n ii +1,n )−1+ (cid:88) (cid:88) F ij (∆ i n i +1,n,∆n ij ,m) = 0, (12)
where Tn+1 > Tm for all j,m, and
(cid:90) x
F (x,y) = (cid:15)w e−x esJ(s+y)ds.
Phase-locked solutions may be found, for an arbitrary coupling strength (cid:15), using the ansatz Tm =
(m−φ )∆ for some self-consistent ISI ∆ and constant phases φ . Substitution into (12) yields
(cid:90) ∆
and P(t) = P(t+∆). Choosing one of the phases, say φ , as a reference then (13) provides a set
of N equations for the unknown period ∆ and the remaining N −1 relative phases φ −φ .
Inordertoinvestigatethelinearstabilityofphase-lockedsolutionsofequation(13), weconsider
perturbations of the firing times which we write in the form Tm = (m−φ )∆+δm. Linearisation
of the firing map (12) gives an explicit map for these perturbations that can be written as
i i i ∂x i i ∂y i j
where the partial derivatives of F are evaluated at the phase-locked state (∆n+1,n,∆n,m) =
(∆,(n−m)∆+(φ −φ )∆). For solutions of the form δm = λmδ this reduces to
(cid:80) (cid:80)
i i j ij j i ij ij j i ij k ik k
(cid:90) ∆
One solution to equation (14) is λ = 1 with δ = δ for all i = 1,...,N. This reflects the invariance
of the dynamics with respect to uniform phase shifts in the firing times. Thus the condition for
linear stability of a phase-locked state is that all remaining solutions λ of equation (14) are within
the unit disc. For λ−1 ∼ O((cid:15)), and (cid:15) small, we may expand (14) as
where H (Φ) = H (1) = [W K(cid:48)(φ − φ ) − δ (cid:80) W K(cid:48)(φ − φ )]/∆ and we have used the
ij ij ij j i ij k ik k i
result that G(φ,1) = K(cid:48)(φ)/∆. Suppose for simplicity that I = I > 1 for all i, so that ∆ =
ln[I/(I − 1)] + O((cid:15)). Then the weak-coupling stability condition is that Reλ < 0, where λ ,
p = 1,...,N, are the eigenvalues of the N ×N matrix with elements (cid:15)H (Φ).
As an explicit example let us consider the synchronous state (φ = φ for all i). From (13)
we see that this is guaranteed to exist for the choice W = γ and I = I[1 − (cid:15)K(0)γ] for
some constant I > 1 which sets the period as ∆ = ln[I/(I −1)]. Using the result that K(cid:48)(φ) =
−∆K(φ)+∆P(φ∆)/I the spectral problem for the synchronous state then takes the form
We may diagonalise this equation in terms of the eigenvalues of the weight matrix, denoted by ν
with p = 1,...,N (and we note that γ is the eigenvalue with eigenvector (1,1,...,1) corresponding
toauniformphase-shift). Lookingfornon-trivialsolutionsthengivesusthesetofspectralequations
E (λ) = 0, where
We may use (15) to determine bifurcation points defined by |λ| = 1. For sufficiently small (cid:15),
solutions to (15) will either be in a neighbourhood of the real solution λ = 1 or in a neighbourhood
of one of the poles of G(0,λ). Since the latter lie in the unit disc, the stability of the synchronous
solution (for weak coupling) is determined by (cid:15)K(cid:48)(0)[Reν − γ] < 0. For strong coupling the
characteristic equation has been solved numerically in [49] to illustrate the possibility of Hopf
bifurcations (λ = eiθ, θ (cid:54)= 0, θ (cid:54)= π) with increasing |(cid:15)|, leading to oscillator death in a globally
coupledinhibitorynetworkforasufficientlyslowsynapseandburstingbehaviourinasymmetrically
coupled networks. Bifurcation diagrams illustrating these phenomenon are shown in Fig. 10 To see
how these phenomena can occur from a more analytical perspective it is useful to consider the
Fourier representation J(t) = (2π)−1(cid:82)∞ dωJ(cid:101)(ω)eiωt, where J(cid:101)(ω) = α2/(α+iω)2, so that G may
be easily evaluated with λ = ez as
fromwhichitiseasytoseeapoleatz = −α∆. Thissuggestswritingz intheformz = −α(1+κ )∆
and expanding the spectral equation in powers of α to find a solution. For small α we find from
(16) that G(0,ez) = −α(1 + κ )(1 − e−∆)/(κ2∆). Balancing terms of order α then gives κ2 =
(cid:15)ν (1 − e−∆)/(∆2(I − 1)), where we use the result that G(0,e0) = O(α2). Thus for small α,
c region of
5 stability 50
oscillator death
0 1 2 α 3 α 4 0 1 2 α 3
Figure 10: Left: Region of stability for a synchronised pair of identical IF neurons with inhibitory
coupling and collective period T = ln2. The solid curve |(cid:15)| = (cid:15) (α) denotes the boundary of the
stability region. Crossing the boundary from below signals excitation of the linear mode (1,−1)
leading to a stable state in which one neuron becomes quiescent (oscillator death). For α > α the
synchronous state is stable for all (cid:15). The dashed curve denotes corresponds to the eigenvalue with
ν = 1. Right: Plotofcriticalcoupling(cid:15) asafunctionofα forvariousnetworksizesN. Thecritical
inverse rise-time α (N) is seen to be a decreasing function of N with α (N) → 0 as N → ∞.
namely slow synaptic currents, we have that K(cid:48)(0) = 0, so that a weak-coupling analysis would
predict neutral stability (consistent with the notion that a set of IF neurons with common constant
input would frequency lock with an arbitrary set of phases). However, our strong coupling analysis
predicts that the synchronous solution will only be stable if Rez± < 0 with z± = [−1±κ ]α∆.
Introducing the firing rate function f = 1/∆ then z± can be written succinctly as
(cid:20) (cid:113) (cid:21)
Thus for an asymmetric network (with at least one complex conjugate pair of eigenvalues) it may
occur that as |(cid:15)| is increased a pair of eigenvalues determined by z± may cross the imaginary axis
to the right hand complex plane signalling a discrete Hopf bifurcation in the firing times. For a
symmetricnetworkwithrealeigenvaluesaninstabilitymayoccurassomeκ ∈ Rincreasesthrough
1, signalling a breakdown of frequency locking. The above results (valid for slow synapses) can also
be obtained using a firing rate approach, as described in [49].
The results above, albeit valid for strong coupling, are only valid for LIF networks. To obtain
more general results for networks of limit cycle oscillators it is useful to consider a reduction to
phase models.
5 Reduction of limit cycle oscillators to phase-amplitude and phase
Consider a system of the form
x = f(x)+(cid:15)g(x,t), x ∈ Rn, (17)
such that for (cid:15) = 0 the system possesses a periodic orbit
with minimal period T > 0 (such that u(t) = u(t+T) for all t ∈ R but u(t) (cid:54)= u(s) for 0 < s < T).
We will assume that Γ is attracting and hyperbolic, i.e. linearly stable so there one zero Floquet
exponent and the others with negative real part. Then we say that (17) is a limit cycle oscillator.
We will reduce this to a description that involves a phase that lives on a topological circle that
can be thought of an interval [0,T) with the topology that comes from identifying the ends of the
interval: (cid:15) and T −(cid:15) are close for (cid:15) small. This circle is sometimes called the one-torus T.
There are a number of conventions used in the literature to represent this phase. We discuss
these conventions before looking at general reduction methods. One convention is to define a phase
ϑ modulo T such that
where ϑ(u(t)) = t interpreted modulo T and such that ϑ(u ) = 0 for some chosen point u ∈ Γ.
Another convention is to define a phase θ modulo 2π such that
where ω = 2π/T is the angular frequency of the oscillator. Again we pick a point u ∈ Γ and
require that θ = 0 at u = u .
In the remainder of the article we will use ϑ and θ as an indication of the convention we are
using for phase, in the special case T = 2π both conventions coincide and we use θ. Typically
one of these descriptions is more convenient than the others but all can in principle be adapted to
any phase reduction. Table 2 expresses some features of the conventions which commonly used for
phase variables.
We now review some techniques of reduction which can be employed to study the dynamics of
(17) when (cid:15) (cid:54)= 0 so that the perturbations may take the dynamics away from the limit cycle. In
doing so we will reduce for example to an ODE for ϑ(t) taken modulo T. Clearly any solution of
an ODE must be continuous in t and typically ϑ(t) will be unbounded in t growing at a rate that
corresponds to the frequency of the oscillator. Strictly speaking, the coordinate we are referring to
in this case is on the lift of the circle T to a covering space R, and for any phase ϑ ∈ [0,T) there
are infinitely many lifts to R given by ϑ+kT for k ∈ Z. However, in common with most literature
in this area we will not make a notational difference between whether the phase is understood on
the unit cell e.g. θ ∈ [0,2π) or on the lift, e.g. θ ∈ R modulo 2π.
5.1 Isochronal coordinates
Consider (17) with (cid:15) = 0. The asymptotic (or latent) phase of a point x in the basin of attraction
of the limit cycle Γ of period T is the value of ϑ(x ) such that
where x(t) is a trajectory starting at x . Thus if u(t) and x(t) are trajectories on and off the
limit cycle respectively, they have the same asymptotic phase if the distance between u(t) and x(t)
vanishes as t → ∞. The locus of all points with the same asymptotic phase is called an isochron.
Symbol Phase Period Uncoupled Advantages Disadvantages
space equation
ϑ R/TZ, T dϑ = 1 Simplicity of Phase space
[0,T) uncoupled depends on
equation, in- parameters
terpretation of and initial
ϑ as “time” conditions.
θ R/2πZ, 2π dθ = ω Phase space Equations
[0,2π) fixed, good for need scaling.
heterogeneous
oscillators.
φ R/Z, 1 dφ = 1 Phase space Equations
[0,1) fixed, good for need scaling.
heterogeneous
oscillators.
Table 2: Comparison of the three conventions for a phase variable that we use in this review. The
φ is used for IF models.
Thusanisochronextendsthenotionofphaseoffthecycle(withinitsbasinofattraction). Isochrons
can also be interpreted as the leaves of the stable manifold of a hyperbolic limit cycle. They fully
specify the dynamics in the absence of perturbations [127].
There are very few instances where the isochrons can be computed in closed form (though see
the examples in [351] for plane-polar models where the radial variable decouples from the angular
one). Computingtheisochronfoliationofthebasinofattractionofalimitcycleisamajorchallenge
since it requires knowledge of the limit cycle and therefore can only be computed in special cases
or numerically.
One computationally efficient method for numerically determining the isochrons is backward
integration, howeveritisunstableandinparticularforstronglyattractinglimitcyclesthetrajecto-
ries determined by backwards integration may quickly diverge to infinity. See Izhikevich [146] for a
MATLAB code which determines smooth curves approximating isochrons. Other methods include
the continuation based algorithm introduced by Osinga and Moehlis [243], the geometric approach
of Guillamon and Huguet to find high order approximations to isochrons in planar systems [129],
quadratic and higher order approximations [281, 314], and the forward integration method using
the Koopman operator and Fourier averages as introduced by Mauroy and Mezi´c [212]. This latter
method is particularly appealing and given its novelty we describe the technique below
The Koopman operator approach for constructing isochrons for a T-periodic orbit focuses on
tracking observables (or measures on a state space) rather than the identification of invariant sets.
The Koopman operator, K, is defined by K = z ◦Φ (x), where z : Rn → R is some observable of
the state space and Φ (x) denotes the flow evolved for a time t, staring at a point x. The Fourier
average of an observable z is defined as
1 (cid:90) T
(cid:98) t
For a fixed x, (18) is equivalent to a Fourier transform of the (time-varying) observable computed
along a trajectory. Hence, for a dynamics with a stable limit cycle (of frequency 2π/T), it is clear
that the Fourier average can be nonzero only for the frequencies ω = 2πn/T, n ∈ Z. The Fourier
averages are the eigenfunctions of K, so that
Kz(x;ω ) = eiωntz(x;ω ), n ∈ Z.
(cid:98) n (cid:98) n
Perhaps rather remarkably the isochrons are level sets of z(x;ω ) for almost all observables. The
(cid:98) n
only restriction being that the first Fourier coefficient of the Fourier observable evaluated along the
limit cycle is nonzero over one period. An example of the use of this approach is shown in Fig. 11,
where we plot the isochrons of a Stuart-Landau oscillator.
-2 -1 0 1 2
Figure 11: Isochron(cid:70)s(cid:105)(cid:103)(cid:117)fo(cid:114)(cid:101)u(cid:49)n(cid:48)(cid:58)d(cid:73)(cid:115)u(cid:111)(cid:99)s(cid:104)i(cid:114)n(cid:111)g(cid:110)(cid:115)t(cid:102)(cid:111)h(cid:117)e(cid:110)(cid:100)m(cid:115)(cid:117)e(cid:115)t(cid:105)(cid:110)h(cid:103)o(cid:116)d(cid:104)(cid:101)o(cid:109)f(cid:101)(cid:116)F(cid:104)o(cid:111)(cid:100)u(cid:111)r(cid:102)ie(cid:70)r(cid:111)(cid:117)a(cid:114)(cid:105)v(cid:101)(cid:114)er(cid:97)(cid:118)a(cid:101)g(cid:114)(cid:97)e(cid:103)s(cid:101)(cid:115)fo(cid:40)(cid:50)r(cid:46)(cid:52)(cid:56)t(cid:41)h(cid:102)e(cid:111)(cid:114)S(cid:116)(cid:104)t(cid:101)u(cid:83)a(cid:76)rt-Landau oscillator:
dz = z[λ(1+ic)/2(cid:115)(cid:121)+(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)i(cid:109)ω](cid:40)−(cid:50)(cid:46)(cid:52)z(cid:50)(cid:41)|(cid:44)z(cid:119)|2(cid:105)(cid:116)((cid:104)1(cid:21)+(cid:61)ic(cid:50)(cid:46))(cid:48)/(cid:44)(cid:99)2,(cid:61)z(cid:49)(cid:46)=(cid:48)(cid:44)(cid:33)x(cid:61)+(cid:49)(cid:46)i(cid:48)y(cid:46),(cid:84)w(cid:104)(cid:101)it(cid:98)h(cid:97)(cid:99)λ(cid:107)(cid:103)(cid:114)=(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:110)2(cid:100),(cid:99)c(cid:111)(cid:108)=(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)1(cid:114)(cid:101)a(cid:112)n(cid:114)(cid:101)d(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)ω(cid:116)(cid:115)= 1 so that T = 2π.
The black curve re(cid:116)(cid:104)p(cid:101)re(cid:70)s(cid:111)e(cid:117)n(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)t(cid:114)s(cid:97)t(cid:118)h(cid:101)(cid:114)e(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)p(cid:44)e(cid:119)r(cid:104)io(cid:105)(cid:108)(cid:115)d(cid:116)ic(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)or(cid:99)(cid:111)b(cid:108)(cid:111)it(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:101)o(cid:100)f(cid:108)(cid:105)t(cid:110)h(cid:101)(cid:115)e(cid:97)s(cid:114)(cid:101)ys(cid:116)t(cid:104)e(cid:101)m(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111);(cid:99)(cid:104)i(cid:114)n(cid:111)(cid:110)t(cid:115)(cid:44)h(cid:103)is(cid:105)(cid:118)(cid:101)c(cid:110)a(cid:97)s(cid:115)e,(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:118)w(cid:101)(cid:108)e have θ = ϑ. The
background colour(cid:115)r(cid:101)e(cid:116)(cid:115)p(cid:111)r(cid:102)es(cid:116)(cid:104)e(cid:101)n(cid:70)t(cid:111)s(cid:117)t(cid:114)(cid:105)h(cid:101)(cid:114)e(cid:97)F(cid:118)(cid:101)o(cid:114)u(cid:97)(cid:103)r(cid:101)i(cid:46)er(cid:84)(cid:104)a(cid:101)ve(cid:119)r(cid:104)a(cid:105)(cid:116)g(cid:101)e(cid:100),(cid:111)(cid:116)w(cid:115)h(cid:97)(cid:114)i(cid:101)ls(cid:116)t(cid:104)(cid:101)th(cid:97)(cid:99)e(cid:116)(cid:117)c(cid:97)o(cid:108)l(cid:105)o(cid:115)(cid:111)u(cid:99)r(cid:104)e(cid:114)(cid:111)d(cid:110)(cid:115)l(cid:44)in(cid:99)(cid:111)e(cid:109)s(cid:112)a(cid:117)(cid:116)r(cid:101)e(cid:100)the isochrons, given
as level sets of the Fourier average. The white dots are the actual isochrons, computed analytically
(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:108)(cid:121)(cid:46)
(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:103)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:70)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:44)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:119)(cid:104)(cid:105)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:111)(cid:116)(cid:115)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)
(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:117)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:67)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:44)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:108)
5.2 Phase-amp(cid:102)(cid:111)l(cid:114)i(cid:115)t(cid:116)u(cid:117)(cid:100)d(cid:105)(cid:101)e(cid:115) (cid:111)m(cid:102) (cid:108)(cid:97)o(cid:114)(cid:103)d(cid:101)e(cid:110)(cid:101)l(cid:116)s(cid:119)(cid:111)(cid:114)(cid:107)(cid:115)(cid:46) (cid:72)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:101)(cid:118)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44) (cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101) (cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114) (cid:97)(cid:112)(cid:112)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:120)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:116)(cid:111) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)
(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:111)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:115)(cid:99)(cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:108)(cid:105)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:44)(cid:97)(cid:110)(cid:100)(cid:109)(cid:97)(cid:107)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:103)(cid:99)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:97)(cid:105)(cid:110)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:115)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:97)(cid:98)(cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:121)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:44)(cid:119)(cid:101)
An alternative (non isochronal) framework for studying oscillators with an attracting limit cycle is
(cid:99)(cid:97)(cid:110) (cid:117)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:112)(cid:104)(cid:97)(cid:115)(cid:101) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110) (cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:99)(cid:104)(cid:110)(cid:105)(cid:113)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115) (cid:116)(cid:111) (cid:114)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:117)(cid:99)(cid:101) (cid:116)(cid:104)(cid:101) (cid:110)(cid:117)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114) (cid:111)(cid:102) (cid:100)(cid:105)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:110)(cid:115)(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:115) (cid:105)(cid:110) (cid:111)(cid:117)(cid:114)
to make a transformation to a moving orthonormal coordinate system around the limit cycle where
(cid:109)(cid:111)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:108)(cid:46)
onecoordinategivesthephaseonthelimitcyclewhiletheothercoordinatesgiveanotionofdistance
fromthelimitcycle. Ithaslongbeenknowninthedynamicalsystemscommunityhowtoconstruct
such a coordinate transformation, see [133] for a discussion. The importance of considering the
effects of both the phase and amplitude interactions of neural oscillators has been highlighted
by several authors including Ermentrout and Kopell [104] and Medvedev [216], and that this is
(cid:51)(cid:51)
especially pertinent when considering phenomenon such as oscillator death (and see § 3.3). Phase-
amplitudedescriptionshavealreadysuccessfullybeenusedtofindequationsfortheevolutionofthe
energies(amplitudes)andphasesofweaklycoupledweaklydissipativenetworksofnonlinearplanar
oscillators (modelled by small dissipative perturbations of a Hamiltonian oscillator) [17, 18, 19].
Lee et al. [189] use the notion of phase and amplitudes of large networks of globally coupled
Stuart-Landau oscillators to investigate the effects of a spread in amplitude growth parameter
(units oscillating with different amplitudes and some not oscillating at all) and the effect of a
homogeneous shift in the nonlinear frequency parameter.
We now discuss the phase-amplitude coordinate transformation detailed by Hale [133], some of
the situations where it has been employed and other areas in which a phase-amplitude description
of oscillators is necessary to reveal the dynamics of the system. Consider again the system (17)
with (cid:15) = 0 which has an attracting hyperbolic periodic orbit. Make a transformation to a moving
orthonormal coordinate system as follows. Choose one axis of the coordinate system to be in the
direction of unit tangent vector along the periodic orbit, ξ, given by
(cid:12) (cid:12)
du(cid:46)(cid:12)du(cid:12)
dϑ (cid:12)dϑ(cid:12)
The remaining coordinate axes can be expressed as the columns of an n×(n−1) matrix ζ. We
can then write an arbitrary point x in terms of its phase ϑ ∈ [0,T) and its amplitude ρ:
Here, |ρ| represents the Euclidean distance from the limit cycle. The vector of amplitudes ρ ∈ Rn−1
allows us to consider points away from the limit cycle.
Upon projecting the dynamics onto the moving orthonormal system, we obtain the dynamics
of the transformed system for ϑ ∈ [0,T) and ρ ∈ Rn−1
(cid:20)(cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12) du
(cid:21)−1
(cid:12)dϑ(cid:12) dϑ dϑ
and Df is the Jacobian of the vector field f, evaluated along the periodic orbit u. The technical
details to specify the orthonormal coordinates forming ζ can be found in the appendix of [344]. It
is straight-forward to show that f (ϑ,ρ) → 0 as |ρ| → 0, f (ϑ,0) = 0 and that ∂f (ϑ,0)/∂ρ = 0.
In the above, A(ϑ) describes the ϑ-dependent rate of attraction or repulsion from cycle and f
captures the shear present in the system, that is, whether the speed of ϑ increases or decreases
dependent on the distance from cycle. A precise definition for shear is given in [245] and will be
discussed further in § 5.3.
Some caution must be exercised when applying this transformation as it will break down when
the determinant of the Jacobian of the transformation vanishes. This never occurs on cycle (where
ρ = 0) but it may do so for some |ρ| = k > 0, setting an upper bound on how far from the limit
cycle these phase-amplitude coordinates can be used to describe the system. In [344] it is noted
that for the planar ML model the value of k can be relatively small for some values of ϑ, but that
breakdown occurs where the orbit has high curvature. In higher dimensional systems this issue
would be less problematic.
Similarly, the coordinate transformation can be applied to driven systems (i.e. (17) with (cid:15) (cid:54)= 0)
where (cid:15) is not necessarily small. In this case the dynamics in (ϑ,ρ) coordinates, where ϑ ∈ [0,T)
and ρ ∈ Rn−1, are
and I is the n×n identity matrix. Here, h and B describe the effect in terms of ϑ and ρ that the
perturbations have. For planar models, B = I .
Medvedev [216] has employed this phase-amplitude description to determine conditions for
stabilityofthesynchronisedstateinanetworkofidenticaloscillatorswithseparablelinearcoupling.
Medvedev[215]hasalsousedtheframeworktoconsidertheeffectsofwhitenoiseonthesynchronous
state, identifying thetypesof linearcouplingoperators leadtosynchronyina network ofoscillators
provided that the strength of the interactions is sufficiently strong.
5.3 Dynamics of forced oscillators: shear-induced chaos
Sincephase-amplitudecoordinatescancapturedynamicsafinitedistanceawayfromthelimitcycle,
(and additionally have the advantage over isochronal coordinates of being defined outside of the
basin of attraction of the limit cycle) they can be used to model dynamical phenomena in driven
systems where the perturbations necessarily push the dynamics away from the limit cycle. There
is no need to make any assumptions about the strength of the forcing (cid:15).
The phase-amplitude description of a forced oscillator is able to detect the presence of other
structures in the phase space. For example if the system were multistable, phase-amplitude co-
ordinates would track trajectories near these other structures and back again, should another
perturbation return the dynamics to the basin of attraction of the limit cycle. These coordinates
would also detect the presence of other non-attracting invariant structures such as saddles in the
unperturbed flow. Orbits passing near the saddle will remain there for some time and forcing may
act to move trajectories near to this saddle before returning to the limit cycle. It may also be
the case that the forcing acts to create trapping regions if the forcing is strong compared to the
attraction to the limit cycle.
Another dynamical phenomenon which phase-amplitude coordinates are able to capture is the
occurrence of shear-induced chaos. Shear in a system near a limit cycle Γ is the differential in
components of the velocity tangent to the limit cycle as one moves further from Γ in phase space.
Shear forces within the system act to speed up (or slow down) trajectories further away from the
limit cycle compared to those closer to it. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 12.
Asweshowbelow,animpulsiveforceisapplied(thesystemiskicked)a‘bump’inΓisproduced.
If there is sufficient shear in the system then the bump is folded and stretched as it is attracted
LIMIT CYCLE
!
!
Figure 12: The stretch-and-fold action of a kick followed by relaxation in the presence of shear.
Left: A non-constant kick moves data away from the limit cycle (horizontal grey line). As the
image of the cycle under the kick relaxes back to the cycle (under the unperturbed flow) the action
of shear causes folds to appear. Right: The geometry of folding in relation to the isochron foliation
(black lines). An initial segment γ is kicked to the blue curve and is then allowed to relax back
to cycle, passing through the red and green curves, which are images of the blue curve under the
unperturbed flow.
backtothelimitcycle. Suchfoldingcanpotentiallyleadtotheformationofhorseshoesandstrange
attractors. However, if the attraction to the limit cycle is large compared to the shear strength or
size of the kick then the bumps will dissipate before any significant stretching occurs.
Shear-induced chaos is most commonly discussed in the context of discrete time kicking of limit
cycles. Wang and Young [339, 340, 338] prove rigorous results in the case of periodically kicked
limit cycles with long relaxation times. Their results provide details of the geometric mechanism
for producing chaos. Here we briefly review some of these results. More detailed summaries can be
found in [196] and [197].
Let Φ be the flow of the unperturbed system, which has an attracting hyperbolic limit cycle
Γ. We can think of a kick as a mapping κ. The dynamics of the system with periodic kicking
every τ units of time can be obtained by iterating the map F = Φ ◦κ. Provided that there is a
neighbourhood U of Γ such that points in U remain in the basin of attraction of Γ under kicks and
τ is long enough that the kicked points can return to U, then Γ = ∩ Fn(U) is an attractor for
the periodically kicked system. If the kicks are weak then Γ is generally expected to be a slightly
perturbedversionofΓandweshouldexpectfairlyregularbehaviour. InthiscaseΓ isaninvariant
circle. To obtain more complicated dynamics it is necessary to break the invariant circle. This idea
is illustrated by the following linear shear model considered in [340]:
d (cid:88)
where (ϑ,y) ∈ [0,T)×R = S1 ×R are coordinates in the phase space, λ,σ,A > 0 are constants
and H : S1 → R is a nonconstant smooth function. The unforced system (A = 0) has a limit cycle
Γ = S1×{0}. If the quantity
A ≡ ×(kick ‘amplitude’),
λ contraction rate
is sufficiently large, then it is possible to show that there is a positive measure set T ⊂ R+ such
that for all τ ∈ T, Γ is a strange attractor of F [338]. How large the quantity must be depends
on the function H(ϑ). Since H(ϑ) is nonconstant (to create the bumps), the larger shear σ and
the kick amplitude A, the more folding will occur as the bump is attracted back to the limit cycle.
Also note that weaker limit cycles (smaller λ) create more favourable conditions for shear induced
chaos as the shear has longer to act before the bump is attracted back to the limit cycle.
For a more general system with periodic forcing the shear may not appear explicitly as a
parameter. To elucidate what kind of kicks may cause shear induced chaos in this case we appeal
to the isochrons of the system. We think of the isochrons of Γ as the strong stable manifold of Γ.
Suppose, as illustrated in Fig. 12, that a section Γ of the limit cycle is kicked upwards with the
end points held fixed and assume τ = np for some n,p ∈ Z+. Since the isochrons are flow invariant,
during relaxation the flow moves each point of the kicked curve κ(Γ ) back towards Γ along the
isochrons. In Fig. 12 we can clearly see the effect of the shear with a fold forming.
From Fig. 12 one can see that kicks along isochrons or in directions roughly parallel to the
isochrons will not produce strange attractors, nor will kicks that carry one isochron’s manifold
to another. The cause of the stretching and folding is the variation in how far points x ∈ Γ are
moved by κ in the direction transverse to the isochrons (i.e. the ordering of points in terms of
asymptotic phase is altered by the action of the kick). Lin and Young [196] emphasise that the
occurrence of shear induced chaos depends on the interplay between the geometries of the kicks
and the dynamical structures of the unforced system.
In the case of the linear shear model above, the isochrons of the unforced system are simply
the lines with slope −λ/σ in (ϑ,y) coordinates. Variation in kick distances in directions transverse
to these isochrons is guaranteed with any nonconstant function H, with greater variation given by
larger values of σ/λ and A.
Beyond the rigorous results proved by Wang and Young [339, 340, 338, 196] concerning peri-
odically kicked limit cycles of the linear shear model and for supercritical Hopf bifurcations, Ott
and Stenlund [245] prove that shear-induced chaos may exist near general limit cycles. In addition,
Lin and Young [196] have carried out numerical studies including random kicks at times given by a
Poisson process and systems driven by white noise. They also consider forcing of a pair of coupled
oscillators. In all cases, shear-induced chaos occurs when the shearing and amplitude of the forcing
are large enough to overcome the effects of damping.
Lin et al. [194] demonstrate that the ML model can exhibit shear-induced chaos near the
homoclinic bifurcation when periodically forced, by plotting images of the periodic orbit under
successive applications of the kick map and calculating the maximum Lyapunov exponent. They
alsoemphasisethatthephenomenonofshear-inducedchaoscannotbedetectedbytheperturbative
techniques such as those outlined in § 5.4 and § 5.5 below.
Wedgwood et al. [344] go on to show that the phase-amplitude description is well-suited to
understanding the behaviour of neural oscillators in response to external stimuli. They consider a
number of neural oscillator models in addition to a generic planar model and examine the response
of the system to periodic pulsatile forcing by taking x ∈ R2,
and a variety of choices for f(x) in (17). Their numerical simulations indicate that for both
the FHN and ML models the behaviour remains qualitatively similar when the relevant functions
f (ϑ,ρ) are replaced by σρ, f (ϑ,ρ) is dropped and A(ϑ) is replaced with −λ (for a wide range of
σ,λ > 0). They then focus on the effect of the form of the forcing function in the phase-amplitude
coordinates. Evaluating the functions h(ϑ,ρ) and B(ϑ,ρ) of equations (19) and (22) respectively
fortheparticularmodelanddenotingthefirstcomponentofhasP andthefirstcomponentofξ as
P they find that forcing each system at the same ratio of the natural frequency of the underlying
periodic orbit and implementing the choices above gives the following ODE on ϑ ∈ [0,T), ρ ∈ Rn−1
d (cid:88) d (cid:88)
By developing a stroboscopic map for this system, Wedgwood et al. [344] numerically evaluate the
largest Lyapunov exponent which is found to be positive for the Morris-Lecar model but negative
for the FHN model.
Theanalysisofthebehaviourofgenericnetworksofoscillatorswithinaphase-amplitudeframe-
work is a challenging open problem but such a description would allow for greater accuracy (com-
pared to the phase only methods traditionally used and described below) in elucidating a richer
variety of the complex dynamics of oscillator networks.
5.4 Phase oscillator models
Toobtainaphasedescription, onecanconsiderthelimitofstrongattractioninequations(20)-(21).
However, it is more appealing to consider a phase variable with a uniform rotation rate that assigns
a phase coordinate ϑ ∈ [0,T) to each point x ∈ Γ according to
This reduction to a phase description gives a simple dynamical system, albeit one that cannot
describe evolution of trajectories in phase-space that are away from the limit cycle. However, the
phase reduction formalism is useful in quantifying how a system (on or close to a cycle) responds
to weak forcing, via the construction of the infinitesimal phase response curve (iPRC). This can
be written, for a given ODE model, as the solution to an adjoint equation. For a given high
dimensional conductance based model this can be solved for numerically, though for some normal
form descriptions closed form solutions are also known [55].
The iPRC at a point on cycle is equal to the gradient of the (isochronal) phase at that point.
Writing this vector quantity as Q means that weak forcing (cid:15)g(t) in the original high dimensional
models transforms as dϑ/dt = 1 + (cid:15)(cid:104)Q,g(cid:105) where (cid:104)·,·(cid:105) defines the standard inner product and (cid:15)
is a small parameter. For periodic forcing such equations can be readily analysed, and questions
relating to synchronisation, mode-locking and Arnol’d tongues can be thoroughly explored [255].
Moreover, this approach forms the basis for constructing models of weakly interacting oscillators,
where the external forcing is pictured as a function of the phase of a firing neuron. This has led to
a great deal of work on phase-locking and central pattern generation in neural circuitry and see for
example [142].
However, theassumptionthatphasealoneisenoughtocapturetheessentialsofneuralresponse
is one made more for mathematical convenience than being physiologically motivated. Indeed for
the popular type I ML firing model with standard parameters, direct numerical simulations with
pulsatile forcing show responses that cannot be explained solely with a phase model [194], as just
highlightedin§5.3(sincestronginteractionswillnecessarilytakeoneawayfromtheneighbourhood
of a cycle where a phase description is expected to hold).
5.5 Phase response
It is common practice in neuroscience to characterise a neuronal oscillator in terms of its phase
response to a perturbation [273]. This gives rise to the notion of a so-called phase response curve
(PRC),whichforarealneuroncanbedeterminedexperimentally[114,317],andcanalsoberelated
to the poststimulus time histogram [130]. Consider a dynamical system dx/dt = f(x), x ∈ RN
with a T-periodic solution u(t) = u(t+T) and introduce an infinitesimal perturbation ∆x to the
trajectory u(t) at time t = 0. This perturbation evolves according to the linearised equation of
motion:
HereDf(u)denotestheJacobianoff evaluatedalongu. Introducingatime-independentisochronal
phase shift ∆ϑ as ϑ(u(t)+∆u(t))−ϑ(u(t)), we have to first order in ∆x that
where (cid:104)·,·(cid:105) defines the standard inner product, and Q = ∇ ϑ is the gradient of ϑ evaluated at u(t).
Taking the time-derivative of (24) gives
(cid:28) (cid:29) (cid:28) (cid:29)
d Q,∆x = − Q, d ∆x = −(cid:104)Q,Df(u)∆x(cid:105) = − (cid:10) DfT(u)Q,∆x (cid:11) .
Since the above equation must hold for arbitrary perturbations, we see that the gradient Q = ∇ ϑ
satisfies the linear equation
subject to the boundary conditions
The first condition simply guarantees that dϑ/dt = 1 (at any point on the periodic orbit), and
the second enforces periodicity. Note that the notion of phase response can also be extended to
time-delayed systems [168, 236].
In general equation (25) must be solved numerically to obtain the iPRC, say, using the adjoint
routine in XPPAUT [99] or MatCont [126]. However, for the case of a nonlinear IF model, defined
by (1), the PRC is given explicitly by
1 (cid:90) v(t) dv(cid:48)
wheretheperiodofoscillationisfoundbysolvingΨ(v ) = T (andtheresponsefunctionisvalidfor
finite perturbations). For example, for the quadratic IF model, obtained from (1) with the choice
with f(v) = v2, and taking the limit v → ∞ and v → −∞ we find Q(ϑ) = sin2(ϑπ/T)/I with
T = πτ/ I, recovering the iPRC expected of an oscillator close to a SNIC bifurcation [95, 107].
For a comprehensive discussion of iPRCs for various common oscillator models see the excellent
survey article by Brown et al. [55]. The iPRC for planar piecewise linear IF models can also be
computed explicitly [77], although we do not discuss this further here. In Fig. 13 we show the
40 0.6 2 0.2 800
0 0.3 0.6 0 400
-40 0 0.2 -2 0
-80 -0.2 -400
-0.3 -4 -0.2
0 T 0 T 0 T
Figure 13: From left to right: Phase response curves for the Hodgkin-Huxley model, the Wilson
model and the Morris-Lecar model corresponding to the discussion in § 2. Orbits are in blue and
iPRCs in red.
numerically computed iPRCs for the Hodgkin-Huxley model, the Wilson cortical model and the
Morris-Lecar model previously discussed in § 2. For completeness it is well to note the iPRC for
a planar oscillator close to a supercritical Hopf bifurcation has an adjoint with a shape given by
Having defined the phase in some neighbourhood of the limit cycle, we can write (23) as
(cid:28) (cid:29)
Fordx/dt = f(x)thisgives(cid:104)∇ ϑ,f(x)(cid:105) = 1. Wenowconsidertheeffectofasmallexternalperiodic
force on the self sustained oscillations as in (17), with g(x,t) = g(x,t+∆), where in general ∆ is
differenttoT. Forweakperturbations((cid:15) (cid:28) 1)thestatepointwillleave Γ, thoughwillstayinsome
neighbourhood, which we denote by U. We extend the phase off cycle using isochronal coordinates
so that (cid:104)∇ ϑ,f(x)(cid:105) = 1 holds for any point x ∈ U. For a perturbed oscillator, in these coordinates
(cid:28) (cid:29)
As a first approximation we evaluate the right hand side of the above on the limit-cycle to get an
equation for the phase dynamics:
The phase dynamics (27) is still very hard to analyse, and as such it is common to resort to a
further simplification, namely averaging. First let us introduce a rotating phase ψ = ϑ−Tt/∆, in
which case (27) becomes
If both (cid:15) and δ are small then dψ/dt (cid:39) 0 and ψ evolves slowly. Thus we may set ψ(s) (cid:39) ψ(t) for
s ∈ [t,t+T]. Averaging the above over one period gives
d 1 (cid:90) T
wherewehaveusedtheresultthatI(ψ+s,t) = I(ψ+s+T,t+T). ThefunctionH(ψ)isT-periodic
and can be written as a Fourier series H(ψ) = (cid:80) H e2πinψ/T, with the simplest example of an
averaged phase-dynamics being
which is called the Adler equation [6]. If we denote the maximum and minimum of H by H
and H respectively then for a phase-locked 1:1 state defined by dψ = 0 we require (cid:15)H <
max dt min
δ < (cid:15)H . In this case there are two fixed points ψ defined by H(ψ ) = δ. One of these is
unstable (say ψ , so that (cid:15)H(cid:48)(ψ ) > 0) and the other stable (ψ , with (cid:15)H(cid:48)(ψ ) < 0). This gives
rise to a rotating solution with constant rotation frequency so that ϑ = (1+δ)t+ψ . The two
solutions coalesce in a saddle-node bifurcation when δ = (cid:15)H and δ = (cid:15)H (or equivalently
when H(cid:48)(ψ ) = 0). In the case of the Adler model the parameter region for phase-locking is given
explicitly by a triangular wedge defined by (cid:15) = |δ| – a so-called Arnol’d tongue. Outside of this
tongue solutions drift (they cannot lock to the forcing period) according to (28), and the system
evolves quasi-periodically. We treat weakly coupled phase oscillators in § 6.
6 Weakly coupled phase oscillator networks
The theory of weakly coupled oscillators [173, 102] is now a standard tool of dynamical systems
theory and has been used by many authors to study oscillatory neural networks, see for example
[102,331,64,192]. ThebookbyHoppensteadtandIzhikevichprovidesaverycomprehensivereview
of this framework [142], which can also be adapted to study networks of relaxation oscillators (in
some singular limit) [147, 71].
Consider, for illustration, a system of interacting limit-cycle oscillators (8). Following the
method in § 5.5, similar to (28) we obtain the network’s phase dynamics in the form
d (cid:88)
i i ij i i i j j
where the frequency ω allows for the fact that oscillators are not identical and, for this reason,
we will assume that θ ∈ [0,2π). Precisely this form of network model was originally suggested
by Winfree to describe populations of coupled oscillators. The Winfree model [352] assumes a
separation of time-scales so that an oscillator can be solely characterised by its phase on cycle (fast
attraction to cycle) and is described by the network equations
d 1 (cid:88)
describing a globally coupled network with a biologically realistic PRC R and pulsatile interaction
function P. Using a mixture of analysis and numerics Winfree found that with large N there was
a transition to macroscopic synchrony at a critical value of the homogeneity of the population.
Following this Kuramoto [173] introduced a simpler model with interactions mediated by phase
differences, and showed how the transition to collective synchronisation could be understood from
a more mathematical perspective. For an excellent review of the Kuramoto model see [312] and [5].
The natural way to obtain a phase-difference model from (29) is, as in § 5.5, to average over one
period of oscillation. For simplicity let us assume that all the oscillators are identical, and ω = ω
∀i, in which case we find that
d (cid:88)
1 (cid:90) 2π
The 2π-periodic function H is referred to as the phase interaction function. If we write complex
Fourier series for Q and G as
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Q(t) = Q eint and G(t) = G eint
respectively then
with H = (cid:104)Q ,G (cid:105). Note that certain caution has to be exercised in applying averaging theory.
In general, one can only establish that a solution of the unaveraged equations is (cid:15)-close to a
corresponding solution of the averaged system for times of O((cid:15)−1). No such problem arises in the
case of hyperbolic fixed points corresponding to phase-locked states.
When describing a piece of cortex or a central pattern generator circuit with a set of oscillators,
the biological realism of the model typically resides in the phase interaction function. The simplest
example is H(ψ) = sin(ψ), which when combined with a choice of global coupling defines the well
known Kuramoto model [173]. However, to model realistic neural networks one should calculate
(32) directly, using knowledge of the single neuron iPRC and the form of interaction. As an
example consider synaptic coupling, described in § 2.5, that can be written in the form G(u(ψ)) =
η(ψ+m2π), and a single neuron model for which the iPRC in the voltage variable v is given
by R (say experimentally or from numerical investigation). In this case
(cid:90) ∞
If instead we were interested in diffusive (gap-junction) coupling then we would have
1 (cid:90) 2π
For the HH model R(t) is known to have a shape like −sin(t) for a spike centred on the origin (see
Fig. 13). Making the further choice that η(t) = α2te−αt then (34) can be evaluated as
In the particular case of two oscillators with reciprocal coupling and ω = 1 then
and we define ϕ := θ (t)−θ (t). A phase-locked solution satisfies constant phase difference φ that
is a zero of the (odd) function
A given phase-locked state is then stable provided that K(cid:48)(ϕ) < 0. Note that by symmetry both
the in-phase (ϕ = 0) and anti-phase (ϕ = π) states are guaranteed to exist. For the form of phase
interaction function given by (35), The stability of the synchronous solution is governed by the sign
of K(cid:48)(0):
Thusforinhibitorycoupling((cid:15) < 0)synchronisationwilloccurif1/α > 1,namelywhenthesynapse
is slow (α → 0). It is also a simple matter to show that the anti-synchronous solution (ϕ = π) is
stable for a sufficiently fast synapse (α → ∞). It is also possible to develop a general theory for
the existence and stability of phase-locked states in larger networks than just a pair.
6.1 Phase, frequency and mode locking
Now suppose we have a general population of N ≥ 2 coupled phase oscillators
describedbyphasesθ ∈ R/2πZ. Foraparticularcontinuouschoiceofphasesθ(t)forthetrajectory
one can define the frequency of the jth oscillator as
This limit will converge under fairly weak assumptions on the dynamics [154], though it may vary
for different attractors in the same system, for different oscillators j and in some cases it may vary
even for different trajectories within the same attractor.
We say two oscillators j and k are phase locked with ratio (n : m) for (n,m) ∈ Z2 \(0,0) with
no common factors of n and m, if there is an M such that
for all t > 0. The oscillators are frequency locked with ratio (n : m) if
If we say they are simply phase (or frequency locked) without explicit mention of the (n : m) ratio,
we are using the convention that they are (1 : 1) phase (or frequency) locked. The definition of
Ω means that if two oscillators are phase locked then they are frequency locked. The converse is
not necessarily the case: two oscillators may be frequency locked but not phase locked if the phase
difference nθ (t)−mθ (t) grows sublinearly with t.
Forthespecialcasegloballycoupledaveragednetworks(w = 1/N forthesystem(31))isS ×T
equivariant. By topological arguments, maximally symmetric solutions describing synchronous,
splay, and a variety of cluster states are expected to exist generically [23]. The system (31) with
global coupling is in itself an interesting subject of study in that it is of arbitrarily high dimension
N but is effectively determined by the single function H(ϕ) that is computable from a single pair
of oscillators. The system (and variants thereof) have been productively studied by thousands of
papers since the seminal work of Kuramoto [173].
6.2 Dynamics of general networks of identical phase oscillators
The collective dynamics of phase oscillators have been investigated for a range of regular network
structuresincludinglineararraysandringswithuni-orbi-directionalcouplinge.g. [102,97,23,54],
and hierarchical networks [295]. In some cases the systems can be usefully investigated in terms
of permutation symmetries of (31) with global coupling, for example Z or D for uni- or bi-
directionally coupled rings. In other cases a variety of approaches have been developed adapted
to particular structures though these have not in all cases been specifically applied to oscillators;
some of these approaches are discussed in § 3.2
We recall that the form of the coupling in (31) is special in the sense that it assumes the
interactions between two oscillators are independent of any third - pairwise coupling [23, 54]. If
there are degeneracies such as
m−1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:88) 2πk
whichcanappearwhensomeoftheFouriercomponentsofH arezero, thiscanleadtodegeneracies
in the dynamics. For example [342], while [23, Theorem 7.1] shows that if H satisfies (36) for
some m ≥ 2 and N is a multiple of m then (31), with global coupling, will have m-dimensional
invariant tori in phase space that are foliated by neutrally stable periodic orbits. This degeneracy
will disappear on including either non-pairwise coupling or introducing small but non-zero Fourier
components in the expansion of H but as noted in [167] this will typically be the case for the
interaction of oscillators even if they are near a Hopf bifurcation.
We examine in more detail some of the phase locked states that can arise in weakly coupled
networks of identical phase oscillators described by (31). We define a 1:1 phase-locked solution to
be of the form θ (t) = ϕ +Ωt, where ϕ is a constant phase and Ω is the collective frequency of
the coupled oscillators. Substitution into the averaged system (31) gives
After choosing some reference oscillator, these N equations determine the collective frequency Ω
and N −1 relative phases with the latter independent of (cid:15).
It is interesting to compare the weak coupling theory for phase-locked states with the analysis
of LIF networks from § 4.3. Equation (13) has an identical structure to that of equation (37)
(for I = I for all i), so that the classification of solutions using group theoretic methods is the
same in both situations. There are, however, a number of significant differences between phase-
locking equations (37) and (13). First, equation (13) is exact, whereas equation (37) is valid only
to O((cid:15)) since it is derived under the assumption of weak coupling. Second, the collective period of
oscillations ∆ must be determined self-consistently in equation (13).
In order to analyse the local stability of a phase-locked solution Φ = (φ ,...,φ ), we linearise
the system by setting θ
+Ωt+θ(cid:101)i (t) and expand to first-order in θ(cid:101)i :
d (cid:88)
θ(cid:101)i = (cid:15) H(cid:98)ij (Φ)θ(cid:101)j ,
and H(cid:48)(ϕ) = dH(ϕ)/dϕ. One of the eigenvalues of the Jacobian H(cid:98) is always zero, and the cor-
responding eigenvector points in the direction of the flow, that is (1,1,...,1). The phase-locked
solution will be stable provided that all other eigenvalues have a negative real part. We note that
the Jacobian has the form of a graph-Laplacian mixing both anatomy and dynamics, namely it is
the graph-Laplacian of the matrix with components −w H(cid:48)(ϕ −ϕ ).
6.2.1 Synchrony
Synchrony (more precisely, exact phase synchrony) is where θ = θ = ... = θ = θ = Ωt+t
1 2 N−1 N 0
for some fixed frequency Ω is a classic example of a phase-locked state. Substitution into (31),
describing a network of identical oscillators, shows that Ω must satisfy the condition
One way for this to be true for all i is if H(0) = 0, which is the case say for H(θ) = sin(θ) or for
diffusive coupling, which is linear in the difference between two state variables so that H(0) = 0.
The existence of synchronous solutions is also guaranteed if
w is independent of i. This
would be the case for global coupling where w = 1/N, so that the system has permutation
symmetry.
If the synchronous solution exists then the Jacobian is given by (cid:15)H(cid:48)(0)L where L is the graph-
Laplacian with components L = w −δ w . We note that L has one zero eigenvalue, with
ij ij ij k ik
eigenvector(1,1,...,1,1). HenceifalltheothereigenvaluesofLlieononesideoftheimaginaryaxis
then stability is solely determined by the sign of (cid:15)H(cid:48)(0). In Fig. 14 we show the eigenvalues of the
graph-Laplacian of the anatomical network structure of the Macaque monkey brain, as determined
from the CoCoMac database [305]. Here all the eigenvalues lie to the left of the imaginary axis so
that the stability of the synchronous solution (should it exist) is solely determined by the sign of
(cid:15)H(cid:48)(0). For global coupling we have that L = N−1−δ , and the (N −1 degenerate) eigenvalue
is −1. Hence the synchronous solution will be stable provided λ = −(cid:15)H(cid:48)(0) < 0.
Spectrum of
−20 dH−10 0
Figure14: Eigenvaluesofthegraph-Laplacianfortheanatomicalne0t.0w8orkstructureoftheMacaque
monkey brain — generated from the CoCoMac database. 0.06
6.2.2 Asynchrony
Another example of a phase-locked−8state is the purely asynchronous solution whereby all phases
are uniformly distributed around t−h9e unit circle. This is sometimes referred to as a splay state or
splay-phase state and can be writt−e1n0 dθ
/dt = Ω with θ
= 2π/N ∀i. Like the synchronous
−4 −2 0 2 4
solution it will be present but not necessarily stable in networks with global coupling, with an
emergent frequency that depends on H:
N (cid:18) (cid:19)
1 (cid:88) 2πj
In this case the Jacobian takes the form
where Γ = (cid:80) H(cid:48)(2πk/N) and A = H(cid:48)(2πn/N). Hence the eigenvalues are given by λ =
(cid:15)[ν −Γ]/N, p = 0,...,N −1 where ν are the eigenvalues of A : (cid:80) A ap = ν ap, where
p p n−m m n−m m p n
ap denote the components of the pth eigenvector. This has solutions of the form ap = e−2πinp/N so
that ν = (cid:80) A e2πimp/N, giving
N (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:15) (cid:88) 2πm
and the splay state will be stable if Re(λ ) < 0 ∀p (cid:54)= 0.
In the large N limit N → ∞ we have the useful result that (for global coupling) network
averages may be replaced by time averages:
1 (cid:88) N (cid:18) 2πj (cid:19) 1 (cid:90) 2π
lim F = F(t)dt = F ,
N→∞ N N 2π 0
for some 2π-periodic function F(t) = F(t+2π) (which can be established using a simple Riemann
sum argument), with a Fourier series F(t) = (cid:80) F eint. Hence in the large N limit the collective
frequency of a splay state (global coupling) is given by Ω = ω+(cid:15)H , with eigenvalues
(cid:15) (cid:90) 2π
λ = H(cid:48)(t)eiptdt = −2πip(cid:15)H .
Hence a splay state is stable if −p(cid:15)ImH < 0, where we have used the fact that since H(θ) is real,
then ImH = −ImH . As an example consider the case H(θ) = θ(π−θ)(θ−2π) for θ ∈ [0,2π)
and (cid:15) > 0 (where H is periodically extended outside [0,2π)). It is straight forward to calculate
the Fourier coefficients (33) as H = 6i/n3, so that −p(cid:15)ImH = −6(cid:15)/p2 < 0 ∀p (cid:54)= 0. Hence the
asynchronous state is stable. If we flip any one of the coefficients H → −H then Reλ > 0 and
the splay state will develop an instability to an eigenmode that will initially destabilise the system
in favour of an m-cluster.
Figure 15: (a) A phase interaction given by (cid:15)H(θ) = θ(π−θ)(θ−2π) for θ ∈ [0,2π) with complex
Fourier series coefficients given by H = 6i/n3. The remaining panels show the effect of flipping
the sign of just one of the co-efficients, namely H → −H . (b) m = 1, and the asynchronous
solution will destabilise in favour of the synchronous solution since H(cid:48)(0) > 0. (c) m = 2, and the
asynchronous solution will destabilise in favour of a 2-cluster. (d) m = 3, and the asynchronous
solution will destabilise in favour of a 3-cluster. Note that only small changes in the shape of H,
as seen in panels (c)-(d), can lead to a large change in the emergent network dynamics.
6.2.3 Clusters for globally coupled phase oscillators
For reviews of the stability of cluster states (in which subsets of the oscillator population synchro-
nise, with oscillators belonging to different clusters behaving differently) we refer the reader to
[23, 119, 54]; here we use the notation of [242]. If a group of N oscillators is neither fully synchro-
nised nor desynchronised it may be clustered. We say A = {A ,...,A } is an M-cluster partition
of {1,...,N} if
{1,...,N} = A ,
where A are pairwise disjoint sets (A ∩A = ∅ if p (cid:54)= q). NB if a = |A | then
a = N .
One can refer to this as a cluster of type (a ,...,a ). It is possible to show that any clustering
can be realised as a stable periodic orbit of the globally coupled phase oscillator system [242] for
suitable choice of phase interaction function; more precisely, there is a coupling function H for the
system (31), with global coupling, such that for any N and any given M-cluster partition A of
{1,...,N} there is a linearly stable periodic orbit realising that partition (and all permutations of
it). Seealso[294]wheretheauthorsconsiderclusteringinthissystemwhereH(ϕ) = sinMϕ. More
generally, thereareverymanyinvariantsubspacescorrespondingtospatio-temporalclusteringthat
we can characterise in the following Theorem.
Theorem 6.1 [23, Theorem 3.1] The subsets of TN that are invariant for (31), with global
coupling, because of symmetries of S ×T correspond to isotropy subgroups in the conjugacy class
where N = mk, k = k + ··· + k and × denotes the semidirect product. The points with this
1 (cid:96) s
isotropy have (cid:96)m clusters that are split into (cid:96) groups of m clusters of the size k . The clusters
within these groups are cyclically permuted by a phase shift of 2π/m. The number of isotropy
subgroups in this conjugacy class is N!/[m(k !...k !)].
1 (cid:96)
It is a nontrivial problem to discover which of these subspaces contain periodic solutions. Note
that in-phase corresponds to (cid:96) = m = 1, k = N while splay phase corresponds to (cid:96) = k = 1,
m = N. The stability of several classes of these solutions can be computed in terms of properties
of H(ϕ); see for example § 6.2.1 and § 6.2.2 and for other classes of solution [23, 54, 242].
6.2.4 Generic loss of synchrony in globally coupled identical phase oscillators
Bifurcation properties of the globally coupled oscillator system (31) on a varying parameter that
affects the coupling H(ϕ) are surprisingly complicated because of the symmetries present in the
system; see § 3.6. In particular, the high multiplicity of the eigenvalues for loss of stability of the
synchronous solution means:
• Path following numerical bifurcation programmes such as AUTO or XPPAUT need to be
done with great care when applying to problems with N ≥ 3 identical oscillators - these
typically will not be able to find all solutions branching from one that loses stability.
• A large number of branches with a range of symmetries may generically be involved in the
bifurcation; indeed, all 2-cluster states S ×S .
• Local bifurcations may have global bifurcation consequences owing to the presence of connec-
tions that are facilitated by the nontrivial topology of the torus [30, 23].
• Branches of degenerate attractors such as heteroclinic attractors may appear at such bifur-
cations for N ≥ 4 oscillators.
Hansel et al. [135] consider the system (31) with global coupling and phase interaction function
of the form
for (r,α) fixed parameters; detailed bifurcation scenarios in the cases N = 3,4 are shown in [27].
As an example, Figure 16 shows regions on stability of synchrony, splay phase solutions and robust
heteroclinic attractors as discussed later in § 7.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
Figure 16: Regions of stability for the globally coupled N = 4-oscillator system (31) with phase
interaction function (38) and parameters in the region r > 0, 0 < α < π [27]. The narrow stripes
show the region of stability of synchrony, while the wide stripes show the region of stability of the
splay phase solution. The pink shaded area shows a region of existence of a robust heteroclinic
network that is an attractor with in the checkerboard region; the boundaries are described in [27].
6.3 Phase waves
The phase reduction method has been applied to a number of important biological systems, includ-
ing the study of travelling waves in chains of weakly coupled oscillators that model processes such
as the generation and control of rhythmic activity in central pattern generators (CPGs) underlying
locomotion [66, 162] and peristalsis in vascular and intestinal smooth muscle [102]. Related phase
models have been motivated by the observation that synchronisation and waves of excitation can
occur during sensory processing in the cortex [101]. In the former case the focus has been on
dynamics on a lattice and in the latter continuum models have been preferred. We now present
examples of both these types of model, focusing on phase wave solutions [106].
Phase waves: a lattice model
The lamprey is an eel-like vertebrate which swims by generating travelling waves of neural activity
that pass down its spinal cord. The spinal cord contains about 100 segments, each of which is a
simple half-center neural circuit capable of generating alternating contraction and relaxation of the
body muscles on either side of body during swimming. In a seminal series of papers, Ermentrout
and Kopell carried out a detailed study of the dynamics of a chain of weakly coupled limit cycle
oscillators [102, 164, 163], motivated by the known physiology of the lamprey spinal cord. They
considered N phase-oscillators arranged on a chain with nearest-neighbour anisotropic interactions
and identified a travelling wave as a phase-locked state with a constant phase difference between
adjacent segments. The intersegmental phase differences are defined as ϕ = θ −θ . If ϕ < 0
then the wave travels from head to tail whilst for ϕ > 0 the wave travels from the tail to the head.
For a chain we set W = δ W +δ W to obtain
ij i−1,j − i+1,j +
q q q q q q q
1 2 n-1 n n+1 N-1 N
Figure 17: A chain of N phase oscillators ϕ = θ −θ with H (ϕ) = W H(ϕ).
i i+1 i ± ±
i i + i+1 i − i−1 i
N N − N−1 N
where θ ∈ R/2πZ. Pairwise subtraction and substitution of ϕ = θ − θ leads to an N − 1
dimensional system for the phase differences
i i + i+1 i − i i−1
for i = 1...N −1, with boundary conditions H(−ϕ ) = 0 = H(ϕ ), where ∆ω = ω −ω .
0 N+1 i i+1 i
There are at least two different mechanisms that can generate travelling wave solutions.
The first is based on the presence of a gradient of frequencies along the chain, that is, ∆ω
has the same sign for all i, with the wave propagating from the high frequency region to the low
frequency region. This can be established explicitly in the case of an isotropic, odd interaction
function, W = 1 and H(ϕ) = −H(−ϕ), where we have
i i i+1 i−1 i
The fixed points Φ = (ϕ ,...,ϕ ) satisfy the matrix equation H(Φ) = −A−1D, where H(Φ) =
(H(ϕ ),...,H(ϕ ))(cid:62), D = (∆ω ,...,∆ω )(cid:62), and A is a tridiagonal matrix with elements A =
1 N 1 N ii
−2, A = A = 1. For the sake of illustration suppose that H(ϕ) = sin(ϕ+σ). Then a
i,i+1 1+1,i
solution Φ will exist if every component of A−1D lies between ±1. Let a = max{|(A−1D) |}. If
a < 1 then for each i = 1,...,N there are two distinct solutions ϕ± in the interval [0,2π] with
H(cid:48)(ϕ−) > 0 and H(cid:48)(ϕ+) < 0. In other words, there are 2N phase-locked solutions. Linearising
about a phase-locked solution and exploiting the structure of the matrix A, it can be proven that
only the solution Φ− = (ϕ−,...,ϕ−) is stable. Assuming that the frequency gradient is monotonic,
this solution corresponds to a stable travelling wave. When the gradient becomes too steep to
allow phase-locking (i.e. a > 1), two or more clusters of oscillators (frequency plateaus) tend to
form that oscillate at different frequencies. Waves produced by a frequency gradient do not have a
constant speed or, equivalently, constant phase lags along the chain.
Constant speed waves in a chain of identical oscillators can be generated by considering phase-
lockedsolutionsdefinedbyϕ = ϕforalli,withacollectiveperiodofoscillationΩdeterminedusing
dθ /dt = ΩtogiveΩ = ω +W H(ϕ ). Thesteadystateequationsarethen∆ω +W H(−ϕ) = 0,
1 1 + 1 1 +
∆ω −W H(ϕ) = 0 and ∆ω = 0, for i = 2,...,N−2. Thus, a travelling wave solution requires
that all frequencies must be the same except at the ends of the chain. One travelling solution is
we have that ϕ = −σ and ∆ω = −W sin(2σ). If 2σ < π then ∆ω = ω −ω < 0 and ω must
1 − 1 2 1 1
be larger than ω and hence all the remaining ω for a forward travelling wave to exist. Backward
swimming can be generated by setting ω = 0 and solving in a similar fashion.
Phase waves: a continuum model
There is solid experimental evidence for electrical waves in awake and aroused vertebrate prepa-
rations, as well as semi-intact and active invertebrate preparations, as nicely described by Ermen-
trout and Kleinfeld [101]. Moreover, these authors argue convincingly for the use of phase models
in understanding waves seen in cortex and speculate that they may serve to label simultaneously
perceived features in the stimulus stream with a unique phase. More recently it has been found
that cortical oscillations can propagate as travelling waves across the surface of the motor cortex of
monkeys (Macaca mulatta) [277]. Given that to a first approximation the cortex is often viewed as
being built from a dense reciprocally interconnected network of corticocortical axonal pathways, of
which there are typically 1010 in a human brain it is natural to develop a continuum phase model,
along the lines described by Crook et al. [79]. These authors further incorporated axonal delays
into their model to explain the seemingly contradictory result that synchrony is stable for short
range excitatory coupling, but unstable for long range. To see how a delay induced instability may
arise we consider a continuum model of identical phase oscillators with space-dependent delays
where x ∈ D ⊆ R and θ ∈ R/2πZ. This model is naturally obtained as the continuum limit of (31)
for a network arranged along a line with communication delays τ(x,y) set by the speed of an action
potential v that mediates the long range interaction over a distance between points in the tissue at
x and y. Here we have used the result that for weak coupling then delays manifest themselves as
phase-shifts. The function W sets the anatomical connectivity pattern. It is convenient to assume
that interactions are homogeneous and translation invariant, so that W(x,y) = W(|x−y|) with
τ(x,y) = |x−y|/v, and either assume periodic boundary conditions or take D = R.
Following [79] we construct travelling wave solutions of equation (39) for D = R of the form
θ(x,t) = Ωt+βx, with the frequency Ω satisfying the dispersion relation
(cid:90) ∞
Whenβ = 0, thesolutionissynchronous. Toexplorethestabilityofthetravellingwavewelinearise
(39) about Ωt+βx and consider perturbations of the form eλteipx, to find that travelling phase
waves solutions are stable if Reλ(p) < 0 for all p (cid:54)= 0, where
(cid:90) ∞
Note that the neutrally stable mode λ(0) = 0 represents constant phase-shifts. For example, for
the case that H(θ) = sinθ then we have that
(cid:90) ∞
and β = ±β −1/(v). A plot of the region of wave stability for the choice W(y) = exp(−|y|)/2
and (cid:15) > 0 in the (β,v) plane is shown in Fig. 18. Note that the synchronous solution β = 0
is unstable for small values of v. For a discussion of more realistic forms of phase interaction,
describing synaptic interactions, see [47].
6.3.1 Phase turbulence
For appropriate choice of the anatomical kernel and the phase interaction function, continuum
models of the form (39) can also support weak turbulent solutions reminiscent of those seen in
the Kuramoto-Sivashkinsky (KS) equation. The KS equation generically describes the dynamics
near long wavelength primary instabilities in the presence of appropriate (translational, parity and
Galilean) symmetries, and is of the form
t xx x xxxx
whereα,β,γ > 0. Forafurtherdiscussionofthismodelsee[255]. Forthemodel(39)withdecaying
excitatory coupling excitation and purely sinusoidal phase coupling, simulations on a large domain
showamarkedtendencytogeneratephase-slipsandspatiotemporalpatternshedding,resultingina
lossofspatialcontinuityofθ(x,t). However,Battogtokh[38]hasshownthatamixtureofexcitation
Figure 18: Stability region (black) for a phase wave θ(x,t) = Ωt+βx in the (β,v) plane for the
and inhibition with higher harmonics in the phase interaction can counteract this tendency and
allow the formation of turbulent states. To see how this can arise consider an extension of (39) to
allow for a mixing of spatial scales and nonlinearities in the form
M (cid:90)
∂ (cid:88)
where we drop the consideration of axonal delays. Using the analysis of § 6.3 the synchronous wave
solution will be stable provided λ(p) < 0 for all p (cid:54)= 0 where
(cid:88) M (cid:104) (cid:105) (cid:90)
After introducing the complex function z(x,t) = exp(iθ(x,t)) and writing the phase interaction
functions as Fourier series of the form H (θ) = (cid:80) Hµeinθ then we can re-write (41) as
 (cid:88)(cid:88) 
 µ=1n∈Z 
The form above is useful for computational purposes, since ψµ can easily be computed using a
fast Fourier transform (exploiting its convolution structure). Battogtokh [38] considered the choice
1 2 3 µ µ µ
. In this case W(cid:99)µ (p) = γ
2 +p2), so that
(cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:15) (cid:15) +2(cid:15)
By choosing a mixture of positive and negative coupling strengths the spectrum can easily show
a band of unstable wave-numbers from zero up to some maximum as shown in Fig. 19. Indeed
0 0.5 1 p 1.5
Figure 19: Spectrum for the phase oscillator continuum model (41) with a mixture of spatial
scales and nonlinearities. Here H (θ) = H (θ) = sin(θ + α), H = sin(2θ + α) and W (x) =
γ exp(−γ |x|)/2 with γ = γ . Parameters are (cid:15) = 0.5, (cid:15) = 0.15, (cid:15) = −0.3, γ = 1/2, γ = 1/4,
µ µ 2 3 1 2 3 1 2
and α = −1.45. There is a band of unstable wave-numbers with p ∈ (0,p ), with p (cid:39) 1.25.
this shape of spectrum is guaranteed when (cid:80) (cid:15) H(cid:48)(0) > 0 and (cid:80) (cid:15) H(cid:48)(0)/γ2 < 0. Similarly
the KS equation (40) has a band of unstable wave-numbers between zero and one (with the most
unstable wave-number at 1/ 2). For the case that all the spatial scales γ−1 are small compared
to the system size then we may develop a long wavelength argument to develop local models for
µ. To explain this we first construct the Fourier transform ψ(cid:98)n µ(p,t) = W(cid:99)µ (p)f
(p,t), where f
the Fourier transform of zn and use the expansion W(cid:99)µ (p) (cid:39) 1−γ
−4p4+.... After inverse
Fourier transforming we find
n µ xx µ xxxx
Noting that H1 = H1 = H2 = exp(iα)/(2i) ≡ Γ with all other Fourier coefficients zero then (42)
t µ µ xx µ xxxx
3 3 xx 3 xxxx
where Ω = ω + (cid:80) (cid:15) H (0). Expanding (43) to second order gives θ = Ω − αθ + β(θ )2,
µ µ µ t xx x
where α = − (cid:80) (cid:15) H(cid:48)(0)γ−2 and β = − (cid:80) (cid:15) H(cid:48)(cid:48)(0)γ−2. Going to higher order yields fourth
order terms and we recover an equation of KS type with the coefficient of −θ given by γ =
(cid:80) (cid:15) H(cid:48)(0)γ−4. To generate phase turbulence we thus require α > 0, which is also a condition
required to generate a band of unstable wave-numbers, and β,γ > 0. A direct simulation of the
model with the parameters for Fig. 19, for which α,β,γ > 0, shows the development of a phase
turbulent state. This is represented in Fig. 20 where we plot the absolute value of the complex
function Ψ = ((cid:15) W +(cid:15) W )⊗z+(cid:15) W ⊗z2.
1 1 2 2 3 3
Figure 20: The emergence of a turbulent phase state in a phase oscillator continuum model. The
parameters are those as in Fig. 19 with ω = 0 for which α = 0.63, β = 5.16 and γ = 0.096. The
physical domain size is 27 and we have used a numerical mesh of 212 points with Matlab ode45
to evolve equation (42) with convolutions computed using fast Fourier transforms. As an order
parameter describing the system we have chosen |Ψ|, where Ψ = ((cid:15) W +(cid:15) W )⊗z+(cid:15) W ⊗z2.
1 1 2 2 3 3
7 Heteroclinic attractors
In addition to dynamically simple periodic attractors with varying degrees of clustering, the emer-
gentdynamicsofcoupledsystemssuchas(31)canberemarkablycomplexeveninthecaseofglobal
coupling. In this case, the dynamical complexity depends only on the phase interaction function
H and the number of oscillators N. Chaotic dynamics [41] can appear in four or more globally
coupled phase oscillators for phase interaction functions of sufficient complexity. We focus now
on attractors that are robust and apparently prevalent in many such systems: robust heteroclinic
attractors.
In a neuroscience context such attractors have been investigated under several related names,
including slow switching [135, 165, 166, 160] where the system evolves towards an attractor that
displays slow switching between cluster states where the switching is on a timescale determined
by the noise, heteroclinic networks [9, 27, 22] or winnerless competition [262, 265] where there
are a number of possible patterns of activity that compete with each other but such that each
pattern is unstable to some perturbations that take it to another pattern - this can be contrasted
to winner-takes-all competition where there is attraction to a asymptotically stable pattern.
These attractors obtain their dynamical structure from the presence of invariant subspaces for
the dynamics that allow the possibility of robust connections between saddles. These subspaces
may be symmetry-induced fixed point subspaces, spaces with a given clustering, subspaces forced
by multiplicative coupling or subspaces forced by assumptions on the nature of the coupling. In all
cases, there will be a number of dynamically simple nodes, usually equilibria or periodic orbits, say
x , i = 1,...,k each of which has saddle type. These nodes have unstable manifolds that, within
some invariant subspace, limit to other nodes within the network - usually because there is a robust
(transverse) saddle-to-sink connection between the nodes within some invariant subspace; see [29].
It can be verified that such heteroclinic networks can be attracting if, in some sense, the rate of
expansion away from the nodes is not as strong as the rate of contraction towards the nodes - see
[171] for some precise results in this direction. Figure 21 illustrates some of the ingredients for a
robust heteroclinic attractor.
x(t) x i i x i+1 c i+1
Figure 21: Schematic diagram showing a trajectory x(t) (solid line) approaching part of a robust
heteroclinic network (bold dashed lines). The nodes x represent equilibria or periodic orbits of
saddle type and the invariant subspaces P are forced to exist by model assumptions and there are
connecting (heteroclinic) orbits c that connect the nodes within the P in a robust manner. A
neighbourhood of the connecting orbits c is an absorbing stable heteroclinic channel that can be
used to describe various aspects of neural system function in systems with this dynamics; see for
example [264].
7.1 Robust heteroclinic attractors for phase oscillator networks
Hansel et al. [135] considered the dynamics of (31) with global coupling and phase interaction
function of the form (38) for (r,α) fixed parameters. For large N, they find an open region in
parameter space where typical attractors are heteroclinic cycles that show slow switching between
states where the clustering is into two clusters of macroscopic size. This dynamics is examined in
moredepthin[165]wherethesimulationsfortypicalinitialconditionsshowalongandintermittent
transient to a two-cluster state that, surprisingly, is unstable. This is a paradox because only low
dimensional subset of initial conditions (the stable manifold) should converge to a saddle. The
resolution of this paradox is a numerical effect: as the dynamics approaches the heteroclinic cycle
where the connection is in a clustered subspace, there can be numerical rounding into the subspace.
For weak perturbation of the system by additive noise, they find that the heteroclinic cycle is
approximated by a roughly periodic transition around the cycle whose approximate period scales
as the logarithm of the noise amplitude.
The bifurcations that give rise to heteroclinic attractors in this system on varying (r,α) is quite
complex even for small N. As discussed in [27] one can only find attracting robust heteroclinic
attractors in (31), (38) for N ≥ 4: in this case Fig. 16 shows a region where robust heteroclinic
attractors of the type illustrated in Fig. 22 appear. A trajectory approaching such a network will
spend much of its time near a cluster state with two groups of two oscillators each. Each time there
is a connection between the states, one of the groups will break clustering for a short time, and over
a longer period the clusters will alternate between breaking up and keeping together. Qualitatively
similarheteroclinicattractorscanbefoundforexampleincoupledHodgkin-Huxleytypelimitcycle
oscillators with delayed synaptic coupling as detailed in [29] and illustrated in Fig. 23.
Figure 22: A robust heteroclinic cycle attractor for the all-to-all coupled 4-oscillator system (31)
with phase interaction function (38) and an open region of parameter space, as in [27]. The figure
shows the cycle in the 3 dimensional space of phase differences; the vertices R all represent the
fully symmetric (in-phase) oscillations (ϕ,ϕ,ϕ,ϕ), varying by 2π in one of the arguments. The
point Q represents solutions (ϕ,ϕ,ϕ+π,ϕ+π) with symmetry (S ×S )× Z . The heteroclinic
with S ×S isotropy. The robust connections G and G shown in red lie within two dimensional
invariant subspaces with isotropy S while the equilibria S have isotropy S . This structure is an
attractor for parameters in the region indicated in Figure 16.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
60 v 3 =v 4 v 2 v 1 v 3 =v 4 v 1 =v 2 v 4 v 3 v 1 =v 2
200 250 300 350 400 450
Figure 23: Robust heteroclinic cycle attractor for all-to-all coupled oscillatory Hodgkin-Huxley
systems with delay synaptic coupling. The top panel shows synchronisation indices r that only
equal one when the systems i and j are synchronised while the bottom panel shows the action
potentials v for the four oscillators; see [29] for more details. Observe that the mechanism of
symmetry breaking and re-synchronisation of pairs is the same as in Fig. 22.
TheheteroclinicattractorsthatappearforN > 4canhavemorecomplexstructures. ForN = 5
this is investigated in [24, 25] for (31), (38) and in [21] for more general phase interaction function
where α, β and r are parameters. Figure 24 illustrates a trajectory of (31) with global coupling and
phase interaction function (44) as a raster plot for five phase oscillators with parameters r = 0.2,
α = 1.8, β = −2.0 and ω = 1.0 and with addition of noise of amplitude 10−5. Observe there is a
dynamic change of clustering over the course of the time-series with a number of switches taking
place between cluster states of the type
where y, g and b represent different relative phases that are coloured “yellow”, “green” or “blue”
in Fig. 25 to other symmetrically related cluster states. One can check that the group orbit of
states with this clustering gives 30 symmetrically related cluster states for the system; details of
the connections are shown in Fig. 25. All cluster states connect together to form a single large
heteroclinic network that is an attractor for typical initial conditions [21]. Fig. 24 illustrates the
possible switchings between phase differences near one particular cluster state for the heteroclinic
network in this case. The dynamics of this system can be used for encoding a variety of inputs,
as discussed in [355] where it is shown that a constant heterogeneity of the natural frequencies
between oscillators in this system leads to a spatio-temporal encoding of the heterogeneities. The
sequences produced by the system can be used by a similar system with adaptive dynamics to learn
a spatio-temporal encoded state [242].
Robust heteroclinic attractors also appear in a range of coupled phase oscillator models where
the coupling is not global (all-to-all) but such that it still preserves enough invariant subspaces for
the connections to remain robust. For example, [154] study the dynamics of a network “motif”
of four coupled phase oscillators and find heteroclinic attractors that are “ratchets”, i.e. they are
robust heteroclinic networks that wind preferentially around the phase space in one direction - this
means that under the influence of small perturbations, phase slips in only one direction can appear.
0 100 200 300 t
Figure 24: Raster plot showing a robust heteroclinic attractor in a system of five globally coupled
phase oscillators (31) with phase interaction function (44) and a particular choice of parameters
(see text). The vertical dark lines mark times (t in horizontal axis) when the oscillator represented
by θ (t) (k in vertical axis) passes through zero. Observe that most of the time there are three
clusters. Occasionally the clustering splits and reforms different three clusters reforms, at times
indicated by the grey bars, approximately every 70 time units. [Adapted from [21]]
3,1,3,2,1=bybgy
2,1,3,1,3= gybyb 2
1,3,1,3,2=ybybg
Figure 25: (a) Graph of heteroclinic connections between three cluster states for a robust hetero-
clinic attractor in a system of N=5 globally coupled phase oscillators. Phase interaction function
and parameters as in Fig. 24; see [21] for more details of the dynamics. Each vertex represents a
particular saddle periodic cluster state that is a permutation of the states shown in (b-d). Note
that there are precisely two incoming and two outgoing connections at each vertex. (b-d) show the
relative phases of the five oscillators, indicated by the angles of the “pendula” at the vertices of a
regular pentagon, for a sequence of three consecutive three saddle cluster states visited on a longer
trajectory that randomly explores graph (a) in the presence of noise. Inequivalent clusters are
characterised by different coloured “pendula” and numbers where yellow corresponds to 1, green to
2 and blue to 3. The yellow cluster is stable to cluster-splitting perturbations while the blue cluster
is unstable to such perturbations - observe that after the connection the yellow cluster becomes the
blue cluster while the blue cluster splits up in one of two possible way.
7.2 Winnerless competition and other types of heteroclinic attractor
Heteroclinic connections play an key role in describing winnerless competition dynamics [262, 265].
This dynamics is usually associated with firing rate model of coupled neurons of “Lotka-Volterra”
d (cid:88)
i i i ij j
where x (t) is an instantaneous firing rate of a neuron or group of neurons, λ is a self-excitation
term and A represents coupling between the x , though it is also possible to consider generalisa-
tions [261]. These models were originally developed for predator-prey interaction of species in an
ecosystem. Having found wide use in population ecology, they have more recently be applied to
evolutionary game dynamics [139], including applications in economics. Since the seminal paper of
May [214] it has been recognised that (45) can have robust heteroclinic attractors for an open set
of parameter choices λ and A , as long as at least three species are involved. Indeed, the system
can show a wide range of dynamics such as “winner-takes-all” equilibria where there is a stable
equilibrium with x > 0 and x = 0 for j (cid:54)= i (i is the “winner”), “cooperative” equilibria where
several of the x are non-zero as well as non-trivial periodic or chaotic dynamics. The particular
case of “winnerless competition” gives attractors consist of chains or networks of saddles joined by
connections that are robust because the absence of a species (or in our case, the lack of firing of
one neuron or group of neurons) x = 0 is preserved by the dynamics of the model (45).
The simplest case of this appears in a ring of N = 3 coupled neurons with dynamics
for α + β > 2 and 0 < α < 1 [214], corresponding to cyclic inhibition of the neurons in one
direction around the ring and cyclic excitation in the other direction. This “rock-paper-scissors”
typeofdynamicsleadstowinnerlesscompetitionthathasbeenappliedinavarietyofmorecomplex
models of neural systems. The local behaviour near connections in such heteroclinic attractors has
been called “stable heteroclinic channels” [264] and used to model a variety of low-level and high-
level neural behaviours including random sequence generation, information dynamics, encoding of
odours and working memory. We refer to the reviews [263, 264, 261].
Analogous behaviour has been found in a range of other coupled systems, for example [9] or
delayed pulse-coupled oscillators [166, 322, 32, 159, 53, 232]. Recent work has also considered an
explicit constructive approach to heteroclinic networks to realise arbitrary directed networks as a
heteroclinic attractor of a coupled cell system [22].
More complex but related dynamical behaviour has been studied under the names of “chaotic
itinerancy” (see for example [152]), “cycling chaos” [85], “networks of Milnor attractors” [153] and
“heteroclinic cycles for chaotic oscillators” [178]. It has been is suggested that these and similar
models are useful for modelling of the functional behaviour of neural systems [328].
Because heteroclinic attractors are quite singular in their dynamical behaviour (averages of
observablesneednotconverge, thereisagreatdealofsensitivityofthelong-termdynamicstonoise
and system heterogeneity), it is important to consider the effect of noise and/or heterogeneities in
the dynamics. This leads to a finite average transition time between states determined by the level
of noise and/or heterogeneity (which may be due to inputs to the system) and the local dynamics
- see for example [310]. Another useful feature of heteroclinic attractors is that they allow one to
model “input-output” response of the system to a variety of inputs.
8 Stochastic oscillator models
Noise is well known to play a constructive role in the neural encoding of natural stimuli, leading
to increased reliability or regularity of neuronal firing in single neurons [206, 313] and across pop-
ulations [100]. From a mathematical perspective it is natural to consider how noise may affect
the reduction to a phase-oscillator description. Naively one may simply consider the addition of
noisetoadeterministicphase-oscillatormodeltogenerateastochasticdifferentialequation. Indeed
models of this type have been studied extensively at the network level to understand noise-induced
first- and second-order phase transitions, and new phenomenon such as noise-induced synchrony
[116, 228, 181] or asynchrony [155], and noise-induced turbulence [156]. We refer the reader to the
review by Lindner [198] for a comprehensive discussion. More recently Schwabedal and Pikovsky
have extended the foundations of deterministic phase descriptions to irregular, noisy oscillators
(based on the constancy of the mean first return times) [279], Ly and Ermentrout [202] and Nakao
et al. [229] have built analytical techniques for studying weak noise forcing, and Moehlis has
developed techniques to understand the effect of white noise on the period of an oscillator [223].
At the network level (global coupling) a classic paper examining the role of external noise in IF
populations, using a phase description, is that of Kuramoto [174], who analysed the onset of col-
lective oscillations. Without recourse to a phase-reduction it is well to mention that Medvedev has
been pioneering a phase-amplitude approach to studying the effects of noise on the synchronisation
of coupled stochastic limit cycle oscillators [215, 217], and that Newhall et al. have developed a
Fokker-Planck approach to understanding cascade-induced synchrony in stochastically driven IF
networkswithpulsatilecouplingandPoissonspike-trainexternaldriven[233]. Morerecentworkon
pairwise synchrony in network of heterogeneous coupled noisy phase oscillators receiving correlated
and independent noise can be found in [201]. However, note that even in the absence of synap-
tic coupling, two or more neural oscillators may become synchronised by virtue of the statistical
correlations in their noisy input streams [2, 51, 58].
8.1 Phase reduction of a planar system with state-dependent Gaussian white
Forclarityofexpositionletusconsiderthephasereductionofaplanarsystemdescribedbydx/dt =
F(x)+p(x)ξ(t), whereξ(t)iswhiteGaussiannoisesuchthat(cid:104)ξ(t)(cid:105) = 0and(cid:104)ξ(t)ξ(s)(cid:105) = 2Dδ(t−s),
where(cid:104)·(cid:105)denotesaveragingovertherealisationofξ,andD > 0scalesthenoiseintensity. Weemploy
an Stratonovich interpretation of the noise (such that the chain rule of ordinary calculus holds). In
the absence of noise we shall assume that the system has a stable T-periodic limit-cycle solution,
with a phase that satisfies dϑ/dt = 1. For weak noise perturbations the state point will leave the
cycle, though will stay in some neighbourhood, which we denote by U. To extend the notion of a
phaseoffthecycleweletϑbeasmoothfunctionofxsuchthat(cid:104)∇ ϑ,F(x)(cid:105) = 1holdsforanypoint
x ∈ U. We shall denote the other coordinate in U by ρ, and assume that there exists a smooth
coordinate transformation x → (ϑ,ρ). For a noise perturbed oscillator, in the new coordinates we
where we have introduced h = (cid:104)∇ ϑ,p(cid:105), f = (cid:104)∇ ρ,F(cid:105) and g = (cid:104)∇ ρ,p(cid:105). Note that the full
coordinate transformation (ϑ,ρ) = (ϑ(x),ρ(x)) is not prescribed here, though it is common to use
one such that ρ can be interpreted as some distance from cycle. Thus although results may be
formally developed for the system (46) they cannot be directly interpreted in terms of a given
model until the full coordinate transformation taking one from x ∈ R2 to (ϑ,ρ) is given.
One can transform (46) into a stochastic phase-amplitude equation in the It¯o sense, where it
where the subscripts ϑ and ρ denote partial derivatives with respect to ϑ and ρ respectively.
Using the It¯o form we may construct a Fokker-Planck equation for the time-dependent probability
distribution Q(t,ϑ,ρ) as
with periodic boundary condition Q(t,0,ρ) = Q(t,2π,ρ).
When D = 0 the steady state distribution is given by Q (ϑ,ρ) = δ(ρ)/(2π). For small noise
amplitude D we expect Q to still localise near ρ = 0 [359], say over a region −ρ < ρ < ρ . In this
case it is natural to make the approximation that for large t, Q = 0 = ∂Q/∂ρ at ρ = ±ρ . Now
introduce the marginal distribution
(cid:90) ρc
Following [359] we can integrate (47) over the interval I = [−ρ ,ρ ] and generate a Fokker-Planck
equationforP. Thelastthreetermsin(47)vanishafterintegrationduetotheboundaryconditions,
so that we are left with
∂ ∂ (cid:90) ∂2 (cid:90)
P = − D(h h+h g)Qdρ+D h2Qdρ.
We now expand about ρ = 0 to give h(ϑ,ρ) = Z(ϑ) + ρh (ϑ,0) + ... and g(ϑ,ρ) = g(ϑ,0) +
ρg (ϑ,0)+..., where Z(ϑ) is identified as the infinitesimal phase response (cid:104)∇ ϑ,p| (cid:105). In the
limit of small D where Q (cid:39) δ(ρ)/(2π) we note that, for an arbitrary function R(ϑ),
∂n (cid:90) ∂n (cid:90)
Making use of the above gives the Fokker-Planck equation as
where Y(ϑ) = h (ϑ,0)g(ϑ,0). Hence, the corresponding It¯o equation is
while the Stratonovich version is
Equations (49) and (50) are the stochastic phase oscillator descriptions for a limit cycle driven by
weak white noise. These make it clear that naively adding noise to the phase description misses
not only a multiplication by the iPRC but also the addition of a further term Y(ϑ) that contains
information about the amplitude response of the underlying limit cycle oscillator.
We are now in a position to calculate the steady state probability distribution P (ϑ) and use
this to calculate the moments of the phase dynamics. Consider (48) with the boundary condition
P(t,0) = P(t,2π), and set P = 0. Adopting a Fourier representation for P , Z and Y as P (ϑ) =
(cid:80) P einϑ, Z(ϑ) = (cid:80) Z einϑ, Y(ϑ) = (cid:80) Y einϑ, allows us to obtain a set of equations for the
n n n n n n
unknown amplitudes P as
(cid:88) (cid:88)
−P +D Z Z i(l−n)P −D Y P = Kδ , l ∈ Z, (51)
l n m l−(n+m) n l−n l,0
for some constant K. For D = 0 we have that P = K, and after enforcing normalisation we may
set K = 1/(2π). For small D we may then substitute P into (51) and work to next order in D to
obtain an approximation for the remaining amplitudes, l (cid:54)= 0, in the form
D  (cid:88) 
P = Z Z im−Y .
Using this we may reconstruct the distribution P(ϑ), for small D, from (18) as
The mean frequency of the oscillator is defined by ω = lim T−1(cid:82)T dϑ(t)dt. This can be
calculated by replacing the time average with the ensemble average. For an arbitrary 2π-periodic
function R we set lim
T−1(cid:82)T
(cid:82)2π
R(ϑ)P (ϑ)dϑ. Using (52) and (49) we obtain
where we have used the fact that (cid:104)Z(ϑ)ξ(t)(cid:105) = (cid:104)Z(ϑ)(cid:105)(cid:104)ξ(t)(cid:105) = 0. We may also calculate the
phase-diffusion D(cid:101) as
(cid:90) ∞ (cid:28)(cid:20) d (cid:28) d (cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:20) d (cid:28) d (cid:29)(cid:21)(cid:29)
dt dt dt dt
D (cid:90) 2π
where we use the fact that (cid:104)ξ(t)(cid:105) = 0 and (cid:104)ξ(t)ξ(s)(cid:105) = 2Dδ(t−s). This recovers a well known
result of Kuramoto [173].
8.2 Phase reduction for noise with temporal correlation
A recent paper by Teramae et al. [318] shows that when one considers noise described by an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process with a finite correlation time then this can interact with the
attraction time-scale of the limit cycle and give fundamentally different results when compared to
Gaussian white noise (which has a zero correlation time). This observation has also been indepen-
dently made in [358]. Both approaches assume weak noise, though [358] makes no assumptions
about relative time-scales, and is thus a slightly more general approach than that of [318]. Re-
lated work by Goldobin et al. [117] for noise η(t) with zero-mean (cid:104)η(t)(cid:105) = 0 and prescribed
auto-correlation function C(τ) = (cid:104)η(τ)η(0)(cid:105), yields the reduced Stratonovich phase equation
1 (cid:90) ∞
where λ is the average rate of attraction to the limit cycle. Note that for C(τ) = 2Dδ(τ), Y(cid:101)(ϑ) =
Y(ϑ) and (53) reduces to (50) as expected. To lowest order in the noise strength the steady state
probability distribution will simply be P (ϑ) = 1/(2π). Therefore to lowest noise order the mean
frequency is determined from an ensemble average as
1 (cid:90) 2π (cid:90) ∞
where the last term comes from using the It¯o form of (53) and the subscript 0 notation is defined
as in (52). The phase-diffusion coefficient at lowest noise order is given by
1 (cid:90) 2π (cid:90) ∞
Let us now consider the example of OU noise so that C(τ) = Dγexp(−γ|τ|). Furthermore
let us take the simultaneous limit γ → ∞ (zero correlation timescale) and λ → ∞ (infinitely fast
attraction), such that the ratio α = λ/γ is constant. In this case we have from (54) that
Hence, when the correlation time of the noise is much smaller than the decay time constant α = 0
and we recover the result for white Gaussian noise. In the other extreme when α → ∞, where
the amplitude of the limit cycle decays much faster than the correlation time of the noise, then Y(cid:101)
vanishes and the reduced phase equation is simply dϑ/dt = 1+Z(ϑ)η(t), as would be obtained
using the standard phase reduction technique without paying attention to the stochastic nature of
the perturbation.
9 Low dimensional macroscropic dynamics and chimera states
The self-organisation of large networks of coupled neurons into macroscopic coherent states, such
as observed in phase-locking, has inspired a search for equivalent low-dimensional dynamical de-
scriptions. However, the mathematical step from microscopic to macroscopic dynamics has proved
elusive in all but a few special cases. For example, neural mass models of the type described in
§ 2.6 only track mean activity levels and not the higher order correlations of an underlying spiking
model. Only in the thermodynamic limit of a large number of neurons firing asynchronously (pro-
ducing null correlations) are such rate models expected to provide a reduction of the microscopic
dynamics. Moreover, even here the link from spike to rate is often phenomenological rather than
rigorous. Unfortunatelyonlyinsomerareinstanceshasitbeenpossibletoanalysespikingnetworks
directly (usually under some restrictive assumption such as global coupling) as in the spike-density
approach [238], which makes heavy use of the numerical solution of coupled PDEs. Recently how-
ever, exact results for globally pulse-coupled oscillators described by the Winfree model [352] have
been obtained by Paz´o and Montbri´o [249]. This makes use of the Ott-Antonsen (OA) ansatz,
which was originally used to find solutions on a reduced invariant manifold of the Kuramoto model
[174]. The major difference between the two phase-oscillator models being that the former has
interactions described by a phase product structure and the latter a phase difference structure.
9.1 Ott-Antonsen reduction for the Winfree model
The Winfree model is described in § 6 as a model for weakly globally pulse-coupled biological
oscillators, and can support incoherence, frequency locking, and oscillator death when P(θ) =
1+cosθ and R(θ) = −sinθ [14]. We note however that the same model is exact when describing
nonlinear IF models described by a single voltage equation, and that in this case we do not have
to restrict attention to weak-coupling. Indeed the OA ansatz has proved equally successful in
describing both the Winfree network with a sinusoidal PRC [249] and a network of QIF neurons
[200]. This is perhaps not surprising since the PRC of a QIF neutron can be computed using (26),
and for the case described by (1) with τ = 1 and f(v) = v2 and infinite threshold and reset then
R(θ) = a(1−cosθ) with a = 1/ I for θ ∈ [0,2π) (which is the shape expected for an oscillator
near a SNIC bifurcation). We shall now focus on this choice of PRC and a pulsatile coupling that
we write in the form
(cid:88) (cid:88)
where we have introduced a convenient Fourier representation for the periodic function P. We
now consider the large N limit in (30) and let ρ(θ|ω,t)dθ be the fraction of oscillators with phases
between θ and θ+dθ and natural frequency ω at time t. The dynamics of the density ρ is governed
by the continuity equation (expressing the conservation of oscillators)
where the mean-field drive is h(t) = lim (cid:80) N−1P(θ ). Boundary conditions are periodic
in the probability flux, namely ρ(0|ω,t)v(0,t) = lim ρ(θ|ω,t)v(θ,t). A further reduction in
dimensionality is obtained for the choice that the distribution of frequencies is described by a
Lorentzian g(ω) with
for fixed ∆ and ω (controlling the width and mean of the distribution respectively), which has
simple poles at ω = ω ±i∆.
A generalised set of order parameters is defined as
(cid:90) ∞ (cid:90) 2π
Theintegrationoverω canbedoneusingacontourinthelowerhalfcomplexplanesothatZ (t) =
(cid:104)e−imθ,ρ(θ|ω ,t)(cid:105),wherewehaveintroducedtheinnerproduct(cid:104)u(θ),v(θ)(cid:105) = (2π)−1(cid:82)2π dθu(θ)v(θ)dθ.
The OA ansatz assumes that the density ρ can be written in a restricted Fourier representation as
whereccstandsforcomplexconjugate. Substitutionintothecontinuityequation(56)andbalancing
terms in eimθ shows that α must obey
Moreover, using the inner product structure of Z we easily see that Z (t) = [α(ω ,t)]m. Thus
the Kuramoto order parameter Z ≡ Re−iΨ is governed by (58) with ω = ω yielding:
d h d (cid:20) 1+R2 (cid:21)
dt 2 dt 2R
To calculate the mean-field drive h we note that it can be written as
(cid:90) 2π
= 1+ (cid:88) (Z )m+(Z )m = 1+ Z 1 + Z 1 , |Z | < 1.
Hence, we have explicitly that h = h(R,Ψ) with
1−2RcosΨ+R2
The planar system of equations defined by (59) and (60) can be readily analysed using numerical
bifurcation analysis.
We note that the OA density (57) can be written in the succinct form
1 (cid:20) 1+αeiθ (cid:21)
The form of this equation suggests recasting the density in terms of new variables W = (1 +
a Lorentzian shape given explicitly by
with dV/dt = I +V2 +(cid:15)h, where we have set ω = 2 I and re-scaled V by a factor of I. Using
the continuity equation for ρ(V|ω,t) and then integrating over V gives the evolution of W as
+(cid:15)h−W2(cid:3)
(cid:90) ∞
where we identify v as the average of V. The firing probabilities for arbitrary cells at time t
are equal to the passage rate of the probability density through the spike phase, which gives the
population firing rate as
Thus we may use (61) to determine the evolution of the coupled rate and average network activ-
ity by integrating over the distribution of parameters I = ω2/4. The evolution of (r(t),v(t)) =
r = 0 +2rv, v = v2+ 0 +(cid:15)πr−π2r2, (62)
dt 2π dt 4
where we have used the result that h = (W + W)/2 = πr. Exploiting the fact that the order
parameters in the ‘θ’ and ‘V’ descriptions of macroscopic dynamics are related by a conformal
mapping, namely Z = (W − 1)/(W + 1), we may explore both the firing rate and degree of
synchrony of the network. Thus (62) is a mean field reduction of a population of spiking QIF
neurons, and unlike a phenomenological neural mass model it is able to track a measure of within
population synchrony. The system (62) is capable of supporting bistable fixed point behaviour as
shown in Fig. 26, where we also plot the basin boundary (stable manifold of a saddle). The OA
Figure 26: A phase portrait for the macroscopic ‘V’ dynamics showing the rate and average (r,v)
plane with three fixed points for ω = 1 and ∆ = 10 = (cid:15). For this parameter set the system
is bistable and the stable (blue) and unstable (green) manifolds of the saddle are plotted. The
remaining curves are nullclines.
ansatz has also proved remarkably useful in understanding non-trivial solutions such as chimera
states (where a sub-population of oscillators synchronises in an otherwise incoherent sea).
9.2 Chimera states
Phase or cluster synchronised states in systems of identical coupled oscillators have distinct limita-
tions as descriptions of neural systems where not just phase but also frequency clearly play a part
in the processing, computation and output of information. Indeed, one might expect that for any
coupled oscillator system that is homogeneous (in the sense that any oscillators can be essentially
replaced by any other by a suitable permutation of the oscillators), the only possible dynamical
states are homogeneous in the sense that the oscillators behave in either a coherent or an inco-
herent way. This expectation however is not justified - there can be many dynamical states that
cannot be easily classified as coherent or incoherent, but that seem to have a mixture of coherent
and incoherent regions. Such states have been given the name “Chimera state” by Abrams and
Strogatz [3, 4] and have been the subject of intensive research over the past five years. For reviews
of chimera state dynamics we refer the reader to [183, 247].
Kuramoto and Battogtokh [176, 175] investigated continuum systems of oscillators of the form
where θ represent phases at locations x ∈ D ⊆ R, the kernel G(u) = κexp(−κ|u|)/2 represents
a non-local coupling and ω,α,κ are constants. Interestingly this model is precisely in the form
presented in § 6.3 as equation (39) for an oscillatory model of cortex, although here there are
no space-dependent delays and the interaction function is H(θ) = sin(θ − α). Kuramoto and
Battogtokh found for a range of parameters near α = π/2, and carefully selected initial conditions,
that the oscillators can split into two regions in x, one region which is frequency synchronised (or
coherent) while the other region shows a nontrivial dependence of frequency on location x. An
example of a Chimera state is shown in Fig. 27.
0 1 2 3 x 4
Figure 27: A snapshot of a Chimera state for the model (63) in a system of length 4 using 29
numerical grid points and periodic boundary conditions. Here ω = 0, (cid:15) = 0.1, α = 1.45 and κ = 1.
Note that a discretisation of (63) to a finite set of N coupled oscillators is
d (cid:88)
where θ ∈ [0,2π) represents the phase at location i = 1,...,N and the coupling matrix K =
G(|i−j|/N)/N isthediscretisedinteractionkernel(assumingadomainoflength1). Usingdifferent
kernels,G(u) = exp(−κcos(2πu))andanapproximationG(u) = 1−κcos(2πu)forsmallκ,Abrams
and Strogatz [3] identified similar behaviour and [4] discussed a limiting case of parameters such
that the continuum system provably has chimera solutions. The OA reduction discussed in § 9.1
allowsanexactreductionofoscillatornetworksofthisformandinthecontinuumlimitthiscangive
a solvable low-order system whose solutions include a variety of chimera states [183]. It is useful to
note that when α = π/2, pure cosine coupling results in an integrable Hamiltonian system [343],
such that disordered initial states will remain disordered. Thus α determines a balance between
spontaneous order and permanent disorder.
However, it seems that chimera states are much more “slippery” in finite oscillator systems
than in the continuum limit. In particular, Wolfrum and Omel’chenko [354] note that for finite
approximations of the ring (63) by N oscillators, with a mixture of local and nearest rN-neighbour
coupling corresponding to (64) with a particular choice of coupling matrix K , chimera states
apparently only exist as transients. However, the lifetime of the typical transient apparently grows
exponentially with N. Thus, at least for some systems of the form (64), chimeras appear to be
a type of chaotic saddle. This corresponds to the fact that the boundaries between the regions
of coherent and incoherent oscillation fluctuate apparently randomly over a long timescale. These
fluctuations lead to wandering of the incoherent region as well as change in size of the region.
Eventually these fluctuations appear to result in typical collapse to either fully coherent or fully
incoherent oscillation [354].
Although this appears to be the case for chimeras for (64), there are networks such as coupled
groups of oscillators; [211] or two dimensional lattices [289] where chimera attractors can appear.
It is not clear what will cause a chimera to be transient or not, or indeed exactly what types of
chimera-like states can appear in finite oscillator networks. A suggestion of [26] is that robust
neutrally stable chimeras may be due to the special type of single-harmonic phase interaction
function used in (63,64).
More recent work includes investigations of chimeras (or chimera-like states) in chemical [323]
or mechanical oscillator networks [210]; chimeras in systems of coupled oscillators other than phase
oscillators have been investigated in many papers; for example in Stuart-Landau oscillators [176,
241, 284], Winfree oscillators [249] and models with inertia [239]. Other recent work includes
discussion of feedback control to stabilise chimeras [292], investigations of chimeras with multiple
patches of incoherence [207] and multicluster and traveling chimera states [357].
In a neural context chimeras have also been found in pulse-coupled LIF networks [240], and
hypothesised to underly coordinated oscillations in unihemispheric slow-wave sleep, whereby one
brain hemisphere appears to be inactive while the other remains active [204].
10 Applications
We briefly review a few examples where mathematical frameworks are being applied to neural
modelling questions. These cover functional and structural connectivity in neuroimaging, central
pattern generators (CPGs) and perceptual rivalry. There are many other applications we do not
review, for example to deep brain stimulation protocols [203] or to modelling of epileptic seizures
where network structures play a key role [319].
10.1 Functional and structural connectivity in neuroimaging
Functional connectivity (FC) refers to the temporal synchronisation of neural activity in spatially
remote areas. It is widely believed to be significant for the integrative processes in brain function.
Anatomical or structural connectivity (SC), is widely believed to play an important role in deter-
mining the observed spatial patterns of FC. However, there is clearly a role to be played by the
dynamics of the neural tissue. Even in a globally connected network we would expect this to be the
case, given our understanding of how synchronised solutions can lose stability for weak coupling.
Thus it becomes useful to study models of brain like systems built from neural mass models (such
as the Jansen-Rit model of § 2.6), and ascertain how the local behaviour of the oscillatory node
dynamics can contribute to global patterns of activity. For simplicity, consider a network of N
globally coupled identical Wilson-Cowan [349] neural mass models:
d (cid:15) (cid:88)
i i 1 i 2 i j
i i 3 i 4 i
for i = 1,...,N. Here (x ,y ) ∈ R2 represents the activity in each of a pair of coupled neuronal
population models, f is a sigmoidal firing rate given by f(x) = 1/(1+e−x) and (P,Q) represent
external drives. The strength of connections within a local population is prescribed by the co-
efficients c ,...c , which we choose as c = c = c = 10 and c = −2 as in [142]. For (cid:15) = 0 it is
1 4 1 2 3 4
straight forward to analyse the dynamics of a local node and find the bifurcation diagram in the
(P,Q) plane as shown in Fig. 28. Moreover, for (cid:15) (cid:28) 1 we may invoke weak coupling theory to
describe the dynamics of the full network within the oscillatory regime bounded by the two Hopf
curves shown in Fig. 28 left. From the theory of § 6.2.1 we would expect the synchronous solution
to be stable if (cid:15)H(cid:48)(0) > 0. Taking (cid:15) > 0 we can consider H(cid:48)(0) as a proxy for the robustness
of synchrony. The numerical construction of this quantity, as in [136], predicts that there will be
regions in the (P,Q) plane associated with a breakdown of FC (where H(cid:48)(0) < 0), as indicated
by points a and b in Fig. 28. This highlights the role that local node dynamics can have on
emergent network dynamics. Moreover, we see that simply by tuning the local dynamics to be
deeper within the existence region for oscillatory solutions we can, at least for this model, enhance
the degree of FC. It would be interesting to explore this simple model further for more realistic
brain like connectivities, along the lines described in [16]. Moreover, given that this would preclude
the existence of the synchronous state by default (since we would neither have that H(0) = 0 or
w would be independent of i) then it would be opportune to explore the use recent ideas in
[235, 251] to understand how the system could organise into a regime of remote synchronisation
whereby pairs of nodes with the same network symmetry could synchronise. For related work on
Wilson-Cowan networks with some small dynamic noise see [81], though here the authors construct
a phase-oscillator network by linearising around an unstable fixed point, rather than use the notion
of phase response.
Figure 28: Left: Bifurcation diagram for an isolated Wilson-Cowan node in the (P,Q) plane. Here
HB denotes Hopf bifurcation and SN a saddle node of fixed-points bifurcation. At points a and c
we find H(cid:48)(0) < 0 and at point b H(cid:48)(0) > 0. A breakdown of FC (loss of global synchrony) within
a globally coupled network is predicted at points a and c.
10.2 Central Pattern Generators
CPGs are (real or notional) neural subsystems that are implicated in the generation of spatio-
temporalpatternsofactivity[226],inparticularfordrivingtherelativelyautonomousactivitiessuch
as as locomotion [68, 287, 278] or for driving involuntary activities such as heartbeat, respiration
or digestion [37]. These systems are assumed to be behind the creation of the range of walking
or running patterns (gaits) that appear in different animals [67]. The analysis of phase-locking
provides a basis for understanding the behaviour of many CPGs, and for a nice overview see the
review articles by Marder and Bucher [209] and Hooper [141].
In some cases, such as the Leech (Hirudo medicinalis) Heart or Caenorhabditis elegans locomo-
tion, the neural circuitry is well studied. For more complex neural systems and in more general
cases CPGs are still a powerful conceptual tool to construct notional minimal neural circuitry
needed to undertake a simple task. In this notional sense they have extensively been investigated
to design control circuits for actuators for robots; see for example the review [145]. Recent work
in this area includes robots that can reproduce salamander walking and swimming patterns [78].
Since the control of motion of autonomous “legged” robots is still a very challenging problem in
real-time control, one hope of this research is that nature’s solutions (for example, how to walk
stably on two legs) will help inspire robotic ways of doing this.
CPGs are called upon to produce one or more rhythmic patterns of actuation; in the particular
problem of locomotion, a likely CPG is one that will produce the range of observed rhythms of
muscle actuation, and ideally the observed transitions between then. For an early discussion of
design principles for modelling CPGs, see [161]. This is an area of modelling where consideration of
symmetries as in § 3.6 has been usefully applied to constrain the models. For example [69] examine
models for generating the gaits in a range of vertebrate animals, from those with two legs (humans)
through those with four (quadrupeds such as horses have a wide range of gaits - walk, trot, pace,
Front Back
Figure 29: Schematic diagram showing central pattern generators (a) with 4n coupled cells that is
used to model gait patterns in animals with 2n legs [124] and (b) a three cell motif of bursters with
varying coupling strengths, as considered in [288, 353].
canter, gallop - they may use) or larger numbers of legs (myriapods such as centipedes). Insects
make use of six legs for locomotion while other invertebrates such as centipedes and millipedes
have a large number of legs that are to some extend independently actuated. As an example,
[124] consider a schematic CPG of 2n oscillators for animals with n legs, as shown in Fig. 29(a).
The authors use symmetry arguments and Theorem 3.1 to draw a number of model-independent
conclusions from the CPG structure.
One can also view CPGs as a window into more fundamental problems of how small groups of
neurons coordinate to produce a range of spatio-temporal patterns. In particular, it is interesting
to see how the observable structure of the connections influences the range and type of dynamical
patterns that can be produced. For example, [288] consider a simple three-cell “motif” networks
of bursters and classify a range of emergent spatio-temporal patterns in terms of the coupling
parameters. Detailed studies [353] investigate properties such multistability and bifurcation of
different patterns and the influence of inhomogeneities in the system. This is done by investigating
return maps for the burst timings relative to each other.
The approach mentioned in § 3.11 and outlined in [307, 123] seems to be a promising way of
providingacontextinwhichviewCPGswherethereisaconstrainedconnectionstructuresuggested
by either the neurobiology or from conceptual arguments, but this structure is not purely related
to symmetries of the network. For example, [120] use that formalism to understand possible spatio-
temporal patterns that arise in lattices or [151] that relates synchrony properties of small motif
networks to spectral properties of the adjacency matrix.
10.3 Perceptual rivalry
Many neural systems process information - they need to produce outputs that depend on inputs. If
thesystemeffectivelyhasnointernaldegreesoffreedomthenthiswillgiveafunctionalrelationship
between output and input so that any temporal variation in the output corresponds to a temporal
variation of the input. However, this is not the case for all but the simplest systems and often
outputs can vary temporally unrelated to the input. A particularly important and well-studied
system that is a model for autonomous temporal output is perceptual rivalry, where conflicting
information input to a neural system results, not in a rejection or merging of the information, but
in an apparently random “flipping” between possible “rival” states (or percepts) of perception.
This nontrivial temporal dynamics of the perception appears even in the absence of a temporally
varying input. The best studied example of this type is binocular rivalry, where conflicting inputs
are simultaneously made to each eye. It is widely reported by subjects that perception switches
from one eye to the other, with a frequency that depends on a number of factors such as the
contrast of the image [44]. More general perceptual rivalry, often used in “optical illusions” such
as ambiguous figures - the Rubin vase, the Necker cube - show similar behaviour with percepts
shifting temporally between possible interpretations.
Various approaches [290] have been made to construct nonlinear dynamical models of the gen-
eration of a temporal shifting between possible percepts such as competition models [42], bifur-
cation models, ones based on neural circuitry [182], or conceptual ones [350] based on network
structures[90] or on heteroclinic attractors [20].
11 Discussion
As with any review we have had to leave out many topics that will be of interest to the reader.
In particular we have confined ourselves to “cell” and “system-level” dynamics rather that “sub-
cellular”behaviourofneurons. Webrieflymentionsomeotheractiveareasofmathematicalresearch
relevanttothescienceofrhythmicneuralnetworks. Perhapsthemostobviousareathatwehavenot
coveredinanydepthisthatofsingleunit(cellorpopulation)forcing,whichitselfisarathernatural
starting point for gaining insights into network behaviour and how best to develop mathematical
tools for understanding response [221, 184]. For a general perspective on mode-locked responses to
periodic forcing see [115] and [255].
For a more recent discussion of the importance of mode-locking in auditory neuroscience see
[186, 190] and in motor systems see [80]. However, it is well to note that not much is known
about nonlinear systems with three or more interacting frequencies [62], as opposed to periodically
forced systems where the notions of Farey tree and the devil’s staircase have proven especially
useful. We have also painted the notion of synchrony with a broad mathematical brush, and not
discussed more subtle notions of envelope locking that may arise between coupled bursting neurons
(where the within burst patterns may desynchronise) [11]. This is especially relevant to studies
of synchronised bursting [282] and the emergence of chaotic phenomena [227]. Indeed, we have
said very little about coupling between systems that are chaotic, such as described in [361], the
emergence of chaos in networks [297, 296] or chaos in symmetric networks [41].
Theissueofchaosisalsorelevanttonotionsofreliability, whereoneisinterestedinthestability
ofspiketrainsagainstfluctuations. Thishasoftenbeendiscussedinrelationtostochasticoscillator
forcingratherthanthosearisingdeterministicallyinahighdimensionalsetting[321,118,100,195].
Of course, given the sparsity of firing in cortex means that it may not even be appropriate to treat
neurons as oscillators. However, some of the ideas developed for oscillators can be extended to
excitable systems, as described in [144, 266]. As well as this it is important to point out that
neurons are not point processors, and have an extensive dendritic tree, which can also contribute
significantly to emergent rhythms as described in [47, 280], as well as couple strongly to glial cells.
Although the latter do not fire spikes, they do show oscillations of membrane potential [12]. At the
macroscopic level it is also important to acknowledge that the amplitude of different brain waves
can also be significantly affected by neuromodulation [188], say through release of norepinephrine,
serotonin and acetylcholine, and the latter is also thought to be able to modulate the PRC of a
single neuron [309].
This review has focused mainly on the embedding of weakly coupled oscillator theory within a
slightly wider framework. This is useful in setting out some of the neuroscience driven challenges
for the mathematical community in establishing inroads into a more general theory of coupled
oscillators. Heterogeneity is one issue that we have mainly side-stepped, and remember that the
weakly coupled oscillator approach requires frequencies of individual oscillators to be close. This
can have a strong effect on emergent network dynamics [335], and it is highly likely that even a
theory with heterogeneous phase response curves [327] will have little bearing on real networks.
The equation-free coarse-graining approach may have merit in this regard, though is a numerically
intensive technique [224].
Wesuggestagoodprojectforthefutureistodevelopatheoryofstronglycoupledheterogeneous
networks based upon the phase-amplitude coordinate system described in § 5.2, with the challenge
todevelopareducednetworkdescriptionintermsofasetofphase-amplitudeinteractionfunctions,
and an emphasis on understanding the new and generic phenomena associated with nontrivial
amplitude dynamics (such as clustered phase-amplitude chaos and multiple attractors). To achieve
thisonemightfurthertapintorecentideasforclassifyingemergentdynamicsbaseduponthegroup
of structural symmetries of the network. This can be computed as the group of automorphisms
for the graph describing the network. For many real-world networks, this can be decomposed into
direct and wreath products of symmetric groups [205]. This would allow the use of tools from
computational group theory [140] to be used, and open up a way to classify the generic forms of
behaviour that a given network may exhibit using the techniques of equivariant bifurcation theory.
Appendix A
The Hodgkin-Huxley description of nerve tissue is completed with:
0.1(V +40)
0.01(V +55)
and C = 1µF cm−2, g = 0.3mmho cm−2, g = 36mmho cm−2, g = 120mmho cm−2, V =
−54.402mV, V = −77mV and V = 50mV. (All potentials are measured in mV, all times in ms
and all currents in µA per cm2).
We give a brief list of some of the abbreviations used within the review.
DDE Delay differential equation
IF Integrate and fire (model for neural oscillator)
iPRC Infinitesimal phase response curve
ISI Inter-spike interval
FHN Fitzhugh-Nagumo equation (model for neural oscillator)
HH Hodgkin-Huxley equation (model for neural oscillator)
LIF Leaky integrate and fire (model for neural oscillator)
ML Morris-Lecar equation (model for neural oscillator)
MSF Master stability function
ODE Ordinary differential equation
PDE Partial differential equation
PRC Phase response curve
QIF Quadratic integrate and fire (model for neural oscillator)
SDE Stochastic differential equation
SHC Stable heteroclinic channel
SNIC Saddle-node on an invariant circle (bifurcation)
WLC Winnerless competition
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author’s contributions
PA, SC and RN contributed equally. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
WewouldliketothankKyleWedgwoodandA´ineByrneforusefulcommentsmadeondraftversions
of this manuscript. SC was supported by the European Commission through the FP7 Marie Curie
Initial Training Network 289146, NETT: Neural Engineering Transformative Technologies.