Meandering of liquid rivulets on
partially wetting inclines
Stéphanie Couvreur and Adrian Daerr∗
arXiv:1210.3902 [physics.flu-dyn]
This fluid dynamics video illustrates recent advances in the understanding of the
mechanism which causes the sinuous path formed by liquid rivulets on partially
wetting inclines. The images themselves show how a simple lighting set-up using a
large Fresnel lens can be used to obtain high contrast images of large transparent
objects.
Video links1: 640×360 version, 6MB 1280×720 version, 34MB
The meandering of liquid rivulets is an ubiquitous phenomenon whose mechanism
has however remained subject to debate[1]. While the main intervening forces are
quickly listed, the wetting hysteresis found on most partial wetting substrates causes
contact line pinning, which makes modelling difficult. The recent description of a system
exhibiting meandering in total wetting conditions[2] has led us to measure and calculate
the dynamics of the rivulet and to identify an inertial linear instability, with good
agreement between theory and experiment[3].
We revisit meandering in partial wetting conditions with an experimental set-up that
delivers high contrast images of the rivulet for quantitative analysis at both local and
large scales. This is achieved by lighting the rivulet from below through a Fresnel lens
(lateral dimenions 1.2m by 0.8m, focal length f = 1m) and a transparent substrate,
and placing a camera at the point where the light rays emanating from a light emitting
diode are focussed by the lens. The minimal distance of camera and light source is
4f if the conjugated positions are chosen symmetrically, at equal distance to the lens.
In the absence of any obstacle, the substrate appears evenly illuminated, as light rays
through every point of the lens enter the camera’s entrance pupil. The set-up is very
sensitive to the quality of the optical components in play, as there is now essentially
only one light ray through any point in the substrate, at least in the limit where the
size of the light source and the objective diaphragm (both about 1mm in diameter) are
negligible compared to the length of the light path (∼ 4f = 4m). In practice we see
mainly chromatic aberrations and diffraction on the rings of the Fresnel lens.
Therivuletsshowninthevideoaredistilledwaterrunningdownaverticalpolyethylene
or glass substrate at flow rates of a few cm3/s.
∗Matière et Systèmes Complexes, UMR 7057, Université Paris Diderot, 75205 Paris cedex 13, France
]nyd-ulf.scisyhp[
2v2093.0121:viXra
Figure 1: Photograph of the meander, with magnified details in the middle and to the
right. Note how the white line in the rivulet, visible in the most zoomed detail
to the right, indicates the locus of maximum rivulet thickness.
With a 12Megapixel digital camera, the resolution is sufficiently good to measure the
curvature of the meander down to the scale of the rivulet width (see Fig. 1). We have
used this recently to find a relation between the mean roughness of the initial straight
rivulet, and the threshold flow rate at which that rivulet starts forming meanders[4].
The meander dynamics shows a surprising range of time scales. While the liquid
takes only about one second to run down the incline, the lateral motion of the rivulet
is typically two orders of magnitude smaller (∼1cm/s). Stationary shapes of meanders
are sometimes reached only after about 104s. In principle our highly contrasted images,
compatible with automatic detection and image processing, should allow for detailed
analysis of this long dynamics.