Measurement error in two-stage analyses, with
application to air pollution epidemiology
Adam A. Szpiro and Christopher J. Paciorek
July 22, 2013
Public health researchers often estimate health effects of exposures (e.g., pollution,
diet, lifestyle) that cannot be directly measured for study subjects. A common strategy
in environmental epidemiology is to use a first-stage (exposure) model to estimate the
exposure based on covariates and/or spatio-temporal proximity and to use predictions
from the exposure model as the covariate of interest in the second-stage (health) model.
Thisinducesacomplexformofmeasurementerror. Weproposeananalyticalframework
and methodology that is robust to misspecification of the first-stage model and provides
valid inference for the second-stage model parameter of interest.
We decompose the measurement error into components analogous to classical and
Berkson error and characterize properties of the estimator in the second-stage model
if the first-stage model predictions are plugged in without correction. Specifically, we
derive conditions for compatibility between the first- and second-stage models that guar-
antee consistency (and have direct and important real-world design implications), and
wederiveanasymptoticestimateoffinite-samplebiaswhenthecompatibilityconditions
are satisfied. We propose a methodology that (1) corrects for finite-sample bias and (2)
correctly estimates standard errors. We demonstrate the utility of our methodology in
simulations and an example from air pollution epidemiology.
1 Introduction
Weconsidermeasurementerrorthatresultsfromusingpredictionsfromafirst-stagestatistical
model as the covariate of interest (the exposure) in a second-stage association study. Regard-
less of the exposure prediction model, there will be measurement error from the difference
between predictions and the unmeasured true values. In contrast with standard measurement
error models and the usual classification into classical and Berkson error, such predictions
induce a complicated form of measurement error that is heteroscedastic and correlated across
study subjects (Gryparis et al. 2009; Szpiro et al. 2011b). Our objectives are to characterize
the effects of this error, to give guidelines for study design to minimize the impact, and to
provide a correction method that reduces bias and gives valid confidence intervals.
2v1537.0121:viXra
In this section, we review the literature on measurement error correction for air pollution
cohort studies and describe how our approach advances the state of the art (Section 1.1),
comment on connections between our work and fundamental statistical issues concerning the
interpretation of random effects models and the interplay between random vs. fixed covariate
regression and misspecified mean models (Section 1.2), and outline the main sections of the
paper (Section 1.3).
1.1 Measurement error
There has been extensive research on measurement error (Carroll et al. 2006), but the statis-
tical literature has only recently begun to deal with the problem presented here. For spatial
exposure contrasts, we have generalized the standard categories by decomposing the mea-
surement error into a Berkson-like component from smoothing the exposure surface and a
classical-like component from variability in estimating exposure model parameters (Gryparis
et al. 2009; Szpiro et al. 2011b; Sheppard et al. 2011). We and others have also shown that the
parametric bootstrap (or a computationally efficient approximation to the parametric boot-
strap) can be used to correct for the effects of measurement error (Madsen et al. 2008; Lopiano
et al. 2011; Szpiro et al. 2011b). However, validity of these results depends crucially on having
a correctly specified exposure model. In practice such models are developed for predictive
performance and often use predictors based on convenience, so we believe misspecification is
ubiquitous. A distinguishing feature of our methodology in this paper is that it is robust to
misspecification of the mean and/or variance in the exposure model and still provides valid
second-stage inference.
We focus on two-stage analysis, as this is a common and practical approach when exposure
is not directly measured. An alternative is a unified analysis in which the exposure model is
a component of a joint model for the exposure and health data (e.g., Sinha et al. (2010) in
nutritionalepidemiologyandGryparisetal.(2009)inairpollutionepidemiology),butthistype
of joint model has several difficulties. First, it presupposes that one has a correct (or at least
nearly correct) exposure model; we argue that an exposure model can generally only capture
a portion of the full exposure and should be treated in this light. Second, outlying second-
stage data may influence estimation of the exposure model in unexpected ways, especially
when the second-stage model is misspecified (noting at the same time that this feedback is an
essential aspect of a coherent joint model and leads to increased efficiency). Third, the same
exposure data are often used with multiple second-stage outcome data, and it is scientifically
desirable to use the same predicted exposures across studies. Finally, exposure modeling can
be computationally demanding, involving spatial and spatio-temporal prediction, so pursuing
a two-stage strategy has practical appeal. For further elaboration of these points, see Bennett
and Wakefield (2001), Wakefield and Shaddick (2006), Gryparis et al. (2009), Lunn et al.
(2009), and Szpiro et al. (2011b).
We and others have also evaluated standard correction methods such as regression cal-
ibration, including using personal measurements as validation data (Gryparis et al. 2009;
Spiegelman 2010; Szpiro et al. 2011b). Performance in the spatial setting is mixed, most
likely because the error structure differs substantially from classical measurement error. The
methodology we describe here directly accounts for the spatial characteristics of measurement
error and relies on statistical estimates of uncertainty from the exposure model rather than
validation data.
A key application, and the one that motivates this work, is studying the health effects of
chronic exposure to ambient air pollution. Long-term air pollution exposure has been linked
with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in prominent studies that form part of
the basis for regulations with broad economic impact (Dockery et al. 1993; Pope et al. 2002;
Peters and Pope 2002). Early air pollution cohort studies focused on mortality (Dockery
et al. 1993; Pope et al. 2002), while more recent work has shown associations with non-fatal
cardiovascular events (Miller et al. 2007) and sub-clinical indicators of disease (Ku¨nzli et al.
2005; Van Hee et al. 2009; Adar et al. 2010; Van Hee et al. 2011). In general, the health
risk of air pollution to any single individual is thought to be small, but there are important
public health implications because of the large number of people exposed and the ability of
governments to mitigate exposure through regulatory action (Pope et al. 2006).
In air pollution studies, exposure modeling is motivated by the desire to estimate intra-
urban (i.e., within a metropolitan area) variation in exposure, which is more difficult to quan-
tify than inter-urban pollution contrasts. There are significant advantages to exploiting intra-
urban contrasts, as this can increase statistical power to detect health effects, help rule out
unmeasured confounding by city or region, and improve our ability to differentiate between
the effects of different pollutants or pollutant components. Pollution data are typically avail-
able from regulatory and research monitoring networks but not from long-term residential or
personal monitoring of individuals participating in observational health studies, leading to a
spatial misalignment problem. Typical exposure prediction models rely on monitoring data
in a regression with geographically-varying covariates and smoothing by splines or kriging
(Fanshawe et al. 2008; Jerrett et al. 2005a; Hoek et al. 2008; Su et al. 2009; Yanosky et al.
2009; Szpiro et al. 2010b; Brauer 2010). Standard practice is to select an exposure model
with good prediction accuracy, treat the predicted exposures as known, and plug them into a
health model to estimate the association of interest without accounting for measurement error
(Jerrett et al. 2005b; Ku¨nzli et al. 2005; Kim et al. 2009; Puett et al. 2009; Adar et al. 2010;
Van Hee et al. 2011).
While motivated by air pollution epidemiology, the core measurement error ideas in this
paper have much broader relevance. Indeed, Prentice (2010) (in the 2008 RA Fisher lecture at
the Joint Statistical Meetings) states that “measurement error in exposure assessment may be
apotentiallydominatingsourceofbiasinsuchimportantpreventionresearchareasasnutrition
and physical activity epidemiology.” It is essential to better understand the implications of
measurement error in a wide variety of applications in which one must first estimate exposure.
These applications include (1) nutritional epidemiology, (2) physical activity epidemiology, (3)
a environmental and occupational epidemiology, (4) exposure to disease vectors or infectious
agents, and (5) two-stage analyses in functional data contexts. Statistical exposure models are
commonly used in environmental and occupational epidemiology (Dement et al. 1983; Preller
et al. 1995; Stram et al. 1999; Ryan et al. 2007; Slama et al. 2007), with kriging and land
use regression particularly popular in air pollution research. More generally, proxy data are
becomingincreasinglyavailableandanaturalideainmanycontextsistomodelanexposureof
interest given publicly available data. Such data could include remote sensing from satellites
or large networks of inexpensive sensors deployed to measure physical phenomena.
1.2 Connections to other fundamental statistical issues
In addition to advancing measurement error research, our development emphasizes the rela-
tionships between certain foundational issues in applied statistics that are of current interest
in the field, specifically the interpretation of random effects models and the interplay between
random vs. fixed covariate regression and misspecified mean models.
As discussed in Section 2.1, we have chosen to condition on a fixed but unknown spatial air
pollutionsurface,ratherthantakingthemoreconventionalgeostatisticalapproachofmodeling
an unknown spatial surface as a random effect or spatial random field (Cressie 1993; Banerjee
et al. 2004). The repercussions of this decision are related to the more general question of
how to interpret random effects models in light of reasonable assumptions about the true
data-generating mechanism, and whether this terminology is even adequate for describing the
range of problems to which random effects-based algorithms are currently applied (Gelman
2005; Hodges and Reich 2010). Indeed, in a new book on richly parameterized models, Hodges
(2013) points out that our particular modeling framework illustrates an important practical
differenceininferentialmethodologybetweenwhathecalls‘old’and‘new’stylerandomeffects.
As discussed in Sections 2.1–2.2, we regard the entire unknown exposure surface as part
of the mean in a finite rank regression, rather than allocating the spatial component to the
variance by means of a random effect, so we must address the consequences of a misspecified
mean model. In addition, we regard the exposure monitor locations as random rather than
fixed (since they could presumably vary between hypothetical repeated experiments), so we
are in the setting of random covariate regression with a misspecified mean model. Buja et al.
(2013) and Szpiro et al. (2010a) have recently discussed some implications of the distinction
betweenfixedandrandomcovariateswhenthemeanmodelismisspecified. Infact, theseminal
paper by White (1980) on sandwich covariance estimators includes the case of a misspecified
mean model, but perhaps in part because the title focuses on heteroscedasticity, applications
of the sandwich estimator tend to focus only on the importance of non-constant variance. One
often neglected consequence of the “conspiracy of model violation and random X” (Buja et al.
2013) that is important in our development is that regression parameter estimates are not
quite unbiased. We provide an approach to characterizing and estimating the asymptotic bias
(see equation (3.9) and the surrounding discussion) that is, as far as we know, novel.
1.3 Outline of paper
Section 2 presents our basic framework, a key feature of which is that it avoids the assumption
that the exposure model is correct and instead projects exposure data into a lower dimensional
space. We present conditions on the compatibility of the first and second stage designs that
haveimportantreal-worlddesignandanalysisimplications. Section3decomposestheresulting
measurement error into Berkson-like and classical-like components. Under the compatibility
conditions, we show that there is essentially no bias from the Berkson-like error, although this
component of the error still increases variability of second-stage effect estimates. We then
derive asymptotic estimates of the bias and variance caused by the classical-like error. Section
4 describes our measurement error correction approach, wherein we correct for bias from
the classical-like error using our asymptotic results and estimate the uncertainty, including
that from both sources of measurement error, using a form of the nonparametric bootstrap.
Sections 5 and 6 present simulations and an example application to the Multi-Ethnic Study
of Atherosclerosis and Air Pollution (MESA Air).
2 Analytical framework
2.1 Data-generating mechanism
We develop an analytic framework for air pollution cohort study data that also more generally
illustrates how one can use a measurement error paradigm to formalize two-stage analysis with
a misspecified first-stage model. While previous work has modeled the spatial variation in air
pollution as a random field (Gryparis et al. 2009; Szpiro et al. 2010b, 2011b), we regard the
spatial surface itself as fixed and treat the data locations as stochastic. This avoids the philo-
sophical difficulties inherent in attributing spatial structure of long-term average air pollution
to a stochastic spatial process that would be different in a hypothetical repeated experiment.
Long-term average air pollution concentrations over one or more years are predominately
determined by fixed but complex climatological, economic, and geographic systems, so it is
scientifically preferable to regard the unknown surface as deterministic. Thus, we condition
on the fixed physical world in the time period of the study and consider a repeated sampling
framework in which observations might have been collected at different locations according
to a (not necessarily known) study design. In Section 7, we discuss the implications of this
approach when considering shorter-term air pollution exposures.
More formally, consider an association study with health outcomes y and corresponding
exposures x for subjects i = 1,...,n at geographic locations s ∈ R2, with additional health
model covariates z = (z ,...,z ) ∈ Rp, including an intercept. Consider a linear model,
y = x β +z β +(cid:15) , (2.1)
where conditional on covariates the (cid:15) are independent but not necessarily identically dis-
tributed, satisfying E((cid:15) ) = 0. Our target of inference is the health effect parameter, β. If
the x and z were observed without error, inference for β would be routine by ordinary least
squares (OLS) and sandwich-based standard error estimates (White 1980). We are interested
in the situation where the y and z are observed for all subjects, but instead of the actual
subject exposures we observe monitoring data, x∗, for j = 1,...,n∗, at different locations s∗.
Nonlinear health models are of course important and are the subject of ongoing research, but
the linear setting is helpful for developing the general framework and our specific asymptotic
results.
We emphasize that we regard the spatial locations s and s∗ of study subjects and monitors
as realizations of spatial random variables. The locations are chosen at the time of the study
design, anditisnaturaltoregardthemasstochasticinordertoaddressthestatisticalquestion
of how the estimates of β would vary if different locations were selected according to similar
criteria. Thus, inourdevelopmentweassumethes ands∗ aredistributedinR2 withunknown
densities g(s) and h(s), respectively, and corresponding distribution functions G(s) and H(s).
Throughout, we assume the subject locations are chosen independently of the monitoring
locations. To simplify the exposition, we further assume in Sections 3 and 4 that both sets of
locationsarei.i.d. Itisstraightforwardtoaccountforclusteringofsubjectormonitorlocations;
see, for example, the simulation study in Section 5.2 and the data analysis in Section 6.
Conditional on the s , we assume the x satisfy
with i.i.d. mean zero η . The function Φ(s) is a deterministic spatial surface that is potentially
predictable by covariates and spatial smoothing, and the η represent variability between
exposures for subjects at the same physical location. We assume an analogous model for
the monitoring data at locations s∗, with the same deterministic spatial field Φ(s∗) and with
instrument error represented by η∗ having variance σ2 .
Finally, we assume the additional health model covariates z satisfy
where Θ(s) = (θ (s),...,θ (s)) is a p-dimensional vector-valued function representing the
spatial component of the additional covariates, and which includes the intercept, and the
ζ = (ζ ,...,ζ ) are random p-vectors independent between subjects and independent of
the η . Each component of ζ has mean zero, but the components of ζ are not necessarily
independent of each other. To illustrate, one additional health model covariate might be
household income, decomposed into spatial variation representing the socioeconomic status of
the neighborhood and the residual variation between residences.
2.2 Exposure estimation
Standard practice is to derive a spatial estimator of exposure wˆ(s) based on the monitoring
data and then to use the wˆ(s ) in place of the x in (2.1) to estimate β. We consider a hybrid
regression (on geographically-defined covariates) and regression spline exposure model. Thus,
we let R(s) be a known function from R2 to Rr that incorporates q covariates and r−q spline
basis functions. If we knew the least-squares fit of the exposure surface with respect to the
density of subject locations g(s),
(cid:0) (cid:1)2
it would be natural to approximate x by w(s ) = R(s )γ. Notice that we do not assume
the spatial basis is sufficiently rich to represent all of the structure in Φ(s), so we allow for
misspecification in the sense that Φ(s) (cid:54)= w(s) for some s ∈ R2, for any choice of γ.
We do not know γ, so we will estimate it from the monitoring data by γˆ and then use the
estimated exposure, wˆ(s ) = R(s )γˆ, in place of x . In particular, we derive γˆ by OLS
γˆ = argmin
(cid:88)(cid:0)
x∗ −R(s∗)ξ
Under standard regularity conditions (White 1980), γˆ is asymptotically normal and converges
a.s. to γ∗ as n∗ → ∞, where γ∗ is the solution to (2.2) with H(s) in place of G(s). In
Section 2.3, we discuss the implications of distinct reference distributions in (2.2) and (2.3).
2.3 Exposure model choice
So far we have taken R(s) to be a known function from R2 to Rr, encoding a set of de-
cisions about which covariates and spline basis functions to include in the exposure model.
Indeed, model selection is a complex task that involves trading off flexibility (advantageous for
modeling as much of the true exposure surface as possible) and parsimony (advantageous for
reducing estimation error). We begin by specifying compatibility conditions for the first-stage
exposure model that are needed to guarantee consistent estimation of β in the second-stage
health model. The following two conditions are sufficient, and we will discuss their motivation
further in Section 3.
Condition 1. The probability distribution of R(s) is the same if s is sampled from G(s) or
H(s).
Condition 2. The span of R(s) includes the elements of Θ(s), θ (s),k = 1,...,p, the spatially
structured components of the additional health model covariates.
Note that Condition 1 is satisfied if the probability distributions of subject and monitor
locations are identical, i.e., g(s) = h(s) for all s. Visual inspection on a map can be useful
for verifying that g(s) and h(s) represent similar spatial patterns that are relevant for spline
functions, butindividualgeographiccovariatesmayhaveveryfinespatialstructure, soitisalso
useful to examine the values of these geographic covariates at subject and monitor locations.
If a particular covariate has noticeably different distributions in the two populations, then it
should not be included in R(s) (see, for example, the discussion of the MESA data analysis
in Section 6).
SelectingR(s)tosatisfyCondition2implicitlyrequiresthatΘ(s)bedefinedatalllocations
in the supports of g(s) and h(s). If g(s) = h(s) for all s, then this is automatically true since
Θ(s) is defined at all locations where it is possible for study subjects to be located.
Beyond the compatibility conditions above, there is a sizable and relevant statistical liter-
ature on methods for maximizing out-of-sample prediction accuracy, which for spline models
amountstoselectingthenumberofbasisfunctionsandlocationsofknotsorselectingapenalty
parameter (Hastie et al. 2001; Ruppert et al. 2003). In our setting, improved accuracy of expo-
sure model predictions will often correspond to improved efficiency in estimating β, although
this is not always the case (Szpiro et al. 2011a). We comment further on the tradeoff between
exposure model complexity and parsimony in Section 7, but a specific algorithm for selecting
geographic covariates or spline basis functions is beyond the scope of this paper.
3 Measurement error
Let β be the health effect estimate obtained from the OLS solution to (2.1) using wˆ(s )
estimated from n∗ monitoring locations in place of x , for study subjects i = 1,...,n. This
estimator is affected by two fundamentally different types of measurement error: Berkson-like
and classical-like components (Szpiro et al. 2011b). Defining w∗(s ) = R(s )γ∗, we can express
the measurement error, u = x −wˆ(s ), as
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
= u +u . (3.1)
TheBerkson-likecomponent,u ,istheinformationlostfromsmoothingevenwithunlimited
monitoringdata(aformofexposuremodelmisspecification), andtheclassical-likecomponent,
u , is variability that arises from estimating the parameters of the exposure model based
on monitoring data at n∗ locations.
The designation of u as Berkson-like error refers to the fact that this is part of the
true exposure surface that our model is unable to predict, even in an idealized situation
with unlimited monitoring data. As such, it results in predictions that are less variable than
truth. In Section 3.1 we consider the impact of the Berkson-like error alone and demonstrate
asymptotic unbiasedness for large n in Lemma 1, assuming the compatibility conditions of
Section 2.3 are satisfied. This result motivates the need for the compatibility conditions, but
it is not used directly in our measurement error methodology in Section 4. Our consistency
result in Lemma 1 is analogous to Lemma 1 in White (1980), indicating that finite sample bias
occurs in generic random covariate regression even in the absence of measurement error. Here
we regard this bias as negligible, because in public health contexts n is often relatively large,
particularly compared to n∗. Although u alone does not induce important bias, it does
inflatethevariabilityofhealtheffectestimates, andweaccountforthiswiththenonparametric
bootstrap in our proposed measurement error methodology in Section 4.
Classical-like measurement error, u , results from the finite n∗ variability of γˆ as an
estimator of γ∗. As discussed by Szpiro et al. (2011b), it is similar to classical measurement
error in the sense that it contributes additional variability to exposure estimates that is not
related to the outcome. Like classical measurement error, u introduces bias in estimating
β and affects the standard error, but it is not the same as classical measurement error because
it is heteroscedastic and shared between subjects. In Section 3.2 we estimate the bias from
classical-like measurement error (still under the the compatibility conditions of Section 2.3).
This estimate will provide a means to correct for bias as part of our measurement error
methodology in Section 4.
3.1 Berkson-like error (u )
Considering our estimator, β ˆ , we isolate the impact of u by operating in the n∗ = ∞
limit with w∗(s ) = R(s )γ∗ and analyzing the behavior of β ˆ . The following lemma holds
under sufficient regularity of g(s), h(s), Φ(s), and R(s). We include the proof here because it
is helpful for understanding the importance of the compatibility conditions in Section 2.3.
Lemma 1. Assuming Conditions 1 and 2, β converges a.s. to β as n → ∞.
Proof. It is easy to see that β ˆ is the OLS solution to (2.1) using w∗(s ) = R(s )γ∗ in place
of x . Condition 1 implies γ∗ = γ, so we consider the impact of using w(s ) = R(s )γ as the
exposure. We write
i i i z i i i i
where the three terms grouped in parentheses are regarded as unobserved error terms. To
apply Lemma 1 from White (1980), it is sufficient that
and for each k = 1,...,p
where the random sampling of s is according to the density of subject locations, g(s). Or-
thogonality of residuals in the least squares optimization for γ in (2.2) implies (3.3), and
Condition 2 implies (3.4) since each θ (s) can be represented as a linear combination of ele-
ments of R(s). We actually need (3.4) with z = θ (s )+ζ in place of θ (s ) for Lemma 1 of
ik k i ik k i
White (1980), but this follows from (3.4) since ζ has mean zero and is independent of s .
We comment on the necessity of Conditions 1 and 2. The proof of Lemma 1 depends
on γ∗ = γ. This will always hold if Φ(s) is spanned by the R(s), but otherwise we rely on
Condition 1. If γ∗ (cid:54)= γ, then (3.2) becomes
i i i z i i i i
We cannot expect that R(s )γ∗ is orthogonal to (Φ(s )−R(s )γ∗) when s is drawn according
to the probability density g(s), since γ∗ is the least squares fit from (2.2) with H(s) in place
of G(s). Therefore, treating (Φ(s )−R(s )γ∗) as part of the random variation in (3.5) results
in the equivalent of omitted variable bias when estimating β.
Condition 2 is needed to guarantee (3.4) in the proof of Lemma 1. The difficulty if (3.4)
does not hold is that (Φ(s )−R(s )γ) in (3.2) may be correlated with one or more elements of
the Θ(s ) component of z . Intuitively, this can introduce bias because estimation of β relies
on the variation in R(s )γ that is unrelated to the covariates z , i.e., the residual variation
after projecting onto the span of the elements of z , which is equivalent to the span of Θ(s ).
Without (3.4), the residual term (Φ(s )−R(s )γ) in (3.2) need not be orthogonal to this
variation. Note that the need to include the covariates from the health model in the exposure
model is analogous to the inclusion of covariates in standard regression calibration (Carroll
et al. 2006).
3.2 Classical-like error (u )
We will isolate the impact of u on β by operating in the n = ∞ limit, corresponding
to the entire superpopulation of study subjects, and analyzing the asymptotic properties of
β ˆ as n∗ → ∞. The exposure model parameter vector, γˆ, is asymptotically normal (as
discussed in Section 2.2) with dimension fixed at r, and β is a deterministic function of
γˆ, so under the conditions of Lemma 1 a standard delta-method argument can be used to
establish that β is asymptotically normal with mean β. In particular, this implies that
bias from classical-like error is asymptotically negligible in the sense that it is of comparable
magnitude to the variance. This situation contrasts with classical measurement error where
there are as many random error terms as observations and there is large-sample bias (Carroll
et al. 2006).
Even though the bias term is asymptotically negligible, our simulation studies suggest
that it can still be important for moderate size n∗, so we will derive a bias correction. Since
only the variability in the exposure estimate that is orthogonal to covariates from the health
model plays a role in deriving β ˆ , it is helpful in the following analysis to define Rc(s) with
elements Rc(s) = R (s)−Θ(s)ψ , where ψ = argmin
dG(s). Analogous
k k k k ω k
to wˆ(s) and w(s), we define wˆc(s) = Rc(s)γˆ and wc(s) = Rc(s)γ.
Note that the expectation of β ˆ need not be defined for finite n∗ because it is a function
ofγˆ ,andthedenominatorintheOLSsolutionforγˆ isnotboundedawayfromzero. Therefore,
we adapt the definition of asymptotic expectation for a sequence of random variables from
Shao (2010, page 135). The basic idea is to identify the highest order term in a power
series expansion that has non-zero expectation as the asymptotic expectation. See a related
discussion of concepts of asymptotic bias in Lumley (2010, Appendix A.1.2).
Definition 1. Let υ ,υ ,... be a sequence of vector-valued random variables and let a ,a ,...
be a sequence of positive numbers such that lim a = ∞. (i) Suppose υ is such that
E|υ| < ∞ and we can write υ = υ˜ + υ(cid:48) with E(υ˜ )=0 and lim a υ(cid:48) → υ. Then
n n n n n→∞ n n d
we denote E (υ ) = E(υ) and call E (υ )/a an order a−1 asymptotic expectation of
[an] n [an] n n √ n
υ . (ii) Suppose υ is such that Cov(υ) < ∞ and lim a υ → υ. Then we denote
n n→∞ n n d
Cov (υ ) = Cov(υ) and call Cov (υ )/a an order a−1 asymptotic covariance of υ .
[an] n [an] n n n n
Lemma 2. Assume sufficient regularity of g(s), h(s), Φ(s), and R(s) and Conditions 1 and 2.
(cid:82) (cid:82)
1 2 [n∗] 1 2 1 2
(cid:0)(cid:82) (cid:1)2
Var (β ˆ ) = β2 1 2 [n∗] 1 2 1 2 , (3.7)
then E (β ˆ −β)/n∗ is an asymptotic expectation of β ˆ −β and Var (β ˆ )/n∗ is an
asymptotic variance of β ˆ (both of order n∗−1) .
The proof is outlined in Appendix A, where we express β ˆ as a function of γˆ and do
a second order Taylor expansion around γ. Definition 1 is required to define the order n∗−1
asymptotic expectation in the first term of (3.6), which is a linear function of γˆ − γ. The
first order terms in a Taylor expansion of γˆ −γ are of order n∗−1/2 and do not converge when
multiplied by n∗. However, they have expectation zero, so they play the role of υ˜ and do not
contribute to the asymptotic expectation. See (3.9) and the surrounding discussion.
The practical import of Lemma 2 is that we can use (3.6) to correct for the bias from
classical-like error. The variance estimate in (3.7) is not directly useful as a standard error
because it does not include variability from Berkson-like error or from having n < ∞ study
subjects,butitprovidesinsightintotherelativemagnitudesofbiasandvariancefromclassical-
like error.
To estimate (3.6), we can estimate wc(s) by wˆc(s) = Rc(s)γˆ, noting that Rc(s) is approxi-
mated from the observed exposure covariates for the health observations, orthogonalizing with
respect to the health model covariates, which is the finite sample approximation to the con-
struction of Rc(s) stated earlier in this section. To estimate the variances and covariances of
wˆc(s), we use a robust estimator for Cov (γˆ) (White 1980; Carroll et al. 2006). We use the
sandwich estimator to avoid the assumption of having a correctly-specified model, as required
for the standard model-based estimator. Given these estimators, all the integrals in the first
two terms of (3.6) can be estimated as averages with respect to the discrete measure with
equal weight on each health observation, the standard plug-in estimator for G(s).
Finally, in the third term of (3.6), we need to estimate E (wˆc(s)−wc(s)) = R(s)E (γˆ−
γ), and therefore the asymptotic expectation of γˆ. Since we have assumed Condition 1, which
implies γ = γ∗, the expectation of γˆ is approximately equal to γ. However, γˆ is derived
by means of a random covariate regression with a misspecified mean model, so its standard
expectation is not defined. An estimate of its asymptotic expectation is developed as follows.
Let Φ∗ be the vector comprised of the Φ(s∗) and R∗ the n∗ ×r matrix obtained by stacking
the R(s∗) for j = 1,...,n∗. For arbitrary m , denote by M the n∗ ×n∗ diagonal matrix with
entries m ,...,m . If we set m = 1/n∗ for j = 1,...,n∗ and define
κ(m ,...,m ) = (cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62)MΦ∗, (3.8)
then we notice E(γˆ|s∗,...,s∗ ) = κ(m ,...,m ). We are interested in the unconditional
expectation of γˆ. Heuristically, we assume that the true h(s) is supported on the observed
monitor locations and gives equal weight to each observation (i.e., we use the plug-in estimator
for h(s)). In that case, a realization of s∗,...,s∗ can be expressed as a multinomial draw,
m ,...,m , where the m are the fraction of times each location in the support of h(s)
is drawn. We can estimate the expectation of κ(m ,...,m ) by means of a Taylor series
expansion of κ(·) around m = 1 for j = 1,...,n∗. Using the first and second moments of a
multinomial distribution, we have
1 (cid:18) 1 1 (cid:19) (cid:88) n∗ ∂2κ 1 1 (cid:88) n∗ ∂2κ
j=1 j j,k=1;j(cid:54)=k j k
It easy to see that the first order terms in the Taylor expansion of κ(·) (not shown) have expec-
tation zero, so they play the role of υ˜ in Definition 1 and do not contribute to the asymptotic
expectation. We give further details on numerical calculation of the above expression in Ap-
pendix B. A more formal derivation that does not begin by assuming a discrete distribution
could be developed by a von Mises expansion with the empirical process of monitor locations
(van der Vaart 1998, Section 20.1). Note that although we do not observe the Φ(s∗), replacing
them with x∗ in (3.8) does not introduce bias since x∗ = Φ(s∗)+η∗, and the η∗ are independent
of everything else and have mean zero.
Finally, we can gain additional insight into the bias and variance contributions from
classical-like error by considering the simplified situation in which the exposure model is
correctly specified so that w(s) = R(s)γ for all s, the subject and monitor location densities,
g(s) and h(s), are the same, and there are no additional covariates or intercept in the health
model. In that case it is easy to show that the asymptotic expectation simplifies to
w(s)2dG(s)
and the asymptotic variance simplifies to
w(s)2dG(s)
The r−2 term in (3.10) illustrates the fact that the bias is away from the null in the case of
a one-dimensional exposure model and that more typically it is toward the null and becomes
larger with higher-dimensional exposure models, for a given true exposure surface. This is
what occurs empirically in our simulations and examples.
In addition, the ratio of the squared bias to the variance is
which demonstrates that the importance of the bias depends on the dimensionality of the
exposure model relative to the sample size and the ratio of the noise to the signal in the
exposure data.
4 Measurement error correction
We correct for measurement error by means of an optional asymptotic bias correction based
on (3.6) followed by a design-based nonparametric bootstrap standard error calculation (in-
corporating the asymptotic bias correction in the bootstrap, if appropriate).
Given a bias estimate b from (3.6) the bias-corrected β is β/(1 + b). Bias correction is
optional since the asymptotic results of Section 3 show that the naive health effect estimator
is consistent, with variance dominating the bias in the limit as the number of exposure obser-
vations increases. We explore the magnitude of bias and utility of including the asymptotic
correction via simulation in the next section and comment further on this topic in Section 7.
We need to estimate the uncertainty in either β or β in a way that accounts for all the
components of the measurement error and the sampling variability in the health model. Note
that the asymptotic variance (3.7) accounts only for the variance from the classical-like mea-
surement error. Since we have assumed that the locations of health and exposure data are
randomly drawn according to the densities g(s) and h(s), respectively, a simple design-based
nonparametric bootstrap is a suitable approximation to the data-generating mechanism. To
obtain each bootstrap dataset, we separately resample with replacement n∗ exposure measure-
ments and n health observations. We fit the exposure model to the bootstrapped exposure
measurements and use the results to predict exposures at the locations of the bootstrapped
health observations. We then obtain bootstrap health effect estimates (with or without bias
correction) and estimate the standard error of β or β by means of the empirical standard
deviation of these values.
In principle, we could avoid the asymptotic calculations in (3.6) by employing a bootstrap
procedure to estimate bias followed by a second round of bootstrapping for standard error
estimation. Suchanestedbootstrapiscomputationallydemanding. Furthermore,ourstrategy
of using the bootstrap after addressing the bias is consistent with the comments of (Efron
et al. 1993, Chapter 10) who caution that bias correction with the bootstrap is more difficult
than variance estimation. Along similar lines, (Buonaccorsi 2010, p. 216) notes the need for
additional assumptions when developing a two-stage bootstrap that includes bias correction.
5 Simulations
5.1 One dimensional exposure surface
Our first set of simulations is in the simplified setting of a one dimensional exposure surface.
In this setting, we illustrate the bias from Berkson-like error for very large n∗ when either
Condition 1 or 2 is violated, and we illustrate the finite n∗ measurement error correction
methods from Section 4 when both compatibility conditions are satisfied. We simulate 1,000
Monte Carlo datasets and use 100 bootstrap samples, where applicable.
The true health model is linear regression with β = 1, with i.i.d. (cid:15) ∼ N(0,1) and an
intercept but no additional health model covariates. We use n = 500 subjects. The true
exposure surface on (0,10) is a combination of low frequency and high frequency sinusoidal
components
and we set σ2 = σ2 = 0.5. The density of monitor locations is
0.142 0 < s ≤ 10, 20 < s < 10
0.0142 10 ≤ s ≤ 20,
and we use an exposure model R(s) comprised of a B-spline basis with 5 to 25 degrees of
freedom (Hastie et al. 2001).
ToillustratethebiasfromtheBerkson-likeerrorwheneitherofthecompatibilityconditions
is violated, we set n∗ = 1000 so that the classical-like error is negligible. The results of these
simulations are shown in Figure 1. In panels (a) and (b), the health model is fit with an
intercept but no additional health model covariates, so Condition 2 is automatically satisfied.
In panel (a) the density of subject locations g(s) is the same as h(s), and there is no evidence
of bias in β. In panel (b), g(s) is uniform on the interval (0,10) so that Condition 1 is violated.
There is clear evidence of bias away from the null for 5 and 9 df exposure models. There is no
evidence of bias with 13 df, which can be attributed to the fact that the exposure model with
13 df is sufficiently rich to account for almost all of the spatial structure in Φ(s), meaning that
the Berkson-like error behaves like pure Berkson error.
In panels (c) and (d) of Figure 1, g(s) is the same as h(s), but we fit the health model
including an additional covariate z = sin(s ). In panel (c), this covariate is also included
in the exposure model, and as expected we see no evidence of bias in β. In panel (d), the
additional covariate is not included in the exposure model, so Condition 2 is violated. There
is noticeable bias of β toward the null, especially for the 5 and 9 df spline models.
In Figure 2, we show results from a separate set of simulations with n∗ = 200 in order to
illustrate the measurement error correction methods from Section 4. In these simulations, g(s)
is the same as h(s) and the health model is fit without additional covariates, so Conditions 1
and 2 are satisfied. The mean out-of-sample R2 ranges from 0.25 for 5 df to 0.35 for 13 df,
corresponding to the challenging situation of an exposure model with marginal performance
that can lead to substantial bias in estimating β. In panel (a), we see that the uncorrected
health effect estimates have notable bias, especially for larger df exposure models, and our
correction successfully removes most of the bias. Panel (b) shows the coverage of nominal
95% confidence intervals. In the uncorrected analyses, coverage ranges from 45% to 80%,
depending on the df in the exposure model. Confidence intervals that incorporate either the
bias correction or bootstrap standard errors improve the coverage. We obtain nearly perfect
95% coverage when we incorporate the bias correction and bootstrap standard errors.
5.2 Spatial exposure surface
Our second set of simulations is based on the MESA Air study design in the Baltimore region
(Section 6), using 1,000 simulated datasets and 100 bootstrap samples. We enforce Con-
ditions 1 and 2 and focus on illustrating the value of the correction methods described in
Section 4 in a realistic spatial setting. The spatial domain is a 257×257 discrete grid scaled
to be a square 30 units on a side. There are n∗ = 125 monitor locations, sampled in clusters
by first choosing 25 locations i.i.d. uniformly on S and then also including the four nearest
neighbors for each such location. Our bootstrap for these simulations resamples clusters of
five monitors. A total of n = 600 subject locations are selected uniformly and independently
from S.
The predictable part of the exposure surface is
0 1 1 2 2 3 3 1
Each γ = 4.9, and each R (s) is constructed by drawing i.i.d. realizations from N(0,1/3)
at each s ∈ S. Φ (s) is a fixed realization from a spectral approximation to a Gaussian field
with Mat´ern covariance (Paciorek 2007) with range 20 and unit differentiability parameter,
normalized such that the variance of Φ (s) on S is 30. Thus the total variance of Φ(s) on S
is approximately 54. In the true exposure surface and monitoring data, there is also a nugget
with variance σ2 = σ2 = 6. We consider two spatial scenarios, corresponding to different
fixed realizations of Φ (s). These surfaces are shown in Figure 3.
The spatial exposure model has R(s) comprised of R (s) for k = 1,2,3 and a thin-plate
spline basis derived by fitting a GAM from the MGCV package in R (Wood 2006) to the
observed monitoring data with fixed degrees of freedom (df). Thus the spatial basis is actually
different for each simulated dataset since it depends on the monitor locations, but we keep
the same basis functions for the bootstrap analysis within each simulation run. We estimate
the standard error of γˆ using a sandwich estimator for clustered data implemented in the R
package geepack (Hojsgaard et al. 2006).
The true and fitted health models have an intercept but no additional covariates. We set
β = 0.1 and consider i.i.d. normally distributed (cid:15) ∼ N(0,σ2) with σ2 equal to 200 or 10.
(cid:15) (cid:15)
The larger value of σ2 = 200 is consistent with what we see in the MESA Air data with
left ventricular mass index (LVMI) as the outcome, where the air pollution exposure explains
approximately 0.3% of the variance after adjustment for known risk factors. We also consider
σ2 = 10 such that air pollution exposure explains approximately 5% of the health outcome
variance in order to see more clearly the potential impact of exposure measurement error.
The two spatial surfaces, while generated at random, represent different deterministic
scenarios in which we could find ourselves (e.g., different metropolitan areas). In scenario 1
the spatially structured part of the air pollution surface Φ (s) can be represented fairly well
using thin-plate splines with either 5 or 10 df, while the spatial surface in scenario 2 cannot
be represented well with 5 df but can be reasonably well modeled with 10 df. This is reflected
in the R2 values in Figure 3, which represent the best thin-plate spline fits to the surfaces,
assuming essentially unlimited monitoring data is available. The cross-validated and out-of-
sample R2 values for predicting the full air pollution surface Φ(s) (including non-spatially
structured covariates) based on monitoring data reported in Table 1 exhibit a similar pattern.
For leave-one-out cross-validation, the clusters of five adjacent monitors are treated as a single
unit.
We focus our discussion on the scenarios with σ2 = 10 because this is where the impact of
exposuremeasurementerrorismostprominent. Themeasurementerrorimpactisqualitatively
similar for σ2 = 200, but it is less important because the unmodeled variability in the health
outcome dominates. Our theory dictates that the relative biases for σ2 = 10 and σ2 = 200 are
(cid:15) (cid:15)
identical, which we verified in simulations out to four significant digits, so we only report one
value.
When we fit the exposure model with a 5 df thin-plate spline, there is modest bias toward
the null of 3% in scenario 1 and more substantial bias of 12% in scenario 2. Our asymptotic
correction reduces the magnitude of bias in both instances. The bias correction followed by
bootstrap standard errors consistently gives valid inference, including accurate standard error
estimates and nominal coverage of 95% confidence intervals. In scenario 1, we also get valid
inference with bootstrap standard errors and no bias correction.
When we increase the complexity of the spatial model to 10 df, prediction accuracy im-
proves in both scenarios, but inference about the health effect parameter is degraded. The
magnitude of bias is approximately the same as with 5 df, but our asymptotic correction is less
effective. Furthermore, the bootstrap standard error estimates tend to be too large, resulting
in over-coverage of 95% confidence intervals. These findings are not surprising, because while
each simulated dataset has 125 monitor locations, they are clustered in groups of 5 so that
there are effectively only 25 unique locations for estimating the smooth component of the
spatial surface, so a thin-plate spline model with 10 df overfits these data in the sense that we
do not expect to be able to rely on large n∗ asymptotic approximations such as (3.6) or the
nonparametric bootstrap.
6 Data analysis
The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and Air Pollution (MESA Air) is an ongoing cohort
study designed to investigate the relationship between air pollution exposure and progression
of subclinical atherosclerosis (Bild et al. 2002; Kaufman et al. 2012). The MESA Air cohort
includes over 6,000 subjects in six U.S. metropolitan areas (Baltimore City and Baltimore
County, MD; Chicago, IL; Forsyth County (Winston-Salem), NC; Los Angeles and Riverside
Counties, CA; New York and Rockland County, NY; and St Paul, MN). Four ethnic/racial
groupsweretargeted, white, AfricanAmerican, Hispanic, andChineseAmerican, andallstudy
participants (46 to 87 years of age) were without clinical cardiovascular disease at the baseline
examination (2000-2002). An early cross-sectional finding from MESA Air is that an elevated
left-ventricular mass index (LVMI) is associated with exposure to traffic related air pollution,
specifically outdoor residential concentrations of gaseous oxides of nitrogen (NOx) (Van Hee
et al. 2009, 2012). Van Hee et al. (2012) found that an increase in NOx concentration of 10
parts per billion (ppb) is associated with a 0.36 g/m2 increase in LVMI (95% CI: 0.02 - 0.7
g/m2).
Van Hee et al. (2012) utilized predictions from a spatio-temporal exposure model that
incorporates regulatory and study-specific monitoring data in all six regions (Szpiro et al.
2010b). To illustrate our methodology for a purely spatial exposure model, we re-analyze the
data restricted to subjects in the Baltimore region, and we construct an exposure model based
on data from three community snapshot monitoring campaigns conducted by MESA Air.
In brief, the community snapshot campaign consisted of three separate rounds of spatially
rich sampling during single two-week periods in different seasons. In the Baltimore area,
approximately 100 measurements were made in each of three two-week periods in May 2006,
November 2006, and February 2007. In each round of snapshot monitoring, the majority
of monitors were arranged in clusters of six, with three on either side of a major road at
distances of approximately 50, 100, and 300 meters (Cohen et al. 2009). In addition, the
locations were chosen to characterize different land use categories and to cover the geographic
region as broadly as possible. To help with satisfying Condition 1, we exclude one cluster from
our analysis because it is far from any of the study subjects, and we approximate long-term
average concentrations by averaging the three available measurements at locations that were
monitored in all three seasons. The 93 monitor locations and 625 subject locations in our
analysis are shown in Figure 4.
Our exposure model incorporates five geographic covariates: (i) distance to a major road,
(ii) local-source traffic pollution from a dispersion model (Wilton et al. 2010), (iii) population
density in a 1 km buffer, (iv) distance to downtown, and (v) transportation land use in a 1
km buffer. The first three of these geographic covariates are log-transformed. An additional
covariate describing the density of high-intensity land-use (commercial, industrial, residential,
etc.) wasalsoincorporatedintheoriginalspatio-temporalmodelpredictionsusedby(VanHee
et al. 2012), but we exclude this covariate from our model because it has very different distri-
butions across subject and monitor locations, a clear violation of Condition 1. To account for
unmodeled spatial structure, we use a thin-plate spline basis with 0, 5, or 10 df, constructed
as in the simulations. We estimate the standard error of γˆ using a sandwich estimator for
clustered data implemented in the R package geepack (Hojsgaard et al. 2006). We estimate
the association between NOx and LVMI by fitting a multivariate linear regression, including
an exhaustive set of additional health model covariates that could be potential confounders
(Van Hee et al. 2009).
The results of our analysis are shown in Table 2, with 10,000 bootstrap replicates (resam-
pling clusters of monitors, where applicable). Our findings are very similar for an exposure
model that is purely land-use regression and one that includes splines with 5 df. We esti-
mate that an increase in NOx concentration of 10 parts per billion (ppb) is associated with
approximately a 0.7 g/m2 increase in LVMI. Our standard error estimates for these models
in Table 2 range from 0.55 to 0.68 g/m2, so the difference in effect size from that found by
Van Hee et al. (2012) is very likely due to our more limited dataset. The exposure model
that includes 5 df splines has a larger cross-validated R2, suggesting that it captures more
variability in the exposure. This translates into a smaller model-based standard error, but
this apparent advantage is attenuated when we correct for exposure measurement error with
bootstrap standard error estimates, and it goes away entirely when we also incorporate the
bias correction.
The exposure model with 10 df gives slightly larger effect estimates and standard errors.
There is also more evidence of bias from classical-like error than for the lower dimensional
exposure models. However, our simulation results in Table 1 suggest that a 10 df spline is too
rich of a model for the available monitoring data and that these results should be considered
less reliable than those based on 5 df splines.
7 Discussion
Wehavedevelopedastatisticalframeworkforcharacterizingandcorrectingmeasurementerror
in two-stage analyses, focusing particularly on problems where a first-stage spatial model is
used to predict exposure that is measured at different locations than are needed in a second-
stage health analysis. Our methodology is robust to misspecification of the exposure model,
treatingitasadevicetoexplainsomeportionofthevariabilityinexposure. Weadoptadesign-
basedperspectiveinwhichtheprocessofselectingexposuremeasurementandsubjectlocations
is the primary source of spatial randomness, leading naturally to nonparametric bootstrap
resampling for standard errors. A major contribution of our work is that we delineate the
potential sources of bias from Berkson-like and classical-like measurement error and provide
strategies for reducing bias and variance at the design and analysis stages. Bias from classical-
like error can be corrected using an asymptotic approximation, whereas bias from Berkson-like
error should be addressed at the design stage or when selecting an exposure model.
While our research is primarily motivated by epidemiologic analysis of long-term air pollu-
tion health effects, we note that the spatial prediction problem can be interpreted as a linear
model. Thus, our measurement error decomposition, asymptotic results, and bias correction
hold equally well in non-spatial settings.
Our theory and simulations demonstrate that bias from the classical-like error is small
when the exposure model is not overfit in the sense that there are sufficient observations rela-
tive to the dimension of the exposure model for the large n∗ asymptotics to be relevant. The
limited magnitude of the bias suggests that measurement error correction efforts should focus
on avoiding overfitting the exposure model and satisfying the conditions needed to ensure that
Berkson-like error does not induce important bias (at least in a linear health model). Nonethe-
less, in several simulation scenarios our asymptotic correction for bias from classical-like error
results in improved estimation and inference, even at the expense of increased variance. In-
deed, in our analyses and simulations the increased variance caused by estimating the bias is
modest.
Our theoretical development motivates the use of a nonparametric bootstrap to account for
variability induced by measurement error. When the bias correction is not used, simulations
suggest that the underestimation of uncertainty from ignoring the measurement error (using
a sandwich variance estimator) is modest, but even so there are cases in which accounting for
the effect of measurement error is necessary. When we include the asymptotic bias correction,
the bootstrap is more generally necessary for valid confidence intervals.
As we remarked in Section 2.3, exposure model selection is a broad topic and a specific
algorithm for selecting geographic covariates or spline basis functions is beyond the scope of
this paper. However, we discuss below several practical approaches that can be considered in
designing a study to approximately satisfy the compatibility conditions from Section 2.3, so
as to minimize the bias from Berkson-like error. We will explore these options and related
tradeoffs further in future work.
First, to satisfy Condition 1, as much care as possible should be taken at the design stage
to ensure the sampling densities of locations and exposure covariates are as similar as possible
in the first-stage exposure observations and the second-stage outcome observations. While
this criterion is overly abstract in the context of a specific study, the practical implication is
that first-stage and second-stage locations should be chosen to be similar in terms of location
and pertinent covariates. If exposure data have already been collected, it may be necessary
to consider excluding exposure or outcome data or deleting one or more covariates from R(s)
in order to minimize the mismatch.
If we are particularly concerned about Condition 2, we can add terms to R(s) to span
Θ(s). We generally will not know Θ(s) directly, but if we do (e.g., if household income were
known and monitors were located at homes) then supplementing R(s) with Θ(s) or projecting
R(s) to make it orthogonal to Θ(s) are equivalent. In most realistic settings, we will assume
that Θ(s) is a set of smooth functions of space that can be modeled by spline terms, but we
will not know the minimal spanning spline basis. In this case it is preferable to supplement
R(s) with as rich of a basis as possible without introducing substantial classical-like error.
Projecting R(s) to make it orthogonal to a similarly rich spline basis would likely result in
a significant diminution of exposure variability beyond what is needed to eliminate bias from
not satisfying Condition 2.
ThepossibilityofaddingdimensionstoR(s)highlightsthecriticaltradeoffbetweenBerkson-
like and classical-like error. Augmenting R(s) reduces Berkson-like error by accounting for
more of the variability in w(s). Since eliminating Berkson-like error also eliminates the need
to satisfy the compatibility conditions, we generally expect that adding such terms will limit
bias from the Berkson-like error. A side effect of augmenting R(s) is to change the sampling
variabilityofγˆ, whichimpactstheclassical-likeerror. Thiscouldbebeneficialiftheadditional
terms in R(s) account for a substantial amount of variability in w(s), since the result will be
to reduce the variance of the original components of γˆ. On the other hand, if the coefficients
for the new terms are difficult to estimate, the result will be a substantial new contribution to
the classical-like error, leading to additional bias and variance in the second-stage estimation.
In fact, in order to reduce classical-like error, one might choose to remove selected dimensions
from R(s) if their coefficients are particularly difficult to estimate.
There are some key assumptions in our model that may not be strictly satisfied in air
pollution epidemiology studies. First, we regard the sets of locations of exposure and health
observations to be independent, or at least independent clusters. This assumption can be
questioned, particularly in the case of air pollution monitors, as one would not expect a
government agency to select two sites that are very close together. Second, a major source
of exposure heterogeneity that we do not consider is the difference between exposure at a
residence and the exposure experienced by individuals when they are not home. Mobility may
be less important in studies of small children and the elderly, but this remains an open issue
in the epidemiologic literature.
Finally, as described in Section 2.1, we condition on the unobserved but deterministic
spatial variation in exposure during the time period of the study. This avoids having to
postulate that one could meaningfully repeat the experiment in other time periods. This is
particularly important when the averaging period of interest is one or more years since secular
trends in the nature and sources of air pollution limit the number of years during which air
pollution studiescan be regardedas answering analogous scientificquestions. Forshorter-term
studies, there is additional variability associated with the choice of time period, and it would
be reasonable to regard the different air pollution surfaces at different times as arising from a
random spatial process. However, with data from only a single time period and a misspecified
mean model, it is impossible to identify both the fixed and random components of the spatial
residuals, so we do not incorporate a random effect in our formulation.
Ourmeasurementerrorcorrectionisbasedonasymptoticapproximationsderivedforlinear
regression for the exposure and health models. Real world applications often involve addi-
tional complications, suggesting further research directions. On the exposure model side, our
methods can be extended to penalized models and full-rank models such as universal kriging
and related spatio-temporal models that are often used in environmental studies. Nonlinear
models such as logistic regression and Cox regression are commonly used for the second stage
in health studies, and it is also important to consider the implications of misspecification in
the second-stage model, in addition to the exposure model.
Two-stage analyses to date have taken the approach of optimizing the exposure model
for exposure prediction accuracy, based on the implicit assumption that this will also lead to
optimal second-stage health effect inference. In previous work we have shown that optimizing
the exposure model for prediction accuracy can be sub-optimal for health effects estimation
(Szpiro et al. 2011a). An interesting avenue for future research involves developing methods
to optimize the exposure model for estimation of the health effect of interest in the second-
stage model. A final direction for additional research that is of great interest in air pollution
epidemiology is to extend these methods for measurement error correction when assessing
health effects of multiple exposures or mixtures of exposures. When predictions for more than
one exposure are used in a health model, there is the possibility of a form of omitted variable
bias from components of variability that are missing from the predictions of the exposures.
Acknowledgments
AAS was supported by the United States Environmental Protection Agency through R831697
and RD-83479601 and by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences through
R01-ES009411 and 5P50ES015915. CJP was supported by the National Institute of Environ-
mental Health Sciences through ES017017-01A1. We thank Brent Coull and Lianne Sheppard
for comments on the manuscript and Joel Kaufman, Victor Van Hee, and the MESA Air data
team for assistance with MESA Air data.
Although the research described in this presentation has been funded wholly or in part
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency through R831697 and RD-83479601
to the University of Washington, it has not been subjected to the Agencys required peer and
policy review and therefore does not necessarily reflect the views of the Agency and no official
endorsement should be inferred.
A Proof of of Lemma 2
Proof of Lemma 2. By definition, β is the ’true’ parameter value in a linear model for y
on wˆ(s) and covariates, z, so we can express
i ∞,n∗ i z,∞,n∗ i i
for some β and an error term, ν , that is orthogonal to wˆ(s ) and to the elements of z
z,∞,n∗ i i i
with respect to the density g(s). We can rewrite this expression as
(cid:16) (cid:17)
i ∞,n∗ i z,∞,n∗ i i ∞,n∗ i i
and note that each of the last three terms is orthogonal to wˆc(s ). Given this orthogonality,
we can view the last three terms as a single error term. The OLS solution for this no-intercept
linear model,
(cid:80)n y wˆc(s )
i=1 i i , (A.2)
converges a.s. to β ˆ for any fixed n∗ based on Lemma 1 of White (1980). We can express
each observation as
i i i i i i i z i i
and plug in for y in (A.2). Taking the limit as n → ∞ shows that the a.s. limit of (A.2) can
be expressed as
where the limiting value on the right hand side is found by dividing the numerator and
denominator of (A.2) by n and invoking the law of large numbers. In the numerator, only
the first summand in the expression for y gives a non-zero contribution. The contribution
from the second summand is zero because (w(s )−wc(s )) is a linear combination of elements
of Θ(s) while wc(s) is orthogonal to each component of Θ(s). For the third summand, we
use our assumption that Condition 2 is satisfied. Namely, wc(s) is a linear combination of
elements of Θ(s) and R(s), so it is sufficient for (Φ(s )−w(s )) to be orthogonal to each of
the elements of Θ(s) and R(s), and this is guaranteed if the elements of Θ(s) are in the span
of R(s) as required by Condition 2.
We now define the p×p matrix A = Rc(s)(cid:62)Rc(s)dG(s) and set
so that β ˆ = βf(γ). The gradient of f(γˆ) is
and its Hessian is
A second order Taylor expansion of f(γˆ) can be written
(cid:82) (cid:82)
(cid:0)(cid:82)
(cid:0)(cid:82) (cid:1)2
(cid:82) (cid:82)
1 1 2 2 1 2 1 2
(cid:0)(cid:82) (cid:1)2
wc(s)dG(s)
We require sufficient regularity such that the higher order terms converge in distribution to
zero sufficiently fast as n∗ → ∞. Equations (3.6) and (3.7) are then derived by taking the
asymptotic expectation and asymptotic variance of the expression above (for the asymptotic
variance, we can restrict our attention to the first non-constant term above). This requires
interchanging asymptotic expectations with respect to γˆ with integrals in s. A sufficient
conditiontodothisisthatR(s)isboundedasafunctionofs. Theinterchangeisaccomplished
by expressing asymptotic expectations as standard expectations of the appropriate limiting
distributions of functions of n∗(γˆ −γ) using Definition 1, invoking the continuous mapping
theorem to express these limiting distributions as functions of the limiting distribution of
n∗(γˆ−γ), andthenusingtheFubini-Tonellitheorem(Folland1999)toexchangetheorderof
integration between γˆ and of s. There is an additional step to express asymptotic expectations
as the asymptotic covariances in (3.6) and (3.7). We use Definition 1 to express the asymptotic
expectations as standard expectations of the appropriate limiting distributions of functions of
n∗(γˆ−γ), again invoke the continuous mapping theorem, express the resulting expectations
as covariances of the limiting distributions of functions of n∗(γˆ −γ), and finally write the
resulting expression as asymptotic covariances using Definition 1.
B Estimating the asymptotic bias
To estimate the asymptotic bias based on (3.8), we require the second derivatives, ∂2κ .
Differentiating with respect to m and m gives us a long expression involving first and second
derivatives of M:
(cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62) R∗ (cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62) R∗ (cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62)MΦ∗ −
(cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62) R∗ (cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62) R∗ (cid:0) R∗(cid:62)MR∗ (cid:1)−1 R∗(cid:62)MΦ∗ −
The first derivative with respect to m is a matrix of zeros with a single one in the jth diagonal
position, while the second partial derivative is a matrix of zeros. The terms that remain in the
expression can be easily calculated based on the observed R∗ and using the plug-in estimate,
X∗ = (x∗,...,x∗ )(cid:62), for Φ∗. Note that R∗(cid:62)∂MR∗ = R∗R∗(cid:62), where R∗ is the jth row of R∗,
1 n∗ ∂mj j j j
and R∗(cid:62)∂MX∗ = R∗(cid:62)x∗.