]scitpo.scisyhp[
1v9414060/scisyhp:viXra
Metaphoric optical computing of fluid dynamics
MankeiTsangandDemetriPsaltis
DepartmentofElectricalEngineering,CaliforniaInstituteofTechnology,Pasadena,California91125
CompiledMarch23,2011
We present theoretical and numerical evidence to show that self-defocusing nonlinear optical propagation can be used to
computeEulerfluiddynamicsandpossiblyNavier-Stokesfluiddynamics.Inparticular,theformationoftwinvorticesandthe
Ka´rma´n vortex street behind an obstacle, two well-known viscous fluid phenomena, is numerically demonstrated using the
nonlinearSchro¨dingerequation. (cid:13)c 2011 OpticalSocietyofAmerica
OCIScodes: (200.0200)Opticalcomputing;(190.5530)Pulsepropagationandsolitons
1. Introduction can compute fluid dynamics as well. An optical beam in-
herentlyholdsthree-dimensionalspatiotemporalinformation,
A. Philosophyofmetaphoriccomputing
andnonlinearopticalpropagationcomputestheevolutionof
Nonlinear dynamicalsystems, such as weather, plasma, and thislargeamountofinformationsimultaneouslyatthespeed
theeconomy,areubiquitousinnatureandeveryday’slife,yet oflight,promisingsubstantialparallelismandspeedforcom-
suchsystemsaretypifiedbytheirhighlycomplexandchaotic puting.Althoughtheuseofnonlinearopticsfordigitalcom-
behaviors, making them notoriously difficult to study theo- putinghasnotbeenassuccessfulastheuseofsolid-stateelec-
retically,experimentally,andnumerically.Analyticsolutions tronics,forcingopticalbeamstocomputebinarylogicwastes
of nonlinear systems are rare, experimentsare often too in- most of the spatiotemporal information that can be manip-
flexible orimpractical, andnumericalsimulationsmusttake ulated in optical beams. Instead of fitting a square peg in a
intoaccountalargenumberofdatapointsinmultipledimen- roundhole,usingopticstosimulateothernonlineardynami-
sionsinordertoaccuratelymodelaproblemofinterest,such calsystemsprovidesanaturalwayofmakingfulluseofthe
thateventhefastestsupercomputerstodaywouldtakedaysor computingcapacityofferedbyanonlinearopticalsystem.
weeks to simulate relatively simple nonlineardynamicsthat Fluid dynamics, the foundation of a wide variety of im-
aphysicalsystemexhibitsinseconds. portant research fields including meteorology, aeronautics,
On the opposite side of the same coin, we can regardthe plasma physics,superfluids,and Bose-Einsteincondensates,
physicalsystem as a computationaldevicethatcomputesits is an ideal problem to solve by metaphoric computing. In-
own dynamics at a speed unimaginable by supercomputers. tractabletheoreticalanalysisandinflexibleexperimentscom-
Thekeytoharnessingthistremendouscomputingpowerofa pelthe use of numericalsimulations,the difficultyof which
physicalsystem is thereforeto make it compute other inter- nonetheless gives rise to a whole new field, computational
estingproblemsofthesameorderofcomplexity.Ofcourse, fluiddynamics,initself.Themaindifficultyisduetothein-
a conventional digital computer is itself a physical system, herentcomplexityofafluiddynamicsproblem,whichisnon-
butitmakesuse ofcomplexsemiconductorphysicsto com- linearandcontinuouslygeneratesfinerstructuresasthefluid
pute elementary logic operations, and in doing so, discards dynamics evolves. For problems that are of practical inter-
alargeamountofinformationthatisconsideredextraneous. est,suchfinestructuresareoftenorders-of-magnitudesmaller
In this perspective, a digital computer is an extremely inef- thanthesize ofthe objectsunderconsideration,thusrequir-
ficient computing device, as it only utilizes an exceedingly ingalargenumberofdatapointsineachofthethreespatial
smallamountofthefullcomputingcapabilitypotentiallyof- dimensionstobemanipulatedateachtimestep,whichmust
feredbyitsphysics.Theadvantageinthiscaseistheflexibil- alsobecorrespondinglysmalltoavoidnumericalinstabilities.
ityincascadingdifferentlogicoperationsforgeneral-purpose Analternativemethodofsimulatingcomplexfluiddynamics
computing,butasevidencedbythedifficultiesinthenumer- that combinesthe speed of a fluid experimentand the flexi-
ical simulations of nonlinear dynamicalsystems, this ineffi- bility of a numericalanalysisis hence of greatpracticalim-
cientcomputingmethodisofteninadequate. portance.Inthispaper,weshowthat,viaasuitabletransfor-
In order to make full use of the computing capability of- mation,nonlinearopticalpropagationcanbeutilizedtosimu-
fered by a physical system, we hereby propose the concept lateEulerfluiddynamics,whichisknowntobecomputation-
of metaphoric computing, which makes use of a more ex- ally expensive and unstable to solve numerically . We also
perimentallyaccessiblenonlineardynamicalsystemtosimu- provide strong evidence that nonlinear optics can simulate
lateanothernonlineardynamicalsystem.Anexampleofthis high-Reynolds-numberNavier-Stokesfluiddynamicsaswell,
computing method is a wind tunnel, in which a small-scale whichincludealargeclassofimportantandcomputationally
fluid experiment is performed to simulate large-scale fluid difficultproblems,suchasturbulence.Withthespeed,paral-
dynamics,by virtueofthe scalinglaws inherentin fluid dy- lelism,andconfigurabilityofoptics,an“opticalwindtunnel”
namics.Metaphoriccomputing,however,is notrestricted to mayonedaybecomeaviablealternativetoexperimentsand
the use of similar physical systems to simulate each other. numericalanalysisinthestudyoffluiddynamics.
In this paper, we show in particular that nonlinear optics
B. Correspondencebetweennonlinearopticsandfluiddy- metaphoric optical computing in preference to conventional
namics digital computing. A three-dimensional fluid modeling, on
the other hand, requires a processing capability orders-of-
Theanalogybetweennonlinearopticsandfluiddynamicshas magnitudehigherthanthatavailableintoday’ssupercomput-
beennotedbymanyauthors.1–18Wagneretal.firstsuggested ers,sometaphoricopticalcomputingwouldneedtocompute
that the nonlinear propagation equation of an optical beam such problems much more efficiently to compete with elec-
canberecastintoequationsthatresemblethecontinuityequa- troniccomputersandtheMoore’slaw.
tion and the Bernoulli equation in irrotational fluid dynam- In the following sections, we shall attempt to estab-
ics.1 Coullet et al. first coined the term “optical vortices,” lish the correspondencebetweennonlinearoptics andthree-
which showsthe analogybetweenphase singularitiesin op- dimensional fluid dynamics. We shall show that, taking
ticsandfluidvortices.2Brambillaetal.notedthatlaserequa- group-velocitydispersionintoaccount,nonlinearopticaldy-
tions can be transformedto a hydrodynamicform.3 Arecchi namicsapproachesthree-dimensionalinviscidEulerfluiddy-
etal.firstexperimentallydemonstratedthedynamicsofopti- namicsinthehighlynonlinearself-defocusingregime,where
calvorticesin nonlinearoptics.4 Akhmanovetal.calledthe the optical intensity represents the fluid density, the optical
rich nonlinear dynamics observed in a nonlinear resonator phasegradientrepresentsthefluidvelocity,thenonlinearre-
“optical turbulence.”5 Swartzlander and Law observed opti- fractiveindexperturbationrepresentspressure,the propaga-
cal vortex solitons created via the instability of dark soliton tiondistancerepresentstime,andthetemporaldimensionof
stripesanalogoustotheKelvin-Helmholtzinstabilityinfluid the opticalpulse representsthe third dimensionof the fluid.
dynamics.6 Staliunas showed that a laser can be described AsEulerfluidequationsoftenexhibithighnumericalinstabil-
bytheGinzburg-Landauequation,whichcanbetransformed ities,thiscorrespondenceinitselfshouldbeusefulinmodel-
into equations resembling the Navier-Stokes equations that inghigh-Reynolds-numberfluiddynamicsawayfromobjects
describeviscousfluiddynamics.7Vaupeletal.observedvor- andboundaries.IntheconvergenceofnonlinearSchro¨dinger
texpairnucleationbytheinterferenceoftwomodesinalaser equationtowardsthe Euler equations,a “quantumpressure”
andclaimedthatitwasananalogofavortexstreetbehindan term arising from the nonlinear Schro¨dinger equation plays
obstacleina fluidflow.8 Molina-Terrizaetal.alsoobserved theroleofasmallparameter.Asthisquantumpressureterm
optical vortex streets in walking second-harmonic genera- playsanalogousrolestoviscosityintheNavier-Stokesequa-
tion.9 Roux10 andRozasetal.11 studiedthe interactionsbe- tions, we argue that nonlinear optics should be able to ap-
tweenopticalvorticesandfoundthattheirinteractionsresem- proximate viscous Navier-Stokes fluid dynamics as well, in
ble those of fluid vortices. Rozas et al. then experimentally the regime where quantum pressure and viscosity both play
demonstrated the fluidlike motion of a pair of optical vor- theroleofsmallparametersintherespectiveequations.That
tices.12 Michinel et al.13 and Paz-Alonso et al.14 found that said,wedonotpretendthatwehaveestablishedtheequiva-
optical propagationin a cubic-quinticnonlinearmedium re- lencebetweennonlinearopticsandNavier-Stokesdynamics,
semblesaliquiddrop,andopticalvorticesinsuchamedium as the similarity between quantum pressure and viscosity is
also have fluidlike motions.15 On the other hand, nonlinear stillanopenproblem.
opticshasbeencomparedwithsuperfluidsandBose-Einistein On the practical side, in cases where ideal nonlinear op-
condensates, as they can all be described, to varying de- ticssetupisnotavailable,wesuggestasplit-stepmethodthat
grees,bythenonlinearSchro¨dingerequation,19,20commonly pieces together different optical devices to approximate an
knownastheGross-Pitaevskiiequationinthefieldofsuper- idealnonlinearopticsexperiment.Thismethodisverysimilar
fluids.21 Pomeau and Rica suggested that the phenomenon tothemethodproposedtosimulatequantumsystemsusinga
of transition to dissipation in a superflow22 can be observed quantumcomputer.23
in nonlinear diffraction.16 Bolda et al. numerically demon- It must be stressed that although we focus on simula-
stratedthesamephenomenoninanonlinearFabry-Pe´rotcav- tions of classical physical systems, future quantum com-
ity.17 Chiao also foundthat photonsin such a cavity should puters that simulate quantum systems23 would run into the
obeytheBogoliubovdispersionrelationforasuperfluid.18 same problem of manipulating a large amount of multi-
The abundant amount of prior work credited above pro- dimensional information. In the case of quantum sys-
vides ample evidence that nonlinear optics resembles fluid tems, multi-dimensional quantum information, such as a
dynamics to a certain degree. In order to use nonlinear op- multi-particle multi-spatiotemporal-dimensional wavefunc-
tics as a useful and practical computational tool for fluid tion, needs to be processed in parallel. Quantum comput-
dynamics, however, simply drawing analogies between the ers can naturally parallelize the multi-particle aspect, but
two kinds of dynamics is not enough. One must be able to there is no obvious way of parallelizing the manipulation
show an exact correspondence, or at the very least, an ap- of multi-spatiotemporal-dimensionalinformation via simple
proaching convergencebetween a problem in nonlinear op- binary quantum logic. Perhaps a quantum metaphoric com-
tics and a problem in fluid dynamics, in order to produce puting would then be necessary, where a more accessible
anyusefulpredictionoffluiddynamicsvianonlinearoptics. multi-dimensional quantum system is used to simulate an-
Moreover,as computersnowadayshave enoughcapabilities otherquantumsystem.
tosimulatetwo-dimensionalfluids,themerecorrespondence
between optics and two-dimensionalfluid dynamicsconsid-
eredinmostofthepriorworkwouldnotmotivatetheuseof
2. Correspondence betweennonlinear opticsand Euler term in Eq. (8) is a peculiar term that arises from optical
fluiddynamics diffractionanddispersion,doesnotexistinclassicalfluiddy-
namics,andiscommonlycalledthe“quantumpressure.”
A. Madelungtransformation
In order to compare these equations with fluid equations
We now proceed to show mathematically how the self- moreeasily,weusethefollowingnormalizedvariables,
defocusingnonlinearopticalpropagationequation,including
theeffectofgroup-velocitydispersion,canbetransformedto (cid:209) =W(cid:209) , z = z, (9)
three-dimensional hydrodynamic equations. First, we show Wk 0
how the optics equations,in the absence of opticalvortices, r = I , u= k = 1 (cid:209) f , (10)
correspond to inviscid and irrotational fluid equations. This I 0 K KW
form of transformation is widely attributed to Madelung.24 1
a= , M =Ka, R=KW, (11)
We model the paraxial nonlinear propagation of an optical k √ n I
beam,describedbytheenvelopefunctiony (z,x,y,T),viathe −
nonlinearSchro¨dingerequation,19,20 where W is the characteristic size, K is the characteristic
phase gradient, I is some characteristic optical intensity
¶y 1 ¶ 2 ¶ 2 b ¶ 2y of the propagation, and a is the so-called “healing” length,
i = + y + 2 k n y 2y ,
¶ z −2k (cid:18)¶ x2 ¶ y2(cid:19) 2 ¶ T2 − 0 2 | | whichisthelengthscaleatwhichthequantumpressureterm
hasthesameorderofmagnitudeasthenonlineartermonthe
right hand side of Eq. (8), M is the Mach number, which
wherezisthepropagationdistance,k =2p n /l isthecar- measures the relative strength of fluid pressure compared
rier wave number, b is the group-velocity dispersion coef- withconvection,andR isanothernumberthatmeasuresthe
ficient, T is the time coordinate in the moving frame of the relativestrengthoffluidconvectioncomparedwithquantum
pulse,andn isthenonlinearKerrcoefficient.Tousethetime pressure.Thenormalizedequationsbecome
coordinateasthethirdspatialdimensionofafluid,anomalous
group-velocitydispersion,orb <0,isrequired.Dispersion +(cid:209) (r u)=0, (12)
canthenberegardedinequalfootingasdiffractionif a nor-
malizedtimecoordinateisdefinedas +(cid:209) u u = (cid:209) r 2
¶z (cid:18)2 · (cid:19) −M2r (cid:18)2 (cid:19)
t , (2) 1 1
≡ b n k (cid:209) (cid:209) 2√r . (13)
− 2 0 0 −R2 (cid:18)2√ r (cid:19)
Equation(12)isexactlythesameasthefluidcontinuityequa-
¶y 1 ¶ 2 ¶ 2 ¶ 2 tion,andinthelimitofM/R 0,whichisthehighlyself-
i ¶ z = −2k (cid:18)¶ x2 + ¶ y2 + ¶t 2(cid:19) y − k 0 n 2 | y | 2y . (3) defocusingregime,Eq.(13)ist → hesameasthehydrodynamic
equationofmotionthatdescribesinviscidandirrotationalflu-
TheMadelungtransformationisdefinedasfollows, ids.Equations(12)and(13)alsoadmitsoundwavesolutions,
whichdescribetravellingperturbationstothedensityandthe
y = y exp(jf ), (4) velocity. As long as the sound waves are weak, the depen-
I= y 2, (5) denceofpressureonthedensityisnotcrucial,andtheuseof
| | self-defocusing Kerr nonlinearity is adequate. This restricts
k=(cid:209) f =xˆ +yˆ +tˆ , (6) thecorrespondencetoslightlycompressiblebarotropicfluids.
′ ¶ x ¶ y ¶t In order to model slightly compressible fluids, the opti-
cal beam needs to have a relatively constant intensity back-
suchthattheevolutionequationsfortheintensity,I,andthe
ground. This can be achieved approximately near the cen-
phasegradient,k,aregivenby
ter of a very large beam, in a large multimode waveguide
¶ I 1 as a container in two spatial dimensions, or in a cubic-
¶ z + k (cid:209) ′ · (Ik)=0, (7) quintic nonlinear medium to provide a “surface tension” to
0 thebeam.13–15,25
+ (cid:209) k k =(cid:209) (k n I)+
¶ z k 0 ′ (cid:18)2 · (cid:19) ′ 0 2 B. Vorticity
(cid:209) (cid:209) 2√I . (8) Ingeneral,thefluidvelocityvectorshouldcontainanirrota-
k 0 (cid:18)2√I (cid:19) tionalcomponentandarotationalcomponent,
One can already see that Eq. (7) has the exact same form u= (cid:209) j (cid:209) A, (14)
as the fluid continuityequation,while Eq. (8) resemblesthe − − ×
Bernoulli equation,1 if one regardsthe intensity as the fluid where j is called the velocity potential,and the curlof u is
densityandthephasegradientasthefluidvelocity.Thenon- definedasthefluidvorticity,
linear refractiveindexterm,k n I, would resemblethe fluid
0 2 www =(cid:209) u= (cid:209) ((cid:209) A). (15)
pressure if n < 0, so self-defocusing is required. The last
Thedynamicsofvorticityisarguablythecornerstoneofhy- thedarkspotofa vortexsoliton.Inthreedimensions,avor-
drodynamics.21Theinviscidfluiddynamicsthatincludesthe texsolitonexistsasavortexfilament.Weshallhereaftercon-
rotationaleffectisgovernedbytheEulerequation, sidersingle-chargedvortexsolitonswithm= 1only,asthey
havethelowestenergyandarethemostprevalentonesaris-
+u (cid:209) u= (cid:209) P, (16) ingfromanexperimentalsituation.Itisalsomoreaccurateto
¶z · −M2r approximatecontinuousvorticitywithonlydiscrete vortices
withthesmallesttopologicalcharge.
wherePisthepressure.Forincompressiblefluids,M <<1,
and as long as P increases with r , the specific dependence Eq. (22) suggests that an opticalvortex soliton resembles
anidealpointvortexinincompressiblefluids.Indeed,themo-
of P on the fluid properties is not important. Equation (16)
containstheconvectivetermu (cid:209) u,whichcanbewrittenas tionofopticalvorticesinthehighlyself-defocusinglimitcan
· berigorouslyproventobehaveinthesamewayaspointfluid
1 vortices.10,11,28–31 If onedefinesthe positionof each vortex
u (cid:209) u=(cid:209) u u +((cid:209) u) u (17)
· (cid:18)2 · (cid:19) × × filament as x j , then the fluid velocity at each point due to
thepresenceofthevortexfilamentsinthelimitofhighself-
=(cid:209) u u +www u. (18) defocusingisgivenby
(cid:18)2 · (cid:19) ×
O m n is e se c s an th th e e r n o s ta e t e io th n a a t l t c h o e m op p t o i n ca e l n B t e o r f n t o h u e ll c i o eq nv u e a c ti t o iv n e ,E te q r . m (1 . 3 I ) n , u(x,z )= − (cid:229) j 2p m j Z (x 4 − p | x x j − ) × x j d | 3 x j − (cid:209) j , a → 0,
otherwords,theMadelungtransformationisonlyabletode- (23)
scribe the irrotational part of the fluid motion, but not the
moreimportantrotationalpart. wherexisthenormalizedthree-dimensionalpositionvector,
The inability of the Madelung transformation to describe m j isthetopologicalchargeofvortex j,and (cid:209) j describes
vorticityisduetothefailureofthetransformationnearopti- the irrotationalflow accordingto Eq. (13). In particular, the
calvortices,whereEq.(13)isill-defined.Tounderstandthis motionofeachfilamentisgivenby,
problem,considerarectilinearopticalvortexinpolarcoordi-
natesandneglectthethirdfluiddimensionfornow, ¶ ¶z x i = − (cid:229) j 2p m j Z (x 4 i p − | x x i j − ) × x j d | 3 x j − (cid:209) j , a → 0, (24)
y in the leading order. These equations of vortex motion are
r= x2+y2, q =tan 1 , (20)
− validaslongastheseparationsofthevorticesaremuchlarger
p (cid:16) (cid:17)
than a. For example, Fig. 1 plots the intensity, phase, and
wheremisanintegerandiscalledthetopologicalchargeof
phasegradientoftworectilinearopticalvortexsolitonswith
anopticalvortex.Thephasegradientisthengivenby
thesamecharge,whichshouldrotatearoundeachother,and
1 ¶ m those of two vortices with opposite charges, which should
k=qˆ (mq )=qˆ . (21) driftinthesamedirectionperpendiculartotheirseparation.
Thefluidvorticityisproportionaltothecurlofk,
whichresemblesthevorticityofanidealpointfluidvortex.26
The motion of these vortices, however, cannot be described
bytheMadelungtransformedequationsduetotwoproblems:
kdivergeswhenr 0,sothefluidvelocityuatthecenterof
avortexisinfinite, → and f(r)mustapproachrm inthelimitof
r 0 tomaintainthecontinuityofy , sothequantumpres-
su → re term, with √ r in the denominator,is also infinite near
thevortexcenter.
To overcomethese difficulties, it is necessary to consider
the motion of the optical vortices separate from the irrota- Fig. 1. Intensity (left column), phase (middle column), and
tionalopticalflow. phase gradient(right column)of two optical vortex solitons
with the same charge (top row), which should rotate in the
C. Opticalvortexsolitonsandpointvortices
same sense, and those of two vortex solitons with opposite
Inarelativelyconstantintensitybackground,opticalvortices charges, which should drift in a direction perpendicular to
exist as optical vortex solitons.6,25,27 The optical envelope their separation. The phase gradient near the centers of the
function y of a vortex soliton is given by Eq. (19), where vorticesisnotplottedduetoitsdivergence.
f(r) rm for r <<a, and f(r) approaches a constant for
r >>a, where a is the healing length and also the size of With the vortex filaments, one can define the equivalent
vorticityinanopticalbeam, anopticalbeam,includingthecenterofanopticalvortex.In
termsoftheflux,thetensordynamicalequationsnowread34
www (x,z )= (cid:229) 2p m dx d (x x ), (25)
Z − ¶r ¶ J
+ =0, (28)
which can be used to approximate the continuous vorticity i
¶ J ¶ JJ 1 ¶ 1
ofa fluid,if thenumberofvortexfilamentsislargeenough. i + i j = r 2
In this case, to include the vorticity effect in the nonlinear ¶z ¶ x j (cid:18) r (cid:19) −M2¶ x i (cid:18)2 (cid:19)−
opticaldynamics,one can phenomenologicallypatch up the 1 ¶ 1 ¶ √ r ¶ √ r ¶ 2√ r
irrotationalequationofmotion,Eq.(13), R2¶ x j 2(cid:18) ¶ x i ¶ x j − ¶ x i ¶ x j (cid:19)
¶ u 1 1 (29)
+(cid:209) u u +www u= (cid:209) r . (26)
¶z (cid:18)2 · (cid:19) × −M2 where J is the ith component of J, ¶ /¶ x is the ith spatial
Thismodificationoftheequationofmotioncanbeattributed derivative,andrepeatedindicesareimplicitlysummedinthe
tothephenomenonofphaseslippage,21,32wellknowninthe manner of Einstein’s summation. These equations have the
fieldofsuperfluids.Theuseofdiscretepointvortexinterac- same form as the normalized Euler equations in the tensor
tionsto calculate Euler fluid dynamicsis also a well-known form,
numericalmethodincomputationalfluiddynamics.33Hence,
to simulate Euler fluid dynamics, one can approximateboth + i =0, (30)
therotationalandirrotationalcomponentsoftheinitialfluid i
velocity profile by the opticalphase and the phase singular- ¶ J i ¶ J i J j 1 ¶ P
+ = , (31)
ities in an optical beam, and the nonlinear self-defocusing ¶z ¶ x
(cid:18) r (cid:19) −M2¶ x
propagation of the beam would converge to incompressible
Eulerfluiddynamicsin thestronglyself-defocusingregime. exceptthequantumpressureterm in Eq.(29).Hence, in the
One can also borrow from the well-established numerical fluxrepresentation,wehavesuccessfullyavoidedtheproblem
techniques33todeterminehowthedistributionofopticalvor- ofdivergentquantities.Furthermore,Eq.(29), in contrastto
ticessufficientlyapproximatesthecontinuousvorticityinflu- Eq.(13),includesthecorrectconvectiveterm.
ids. The use of momentum density in the description of non-
linearopticaldynamicsismorenaturalandappropriatethan
D. Thefluidfluxrepresentation theuseofvelocityintheMadelungtransformation,asthedy-
namicsultimatelyevolvesaccordingtothebasiclawofmo-
Sofar,wehaveshownthatopticalvortexsolitonsbehavelike
mentumconservation.Asweshallshownext,whencompar-
point vortices in fluids when they are far away from each
ingthe opticalflux to the fluid flux,the dynamicsof optical
other, and this behavior can be used to approximate Euler
vortex solitons are much more similar to that of less singu-
fluid dynamics.However,there isno guaranteethatthe vor-
larfluidvorticesthanpointvortices,andthecorrespondence
tices would remain well separated in the course of the vor-
betweennonlinearopticsandEulerfluiddynamicsisstilljus-
tex dynamics. If optical vortices behaved exactly like point
tifiedwhenaisfinite.
vortices, then their velocities would diverge when they are
closetoeachother.Thisvelocitydivergenceiswellknownto
E. Opticalvortexsolitonsandvortexblobs
causesignificantnumericalinstabilityintheuseofpointvor-
ticesforcomputationalfluiddynamics.33Anotherproblemis Inlightofthefluidfluxrepresentation,oneshouldtherefore
thatinthreedimensions,theself-inducedvelocityofacurved compare the flux of an optical vortex soliton to the flux of
point vortex filament diverges logarithmically ln(1/a) in afluidvortex.Inanincompressiblefluid,thedensityiscon-
thelimitofa 0.33 Sincetheopticalintensity ∼ decreasesto stant,sothefluxisproportionaltothevelocity,andthefluxat
zero near the → center of an optical vortex, the quantum pres- thecenterofapointvortexhasthesamesingularbehavioras
sureterm,whichdeterminesthesizeofthevortexdarkspot, thevelocity.Nearavortexsoliton,however,thefluxisfinite.
cannolongerbeignored,andtheopticalvortexinteractions Considertheexampleofasingle-chargedvortexsoliton.The
should differ markedly from point vortex interactions when fluxnearthecenterisgivenby
theirseparationisontheorderofa.
J(cid:181) qˆr, r<<a, (32)
To investigate the optical vortex dynamics when they are
closetoeachother,thefluidvelocityisnolongeranappropri-
which vanishes as r 0, as opposed to the divergence of
atequantitytostudy,becauseitdivergesnearavortexcenter. →
J 1/ratthecenterofapointvortex.
Thedensity,ontheotherhand,approacheszerotowardsthe ∼
Insteadofcomparingavortexsolitontoapointvortex,one
center.Thismotivatesustodefineanalternativefinitequan-
should hence compare the soliton to a vortex blob,33 which
titybymultiplyingthevelocityandthedensity,
hasfinitevorticityoverafinitearea.Thevorticityofavortex
J r u. (27) blobfilamentismathematicallydescribedby
whichisthefluidflux,orthemomentumdensity.Simplecal- www (x,z )=2p m dx g (x x ) (33)
culations show that the flux is indeed finite everywhere in Z | − |
where g is a vorticity distribution function for the filament. Schro¨dinger equation by Nore et al.36,37 Using the nonlin-
The velocity near the center of a rectilinear vortexblob and earSchro¨dingerequation,Noreetal.numericaldemonstrated
farawayfromthecenteris theEulerfluiddyanmicsofajetmadeofanarrayofcounter-
rotatingvortices,whichexhibitsinuousandvaricoseinstabil-
u(cid:181) qˆr, r<<a, (34) ities.36 Inanotherstudy,Noreetal.alsodemonstratedthree-
1 dimensionalshearflowsandshowedthatnumericallysolving
u(cid:181) qˆ , r>>a, (35)
r nonlinearSchro¨dingerequationisaviablealternativetoEuler
andNavier-Stokesequationsforthenumericalstudyofshear
soinanincompressiblefluid,thefluidfluxofanopticalvor- flows.37Asnonlinearopticalpropagationisgovernedbynon-
tex soliton with size a is the same as that of a vortex blob
linear Schro¨dinger equation, The numerical experiments by
with size a. See Fig. 2 for a graphical illustration. The dy-
Noreetal.showthatnonlinearopticsshouldalsobeableto
computeEulerfluiddynamics.
3. SimilaritiesbetweennonlinearSchro¨dingerdynamics
andNavier-Stokesfluiddynamics
Intheprevioussections,wehaveshownthecorrespondence
betweenself-defocusingopticalpropagationandinviscidEu-
ler fluid dynamics via a variety of methods, including the
Madelung transformation, the incorporation of vorticity ef-
fect due to the “phase slip” phenomenon,the fluid flux rep-
resentation,andthecomparisonbetweenopticalvortexsoli-
tonsandvortexblobs.Eventhoughviscosityplaystheroleof
a small parameter in most interesting fluid dynamics prob-
lems, its effects are of paramount importance near a “no-
slip” boundary and in the dissipation of eddies, in which
cases the viscous Navier-Stokes equations should be used.
In this section we shall present evidence that the nonlinear
Schro¨dinger equation exhibits many of the same behaviors
Fig.2.Sketchesofvelocityandfluxofavortexblobandan of viscous Navier-Stokes fluid dynamics, and in each case,
opticalvortexalonga line across the center,to illustrate the quantumpressureplaysananalogousroletoviscosity.
similaritiesbetweenthetwointermsoftheflux. ThenormalizedNavier-Stokesequationsinthefluxrepre-
sentationaregivenby
namicsofa vortexblobandthatof a vortexsoliton are also
extremelysimilar. For example,the rotationfrequencyW of ¶r ¶ J i
+ =0, (37)
twolike-chargedvortexblobsapproachesaconstant(cid:181) 1/a2 ¶z ¶ x
whentheirseparationgoestozero.Numericalsimulationsof ¶ J ¶ JJ 1 ¶ P
the nonlinear Schro¨dinger equation also show that the rota- ¶z ¶ x
(cid:18) r (cid:19) −M2¶ x
tionfrequencyoftwolike-chargedvortexsolitonsapproaches
1 ¶ ¶ u ¶ u
a constant (cid:181) 1/a2 and does not diverge like two point vor- i + j , (38)
tices.35 On the other hand, the self-induced velocity of a R ¶ x j (cid:18)¶ x j ¶ x i (cid:19)
curvedvortexblobfilamentisgivenby33
where the last term in Eq. (38) is the viscosity term and R
is called the Reynolds number, which describes the relative
i = i ln c , (36) strengthofconvectioncomparedtoviscosity,
wherebistheunitbinomialvectorofthefilamentandr c is R= n , (39)
theradiusofcurvative.Theself-inducedvelocityofanoptical
vortex soliton filament is proven to be exactly the same.29 whereU isthecharacteristicvelocityofthefluidsystem,Lis
Hence,opticalvortexsolitonsactasvortexblobs,andalarge the characteristic length,and n is the kinematic viscosity of
numberofsolitonscansimulateEulerfluiddynamics,much the fluid. Comparingthe viscosity term in Eq. (38) with the
likethepopulardiscretevortexblobmethodincomputational quantumpressure term in Eq. (29) via a dimensionalanaly-
fluiddynamics.33 siswouldsuggestthatananalogousopticalReynoldsnumber
wouldbedefinedas
F. Numerical evidence of correspondence between nonlin-
R=KW, (40)
earopticsandEulerfluiddynamics
The most telling evidence of the correspondence between where, to recall, K is the characteristic optical phase gradi-
nonlinear optics and Euler fluid dynamics is perhaps the ent,andW isthecharacteristicsizeoftheopticalexperiment
numerical fluid dynamics simulations using the nonlinear setup. The optical Reynolds number thus roughly measures
the number of optical vortices. In other words, if the opti- nections.44 The radiation of acoustic energy in both cases
calReynoldsnumberindeedcorrespondstoitsfluidcounter- mustcausea dampingofthehigh-spatial-frequencyconvec-
part,thenthequantizationoftheopticalvorticeswouldplay tionwithintheopticalbeam,andtheeffectiveReynoldsnum-
an analogous role to fluid viscosity. This view seems to be ber is again estimated to be equal to the optical Reynolds
echoed by other researchers in the field of superfluids,38–41 number.38,39,41
althoughwemuststressthatitisstillanopenproblemasto
whatextentthequantizationeffectresemblestheviscousef- C. Ka´rma´nvortexstreet
The Ka´rma´n vortex street is a famous viscous fluid phe-
nomenon,in which alternate fluid vortices are emitted from
A. Zero-flux boundary conditions, boundary layers, and
thebackofanobstacletotheflowofaviscousfluid,whenthe
boundarylayerseparation
Reynolds number increases beyond a certain threshold.26,45
Inclassicalfluiddynamicsthe“no-slip”boundarycondition Using the numericalvortex blob method, Chorin first simu-
is most commonly used, and restricts the total velocity and latedsuchaphenomenonforacylinderobstacleandobtained
hencethetotalfluxtobezeroattheboundary.Forfluidflow good agreement with experimental data.46 Since an optical
above a surface, the velocity shear introduced must be bal- beamdiffractingpastalowrefractiveindexregionwouldalso
anced by a viscousstress, resulting in a boundarylayer that emitopticalvorticesandthevorticesinteractlikevortexblobs
connectsthezerovelocityattheboundarytotheflowveloc- in a self-defocusingmedium,we performeda numericalex-
ityabovetheboundaryinanasymptoticexpansion.42Forthe perimentofthenonlinearSchro¨dingerequationtoinvestigate
nonlinearSchro¨dingerequation,theboundaryconditionofan ifwewouldobserveasimilarphenomenonfornonlinearop-
impenetrableobjectcanbespecifiedbyaverylowrefractive tics.
indexregion,whichrestrictstheopticalintensitytobezeroat
thesurface43 duetototalinternalreflection.Eventhoughthe
tangentialvelocitycan have a non-zerovalue atthe surface,
boththe normaland tangentialcomponentsof the flux must
be zero there. This can hence be viewed as a zero-flux“no-
slip” boundary condition. An optical boundary layer analo-
goustotheviscousboundarylayerinclassicalfluiddynamics
isalsoformed.43SeeFig.3foragraphicalillustrationofthe
similaritiesbetweenaviscousboundarylayerandanoptical
boundarylayer.
Fig.4.Setupofnumericalexperiment(not-to-scale).
The numerical setup is sketched in Fig. 4. A big opti-
cal beam is assumed to propagate at an angle to an ellip-
soid cylinder, with a refractive index much lower than the
Fig.3.Comparisonbetweenaviscousboundarylayerandan
surroundings to act as an impenetrable object, in a self-
opticalboundarylayer.
defocusing medium. The length of the long axis of the el-
lipsoidcrosssectionisassumedtobeW,andtheshortaxisis
For a viscousfluid flow pastan obstacle, as the Reynolds
assumedtobeone-fifthofW throughoutthesimulations.The
numberincreases,theboundarylayerbeginstoseparateand
two-dimensional nonlinear Schro¨dinger equation is solved
vorticityisconvectedbehindtheobstacle.Ananalogyinthe using the Fourier split-step method,20 which implies a peri-
dynamicsofthenonlinearSchro¨dingerequation,intheform
odicboundaryconditionfortheopticalbeam.Thisshouldnot
of vortex nucleation on the boundary, is also predicted,22
affectthequalitativebehaviorofthedynamics,iftheoptical
andin thecase of largeobjects,the instabilityof theoptical
beam is much bigger than the object. In all of the simula-
boundary layer also depends on the optical Reynolds num- tions,the Mach numberM is fixedat0.4,while the optical
berR definedinEq.(40),40 muchliketheviscousboundary ReynoldsnumberR isvaried.Figure5plotstheintensityof
layerseparation. theopticalbeamatanormalizedpropagationdistancez =10
foranopticalReynoldsnumberR=KW=12.8.Opticalvor-
B. Dissipationofeddies
texsolitonsarecreatedonthetopandbottomsideofthelow-
Another important effect of viscosity is the dissipation of refractive-indexregion, and they interact in such a way that
small-scale structures in turbulence. An analogous effect in resemblesthephenomenonoftwinvorticesbehindanobsta-
nonlinear Schro¨dinger equation is the emission of sound cleinalow-Reynolds-numberviscousfluidflow.
waves two vortices are close to each other35 and the gener- Figure6plotsthefluxJ=(y (cid:209) y y (cid:209) y )/2iandFig.7
ation of Kelvin waves in the process of vortex line recon- plotsthe momentumvorticity (cid:209) J. − Both plotsconfirm the
Fig.5.Theintensityoftheopticalbeamatanormalizedprop- Fig.7.Aplotofthemomentumvorticity(cid:209) Jatz =10,for
agationdistancez =10,forM =0.4andR=12.8.Thedark M =0.4and R =12.8.A white dotindic × atesthat the vor-
ellipse is the low-refractive-indexregion that acts as an im- texhasapositivetopologicalchargeandablackdotindicates
penetrableobject.Opticalvortexsolitonsareseen tobecre- thatthevortexhasanegativecharge.Theplotshowsthesim-
atedonthetopandbottomsideoftheellipse,Whilethecon- ilarity between the numerically observed dynamics and the
vection of the solitons behindthe objectresembles the twin phenomenonoftwinvortices.
vorticesbehindanobstacleinaviscousfluidflow.
similarity between the numerically observed dynamics and
thephenomenonoftwinvorticesinaviscousfluidflow.
Fig.8.Theintensityoftheopticalbeamatanormalizedprop-
agation distance z =20, for M =0.4 and R =12.8. The
qualitativedynamicalbehaviorisessentiallyunchangedfrom
thatshowninFig.5.
Fig. 6. A vector plot of the flux J at z =10, for M =0.4
andR=12.8,whichconfirmsthesimilaritybetweenthenu-
merically observed dynamics and the phenomenon of twin
vortices.
Figures8,9,and10plottheintensity,flux,andmomentum
vorticityoftheopticalbeamrespectively,atalongerpropaga-
tiondistancez =20forthesameparameters.Thequalitative
dynamical behavior of vortices staying behind the object is
essentiallyunchanged.
We nowraise theReynoldsnumberto R =25.6andper-
formthenumericalexperimentagain.AsseenfromFigs.11, Fig.9.AvectorplotofthefluxJatz =20,forM =0.4and
12, and 13, the optical vortex solitons become smaller and
R=12.8.
more abundant, but at z =10 the phenomenonof twin vor-
ticesbehindanobstacleisagainobserved.
Atz =20,however,significantinstabilityinthetwinvor-
tices develops, such that the spatial symmetry between the
upper plane and the lower plane is broken, and alternative
bunchesofopticalvorticesbegintobeemittedfromtheback
of the object. Figures 14, 15, and 16 plot the intensity, flux
andvorticityatz =20respectively,whichdemonstrateabe-
haviorstronglyresemblingthefamousKa´rma´nvortexstreet
phenomenon.
Due to computing power constraints, we are only able to
simulate low-Reynolds-number flows, which we do not ex- Fig. 10. A plotof the momentumvorticity(cid:209) J at z =20,
pect to quantitativelyreproduceviscous fluid dynamics. We forM =0.4andR=12.8. ×
Fig. 15.Flux atz =20,forM =0.4and R =25.6,which
Fig. 11. The optical intensity at z =10, for M =0.4 and
showsaflowpatternstronglyresemblingtheKa´rma´nvortex
R=25.6.Thevortexsolitonsareobservedtobesmaller,and
street.
thephenomenonoftwinvorticesisagainobserved.
Fig. 16. Vorticity at z = 20, for M = 0.4 and R = 25.6,
whichconfirmsthatthealternatebunchesofvorticesindeed
Fig.12.ThefluxJatz =10,forM =0.4andR=25.6.
havetherightchargesthatresembletheKa´rma´nvortexstreet
phenomenon.
have to use an ellipsoid cylinder in the numerical experi-
ments, instead of the more conventional circular cylinder,
to artificially generate more optical vortices, and the Mach
number is a little too high for compressional waves not to
playasignificantroleinthedynamics.Withallthatsaid,us-
ing the nonlinear Schro¨dinger equation, we are still able to
qualitativelydemonstrate,forthefirsttimetoourknowledge,
twowell-knownviscousfluidphenomena,namely,theforma-
tion of twin vorticesbehind an obstacle, and the symmetry-
Fig.13.Themomentumvorticity(cid:209) Jatz =10,forM = breaking instability of the twin vortices that leads to the
0.4andR=25.6. × Ka´rma´nvortexstreetwhentheReynoldsnumberisincreased.
Compared with previous claims of observing the Ka´rma´n
vortexstreet in nonlinearopticsnumerically7 or experimen-
tally,8,9 ournumericalresultsdemonstrateanunprecedented
levelofcorrespondencebetweennonlinearopticaldynamics
andtheKa´rma´nvortexstreetphenomenon,thankstothepres-
enceofamuchlargernumberofopticalvorticesinoursimu-
lations.
D. Kolmogorovturbulence
The striking similarities between nonlinear optics and vis-
cousfluiddynamicsarenotlimitedtolow-Reynolds-number
two-dimensional problems. As the Reynolds number is fur-
Fig. 14. Optical intensity at z =20, for M =0.4 and R = ther increased to the order of a million, the viscous fluid
25.6.Thetwinvorticesbecomeunstableanddetachalterna- flow enters a turbulent regime. Since this regime is highly
tivelyfromtheobject. chaotic,onlystatisticalsignaturescanbereproducedinatur-
bulentfluidflow.Awell-knownsignatureofturbulenceisthe
Kolmogorov energy spectrum,47 derived under the assump- theerrororder,
tion that a “steady state” is reached when the macroscopic-
1 D z N D z
scalefluidflowcontinuouslygeneratefinerspatialstructures y (z +D z )= (cid:213) exp Hˆ (cid:213) exp Hˆ y (z )+
via convection and viscosity dissipates the smallest struc- 2 2
m=N (cid:16) (cid:17)n=1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
tures.AsviscosityplaysasignificantroleintheKolmogorov
O(H3D z 3). (44)
turbulence spectrum, it is surprising to see that numerical
simulations of the three-dimensional nonlinear Schro¨dinger
The split-step method is not unlike the proof of a quan-
equation also reproduce the Kolmogorov spectrum at high tumcomputerbeingabletosimulateanyquantumsystems.23
Reynolds numbers, and the vorticity dynamics of the “su-
Whereasitisdifficulttofindaquantumdevicethatperforms
perflow”describedbythenonlinearSchro¨dingerequationre-
theexactHamiltonianofthequantumsystemofinterest,itis
semblesthatoftheviscousflow,inwhichvortexreconnection
possibletoapproximatetheHamiltonianinsmalltimeslices.
eventsplayamajorrole.38,39
Similarly,in a metaphoricopticalcomputer,one can forma
The dissipation of the smallest spatial structures in a su-
unitcell of a “meta-material” by combininga slice of defo-
perflow is speculated to be the Kelvin waves produced by
cusing material, a slice of material with anomalous group-
thenaturalmotionandreconnectionsofvortexfilaments,41,44
velocity dispersion, a slice of ultrafast phase modulator to
andthe correspondingReynoldsnumberis againspeculated
applythethree-dimensionalboundaryconditions,andagain
to be R =KW.41 Numericaland theoreticalanalysesof the
medium to compensate for loss. The optical beam can loop
so-called “quantum turbulence” exhibited by the nonlinear
through the unit cell multiple times in a cavity, so that the
Schro¨dingerequationall revealstrikingsimilarities between
outcome will approximate the true solution as if we had an
quantumandclassicalfluids,anditisarguedthatthestudyof
idealmedium. See Fig. 17 for a graphicalillustration of the
quantum turbulence could lead to a better understanding of
method.
turbulenceinnormalfluids.48
Ideal Nonlinear Medium
4. Thesplit-stepmethod
While a nonlinear optical system shows promise for com- Input Beam Hˆ total =Hˆ 1 +Hˆ 2 +... Output Beam
putingEulerandNavier-Stokesfluiddynamics,italsoposes
serious technical challenges. Ideally one would like to have
a configurable nonlinear material with low loss, anomalous
"Split-Step" System
group-velocitydispersion,highdefocusingnonlinearity,and
three-dimensionalco-propagatingboundaries.Onemayonly Hˆ Hˆ
be able to findseparate materialsor opticaldevices, eachof
which performs only some of the functions. Moreover,par- D z D z
asitic effectssuch as loss, two-photonabsorption,and high-
orderdispersioncanbedetrimentaltotheaccuracy.Tocom-
binedifferentdevicesandperiodicallycompensateforpara-
sitic effects, we herebyproposethe “split-step” method,the
inspirationofwhichcomesfromthenumericalFourier“split-
Fig. 17. Sketch of a split-step optical system that approxi-
step” method.20 Consider the generalnonlinearSchro¨dinger
matestheidealnonlinearmedium.
¶y N The split-step method has the additional advantages that
= (cid:229) Hˆ y , (41) eachsubsystemcanbetunableandeasilysubstitutedwithan-
n=1 othermaterialordevice,andthepulseevolutioncanbemon-
itoredmoreeasily.Themagnitudeofeacheffectcanbetuned
where propagation effects and boundary conditions are ex-
pressedintermsofoperatorsHˆ .Theformalsolutionis by simply changing the propagation length in each device,
In exchange of configurability we have sacrificed some ac-
y (z +D z )=exp
Hˆ dz y (z ). (42)
curacydue to discretization errorsand instability. The com-
n ′ putation speed may also be reduced by a large but constant
(cid:16)Zz n=1 (cid:17)
fraction, as the pulse may spend most of its time on simply
ButifD z ismuchsmallerthan1/HwhereHisthemagnitude propagatingfromonedeviceto thenextandnotperforming
oftheoperators,byvirtueoftheBaker-Hausdorffformulawe thecorecomputationbynonlinearpropagation.Thesplit-step
have method, however, does not detract from the inherent paral-
lelism in the computation, as the transverse dimensions are
y (z +D z )= (cid:213) exp Hˆ D z y (z )+O(H2D z 2). (43) notdiscretized.
n=1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
5. Conclusion
Each of the propagation effects can hence be applied sepa-
ratelytoanopticalpulse,withaquadraticerrorterm.Asym- In conclusion,we have used a variety of theoreticalandnu-
metrizedversionof the split-step methodcanfurtherreduce mericalmethodsto show thatself-defocusingopticalpropa-
gationhasaconvergingcorrespondencewithEulerfluiddy- 9. G. Molina-Terriza, D. V. Petrov, J. Recolons, and L. Torner,
namicsandastrikingsimilaritywithNavier-Stokesfluiddy- “Observation of optical vortex streets in walking second-
namics. We have numerically shown that the interactionsof harmonicgeneration,” Opt.Lett.27,625-627(2002).
a large number of optical vortex solitons are able to simu- 10. F.S.Roux,“Dynamicalbehaviorofopticalvortices,” J.Opt.
latetwowell-knownviscousfluidphenomena.Wehavealso Soc.Am.B12,1215-1221(1995).
11. D.Rozas,C.T.Law,andG.A.Swartzlander,Jr.,“Propagation
proposed the split-step method, a way of practically imple-
dynamics of optical vortices,” J.Opt. Soc.Am. B 14, 3054-
mentingthemetaphoricopticalcomputer.
3065(1997).
Thereareserioustechnicalchallengesifametaphoriccom-
12. D. Rozas, Z. S. Sacks, and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., “Exper-
puter is to become usefulfor computingfluid dynamics,es-
imental observation of fluidlike motion of optical vortices,”
peciallythree-dimensionalfluiddynamicsproblems,astech-
Phys.Rev.Lett.79,3399-3402(1997).
niquesforthecompletespecificationandcharacterizationof 13. H. Michinel, J. Campos-Ta´boas, R. Garc´ia-Ferna´ndez, J. R.
thespatiotemporalopticalfieldare stillintheirinfancy.The
Salgueiro,andM.L.Quiroga-Teixeiro,“Liquidlightconden-
speed,configurability,andparallelismofametaphoricoptical sates,” Phys.Rev.E65,066604(2002).
simulatornonethelesspromisevastadvantagesoverconven- 14. M.J.Paz-Alonso,D.Olivieri,H.Michinel,andJ.R.Salgueiro,
tionalnumericalsimulations. “Collisionaldynamicsofvorticesinlightcondensates,” Phys.
Since photons are quantum objects, optical propagation Rev.E69,056601(2004).
would also inherently compute the quantum dynamics of 15. M.J.Paz-AlonsoandH.Michinel,“Superfluidlikemotionof
bosons, and may therefore be used as a metaphoric simula- vortices in light condensates,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 093901
tor of quantum fluids, such as superfluids, superconductors, (2005).
16. Y. Pomeau and S. Rica, “Nonlinear diffraction,”C. R. Acad.
andBose-Einsteincondensates.Inthiswaytheadvantagesof
Sci.Paris,317,1287-1292(1993).
ametaphoriccomputerandthoseofaquantumcomputerare
17. E.L.Bolda,R.Y.Chiao,andW.H.Zurek,“Dissipativeoptical
combined,andonlythentheclassicalandquantumcomput-
flow in anonlinear Fabry-Pe´rot cavity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
ingcapabilitiesofferedbyphotonswouldtrulybeexhausted.
416-418(2001).
Thisextensionofmetaphoricopticalcomputingwillbeasub-
18. R. Y. Chiao, “Bogoliubov dispersion relation for a ’photon
jectoffuturework.
fluid’: Is this a superfluid?” Opt. Commun. 179 157-166
(2000).
Acknowledgments 19. R. W. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, San Diego,
2002).
We wouldlike to acknowledgehelpfulandinspiringdiscus- 20. G.P.Agrawal,NonlinearFiberOptics(AcademicPress,San
sions with Ravi Athale, Michael C. Cross, and Martin Cen- Diego,2001).
turion.ThisworkissupportedbytheDefenseAdvancedRe- 21. R. J. Donnelly, Quantized Vortices in Helium II (Cambridge
searchProjectsAgency(DARPA). UniversityPress,NewYork,1991).
22. T.Frisch,Y.Pomeau,andS.Rica,“Transitiontodissipationin
amodelofsuperflow,” Phys.Rev.Lett.69,1644-1646(1992).