Microeconomic Structure determines
Macroeconomic Dynamics.
Aoki defeats the Representative Agent
Sorin Solomon and Nataša Golo,
The Racah Institute of Physics,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
July 7, 2018
Masanao Aoki developed a new methodology for a basic problem of economics:
deducingrigorouslythemacroeconomicdynamicsasemergingfromtheinteractions
of many individual agents. This includes deduction of the fractal / intermittent
fluctuationsofmacroeconomicquantitiesfromthegranularityofthemezo-economic
collectiveobjects(largeindividualwealth,highlyproductivegeographicallocations,
emergent technologies, emergent economic sectors) in which the micro-economic
agents self-organize.
In particular, we present some theoretical predictions, which also met extensive
validation from empirical data in a wide range of systems:
• The fractal Levy exponent of the stock market index fluctuations equals the
Paretoexponentoftheinvestorswealthdistribution. Theoriginofthemacroe-
conomic dynamics is therefore found in the granularity induced by the wealth
/ capital of the wealthiest investors.
• EconomiccyclesconsistofaSchumpeter’creativedestruction’patternwhereby
the maxima are cusp-shaped while the minima are smooth. In between the
cusps, the cycle consists of the sum of 2 ’crossing exponentials’: one decaying
and the other increasing.
This unification within the same theoretical framework of short term market
fluctuations and long term economic cycles offers the perspective of a genuine con-
ceptual synthesis between micro- and macroeconomics. Joining another giant of
contemporary science - Phil Anderson [1] - Aoki emphasized the role of rare, large
fluctuations in the emergence of macroeconomic phenomena out of microscopic in-
teractions and in particular their non self-averaging, in the language of statistical
physics. In this light, we present a simple stochastic multi-sector growth model.
1 Introduction
I first met Professor Aoki some 15 years ago when the application of physics inspired
methods was a rare appearance at economics conferences. Yet already then Masanao
]NG.nif-q[
1v6947.1041:viXra
had an impressive amount of work applying statistical mechanics techniques to economic
issues such as growth, employment, aggregation. Since then, we kept meeting almost
yearly at workshops, schools and conferences. Beyond the technical interest in his work,
I felt great hope that Masanao scientific vision and personality might help us achieve
this fusion between the economic facts and ideas and between the physics techniques and
Popperian ethos [2]. Yet, the physical oceans separating us prevented what a posteriori
feels like a great occasion of merging more intimately our ideas and methods. We take
the present volume as a belated occasion to draw the lines along which such a synthesis
or at least dialogue can take place. We will first list some of the converging interests,
ideas and subjects and then will concentrate on a few more specific results.
2 Solvable agent based models of Schumpeter’s creative destruction
Following Schumpeter [3], Aoki and Yoshikawa attributed growth to the endogenous
emergence of novelty. The introduction of new goods, the opening of new markets, the
financial innovations do influence the firms of the real sector heterogeneously. After
such an event (/shock), many big firms start to shrink and some small firms start to
grow. Moreover, firms in previously dominating sectors disappear exponentially, while
new sectors and firms capable of exploiting the new situation are established in growing
numbers (Fig. 2). Schumpeter and the later evolutionary economists have (sometimes
withreserve)likenedthistobiologicalevolution. AokiandYoshikawa,followingMontroll
[4] emphasized another common factor influencing economic and biological phenomena:
the Malthus-Verhulst logistic equation. Aoki considered very early [5] a simpler version
of such a dynamics which in fact is mathematically similar to the famous AK model [6]
Eq. 31.
In the present paper we elaborate on the connection between the theoretical pre-
dictions of such an approach and the empirical observations on the economic effects
of technological, financial and political changes. Moreover we explain, fit and predict
the fractal / intermittent macroeconomic fluctuations 1 as a result of the granular /
multi-scale structure of the collective objects (capital accumulations, economic sectors,
geographical regions with outstanding productivity) that aggregate the microeconomic
elements (money, investors, workers, technological know-how).
By doing so we transcend [9] the ’Representative agent’ approach giving macroe-
conomics a microeconomic foundation that is able to provide, in coherent conceptual
framework, theoretical and numerical predictions in agreement with the empirical facts.
Suchmulti-agentnon-equilibriummodelsarenotthebreadandbutteroftheneo-classical
1InthispaperweuseforfractalfluctuationsthedefinitionofMandelbrotforLévyflights[7]: arandom
walkinwhichthestep-lengthshaveapowerlaw(Pareto)probabilitydistribution. Forintermittencywe
use the definition of Zel’dovich [8]:"Some specific structures in which a growing quantity reaches record
high values typically arise for instabilities in random media. Despite the rarity of these concentrations,
they dominate the integral characteristics of the growing quantity (the mean value, the mean square
value, etc.). The appearance of such structures is called ’intermittency’." Thus we reserve the term
’intermittent’forrandomprocessestotallydominatedbytheirraresteventswhileforprocessesthatare
merely outside the basin of attraction of the normal distribution we use the term fractal.
economicsmainstream. Inthepastmanyeconomists[10]deemeditimpossibletodeduce
from first principles the collective dynamics underlying the macroeconomic properties.
But Masanao was not afraid to face these difficulties head-on. He used the master
(Chapman-Kolmogorov) equation as a powerful method for the correct aggregation of
’microeconomic acts’ into ’macroeconomic behavior’ erasing thereby de facto the barrier
between micro- and macro–economics [11]. By applying exact methods he showed that
in economic systems the fluctuations are not vanishing even when the number of com-
ponents is taken to infinity: the statistical samples are not self-averaging and lead to
macroscopic (fractal, intermittent) fluctuations. In this context, he found rigorous basis
for the emergence of power laws in economic statistical distributions. Masanao used the
master (Fokker-Planck) equations also in order to characterize the clustering effects and
the space-time aggregation processes responsible for macroeconomic fluctuations. Such
effects are indeed crucial for the economic growth.
Aoki’sconclusionsconvergewiththeresultsobtainedbyphysicstechniques[12]which
predicted theoretically and validated empirically the equality between the Pareto wealth
distributionexponentandthefractalexponentcharacterizingthefluctuationsofthestock
markets and growth rates Fig. 1 and [13].This was an important step in transforming
Economics into a Popperian science: the theoretical prediction connecting the individual
wealth granularity to the fluctuations of aggregated economic and financial indexes has
been very precisely validated by the empirical measurements [14] [15] [16] Such causal
modelswhichpredictconnectionsbetweenstructural(granularity)anddynamical(fractal
/ intermittent fluctuations) measurable properties of the economic systems provide a
significant advancement beyond the mathematical identities connecting static variables
provided by the neo-classical equilibrium assumptions.
Aoki’s work connotes with Schumpeter proposal [3] of innovation as the intrinsic fun-
damental feature of capitalism. According to Schumpeter, in order to achieve progress
after an innovation, it is not sufficient to establish and develop the new firms and sectors
applying it for production: it is equally important for the production means and organi-
zation related to the old technology to disappear (cf. Fig. 2 below). Thus Schumpeter
coined the term ’creative destruction’ which makes bankruptcies, crisis and unemploy-
ment part of the economic progress. It connects the booms and crises in the global
economic indices to the appearance, disappearance, shrinking and growing of collective
economicobjects(firms,investorherds,largewealthaccumulations,sectors,technologies,
regions) and their production.
Given the limitations in the mathematical methods available for multi-agent sys-
tems at the time, Schumpeter’s model was not formally and quantitatively tractable. As
expressed mathematically by the non-self-averaging properties emphasized by Aoki, an
economic system with many interactive agents and multi-scale granularity is exceedingly
difficult to predict. Yet the recognition of its importance for describing economic cycles
continuedtogrow[17]. Masanao’svisionandmethodsmayfindoneoftheirmostimpact-
ful applications in this direction. Following the appearance of a new technology or new
production conditions the economic system may undergo extensive changes: following
such a shock, some sectors which might not even existed before, emerge, grow and their
companies multiply. By contrast, some other sectors which were dominating before the
changebecomenotsustainable, theyshrinkandtheircompaniesdisappear. Thisleadsto
the emergence of very interesting adaptive collective objects (new sectors, new technolo-
gies, new ’Silicon Valleys’, new ’Start-Up Nations’) [18]. In turn, the growth / shrinking
/ appearance / failure of the individual firms, sectors, technologies constitute the very
stuff from which the global intermittent macroeconomic dynamics is made of. They are
in the same time an embodiment of the Schumpeter creative destruction scenario: the
old economy is shrinking and innovative sectors appear and develop adaptively [19], [20].
We will see that this picture has very precise implications on the short (Fig. 1) and
long (Figs. 2 , 3) term fluctuations of the economic indices. These implications were
confirmed with great precision by the empirical data Figs. 1, 5, 6.
3 Proliferating agents and logistic / autocatalytic systems
The crucial property that fuels the propagation of microeconomic events to systemic
changes is ’autocatalicity’. By the term ’autocatalytic’ we mean here a process or rather
a quantity whose time variation is proportional to itself as expressed mathematically by
Eqs. 3-5and31-34. Theoriginoftheconceptofautocatalyticprocessesasthemechanism
ofsystemicgrowthcanbetracedback200yearstoMalthus[21]. Malthusideashavebeen
developedextensivelybylaterworkers. AokicitesMontroll[4]asattributingMalthus-like
dynamics to virtually all social systems. Malthus applied it initially to the population
growth but we shall see that the idea is relevant to economic growth and many other
phenomena [22].
In modern agent-based language, Malthus’ assumptions can be translated at the
individual agent ’microscopic’ scale as follows:
• in the presence of sufficient resource units a any (female) individual (animal /
human) k can generate with some probability rate per unit time s another (female)
animal / human:
• each such individual has a death probability rate δ per unit time:
k → nothing; δ. (2)
• each k and a can diffuse by jumping between neighboring x locations with proba-
bilities per unit time D and respectively D .
Malthus implicitly assumed that the space (x) and time (t) density (A(x,t)) of the
a agents is constant, i.e. A(x,t) = A. This seemed as a good assumption at the time.
For instance, this is the macroscopic asymptotic equilibrium state if one assumes that
the a’s diffuse randomly cf. Eq. 10. We will see later that this approximation that
neglects the microscopic random fluctuations intrinsic to the discrete character of the a
individuals, is highly dangerous and misses most of the salient effects. By neglecting the
space dependence of the a and k agents densities A(x,t) and K(x,t) 2 , Malthus deduced
an ordinary differential equation governing the time evolution of K(t), the total number
of k’s in terms of A, the reproduction rate s and the death rate δ. 3:
where one defined the growth rate g by:
Eq. 3 has the exponential solution 4 :
i.e. exponential growth for
and exponential decay for
g < 0. (7)
For two hundred years it was believed that the differential equations of the type Eq.
3 can faithfully represent the evolution of the total amount K(t) of k self-reproducing
agents 5:
in the presence of an average amount of resources
2WeshallcalloccasionallyA(x,t)andK(x,t)’densities’whendiscussingtheminthemacro-approx-
imation where A(x,t) and K(x,t) are considered as functions defined on a space where the locations x
are real numbers. However one should not forget that the main point of this paper is that the macro /
continuumapproximationhasseverelimitationsandthecorrectandbindingformulationisthediscrete
one,whereA(x,t)andK(x,t)arejustthenumberofagentsaandk atthediscretelocationxattimet.
3The notations K, s, A, δ are not the standard ones in the Malthus context. We use them here to
facilitatethecontactwiththeeconomistreadership: withthepresentnotations,Eq. 3becomesidentical
with the familiar AK model Eq. 31 [23].
4 AfewdecadesafterMalthus,Verhulst[24]includedinEq. 3anon-linearterm−K2 corresponding
to k’s competition, confrontation, limited resources and called the new equation ’the logistic equation’.
In terms of the agents the competition between k’s is expressed by the reaction: k+k → k; c. The
Verhulst non-linear term has the effect of diminishing the K(t) growth, dK/dt, as K(t) increases and
in fact eventually leads to the saturation of the K population growth. Thus, the solution of the logistic
equation starts increasing in time with the same exponential growth rate g as the Malthus solution Eq.
5, but eventually it curbs down and saturates. In the current discussion we will not discuss the effects
of the Verhulst term.
5 Wewilluseoccasionallytheintegral (cid:82) anddifferential∆notationswhendiscussingthecontinuum
approximation. However, one should remember that it is one of the main claims of the present paper
that this approximation fails in crucial ways and that the correct formulation is the discrete one. In
particular using discrete sum instead of the integral.
(recall that since a are not created or destroyed A(t) = A(0) is constant in time).
In fact, even when one starts with a macroscopically inhomogenous A(x,t), the dif-
fusion of the individual a’s, expressed in the continuum as:
causes A(x,t) to converge rather fast to a spatially and temporally constant A(x,t) =<
So once one neglects the microscopic fluctuations of A(x,t) and considers it a contin-
uous differentiable function, one is forced unavoidably into the Eqs. 3 and 5. However
its has been shown that the very assumption that the system of discrete agents Eqs.
1, 2 can be faithfully represented in terms of continuous differentiable functions A(x,t)
and K(x,t) turns out to be false. If the growth factor is different for different locations
and parts of the system, then the different exponentials of the type Eq. 5 at different
locations lead to functions K(x,t) which are too singular to respect (partial) differential
equations. In particular, the naïve scalar ordinary differential equation Eq. 3 does not
apply.
We refer the reader to the original literature [25], [26], [27] for the rigorous proofs
and present below only heuristic explanations and discussions of it. The most striking
result obtained in these papers is that in large enough spaces with d ≤ 2 dimensions the
k population K(t) always grows irrespective of the values of s, δ, A, D , D . The proof
goes along the following points:
• one assumes that each agent a has an equal probability to be originally situated
at any of the locations x in space. This means that the a’s are distributed by a
Poisson distribution Eq. 13.
• Random walks in d ≤ 2 dimensions are recurrent. I.e. as the duration of the
random walk is taken to infinity, each agent a returns an infinite number of times
to its original position.
• during those visits ’home’ to its site of origin x, each a contributes an exponential
factor to the K(x,t) expectation.
• So, each a originating at x has a multiplicative contribution to K(x,t) expectation
that increases exponentially in time.
• Thus, if at the beginning there are enough a agents A(x,0) on a site x then the
product of their exponential growth contributions will be able to defeat / compen-
sate any exponential decay with fixed negative rate originating in the k’s deaths
(due to δ) and k migration (due to D ).
• Even if the above scenario requires a very large initial number A(x,0) of a’s to
be originally at the site x: A(x,0) >> A still this has a finite (even if
exceedingly small) probability P(A(x,0)) . In fact one can compute it using the
Poisson formula Eq. 13.
• If the volume (number of sites x) of the system is V >> 1/P(A(x,0)), then the
expected number of sites x where one has initially a number of a agents A(x,0) or
more is larger than 1.
• In those points, the expected value of K(x,t) grows exponentially.
• Thus even if in all the other points K(y,t) collapses, the total K(t) grows expo-
nentially on the account of those special / singular points.
• The expected growth of K(t) is an exponential of time with a coefficient of t in the
exponent which is dictated by the largest A(x,0) in the system. In particular
for an infinite system , the expectation of K(t) grows faster than any exponential
[26].
Thus it comes natural that in the next section we first describe the case in which the
a’s do not leave the original site at all (D = 0) and then to extend the analysis to the
case D > 0 while taking into account the occasional returns of a to their original site.
4 Anomalous resilience of autocatalytic multi-agents systems
If we look at the system Eqs. 1, 2 microscopically, from the individual agents point of
view, even if the position of each of the a’s is chosen from a spatially uniform probability
distribution, the result will be that each realization of the system will respect a Poisson
distribution. In particular each finite (but arbitrarily large) value of A(x,t) at any
location x, has a finite (though possibly extremely small) probability to be realized.
Ignoring the rarest events where A(x,t) is largest leads to the naive (and too stringent)
criterion, Eqs. 6, 4, for the survival and growth of K(t):
This is of course a too strong condition: for the total number K(t) of agents k to grow it
is not necessary that K(x,t) will grow at the majority of sites x and times t. The growth
of K(x,t) in a (non-zero-measure) subset S(t) of the x space is sufficient to insure the
eventual growth of K(t) as a whole .
A hint of how it happens is to realize that because of the convexity of the exponential
function, the average of the exponents is larger then the exponent of the average. In
our case, the average growth factor
(cid:10) eg(x,t)(cid:11)
is always larger than the exponent of the
average growth rate < g(x,t) > :
(cid:68) (cid:69)
Thuseveniftheaverageofthegrowthrateg isnegative(Eq. 7), andthesolutionEq.
5 of the naive Eq. 3 is decaying exponentially, in the actual stochastic discrete system
defined by Eqs. 1 and 2 the microscopic granularity of A(x,t) is sufficient to insure that
in a very wide range of conditions the total number of k’s in the system K(t) increases.
4.1 The case of non-diffusive a’s: D =0
For a first familiarization with the arguments, let us momentarily neglect the diffusion
of the a agents and take D = 0. Assume each agent a has an equal probability to be
located at any of the locations in the x space. Such a probability distribution was of
course studied extensively under the name of Poisson distribution.
While at the macroscopic scales the Poisson distribution is as uniform as it can
possibly be, the microscopic granularity allows for arbitrarily large local deviations of
A(x,t) from the average A. In fact the probability at any site x for the number of agents
a to be A(x,t) is given by the Poisson formula:
Thus, for any x, A,δ,s there is a non-vanishing (though possibly extremely small) prob-
ability that A(x,t) > δ/s. Thus, for a large enough x space, with a number of locations
N > 1/P(A(x,t)) the expected number of sites x with an a occupancy A(x,t) exceeds
1. In general, this means that in the x space there exists a set S(t) 6 of non-vanishing
measure for which the local growth rate g(x,t) is positive:
This is enough to insure that
Eq. 15 holds because even if for the rest of the x locations the integral vanishes, on
the set S(t) the integral diverges:
K(x,t) = eg(x,t)t; for x ∈ S(t) (16)
(because g(x,t) as well as A(x,t) and S(t) are actually constant in time if D = 0).
Consequently
K(t) ∼ etg(x,t) > etgmax → ∞. (17)
where g is the largest among the values of g(x,t) in the entire system. Using the
inequality 17, Kesten [26] proved that for an infinitely large system (infinite number of
x sites) K(t), the number of k’s, increases even faster than any exponential.
Thus,theveryraremicroscopiceventswhereA(x,t) > δ/sconstitutesingulargrowth
centers where auto-catalytic amplification of the k’s density K(x,t) takes place and thus
leads to the emergence in their neighborhood of large growing k-collectives/ ’herds’ /
’islands’/’mountains’withexponentiallygrowingK(x,t). ThecaveatisthatforD (cid:54)= 0
the a’s configuration changes continuously due to their diffusion and so does the growth
set S(t). Thus the crucial question for the survival and growth of K(t) is whether the k
’herds’ / ’islands’ / ’mountains’ are able to follow the fluctuations, changes, appearance,
disappearance and moves of the A(x,t) > δ/s regions S(t).
6Actually S(t) does not change in time for the case D = 0. But for the next case D (cid:54)= 0 the
changes in S(t) will be crucial.
4.2 The case of diffusive a’s : D (cid:54)= 0
Thequestionofthepreviousparagraphcanbedecidedrigorously, analyticallyandquan-
titativelybytreatingthespatiallyextendedagentbasedmodeldefinedbyEqs. 1, 2using
the combinatorial techniques of Masanao or by field theory renormalization group tech-
niques [25], or by branching random walk techniques [26]. The answer is that in the
general case where one considers the a’s diffusion D > 0, the actual condition for K(t)
not to vanish as t → ∞ is:
s/D > 1−Pol , (18)
wherePol isthePolyaconstantinthespacewithddimensionswherethea’sdiffuse. By
definition the Polya constant Pol is the probability that given enough time a randomly
walking a would return to its initial position. Since for d ≤ 2 space dimensions Pol = 1,
for a large enough system K(t) never decays to 0 because cf. Eq. 18 the condition
becomes s/D > 0 which always holds for s > 0.
Note how different is the survival / growth condition Eq. 18 from the naive criterion
Eq. 11: the condition Eq. 18 expresses the capability of K(x,t) to adapt and survive
the A(x,t) changes while the condition Eq. 11 merely takes a global, static, average,
representative view on the quantities of A and K.
ThepropertyPol = 1ford ≤ 2expressesthefactthatrandomwalkersaind ≤ 2di-
mensions almost never travel to infinite distances from their original location. This leads
to a rather anomalous behavior of random walkers diffusion in d ≤ 2 dimensions which
culminates with the fact that in a sense the a random walkers never leave definitively
their neighborhood of origin and return eternally again and again to it. This allows the
large k ’herds’ / ’mountains’ / ’islands’ that the a agglomerations created to be contin-
uously revisited and reinforced by the a’s that originally created them. Thus in d ≤ 2
dimensions, the k’s survive even in the most severe conditions: the collective k objects
have almost always the chance and time to adapt their position to the very mild and
slow changes in the a configuration that the relation Pol = 1 implies [27].
This is not typical at all: in fact for d > 3 the a’s have a large probability never to
return to the region of origin. In fact only about 1/3 of them do and the rest are lost
to ’infinity’. The condition Eq. 18 for the k ’herds’ / ’islands’ / ’mountains’ survival
becomes non-trivial:
s/D > 0.659563 (19)
Note that while Eq. 19 is a less shocking result than the absolute resilience of the d < 2
system7 ,thisresultisstillatcompletedisagreementwiththenaivecontinuumcondition
Eq. 11.
In conclusion, the system Eqs. 1, 2 far from being characterized by the scalar Eq.
3 presents extraordinary resilience related with the spontaneous emergence of growing
herds of k around the locations where large enough fluctuations of the number of a
above the average A exist. These fluctuations in the a’s result in exponentially growing
7It was noted that species choose to live in 2 dimensional environments even if they do have in
principle the option of a 3 dimensional space [28]
fluctuations in the k herds which often reach macroscopic or at least mezoscopic sizes.
In turn these are responsible for the large time fluctuations of K(t).
Thus in order to understand the macro dynamics one has to understand first the
nature of the micro and mezo-granularity represented by the emergent collective objects.
In the end the possibility of the k collectives to follow the changes in the growth
centers’ location depends on the k proliferation rate s, the a’s diffusion rate D and
the Polya’s constant of the geometry of the space in which the a’s and k’s move. Thus
Eq. 15 expresses the fact that the k’s form collective objects – ’islands’ / ’clusters’ /
’herds’ – which adaptively identify, follow and exploit to their advantage the fortuitous
fluctuations of the a medium. The spontaneous emergence of adaptive, collective objects
out of the completely mechanical k’s is what renders the system Eqs. 1, 2 anomalously
resilient.
Theadaptivecollectiveclustersofproliferatingindividualsk whichfollowandexploit
the gain / growth opportunities offered by the fortuitous temporary agglomerations a’s
[29] have important implications on the characteristic of the time fluctuations of the
entire system.
The appearance and disappearance of such collective objects is responsible for large
non-self-averaging fluctuations in the system. For the theorems and for the exact condi-
tions in which these results hold, see [25], [27], [19].
Sucheffectshavebeendescribedinrelationtotherisesandfallsofglobalizedeconomies
We will see in the next sections that when interpreted in terms of capital dynamics,
this implies that the different parts of the economy have very heterogeneous intrinsic
growth rates and that the system as a whole has very outstanding resilience.
Infactonecansaythataneconomyorecologydoesnotstandachanceintheabsence
of heterogeneity. The spontaneous emergence of collective adaptive objects in systems of
many autocatalytic (proliferating) elements is crucial for their survival. Such collective
objects (large wealth accumulations, herds, high-tech integrated labor communities) in-
sure the resilience of the entire system. They are the carriers and the embodiment of a
eventful ’evolutionary’ dynamics, never in equilibrium, ever changing in the processes of
creation, destruction, growth and decay.
5 Probability of return to origins, system inertia and fractal intermittent
Section 4.2 studied the properties of random walkers in terms of their probability of
returning to their original position. This is a powerful method to extract quantitative
predictions from stochastic models involving random sequences. In addition, it allows
the qualitative discrimination between various dynamical regimes:
• normal (Gaussian ’microscopic’ fluctuations),
• fractal (Levy [7], ’scaling fluctuations’) and
• intermittent (Zel’dovich [8], catastrophic fluctuations / extreme events).
In the next subsections we will use those measures in order to relate the granularity
of the distribution of K(x,t) for fixed time to the time fluctuations of its aggregate
K(t). We will find that the size distribution of the large herds characterizing K(x,t)’s
granularity determines the size distribution of the K(t) fluctuations [12], [13], [15], [33].
The present section develops the language and tools to explain this connection.
5.1 Probability of return to origins, system inertia and fractal / intermittent walks
The value Pol = 1 of the Polya constant is related to P (2t) = P(x = 0,2t) the
probability for an agent a starting a random walk at origin to be found at origin after 2t
time steps 8. More precisely 9:
Pol = 1 iff P (2t) = ∞. (20)
For d = 1,2 this is the case:
(cid:88) (cid:88)
We learn from Eq. 20 that the quantity P (t) is very important not just in order
to establish the properties of the small fluctuations of a random walk process but mainly
for characterizing the extremely large fluctuations - the ones that can bring the system
arbitrarily far from its origins. Thus we will see in the Appendinx and use in the next
Sections that the best way to characterize the large fluctuations of the system is to study
P (t):
• theoretically its time scaling exponent as in Eq. 21 connects to the scaling of the
sizesoftheindividualtimestepsinK(t)andthroughthemtothescalingproperties
of the clusters, herds and other collective objects composing the system.
• practicallyitallowsperforminghighprecision, highreliabilitymeasurementswhich
avoid the statistics and finite size problems that plague the precision and reliability
of the direct measurements of the large fluctuations from the origin [34].
8on a square lattice, the probability of return after an odd number of time steps vanishes P(x =
0,2t+1)=0.
ca/~kozdron/Research/Talks/duke_polya.pdf
5.2 Clusters, k-herds and Levy process properties
The quantity P (t) introduced in the previous Section has a crucial role in charac-
terizing the fractal / intermittent / ’cyclic’ properties of stochastic systems.
AsprovenintheAppendixthisquantityintermediatesbetweenthegranularstructure
of the emergent collective mezoscopic objects in which the microscopic components of
the system self-organize and between the time evolution of the system as a whole. More
precisely consider a generic system where:
1. the system size K(t) is the sum of the sizes K (t) of the i collective objects:
Consequently the unit steps ∆K(t) in the time evolution of K(t) are the unit steps
∆K of the individual K ’s (assuming the dynamics is asynchronous i.e. the K ’s
are not updated at exactly the same time / ’synchronous’).
2. As a result of the microscopic autocatalytic dynamics (e.g. Eq. 1, 2) the sizes of
thecomponentswhenordered(indecreasingorder)accordingtotheirrank(largest
K first) respect a Pareto-Zipf power law:
3. Due to the same autocatalytic character of the microscopic dynamics, the short
time changes ∆K of the K ’s are distributed by the same Pareto-Zipf power law.
This can be written equivalently to Eq. 24 in terms of the probability of a step
∆K to be larger than a certain StepSize value:
Prob (∆K > StepSize) ∼ (StepSize)−α (25)
Taking into account Eq. 23, this means that the time evolution of K(t) is a Levy
flights process; i.e. a random walk with steps distributed by a Pareto power law:
Prob (∆K > StepSize) ∼ (StepSize)−α (26)
In these conditions (1-3), according to the Levy and Mandelbrot analysis [7] (see
Appendixforthedetailsoftheargument), thetimevariationofK(t)overatimeinterval
of t steps is a Levy distribution L (∆K,t) with a width that expands in time as:
which (as explained above) is reflected in the scaling in time of its central peak as:
Levy origin Levy Levy
Thus the behavior of the K(t) Levy flights process depends on the actual values
of α i.e. of the size of the elementary objects (large lumps of individual capital, large
firms, investor herds, production sectors, highly productive geographical locations) that
determine the individual steps size distribution 10.
• For α > 2 one recovers the Gaussian result.
• For1 < α < 2thefluctuationsarefractal(Levystable)andreachlargerscales(but
still limited by the finite size of the largest individual objects). The probability for
the system to be at the original state after a time t decreases much faster then in
the Gaussian case. More precisely the speed by which the system gets away from
the original value is dictated by the same exponent α that characterizes the step
size distribution Eq. 24 (Eq. 56 in the Appendix) and is measured by the decay
speed of the central peak Eq. 28 (Eq. 60 in the Appendix).
Fig. 1 demonstrates the remarkable agreement between the theoretical prediction
and the empirical data by comparing the exponent in Eq. 24 (size of the wealth
of the largest investors) vs. the exponent in Eq. 28 (the time dependence of the
central peak of the market index fluctuations).
• For α < 1 the fluctuations are so strong that essentially the system is completely
dominatedbythelargeststepssizesandthedynamicsisdominatedbyintermittent
singular events (see Sections 9 and 10) similar with the economic cycles of crises
and booms.
Itisveryencouragingthatthesametheoreticalformalism, byjustchangingthevalue
of a parameter α is capable to fit, explain and predict such a wide range of empirical
phenomena, from microscopic short time fluctuations, via fractal fluctuations spanning a
wide range of time and amplitude scales, to very rare extreme fluctuations with macro-
scopic systemic dimensions both in amplitude and in time.
In the present paper we will give an interpretation of the results of [25], [27] in a form
closer to Aoki’s work and keep only the autocatalytic features necessary for the creation-
destruction process. Moreover, rather than dealing directly with the ’microscopic agents’
based model, we take a coarser - ’mezoscopic’ - view, which is an intermediate level
description of the Eqs. 1, 2 system, between:
• the original microscopic one (studied in [25], [26]) consisting of a macroscopic num-
ber of individual microscopic agents and
• theclassicalmacroscopiconeEqs. 3,5[21]inwhichtheentiresystemisrepresented
by a single macroscopic variable K(t).
Rather than not aggregating at all or aggregating to a single global representative agent,
we aggregate to the level of the emergent herds found in the microscopic model.
The hypothesis described in the following sections that the complex economic cy-
cles dynamics resulting from the myriads of microscopic interactions can be reduced to
10Notehoweverthataboveacertainamplitude,theverylargefluctuationsaredisturbedbyfinitesize
effects and have a very different exponent of the power law [34].
Figure 1: Granular structure of individual wealth / capital distribution
determines the size distribution of the financial system time fluctuations
This is an economics realization of the wider result that in microscopic Eqs. 1 - 2 and
mezoscopic 23-24 or 32-33 discrete stochastic models: the granularity of the k clusters
/ herds / collective objects (sub-figure a) determines the time fluctuations of total
quantity of k’ in the entire system K(t) (sub-figure b).
Figure 1a) represents the granular structure of the wealth distribution in terms
of the individual wealth of the wealthiest people in US (Forbes 400). It is found that it
fulfills a Pareto-Zipf power law distribution W(N) ∼ N−1/α where N is the rank of the
individual in the Forbes list and W(N) is their wealth.
Figure 1b) represents the fractal scaling properties of the returns ∆K(t) distribution
P(∆K,t) in terms of the probability P (t) = P(∆K(t) = 0,t) of finding the
current market index K(t) at the same value after a time interval t. One finds that
P (t) ∼ t−1/β which implies cf. 28: σ(t) ∼ t1/β (note that this does not imply
necessarily that the very long tail of the distribution decays by the same exponent [34]).
Figure 1c) compares the empirical values of the 2 exponents in 3 different countries:
- blue circles represent α (exponent of the individual agents’ capital distribution)
- red crosses represent β (exponent of the fluctuations of the market index). One finds
that α = β thereby validating empirically the predictions cf. Eqs. 24, 28 (54, 59 in the
Appendix).
discontinuous events that correspond to the appearance / growth and disappearance /
shrinking of the dominant herd / economic sector is very non-trivial and may be over-
simplifying 11.
However it is strongly supported both by the analysis of the first principles system
Eqs. 1 , 2 and by the confrontation with the data (see Section 10).
Moreoveritgivesformalquantitativesupporttodeepideasformulatedpreviouslyonly
in words by Schumpeter and Minsky. To develop this effective mezoscopic formulation
in an growth economics context, we start below from the simplest endogenous economy
growth model [6].
6 The AK model and its multi-component heterogenous extensions
The AK model describes the growth process starting from two assumptions:
1. that the current flow of output goods Y is proportional to the stock of capital K
(which aggregates physical, human and intellectual capital):
Y = AK (29)
where A is a constant [35], and
2. thatthecapitalaccumulationintimedK/dtasadifferencebetweentheinvestment
(assumed equal to the savings which in turn are assumed proportional to Y) and
the capital depreciation (assumed to be proportional to K):
By substituting Y from Eq. 29 into Eq. 30, one obtains the differential equation describ-
ing the growth of the economy in the AK model:
where g is defined as in Eq. 4 with of course new, different interpretations of the K
variable and the s, A, δ constants.
This establishes the formal equivalence of the Malthus Eq. 3 to the endogenous
growth model Eq. 31. In fact, as mentioned above, we chose intentionally notations that
while non-standard in the agent-based models, are familiar to the AK practitioners.
Thisisamathematicalequivalencebetweentheequationsexpressinglifere-production
and the equations expressing capital reproduction. They both share the autocaliticity
property that the variation dK/dt of K is proportional to K itself. We will argue below
thatthisautocatalyticbehavioristheverybasisoftheemergenceofmostmacroeconomic
phenomena out of microeconomic individual interactions.
11Popper called science "the art of over-simplification".
As with Eqs. 3, 5, the simplest endogenous growth model Eq. 31 where A and K are
scalars cannot describe systems which consist of heterogeneous components: very often
a macroeconomic system consists of many interacting subsystems with different natural
resources, different labour prerequisites and different socio-economic structures. The
inhomogeneity can be among regions in real geographical space [18] or among sectors
in the space of products [36] or among the economic sectors [37]. Thus rather than
lumping all capital in one number, K has to be generalized to a collection of interacting
heterogenous parts [38], each with a growth rate governed by different coefficients and
interactingamongthemselves. Infactwewillfindinthispaperthatthegranularityofthe
emergentcollectiveobjectsthatcomposethesystemdeterminesthecharacteristicsofthe
time evolution of the system as a whole: the individuals wealth distribution determines
the fluctuations of the stock market indices Fig. 1, the economic sectors determine the
GDP cycles behavior Fig. 5, the geographical regions determine the system behavior
after shocks Fig. 6 etc.
The interaction between the microeconomic heterogenous elements, leads to a wide
range of non-trivial consequences: self-organization, emergence of adaptive collective
objects and anomalous resilience [25].
The choice of the nature and scale of the parts composing K(t) and of the space in
which they act is a crucial modeling decision which has to be adapted to the specific
application. In [25] the discrete agents k moved in a space background populated by
growth agents a. The agents k and a as well as the space in which they diffuse admit
an extensive range of interpretations and of coarser , mezoscopic representations. In this
paper we will refer only to three examples:
• the space is the network of individual investors, the number of k on a node is
the investor’s capital, the links represent capital flow between the investors and
the number of a’s on a site is proportional to the returns the investor is getting
(k proliferation). This model is the micro-economic basis for the mezo-economic
effective model discussed in Section 7.
• the space is the network of geographical locations, the a’s are people’s capabili-
ties, k are companies. This is the microeconomic foundation for the Poland post-
liberalization mezo-economic discussion in Sections 9-10.
• the space is the supplier-client production network. Links represent client-supplier
relationships. The amount of k’s on a given node is the capital of the company and
the a its productivity. The mezo-economic counterpart is the space where nodes i
are economic sectors, K are their capital, links are capital transfer lines A ’s. A
are intrinsic growth rates of the sectors i. This is the basis for the discussion in
[20] [19], Section 9 and Figs. 3 and 5.
Asmentionedabove,theanalytictreatmentofsystemswithinfinite(’thermodynamic
limit’) or very large number of components requires the use of heavy combinatorial,
renormalization group or branching random walks techniques. This often makes less
evident the crux of the matter.
The spontaneous emergence of the mezoscopic adaptive self-organizing objects is the
key to the outstanding resilience of the economic systems. Political regimes that try to
eliminate the heterogeneity (inequality) in the system and / or the fluctuating nature of
its time evolution, prepare the way to their own demise.
In the remaining sections we introduce a mezoscopic representation of the systems
where the herds / clusters / individual capital lumps are considered as the elementary
objects. Rather than following up their spontaneous emergence from the microscopic
interactionsasinSections4-5weincludethemexplicitlyinthemodelfromthebeginning
and study their consequences.
Thus, instead of splitting the total macroscopic K into a multitude of heterogeneous
interacting agents k, we will only generalize K to a vector K(cid:126) whose components k
represent the capital in different parts of the economy:
K(cid:126)(t) ≡ (k ,k ,...,k ). (32)
Appropriately, as opposed to Eqs. 3, 31, G(cid:126) is not a scalar anymore, but it is a matrix of
elements that represent inflow and outflow between the elements of the vector K(cid:126). Thus
we reach as a hetrogenous generalization of Eq. 31 the system of linear equations:
dK(cid:126)
In the case in which G(cid:126) does not depend on time, the formal solution is:
K(cid:126)(t) = eG(cid:126)tK(cid:126)(0). (34)
Or more explicitly,
K(cid:126)(t) = < K(cid:126)(0),(cid:126)u > eλit(cid:126)u , (35)
where N is the dimension of G(cid:126), and λ and (cid:126)u are its eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
However, we will also discuss here the interesting cases where G(cid:126) changes in time.
The components of K(cid:126) can represent economic clusters, sectors, geographic regions,
investorsorcompanies. ThustheelementsoftheG(cid:126) matrixcanrepresentcapital(wealth)
transfer between either geographical domains or transfers between economic sectors, or
the gains of various companies or investors. In the case where the components are
different economic sectors, the matrix G(cid:126) is similar to the Leontief matrix (except that
it includes endogenously the demand term by including labor, consumption etc). In this
interpretation,eachcolumnofG(cid:126) reportsthemonetaryvalueofasector’s(orgeographical
region) inputs and each row represents the value of its outputs. The K(cid:126)(t) components
can still be connected to the (aggregated) capital in each component of the economy
but the connection to the GDP is more complicated because it depends on the details
of the payments within and between the various components. We will thus consider the
aggregated capital K (t) to be the sum over the K(cid:126) components:
where k (t), k (t), ···, k (t) are the components of the vector K(cid:126)(t).
Assuming similarity to Eq. 29, the GDP Y (t) is still proportional to K (t) but
in a rather complicated way that is largely missed by the coarse representation of the
payments that G(cid:126) contains. This similarity extends to the it changes in the individual
capitals k (t): the change in the total wealth ∆K is the sum of the (asynchronous)
changes in the individual wealths ∆k which in turn are proportional (in a complicated
matriceal, stochastic way) to the k themselves.
7 Granular individual wealth, intermittent macroeconomic returns, Pareto
law and Levy walks
As mentioned above, in the generic case the matrix G(cid:126) varies in time. The fact that
the microscopic agents a are dynamic reflects into the fact that G(cid:126) is not a constant
either. In particular, because of the exponential in Eq. 34, any additive change in G(cid:126)
leads to a multiplicative change in K(cid:126)(t). Thus the changes in the individual wealths are
proportional to the wealths themselves via a random factor. This has been confirmed in
[14].
The last paragraph implies that the changes in the total wealth constitute a sequence
of jumps proportional to the wealths of the individual economic players. This prediction
has been formalized in [12], [13] in a relation between the granularity of the individual
wealths at a certain time and the market index fluctuations in the same period. In terms
of the present paper this means that the exponent in Eq. 24 (Pareto-Zipf distribution of
the wealth of the largest investors) and the exponent in Eq. 28 (the exponent character-
izing the fractal distribution of returns of the stock market index) are equal. This has
been very precisely confirmed by subsequent empirical measurements (Fig. 1).
Beyondtheacademicinterestofhavingempiricalconfirmationstotheoreticalmodels,
this relation between the measure of inequality in the wealth (Pareto exponent) and the
measure of instability in the financial markets (fractal exponent of the market fluctua-
tions) has important practical and social interest. It shows that social inequalities are
not only morally and socially problematic, but they are endangering the interests of the
capital itself. Limiting the wealth inequality is a capital interest not less that an interest
of the humans involved in the economy.
If one interprets the individual capital clusters K(x,t) as the wealth of the individ-
uals and the stock market index as a measure of the capital K(t) in the system, then
one predicts that the time changes in K(t) are proportional to the relative sizes of the
individuals’ wealth. This prediction is validated by the subfigures (a), (b) and (c) in Fig.
1:
(a) representsthedistributionofwealthsizesofthe(richest)individualsinUS.Itturns
out this is close to a power law with Pareto exponent α (Eq. 24).
(b) represents the height (∼1/width) of the distribution of returns in the (S&P) stock
market index as a function of the time interval on which the returns are measured.
It is well approximated by a power law with fractal exponent β (Eq. 28).
(c) representsthevaluesofα(bluecircles)andβ (redcrosses)for3westerneconomies.
As predicted by the theory, the 2 exponents, while very different for the different
countries, are equal for each country, α = β. Thus the granularity of wealth at a
given time determines the amplitudes of the fluctuations of the total wealth of the
system.
In terms of the possible values for α one distinguishes 3 regimes:
1. For α > 2 one recovers the Gaussian random walk. The granularity of the indi-
vidual wealths is not felt at the macroscopic level because there are no individuals
with macroscopically significant wealth / capital. Thus, the fluctuations of the
total wealth in the system (e.g. market index) are the result of many microscopic
contributions which cancel one another in great measure and keep the system free
of macroscopic fluctuations. The system is very stable as a result of a rather egal-
itarian wealth distribution among the players / traders / investors.
2. for 1 < α < 2 the fluctuations are larger and the probability to be at origin after a
time t decreases much faster then in the Gaussian case. More precisely the speed
by which the system gets away from the original value Eq. 28 (in the Appendix 59)
is dictated by the same exponent α that characterizes the wealth size distribution
given by Eq. 24) (in the Appendix 54). In particular the fluctuations have a
divergent second momentum (square standard deviation). Thus, while the largest
individual players have substantially smaller wealth than the entire wealth in the
system, their anomalous power law distribution of wealth influences the market
fluctuations making the volatility of the order of the macroscopic system wealth
rather then the naively expected 1/ number of individual agents.
3. for α < 1 the fluctuations are so strong that essentially the system is completely
dominated by the largest steps sizes. For this case virtually the entire wealth of
the system is concentrated in a very small number of players and their individual
actions directly impact on the market index. Thus large wealth inequality ends up
in very dangerous financial market instability [32] [30].
Whilemostoftheeconomiesareinthecase2when1 < α < 2(asseeninFig. 1)thereare
examplesofcountrieslikeArgentina,Brasil,formerUSSRcountriesafterliberalizationin
whichatleasttemporarilytheinequalityreachedα < 1andresultedinfinancialmayhem
Moreover, as seen in the next sections, the α < 1 regime in which the most of the
system is dominated by a very small number of the largest components is capable to
describe and predict the typical behavior of economic cycles .
In fact the present treatment in which different regimes differ by just the value of a
single parameter (α) blurs - and even gives the hope of erasing - the boundaries between
micro- and macroeconomics. If successful, this would be truly a realization of Aoki’s
vision.
8 Schumpeter’s creative destruction and the universal ’crossing expo-
nentials’ pattern
One can go now one step beyond the statistical connection between the macroeconomic
dynamics and the economy granular structure: one can connect the time variations in K(cid:126)
to specific events in G(cid:126) which affect deferentially the K(cid:126) components.
In[27]itwasprovenanalyticallythatthemicroscopicstochasticadensityfluctuations
lead to the creation and destruction of macroscopic collective objects.
Thegrowth/shrinkingofthoseobjectsturnedouttoberesponsibleforaveryspecific
universal pattern that appears ubiquitously in the time evolution of the global system.
We call this pattern the ’crossing exponentials’. The ’crossing exponentials’ pattern is
the quantitative and visual expression of the Schumpeter ’creative destruction’ idea.
In the following we will express mezoscopically this empirically observed economic
dynamics as the effect of sudden discontinuous changes in the matrix G(cid:126). These jumps
in G(cid:126) may correspond to the changes produced by innovation or any other endogenous
or exogenous changes in the economy. Obviously, such changes affect differently the
different components of the economy and even initiate dramatic events like the dismiss
or the inception of entire economic sectors or production technologies.
The fact that these changes can be reduced at the macro-economic scale to discon-
tinuous changes in a low-dimensional matrix G(cid:126) is a non-trivial hypothesis (suggested by
the above mentioned previous microscopic studies and by Schumpeter’s analysis). This
hypothesis has to be confronted with the empirical data in the same way in which the
hypotheses underlying the microscopic model Eqs. 1, 2 have been confronted with the
empirical growth data in [18].
Todothis, weexposeinthenextsectionstheimplicationsofthemezoscopicG(cid:126) model
of Schumpeterian creative destruction and compare them with the empirical data. The
main predictions, confirmed by the empirical data will be:
• Betweenthe shocks ofthe matrixG(cid:126) the model Eq. 33 representsa quasi-stationary
economy: if the matrix G(cid:126) is constant for a long enough time, the economy reaches
a steady state in which it grows at a constant rate, preserving the ratios between
its sectors sizes.
• UponagenericchangeinthematrixG(cid:126) thesystementersanexponentiallydecaying
phase of destruction with various components having different different growth /
decay rates.
• Eventually the system reaches a new steady state of uniform growth rate for the
entireeconomy(stillwithlargedifferencesintheabsoluteGDPpercapitaofvarious
components).
We present below the simple case of a 2x2 G(cid:126) matrix. While in detailed empirical studies
we considered matrices as large as 3000x3000 (e.g. for the Polish post-liberalization
application Fig. 6) or spatially extended systems with millions of agents a and k cf. Eqs.
1, 2, as in [30], [29], the 2x2 example provides a surprisingly good fit (Figs. 2, 3) to many
real economic events (e.g. Fig. 5).Remarkably, it does it very economically in the Occam
razor sense by invoking a very small number of parameters that can be readily calibrated
[19]. In the cases where we were able to get enough detailed data the explanation for
this remarkable simplicity is the dominance of the exponentials over other functional
dependencies in the system. More precisely, it has been found in [20] that after a shock,
the economic sectors can be lumped to a good approximation in 2 parts / herds:
• the part that dominated the economy until the shock and undergoes destruction
following the shock.
• a part that was rather obscure before the shock but it is the main beneficiary of
the changes and undergoes Schumpeter creative growth in the aftermath.
If the 2 parts are not significantly disjoint, the shock is mild or even not deserving
the classification as a shock.
If the 2 parts are disjoint to a significant degree, then the dynamics of the system is
dominated by 2 processes taking place in parallel:
• Thepartoftheeconomythatisfavoredaftertheshockstartsgrowingexponentially.
By definition, having a limited overlap with the old dominant part, it starts with a
size that is a small part of the entire economy. However given its growth with the
new, dominant growth rate, it eventually becomes the largest part of the economy,
dictating in particular the overall growth rate of the entire economy.
• The part of the economy that dominated the economy before the shock undergoes
an exponential decay. While at the beginning it constituted the largest part of the
economy and imposed the overall growth / decay rate, at some stage it shrinks to
a sub-dominant position. Its growth may be eventually restored only in as far as
it interacts with (and benefits from transfers / business from) the new growing,
dominant part of the economy.
This trivial example gives an additional illustration of the following facts.
• If G(cid:126) is a matrix, even if the average of its elements is a negative constant, one can
get rather than an exponential decay in K (t) as suggested by Eq. 4, an overall
exponentially growing trend for K (t) in Eq. 12 and Eq. 35.
• Immediately after changes in G(cid:126) (representing punctuated interesting events, such
asspectacularcrisesandreforms)oneobservesadecreasingexponentialdecayeven
if on long range the growth is accelerated.
• As opposed to the typical depiction of the economic cycle fluctuations where both
the maxima and the minima are smooth, the model predicts that the maxima are
cusps. In between them, K(t) is a sum of 2 exponentials (corresponding to the
old and new dominant economy components e.g. Fig. 5) with a smooth bottom.
We will call this generic scenario the Schumpeter ’crossing exponentials’ after-shock
effect. Even in the cases where one considers more than 2 parts, the corrections are
negligible because the largest exponentials before and after the shock will dominate [18].
Eveninthecaseswheretheshockadvantagesthenewsector/regionwithoutsuppressing
the first, one still has a crossing in the relative weight of the old and new sectors and an
eventual dominance of the growth rate of the new sector. Such shocks are less dramatic
than the usual ones in which the new sector is advantaged on the expense of the old
sector. However, with enough (quarterly) time resolution one can detect in the empirical
data that the growth of economies is generically a sequence of such crossings [19].
It is still non-trivial that the transition between regimes can be described by punctu-
ated changes in the matrix G(cid:126) rather than a smooth evolution of it. We connect it with
the existence, emergence and collapse of the adaptive collective objects discovered in the
context of the microscopic models [25], [30].
The 2x2 model described in the next section translates the intuitive but brilliant
narrative of Schumpeter into a mathematically precise formulation which takes into ac-
count in a quantitative way the overlap between the new and old sectors favored by the
dynamics before and respectively after the shock. As it turns out, the predictions of this
simplified model are quantitatively confirmed by the empirical data.
An effect which is missed (or rather included by hand / by dictum) through the
reduction of the model to just 2 components is the extreme resilience of the system with
many components. Indeed as found in [25] and [26], when the number of components
diverges to infinity, the system’s resilience diverges too (at least in the 2D geographical
case).
This is because the probability P that with a random choice of the new A(cid:126) and G(cid:126)
matrices one still has at least one growing component approaches P = 1. This implies
that even economic systems with zero-intelligence investors survive if they are diverse
enough and if the capital is reinvested in the neighborhood of the sector in which it was
created.
Inthe2x2example,thiseffecthastobeincluded’byhand’: inordertoobtaingrowth,
at least one of the 2 sectors (the new one) has to be assigned a positive intrinsic growth
rate. Thus, unlike the many-agent model Eqs. 1, 2 where the emergence of a positive
growth subsystem S is guaranteed cf. Eq. 14 with probability of 1, Eq. [25], in the 2x2
G(cid:126) matrix model of creative destruction this has to be built in as one of the assumptions.
Still the agreement of its predictions with the empirical measurements makes this
modelusefulbothconceptuallyandasaregulation,forecastandpolicytool. Inparticular
the dependence of the dynamics on the off-diagonal terms allows to find the optimal
balance between attenuating the pains of the short range recession (by supporting the
old part of the economy) without sacrificing the long term recovery (which depends on
allowing the new part to take off as soon as possible). This is explained below and in
Fig. 3.
9 Quantitative predictions of the Schumpeter creative destruction model
One of the difficulties in following the ideas underlying the models that bridge between
themicroandmacrolevelsistheratherinvolvedmathematicalformalism. Inthissection
we will try to avoid it. We will explain some of the effects through the intermediary of
an effective model that lumps the agents in just two sectors. In spite of this gross
oversimplification the similarity of its predictions (Figs. 2 and 3) to the data (Fig. 5) is
still remarkable.
Such a reduction of the number of parameters is often suggested by the data: in
the original analysis of the Polish economy after liberalization, the behavior of the 3000
counties was grouped in 6 herds according to their education level. Of course a priori one
does not know the necessary and sufficient level of resolution for a particular application.
A posteriori one could represent the post-liberalization dynamics in terms of just two
groups / herds:
• the’new’sectorflourishingafterliberalization(16countieswith11.5ormoreschool-
ing years per capita), and
• the ’old’ sector hit by liberalization (most of the other counties).
The economy of a country with just two sectors is represented cf. Eq. 33 by a differential
2x2 matrix equation that can be decomposed in its orthonormal components:
dK(cid:126)(t)
=< K(cid:126)(t),(cid:126)u > λ (cid:126)u + < K(cid:126)(t),(cid:126)u > λ (cid:126)u (37)
1 1 1 2 2 2
where(cid:126)u ,(cid:126)u arethe2eigenvectorsofthe2x2matrixG(cid:126). λ andλ aretheirrespective
eigenvalues. To obtain Eq. 37 from Eq. 35, we have used:
• the fact that one can decompose the vector K(cid:126) in terms of the orthonormal basis
(cid:126)u , (cid:126)u ((cid:126)u ⊥(cid:126)u ,<(cid:126)u ,(cid:126)u >= 0,<(cid:126)u ,(cid:126)u >= 1,<(cid:126)u ,(cid:126)u >= 1),
1 2 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2
K(cid:126)(t) =< K(cid:126)(t),(cid:126)u >(cid:126)u + < K(cid:126)(t),(cid:126)u >(cid:126)u (38)
• The fact that (cid:126)u and (cid:126)u are eigenvectors of G(cid:126):
G(cid:126) ·(cid:126)u = λ ·(cid:126)u (39)
1/2 1/2 1/2
The analytic solution of this linear homogenous 2x2 differential system Eq. 37 is plotted
in Fig. 2 :
K(cid:126)(t) =< K(cid:126)(0),(cid:126)u > eλ1t(cid:126)u + < K(cid:126)(0),(cid:126)u > eλ2t(cid:126)u , (40)
where the K(cid:126)(0) vector represents the initial conditions before the shock. Assuming that
before the shock the ’old’ sector k (t) has been dominant, and the ’new’ sector k (t) has
been undeveloped implies k (0) >> k (0).
Figure2: Aftershocktimeevolutionofthe2x2Schumpetercreativedestruction
The graphs describe the development of an economy with two sectors after an initial
shock. The intrinsic growth rate of the new sector is positive g = 0.15 while the
one of the old sector is negative g = −0.35. Their average growth rate is is negative
g = −0.1 which means that a scalar model aggregating them would predict the decay of
the economy. The transfer terms between sectors are g = 0.1,g = 0.1. The initial
conditions are described by the vector K(cid:126)(0) = [k (0) = 1,k (0) = 0.01]. We take the
initial ratio of new to the old component 0.01 because as it turned out in the Poland
application (Fig. 6) the number of counties leading the ’new’ economy was 16 while the
ones representing the ’old’ decaying economy was about 100 larger.
The graphs display the main universal characteristics of the 2x2 Schumpeter creative
destruction model:
A. Immediately after the shock, the growth rates diverge: the old sector k (t) (pink
triangles) decreases exponentially (rougly with decay rate g ) while the new sector k (t)
(black circles) increases exponentially (rougly with decay rate g ).
B. The 2 exponentials cross at the bottom of the crisis (the minimum of K (t) =
k (t)+k (t) represented by the blue interrupted line).
C. After some time, the growth rates of the 2 sectors dk (t)/dt and dk (t)/dt allign and
both equal λ (the largest eigenvalue of the matrix G(cid:126).
D. However, the difference between the values of k (t) and k (t) increases exponentially
keeping their ratio roughly at the level of the capital transfer term k (t)/k (t) → g
from the new sector to the old one.
For definiteness, we also assume that the largest eigenvalue of G(cid:126) is λ = λ > λ .
This is natural because by the choice g < 0, g > 0 the eigenvector(cid:126)u =(cid:126)u is closer
11 22 max 2
tothevectorrepresentingthe’new’growingsectordirection(0,1)thantothe’old’(1,0).
Let us assume for clarity and in accordance with the discussion above that the com-
ponent of K(cid:126)(t) representing the ’old’ sector k (t) has after the shock a negative intrinsic
growthrateg < 0whilethe’new’sectork (t)hasapositiveintrinsicgrowthrateg > 0
12. The flows of capital between the sectors are parameterized by the off-diagonal G(cid:126) el-
ements. We will assume later that the regulators have the possibility to modify those
flows.
TheanalyticsolutiongivenbyEq. 40isshowninFig. 2. Thetotalsizeoftheeconomy
is cf. Eq. 36 represented by K (t) = k (t)+k (t) and has a ’crossing exponentials’
shapewiththeoldsectork (t)initiallydecayingandthenewsectork (t)increasing. This
illustrates the underlying Schumpeterian creative destruction economic process: the old
sector decays exponentially while the new sector expands exponentially.
The empirical data of Fig. 6 clearly confirms this behavior: immediately after the
shock the economic activity in some of the counties more than doubles while in the rest
of the country it almost halves.
This ’crossing exponentials’ (Eq. 40) behavior after a shock has been empirically
confirmed in tens of cases [19]. A sharper version of the ’crossing exponential’ effect
happens when a new, second shock takes place while the system is still recovering from
the first shock. This sudden new switch between the leading and decaying sectors leads
to the prediction of a very specific signal shown in Fig. 3, which is very closely confirmed
by empirical data Fig. 5: the initial sum of decaying+growing exponentials is abruptly
broken and a new one, with a similar crossing exponentials structure, Eq. 40. Conse-
quently, a very sharp cusp signal is associated with the timing of the second shock. The
off-diagonal terms of G(cid:126) are important because:
• theinitialresourcesoftheoldsector1arebeingusedthroughg > 0tojump-start
the new sector 2. (even an exponential factor cannot enhance a (almost) vanishing
initial value).
• Reciprocally, the exponentially growing wealth produced by the new sector 2 is
eventually used through g > 0 to support the growth of the otherwise decaying
old sector 1.
• eventually after shrinking to its new natural size, the old sector will grow at the
same rate with now leading new sector . Its relative size to it will be dictated by
the flow of capital g that it gets from the new sector.
More practically relevant, by controlling g and g , a government can enforce its
policy by stimulating or suppressing the transfer of funds between the two sectors. Let
12Thisisnotanecessaryassumption. SmallershocksliketheonesinFinlandandBritaindiscussedin
the Section 10 do not lead to negative g but only to an exchange in the relation between the intrinsic
growth rates of different parts of the economy: from g > g to g < g . To detect with precision
11 22 11 22
such shocks one needs finer GDP time resolution : quarterly rather than annually
Figure 3: Shock in the middle of the recovery
The hypothesis that underlies the matrix Schumpeter creative destruction model is that
the microscopic agents model Eqs. 1, 2 dynamics is dominated by the appearance and
disappearance of the dominant herds of k. In the mezo-economic level, where the mi-
croscopic agents are aggregated in herds rather than in a global representative agent
this is represented as a change in the growth matrix G(cid:126). The present graph starts with
K(0) = [k (0) = 1,k (0) = 0.1], and G(cid:126) = [g = −0.35,g = 0.1,g = 0.1,g = 0.15]
1 2 11 12 21 22
and develops the usual cross-exponential pattern. However, at t = 8, one modifies the
growth matrix to G(cid:126) = [g = 0.15,g = 0.1,g = 0.1,g = −0.35]. This sharply stops
11 12 21 22
the current cross exponential pattern and starts a new one.
The signal is very sharp and unambiguous: as opposed to the typical depiction of the
economic cycle fluctuations where both the maxima and the minima are smooth, the 2x2
Schumpeter creative destruction model Eq. 33 predicts that the maxima are cusps. In
between, K(t) is a sum of 2 exponentials (corresponding to the old and new dominant
economy components) with a smooth bottom.
As seen in Fig. 5 , the empirical data greatly validate this.
This pattern is also quite universal: it has been found also in real estate, population
dynamics and many other systems.
us assume that initially the two sectors have been independent g = g = 0 and
the government decides to use taxes to compensate partially their inequality [19]. The
resulting G(cid:126) matrix will be:
(cid:20) (cid:21)
g −µ/2 µ/2
G(cid:126) = 11 (41)
µ/2 g −µ/2
Fig. 4 shows the effects of the transfer policy for different values of the transfer
parameter µ. For its relevance to real economic crises see the discussion in Section 10.
In the case when there is almost no transfer between sectors (red curve, µ = 0.0001), the
recovery is very strong but only after having a very large and deep recession bottoming
out at roughly t = 45. By that time many companies and humans may have incurred
irreparable damage and suffering. Such a scenario is close to what actually happened
during the shock therapy in Poland.
A moderate transfer can make the crisis shallower but longer in time (blue line,
µ = 0.05). Moreover, this would imply a longer recovery period and a penalty in the
growth rate with which the economy exits the crisis. The example of Japan comes to
ones mind.
An exaggerated wish for equality, enforced by a large transfer could even lead to a
continuous crisis and no recovery at all. This is seen in the µ = 0.1 curve in Fig. 4. The
collapse of the communist economies is an illustration of this effect.
Thiseffectiveanalysismethodallowsforpredictionoftheeffectofinterventionpolicies
and the speed of the recovery. Challet et al [19] considered a dynamically optimized
transfer between sectors in which µ changes with the stages of the process. This allowed
to reduce the initial shrinking /destruction of the economy due to the negative growth
rate of the ’old’ sector without endangering the speedy and full recovery of the economy.
Let us now discuss the behavior of the solution Eq. 40 for long periods of time
between the jumps in G(cid:126). For t → ∞ both components k (t) and k (t) of K(cid:126) will grow
exponentially with the same exponent equal to the highest eigenvalue λ :
K(cid:126)(t → ∞) =< K(cid:126)(0),K(cid:126) > eλmaxtK(cid:126) (42)
This leads to the conclusion that the growth rate of the total economy as well as the
growth rate of the individual sectors will align with the slope given by the maximal
eigenvalue λ . The relative size of the sectors will be then fixed in asymptotic time
and equal to the ratio of the components of eigenvector K(cid:126) :
This property that for asymptotically large times, in between G(cid:126) shocks, the economy
reaches a steady state in which the sectors have the same exponential growth is true in
general according to Frobenius-Perron theorem. One can see the empirical confirmation
of this alignment of the growth rates in Fig. 6 after 1995. See the alignment of different
Figure 4: Size of total economy versus time for various values of the transfer
policy parameter µ
The initial values are K(cid:126)(0) = [k (0) = 0.1,k (0) = 0.9].
The 2x2 growth matrix after the shock is
11 12 21 22
One sees there is a trade-off between avoiding short-term sacrifices and between ensuring
long term prosperity:
- while the hands-off shock-therapy in post-liberalization Poland was a posteriori criti-
cized for its extreme human sufferance costs, it insured as seen in the Fig. 6 the quick
recovery of even the least developed corners of the country. This is similar to the red
µ = 0.00001 graph.
- on the other hand, the Soviet reluctance to allow the creative destruction of the artifi-
cially upheld industrial and agricultural production modes let eventually to its demise.
This is similar to the µ = 0.1 graph.
- somewhat in the middle, the current policy of the US government and Fed has too
many elements of supporting old dominant economic institutions and industries on the
expense of the new emerging ones. One should be aware that this might affect the long
term future growth as in the pink µ = 0.05 graph (similarity to the Japan handling of
sectorswithinanationaleconomyaswellasthealignmentofdifferentnationaleconomies
During the period of stability, the matrix G(cid:126) has properties that recall very much the
Leontief matrix. However, Leontief did not consider shocks in G(cid:126) nor their implications
for the growth rates:
• the divergence of growth rates immediately after the shock,
• the crossing exponential in the transition period and
• the alignment of the growth rates for asymptotic times.
Thus, one of the criticisms to Leontief theory was that different countries would have
different growth rates. The above analysis shows on the contrary, that once the transfers
g betweenthecomponents(countiesorcountries)ofaninteractingeconomicsystemare
introduced, the model predicts the asymptotic convergence of their growth rates. The
theoretical analysis and the empirical confirmation of this effect in the inter-countries
data was presented in detail in [20].
The present framework has a significant unifying potential in as much as it merges in
a common conceptual framework the ideas of Schumpeter creative destruction, an agent
model extension of the AK model, Leontieff matrix, Pareto scaling, Levy distributions,
Simon-Mandelbrot skew distributions and cyclic economic behavior.
10 Empirical validation of the theoretical predictions
We discuss below some empirical results that confirm the theoretical analysis in the
previous sections.
The cross-exponentials recovery pattern was detected in many ex-communist coun-
triesafterthefalloftheoldregime. Inseveralcountries,evena’doublecross-exponentials’
pattern(2successivecross-exponentialpatterns)asdepictedinFig. 5)hasbeenrecorded.
In a high resolution time series of Britain and Finland GDP 1990-2008, the entire
range of 70 quarters was fitted with high precision in terms of cross-exponential episodes
separatedbycuspsrepresentingshocks/crises[19]. InthecaseofFinlandonehadjust2
cross exponential episodes: the first between the 1990 recession and the dot.com bubble
burst in 2001 and the second between 2001 and the 2008 recession. In the case of Bitain
one had an additional shock in 1995 connected to the real estate bubble burst and an
additional small one in 2004.
This demonstrates the possibility to precisely identify the shocks that start the eco-
nomic cycles and model the economy as a sequence of such Schumpeterian creation-
destruction episodes in terms of collective objects / herds that appear and disappear
after shocks (marked by up-oriented cusps (Λ shape)). The identification of the
granular structure of the economy in terms of those large lumps of capital / production
allows the evaluation and prediction of the expected fluctuations in the economy as a
whole.
Figure 5: Crossing exponentials events in real sector economy of different countries [19]:
Bulgaria (a), Czech republic (b) and Romania (c) caused by different types of financial
shocks. In these cases, it was possible not only to pin-point the moments of the shock
but in fact one could identify the actual events that caused those shocks. Some of those
shocks were endogenous (deficit) and some exogenous (government and policy change).
One sees that in confirmation of the main hypothesis of this article (and in agreement
with the Schumpeter / Minsky scenarios) the changes in the economic conditions can
be described by discrete events where the G(cid:126) matrix changes. Indeed this leads to sharp
breaks in the economic dynamics as predicted in Fig. 3. In between those changes the
system is quite precisely following the crossing exponential behavior Eq. 40.
Note that the graphs confirm a strong prediction of the mezo-economic Schumpeter
matrix creative destruction model: the fluctuations can be decomposed into crossing
exponentials (J shape) episodes with smooth minima separated by cusp (Λ shape)
maxima. Notethisisopposedtothetypicaldepictionoftheeconomiccyclefluctuations
whereboththemaximaandtheminimaaresmooth. Thepatternisuniversalandappears
in many other autocatalytic systems in different disciplines.
The plots in Fig. 5 start at the beginning of the liberalization shock. All three
countries in Fig. 5 underwent the second shock in the moment when they were in
a positive growth phase. As mentioned in the Fig. 5 the causes of the shocks were
different: deficit, austerity program, banking crisis. Yet the 3 countries present the same
pattern: the initial decaying exponential+growing exponential pattern was interrupted
for a second one to take place.
This creates the pattern which when iterated is the hallmark of all the autocatalytic
models (microscopic and mezoscopic) described in this paper: fluctuations that consist
of cusps pointing up (Λ shapes) separated by smooth valleys (J shapes) corre-
sponding to the crossing exponentials of the decaying old and expanding new dominant
economy components.
Themodelsdescribedinthispapermayinformtheoptimalredistributionofresources
policy within the economy. One can think how to transfer resources from the new emerg-
ingsectorstotheoldbulkoftheeconomyorvice-versa. AccordingtoFig. 4thepolicyof
transfersbetween the stronger andweaker sectors canmakethe crisisshorter but deeper,
more violent and severe or the opposite. The red line (µ = 0.0001), corresponding to
minimal government intervention is somewhat similar to the case of Poland: the effect of
the liberalization shock was very deep but very short and the recovery was very dramatic
exiting the crisis with a very high growth rate. The blue line (µ = 0.05) in Fig. 4 is
similar with the case of Japan, where upon the triggering of the crisis, the government
decided to intervene maximally to soften the crisis. Contrary to the Schumpeterian doc-
trine of letting the crisis purge the economy of old, unsustainable production methods
and technologies the Japanese government did not hesitate to transfer whatever amounts
were necessary in order to preserve the existing businesses and sectors. As predicted by
the Schumpeterian ideas, this made the crisis much milder but it prolonged it.
Another possibility, corresponding to the black curve in Fig. 4 is to subsidize the old
sector even beyond the minimum necessary to prevent its immediate economic collapse.
Paradoxically, the analysis of the matrix Schumpeter creative-destruction model shows
that this can be the most dangerous choice. An example of the results of such a policy
was the case of Soviet Union. There, the government intervened continuously and sys-
tematically in order to subsidize the old obsolite economy on the expense of the sectors
which - if allowed - had a chance to produce growth. The result was that there was no
recovery but going down from bad to worse. Our models showed that one can design an
interactive policy in which one does not fix from the beginning the amount of transfer
but does it by momentary optimization [19]. Then one can optimize the policy ensuring
both the shallowest crisis and the fastest and most successful recovery.
The transient regime after shock and in particular the growing + decaying (con-
struction+destruction) crossing exponentials have been validated in tens of post-shock
examples in different countries in [19]. The case studied in the finest detail was based on
the annual data for the 3000 regions composing Poland in the years after liberalization
[18]. This was one of the cleanest examples of a creative destruction (of the legacy of
communist economy) which not only the regulators did not try to harness but in fact
deliberately initiated and allowed to unfold to its natural outcome. Because of this, the
liberalization in Poland rightly deserved the label of shock therapy. The Balcerowicz
program (as inspired by the ideas of Jeffrey Sachs) has led to a lot of suffering in the
first years but it lead to a very good take off by the entire country very quickly.
The Poland post-liberalization scenario fits exactly the theoretical predictions of
model Eq. 33 and its agent based version Eqs. 1 and 2: Immediately after the shock
a few growth centers (a herd of 16 counties represented by the black curve in Fig. 6)
emerged with growth rates of 400% per year. At the same time, the economy of most
of the country (the herd represented by the pink curve) collapsed by 50%. Eventually,
by diffusion, the economic recovery spread quickly from the initial herd of 16 counties
throughout the entire economy. After only 5 years the system reached the steady state
(the right side of the Fig. 6 after 1995) where, as predicted by the model, the various
regions converged to a common growth rate.
Note that the convergence in terms of the growth rates is very clear while in terms
of production per capita the data for different counties is still divergent: in Fig. 6 the
difference between the number of enterprises per capita in the most (black) and the least
(pink) educated counties continues to increase after 1995 exponentially with an exponent
equaltotheircommongrowthrate. Thisexplainswhytheconvergence-divergencedebate
in economics was never convincingly settled [6], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43]. The various
measures designed to detect convergence: β-convergence, σ-convergence but were not
Figure 6: The evolution of different components (gminas herds) of the Polish economy
following the liberalization.
The blue squares are based on the empirical data in [18] for the evolution of the most
educated counties (average 12 years of schooling or more).
Theredovalsarebasedtheempiricaldatain[18]fortheleasteducatedcounties(average
8 years of schooling or less).
The (blue dotted and red continuous) lines represents a 2x2 matrix Schumpeterian nu-
merical experiment as in Fig. 2. The graphs and data were shifted vertically to account
for the different number of counties in each set (16 for the most educated and 178 for
the least educated). No effort was made to achieve exact fit between the real system
and the 2x2 numerical experiment, but it is clear that the 2x2 captures the qualitative
characteristics of the empirical data:
- the divergence of the growth rates during the initial Schumpeter creative destruction
phase (before the vertical green line),
- the crossing exponentials, and
- the asymptotic Frobenius-Perron alignment of the growth rates, Eqs. 42, 43 (after the
vertical green line).
able to find definitive evidence for it. This is because they looked for convergence in the
absolutevaluespercapitaofthedomesticproduct. Accordingtothepresent(microscopic
agent based and mezoscopic matrix-like) models (e.g. [18]), what is converging is not the
domesticproductpercapitaofthedifferentregions, butratherthecorrespondinggrowth
rates of it. Once it is realized that this is what should be measured and compared, it
becomes evident e.g. Fig. 6 that such a convergence does take place.
11 Concluding remarks
One of the important lessons from Masanao’s work is the correction of a widespread
misunderstanding in the economics mainstream. This misunderstanding produced and
continues to inflict great damage to the advancement of economics. We are referring
to the urban legend that agent based modelling means simulations. While there are
studies of agent based models that use simulations [44], [45] and much of the results
described above can bereproduced by massive Monte Carlo simulations, we intentionally
emphasized the fact that with appropriate techniques, one can obtain important and
illuminating analytical results. Those results guide the theoretical understanding of the
system in terms of appropriate concepts: scaling, fractals, localization, singularities,
phase transitions, non-ergodicity, etc. The multi-component generalization of the AK
model Eq. 33 capable to unify within the same theoretical formalism the short term
fractal dynamics of markets Section 7 and the long term economic cycles Section 9 is an
indication of the progress one can be expected for the future.
The extraction of quantitative predictions from the multi-agent spatially extended
stochastic models that express the non-equilibrium, non-self-averaging ideas of Masanao
Aoki require results from field theory, master equation, percolation, branching random
walks, stochastic differential systems, renormalization group which we tried to reproduce
above in very simple terms. The present paper follows Aoki’s lead in meeting the great
challenge to overcome the language and social barriers between the disciplinary domains
andconnectthephysicsandmathematicsmethods, ideasandtechniquestotheeconomic
and financial domains that so badly need them. In the next phase, one has to make the
results, conclusions and tools available to the practitioners and the decision makers in
order to help them react to otherwise unexpected crises and opportunities.
The autocatalytic feedback loops techniques touched upon in this paper are capable
of transcending the usual linear causality and to express in rigorous terms the sponta-
neous emergence of qualitatively novel properties as the collective effect of a multitude
of random causes. In order to understand and control the evolution of mass phenom-
ena such as the current crisis, one has to give up the concept of linear causality chains
which associate to each effect a cause. One has to think, rather, in terms of a collec-
tive causality emerging from the microstructure. The existence of interactions between
the components that constitute the system and the system as such renders the system
capable of endogenous creativity and innovation.
The spontaneous emergence of self-organized adaptive collective objects is the key to
a functional economy. With all the penalties that that free capitalist economy has to pay
foritsheterogeneityandinequalityandforitsfractalandcyclicintrinsicfluctuations,this
seems the only viable alternative. As argued by Schumpeter and Minsky, any attempt
to eliminate wealth heterogeneity and / or time fluctuations in the economy, renders
the system dysfunctional. This was confirmed empirically along the history through the
demise of so many regimes that tried to ignore it.
This understanding opens the way of bringing the economic models closer to the real-
ity as perceived by Masanao: capable of endogenous innovation, capable of transcending
the mere implications of their previous time evolution, capable to generate collective ob-
jects with properties that are completely different from the intentions, scales and scope
of the original individual components [18], [46], [47].
As emphasized by Masanao in his work on non-self-averaging [48], [49], [50], a crucial
aspect of economic systems is the irrelevance of statistical averages: while one can define
an average over different realizations of the system, this will be often irrelevant for each
individual realization: once specific individual rare events are promoted to systemic
changes, they cause the system to take dramatically different time trajectories.
Masano’s singular path in science may in itself be an example of an instance in which
a very rare event influenced the collective macroscopic dynamics of the entire system.