MicroRNA Systems Biology
Edwin Wang
1. Biotechnology Research Institute, National Research Council of Canada, 6100 Royalmount Avenue,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, and 2. Center for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Email: Edwin.Wang@cnrc-nrc.gc.ca
Fax : 1-514-496-5143
Tel : 1-514-496-0914
More similar work can be found at: www.bri.nrc.ca/wang
Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as central posttranscriptional regulators
of gene expression. miRNAs regulate many key biological processes, including cell
growth, death, development and differentiation. This discovery is challenging the central
dogma of molecular biology. Genes are working together by forming cellular networks. It
has become an emerging concept that miRNAs could intertwine with cellular networks to
exert their function. Thus, it is essential to understand how miRNAs take part in cellular
processes at a systems-level. In this review, I will first introduce basic knowledge of
miRNAs and their relations to heart disaeses and cancer, highlight recently dicovered
functions such as filtering out gene expression noise by miRNAs. I will aslo introduce
basic concepts of cellular networks and interpret their biological meaning in such a way
that the network concepts are digested in a biological context and are understandable for
biologists. Finally, I will summarize the most recent progress in understanding of miRNA
biology at a systems-level: the principles of miRNA regulation of the major cellular
networks including signaling, metabolic, protein interaction and gene regulatory
networks. A common miRNA regulatory principle is emerging: miRNAs preferentially
regulated the genes that have high regulation complexity. In addition, miRNAs
preferentially regulate positive regulatory motifs, highly connected scaffolds and the
most network downstream components of cellular signaling networks, while miRNAs
selectively regulate the genes which have specific network structural features on
metabolic networks.
1.1 Introduction
According to the central dogma of molecular biology, RNAs are passive messengers and
only take charge of transferring genetic information, or carrying out DNA instructions, or
code, for protein production in cells. However, this central dogma is getting challenged
by the recent findings that tiny fragments of noncoding RNA, typically ~22 nucleotides
in length, namely microRNA (miRNA), are able to negatively regulate protein-coding
genes by interfering with mRNA’s original instructions. Recent studies indicate that
miRNAs have emerged as central posttranscriptional repressors of gene expression.
miRNAs suppress gene expression via imperfect base pairing to the 3′ untranslated region
(3′UTR) of target mRNAs, leading to repression of protein production or mRNA
degradation (Bartel, 2004; Carthew, 2006; Valencia-Sanchez et al. 2006). These
noncoding regulatory RNA molecules have been found in diverse plants, animals, some
viruses and even algae species and it now seems likely that all multicellular eukaryotes,
and perhaps some unicellular eukaryotes, utilize these RNAs to regulate gene expression.
Some researchers claimed that the human genome might encode more than 1,000
miRNAs (Bentwich et al. 2005), however, a recent sequencing survey of miRNA
expression cross 26 distinct organ systems and cell types of human and rodents validated
that only over 300 miRNAs are present in humans and/or rodents (Landgraf et al. 2007).
Computational predictions indicate that thousands of genes could be targeted by miRNAs
in mammals (John et al. 2004; Krek et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2003; Rajewsky, 2006).
Experimental analysis revealed that 100 to 200 target mRNAs are repressed and
destabilized by a single miRNA (Krutzfeldt et al. 2005; Lim et al. 2005; Yu et al. 2007a).
It is estimated that more than one third of human genes are potentially regulated by
miRNAs. These findings suggest that miRNAs play an integral role in genome-wide
regulation of gene expression.
miRNAs regulate many key biological processes, including cell growth, death,
development and differentiation, by determining how and when genes turn on and off.
Animals that fail to produce certain mature miRNAs are unable to survive or reproduce
(Bernstein et al. 2003; Forstemann et al. 2005; Ketting et al. 2001; Wienholds et al. 2003;
Cao et al. 2006; Plasterk, 2006; Shivdasani, 2006). Thus, a single, malfunctioning
microRNA can be sufficient to cause cancer in mice (Costinean et al. 2006). These
discoveries offer new insight into another layer of gene regulation and at the same time
underscore the powerful role that these tiny snippets of non-coding RNA play in cells.
These discoveries indicate that it is no longer the genes, or mRNAs themselves that held
the most intrigue, but the miRNAs that influence their behavior and the result that such
gene regulation process produces. Thus, miRNA has become an important force in
biology.
In cells, genes are not isolated and do not independently perform a single task; instead,
genes are grouped to collaborate and carry out some specific biological function. This
collaborative effort of genes indicates that genes are working together in a cell, and we
can formulate this conceptually depicting the various interactions as cellular networks.
miRNAs can be regarded as regulators that regulate all kinds of cellular networks and can
also be treated as network components that are involved in many cellular functions. Thus,
it is imperative to understand how miRNAs take part in cellular processes at a systems-
level. In this review, I will first introduce basic knowledge of miRNAs, their biogenesis,
functions, and relations to heart disaese and cancer, and then introduce the basic concepts
and biological meaning of cellular networks. Network concepts are borrowed from
mathematics and graph theory, however, I will digest the concepts in a biological context
and make them understandable for biologists. Finally, I will summarize the most recent
progress in understanding of miRNA biology at a systems-level: the principles of miRNA
regulation of the major cellular networks, including signaling, metabolic, protein
interaction and gene regulatory networks.
1.1.1 miRNA biogenesis
miRNAs as posttranscriptional regulatory molecules were first discovered to regulate
expression of partially complementary mRNAs in Caenorhabditis elegans (Lee et al.
1993; Wightman et al. 1993; Moss et al. 1997). miRNAs are encoded in either intergenic
regions of genomes or within introns of known protein-coding genes. miRNAs are
transcribed by RNA polymerase II as long precursor transcripts, which are called primary
miRNAs (pri-miRNAs). The pri-miRNAs are capped and polyadenylated, and can reach
several kilobases in length (Cullen, 2005; Kim, 2005). A single pri-miRNA might contain
one, or up to several miRNAs. Several sequential steps of transcript processing are
required to produce mature miRNAs from pri-miRNAs. In the nucleus, the
microprocessor complex in which the major components are the RNase-III enzyme
Drosha and its partner DGCR8/Pasha (Denli et al. 2004; Gregory et al. 2004; Landthaler
et al. 2004), which are initially recognize pri-miRNAs and then excise the stem–loop
hairpin structure that contains the miRNA, a 60–80 nucleotide intermediate knowen as
precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA) with pri-miRNAs. Exportin-5, a nuclear export factor,
recognizes and transports the pre-miRNAs to cytoplasm (Yi et al. 2003; Bohnsack et al.
2004; Lund et al. 2004). In the cytoplasm, Dicer, a second RNase-III enzyme, cleavages
the pre-miRNAs to generate double-stranded 18–24 nucleotide-long RNA molecules –
miRNAs (Bernstein et al. 2001; Grishok et al. 2001; Hutvagner et al. 2001; Ketting et al.
2001; Knight and Bass, 2001). RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), the core
component of which is the Argonaute protein (Kim, 2005), incorporates one of these two
strands – the guide strand of miRNAs. Finally, the miRNA guides the RISC complex to
the target mRNA to suppress gene expression via imperfect base pairing to the 3′UTR of
target mRNAs, leading to repression of protein production and, in some cases, mRNA
degradation (Bartel, 2004; Carthew, 2006; Valencia-Sanchez et al. 2006).
1.1.2 Biological functions of miRNAs
1.1.2.1 miRNA emerges as a central regulator for development
Several reports indicated that miRNAs repress a large set of targets so that the targets are
expressed at low levels in the miRNA-expressing cells (Krutzfeldt et al. 2005; Lim et al.
2005; Yu et al. 2007a). This might offer a second layer of regulation to reinforce
transcriptional controls at posttranscriptional level. A number of lines of evidence
suggested that miRNAs are involved in regulating developmental processes. We
conducted a genome-wide survey of transcription factor binding sites in the promoter
regions of human genes and found that developmental genes are significantly regulated
by more transcription factors (Cui et al. 2007a). Furthermore, we showed that the more
transcription factors a gene is regulated by, the more miRNAs that gene is regulated by
(Cui et al. 2007a). Certain miRNAs have been suggested to be essential regulators for
developmental programs (Giraldez et al. 2005). For instance, without miR-430, zebrafish
embryos develop defects, which can be rescued and complemented by supplying miR-
430 (Giraldez et al. 2005). Genes in this process by miR-430 seem to be direct miR-430
targets based on miRNA seed matches, are misregulated in the absence of miR-430
(Giraldez et al. 2006). Another example comes from the study of C. elegans miRNAs,
lin-4 and let-7. Without lin-4, C. elegans is unable to make the transition from the first to
the second larval stage due to a differentiation defect, which is caused by a failure to
posttranscriptionally repress the lin-14 gene, which is the target gene of lin-4 (Lee et al.
1993; Wightman et al. 1993). Similarly, without let-7, a failure of larval-to-adult
transition was observed (Reinhart et al. 2000). It is known that lin-41, hbl-1, daf-12 and
the forkhead transcription factor pha-4 are the direct targets of let-7 during this transition
(Abrahante et al. 2003; Grosshans et al. 2005; Slack et al. 2000).
1.1.2.2 miRNAs are involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis
miRNAs have been shown to regulate key genes for tumorigenesis and cancer
progression, which coordinately controls cell proliferation and apoptosis. For instance,
miRNA let-7 promotes tumorigenesis by regulation KRAS and NRAS transcripts
(Johnson et al. 2005). miRNAs are known to regulate pathways controlled by genes like
p53, MYC and RAS. Furthermore, miR17-92 cluster has been shown to be able to act as
a functional switch between cell proliferation and apoptosis.
1.1.2.3 miRNAs act as regulators for noise filtering and buffering
Eukaryotic cells are noisy environments in which transcription often occurs in a bursting
manner, causing the number of mRNAs per cell to fluctuate significantly (Blake et al.
2006; Golding et al. 2005; Raj et al. 2006). Moreover, such fluctuations can propagate
through the network, e.g., fluctuations in the level of an upstream transcription factor can
significantly induce the expression fluctuations of downstream genes (Pedraza and van,
2005; Rosenfeld et al. 2005). In positive regulatory loops, noise or stochastic fluctuations
of gene transcripts and protein molecules leads to randomly switching cell phenotypes in
yeast, while a negative regulator adding in the positive regulatory loops often helps
reducing such noise in biological systems and making a robust decision for cell
development (Acar et al. 2005). Because miRNAs can tune target protein levels more
rapidly at the posttranscriptional level, they might significantly shorten the response
delay and, in turn, provide more effective noise buffering. The miRNA, miR-17 might
play a role in preventing noise-driven transition from apoptosis to cell proliferation. c-
Myc and E2F1 are known to reciprocally activate transcription of one another,
establishing a positive feedback circuit (Fernandez et al. 2003; Leone et al. 1997). This
architectural structure of the circuit makes it possible for miRNAs to support a shift from
apoptosis toward proliferation by repressing E2F1. Expression of E2F1 promotes G1 to S
phase progression by activating genes involved in cell cycle (Bracken et al. 2004). High
expression of E2F1, however, is sufficient to induce apoptosis (Matsumura et al. 2003;
Johnson et al. 1994a; Johnson et al. 1994b). In the absence of additional regulatory
mechanisms, this circuit might be expected to overactivate E2F1, leading to apoptosis.
When c-Myc simultaneously activates E2F1 transcription and miR17-92 cluster, which in
turn negatively regulates E2F1. This might promote a proliferative signal but not a
apoptotic signal. Another example is the fly miR-9a, which is suggested to set up a
‘threshold’ for signals in a positive feedback loop, so that it can filter out noise (Li et al.
2006). Without miR-9a, flies produce extra sense organs (Li et al. 2006). During fly
sensory organ development, a fly gene, senseless expression is activated by proneural
proteins and feedbacks positively to reinforce proneural gene expression. If senseless, the
target of miR-9a, is highly expressed, the defects mentioned above occur. miR-9a has
been suggested to set a threshold that senseless expression has to overcome to induce the
normal developmental program. In agreement with these findings, we found that cross-
species expression divergences of miRNA target genes are significantly smaller than
those of other genes (Cui et al. 2007b). Similar observations have been found between
human and chimpanzee, between human and mouse, Drosophila species, and D.
melanogaster and D. simulans (Cui et al. 2007b). These results suggest that miRNAs
might provide a genetic buffer to constrain gene expression divergence. We showed that
miRNAs preferentially regulate positive regulatory loops (Cui et al. 2006). It is possible
that miRNAs serve to buffer stochastically fluctuating expression of genes in positive
regulatory loop, in turn, provide a common mechanism in buffering gene expression
noise. Buffering by miRNAs decreases the detrimental effects of errors in gene
regulation. miRNA buffering might also provide a way for silence-accumulating
mutations without being subjected to selective forces and thus might contribute to
evolvability.
1.1.2.4 miRNAs might contribute to maintaining tissue identity
We conducted a genome-wide analysis of the expression profiles of mRNA targets in
human, mouse and Drosophila (Yu et al. 2007a). We found that the expression levels of
miRNA targets are significantly lower in all mouse mature tissues and Drosophila later
life stages than in the embryos. These results indicate that miRNAs might play roles in
determining the timing of tissue differentiation during larva period of Drosophila
development and maintaining the tissue identity during the adulthood.
1.1.3 miRNAs in human disease
1.1.3.1 miRNAs and heart diseases
Loss- or gain-of-function of specific miRNAs appears to be a key event in the genesis of
many diverse diseases. Recently, an interesting question how miRNAs influence heart
development and disease has been addressed. Four recent papers highlighted the role of
miRNAs in the heart. These reports showed that miRNAs are essential for heart
development and regulating the expression of genes which take part in cardiac function in
vivo: the conductance of electrical signals, heart muscle contraction, and heart growth
and morphogenesis.
Yang et al. reported a function for miR-1 in heart conductivity. miR-1 levels were
positively correlated with coronary artery disease and rats after cardiac infarction (Yang
et al. 2007). Loss-of-function of miR-1 prevented heart arrhythmia, whereas miR-1
overexpression caused heart arrhythmia in normal and infarcted hearts. They further
showed that both gain- and loss-of-function of miR-1 affect conductivity through
affecting potassium channels. These results suggest that miR-1 has a prominent effect on
the development of cardiac arrhythmia, irregular electrical activity in the heart. In a
separate study, Zhao et al. also focused on miR-1 study by creating mice that are deficient
in a muscle-specific miRNA, miR-1-2 (Zhao et al. 2007). They showed that the miRNA
deficient embryos have cardiac failure and a variety of developmental defects, including
pericardial edema and underdevelopment of the ventricular myocardium, increasing in
cardiomyocyte proliferation and electrophysiological defects, reducing heart rate and
prolonging ventricular depolarization. Interestingly, these phenotypes are similar to the
defects during heart development in zebrafish embryos, when miRNAs are non-
functional (Giraldez et al. 2005). Both studies identify miR-1 targets that might, at least
in part, account for the manifestation of the associated diseases.
In another study, Care et al. found that the muscle-specific miR-133 is a negative
regulator of cardiac hypertrophy which is an essential adaptive physiological response to
mechanical and hormonal stress and heart size (Care et al. 2007). To understand the
molecular mechanism by which miR-133 controls heart size, they showed that Rhoa,
Cdc42 and Whsc2 are the direct targets of miR-133. Moreover, van Rooij and colleagues
found that the heart-specific miRNA miR-208 also modulates the genes that are
controlling the hypertrophic response (van Rooij et al. 2007). The main function of miR-
208 seems to be mediating the switch from expression of the heavy chain of α-myosin to
that of β-myosin during stress or thyroid-hormone-induced cardiac growth (van Rooij et
al. 2007). These results suggest that miR-208 is an important regulator for cardiac growth
and gene expression in response to stress and hypothyroidism.
Taken together, it seems clear that miRNAs have an important role in regulating gene
expression in the heart. These studies indicate that miRNAs are important during heart
development and adult cardiac physiology, and modulate a diverse spectrum of
cardiovascular functions in vivo. These findings revealed a level of molecular control of
heart physiology that is beyond the well-accepted regulatory role of signaling and
transcription factor complexes in the heart. Furthermore, these studies also have
implications for understanding complex pathways, e.g., interactions between miRNAs,
cell signaling and transcription factors, involved in heart diseases, and lead to potential
opportunities in manipulating miRNAs as therapeutic targets.
1.1.3.2 miRNAs and cancer
Human cancer studies are always the hotspots in life science research. Much progress in
miRNAs and cancer has been made significantly in the past few years. Genome-wide
studies of miRNA expression profiling showed that miRNA expression levels are altered
in primary human tumors (Calin et al. 2004; Lu et al. 2005). Significant signatures of
miRNA expression profiles can be linked to various types of tumors, suggesting that
miRNA profiling has diagnostic and perhaps prognostic potential (Lu et al. 2005; Calin
and Croce, 2006). Certain miRNAs could be tumor suppressors, because loss of these
miRNAs is often associated with cancers. miR-15a and miR-16-1 genes are deleted in
most cases of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Calin et al. 2004). Loss of miRNA let-7 in
lung tumors correlates with high RAS protein expression, suggesting that let-7 promote
tumorigenesis by regulation popular oncogenes, KRAS and NRAS transcripts (Johnson et
al. 2005). miR-372 and miR-373 have been shown to be able to overcome oncogenic
Ras-mediated arrest and, therefore, induced tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006). miR-
21 was demonstrated to be consistently upregulated in human glioblastoma tumor tissues,
primary tumor cultures and established glioblastoma cell lines relative to normal fetal and
adult brain tissue (Chan et al. 2005). Knockdown of miR-21 in glioblastoma cell lines
lead to activation of caspases and a corresponding induction of apoptotic cell death.
Furthermore, two rececent studies have placed miR-24 family into the p53 tumor spressor
network. miR-24, regulating apoptosis and cell proliferation, has become an essential
component of the p53 network (He et al. 2007; Raver-Shapira et al. 2007), which is
closely associated with cancer.
1.1.3.3 Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of miRNA binding sites and human
Chen and Rajewsky used human SNP genotype data (25,000 SNPs) generated in the
HapMap and Perlegen projects and mapped onto the 3'-UTR regions of human gene
transcripts (Chen and Rajewsky, 2006). They uncovered that SNP density in conserved
miRNA sites was lower than in conserved control sites. These results indicate that a large
class of computationally predicted conserved miRNA target sites is under significant
negative selection. Similarly, we showed the same trend when mining NCBI’s dbSNP
database (Yu et al. 2007b). These results have implications that SNPs located at miRNA-
binding sites are likely to affect the expression of the miRNA target and might contribute
to the susceptibility of humans to common diseases. Indeed, naturally occurring
polymorphisms in miRNA binding sites have been documented in Tourette's syndrome in
humans and muscularity in sheep. (Abelson et al. 2005; Clop et al. 2006)
Motivated by this concept, we explored the effects of miRNA-binding SNPs on cancer
susceptibility by genome-wide analyzing the data deposited in NCBI’s dbSNP database
and human dbEST database (Yu et al. 2007b). Interestingly, we found that the
frequencies of the minor alleles (non-target alleles) of the miRNA-binding SNPs are
extremely lower. Furthermore, we showed that the average expression level of the non-
target alleles of miRNA-binding SNPs is significantly higher than that of the target
alleles. Moreover, we identified a set of potential candidates for miRNA-binding SNPs
with an aberrant allele frequency present in the human cancer EST database. Finally, we
experimentally validated them by sequencing clinical tumor samples.
Although the miRNA inducing disease studies are still in their infancy, miRNAs are
known to regulate pathways controlled by genes like p53, MYC and RAS. These findings
emphasize the need to integrate the study of miRNA expression and function into other
cellular processes such as signaling, gene regulation, and others in order to achieve a
complete understanding of this group of disorders. Unraveling miRNA regulatory
circuits, even miRNA regulation of cellular networks that are involved in disease
development, is challenging, but is essential to gain a comprehensive understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of the diseases. Luckily, there have been recent developments
in technologies such as microarray and systemic delivery of small RNA systems that
allow high-throughput studies the function of miRNAs (Soutschek et al. 2004; Krutzfeldt
et al. 2005). These approaches provide promise for understanding miRNA function at
systems-level and evenually developing therapeutic strategies based on miRNA
overexpression or inhibition.
1.2 Basic network concepts and their biological meanings
1.2.1 Biological functions and activities are encoded in cellular networks
Traditionally scientists treat cellular events in the view of biological pathways such as
signaling pathways and metabolic pathways, study one pathway at a time and then try to
compile information from a few pathways together to understand what is going on inside
cells. However, enzymes and other proteins, which make up one individual pathway,
rarely operate in isolation but “cross-talk” with another pathway’s enzymes/proteins to
process metabolic flows and signal information. Currently, it is believed that in the cell,
no gene is one island. Biological functions are performed by groups of genes which form
interdependent interactions and complex cellular networks such as signaling networks,
gene regulatory networks and metabolic networks. The biological complexity encoded in
cellular networks has become the core of systems biology (Wang et al. 2007). Therefore,
a network view, or a systems-level view of cellular events emerges as an important
concept.
For a long time, scientists have investigated one gene or one pathway at a time. In
‘omics’ era, various high-throughput approaches such as genome sequencing technology,
microarray technology and proteomic characterization of proteins and complexes have
allowed us to gathering vast amounts of data to construct cellular networks. These efforts
provide an opportunity to investigate cellular processes at a global level, therefore, it is
essential to develop systematic methods for analyzing cellular networks as well as
understanding their properties in a biological context. In the past few years, significant
progress has been made for the identification and interpretation of the structural
properties of cellular networks. This information has shed light on how such properties
might reflect the biological meanings and behaviors of cellular networks (Babu et al.
2004; Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004).
1.2.2 Types and categories of cellular networks
Four types of cellular networks have been found in cells: protein interaction networks,
metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks and signaling networks, which can be
further classified into two categories. Protein interaction networks encode the information
of proteins and their physical interactions. Protein interaction information in the network
ranges from basic cellular machinery such as protein complexes for DNA synthesis,
metabolic enzyme complexes, transcription factor complexes, to protein complexes
involved in cellular signaling. Simply put, a genome-wide protein interaction network
encodes all the protein interaction information cross all biological processes in a cell. A
gene regulatory network describes regulatory relationships between transcription factors
and the protein-coding genes. Similar to protein interaction networks, a gene regulatory
network encodes the gene regulatory information for all biological processes and
activities in a cell. Therefore, I have classified protein interaction networks and gene
regulatory networks into the first category: general network. The second category of
networks identified is: cellular specific network, which encompasses metabolic networks
and signaling networks, describing specific cellular activities. A cellular metabolic
network collects all the metabolic reactions and metabolic flows, while a signaling
network encodes signal information flows and biochemical reactions for signal
transductions. Traditionally, both types of information are presented using pathways, e.g.,
metabolic pathways and signaling pathways. In metabolic network, metabolic pathways
are intertwined so that metabolic flows are transferable across different pathways. Certain
metabolites can be shared and used by many different pathways, while certain end-
product metabolites are able to be produced via bypassing one or several pathways.
Signaling networks illustrate inter- and intracellular communications and information
processing between signaling proteins. In fact, pathway concept gets fuzzy and many
pathways lose their identities in networks (Spirin et al. 2006; Patil and Nielsen, 2005).
1.2.3 The structures of cellular networks are ‘scale-free’
Cellular networks can be presented as either directed or undirected graphs. Usually in
these networks, nodes represent proteins or genes and the links represent the physical
interactions between proteins, gene regulatory relationships, or activation/inactivation
signaling reaction relationships. Notably, signaling networks contain the most
complicated relationships between proteins, e.g., nodes might represent different
functional proteins such as kinases, growth factors, ligands, receptors, adaptors, scaffolds,
transcription factors and so on, which all have different biochemical functions and are
involved in many different types of biochemical reactions that characterize a specific
signal transduction machinery.
One common structural property of cellular networks and other real-world networks is
their ‘scale-free’ topology. In a scale-free network, a small number of nodes act as highly
connected hubs, whereas most nodes have only a few links. For example, a map
describing the air transportation in the United States is a network, in which only a few big
airports (hubs) in big cities such as Boston, New York, Chicago and Los Angles have
many air routes (links) to other airports, while many small airports just have a few air
routes to the nearby big airports. This common structural feature encodes a special
property of these networks: they are robust but also very vulnerable to failure and attack
(Barabasi and Albert, 1999; Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004). In a scale-free network, random
removal of a substantial fraction of the low-linked nodes will make little damage on the
network’s connectivity, however, targeted removal of the hub nodes will easily
disconnect and destroy the network completely, as illustrated by the air transportation
map. Disabling big airports (hubs) will wreak havoc in many ways, while damaging a
few small airports will have little or no effect on overall air transportation. These features
are common in cellular networks too (see next section).
1.2.4 Biological insights of hubs in cellular networks
In gene regulatory networks, hub genes are global transcription factors which govern a
large number of genes in response to internal and external signals. Indeed, hub
transcription factors do control a large spectrum of biological processes through
integrative analysis of the yeast gene regulatory network with gene microarray profiles of
many different cellular conditions (Luscombe et al. 2004). We showed that hub
transcription factors have significantly faster decay rates than non-hub transcription
factors in Escherichia coli gene regulatory network (Wang and Purisima, 2005). The
similar results were observed in yeast recently (Batada et al. 2006). These results suggest
that hub transcription factors facilitate a rapid response of the network to external stimuli
(Wang and Purisima, 2005). In protein interaction networks, hub proteins take part in
many biological processes. Furthermore, hub proteins might be more important for an
organism’s survival. Removal of hub proteins from an organism would have a much
broader effect on the organism than non-hub proteins. Indeed, hub proteins have central
positions in cellular networks and are more essential for the organism’s survival than
other proteins (Babu et al. 2004; Jeong et al. 2001; Wuchty et al. 2006; Wuchty et al.
2003; Calvano et al. 2005). Therefore, the structure of cellular networks not only sheds
light on the complex cellular mechanisms and processes, but also gives insight into
evolutionary aspects of the proteins involved. Hub proteins are more evolutionarily
conserved than non-hub proteins (Saeed and Deane, 2006). One explanation of these
phenomena is that hub proteins are subject to selection pressure and constraints, due to
their involvements in many biological processes and their multiple interacting protein
partners.
In signaling networks, hub proteins are the most usable protein by multiple signaling
pathways. They become information exchanging and processing centers of the network.
Normally hub proteins are conserved across animals. In signaling networks, certain hub
proteins display core genetic buffering properties (Lehner et al. 2006). Similar to
signaling networks, hub enzymes are shared by many metabolic pathways. They become
the center for metabolic flow exchanging. Generally speaking, in specific cellular
networks (singling network and metabolic network), hubs are communication centers for
exchanging information, e.g., signal information and metabolic flows, while hubs in
general networks (gene regulatory networks and protein interaction networks) are central
players involving in broadly biochemical and/or genetic events, e.g., interactions and
gene regulations.
1.2.5 Network motifs, themes and modules
A group of genes/proteins in a cellular network are able to collaborate to perform certain
biological task. We can regard this group of genes as a functional module. Therefore, a
complex signaling network can be broken down into distinct regulatory patterns, or
network motifs, typically comprised of three to four interacting components capable of
signal processing (Babu et al. 2004; Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004). Network motifs are the
smallest functional modules in networks. Network motifs are the statistically significant
recurring structural patterns or small subgraphs or sub-networks that are found more
often in a real network than would be expected by chance (Shen-Orr et al. 2002). In fact,
for a long time, these motifs have been known as gene regulatory loops in biology. In
gene regulatory networks, three major motifs are found in gene regulatory networks:
Single Input Module (SIM), bi-fan and Feedforward Loop (FFL).
It is believed that network motifs have been evolutionarily selected (Conant and Wagner,
2003). In general, positive feedback loops lean to emergent network properties such as
ultrasensitivity, bistability and switch-like behavior, while negative feedback loops
perform adaptation, desensitization, and preservation of homeostasis (Dekel et al. 2005;
Ferrell, 2002; Balazsi et al. 2005; Dekel et al. 2005; Ferrell, Jr., 2002; Luscombe et al.
2004). Another design principle of these motifs is that the transcription factors whose
mRNAs have fast decay rates are significantly enriched in these motifs, suggesting that
motif structures encode a regulatory behavior: network motifs are able to rapidly respond
to internal and external stimuli and decrease cell internal noise (Wang and Purisima,
2005). Both theoretical and experimental studies have shown that network motifs bear
distinct regulatory functions and particular kinetic properties that determine the temporal
program of gene expression (Mangan et al. 2003). Therefore, the frequencies and types of
network motifs with which cells use reveal the regulatory strategies that are selected in
different cellular conditions (Balazsi et al. 2005; Kalir, 2001; Wang and Purisima, 2005).
For example, FFLs are buffers that respond only to persistent input signals (Mangan and
Alon, 2003), which makes them well-suited for responding to endogenous conditions,
while the motifs whose key regulator’s transcripts have a fast mRNA decay rate are
preferentially used for responding to extrogenous conditions (Wang and Purisima, 2005).
In signaling networks, network motifs such as switches (Bhalla et al. 2002), gates
(Ma'ayan et al. 2005; Blitzer et al. 1998), and positive or negative feedback loops provide
specific regulatory capacities in decoding signal strength, processing information and
controlling noise (Dublanche et al. 2006).
Network motifs are not isolated in networks, but form large aggregated structures, called
network themes that perform specific functions by forming collaborations between a
large number of motifs (Zhang et al. 2005). A higher level of aggregation of network
themes can be regarded as network modules.
1.3 Principles of miRNA regulation of cellular networks
It is currently estimated that miRNAs account for ~ 1% of predicted genes in higher
eukaryotic genomes and that up to 10%-30% of genes might be regulated by miRNAs.
miRNAs have been shown to have biological functions in many aspects. miRNA targets
range from signaling proteins, metabolic enzymes, transcription factors and so on. The
diversity and abundance of miRNA targets offer an enormous level of combinatorial
possibilities and suggest that miRNAs and their targets appear to form a complex
regulatory network intertwined with other cellular networks such as signal transduction
networks, metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks and protein interaction
networks. It is reasonable to think that miRNAs exert their functions through regulating
cellular networks. However, it is unclear how miRNAs orchestrate their regulation of
cellular networks and how regulation of these networks might contribute to the biological
functions of miRNAs. We have addressed these questions by analyzing the interactions
between miRNAs and the major cellular networks in cells. Because many miRNAs are
highly conserved, their functions should be advantageous (Pasquinelli et al. 2000; Lagos-
Quintana et al. 2001; Lagos-Quintana et al. 2003). Therefore, the principles of miRNA
regulation in one organism could be transferable into other closely related organisms.
1.3.1 miRNA regulation of cellular signaling networks
1.3.1.1 Signaling networks and computational analysis
Specific signaling pathways deploy many different proteins, however, pathways often
“talk” each other. This so called “cross-talk” between pathways has been systematically
investigated, and an unexpected high numbers of cross-talk events between signaling
pathways have been discovered (Lehner et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2007). These studies
confirmed that signaling pathways form a complex network to process information
(Wang et al. 2007). Cellular signaling networks encode inter- and intracellular
communications and information processes between signaling proteins. The components
of cellular signaling networks, mainly composed of proteins, are activated or inhibited in
response to specific input stimuli and, in turn, serve as stimuli for further downstream
proteins. Cellular signaling network is the primary complex cellular system to responding
stimuli, signals and messages from other cells and environment. Once a cell receives
signals, it processes the information, e.g., signal amplification and noise filtration, and
finally the signals reach to transcription factors so that the signaling network triggers the
responses of gene regulatory networks. Therefore, a signaling network is the most
important complex system in processing the early extra- and intra-cellular signals in a
cell. Cells use signaling networks, as a sophisticated communication system, to perform a
series of tasks such as growth and maintenance, cell survival, apoptosis and development.
Biochemical signaling events, such as phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitylation,
proteolytic cleavage, and so on are known to have mechanisms of activating or
inactivating signaling proteins. Errors in signal transduction can lead to altered
development and incorrect behavioral decisions which could result in abnormal end
points of development. The relationships of signaling proteins are thought to be critical in
determining cell behavior and maintaining cellular homeostasis, therefore, mis-regulation
in the expression of genes and their regulators will be reflected on these cellular signaling
networks which in turn lead to abnormal end points of development such as cancer and
other diseases. miRNAs are posttranscriptional regulators, it is reasonable to think that
miRNAs have great potential to regulate signaling networks.
Signaling networks are presented as graphs containing both directed and undirected links.
In the networks nodes represent proteins, directed links represent activation or
inactivation relationships between proteins, while undirected links represent simply
physical interactions between proteins. Comparing to other types of cellular networks,
signaling networks are far more complex in terms of the relationships between proteins
(Wang et al. 2007).
Network-structural analysis of cellular signaling networks has been limited by the lack of
comprehensive datasets for signaling networks. In the past few decades, enormous efforts
have been made to study signaling pathways and generated lots of signaling information,
especially in mammalian genomes. However, this historically generated information is
scatted in literature. Recently, different researchers began to manually curate signaling
information and organized them as signaling pathways such as EGFR signaling network
2006; Oda et al. 2005) or signaling networks (Awan et al. 2007; Ma'ayan et al. 2005).
Other researchers used high-throughput technologies to fish new signaling proteins and
their interactions based on large-scale experimental studies of protein interactions or
genetic interactions between known signaling proteins and other proteins in genome
(Barrios-Rodiles et al. 2005; Lehner et al. 2006). All these efforts offer new possibilities
to analyze large and complex cellular signaling networks using the graph and network
theory mentioned above.
So far only a few studies have been conducted for large-scale structural analysis of
cellular signaling networks. In 2005, the first network-structural analysis of a literature-
mined human cellular signaling network containing ~500 proteins was conducted, and
showed that signaling pathways are intertwined in order to manage the numerous cell
behavior outputs (Ma'ayan et al. 2005). This work provides a framework for our
understanding of how signaling information is processed in cells. In 2006, we conducted
an analysis of miRNA regulation of the human signaling network using the same dataset
(Cui et al. 2006). In 2007, we collected more signaling information and extended the
signaling proteins and their relations to the human signaling network. As a result, the new
human signaling network contains more than 1,100 signaling proteins (Awan et al. 2007).
Subsequent analysis of cancer-associated genes and cell mobility genes on the signaling
network reveals the patterns of oncogenic regulation during tumorigenesis and finding
oncogenic hotspots on the human signaling network (Awan et al. 2007). Notably,
different regulatory patterns of oncogenic and cell mobility genes on the human signaling
network have been observed (Awan et al. 2007). More recently, we further extended the
human signaling network to contain more than 1,600 signaling proteins. Our efforts for
curating signaling information include recording gene/protein names, molecular types
(e.g., growth factor, ligand, adaptor, scaffold and so on), biochemical reactions (e.g.,
phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitylation and so on), and interaction types (e.g.,
activation, inhibition and simply physical interactions of proteins), cellular locations of
the proteins and so on. These data are freely available on our website:
casually implicated genetic and epigenetic alterations onto the human signaling network
compiled from this more comprehensive dataset. Our analysis revealed where the
oncogenic stimuli are embedded in the network architecture and illustrated the principles
of triggering oncogenic signaling events by genetic and epigenetic alterations,
furthermore, we extracted a human cancer signaling map and showed that different
parts/regions of the cancer signaling map are required to coopt during tumorigenesis (Cui
et al. 2007c). Using the same network, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the
siganling network in an evoltionary context and underscored new insights into the
evolution of cellular signaling networks (Cui et al. manuscript submitted). Collectively,
these efforts indicate that integrative analysis of signaling networks with other datasets
would highlight new insights into signaling mechanisms in different biological aspects,
e.g., principles of miRNA regulation of signaling networks, cancer
development/progression and evolution.
1.3.1.2 Strategies of miRNA regulation of cellular signaling networks
As miRNAs are able to directly and specifically knock down protein expression, we
hypothesized that miRNAs might play an important role in the regulation of the strength
and specificity of cellular signaling networks through directly controlling the
concentration of network components (proteins) at post-transcriptional and translational
levels. We took genome-wide computationally predicted miRNA target genes from two
recent studies (Krek et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005) and then mapped all the overlapped
miRNA targets onto the human signaling network proteins to conduct an network-
structural analysis. This analysis revealed several strategies of miRNA regulation of
signaling networks (Cui et al. 2006).
We found that miRNAs more frequently target signaling proteins than others, e.g., 29.4%
vs 17% of the network proteins and the total genes in human genome are miRNA targets.
This discovery implies that miRNAs might play a relatively more important role in
regulating signaling networks than in other cellular processes. Normally, in signaling
networks, cellular signal information flow initiates from extra-cellular space, a ligand
binds to a cellular membrane receptor to start the signal, which is then transmitted by
intracellular signaling components in cytosol and finally reaches the signaling
components in the nucleus. We found that the fraction of miRNA targets increases with
the signal information flow from the upstream to the downstream, e.g., from ligands, cell
surface receptors, intracellular signaling proteins to nuclear proteins (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Distribution of miRNA targets in a human signaling network at different signaling stages.
Signaling proteins are divided into four groups, e.g. ligands, cell surface receptors, intracellular central
signaling proteins and nuclear proteins, according to their cellular locations in the signaling pathways.
miRNA targets were mapped onto each group. miRNA target rate in each group was then calculated.
For example, only 9.1% of the ligands are miRNA targets, whereas half of the nuclear
proteins, most of which are transcription factors, are miRNA targets. In other words, the
miRNA targets are enriched more than five times in the most downstream proteins
compared to the most upstream proteins. In signaling networks, adaptor proteins recruit
downstream signaling components to the vicinity of receptors. They activate, inhibit or
relocalize downstream components through direct protein-protein interactions. Adaptors
do not have enzyme activity, but physically interact with upstream and downstream
signaling proteins. One adaptor is able to recruit distinct downstream components in
different cellular conditions. We found that miRNAs preferentially target the downstream
components of adaptors, which have potential to recruit more downstream components.
For example, the adaptor Grb2 directly interacts with 14 downstream signaling proteins,
half of which are miRNA targets. These downstream components are functionally
involved in different signaling pathways that lead to different cellular outputs. For
example, SHC regulates cell growth and apoptosis through activation of small GTPases
of the Ras family, while NWASP is involved in the regulation of actin-based
cytoskeleton through activation of small GTPases of the Rho family. These two
components are targeted by different miRNAs. To accurately respond to extracellular
stimuli, adaptors need to selectively recruit downstream components. If an adaptor can
recruit more downstream components, these components should have a higher dynamic
gene expression behavior. This principle is in agreement with the fact that miRNAs have
a high spatio-temporal expression behavior, suggesting that miRNAs might play an
important role for precise selection of cellular responses to stimuli by controlling the
concentration of adaptors’ downstream components.
We further showed that miRNAs more frequently target positively linked network motifs
and less frequently target negatively linked network motifs. A complex signaling network
can be broken down into distinct regulatory patterns, or network motifs, typically
comprised of three to four interacting components capable of signal processing (Babu et
al. 2004; Barabasi and Oltvai, 2004). In our previous work, we showed that mRNA
decay plays an important role in motif regulatory behavior (Wang and Purisima, 2005).
In the network, we identified 11 types of motifs in the network (Figure 2). We classified
each type of motif into several subgroups based on the number of nodes that are miRNA
targets. For example, the three node network may have none of their nodes as a miRNA
target (category 0), or may have just one of their nodes as a miRNA target (category 1),
or 2 (category 2) or all three as miRNA targets (category 3). For each motif, we
calculated the ratio of positive links to the total directional (positive and negative) links
(termed as Ra) in each subgroup and compared it with the average Ra in all the motifs,
which is shown as a horizontal line in Figure 3. For most motifs, the Ra in the subgroup
in which none of the nodes are miRNA targets is less than the average Ra of all the
motifs (Figure 3, P < 4x10-3, Wilcoxon Ranksum test). This result suggests that miRNAs
less frequently target negative regulatory motifs. In contrast, for most motifs, the
preponderance of positive links in the subgroups increased as the number of miRNA-
targeted components rose (Figure 3). More significantly, when all nodes are miRNA
targets in a motif, all the links in the motif are positive links (P < 0.01, Wilcoxon
Ranksum test). These results suggest that miRNAs have high potential to target positively
linked motifs. For example, AP1 (activator protein 1), CREB (cAMP-responsive
element-binding protein) and CBP (CREB-binding protein) form a three-node positive
feedback loop. All of the three proteins are miRNA targets.
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the motifs identified within a human signaling network.
Network motifs were identified using Mfinder program. The number under each motif is the motif ID
number of the corresponding motif. Non-directional links represent neutral links and directional links
represent positive links or negative links. The network motif ID numbering system is from Alon's motif
Positive feedback loops are often used to covert a transient signal into a long-lasting
cellular response and make developmental switches (Cui et al. 2006; Ferrell, 2002). In
the positive feedback loops, noise or fluctuation in any component can be easily
amplified, and then driving the system to switch states randomly. In this situation, a
negative control would enhance filtering or buffering such noise or fluctuation
amplification. Randomly switching phenotypes has been observed in the yeast galactose
network, which contains both positive and negative feedbacks. When the negative
feedback was removed from the network, the genes in the network would randomly
switch on and off over time (Acar et al. 2005). Compared to transcriptional repressors,
miRNAs are likely to tune target protein levels more rapidly at posttranscriptional level.
Thus, miRNAs could significantly shorten the response delay. Therefore, by regulating
positive regulatory loops, miRNAs might provide fast feedback responses and more
effective noise filtering as well as precise definition and maintenance of steady states. In
another study, we showed that miRNA indeed buffers gene expression noise cross
species (Cui et al. 2007b). Consider the facts that positive feedback circuits are abundant
in genomes (Brandman et al. 2005; Ferrell, 2002), we surmise that miRNAs regulation
of positive regulatory loops might provide a common mechanism for filtering noise and
buffering. Compared to transcriptional repressors, miRNAs are likely to tune target
protein levels more rapidly at posttranscriptional level.
Figure 3. Relative abundance of positive links in the individual subgroups of each type of network
motif.
Each type of motif was classified into several subgroups according to the number of nodes which are
miRNA targets. For example, a three-node motif can be divided into four subgroups in which the miRNA
target numbers are 0, 1, 2 and 3 respectively. The ratio of positive links to total positive and negative links
in each subgroup was calculated and plotted as function of miRNA target numbers per motif. The
horizontal lines indicate the ratio of positive links to the total positive and negative links in all of the
respective network motifs. The network motif ID numbering system is from Alon's motif dictionary
To explore which cellular machines of the signaling network are regulated by miRNAs,
we explored the relations between network themes and cellular machines. Network
motifs are often linked together to form larger subgraphs. Network themes are examples
of such larger subgraphs which are enriched topological patterns containing clusters of
overlapping motifs, represent a higher order of regulatory relationships between signaling
proteins and tie to particular biological functions (Zhang et al. 2005). To find the network
themes which are regulated by each miRNA, we used the network motifs that contain at
least one miRNA target and examined whether some of these motifs could aggregate into
clusters. We found that in general, the network motifs regulated by each miRNA formed
1 or 2 network themes. The sizes of the network themes range from 4 to 145 nodes. Most
of network themes contain more than 20 nodes. Statistical analysis of the associations
between these network themes and cellular machines (transcription machinery,
translation machinery, secretion apparatus, motility machinery and electrical response)
revealed that nearly 60% of miRNAs in this study could be associated to one or more
cellular machines of the signaling network.
We also uncovered that highly linked scaffold proteins have higher probability to be
targeted by miRNAs. For example, CRK and SNAP25 are targeted by six miRNAs (miR-
1, miR-10a, miR-126, miR-133a, miR-20 and miR-93) and five miRNAs (miR-1, miR-
128a, miR-130a, miR-153 and miR-27b), respectively. Scaffold protein neutrally linked
to other two proteins that are either positively or negatively connected (Figure 2, Network
Motif id110). Unlike adaptors, scaffold proteins do not directly activate or inhibit other
proteins but provide regional organization for activation or inhibition between other
proteins. Scaffold proteins are able to recruit distinct sets of proteins to different
pathways and thus maintain the specificity of signal information flows. Higher linked
scaffold proteins can recruit more protein sets and have a higher degree of spatio-
temporal expression behavior. The expression of miRNAs is highly specific for tissues
and developmental stages, therefore it makes perfect sense that higher linked scaffold
proteins are regulated by more miRNAs.
Finally we discovered that miRNAs avoid targeting common components of cellular
machines in the network. In the network, we identified 70 proteins that are shared by all
of the five basic cellular machines, e.g., transcription machinery, translation machinery,
secretion apparatus, motility machinery and electrical response. We found that only
14.3% of the 70 proteins are miRNA targets, a significant under-representation compared
to the fraction of miRNA targets (29.4%) in the network (P < 2x10-4). This result
suggests that miRNAs avoid disturbing basic cellular processes, because these common
proteins are highly shared by basic cellular machines and should be frequently used in
various cellular conditions.
These rules or principles indicate that miRNAs regulate signaling networks in multiple
ways. By selectively regulating positive regulatory motifs, highly connected scaffolds
and the most network downstream components, miRNAs may provide a mechanism to
terminate the preexisting messages and facilitate quick and robust transitions for
responses to new signals. These functions fit the spatio-temporal behavior of miRNA
expression. On the other hand, miRNAs less frequently target negative regulatory motifs,
common proteins of basic cellular machines and upstream network components such as
ligands. Although the accuracy of the miRNA target prediction methods has been well
demonstrated by experimental validation of randomly selected targets, 12% of them
could not be proved as real targets. Therefore, we performed the sensitivity analysis to
test the potential effects of the errors on the robustness of the rules we discovered. We
mimicked false positives by randomly adding extra 10% and 20% of network proteins,
which are not predicted miRNA targets, to the target list, performed the same analysis
and recalculated the P values. In addition, we also removed 10% and 20% of miRNA
targets to determine the effect of false negatives. The results indicate that the trend
remains unchanged by the addition of the false positives or false negatives. Therefore, the
principles we obtained in this analysis are robust against substantial errors.
1.3.2 miRNA regulation of gene regulatory networks
Gene regulatory networks describe the regulatory relationships between transcription
factors and/or regulatory RNAs and genes. Theoretically in a cell the entire gene
regulatory network encodes a blueprint of gene regulatory relations and a framework for
combinatorial mechanisms of using different regulatory relations to perform distinct
biological functions. The network reflects the evolutionary selection, e.g., mRNAs of the
hub transcription factors decay faster than other transcription factors (Batada et al. 2006;
Wang and Purisima, 2005). In the past 50 years, E. coli and yeast have been used as
model organisms to study gene regulation. Therefore, rich information about gene
regulatory relations for these organisms has been documented in literature. RegulonDB, a
manually curated database for collecting gene regulatory relations for E. coli, is one of
the efforts to gather gene regulatory relations in literature (Salgado et al. 2004). A
genome-wide determination of gene regulatory relations using chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with DNA microarray in yeast represents an effort to
uncover gene regulatory relations via high-throughput approaches (Lee et al. 2002).
These efforts made it possible to analyze gene regulatory networks in a large-scale
manner. Extensive analyses of gene regulatory networks in E. coli and yeast have been
conducted, ranging from static network-structural analysis (Babu et al. 2004; Lee et al.
2002), network dynamic analysis (Babu et al. 2004; Luscombe et al. 2004), evolutionary
analysis (Conant and Wagner, 2003), network decomposition (Shen-Orr et al. 2002) to
integrative analysis (Wang and Purisima, 2005). However, gene regulatory information is
still less comprehensive in mammalian cells.
To get insights into how miRNA interacts with gene regulatory networks in humans, we
took a dataset which represents three transcription factors, OCT4, NANOG and SOX2
and their target genes in human embryonic stem cells (Boyer et al. 2005). The regulatory
relationships between the transcription factors and their target genes were determined by
using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with DNA microarray. The three
transcription factors totally regulate 2,043 genes, of which 1,314 genes are co-regulated
by two of the three TFs and 391 genes are co-regulated by all of the transcription factors.
Using this dataset, we built a small gene regulatory network in which nodes represent
transcription factors or genes, and links represent regulatory relations between
transcription factors and the regulated genes or transcription factors (Cui et al. 2007a).
We mapped the miRNA targets onto the genes of the network. For genes in the network,
we divided them into three groups, in which they are regulated by one, two and all three
of the transcription factors, respectively, and counted the number of genes that are
miRNA targets and the number of genes that are not miRNA targets, respectively, in each
group. We revealed that miRNA targets are significantly enriched in the genes that are
regulated by more transcription factors. These results tell us that a gene that is regulated
by a larger number of transcription factors is also more likely to be regulated by
miRNAs.
Because the network is very small, e.g., containing only three transcription factors, we
were not confident whether the conclusion we obtained above is robust. To validate and
expand above observation, we examined the relationship between transcription factors
and miRNAs for gene regulation at a genome-wide scale (Cui et al. 2007a). Although we
were not able to get the datasets for a genome-wide gene regulatory network in human,
we could access the datasets, which are computationally determined, of the number of
transcription-factor–binding-site (TFBS) on the promoter region for each gene in human
genome. TFBSs or cis-regulatory elements are normally located in the promoter region of
a gene. Transcription factors regulate a gene through binding to the TFBSs of the gene.
The two TFBS datasets were taken from recent publication of Cora et al. (Cora et al.
2005) and Xie et al. (Xie et al. 2005). Generally speaking, the more TFBSs a gene has,
the more transcription factors the gene is regulated by, and the more complex its
regulation can be as provided by various possible combinations of transcription factors.
We performed analysis to determine the relationship between the number of the TFBSs
and the possibility to be a miRNA target of genes. Toward this end, we grouped genes
based on their TFBS numbers (TFBS-count). The TFBS-count is significantly correlated
with the miRNA target rate (Pearson’s correlation coefficient r = 0.94, P < 3.5 × 10-68).
For example, the miRNA target rate is doubled from the group of genes that have less
than 10 TFBSs to those that have more than 100 TFBSs (from ~35% to ~70%). A similar
result was obtained using the TFBS dataset from Xie et al. (r = 0.97, P < 3.9×10-113).
These results are in agreement with the finding in the human stem cell gene regulation
and therefore strongly suggest that miRNAs preferentially target the genes that bear more
TFBSs has broad applicability. On the other hand, we analyzed the relationship between
the number of miRNAs and the number of TFBSs in the same genes. We found a
significant correlation (r = 0.74, P < 6.1 × 10-12). A similar result was obtained when
using the TFBS dataset of Xie et al. (r = 0.72, P < 9.5 ×10-12). These results suggest that
the genes that are targeted by more miRNAs have more TFBSs (Cui et al. 2007a).
Collectively, we uncovered a basic rule of miRNA regulation of gene regulatory
networks: a gene that is regulated by more transcription factors is also more likely to be
regulated by miRNAs. These results indicate that the complexity of gene regulation by
miRNAs at the post-transcriptional level is positively related to the complexity of gene
regulation by transcription factors at the transcriptional level in human genome.
Genes, which are more complexly regulated at transcriptional level, are required to be
turned on more frequently, furthermore, are more likely to be expressed at different
temporal and spatial conditions, therefore, they are also required to be turned off more
frequently. miRNAs as negative regulators can exert the turning-off function at post-
transcriptional level through repressing mRNA translation and/or mediating cleavage of
mRNAs. This is a potentially novel discovery of mechanism for coordinated regulation of
gene expression. Such coordinately regulated genes are enriched in certain biologocal
processes and functions, particularly in those involved in developmental processes.
In a seperate study, we showede that miRNAs preferientially regulate positive regulatory
loops of signaling networks (Cui et al. 2006). It is also reasonable to hypothesize that
miRNAs preferientially regulate positive regulatory loops of gene regulatory networks.
Given that positive feedback circuits are abundant in genomes (Brandman et al. 2005;
Ferrell, 2002), we surmise that miRNAs frequently regulate gene regulatory networks by
targeting positive regulatory loops. Unfortunately the datasets for positive and negative
regulatory relations are currently unavailable in humans/rodents and even in worm and
fly, and so we are not able to test this hypothesis at this moment.
1.3.3 miRNA regulation of metabolic networks
Metabolites are critical in a cell. Certain metabolites are the basic building blocks of
proteins, DNAs and RNAs, some metabolites such as fatty acids take part in the cellular
processes for growth, development and reproduction, while some others are involved in
defense mechanisms against parasites and cell signaling. Biochemical characterization of
metabolic reactions and enzymes has been conducted for many years. Traditionally,
metabolic reactions are organized and illustrated as metabolic pathways. In term of
pathway components, metabolic pathways are so far the clearest and the most
comprehensive. Genome sequencing efforts offer comparative genomic analysis of
metabolic reactions and enzymes cross many species. As a result, the information for
metabolic pathways is more enriched than before. It makes it possible to build
comprehensive metabolic maps at this time (Feist et al. 2007).
Many metabolites are shared by different metabolic pathways and are further intertwined
to form a complex metabolic network. Thus, various cellular activities are accompanied
with the changes of metabolism. It is essential to control the rates of metabolic processes
in response to changes in the internal or external environment for living cells.
Mechanisms that control metabolic networks are complex and involve transcriptional,
post-transcriptional and translational regulations. For a long time, we have reasons to
believe that the enzymes of metabolic networks are tightly controlled by transcription
factors. Moreover, the principles of transcriptional regulation of metabolic networks by
transcription factors have been illustrated through an integrative analysis of gene
expression profiles and the yeast metabolic network (Ihmels et al. 2004). Since miRNAs
have emerged as an abundant class of negative regulators, it is reasonable to think that
miRNAs might extensively regulate metabolic networks. Indeed, miRNAs have been
shown to regulate amino acid catabolism, cholesterol biosynthesis, triglyceride
metabolism, insulin secretion, and carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, although the
molecular mechanisms of miRNA regulation of metabolism are not clear (Krutzfeldt and
Stoffel, 2006).
We systematically analyzed the human and D. melanogaster metabolic networks by
integrating miRNA target genes onto the networks (Tibiche et al. manuscript submitted).
In both networks, miRNAs selectively regulate certain metabolic processes such as amino
acid biosynthesis, certain sugar and lipid metabolisms, so that they can selectively control
certain metabolite production. When miRNAs regulate specific individual metabolic
pathway, they often regulate the last reaction step (LRS) of that pathway. Furthermore,
once miRNAs regulate the LRS of a pathway, the cut vertex to the LRS and other
enzymes that are in the upstream metabolic flows to the LRS are also enriched with
miRNA targets. A cut vertex or a cutpoint is such a bottleneck node that its deletion will
disconnect at least one component from the network. Cut vertexes are in crucial network
positions and become bottlenecks of the network, and therefore control metabolic flows
from a part to another in the network. These results imply that miRNA is strongly
involved in coordinated regulation of metabolic processes in metabolic networks.
1.3.4 miRNA regulation of protein interaction networks
Protein interaction networks provide a valuable framework for a better understanding of
the functional organization of the proteome and offer a mechanistic basis for most
biological processes in organisms. Large-scale determination of interactions between
proteins have been conducted in yeast, E. coli and other bacteria, worm, fly and humans
(Butland et al. 2005; Gavin et al. 2002; Brechot et al. 1980; Rain et al. 2001; Stelzl et
al. 2005; Rual et al. 2005; Giot et al. 2003; Ito et al. 2001; Li et al. 2004). Because the
datasets for protein interaction networks are relatively easier to be accessed, extensive
analyses of protein interaction networks have been conducted ranging from pure network
structural analysis to the analyses of network motifs, network themes, network
communities and evolution.
Recently, Liang and Li investigated the miRNA regulation of protein interaction
networks (Liang and Li, 2007). miRNAs preferentially regulate the proteins which have
more interacting partners in the network. Protein connectivity in a human protein
interaction network is positively correlated with the number of miRNA target-site types.
In principle, if a protein has more interacting protein partners, it normally takes part in
more biological processes and then its expression is more dynamic (Wang et al. 2007).
Therefore, it makes sense that when a protein has more interacting protein partners, it will
be regulated by more transcription factors and more miRNAs. This is in agreement with
our previous findings that miRNAs preferentially regulate the genes which are regulated
by more transcription factors in the gene regulatory network (Cui et al. 2007a).
Consistently, genes of two interacting proteins tend to be under similar miRNA
regulation, which again is in agreement with these facts that genes encoding interacting
proteins tend to have similar mRNA expression profiles (Li et al. 2004; Rual et al. 2005;
Wuchty et al. 2006). Furthermore, our analysis of microarray profiles of miRNA target
genes in different tissues showed a similar trend: broadly expressed mRNAs tend to be
regulated by more miRNAs (Yu et al. 2007a). Highly linked proteins, e.g., hub proteins,
can be divided into two groups based on clustering coefficient, which is defined as the
fraction of the real number of links among a node’s neighbors and the maximum possible
number of links among them. A hub protein having a high clustering coefficient is likely
to be an intra-modular hub, which interacts with most of its partners simultaneously to
form a protein complex and completes a coherent function. On the other hand, a hub
protein having a low clustering coefficient tends to be an inter-modular hub, which tends
to interact with other proteins in different time and place, and then coordinates different
functional modules (Liang and Li, 2007). It is understandable that inter-modular hub
proteins are more likely to be regulated by miRNAs.
Notably, analyses of miRNA regulation of gene regulatory networks and the protein
interaction networks obtained a consistent conclusion, which reflects a general rule of
miRNA regulation of whole genome genes, because general networks (gene regulatory
networks and the protein interaction networks) collect information for all kinds of
activities in cell. On the other hand, analyses of miRNA regulation of metabolic networks
and signaling networks obtained different results. This observation might reflect that
cellular specific networks (metabolic networks and signaling networks) have local and
specific cellular themes, while general networks (gene regulatory networks and the
protein interaction networks) encode global features of cells.
1.3.5 miRNA regulatory network motifs
At present, experimentally large-scale studies of miRNA regulation of various cellular
networks are still not trivial. However, it is experimentally feasible for characterizing
miRNA regulatory network motifs, or miRNA regulatory circuits. As we mentioned
above, network motifs are the statistically significant recurring structural patterns or
small subgraphs or sub-networks, which are a result of convergent evolution at the
network level, and carry out important functions in cells. Several studies have
experimentally explored miRNA regulatory motifs. For example, the secondary vulva
cell fate in C. elegans is promoted by Notch signaling, which also activates miR-61,
which in turn posttranscriptionally represses an inhibitory factor of Notch signaling,
thereby stabilizing the secondary vulva fate (Yoo and Greenwald, 2005). Similar circuits
are also found in the differentiation of neurons in C. elegans (Johnston, Jr. et al. 2005),
eye development in Drosophila (Li and Carthew, 2005; Li et al. 2006), and granulocytic
differentiation in human (Fazi et al. 2005). Another example of miRNA regulatory
circuits is that miR-17-5p represses E2F1, and both are transcriptionally activated by c-
Myc in human cells (O'Donnell et al. 2005). More recently, two groups of researchers
published data showing that miR-34 family is a key component of the p53 tumor
suppressor network, which controls cellular responses to signals such as DNA damage
and oncogene activation (He et al. 2007; Raver-Shapira et al. 2007).
To systematically characterize miRNA regulatory circuits in human and mouse genomes,
one computational study tended to take the advantages of intron-based miRNAs, or
embedded miRNAs (Tsang et al. 2007). More than 80% of all known miRNAs in human
and mouse are embedded in introns of coding or noncoding genes (Kim and Kim, 2007;
Rodriguez et al. 2004). One could hypothesize that the intron-based miRNAs might be
co-expressed with their host genes. Indeed, the expression profiles of most embedded
miRNAs examined thus far are highly correlated to their host genes at both the tissue and
individual cell levels (Aboobaker et al. 2005; Baskerville and Bartel, 2005; Li and
Carthew, 2005), suggesting that they tend to be cotranscribed at identical rates from the
same promoters (Kim and Kim, 2007). Theses facts led to the assumption that the relative
level of host-gene transcription across conditions can accurately serve as a proxy for that
of the embedded miRNAs.
An upstream regulatory factor triggers the expression of an embedded miRNA and its
targets at the same time, while the transcribed miRNA also regulate its targets.
Intuitively, two types of miRNA regulatory motifs, or feedforward loops can be built up
(Figure 4a, b): Type II miRNA feedforward loops, in which an upstream factor could
repress the transcription of a target gene and simultaneously activate the transcription of a
miRNA that inhibits target gene translation, and Type I miRNA feedforward loops, in
which an upstream factor activates the transcription of a target gene and simultaneously
activates the transcription of a miRNA that inhibits target gene translation. One example
has been characterized experimentally for Type I miRNA feedforward loops, where miR-
17-5p represses E2F1, and both are transcriptionally activated by c-Myc in human cells
(O'Donnell et al. 2005). This kind of loop has the potential to provide a host of regulatory
and signal processing functions (Hornstein and Shomron, 2006).
By analyzing the embedded miRNAs in human and mouse using the Novartis human and
mouse expression atlas comprising 61 tissues/cell types (Su et al. 2004), Type II miRNA
feedforward loops have been found to be prevalent for a significant fraction of the
embedded miRNAs. This result is in agreement of previous findings that predicted target
transcripts of several tissue-specific miRNAs tend to be expressed at a lower level in
tissues where the miRNAs are expressed (Farh et al. 2005; Stark et al. 2005; Yu et al.
2007a). Furthermore, a significant fraction of Type I miRNA feedforward loops were
also found, especially prevalent in mature neurons.
In Type II miRNA feedforward loops, a miRNA regulates its targets coherently with
transcriptional control, thereby reinforcing transcriptional logic at the posttranscriptional
level. As suggested, such circuits can serve as a surveillance mechanism to suppress
“leaky” transcription of target genes (Hornstein and Shomron, 2006; Stark et al. 2005). It
is reasonable to think that these loops would act in concert with other regulators to
increase the feedback strength and enhance the robustness of irreversible cellular
differentiation. On the other hand, Type I miRNA feedforward loops might prevent
noise-driven transitions into proliferation as illustrated in the example of c-
Myc/E2F1/miR-17-92 network (Sylvestre et al. 2007; O'Donnell et al. 2005).
Another effort to computationally identify miRNA network motifs has been conducted by
analyzing the cooperation between transcription factors and miRNAs for regulating the
same target genes (Shalgi et al. 2007). The computational techniques for this kind of
analysis are similar to those used in identifying transcription factor binding sites. They
first looked for transcription factor-miRNA pairs with a high rate of co-occurrence in the
promoters and 3’UTR of the regulated genes. Statistical tests showed that transcription
factor-miRNA pairs significantly co-occur, which is in agreement with the findings of
miRNA regulation of gene regulatory networks. Secondly, they searched miRNA
networks using randomization tests. Similar to above report, Type I and II feedforward
loops are also discovered. In addition, two other types of miRNA network motifs were
also documented: composite regulatory loops and indirect feedforward loops (Figure 4c,
d). In the former motif, a miRNA (MR) represses a transcription factor (TF) and a target
gene (G), while the transcription factor (TF) activates the miRNA (M) and the target gene
(G). In the latter motif, a transcription factor, TF1 activates another transcription factor,
TF2 and a target gene, G, in turn, the TF2 activates a miRNA, M, which represses the
target gene, G. However, the functions of these two motif types are not clear yet.
Figure 4. Types of miRNA regulatory network motifs in the human genome.
M represents miRNA while TF and G represent transcription factors and targeted genes, respectively. Links
represent regulatory relations. Arrows represent activation, while a bar represents inhibition. (a) Type I
miRNA feedforward motif, in which TF sends either activation signal or inhibition signal at the same time
to M and G. (b) Type II miRNA feedforward motif. In one setting, TF activates M and inhibits G at the
same time, while in another setting, TF inhibits M and activates G. (c) Composite regulatory motif. (d)
Indirect feedforward motif.
1.4 Summary
In summary, miRNAs are extensively involved in gene regulation as network motifs in
genomes. By analyzing the interactions between miRNAs and general networks (gene
regulatory and protein interaction networks), a common miRNA regulatory principle is
emerging: miRNAs preferentially regulated the genes that have high regulation
complexity. This fact suggests a novel mechanism of coordinated regulation between
transcriptional level and posttranscriptional level for gene regulation. In addition, for
cellular specific networks (metabolic and signaling networks), miRNAs have different
regulatory strategies. For example, miRNAs preferentially regulate positive regulatory
motifs, highly connected scaffolds and the most network downstream components of
cellular signaling networks, which might provide a mechanism to terminate the
preexisting messages and facilitate quick and robust transitions for responses to new
signals. On the other hand, miRNAs less frequently target negative regulatory motifs,
common proteins of basic cellular machines and upstream network components such as
ligands in signaling networks. In metabolic networks, miRNAs selectively regulate the
genes which have specific network structural features on the network, which might
provide effective and selective regulation of cellular metabolism.
Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by Genome and Health Imitative. I thank our team
members, Dr. Y. Deng and Mrs. M. Mistry for comments.