Gabora, L. (2008). Mind. In R. A. Bentley, H. D. G. Maschner, & C. Chippendale (Eds.),
Handbook of theories and methods in archaeology (pp. 283-296). Walnut Creek, CA:
Altamira Press.
Chapter 17: Mind
Liane Gabora
University of British Columbia
liane.gabora@ubc.ca
Introduction: What Can Archaeology Tell Us about the Mind?
What can relics of the past tell us about the thoughts and beliefs of the people who
invented and used them? Recent collaborations at the frontier of archaeology,
anthropology, and cognitive science are culminating in speculative but nevertheless
increasingly sophisticated efforts to unravel how modern human cognition came about.
By considering objects within their archaeological context, we have begun to piece
together something of the way of life of people who inhabited particular locales, which
in turn reflects their underlying thought processes.
Comparing data between different sites or time periods tells us something about the
horizontal (within generation) or vertical (between generations) transmission of material
culture. In addition to patterns of transmission of existing kinds of artifacts, we are also
interested in novel artifacts that might be indicative of new cognitive abilities, belief
structures, or levels of cooperation. An archaeological period marked by the sudden
appearance of many kinds of new objects may suggest the onset of enhanced creative
abilities. By corroborating archaeological findings with anthropological data (evidence of
sudden change in the size or shape of the cranium, for example) with knowledge from
cognitive science about how minds function, we can make educated guesses as to what
kinds of underlying cognitive changes could be involved, and how the unique abilities of
Homo sapiens arose.
In this chapter, we consider three questions about human cognition that can be addressed
through archaeological data: (1) How did human culture begin? (2) Where, when, and
how did humans acquire the unique cognitive abilities of modern Homo sapiens? and (3)
What role do artifacts play in the evolution of these cognitive abilities?
(1) The Origin of Human Culture
The earliest known artifacts, referred to as Oldowan -- after Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania,
where they were first found -- were simple stone tools, pointed at one end (Leakey 1971),
and widely associated with Homo habilis, although it is possible that they were also used
by late australopithecenes (de Baune 2004). The oldest of these Oldowan tools, from
Kada Gona and Kada Hadar, date to approximately 2.5 million years ago (Semaw et al.
1997). The earliest use of stone tools was probably to split fruits and nuts; "the moment
when a hominin ...produced a cutting tool by using a thrusting percussion ...marks a break
between our predecessors and the specifically human" (de Baune 2004:142). With sharp
edges, Lower Palaeolithic tools could be used to sharpen wood implements and
occasionally butcher small game. Using the sharp flakes associated with these tools,
Homo habilis butchered animals for meat, as these tools are found in context with cut-
marked bones at the FLK Zinj site (1.75 Ma) in the Olduvai Gorge (Leakey 1971; Bunn
and Kroll 1986). Although it has been debated whether they were scavenging, hunting, or
“power scavenging” by scaring carnivores away (e.g., Binford 1977; 1983, 1988; Bunn
and Kroll 1986; Selvaggio 1998), it is clear that these hominids were capable of acquiring
the richer, more meat-rich portions of a kill (Bunn and Kroll 1986). This may have
introduced a positive feedback cycle, in that meat eating, by allowing a smaller gut,
provided metabolic support for a larger brain (Aiello and Wheeler 1995) which, in turn,
would improve cognitive ability for group hunting using mental landscape maps,
interpretation of visual clues such as animal tracks, and knowledge of predator behavior.
With the arrival of Homo erectus by 1.8 Ma, we see sophisticated, task-specific stone
hand axes, complex stable seasonal habitats, and long-distance hunting strategies
involving large game. The size of the Homo erectus brain was approximately 1,000 cc,
about 25% larger than that of Homo habilis, and 75% the cranial capacity of modern
humans (Aiello 1996; Ruff et al. 1997; Lewin, 1999). By 1.6 Ma, Homo erectus had
dispersed as far as Southeast Asia (Swisher et al. 1994), indicating the ability to migrate
and adapt to vastly different climates (Cachel and Harris 1995; Walker and Leakey 1993;
Anton and Swisher 2004). In Africa, West Asia, and Europe, Homo erectus carried the
Aschulean handaxe, which was present by 1.4 Ma in Ethiopia (Asfaw et al. 1992). A do-
it-all tool that may even have had some function as a social status symbol (Kohn and
Mithen 1999) these symmetrical biface tools probably required three stages of
production, bifacial knapping, and considerable skill and spatial ability to achieve their
final form. The handaxe persisted as a tool of choice for over a million years, spreading
by 500 ka into Europe, where was it used by H. heidelbergensis until the Mousterian at
about 200 ka. This period also marks the first solid evidence for controlled use of fire, by
800 ka in the Levant (Goren-Inbar et al. 2004). A 400,000 year-old, fire-hardened
wooden spear found at Schöningen, Germany (Thieme 1997) shows beyond doubt that
Middle Pleistocene Homo were sophisticated big-game hunters (Dennell 1997).
Cognitive Theories of How Culture Began
By a half million years ago the complexity of Homo culture was already beyond that of
any other species (Darwin 1871; Plotkin 1988). What got the ball rolling, enabling the
process of enculturation to take hold? One suggestion is a theory of mind (Cheney and
Seyfarth 1990; Premack and Woodruff 1978), which refers to the capacity to reason
about the mental states of others, such as interpreting the intentions of another through
his/her actions. However, there is abundant evidence that many species are capable of
social attribution and deception, indicating that theory of mind is not unique to humans
(Heyes 1998). Moreover, the invention of tools, taming of fire, and conquering of new
habitats could not have been achieved solely through enhanced social skills; it would
have required enhanced mastery of the physical environment.
Another suggestion is that culture arose due to onset of the capacity for imitation
(Dugatkin 2001; Richerson and Boyd 1998). However, imitation is widespread among
animals such as dolphins, dogs, primates, and birds (Bonner 1980; Byrne and Russon
1998; Lynch and Baker 1994; Robert 1990; Smith 1977). Moreover there is no evidence,
empirical or theoretical, that imitation-like social learning processes (or simple
manipulations of them such as a bias to copy high prestige individuals) are sufficient for
cultural evolution. To get the kind of adaptive modification and diversification of stable
form found in culture (and biology) requires entities that possess an integrated, self-
modifying structure wherein changes to one part percolate to other parts with context-
sensitive effects, such that different structures can potentially result. Artifacts, habits, and
other socially acquired elements of culture do not on their own possess such a structure.
A third proposal is that Homo underwent a transition from an episodic mode of cognitive
functioning to a mimetic mode (Donald 1991). The early hominid, functioning in the
episodic mode, was sensitive to the significance of episodes, could encode them in
memory, and coordinate appropriate responses, but not voluntarily access them
independent of environmental cues. Thus awareness was dominated by what was
happening in the present moment. Donald maintains that with encephalization (brain
enlargement) Homo acquired the capacity for a ‘self-triggered recall and rehearsal loop’.
which basically amounts to the capacity for a stream of thought in which one idea evokes
another which evokes another and so forth recursively. This process, sometimes referred
to by psychologists as representational redescription (Karmiloff-Smith, 1992), allowed
hominds to direct attention away from the external world toward internal thoughts,
planned actions, or episodes encoded in memory, and access them at will. This gave rise
to a mimetic mode of cognitive functioning. The term comes from the word ‘mime’ or
‘pantomime’, and indeed Donald stresses onset of the ability to act out events that may
have occurred in the past or could occur in the future. Thus the mimetic mind is able to
not only escape the here and now, but through gesture facilitate a similar temporary
escape from the present in other minds. This provided a way of sharing knowledge and
experience without language, and may have been our earliest means of cultural
transmission. Self-triggered thought also enabled hominids to evaluate and improve skills
through repetition or rehearsal.
The Underlying Memory Structure: Fine-grained Distributed Representations
The mimetic mode rests heavily on the capacity to generate previous or imagined
episodes or motor acts and adapt them to the present situation. How might it have come
about, and why would it be enhanced by encephalization? To answer this we look briefly
at the structure of memory. Episodes etched in memory are distributed across a cell
assembly (a bundle of brain cells) that contains many locations, and likewise, each
location participates in the storage of many items. Thus the same memory locations get
used and reused (neural re-entrance). Each memory location is sensitive to a range of
subsymbolic microfeatures: primitive attributes of a stimulus or situation. This kind of
architecture is said to be content-addressable because similar or related items activate,
and get encoded in, overlapping memory regions. Now imagine a hominid observing
various features of the landscape. Memory location A may respond preferentially to lines
oriented at say 45 degrees from the horizontal, neighboring location B to lines at a
slightly different angle, say 46 degrees, and so forth. However, although A responds
maximally to lines of 45 degrees, it responds to a lesser degree to lines of 46 degrees.
This kind of organization is referred to as coarse coding. Thus for example, location A
participates in the storage of all those memories involving lines at close to 45 degrees,
and a particular episode affects not just A but many other locations. We refer to this
constellation of locations as the cognitive receptive field (CRF) for that episode.
As brains size increased, CRFs became larger. This enables more fine-grained encoding
of episodes in memory, which makes the memory more prone to self-triggered thought.
Consider, for example, an episode that involves getting pricked by a thorny cactus. A
small brain might encode this episode in terms of a few features (Figure 1a), such as
perhaps the pain involved, and some recognizable feature such as its overall shape or
color. This would aid avoidance of contact with this cactus in the future, and perhaps
similar cacti. However, that would be the extent of this episode’s usefulness. A larger
brain, though, might include in the CRF additional features (Figure 1b), such as the sharp
point of the thorn. The encoding of an episode constituted by both pointed shape and torn
flesh means that there is an association between these properties. Some time later, the
need to kill prey may activate the memory locations involved in the encoding of torn
flesh, leading to the retrieval of the entire episode, including the pointed shape, and
thereby aid in the invention of a spear. Hence the transition from coarse coding, wherein
episodes tend to be encoded separately, to fine-grained coding, whereby episodes overlap
and can thereby be associated, may have brought the capacity for abstract relationships.
Such relationships constitute the stepping stones via which abstract streams of thought
occur (through representational redescription), and by which an internal model of the
world is acquired and thereafter honed as new information is continually integrated.
Abstraction thereby imparts the capacity to reason about anything including, but not
limited to, the mental states of others.
Figure 1. (a) Schematic representation of activation of portion of (a) less fine-­‐grained memory,
left and (b) more fine-­‐grained memory, right. Each vertex represents a possible memory
location. Each black ring represents an actual location. Ring with circle inside represents actual
location with previously encoded item. Degree of whiteness indicates degree of activation in
current thought, which concerns the need to kill prey for food.
(2) Cognitive Modernity
The European archaeological record suggests that a profound cultural transition occurred
between 60,000 and 30,000 ka at the onset of the Upper Paleolithic (Bar-Yosef 1994;
Klein 1989a; Mellars 1973, 1989a, 1989b; Soffer 1994; Stringer and Gamble 1993). The
Upper Paleolithic has often been referred to as a “revolution”. Considering it “evidence
of the modern human mind at work,” Richard Leakey (1984:93-94) describes the Upper
Palaeolithic as “unlike previous eras, when stasis dominated, ... [with] change being
measured in millennia rather than hundreds of millennia.” Similarly, Mithen (1996) refers
to the Upper Paleaolithic as the ‘big bang’ of human culture, exhibiting more innovation
than in the previous six million years of human evolution. This marks the beginning of a
more organized, strategic style of hunting involving specific animals at specific sites,
elaborate burial sites indicative of ritual, the colonization of Australia, and replacement of
Levallois tool technology by blade cores in the Near East. In Europe, many forms of art
appeared, including naturalistic cave paintings of animals, decorated tools and pottery,
bone and antler tools with engraved designs, ivory statues of animals and sea shells, and
personal decoration such as beads, pendants, and perforated animal teeth, many of which
may have indicated social status (White 1989a, 1989b). White (1982:176) also writes of a
“total restructuring of social relations.” Clearly the Upper Palaeolithic was a period of
unprecedented cultural change. Was it strictly a cultural explosion, or a major event in the
biological evolution of our species? In either case, how and why did it happen?
The Upper Palaeolithic as a Cultural Transition
Although the tradition has been to view the Upper Palaeolithic transition as a
“revolution,” a more appropriate null hypothesis might well be that it was not a
“revolution” at all, and that Lower and Middle Palaeolithic symbolism should be
reassessed without our modern expectations about iconography (Bednarik 1992).
Henshilwood and Marean (2003) argue that many of the diagnostic traits (such as art,
burial of the dead, personal ornaments, blade technology, complex hearths, and seasonal
hunting in harsh environments) used to identify behavioral modernity are based on the
European Palaeolithic record and lack relevance to African Stone Age. In fact, models
being proposed for the gradual development of cognitive modernity well before the
Upper Palaeolithic transition are substantially supported by archaeological evidence
(Bahn 1991; Harrold 1992; Henshilwood and Marean 2003; White 1993; White et al.
2003). McBrearty and Brooks (2000), for example, argue that most of the features
associated with a rapid transition to behavioral modernity, at 40–50 ka in Europe, are
actually found in the African Middle Stone Age tens of thousands of years earlier,
including blades and microliths, bone tools, specialized hunting, long distance trade, art
and decoration. Some important examples include the Berekhat Ram figurine from Israel
(d’Errico and Nowell 2000), and an anthropomorphic figurine of quartzite from the
Middle Ascheulian (ca. 400 ka) site of Tan-tan site in Morocco (Bednark 2003).
If modern human behaviors were indeed gradually assembled as early as 250–300 ka, as
McBrearty and Brooks (2000) argue, it would push these changes back into alignment
with the most recent spurt in human brain enlargement, between 600,000 and 150,000 ka
(Aiello 1996; Ruff et al. 1997), well before the Upper Paleolithic. Indeed, an earlier
cultural transition might be easier to explain if it coincided with an increase in brain size
(Bickerton 1990; Mithen 1998).
As Henshilwood and Marean (2003:630) point out, “there is no anatomical evidence (and
there may never be any such evidence) for a highly advantageous neurological change
after 50,000 years ago.” What can be gleaned from skeletal anatomy is that many modern
behaviors were at least anotomically possible by earlier dates. For example, the hyoid
bone (which connects to the larynx) of a Neanderthal from Kebara Cave (63,000 BP)
indicates the anatomically capacity for language (Arensburg et. al. 1989), and the inner-
ear structures of Middle Pleistocene humans from the Sierra de Atapuerca (ca. 800 ka) is
indicative of the capacity to hear language properly (Martinez et al. 2004). Based on
skeletal anatomy, we cannot even rule out the possibility that Homo erectus used some
sort of pre-syntactic vocal communication (Wynn 1998).
From DNA evidence it now seems very likely, although not indisputable (Eswaran 2002;
Wolpoff et al. 2004), that Neanderthals were a separate lineage and not the ancestors of
modern humans (Caramelli et al. 2003; Krings et al. 1997; Ovchinnikov et al. 2000;
Tattersall 1998). If Neanderthals possessed cognitive abilities on par with modern
humans, it would suggest that their abilities evolved independently during their 500,000
years of separate lineage from humans (Mithen 1996:141). Neanderthals had an average
brain size of 1,520 cc (Klein 1989b:272), which is actually slightly larger than the
modern human average. In Europe from 130 ka until at least 50 ka but possibly 30 ka
(Klein 2003), Neanderthals survived glacial cycles with fluctuations in game populations,
climate, and plants. Particularly in their hunting of large mammals (Marean and Kim
1998), their knowledge of cave location, hoof prints, animal behavior, and potential
carcass locations was essential to their survival.
The technical intelligence of Neanderthals was considerable; the Levallois technique of
tool making requires 5 stages and technical thinking throughout the process, such that a
fixed set of rules would be insufficient to do it and even most students today can't learn to
make a Levallois point (Mithen 1996). Neanderthal burials indicate that they at least
occasionally buried their dead, and that the sick and elderly were cared for (Bahn 1998;
Bar-Yosef et al. 1986; Klein 2003; Mithen 1996:135). As for an aesthetic sense, whether
Neandethals were capable of art has become a hotly debated issue (e.g., Davidson 1992;
D’Errico et al. 2003 and associated comments). Bednarik (1992) compiled a list of
published evidence for pre-Upper Palaeolithic symbolic behavior, including the use of
ochre or hematite, crystal prisms and fossils, perforated portable objects, engraved or
notched bone fragments, and rock art. While some (Davidson 1992; Chase and Dibble
1992) considered this evidence to be spread too sparsely over time and continents to
show any convincing pattern, certain individual cases beg explanation, with the higher
profile cases including the decorated bone from Bilzingsleben (see Mithen 1996:161), or
the musical flute of bone from Divje Babe I cave (D’Errico et al. 1998b).
More recently the debate has focused on whether Neanderthals are responsible for the
Chatelperronian industry, which appears to be the early Upper Palaeolithic descendent of
the Mousterian industry (Klein 1989b:335). The site of Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure,
dated at about 34,000 BP, where a Neanderthal temporal bone (Hublin et al. 1996) is
found near Chatelperronian artifacts, has become central to the debate over Neanderthal’s
cognitive capacity for art and symbolism. Based on arguments of the archaeological
context within the Grotte du Renne, d'Errico et al. (1998a, 2003) argued that the
Chatelperronian ivory beads, pierced bear incisors and wolf canines, and ivory rings were
made by Neanderthals, and made distinctively enough so as to not be mere imitations of
Aurignacian ornaments made by contemporary modern humans. The Chatelperronian
predates the oldest Aurignacian (both stratigraphically and in 14C) almost everywhere
they are found (d’Errico et al. 2003; Klein 2003) and that the Chatelperronian lithics
show stylistic continuity from the preceding Neanderthal Mousterian. If their argument is
true, and the Neanderthals really did make simple bone tools, decorate themselves with
perforated animal teeth, and put red ochre on their living floors, then their considerable
cognitive capacities would require a reexamination of the causes of cognitive modernity
(d’Errico et al. 2003; Mellars 1998b).
It has been hypothesized that modernity arose at different times and places (Bahn 1998;
Mellars 1998b), though this has become exceedingly unlikely on the basis of recent
genetic evidence (Prugnolle et al. 2005). Another problem with this scenario is the
apparently extraordinary coincidence that these Neanderthal behaviors would have begun
just as modern humans were spreading into Europe (Demars 1998; Hublin 1998; Mellars
1998a; 1998b; Toscano 1998). If Neanderthals survived in southern Iberia for 5,000 -
10,000 years after the arrival of anatomically modern humans in northern Spain, it seems
likely that they imitated the Aurignacian objects of the newcomers, possibly with some
(intentional or unintentional) modification (Klein 2003). However, D’Errico et al. (2003)
counter that the Iberian Neanderthals maintained their traditional culture long after
modern humans arrived, indicating they were not simply acculturated through contact.
Even if we accept biological ability for “modern” behaviors developed gradually over
hundreds of thousands of years, the question remains about why the development in these
behaviors accelerated at or after 60,000 BP. What is perhaps most impressive about this
period is not the novelty of any particular artifact but that the overall pattern of cultural
change is cumulative; more recent artifacts resemble older ones but have modifications
that enhance their appearance or functionality. This is referred to as the ratchet effect
(Tomasello 1993), and it appears to be uniquely human (Donald 1998). It may have
involved an underlying biological change, as discussed in below. Note however that
many dramatic cultural revolutions, such as the Holocene transition to agriculture or the
modern Industrial Revolution, occurred long after the biological changes that made them
cognitively possible. Thus all that can be said for certain is that by somewhere within the
vicinity of 50,000 or more years ago, the hominid mind had not only had acquired the
potential for cognitive modernity, but its environment (social, cultural, and physical)
enabled it to capitalize on or actualize that potential.
The Upper Paleolithic as an Event in the Biological Evolution of Cognition
The traditional and currently dominant view is that modern behavior appeared in Africa
between 50,000 and 40,000 years ago and then spread out of Africa from anatomically
modern humans who, through their biologically evolved cognitive advantages, replaced
the pre-existing species, including the Neanderthals in Europe (e.g., Ambrose 1998;
Gamble 1994; Klein 2003; Stringer and Gamble 1993). If so, what were these cognitive
advantages, and how did they come together in the modern mind? Let us now review
some explanations.
Advent of syntactic language in modern humans
While earlier Homo and even Neanderthals may have been capable of primitive
language, the syntactic aspects appear to have emerged at the start of the Upper
Palaeolithic (Aiello and Dunbar 1993; Bickerton 1990, 1996; Dunbar 1993, 1996).
Syntax enabled language to become general-purpose, put to use in all kinds of situations,
whereas previously it had been reserved for social situations. Carstairs-McCarthy (1999)
presents a modified version of this proposal, suggesting that although some form of
syntax was present in the earliest languages, most of the later elaboration, including
recursive embedding of syntactic structure, emerged in the Upper Paleolithic. Another
proposal is that at this time humans underwent a transition from a predominantly gestural
to vocal form of communication (Corballis 2002). It is indeed possible that the syntactic
elements of language emerged at this time, and language can transform cognition
(Tomasello 1999). However, we are still left with the question of what made possible the
kind of complex thought processes that sophisticated language requires. Furthermore, we
may never know exactly when syntactic language began, due the ambiguity of the
archaeological evidence. (Bednarik (1992:30), for example, refer to Davidson and
Noble’s (1989) argument on the cognitive origins of language and iconic graphic art “a
house of cards” with no supporting evidence.)
Connection of domain-specific modules: The notion that the mind is modular refers to the
view that many cognitive functions are served by innately channeled domain-specific
systems, whose operations are largely independent of and inaccessible to the rest of the
mind (Fodor, 1983). It has been suggested that what might appear to be unequivocal
evidence of modernity might merely reflect the evolution of cognitive competence
restricted to particular domains governed by particular modules (e.g. Renfrew and
Zubrow, 1994). Another proposal is that modern cognition arose through the connecting
of domain-specific brain modules, enabling cross-domain thinking, and particularly
analogies and metaphors (Gardner, 1983; Rozin, 1976). Mithen (1996) suggests that in
the Upper Paleolithic, modules specialized to cope with domains such as natural history,
technology, and social processes became connected, giving rise to conceptual fluidity.
One problem with this proposal is that although there is evidence that certain abilities are
handled by different modules (e.g. different brain areas specialized for, say, vision and
speech), there is no evidence that different modules handle different domains of life e.g.
no religion module or tool module. Moreover, the logistics of physically connecting these
modules (whose positions in the brain evolved without foreknowledge that they should
one day become connected) would be formidable.
Sperber’s (1994) solution is that the modules got connected not directly, but indirectly,
by way of a special module, the ‘module of meta-representation’ or MMR, which
contains ‘concepts of concepts’. Sperber’s proposal is consistent with there being more
general purpose or ‘association cortex’ by the onset of the Upper Palaeolithic, although
the timing of this cultural transition does not coincide with the increase in cranium size.
Symbolic Reasoning: Deacon (1997) has suggested that the Upper Paleaolithic
‘revolution’ was due to the emergence of an ability to represent complex, internally
coherent abstract systems of meaning, consisting of representations and their properties
and relationships. Some of these are grounded in concrete experience, but many are
instead processes of systematic abstraction or symbolic reasoning. Thus Deacon’s
account focuses on the ability to systematically reason with abstract symbols and thereby
derive causal relationships. It does not deal with the intuitive, analogical, associative
processes through which we unearth relationships of correlation.
Cognitive Fluidity: In contrast, Mithen (1998) proposes that the cultural transition of the
Middle/Upper Paleolithic reflects enhanced cognitive fluidity, resulting in the ability to
map, explore, and transform conceptual spaces. Mithen refers to Boden’s (1990)
definition of a conceptual space as a ‘style of thinking—in music, sculpture,
choreography, chemistry, etc.’ As for why hominids suddenly became good at
transforming conceptual spaces, he is rather vague:
There is unlikely to be one single change in the human mind that enabled
conceptual spaces to become explored and transformed. Although creative
thinking seems to appear suddenly in human evolution, its cognitive basis had a
long evolutionary history during which the three foundations evolved on largely
an independent basis: a theory of mind, a capacity for language, and a complex
material culture. After 50,000 years ago, these came to form the potent
ingredients of a cognitive/social/material mix that did indeed lead to a creative
explosion (Mithen 1998:186).
Although the capacity for a theory of mind, language, and complex artifacts could
conceivably have arisen at different times, it is hard to imagine how each could have
evolved independently. It is possible they have a common cause fact; a single, small
change within a complex interconnected system can have enormous consequences (Bak
et al. 1988; see also chapter 15 of this volume by Bentley and Maschner). The possibility
that the Upper Paleolithic revolution was triggered by a small cognitive change is
consistent with scientific understanding of abrupt phase transitions and with the sudden
‘breakthroughs’ that appear in the archeological record back to the Lower Palaeolithic (de
Baune 2004; Tattersall 2003). However, Mithen’s basic point—that it is related to the
capacity to explore and transform conceptual spaces—holds promise. A similar proposal
is that it was due to onset of the capacity to blend concepts, which greatly facilitated the
weaving of experiences into stories or parables (Fauconnier and Turner 2002). The
question we are left with is: what sort of change in cognitive functioning would enhance
the blending of concepts and exploration of conceptual spaces?
Contextual focus: The above proposals for what kind of cognitive change could have led
to the Upper Paleolithic transition stress different aspects of cognitive modernity.
Acknowledging a possible seed of truth in each of them we begin to converge toward a
common (if more complex) view. Conceptual blending is characteristic of associative
thought, which is quite different from the logical, analytic thought stressed by Deacon.
The modern human mind excels at both. Hence the Paleolithic transition may reflect a
fine-tuning of the genetics underlying the capacity to subconsciously shift between these
modes, depending on the situation, by varying the specificity of the activated cognitive
receptive field (Gabora 2003). This is referred to as contextual focus1[2] because it
requires the ability to focus or defocus attention in response to the situation or context.
Defocused attention, by diffusely activating a diversity of memory locations, is
conducive to associative thought; obscure (but potentially relevant) properties of the
situation thus come into play (Figure 2a). Focused attention is conducive to analytic
thought because memory activation is constrained enough to zero-in and specifically
operate on the most defining properties (Figure 2b). Thus in an analytic mode of thought,
the concept ‘giant’ might only activate the specific concept of bigness, whereas in an
associative mode of thought, the giants of various fairytales might come to mind. Once it
was possible to shift between these modes of thought, cognitive processes requiring
either analytic thought (e.g. mathematical derivation), associative thought (e.g. poetry) or
both (e.g., technological invention) could be carried out more effectively.
1 In neural net terms, contextual focus amounts to the capacity to spontaneously and
subconsciously vary the shape of the activation function, flat for associative thought and spiky for
analytical.
Figure 2. (a) Schematic representation of region of memory activated and retrieved from
during (a) associative thought, left and (b) analytic thought, right. The activation function
is flat in associative thought and spiky in analytic thought. Encoded items in memory
locations in whitened region blend to generate next instant of thought.
When we take into account how memory works, the lag between the second rapid
increase in brain size approximately 500,000 years ago, and the cognitive transition of the
Upper Paleolithic begins to make sense. A larger brain provided more space for episodes
to be encoded, but it doesn’t follow that this increased space could straightaway be
optimally navigated. There is no reason to expect that information from different domains
would immediately be compatible enough to coexist in a stream of thought, as in the
production of a metaphor. It is reasonable that once the brain achieved sufficient capacity
for modern cognition, it took time to fine-tune how its components ‘talk’ to each other
such that different items could be blended together and recursively revised (and recoded)
in a coordinated manner. Only then could the full potential of the large brain be realized.
Thus the bottleneck may not have been sufficient brain size but sufficient sophistication
in the use of the memory already available, which could have come about through onset
of contextual focus. With it the modern mind could both (1) intuitively combine
concepts, and adapt old concepts to new contexts, and (2) logically analyze these new
representations and how they fit together. Together these abilities would lead to the
development of more fine-grained internal model of the world, which through language
could be expressed and revised. Hence it may not be language per se that made the
difference, as Bickerton (1990, 1996) maintained, but rather capacity to shift between
analytic and associative processing --- such that the fruits of one mode provide the
ingredients for the other --- that not only made language possible, but other aspects of the
cultural life of modern humans such as art, science, and religion as well.
(3) Minds, Artifacts, and Evolution
The cumulative nature of artifact change since the Middle Paleolithic tempts one to refer
to culture as an evolution process. Like organisms, artifacts become more complex, more
finely honed, and more adapted to the constraints and affordances they impose on one
another over time. They also create niches for one another; for example, the invention of
cars created niches for seatbelts and gas stations. However, artifacts do not evolve by
means of a genetic code, and do not change through a process of random mutation and
natural selection. So culture does not evolve in the same sense as biological organisms. In
this section we examine in what sense the word evolution applies to artifact change.
Evolutionary Archaeology
As discussed by Bentley and Maschner in chapter 10 of this volume, “evolutionary
archaeology” (EA) is one school among an array of evolutionary approaches that attempt
to analyze culture change in terms of concepts borrowed from population genetics such
as selection or drift -- changes in the relative frequencies of variants through random
sampling from a finite population (O’Brien 1996, 2005; O’Brien and Lyman; for
critiques see Boone and Smith, 1998; Gabora, 2006). EA distinguishes itself from other
evolutionary approaches by its strong maintenance that artifacts constitute part of an
organism’s phenotype (defined in biology as the physical manifestation of an organism’s
genotype) and should be subjected to the same kind of analysis as other phenotypic traits.
O’Brien and Lyman (2004: 179) see human artifacts as phenotypic in the biological
sense, analogous to “a bird’s next, a beaver’s dam, or a chimpanzee’s twig tools as
phenotypic traits.” However, their assumption, that heritable behavior is the major
determinant in the form of a human-made artifact, is rather easily falsified. Colin
Renfrew (1982) succinctly characterized the difference between adaptations that are
accumulated genetically and adaptations that are passed on culturally:
The genetic inheritance, itself the product of environmental selection, may itself be
regarded as environmental ‘memory’... humans [are not] alone in communicating
[their experience of the environment] to others of the species: the dance of the bees,
where individuals can indicate the direction and distance of suitable supplies of
pollen, fulfils precisely this function. The essence of human culture, however, is
that it is an ‘acquired characteristic’, which, unlike the dance of the bees, is not
genetically determined (Renfrew 1982:18).
As Renfrew points out, much of human culture is not genetically determined, meaning
that it can evolve in a Lamarckian fashion by inheriting acquired characteristics. Beaver
dams and bird’s nests, however, cannot evolve this way: if a particular beaver were
taught, perhaps by humans, to build a window in its dam, and its offspring still built
normal windowless dams, we would see that only the dam, and not the window, belongs
in the beaver’s biological phenotype, to be passed on via genetic inheritance.
Do Artifacts Evolve?
Culture has many attributes of an evolutionary process. That is, phenomena such as
transmission and drift can operate on cultural variants themselves regardless of the
Darwinian (genetic) evolution among humans who carry these variants. In computer
simulations (see Costopolous, chapter 16 of this volume), culture evolves through drift or
a combination of invention and imitation, without genomes at all (e.g., Gabora 1995;
Neiman 1995; Madsen et al. 1999; Bentley et al. 2004). But although culture has
attributes of an evolutionary process, it does not operate through the same underlying
mechanisms as biology. When it comes to human-made artifacts, inheritance of acquired
characteristics is not just the exception but the rule. Once we learned how to build
dwellings with windows, dwellings with windows were here to stay. Something is
happening through culture that is prohibited in biology.
Some cultural theorists assume that the basic units of this second evolution process are
mental representations or ideas, or the tangible products that result from them such as
artifacts, language and so forth (Aunger, 2000; Durham, 1991; Lake, 1998). Sometimes
these elements of culture are referred to as ‘memes’, a term that usually implies that they
are not only basic elements of culture but also replicators: entities that make copies of
themselves (Dawkins 1976). What does that entail? The mathematician and computer
scientist John von Neumann (1966) postulated that a replicator, or ‘self-replicating
automaton,’ could be code consisting of (1) a description of itself, or self-description, and
(2) a set of self-assembly instructions. After it is passively copied from one replicant, the
self-description is actively deciphered via the self-assembly instructions to build the next
replicant. In this case, the code functions as interpreted information. Interpreting the code
makes a body, while the uninterpreted use of the code makes something that can itself
make a body. In biology, the DNA code is copied—without interpretation—to produce
new strands of DNA during meiosis. In successful gametes these DNA strands are
decoded—interpreted—to synthesize the proteins necessary to construct a body.
However, an artifact (or idea) is not a replicator because it does not consist of self-
assembly instructions. It may retain structure as it passes from one individual to another.
But it does not replicate it. Like a broadcast signal received by a radio, an idea has no
self-assembly code and needs external apparatus to be replicated – it cannot self-replicate
in the biological sense. Thus the meme perspective is widely believed to be flawed.
Essentially assuming that von Neumann’s definition holds for cultural information, Lake
(1998) differentiates between its expression versus its symbolically coded representation.
Speaking aloud or singing, for example, both express what is represented by a text or
written musical score. Singing expresses what can be represented by written music.
However neither expression nor representation is equivalent to interpretation or
(uninterpreted) copying of a self-assembly code. A musical score does not, on its own,
produce little copies of itself. Symbolic coding is not enough to be a replicator; there
must be a coded representation of the self. In sum then, artifacts are not replicators and
not the basic unit of an evolutionary process.
Mind as primitive replicator
This does not mean however that nothing in culture is a replicator. Another possibility is
that the modern mind itself constitutes a replicator. Not a von Neumann replicator, which
replicates with high fidelity using self-assembly instructions as described above, but a
primitive replicator (Gabora 2004), which replicates in an autopoietic sense.An
autopoietic structure is one in which the parts reconstitute one another and thus the
structure as a whole is self-mending or self-replicating. For example, Kauffman (1993)
proposed that the earliest life forms were autopoietic; that is, that pre-DNA life initially
replicated through a process in which simple molecules each catalyze the reaction that
generates some other molecule in the set and thus as a whole they self-replicate. The
proposal arose in response to the well-known ‘chicken and egg’ problem: which came
first, the nucleotides that make up a genetic self-assembly code which through
transcription and translation leads to proteins, or the proteins that are necessary to many
stages of the transcription/translation process? His answer is neither; a sloppy form of
self-replication is possible without any code.
Kauffman’s proposal draws upon the topological notion of a closure space: a set of points
sufficiently connected such that it is possible to get from any one point to another by
following the edges (connections) between them. Closure can be visualized as follows.
Imagine you spill a jar full of buttons on the floor. You tie two randomly chosen buttons
with a thread, and repeat this again and again. Occasionally you lift a button and see how
many connected buttons get lifted, and you find that clusters start to emerge. When the
ratio of strings to buttons reaches about 0.5, you pass a threshold where, suddenly, a giant
cluster of connected buttons forms, containing most of the buttons. The giant cluster is a
closure space because any two buttons within it are connected through strings and other
buttons. With primitive replicators the chicken-and-egg problem is solved because self-
replication occurs through happenstance interactions of molecules more primitive than
either DNA or proteins. Since replication proceeds not through following a code but
through happenstance interactions, inheritance of acquired characteristics is possible, and
replication has a low fidelity because of it.
Similarly, it is proposed that the enculturated modern human mind constitutes a primitive
replicator that emerges through a self-organized process of conceptual closure (Gabora,
2000; Gabora and Aerts 2005). Indeed an analogous paradox arises in considerations of
the origin of cultural evolution as arose in consideration of the origin of biological
evolution. We know that a mind is not just a collection of imitated cultural elements but
an integrated model of how different aspects of experience relate to one another, or
worldview. But this leads to the following chicken-and-egg situation: Until memories are
woven into a worldview, how can they generate the remindings and associations that
constitute a stream of thought? Conversely, until a mind can generate streams of thought,
how does it integrate memories into a worldview? How could something composed of
complex, mutually dependent parts come to be?
Much as in biology, the chicken-and-egg paradox can be resolved by applying the
concept of closure. To apply the concept of closure to cognition, episodes in memory are
represented as points (buttons), associative paths between them as edges (strings), and
concepts as clusters of connected points. Retrieval of an item from memory evokes
another retrieval, which, in turn, evokes yet another. This increases the density of
associative paths, and the probability of concept formation. Concepts facilitate streams of
thought, which forge connections between more distantly related clusters. The ratio of
associative paths to concepts increases until it becomes almost inevitable that a giant
cluster emerges and the episodes form a connected closure space. Eventually for any one
episode or concept there exists a possible associative path to any other, and together they
constitute an integrated conceptual web.
The idea is that, like the self-organized autocatalytic sets postulated to be the earliest
forms of life, a mind reach a stage in which it is conceptually integrated when it becomes
a primitive replicator. Integrated structure enables it to reason about one thing in terms of
another, adapt ideas to new circumstances, frame new experiences in terms of previous
ones, or combine information from different domains (as what happens with a joke). It
should be stressed that it is not the presence of but the capacity for an integrated
worldview that the human species came to possess. An infant may be born predisposed
toward conceptual integration, but the process must begin anew in each young mind. The
manner in which a worldview replicates is not all-at-once but piecemeal, through social
exchange, often mediated by artifacts. Worldviews are therefore not so much replaced by
as transformed into (literally) more evolved ones. Like cutting a fruit at different angles
exposes different parts of its interior, different situations expose different facets of a
mind, and the production of artifacts is one way a mind reveals its current evolutionary
state. The process is emergent rather than dictated by self-assembly instructions, and
therefore characteristics acquired over a lifetime are heritable. One individual modifies
the basic idea of a cup by giving it a flat enough bottom to stay put when not in use, and
another individual adds a handle, making it easier to grasp. With each instantiation, the
basic idea remains the same but the details change to make it more useful or adapted to
specific needs.
Thus while brains were evolving through biological evolution, integrated minds began
evolving through cultural evolution. The associative or relational structure of the mind
manifests as a capacity to define one element in terms of others, predict how a change to
one element will affect another, compare the present state of an idea or artifact with its
previous state, or desired state, and thereby refine or improve it. Two necessary steps
toward conceptual closure would have been (1) that representations were sufficiently
distributed to allow concept formation and self-cued retrieval, and (2) that contextual
focus enabled the capacity to shift between associative thought (conducive to bridging
domains) and analytical thought (conducive to logical operations within a domain). Thus
the notion of conceptual closure fits well with the explanations put forth to underlie the
two cultural transitions examined earlier, though at present this is speculative.
Artifacts and the Extended Mind
In contradiction to the meme perspective, neither a painting nor the ideas that went
through the artist’s mind while painting it constitute a replicator. Instead, a painting
reveals some aspect of the artist’s mind (which is a primitive replicator) and thereby
affects the minds (other replicators) of those who admire it. As minds become
increasingly complex, the artifacts they manifest become increasingly complex, which
necessitates even more complex cognitive structure, et cetera. This suggests that artifacts
are not the basic unit of either biological or cultural evolution, but that they a crucial if
indirect role in the evolution of the integrated mind.
As Renfrew (1982) suggests, artifacts function as external memory storage, which affects
both the biological and cultural fitness of their makers and users (see also Donald 1991,
2001). Retrieving information from the depiction of bison on a cave wall or calendrical
notches in a log is not so different from retrieving knowledge from memory. Note that
elements of the natural world functioned as a form of memory long before there were
symbolic artifacts; a look of disapproval on a mother’s face could remind a child not to
eat a poisonous mushroom as readily as retrieval of a memory of doing this and getting
sick. The look on the mother’s face is not a material artifact, yet it functions as an
external memory source, in much the same way as notches in a log. This corresponds to
Clark and Chalmers’ (1998) extended mind perspective, in which individual experience is
woven together through interaction between the internal and external world, and in which
the brain and its social cultural environment co-evolve, mutually provoking change in
one another (Deacon, 1997; Durham, 1991; Lumsden and Wilson, 1981).
Conclusions
There are many ways in which human cognition differs from that of other species, such
as our ability to generate and understand complex languages and other symbolic
structures appearing in art, science, politics, and religion. The appearance of stone tools
(2.5 Ma), strategic big game hunting (1.6 Ma), controlled fire use (0.8 Ma), and complex
habitats suggests that prior to the onset of complex language and symbolism, hominid
cognition already differed profoundly from that of other species. It has been suggested
that this reflects onset of the capacity to imitate, or onset of a theory of mind enabling
attribution of mental states to others. However, since these abilities are also present in
other social species, a more likely suggestion is that it reflects onset of the capacity for
self-triggering of thoughts or motor patterns such that one evokes the next. This underlies
abilities ranging from refinement of skills for tool production to enactment of events. A
plausible explanation for how it came about is that encephalization enabled mental
representations of events and skills to become more broadly distributed and thus the
resulting memory was more fine-grained, facilitating the retrieval or reminding events
that recursively reiterated constitute a self-triggered thought process.
Many, but not all, archaeologists believe that these distinctly human abilities likely arose
about fifty thousand years ago, or perhaps somewhat earlier, during the Middle/Upper
Paleolithic. Although encephalization has been occurring throughout the last two million
years, a second spurt occurred between 600,000 and 150,000 ka, well before the cultural
transition of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic. Thus this second cultural transition cannot be
attributed to something so simple as the sudden appearance of a ‘language module’; a
feasible explanation must involve not new brain parts or increased memory but a more
sophisticated way of using the available memory. The advent of language or symbol use
may be part of the answer, but begs the question what sort of cognitive functioning is
capable of producing and using language or symbols. A more in-depth examination of
spatiotemporal patterns in the archaeological record, however, reveals not just the
pronounced appearance symbolic artifacts, but evidence that they build on one another in
cumulative fashion; that is, exhibit the ratchet effect. Indeed some believe this to be the
most distinctly human characteristic of all. It is indicative of conceptual fluidity, which
involves combining ideas in new ways and adapting old ideas to new circumstances, and
requires both the complex mental operations characteristic of analytic thought, and the
intuitive, analogical processes characteristic of associative thought. Thus it has been
proposed that culture was brought about by onset of the capacity to adapt others' ideas to
ones' own circumstances, and this requires (1) an integrated internal model of the world,
and (2) a sophisticated way of navigating that model of the world, such that relationships
can be retrieved and creatively elaborated. This provides a possible cognitive explanation
for the explosion of task-specific decorated tools, beads, pottery, and so forth during the
Middle/Upper Paleolithic: they reflect onset of the capacity to spontaneously shift
between these two forms of thought depending on the situation. Together, analytical
thought allowing calculation within a domain, and associative thought forging
connections amongst seemingly disparate domains. This paved the way for episodes
encoded in memory to become integrated through the formation of a dynamical network
of concepts to yield a self-modifying internal model of the world.
The last section of this chapter looked at the relationship between minds, artifacts, and
evolution. Evolutionary archaeologists view artifacts as part of the human phenotype,
which increase biological fitness through their functionality. However we saw that
although there may be a genetic component to the capacity to produce a well-crafted
artifact it is not the only or even dominant influence; culture appears to play a formidable
role. We also saw that artifacts themselves do not constitute replicators, and are thus not
the basic unit of a cultural evolution process. However it is possible that integrated
worldviews evolve in the same primitive sense as the first living organisms, through an
emergent, self-organized process, resulting in a structure that can be mathematically
described as a closure structure. Because no self-assembly code is involved, the evolution
of such emergent structures is Lamarckian; acquired characteristics are inherited.
In this brief chapter it has been possible only to sketch out some ideas about the evolution
of human cognitive abilities. We have a long way to go before we arrive at a complete
picture, but it is an exciting journey ahead.
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledgement the support of Foundation for the Future. I would also
like to thank Alex Bentley for many helpful comments and additions, and Merlin Donald
for comments on portions of this chapter.