Modeling FX market activity around macroeconomic news:
a Hawkes process approach
Marcello Rambaldi,1 Paris Pennesi,2 and Fabrizio Lillo1,3,4
1Scuola Normale Superiore, Piazza dei Cavalieri 7, Pisa, 56126, Italy
2eFX Quantitative Trading, HSBC Bank, 8 Canada Square, London E14 5HQ, UK
3Dipartimento di Fisica e Chimica, Universita` degli Studi di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze Ed. 18, Palermo, 90128, Italy
4Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA
We present a Hawkes model approach to foreign exchange market in which the high frequency
pricedynamicsisaffectedbyaselfexcitingmechanismandanexogenouscomponent,generatedby
the pre-announced arrival of macroeconomic news. By focusing on time windows around the news
announcement, we find that the model is able to capture the increase of trading activity after the
news,bothwhenthenewshasasizeableeffectonvolatilityandwhenthiseffectisnegligible,either
because the news in not important or because the announcement is in line with the forecast by
analysts. Weextendthemodelbyconsideringnon-causaleffects,duetothefactthattheexistence
of the news (but not its content) is known by the market before the announcement.
I. INTRODUCTION explained by the endogenous component. Markets seem
tobeveryclosetoa”critical”statewhereallthedynam-
icsisendogenouslygenerated(see[4,5]formoredetails).
Complexsystemdynamicsischaracterizedbyasubtle
However in some situations the arrival of exogenous
interplay between endogenous and exogenous effects. Fi-
news has typically a very large impact on the trading nancial markets are, in this respect, paradigmatic. The
activity. An example, which is the one investigated in
dynamicsofassetprices,infact,isaffectedbythearrival
the present paper, is the impact of macroeconomic news
of exogenous news, which modifies the valuation of the
on foreign exchange (FX) markets. This large impact is
fairpriceoftheasset,andbythearrivalofendogenously
duetothefactthatmacroeconomicnews(unemployment
generated events (e.g. trades, orders, and price changes)
rate, GDP data, central banks intervention, etc.) affects
inreactiontopastevents[1–3]. Disentanglingandquan-
significantly the valuation of the economy of a country
tifying the relative importance of these two drivers have
and therefore of its currency. Moreover these announce-
been debated widely in the last half century, since the
ments are scheduled in advance and are monitored with
formalization of the Efficient Market Hypothesis. There
great attention by FX market participants.
is a growing empirical evidence that a significant frac-
tionofmarketactivity1 andvolatilityisexplainedbythe Theimpactofexogenousnewsonassetpriceshasbeen
endogenously generated trading activity. For example, investigatedbyanumberofauthorsstartingwiththepi-
large price movements (jumps) are only partly explained oneering work of [6]. In Ref. [19] authors analysed the
by public news [6, 7]. connection between the daily number of news announce-
mentsreportedbyDowJones&Companyandaggregate
Thedebateabouttheendogenousandexogenouscom-
measures of market activity such as trading volume and
ponentofpricedynamicshasrecentlyreceivedanewim-
market returns. Avellaneda and Lipkin [20] studied the
pulse thanks to the application of Hawkes processes to
phenomenon of stock pinning observed at the expiration
the modeling of financial data [8–15]. Hawkes processes
date of the corresponding options. Refs. [7] and [21] ex-
[16],originallyintroducedinseismology,describeapoint
plored the role of news in high-frequency volatility and
(counting) process where the intensity is not constant
order book dynamics. A more extensive survey of the
but depends on the past history of the counting process,
literature on news impact can be found in [22].
weightedbyasuitablychosenkernel. Duetothenatural
The effects of scheduled macroeconomic announce-
interpretation of a Hawkes process as a branching pro-
ments on the FX market have been the object of several
cess, in terms of immigrant baseline events and offspring
works. EderingtonandLee[23]foundthatthissortofan-
events, it is direct to interpret the integral of the kernel
nouncementsisresponsibleforalargepartofthevolatil-
as the fraction of the activity due to the endogenous self
ity pattern observed in these markets. Ref. [24] pro-
excitation. The empirical analysis on equity and future
videdacharacterizationofthevolatilityintheDM/USD
datahasindicated[4,5,17,18]that,accordingtoHawkes
rate, separating contributions of intraday activity pat-
modeling, a very large fraction of the market activity is
terns,macroeconomicannouncements,andvolatilityper-
sistence. Morerecently,Bauwensetal. [25]haveainves-
tigated volatility dynamics around news announcements
on high-frequency EUR/USD data in the framework of
1 In this paper we will use the term market activity to describe
ARCH-type models. These works focus either on large
therateofpricechangesperunittime,irrespectivelyonthesize,
similarlytowhatinvestigatedin[4,5] time horizons or choose a discrete time setting.
]RT.nif-q[
2v7406.5041:viXra
In this paper we focus on modeling the dynamic evo- # of days Events per Avg. quote
lution in physical (continuous) time of market activity day (Avg.) duration (s)
before and after a macroeconomic news announcement.
Small tick size
We consider the rate of change in the best quotes as a
proxy of market activity, and we take a point process EUR/USD 190 58,902 0.55
EUR/JPY 190 34,857 0.91
perspective. Our main original contribution is a Hawkes
USD/JPY 190 24,477 1.32
model of the FX market activity where one of the ker-
nels describes the (causal and possibly non-causal) effect Large tick size
ofthemacronewsonthemarketactivity. Themodelhas
EUR/USD 60 20,229 1.60
thustwoHawkeskernels,onefortheendogenousandone EUR/JPY 60 19,012 1.70
for the exogenous component. We find that the descrip- USD/JPY 60 7244 4.47
tion of the market activity improves significantly when
one introduces the exogenous kernel. It is important TABLEI:SummarystatisticsfortheFXdatasetduringLon-
to stress that most of the work done so far concerning doncoretradinghours(07:30-16:30),beforeandafterthetick
Hawkes processes in financial data has considered sta- sizeincrease. Eventsrefertocaseswheneitherthebidorthe
tionary processes. In fact, when non stationarities are ask change (with a time resolution of 100ms).
present (e.g. the intraday pattern), one typically tries to
remove them, for example by deseasonalizing the data.
However in some cases, non stationarities are important
We filter the data by considering the events where ei-
and bring relevant economic information that one wants
ther the best ask or the the best bid change. Although
to model. The example considered in this paper is the
FX trading is active 24h a day 7 days a week, the activ-
market activity around macro announcements. Our ap-
ity on Saturdays and Sundays recorded in our dataset is
proach demonstrates how it is possible to reconcile non
almost negligible and therefore we excluded them. This
stationarities like news announcements in the Hawkes-
left us with 250 days. FX trading activity displays an
processes framework, that has proven to be a versatile
high intraday seasonality and therefore we decided to
tool for modeling of high-frequency market dynamics in
restrict our work to London core trading hours (07:30-
physical time.
16:30), where the highest activity is observed. Table I
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we shows the number of bid or ask changes observed during
presentourdatasetofpricesandnewsandthemainvari- the London core trading hours for the three rates. No-
ables introduced to characterize the news. In Section III tice that we have divided the sample in two, depending
we show how Hawkes models are able to describe the on the tick size2. In fact EBS increased the tick size of a
dynamics of FX rates when only the endogenous com- factor five on September 23, 2012 and, as it can be seen
ponent is considered. Section IV presents our modeling from the Table, this fact has reduced the number of best
approach, where a new component of the Hawkes pro- quotechangesbyafactortwoorthree,dependingonthe
cess is added, taking into account the effect of macro rate.
news. InSectionVwepresentanextensionofthemodel
The FX market is strongly affected by macro an-
where a non-causal kernel is added, taking into account
nouncements. Inthispaperweareinterestedinmodeling
thefactthattheexistenceoftheannouncement(butnot
thepricedynamicsaroundtheseannouncements. Inpar-
its content) is known in advance. Finally, in Section VI
ticularherewefocusonannouncementswhosepublishing
wepresentsomeconclusions. InAppendixAwegivethe
is scheduled well in advance, such as Central Banks rate
details of maximum log-likelihood estimation. Appendix
decisions or announcements of unemployment or GDP
B provides further material on the comparison between
data. We obtained the list of all economic announce-
the model with the new exogenous component and the
ments of 2012 from the website www.dailyfx.com. The
one without it.
news data report date and time of the news release, the
currency which is most affected by the news, a brief
description of the news, an estimate of the importance
II. DATA (high, medium, low), and, where available, the expected
(Forecast)andactualvalue. TheForecastvalueisanav-
We investigated EBS live data from January 1, 2012 erage of analysts’ expectations. Not all the news in the
to December 18, 2012, a total of 353 days, for three datasetconcernthepublicationofanindicatorwhichcan
pairs of currencies, namely EUR/USD, EUR/JPY and bequantifiedbyanumber. Anexamplearepressconfer-
USD/JPY. The time resolution of the database is 100ms ences of central banks’ governors. Since there is no nu-
and we used the ebsMarketReferenceTime as the refer- meric value associated to them, there is not any forecast
ence time. Since the time discretization might affect the either. Since we treat only the EUR/USD, EUR/JPY
estimation of the Hawkes process, as customary done,
we randomize the times by subtracting from each time
stamp expressed in second a random number uniformly
distributed in (0,0.1] s. 2 Theticksizeisthediscretizationstepofprice.
and USD/JPY rates, we retained only the news that are it,wecanonlyconsidernewsforwhichtheForecastvalue
linkedtooneofthesecurrencies. Inaddition,inthiswork is given. In the end, starting with 723 news, we are left
weconsideronlynewsthatareratedMediumorHighim- with a total of 559 news or about 77% of the original
portance, so we discarded those rated Low. Quite often, sample.
relatedindicatorsareannouncedatthesametime. Since For each news we have the Actual and the Forecast
we are concerned with the impact of a news before and value, which we denote I and I respectively. The mea-
after its announcement, we kept only the most relevant sures of surprise that we use are the absolute surprise
news for each distinct time. The total of the news re-
tained after this selection is 723. The totals divided per S abs =|I A −I F |, (2)
currency and importance are reported in Table II. The
and the relative surprise
muchsmallernumberofJPYnewsisduetothefactthat
we focus on London core trading hours, and most JPY
news are released outside this time interval. S = A F ×100. (3)
HIGH MEDIUM TOTAL In principle one could distinguish between ”good news”
EUR 130 293 423 and ”bad news”, i.e. if the indicator was better or worse
USD 107 186 293 than expected. However this is difficult to do in an un-
JPY 1 6 7 supervisedway,sinceapositiveincrementisgoodorbad
depending on the type of news. Therefore we chose to
TOTAL 238 485 723
use the absolute value of the difference. The choice be-
tween the absolute and the relative surprise is not im-
TABLEII:Numberofnewsaffectingeachcurrencydisaggre-
gated by importance. mediate. On one hand, in fact, indicators span a wide
range of values, some are of the order of unity other are
given in thousands or in percentage and hence the most
reasonable choice seems the relative surprise. On the
other hand, for some indicators, such as unemployment
rate, that are given in percentage, even a small absolute
A. Activity jumps and news surprise
changemightbesignificant. Forthesereasonsweusethe
absolute surprise for indicators given in percentage and
In order to characterize the news, we introduce two
the relative surprise in all other cases. In the following,
additionalmetrics. Thefirstonemeasureshowmuchthe
the notation S denotes this combined measure.
news has impacted the trading activity, while the second
The correlation between surprise and θ is surprisingly
one measures the degree of surprise of the news, i.e. the
low and the scatterplot is very noisy3. By restricting to
difference between the forecast and the actual value.
Medium and High importance news, the Spearman cor-
To be more specific, for each one minute interval i we
relation coefficient between surprise and θ is 0.34 and
compute the number N of changes in any of the best
i different from zero in a statistically significant way. This
quotes, and we compare it with the Simple Moving Av-
effect comes mainly from the High importance news, for
erage (SMA ) of the same quantity over the previous n
n which the Spearman correlation raises to 0.62. Figure 1
oneminuteintervals. Sincetheeventsinminuteidonot
showsthescatterplotofθvs. thesurpriseforEUR/USD
enter in the calculation of SMA (i), we consider it as a
n for Medium and High importance news. This relation is
measure of the expected activity for the interval i. Simi-
confirmed by P(θ>1|S), which is the probability that θ
larly to what is done in price jumps detection [7, 15], we
is larger than one conditional to a given value of the sur-
define the impact θ as the ratio between the observed
i prise (see Figure 1). We observe that this probability is
numberofeventsatiandtheexpectednumberofevents
systematicallylargerthan1/2,indicatingthatnewstrig-
according to SMA, namely
ger an increase in activity and this increase depends on
the surprise of the news. For EUR/USD and EUR/JPY
θ i = (1) we obtain an almost monotone trend, while USD/JPY
n presents a noisier pattern. It seems that even this very
simple measure of surprise, that does not take into ac-
We shall use the quantity θ for two purposes. First we
countthespecificityofeachindicator,isneverthelessable
use it to identify ”jumps”in the market activity and to
to capture some relevant information.
answer the question of how frequently a high activity is
associated with a recent news. Second we shall use is to
answer the reverse question, i.e. how large is θ after a
macronewsandtoclassifynewsaccordingtotheireffect
on the trading activity. 3 One could try to reduce this noise by normalizing the surprise
indicator by the historical standard deviation, thus taking into
Thesecondmetricmeasuresthedifferencebetweenex-
accountthetypicaluncertaintyofthesurpriseofeachnews. This
pectationsandactualvaluesannouncedbythenews. For
however would require much longer time series in order to have
this reason we call it ”surprise”of the news. To compute enoughobservationsforeachtypeofnews.
10−1 100 101 102 103
4. A non-parametric approach was recently developed
by [14]. The log-likelihood can be computed analytically
(see Eq. (A1) in Appendinx A), though numerical opti-
mization techniques are necessary for maximization. We
note here that definition (4), which is standard in the
literature, assumesthattheprocessstartsinfinitelyback
in the past. Thus, an approximation is made when the
likelihood is evaluated on a finite sample. The quality of
theapproximationimprovesasthesamplesizeincreases.
In our application, for the endogenous kernel we use
eitheradoubleexponential5orapower-lawdecayingker-
nel. The double exponential kernel φ (t) is defined as DE
FIG.1: (Coloronline). Scatterplotofθagainstourmeasureof where α and β (q=A,B) are the constant parameters
news surprise S (left y axis). The figure refers to EUR/USD
of the model. Here two different time scales are present
data for θ. The red line (right y axis) is an estimation of
and their relative weight is controlled by the amplitudes
P(θ>1|S). For reference, when S=0 this probability is 0.73
α. Fordefinitenesswechooseβ ≥β ,i.e. theAsubscript
refers to the shorter time scale and B to the longer one.
The power-law kernel we use is in fact not a truly
III. HAWKES MODELS OF FX MARKET power-law decaying function, but instead, for computa-
ACTIVITY tional reasons, we use an exponential sum that carefully
approximatesafunctionwithapowerlawtail. Inpartic-
In this Section we present the baseline model for mar- ular we adopt the same specification of [5], which reads
ket activity. It consists of a Hawkes process with a
c n o is n m sta d n e t sc b ri a b s i e n li g ne th i e nt e e n n d s o it g y en a o n u d s a eff s e e c l t f-e [4 x , c 5 it ] a . t I io n n th m e e n ch ex a t - φ PL (t)= Z n { M ∑ −1 (a k )−pe − a t k −Se − a− t 1} (7)
Section we will introduce also an exogenous news term.
Hawkes processes are powerful models for describing the where
arrival of events which cluster in time. In one dimension
theymodelacountingprocessN incontinuoustimewith a =τ mk. (8)
an intensity (i.e. probability per unit time of observing
an event) described by Theparametersaren, pandτ . Misthenumberofexpo-
nential terms and m is a scale parameter. We fix M=15
(cid:90) t and m=5 as in [5]. The parameter m controls how well
λ(t)=µ+ φ(t−s)dN s (4) a single exponential approximates the power law. If one
−∞ wishestheapproximationtobevalidovermanyordersof
magnitude, high values of m and M are necessary. Z and
.
.
the constant baseline intensity and the kernel φ(τ)≥0 by the negative exponential, whose time scale is regu-
describes the effect of past counts to the current inten- lated by τ once m is fixed. This approximated power
sity. The process is stationary if n≡ (cid:82) 0 ∞φ(τ)dτ<1. As lawkernel 0 presentsanexponentialcut-offatlarget. This
described in [5, 26], the process can be stationary in the difference with respect to a true power law is however ir-
critical case n=1 if µ=0. If n<1, it is related to µ relevant, in fact, for our choice of M and m, it manifests
through the relation itself only for t larger than ≈109s, a value much larger
than the duration of a trading day. This approximation
Λ≡E[λ(t)]= . (5) of the power law in terms of an exponential sum allows
1−n the log-likelihood to be computed recursively, reducing
the computational cost form O(N2) to O(N), where N is
The quantity n is the fraction of the average rate ex-
plained by the self-exciting mechanism.
The Hawkes process is characterized by the functional
formofthekernelφ(t). Inempiricalapplications,onecan 4 Anotherparametricmethodwasrecentlyproposedin[27].
5 We have also considered the single exponential case. In agree-
chooseaprioriafunctionalformforthekernel,dependent
mentwiththeresultsof[5]forotherfinancialassets,wefindthat
on some parameters, and then use maximum likelihood
FX data are very poorly described by Hawkes processes with a
method to determine the best fitting parameters’ values singleexponentialkernel.
the sample size. This is particularly relevant given the
large number of data available. We refer to Appendix A
for further details on the log-likelihoods functions.
lllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Theoretical quantiles
1 llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
10−3 10−2 10−1 100 101
Theoretical quantiles
by means of a quantile-quantile plot the empirical dis-
tribution of the residuals of both the double-exponential
kernelandthepower-lawkernelagainstthestandardex-
ponential distribution. We find that the power-law ker-
nelperformsbetterthanthedoubleexponential. Infact,
both the right tail and the left tail of the residual distri-
bution for the power law kernel are closer to the theo-
retical one than the one for the exponential kernel. An
analysis of the log-log plot in Figure 2 indicates that the
major discrepancies occur for the left tail of the distri-
bution, which corresponds to the residuals computed on
short durations. The duration distribution of the data is
peakedaround100msevenaftertherandomizationpro-
cedure. The double exponential kernel that presents its
maximum at t =0 is not able to reproduce this feature,
while the power law kernel, which is equipped with an
exponential cutoff at short lags performs better. To sup-
porttheconclusionsdrawnfromtheQQ-plotwemention
thatweperformedatestofexponentialityontheresidu- lDE
PL als, namely the Excess Dispersion (ED) test of Ref. [28].
The test was performed on each day separately for the
three currency pairs. The null hypothesis of the residu-
alsbeingexponentiallydistributedwasrejectedatthe5%
level in 92.8% of the days for the DE kernel and only in
42.2 % of the days for the PL kernel (aggregating across
the pairs). To conclude the comparison between the two
kernels, we stress that also likelihood values are consis-
tentlyhigherforthepowerlawkernel,thusfavouringthis
choice.
FIG. 2: (Color online) Comparison of the distribution of the 1 1 . . 0 5
residuals from the double exponential and power low model 0.5
against the theoretical exponential distribution. Top: lin- 0.4
lin scale. Bottom: log-log scale. The residuals from all the 0.2
separate days and for all the three pairs are pooled together.
A. Results 0.20
We estimated the best parameters for each day (i.e. 1.6
the 9-hour window from 07:30 to 16:30 UTC) separately 1.2
by maximizing the log-likelihood. In this way we obtain
a set of optimal parameters for each day. Appendix A
describes all the details, both analytical and numerical,
of the procedure we used in estimation.
Inordertocomparetheperformanceofthetwokernels
we studied the distribution of the residuals. In fact the
timechangetheorem[10]statesthatifthetruedatagen-
erating process is a point process with intensity λ, then
the residuals
(cid:90) ti+1
Λ = λ(s)ds
are independent and identically distributed with a stan-
dard exponential distribution. In Figure 2 we compare
01 Jan 11 Mar 20 May 29 Jul 07 Oct 16 Dec
FIG. 3: (Color online) Time series of the Hawkes model pa-
rametersforEUR/USD.Marketactivityineventspersecond
is also shown. The dotted line signals the tick size increase.
We now turn to the analysis of the values obtained for
theparameters. Wereporttheresultsfromthepowerlaw
kernel. Figure 3 shows the time series of parameters es-
timated on EUR/USD data. Trading activity measured
in events per second is also shown. In Table III we re-
port the average value of the parameters obtained with
the power law kernel before and after the tick increase
for all the three pairs. The uncertainties on the values,
as estimated from the Hessian of the log-likelihood, are Let Nnews be the counting process describing the ar-
about 10% on µ, 2% on n and τ , and about 1% on p. rival of a news. In order to avoid confusion with the
times {t i } i∈N of arrival of the market activity process, we
Before tick increase indicate with {z j } j∈N the arrival time of the j-th news.
The intensity of the market activity counting process is
EUR/USD EUR/JPY USD/JPY then
activity (events/s) 1.82 (20) 1.08 (28) 0.76 (31) (cid:90) t (cid:90) t
p 1.51 (6) 1.46 (10) 1.52 (7) ti<t zj<t
After tick increase
where φ(t) is the endogenous self-exciting kernel and
EUR/USD EUR/JPY USD/JPY φ (t)istheexogenouskernelthataccountsforthenews-
activity (events/s) 0.62 (15) 0.59 (18) 0.22 (26) induced excitement.
µ (s−1) 0.08 (31) 0.08 (32) 0.03 (36) Theconditionforstationarityisobtainedbytakingthe
n 0.90 (7) 0.91 (7) 0.95 (8) unconditional expectation on both side of (9),
τ0 (s−1) 0.21 (4) 0.22 (16) 0.18 (4)
TABLEIII:Averagevaluesoftheparametersbeforeandafter (cid:90) t (cid:90) t
the tick size increase. Standard deviations across the sample =µ+ φ(t−s)E[λ(s)]ds+ φ N (t−s)E[λ N (s)]ds=
expressed in percent is also reported in parentheses.
(cid:90) t (cid:90) t
We note that the periods before and after the tick in-
(cid:90) ∞ (cid:90) ∞
crease are very different. This is true also for the other =µ+Λ φ(τ)dτ+Λ φ (τ)dτ
pairs. Afterthetickincreasethenumberofquotechanges 0 0
per second drops sharply as expected. In fact, after the
increase a change in a quote implies a larger movement where Λ ≡E[λ (t)] is the average intensity of the news
in the posted price. This drop is mirrored by a drop in
process. Solving for Λ, we finally get
thebaselineintensityµ. Theparameter pcontrollingthe
powerlawdecaydecreasessharplyafterthetickincrease, µ+Λ (cid:82)∞φ (τ)dτ
Λ= N 0 N . (11)
indicating an increase of the number of long durations,
in accordance with what is observed in the data. The
criticality parameter n is quite close to 1 and relatively Provided that Λ exists and is finite, the condition of
insensitive to the tick size change. stationarity is thus the same as in the pure self-exciting
Overall, the Hawkes model equipped with the power case, namely
In particular, it is not neces-
law kernel provides a pretty good description of the em- sary that also
(cid:82)∞φ
(τ)dτ<1 in order to have stationar-
pirical data. In line with [5], we find that a large part of ity of market activity. As we will see below, in real data
the activity is explained by the self-exciting mechanism
(cid:82)∞φ
(ncloseto1)andhenceappearstobeendogenouslygen- In order to test the model of Eq. (9) it is necessary to
erated. specifythefunctionalformofφ(t)andφ (t). Aswehave
seen above, the double exponential kernel and the quasi-
power law kernel give good results for the endogenous
component, hence we adopted these forms also here. For
IV. MODELING MARKET ACTIVITY
the exogenous kernel φ we chose a single exponential
AROUND MACRO NEWS N
specification of the type
We now present the main original contribution of this φ (t)=α e−βNt. (12)
paper, namely an extension of the Hawkes model includ-
inga news-related(exogenous)term. Themodelaimsat Here,α givesthemagnitudeandβ fixesthetimescale.
reproducing in a Hawkes framework the impact of news Moreover, it seems reasonable, at least as a first approx-
arrival on market activity. It is important to note that imation, that the news impact could be described by a
thenewsprocessisconsideredasgiven,thatis,themodel single timescale.
isnotmeanttodescribethenewsprocessitself. Thenews Both by using the double exponential φ (t) and the
process is completely deterministic in this context. As quasi-power law kernel φ (t) the expression for the log-
we said, this is actually also the real case in FX market, likelihoodcanbeanalyticallyderived. Intheformercase
where the news and the forecast value, when available, we estimate 7 parameters, while in the latter case this
are announced at predetermined times. number is equal to 6.
We estimated and tested our model on the series of
best quote changes for the three currency pairs in our 500
database. In each day there are on average three news 400 l l announcements, and we calibrated the model on a win- 300 ll l
dow where only one news is present. Therefore we se- l l
l n t e i o m ct o e e t d o h f t e h r t o h n s e e ew n n s e e w w in s s . e a v In e th n t t r h s ee i t s h h w a o t a u y a r r t w e h i ” e n is d n o o e l w a w t s e c d e e ” n v , t e i e n . r e t e . d h t a h a p e t p re e th n i e s s 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 lll l lllllll lll llllll llll l llllllllll l llllllllll ll llll l l l l l l llllllllllllllllll llllllll lll l l l l l l l l lll l l l llll l l l ll lll l ll l ll lll l llll l llll l l l ll l l lllllll ll l l lll l ll llllllll l ll ll l lll
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
always att=5400 s, i.e. at the median point of the win- Time (s)
dow. We then estimated the parameters of the model in
each window as described in Appendix A. Notice that it
is immediate to extend our modeling to the case where
more than one news is present in the investigated time interval. In the following we focus on windows with only one news mostly for the sake of presentation clarity. SinceweareconsideringonlyHighandMediumimpor- tancenews,thisfilteringprocedurereturnsatotalof266
isolated news. The news are the same for all the pairs.
The average number of quote changes in each window is
17,579 for EUR/USD, 11,199 for EUR/JPY, and 7,322
for USD/JPY.
A. Comparison of models with and without news
In order to visualize the difference between the model
with and without the news component, we present here
calibrated numerical simulations of the two models and
we compare them with the real data. In Figure 4 (top
panel) we consider an important news, namely, the re-
lease of US change in non-farm payrolls which turned
out to be much lower than expected. The model with-
outthenewstermfailstoreproducethetrendofactivity
after the news. On the contrary, the model of Eq. (9)
withtheendogenouspowerlawkernelseemstoreproduce
pretty well both the magnitude and the temporal decay
of the news impact. The model with the double expo-
nential kernel overestimates the impact immediately af-
terthenewsarrival. Moreover,itispossibletonotethat
the models without the news term significantly overesti-
mates the activity before the news. This is because they
attribute the extra activity due to the news to the self-
exciting mechanism, thus increasing the overall activity
insteadofconcentratingitincorrespondenceofthenews.
Figure 4 (bottom panel) refers instead to the effects
of the announcement of the Euro-Zone industrial new
ordersfiguresonUSD/JPY.Thefigureswereinlinewith
expectations and the news had a scarce impact. Again,
the model behaves nicely, in that it correctly captures
the absence of impact in this case.
We compared the performance of the model with and
without the news term across the whole set of news we
examined. Wesimulatedrepeatedlybothmodelsforeach
news, then we examined the number of events generated
by each model in the 5 minutes window that follows the
newsandwecontrastedthisnumberwiththerealnumber
ofevents. Theresultofthiscomparisonindicatesthatthe
model with the news term performs much better than
)nim 1 rep stnuoC(
lTrue Sim No News DE
Sim No News PL
Sim News DE Sim News PL
1 5 0 0 0 0 l l l l l l l l l l ll ll l ll ll l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll ll l l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll ll l l ll l l l l ll l l l l ll l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l lll l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l ll l ll l l l l l l l l l l l l l ll lll l l l l lllllll l l
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
1 rep stnuoC( ytivitcA
Sim No News PL Sim News PL
FIG.4: (Coloronline). Actualandsimulatedactivityaround
two macronews, namely EUR/USD rate around US change
in non-farm payrolls on April 6 (top panel) and USD/JPY
around Euro-Zone Industrial New Orders data on January 5
(bottom panel). The dashed line corresponds to the time of
the announcement. Results from simulations of the models
withoutnewsarealsoshownforcomparison. Foreachmodel
we run 100 simulations and we plot the average with one
standard deviation confidence bands. Confidence bands are
omittedinthetoppanelforimprovingreadability. Parameter
estimateswere{αDE=3.2,βDE=1.6·10−2,αPL=1.45,βPL=
8.2·10−4 } for the first news and { αDE =3.0, βDE =7.0,
αPL=2.72,βPL=7.0}forthesecondone(allvaluesins−1).
the one without it when the news had a sizable impact.
When the news produced little or no impact, the two
models are essentially equivalent. Further details on this
comparison are presented in Appendix B.
In our model the total intensity λ(t) is the sum of
three contributions: the baseline intensity µ, the endoge-
(cid:82) nouscomponent φ(t−s)dN ,andtheexogenouscompo-
(cid:82) nent φ (t−s)dNnews. We can therefore analyse how the
contribution of each term varies over time around the
news announcement. The top panel of Figure 5 shows
the fraction of the intensity coming from each compo-
nent as a function of time for an important news. After
the news release, the contribution of the exogenous term
rises quickly, while the weight of the endogenous one de-
creases. Also the contribution of the baseline intensity
becomesnegligibleimmediatelyaftertheannouncement.
The exogenous contribution then slowly decays towards
zero and the endogenous and the baseline components
regain their pre-news level. It is interesting to contrast
thesefigureswiththemiddlepanelofFigure5,wherethe
contributionstoλ(t)forthesamenewsareshownforthe
model without the news term. The increment of activity
after the news is now attributed to the endogenous com-
ponent. The contribution of the baseline intensity has a
similar trend in the two cases, though we note that its
contribution before the news is higher in the model with
10−2 10−1 100 101 102
FIG. 5: (Color online). Components of the intensity λ(t)
as a function of time. The components sum to one and the
curves are smoothed by using a simple moving average over
100s. ThetopandmiddlepanelrefertoEUR/JPY,incorre-
spondence of the announcement of the high importance and
surprise news of US new jobs data on November 2 at 12:30.
In the top (middle) panel we consider Hawkes model with
(without)theexogenousnewsterm. Thebottompanelrefers
toEUR/USDduringamediumimportancenews,namelythe
announcement of US new home sales data on September 26
at 14:00.
theexogenousterm. Finally,thebottompaneloffigure5
shows the same decomposition for a low impact news. It
is possible to appreciate how, in this case, the exogenous
component decays much faster and has a marginal role.
B. Regression results
Theregressionofthemodelontherealdatagivesaset
ofparametersoftheendogenousandexogenouskernelfor
each investigated news and exchange rate.
Figure 6 shows the distribution of the parameters α ,
β , and α /β for the three rates. Remarkably, the dis-
tributions are very similar across rates. It is worth men-
tioning that the figure does not show a delta peak in the
distribution of α at the value zero. Their number along
with the corresponding average impact is detailed in Ta-
10−510−410−310−210−1100101102103
10−1 100 101 102 103 104
FIG. 6: (Color online). Estimated probability density func-
tion of αN, βN, and αN/βN for the three rates. The scale of
the x axis is logarithmic, hence values of αN and of the ratio
αN/βN exactlyequaltozeroarenotplotted. Theirnumberis
reported in Table IV.
ble IV. We note that the news-related parameters have
a very broad distribution. This is due both to the very
differenteffectsthatnewsproduceandtotheuncertainty
intheestimation. Asamatteroffact,uncertaintyonthe
news-related parameters, calculated from the inverse of
the Hessian matrix, is very high, with averages of about
50% for both parameters. Finally, it is worth noticing
that the distribution of α /β has most of its mass for
values much larger than 1.
Wenowconsidertheproblemofquantifyinghowmuch
we improve the description of the data when we use the
model with the exogenous term as compared to the per-
formance of the simple model with only the endogenous
factor. This is a typical problem of model selection [29].
Since we can compute the maximum likelihood and the
number of parameters is different in the two models, we
made use of the Akaike information Criterion (AIC) [30]
Number of news with αN=0 θ
EUR/USD 10 0.70
EUR/JPY 13 0.69
USD/JPY 13 0.59 0.075
TABLE IV: Number of αN found exactly equal to zero for
eachpair. Theaveragevalueofthecorrespondingθ,θ,isalso 0.050
reported. WerequireαN tobeequalorgreaterthenzero,and
enforce this in the optimization. Hence, values equal to zero
are found on the boundary of the searchable region. 0.025
−260 −180 −100 −20
defined as
AIC=2k−2lnL. (13)
TocorroborateourresultswecomputedalsotheBayesian
Information Criterion (BIC) [31]
BIC=klnn−2lnL (14)
where n represents the sample size. BIC thus generally
penalizes more the introduction into the model of new
freeparametersthanAICdoes. Themodelwiththelow-
est value of AIC or BIC is the one to be selected. Given
a set of models {i=1,2,..,M} the relative likelihood RL
of model i with respect to the best model in the set, for
which AIC=AIC , is
(cid:18) (cid:19) AIC −AIC
RL=exp min i . (15)
AIC scores for the models with the power law endoge-
nous kernel are always better than those for the models
with the double exponential kernel. This is true as well
for the BIC scores. Hence, in the following we compare
the results of the models with the power law endoge-
nouskernelthatdifferforthepresenceofthenewsterm.
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the difference in AIC
and BIC scores between the model with the news term
andtheonewithoutit,namelyAIC −AIC ,and
News noNews
BIC −BIC . The distribution is calculated sep-
News noNews
arately for low impact and high impact news, and for
high surprise and low surprise news. The figure is ob-
tained pooling the values from all currency pairs. For
AIC, only a small fraction of the differences are positive,
meaning that the model with the news term is almost
always better. However, for low-impact and low surprise
news, there is a sharp peak around zero. A difference
in AIC scores exactly equal to 4 corresponds to the case
whenthetwomodelshavethesamelikelihood,andhence
the model with more parameters is penalized by a fac-
tor two times the number of extra parameters (which is
two). Hence values around 4 mean that the models are
essentially equivalent. As noted before, BIC penalizes
moretheextraparameters,sothereisalargerportionof
positive differences. However, for high-impact and high-
surprise news the bulk of the distribution is on negative
values. Indeed,negativedifferencesattainevenverylarge
absolute values (as much as 260).
High Impact
Low Impact
news no news
−260 −180 −100 −20
High Surprise
Low Surprise
news no news
FIG. 7: (Color online). Distribution of the difference in
AIC and BIC scores, AIC −AIC and BIC −
News noNews News
BIC , between the model with the news term and the
one without it. Top: distributions for high impact news,
θ>θ , and low impact news, θ≤θ . Bottom: dis-
median median
tributionsforhighsurprisenewsS>S ,andlowsurprise
news,S≤S . Allthecurrencypairsareaggregated. Me-
dianvaluesofθforeachpairarecalculatedbeforetheaggre-
gation.
Looking at the average relative likelihoods RL for the
two groups we obtain
Indicator High Low
θ 5.6·10−8 1.0·10−1
S 1.5·10−7 1.3·10−3
Thismeansthatforhighimpactnewsthemodelwithout
the news term is about 10−8 times as probable as the
model with the news term to minimize the information
loss, i.e. the model with the news component is much
better. Unsurprisingly,forlowimpactnewsthedifference
between the models reduces, albeit AIC still favours the
model with the news term.
As a final investigation we consider how the endoge-
nous term parameters are influenced by the presence of
thenewsterm. Forbothmodelswiththenewstermand
the one without it, we consider separately the distribu-
tion of the parameters for news with θ≤θ (”Low”)
and those with θ>θ (”High”).
Wefindthattheparameterthatexhibitsthemostrel- parameter t df p−value
evantdifferencewhenthenewstermisincludedisn. For αN -0.11 238.28 9.1·10−1
high impact news n takes lower values in the model that EUR/USD βN -1.27 144.30 2.1·10−1
includesthenewsterm. Infact,animportantpartofthe αN 3.95 181.06 1.1·10−4
activity is now explained by the news term, whereas, in α
N -1.05 133.28 3.0·10−1
the previous model, it was attributed to the endogenous EUR/JPY βN -1.50 132.00 1.35·10−1
term. The baseline intensity µ has instead higher values αN 4.75 157.13 4.5·10−6
in the model with the news term. This is at first sight α
N -1.32 133.81 1.9·10−1
somewhatsurprising,sinceonecouldexpectthatwithout USD/JPY βN -1.65 132.00 1.0·10−1
the news term a higher part of the observed intensity is αN 3.24 166.21 1.4·10−3
attributedtothebaselineintensityµ. Theintroductionof βN
the news term impacts on n, reducing its value when the TABLE V: Results of the t-test of the hypothesis that the
contributionofthenewsissignificant(i.e. whenthenews parameters for high impact and low impact news have the
term explains a large part of the activity which was pre- same mean. The test is two sided and the Welch approxi-
viouslyattributedtotheendogenousmechanism). Thus, mationis usedforthe degreesof freedom(df)toaccountfor
also the contribution of the endogenous component to unequalvariancesinthetwosamples. Wereportthevalueof
the average intensity Λ is lowered. On the other hand, thet-statistic along with the computed p−value.
the exogenous component contributes to Λ with
.
In our case, Λ =1/5400. What we observe is that this
contribution is not enough to compensate for the lower θ median and the second with θ<θ median . For each of the
values of n, and hence a higher µ is needed to maintain three parameters α N , β N , and α N /β N we perform a t-
thesamevalueofΛ. Thetailoftheendogenouskernelis testofthehypothesisthatthemeansforeachparameter
estimated to decay faster to zero in presence of the news are the same for high and low impact news. The results
term and for high impact news. Instead, for low impact are summarized in Table V. We observe that, while we
news, both models give about the same values. Finally, cannotrejectthehypothesisthatα N andβ N individually
the values of τ 0 are not very sensitive to the presence of havethesamemeaninthetwosamples, theratioα N /β N
the news term. has different sample mean for large and small θ. The
In conclusion, the endogenous parameters are influ- behaviour is similar for all the rates. This means that,
enced by the presence of the news term. In particular, evenwhenanewshasalargeimpact,thetypeofresponse
after the news an important fraction of the intensity is of the kernel can affect either the amplitude or the time
nowattributedtothenewsterm. Wenotethatthevalue decay of the kernel (or both), but not in a systematic
of n estimated with the news term may be underesti- way. The ratio between these quantities instead shows
mated when no news are present (e.g. before the an- very different results for high and low impact news.
nouncement) and this in turn leads to higher values of Finally, we examine the relation between the values
µ to compensate. This result is due to the fact that we of the parameters and the surprise indicator S defined
employ constant parameters, while probably the ”right” in Section IIA. To this end, we restricted the analysis
values of n before and after a news are different. As we to the news for which it was possible to calculate a sur-
haveseen,onaveragealargefractionofactivity(≈0.9)is prise value, removing thus those for which the Forecast
explained by the endogenous term. Our intuition is that and Actual fields are not available. This left us with 213
farfromnewseventsn≈1,i.e. activityisalmostentirely news. Since our measure of surprise is pretty rough, we
endogenously driven, whereas after an important news divided the sample in two subsamples, one of High Im-
n becomes much smaller and the exogenous component portanceandoneofMediumImportancenews. Asforθ,
gains weight. wefurtherdividedeachofsubsamplesintwogroups,one
with a surprise value above and one below the sample
median. FortherateEUR/USDaclearpictureemerges.
The rates α and β are not statistically different in
C. Relation between the kernel parameters and the
the two groups, both for High and for Medium impor-
properties of the news.
tance news. On the contrary, for High Importance news
the ratio α /β is significantly larger for large surprise
In this Section we investigate how the parameters es- newsascomparedwithsmallsurprisenews,whilethisef-
timated by the Hawkes process with the exogenous news fectislessevidentforMediumimportancenews(p-values
term are correlated with other measures of the effect of around of 10%). To illustrate the effect on High impor-
the news on the market activity, namely the jump pa- tance news, we divided the news and the corresponding
rameter θ and the news surprise S (see Section IIA). estimated parameters into four groups based on the sur-
Westudywhichparameterofthenewskernelismostly prise value. The intervals are delimited by the quartiles
affected when a news with high impact arrives. To this of S. Figure 8 shows the probability distribution of the
end, for each rate we split the sample of news in two ratio α /β in the four quartiles, showing that higher
subsamples, the first corresponding with news with θ> surprise news correspond to higher value of the ratio.
100 101 102 103 104
with αC, αNC≥0, and βC, βNC>0.
All The stationarity condition now reads
Q3 (cid:104) (cid:105)
N 0 N −∞ N
As before, provided that Λ exists and is finite, the con- N
dition of stationarity is thus the same of the self-exciting
only case, namely
We re-estimated the parameters of the model with
the non-causal term on the same dataset used for the
causal-only model. In Figure 9 we show simulations of
thecausal-onlyandnon-causalmodelscomparedagainst
the real data for an important news. We also add one
FIG. 8: (Color online). Estimated probability density func- standard deviation confidence intervals obtained by per-
tion of the news parameter ratio αN/βN for four different
forming a large number of simulations of the model. We
groups formed on news surprise. Q1 indicates the fist quar-
note that, especially by looking at the zoomed time se-
tiles of surprise, Q2 the second and so on. Also the total
ries (bottom panel), before the announcement the con-
distributionisplottedforcomparison. TherateisEUR/USD
fidence bands of the two models almost do not overlap,
and we considered only High importance news.
andthenon-causalmodelreproducesquitewellthenews-
anticipationeffectwhenitispresent,whereasthecausal-
Similar results are observed for the other rates. In con- only model misses completely this feature of the data.
clusion, even with our simple measure S, different levels
ofsurprisegiverisetodifferentkernelratiodistributions.
0 lllll llllllllll
llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
llllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
0 2500 5000 7500 10000
participants. Therefore it is natural to ask whether the Time (s)
point process describing the market activity is affected
by the news arrival before its announcement. In terms
ofstochasticprocessesthisimpliesthepresenceofanon-
causalkernel,inthesensethatthe(pre-announced)news
arrival affects the intensity at earlier times.
To consider this effect, we modify the model by intro-
ducinganon-causaltermintheexogenouscomponentof
theintensity. Namely,thenewskernelφ (t)isnowgiven N
by the sum of a causal and a non-causal term
where Θ(t) denotes the Heaviside step function and we
assume Θ(0)=0. The intensity function now reads
(cid:90) t (cid:90) +∞
ti<t zj<t zj>t
We chose an exponential specification also for the non-
causal term, so that φ (t) is now written as:
1 rep stnuoC(
True lSim Causal
Sim Non Causal
300 l l l l l
200 l l l l l l l
0 l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l 4500 5000 5500 6000 Time (s)
True lSim Causal
Sim Non Causal
FIG. 9: (Color online). Actual and simulated activity mea-
sured as events per 1 min for EUR/USD on Friday April 06,
when an important figure on US change in non-farm pay-
rolls was released at 13:30. The figure produced an impact
θ≈13 and was much worse than expected (Surprise =44).
The dashed vertical line corresponds to the time of the an-
nouncement. The bottom panel is a zoom of the top panel
in a 30 minute window around the news. Results from sim-
ulation of the models with and without the non causal term
are compared. The dotted and dashed-dotted lines are one
standard deviation confidence intervals obtained from simu-
lations of the calibrated model of the causal-only and non-
causal model, respectively. Parameters estimates for the non
causaltermareαNC=0.3,βNC=3.0·10−3 (allvaluesins−1).
Wethencomparetheextendedmodelwiththecausal-
onlyoneviaAICandBIC.Figure10showsthedistribu-
tion of the differences AIC −AIC and BIC −BIC . NC C NC C
Results from all currency pairs are pooled together. As
the relatively large number of news for which αNC =0
suggests, the news-anticipation effect is often very small
or absent. In these cases, the extended model with the
non-causal term reduces in practice to the causal-only
model. Hence, the extra parameters do not carry any
benefit in these situation, and this is reflected in the in-
formation criteria scores. On the other hand, when the
news anticipation effect is relevant, the improvement of
theextendedmodelissignificantandAICandBICscores
strongly favour the introduction of the non-causal term.
Moreovertheparametersofthecausalnewskernelarees-
sentiallyunchangedbytheintroductionofthenon-causal
kernel.
−180 −100 −20
mentsareknowninadvance,wehavealsoconsideredthe
possible presence of a non causal kernel, describing how
the market prepares itself to the news. In both cases
we have shown that the model with the news kernel(s)
outperformsthesimpleHawkesmodelwithonlyendoge-
nous kernel. We also noted that, once the news term is
introduced, the estimate of the criticality parameter n is
smaller. This suggests that in the presence of localized
exogenous excitations a Hawkes model which does not
consider news-triggered non stationarity could overesti-
mate n. Moreover, even if the non-causal part only helps
in a fraction of cases, from the practical point of view of
a market maker (or anyone trading around news) being
able to gauge the market activity and liquidity at those
particular points is very important and there is a pre-
mium to be able to get that estimate right (or big cost
A B I I C C NC - - A B I I C C C to getting it wrong). Finally, we have also explored the
NC C roleofthesurpriseofthenewswithrespecttoforecasted
value on the parameters of the kernel.
Animportantlimitationofourmodelisthat,asitwas
presented,ittreatsequallyallthenews. Ifmorethanone
news is present in the estimation interval and the news
have different characteristics that lead to very different
impacts,themodelisexpectedtoaveragethedifferences
or to be influenced by the most relevant ones. Future
developments can address this issue for example by in-
troducing a surprise-dependent amplitude α =α (S).
Limiting the dependence on surprise to the amplitude
allows to conserve the recursion relation that speeds up
FIG. 10: Estimated probability density function of the dif-
likelihood computation. However, if the number of ex-
ferences in AIC and BIC scores between the extended model
ogenous events is limited, one can also let β depending
with the non-causal term and the causal-only model. Differ- N
on surprise. Finally, when the number of news is small,
ences from all three currency pairs are aggregated.
one could simply add a separate exogenous term for ev-
ery news. This increases the number of parameters, but
Overall it seems that adding the non-causal term re- eliminates the need of surprise dependence.
sults in an improved description of the real data, albeit
Despite being focused on financial market data, the
in some cases we simply recover the performance of the
approach presented in this paper could be useful in the
already discussed causal-only model.
analysis and modeling of other complex systems. In fact
the presence of exogenous and endogenous drivers of the
activity is ubiquitous in other systems monitored in con-
VI. CONCLUSIONS
tinuous time. Describing the different source of excita-
tionsascorrelatedpointprocessesisingeneralquitecom-
InthispaperwehaveintroducedaHawkesprocessap-
plicated, and the Hawkes approach proposed here could
proachtothedescriptionofforeignexchangeratedynam-
be a useful method to model, fit, and evaluate the rel-
ics around the announcement of macroeconomic news.
ative importance the two drivers of a generic stochastic
These news are very important and might affect in a
dynamics.
significant way the trading activity in a time window
around the announcement. We have first considered the
unconditional Hawkes modeling, i.e. we have neglected
the role of news. We found that, as seen in other as-
set classes, foreign exchange markets are very close to
Acknowledgments
criticality, as measured by the integral of the kernel n.
Moreover, while the parameters of the kernel show an
abrupt change around the change of the tick size, the Authors acknowledge eRisk HSBC team for support
criticality parameter n seems to be pretty insensitive to andEBSforhavingprovidedthedata. FLacknowledges
it. We then considered our main original contribution, partialsupportbythegrant,SNS13LILLBSystemicrisk
namely the introduction of a kernel describing the effect infinancialmarketsacrosstimescales. WealsothankE.
of macro news on the trading activity. Since announce- Bacry and J-P. Bouchaud for useful discussions.
Appendix A: Likelihood details These are essentially the standard asymptotic prop-
erties of maximum likelihood estimators, however there
is an important difference: it is the complete intensity
In this appendix we give the details of log-likelihood
λ∗(t) that enters (A5), and not λ(t). Hence is not true in
computations. For point process models that are speci-
general that
fied via the conditional intensity, the likelihood function
has a fairly simple expression. This makes maximum
likelihood inference a popular choice for these models. I (θ)=−E (cid:20) 1 ∂2lnL T (θ 0 ) (cid:21) ,
Here we follow the notation of Bowsher [32]. Suppose T ∂θ i ∂θ j
we are observing a point process in the interval [0,T].
We denote λ∗(t)=λ(t|H ) the complete conditional albeittheconvergenceresult(A6)supportstheuseofthe
intensity of the process, that is conditioned on the whole Hessian matrix
pasthistory. Weindicatewithλ(t)=λ(t|H )theinten-
sity conditional on the sole information from the obser- 1 ∂2lnL T (θˆ)
vation interval [0,T]. Then, from Ogata [33], the exact T ∂θ∂θ
log-likelihoodontheinterval[0,T]forasimpleunivariate
stationary point process with intensity λ(t) is to estimate I (θ ) [32].
ForalinearHawkesprocessintheform(4)withkernel
φ(t), denoting with f˜ an antiderivative of a function f,
(cid:90) T (cid:90) T
lnL(θ;N(t))=− (λ(s))ds+ lnλ (s)dN(s), (A1) we obtain for the log-likelihood in the interval [0,T]
where θ denotes the parameters vector. Ogata [33] de-
fines also a theoretical log-likelihood under the informa-
tion from the infinite past Thelasttermontherighthandsidehidesadoublesum-
mation that makes the computational complexity of the
lnL∗(θ;N(t))=− (cid:90) T (λ∗(s))ds+ (cid:90) T lnλ∗(s)dN(s). (A2) expression grow as O(N2), where N is the number of
0 θ 0 θ events in the interval. This constitutes an obstacle to
applications on large samples. However, for the particu-
Ogata [33] proves, under assumptions that are veri- lar case of a linear Hawkes process with kernel given by
fied for Hawkes processes, some proprieties of the max- a sum of P exponentials of the form
imum likelihood estimator θˆT obtained by maximizing
(A1) with respect to θ. In particular, θˆT is found to be: P
• Consistent, i.e. θˆT converges to the true value θ q=1
as T →∞:
Ogata[34]shownthattheloglikelihoodcanbecomputed
(cid:104) (cid:105)
∀ε>0, lim P |θ ˆT−θ |>ε =0 (A3) recursively reducing computational complexity to O(N).
T→∞ In fact, we have
• Asymptotically normal, i.e.: P α (cid:16) (cid:17)
0 0 (cid:32) (cid:33)
i=1 j=1k=1
I−1(θ)=E θ0 θ0 =−E T 0 where N denotes the number of events in the interval
θ0 i j i j [0,T]. Now, setting
• Asymptotically efficient, the following asymptotic R j (i)= ∑e−βj(ti−tk)
relationexistsbetweentheHessianofthelikelihood k=1
function and the information matrix I(θ ): i−1
(cid:20) 1 ∂2lnL (θ ) (cid:21) k=1
−E T 0 →I ij (θ 0 ) (A6) (cid:32) i−2 (cid:33)
so the variance of the estimator reaches asymptot-
ically the lower bound I(θ )−1. =e−βj(ti−ti−1)(1+R j (i−1)) (A10)
the log likelihood expression (A9) can be rewritten as: reads
P α (cid:16) (cid:17)
lnL =−µT− q ∑ =1 ∑ ti β q q 1−e−βq(T−ti) −∑ n (cid:32) ∑ M (a k )1−p(1−e − T a − k ti )− S (1−e − T a− − 1 ti ) (cid:33)
N (cid:32) P (cid:33) ti Z k=0 a −1
i=1 j=1 βC
From equation (A11) it follows that for the double ex- zj N
ponential kernel (6) discussed in section III we have: (cid:34) n (cid:32) M (cid:33)
(cid:17) ti k=0
q=A,B ti q + ∑ αCe−βC N (ti−zj)+ ∑ αNCeβN N C(ti−zj) . (A17)
The expression for the causal-only model is easily ob-
tained from the above ignoring the terms which contain
Likewise, for the approximate power-law kernel (7) the
the non-causal terms.
corresponding log-likelihood reads
Theresultsofthispaperareobtainedbyusingaquasi-
Newton optimization routine for optimization. Since
all the parameters are required to be positive or non-
(cid:32) (cid:33)
−∑ n ∑ M (a k )1−p(1−e − T a − k ti )− S (1−e − T a− − 1 ti ) n co e n ga st t r iv a e in , t w ( e n e lm m i p n l b oy o ed f t a h n e o p p a ti c m ka iz g e e r R th ) a . t T c o an in a c c r c e e a p se t b t o h x e
ti k=0 −1 chances of finding the global optimum a set of 10 dif-
(cid:34) (cid:32) (cid:33)(cid:35)
n M ferent starting points was tried, and the result with the
+∑ln µ+ ∑(a k )−pR k (i)−SR S (i) , highestlikelihoodwasretained. Thestartingvalueswere
ti k=0 chosen so to span as much as possible the space of ”rea-
sonable” parameters values. In fact, most parameters
haveaphysicalinterpretationthatfacilitatesthischoice.
with For instance, the baseline intensity µ cannot far exceed
theaveragerateobservedinthemarket. Werepeatedthe
R k (i)= ∑ e − ti a − k tj =e − ti− a t k i−1 (1+R k (i−1)) (A14) p of ro k c e e r d n u el r . e U fo n r ce e r a t c a h in p t a ie i s r o o n f c th u e rr b en es c t ie p s a a ra n m d e f t o e r rs bo es t t h im ty a p te e s s
tj<ti are calculated using the inverse of the Hessian matrix at
− ti−tj − ti−ti−1 the maximum
Appendix B: Comparison of simulated data from the
Using equation (A1) we obtain also the expression of models with and without the news term.
thelog-likelihoodwhenexogenousterms,bothcausaland
non-causal, are added: InthisappendixwecomparefurthertheHawkesmodel
with a power law endogenous kernel and an exogenous
lnL =−µT−∑ (cid:0) φ˜(T−t)−φ˜(0) (cid:1) (news) term and the one without it. For each of the 266
ti news examined and for each currency pair, we simulated
−∑ (cid:0) φ˜C(T−z )−φ˜C(0) (cid:1) the two models 25 times. We then count the number
of events produced by each model’s simulation in the 5
−∑ (cid:0) φ˜NC(0)−φ˜NC(−z ) (cid:1) minutes that follow the news announcement. In the top
j panel of Figure 11 we plot the ratio between the mean
of the simulated counts and the observed (real) counts
+∑lnλ(t i ) (A16) <N sim > in the 5 minute window that follows the news.
ti T N hreeaalbscissaistherankofthenewsintermsofitsimpact
θinascendingorder. Weobservethatthetwomodelsare
z j being the times at which exogenous events take place. essentially equivalent for low impact news, whereas the
Thus, for our non-causal model (17), the expression model with the news term performs increasingly better
of the log-likelihood derived from the previous relation astheimpactgrows. Infact,themodelwithoutthenews
0 1 1 2 . . . . 7 0 5 0 5 0 0 0 l l l ll l l l l ll ll l l ll l l ll l ll l ll l ll l l l l l l ll l l ll l l l ll l ll l l lll l l l l ll l l l l ll l l l l l l ll ll ll l ll l l l ll l l l l lllll ll llll l l l l l l l l l l lll l lll l l l l llll l l ll l lll ll llll lllll ll l ll l l l lllllll ll l lll l l ll ll llllll l l l l l l ll l l l lll lll l ll l l ll l l l lll lllll l l l llll l l l lllll ll ll l l l l l l ll l l l l ll l ll l l l l l l l lll l ll l l 0.50
1 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
Impact rank
oitar stnuoC
llWith news term
Without news term
0 0 1 1 2 2 . . . . . . 5 7 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 0 0 0 l l l l l l ll l l ll l l l l l l l ll l l llll l l l l l l ll l ll l l l l l l ll l l lll l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l lll ll l l l l l l l lll l l l l l l l ll ll l l l l l l l l l l l lll l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l ll l l l l l ll ll l lll l l l l l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l ll l ll ll l l l l l l l ll l ll l l l l ll llll l l ll l l l l l l ll ll l ll ll l l l ll l l l l l l l ll l l l l l l l l ll l l l ll l l l l l lll l l l l l l
1 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250
Impact rank
oitar stnuoC
”Low”,”High”,and”VeryHigh”. Wethentaketheaverage
of the ratio across all news in the same group for each 5
minutes bin. In this way we measure the averave behav- iorpredictedbythemodelsasafunctionoftimedistance from the news announcement. Also in this plot we ob- servethatthemodelsbehaveinthesamewayforverylow
impact news. However, as soon as the news has a signif-
icant impact, the model without the news term strongly
underestimatestheactivitythatfollowsthenews. More-
over, for very high impact news the model without the
1 1 . . 0 2 0 5 lll llll l lll l l lll l l lllll l l lllll llll l 0.75 l
llW W i i t t h h o n u e t w n s e w te s r m term 1.00 l llll l llll l lllll ll llll l llllll l lll l 0.75
.
:
.
.
.
ll lllll l
llll l llllll
(top panel) or precedes (bottom panel) the news plotted as l
a function of news’ impact rank. Simulations were repeated
25 times for each news. All 266 news in our sample are con- 0.50
sidered. The figure shown refers to EUR/USD pair. A one
standard deviation confidence interval is also plotted. 1.00 ll lll l ll l ll l l lll ll llll l l lllll
term systematically underestimate the number of events 0.50
afterhighimpactnews,sincetheself-excitingendogenous
mechanismisunabletoreproducesuchasuddenincrease
in activity. It is worth noting that the model with the
news term does not artificially introduce a news effect
when the news had little impact. For reference we also
show in the bottom panel of Figure 11 the above ratio
computed in the 5 minutes that precede the news. We
observe that the two models produces almost identical
outputs in this case.
These considerations are reinforced by observing Fig-
ure 12. The plot is built as follows: for each of the two
models and for every news in the sample we divide the 3
hours window in bins of 5 minutes, and compute <N sim >
in each bin. We also divide the news in four groreuapl s
basedonquartilesoftheimpactθ,labeledas”VeryLow”,
0 3000 6000 9000
l With news term Without news term
FIG. 12: (Color online). Ratio between mean of simulated
counts and real counts computed in 5 minutes bin. Results
form each bin are averaged across all the news in the same
group of impact θ. The plot refers to EUR/USD data.
news term also systematically overestimate the activity
before the news. This is because, without the exogenous
kernel, the extra activity due to the news is attributed
to the endogenous mechanism and thus it is spread over
the full time interval.
[1] R. F. Engle and V. K. Ng, Journal of Finance 48, 1749 056108 (2012).
(1993). [5] S.J.Hardiman,N.Bercot,andJ.-P.Bouchaud,TheEu-
[2] G.BirzandJ.R.J.Lott,JournalofBanking&Finance ropean Physical Journal B 86, 1 (2013).
35, 2791 (2011). [6] D.M.Cutler,J.M.Poterba,andL.H.Summers,Journal
[3] A. Gross-Klussmann and N. Hautsch, Journal of Empir- of Portfolio Management 15, 4 (1989).
ical Finance 18, 321 (2011). [7] A. Joulin, A. Lefevre, D. Grunberg, and J. Bouchaud,
[4] V. Filimonov and D. Sornette, Physical Review E 85, Wilmott Magazine pp. 1–7 (2008).
[8] P. Hewlett, in Workshop on Financial Modeling with 3, 417 (2003).
Jump processes, Ecole Polytechnique (2006), pp. 6–8. [21] A.Groß-KlußmannandN.Hautsch,JournalofEmpirical
[9] C.G.Bowsher,JournalofEconometrics141,876 (2007), Finance 18, 321 (2011).
ISSN 0304-4076. [22] F. Lillo, S. Miccich`e, M. Tumminello, J. Piilo,
Time Series, edited by T. Mikosch, J.-P. Kreiss, R. A. 10.1080/14697688.2014.931593, (In press) (2014).
Davis, and T. G. Andersen (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, [23] L. H. Ederington and J. H. Lee, The Journal of Finance
2009), pp. 953–979, ISBN 978-3-540-71296-1. 48, 1161 (1993).
[11] P.Embrechts,T.Liniger,andL.Lin,JournalofApplied [24] T.G.AndersenandT.Bollerslev,theJournalofFinance
Probability 48A, 367 (2011). 53, 219 (1998).
[12] I. M. Toke, in Econophysics of Order-driven Markets, [25] L. Bauwens, W. B. Omrane, and P. Giot, Journal of In-
editedbyF.Abergel,B.K.Chakrabarti,A.Chakraborti, ternational Money and Finance 24, 1108 (2005), ISSN
and M. Mitra (Springer Milan, 2011), New Economic 0261-5606.
Windows, pp. 49–64, ISBN 978-88-470-1765-8. [26] P. Br´emaud and L. Massouli´e, Journal of applied proba-
[13] E. Bacry, S. Delattre, M. Hoffmann, and J.-F. Muzy, bility 38, 122 (2001).
Quantitative Finance 13, 65 (2013). [27] J. Da Fonseca and R. Zaatour, Journal of Futures Mar-
[14] E.Bacry,K.Dayri,andJ.Muzy,TheEuropeanPhysical kets 34, 548 (2014).
Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 85, [28] R. F. Engle and J. R. Russell, Econometrica 66, 1127
1 (2012). (1998).
[15] G. Bormetti, L. M. Calcagnile, M. Treccani, F. Corsi, [29] G. Claeskens and N. Hjort, Model Selection and Model
S. Marmi, and F. Lillo, arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.6141 Averaging (Cambridge University Press, 2008).
(Accepted for publication in Quantitative Finance) [30] H.Akaike,AutomaticControl,IEEETransactionson19,
(2013). 716 (1974).
[16] A. G. Hawkes, Biometrika 58, 83 (1971). [31] G. Schwarz, The Annals of Statistics 6, 461 (1978).
arXiv:1308.6756 (2013). uk/economics/papers/2002/w22/NuffWP_final.pdf.
[18] J. H. Hardiman and J.-P. Bouchaud, arXiv preprint [33] Y. Ogata, Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathe-
arXiv:1403.5227 (2014). matics 30, 243 (1978).
[19] M. L. Mitchell and J. H. Mulherin, The Journal of Fi- [34] Y.Ogata,IEEETransactionsonInformationTheory27,
nance 49, 923 (1994). 23 (1981).
[20] M. Avellaneda and M. D. Lipkin, Quantitative Finance