Modeling Corporate Epidemiology
Benjamin N. Waber1, Ellen Brooks Pollock2, Manuel Cebrian1, Riley Crane1, Leon Danon3, and
Alex (Sandy) Pentland1
1MIT Media Laboratory, 2London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine,
3University of Warwick
Corporate responses to illness is currently an ad-hoc, subjective process that has little basis in
data on how disease actually spreads at the workplace. Some businesses emphasize a "tough-it-
out" approach, implicitly encouraging employees to remain at work while they are sick. Other
companies send people home at the first symptom and force them to stay home long after any
symptoms remain. Naturally there is a continuum of responses, but the appropriateness of these
responses has not been gauged. This problem is not trivial, with the common cold costing the
US economy close to $30 billion in lost productivity [1].
Particularly troubling is that many studies have shown that productivity is not an
individual factor but a social one. Large scale studies on the economic impact of disease have
only considered the productivity lost when an individual has to miss work or their reduced
effectiveness if they remain at work [2]. In previous work with this dataset we found that a one
standard deviation increase in network constraint in face-to-face networks was associated with a
10% increase in productivity [11], implying that if opportunities for face-to-face interaction were
limited due to illness, productivity may suffer. Recently, in a causal study we showed that by
modifying employee break structure we were able to increase network constraint and markedly
increase productivity [10]. Therefore in any study on epidemic responses this social factor has to
be taken into account.
The chief barrier to addressing this problem has been the lack of data on the interaction
and mobility patterns of people in the workplace. Surveys are inaccurate and human observation
is difficult and limited in scope [3, 4]. The emergence of low-cost sensing technology as a
scientific tool has changed this equation, however, and researchers have begun using this data to
examine questions that before were thought intractable.
We have created a wearable Sociometric Badge that senses interactions between
individuals using an infra-red (IR) transceiver and proximity using a radio transmitter [9]. Face-
to-face interactions are a major vector for disease transmission, particularly for common diseases
such as influenza and the common cold [8]. Using the data from the Sociometric Badges we are
able to simulate diseases spreading through face-to-face interactions with realistic
epidemiological parameters. In terms of air exchange proximity is a poorer measure than
interactions at detecting probability of infection, but proximity is an easier to obtain measure due
to the widespread availability of Bluetooth proximity data. In this paper we also compare
proximity-based infections to interaction-based infections to determine if proximity data is
suitably fine-grained for modeling purposes.
In this paper we aim to construct a curve trading off productivity with epidemic potential.
This is advantageous because it will allow companies to decide appropriate responses based on
the organizational context of a disease outbreak. Compared with other studies, we are able to
take into account impacts on productivity that arise from social factors, such as interaction
diversity and density, which studies using an individual approach ignore. We also propose new
organizational responses to diseases that take into account behavioral patterns that are associated
with a more virulent disease spread. We believe that as sensing data becomes more
commonplace in organizational and epidemiological studies [1, 5, 7] there will be a fast uptick in
the number and sophistication of disease responses, and we hope that the approach we outline
here will be used as a blueprint.
Study Description
We deployed our Sociometric badge platform for a period of one month (20 working days) at a
one year old division of a Chicago-area data server configuration firm that consisted of 56
employees with 36 participating in the study.
Each employee was instructed to wear a Sociometric badge every day from the moment
they arrived at work until they left their office. The salesman in the field used an automated
program to request a computer system configuration for a potential customer. These
configurations are automatically assigned a difficulty (basic, complex, or advanced, in ascending
order of difficulty) based on the configuration characteristics. Employees in the department are
then assigned a configuration task in a first come first served fashion. This configuration task
may require them to use a computer aided design program in order to satisfy the customer’s
needs. Finally, the employee submits the completed configuration as well as price back to the
salesman, and the employee is placed at the back of the queue for task assignment. The exact
start and end time of the task is logged, and the number of follow-ups that are required after the
configuration is completed is also recorded in the database. We used (negative) completion time
as our measure of productivity, since shorter completion times are more desirable, and in this
organization employees are rewarded based on their throughput.
Transmission Model
Using the data collected over the period of the study, we defined a stochastic, individual based
model of disease transmission [6]. Each pair-wise interaction is assumed to carry a probability of
disease transmission, should one individual of the pair be infected and therefore shedding
disease. The probability of disease transmission scaled with the duration of the interaction with a
rate of 0.007 per minute and a recovery rate of 1/3 per day. For simplicity, we assume that the
incubation period was nil, such that as soon as individuals became infected, they become
infectious, and remain infections at the same level until they recover.
We measure the epidemic potential in terms of the cumulative number of individuals
infected (final epidemic size). Since the model is stochastic, the final size is averaged over many
simulations to obtain meaningful results. Simulations are repeated starting with each individual
in turn and at the beginning of each day during the first week to model different routes of
introduction of disease. Each point is averaged over 185 repetitions.
The baseline final size assumes that all contacts occurred irrespective of infection status.
To mimic potential organizational responses to epidemic threat, we eliminated interactions of a
certain length of time in two ways: a) interactions with duration below a given threshold were
eliminated and b) interactions with duration above a given threshold were eliminated.
Changes in network constraint after interactions are removed and used to predict changes
in productivity using the results from [11] (i.e. a one standard deviation change in cohesion
implies 10% higher productivity).
Preliminary Results
Figure 1: Epidemic Final Size
Figure 2: Productivity Changes. 1 represents the original department-level productivity.
In the baseline model with all interactions permitted, just over 7 individuals were infected during
the course of the epidemic. We found that eliminating interactions of less than x minutes reduced
the mean final size (figure 1, left panel), however the effect was minimal when only interactions
of less than a minute were eliminated. Our results suggest that eliminating interactions of less
than 5 minutes can cut the final epidemic size by nearly 50%. Our data shows that removing
these interactions may actually improve performance by over 5% due to the increase in
constraint, and productivity does not drop more than 1% until all interactions below 30 minutes
are removed (figure 2, left panel). Therefore it may be advantageous for organizations to declare
high-risk infection periods where steps are taken so that people spend more time at their desk and
reduce casual interactions.
From these results we can also see that removing all lengthy interactions (over 30
minutes) has a protective effect, although the relative reduction is less dramatic (figure 1, right
panel). This has a consistently negative effect on performance, however productivity does not
drop by more than more than 1% until all interactions longer than 26 minutes are removed since
these interactions have a negligible effect on constraint (figure 2, right panel). This suggests that
while long meetings are infrequent, they are responsible for a large proportion of epidemic
spreading in the workplace, and rather reduce casual interactions a similar effect could be
obtained by delaying meetings to a low-risk period.
It remains to relate these potential organizational responses to productivity changes. We
also compare taking a sick day versus coming to work and risk infecting others by incorporating
productivity information. For the workshop we will also present that portion of the analysis and
highlight additional results. From our findings it is clear that this study will have profound
implications for how organizations respond to illnesses, and we hope that this will spur further
research in this area in the future.