1v4482070/htam:viXra
IMS Lecture Notes–Monograph Series
Time Series and Related Topics
Vol.52(2006) 138–148
(cid:13)c Institute ofMathematical Statistics,2006
Modeling macroeconomic time series via
heavy tailed distributions
J. A. D. Aston
Academia Sinica
Abstract:Ithasbeenshownthatsomemacroeconomictimeseries,especially
thosewhereoutlierscouldbepresent,canbewellmodelledusingheavytailed
distributionsforthenoisecomponents.Methodsfordecidingwhenandwhere
heavy-tailedmodelsshouldbepreferredareinvestigated.Theseinvestigations
primarilyfocus on automatic methods for model identification and selection.
Current methods are extended to incorporate a non-Gaussian selection ele-
ment,andvariousdifferentcriteriafordecidingonwhichoverallmodelshould
beusedareexamined.
1. Introduction
Whiletimeseriesanalysisisarichtopicfortheoreticalresearch,theimplicationsof
such work can impact many applied sciences,including physical,biologicaland so-
cial. An example of the application of statistical time series methods in economics
is the seasonal adjustment of macroeconomic data, one of the primary functions
carried out by many statistical agencies worldwide. These adjustments allow com-
parisons of economic indicators to be made in the presence of seasonal variations,
and allow economic decisions to be made without the confounding factors of sea-
sonal fluctuations. The seasonally adjusted data is an unobserved component in
the data, and must be estimated using a model, which can be either parametri-
cally or non-parametrically specified. However, the estimates from the model can
be seriously affected by changes in the data, especially outliers in the data.
Methods have been developed to account for outliers in commonly used time
series models for seasonal adjustment using heavier tailed distributions than the
Gaussian [3, 5, 10], such as the t-distribution or mixtures of normals. The aim
of this paper is to present findings regarding how to select whether a heavy tailed
modelisrequiredforadatasetbasedontheperformanceofseveralmodelselection
criteria.
Currently, most statistical agencies use one of two packages for seasonal ad-
justment, X-12-ARIMA [6] from the US Census Bureau, or TRAMO/SEATS [7]
from the Bank of Spain. These two programs both seasonally adjust the data,
but in intrinsically different ways. X-12-ARIMA uses prespecified filters to re-
move the seasonal component from the data, in a non-parametric fashion, while
TRAMO/SEATSuses the ARIMA methodologyof [4] to determine the modeland
estimate the seasonalcomponent. It will be this second approachthat will be gen-
eralised to include non-Gaussian components. Recently, a new integrated version
1Institute of Statistical Science, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia Sinica, Sec 2, Taipei
11529, Taiwan, ROC, Tel: +886-2-2783-5611 ext. 314 Fax: +886-2-2783-1523 e-mail:
jaston@stat.sinica.edu.tw
AMS2000 subject classifications: primary91B82; secondary62M10.
Keywords and phrases:seasonaladjustment,outliers,modelselection,t-distribution,economic
timeseries.
Heavy tailed modeling of seasonal time series 139
of the software has been released [11] and the methodology also applies to this
package.
Two common types of outliers are additive outliers (shocks) and level shift
(break) outliers. The first refers to a single data point that is out of character
for the data given the model, whereas the second refers to a discontinuous jump
either up or down in the level of the data at some point, and continuing on after
that point for the rest of the series. These outliers lead to errors in the determina-
tion of the underlying components, and thus need to be accounted for. However,
they are, by nature, not known prior to the modeling, and are functions of both
the data and the model. A data point may be an outlier for one model but not
another, and its status as an outlier may change when new data is added. This
secondfeatureis especiallyrelevantforthis study,asseasonalmacroeconomicdata
is usually continuously updated month by month, or quarter by quarter.
Firstly,averybriefintroductiontoARIMA models forseasonaladjustmentwill
be given, followed by characterisations of the usual methods of outlier detection
for both the Gaussian and non-Gaussian cases. While attempting to solve similar
problems, the two approaches are appreciably different. Section 4 introduces the
modelselectioncriteriato beconsideredandalsosomejustificationfortheirusage.
Section5providessomeexamplesofrealserieswhereadjustmentusingheavytailed
models gives better performance than using Gaussian models and the final section
provides discussion.
2. Seasonal adjustment and ARIMA model based decomposition
A seasonal time series y can be expressed as the sum of unobserved components,
where S represents the seasonal component and N , the remaining non-seasonal
component. Thus the seasonally adjusted series y(sa) is
andisalsounobservedbythenatureofbeingafunctionofS .ARIMAmodelbased
(AMB)decompositionspecifiesARIMAmodelsfortheunobservedcomponentsand
estimates these from both the data and from the overall model for the data as a
whole.
Box and Jenkins [4] introduced a class of seasonal ARIMA models that model
macroeconomic data well. The simplest model of this form is the airline model,
which models differenced data as a product of moving average (MA) processes;
where By t = y t−1 , s represents the seasonal periodicity, and θ and Θ are the MA
parameters associated with the non-seasonal and seasonal MA parts respectively.
ǫ is assumed to be an iid Gaussian white noise process with variance σ2. This
modelcanbegeneralisedbyalteringthedegreesoftheMApolynomialsandadding
Autoregressive(AR) parts to the left hand side of the equation.It will be assumed
here that the differencing is not modified, and that it remains of an airline type.
This includes the restrictionthatthe MAandAR parameterscannotbe unitroots
as these would alter the overalldifferencing.
140 J. A. D. Aston
For simplicity, the airline model is consideredexplicitly, althoughother general-
isations can be handled similarly. The AMB decomposition for the airline model,
can be expressed in the following way using the decomposition of [9]
where U(B) = (1 + B + + Bs−1) and ω ,η ,ǫ are independent white noise
processes and
In order to define a unique solution (which may or may not exist), the restriction
is taken that the pseudo-spectral densities of the seasonal and trend components
have a minimum of zero (in line with the admissible decompositions of [9]). When
this condition cannot be met without resulting in a negative variance for I , the
decomposition is said to be inadmissible. Throughout the paper, only parameter
combinations resulting in admissible decompositions will be assumed, which is al-
most always the case for macroeconomic data.
Theparameterfunctionsθ (),θ ()andthevariancesofω ,η ,ǫ areallfunctions
of the underlying parameters θ,Θ and σ2. They can be calculated from the partial
fraction decomposition of the pseudo-spectral densities, and the minimisation of
eachresultingcomponent.Thisisusuallydone,forexampleintheSEATSsoftware,
after maximum likelihood estimation of the parameters has taken place, to give a
final adjustment of the data.
2.1. Gaussian outlier adjustment
The TRAMO package [7] is the most widely used method for automatic model
identificationofseasonalARIMAmodelsformacroeconomicseries.Theprogramis
usedtoestimatetheorderofdifferencing,theordersoftheARandMAcomponents
andalsoanyoutliersandcommonregressoreffectsthatmightbepresent.Inherently
in this paper, it has been assumed that the order of differencing is the same as the
airline model, but this assumption canbe easily relaxedwithout significantchange
in the approaches outlined. All the other parts of the TRAMO procedure are used
in exactly the same way in this paper as givenin [8] except for the partrelating to
outlier detection.
The TRAMO softwaredetermines outliers as part of the automatic model iden-
tification portion of the program. Critical values for the thresholds at which data
points are assumed to be outliers are chosen either by the user or from the length
of the series. Outliers are found by determining whether the significance of the re-
gression coefficients determined by assuming an outlier, be it an additive outlier
or a level shift, has occurred at each point in the data. This is done iteratively, by
adding in the largestregressorabove the threshold (if one exists) and then repeat-
ing the exercise. A final check is made at the end to ensure that all regressors are
still above the threshold for the final model.
This method effectively removes the data point when it is considered to be an
outlier. When new data points arrive every month/quarter, the stability of the
seasonal adjustment can heavily rely on the stability of the designated outliers to
thisnewdataasanoutlyingdatapointcanthenbeaddedbackintotheestimation
if no longer classified as an outlier.
Heavy tailed modeling of seasonal time series 141
3. Heavy-tailed models to account for outliers in ARIMA component
AstonandKoopman[3]proposedthisalternatemethodologytotheGaussianclassi-
ficationofoutliersbyusingheaviertaileddistributionstoweightdatapointsrather
than making binary decisions on outliers. A short summary of the methodology is
now given.
Thedecompositionmodel(4)canbemodifiedtoincorporatenon-Gaussiancom-
ponents. In order to retain a similar structure, it is assumed that the components
have the same variance as the decomposition would predict, but different densities
are used to incorporate heavier tails.
The irregular component can be modified to include the t distribution in order
to account for additive outliers as
(6) I ∗ t(0,σ2,ν), t=1,...,n,
where ν > 2 is the number of degrees of freedom and σ2 is the variance, which is
constant for any ν. In the case of an irregular modelled by a mixture of normals,
t ∼ − N I N I
where 0 ρ 1 determines the intensity of outliers in the series and λ measures
the magnitude of the outliers.
The decomposition model with a t-distributed irregular term can be expressed
in its canonical form by
y =S +T +I ∗ , I ∗ t(0,σ2,ν), t=1,...,n.
t t t t t ∼ I
wheret(0,σ2,ν)referstothe t-density.Thismodelhasthesamenumberofparam-
etersastheoriginalmodelspecificationexceptthatthetdensityhasoneadditional
parameter(thedegreesoffreedomν)andthemixtureofnormalshastwoadditional
parameters (the intensity and the variance scalar).
To robustify the decomposition model against breaks in trend we consider the
trend specification
− t T t t ∼ η η
where the t-distribution t(0,σ2,ν ) can be replaced by a mixture of normals dis-
tribution. The decomposition model with heavy tailed densities for both the trend
innovations and the irregular is given by y = S +T∗ +I∗ where the latter two
components are given by (8) and (6), respectively.
These models can be estimated through the use of importance sampling as was
describedin[3].Forcalculation,itisimportanttonotethatthedecompositionmust
now be incorporated into the maximum likelihood estimation, as the individual
componentsaremodified,yet,theyarestilldependentontheoverallARIMAmodel
for the series. However,fast algorithms for the decomposition make the estimation
feasible.
4. Model selection
One of the most important issues is deciding which model to use and when. Here
three different approachesare investigated,one basedon the moments of the data,
142 J. A. D. Aston
another using an empirical evaluation of a model selection criteria and the last
based on the stability of the estimated components when the data is updated.
Although the model is complex and the estimation method of the maximum
likelihood an approximation,certain properties of the model can be usefully inves-
tigated by considering a simpler model. Take the simple case of choosing between
two noise models, one t-distributed and the other gaussian,
and all the y are iid from one model or the other.
As can be seen, these are essentially nested models where the parameter of
interest is the ν degrees of freedom parameter. Slightly different from the usual
nesting setup, the gaussian model is the limiting distribution of the t-model as
ν . A proof is given in the appendix to show by looking at a function of
the moments of the data (essentially the kurtosis), a test can be performed as to
whether the error term under investigation comes from a normal or t-distributed
model. The test simply considers whether √n(Z 3) comes from N(0,24), as
should be the case asymptotically, if the data are normally distributed, while for
the t-distribution, the sequence will diverge. In the actual data case, the test will
be applied to the irregular component data fitted under the normal model for
parameter estimation.
AscanbeseenfromthesimulationsinFigure1,evenforsmallsamplesofthesize
oftherealdataunderinvestigation,thereisamarkeddifference inthe distribution
of the statistic between the two models.
Inadditiontothemodelchoicegivenabove,twoothermethodsareinvestigated.
AIC[2]seemstobewellsuitedtothisproblem,asthemodelsareessentiallynested.
However,thetheoreticaljustificationforAICrequiresthatthemaximumlikelihood
Fig 1. Small sample kurtosis estimator distributions for four different models as generated from
105 simulated samples of n=150. (top left) Gaussian, (top right) t dist (ν =5), (bottom left) t
dist (ν=10), (bottom right)t dist (ν=15)
Heavy tailed modeling of seasonal time series 143
(a)AIC:NoOutliers (b)AIC:3Outliers
Fig2.AICdistributionsfor 100series.(a)Nooutliersarepresentinthedata (b)ThreeOutliers
are present in the data. Black line corresponds to the value where AIC chooses Gaussian vs t-
distributed model (left and right sides respectively).
estimate of the parameters be an interior point within the parameter space, not
on the boundary. Here, as the t distribution becomes the normal distribution as
ν , this assumption is violated. However,in practice it can be seen that while
the use of AIC might not yet be theoretically justified, in the case of the type of
data under investigation, simulation results seem to be promising.
A small simulation study was carried out using the airline model (parameters
of θ = 0.7, Θ = 0.7, σ2 = 1) and two data sets generated, one where there were
no outliers in the data, and one where there were three additive outliers added to
the data (points shifted by 5 times the sd of the irregularcomponent). Histograms
of the AIC differences have been plotted in Figure 2. Corresponding histograms
for AICc and BIC have also been generated (not shown) with similar results. AIC
choosesthelarger(t-distributed)modelwhenthereareoutlierspresentinthedata,
and chooses the smaller model when outliers are not present, with an error rate of
the same order as traditional AIC would predict.
Inadditiontothemodelselectioncriteria,anempiricalmeasurewasassessedfor
determining which model to use. This measure relies on using out-of-sample data
to examine the estimates of the in-sample seasonally adjusted data when future
databecomesavailable.Acrude,yetseeminglypromising,procedureistowithhold
the final year of data, and to plot the changes in the seasonal components from
the two samples, with and without the extra year of data. Given the problems of
revisions when releasing macroeconomic data, adjusted series that remain stable
when future data is added are to be preferred to adjusted series that change. By
examining the plots of the differences, or some overallaverage change, such as the
meanabsolutedifferencebetweenthe twoadjustments,thestabilityoftheseasonal
component to additional data can be quantified. Whilst this statistic is hard to
justify theoretically given the complex nature of the model, it will be seen in the
examples that it does seem to capture differences between the two approaches.
Theoretical justification of this statistic will be the subject of future work.
5. Examples
Many macroeconomicseriesdonothavelargeproblemswith outliers,andthus the
methods described here will not be applicable. However, there are a sizeable pro-
portion ofseries releasedby agencies suchas the US Census Bureauwhere outliers
dooccur.WhenseveralseriesfromtheCensusBureauwereinvestigated,twoseries
144 J. A. D. Aston
whereadditiveoutliersseemedtobepresentweretheAutomobileRetailSeriesand
the Material Handling Equipment Manufacturing Series (or u33mno as it is also
known). These two serieswere analysedwith the two different approaches,and the
model selection criteria were used to determine which was the most appropriate
model. Both series contained 155 data points (Feb 1992 until Dec 2004). For the
seasonal stability plots, the data from 2004 was withheld in one analysis and used
in the other and the results compared.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the seasonalstability plots for the automobile retail
series indicate that the t-distribution provides a more stable adjustment than the
normal model. This is chiefly because when an extra year of data is added, the
number of outliers detected in the series changed. Thus this caused large changes
in the seasonal pattern for the normal model. However, as there is no discrete
detectionprocessforthet-distributedmodel,therewasamorecontinuouschangein
the seasonalpattern when the extra yearof data was added, and thus the stability
was greater. There was a low number of degrees of freedom (approximately 5-6)
estimatedforthismodel.Thedifferencebetweenthetwomodelsisalsowelldetected
byallthemodelselectioncriteria(Table1).Inaddition,themomentestimatorhas
a large value, well outside the 95% confidence interval range of a N(0,24) and
therefore normality of the errorterms are rejected for both the 143 and 155 length
series.
The same conclusion can be reached with Figure 4 for the u33mno series, al-
though the seasonal pattern was more erratic for both models and thus the sta-
bility of the seasonal was closer in both models. This was also shown in smaller
differences for the model selection criteria in Table 1, with all the criteria being
borderline as to which model to use, especially given the small sample nature of
Seasonal Differences (Log Data). top row: Gaussian Data, bottom row: t-distributed model
data, left column: Seasonal Patterns, right column: RMS Differences in Patterns when extra
12observations added
Fig 3. Automobile Retail Series from Feb 1992-Dec 2004 (US Census Bureau). This example
shows that the seasonal difference plot finds a large change inthe seasonal pattern withan extra
year of data when a Gaussian model is used, but this change is reduced when using the model
containing the t-distribution
Heavy tailed modeling of seasonal time series 145
Seasonal Differences (Log Data). top row: Gaussian Data, bottom row: t-distributed model
data, left column: Seasonal Patterns, right column: RMS Differences in Patterns when extra
12observations added
Fig 4. u33mno Seriesfrom Feb 1992-Dec 2004 (USCensus Bureau). Again, thisexample shows
thattheseasonaldifferenceplotfindsalargechangeintheseasonalpatternwithanextrayearof
data when aGaussian model isused, butthischange isreduced (slightly lessthanthe auto retail
series) when using the model containing the t-distribution.
Model selection and comparison of the two example series. Bold face indicates the optimal value
for selecting the model
Data Model Length dˆf Sample LogLik AIC AICc BIC Seas Mean
Kurtosis AbsDiff
Auto G 143 - 35.8 217.18 -2.97 -1.95 -2.86 -
Auto T 143 5.63 - 223.00 -3.04 -2.02 -2.91 -
Auto G 155 - 47.5 236.75 -2.99 -1.97 -2.89 0.0629
Auto T 155 5.10 - 243.05 -3.06 -2.04 -2.94 0.0381
u33mno G 143 - 11.1 92.29 -1.22 -0.20 -1.12 -
u33mno T 143 9.17 - 93.59 -1.23 -0.21 -1.10 -
u33mno G 155 - 13.9 105.19 -1.40 -0.38 -1.30 0.0651
u33mno T 155 7.43 - 107.14 -1.41 -0.39 -1.29 0.0266
series. However, given the increase in the stability and the borderline nature, the
t-distribution model will probably be preferred in the case of u33mno as well.
It can be noted in both Figures 3 and 4 that, for both the t-distributed and
theGaussianmodels,theinstabilitywithinthe estimatesdoesincreasetowardsthe
end of the series. This is due to estimates being weighted functions of other data.
Data that is close to the point to be estimated (either directly or as a multiple
of the seasonal period) is more heavily weighted than data that is further away.
Thus whennew dataisadded,the estimatestowardsthe endofthe seriesaremore
heavily affected than the estimates nearer the beginning of the series.
146 J. A. D. Aston
6. Discussion
Inthispaper,modelselectioncriteriahavebeenproposedtochoosebetweenGauss-
ianandheaviertaileddistributions.Particularemphasishas beenplacedonchoos-
ing between the t-distribution and the Gaussian distribution for modeling the ir-
regular component where additive outliers occur. However, all the techniques are
generalisable to other distributions such as mixtures of normals and to the trend
component to account for level shifts.
The model selection criteria have primarily been evaluated empirically for the
data and models used in the paper. This is for two reasons. Firstly, the seasonal
modelsunderinvestigationarecomplexmodels,wherethelikelihoodevaluationin-
volvesbothapproximationsthroughimportancesamplingandalsopseudo-spectral
decomposition.Thus,resultsforthesetypesofmodelsaredifficulttoobtainexplic-
itly. However, even for simpler models, only theoretical results have been obtained
for the moment estimator selection procedure, given the nature of the model nest-
ing, and the boundary problem. However,the results obtained from simulation are
promising. This also suggests that theoretical justification of these and related re-
sults, which apply in many other modeling situations, may well be a worthwhile
future research area.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to express his gratitude to Ching-Kang Ing for all his help
and suggestions with this work. He would also like to thank Siem Jan Koopman,
Benedikt Po¨tscher and David Findley and an anonymous reviewer for their ex-
tremely helpful comments and discussions.
Appendix A: Moment estimator
Theorem 1 (Sample kurtosis). Let y , 1 τ n be a realisation from one of the
two models given in (9) with finite positive variance.
(10) Z = n i −
n 1 P (y y¯)2 2
(cid:0) P (cid:1)
and if represents convergence in distribution then
when ν and diverges for ν finite.
Proof. Both the denominator and numerator of Z are moment estimators. If y
comes from the first model in (9) then following a similar method to [12, Example
d 4ca 6ba2 3a4
Z =φ(Y,Y2,Y3,Y4)
whereYj = i=1 nyj and√n(Y α ,Y2 α ,Y3 α ,Y4 α )isasymptotically
n 1 i − 1 − 2 − 3 − 4
mean zero normaPl by the CLT where α
is the jth moment of y
wlog.
Heavy tailed modeling of seasonal time series 147
If X = yi , and using the fact that the odd moments of the standard normal
arezeroandthe evenmomentsgivenby 2n! (andthusthe firsteightmomentsare
2nn!
also finite),
0 2 0 12
.
X3 3 0 15 0
    
X4 3  012 0 96
Thefunctionφisdifferentiableatthepoint(α ,α ,α ,α )=(0,1,0,3),andequals
(0,-6,0,1). Hence, by use of the delta method
If y comes from the second model in (9) (and assuming ν >4) then
(cid:18)n − (cid:19)→ ν 2
by explicit calculation of the moments of the t-distribution [1] and thus
Z 3. − (a.s.).
As y comes from second model of (9), ν is finite and as n
will diverge.