Modern Symmetric Cryptography methodologies and its applications
Amin Daneshmand Malayeri Jalal Abdollahi
Department of Computer Engineering Department of Computer Engineering
Young Researchers Club, Malayer Azad University Hamedan University of Technology
Malayer, Iran Hamedan , Iran
amin.daneshmand@gmail.com jalal.abdollahi66@gmail.com
Abstract—Nowadays, using cryptographic systems play an It is essential for providing some requirements in Hardware
effective role in security and safety technologies. One of the and Software systems security. By using Symmetric Cryp-
most applied kind of cryptography is Symmetric Cryptography tography and its aspects, we can design some complex secu-
and its applications. New aspects of symmetric Cryptography rity systems with encryption algorithms.
methodologies and applications has been presented by this
When we use a complex system like RFID tags, its security
paper. Security-based networks and some complex technolo-
must be covered all of its elements.
gies such as RFID and parallel security settings has been intro-
duced by using Symmetric Cryptography is the main base of
discussion in this paper. Designing an unique protocol for
Symmetric Cryptography in security networks elements is our
II. SYMMETRIC CRYPTOGRAPHY
focus. Symmetric key systems require both the sender and the re-
Reviewing benefits of using these methodologies has been pre- cipient to have the same key. This key is used by the sender
sented and discussed in this paper.
to encrypt the data, and again by the recipient to decrypt the
data. Key exchange is clearly a problem. How do you se-
curely send a key that will enable you to send other data
Keywords- Cryptography; Symmetric Cryptography; RFID;
parallel security; Complex designing securely? If a private key is intercepted or stolen, the adver-
sary can act as either party and view all data and communi-
cations. You can think of the symmetric crypto system as
I. INTRODUCTION
akin to the Chubb type of door locks. You must be in pos-
I session of a key to both open and lock the door.
t is widely recognized that security issues play a crucial
Symmetric cryptography uses a single private key to both
role in the majority of computer and communication sys-
encrypt and decrypt data. Any party that has the key can use
tems. A central tool for achieving software protection is
it to encrypt and decrypt data. They are also referred to as
Cryptography. Cryptographic algorithms are most efficient-
block ciphers.
ly implemented in custom hardware than in software run-
Symmetric cryptography algorithms are typically fast and
ning on general purpose processors. Hardware implementa-
are suitable for processing large streams of data.
tions are of extreme importance in case of high perfor-
The disadvantage of symmetric cryptography is that it pre-
mance, security against system intruders and busy systems,
sumes two parties have agreed on a key and been able to
where a cryptographic task consumes too much time. Tradi-
exchange that key in a secure manner prior to communica-
tional ASIC solutions have the well-known drawback of
tion. This is a significant challenge. Symmetric algorithms
reduced flexibility compared to software solutions. Since
are usually mixed with public key algorithms to obtain a
modern security protocols are increasingly becoming algo-
blend of security and speed.
rithm independent, a high degree of flexibility with respect
to the cryptographic algorithms is desirable. The security
degrees of all the techniques are based on the hardness of
mathematical problems. Among them, Elliptic curve crypto-
graphy shows a promise to be an alternative of RSA. A
promising solution which combines high flexibility with the
speed and physical security of traditional hardware is the
implementation of cryptographic algorithms on reconfigura-
ble devices such as FPGAs. FPGAs are hardware devices
whose function is not fixed and which can be programmed
in-system[1].
III. SYMMETRIC CRYPTOGRAPHYAND ENCRYPTION to any reader (without a possibility to check whether a read-
MODULES ALGORITHMSIN RFID-BASEDSYSTEMS er is authorized to receive the information), and the replied
ID is always the same, an attacker can easily forge the sys-
tem by reading out the data of a tag and duplicating it to
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is an emerging tech-
bogus tags. Closed RFID systems with common access of
nology. The main idea behind it is to attach a so called
all readers to a central database, can check for illegal dupli-
RFID tag to every object in a particular environment and
cates (bogus tags) within the database but this is not practic-
give a digital identity to all these objects. An RFID tag is a
al for many applications. Furthermore, it is impossible to
small microchip, with an antenna, holding a unique ID and
distinguish the original tag from its illegal duplicates.
other information which can be sent over radio frequency.
Strong authentication mechanisms can solve uprising securi-
The information can be automatically read and registered by
ty problems in RFID systems and therefore give protected
RFID readers. The data received by the RFID reader can be
tags an added value. The three main security threats in RFID
subsequently processed by a back-end database. Figure 1
systems are forgery of tags, unwanted tracking of customers,
gives a graphical overview of an RFID system.
and the unauthorized access to the tag’s memory. In this
paper, we propose authentication protocols for RFID sys-
tems based on the ISO/IEC 9798-2 standard [2]. These pro-
tocols allow protecting high-value goods against adversary
attackers. Additionally, we show that these protocols are
feasible for nowadays restriction concerning data rates and
compliance to existing standards as well as the requirements
concerning chip area and power consumption. With authen-
tication we mean a method to provide a proof for a claimed
Figure 1: Overview of an RFID system
identity. This proof is based on a secret stored within the
The range of possible applications varies with the capability authenticating part of the system. As long as the secret in-
of the tag and is separated by different classes. Class 0 and formation stays secret and the used protocol does not leak
Class 1 RFID tags are used as barcode replacement and are sensitive information, an attacker cannot forge a tag. A
read-only or can be programmed only once in the field, re- communication system providing authentication can reject
spectively. Inventory maintenance which is used in the access (to information, entry, etc.) to non authorized parties.
supply chain management can be automated using such tags. To keep the authentication secure, it is necessary that an
They are cheap (approximately 5 Cents) and can be used on attacker does not gain information about the secret by listen-
item-level on nearly every product. This paper is focusing ing passively to successful authentications. To fulfill this
on more advanced tags (Class 2) which also have a rewrita- requirement for strong authentication, it is necessary to use
ble memory and additional hardware resources but do not cryptographically strong computations.
have an active power supply on the tag. The energy for op- A)Symmetric Authentication
eration is pulled from the electromagnetic field provided by Authentication is the mechanism that one entity proves its
the reader. In addition, the reader also provides the digital identity to another entity. Strong authentication protocols,
clock frequency for operation. Certain modulation methods such as challenge-response protocols (standardized in
are used for communication from the reader to the tag and ISO/IEC 9798) are widely used in practice today. In chal-
vice versa. Such tags cost about 50 Cents and the available lenge-response protocols, one or several messages are ex-
silicon area is about 10,000 gates. changed between the party who wants to prove its identity
value products like pharmaceutical and branded goods can (the claimant) and the party who wants to verify the identity
be protected against security vulnerabilities. In this paper, (the verifier). This is called the protocol. In a typical scena-
we demonstrate how the project ART (Authentication for rio, the verifier challenges the claimant with an unpredicta-
long-range RFID systems) proposes to improve current ble value that is used no more than once (the nonce). The
RFID systems by providing secure authentication. The claimant is required to return a response that is depending
project is performed by four independent partners, two from on the nonce and on the stored secret. Using strong authen-
industry and two academic partners. A major goal of the tication for RFID systems leads to significant security en-
project is to enhance the functionality of current RFID tags hancements. If readers are required to authenticate them-
with passive power supply. The basic functionality of RFID selves to tags, attacks such as unwanted tracking and unau-
systems is to provide identification of individual objects by thorized memory access are rendered infeasible. If tags are
the replies the attached RFID tag sends to a request per- required to authenticate themselves against readers forgery
formed by a reader. The reader uses an attached database to of tags is prevented. It is advantageous to use standardized
link the received ID number to a specific object described in protocols and algorithms because they have been rigorously
the database. The major drawback of those systems is that cryptanalyzed and are widely used. systems based on stan-
the communication scheme does not provide a method to dardized protocols and algorithms are more likely to be se-
prove the claimed identity. Since a typical tag answers its ID cure and interoperable with other well established infra-
structures. Standardized challenge-response protocols are dard) is computationally very complex compared to other
defined upon symmetric-key and asymmetric-key crypto- tasks of tags. The implementation of the AES that fulfils the
graphic primitives. Using symmetric-key cryptography has requirements concerning low power consumption and low
the disadvantage that there is one secret key shared through die size is far away from being trivial. The current consump-
all parties. If one key is compromised for any reason the tion of additional hardware components on an RFID tag
whole systems gets insecure. However, strong asymmetric- must not exceed 10µA to avoid reduction of the operating
key cryptography requires extremely costly arithmetic oper- range[5] .
ations and is therefore out of question for RFID systems By using these algorithms, we can design a complex encryp-
today. Strong symmetric-key cryptographic primitives in- tion systems that can be influenced on software and hard-
clude encryption primitives such as AES [3] which allow ware modules in RFID-based systems. Our main strategy in
compact implementations [1]. In the following, a few au- defining a security base for complex systems is with follow-
thentication protocols based on challenge-response methods ing steps:
are explained.  Software-based Security(SbS)
 Hardware-based Security(HbS)
1. Protocol Extension. The most important command is  Complexity-based Security(CbS)
the anti-collision sequence which is a command every tag This methodology is our main focus on “Parallel Cryptogra-
has to implement. Thereby, the reader sends an initial in- phy” which has been designed in three separate steps and
ventory command. All tags in the environment make a re- finally added to an unique cycle that its planning is in Sym-
sponse which is the tag’s unique ID. If only one tag an- metric Cryptographic algorithms as showed in figure 2.
swers to the request the ID can be retrieved by the reader
and all subsequent commands can be addressed using the
ID which addresses one single tag. If two or more tags
make an answer to a request a collision occurs. This can
be detected at the reader. The reader then uses a modified
inventory request where it adds a part of the tag’s ID to the
request. Only tags which have this part of the ID are al-
lowed to answer. Once the ID of one tag is identified, the CbS
reader sends a “stay quiet” command to the tag with the
identified ID. This method is used as long as there are no
more collisions and all tags within the environment are
identified. Adding an authentication command to the ISO
18000 standard works by using a custom command which
can be defined. The challenge-response protocol fits ideal- Figure 2 : Complex Symmetric Cryptography diagram
ly to the overall request-response protocol. When authen-
ticating a tag, the reader sends a challenge within the re-
quest and the tag answers according to the presented au- IV. BENEFITS OF PARALLELCRYPTOGRAPHY USING
thentication protocol.
When a complex system uses Parallel Security System
2. Interleaved Authentication Protocol. The authentication (PSS), probability of mistakes in description has been de-
protocol mentioned above onlyworks when the result of the creased, because of designing a complex system with three
cryptographic primitive is available within the time defined main security base that can support security of software,
for the tag’s response. As this time is very short a modifica- hardware and a combination security by Symmetric Crypto-
tion of this authentication scheme was proposed where the graphy and parallel security. Figure 3 shows that how a Pa-
calculation time for the algorithm is of minor importance. rallel Security System can cover all of cryptographic securi-
For this purpose, authentication is split into two parts. The ty base in a complex design.
first part is the Authentication Request (AR), which tells the
tag to encrypt the challenge and does not expect any re-
sponse. The second part is the Response Request (RR),
which collects the authentication response, when the result
is available. For one tag, the timing overhead is large, but
with more than one tag, the reader can use the idle time
(during the tag is busy calculating) to send authentication
requests (or other requests) to other tags[4] .
3.Cryptographic Hardware Module. Computation of the
cryptographic algorithm AES (Advanced Encryption Stan-
Software Security-Layer 1
Hardware Security-Layer 2
Combination Security-Layer 3
Complex Security and Cryptography system
Figure 3. Parallel Security System in a complex design
V. CONCLUSION
At this paper, we show that the most application Symme-
tric-based security systems in complex designing is Parallel
Security System (PSS). When we use a Parallel Security
System, we can support all of software and hardware layers
in a complex design and by using this algorithm coverage of
all subsystems can be provided. Our main strategy discus-
sion in a sample complex system such as RFID tags can
make a secure and safe space for using these kinds of sys-
tems. Three steps PSS in complex designing can make a
cover layer between processing all of procedures .