1v6083.1090:viXra
TheAnnalsofAppliedStatistics
2008,Vol.2,No.4,1384–1408
(cid:13)c InstituteofMathematicalStatistics,2008
MODELING LONG-TERM LONGITUDINAL HIV DYNAMICS
WITH APPLICATION TO AN AIDS CLINICAL STUDY
By Yangxin Huang1 and Tao Lu
University of South Florida
Avirologicmarker,thenumberofHIVRNAcopiesorviralload,
is currentlyusedto evaluateantiretroviral (ARV)therapies in AIDS
clinicaltrials.ThismarkercanbeusedtoassesstheARVpotencyof
therapies,butiseasilyaffectedbydrugexposures,drugresistanceand
otherfactorsduringthelong-termtreatmentevaluationprocess.HIV
dynamic studies have significantly contributed to the understanding
of HIV pathogenesis and ARV treatment strategies. However, the
modelsofthesestudiesareusedtoquantifyshort-termHIVdynamics
(<1month),andarenotapplicabletodescribelong-termvirological
response toARVtreatment duetothedifficultyofestablishing a re-
lationship of antiviral response with multiple treatment factors such
asdrugexposureanddrugsusceptibilityduringlong-termtreatment.
Long-term therapy with ARV agents in HIV-infected patients often
results in failure to suppress the viral load. Pharmacokinetics (PK),
drugresistanceandimperfectadherencetoprescribedantiviraldrugs
areimportantfactorsexplainingtheresurgenceofvirus.Tobetterun-
derstandthefactorsresponsibleforthevirological failure,thispaper
develops the mechanism-based nonlinear differential equation mod-
els for characterizing long-term viral dynamics with ARV therapy.
The models directly incorporate drug concentration, adherence and
drug susceptibility into a function of treatment efficacy and, hence,
fully integrate virologic, PK, drugadherence and resistance from an
AIDS clinical trial into the analysis. A Bayesian nonlinear mixed-
effectsmodelingapproachinconjunctionwiththerescaledversionof
dynamicdifferentialequationsisinvestigatedtoestimatedynamicpa-
rametersandmakeinference.Inaddition,thecorrelationsofbaseline
factorswithestimateddynamicparametersareexploredandsomebi-
ologically meaningful correlation results are presented. Further, the
estimateddynamicparametersinpatientswithvirologicsuccesswere
compared tothosein patientswith virologic failure andsignificantly
Received December 2006; revised May 2008.
1Supportedin part by NIAID/NIHresearch Grant AI055290.
Key words and phrases. AIDS,antiretroviral drugtherapy,Bayesian nonlinear mixed-
effects models, time-varyingdrug efficacy, long-term HIV dynamics, longitudinal data.
This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Statistics,
2008,Vol. 2, No. 4, 1384–1408. This reprint differs from the original in pagination
and typographic detail.
2 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
important findings were summarized. These results suggest that vi-
raldynamicparametersmayplayanimportantroleinunderstanding
HIV pathogenesis, designing new treatment strategies for long-term
care of AIDSpatients.
1. Introduction. For the past decade HIV dynamics has been one of the
most important areas in AIDS research [Ho et al. (1995), Perelson et al.
(1996, 1997), Markowitz et al. (2003), Wu et al. (2005)]. It has since greatly
improved our understanding of the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection, and
guided for the treatment of AIDS patients and evaluation of antiretroviral
(ARV) therapies [Ding and Wu (2001), Wu et al. (2005)]. Analysis of the
dynamicsofHIVinfectioninresponsetodrugtherapyhaselucidatedcrucial
properties of viral dynamics. Long-term treatment in HIV infected patients
with highly active antiretroviral therapies (HAART) results in a decrease
of plasma HIV-1 RNA (viral load). The decay in viral load occurs in the
first few weeks from beginning treatment [Perelson et al. (1997)]: it may be
sustained for a long period, but often is followed by resurgence of plasma
viral load within months [Nowak and May (2000)]. The resurgence of virus
maybecausedbydrugresistance,poorpatientadherence,pharmacokinetics
and other factors duringtherapy [Bangsberg et al. (2000),Wahl and Nowak
(2000)].
Figure 1(a) displays the early stage trajectories based on the first 35-
day viral load data (in log scale) for 42 subjects enrolled in the AIDS
clinical trial study–A5055 [Acosta et al. (2004)], Figure 1(b) includes the
later stage (> 35 days) viral load data of the same patients. This study
was a Phase I/II,randomized, open-label, 24-week comparative study of the
pharmacokinetic, tolerability and ARV effects of two regimens of indinavir
(IDV) and ritonavir (RTV), plus two nucleoside analogue reverse transcrip-
tase inhibitors (NRTIs)on HIV-1-infected subjects failing proteaseinhibitor
Fig. 1. The profiles of viral load measured from RNA levels in plasma (in log scale)
from a group of patients in an AIDS clinical study (A5055). Change in viral load during
treatment is shown for day 0 to day 35 (a) and to the end of study (b).
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 3
(PI)-containing ARV therapies [Acosta et al. (2004)]. 44 subjects whofailed
their first PI-containing regimens were randomized to one of two IDV/RTV
regimens: IDV 800 mgtwice daily (q12h) + RTV200 mgq12h (Arm A) and
IDV 400 mg q12h + RTV 400 mg q12h (Arm B). Out of the 44 subjects,
42 subjects are included in the analysis; for the remaining two subjects, one
was excluded from the analysis since the pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters
were not obtained and the other was excluded since PhenoSense HIV could
not be completed on this subject due to an atypical genetic sequence that
causes the viral genome to be cut by an enzyme used in the assay. Plasma
HIV-1 RNA (viral load) measurements were taken at days 0, 7, 14, 28, 56,
84, 112, 140 and 168 of follow-up. The data for PK parameters (C which
is the trough levels of drug concentration in plasma), phenotype marker
(baseline and failure IC which represents the drug concentration neces-
sary to inhibit viral replication by 50% in vitro) and adherence from this
study were also available. The adherence data were determined from pill-
count data. A more detailed description of this study and data can befound
in the publication by Acosta et al. (2004).
Many HIV dynamic models have been proposed by AIDS researchers
[Ho et al. (1995), Perelson et al. (1997, 1996), Wu and Ding (1999),
Ding and Wu (2000), Nowak and May (2000), Huang, Rosenkranz and Wu
(2003)] to providetheoretical principles in guidingthedevelopment of treat-
ment strategies for HIV-infected patients. Unfortunately, these models are
mostly developed toquantify short-term dynamics.While these modelsmay
reflect well short-term viral dynamics, they do not correctly describe long-
termvirologicresponseswithantiretroviral(ARV)therapies.Inotherwords,
these models fit only the early segment of the viral load trajectory [Figure
1(a)] and thus were limited to interpret typical HIV dynamic data resulting
from AIDS clinical trials. Moreover, as is seen from Figure 1(b), the viral
load trajectory may change to different shapes in the later stage due to,
among other clinical factors, drug resistance and noncompliance. Although
somestudies[Jackson(1997),Labb´e and Verttoa(2006),Verotta(2005)]ex-
plored long-term viral dynamic models with constant drug efficacy incorpo-
rating clinical factors such as drugadherence to describe virologic responses
with ARV therapies, they considered viral dynamic models incorporating
only one factor without accounting for other potential confounding factors.
Huang and Wu (2006) extended the work of these studies to investigate dy-
namic models with time varying drug efficacy incorporating more than one
clinical factor, but they only consider a single drug to quantify antiviral
drug efficacy; in addition, the statistical model, in conjunction with the
differential equations (2.2) in their study, is not parameter identifiable in
the sense that different combinations of values of the nonidentifiable pa-
rameters can lead to the same likelihood, making it impossible to decide
among the potential parameter values. Since HAART usually combines two
4 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
or more ARV drugs, there is a need to develop models with a priori identifi-
able parameters that can describe long-term viral dynamics with more than
one drug treatment effect. Thus, practical models and effective statistical
modeling methods must address the following technical issues: (i) how to
obtain a model with a priori identifiable parameters (from the perspective
of the likelihood); (ii) how to account for the confounding factor effects of
drugconcentration, susceptibility and adherenceon antiviral responseswith
ARV therapies of more than one drug combination treatment; (iii) how to
investigate associate methodologies in conjunction with models specified by
a system of differential equations with a time varying coefficient, but with-
out a closed-form solution. Such extensive research efforts are warranted
to study the intermediate to long-term drug effects on HIV through the
modeling of virologic markers.
Data from viral dynamic studies usually consist of repeated viral load
measurements taken over treatment time course for each subject. Theintra-
individual variation and the inter-individual variation are usually modeled
by a two-stage hierarchical model. The first stage specifies the mean and
covariance structure for a given individual, while the second stage charac-
terizes the inter-individual variation. Such models are often referred to as
nonlinear mixed-effects (NLME) models. Understandingthe natureof inter-
individual systemic and random variation at the second stage often receives
far more emphasis. As is evident from Figure 1, the inter-patient variations
appear to be large, in particular, for the long-term period. Much of this
inter-individual variation may be explained by clinical factors such as drug
exposures and drug resistance. Because the viral dynamic processes share
certain similar patterns between patients while still having distinct individ-
ual characteristics, the hierarchical NLME models are often used to quan-
tify individual heterogeneity among subjects [Wu, Ding and De Gruttola
(1998), Wu and Ding (1999)]. Although the NLME model fitting can be
implemented in standard statistical software, such as the function nlme()
in S-plus [Pinheiro and Bates (2000)] the procedureNLMIXEDin SAS(2000),
it is difficult to use these standard packages in fitting NLME models when
the closed form of the nonlinear function is not available.
Viral dynamic models can be formulated through differential equations.
Buttherehasbeenonly limited development of statistical methodologies for
estimatingsuchmodelsorassessingtheiragreementwithobserveddata.The
purpose of this paper is to develop long-term viral dynamic models based
on a system of differential equations with time-varying coefficients butwith-
out closed-form solutions. It also aims to investigate associated statistical
methodologies in conjunction with the viral dynamic models with applica-
tion to an AIDS clinical trial study. Our dynamic model should be able
to characterize sustained suppression or resurgence of the virus as arising
from intrinsic viral dynamics, and/or influenced by clinical factors such as
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 5
pharmacokinetics,compliancetotreatmentanddrugsusceptibility.Wecom-
bine the Bayesian approach and mixed-effects modeling method to estimate
both population and individual dynamic parameters under a framework of
the hierarchical Bayesian NLME model. The paper is organized as follows.
In Section 2 we introduce the various HIV dynamic systems and propose
a simplified and rescaled viral dynamic model with time-varying drug ef-
ficacy which incorporates the effects of PK variation, drug resistance and
adherence. In Section 3 a Bayesian approach implemented usingtheMarkov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques is employed to estimate dynamic
parameters for inference. The proposed methodology is applied to the data
for pharmacokinetics, drug resistance and adherence, as well as the viral
load from the AIDS clinical trial described in Section 1, and the results are
presented in Section 4. Finally, the paper concludes with some discussions
in Section 5.
2. HIV dynamic models.
2.1. Structural models with constant drug efficacy. Thestructuralmodel
isamathematical descriptionofHIVdynamicsnotincludingcovariates and,
in particular, drug exposure and resistance to treatment in the description
of the data. Basic models of viral dynamics describethe interaction between
cells susceptible to target cells (T), infected cells (T∗) and free virus (V).
The most common model with imperfect drug effect is expressed in terms
of the following set of differential equations [Perelson and Nelson (1999)]
where λ represents the rate at which new T cells are created from sources
within the body, such as the thymus, d is the death rate of T cells, k is the
infectionrateofT cellsinfectedbyvirus,δ isthedeathrateforinfectedcells,
N is the numberof new virions producedfrom each of theinfected cells dur-
ing their life-time, and c is the clearance rate of free virions. The parameter
γ (0≤γ ≤1) denotes the constant antiviral drug efficacy. If the regimen
is not 100% effective (γ 6=1), the system of ordinary differential equations
can not be solved analytically. The solutions to (2.1) then have to be evalu-
ated numerically. When γ =0 (the drug has no effect), the model (2.1) re-
ducestothemodelinthepublications[Nowak et al.(1995),Nowak and May
(2000), Stafford et al. (2000)] while γ =1 (the drug is 100% effective), the
model (2.1) reverts to the model discussed by Perelson et al. (1996) and
Nowak and May (2000).
6 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
2.2. Viraldynamicmodelwithtime-varyingdrugefficacy. Sincethemod-
el (2.1) assumes drugefficacy with a constant and does not consider the fact
of variability in drug susceptibility (drug resistance) and adherence in the
presence of ARV therapy, this model is only used to quantify short-term
dynamics and does not correctly describe the long-term virologic responses
with ARV treatment. In other words, the model is only used to fit the early
segmentdataoftheviralload trajectory. Byconsideringdrugexposuresand
drug susceptibility, a long-term HIV dynamic model can be expressed as
Although this model also includes the interaction of target uninfected
cells,infectedcellsthatactivelyproducevirusesandfreevirus,itdiffersfrom
the previous model (2.1) in that the model (2.2) includes a time-varying pa-
rameter γ(t) (as defined below), which quantifies the time-varying antiviral
drug efficacy.
If we assume that the system of equations (2.2) is in a steady-state before
initiating ARV treatment, then it is easy to show that the initial conditions
for the system are
(2.3) T = , T∗= 0 , V = − T .
0 kN 0 δN 0 c k
As Huang, Rosenkranz and Wu (2003) have shown, there exists a drug effi-
cacy thresholde =1−cd /kNλ suchthatif γ(t)>e forallt,theviruswill
beeventuallyeradicatedintheory.However,ifγ(t)<e (treatmentisnotpo-
tent enough) or if the potency falls below e before virus eradication (dueto
drugresistance,e.g.),viralloadmayrebound[seeHuang, Rosenkranz and Wu
(2003) for a detailed discussion]. We briefly discuss the drug efficacy model
with two or more agents which includes the model of one agent described in
Huang and Wu (2006) as a special case.
Within the population of HIV virions in a human host, there is likely to
be genetic diversity and corresponding diversity in sensitivity to the vari-
ous ARV agents. In clinical practice, genotypic or phenotypic tests can be
performed to determine the sensitivity of HIV-1 to ARV agents before a
treatment regimen is selected. Here we use the phenotypic marker, the me-
dian inhibitory concentration (IC ) [Molla et al. (1996)] to quantify agent-
specific drug susceptibility. To model within-host changes over time in IC
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 7
Fig. 2. (a) The median inhibitory concentration curve [IC (t)]; (b) the time-course of
adherence [A(t)]; (c) thetime-course ofinhibitoryquotient [IQ(t)]; (d)the time-course of
antiviral drug efficacy [γ(t)].
duetotheemergenceofnewdrugresistantmutations,thefollowingfunction
can be used:
I + t, for 0<t<t ,
(2.4) IC 50 (t)=  0 t r r
I , for t≥t ,
whereI andI arerespectivevaluesof IC (t) atbaselineandtimepointt
0 r  50 r
atwhichtheresistantmutationsdominate.Inourstudyt isthetimeofviro-
logicfailure.ForsubjectswithoutafailuretimeIC ,baselineIC washeld
constantovertime. Inotherwords,if I =I ,nonewdrugresistantmutation
is developed during treatment. Although more complicated models for me-
dian inhibitory concentration have been proposed based on the frequencies
of resistant mutations and cross-resistance patterns [Wainberg et al. (1996),
Bonhoeffer, Lipsitch and Levin (1997)] in clinical studies or clinical practice
it is common to collect IC values only at baseline and failure time as de-
signed in A5055. Thus, this function may serve as a good approximation.
As an example, such function for two ARV drugs is plotted in Figure 2(a).
Poor adherence to a treatment regimen is one of the major causes of
treatment failure [Besch (1995), Ickovics and Meisler (1997)]. For various
reasons patients may occasionally miss doses, may misunderstand prescrip-
tion instructions or may miss multiple consecutive doses. These deviations
8 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
from prescribed dosing affect drugexposurein predictable ways. We use the
following model to represent adherence:
1, for T <t≤T , if all doses are taken in [T ,T ],
k k+1 k k+1
(2.5)A (t)= R , for T <t≤T , if 100R %
d d k k+1 d
 doses are taken in [T k ,T k+1 ],
where 0≤R <1 (d=1,2), with R indicating the adherence rate for drug
d (in our study we focus on the two PI drugs of the prescribed regimen).
T denotes the adherence evaluation time at the kth clinical visit. As an
example, Figure 2(b) shows the effect of adherence over time for two ARV
drugs, respectively.
The HAART, containing two or more nucleoside/nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (RTI) and protease inhibitors (PI), has proven to
be effective in reducing the amount of virus in the blood and tissues of
HIV-infected patients. To modeltherelationship of drugexposureandresis-
tance with antiviral efficacy, we employ the following modified E model
[Sheiner (1985)] to represent the time-varying drug efficacy for two ARV
agents within a class (e.g., the two PI drugs IDV and RTV):
where IQ (t)=Cd /ICd (t) (d=1,2) denotes the inhibitory quotient (IQ)
[Hsu et al. (2000)], Cd , A (t) and ICd (t) (d=1,2) are the trough lev-
els of drug concentration in plasma, adherence profile and the median in-
hibitoryconcentrationsforthetwoagents,respectively.NotethatC could
be replaced by other PK parameters such as the area under the plasma
concentration-time curve(AUC).AlthoughIC (t)canbemeasuredbyphe-
notype assays in vitro, it may not be equivalent to the IC (t) in vivo. The
parameter φ is used to quantify the conversion between in vitro and in vivo
IC that can be estimated from clinical data. γ(t) ranges from 0 to 1, im-
plying that one drugappears to be equally effective as the other. If γ(t)=1,
the drug is 100% effective, whereas if γ(t)=0, the drug has no effect. Note
that, if Cd , A (t) and ICd (t) are measured from a clinical study and φ
can beestimated from clinical data, then thetime-varying drugefficacy γ(t)
can be estimated for the whole period of ARV treatment. Lack of adher-
ence reduces the drug exposure, which can be quantified by equation (2.5),
and thus, based on the formula (2.6), reduces the drug efficacy which, in
turn, can affect virologic response. The examples of the time courses of the
inhibitory quotients and the drug efficacy γ(t) with φ=1, C1 =80 and
C2 =50 for two PI drugs are shown in Figures 2(c) and (d), respectively.
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 9
2.3. Model reparametrization. It is challenging to estimate all the seven
parameters in the model (2.2) and conduct inference because this model is
not a priori identifiable [in the sense of Cobelli, Lepschy and Jacur (1997):
multiple sets of parameters obtain identical fits to the data], given only viral
load measurements. To obtain a modelwith a prioriidentifiable parameters,
the model (2.2) is reparametrized using the rescaled variables T =(d /λ)T,
T∗=(δ/λ)T∗, V =(k/d )V. These yield the rescaled version as follows:
de V =c(R T∗−V e ), e e
) reepresentsethe beasic reproductiveratio for the virus,
definedasthenumberofnewlyinfectedcellsthatarisefromanyoneinfected
cell when almost all cells are uninfected [Nowak and May (2000), Verotta
(2005)]. Note that the rescaled model (2.7) has fewer parameters than the
“original” model (2.2). We reparameterize the dynamic model so that iden-
tifiability of model (2.7) is guaranteed [Cobelli, Lepschy and Jacur (1997),
Verotta (2005)] and parameters of the model can be uniquely identified. For
model (2.7), the drug efficacy threshold e =1−1/R .
If R <1, then the virus will not spread, since every infected cell will on
average produce less than one infected cell. If, on the other hand, R >1,
then every infected cell will on average produce more than one newly in-
fected cell and the virus will proliferate. For the HIV to persist in the host,
infected cells mustproduceat least onesecondary infection, and R mustbe
greater thanunity.Moreover, thegreater themagnitudeof R is,thegreater
the degree of infection would be. If we assume that on a scale of weeks or
days, the T-cell counts, infected cell counts and free virus do not change be-
fore thebeginningof drugtherapy, then we can computea fullpretreatment
steady state [Perelson and Nelson (1999), Verotta (2005)]. Thus,initial con-
ditions for the model can now be expressed as simple functions of the initial
condition of viral load (V ): T =1/(1+V ),T∗ =V /(1+V ),V =V(0).
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
The assumption of the initial steady state is necessary to guarantee iden-
tifiable (none of the modeels reeported or erefereencedehere iseidenetifiabele if
the initial states are unknown), and is often justified by the clinical trial
protocol [Nowak and May (2000), Verotta (2005)]. For example, in ACTG
protocol 5055 (A5055), individual patients were taken off the drug before
the initiation of the new therapy (washout period) to eliminate the effect of
previously administered drugs and to guarantee that all individuals started
from steady-state conditions. Finally, the predicted viral load (V ) related
10 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
to an equation output of viral load amount (V) in model (2.7), such as
V =ρV, is required to complete the rescaled model, where ρ, which is the
equivalent of a volume of distribution for pharmeacokinetics, is a viral load
scalinge(proportionality)factor (10,000 copies/mL)tobeestimated fromthe
data; V is generally expressed in copies RNA per unit volume.
3. Beayesiannonlinearmixed-effectsmodels. ABayesiannonlinearmixed-
effects (BNLME) model allows us to incorporate prior information at the
population level into the estimates of dynamic parameters for individual
subjects. Denote the number of subjects by n and the number of mea-
surements on the ith subject by m . For notational convenience, let µ=
(logφ,logc,logδ,logd ,logρ,logR )T,θ =(logφ ,logc ,logδ ,logd ,logρ ,
T 0 i i i i Ti i
logR )T, Θ={θ ,i=1,...,n}, Θ ={θ ,l6=i} and Y={y ,i=1,...,n;
0i i {i} l ij
j =1,...,m }. Let f (θ ,t )=log (V (θ ,t )), where V (θ ,t ) is propor-
i ij i j 10 p i j p i j
tional to the numerical solution of V(t) in the differential equations (2.7)
for the ith subject at time t . Let y (t) and e (t ) denote the repeated
measurements of the common logaritehmic viral load and a measurement er-
ror with mean zero, respectively. Note that log-transformation of dynamic
parameters and viral load is usedto make sureestimates of dynamicparam-
eters are positive and to stabilize the variance, respectively. The BNLME
model can be written in the following three stages [Gelfand et al. (1990),
Davidian and Giltinan (1995), Wakefield (1996)].
Stage 1. Within-subject variation:
i i i i i i mi
where y =(y (t ),...,y (t ))T, f (θ )=(f (θ ,t ),...,f (θ ,t ))T,
i i1 1 imi mi i i i1 i 1 imi i mi
e =(e (t ),...,e (t ))T.
i i 1 i mi
Stage 2. Between-subject variation:
Stage 3. Hyperprior distributions:
where the mutually independent Gamma (Ga), Normal (N) and Wishart
(Wi) prior distributions are chosen to facilitate computations
[Davidian and Giltinan (1995)]. In this modeling analysis, the data are as-
sumed to be missing at random (MAR) and, thus, analysis will give valid
inferences [Heitjan and Basu (1996)].
Following the studies by Gelfand and Smith (1990) and Davidian and
Giltinan (1995), it is shown from (3.1)–(3.3) that the full conditional distri-
butions for the parameters σ−2,µ and Σ−1 may be written explicitly as
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 11
n m 1 1 n mi −1
∼Ga a+ i=1 i , + [y −f (θ ,t )]2 ,
P 2 (b 2 i=1j=1 ) !
!
!
" # !
Here, however, the full conditional distribution of each θ , given the re-
maining parameters and the data, cannot be calculated explicitly. The dis-
tribution of [θ |σ−2,µ,Σ−1,Θ ,Y] has a density function which is propor-
ij ij i j i i
To carry out the Bayesian inference, we need to specify the values of the
hyper-parameters in the prior distributions. In the Bayesian approach we
only need to specify the priors at the population level which are easy to
obtain from previous studies or reference literature and usually are accu-
rate and reliable. The values of hyper-parameters in this study were de-
termined from the previous publications [Ho et al. (1995), Perelson et al.
(1996), Perelson et al. (1997), Perelson and Nelson (1999), Nowak and May
(2000), Verotta (2005)]. After we specify the model for the observed data
and the prior distributions for the unknown parameters, we can draw statis-
tical inferencefortheunknownparametersbasedontheirposteriordistribu-
tions. In the above Bayesian modeling approach evaluation of the required
posterior distributions in a closed-form solution is prohibitive. However, as
indicated above, it is relatively straightforward to derive either full condi-
tional distributions for some parameters or explicit expressions which are
proportional to the corresponding full conditional distributions for other
parameters.
The MCMC scheme for drawing samples from the posterior distributions
of all parameters in the above three stage model is obtained by iterating
between the following two steps: (i) sampling from one of the conditional
12 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
distributions (3.4)–(3.6); (ii) sampling from the expression (3.7). To im-
plement an MCMC algorithm, here the Gibbs sampler is used to update
σ−2,µ and Σ−1, while we update θ (i=1,2,...,n) using the Metropolis–
Hastings (M–H) algorithm. After collecting the final MCMC samples, we
are able to draw statistical inference for the unknown parameters. In par-
ticular, we are interested in the posterior means and quantiles. See the arti-
cles [Carlin and Louis (1996), Gelfand et al. (1990), Huang and Wu (2006),
Roberts(1996)andWakefield(1996)]fordetaileddiscussionsoftheBayesian
modeling approach and the implementation of the MCMC procedures, in-
cluding the choice of the hyper-parameters, the iterative MCMC algorithm,
the choice of proposal density related to M–H sampling, sensitivity analysis
and convergence diagnostics.
ThehierarchicalBayesian approachallows usnotonly toborrowinforma-
tion from previous studies, but also to borrow information across-patients
in the same study to estimate the dynamic parameters for an individual
patient. Across-patient information is incorporated in Stages 1 and 2 via
Bayesian theories, and the prior information regarding the estimates of the
viraldynamicparametersfrompreviousstudiesis incorporatedinStage3in
the hierarchical model (3.1)–(3.3). Thus, the estimates of viral dynamic pa-
rameters foran individualpatient arebased on thedatafrom this particular
patient, the data from other patients in the same study and the prior infor-
mation from previous studies. The information from these three resources
is weighted according to the uncertainty of each information component in
an efficient and optimal way via Bayesian theories. In contrast, the nonlin-
ear least squares (NLS) method fits a model to the data from individual
patients at a time. The data from an individual patient sometimes may not
be enough to reliably identify all the viral dynamic parameters, and hence,
data from other patients are generally not used. Thus, the key advantage
of the hierarchical Bayesian approach, compared to the NLS method, is its
efficient utilization of all the information available at hand.
For individual dynamic estimates, we may carry out further analysis
for the estimated dynamic parameters using standard statistical methods
[Ding and Wu (2001)]. We correlated the estimated viral dynamic param-
eters with baseline host factors (baseline viral load, CD4, age and weight)
and summary statistics of virologic/immunologic responses. We used the
Spearman rank test to evaluate statistical significance of correlations. Sim-
plelinearrelationshipswereexploredusingarobustlinearregressionmethod
(MM-estimator) due to the presence of outliers (although some of the rela-
tionships may be nonlinear) [Venables and Ripley (1999)]. All P-values are
two-sided with a significance level of 0.05, and no adjustments for multiple
testing were made in this analysis.
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 13
4. Analysis of A5055 data. In this section we apply the BNLME mod-
eling approach for fitting the A5055 data described in Section 1. Based on
the discussion in Section 3, the prior distribution for µ was assumed to be
N(η,Λ), with Λ being a diagonal matrix. The details of the prior construc-
tion for unknown parameters are discussed in Huang and Wu (2006). Thus,
the values of the hyper-parameters are chosen as follows [Ho et al. (1995),
Perelson et al. (1996, 1997), Perelson and Nelson (1999), Nowak and May
(2000), Verotta (2005)]:
a=4.5, b=9.0, ν=8.0,
η=(4.0,1.1,−1.0,−2.5,1.4,0.28)T,
Λ=diag(1000.0,1000.0,1000.0,1000.0,1000.0,1000.0),
Ω=diag(2.0,2.0,2.0,2.0,2.0,2.0).
Note that the noninformative priors are chosen for all the parameters. As
suggested by Geman and Geman (1984), for example, one long run may be
more efficient with considerations of the following two points: (i) a num-
ber of initial “burn-in” simulations are discarded, since from an arbitrary
starting point it would be unlikely that the initial simulations came from
the stationary distribution targeted by the Markov chain; (ii) one may only
save every kth (k being an integer) simulation samples to reduce the depen-
dence among samples used for parameter estimation. We are going to adopt
these strategies in our MCMC implementation using FORTRAN code that
calls a differential equation subroutine solver (DIVPRK) in IMSL library
(1994), which uses the Runge–Kutta–Verner fifth-order method. The com-
puter codes are available from the corresponding author upon request. An
informalcheckofconvergenceisconductedbasedongraphicaltechniquesac-
cordingtothesuggestionofGelfand and Smith(1990).Basedontheresults,
we propose that, after an initial number of 30,000 burn-in iterations, every
5th MCMC sample was retained from the next 120,000 samples. Thus, we
obtained 24,000 samples of targeted posterior distributions of the unknown
parameters.
4.1. Model fitting and parameter estimation results. Thedynamicmodel
(2.7) was fitted to the viral load data from 42 patients using the proposed
Bayesian approach. We report the individual dynamic parameter estimates
in Figure 3 and their summary statistics in Table 1. We observed a large
between-subject variation in the estimates of all individual dynamic param-
eters [the coefficient of variation (CV) ranges from 18.2% to 175.0% for
different dynamic parameters]. For instance, the smallest virus clearance
rate (c) was estimated as 2.157 day−1 with a corresponding half-life of 0.32
(=log2/c)daysor7.7hours,andthelargestwas6.448 day−1 withahalf-life
14 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
Fig.3. Theestimatedparametersofsubject-specificindividualsbasedonanAIDSclinical
trial dataset with 42 patients. SD and CV=SD/Mean denote the standard deviation and
coefficient of variation, respectively.
of 0.1 days or 2.4 hours. The smallest death rate of infected cells (δ) was
estimated as 0.08 day−1 with a corresponding half-life of 8.7 days and the
largest was estimated as 0.641 day−1 with a half-life of 1 day.
The population posterior means and the corresponding 95% equal-tail
credible intervals (CI) for the six parameters are summarized in Table 2. It
is shown that the population estimates are 4.736 and 0.360 for c and δ, re-
spectively, which are the most important parameters in understanding viral
dynamics.Incomparisonwith previousstudies,ourpopulation estimate of c
(4.736) is greater than the mean estimate of c, 3.07 in Perelson et al. (1996)
and3.1inPerelson and Nelson(1999),further,ourpopulationestimateof c,
4.736, withCIbeing(1.570, 8.408)isgreaterthanthepopulationestimateof
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 15
The summary of estimates of individual dynamic parameters, where SD and
CV=SD/Mean denote the standard deviation and coefficient of variation, respectively
φi ci δi dTi ρi R0i
Minimum 1.216 2.157 0.080 0.002 0.208 1.043
Median 10.112 4.815 0.158 0.012 1.395 2.818
Maximum 322.851 6.448 0.341 0.196 11.319 4.064
Mean 39.755 4.827 0.170 0.033 1.472 2.726
SD 69.600 0.878 0.063 0.043 2.570 0.738
CV(%) 175.0 18.2 36.7 131.0 175.0 27.1
c, 2.81, with CI being (1.24, 6.49) obtained by Han, Chaloner and Perelson
(2002) and 3.09 with CI being (2.80, 3.40) in Huang and Wu (2006). Our
population estimate of δ is almost equal to the mean value of δ, 0.37 in
Huang and Wu (2006), Stafford et al. (2000) and Klenernam et al. (1996).
On the other hand, our population estimate of δ (0.36) is less than the first-
phase decay rate of 0.49 [Perelson et al. (1996)], 0.5 [Perelson and Nelson
(1999)] and 0.43 [Nowak et al. (1995)]. In addition, in two separate stud-
ies by Perelson et al. (1997) and Markowitz et al. (2003), the mean values
of 1.0 and 0.7 for δ were obtained by holding clearance rate c as constant
with values of 23 and 3, respectively, and these two values are substantially
greater than our population estimate of 0.36 for δ. Our population estimate
of ρ (3.701) is less than those (4.31 and 4.32) for two different data sets
estimated by Labb´e and Verttoa (2006) and the population estimate of R
(2.608) is greater than that (1.03) in Labb´e and Verttoa (2006). These dif-
ferences may be due to the various reasons as follows. The analysis of those
studies assumed that viral replication was completely stopped by the treat-
ment, they did not incorporate critical clinical factors in the models, and/or
theyusedshort-termviralloaddatatofittheirmodelsaswellasotherissues
such as parameter unidentifiability problems in the models. In addition, the
first-phase decay rate, estimated from a biexponential viral dynamic model
A summary of the estimated posterior means (PM) of population parameters and the
corresponding 95% equal-tail credible intervals, where LCI and RCI denote the left and
right credible limits of 95% credible intervals
φ c δ dT ρ R0
PM 14.216 4.736 0.360 0.016 3.701 2.608
LCI 3.394 1.570 0.112 0.003 0.587 1.523
RCI 37.132 8.408 0.529 0.075 7.144 4.072
16 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
[Ho et al. (1995), Perelson et al. (1996), Wu and Ding (1999)] under per-
fect treatment assumption, is not the exact death rate of infected cells (δ)
since the current ARV therapy cannot completely block viral replication
[Ding and Wu (1999), Perelson and Nelson (1999), Callaway and Perelson
(2002)]. In this study we estimated the death rate of infected cells (δ) di-
rectly by accounting for the nonperfect treatment with time-varying drug
efficacy. Note thatwe areunableto validate our results of theother parame-
ter estimates as no conclusive or comparable estimates have been published
to date.
Asanexample,Figure4presentssixindividuallyfittedcurves(solidlines)
with observed viral load data in log scale as well as the estimated drug
efficacyγˆ(t)(dottedlines)andthecorrespondingthresholde (brokenlines).
The constant γˆ(t) indicates that both adherence rate A(t) and IC (t) were
held constant over time. It can be seen that the model provides a good fit
to the observed data for these subjects. Notably, by comparing the fitted
curves and estimated drug efficacy γˆ(t), we have seen that, in general, if
γˆ(t) falls below the threshold e , viral load rebounds as shown in subjects
four andsix, andin contrast, if γˆ(t) is above e ,the correspondingviralload
does not rebound, which are consistent with our theoretical analysis of the
dynamic models [Huang, Rosenkranz and Wu (2003)]. It is also important
Fig.4. Individualfittedcurves(solidline)withobservedviralloadmeasurementsinlog
scale, estimated drug efficacies γˆ(t) (dotted line) and corresponding thresholds ec (broken
line) for the six representative subjects.
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 17
that we can estimate the threshold of the drug efficacy (e ) which is an
indicator of drug potency; e may reflect the immune response of a patient
for controlling virus replications by the patient’s immune system and, thus,
may pave the way for clinicians to assess whether an ARV regimen is potent
enough to suppress viral replication for a patient and to decide whether
regimens should be switched. In addition, ARV drugs may show different
potencies(Figure4)fordifferentpatientsbeingtreatedonthesameregimen.
This may be explained by the fact that a large between-subject variation
in estimates of individual parameters may be observed from our modeling
approach (see Figure 3), suggesting that parameter estimates such as δ, c
may be an important indicator for clinicians to choose individualized ARV
therapy.
4.2. Correlations between baseline factors and viral dynamic parameters.
Wehavecorrelatedthebaselinefactorssuchasbaselineviralload(copies/mL),
CD4 cells (cells/mm3), age and weight of patients with the estimated viral
dynamic parameters using the Spearman rank correlation test. Baseline vi-
ral load and CD4 cell counts were significantly correlated with most of the
viral dynamic parameters. These correlations are plotted in Figure 5. No
significant correlation was observed between the age or weight of patients
and viral dynamic parameters.
Some correlations between baseline viral load and viral dynamic param-
eters are interesting. A strong negative correlation (r=−0.727,p<0.0001)
between baseline viral load and viral clearance rate (c) and a positive cor-
relation (r =0.711,p <0.0001) between baseline viral load and viral load
scaling factor (ρ) were consistent with the fact that the slower clearance
rate of virions and a larger viral load scaling factor, which is the equivalent
of a volume of distribution for pharmacokinetics, result in a higher viral
load. The positive correlation (r=0.694,p<0.0001) between baseline viral
loadandthedeathrateoftargetcells(d )isalsointerpretable.Onepossible
interpretation is that the higher death rate of target cells may lead to more
targets for HIV to infect, which may result in a higher baseline viral load
level. A strong positive correlation (r=0.761,p<0.0001) between baseline
viral load and drug efficacy parameter (φ) indicates that the larger value of
φ, which corresponds to the lower drug efficacy (because drug efficacy de-
creases when φ increases), leads to a higher viral load. The positive correla-
tion (r=0.488,p=0.0018) between baseline viralload andthe death rate of
infectedcells(δ)mayindicatethatthemorevirus(higherbaselineviralload)
may accelerate the apoptosis of infected cells. This may also clarify the con-
flicting results in the recent literature on correlation between baseline viral
load and first-phase viral decay rate. For example, Notermans et al. (1998)
and Wu et al. (2004) reported that plasma baseline HIV-1 RNA levels were
positively correlated withfirstphaseviraldecay rates;in contrast, Wu et al.
18 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
Fig.5. Correlationsofbaselinelog (RNA),baselineCD4cellcountswithestimateddy-
namic parameters. The correlation coefficients and p-values are obtained from the Spear-
man rank correlation test.
(1999) and Wu et al. (2003) found a negative correlation between baseline
plasma HIV RNA and first phase viral decay rates in two studies. These
confused results may be due to the following reason. The first-phase viral
decay rate, estimated from a biexponential viral dynamic model [Wu et al.
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 19
Fig. 5. Continued.
(1999),Ding and Wu(2001)]underperfecttreatmentassumption,isnotthe
true death rate of infected cells (δ) because the current ARV therapy can
not completely block viral replication.
It is clearly shown from Figure 5 that baseline CD4+ T cell counts had
opposite relationships with the estimated dynamic parameters as baseline
viral load had. This is presumably due to a negative correlation between
baseline CD4+ T cell count and viral load (data not shown).
4.3. Relations of viral dynamic parameters with virologic responses. Vi-
rological failure in this study was defined as confirmed two consecutive
plasma HIV-1 RNA levels of ≥ 200 copies/mL with less than a 1.0-log
decreaseinplasmaHIV-1RNAfrombaselinebyweek 8,orfailuretoachieve
a confirmed plasma HIV-1 RNA level of < 200 copies/mL by week 24.
Treatment response (success) was defined as two consecutive plasma HIV-
1 RNA levels of < 200 copies/mL at any point during the 24-week study
[Acosta et al. (2004)].
The estimated viral dynamic parameters in patients with virological suc-
cess were compared to those in patients with virological failure using the
Wilcoxon rank sum test (Figure 6). First we included 33 patients with con-
firmed virological success or failure status. The patients with virological
success had significantly smaller φ, higher clearance rate of free virions (c),
lower death rate of infected cells (δ), lower death rate of target T cells (d ),
smaller viral load scaling factor (ρ), and higher basic reproductive ratio
for the virus (R ). Intent-to-treat analysis (treating missing data cases as
failure) produced similar results.
We correlated the estimated viral dynamicparameters with the viralload
changes from baseline to weeks 2, 4 (short-term) and 24 (longer-term). We
found that some of the dynamic parameters were significantly correlated
withweeks2and4(short-term)virologicalresponses,butnotweek24(long-
term)virologicalresponses.Thedeathrateofinfectedcells(δ)waspositively
correlated with short-term weeks 2 and 4 viral load reduction in log scale
(r=0.35 with p=0.029 at week 2 and r=0.38 with p=0.019 at week 4).
20 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
Fig. 6. Comparisons of estimated dynamic parameters for patients with virological suc-
cess versus failure (9 patients were excluded due to missing virological response data).
The death rate of target cells (d ) was positively correlated with short-term
weeks 2 (r=0.45 with p=0.0044) and 4 (r=0.40 with p=0.015). These
correlations suggest that the higher death rates of infected cells and target
cells may result in a larger viral load decline at short-term from baseline.
Based on the protocol, the patient’s virological response status was clas-
sified as success, failure and missing for a longer-term (24 weeks) response.
The patients with virological success had a significantly smaller value of φ,
which indicates a stronger drug efficacy (more potent regimen) obtained. It
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 21
is also understandable biologically that the patients with virological success
had a significantly higher clearance rate of free virions (c), lower death rate
of target T cells (d )andasmaller valueof viralload scaling factor (ρ). The
patients with virological success had a significantly lower death rate of in-
fected cells (δ) and a higher basic reproductive ratio (R ); and these results
were not always consistent with the analysis results of short-term response
correlations, which may suggest a discrepancy between the short-term viral
response and the longer-term response. For example, the higher death rate
ofinfectedcells(δ)mayresultinalargerviralloadreductioninashort-term
(2 to 4 weeks), but may not increase the likelihood of virological success in
thelonger-term(24weeks).Althoughthisisperplexing,ifimmuneresponses
are important in virological success, perhaps such responses are continued
if infected cells live longer.
5. Discussion. The advent of HAART has provided a wealth of informa-
tion on the interaction between HIV and the human immune system, and is
continuing to stimulate the debate on the basic mechanism of viral patho-
genesis. However, most of the models developed by biomathematicians and
biologists are too complicated and contain too many unknown parameters
to be used to analyze real clinical data [Wein, Damato and Perelson (1998),
Nowak and May (2000), Stafford et al. (2000)]. In the past decade, some
simplified models have been proposed and applied to real viral load data
[Ho et al.(1995),Perelsonetal.(1996,1997),Wu et al.(1999),Ding and Wu
(2000), Markowitz et al. (2003)]. However, most of these studies only mod-
eled viral dynamic data in a short time period (2 to 8 weeks) after initiating
an ARV treatment which was frequently assumed to be 100% effective. In
this article we developed a mechanism-based nonlinear time-varying differ-
ential equation model for characterizing long-term dynamics to (i) establish
the relationship of virological response (viral load trajectory) with drug ex-
posure (pharmacokinetics and adherence) and drug resistance (IC ), (ii)
to describe both suppression and resurgence of virus, (iii) to directly in-
corporate observed drug concentration, adherence and drug susceptibility
into a function of treatment efficacy and (iv) to use a hierarchical BNLME
modeling approach that can not only combine prior information with cur-
rent clinical data for estimating dynamic parameters, but also characterize
inter-subject variability. Thus, the results of estimated dynamic parameters
based on this model should be more reliable and reasonable to interpret
long-term HIV dynamics. Our models are simplified with the main goals of
retaining crucial features of HIV dynamics and, at the same time, guaranty-
ing their applicability to typical clinical data, in particular, long-term viral
load measurements. We investigated a hierarchical BNLME modeling ap-
proach to estimate dynamic parameters in the reparametrized model (2.7)
for long-term HIV dynamics. The proposed model fitted the clinical data
22 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
reasonably well for most patients in our study, although the fitting for a
few patients (less than 10%) was not completely satisfactory due to unusual
viral load fluctuation patterns, inaccurate measurements of drug exposure
and/or adherence for these subjects. For example, self-reported pill count
measurements may not reliably reflect actual adherence profiles for some
subjects.
We investigated the correlations between baseline factors and estimated
dynamic parameters. Some biologically meaningful and interesting correla-
tion results were found. Thus, we may be able to use the baseline viral load
or CD4 count to determine whether a treatment regimen is potent enough
for a particular patient, as dynamic parameters such as the death rate of
infected cells (δ) or viral clearance rate (c) can be an indicator of treat-
ment potency. These correlations will help clinicians to select a treatment
for their patients. The estimated dynamic parameters in patients with viro-
logic success were compared to those in patients with virologic failure and
significantly important findings were summarized in Section 4.
The basic tool for investigating model uncertainty is the sensitivity anal-
ysis. That is, we simply make reasonable modifications to the assumptions
in question, recompute the posterior quantities of interest, and see whether
theyhavechangedinawaythatsignificantly affectstheresultinginterpreta-
tions or conclusions. If the results are robust against the suspected assump-
tions, we can report the results with confidence and our conclusions will be
solid. However, if the results are sensitive to the assumptions, we choose to
communicate the sensitivity results and interpret the results with caution
[Gamerman (1997)].Inorder toexamine thedependenceof dynamicparam-
eter estimates on theprior distributionsandinitial values, weconducted the
sensitivity analyses using the different mean vector η of prior distributions
and different initial values (data not shown). The sensitivity analysis results
can be summarized as follows: (i) The estimated dynamic parameters were
not sensitive to both priors and/or the initial values, and final results are
reasonable and robust. (ii) When different priors and/or different initials
were used, the results follow the same patterns as those presented in this
paper. The conclusions of our analysis remain unchanged.
Although the analysis presented here used a simplified model which ap-
peared to perform well in capturing and explaining the observed patterns,
and characterizing the biological mechanisms of HIV infection under rel-
atively complex clinical situations, some limitations exist for the proposed
modelingmethod.First, our modelis asimplified modelandthereare many
possible variations [Perelson and Nelson (1999), Nowak and May (2000),
Callaway and Perelson (2002)]. We did not separately consider the com-
partments of short-lived productively infected cells, long-lived and latently
infectedcells[Perelson et al.(1997)].Instead,weexaminedapooledproduc-
tively infected cell population. The virus compartment was not further de-
composedintoinfectiousvirionsandnoninfectiousvirionsasinPerelson et al.
MODELINGLONG-TERM LONGITUDINALHIV DYNAMICS 23
(1996). Thus, different mechanisms of NRTI and PI drug effects were not
modeled. In fact, we only considered PI drug effects in the drug efficacy
model (2.6) since the information of NRTI drugs was not collected in our
study and the effect of NRTI drugs was considered less important compared
to the PI drugs. Second, one may notice that we only have the IC data
at baseline and failure time. We extrapolated the IC data linearly to the
whole treatment period in our modeling. The linear extrapolation is the
best approximation that we can get from the sparse IC data [Wu et al.
(2005)]. The linear assumption might have some influence on the estimation
results since the IC might have jumped to a higher level earlier before
the failure time when we obtained the sample for the drug resistance test.
But we expect that this assumption had little effect on the prediction of
virological response since we had relatively frequent monitoring (monthly in
the later stage) of virological failure in this study. Third, as measurements
of adherence, pill counts, may not reflect actual adherence profiles for in-
dividual patients, the data quality would affect our estimation results for
viral dynamic parameters. More accurate measurements for adherence such
as electronic monitoring devices (e.g., MEMs caps) may improve data qual-
ity. Further studies on these issues are definitely needed. Nevertheless, these
limitations would notoffset the major findingsfrom our modelingapproach,
although further improvement may be warranted.
We assumed that the distribution of the random effects b is normal.
However, due to the nature of AIDS clinical data, it is possible that the
data may contain outlying individuals and, thus, may result in a skewed
distribution of individual parameters, that is, the random effects may not
follow a normal distribution. As Wakefield (1996) suggested, a t distribu-
tion may be used which is more robust to outlying individuals than the
normal distribution. An extended direction is to incorporate baseline char-
acteristics, such as age and weight, in our drug efficacy model to test the
effect of these covariates on each parameter. In addition, this paper com-
bined new technologies in mathematical modeling and statistical inference
with advances inHIV/AIDS dynamicsandARVtreatment toquantify com-
plex HIVdisease mechanisms.Thecomplex natureof HIV/AIDS ARVther-
apy will naturally pose some challenges, including missing data and mea-
surement error in covariates. These complicated problems, which are be-
yond the purpose of this article, may be addressed using two-step meth-
ods [Higgins, Davidian and Giltinan (1996)] and the joint model method
[Wu (2002)]. We are actively investigating these problems now. We hope
that we could report these interesting results in the near future.
In summary, the mechanism-based dynamic model is powerful and ef-
ficient to characterize relations between antiviral response and drug expo-
sures,drugsusceptibility,althoughsomebiologicalassumptionsarerequired.
The fitting of a model specified as a set of nonlinear differential equations is
24 Y.HUANGAND T. LU
routinely done in many fields (in particular, pharmacokinetics and pharma-
codynamics, which are closely associated with the analysis of clinical data
consideredinthisarticle).Long-termviraldynamicscanbereasonablymod-
eledwithcarefulconsiderationsoftheeffectsofpharmacokinetics,adherence
anddrugresistance.Dynamicparametersforindividualsubjectscanbeesti-
mated by borrowinginformation fromprior populationestimates andacross
subjects in the same patient population using the novel Bayesian approach.
The established models may also be used to simulate antiviral responses of
new antiviral agents and will have a notable impact on our understanding
of HIV pathogenesis, long-term care with HIV-infected patients and design
of new treatment strategies. Although this paper concentrated on HIV dy-
namics,thebasicconcept oflongitudinaldynamicsystemsandtheproposed
methodologies in this study are generally applicable to dynamic systems in
other fields such as biology, biomedicine, PK/PD studies or physics, as long
as they meet the relevant technical specification (e.g., specified by a set of
differential equations).
Acknowledgments. The authors thank the Editor and an Associate Ed-
itor for their insightful comments and suggestions that led to a marked
improvement of the article. We are also indebted to Drs. John G. Gerber,
Edward P. Acosta and other A5055 study investigators for their collabora-
tions and allowing us to use the clinical data from their study.