Citation: Cellular Therapy and Transplantation, Vol. 1, No. 4
Reprinted with Permission of The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Originally published in: Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 10:1 (1966), 19-32.
Molecular biology, nucleic acids, and the future of medicine
E. L. Tatum
Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA
This paper was presented at the dedication symposium of the new research laboratories of Merck Sharp and Dohme
in New York, May, 1966. Columbia University College of Physicians and Sur geons was a joint sponsor.
All the papers presented will be published in book form by Merck & Co.
Cost of publication of this article has been covered by the National Foundation.
It seems particularly fitting, in this symposium, to try to assess Accordingly, I will concent rate primarily on the following areas
the prob able and possible impact of molecular biology and its in which progress seems to me to be particularly directly related
important com ponent, the structure and function of nucleic acids, to the concepts of molecular biology and dependent on nucleic
on the future of medicine. Although I attempt specific predictions acid research. These major areas are:
with considerable trepi dation, not being qualified in either fortune-
telling or medicine, I do so in the firm belief that the findings and (1) viruses and virus diseases;
concepts of molecular biology will play a leading role in the future (2) hereditary metabolic defects, enzymatic, and regulatory;
of medicine. Medicine, after all, primarily involves the application (3) developmental, congenital, and structural defects; and
of biological concepts and understanding to the health and welfare (4) cancer.
of man.
What developments can be predicted in these general areas during
After considering various alternative presentations, I have decided the next twenty years or so?
first to point out some of the principal problem areas facing medi-
cal science in which molecular biology is most immediately con- In the field of viruses and viral diseases, it can be anticipated
cerned. I will then do my best to predict some developments in fairly confidently that the study of viruses — bacterial, plant, and
these areas over the next ten to twenty years. animal — will continue to hold as important a place in molecular
biology and genetics as has been true during the past decade or
Before doing this, however, I feel a real obligation to mention a so. Most, if not all, viral diseases will be conquered either through
prob lem that is peripheral in one sense, but that in another is relat- immunological means or by the design and synthesis of specific
ed to and even supersedes most others in basic importance to man. antiviral chemicals. With this, and with definitive understanding
This is the world problem of population and the means of arriving of the roles of viruses in human problems involving de velopment
at and maintaining an effective balance between the population and with regulation of cell growth, will come effective pre vention
explosion and natural resources. Although this problem is outside and hence control of human problems attributable to viral disease.
the main thread of this symposium, it is actually of primary im- Finally, it can be anticipated that viruses will be effectively used
portance. Unless it can be solved, and a new „dark age“ avoided, for man‘s benefit, in theoretical studies in somatic-cell genetics
scientific progress can hardly be maintained, and the appli cation and possibly in genetic therapy.
to man of new findings will be defeated by sheer numbers. In the area of metabolic disorders, the recognition of the genetic
basis of many more disorders can be anticipated. The specific
However, let us assume that this problem will be solved, and pro- enzymatic defects will be identified in many more instances, as
ceed to problem areas in medical science. Some of the most impor- already has been done for PKU (phenylketonuria), galactosemia,
tant of these are being discussed by the other symposium speakers, certain amino acidurias, and abn ormalities in hemoglobin and
auto-immune dis eases by Sir Macfarlane Burnet, brain function by other serum proteins. Rapid, simple, and sensitive methods for
Dr. Schmitt, and de generative diseases by Sir George Pickering. the detection of carriers and for the early diagnosis of affected in-
74 www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4)
dividuals will be developed, thus facilitating both more effec tive in one direction at a single growing point which moves along the
eugenic measures and more effective therapy by dietary and other chromosome until all the genes have been copied and the process
means. We can even be somewhat optimistic on the long-range is completed [1]. The circularity may also serve in part to protect
possibility of therapy by the isolation or design, synthesis, and DNA from enzymatic attack on free ends of the molecule.
introduction of new genes into defective cells of particular organs.
The evidence suggests that a double helical form of nucleic
In the field of developmental biology, as the consequence of a acid is es sential for its replication. For example, replication
better understanding of the molecular and spatial-temporal se- of a single-stranded phage DNA (ΦX174), of single-stranded
quences involved in differentiation and development, we can RNA of the phage f2, and of several plant and animal virus-
foresee the effective prevention and alleviation of developmental es has been shown to involve the enzymatic formation of a
errors, such as congenital malformations, whether these be due double-stranded replicative form. Only one of these (-strand),
to genetic defects or to faulty gene expression or regulation or the complement to the parental strand, would then serve as
are indirectly related to gene activity via hormone produc tion or template for the synthesis of new viral RNA (+strand). An ap-
target-organ receptivity. parent exception to the requirement for replication of a double-
stranded struc ture, the in vitro replication of a biologically ac-
Perhaps in no area is the foreseeable rapid accumulation of basic tive bacterial virus RNA, was recently reported by Spiegelman
infor mation more pertinent to molecular biological research and and co-workers [2]. However, later experiments by Weissman
concepts, or more promising for the future, than in the area of and Feix [3] strongly suggest the presence of a double-stranded
neoplasia—cancer. I feel that we can reasonably anticipate that the replicating form of RNA in this system as well.
basic causes of many, if not all, forms of cancer will be established
within the next few decades. All suspected causes, viral, mutational, Strandedness would appear also to be important in repair of dam-
or regulatory failures, center on cell genetics, and on nucleic acid aged DNA, as with ultraviolet radiation. It should be recalled that
structure and function. Hence, we can be reasonably optimistic of ultraviolet-produced thymine dimers are split in photoreactivation
the development, first, of effective preventive measures and, later, but are excised and the strand repaired in a dark reaction. Bacte-
of curative therapy. These will come by epidemiological, immuno- rial mutants deficient in the excision reaction are known, and the
logical, and chemotherapeutic means, by modification and regula- ultraviolet-damaged double-stranded replicative form of ΦX174
tion of gene activities, or by means of gene repair or replace ment. is capable of dark repair, whereas the single-stranded form of the
bacteriophage DNA is not. Incidentally, it might also be pointed
Let us now explore the basis for my optimism, which rests, first, out here that exo-nuclease III may well be involved in the excision
on the general validity of the concepts of molecular biology and reaction and therefore might be absent in the „excision negative“
the significance of nucleic acid structure and function therein and, bacterial mutants just mentioned.
second, on the „state of the art“ in nucleic acid research and on
the exponential rate at which knowledge in this and other areas of Strandedness and circularity seem also to be important in deter-
biology is increasing. mining the template specificity in RNA synthesis on either DNA or
RNA tem plates. In vitro, cellular RNA polymerase can use either
It is now generally accepted that the basic unit of heredity in all DNA or RNA templates, either single or double stranded. With
forms of life is DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, consisting of the double-stranded DNA, both strands usually serve as templates.
now familiar complementary stranded double helix of Watson However, in in vivo m-RNA synthesis and in vivo synthesis of
and Crick. This struc ture uniquely possesses all the qualifications viral RNA, only one of the double strands of the nucleic acid
essential for genetic function: specificity through purine and py- appears to serve as template. This also seems to be true in vitro in
rimidine base sequence; mutation through alterations in base se- several other instances involving transcription to RNA of double-
quence; replication by the enzymatic assem bly of new strands stranded nucleic acids related to bacterial viruses. That circu larity
on the two parental strands as templates; and translation into may be involved in determining single-strand transcription is sug-
cell function by transcription of one strand into a complemen- gested by the experiments of Hayashi, Hayashi, and Spiegelman
tary strand of messenger RNA (ribonucleic acid). The messenger [4] with ΦX174 replicating form DNA. In vitro, only one strand
RNA is transferred from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and there of the circular form was transcribed, but both strands of the open
directs the ass embly of amino acids into enzymes and other pro- linear form were so used.
teins in the ribosomes, with the sequence of base triplets in the
gene thus specifying a particular sequence of amino acids in the In connection with the structure of DNA and its transcription,
protein product. an im portant field of investigation was initiated a few years ago
with the dis covery by Reich and co-workers that actinomycin D
The past several years have seen the fleshing out of these bare primarily acts by binding specifically to the amino group of gua-
conceptual bones in considerable detail and with some remark- nine in the minor groove of double-stranded DNA. In so doing,
able observations and phenomena. it prevents the DNA from func tioning as a template for cellular
RNA synthesis but does not affect RNA-dependent synthesis of
Genetic material is frequently, or even perhaps usually, present viral RNA [5]. Other studies [6] have shown that chromomycin
in the form of circular molecules, such as in bacterial „chromo- and related antibiotics react similarly and that ethidium bromide
somes“ in bacteriophages, in polyoma virus, and perhaps even in and daunomycin bind to DNA and inhibit its function non-specif-
chromosomes of higher forms. It would appear that this circular- ically, perhaps, like proflavin, by intercalation between adjacent
ity has a control function in the replication process, which, at least base pairs. Bhuyan and Smith [7], in similar studies, have shown
in bacteria, appears to start at a particular location and proceed that nogalo-mycin binds to DNA, probably to either adenine or
www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4) 75
thymine residues. In contrast, another antibiotic, tubercidin, an ditions or substances that bind to ribosomes, disassociate their
analogue of adenosine, appare ntly is incorporated into both RNA subunits, or otherwise affect their structure or binding of s-RNA.
and DNA [8], as are some other base analogues. Such studies in Examples are basic com pounds, such as spermidine, and the anti-
general not only provide an understanding of the molecular basis biotics lincomycin and, probably, chloramphenicol. Interestingly,
of activity of these antibiotics but lead to the recog nition and use organic solvents such as alcohol and cert ain salts may change the
of valuable tools in investigating the structure and function ing of specificity of recognition between m-RNA codon and the s-RNA
nucleic acids. anticodon. Related to this is the finding that sup pressor muta-
tions may involve alterations in the recognition site of a particular
The second step of gene transcription involves not only m-RNA s- RNA and thus restore normal transcription. Another very im-
but two other classes of RNA, both of which are gene determined. portant related finding is the discovery by Davies, Gilbert, and
Transfer or soluble RNA (s-RNA) attaches activated amino acids Gorini [14] that streptomycin alters the specificity of m-RNA
at its CCA term inal end and transfers them to the growing poly- codon recognition by s-RNA, and hence disarranges normal
peptide chain in the ribosome, which contains at least two ribo- transcription, but can function as a „suppressor substance“ in
somal structures containing RNA (18S and 23S). Each amino acid correcting faulty transcription due to gene mutation.
is carried by at least one specific s-RNA. Some evidence suggests
that the DNA loci responsible for ribo somal and transfer RNA are In view of the widespread interest in and knowledge of the intri-
bunched and may be transcribed more or less as a group, whereas cacies of the triplet genetic code, it should here suffice to point
the loci for m-RNA are more widely and randomly distributed [9]. out that, as the result of the brilliant pioneering work of Nieren-
berg, Ochoa, and Khorana, and their collaborators, we now have
Each s-RNA has two separate recognition sites, one specific for an almost complete key to the triplet codons for all amino acids.
its ammo add and one specific for the corresponding base triplet This accomplishment has required particularly the techniques of
or codon on the m-RNA. The first complete base-sequence analy- nucleic acid chemistry and biochemistry, in producing the nec-
sis was reported just this last year by Holley and collaborators essary oligonucleotides of defined sequence and length. I would
for yeast alanine s-RNA [10]. When sequences of other s-RNA only remind you, in addition, that the universality of the code has
molecules are established, as can be anticipated fairly soon, it now been fairly convincingly established by work with viruses,
should be possible to define structurally both recognition sites, bacteria, plants, and animals. This is particularly pertinent to our
the anticodon, and the amino acid recognition site. later consideration of genetic engineering.
The final step in protein synthesis, the assembly of polypeptide Another area of nucleic acid research that should be mentioned
chains, takes place in the ribosomes. These consist of two dif- here is that of mutation, which in its simplest form represents the
ferent-sized subunits and function most effectively as aggregates substitution of one base for another in a DNA triplet. We already
or polysomes, with each ribosome involved in transcription of know that certain sub stitutions are more frequent than others and
a different section of the m-RNA mole cule that holds the ri- can selectively be made still more frequent by the incorporation
bosomes together in the aggregate. In some instances at least, into DNA of base analogues which alter base pairing specificities
a single polycistronic m-RNA molecule may code for several or, under more natural conditions, by the presence of a „mutator“
polypeptide chains. gene. These observations, together with knowl edge of the code,
make the prospects of directed mutation somewhat more hopeful
Protein synthesis on the ribosome is subject to regulation and con- for the future.
trol in a number of ways. One of the important recent questions
has been the punctuation in the genetic code. Are there start and We perhaps should here also remind ourselves that genes and
stop signals? It seems that there are! The start signal for most gene functions in living organisms are not isolated entities and
Escherichia coli proteins appears to be a particular nucleotide se- phenomena in a test tube but are subject to regulation or control
quence which specifies at least N-formyl-methionine, and perhaps mechanisms which turn them on, or turn them off, either sepa-
even N-formyl-methionyl-alanyl-serine. After completion and rately or in operon groups, in feedb ack response to repressor or
release, one or more of the N-terminal groups is enzymatically activator molecules. Developmental geneticists believe that gene
removed. The evidence for this process comes from the elegant activation and repression are of primary significance in process-
work of Webster, Engelhart, and Zinder [11] on the in vitro syn- es of differentiation and development. The more we learn about
thesis of f2 virus coat protein and from related findings of Adams these repressors and activators and how they work, the more opti-
and Capecchi [12]. mistic we can be about the prospects of controlling and correcting
faulty developm ental processes.
That there are also stop signals seems equally probable. These
may func tion in a manner analogous to the termination of peptide Finally, in this general discussion, both for aesthetic complete-
synthesis by puromycin, which is added to the growing carboxyl ness and because of its possible role in infective processes and
end of the chain, stopping further additions and causing release of in development, I want to mention extrachromosomal inheri-
the incomplete chain from the ribosome. At least two possible nu- tance. The last few years have seen a considerable clarification
cleotide triplets (UAG and UAA), which seem not to code for any of the physical basis of extrachromosomal genetic phenomena.
ammo acid, have been suggested by Sarabhai, Stretton, Brenner, Cell organelles such as mitochondria and plastids, and entities
and Bolle [13] as giving a signal for peptide chain termination in such as infective bacterial episomes, replicate and divide inde-
some strains of E. coli. pendently of the nucleus, can mutate, and control certain typical
charac teristics of the cells in which they exist. These character-
Ribosomal protein synthesis in vitro can also be modified by con- istics are inherited in a non-Mendelian pattern, often completely
76 www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4)
maternally. It is intellectual ly satisfying that all such entities in- activity in the target cells, leading to the production of specific
vestigated have been found to contain double-stranded, helical, m-RNA, as shown for animals by the recent experi ments of
high-molecular-weight DNA. It is particularly gratifying to me Kidson and Kirby [20]. It should be pointed out, however, that
that it is now known that Neurospora mitochondria grow and other modes of action have not been ruled out, for instance, that
divide [15], that they contain DNA [16], and that a cytoplasmic cell-membrane permeability is involved.
char acter in Neurospora is transmitted from cell to cell by pure
isolated mito chondria, as shown in our laboratories [17]. Drs. The last area I have emphasized, that of neoplasia or cancer, is
Luck and Reich have most recently [18] produced evidence at the same time one of the greatest problems facing medicine
consistent with the semiconservative replication of Neurospora and one of the most complex. In an intellectual sense this com-
mitochondrial DNA, as is true for bacterial plant, animal, and plexity, centering on the variety of phenomena implicated in the
some viral DNA. They have also shown, as followed by a spe- causation and manifestations of cancer, is reason for optimism,
cies-specific density difference, that this mitochondrial DNA is since it provides the opportunity of understanding the process of
in herited maternally. A role of mitochondrial DNA in mater- caremogenesis, „spontaneous,“ viral, or chemically or physically
nally inherited respiratory-deficient mutants of Neurospora has induced. All of these would appear basically to involve genetic
very recently been sug gested by Woodward and Munkres [19] material. Similarly, there is cause for optimism in understanding
to involve the control of mito chondrial structural protein. It is and treating the manifestations, since they would appear to involve
of considerable interest that chemothera py is of potential value various steps in gene expression.
in controlling the replication of extrachromosomal DNA, as sug-
gested by the effects of agents such as proflavin, streptomy cin, This general thesis is supported by the increasing evidence that
and nitrosoguanidine in micro-organisms. many forms of cancer in animals are indeed due to particular
viruses in a phenomenon basically analogous to lysogenesis in
In the light of the foregoing survey of some of the high spots of bacteria. Most simply it would appear that viral genes so in-
nucleic acid research pertinent to molecular biology, let us refocus troduced are integrated into the host-cell genome, transforming
our attention on my earlier predictions as to the future of medicine. them into tumor cells, with characteristic new properties such as
I hope that I have succeeded in making clear, first, the central role loss of contact inhibition, change of morphology and growth re-
played by nucleic acids in biology and genetics, so that the basic quirements, and new tumor or viral antigens. We are coming closer
phenomena in the various problem areas, virus infection, meta- to the clarification of the role of viruses in human cancer through
bolic diseases, developmental defects, and neoplasia, are actu- detailed studies of the “transformation“ process in cultured cells,
ally interrelated, and, second, the fact that these basic phenomena induced by human and annual viruses; through studies showing the
involve changes from normality because of interference with, or need for a “helper” virus acting with a tumor vims in viral caremo-
changes in, the normal sequences of molecular biology that link genesis in animals; and through epidemiological and other studies
gene to enzyme. in human cancer such as malignant lymphoma and leukemia.
Virus infection introduces new genetic material and interferes The possibilities of prevention and therapy would seem to be
with the functioning of host genes. Mutation changes genes, gen- many and diverse, ranging from prevention of infection, replica-
erally for the worse, as in inborn metabolic diseases character- tion, expression, and integration of viral genetic material, perhaps
ized by single enzyme defects. as with antiviral agents such as HBB, guanidine, and IUDR, to
specific chemotherapeutic suppression of the transformed tumor
Developmental defects may be due to mutant genes, as for club- cells, or even their reconversion to normality. Effective attacks on
foot, harelip, etc.; to virus infection, as with Rubella or probably these fronts will lean heavily on our knowledge of the molecuar
adenovirus; to drugs such as actinomycin or thalidomide; or to events involved, that is, on knowledge in molecular and nucleic
prenatal environmental factors such as a riboflavin deficiency. acid biology.
Some of these environmental fact ors probably act by changing
the spatial-temporal sequence of gene acti vation and expression Many, including myself, have talked and written about the appli-
necessary for normal development. Certain dev elopmental defects cation of the newer knowledge of molecular genetics and biology
may be due to an extra chromosome as in mongolism or Turner’s to the improvement of man’s life, heritage, and health in terms of
and Klinefelter’s syndromes. These chromosomal effects ap pear engineering. In these terms, eugenic engineering operates at the
to be due to defective gene expression as the consequence of level of existing genes and involves purposeful, conscious effort
chromo some imbalance. It is of considerable interest that some to decrease the prevalence and expression of undesirable genes.
recent data on mongolism in Australia support the possibility that These efforts will be effective in proportion to the numbers of
some unknown in fective agent may affect oogenesis, causing the detrimental genes that can be identified; to the development of
non-disjunction that leads to the extra chromosome 21. If this effective methods for their detection in the hidden, carrier state;
proves to be true, the significance for preventive therapy is obvi- and, most important, to the general acceptance by individuals of
ous. their social responsibility not to perpetuate these genes.
Certain heritable developmental abnormalities are accompanied Eugenic engineering operates at the level of gene expression on
by and even attributable to hormone deficiencies, as for thyroxin the phenotype of the individual. It is already widely used in medi-
in cretinism or growth hormone in a type of dwarfism. The basis cine, if not so recognized, as in the administration of vitamins,
of hormone activity itself is still unsettled. However, evidence has hormones such as insulin, and thyroxine. Better-recognized ex-
been accumulating recently that many, particularly the sex hor- amples include the prevention of the harmful accumulation of toxic
mones and the insect hormone ecdy-sone, act by regulating gene materials associated with genetic defects by dietary restrictions
www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4) 77
such as of phenylalanine in PKU, of galactose in galactosemia, or purposes of genetic engineering seems obvious.
of certain branched amino acids in maple-sugar urine disease or
the recently described isovaleric acidemia. Such diseases are of Let me now try to summarize. I have attempted to point out and
special interest and significance in that they characteristically in- discuss some of the high spots in molecular biology and nucleic
volve brain function and mental retardation. This, and the known acid research that are particularly promising for the future of med-
actions of drugs such as LSD, forecast the eventual understanding icine. It is apparent that multidisciplmary concepts, approaches,
of the organic basis of other mental illnesses, such as schizophre- and techniques are essential to the fulfilment of the potentialities
nia, and their successful treatment. which can now be only speculated on. This is particularly appar-
ent if we try to list some of the areas and techniques involved and
Another much less developed type of eugenic engineering would indicate some needs for further information and development.
make use of the concepts of gene regulation and control, by way
of feedback regulation by the administration of compounds yet to One major area involves the design and synthesis of compounds
be discovered. For example, the activities of harmful dominant for chemotherapeutic use. In relation to viruses, these will in-
genes in theory could be re pressed as desired, or inactive genes clude agents affecting their adsorption, penetration, and replica-
could be turned back on or derepressed as needed, even in utero at tion. In relation to gene function, transcription to m-RNA, and
critical periods of development. As already pointed out, hormore protein, agents already exist and more surely can be designed
therapy may actually represent this type of gene regulation. that will even more specifically affect DNA and RNA structure
and particular functions. Other „suppressor sub stances“ can be
I would define genetic engineering as the alteration of existing imagined, which, like streptomycin, will change nucleic acid
genes in an individual. This could be accomplished by directed transcription at the level of protein synthesis and thereby correct
mutation or by the replacement of existing genes by others. In genetic errors. Still others, patterned after repressor or regulator
principle, and in respect to possible ways of accomplishing this substances yet to be isolated and identified, will be able to modu-
replacement, there are only minor technical differences between late the activities of specific genes.
genetic engineering as applied to genes in germinal and in so-
matic cells, although the net result would be consider ably differ- With the structures of key enzymes established, the DNA code
ent. Precedents for the introduction or transfer of genes from one com pletely established, and with suitable synthetic methods
cell to another exist in microbial systems and are now being tried available, genes can be synthesized to order. The time may soon
with mammalian cells in culture. Isolated DNA as such is physi- come when a few mole cules of such synthetic genes, or of genes
cally taken up and integrated into the recipient bacterial genome isolated in pure state from na ture, will be replicated enzymati-
in the transformation process, or in transduction is transferred cally in vitro. With more complete knowledge of the biological
from one bacterium to another by a virus, followed by integra- processes and techniques involved in DNA uptake and integra-
tion. If this can be done successfully with animal cells, it will tion, these DNA’s can be incorporated into chromo somes. Ge-
facilitate the development of a mammalian somatic-cell genetics. netic engineering will then be just around the corner.
It will also bring us considerably closer to successful genetic en-
gineering. It is pertinent to point out that, for the phenotypic cor- Such speculations as these may be considered by some as too
rection of most genetic errors, only one of the two inactive genes idle day dreaming for a serious symposium. Yet the phenomena of
in a diploid cell need be replaced by an active gene and that this molecular bi ology which are now almost taken for granted were
may need to be done only in a certain critical number of cells in not even dreamed of a very few years ago! So, to paraphrase,
the particular organ in which the gene function is needed. Hence,
it can be suggested that the first successful genetic engineering The time has come, it may be said,
will be done with the patient‘s own cells, for example, liver cells, To dream of many things;
grown in culture. The desired new gene will be introduced, by Of genes—and life—and human cells—
directed mutation, from normal cells of another donor by trans- Of Medicine—and kings—
duction or by direct DNA transfer. The rare cell with the desired
change will then be selected, grown into a mass culture, and re-
implanted in the patient‘s liver. The efficiency of this process and
its potentialities may be consider ably improved by the synthesis
of the desired gene according to the specifications of the genetic
code and of the enzyme it determines, by in vitro enzymatic rep-
lication of this DNA, and by increasing the effectiveness of DNA References
uptake and integration by the recipient cells, as we learn more
about the factors and conditions affecting these processes. 1. K. G. Lark. Bacteriol. Rev., 30:3, 1966.
An even more speculative biological possibility for genetic engi- 2. S. Spiegelman, I. Haruna, I. B. Holland, G. Beaudreau, and D.
neering may be suggested, stemming from the finding by Harris Mills. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 54:919, 1965.
[21] that in culture, mammalian cells, even from different spe-
cies, can be caused to fuse by exposure to an as yet unidentified 3. C. Weissman and G. Feix. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 55:1264,
component of certain animal viruses. These „hybrid“ cells can 1966.
survive and grow, retaining all or part of the chromosome com-
plements of the two „parental“ cells. The possible applicability 4. M. Hayashi, M. N. Hayashi, and S. Spiegelman. Nat. Acad. Sci.
of this approach to the introduction of new genetic material for (U.S.), Proc, 51: 351, 1964.
78 www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4)
5. E. Reich. Symp. Soc. Gen. Microbiol., 16:266, 1966. 15. D. J. L. Luck. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 49:233, 1963.
6. D. C. Ward, E. Reich, and I. H. Goldberg. Science, 149:1259, 16. D.J. L. Luck and E. Reich. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc,
1965. 52:931, 1964.
7. B. K. Bhuyan and C. G. Smith. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 17. E. G. Diacumakos, L. Garnjobst, and E. L. Tatum. J. Cell
54:566, 1965. Biol., 26:427, 1965.
8. G. Acs, E. Reich, and M. Mori. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 18. E. Reich and D. J. L. Luck. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc,
52:493, 1964. 155:1600, 1966.
9. B. J. McCarthy and E. T. Bolton. J. Mol. Biol., 8:184, 1964. 19. D. O. Woodward and K. D. Munkres. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.),
Proc, 55:872, 1966.
10. R. W. Holley et al. Science, 147:1462, 1965.
20. C. Kidson and K. S. Kirby. Nature, 203:599, 1964.
11. R. E. Webster, D. L. Engelhardt, and N. D. Zinder. Nat. Acad.
Sci. (U.S.), Proc, 55:i55, 1966. 21. H. Harris and J. F. Watkins. Nature, 205:640, 1965.
12. J. Adams and M. R. Capecchi. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Proc,
55:147, 1966.
13. A. S. Sarabhai, A. O. W. Stretton, S. Brenner, and A. Bolle.
ctt-journal.com
Nature, 201:13, 1964.
Reprinted with Permission of The Johns Hopkins University Press.
14. J. Davies, W. Gilbert, and L. Gorini. Nat. Acad. Sci. (U.S.), Originally published in: Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
Proc, 51:883, 1964. 10:1 (1966), 19-32.
www.ctt-journal.com 2009;1(3) / 2010;1(4) 79