Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71
REVIEW Open Access
Molecular dynamics simulations and drug
Jacob D Durrant*1 and J Andrew McCammon2,3,4
formed not mechanically, but by shifting clouds of
electrons that are simultaneously waves and particles. As
This review discusses the many roles atomistic
Feynman eloquently put it, this is ‘nature as she is -
computer simulations of macromolecular (for
absurd’ [1].
example, protein) receptors and their associated
Understanding these absurd molecular motions is
small-molecule ligands can play in drug discovery,
undoubtedly germane to drug discovery. The initial ‘lock-
including the identification of cryptic or allosteric
and-key’ theory of ligand binding [2], in which a frozen,
binding sites, the enhancement of traditional virtual-
motionless receptor was thought to accommodate a small
screening methodologies, and the direct prediction
molecule without undergoing any conformational re-
of small-molecule binding energies. The limitations of
arrangem ents, has been largely abandoned in favor of
current simulation methodologies, including the high
binding models that account not only for conformational
computational costs and approximations of molecular
changes, but also for the random jiggling of receptors and
forces required, are also discussed. With constant
ligands [3-7].
improvements in both computer power and algorithm
The mollusk acetylcholine binding protein (AChBP), a
design, the future of computer-aided drug design is
structural and functional surrogate of the human
promising; molecular dynamics simulations are likely to
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) ligand-binding
play an increasingly important role.
domain [8-11], is one of countless examples that illustrate
Keywords molecular dynamics simulations, computer- the importance of accounting for these atomistic motions
aided drug discovery, cryptic binding sites, allosteric (Figure 1). In crystallographic structures of small-mole-
binding sites, virtual screening, free-energy prediction.} cule AChR agonists bound to AChBP, a key loop (loop C)
partially closes around the ligand (Figure 1a,c). In con-
trast, crystal structures of large AChR antagonists like
Introduction
snake α-neurotoxins bound to AChBP reveal that this
Richard Feynman, recipient of the 1965 Nobel Prize in same loop is displaced by as much as 10 Å, producing an
Physics, once famously stated: ‘If we were to name the active site that is far more open (Figure 1b,c) [12]. Bourne
most powerful assumption of all, which leads one on and et al. [12] proposed that the unbound AChBP and AChR
on in an attempt to understand life, it is that all things are are highly dynamic proteins that, in the absence of a
made of atoms, and that everything that living things do ligand, sample many conformational states, both open
can be understood in terms of the jigglings and wigglings and closed, that are selectively stabilized by the binding
of atoms.’ Much of the biophysics of the last 50 years has of agonists and antagonists. Any one of these binding-
been dedicated to better understanding the nature of this pocket conformations may be druggable and therefore
atomic jiggling and wiggling. The quantum-mechanical pharmacologically relevant. If this general model of
laws governing motions in the microscopic world are ligand binding is correct, the implications for structure-
surprisingly foreign to those familiar with macroscopic based drug design are profound, as the same principle of
dynamics. Motions are governed not by deterministic binding likely applies to many other systems as well.
laws, but by probability functions; chemical bonds are
Molecular dynamics simulations
While crystallographic studies like these convincingly
*Correspondence: jdurrant@ucsd.edu
demonstrate the important role protein flexibility plays in
1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA ligand binding, the expense and extensive labor required
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article to generate them have led many to seek computational
© 2011 Durrant and McCammon; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 2 of 9
Initial atomic model
Calculate molecular forces acting on each atom
Move each atom according to those forces
Advance simulation time by 1 or 2 fs
Figure 2. A schematic showing how a molecular dynamics
simulation is performed. First, a computer model of the receptor-
ligand system is prepared. An equation like that shown in Figure 3
is used to estimate the forces acting on each of the system atoms.
The positions of the atoms are moved according to Newton’s laws of
motion. The simulation time is advanced, and the process is repeated
many times. This figure was adapted from a version originally created
by Kai Nordlund.
developed in the late 1970s [13], seek to overcome this
limitation by using simple approximations based on
Newtonian physics to simulate atomic motions, thus
reducing the computational complexity. The general
process of approximation used is outlined in Figure 2.
First, a computer model of the molecular system is
prepared from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
crystallo graphic, or homology-modeling data. The forces
acting on each of the system atoms are then estimated
from an equation like that shown in Figure 3 [14]. In
brief, forces arising from interactions between bonded
and non-bonded atoms contribute. Chemical bonds and
atomic angles are modeled using simple virtual springs,
and dihedral angles (that is, rotations about a bond) are
modeled using a sinusoidal function that approximates
the energy differences between eclipsed and staggered
conformations. Non-bonded forces arise due to van der
Waals interactions, modeled using the Lennard-Jones 6-
12 potential [15], and charged (electrostatic) interactions,
modeled using Coulomb’s law. For a more in-depth
Figure 1. The different conformations of the acetylcholine review describing how the equations describing these
binding protein from Lymnaea stagnalis. Portions of the protein interactions are parameterized, see [14].
have been removed to facilitate visualization. (a) The protein in a
In order to reproduce the actual behavior of real mole-
closed conformation with nicotine bound (PDB ID: 1UW6), shown in
cules in motion, the energy terms described above are
blue. (b) The protein in an open conformation (PDB ID: 1YI5) with the
same nicotine conformation superimposed on the structure, shown parameterized to fit quantum-mechanical calculations
in pink. (c) Ribbon representations of the two conformations. and experimental (for example, spectroscopic) data. This
parameterization includes identifying the ideal stiffness
and lengths of the springs that describe chemical bonding
techniques that can predict protein motions. Unfor tu- and atomic angles, determining the best partial atomic
nately, the calculations required to describe the absurd charges used for calculating electrostatic-interaction
quantum-mechanical motions and chemical reactions of energies, identifying the proper van der Waals atomic
large molecular systems are often too complex and radii, and so on. Collectively, these parameters are called
computationally intensive for even the best super- a ‘force field’ because they describe the contributions of
computers. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, first the various atomic forces that govern molecular dynamics.
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 3 of 9
Figure 3. An example of an equation used to approximate the atomic forces that govern molecular movement. The atomic forces that
govern molecular movement can be divided into those caused by interactions between atoms that are chemically bonded to one another and
those caused by interactions between atoms that are not bonded. Chemical bonds and atomic angles are modeled using simple springs, and
dihedral angles (that is, rotations about a bond) are modeled using a sinusoidal function that approximates the energy differences between
eclipsed and staggered conformations. Non-bonded forces arise due to van der Waals interactions, modeled using the Lennard-Jones potential,
and charged (electrostatic) interactions, modeled using Coulomb’s law.
Molecular dynamics simulations: current limitations
Several force fields are commonly used in molecular
dynamics simulations, including AMBER [14,16], These successes aside, the utility of molecular dynamics
CHARMM [17], and GROMOS [18]. These differ princi- simulations is still limited by two principal challenges
pally in the way they are parameterized but generally give [27]: the force fields used require further refinement, and
similar results. high computational demands prohibit routine simula-
Once the forces acting on each of the system atoms tions greater than a microsecond in length, leading in
have been calculated, the positions of these atoms are many cases to an inadequate sampling of conformational
moved according to Newton’s laws of motion. The simu- states. As an example of these high computational
la tion time is then advanced, often by only 1 or demands, consider that a one-microsecond simulation of
2 quadrillionths of a second, and the process is repeated, a relatively small system (approximately 25,000 atoms)
typically millions of times. Because so many calculations running on 24 processors takes several months to
are required, molecular dynamics simulations are complete.
typically performed on computer clusters or super- Aside from challenges related to the high compu-
computers using dozens if not hundreds of processors in tational demands of these simulations, the force fields
parallel. Many of the most popular simulation software used are also approximations of the quantum-mechanical
packages, which often bear the same names as their reality that reigns in the atomic regime. While simu-
default force fields (for example AMBER [19], CHARMM lations can accurately predict many important molecular
[17], and NAMD [20,21]), are compatible with the motions, these simulations are poorly suited to systems
Message Passing Interface (MPI), a system of computer- where quantum effects are important, for example, when
to-computer messaging that greatly facilitates the execu- transition metal atoms are involved in binding.
tion of complex tasks by one software application on To overcome this challenge, some researchers have
multiple processors operating simultaneously. introduced quantum mechanical calculations into classic
While the utility of molecular dynamics simulations molecular-dynamics force fields; the motions and
should not be overstated, a number of studies comparing reactions of enzymatic active sites or other limited areas
these simulations with experimental data have been used of interest are simulated according to the laws of
to validate the computational technique [22]. NMR data quantum mechanics, and the motions of the larger sys-
are particularly useful, as the many receptor and ligand tem are approximated using molecular dynamics. While
conformations sampled by molecular dynamics far from the computationally intractable ‘ideal’ of using
simulations can be used to predict NMR measurements quantum mechanics to describe the entire system, this
like spin relaxation, permitting direct comparison between hybrid technique has nevertheless been used successfully
experimental and theoretical techniques. Indeed, a to study a number of systems. For example, in one recent
number of studies have shown good agreement between simulation of Desulfovibrio desulfuricans and Clostridium
computational and experimental measurements of macro- pasteurianum [Fe-Fe] hydrogenases, a ‘QM [quantum
molecular dynamics [23-26]. mechanical] region’ was defined encompassing a
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 4 of 9
metal-containing region of the protein thought to be the same graphics-processing-units (GPUs) designed to
cata lytically important, and the remainder of the protein speed up video games can be used to speed up molecular
was simulated using classical molecular dynamics [28]. dynamics simulations as well, usually by an order of
The simulations revealed an important proton transfer in magnitude [34-36].
the QM region, a bond-breaking and bond-formation Not satisfied with merely adapting molecular-dynamics
event that could not have been modeled with a traditional code to run on specialized graphics processors, some
force field. The hypothesized catalytic mechanism was engineers have designed new processors specifically for
subse quently supported by experimental evidence. these simulations. The research group of DE Shaw is one
Aside from bond breaking and formation, electronic notable advocate of this approach. They have built a
polarization, caused by the flow of electrons from one supercomputer codenamed Anton capable of performing
atomic nucleus to another among groups of atoms that microseconds of simulation per day. With Anton, simula-
are chemically bonded, is another quantum-mechanical tions longer than one millisecond [31] have successfully
effect that, with few exceptions, is generally ignored. In captured protein folding and unfolding as well as drug-
classical molecular dynamics simulations, each atom is binding events [37]. Shortcomings certainly still exist, but
assigned a fixed partial charge before the simulation these and other future techniques will likely make great
begins. In reality, however, the electron clouds surround- progress towards overcoming current limitations on
ing atoms are constantly shifting according to their conformational sampling.
environments, so that the partial charges of atoms would
Molecular dynamics simulations and drug discovery
be better represented as dynamic and responsive. Despite
wide agreement on the importance of accounting for Weaknesses in current force fields and conformational
electronic polarization, after 30 years of development a sampling aside, molecular dynamics simulations and the
generally accepted polarizable force field has not been insights they offer into protein motion often play impor-
forthcoming, and molecular dynamics simulations using tant roles in drug discovery. Just as a single photograph of
those force fields that are available are rare [29]. a runner tells little about her stride, a single protein
Nevertheless, a number of polarizable force fields are conformation tells little about protein dynamics. The
currently under development [30], and future implemen- static models produced by NMR, X-ray crystallography,
ta tions may lead to improved accuracy. and homology modeling provide valuable insights into
In addition to neglecting quantum-mechanical effects, macromolecular structure, but molecular recognition
molecular dynamics studies are also limited by the short and drug binding are very dynamic processes. When a
time scales typically simulated. To reproduce thermo- small molecule like a drug (for example, a ligand)
dynamic properties and/or to fully elucidate all binding- approaches its target (for example, a receptor) in solution,
pocket configurations relevant to drug design, all the it encounters not a single, frozen structure, but rather a
possible conformational states of the protein must be macromolecule in constant motion.
explored by the simulation. Unfortunately, many bio- In some rare cases, protein motions are limited, and
chemical processes, including receptor conformational the ligand may fit into a fairly static binding pocket like a
shifts relevant to drug binding, occur on time scales that key fits into a lock [2]. More typically, the ligand may
are much longer than those amenable to simulation. With bind and stabilize only a subset of the many confor-
some important exceptions [31], simulations are currently mations sampled by its dynamic receptor, causing the
limited to at most millionths of a second; indeed, most population of all possible conformations to shift towards
simulations are measured in billionths of a second. those that can best accommodate binding [4-7]. Upon
A number of solutions to this challenge have already binding, the ligand may further induce conformational
seen limited use. For example, in accelerated molecular changes that are not typically sampled when the ligand is
dynamics (aMD) [32,33], large energy barriers are artifi- absent [38]. Regardless, receptor motions clearly play an
cially reduced. Though this process inevitably introduces essential role in the binding of most small-molecule
some artifacts, it does allow proteins to shift between drugs. Several techniques have been developed to exploit
conformations that would not be accessible given the the information about these motions that molecular
time scales of conventional molecular dynamics. These dynamics simulations can provide.
novel conformations can then be further studied using
Identifying cryptic and allosteric binding sites
classical molecular dynamics or other techniques.
Novel hardware has also been used to overcome the NMR and X-ray crystallographic structures often reveal
time-scale limitations of conventional molecular dynamics well defined binding pockets that accommodate endo-
simulations. Many of the same calculations required for genous ligands; however, sometimes the models pro-
these simulations are commonly performed by video- duced by these experimental techniques obscure other
game and computer-graphics applications. Conse quently, potentially druggable sites. As these sites are not
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 5 of 9
imme diately obvious from available structures, they are To better account for receptor flexibility, a new virtual-
sometimes called cryptic binding sites. screening protocol has been developed called the relaxed
Molecular dynamics simulations are excellent tools for complex scheme (RCS) [45,46]. Rather than docking
identifying such sites [39-41]. For example, in 2004 many compound models into a single NMR or crystal
Schames et al. [39] performed a molecular dynamics structure, each potential ligand is docked into multiple
simul ation of HIV integrase, a drug target that had not protein conformations, typically extracted from a mole-
seemed amenable to structure-based drug design. The cul ar dynamics simulation. Thus, each ligand is asso-
simulations revealed a previously unidentified trench that ciated not with a single docking score but rather with a
was not evident from any of the available crystal struc- whole spectrum of scores. Ligands can be ranked by a
tures. X-ray crystallography later demonstrated that number of spectrum characteristics, such as the average
known inhibitors do in fact bind in this cryptic trench, as score over all receptors. Thus, the RCS effectively accounts
predicted. These results led to new experimental studies for the many receptor conformations sampled by the
at Merck & Co. [42]; further development ultimately simulations; it has been used successfully to identify a
resulted in production of the highly effective antiretro- number of protein inhibitors, including inhibitors of FKBP
viral drug raltegravir, the first US Food and Drug Admin- [47], HIV integrase [39], Trypanosoma brucei RNA edit-
is tration-approved HIV integrase inhibitor. ing ligase 1 [48,49], T. brucei GalE [50], T. brucei FPPS
Aside from cryptic binding sites, molecular dynamics [51], and Mycobacterium tuberculosis dTDP-6-deoxy-L-
simulations can also be used to identify druggable allo- lyxo-4-hexulose [52]. In two of these projects, the identi-
steric sites. In one recent study, Ivetac and McCammon fied inhibitors were effective not only against the target
[43] performed simulations of the human β (βAR) and proteins, but against the whole-cell parasite [49,50].
β (βAR) adrenergic receptors. Multiple protein confor- While these successes are promising, the relaxed
mations were extracted from these simulations, and the complex scheme certainly has its weaknesses. Aside from
protein surface was computationally ‘flooded’ with small being based on molecular dynamics simulations that are
organic probes using FTMAP [44] to identify potential themselves subject to crude force-field approximations
binding sites. Regions of the protein surface where the and inadequate conformational sampling, the scheme
organic probes consistently congregated across multiple relies on computer-docking scoring functions that of
structures were then identified as potential allosteric necessity are optimized for speed at the expense of
sites. In all, five potential sites were identified, some of accuracy. In order to facilitate high-throughput virtual
which were not evident in any of the existing crystal screening, these scoring functions often treat subtle
structures. influences on binding energy like conformational entropy
and solvation energy only superficially [27,53], thus
Improving the computational identification of
sacrificing accuracy for the sake of greater speed.
true small-molecule binders: the relaxed complex
scheme Advanced free-energy calculations using molecular
dynamics simulations
One common technique used to identify the precursors
of potential drugs in silico is virtual screening. A docking Though docking programs are optimized for speed rather
program is used to predict the binding pose and energy than accuracy, more accurate, albeit computationally
of a small-molecule model within a selected receptor intensive, techniques for predicting binding affinity do
binding pocket. Traditionally, many ligand models, exist. These techniques, which include thermodynamic
typically taken from a database of compounds that can be integration [54], single-step perturbation [55], and free
easily synthesized or commercially purchased, are docked energy perturbation [56], are based in large part on
into a single static receptor structure, often obtained molecular dynamics simulations.
from NMR or X-ray crystallography. The best predicted Free energy is a state function, meaning that the free-
ligands are subsequently tested experimentally to confirm energy difference associated with a given event like a
binding. drug binding to its receptor is determined only by the
Unfortunately, traditional docking relying on a single energy prior to that event and the energy following it;
receptor structure is problematic. Some legitimate ligands while the path taken from the initial to the final state may
may indeed bind to the single structure selected, but in influence receptor-ligand kinetics, it has no bearing on
reality most receptor binding pockets have many valid the free energy. Perhaps the ligand diffuses slowly
conformational states, any one of which may be towards the active site and slips easily into the binding
druggable. In a traditional virtual screen, true ligands are pocket. Perhaps the protein unfolds entirely and then
often discarded because they in fact bind to receptor refolds around the ligand. Perhaps the ligand in solution
conformations that differ markedly from that of the is beamed to a starship in orbit, only to rematerialize in
single static structure chosen. the active site a few seconds later. The mechanics do not
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 6 of 9
matter; the free energy depends only on the initial molecular-dynamics-based free-energy calculations in
energy in solution and the final energy following the the 1980s and early 1990s that was not matched in
binding event. subsequent decades [27,58] as computational predictions
With some notable exceptions [37], simulating a fell short of experimental measurements. However,
receptor-ligand system long enough to capture an entire steady algorithmic and engineering advances in recent
binding event is not currently feasible. However, it is still years have led to renewed attention. The successful
possible to calculate a drug’s binding affinity using a applications of alchemical techniques in recent years are
technique called ‘alchemical transformation,’ first described legion; accurate predictions have been obtained for ligand
in 1984 [57]. This transformation is not too different from binding to the src SH2 domain [59], to a mutant T4 lyso-
the starship example given above. During the course of a zyme [60], to FKBP12 [61], to HIV reverse transcriptase
molecular dynamics simulation, the electrostatic and van [62], to trypsin [63], to a bacterial ribosome [64], and to
der Waals forces produced by ligand atoms are turned estrogen receptor-α [65], among many others.
down gradually enough to avoid undesirable artifacts. These successes aside, it is important not to oversell
Eventually, the ligand is no longer able to interact with alchemical techniques. All molecular-dynamics-based
the protein or solvent. For all practical purposes, the drug-discovery techniques would benefit from improved
ligand has disappeared. It does not matter that this force fields, but the alchemical techniques are, in
transformation is not at all physical; free energy is a state addition, uniquely sensitive to inadequate conformational
function, so the path from the initial to the final state, sampling [66]. When molecular dynamics simulations of
whether real or imaginary, is irrelevant. insufficient length are used to identify cryptic sites,
It is not clear, however, in what context the ligand allosteric sites, or pharmacologically relevant binding-
should be figuratively annihilated in this way. Should a pocket conformations for virtual-screening projects, the
molecular dynamics simulation be run in which the risk is that some suitable receptor conformations will be
bound ligand vanishes? What about the ligand in solu- missed. The conformations that are identified, however,
tion? To address these questions, alchemical transfor- are still useful; the results of the simulation are therefore
mations are selected based on the thermodynamic cycle incomplete, but not necessarily wrong.
shown in Figure 4. As free energy is a state function that However, the alchemical techniques used to calculate
depends only on the energy of the initial and final states, free energies of binding are far more dependent on
a system that proceeds from one state around this free- thorough conformational sampling than are RCS screens.
energy cycle only to return to the same initial state should If molecular dynamics simulations fail to sample system
have no change in total free energy (that is, ΔG + conformations that are in fact sampled ex silico, these
ΔG - ΔG - ΔG = 0). We note that ΔG in this conformations will not contribute to the total calculated
protein water
equation is itself zero, since the ligand is entirely energy, leading to an incorrect prediction of the binding
disappeared in both of the states shown in the bottom affinity. Molecular dynamics simulations are compu-
half of Figure 4, meaning the ligand cannot interact with tation ally demanding and often of necessity unacceptably
the water solvent or the protein in either state. Thus, short; insufficient conformational sampling is therefore a
ΔG + ΔG - ΔG = 0, and, consequently, ΔG = common problem that future algorithmic and hardware-
bind protein water bind
ΔG - ΔG . These equations demonstrate that it is engineering efforts must address. It is largely because
water protein
possible to estimate a drug’s free energy of binding, an accurate predictions often require lengthy simulations
indirect measurement of drug potency, by running two that these alchemical techniques have not yet been widely
simulations, one in which the receptor-bound ligand dis- adopted by the pharmaceutical industry, despite great
appears, and one in which the solvated ligand disappears. interest [27].
A similar task, calculating relative ligand binding
Conclusions
energies, is useful during drug optimization when one
wishes to determine if a given chemical change will In this review, we have discussed the many roles that
improve the potency of a candidate ligand. In this case, molecular dynamics simulations can play in drug dis-
rather than annihilating the entire ligand, one section of covery, including the identification of cryptic or allosteric
the ligand is gradually transformed. For example, a key binding sites, the enhancement of traditional virtual-
carbon atom might be gradually converted into an screening methodologies, and the direct prediction of
oxygen atom to see if the binding affinity is improved or ligand binding energies. As ligand binding and the
diminished. These kinds of alchemical molecular dynamics impor tant macromolecular motions associated with it
simulations may provide medicinal chemists with useful are microscopic events that take place in mere millionths
insights that can guide further drug development. of a second, a complete understanding of the atomistic
A series of early fortuitous results that agreed remark- energetics and mechanics of binding is unattainable using
ably well with experiments led many to an enthusiasm for current experimental techniques. Molecular dynamics
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 7 of 9
water protein
bind protein water
bind protein water
bind water protein
Figure 4. The thermodynamic cycle used for selecting alchemical transformations. Typically, one wishes to calculate the free energy of
binding, ΔG , shown across the top. However, it is generally impractical to run a molecular dynamics simulation long enough to capture an entire
binding event. Instead, a series of alchemical transformations are performed using molecular dynamics simulations. ΔG is the change in free
energy that occurs when a bound ligand is ‘annihilated’. ΔG is the change in free energy that occurs when an unbound ‘ghost’ ligand binds to the
receptor; however, since a ghost ligand is not able to interact with any solvent or receptor atoms, this energy is always zero. Finally, ΔG is the
change in free energy that occurs when an unbound ligand in solution is ‘annihilated’. A system that proceeds from one state around this free-
energy cycle only to return to the same initial state should have no change in total free energy; consequently, ΔG = ΔG - ΔG .
bind water protein
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 8 of 9
simulations are useful for filling in the details where 16. Wang J, Wolf RM, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA, Case DA: Development and
testing of a general amber force field. J Comput Chem 2004, 25:1157-1174.
experimental methods cannot.
17. Brooks BR, Bruccoleri RE, Olafson BD, States DJ, Swaminathan S, Karplus M:
With constant improvements in both computer power CHARMM - a program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and
and algorithm design, the future of computer-aided drug dynamics calculations. J Comput Chem 1983, 4:187-217.
18. Christen M, Hünenberger PH, Bakowies D, Baron R, Bürgi R, Geerke DP, Heinz
design is promising; molecular dynamics simulations are
TN, Kastenholz MA, Kräutler V, Oostenbrink C, Peter C, Trzesniak D, van
likely to play an increasingly important role in the Gunsteren WF: The GROMOS software for biomolecular simulation:
developm ent of novel pharmacological therapeutics. GROMOS05. J Comput Chem 2005, 26:1719-1751.
19. Case DA, Cheatham TE 3rd, Darden T, Gohlke H, Luo R, Merz KM Jr, Onufriev A,
Acknowledgements Simmerling C, Wang B, Woods RJ: The AMBER biomolecular simulation
This work was carried out with funding from NIH GM31749, programs. J Comput Chem 2005, 26:1668-1688.
NSF MCB-0506593, and MCA93S013 to JAM. Additional support from the 20. Kale L, Skeel R, Bhandarkar M, Brunner R, Gursoy A, Krawetz N, Phillips J,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the NSF Supercomputer Centers, the Shinozaki A, Varadarajan K, Schulten K: NAMD2: greater scalability for
San Diego Supercomputer Center, the WM Keck Foundation, the National parallel molecular dynamics. J Comput Phys 1999, 151:283-312.
Biomedical Computational Resource, and the Center for Theoretical Biological 21. Phillips JC, Braun R, Wang W, Gumbart J, Tajkhorshid E, Villa E, Chipot C, Skeel
Physics is gratefully acknowledged. We would also like to thank Paul Gaspar for RD, Kale L, Schulten K: Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD. J Comput
help with figure preparation. Chem 2005, 26:1781-1802.
22. van Gunsteren WF, Dolenc J, Mark AE: Molecular simulation as an aid to
Author details
experimentalists. Curr Opin Struc Biol 2008, 18:149-153.
1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San
23. LaConte LEW, Voelz VA, Nelson WD, Thomas DD: Molecular dynamics
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 2Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
simulation of site-directed spin labeling: Experimental validation in
NSF Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, National Biomedical
muscle fibers. BiophysJ 2002, 82:484A-484A.
Computation Resource, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
24. Peter C, Rueping M, Worner HJ, Jaun B, Seebach D, van Gunsteren WEF:
USA. 3Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego,
Molecular dynamics simulations of small peptides: can one derive
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. 4Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
conformational preferences from ROESY spectra? Chemistry 2003,
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
9:5838-5849.
Published: 28 October 2011 25. Bruschweiler R, Showalter SA: Validation of molecular dynamics simulations
of biomolecules using NMR spin relaxation as benchmarks: Application to
References the AMBER99SB force field. J Chem Theory Comput 2007, 3:961-975.
1. Feynman RP: QED : the Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton, NJ: 26. Markwick PRL, Cervantes CF, Abel BL, Komives EA, Blackledge M, McCammon
Princeton University Press; 1985. JA: Enhanced conformational space sampling improves the prediction of
2. Fischer E: Einfluss der Configuration auf die Wirkung der Enzyme. Ber Dtsch chemical shifts in proteins. J Am Chem Soc 2010, 132:1220-1221.
Chem Ges 1894, 27:2985-2993. 27. Chodera JD, Mobley DL, Shirts MR, Dixon RW, Branson K, Pande VS:
3. Teague SJ: Implications of protein flexibility for drug discovery. Nat Rev Alchemical free energy methods for drug discovery: progress and
Drug Discov 2003, 2:527-541. challenges. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2011, 21:150-160.
4. Ma B, Kumar S, Tsai CJ, Nussinov R: Folding funnels and binding 28. Hong G, Cornish AJ, Hegg EL, Pachter R: On understanding proton transfer
mechanisms. Protein Eng 1999, 12:713-720. to the biocatalytic [Fe-Fe](H) sub-cluster in [Fe-Fe]H(2)ases: QM/MM MD
5. Kumar S, Ma B, Tsai CJ, Wolfson H, Nussinov R: Folding funnels and simulations. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011, 1807:510-517.
conformational transitions via hinge-bending motions. Cell Biochem 29. Jorgensen WL: Special issue on polarization. J Chem Theory Comput 2007,
Biophys 1999, 31:141-164. 3:1877.
6. Tsai CJ, Kumar S, Ma B, Nussinov R: Folding funnels, binding funnels, and 30. Cieplak P, Dupradeau FY, Duan Y, Wang J: Polarization effects in molecular
protein function. Protein Sci 1999, 8:1181-1190. mechanical force fields. J Phys Condens Matter 2009, 21:333102.
7. Ma B, Shatsky M, Wolfson HJ, Nussinov R: Multiple diverse ligands binding at 31. Shaw DE, Maragakis P, Lindorff-Larsen K, Piana S, Dror RO, Eastwood MP, Bank
a single protein site: a matter of pre-existing populations. Protein Sci 2002, JA, Jumper JM, Salmon JK, Shan Y, Wriggers W.: Atomic-level characterization
11:184-197. of the structural dynamics of proteins. Science 2010, 330:341-346.
8. Bouzat C, Gumilar F, Spitzmaul G, Wang HL, Rayes D, Hansen SB, Taylor P, Sine 32. Hamelberg D, Mongan J, McCammon JA: Accelerated molecular dynamics:
SM: Coupling of agonist binding to channel gating in an ACh-binding A promising and efficient simulation method for biomolecules. J Chem
protein linked to an ion channel. Nature 2004, 430:896-900. Phys 2004, 120:11919-11929.
9. Talley TT, Yalda S, Ho KY, Tor Y, Soti FS, Kem WR, Taylor P: Spectroscopic 33. Hamelberg D, McCammon JA: Fast peptidyl cis-trans isomerization within
analysis of benzylidene anabaseine complexes with acetylcholine binding the flexible Gly-rich flaps of HIV-1 protease. J Am Chem Soc 2005,
proteins as models for ligand-nicotinic receptor interactions. Biochemistry 127:13778-13779.
2006, 45:8894-8902. 34. Yang J, Wang Y, Chen Y: GPU accelerated molecular dynamics simulation of
10. Babakhani A, Talley TT, Taylor P, McCammon JA: A virtual screening study of thermal conductivities J Comp Physics 2007, 221:799-804
the acetylcholine binding protein using a relaxed-complex approach. 35. Liu W, Schmidt B, Voss G, Müller-Wittig W: Accelerating molecular dynamics
Comput Biol Chem 2009, 33:160-170. simulations using Graphics Processing Units with CUDA. Comput Phys
11. Ulens C, Hogg RC, Celie PH, Bertrand D, Tsetlin V, Smit AB, Sixma TK: Commun 2008, 179:634-641.
Structural determinants of selective alpha-conotoxin binding to a 36. Friedrichs MS, Eastman P, Vaidyanathan V, Houston M, Legrand S, Beberg AL,
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor homolog AChBP. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A Ensign DL, Bruns CM, Pande VS: Accelerating molecular dynamic simulation
2006, 103:3615-3620. on graphics processing units. J Comput Chem 2009, 30:864-872.
12. Bourne Y, Talley TT, Hansen SB, Taylor P, Marchot P: Crystal structure of a 37. Shan Y, Kim ET, Eastwood MP, Dror RO, Seeliger MA, Shaw DE: How does a
Cbtx-AChBP complex reveals essential interactions between snake alpha- drug molecule find its target binding site? J Am Chem Soc 2011,
neurotoxins and nicotinic receptors. EMBO J 2005, 24:1512-1522. 133:9181-9183.
13. McCammon JA, Gelin BR, Karplus M: Dynamics of folded proteins. Nature 38. Koshland DE: Application of a theory of enzyme specificity to protein
1977, 267:585-590. synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1958, 44:98-104.
14. Cornell WD, Cieplak P, Bayly CI, Gould IR, Merz KM, Ferguson DM, Spellmeyer 39. Schames JR, Henchman RH, Siegel JS, Sotriffer CA, Ni H, McCammon JA:
DC, Fox T, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA: A second generation force field for the Discovery of a novel binding trench in HIV integrase. J Med Chem 2004,
simulation of proteins, nucleic acids, and organic molecules. J Am Chem 47:1879-1881.
Soc 1995, 117:5179-5197. 40. Durrant JD, Keranen H, Wilson BA, McCammon JA: Computational
15. Lennard-Jones JE: On the determination of molecular fields. II. From the identification of uncharacterized cruzain binding sites. PLoS Negl Trop Dis
equation of state of a gas. Proc R Soc Lond A 1924, 106:463-477 2010, 4:e676.
Durrant and McCammon BMC Biology 2011, 9:71 Page 9 of 9
41. Grant BJ, Lukman S, Hocker HJ, Sayyah J, Brown JH, McCammon JA, Gorfe AA: 54. Adcock SA, McCammon JA: Molecular dynamics: survey of methods for
Novel allosteric sites on Ras for lead generation. PLoS One 2011, in press. simulating the activity of proteins. Chem Rev 2006, 106:1589-1615.
42. Hazuda DJ, Anthony NJ, Gomez RP, Jolly SM, Wai JS, Zhuang L, Fisher TE, 55. Schwab F, van Gunsteren WF, Zagrovic B: Computational study of the
Embrey M, Guare JP Jr, Egbertson MS, Vacca JP, Huff JR, Felock PJ, Witmer MV, mechanism and the relative free energies of binding of anticholesteremic
Stillmock KA, Danovich R, Grobler J, Miller MD, Espeseth AS, Jin L, Chen IW, Lin inhibitors to squalene-hopene cyclase. Biochemistry 2008, 47:2945-2951.
JH, Kassahun K, Ellis JD, Wong BK, Xu W, Pearson PG, Schleif WA, Cortese R, 56. Kim JT, Hamilton AD, Bailey CM, Domaoal RA, Wang L, Anderson KS,
Emini E, et al.: A naphthyridine carboxamide provides evidence for Jorgensen WL: FEP-guided selection of bicyclic heterocycles in lead
discordant resistance between mechanistically identical inhibitors of optimization for non-nucleoside inhibitors of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.
HIV-1 integrase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:11233-11238. J Am Chem Soc 2006, 128:15372-15373.
43. Ivetac A, McCammon JA: Mapping the druggable allosteric space of 57. Tembe BL, Mccammon JA: Ligand receptor interactions. Comput Chem 1984,
G-protein coupled receptors: a fragment-based molecular dynamics 8:281-283.
approach. Chem Biol Drug Des 2010, 76:201-217. 58. Chipot C, Pearlman DA: Free energy calculations. The long and winding
44. Brenke R, Kozakov D, Chuang GY, Beglov D, Hall D, Landon MR, Mattos C, gilded road. Mol Simulat 2002, 28:1-12.
Vajda S: Fragment-based identification of druggable ‘hot spots’ of proteins 59. Chipot C, Rozanska X, Dixit SB: Can free energy calculations be fast and
using Fourier domain correlation techniques. Bioinformatics 2009, accurate at the same time? Binding of low-affinity, non-peptide inhibitors
25:621-627. to the SH2 domain of the src protein. J Comput Aided Mol Des 2005,
45. Amaro RE, Baron R, McCammon JA: An improved relaxed complex scheme 19:765-770.
for receptor flexibility in computer-aided drug design. J Comput Aided Mol 60. Roux B, Deng YQ: Calculation of standard binding free energies: Aromatic
Des 2008, 22:693-705. molecules in the T4 lysozyme L99A mutant. J Chem Theory Comput 2006,
46. Lin JH, Perryman AL, Schames JR, McCammon JA: The relaxed complex 2:1255-1273.
method: Accommodating receptor flexibility for drug design with an 61. Roux B, Wang JY, Deng YQ: Absolute binding free energy calculations using
improved scoring scheme. Biopolymers 2003, 68:47-62. molecular dynamics simulations with restraining potentials. Biophys J 2006,
47. Lin JH, Perryman AL, Schames JR, McCammon JA: Computational drug 91:2798-2814.
design accommodating receptor flexibility: the relaxed complex scheme. 62. Jorgensen WL, Zeevaart JG, Wang LG, Thakur VV, Leung CS, Tirado-Rives J,
J Am Chem Soc 2002, 124:5632-5633. Bailey CM, Domaoal RA, Anderson KS: Optimization of azoles as anti-human
48. Amaro RE, Schnaufer A, Interthal H, Hol W, Stuart KD, McCammon JA: immunodeficiency virus agents guided by free-energy calculations. J Am
Discovery of drug-like inhibitors of an essential RNA-editing ligase in Chem Soc 2008, 130:9492-9499.
Trypanosoma brucei. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008, 105:17278-17283. 63. Ren PY, Jiao D, Zhang JJ, Duke RE, Li GH, Schnieders MJ: Trypsin-ligand
49. Durrant JD, Hall L, Swift RV, Landon M, Schnaufer A, Amaro RE: Novel binding free energies from explicit and implicit solvent simulations with
naphthalene-based inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei RNA editing ligase 1. polarizable potential. J Comput Chem 2009, 30:1701-1711.
PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2010, 4:e803. 64. Ge XX, Roux B: Absolute binding free energy calculations of sparsomycin
50. Durrant JD, Urbaniak MD, Ferguson MA, McCammon JA: Computer-aided analogs to the bacterial ribosome. J Phys Chem B 2010, 114:9525-9539.
identification of Trypanosoma brucei uridine diphosphate galactose 65. Michel J, Essex JW: Hit identification and binding mode predictions by
4’-epimerase inhibitors: toward the development of novel therapies for rigorous free energy simulations. J Med Chem 2008, 51:6654-6664.
African sleeping sickness. J Med Chem 2010, 53:5025-5032. 66. McCammon JA: Computer-aided drug discovery: physics-based
51. Durrant JD, Cao R, Gorfe AA, Zhu W, Li J, Sankovsky A, Oldfield E, McCammon simulations from the molecular to the cellular level. In Physical Biology:
JA: Non-bisphosphonate inhibitors of isoprenoid biosynthesis identified From Atoms to Medicine. Edited by Zewail AH. London, England: Imperial
via computer-aided drug design. Chem Biol Drug Des 2011, 78:323-332. College Press; 2008. 401-410.
52. Wang Y, Hess TN, Jones V, Zhou JZ, McNeil MR, McCammon JA: Novel
inhibitors of Mycobacterium tuberculosis dTDP-6-deoxy-L-lyxo-4-hexulose
reductase (RmlD) identified by virtual screening. Bioorg Med Chem Lett
2011, in press.
53. Kitchen DB, Decornez H, Furr JR, Bajorath J: Docking and scoring in virtual
Cite this article as: Durrant JD, McCammon JA: Molecular dynamics
screening for drug discovery: methods and applications. Nat Rev Drug
simulations and drug discovery. BMC Biology 2011, 9:71.
Discov 2004, 3:935-949.