]hp-oib.scisyhp[
1v5701.7021:viXra
Vol.2, No. 2 (2012) 1–20
(cid:13)c World ScientificPublishing Company
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY AT THE QUANTUM LEVEL:
CAN MODERN DENSITY FUNCTIONAL THEORY
FORGE THE PATH?
Brian Kolb and T. Thonhauser
Department of Physics, Wake Forest University,
1834 Wake Forest Road, Winston-Salem, NC 27109, USA
kolbba5@wfu.edu, thonhauser@wfu.edu
Recent yearshave seen vast improvementsin the ability of rigorousquantum-mechanicalmeth-
ods to treat systems of interest to molecular biology. In this review article, we survey common
computationalmethods usedto study suchlarge,weakly boundsystems,starting fromclassical
simulations and reaching to quantum chemistry and density functional theory. We sketch their
underlying frameworks and investigate their strengths and weaknesses when applied to poten-
tially large biomolecules. In particular, density functional theory—a framework that can treat
thousandsofatomsonfirmtheoreticalground—cannowaccuratelydescribesystemsdominated
by weak van der Waals interactions. This newfound ability has rekindled interest in using this
tried-and-true approach to investigate biological systems of real importance. In this review, we
focusonsomenewmethodswithindensityfunctionaltheorythatallowforaccurateinclusionof
theweakinteractionsthatdominatebindinginbiologicalmacromolecules.Recentworkutilizing
these methods to study biologically-relevant systems will be highlighted, and a vision for the
future of density functional theory within molecular biology will be discussed.
Keywords:Molecularbiology,vanderWaalsinteractions,quantumchemistry,densityfunctional
1. Introduction rally in such endeavors and this has bred a symbi-
otic relationship between biologists, chemists, and
The scientific disciplines (e.g. biology, chemistry,
physicists, who now seek to answer similar ques-
physics) once stood well separated from each other,
with practitioners from each approaching different
Some of the most important questions arising
questions in different ways. These divisions are be-
in this arena relate to the structure and function of
ginning to blur, however, as answers to questions
biological macromolecules.4,5 For example, for ra-
from one field increasingly require techniques and
tional drug design to be viable, a detailed knowl-
knowledge built up in another. There is evidence
edge of the interactions between a target protein
of this effect in the increasing need for interdisci-
and a potential drug molecule is necessary to un-
plinary collaborations to solve problems arising in
derstand whether the drug will bind to the protein
distinct fields. A particularly poignant example of
at the right location and in the right way.6 From
thisblurringoflinesisthefieldofmolecularbiology,
there, an atomic-level understanding of the protein
where researchers try to build an understanding of
itself is necessary to understand how allosteric ef-
biological systems starting at the molecular level.
fects turn a drugbinding event into a change in the
Concepts from chemistry and physics arise natu-
behavior of the protein.7 Thesedetails cannot come
2 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
from a top down investigation of the molecules, nor 2. Survey of Common
can they come from simply observing the changing Computational Methods
behavior as a function of drug binding. Part of the
2.1. Classical simulations
physics lies in the statistical mechanics of protein
conformations, and part resides in the communica- For many purposes, the best present-day meth-
tion networks within the protein, the elucidation of ods to study biologically-relevant systems are clas-
which hinges on the detailed physics of the binding sical force field models. Such methods allow one
event and the transmission of information from the to study the large-scale dynamics of systems with
binding site to a possibly distant effector site. perhaps millions of atoms over biologically-relevant
The same can be said of the “holy grail” of timescales.9 Thisisbyfarthemostcommoncompu-
molecular biology—understanding protein folding tational method of study for macromolecules, and
and how the structure of a protein relates to its has provided indispensable insight into numerous
function. Coarse-grained models provide some in- biological systems.
sight into the process of protein folding,8 but a The main goal of a force field is simple; to
true understanding of the process and the ability represent the energy and forces of a collection of
to reliably predict how a protein will fold requires atoms using a physically-motivated, yet relatively
an atomic-level understanding of the interactions straight-forward,algebraicexpression.Thissimplic-
within a particular protein. There are many other ity is what allows the simulation of large systems
examples of the need for atomistic detail in molecu- over significant timescales.9 Generally, the physi-
lar biology. Ultimately, all properties of biological cal motivation for terms in the energy Hamiltonian
macromolecules—such as DNA, RNA, proteins— comefrommacroscopic physics.For example,many
aregoverned byminutedetails involving theatomic force fields treat bond stretches and angle flexes as
and electronic structure of their constituent parts classical harmonic oscillators obeying Hooke’s law.
as well as the interactions between neighboring This is, in fact, what is meant by the phrase classi-
pieces of the molecule. Even dynamic conforma- cal force field.
tional changes that may be essential to a particular In its most basic form, a typical force field can
process are ultimately governed by these interac- bewrittenas asumof separate contributions tothe
tions and similar interactions with the surrounding total energy,9–13 i.e.
environment.
E = E +E +E +E
Developing an atomic-level understanding of ff bonds angles dihedrals non-bonded
large molecular systems is not an easy task and, 1
until recently, the application of accurate quantum b b 0
mechanical methods to such systems was infeasi-
ble. This review highlights recent advances made + k (θ −θ )2
in the fields of computational physics and physical 2
chemistry that can aid in building such an under- 1
standing. After discussing classical simulations and d
common quantum-chemistry approaches, we focus Xd (cid:2) (cid:3)
specifically on advances within density functional q i q j C 12 C 6
theory (DFT)—a framework used successfully for (cid:20) r (cid:18)r12 r6 (cid:19)(cid:21)
Xnb ij ij ij
decades in the field of condensed matter physics—
which affords unprecedented accuracy and utility Thefirstterm on the right hand sideof Eq. (1) rep-
in treating large, weakly bound molecular systems. resentsanharmonicoscillator (withspringconstant
These new methods will be discussed and paired k ) in bond length between each pair of covalently-
with a survey of their use on biologically-relevant bonded atoms within the system. The second does
molecular systems. Possible future applications of the same for the three-atom angle term. Dihedral
these methods will also be addressed. angles are treated with a fairly shallow periodic
potential, represented by the third term. The last
line of Eq. (1) represents non-bonded interactions
and includes a coulomb term for charge-charge in-
teractions and a Lennard-Jones (6–12) potential
to account for van der Waals type interactions.
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 3
Some force fields add additional terms for out-of- 2.2. Incorporating quantum
plane motions (improper dihedrals) or higher-order mechanics
terms.9 Variations on the functional form are also
The obvious solution to the shortcomings of the
sometimes applied. For example, a Morse potential
classical force field methods is to directly include
can be used in place of the harmonic bond term to
quantum mechanics in calculations. Therefore, the
allow for bond breaking during a simulation.9,11
solutiontotheproblemisstraight-forward;onesim-
For alltheir usefulness,socalled “Class I”force
ply has to solve the time-independent Schro¨dinger
field approaches suffer from some drawbacks. First,
treating microscopic phenomena using macroscopic
theory is, in essence, a mean-field approach. The Hˆ |Ψi= ε|Ψi , (2)
quantum-mechanical interactions between electron
where the Hamiltonian Hˆ in atomic units is given
clouds are averaged over. This, along with the as-
sumed form for all physical interactions, does not
allownewphysicstobeuncovered.Theonlyphysics 1 n Z
present in the simulation is what was explicitly in- 2 i |~r −R~ |
cluded, meaning one cannot gain any true atomic-
Xi Xi,J i J
level insight into the underpinnings of interesting 1 1 1 Z I Z J
phenomena.Second,thesimplicityofthemean-field 2 Xi6=j |~r i −~r j | 2 IX6=J |R~ I −R~ J |
approach used in force field simulations means that
they are generally incapable of transferably achiev- Here,lower-caselettersrepresentelectronicdegrees-
ing chemical accuracy.14 While bulk motions and of-freedom, upper-case letters represent nuclear
general trends can often be gleaned from such sim- degrees-of-freedom (including charge Z), ε is the
ulations, the precise movements and behavior of energy of the system, and the explicit representa-
atoms are probably not accurate. This poses a sig- tion of the Hamiltonian Hˆ follows from specializa-
nificant problem for applications such as drug de- tion to an isolated system of atoms undertheBorn-
sign, where one seeks to find a small molecule (an Oppenheimer approximation.
enzymeinhibitorperhaps)thatbindswithacertain Theunknown function |Ψi is the wave function
affinity to a site in the protein. for the electrons and from it (along with knowl-
Biophysicists and biochemists have already edge of the nuclear positions {R~ I }) one can cal-
made substantial headway against this problem.14 culate all accessible properties of the system. Un-
Originally, force fields included the partial charge fortunately, |Ψi depends on the coordinates of all
on an atom as a fitting parameter. The charge was electrons within the system and, as a result, direct
assumed fixed during the simulation so effects of solutionofEq.(3)forthefullmany-bodywavefunc-
polarization could not be treated. The next genera- tion is difficult or impossible for all but the most
tion of force fields incorporates the ability of charge trivial systems. For example, a single neutral wa-
to rearrange during a simulation. Such polarizable ter molecule has 10 electrons, so its wave function
force fields incorporate some of the quantum effects is a function of 30 variables (i.e. 10 electron posi-
necessary to accurately model molecular systems. tions in three dimensions). While an analytical so-
One example of this new type of force field is the lution in this simple case is already not possible, it
AMOEBA force field, which includes both static is conceivable that the Schro¨dinger equation could
anddynamicpolarizabilities andrepresentsasignif- be solved numerically. However, to store the wave
icant step towards accurate energetics from a force function on a numerical grid consisting of 10 points
field.15 In addition, newer force fields often include in each dimension (a laughably coarse grid) using
cross-terms that account for how changes in one in- single precision numerics would take 4×1030 bytes
ternal coordinate affect other energy terms. These (approximately 1018 TB) of storage. This is “the
help improve accuracy and transferability but can- curse of dimensionality” on a grand scale and ren-
not correct for the lack of an explicit quantum me- ders full solution of the Schro¨dinger equation for
chanical treatment. most systems utterly intractable.
Surmounting this fundamental problem in a
physical way is not easy and has consumed the ef-
forts of chemists and physicists alike for decades.
From those efforts, however, have sprung a number
4 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
of useful approaches. These can be split into two their behavior. Correlation is (almost) completely
categories, wave function theories and density func- missed in the Hartree-Fock method, which explic-
tionaltheory, bothofwhich wewilldiscussindetail itly assumes single-particle states—the static corre-
below. lation due to the Pauli exclusion principle is fully
All the methods described in what follows accounted for. Nevertheless, HF theory is a good
have exhibited great success in describing various first-order starting point for corrections that incor-
quantum-mechanical properties of molecules and porateelectron correlation into thetotal wave func-
materials in general. However, when dealing with tion and its associated energy. Such methods are
biologically-relevant systems two special consider- termed post-HF methods, since they use the results
ations arise: (i) such systems are typically quite of a HF calculation as a starting point to incorpo-
large and (ii) their structure and binding is often rate electron correlation explicitly.
dominated by weak van der Waals interactions. There are many post-HF methods that exhibit
Since this review is focused on biological applica- various accuracies coming at related computational
tions of quantum-mechanical methods, special at- costs. One of the best features of the wave func-
tention will be paid to the ability of each method tion methods is their segregation into a hierarchy
to scale well with system size and to adequately de- of so called “levels of theory”. Thus, one knows in
scribevanderWaals interactions. As such,theabil- some sense, to what degree a result can be trusted,
ity of a method to treat large systems involving van dependingon the precise method used. If better re-
derWaals interactions willdetermine its applicabil- sults are desired, one merely has to progress to a
ity to the biologically-relevant systems considered higher level of theory. Basis sets (the set of func-
here. tions used to expand the wave functions) are also
of critical importance. They too, however, exhibit a
hierarchy of complexity and applicability. Figure 1
2.3. Wave function approaches
gives a cartoon depiction of how one can approach
Asimplesolution to thedimensionality problem in- the numerically exact solution |Ψi by combining a
troduced by Eq. (3) is to seek solutions of the form large basis set with a high level of theory.
i 1 1 2 2 n n
thatis,to assumethat thetotal electron wave func-
tion can be separated and written as a product
of single-electron states (orbitals) φ . The Pauli-
exclusion principle and the anti-symmetry of the
wave function can be enforced by forming a Slater
determinant of the single-particle solutions. Since
the Fock operator used to find the orbitals depends
explicitly on those orbitals, the resulting equations
aregenerally solved self-consistently. Thisapproach
is a form of mean-field theory where each electron
responds to the average field created by all other
electrons residing in their single-particle orbitals.
The advantage of this approach is that each orbital
is now a function of the three spatial coordinates,
makingnumericalcalculations computationally fea-
sible.Wavefunctionmethodsaredescribedindetail
Fig. 1. Map of theroute from classical physicsto quantum
in Ref. 16. physicsviaquantumchemistry.Basissetsarerepresentedon
The Hartree-Fock (HF) method, which takes thehorizontalaxisandincreaseinsizeasmorefunctionsare
this approach, is relatively fast and based on sound added. The level of theory is indicated on the vertical axis.
Thereisaconcomitantincreaseincomputationalcomplexity
quantum mechanics, but the approximations in-
as one moves along the path from classical physics to quan-
voked by its use miss some crucial physics. In par-
tum physics. A plot of this nature is often called a Pople
ticular, electrons are dynamic entities. The total diagram.
energy of the system can be lowered if, averaged
oversomedegree-of-freedom,theelectrons correlate
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 5
The most rigorous method to include electron methods have shown that MP2 often significantly
correlation is full configuration interaction (CI). In overestimates the correlation, especially in delocal-
theCImethod,onestarts as usualwith theorbitals ized π systems.17,18 Usage of the higher-order ex-
found by a Hartree-Fock calculation. Instead of us- pansions (e.g. MP4) may yield increased accuracy,
ing a single Slater determinant of these functions, but the results are not as straightforward as one
however, a linear combination of Slater determi- might hope, as convergence of the Møller-Plesset
nants is formed,each onecorrespondingto one pos- series has been shown to be unreliable.19 In many
sible ordering of electrons in the orbitals. In other cases, estimates of correlation may get worse with
words, all possible combinations of electron excita- increasing order; sometimes oscillating or even di-
tions are given a Slater determinant, and the opti- verging in the worst cases.20 Convergence depends
mized linear combination of these yields thenumer- on both the system under study and the basis set
ically exact wave function. This renders Full CI a being employed, with poor results often accom-
combinatorial problem—taking a given number of panying use of the diffuse functions required to
electrons and producing all possible excitations to correctly model dispersion interactions. Neverthe-
a given set of orbitals. Thus, full CI scales facto- less, MP methods are highly prized in quantum-
rially with the number of basis functions used and chemistry wave function calculations because they
therefore is not practical in all but the smallest of contain a good balance of accuracy and computa-
systems. tional efficiency. Theasymptotic scaling of MP2 (as
Perhaps the next best thing to a full CI calcu- O(N5)) makes it substantially cheaper than high-
lation is to use coupled cluster theory. The coupled level coupled cluster methods. MP2 can be used on
cluster approach mimics CI but using only small systems of respectable size. A system with a hun-
numbersof electron excitations, usuallyconsidering dred atoms or more is not out of the reach of an
only excitations of one to three electrons. The most MP2 calculation on a high-end computer.
commonvariantofcoupled-clustertheoryisnotated
CCSD(T), which includes single and double exci-
tations iteratively, and triple excitations perturba-
tively. This has proven incredibly reliable and rep-
resents the “gold standard” for accurate quantum-
chemistry calculations. Although it has polynomial
(rather than factorial) scaling in the number of ba-
sis functions used, the asymptotic scaling of O(N7)
for the generally used form renders this approach
mainlyusefulonrelatively smallsystemsofperhaps
30–50 atoms.
Among the most used post-HF methods is
Møller-Plesset perturbation theory at second order
(MP2) or higher order (MP3, MP4, ...). In pertur-
bation theory, one seeks to find the solution of
wheretheperturbationstrengthfactorλisassumed
small, and the solution to the unpertured problem
(λ = 0) is already known. In this case, Hˆ is the Fig.2. Maximalsystemsize(measuredbynumberofatoms)
non-interacting Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian and Hˆ′, that various quantum mechanical methods can treat, as a
function of time. “Exact treatment” refers to an exact solu-
which is assumed to be small in effect relative to
tiontotheSchr¨odingerequationandQMCstandsforQuan-
Hˆ , is the Hamiltonian for inclusion of electron cor-
0 tum Monte Carlo (not discussed here). All other methods
relation. MP2 expands this expression in terms of are discussed throughout the text. (Reprinted with permis-
powers of λ up to second order. This can be used sion from Ref. [21]; (cid:13)c 2008 American Physical Society).
to correct both energies and wave functions.
MP2 has shown great success, but it is not per-
fect. Comparison with coupled cluster and full CI
6 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
2.4. Density functional theory the density, thereby finding the ground-state den-
sity. Since, E is not known however, it must be
WaveFunctiontheorieshaveanumberofniceprop- xc
approximated in some way. This is the main ap-
erties, but they scale poorly with systems size. A
proximation in DFT and determines the method’s
completely different approach, density functional
applicability to a particular system. Not surpris-
theory (DFT), scales as O(N3), and is therefore
ingly then, much effort is put into improving the
much more amenable to calculation of large sys-
approximations made in generating E [n(~r)].
tems. Calculations can be performed on systems xc
One approach is to assume that the exchange-
consisting of perhaps several thousand atoms, mak-
correlation energy is a local functional of the
ing it applicable to biochemical systems.
density—one that depends on n(~r) in a point-
In 1964 Hohenberg and Kohn22 published
wise fashion.24,25 This local density approximation
a seminal paper showing that the quantum-
(LDA) is good when the density is slowly varying,
mechanical energy of a set of atoms can be writ-
becoming exact in the limit of a uniform electron
ten uniquely as a functional of the electron charge
density.
density (within the Born-Oppenheimer approxima-
Despite its simplicity, the LDA is amazingly
tion). Furthermore, the charge density n (~r) that
good in many systems, especially in those with rel-
minimizesthisfunctionalistheground-statecharge
atively concentrated charge density such as crys-
density for the system, and all measurable proper-
talline environments where metallic or covalent
ties of the system can be written in terms of this
bonding dominates. For molecules, where direc-
optimal charge density. This avoids the dimension-
tional covalent bonds are the primary interaction,
ality problem of Eq. (3) by shifting the quantity of
it tends to perform less adequately. One can imag-
interest to the charge density in real space, a func-
ine the LDA as the zeroth-order term in the Taylor
tionofonlythreevariablesregardlessofthenumber
expansionofthedensityabouteachpoint,andenvi-
of electrons.
sion addingadditional, derivative-dependent terms.
Density functional theory as a modern ap-
Afunctionaldependingonthedensityanditsgradi-
proach was initiated when Kohn and Sham23 wrote
ent(firstderivative) inapoint-wisefashioniscalled
the energy as a density functional of the form
a semi-local functional, and the approximation of
E [n(~r)] =E [n(~r)]+E [n(~r)]+E [n(~r)] the true energy functional in this way is called the
DFT k N-e e-e
generalized gradient approximation (GGA).26 This
approximation is a substantial improvement over
where E is the total kinetic energy of the sys- LDA in many systems, particularly molecules.
tem, in principle written as a density functional, The E term in Eq. (6) must approximate
but in practice written as a functional of the Kohn- the effects of both exchange, which removes the
Sham orbitals. An analytical density functional for unphysical electron self interaction while enforcing
E k is not known, but approximations to it lead thePauliexclusionprinciple,andcorrelation,which
to so called orbital-free methods. The final term roughly speaking, accounts for the fact that each
in Eq. (6) is the nucleus-nucleus repulsion term, electron experiences a highly dynamic environment
which can be treated as a simple additive con- rather than a mean field of the other electrons. In
stant since it is uniquely determined by the posi- Hartree-Fock theory, the form of the exchange op-
tions of the nuclei and these are decoupled from erator is known, so exchange could be treated ex-
the quantum-mechanical problem by use of the actly and combined with an approximate correla-
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Analytical ex- tion functional. Unfortunately, most functionals ex-
pressions are known for both E N-e (the nucleus- hibitserendipitouserrorcancellations betweentheir
electron, effective 1-body term) and E e-e (the exchange and correlation pieces, making just using
Hartree term giving the average electron-electron the correlation contribution prone to large errors.
interaction), leaving the exchange-correlation func- In 1993 Becke proposed using a 50%–50% mix of
tional E xc [n(~r)] as the sole unknown object in exact exchange and LDA,27 eventually leading to
Eq. (6). the 3-parameter B3LYP functional28 and similar
If the exchange-correlation functional and its hybrid functionals, which are among the most ac-
functional derivative with respect to the density curate functionals for covalently-bound molecules.
were known, they could be used to optimize the to- Early successes of hybrid functionals led some to
tal energy functional (E [n(~r)]) with respect to
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 7
erroneously believe that they could describe weak correlatewithelectronmotionsinanearbyatom(or
van der Waals interactions. Unfortunately, hybrid molecule) setting up transient but interacting mul-
functionals, being a linear combination of exact ex- tipoleswithineach.35 Correlationbetweenelectrons
change and (semi)-local exchange-correlation ap- lowers their energy relative to uncorrelated elec-
proximations, cannot account for van der Waals trons, so the van der Waals force is always attrac-
interactions. This is because van der Waals inter- tive.Insomesystems,crystallineNaClforexample,
actions are a non-local correlation effect, and any the contribution of these interactions to the overall
functional that is local or semi-local in correlation binding are negligible. In other systems these in-
is—by construction—not able to reliably describe teractions can be an appreciable part of the overall
them.29 There is ample discussion in the literature interaction. Nobel gas dimers such as Ar and Kr
of the poor performance of standard hybrid func- are held together entirely by van der Waals inter-
tionals in weakly bound complexes.30–34 actions. Large diffuse molecular systems (prime ex-
amples being biological macromolecules) rely quite
heavily on van der Waals interactions for their sta-
2.5. van der Waals interactions in
bility, so such interactions play an integral role in
their behavior.
As evident from the discussion in Section 2.4 and With this in mind, numerous attempts were
Fig. 2, DFT is capable of treating large systems of madetoincludetheabilitytocapturevanderWaals
perhaps thousands of atoms, which is one of the re- interactions within conventional DFT. A thorough
quirements if it is to be applicable to systems of accountofalltheseeffortsisbeyondthescopeofthe
interest in molecular biology. However, at the same present review, but several promising approaches
time, it also has to be able to accurately describe will be discussed.
weak van der Waals interactions, which play an im-
portant role in biomolecules. Historically, DFT has
2.6. DFT-D
not performed well when applied to systems with
van der Waals interactions—this is probably the As stated earlier, van der Waals interactions arise
single most important problem that has prevented when electronic motions within separated atoms
DFT from gaining a strong foothold in molecular correlate, setting up transient multipole moments
biology. Below we discuss the shortcomings of stan- within the individual atoms. One can expand
dard DFT and several recent developments that the dispersion energy of two arbitrary, polarizable
overcome this barrier, leading to a full applicabil- charge densities in terms of the interactions of in-
ity of DFT to large biomolecules. duced multipoles. If a point of interest is located at
In standard DFT, the exchange-correlation a distance r that is large compared to some charac-
functional is often assumed to be local, i.e. a single teristic length scale of the charge distribution, the
spacial integral of the exchange-correlation energy pairwise dispersionenergycanbeexpandedinpow-
density, which depends explicitly on the charge- ers of 1/r as36
density. This approach leads to the so called lo-
cal density approximation (LDA). Adding a de- E = − 6 − 8 − 10 −··· , (7)
disp r6 r8 r10
pendence on the gradient of the charge density
results in the generalized gradient approximation where the constants C correspond to a particular
(GGA), while inclusion of higher-order derivative system and determine the relative strengths of the
terms yield meta-GGA functionals. However, this various terms.
approach fails to correctly account for van der For sufficiently large distances r, the dipole-
Waals (vdW) interactions, which are non-local cor- dipole term dominates and dispersion interactions
relation effects; they occur between physically sep- go as 1/r6. This observation is the basis of the den-
arated regions of charge, generally with little over- sity functional theory with added dispersion (DFT-
lap of their density functions. Capturing these ef- D) method.18,37,38 Typically, this method works by
fects correctly requires a functional that expresses addingto thetotal energy apairwiseatomic correc-
the exchange-correlation energy as (at minimum) a tion of the form
double spacial integral. van der Waals interactions,
ubiquitous in polyatomic systems, occur when elec- E = − f (R ) 6 , (8)
vdW 2 damp IJ R6
tron motions in one atom (or within one molecule) IX6=J IJ
8 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
where E is the dispersion energy, C is an re-parameterized many times bothfor improved ac-
empirically-derived coefficient that is atom-pair- curacy and for application to other systems.18,37,46
dependent, f (R ) is a damping function, and To improve on the transferability and overall
the sum runs over all pairs of atoms. The damping accuracy of DFT-D, Tkatchenko and Scheffler pro-
function ranges from 0 at small R to 1 for larger posed an alteration, which uses a relative C coef-
separations, andis required becausetheasymptotic ficient calculated on-the-fly from the charge den-
1/R6 form becomes unphysicalas distances become sity.44 In this approach (hereafter referred to as
small. The specific form of the damping function DFT+vdW) they define the effective volume for an
plays a role in the accuracy of the technique.39,40 atom A within a system, relative to the free-atom
Too weak a damping with decreasing distance re- volume as:
sultsin over-counting of theinteraction energy. Too
strong a dampingwill weaken the vdW interactions Veff
at relevant ranges. The most critical aspect of the A = , (10)
damping function is how it behaves at intermediate V A free r3nfree(~r)d3~r
distances near the bonding length of a vdW bond.
Much attention has been paid to the form of the where f (~r) is the fraction of the density at ~r aris-
dampingfunction,andopinionsdifferonitsoptimal ing from atom A in a linear combination of free-
form.Commonly,the dampingfunction is given the atom charge densities.
form40–44 Starting from the free-atom coefficients Cfree,
1 they define the effective coefficient for an atom
RIJ−1 within a molecule or solid as
(cid:0) (cid:1) Veff 2
where α is a chosen constant and R sets the rele- Ceff = Cfree , (11)
0 6 (cid:18)Vfree(cid:19) 6
vant distance scale for the interaction of atoms I
and J and is generally chosen to be the sum of with the hetero-nuclear combination rule for atoms
their van der Waals radii. This was the form cho- A and B defined as:
sen by Grimme in 2004,18 when he published a set
of C coefficients based on a database of dipole CAB = 6 6 , (12)
6 6 αBCAA+ αACBB
oscillator strength distributions, for a number of αA 6 αB 6
important atoms and demonstrated the method’s
whereα isthestatic polarizability of atom i.Thus,
effectiveness on a large set of molecular systems.
in the DFT+vdW approach one may write
The values of the C coefficients (and correspond-
ing vdW-radii) depend somewhat on the choice of E [n(~r)] = − 1 C 6 IJ[n(~r)] , (13)
exchange-correlation functional, so Grimme added vdW 2 R6
an empirical parameter he called s that scales the
interaction, adjusting its strength to the functional with I and J ranging over all atoms. That is, the
beingused.Approacheslike theDFT-D methodare dispersionenergycanbewrittenasafunctional(al-
not new, dating back at least as far as London him- beit a non-universal one that depends on the ar-
self,45 but they have proved extremely useful at rangement of nuclei) of the charge density. Writ-
many levels of atomic theory, and continue to be ing the C 6 coefficients as density functionals allows
so within DFT. for the polarizability of atoms to be a dynamic,
environment-dependent quantity. If it could be cal-
culated, the functional derivative of this expression
2.7. DFT+vdW
with respect to the charge density would yield the
The pairwise dispersion correction given by Eq. (8) Kohn-Sham potential for the dispersion energy, al-
is not a density-functional, but instead relies on fit- lowing the latter to be calculated self-consistently.
ting to a chosen set of external data. The data used It is not clear at present whether this would sig-
in the fit and the interaction between the disper- nificantly affect the interaction energies of vdW
sion correction and the functional coupled with it compounds when using the DFT+vdW method.
both affect the results obtained. Such a fitting pro- TkatchenkoandSchefflerdonote,however,thatthe
cedure can limit transferability between systems. useofEq.(10)largelycancelsthechargedensitydif-
The original DFT-D approach of Grimme has been ferencesarisingfromtheuseofdifferentfunctionals,
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 9
making their method less sensitive to the particu- functionalsandEnon-local isanon-localpiece, which
lar exchange-correlation functional used compared isevaluatedbyconsideringallpairwise pointsinthe
with static C 6 /r6 approaches.44 charge density. Thekernel function φ describeshow
In 2008, Tkatchenko and von Lilienfeld noted charge densities at ~r and ~r correlate.
that many body effects can play a significant role Ameaningfulform for φwas described by Dion
in the energetics of vdW-rich systems.47 This is es- et al. in 2004, leading to the van der Waals density
pecially true in bulk, where close-packed atoms can functional (vdW-DF).49 This functional evolved
be geometrically arranged in many complex ways. from a less general one restricted to planar geome-
In particular, three-body, triple-dipole interactions tries.50 The analytical form of φ and its numeri-
can contribute substantially to binding energies, cal computation are onerous, but since φ itself does
typically raising them relative to pure pairwise in- not depend on the density, it can be calculated and
teractions. Given the recent surge of inquiry into tabulated once-and-for-all. The functional deriva-
metalorganicframeworksandothermolecularcrys- tive of Eq. (15) with respect to the charge density
tals,48 the ability to account for this fact may be- was given in 2007,51 allowing for completely self-
come of increasing interest. In 2010, an expanded consistent calculation of energies and forces using
version of DFT+vdW was described, wherein an this method.
additionalthree-bodytermwasadded.36 Thethree- The functional as originally proposed required
body term was given the form the evaluation of a double integral over three-
dimensionalspace, as one might expect from a non-
E 3-body = CABC AB BC AC , local functional. This made the use of the func-
vdW 9 R3 R3 R3
AB BC AC tional costly relative to other local or semi-local
options. However, in 2009 Rom´an-P´erez and Soler
where R is the distance between atoms I and J
effected a great simplification, by transforming the
and φ is the angle between R~ and R~ . The
double integral into a single integral over Fourier
formulation of this expression into a density func-
transforms using the convolution theorem.52 Since
tional then follows in a fashion similar to that of
Fourier transforms are efficiently obtained and/or
the C term, the fundamental difference being the
readily available in plane-wave DFT codes, this
inclusion of an angular dependence in the damping
dropped dramatically the time required to evaluate
function.
thevdW-DFfunctionalandmadethecostofitsuse
on par with that of a similar GGA calculation.
2.8. vdW-DF It was quickly noted that, when used on vdW-
rich systems, the functional produced binding dis-
An alternative approach to the addition of pair-
tances that were slightly larger compared with ex-
wise atomic dispersion terms is to express the to-
perimentorhigh-levelcalculations.53 Thisledtothe
tal energy of a system directly as a non-local func-
assertion that the revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhoff
tionalofthedensity.Thatis,towritetheexchange-
exchange functional,54 originally chosen to accom-
correlation functional in such a way that it depends
pany the vdW-DF because it exhibited minimal
simultaneously on the charge density at multiple
spurious binding of its own, was too repulsive.55
points. In principle, this is the optimal approach
Leeetal.revisedtheapproachin2010,recommend-
because the true exchange-correlation functional is
ing the use of a less repulsive revised version of the
fundamentally anon-localfunctional.Treatingiton
Perdew-Wang56,57 exchange functional and chang-
such a footing allows for its integration into DFT
ingthevalueof agradientcoefficient.58 Thesesmall
in a seamless and self-consistent manner.
changes improved the method’s accuracy for both
In the van der Waals density functional (vdW-
energy and geometry in many systems. For an in-
DF) approach, the exchange-correlation functional
depth review of this approach see Ref. 59.
E takes the form
E = Elocal +Enon-local (15)
xc xc xc 2.9. Other methods
= E x lo c cal + n(~r 1 )φ(~r 1 ,~r 2 )n(~r 2 )d3~r 1 d3~r 2 , There are a number of other approaches that are
capable of describing van der Waals interactions
where Elocal is a local-like piece of the functional within a DFT framework. A full listing is beyond
that is assumed to be well modeled by standard the scope of this review, but several of the more
10 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
common approaches are briefly discussed here. uses the same type of effective core potential that
In symmetry adapted perturbation theory is traditionally used in plane-wave calculations, its
(SAPT), the interaction energy of a system is usedoes not imposeadditional computational com-
written as a perturbative expansion in terms plexity. The effective potential is designed as a van
of physically-meaningful interactions. The Hamil- derWaals correction tostandardgradient-corrected
tonian for a superposition of non-interacting exchange-correlation functionals,sopotentialsmust
monomers is taken as Hˆ , with the interaction be optimized for each type of atom and for every
between monomers forming the perturbing poten- exchange-correlation functional that the method is
tial.60 Terms in the perturbation generally include to be paired with. Optimized effective potentials
electrostatic, exchange, induction, and dispersion have been generated for all the standard biolog-
interactions.61,62 The principle advantage of this ical atoms (carbon,66,67 nitrogen,67 oxygen,67 hy-
approach is that therelative contributions from dif- drogen,67 sulfur,68 and phosphorus69), each with
ferent physical interactions can be determined ex- several gradient-corrected functionals. The method
plicitly. This leads to an intuitive interpretation of shows good transferability and has been used in
the interaction energy. The downside to the ap- molecular70 as well as solid-state applications.68,69
proach is its computational cost since the method Although van der Waals interactions are gen-
scales as O(N6) (when taken to second order) with erally thought of as a correlation effect, the ap-
increasing system size.61 It is therefore limited to proach of Becke and Johnson takes a wholly differ-
relatively small systems. See Ref. 60 for an excel- entviewpoint,treatingtheminsteadasarisingfrom
lent overview of SAPT and its applications. interactions between an electron-exchange hole pair
Zhao and Truhlar have developed a series of in one system and an induced dipole in another.71
functionals designed to obtain accurate energies for This viewpoint is motivated by the fact that the
weakly-bound systems.63,64 These functionals have exchange hole is, in general, not spherically sym-
been shown to work well for the π-stacking and hy- metric, so the electron-exchange hole system has a
drogen bonding interactions that are omnipresent non-zero dipole moment. This dipole moment does
in biological macromolecules.30,65,75,76 The advan- not affect the energy of the system containing the
tage of these functionals is their efficiency, beinges- electron-exchange hole pair since only the spherical
sentially the same computational cost as a typical average of the exchange hole enters the energy ex-
DFT calculation. Thereare several families of these pression for a system. This electron-hole dipole can
functionals, designed and parameterized to apply correlate with a separate system, however, yielding
to different chemical situations. Thefunctionals are a dispersion-like interaction. When averaged over
known to poorly describe dispersion interactions in the entirety of a system, the approach yields molec-
the asymptotic limit, where they decay exponen- ular C coefficients in good agreement with those
tially ratherthanas1/r6.65 Nevertheless, theyhave from high-level methods.71 These can be decom-
seen heavy use recently for their ability to accu- posed into atomic C coefficients and used in a
rately and efficiently capture the short-ranged con- scheme similar to that in the DFT-D approach.72
tributions to dispersion interactions. A required component of the approach is the dipole
In the dispersion-corrected atom-centered po- moment of the exchange hole, which Becke and
tential(DCACP)approachofvonLilienfeldetal.,66 Johnson conveniently cast as a meta-GGA func-
van der Waals interactions are handled by means of tional by utilizing the approximate Becke-Roussel
aneffectiveelectron-coreinteraction.Typicalplane- form for the exchange hole.73 Further development
wave density functional theory approaches utilize led to the ability to calculate C and C coeffi-
pseudopotentials, which treat nuclei and core elec- cients.74 This approach is simple, elegant, and per-
trons together as an effective, angular momentum- forms well over a variety of systems.
dependentpotential. Thepotential is designed such
that the all-electron wave-function is reproduced
3. Applications to Biochemistry and
faithfully. In the DCACP approach, the non-local
Molecular Biology
piece of this effective core potential is optimized
to reproduce high-level calculations of molecular As can be seen from Fig. 2, of all the quantum
properties, specifically, the dispersion energies and mechanical methods discussed above, only DFT
forces within molecules. Since the DCACP method is currently capable of treating systems consisting
of several hundred to several thousand atoms—i.e.
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 11
the lower end of the range of biologically relevant atomistic interactions in water. At the fundamen-
molecules. As such, in this application section we tal level there are quantum effects, most notably
will almost exclusively focus on studies that have thequantum-mechanicalnatureofthehydrogennu-
used DFT to investigate such systems. clei,82,83 thatcannotbeeasilyreproducedwithclas-
The methods outlined above represent current sical models. This clouds the connection between
state-of-the-art DFT as it applies to vdW-rich sys- microscopic effects and bulk behavior. A full un-
tems. In what follows, these methods’ ability to do derstanding of the behavior of water can only come
useful biochemistry will be highlighted through a fromaquantummechanicaldescriptionthatapplies
brief survey of recent studies conducted both to at the microscopic level, but can be extended up to
test them and to learn from them. This survey is the macroscopic limit.
intended to act as a showcase of the capabilities of The behavior of small water clusters (H O)
modern DFT, rather than a comparison of particu- with n less than about 6 has been extensively stud-
lar methods of its implementation. ied at the quantum level and is largely under-
stood.84–90 Minimum energy geometries can be cal-
culated with high level wave function methods and
3.1. Small molecules
these have been compared with various DFT treat-
Small molecules make a natural proving ground for ments. At this level, standard DFT does a reason-
new methods in DFT because calculations can be able job at describing the geometric and energetic
compared with quantum chemistry methods. There properties of water, but some improvement can be
exists an extensive body of work, much of it carried made by including dispersion interactions.91–93 Al-
out by Sˇponer and Hobza75,77 and, independently, though the hydrogen bonds that govern water’s
byStefanGrimme,78 benchmarkingtheDFTmeth- structure are not typically thought of as a van der
ods discussed above against accurate wave func- Waals effect, recentstudieshaveshownthatgeome-
tion approaches with special focus being placed on tries, energies, dipolemoments, and vibrational fre-
biologically-relevant molecular systems. This work quencies of small water clusters are all improved by
has yielded encouraging results and forms the foun- inclusion of van der Waals interactions,94–96 as can
dation upon which studies of the physics in these be seen in Figs. 3 and 4.
systems rests. But studying small molecules is use-
fulin its own right,since theseplay a pivotal role in
biochemistry. Most notable among the biologically-
relevant small molecules are water and the building
blocks of macromolecules themselves, namely, DNA
bases and amino acids.
3.2. Water
Water has received special attention in the lit-
erature, both because of its great importance
to (bio)chemistry and because an accurate first-
principles understanding of it has proven surpris-
ingly elusive. Most molecular interactions within
living systems occur in an aqueous environment, so
an understanding of water is a necessary precursor
to developing an understandingof in vivo biochem-
istry.
These days, the bulk behavior of water (e.g.
Fig. 3. Systematic improvement in the description of wa-
phase diagram, radial distribution functions) is
ter properties with the inclusion of van der Waals interac-
well modeled by parameterized force fields.79–81 Al-
tions. Calculations on small water clusters includingvan der
though these force fields get many of the properties
Waals interactions (vdW-DF) compared with standard lo-
ofwatercorrectcomparedwithexperiment,thefact cal (LDA)and gradient-corrected (PBE) functionals. Shown
that they were parameterized to do just that lim- are the binding energies, equilibrium geometries, and dipole
its their usefulness as a tool for understanding the moments for each cluster. (Reprinted with permission from
12 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
Ref. [94]; (cid:13)c 2011 American Physical Society). It is worth pointing out that the results of
DFT calculations can vary quite widely depending
on the choice of basis set and exchange-correlation
The improved description of water when van functional used, and great care must be taken
derWaalseffectsareincludedisnotlimitedtosmall with their selection. For example, when coupled
waterclusters,butcontinuesintothebulk.91,92,94,97
to the non-local piece of the vdW-DF, the overly
Through a series of ab initio molecular dynamics repulsive revised PBE exchange functional actu-
simulations Lin et al.92 showed that the radial dis- ally produces water that is under-structured com-
tribution functions produced by standard gradient- pared with experiment, in contrast to most other
corrected functionals tend to produce water that exchange functionals. This is related to the afore-
is over-structured compared with experiment. This mentioned tendency of the original vdW-DF to
was also evident in the average number of hydro- predict intermolecular interaction distances that
gen bonds and the self-diffusion coefficient, both are large compared with experiment and high-level
of which show an over-structuring of the water wave-function methods. Additionally, it has been
molecules. These results mirror obtained by numer- pointed out that the properties of liquid water cal-
ous other groups working with a variety of different culated within DFT can depend quite strongly on
codes, exchange-correlation functionals, and basis the choice of basis set.102 Calculations similar to
sets98–102 This over-structuring is mitigated to a those shown in Fig. 4 were carried out by Zhang
largedegreebyapropertreatmentofvanderWaals et al. and showed considerably less improvement in
interactions. The self diffusion coefficient increases theoxygen-oxygen radialdistributionfunctioncom-
three-fold and the over-structuring evident in the pared to experiment.103 The basis sets used in the
radial distribution functions softens when van der two sets of calculations were fundamentally differ-
Waalsinteractions areincluded.Thisisalsotruefor ent, making a direct comparison of their appropri-
bulk ice in its standard hexagonal form (I h ) where ateness difficult. Despite these issues, it is gener-
inclusion of van der Waals interactions again im- ally agreed that, when properly chosen basis sets
proves the description of structural and electronic and exchange-correlation functionals are used, the
properties. inclusion of van der Waals interactions fundamen-
tally improves the DFT description of water, both
at the microscopic level and in bulk.
It is interesting to note that, although inclu-
sion of van der Waals interactions greatly improves
the description of water, this alone does not com-
plete the picture of important effects within wa-
ter. The standard Born-Oppenheimer approxima-
tion used in quantum-mechanical studies treats all
nuclei as classical point particles. Recent work by
a number of groups, however, has shown that nu-
clear quantum effects may play a significant role
in determining the properties of water.83,104–106 In
fact, it has been shown that such nuclear quantum
effects may be more far-reaching, playing a sub-
stantial role in hydrogen bonds in general, not just
between water molecules.83 This would, of course,
have enormous consequences for a proper descrip-
tion of interactions within biological molecules such
Fig.4. Decompositionoftheoxygen-oxygenradialdistribu- as proteins and DNA, where hydrogen bonds of-
tion function as calculated by a standard gradient-corrected ten dominate the binding. For example, it has been
functional (PBE) and vdW-DF (here called DRSLL-PBE). proposed107 that theketo form of DNA nucleobases
The interactions are broken into (from top to bottom) first
(the standard form required for Watson-Crick hy-
coordinationshellhydrogenbonds,secondcoordinationshell
drogenbonding)canspontaneouslytautomerizevia
hydrogen bonds, and higher-order interactions. (Reprinted
with permission from Ref. [96]; (cid:13)c 2011 American Institute hydrogen tunneling to the enol form, a process
of Physics).
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 13
which could be responsible for some types of DNA
damage. A recent study by P´erez et al. found that, of fledgling methods within DFT to correctly ac-
although such tunneling does occur, the metastable count for van der Waals interactions. Within this
enol form has a lifetime too short to play a sig- set (which was later revised, expanded, and placed
nificant role in DNA mismatch damage.108 In fact, in a convenient online database)114 were a homo-
theeffects ofquantumnucleiappeartodynamically dimer of uracil and an A:T heterodimer.
stabilize the keto form. For a recent review of these
considerations see Ref. 109.
3.3. DNA nucleobases
The four nucleobases, arranged in different se-
quences along strands of a sugar-phosphate poly-
mer, have enabled the information of life to be
stored and propagated since life began. Each of
these relatively simple molecules contains an aro-
matic ring capable of engaging in multiple hydro-
gen bonds. When these bases come together in
a Watson-Crick, edge-on manner, they can form Fig. 7. Ratio of 3-body dispersion term to total CCSD(T)
hydrogen bonds strong enough to hold two DNA binding energy for the 22 systems in the S22 data set (data
strands together. When brought together in a par- takenfromRef.36).Notethatthehydrogen-bonddominated
systems show little dependence on 3-body dispersion while
allel face-on fashion, they form π–π stacking inter-
the dispersion systems show variable but significant 3-body
actions strong enough to give it an average persis-
contributions. Specifically marked are the uracil-uracil U:U
tence length of roughly 50 nm with some sequences and adenine-thymine A:T dimers, which exhibit the highest
having even larger persistence lengths.110 3-bodydispersionfractionofallthesystems.Thegrayboxes
Cooper, Thonhauser, and Langreth calculated denote the average 3-body dispersion fraction within each
group.
thebaseinteraction energyasafunctionofdistance
for a Watson-Crick, edge-on approach of two base
pairs (see Fig. 5).111 This was done for the A:T, In2010,alandmarkpaperbyvonLilienfeldand
A:U, and G:C combinations. The G:C base pair ex- Tkatchenko showed that the uracil-uracil U:U and
hibitsamaximuminteraction energyofabouttwice adenine-thymine A:T stacked bases exhibit large 3-
that of the other pairs, not surprising since it has body dispersion terms.36 Going a step further, the
an extra hydrogen bond, and all three show similar authors addressed the magnitude of two and three-
equilibrium binding distances. body dispersion interactions across the entire S22
The base stacking energy as a function of ge- dataset. Some of their results are shown in Fig. 7.
ometry has been studied by several groups.113 The Using the DFT+vdW approach enhanced with the
binding energies as a function of twist angle for all triple-dipole term (as discussed in Section 2), they
possiblestacked base pairs are shown in Fig. 6. It is found that the three distinct groups of the S22
noted that the methyl substitution that differenti- set show markedly different dependencies on three-
ates thyminefromuracilstabilizes thesystemswith body dispersion interactions. The systems showing
respect to twist. large 3-body dispersion terms (which include the
In 2006, Jurecka et al. published a set of ac- stacked U:U and A:T dimers) were the systems
curate, quantum-chemical binding energies of 22 deemed dispersion-dominant and those with essen-
molecular dimers, selected for the importance of tially no 3-body dispersion interactions were sys-
van der Waals interactions within them.77 The set tems dominated by hydrogen bonding.The authors
(dubbedtheS22dataset) wasbrokenintothreedis- argue that 3-body effects may be more important
tinct groups: (i) dimers for which hydrogen bond- than previously thought. Interestingly, for stacked
ing is the key component of binding, (ii) dimers for nucleobases the 3-body dispersion term seems to
whichpuredispersionisthekeycomponentofbind- berelatively constant,especiallycomparedwiththe
ing,and(iii)dimerswhichexhibitamixtureofboth pairwise dispersion term. Figure 8 shows the 2 and
of these effects. Comparison with this dataset be- 3 body dispersion terms calculated by von Lilien-
came the de facto metric for assessing the ability feld and Tkatchenko for 42 stacked nucleobases and
14 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
2.5 2.75 3 3.25 3.5 3.75
]lom/lack[
noitcaretnI
A:T G1G0A A:U G:C
N6 O4 5 N6 O4 -10 O6 N4
N1 N3 N1 N3 -15 N1 N3
2.5 2.75 3 3.25 3.5 3.75 2.5 2.75 3 3.25 3.5 3.75
Fig.5. Interaction withinA:T,A:U,andG:CbasepairsasafunctionofN1···N3separation forthecanonicalWatson-Crick,
edge-on orientation. Both GGA (solid circles) and vdW-DF (solid triangles) energies are shown. The labeled atoms are the
non-hydrogen atoms engaging in hydrogen bonding. (Reprinted with permission from Ref. [111]; (cid:13)c 2008 American Institute
of Physics).
Fig.6. InteractionenergyasafunctionoftwistforallpossibleDNAbasepairstepsaswellasthosefortheiruracil-containing
counterparts.TheinsetsgiveatopviewofthemolecularinteractionfortheAT:AT(topleft),TA:TA(topcenter),andAA:TT
(top right) steps. All calculations were carried out using the vdW-DF. (Reprinted with permission from Ref. [112]; (cid:13)c 2008
American Chemical Society).
base pairs. The 3-body contribution to the energy
is relatively constant across theentire dataset while
the 2-body term varies considerably, especially for
the weaker-binding systems.
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 15
)lom/lacK(
dispersion energy for this system to be a substan-
tial –57 kcal/mol and the 3-body correction term
was 8.9 kcal/mol.36 This is certainly a significant
binding event and shows the strength with which
aromatic molecules can interact with the loose π
electrons within DNA. Such interactions are com-
mon for π-stacked molecules such as benzene and
thelargenumberofrelativelycloseneighborswithin
the π-conjugated DNA bases is believed to be re-
2-Body Dispersion Energy
3-Body Dispersion Energy sponsible for the large interaction energy.
Total Binding Energy
Fig. 8. Contributions from 2-body (red boxes) and 3-body
(blue circles) dispersion interactions over all stacked base
pairs investigated by von Lilienfeld and Tkatchenko (data
taken from Ref. 36). The green line shows the total binding
energy as calculated by CCSD(T).
3.4. DNA intercalation
The π–π stacking interactions of DNA bases dis-
cussed in the previous section are important for an-
other reason. Many cancer-causing agents act by
intercalating between base-pairs within a strand of
DNA, preventing it from carrying out its normal
functions. Ironically, some anti-cancer drugs can Fig.9. Interactionenergyofanellipticinemoleculeasitin-
also act in this way. In the latter case the DNA tercalates into a CG:CG base step. Here ∆x represents the
is intentionally disturbedeither to prevent its repli- displacementoftheellipticinefromthefinalintercalatedpo-
sition. The insets correspond to the fully intercalated struc-
cation or to trigger cell death.
ture at ∆x = 0 ˚A (top left) and ∆x = 5 ˚A(bottom right).
One well known intercalating anticancer drug
(ReprintedwithpermissionfromRef.[70];(cid:13)c 2007American
is the poly-aromatic ellipticine molecule. This
Chemical Society).
moleculecanintercalate between basepairsofDNA
where it is believed to interfere with the process of
replication, effectively killing the cell.115 Li et al. The intercalation of both positively charged
calculated the binding energy between the neutral and neutral proflavine has also been studied.116
ellipticine molecule and a single C:G base pair to Neutral proflavine was found to bind to a C:G
be–18.4 kcal/mol.116 Not surprisingly,the strength base pair with an energy of about –20.3 kcal/mol
of the binding was shown to have a substantial de- and charged proflavine with an energy near 12.1
pendence on the relative angle between the ellip- kcal/mol. The difference between the charged and
ticine and DNA bases, showing a relatively strong uncharged binding was attributed to electrostatic
(several kcal/mol) preference for near parallel and effects rather than those of correlation. This con-
anti-parallel conformations. Chun Lin et al. inves- clusion was reached largely because the results of
tigated the intercalation of ellipticine between a standard PBE calculations, although they get the
cytosine-guanine base step (i.e. a pair of C:G base interaction energy of each system wrong, exhibit
pairs).70 As shown in Fig. 9, they found that ellip- a similar difference between the two binding ener-
ticineissignificantly attracted totheDNAcomplex gies. It is interesting to note that the binding en-
even when it is several angstroms away and ulti- ergy is larger for the positively charged proflavine
mately intercalates with a binding energy of about even though the negatively charged backbone was
37 kcal/mol, in perfect accord with the earlier re- omitted from these calculations. Again, a substan-
sultsfoundby Liet al. Further,they foundthatthe tialpreferencefornearparallelandanti-parallel rel-
interaction was repulsive when van der Waals in- ative angles was found.
teractions were excluded from the calculations. von The energetics of the interaction between
Lilienfeld and Tkatchenko found that the pairwise proflavine and a T:A base pair was also studied,
16 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
with results qualitatively similar to those of the bonds. Despite this, the study found that van der
proflavine–C:G system.116 Proflavine was found to Waals interactions were critical to explain the ob-
bind to T:A with a binding energy of –18 kcal/mol, served stability of poly-alanine helices up to about
again showing preference for near parallel and 700 K. Through ab initio molecular dynamics cal-
anti-parallel configurations. Steric clashes with the culations Tkatchenko et al. found that, when van
methyl group on the thymine base produced some der Waals effects were excluded, the helical struc-
interesting features in the rotation curve but did ture gave way to the fully extended form at a tem-
not change the overall preferred structures. perature well below that observed experimentally,
Perhaps the most interesting findingof Li et al. even though hydrogen bondswere still correctly ac-
was that both intercalators studied were found to counted for.Agreement withexperiment was recov-
havestrongerinteractionswithaC:Gbasepairthan eredwhenvanderWaals interactions wereincluded
aC:Gbasepairhaswithanother C:Gbasepair,and in the calculations, which showed a breaking up of
that the angular dependence of these interactions the helical structure between 700 and 800 K.
qualitatively differ.116 A C:G base pair dimer has a Drugdiscovery is amulti-billion dollar business
double-well minimum centered around 0◦, with the and much effort is being put into so called ratio-
minimum-energy configurations at a twist of about nal drug design where potential drug molecules are
35◦ and–35◦.Theintercalators,bycontrast,exhibit scored based on their predicted binding affinity to
only one of these minima. This may partially ex- a particular protein target.6,120,121 This transfers
plainthedisruptionofsecondarystructureobserved the trial-and-error phase away from the lab, where
upon intercalation of these molecules, which may experiments to test drug binding affinities can be
play an important role in their anti-cancer func- relatively expensive and time-consuming, to the
tion.117 computer, where thousands of potential drugs can
be tested for binding at relatively low cost.121,122
Working toward this end, Antony et al. studied the
3.5. Proteins
interactions of a numberof protein active sites with
Owingtotheirlargesizeandcomplexity,simulation their respective biological ligands.123 They found
ofproteinsoftenprovestobeaformidablechallenge that exclusion of van der Waals interactions can
even for simpleparameterized models. Theapplica- substantially change the ordering of ligand bind-
tion of quantum mechanics to a full protein is, un- ing affinities. Further, they found that neglect of
fortunately, still beyond the reach of modern DFT. theseinteractionscanactuallyleadtothecomputed
Recently, however, significant steps toward a quan- bindingenergiesforaligandwithitstargetreceptor
tum understanding of proteins have been made. being of the wrong sign.
Helical chains of alanine molecules are often Another study, carried out by Rutledge and
studied because they are relatively simple yet they Wetmorefocusedonligandsthatinteractwiththeir
exhibit the canonical helix structure present in so host protein via π–π stacking interactions and T-
many proteins. In addition, when capped with a shaped π interactions.32 As before, they found that
charged species they can be formed experimentally inclusion of van der Waals effects is imperative to
so computed properties may be compared with ex- obtain accurate energetics in such systems.
periment.118 In one study, Tkatchenko et al. looked
at three helical forms (α, π, and 3 ) of poly-
4. Future Directions
alanine chains.119 By comparing with PBE, a stan-
dard gradient-corrected functional, they found sig- With the utility of these methods established, at-
nificant van der Waals stabilization of all three he- tention can be turned toward the future and what
lix types relative to the fully extended structure. In can be accomplished with them. Computation of a
fact, PBE predicts nearly equal stabilization ener- fullmacromoleculeinatomisticdetailisstillbeyond
gies for all three whereas the van der Waals calcu- the reach of DFT, even for the most advanced com-
lations showed a splitting of about 2 kcal/mol be- puters, but the method can still be used as a tool
tween the α-helix and 3 structures. The authors to aid in our understanding of such systems.
note that the van der Waals effects are of much One useful approach that has been adopted by
shorterrangethanthestandardhydrogenbondsta- some groups is to use DFT to parameterize new
bilizations in the helical forms, since the helices are force fields. Typically, these are parameterized ei-
long-rangedstructuresexhibitingperiodichydrogen ther to reproduce experimental results or the re-
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 17
sults of high-level quantum chemistry calculations. adequately treat dispersion interactions, such lin-
AsdiscussedinSection2,quantumchemistrymeth- earscalingDFTapproachesmayprovideapractical
odsarelimitedtofairlysmallsystems.Parameteriz- means to apply full quantum mechanics to biologi-
ing force fields using the much larger systems that cal problems of real interest in the near future.
DFT is capable of simulating might help average
out size effects and better represent the environ-
ment that exists within macromolecules. Addition- References
ally, solid-state parameter sets could be developed
1. A. A. Deniz, S. Mukhopadhyay and E. A. Lemke,
to deal with molecular crystals.
J. R. Soc. Interface 5, 15 (2008).
Another useful application of DFT is in the re-
2. E. F. Keller, J. Hist. Bio. 23, 389 (1990).
finement of experimental structures. Typical x-ray
3. H. V. Westerhoff and B. O. Palsson, Nature
and NMR techniques provide data that is consis-
Biotechnology 22, 1249 (2004).
tent with more than one structure. Also problem- 4. P. E. Wright and H. J. Dyson, J. Mol. Biol. 293,
atic is theplacement of thex-ray invisible hydrogen 321 (1999).
atoms. Given this, experimentalists often use semi- 5. D.J.Mu¨ller,H.Janovjak,T.Lehto,L.Kuerschner
empirical calculations to refine the observed struc- and K. Anderson, Prog. Biophys. & Mol. Bio. 79,
ture. Use of high-level DFT calculations including 1 (2002).
van der Waals interactions could yield a better re- 6. C. L. Verlinde and W. G. Hol, Structure 2, 577
sult, since large systems can be calculated very ac- (1994).
7. Q. Cui and M. Karplus, Pro. Sci. 17, 1295(2008).
curately.
8. C. Clementi, Curr. Opinion Struct. Bio. 18, 10
Drug discovery is another area where useful
(2008).
progressisbeingmadebyincorporatingDFTcalcu-
9. A. D. MacKerell Jr., J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1584
lations anditis expected thatDFT willplay an im-
(2004).
portantroleinthisareasoon.124 Althoughanentire
10. C. Oostenbrink, A. Villa, A. E. Mark and W. F.
protein may not beable to betreated quantum me- Van Gunsteren, J. Comp. Chem. 25, 1656 (2004).
chanically,hybridmethodsthatapplyvaryinglevels 11. A. K. Rapp´e, C. J. Casewit, K. S. Colwell, W. A.
of theory to regions within a protein are being used Goddard III and W. M. Skiff, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
withmuchsuccess.Onecan treatthedrugmolecule 114, 10024 (1992).
and its binding site with full quantum-mechanical 12. T. A. Halgren, J. Comp. Chem. 17, 520 (1996).
rigorwhiletreatingdistantregionsusingwell-tested 13. A. D. MacKerell, Jr. and N. Foloppe, Biopolymers
classical or semi-empirical approaches. This allows 56, 257 (2000).
14. A. T.HaglerandC.S. Ewig,Comp. Phys. Comm.
themostimportantphysicstobetreatedaccurately
84, 131 (1994).
and coupled to a sufficient treatment of the less
15. J. W. Ponder, C. Wu, P. Ren, V. S. Pande,
important parts of the problem. This is not only
J. D. Chodera, M. J. Schnieders, I. Haque, D. L.
a useful approach for drug design but also applies
Mobley, D. S. Lambrecht, R. A. DiStasio Jr.,
to understanding the normal operation of ligand-
M. Head-Gordon, G. N. I. Clark, M. E. Johnson
bindingproteins.Suchmethodsaregeneralreferred andT.Head-Gordon,J. Phys. Chem. B 114,2549
to as QM/MM, i.e. quantum mechanics/molecular (2010).
mechanics. 16. A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum
Finally, although the applicability of DFT to Chemistry: Introduction to Advanced Electronic
calculationsonfullmacromoleculesiscurrentlylim- Structure Theory (Dover, New York, 1996).
ited,linearscalingDFTmethodsarebecomingpop- 17. T. Schwabe and S. Grimme, J. Phys. Chem. A.
ular and provide a tantalizing way forward. These 113, 3005 (2009).
18. S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem. 25, 1463 (2004).
approaches, which make use of special algorithms
19. Y. He and D. Cremer,Mol. Phys. 98,1415(2000).
andhighly-localized basisfunctions,caneasilytreat
20. M.L.Leininger,W.D.Allen,H.F.SchaeferIIIand
thousands of atoms—see Fig. 2. Such capabilities
C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Phys. 112, 9213 (2000).
make computation of full macromolecular systems
21. M.Head-GordonandE.Artacho,Phys. Today 61,
feasible. For example, the fledgling linear-scaling
58 (2008).
code ONETEP has been used to calculate proper- 22. P.HohenbergandW.Kohn,Phys. Rev.136,B864
ties of a 20 base-pair strand of DNA containing al- (1964).
most 1300 atoms. If augmented with the ability to 23. W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133
(1965).
18 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
24. J.P.PerdewandA.Zunger,Phys.Rev.B 23,5048 and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401
(1981). (2004).
25. D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50. H. Rydberg, M. Dion, N. Jacobson, E. Schr¨oder,
45, 566 (1980). P. Hyldgaard, S. Simak, D. C. Langreth and
26. J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. B. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 126402 (2003).
Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). 51. T. Thonhauser, V. R. Cooper, S. Li, A. Puzder,
27. A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 98, 1372 (1993). P. Hyldgaard and D. C. Langreth, Phys. Rev. B
28. P. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski and 76, 125112 (2007).
M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem. 98, 11623 (1994). 52. G. Roma´n-P´erez and J. M. Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett.
29. R.H.French,V.A.Parsegian,R.Podgornik,R.F. 103, 096102 (2009).
Rajter, A. Jagota, J. Luo, D. Asthagiri, M. K. 53. T. Thonhauser, A. Puzder and D. Langreth, J.
Chaudhury, Y.-M. Chiang, S. Granick, S. Kalinin, Chem. Phys. 124, 164106 (2006).
M.Kardar,R.Kjellander,D.C.Langreth,J.Lewis, 54. Y. Zhang and W. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 890
S. Lustig, D. Wesolowski, J. S. Wettlaufer, W.-Y. (1998).
Ching, M. Finnis, F. Houlihan, O. A. Von Lilien- 55. V.R.Cooper,Phys. Rev. B 81,161104(R)(2010).
feld, C. J. Van Oss and T. Zemb, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56. J. P. Perdew and W. Yue, Phys. Rev. B 33, 8800
82, 1887 (2010). (1986).
30. Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Chem. Chem. 57. E.D.Murray,K.LeeandD.C.Langreth,J.Chem.
Phys. 7, 2701 (2005). Theory Comput. 5, 2754 (2009).
31. F. Ortmann, K. Hannewald and F. Bechstedt, J. 58. K. Lee, E. D. Murray, L. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist
Phys. Chem. B 112, 1540 (2008). and D. C. Langreth, Phys. Rev. B 82, 081101(R)
32. L.R.Rutledge andS.D.Wetmore, Can. J. Chem. (2010).
88, 815 (2010). 59. D. C. Langreth, B. I. Lundqvist, S. D. Chakarova-
33. R. Huenerbein, B. Schirmer, J. Moellmann and K¨ack, V. R. Cooper, M. Dion, P. Hyldgaard,
S. Grimme, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 6940 A.Kelkkanen,J.Kleis,L.Kong,S.Li,P.G.Moses,
(2010). E. Murray, A. Puzder, H. Rydberg, E. Schr¨oder
34. K. S. Thanthiriwatte, E. G. Hohenstein, L. A. andT.Thonhauser,J.Phys.:Condens. Matter 21,
Burns and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Theory Com- 084203 (2009).
put. 7, 88 (2011). 60. B.Jeziorski,R.MoszynskiandK.Szalewicz,Chem.
35. S. Grimme, R. Huenerbein and S. Ehrlich, Chem. Rev. 94, 1887 (1994).
Phys. Chem. 12, 1258 (2011). 61. A. J. Misquitta, R. Podeszwa, B. Jeziorski and
36. O. A. Von Lilienfeld and A. Tkatchenko, J. Chem. K. Szalewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 214103 (2005).
Phys. 132, 234109 (2010). 62. K. Patkowski, K. Szalewicz and B. Jeziorski, J.
37. S. Grimme, J. Comput. Chem. 27, 1787 (2006). Chem. Phys. 125, 154107 (2006).
38. S. Grimme, J. Antony, T. Schwabe and C. Mu¨ck- 63. Y.ZhaoandD.G.Truhlar,J.Phys. Chem. A108,
Lichtenfeld, Org. Biomol. Chem. 5, 741 (2007). 6908 (2004).
39. T. A. Halgren, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114, 7827 64. Y.Zhao,N.E.SchultzandD.G.Truhlar,J.Chem.
(1992). Theory Comput. 2, 364 (2006).
40. Y. Liu and W. A. Goddard, III, Mat. Trans. 50, 65. Y.ZhaoandD.G.Truhlar,J.Chem. TheoryCom-
1664 (2009). put. 3, 289 (2007).
41. Q. Wu and W. Yang, J. Chem. Phys. 116, 515 66. O.A.vonLilienfeld,I.Tavernelli,U.Rothlisberger
(2002). and D. Sebastiani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 153004
42. U. Zimmerli, M. Parrinello and P. Koumoutsakos, (2004).
J. Chem. Phys. 120, 2693 (2004). 67. I.-C. Lin, M. D. Coutinho-Neto, C. Felsenheimer,
43. S. Grimme, Comp. Mol. Sci. 1, 211 (2011). O. A. von Lilienfeld, I. Tavernelli and U. Rothilis-
44. A. Tkatchenko and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett. berger Phys. Rev. B 75, 205131 (2007).
102, 073005 (2009). 68. P.C.Aeberhard,J.S.Arey,I.-C.LinandU.Roth-
45. F. London, Zeitschrift fu¨r Physik 63, 245 (1930). lisberger J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 23 (2009).
46. S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. 69. M.Cascella,I.-C.Lin,I.TavernelliandU.Rothlis-
Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010). berger J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 2930 (2009).
47. O.A.Tkatchenko,vonLilienfeld,Phys. Rev.B 78, 70. I.-C.Lin,O.A.V.Lilienfeld,M.D.Coutinho-Neto,
045116 (2008). I. Tavernelliand U. Rothlisberger, J. Phys. Chem.
48. Y. Yao, N. Nijem, J. Li, Y. J. Chabal, D. C. Lan- B 111, 14346 (2007).
grethandT.Thonhauser,Phys. Rev.B 85,064302 71. A. D. Becke and E. R. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys.
(2012). 122, 154104 (2005).
49. M.Dion,H.Rydberg,E.Schr¨oder,D.C.Langreth 72. E. R. Johnson and A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys.
Molecular Biology at the Quantum Level 19
123, 024101 (2005). 98. M. V. Ferna´ndez-Serra, G. Ferlat and E. Artacho
73. A. D. Becke and E. R. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys. Mol. Sim. 31, 361 (2005).
123, 154101 (2005). 99. T.D.Ku¨hne,M.KrackandM.ParrinelloJ.Chem.
74. A. D. Becke and E. R. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys. Theory Comput. 5, 235 (2009).
127, 124108 (2007). 100. J. C. Grossman, E. Schwegler, E. W. Draeger, F.
75. J. Sˇponer, K. E. Riley and P. Hobza, Phys. Chem. GygiandG.GalliJ.Chem. Phys.120,300(2004).
Chem. Phys. 10, 2595 (2008). 101. E.Schwegler,J.C.Grossman,F.GygiandG.Galli
76. L. A. Burns, A. Va´zquez-Mayagoitia, B. G. J. Chem. Phys. 121, 5400 (2004).
Sumpter and C. D. Sherrill, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 102. S.KumarandP.K.SchellingInt.J.Quant.Chem.
084107 (2011). 107, 556 (2007).
77. P.Jureˇcka,J.Sˇponer,J.Cerny´andP.Hobza,Phys. 103. C. Zhang, J. Wu, G. Galli and F. Gygi J. Chem.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 1985 (2006). Theory Comput. 7, 3054 (2011).
78. J. Antony and S. Grimme, Phys. Chem. Chem. 104. G.S.Ganourgakis,G.K.SchenterandS.S.Xanth-
Phys. 8, 5287 (2006). eas J. Chem. Phys. 125, 141102(2006).
79. W. L. Jorgensen and J. Tirado-Rives, PNAS 102, 105. J. A. Morrone and R. Car Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
6665 (2005). 017801 (2008).
80. M. W. Mahoney and W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chem. 106. B. Chen, I. Ivanov,M. L. Klein and M. Parrinello,
Phys. 112, 8910 (2000). Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 215503(2003).
81. E. Sanz, C. Vega, J. L. F. Abascal and L. G. Mac- 107. P.-O. Lo¨wdin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 35, 724 (1963).
Dowell, J. Chem. Phys 121, 1165 (2004). 108. A. P´erez,M. E.Tuckerman,H. P. Hjalmarsonand
82. C.Vega,M.M.Conde,C.McBride,J.L.F.Abas- O.A.VonLilienfeld,J.Am.Chem.Soc.132,11510
cal, E. G. Noya, R. Ramirez and L. M. Ses´e, J. (2010).
Chem. Phys. 132, 046101 (2010). 109. J.Pu, J.Gao andD. G. Truhlar,Chem. Rev.106,
83. X.-Z. Li, B. Walker and A. Michaelides, PNAS 3140 (2006).
108, 6369 (2011). 110. J. Bednar, P. Furrer, V. Katritch, A. Z. Stasiak,
84. K. Liu, J. D. Cruzan and R. J. Saykally, Science J.Dubochet andA. Stasiak,J. Mol. Bio. 254,579
271, 929 (1996). (1995).
85. J. K. Gregory, D. C. Clary, K. Liu, M. G. Brown 111. V. R. Cooper,T. ThonhauserandD. C. Langreth,
and R. J. Saykally, Science 275, 814 (1997). J. Chem. Phys. 128, 204102 (2008).
86. S.S.Xantheas,C.J.BurnhamandR.J.Harrison, 112. V. R. Cooper, T. Thonhauser, A. Puzder,
J. Chem. Phys. 116, 1493 (2002). E. Schr¨oder, B. I. Lundqvist and D. C. Langreth,
87. B. Santra, A. Michaelides and M. Scheffler, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 1304 (2008).
Chem. Phys. 127, 184104 (2007). 113. A. Fiethen, G. Jansen, A. Hesselmann and
88. M. E. Dunn, T. M. Evans, K. N. Kirschner and M. Schu¨tz, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 1802 (2008).
G. C. Shields, J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 303 (2006). 114. J. Rˇez´aˇc, P. Jureˇcka, K. E. Riley, J. Cˇerny´,
89. S. S. Xantheas and T. H. Dunning Jr., J. Chem. H. Valdes, K. Pluha´ˇckov´a, K. Berka, T. Rˇez´aˇc,
Phys. 99, 8774 (1993). M. Pitonˇa´k, J. Vondra´ˇsek and P. Hobza, Collect.
90. S. S. Xantheas, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 7523 (1994). Czech. Chem. Commun. 73, 1261 (2008).
91. R. Jonchiere, A. P. Seitsonen, G. Ferlat, A. M. 115. C.Auclair,Arch.Biochem. Biophys.259,1(1987).
Saitta and R. Vuilleumier, J. Chem. Phys. 135, 116. S.Li,V.R.Cooper,T.Thonhauser,B.I.Lundqvist
154503 (2011). andD.C.Langreth,J. Phys. Chem. B 113,11166
92. I.-C. Lin, A. P. Seitsonen, M. D. Coutinho-Neto, (2009).
I. Tavernelliand U. Rothlisberger, J. Phys. Chem. 117. H. M. Berman and P. R. Young, Ann. Rev. Bio-
B 113, 1127 (2009). phys. Bioeng. 10, 87 (1981).
93. B. Santra, J. Klimeˇs, D. Alf`e, A. Tkatchenko, 118. R.R.Hudgins,M.A.RatnerandM.F.Jarrold,J.
B. Slater,A. Michaelides,R. Car andM. Scheffler, Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 12974 (1998).
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 185701 (2011). 119. A. Tkatchenko, M. Rossi, V. Blum, J. Ireta and
94. B. Kolb and T. Thonhauser, Phys. Rev. B 84, M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 118102 (2011).
045116 (2011). 120. H. Gohlke and G. Klebe, Curr. Opinion Struct.
95. P. L. Silvestrelli, Chem. Phys. Lett. 475, 285 Bio. 11, 231 (2001).
(2009). 121. R. Abagyan and M. Totrov, Curr. Opinion Chem.
96. J.Wang,G.Roma´n-P´erez,J.M.Soler,E.Artacho Bio. 5, 375 (2001).
and M.-V. Ferna´ndez-Serra, J. Chem. Phys. 134, 122. P. J. Gane and P. M. Dean, Curr. Opinion Struct.
024516 (2011). Bio. 10, 401 (2000).
97. F.PaesaniandG.A.Voth,J.Phys. Chem. B 113, 123. J. Antony, S. Grimme, D. G. Liakos and F. Neese,
5702 (2009). J. Phys. Chem. A 115, 11210 (2011).
20 B. Kolb and T.Thonhauser
124. M. A. Patel, E. Deretey and I. G. Csizmadia, J. Mol. Struct.: Theochem 492, 1 (1999).