Lintott, Masters: Meeting report Lintott, Masters: Meeting report
Morphology in the era of large surveys
The study of galaxies has changed dra- 1
matically over the past few decades with
the advent of large-scale astronomical
surveys. These large collaborative efforts have
made available high-quality imaging and spec-
troscopy of hundreds of thousands of systems,
providing a body of observations which has
significantly enhanced our understanding not
only of cosmology and large-scale structure in
the universe but also of the astrophysics of gal-
axy formation and evolution. Throughout these
changes, one thing that has remained constant
is the role of galaxy morphology as a clue to
understanding galaxies. But obtaining morphol-
ogies for large numbers of galaxies is challeng-
ing; this topic, “Morphology in the era of large
surveys”, was the subject of a recent discussion
meeting at the Royal Astronomical Society.
Morphology has been recognized as an impor-
tant tool in categorizing and characterizing gal-
axies for more than a century, dating back to
the early work of Hubble and others. As Roger 1: The Hubble tuning-fork diagram is the basis for most galaxy classification schemes. (Sloan Digital
Davies (University of Oxford) reminded us in Sky Survey [SDSS] and K Masters, Univ. of Portsmouth)
an invited talk to open the meeting, the shape
of a galaxy is essentially a measure of its orbital for example, a round smooth galaxy in an image theory and observation. Prof. Athanassoula
structure as determined by its gravitational could be a spherical E0, or a face-on featureless began by emphasizing that when it comes to
potential. Gas, dust and stars pile up at orbital disc (S0). Structure within these systems has understanding disc galaxy dynamics, details
resonances, and the art of analysing morphol- been studied since at least the late 1970s (Carter matter: the presence of a bar, for example,
ogy becomes one of interpreting what can be 1978) when systems were divided according to rather than being like “frosting on the cake”,
seen or measured in images as a frozen snapshot their iso photal shapes into “boxy” or “disky” might drive the evolution of a system, and the
of the dynamics of the different components. systems; more recent work (e.g. Kormendy and presence of spirals and rings (even if they really
For many astronomers, morphological clas- Bender 2012) has led to the suggestion that the are just “frosting”) allows the direct testing of
sification involves placing objects on some vari- Hubble diagram’s low-luminosity tail may need theoretical models of stellar orbits. Prof. Atha-
ant of the Hubble tuning-fork diagram (figure alteration. Complicating the picture further, the nassoula showed how theoretical models that
1). Alternative classification schemes have been resolved spectroscopy survey ATLAS3D meas- assume a galaxy potential and use manifold
developed, but most share basic features with ured the stellar kinematics of the early-type methods have had remarkable success at repro-
Hubble’s seminal work; most often the tuning population to show that many galaxies morpho- ducing not only the broad features of bars in
fork version enhanced by Sandage and collabo- logically classed as E in fact rotate like discs. disc galaxies, but even the details of the bars’
rators starting in the 1960s is used. The subtly As an example, Prof. Davies showed us that internal structure, for example, if it has a rec-
different scheme, developed by de Vaucouleurs, NGC 3379 and NGC 4636 look almost identi- tangular shape, or is more oval.
is also commonly applied. This emphasizes the cal in their optical images, but the kinematics of More recent simulations, such as those in
continuity between classifications by introduc- the rounder looking NGC 3379 (figure 2) reveal Athanassoula et al. (2013) are able to take into
ing transitional morphologies; it has not only a rotating disc, while the slightly elongated account the effect of dynamical dark matter
SA (unbarred spiral) and SB (barred spiral) sys- NGC 4636 hides no rotation. halos and the cosmic evolution of the gas sup-
tems, but also SAB systems with intermediate Late-type disc-dominated galaxies have a ply. Having done so, models with only a few
bar strengths, for example. more obvious three-dimensional shape, and cor- parameters can reproduce even the subtle fea-
The fundamental division in galaxy morphol- rections can be made for viewing angle to reveal tures of objects such as NGC 936 (figure 4); the
ogy in any classification scheme is between late- the face-on structures. The internal structures apparent bulge at the centre of this system could
type (spiral) galaxies and early-type (elliptical) in disc galaxies can then be used to great effect be part of the bar (another reminder of the dif-
galaxies. Early-type galaxies, those with a high to reveal the details of their secular evolution ficulty of distinguishing subtle morphological
degree of central concentration and no structure, (a term introduced by Kormendy in the 1970s, features). This work also makes predictions
might appear simple, but Prof. Davies reminded meaning evolution that is slow compared to the about population statistics; because it shows
the conference that their smooth light distribu- dynamical timescale). The second invited talk of that bars take longer to form in the presence
tion can hide a wide variety of orbital structures. the morning, by Lia Athanassoula (Laboratoire of classical bulges and/or in gas-rich galaxies,
For a smooth object where neither the intrinsic d’Astrophysique de Marseille) concentrated on we should see the resulting trends of the bar
shape nor the inclination is known, the visual the theoretical understanding of bars in disc gal- fraction in the disc galaxy population. Indeed,
appearance may be completely uninformative; axies, and in particular on the links between several recent works have shown bars are more
5.16 A&G • October 2013 • Vol. 54
Downloaded
University
Portsmouth
Lintott, Masters: Meeting report
Morphology in the era of large surveys
Meeting report Chris Lintott and Karen Masters
review progress in understanding galaxy
morphology, as discussed at this RAS meeting.
2 3 and efficient, yet sensitive to subtle features.
It should also be understandable: black boxes
are often unhelpful when physical insight is
sought. These criteria could be used to assess
successive generations of attempts, from basic
single-parameter metrics such as colour, con-
centration of Sersic index, through to higher-
order attempts such as CAS (concentration,
asymmetry and clumpiness; the main features
it assesses) or Gini-M which also make use of
multiple parameters.
Perhaps the most substantial progress towards
automated morphology has been attempts to
deploy neural networks for galaxy classifica-
tion. Lahav et al. (1995) were already able to
2: In the optical, NGC 3379 4 use such methods to match the performance of
looks like a typical
a set of expert classifiers, although at the cost
elliptical galaxy; ATLAS
3D revealed the smooth of using inputs that included manual measure-
structure hides a rotating ments, and requiring a training set that included
disc. most of the subjects to be classified. Ball et al.
(2004) applied neural networks to SDSS galax-
3: IC 756 is a remarkable
ies for the first time, but included colour, mag-
galaxy. Despite having
nitude and size in the input parameters. These
no visible bulge, it hosts
an actively growing variables correlate well with morphology, but
supermassive black hole. are not themselves morphological, and when
included they dominate the classification. A
4: What looks like a bulge
hybrid approach taken by Banerji et al. (2010)
at the centre of NGC 936
used Galaxy Zoo morphologies to train and val-
might actually be part of
the bar. idate automated classifiers. They also attempted
(All SDSS) to use only morphological inputs, with reason-
able success. So far, surprisingly, sophisticated
quantities expected to correlate well with mor-
common in more massive, redder and less star- well with morphology, is a distraction. Willett phology, such as “texture”, provide much less
forming disc galaxies, as we shall see below. described techniques used to collate the ~40 discriminatory power than simple measures of
votes per question, correct for observational the concentration of the light profile.
Observing morphologies
biases, and create “classification likelihoods” For most galaxies, automated approaches
Several of the effects mentioned above have been from the Galaxy Zoo project. The classifica- are already as accurate as human classifiers for
noticed recently thanks to the large morphologi- tions, which are now available via the Galaxy basic morphology. The main remaining difficul-
of the renewed interest in morphology may be of the Tenth Data Release of SDSS, provide typical trends – such as spirals with dominant
due to the availability of such resources. Among interesting insight on what experts really mean bulges, or discs without spiral arms – and deal-
the largest such datasets are those produced by when classifying galaxies. For example, GZ2 ing with galaxies with uncertain or intermediate
www.galaxyzoo.org). In the first contributed pitch angle of the spiral arms and the T-type of tant populations for improving our physical
talk of the day, Kyle Willett (University of Min- galaxies as recorded by experts such as Nair and understanding of galaxies. But should we be
nesota) presented results from Galaxy Zoo 2, Abraham (2010). In other words, classical spiral aiming to do better than reproducing human
which provides detailed morphological classi- Hubble types as recently used in the astronomi- classifications? It was posited that an ideal
fications of more than 300 000 galaxies drawn cal literature have evolved to mean measure- automated morphological classifier should be
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (Willett et al. ments almost exclusively of bulge dominance, trained using as much information as possible,
2013). Defining a successful classification as a rather than also accounting for the tightness of including high-quality imaging and kinematic
measurement of morphology, Willett noted that the winding of the spiral arms. data, then perform its classifications using only
automatic classifiers too often use colour as a In the last invited talk of the morning, Steven uncalibrated images, to prevent it from relying
proxy for morphology. If the central reason to be Bamford (University of Nottingham) looked on non-morphological information. This would
interested in morphology is to reveal the dynami- beyond Galaxy Zoo to the issue of automated make an interesting challenge for the machine-
cal history of the system in question, the col- methods for measuring morphology. Lay- learning community.
our – which measures primarily only the recent ing out the requirements for a perfect meas- Finally, this talk highlighted several auto-
star formation history – even if it correlates very ure, he demanded that it should be objective mated approaches that attempt to go beyond
A&G • October 2013 • Vol. 54 5.17
Downloaded
University
Portsmouth
Lintott, Masters: Meeting report Lintott, Masters: Meeting report
classification and measure the properties of population. Although care needs to be taken to disc galaxies, we see a substantial number of
specific morphological features such as bars, avoid observational biases, this effect is exactly blue spheroids devoid of tidal features but which
spiral arms, bulges and discs. In particular, the what is seen in the new Galaxy Zoo data. appear to have rapid star formation timescales.
advantages of harnessing the availability of the Turning from the evolution of a particular These, it seems, are systems in the main phase
latest large, multi-wavelength datasets were morphological feature to the trajectory taken of their assembly: spheroids forming directly
demonstrated. A lot is undoubtedly still to be by systems throughout their history, Kevin from collapse of clumpy discs. Surveys such as
done to produce measures of morphology capa- Schawinski (ETH Zurich) discussed the mor- CANDELS provide the promise of very soon
ble of making the most of the huge quantity of phologies of galaxies crossing the green val- going beyond these relatively small-number sta-
data provided by modern surveys, but the work ley. The colour–magnitude (or, equivalently, tistics and surveying the bulk of the population
is underway, and much science is flowing from colour–mass) diagram has become an important of normal star forming galaxies at high redshift.
the classifications we already have. tool for understanding galaxy evolution, and If we are to understand the contribution of
the bulk of the local galaxy population lies in mergers to galaxy assembly, we ideally need
Science with morphology
regions of the space called the red sequence and a control sample of galaxies which have been
With its involvement of hundreds of thousands the blue cloud; the green valley is the relatively untouched by major interactions. Such a sample
of volunteers, the Galaxy Zoo project has been unpopulated region between these. Schawinski was presented by Brooke Simmons (University
effective public outreach, but the project’s long- used galaxies with well-determined morpholo- of Oxford), who showed a sample of the most
term significance also depends on the science it gies from Galaxy Zoo 1 to show how, in the col- bulge-free galaxies selected from Galaxy Zoo.
enables, a point highlighted by the fact that most our–magnitude diagram, the green valley late Simulations show that any significant inter-
volunteers say they spend time on the project to and early types appear only as the tails of their action (perhaps even down to a mass ratio of
help science (Raddick et al. 2010). Karen Mas- distribution. Schawinski shows that, however, 1:10) would inevitably kick stars up into a bulge,
ters (University of Portsmouth) began the pres- the green valley late-types are still a tail in the and so bulgeless galaxies, with less than 1% of
entation of science results from Galaxy Zoo, distribution of star formation versus mass, but their light in either a bulge or pseudobulge,
returning to the theme of bars. She talked about green valley early-types are displaced from the should be guaranteed merger-free.
results which show that while perhaps as many main population. Amazingly, Simmons presented a sample of 13
as 75–80% of red spirals have strong bars of the Schawinski’s recently submitted work uses UV/ such bulgeless galaxies with actively growing
type found by the survey, the same is not true for optical colours, corrected for dust, in order to black holes (optical AGN; e.g. figure 3). Perhaps
the blue population, an important effect previ- constrain the star formation history of the sys- not surprisingly, these bulgeless galaxies lie off
ously obscured by the practice of selecting disc tems. Models that assume a constant star forma- the standard bulge mass–black hole mass rela-
galaxies out of large galaxy samples by colour. tion rate and appropriate quenching provide a tion, but are found on the line for total stellar
This result raises the interesting possibility simple set of toy models with which to test these mass–black hole mass relation. In other words,
that bars might be contributing to the cessation ideas, revealing the need for a sudden quench- these systems may be telling us that the growth
of star formation in red disc galaxies (or the ing of star formation to move early-type systems of a galaxy is controlled by the dark matter halo
bar is a side effect of processes that turn the onto the red sequence. If such rapid quenching potential, rather than its merger history. These
disc galaxy red). indeed proves to be necessary, then it may be evi- results (Simmons et al. 2013) are based on a small
To look directly at the connection between the dence for such processes as merger-induced AGN sample of the most bulgeless systems with AGN
bar and gas in a galaxy, Masters used data from feedback. By contrast, there is no evidence for found in Galaxy Zoo; the next step is to estab-
ALFALFA, a blind H i survey conducted with such a sudden cut-off in late-types, which might lish how rare such merger-free systems are, along
the Arecibo radio telescope which now covers be expected to move only slowly onto the green with detailed follow-up at Gemini and WIYN.
approximately half of the SDSS Legacy area. The valley itself. Schawinski proposes this is consist- If these results indeed show that the growth of
net result is that more bars are seen in systems ent with models in which the gas supply is shut the central black hole in most galaxies is driven
which have less H i, and that at fixed galaxy mass off, but no star formation quenching happens. not by merger-triggered accretion but rather by
it is the gas fraction that dominates the odds of secular processes, this presents a challenge to
Do mergers matter?
a particular disc having a bar. In reverse, for a modellers. This problem was the subject of a
given gas fraction, barred systems are observed These observations support the now standard talk by Victor Debattista (University of Central
to be more likely to be red than their non-barred model in which early-type galaxies are merger Lancashire), who presented a set of models that
counterparts (Masters et al. 2012). products, with a rapid shut-off of star forma- show the disc and the bulge growing together
Taking advantage of the large sample sizes tion as a result of AGN feedback triggered by over time: as the disc grows, the bulge becomes
from Galaxy Zoo and ALFALFA, Masters iden- gas inflow from the interaction. The contribu- compressed and its velocity dispersion increases.
tified some very rare, gas-rich, strongly barred tion of mergers to the assembly of galaxies was (Debattista et al. 2013)
discs, and has been awarded Jansky Very Large the subject of much debate during the meeting, Taking into account these effects, the models
Array time to obtain resolved H i images of coming up in several contributed talks. Speaker predict that a black hole should grow at about
some. Curiously, these have extreme gas frac- Sugata Kaviraj (University of Hertfordshire) half the rate of the disc, a number that is roughly
tions but a wide variety of optical colours. presented attempts to test the traditional model, in agreement with studies such as that carried
Observing bars at higher redshift was the topic which sees major mergers driving the transfor- out by Gadotti and Kauffman (2009). However,
of the next talk by Thomas Melvin (University mation of galaxies. Using recent WFC3 data to the predicted M-sigma relation (e.g. Gültekin
of Portsmouth), using data from the third phase probe the peak of star formation density at a et al. 2009) does not fit observations. Despite
of the Galaxy Zoo project, which provides mor- redshift of about 2, Kaviraj et al. (2013) find, the lack of mergers, the black hole must still be
phological classifications for galaxies drawn perhaps surprisingly, that the star formation growing in a self-regulating way, with gas fall-
from the HST COSMOS field. This is of espe- rate of major mergers are not significantly dif- ing directly into the centre.
cial interest because bars are believed to form in ferent from the background population. Only The discussion stimulated by the sample of
dynamically stable galaxies, and so an increas- 15% of star formation at this epoch is in sys- unusual (bulgeless) galaxies highlighted the
ing bar fraction with time (or decreasing with tems which show morphological signatures of need to classify large data sets; just 13 bulge-
redshift) is a tracer for a maturing disc galaxy a major merger. As well as star formation in less galaxies with AGN were ultimately derived
5.18 A&G • October 2013 • Vol. 54
Downloaded
University
Portsmouth
Lintott, Masters: Meeting report
in an image) provides an objective measure of
merger likelihood. Using this method, the frac-
tion of mergers in the galaxy population doesn’t
seem to evolve out to a redshift of 1.2.
At z < 1.5, spheroids can be formed by mergers
but, as noted by previous speakers, they cannot
be the major drivers of either star formation or
AGN activity. Determining merger fractions
above this redshift is difficult, and simulations
of the sort used to calibrate the more local data
will undoubtedly be important. Data from both
CANDELS and from Herschel show that there
is lots of merging, but also that low-luminosity
AGNs are ubiquitous by z = 2. To reconcile all
of this information requires work, but a picture
is emerging of two pathways to quiescent sphe-
roids as seen in the local universe: one merger
driven, and one through isolated collapse.
There is undoubtedly much more to come
from this work, and morphology – a subject
introduced at the dawn of galactic astrophys-
ics – is still a critical component of our attempts
to understand the galaxy population we see
around us. A stimulating and lively meeting
brought together observers, classifiers, simula-
tors, modellers and theorists to discuss what
remains to be done. Perhaps the most impor-
tant conclusion is that these groups now have
a shared understanding of what morphology
means. We should expect to hear much more
5: Hanny’s Voorwerp (“Hanny’s
about mergers and bars, about bulgeless galax-
object”) is a cloud of gas the size of a
ies and spheroidals for the foreseeable future.
galaxy, which has been ionized by jets ●
from the spiral galaxy IC 2497. It was
discovered in 2007 by schoolteacher The RAS Specialist Discussion Meeting on 10 May
Hanny van Arkel as part of the Galaxy 2013 was organized by Chris Lintott, researcher
Zoo project. (NASA, ESA, W Keel [Univ.
and citizen science project lead, University of
Alabama] and the Galaxy Zoo team)
Oxford; Karen Masters, research fellow, Institute
for Cosmology and Gravitation, University of
from the Galaxy Zoo sample of nearly 900 000 that more than a third show signs of rapid shut- Portsmouth (Karen.Masters@port.ac.uk); Brooke
systems. One of the biggest successes of the down of the AGN, perhaps representing a shift Simmons, postdoctoral researcher, University
Galaxy Zoo project has been the serendipitous from radio to kinetic modes of accretion, and a of Oxford; Steven Bamford, research fellow,
discovery of truly unusual objects, an area high- laboratory to study the most recently quenched University of Nottingham; and Sugata Kaviraj,
lighted by Chris Lintott (University of Oxford) AGN in the local universe. senior lecturer, University of Hertfordshire.
who spoke about what we can learn from light
Morphology at high redshift
echoes of AGN. The first of these extremely rare References
objects was found by Galaxy Zoo volunteers The meeting closed with an invited talk by Jen- Athanassoula E et al. 2013 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc.
429 1949.
and dubbed Hanny’s Voorwerp (figure 5; Lin- nifer Lotz (Space Telescope Science Institute) on
Ball N M et al. 2004 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 348 1038.
tott et al. 2009). This object has been shown to galaxy morphology in large samples at high red- Banerji M et al. 2010 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 406 432.
be a galaxy-scale gas cloud highly ionized by shift. Lotz reminded the meeting that morphol- Carter D 1978 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 182 797.
jets associated with AGN activity in IC 2497, a ogy at high redshift, particularly identifying Debattista V P et al. 2013 Ap. J 765 23.
Dekel A et al. 2009 Ap. J. 703 785.
neighbouring infrared–luminous disturbed spi- merging systems, is a tool to understand how
Gadotti D A and Kauffman G 2009 Mon. Not. R. Astron.
ral galaxy. However, X-ray and infrared obser- hierarchical assembly works on small scales to Soc. 399 621.
vations have established that IC 2497’s current grow galaxies (see Dekel et al. 2009). Follow- Gültekin K et al. 2009 Ap. J. 706 404.
Kaviraj S et al. 2013 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 429 L40.
AGN luminosity is insufficient to account for ing a series of talks about the possible relative
Keel W C et al. 2012 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 420 878.
the Voor werp’s appearance. This suggests that unimportance of merging, Lotz reminded us
Kormendy J and Bender R 2012 Ap. J. Supp. 198 2.
a drop of at least an order of magnitude in AGN that at least they can be observed and counted Lahav O et al. 1995 Science 267 859.
luminosity has taken place within the past few at high redshift; while gas accretion may play a Lintott C et al. 2009 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 399 129.
Masters K et al. 2012 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 424 2180.
hundred thousand years in IC 2497. Inspired significant role in galaxy evolution, it is impos-
Nair P B and Abraham R G 2010 Ap. J. Supp. 186 427.
by this discovery, Galaxy Zoo volunteers had sible to observe directly. Identifying mergers Raddick M J et al. 2010 Astronomy Education Review
found more examples of AGN-ionized gas consistently, however, is also not easy: confu- 9 010103.
clouds (Keel et al. 2012), which have been the sion with close non-merging pairs is always a Schawinski K et al. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. submitted.
Simmons B D et al. 2013 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 429
subject of an extensive HST programme. Of problem. Lotz’s use of the Gini-M method
20 2199.
the 19 studied in detail, it is exciting to note (which measures uniformity and concentration Willett K et al. 2013 Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. in press.
A&G • October 2013 • Vol. 54 5.19
Downloaded
University
Portsmouth