1v4840.6070:viXra
Motivation, Design, and Ubiquity:
A Discussion of Research Ethics
and Computer Science
David R. Wright
North Carolina State University
drwrigh3@ncsu.edu
Comments welcome — Please send to the author at the email address above.
Modernsocietyispermeatedwithcomputers,andthesoftwarethatcontrolsthemcanhavelatent,
long-term, and immediate effects that reach far beyond the actual users of these systems. This
placesresearchersinComputerScienceandSoftwareEngineeringinacriticalpositionofinfluence
andresponsibility,morethananyotherfieldbecausecomputersystemsarevitalresearchtoolsfor
other disciplines. Thisessaypresents several keyethical concerns and responsibilitiesrelatingto
research incomputing. The goal isto promote awareness anddiscussionof ethical issues among
computer science researchers. A hypothetical case study is provided, along with questions for
reflectionanddiscussion.
GeneralTerms: Codesofethics,Ethicaldilemmas
AdditionalKeyWordsandPhrases: Researchethics
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author acknowledges with great appreciation Gary Comstock, Thomas Hon-
eycutt, andEdGehringerfor their comments andguidance inpreparingthis essay.
1. INTRODUCTION
Computersandthesoftwarethatmakesthemworkhavepenetratedintonearlyev-
ery niche of modern life. Manufacturing, transportation, communications, medical
care,financial,and governmentsystems, amongothers, arehighly dependent upon
computers and software systems. This places the disciplines of Computer Science
andSoftwareEngineeringinaparticularlycriticalposition,wieldingmoreinfluence
over the day-to-day lives of people all over the world than any other single field of
research and application. Writing about engineering in general, Bugliarello[2005]
ThismaterialisbaseduponworksupportedbytheNationalScienceFoundationunderGrantNo.
9818359. Anyopinions,findingsandconclusionsorrecommendationsexpressedinthismaterialare
thoseoftheauthor(s)anddonotnecessarilyreflecttheviewsoftheNationalScienceFoundation
(NSF).
Copyright 2006, David R. Wright and North Carolina State University. Permission to make
digitalorhardcopies ofpartorallofthisworkforpersonalor classroomuseisgranted without
fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Abstracting with credit is
permitted.
notes that “...ethics of engineering must go beyond broad generalities and codes of
professional good conduct modeled after the Hippocratic oath.” Little of modern
engineering couldbe accomplishedwithout computers andsoftware,andcomputer
scientists and software engineers must be aware of the broad range of ethical re-
sponsibilities that come with being direct or indirect enablers of change.
Science and engineering are commonly distinguished as two different sorts of
activities. Science, generally speaking, is the pursuit of theoretical results, while
engineering seeks to apply those results through the creation and refinement of
technology. Computer science, as it is generally organized,taught, and researched,
stands in a unique position, intimately involved in both theoretical and applied
research. If engineering requires an ethical position beyond professional codes of
conduct, as Bugliarello notes, then a discipline that spans both theory and appli-
cation, and that touches so many facets of life, should be grounded in an equally
(or stronger) ethical foundation.
Indiscussionsofethicsandcomputing,topicssuchashacking,computerviruses,
software piracy, privacy, and security often come to mind. These subjects are
commonlycollectedunderthe headingof“ComputerEthics.” Thisessay,however,
isdirectedtowardsresearchers incomputerscienceandsoftwareengineering,andis
concernedwith the ethical conduct ofresearchin these andrelatedfields. Concern
forresearchethicsisgrowingthroughouttheresearchcommunityingeneral. Given
the impact research in computer science has had, and will continue to have, on a
globalscale,it is importantthat researchersin this discipline understandpotential
ethical dilemmas in their research.
Inthe LANGURE seriesofmodules,ethics isdefinedasthe studyofarguments
about right and wrong, good and bad. We have identified four theories that offer
guidance in this decision process, and in this essay we assume that the reader has
been introduced to these theories and how to apply them. As a basis for analyz-
ing the dilemmas we will discuss, we propose to use a simple and straightforward
principle: if everyone engagedin a particular behavior, would we consider that be-
haviorcorrectandproper? Itisimportanttonotethatthisperspectiveisconcerned
both with the act or behavior itself as well as the results. Judging the rightness
or wrongnessof anactconsequentalistandnonconsequentalistconsiderationsis an
importanttask in any areaof research. The readeris, of course, free to apply their
own ethical analysis of the situations presented.
The intent of this paper is not only to point out concerns and potential dilem-
mas,butalsotobuildawarenessandtoprovokediscussionoftheseimportantissues
within the discipline of Computer Science. Computers have become nearly ubiqui-
tous in modernsociety, and their influence reachesto the mostremote parts ofthe
globe. Researchincomputersciencecanoftenfindaplaceinreal-worldapplications
far faster than in any other discipline. As Wulf notes, the ripple effects from inno-
vations and technological achievements are often impossible to predict[2000], and
can affect the lives of millions of people. Furthermore, many sources for research
1LANGURE is an acronym for Land Grant University Research Ethics, a NSF-funded project
to develop a model curriculum inresearchethics for doctoral candidates. For moreinformation,
Research Ethics and ComputerScience 3
funding require ethical review of research projects, especially when these projects
involve human subjects. In many fields the line of demarcation regarding human
subjects or participants is clear. This is often not the case in computer science re-
search. How this discipline responds to growing economic and regulatory pressure
willdirectlyaffectresearchersincomputerscience,andindirectlyinfluenceresearch
in other disciplines that depend on innovations in computing for their livelihood.
The immediate goals of this essay are twofold: first, to identify some critical
ethicalconcernsandresponsibilities relatingto researchincomputing; andsecond,
to promote awareness and discussion among researchers in this field about ethical
concerns and issues. Section 2 examines practical aspects of computer science
research that involve ethical judgement. Section 3 reflects upon the preceding
discussionin conjunction with the reader’sownexperiences and observationsin an
attempt to evaluate the current level of ethical awareness in the discipline, and
what can (and should) be done to improve it. A hypothetical case is presented
in Section 4 along with questions to stimulate discussion. Section 5 lists Codes of
Conduct for researchersand practitioners of computer science and related fields.
2. ETHICAL CONCERNS IN THE CONDUCT OF
COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH
In this section we discuss several key ethical issues that impact computer science
research. These are practical concerns that most researchers in the field must be
aware of and address in the design, implementation, analysis, and reporting of re-
search projects. Most researchers in all fields are aware of the need to take special
care and precautions when their research involve human subjects. In computing
research,however,thereareoftenindividualsatriskofharmthatarenotatallobvi-
ous. Becauseoftheubiquityandcasualuseofcomputingdevicestoday,researchers
must carefully assess the possible risks to others using these devices. Researchers
mustalsoevaluatethepotentialforharmtothosewhogenerateinformationsources
subsequently used in experimental or case studies. Identifying at-risk individuals
and groups is an essential component of ethical researchconduct.
The quest for knowledge and understanding is an open-ended journey, requiring
researchers to look forward while building upon the work or predecessors. Some
areas of computing researchare relatively mature and stable while other areas are
more dynamic and fluid, and the level of stability is not necessarily dependent
upon how long significant research efforts have been underway. In these dynamic
areas, researchers are often faced with a difficult choice: corroborating prior work
to strengthenthe foundations of the researchareaor “pushing the envelope” while
relying on prior work that may be less reliable. The pressure to be original and
cutting edgecanbe enormous,with the potentialto makeorbreakacareer. These
decisions must be made under the influence of the basic scientific principles that
define and guide the conduct of researchin general.
We begin by looking at the role of software in research, both as the entity un-
der study and as a research tool to examine and measure other entities and/or
phenomena. Potential concerns include the objectivity of the software as well as
thesoftwaredeveloper(s),interactionsbetweendifferentcomputerprogramsand/or
computerhardware,andhumaninterference. Theseissuesraisesignificantbutoften
unacknowledgedethicalconcernsthatrequireextracareinthedesign,preparation,
and execution of software-relatedexperiments.
Software as the subject of research
Softwaresystemsareoftenplaced“underthemicroscope”ofscientificstudytoeval-
uate their performance under different situations and stresses. A researchproblem
is identified, and a hypothesis formulated as a solution to the problem. The hy-
pothesis is translated into a computer program, which is then tested against the
constraintsthatcharacterizetheproblem. Thehypothesisiseithercorroboratedor
falsified by the software tests.
To illustrate the potential ethical dilemmas involved in this research, consider
the typical softwaredevelopment process. A customer/clientidentifies a particular
problemto be solvedor goalto be achievedthroughthe developmentof a software
tool or system, for example, a web-based retail sales portal. The problem or goal
is described in detail by a set of requirements stating exactly what the software
should and should not do. In this example, the requirements would state privacy
and security policies, protocols allowing the application to interact with shipping
companies to calculate delivery costs, interfaces with the company’s product and
customer databases and accounting systems, user interface design, etc., as well as
specific requirements for demonstrating that the expected improvement actually
occurs. These requirementsaretranslatedinto specifications for the system, which
form the basis for the design and implementation of the software. Test suites are
also developed to evaluate the correct behavior of the delivered product, based on
the identified requirements. Software that does not pass a predefined minimal set
of tests is judged to be unacceptable because it does not fulfill a minimal set of
requirements.
While a researchhypothesis usually will notprovide a full set of requirements in
aformalandexplicitmanner,thoserequirementsexistimplicitly inthedescription
of the problem, the context in which the problem is being investigated, and the
solution proposed by the hypothesis. An example might involve the development
ofanewalgorithmforsearchingdatabases. Theresearcher’shypothesisstatesthat
this new algorithm resolves a problem existing algorithms exhibit when searching
for particular kinds of information in databases using certain types of structure or
organization. The hypothesis specifies an algorithm (with specific requirements as
to its implementation), a particular kind of search operation (characterizing the
contents of the databases), and the structure and organization of those databases.
These requirements define the functional and nonfunctional behaviors and char-
acteristics of the research software just as they do in a commercial development
project. This leads to two questions:
(1) If the software under study appears to corroborate the hypothesis, is this due
to a weak suite of tests, a weakly stated hypothesis, “creative programming,”
or accurate corroboration?
Research Ethics and ComputerScience 5
(2) Ifthesoftwareunderstudyappearstofalsifyordisprovethehypothesis,isthis
a resultofan errorin creatingthe software(or testsuite), anintentionaleffort
to disprove the hypothesis, or an accurate falsification?
Answering these questions is not a trivialtask, andwill require carefulexamina-
tionofexperimentaldesign,softwaredevelopment,environmentalconstraints,data
collection and analysis, and duplicability. Computers are fundamentally determin-
istic machines: they do what they are told to do. If the results are not what was
expected, is it because the expectation was wrong, or does the fault exist in the
instructions given? Similarly, if the end results correspond with the expectations,
is it because the expectations were valid, or was a particular set of instructions
chosenthatwouldleadto those resultsregardlessofthe validity ofthe hypothesis?
Defects in software are the norm rather than the exception, and most of the
research in software engineering over the past forty years has sought processes
to develop software systems with fewer defects, and techniques to detect defects
more reliably. Complicating the defect level is the difficulty in exhaustively testing
software systems to guarantee “zero defects” in the delivered product. Based on
the historical track record of software development, an unexpected falsification of
a research hypothesis is often viewed with a degree of skepticism, spurring more
careful examination of the software under study and the environmentin which the
failure occurred. This may then lead to a correction of defects in the software or
test suite, or a re-evaluation of the hypothesis.
Similarly, programming errors can also result in a false positive experimental
result. The software under study may not accurately reflect the requirements im-
plied in the hypothesis, or the test suite (experimental setup) may not accurately
measure the results, either accidentally or intentionally. Researchers must apply
the same level of skepticism and caution to justify positive results as they do to
mitigate a negative outcome. Furthermore, detailed records and documentation
must be maintained in order to justify the correctness of the experimental ap-
proach, software design and implementation, experimental environment (hardware
and software), and collected data[1998].
Inthesamepaper,Zobelpointsoutseveralotherrelatedethicalproblemsinem-
pirical studies of software,noting that the actual implementation code itself is not
sufficientdocumentationofanexperiment. Aresearcher’sbiastowardsaparticular
algorithm or implementation can alter the results of an experiment. The choice of
data, underlying hardware and software, and the quality of the implementations
used in an experiment can have significanteffects on the results. Programmerskill
andexperiencewiththe hardwareenvironmentcanalsohavecriticaleffects: apro-
grammer with minimal experience using the C programming language on a UNIX
orLinuxmachinemaywritelessreliablecodethanonewithmoreextensiveexperi-
ence. Healsonotesthatitisnotsufficienttonotethataparticularimplementation
workedforaparticulardataset;itmustbeshowntoworkconsistentlyonavariety
ofinputdata. Additionally,theexperimentermustexplainwhy theimplementation
worked, as well as providing detailed information about failures[1998]. These are
among the standards for researchin most other scientific disciplines, and certainly
should be in computer science.
Researchersmustalsoexercisecareintheselectionandapplicationofmetricsand
analysismethods. Thesearchforreliablemetricscontinuestobeanactiveresearch
area, motivated, in part, by the need to define a core set of measurements and
analysestomeasurevariousaspectsofsoftwarequalityandperformance. ElEmam,
Benlarbi,Goel,andRaidemonstratedthatevencommonlyacceptedmetricsarenot
asreliableasexpected,identifyinga“confoundingeffect”incertainobject-oriented
source code metrics[2001]. These metrics had been shown to correlate with the
fault-proneness of a classimplementation, but using the method they developedto
controlfortheclassimplementationsize,themetricsnolongershowedtheexpected
relationship. Repeating priorexperiments by other researchersgeneratedthe same
results (i.e., the lack of correlation between the metrics and the defects), leading
them to question the common use of these metrics and to recommend revisiting
previous studies to confirm earlier conclusions.
Metrics andanalysismethods areprimaryinstruments ofcomputerscientists re-
searching software systems. The development and validation of these metrics and
methods is complicated by the dynamic and diverse nature of computing itself:
metrics are usually dependent upon the programming language used and the plat-
formwherethe softwareisexecuted. Alackofconsensusonthe topic ofmeasuring
instruments and metrics combined with minimal attention directed towards the
quality of measurement results in this discipline, as comparedto other science and
engineering fields, further complicates the researcher’s work [2002]. Jones [1994] is
even more critical: “The software industry is an embarrassment when it comes to
measurementandmetrics,”notingthatthemeasurementsgenerallyreportedinthe
literaturelacktheprecisiontoduplicatetheauthor’swork,acanonicalrequirement
in other scientific disciplines.
Because software is a human-created entity, and is fundamentally deterministic
(although this determinism may be obscured by the system’s complexity), many
opportunitiesforbias,bothintentionalandaccidental,existinthestudyofsoftware
itself. Furthermore, computer software is an artifact of human creation that exists
(as a dynamic phenomenon)within another artificial,human-createdenvironment,
and researchers must be careful to ensure the objectivity of experimental designs
andimplementations. Softwarewrittenfortheexpressedpurposeofdemonstrating
a particularperformancecharacteristicshouldbe asneutralas possible,andwhere
implementation biases exist, they must be disclosed and their effect on the results
explainedtoallowotherresearchersandpractitionerstorelatethoseresultstotheir
own work — this is a hallmark of responsible science. Well-known and understood
metricsshouldbeusedwheneverpossible,andanypossiblebiasesinmeasurement,
such as those identified in [2001], should also be accounted for in the analysis of
the results. The failure to disclose biases, either actual or potential, in the imple-
mentation, metrics, or analysis of experimental software can easily be interpreted
as laziness or even as an attempt to intentionally deceive others, neither of which
are acceptable in scientific research[1993,p. 168].
Detailed record-keeping is an essential aspect of scientific research,but one that
is often neglected in software research. Part of this is attributable to the feeling
that “the recordsarein the software”and associateddocumentation[1998]. As Zo-
bel goes on to point out, this is a very weak assumption on several accounts. The
Research Ethics and ComputerScience 7
current version of the software, while a result of all the changes that occurred in
prior versions, usually does not retain all of the original code. The relationships
between the source code, software requirements and design, experimental design,
and research hypothesis can easily be obscured, and the source code itself cannot
capture and store the entire sequence of design and implementation decisions that
led to it: the finished product is a result of all of those decisions, but not a record
of them. Zobel’s recommendation is to adopt the practices of other research dis-
ciplines, keeping detailed daily journals of all research-related work, use version
control systems to maintain all versions of experimental software, and to record
detailed logs of all experimental data, even if there is no expectation of using all
of the data generated[1998]. The nature of software and the virtual environment
in which it exists does not permit short-cutting the essential tasks of researchers.
Rather, this nature and environment require as much, if not more care, discipline,
and effort than may be common in other fields.
Software as a research tool
In addition to being the subject of investigation, software is used in computer sci-
ence research as a tool for making a variety of measurements in existing or new
systems, either hardware or software. The use of software benchmarks (programs
that measure the performance of hardware and software systems) became popular
in the early 1980s,spurredby the variety of hardwareplatforms resulting fromthe
introduction of personal computer systems. These results generated by these tools
werefrequentlyusedincommercialadvertisingaswellasinresearchenvironments.
Benchmarking software continues to be a widely used method for evaluating hard-
wareandsoftwaresystemperformance,particularlyinresearchenvironments. The
problems surroundingthe choice of measuring instruments, how the measurements
are actually implemented in the system under study, and the interpretation of the
results raise several ethics-related issues.
We begin a discussion about the ethical use of software instrumentation with
several concerns, based on the work of Levy and Clark[1982],regarding the choice
ofbenchmarksoftware. Firstandforemost,aresearchermustunderstandwhatitis
that the benchmark program actually measures, as well as the specific behavior(s)
or attribute(s) to be measured. Pointing out weaknesses in benchmark software,
Gustafson identifies several examples of benchmarks that do not necessarily mea-
sure what the user might expect. One example checks the results of floating-point
calculations to only four decimal places, although the benchmark program itself
requires the use of high-precision (64-bit) data[2004]. This approximation saves
processing time, but if the user is interested in floating-point mathematical oper-
ations and is not aware of this benchmark’s limitations, the interpretation of the
results may be in error. Investigating the health benchmark, Ziles found that
this particular tool was not a valid benchmark for the type of measurementit per-
formed, but rather was a “micro-benchmark” and an inefficient one at that[2001].
The health benchmark is a health care simulator that models a hierarchy of hos-
pitals and the patients undergoing treatment at each one, and is used to evaluate
theperformanceoflinkeddatastructures. Zilesfoundthatthebenchmarkactually
measured traversal time over long linked-lists, and demonstrated an algorithmic
modification to the benchmark itself that improved the execution time of the tool
by a factor of 200. Furthermore, he also found that the model itself is flawed be-
causethe number ofpatients arrivingexceedsthe capacityofthe hospitalsto treat
and discharge them; thus as the simulation is run for longer times to collect more
data, the reported performance of the system under evaluation will decline as the
waiting list grows longer and longer.
A second area of concern that Levy and Clark identify is that of bias in bench-
marks as a result of how the programs are implemented, including the particular
programming language and/or compiler used to create the program[1982]. Pro-
gramming languages have different features and semantics that may offer more
efficient ways of coding specific operations. Compilers are platform-specific, and
may also perform optimizations tailored to specific hardware architectures. While
a researcher might be able to easily recognize optimizations resulting from the
choice of programming language or particular features within a language, identi-
fying architecture-specific optimizations performed by a compiler is a much more
difficult task. Levy and Clark highlight an example of this kind of bias using sev-
eral different benchmark programs written in different languages, and compiled
and executed on different hardware platforms[1982]. Their goal was to compare
the performanceofthese toolsto identify differencesrelatedto the implementation
languageandexecutionplatform. Theyconcludedthatthebenchmarkperformance
cannotbeattributedtoanyonefactor,andthatthistypeofscalarmeasurementof
execution time is not a reliable way to compare the performance of different hard-
ware and software systems. A direct comparison of two different compilers, using
the samehardwarearchitectureandplatform, wasdone recentlyby Gurumaniand
Milenkovic, who found that code compiled by the Intel C++ compiler performed
better thancodegeneratedbyMicrosoft’sVisualC++compilerusingarecognized
standard benchmark suite[2004].
The Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation (SPEC) CPU2000 suite of
benchmarks is an industry-standardized reference for measuring a computer sys-
tem’s processor,memory, and compiler support[2000]. Citron surveyed 173 papers
published in three respected computer architecture conferences two years after the
suite’s introduction. He found that 115 of these papers cited the use of of a SPEC
benchmark, but only 23 of these used then entire suite[2003]. Of the 92 partial
uses, only 27 papers discussed the reason(s) for not using the entire suite. This
survey raises two concerns: the limited use of the entire suite of benchmarks that
arewidely acceptedasstable andreliableperformancemeasuringinstruments;and
the lack of explanation for omitting some of the tests or substituting simulated
results in place of actual measurements. Citron notes that this partial use can be
misleadingtoreaders,particularlywhenlittle ornoexplanationisgiven—readers
maynothavesufficientinformationtodrawrealisticconclusionsabouttheresearch
results.
Hennessy, Citron, Patterson, and Sohi[2003] continue this discussion, generally
drawing the same conclusions regarding the misuse of the SPEC benchmarks as
Citrondidinthepapernotedabove. Sohi,however,arguesthattherearesometimes
extenuatingcircumstancesfornotusingtheentiresuite: notallofthetoolscompile,
certain tools evaluate aspects of performance not thought to be related to the
Research Ethics and ComputerScience 9
problem at hand, etc. He compares this to pharmaceutical researchers who do
not try to evaluate a new drug’s performance against all possible diseases. This
statement is misleading on two key points. First, as Hennessy points out in the
conclusionofthisdiscussion,alternativeapplicationsaresometimesfoundfordrugs
thatarenoteffectivefortheiroriginalpurpose,citingViagraasanexample. Second,
Sohidoesnotrecognizethatmostoftheresearchperformedonanewdrugpriorto
[human] clinical trials is designed to determine the positive and negative effects of
the drug[2006]. Concern for negative side effects continues throughout the clinical
testing phase[2006],and throughoutthe life of the drug, as exhibited by the recent
removal of an entire group of drugs (including Vioxx, Celebrex, and Bextra) from
the market as a result of significant risks to patients[2004]. Unfortunately, Sohi
seems to ignore the fact that thoroughtesting canilluminate negative behaviorsin
computer systems that limited benchmarking may hide.
The third issue that computer scientists who are using benchmarks need to be
awareofishowthebenchmarkprograminteractswiththesystemunderstudy. On
one hand, a programthat consumes excessive resourcessuch as memory, processor
time, or disk I/O may significantly affect the measurements made. On the other
hand, if the benchmark does not interact sufficiently with the system under study,
it may not be able to accurately collect data from the system. The compromise
usuallyinvolvessomekindofdatasamplingcoupledwithstatisticalanalysis. Often,
this analysisisthe computationofameanvalue fora dataset,althoughthe choice
of which mean (arithmetic, harmonic, or geometric) to use is sometimes a matter
fordispute. Masheyconcludesthatthechoiceofwhichmeantouseforaparticular
benchmark is less important than understanding the statistical distribution of the
data set[2004].
Benchmarkingtoolsareanecessarycomponentofcomputerscienceresearchand
can effectively and positively influence the maturity of the discipline by providing
a commonsetofexperimentalevaluationstools andtechniques. The availabilityof
standardized, well-defined means of making measurements is an essential element
ofscience andresearch. This commongroundfostersconsensus,collaboration,and
rigor[2003]. It is critical, however, that the tools themselves are well understood
and documented so that researcherscan choosethe instrument appropriate for the
task at hand. Researchers must also take responsibility for the benchmarks they
choose to employ, andfully disclose the reasonsfor making those choices as well as
detailed explanations of how the tools are used. It is also essential to accurately
and specifically define what is measured and why.
Basic principles of scientific inquiry
Rational discourse, replication, and criticism are cornerstones of modern scientific
inquiry,providingthemeanstoadvancescienceandtotranslatetheoryintopractice
and technology. They also help define what is and is not responsible conduct
and reporting of research, a critical topic for a relatively young discipline such as
computer science. We will consider each of these three subjects as they apply to
computerscienceresearchanddiscusshowanawarenessoftheirethicalimportance
can improve and strengthen researchefforts in this discipline.
Rationaldiscourseis the clearandcommonlyunderstoodcommunicationamong
scientistsofadiscipline,andbetweenthemandresearchersinotherdisciplinesand
the “outside” world. On the surface, this communication involves style and stan-
dardsforpublication,andcomputersciencehasbuiltlargelyuponearlierstandards
established in fields like mathematics and logic. It is important, however, to look
beyondthehow wecommunicateandexaminewhat wediscussandwhy. Computer
sciencehasevolvedfromits originsinmathematicsandlogictoencompassabroad
diversity of research areas, ranging from formal languages and models of compu-
tation, stochastic processes, algorithms, and data structures to human-computer
interaction, networked and embedded computing, and the many specialties that
fall under the umbrella of software engineering. Over the past fifty years, com-
puters have moved from the isolated and controlled “computer room” to a nearly
ubiquitous presence in modern life.
This variety of perspectives has led to a corresponding diversity of research in
computer science. Without a well-defined body of knowledge, these “branches”
have fed primarily on themselves in terms of prior foundational work. While di-
versity of opinion and research emphasis is not a sign of poor ethical judgement
or practice, relying strictly on one path of research introduces additional risk into
theresearcheffortitself,particularlywhenreferencestoworkoutsidethatperspec-
tive are the exception rather than the rule in new research. Precisely because the
body of knowledge is still youthful and growing, it is critically important to relate
new research to other investigations into the same or similar problems. It is also
important to seek out and relate research in fields outside software engineering to
this new work, as results in other fields may have direct and valuable bearing on
computer science research.
In his 1993 Turing Award Lecture, Hartmanis argues that computer science is
fundamentally different from other sciences because it does not conform to the
paradigms of the physical sciences [1994]. The “defining characteristics of com-
puterscience”includetheunprecedenteddifferenceinscalebetweenindividualbits
ofdataandprogramsandthebillionsofinstructionsoroperationscarriedouteach
second by modern computers and the different roles played by theory and experi-
ment. Theories are used to develop methodologies, models, logics, and semantics
to be used onprogramdesignandimplementation, rather thanto explainobserva-
tions and predict new phenomena. Experiments in computer science demonstrate
the validity ofthese methods andmodels, constrainedbytheir designcontextsand
actual implementations. Hartmanis concludes that computer science is indeed an
“independent new science, but it is intertwined and permeated with engineering
concerns and considerations” and a “new form of engineering...the engineering of
mathematics or mathematical processes.”[1994]Because of these differences, Hart-
manis contends that research in computer science, and the rules of more “tradi-
tional” sciences do not equally apply, in particular to empirical research.
Stewart counters Hartmanis’s arguments by first noting that physics deals with
multiple scales: phenomena ranging fromthe tiniest subatomic particles to the en-
tireuniverse[1995],aspanofatleast10 inmagnitudeandeclipsingthe“immense
differences in scale” that Hartmanis claims are present in computer science[1994].
Stewart also notes that many researchareas in computer science are equally capa-
Research Ethics and Computer Science 11
ble of developing theories that can be empirically judged rather than just demon-
strated, suggesting the common relation between theory and experiment in this
discipline is a “fatalflaw to be remedied” rather than a reasonfor maintaining the
status quo[1995]. Stewart agrees that computer science is a science in the tradi-
tional sense, while sternly criticizing the discipline for its failure to adhere to the
basicprinciplesofmodernscience. Inparticular,henotesthatmanysubdisciplines
relymoreonexploratoryexperimentationratherthanstatingwell-definedproblems
amicable to theoretical and empirical analysis.
Freeman asserts that an effective computer science research program requires
not only a strong core knowledge, but must also interact with other disciplines in
a larger, real-world context [1995]. Hartmanis also asserted that computer science
must“increaseitscontactandintellectualinterchangewithotherdisciplines,” look
for important emerging computer science problems in other fields, avoid focusing
on distinctions between basic and applied researchand development, and embrace
thetransferofknowledgebetweenacademic,industrialandsocialresearchers[1992].
Levesonhas noted the need to incorporateresearchin socialandcognitive sciences
into software engineering research[1997]. Glass, Vessy, and Ramesh also concluded
thatsoftwareengineeringresearchisbothnarrowinresearchmethodandapproach,
andfocuses onitself as a reference discipline rather thanlooking outwardfor foun-
dational or supportive research[2002]. Given the current ubiquity of computing
and the prospect that it will become more and more integrated into society, it is
imperative that research topics and discourse become more open and active in in-
terdisciplinary research efforts. Computer science must build not only upon itself,
but must actively seek out and build upon research and theory from other disci-
plines. Failuretodosoisabreachoftheimpliedmoralandsocialcontractbetween
science and society.
The ability to duplicate the work of other researchers is perhaps the most fun-
damentalprinciple andresponsibilityof science. Repeating anexperimentallowsa
new result to be corroboratedor refuted, as well as providing the means to restate
andrefinetheproblemunderconsideration. Duplicatingthepriorworkofotherre-
searchersisoftenalsomorethansimplyrecreatingtheearlierexperiment: thelater
researcher should also be looking for new results that extend or clarify the earlier
work or have stated a thesis outlining why the duplication is expected to fail. It
is the continual refinement of hypotheses that builds credibility of researchers and
results alike.
Rational discourse is a requisite for replicating research. Clear and precise de-
scriptionsofexperimentalsetupsandprotocols,researchhypotheses,resultsantici-
patedbasedontheoreticalanalyses,andcompleterecordsofcollecteddataprovide
the groundwork from which other researchers can attempt to corroborate, refute,
and refine existing research. From these attempts to duplicate prior work new,
andpotentially moreinteresting,problemsbecome clear. Detailed recordscanalso
protect researchers against accusations of fraud or misconduct, just as lapses may
indicate their presence.
Given the diversity of research topics within computer science, there cannot be
a single standard of judgement for documentation and record keeping. Some ex-
periments, e.g., those studying human reactions or interactions with computing
systems,willhaverequirementsclosertothoseofpsychologicalorcognitivescience
research, while areas such as experimental algorithmics will not require the same
degree ofdetail[1998]. Zobel alsopoints outthat, inlight ofrapidly changing com-
puter technology, it may be nearly impossible to experimentally reproduce results,
but that these results should illustrate the same underlying phenomena.
It is the responsibility of computer science researchersto build upon the work of
others, while creating new knowledge and understanding to extend and strengthen
the discipline. For a young discipline or subarea, it is often critical to look outside
the immediate bounds ofthatresearchareato similarfields inotherareasofinves-
tigation. Unfortunately,thatoutward-lookingattitude istheexceptionratherthan
the ruleincomputerscienceandsoftwareengineering: 89%and98%(respectively)
of literature references were within the field of study according to one survey of
publications[2004]. Not only does this introversionplace limits on possible insights
and innovations, it reflects a separation from the larger community of science and
society.
Thisleadsustotheissueofcriticismwithintherationaldiscourseofadiscipline.
Science grows through critical analysis and testing of hypotheses: one need only
look at the history of science to see this phenomenon. But critical analysis is only
effective when hypotheses are stated clearly and precisely. Generalizations may be
easy to corroborate, but ultimately tell us little about the real world, since they
can be very difficult to disprove.
Popper identifies four critical lines of testing[1959, pp. 32-33]for scientific theo-
ries:
—The comparison of conclusions among themselves for internal consistency.
—Investigationofatheory’slogicalformtodetermineifitisempirical/scientificor
tautological.
—Comparisonwithother theoriesto determine ifitrepresentsascientificadvance.
—Testing via empirical application of conclusions derived from the theory.
The identification of these types of testing lead to his definition of the term
falsifiability as the ability for a scientific system to be refuted by experience[1959,
pp. 40-41]. Basically, he asserts that scientific theories are not “proven true” by
positive results, but only supported temporarily pending a negative result. He
also shows that the empirical content of a statement increases with the degree of
falsifiability — the more specific a theory is (e.g., the more it forbids), the more
that theory says about the world of experience[1959, p.119]. For example, the
statement“therearewhite ravens”is notfalsifiablewithoutexaminingeveryraven
that exists, past, present, and future, everywhere in the universe. Such statements
areconsideredby Popperto be non-empirical. Onthe otherhand,a statementlike
“all ravens are black” is falsifiable; one need only find a single raven that is not
black to refute the hypothesis. In short, scientific criticism is enabled by testable
hypotheses.
Glass, et. al. found that the majority of publications in computer science and
software engineering presented abstract and formulative research findings[2002,
Research Ethics and Computer Science 13
2004]. Hartmanis uses this emphasis on the abstract how to justify computer
science’s distinction as a new kind of science[1994], while Stewart[1995] criticizes
the vague and often unstated problems and hypotheses that characterize some ar-
eas of research in the discipline. Tichy, Lukowicz, Prechelt, and Heinz are less
gentle[1995]: theycallthelackofexperimentalevaluationincomputerscience“un-
acceptable, even alarming,” echoing Jones[1994] characterization of the software
industry as “amateurish craft” and an “embarrassment.” They discount explana-
tions regarding the youth of the discipline, the difficulty of experimentation, and
the fear of negative career impact, with the unstated implication that the root
cause may be simple laziness or not wanting to figuratively rock the boat. The
risk of damage to the discipline is great, and because of the intimacy and perva-
siveness of computing today, the risk to society as a whole is even greater. To
paraphraseAsimov’sZerothLawofRobotics[1985]: “Acomputerscientistmaynot
injure humanity, or, through inaction, allow humanity to come to harm.”
Human participants in computing research
Whenthetopicofhumanparticipantsincomputerscienceresearchisdiscussed,the
firstarea that probablycomes to mind is human-computer interaction. Evaluation
of educational methods or analytic/modeling techniques for software development
would likely follow close behind. There are, however, other research areas that
involve human participants in more subtle ways. In this section, we consider some
oftheseareasthroughdiscussionsofspecificcases. Weconcludewithacomparison
of corporate entities and human participants in research, and raise some hitherto
unaskedquestionsaboutpotentialethicalissuesparallelingthoseconcerninghuman
subjects.
The first case we consider is that of research involving open source software
(OSS). El-Emam points out that OSS is an attractive alternative for researchers
desiringto analyze largesoftwaresystems,as the sourcecode is publicly andfreely
available[2001]. He also points out that developers of OSS code did not intend
for their work to be used as the subject of research, and thus informed consent
must be given in order to use the code. However, the task of getting consent
from everyone involved in an OSS project is daunting: there may be hundreds or
even thousands of contributors, and a researcher cannot know in advance which
particular individual’s contributions are going to be the subject of analysis. El-
Emam also raises questions regarding minimization of harm and confidentiality.
Version control systems used in OSS projects tag contributions with information
identifying the developer responsible for each piece of code integrated into the
system. If the research resulting in the publication of code segments, particularly
in a negative manner, the source code could be traced back to the individual who
wrote it, and possibly cause that person professional or personal harm.
Responding to this dilemma, Vinson and Singer note that eliminating personal
identifiers from the reported data in order to maintain confidentiality reduces the
needforinformedconsent,butdoesnotnecessarilyeliminateit[2001]. Furthermore,
removing personal identifiers is far from simple. Consider a popular open source
e-mailclientthatisavailableforawidevarietyofhardwareplatformsandoperating
systems: Mozilla Thunderbird. Even if the name of this particular program was
not stated, the set of possible candidates is small. Including a segment of source
code could facilitate the identification of the program with a search of the OSS
project’ssourcecoderepositoryaswellastheidentityofthecontributingdeveloper.
Vinson and Singer also point out that removing identifiers inhibits replicating the
research because subsequent researchers cannot be sure they are evaluating the
same software. This also reduces the compatibility of the initial results with later
findings for the same reason. They conclude that research with OSS is “fraught
with ethical issues,” and encourage researchersto be proactive in the development
of ethical guidelines for this type of research.
A second case is described by Storey, Phillips, and Maczewski, where they con-
ducted research, using students as subjects, on web-based learning tools[2001].
Among the ethical issues they raised were the inadvertent coercion of students to
participate (by giving course credit to participants), the fairness between students
who dropped out and those who did not, and the involvement of the instructor
andteachingassistantasexperimentersinthe research. Participantsalsofacedthe
stress of learning and switching between new and unfamiliar tools, as well as ex-
traordinarytime demands onthe teaching staffdue to questions aboutand defects
in the systems under evaluation. Davis provides extensive insight into the ethical
issues in this case, focusing on the coercion that existed in the experiment[2001].
Davis notes that the students who “volunteered” for the study had registered for
theclasswithoutknowingabouttheresearch. Studentsregisteredfortheclasswith
the expectation of doing the usual course work, but were then faced with making
an unexpected choice between participating in the researchor writing a significant
reviewofthetoolsusedinthestudy. Changingtheirscheduleswouldhaveincurred
significant financial cost, further coercing students into participating in the study.
While this choice is not necessarily wrong, he notes that it does require justifi-
cation from two perspectives: 1) that the new requirement (participating in the
study or writing the review) has positive value for the students, and 2) there is no
less-coercive means to achieve the resulting good. Davis concludes by questioning
why the institution’s ethics review committee did not identify the coercion in the
experiment.
Sieber notes similarities betweenstudents andemployeesassubjects in research,
in particular their vulnerability to psychological, social and economic harm[2001].
Recruitment by coworkers or supervisors can be coercive; announcements should
be made in public forums and volunteers accepted in private to minimize the peer
pressure to participate. Singer and Vinson identified other ethical issues involving
research in corporate environments with employee subjects[2002]. In the course
of their research, managerialapproval was required before subjects could be inter-
viewedtoensurethattheemployeeswerenotbotheredduringcriticalworkperiods,
compromising the anonymity of the subjects. Observationof employees at work in
most corporateenvironments (i.e., cubicles) clearlyidentifies subjects to coworkers
and supervisors. Singer and Vinson also emphasized the need to work with large
groups of subjects to minimize the chance of identifying individuals from research
reports. Finally,they notedthatemployerssponsoringresearch,andallowingtheir
employeestoparticipateinit, areofteninterestedinhowthesubjectsareperform-
Research Ethics and Computer Science 15
ing. Not only are confidentiality issues at work, but there is potential conflict of
interest between the good of the research, the good of the employee/subject, and
the good of the company.
Seamanraises new questions about a researcher’sinteractions with employees in
her case regarding a pair of qualitative studies conducted at two different compa-
nies[2001]. To help foster a relaxed relationship with the subjects, the researcher
(Seaman) engaged in frequent informal conversation with the employees at both
companies. The second company knew of the first study, and in the course of
these informal conversations, asked questions about the work practices at the first
company. Evading the questions might reinforce the observer-subject relationship
and compromise the research, while answering them might cause employees to be
concernedabouttheresearcherdiscussingtheir workhabitswithasubsequentcom-
pany,alsoriskingthe qualityofthe research. Gotterbarnrespondsto this dilemma
by asserting that this is not a research ethics problem, but an awkward situation,
pointing out that the ethical principles are clear. Only information specifically
authorized in the consent agreement can be discussed. Handled tactfully, the re-
searcher can use this situation to build additional trust between herself and the
company[2001].
3. IS RESEARCH ETHICS A NEGLECTED TOPIC IN THE TRAINING OF COM-
PUTER SCIENCE RESEARCHERS?
The purpose of this essay has been to point out some ethical issues that can occur
in the course of research in computer science. We have purposely avoided topics
such as plagiarism,authorship, and more general principles of responsible research
conduct,asthesearecommontoallresearchareas. Issuespertainingtoprofessional
ethics have also been omitted, as they relate to the conduct of practitioners in in-
dustryratherthanresearchers,topicsthatarebetteraddressedinareviewdirected
at professional practice. It is hoped that by focusing attention on these less than
obvious issues researchers in computer science and related fields will become more
awareofethicalconcernsintheirresearchandbegindialogsamongtheircolleagues
on the subject.
Tohighlighttheproblem,weconcludebybrieflydiscussingasurveyconductedto
investigate the awarenessof researchethics among academic computer science and
softwareengineeringresearchersinthe United Kingdom,withdiscouragingresults.
Amongthe resultsHallandFlynnreported,only 16ofthe 44respondentsconsider
monitoring the ethical considerations of software engineering research to be very
important[2001]. The other respondents stated they did not have feelings either
way(39%),theyconsidersuchmonitoringnotimportant(18%),ortheydon’tknow
(7%). Hall and Flynn also reported some striking comments from respondents:
“I find this questionnaire very worrying because the idea of having to
seek ethical approval threatens academic freedom.”
“(Seeking ethical approval) has never arisen and I don’t know why this
is an issue.”
“No one is responsible for the ethical approval of CS research.”
ThissurveywasconductedintheUKandtheresultsmaynotbedirectlyextrap-
olated to universities in the United States. However, this author’s conversations
with graduate students and faculty confirms a more general apathy towards re-
search ethics. Many students, in particular, are not aware of review requirements
forhumansubjectsinresearch. Evenmorediscouraging,however,wastheattitude
towardsresearchethicsshownbysomeofthecandidatestheauthorhadtheoppor-
tunity to question during a recent faculty search. Several of these candidates (all
were currently full professors) did not see the relevance or importance of research
ethics trainingfor PhDstudents incomputer science,evenwhensomeofthe situa-
tionsdiscussedinthis essayweredescribedto them. Theirethicalconcernsrelated
to plagiarism and cheating. While these are certainly important topics, there are
other very significant ethical issues in computer science research as this essay has
tried to illustrate.
Faultyresearchincomputersciencemaynothavetheobviouseffectsthatfailures
in medicine or other disciplines may exhibit. Rather, these effects may be subtle
and very difficult to identify when they find their way into real-worldapplications,
butcanaffectthelivesofmillionsofpeople. Computersareroutinelyusedtomodel
and forecast weather, crop production, the spread of infectious diseases, economic
markets,and many other complex systems. Modernsociety relies onthese models,
and subtle flaws or undocumented behaviors resulting from shortcuts in research
can have both immediate and long-term effects. Algorithms can be incorporated
into commonly used software tools (e.g., spreadsheets, database systems, internet
search engines, etc.) based upon the performance reported in researchpapers, but
if the real-world performance does not meet the expectations from the research,
time and money are wasted.
It is not hard to imagine scenarios where computers can have significant con-
sequences for people in the remotest parts of the world, people who have never
seen a computer themselves. Consider the following example. A deadly disease
begins spreading through small, remote villages. Health officials use computers
to store and analyze data collected on the disease, tracking its spread to identify
infection vectors and characterizing its symptoms to narrow the possible causes.
If the software does not perform as expected, based on the research leading to
its implementation, critical time is wasted pursuing false leads. Other researchers
use computer-aided microscopy and other analysis methods to visualize the virus
andmapitsstructureforcomparisontoknownviruses,withmorepotentialforlost
time. Drugcompaniesusethecollecteddatatoguidedataminingsoftwarethrough
their repositories of compounds they have developed, searching for potential treat-
ments, cures, and vaccines. A data mining algorithm that was reported to work
wellonthiskindandscaleofinformation,basedonpartialtestingandsimulations,
does notperformto expectations,but this flaw is unnoticedbecausethe size ofthe
data sources and complexity of the search criteria prevent manual correlation as a
backup, and a probable cure goes uninvestigated. These are not “defects” in the
usualsenseofthe term—the softwaredoesnotcrash,visiblyerroneousresultsare
not generated — everything seems to be working as designed.
Thepervasivenessofcomputersmakesthispossible. Computerscienceisaunique
discipline,andneeds aunique andcomprehensiveapproachto researchethics. Our
Research Ethics and Computer Science 17
modernsocietyreliesheavilyoncomputer systemsthathavethe potentialtoreach
into the remotest parts of the world. Researchers must be aware of the immediate
consequencesoftheirdecisionsaswellasthelong-termandfar-reachingeffectsthey
can have on the world. Society expects this level of diligence from researchers in
medicine, biotechnology, agriculture, energy, and many other disciplines. Because
computersareavitalpartofvirtuallyeveryotherresearcharea,computerscientists
should hold themselves to these high standards and expectations.
4. CASE STUDY
Ken and Ann are doctoral students working under Dr. Smith, an internationally
respected computer scientist whose specialty is the static analysisof large software
systems. Static analysis is used to analyze how a software system will behave
without actually executing the program. The results of this analysis can be used
to identify programming defects and verify behavior against specifications. Over
the past decade, Dr. Smith and his students, along with colleagues from other
institutions, have developed and refined a suite of tools for identifying software
defects using static analysis. Ken and Ann have each made separate modifications
to detect two kinds of defects that are currently not identifiable using this suite
of tools. Their experimental setup includes “control” software systems written
specifically to include and exclude the particular defects they are interested in, as
well as mission-critical systems provided by four vendors who are also providing
funding for the research in exchange for access to the resulting data.
Testing their modified tools against the control systems generates the expected
results — the intentionally introduced defects are identified, and there are no false
positives. Satisfied with these results, Ken and Ann independently run their tools
against seven real-worldsystems, where both notice an interesting anomaly. Their
tools do indeed identify the defects, but both also return a statistically significant
number of false positives from one vendor’s supplied systems.
Kenattemptstoduplicatethefalsepositivesbymodifyingthedefect-freecontrol
toincludethecodecausingtheerrorsinthevendorsystems. Allofhistrialsagainst
these modified controls fail to replicate the false positives generated by the actual
systems. Stymied, Kenconcludesthattheremustbe somesubtleties inotherparts
of the vendor’s design or implementation that is causing the false positives.
Meanwhile, Ann takes a different track to identify the cause of the anomalous
behaviorbyfirstrunningtheunmodifiedanalysistoolsagainstthe vendorsystems.
Interestingly, she finds that other analyses also produce false positives with this
vendor’s software more consistently than with systems from the other six vendors.
Reviewing the results of earlier work with the tool suite by other researchers,Ann
finds that this behavior has been noted before, but explained as an artifact of this
vendor’s particular programming style. Ann contacts Ken (Dr. Smith is currently
out of the country at a conference) and finds that he has noted the same behavior
and concluded that the source of the problem is in the software system, not in the
analysis tools. Ann is uncomfortable with this position and suspect some kind of
bias in the test suite, but a manual analysis of these software systems would be
very tedious and time-consuming. As both students are under pressing submission
deadlines,theydecide towriteuptheirresultsasis,acceptingthe previousconclu-
sions for the anomalous behavior and using the published statements as validation
for their conclusions.
Research Ethics and Computer Science 19
Questions for discussion:
(1) The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct[1992] states in section 2.5
that a ACM computing professional will “Give comprehensive and thorough
evaluations of computer systems and their impacts, including analysis of pos-
sible risks.”
Similarly, the joint ACM/IEEE Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Pro-
fessional Practice[1999] states that a software engineer shall:
6.07. Be accurate in stating the characteristics of software on which
they work, avoiding not only false claims but also claims that might
reasonably be supposed to be speculative, vacuous, deceptive, mis-
leading, or doubtful.
6.08. Take responsibility for detecting, correcting, and reporting er-
rors in software and associated documents on which they work.
In light of these statements, is it clear that Ann and Ken cannot ignore the
anomalous behavior detected in the course of their research?
(2) Should anomalous results always be published?
(3) If the similar anomalies have been noted by other researchers using the same
software tools, data sources, etc., should these prior comments be invoked as
the sole explanation for the extraordinary behavior, or does a researcher have
an obligation to extend his or her investigation in an attempt to explain the
behavior?
(4) What other steps could Ken and Ann take to identify the suspected bias in
their experiments?
(5) What risks do Ann and Ken expose themselves to by attempting to identify
any such bias? What are the risks if they do not?
(6) What risks exist for their advisor, Dr. Smith, if they take either course of
action?
(7) What rules of thumb do we have with respect to making these decisions?
5. CODES OF CONDUCT
— ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct
— Software Engineering Code of Ethics and Professional Practice
— IEEE Code of Ethics
— AITP Code of Ethics
— Australian Computer Society Code of Ethics
— Computer Society of India Code of Ethics
— DPMA Code of Ethics
— An Engineer’s Hippocratic Oath
— New Zealand Computer Society Code of Ethics & Professional Con-
— NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
— American Mathematical Society Ethical Guidelines
— Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct
Research Ethics and Computer Science 21