Multiply Connected Topological Economics, Confidence
Relation and Political Economy
Yi-Fang Chang
Department of Physics, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China
(e-mail: yifangchang1030@hotmail.com)
Using the similar formulas of the preference relation and the utility function, we propose the
confidence relations and the corresponding influence functions that represent various interacting
strengths of different families, cliques and systems of organization. Since they can affect products,
profit and prices, etc., in an economic system, and are usually independent of economic results,
therefore, the system can produce a multiply connected topological economics. If the political
economy is an economy chaperoned polity, it will produce consequentially a binary economy. When
the changes of the product and the influence are independent one another, they may be a node or
saddle point. When the influence function large enough achieves a certain threshold value, it will form
a wormhole with loss of capital. Various powers produce usually the economic wormhole and various
corruptions.
Key words: topological economics, organization, confidence relation, influence function, political
economy.
MSC: 91B64; 91B14; 54H99;91B24; 91B99
1. Introduction
In mathematical economics the fixed-point theorems of topology are used to prove the Nash
equilibrium for n-person games. Arrow and Debreu presented a general model of Walrasian
equilibrium theory, and proved the existence theorem of equilibrium for a competitive economy by
topology [1]. Then McKenzie [2], Debreu [3], et al., developed the competitive equilibrium theory.
Differential topology is introduced into economics, and Debreu [4] discussed two detailed questions.
Usual economic theories include only some interpretation on pure market process. The public
choice theory is a great economics that intersects the two disciplines: the institutions are those of
political science, and the method is that of economic theory [5-7]. It applies and develops scientific
economic methods to other social regions. The public choice theory emphasizes comparative
institutional analysis and, in particular, by their concentration on the necessary relationship between
economic and political institutions. But alternative institutions may also have defects.
In the classical economics various quantities may be classified to two types: 1. Quantitative
quantities, for example, capital, labor, product and profit, etc; 2. Qualitative quantities, for example,
management, policy and preference, etc. The later possesses some human subjective factors. The two
respects intersect usually each other, such the economic systems often show more complex social
phenomena.
In the microeconomic theory of consumer behavior either a utility function or a binary relation
can describe the preferences of an individual. The strict equivalence of these two primitive concepts,
ordinal utility functions and preference relations, was first axiomatized by Debreu [8,9]. He studies the
concept of cardinal utility in three different situations by means of the same mathematical result that
gives a topological characterization of three families of parallel straight lines in a plane [8], and
discussed that for every continuous complete and transitive binary relation
defined on an arbitrary
subset X of the commodity space R, there is a continuous utility representation; that is, there is a
continuous function u of X into R such that u(y) u(x) if and only if y x. Therefore, the more
basic concept of preferences is applied instead of utility by means of a topology or a metric on the
space of preferences. Undoubtedly, it is a great contribution for economics.
The topological structure on the space of preferences is very useful. For example, Hildenbrand
used the structure to describe an exchange economy by its distribution of agents characteristics:
preferences and endowments.
Moreover, the solution to the static maximization problem in Bellman equation yields a policy
function that gives the optimal value of the current control as a function g (x ) of time and the
current state. So the tomorrow state in is given by x m[g (x ),x ], and a solution to a similar
t 1 t t t t
problem then yields tomorrows optimal control [10].
2. The confidence relations and the influence function
In microeconomics we introduce the confidence relations that represent various interacting
strengths of different families, cliques and systems of organization. It is an important human relation
in economics, even is independent of economic results. The confidence relation can be defined by a
similar method with the preference relation in consumer theory.
The confidence relation
defined on the choice set X is a complete preordering, continuous
and strictly monotone. This requires [10]
(1). Reflexivity: x X,x x;
(2). Completeness: x,y X , either x y or y x or both;
(3). Transitivity: x,y,z X , [x y and y x] x z.
Then can be represented by a real-valued, continuous and increasing payoff function.
Further, the definition of the influence function I is similar with the utility function: A real-valued
function Ii : Xi R represents a confidence preordering { }
defined on the choice set Xi of
agent i if x,y Xi,x y Ii(x) Ii(y). The influence function that represents a confidence
preorder is not uniquely defined. Any monotonically increasing transformation ( ) of I( ) will
represent exactly the same confidences, because with ( ) strictly increasing, we have
for all x,y X . Hence I( ) is an ordinal influence function. The sign of the difference I(x)-I(y) is
important because it tells us which outcome is confided, but the value of this difference is meaningless,
as it will change with any nontrivial increasing transformation ( ). It is also a basic characteristic of
topology, where those concrete spacing values are meaningless. Although the influence function is
similar to the utility function that obeys the law of diminishing marginal utility, but the influence
function seems to obey the law of augmenting lust for power.
3. Multiply connected topological economy
The confidence relation, the corresponding influence function I( ) and the function ( ) can
affect products Q, profit and prices, etc., in an economic system. But, they are usually independent of
economic results, and sometimes are stochastic, even change suddenly. In a continuous topological
manifold of economics they break easily original structure, and form a new hole or branch region.
This will construct a multiply connected topological manifold. In an image the economic structure is a
cup, while the influence function is a handle.
In a multiply connected region of topology there is a famous Euler-Poincare formula
For a convex polyhedron, a ,a ,a denote the number of vertices, edges, and faces, respectively;
p is the mth Betti number of complex K. This may be considered intuitively as the numbers of
m-dimensional holes in K, or is the number of (m+1)-dimensional chains that must be added to K so
that every free m-cycle on K is a boundary [11]. The number ( 1)ma is called the Euler
characteristic of the complex K. In the polyhedron p p 1,p 2p, p is the deficiency of a
curved surface. In 2-dimensional curved surface, a a 1 2p. Assume that vertices represent
the number of market, which is direct proportional to the sales volume y and the profit, and edges
represent the market network. But the multiply connected economy brings the profit decrease. In this
case there is a defective profit due to the deficiency p.
In some systems of organization the profit maximization and the confidence relations are
inseparable. The aim of a pure producer is the profit maximization
(y,w) max{py wx}, (3)
where y and x are output and input, p and w are output and input prices. For a social system with the
influence function I, we should define an aim function as
The objective function f (x; ) gives his payoff, when he faces environment
and chooses
action x [10]. Usual profit is
where TR(Q) and TC(Q) are the total revenue and the total cost, the three quantities all are the
functions of products Q=f(K,L). Now the maximum principle is the aim function maximization. The
initial condition of the profit maximization is
i.e., MR=MC, the marginal revenue equals to the marginal cost. While now we derive a new result:
dA dTR dTC dI
dQ dQ dQ dQ
MR MC 0. (9)
In the social system the aim function deviates the profit maximization, which is defective usually
since MR MC 0.
The production function in the traditional theory of the firm expresses output Q as a function of
two inputs: capital K and labor L,
The profit maximization of the firm is
pQ mK nL, (11)
where p, m and n are the prices of output, capital and labor flows respectively [12]. If the influence
function regards as a condition of the economic system, the economic meaning of the influence
function will also be able to be discussed using the Lagrange method of conditional maximization.
4.Political economy and multiply connected topological economy
A complete market economy should be a simplex free economy. But, a non-market economy, and
any oligarch economy must be a multiply connected topological economy, which changes to a higher
dimension, for example, it will add a new dimension with man-rule. This economy may be
dismembered and comminuted, and has various holes and be mangled easily for distortions.
According to <Oxford Advanced Learner Dictionary of Current English> the political economy
is study of the political problems of government. It as an early title is very famous, for example, David
Ricardos <The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation>(1817), Thomas Robert Malthus
<Principles of Political Economy>(1820) and <Definitions of Political Economy>(1827), James Mills
<Elements of Political Economy>(1821), and Karl Marxs <The Critique of Political Economy> and
so on. The political economy now sounds old-fashioned but usefully emphasizes the importance of
choice between alternatives in economics which remains, despite continuing scientific progress [13].
If the political economy is an economy chaperoned polity, it will produce consequentially a
binary economy. Its basic group is different with a complete market economy in the algebraic
topology.
A general change of the supply-demand function is
d s f(Q ,Q ,p) V S. (12)
Here V is a governmental potential, and S is a stochastic factor. The equation (12) has the outside
force and the potential V, such the economic results change along with different V. If V is inequitable
and factitious, the results will possess bigger stochasticity.
Various powers are some different attractors, and produce the economic wormhole and various
corruptions. In particular, if the multifarious confidence relations exist, a whole economic system and
corresponding topological manifold will be covered with many big and small holes like bruises and
scars. In this society the highest economic aim is only the confidence relation for families, cliques and
systems of organization. Some big or small powers cling to an economic system, and form the
multiply connected topological economy, and have a series of corruption with the self-similarity. It is a
special type of the fractal economy. There is a binary economic function of power-business. Both is
usually asymmetry, i.e., is inequality. Under this system various aspects tend spontaneously to the
breaking of symmetry. An imperium is an economic black hole, which will derive the huge corruption,
and finally the system dies out.
The political economy should be a pair coupling equations on polity and economy. Assume that a
potential is U 2aX2Y. Here X is a confidence relation, Y is an economic benefit, and a is a
coefficient. From this the difference between a theoretic value and a practice value will be estimated.
When the politics is put in command, the economy and its equation will be neglected. But, when
oligarch notices the social crisis, the economic rules will be obeyed more. Both alternation exhibits a
periodicity. If they conflict, the result will be reform for the economics bigger than politics, or be
retrogression for the economics smaller than politics.
The political economy is usually imperfect economic question, even completely is not an
economic question for some particular cases. It is not a strict economic rule, because in this case
economy is only an appendage of polity. The economy will change along with polity.
The multiply connected topological economy may be extended to various relations between
economy and other politics, family, religion, etc. Further, it may be developed to many regions of
without direct relations with economy, for example, welfare, environment, and full employment, etc.
5.Singularity and wormhole
If the influence function changes as time, the system will be more complex. Assume that the
economic system and its change are linear [10]:
a Q a I , (13)
a Q a I . (14)
Their characteristic matrix is
The corresponding characteristic equation is
2 (a a ) (a a a a ) 2 T D 0. (16)
11 22 11 22 12 21
From this we may discuss the general cases. As the simplest example, if the changes of the product
and the influence are independent one another, i.e., a a 0, the solutions of the equations will
be Q Q exp(a t),I I exp(a t). T 2 4D (a a )2 0 for a real domain.
0 11 0 22 11 22
When a ,a are real numbers of the same signs, D>0, the state (Q ,I ) of the system is a
node point, which is stable for a ,a <0, and is unstable for a ,a >0 (Fig.1).
11 22 11 22
Fig.1 Stable and unstable node points
When a ,a are real numbers of opposite signs, D<0, the state (Q ,I ) of the system is a saddle
point (Fig.2).
Fig.2 Saddle point
It represents that product increases and the conference decreases. If the two changes of the product
and the influence intersect one another, the states of the economic system will be able also to be the
spiral (focal) point, or center, etc.
The form of the influence function can be an unrestricted function, even a stochastic function.
Perfect competition prevails that each producer and consumer regards the prices paid and received as
independent of his own choices [1]. An economy with the confidence relations and the influence
functions is a type of imperfect competitive economic systems, and break the symmetries in economic
topology. They are not homeomorphic spaces. Usually this structure will hinder the economic
development. If the confidence relations and the influence functions have p-levels or p-types, i.e.,
I (Q), they will construct a multiply connected normal curved surface with the deficiency p.
When the influence function large enough achieves a certain threshold value, the economic elasticity
of topological structure will be broken, and a new hole will appear. Unified market economy will be
riddled with holes. This will form a new multiply connected topological manifold. As an example,
using the concept of general relativity a large influence as mass of general relativity forms a pit in the
economic system. According to Fuller-Wheeler theory [14], a very strong pit can construct a
wormhole, sometimes called the Einstein-Rosen bridge [15]. Therefore, some capital will pass through
a throat into another topological space, or from a region to another region in the same space (Fig.3).
This model will may describe a loss of capital (including waste, and corruption).
Fig.3 The wormhole model in social economics from a space into another topological space, or
from a region to another region in the same space
In a word, the confidence relation and the influence function provide the useful tools for a
description of human activity in economic system. Based on the main characteristics of a new epoch
of knowledge economy and its similarity with the information theory, we proposed the four theorems
of the knowledge economic theory, and expounded the production function and basic equations, and
discussed some possible directions of the development on the knowledge economy and its theory [16].
We think that topology and its tools in economy will exhibit larger function in the epoch.
Finally, this method of the multiply connected topological economy can be extended to various
aspects on polity-law, on polity-eduction, on government-people and so on.