]hp-pmoc.scisyhp[
2v7991.5090:viXra
Multiscale Lagrangian Fluid Dynamics Simulation
for Polymeric Fluid
Takahiro Murashima1,2 and Takashi Taniguchi1,2
1Department of Chemical Engineering,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan
2CREST, JST, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
(Dated: March 31, 2022)
We have developed a simulation technique of multiscale Lagrangian fluid dynamics to tackle
hierarchical problems relating to historical dependency of polymeric fluid. We investigate flow
dynamics of dilute polymeric fluid by using the multiscale simulation approach incorporating La-
grangian particle fluid dynamics technique (the modified smoothed particle hydrodynamics) with
stochastic coarse-grained polymer simulators (the dumbbell model). We have confirmed that our
approach is nicely in agreement with the macroscopic results obtained by a constitutive equation
corresponding to the dumbbell model, and observed microscopic thermal fluctuation appears in
macroscopic fluid dynamics as dispersion phenomena.
PACS numbers: 47.11.St, 47.50.-d, 83.10.Ff, 83.10.Gr, 83.10.Mj, 83.50.Ha
Keywords: Multiscale simulation, Polymer rheology, CONNFFESSIT, Lagrangianfluid dynamics
∗Electronic address: murasima@cheme.kyoto-u.ac.jp
†Electronic address: taniguch@cheme.kyoto-u.ac.jp
I. INTRODUCTION
Polymer rheology is complicated and exhibits various phenomena, e.g. vortex growth,
die swell, or Weissenberg effect, caused by a collaboration between microscopic dynamics of
polymers and macroscopic fluid dynamics[1]. In order to investigate such complex fluids, we
usually take either one of the following two approaches[2]. One is a fluid dynamics approach
regarding whole system as a continuum from a macroscopic viewpoint, and the other is a
molecular dynamics approach from a microscopic viewpoint. Although there is a significant
difference among applicable time and lengths scale in these approaches, we can improve our
comprehension of polymer rheology from the intercommunication between the different hi-
erarchies through parameters in constitutive equations. A lot of constitutive equations have
been proposed to investigate variety of polymer rheology, but they are not always applicable
to any kinds of polymeric liquids and the generalization of them is a considerably difficult
issue. Then, in order to treat more general polymer rheology, an available approach is to
incorporate the fluid dynamics approach directly with the molecular dynamics approach
without constitutive equations. CONNFFESSIT (Calculation of Non-Newtonian Flow: Fi-
nite Elements and Stochastic Simulation Technique) proposed by Laso and O¨ttinger[3] is
one of the hierarchical approaches without assuming constitutive equations, and is a pioneer
work in the multiscale simulation field, communicating with macroscopic finite elements
and microscopic ensembles of polymers. However, it is an extremely heavy technique due
to remeshing process in the finite element method to solve macroscopic fluid dynamics. Af-
ter updating the displacements of particles holding microscopic ensembles of polymers, it is
needed to remesh the finite elements in order to preserve one-to-one correspondence between
macroscopic elements and microscopic particles representing the center of mass of ensem-
bles. To avoid thedifficulty ofremeshing, asemi-Lagrangianapproach[4] has beenproduced,
where the convection terms are treated using a finite volume scheme, although this tech-
nique is acceptable only when the local stress does not depend on the history of flow. The
heterogeneous multiscale method with the fully Eulerian approach at macroscopic level[5, 6]
is sufficiently practical when we consider historically independent fluids, e.g. simple fluids,
or Newtonian fluids.
In order to treat historical dependency associating with deformations and orientations of
polymer coils and their entanglements, we develop a fully Lagrangian multiscale simulation
method, in which fluid points embedding microscopic internal degrees of freedom move
with the flow field. Some multiscale simulations are similar in the concept to our new
method[7, 8]. However, these methods are involved and somewhat cumbersome, since they
use the Eulerian and Lagrangian schemes alternatively in their numerical schemes. Our new
simulation method is technically simple. By using our method, we can directly trace the
material points retaining their strain and strain rate history and easily handle historically
dependent fluids.
Here we employ the modified smoothed particle hydrodynamics (MSPH) method[9] as a
macroscopic solver. The MSPH method highly improves its accuracy especially at points
near the boundary of the domain as compared with the conventional smoothed particle hy-
drodynamics (SPH) method[10]. As a microscopic polymer simulation, we use the dumbbell
model which is the simplest model of polymer in a dilute polymer solution and a standard
one as used in CONNFFESSIT. An ensemble of the dumbbell model corresponds to an
analytical model, e.g. the Maxwell model, and therefore we can verify the validity of our
simulation results as a benchmark.
We would like to mention Ellero et al.’s work since the first fully Lagrangian multiscale
simulation method has been accomplished by them[11]. In their simulation, the normal SPH
method has been employed to solve the macroscopic fluid dynamics. The SPH method fun-
damentally belongs to a kind of difference methods, therefore the first derivative of arbitrary
function is defined between two smoothed particles. However the MSPH method is a variant
of least square fitting methods, the derivative is defined just on a corresponding smoothed
particle in case of the MSPH method. The MSPH method is rather straightforward to apply
to any differential equations than the original SPH method.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we explain the multiscale La-
grangian fluid dynamics method. We review the MSPH method and the dumbbell model
there. In Section III, the hybrid simulation is applied to study start-up flows in a 2-
dimensional channel. Section IV summarizes conclusions.
II. MULTISCALE LAGRANGIAN FLUID DYNAMICS
Cauchy’s continuum equation of motion serves as a starting point to consider general
fluids:
where ρ is the density of fluid, v is the flow velocity, t is time, σ is the stress tensor, and
f is the body force. A convective term does not appear in the above equation because we
treat fluids here in a Lagrangian manner. The stress tensor σ is represented by isotropic
pressure p and the deviatoric stress tensor τ:
where I isthe d×didentity matrix anddis the dimension of thespace. Usually, the pressure
p is obtainable because of the incompressibility condition, but the deviatoric stress tensor τ
is not, which arises from microscopic internal degrees of freedom. Since the tensor τ fully
depends on microscopic states, the derivation of the tensor is considerably difficult especially
in complex fluid cases such as polymer fluids. Even so, many constitutive relations for the
tensor τ have been found phenomenologically or on the basis of microscopic consideration
of polymer chains[12]. They are qualitatively useful in applying to polymer processing, even
if they do not hold microscopically detailed structures. Because, these microscopic details
are compressed to macroscopic parameters appearing in the constitutive relations.
Polymeric fluids represent stress-strain and stress-strain rate historical dependency com-
ing from microscopic polymer dynamics. The historical dependence of stress is essential
in several polymeric phenomena such as strain hardening or shear thinning. In order to
handle the effect of microscopic polymer dynamics we need to consider microscopic details
omitted in the above constitutive equations. The easiest way to incorporate polymer dy-
namics is to perform a molecular dynamics simulation of polymers, but such a simulation
is impractical to investigate rheological behaviors due to the shortness of computationally
accessible time. The other effective simulations have already been developed, and these sim-
ulations have been found to represent not only qualitatively but also quantitatively sufficient
results[13, 14]. Even so, there is still a gap to apply these simulation methods to polymeric
flow problems since they are specialized to find the stress-strain and -strain rate relations
in a small simulation box. If we treat such a simulation system so as to give a constitutive
relation under any applied flow, the polymeric flow problems on which microscopic polymer
dynamics gives essential influence become solvableby incorporating themicroscopic polymer
simulation into a fluid dynamics simulation. Such a multiscale simulation method will be
available within near future since computer technology is rapidly developing and parallel
computing environments become easy to available. Therefore, we are addressing to advance
computational techniques to fully utilize the high performance computing technology. The
multiscale simulation technique become increasingly important in the future.
In order to develop consistently effective techniques for a future multiscale simulation,
first of all, we demand a Lagrangian method to solve fluid dynamics because of its historical
dependence coming from the microscopic degrees of freedom. Secondly, highly parallel com-
puting technique is necessary. We present such a multiscale parallel computing technique.
We solve start-up flow problems of polymeric fluid in a 2-D channel as a benchmark test in
the section III.
A. Macroscopic Fluid Dynamics Simulation
We mentioned the importance of historical dependence of microscopic systems incor-
porated into the macroscopic system in the previous section. In order to simulate non-
Newtonian fluids with a nonlinear relation between shear stress and strain rate, we have to
solve the Cauchy’s equation of motion in a Lagrangian manner. If we use a Eulerian method
to non-Newtonian fluids, we need to consider the convection of the stress from adjacent
grids, which means the history of fluids is no longer maintained in the Eulerian manner
without introducing auxiliary field such as orientation tensor field and a variable describing
the stretch of polymer coils. In some trivial cases such as stationary flows it is easy to
obtain the stream line and to know the path through which the fluids flowed in the past. In
such cases, we are able to treat the non-Newtonian fluids even in the Eulerian framework by
taking into account the convection of the stress[3]. However, their applications are limited
to predictable cases. In usage of Lagrangian methods we can treat more general cases.
Before we solve any differential equations, we have to know spatial derivatives of fields,
for example ∇ · σ appearing in Cauchy’s equation of motion. In the Lagrangian picture,
the distribution of fluid particles which are used as substitutes for Eulerian grids does not
necessarily have a regular pattern and changes momentarily. So it is difficult to define the
derivative values in the Lagrangian frame.
Using some kernel functions to interpolate between the unstructured fluid particles, the
SPH method accomplished to obtain average values of the derivatives[10]. Therefore, when
we use the SPH method to solve a differential equation, we have to be aware of using the
average values. The SPH derives the smoothed derivatives of fields even when the values
are drastically changing among fluid particles.
In order to remove the problem mentioned above, we implement the MSPH technique
based on the Taylor expansion of the original SPH averages[9]. By using the MSPH method,
we are available to obtain first and higher derivatives instead of the averaged derivatives
which are given in the original SPH method. Once we calculate the derivative values on a
fluid particle, or a calculation point, we have only to substitute them into the differential
equations, and then we find their solutions by using a time integrating scheme, for example
the velocity Verlet algorithm or the Runge-Kutta method. The MSPH method do not need
any alternations of original differential equations, whereas the SPH method demand further
considerations because the derivative of fields obtained by using SPH is the average value
of the differences defined between fluid particles[11]. The distinction in their treatments
results from an approximation accuracy of these methods: The approximation accuracy of
SPH is the first order while that of MSPH is the second order.
Here we summarize the MSPH method briefly (see ref.[9] for more information). This
method can be regarded as a variant of unstructured grid methods and least square fitting
techniques. Based on the SPH procedure, an average of discrete field f(x ) on fluid particles
x are defined by weighted sum:
where W(x) is a Gaussian type function of distance x within a finite region Ω. Originally,
field f(x) is continuous, hereafter we use the following continuous representation:
hf i = dxf W , (4)
where f ≡ f(x) and W ≡ W(|ξ −x|). Then we obtain the following set of equations in
accordance with the usual SPH procedure:
hf i ≡ h∇ f i = dxf ∇ W , (5a)
hf i ≡ h∇ ∇ f i = dxf ∇ ∇ W , (5b)
where ∇ X denotes a spatial derivative of X with respect to the α-component of ξ, i.e.
ξα. We assign coordinate axes to subscript and superscript Greek characters in the present
paper. Substituting f in the above equations (5) to the following Taylor series of f around
a reference position ξ represented as
ξ ξ,α ξ,βγ
the next equations are derived up to the second order in R:
hf i = f h1i+f hRαi+ f hRβRγi, (7a)
hf i = f h1i +f hRαi + f hRβRγi , (7b)
hf i = f h1i +f hRαi + f hRβRγi . (7c)
We can rewrite these equations (7) to the Matrix form;
hf i h1i hRαi 1hRβRγi f
    
hf i = h1i hRαi 1hRβRγi f . (8)
    
 hf i   h1i hRαi 1hRβRγi  f 
    
The number of rows in Eq. (8) is seven in two dimensional space, whereas thirteen in
three dimensional space. Considering the commutativity of spatial derivatives (∇ ∇ f =
∇ ∇ f), we can reduce the number of rows in Eq. (8) from seven to six in two dimensions
because of f = f , and from thirteen to ten in three dimensions;
hf i h1i hRαi C(β,γ)hRβRγi f
    
hf i = h1i hRαi C(β,γ)hRβRγi f . (9)
    
    
Here we introduce coefficients C(β,γ) ≡ 1− 1δ where δ is Kronecker’s delta.
In order to obtain the differential values f ≡ ∇ f , our procedure is as follows. At
first we calculate the average values h·i in Eq. (9) in the usual SPH manner, and then we
solve the above linear equation (9) by using, for example, the LU decomposition.
Here, we adopt a Gaussian kernel function W(x) firstly used in the MSPH method[9]:
, if |x| ≤ 2h
0, otherwise
where d is a dimensionality of the space and the cut-off radius is 2h. The normalization
parameter A equals to 1.04823, 1.10081 and 1.18516 for d = 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The
density of each distributed particle ρ(ξ) is obtained by integrating the kernel function in the
same manner as the ordinal SPH method:
where m is mass of particle.
Asabenchmarkofourmultiscalesimulation, weinvestigatetwotypesofmacroscopicsim-
ulation with constitutive relations, Newtonian viscosity model (Newton model) andMaxwell
constitutiveequation(Maxwell model). Newtonmodelissymbolicallyrepresentedbyadash-
podwithaviscosityconstant η. ThedeviatoricstresstensorofNewtonmodelisproportional
to strain rate:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where κ is velocity gradient tensor defined as κ ≡ ∇v. Maxwell model is symbolically
represented by connecting a dashpod with a viscosity constant η and a spring with an
elastic constant G in series. Maxwell constitutive equation is expressed as follows:
where λ is a relaxation time. The constants η in Eq. (13) and G are connected through
η = Gλ.
Assuming the deviatoric stress tensor τ in the Cauchy’s equation of motion (1) as to be
Newton model, we obtain the Navier-Stokes equation:
Even though we can solve the Navier-Stokes equation directly by using the MSPH method,
we elaboratelysolve the Cauchy’s equation ofmotion(1)after obtaining thedeviatoric stress
tensor τ to be applicable to general problems.
We shortly mention how to determine the isotropic pressure p. When we consider high
pressure case, e.g. a flow in a duct or shock wave, we can treat an incompressible fluid by
solving the Poisson equation of pressure p as shown in Ref. [15]. In low pressure case, the
effect of compressibility is negligibly small even if we assume a barotropic fluid p = p(ρ). In
this work, we investigate a fluid in low pressure environment only.
We investigate start up flow profiles obtained by solving the Cauchy’s equation of motion
(1) with two different types of constitutive equations, Newton model (12) and Maxwell
model (13). For convenience, we concentrate on the flow behavior between two parallel
plates. Assuming translational symmetry for the z-direction which is parallel to plates
and perpendicular to the flow direction, we can treat the present system in two dimensional
space. At first, we prepare a rectangular system box (Lx·Ly) in which particles areregularly
displaced as shown in Figure 1. We set the initial distance a between nearest neighbor
particles, the mass of particles m and simulation time interval t as unity. The total number
of particles N are L ×L . We set the thickness of plates l to 3a larger than h in order to
maintain the density of fluid near the plates as much as that of bulk. We assume the fixed
boundary condition for fluid particles on plates and the periodic boundary condition for the
x-direction. Applying the body force f = (1.0×10 3,0.0)×m/(a2t2) to the fluid, the fluid
flows toward the x-direction. Values of simulation parameters are summarized in Table I.
The displacements of fluid particles are updated according to the following equation after
solving the Cauchy’s equation of motion (1):
where r is the position of fluid particle. In order to treat the time-derivative numerically,
we discretize it as
df fNew −fOld
with the finite difference ∆t = 0.01t . We use the velocity-Verlet algorithm as time-integral
scheme.
Figures 2 and 3 represent the flow profiles in cases of Newton model and Maxwell model,
respectively. From the positions of tracer particles we can extract their characters of flow
behaviors. In case of Newton model, flow profiles show a plane Poiseuille flow, however,
those of Maxwell model represent a plug flow like behavior when the elastic constant is very
small and the relaxation time is very long. Maxwell model (13) corresponds to Newton
model (12) in the limit λτ˙ → 0, while keeping η constant, which means that the elastic
property of the spring can be negligible. Therefore, when the relaxation time λ becomes
smaller, the flow behavior of Maxwell model approaches to that of Newton model.
B. Microscopic Polymer Simulation
In this study, we select the dumbbell model as microscopic model of polymer in our
multiscale simulation since the dumbbell model is the simplest and in the statistical limit
it corresponds to an analytical model, i.e. the Maxwell model. The dumbbell model is
modeling a dilute polymeric fluid without entanglements between polymers. The dynamics
of a dumbbell consists of elastic dynamics and thermal fluctuation.
(cid:18) 2λ (cid:19) r λ
where Q is end-to-end vector of the dumbbell, and Φ is the Gaussian white noise that is
satisfying the following equations:
α β ′ αβ ′
We can derive the expression for the dumbbell model (17) from microscopic view points[16,
17]. Forsimplicity, we only explain about the roles of each term here. The parentheses of the
first term in Eq. (17) consists of Affine deformation and elastic dynamics. The relaxation
time λ is related to the elastic constant G as discussed in the previous subsection. When the
relaxation time of dumbbell is large, the dumbbell is easy to be extended since the elastic
constant G = η/λ is small. The relaxation time of dumbbell also appears in the coefficient of
second term in the right-hand-side of Eq. (17) through the fluctuation-dissipation theorem.
The dumbbell with a long relaxation time is sensitive to the Affine deformation rather than
the elastic relaxation and the thermal fluctuation. The averaged stress in a microscopic
simulation system is represented by Kramers-Kirkwood formula:
Generally speaking, the Kramers-Kirkwood formula consists of contributions from a solvent,
intramolecular forces, external forces, dynamics of beads, and isotropic pressure[2]. To
simplify our arguments, we only consider the effects of intramolecular forces and isotropic
pressure in Eq. (19). This lead us to concentrate on the orientation and length of end-to-end
vector of dumbbell.
To update the end-to-end vector according to Eq. (17), we adopt the second order
stochastic Runge-Kutta algorithm here[18]. This algorithm decreases order of numerical er-
rorsfromO((∆t)2) containedinordinaryBrowniandynamics algorithmstoO((∆t)3). These
errors are caused by its numerical algorithm not by the random noise. Initial conditions of
dumbbells are prepared by performing the dumbbell simulation under a stationary condition
over twice of the relaxation time.
Figure 4 shows the stress history under a constant shear rate κ = 1.0/t with λ =
100t and G = 0.01m/a comparing the dumbbell model and Maxwell model. The thermal
fluctuation appears after the Newtonian viscosity η = τ/κ grows up to the zero shear
viscosity, however it doesn’t appear or negligibly small in the transient region. This stress
history process can be separated into two processes, elongation and rotation of dumbbells,
respectively. The border line exists at more or less t/λ = 1. The stress tensor (19) is
insensitive to the effect of random noise in the elongation process, since the orientations
of dumbbells are almost same direction. In the rotation process, however, the angular
velocityofdumbbellsissensitivetothelengthofend-to-endvector, andthereforethethermal
fluctuation becomes influential. Increasing the number of dumbbells N , the fluctuation of
stress is decreasing in proportional to N− by the law of large numbers in statistics because
the stress is defined by astatistical average ofG(QQ−I) over N dumbbells as shown inEq.
(19). We expect the dumbbell model corresponds to Maxwell model in the limit N → ∞.
As shown in Fig. 4, the thermal fluctuation has been almost suppressed when N = 10000.
C. Macro-micro Hybridization
In the previous subsections IIA and IIB, we have introduced the simulation techniques
of macroscopic fluid dynamics and microscopic polymer dynamics and explained about their
features. Now we incorporate them in order to treat polymeric fluid dynamics. The main
idea of our hybrid simulation is similar to that of CONNFFESSIT; we perform the polymer
simulation in stead of the constitutive equation in order to obtain the stress tensor σ in
Cauchy’s equation of motion (1).
The procedure of our simulation is summarized to the following steps:
1. Macroscopic fluid dynamics simulation to update r, v, and p.
2. MSPH method to obtain ∇v.
3. Microscopic polymer simulation to update τ.
4. MSPH method to obtain ∇ · σ.
5. Return to 1.
We perform these processes every time steps. We adopt the linked list algorithm[19] to find
a pair of particles at macroscopic fluid simulation in order to decrease the calculation time
O(N2) to O(N) for N particles. In each step, we can perform the calculations on a particle
independently from those of other particles, and therefore we benefit from usage of parallel
computing.
III. NUMERICAL RESULTS ON HYBRID SIMULATION
Now we investigate the flow profiles of multiscale Lagrangian fluid dynamics simulation
and compare the resultant flow profiles with the macroscopic results shown in Sec. IIA. We
perform the multiscale simulation under the same condition explained in Sec. IIA, however
we use the dumbbell model to obtain the deviatoric stress tensor τ. We set the number
of dumbbells N in each fluid particle to 1000. Under the environment using 2×3.16 GHz
Quad-CoreIntelXeonprocessor(8cores)andOpenMP(OpenMulti-Processing)programing
interface, the calculation time for 100 cycles of the simulation procedure explained in the
previous section IIC is about 2.5 minutes, which corresponds to t = 1.0t because of ∆t =
0.01t .
Figure5represents theflow behaviors obtained fromour new simulation technique. Com-
paring between Figs. 3 and 5, the tendencies of these flows are almost similar, except for the
thermal fluctuation observed in Fig. 5. When the relaxation time λ is small, the fluctuation
of fluid becomes larger. There are two reasons. One reason is that the coefficient of random
noise in Eq. (17) is large in λ small case, because of the fluctuation dissipation theorem.
Another one is that time of elongation process, discussed in Sec. IIB, becomes short, and
then the thermal fluctuation appears earlier.
We have also performed the multiscale simulation with N = 10000. The resultant flow
behaviors have been very close to those of the Maxwell model which are shown in Fig. 3,
since the thermal fluctuation in this case has been almost suppressed as mentioned in Sec.
IIB.
Strictly speaking, the incompressibility doesn’t satisfied at some local regions in the
present simulation. In order to improve this failure, we should solve the Poisson equation of
isotropic pressure p[15].
IV. CONCLUSION
We have developed the multiscale Lagrangian fluid dynamics technique to simulate a
hierarchical polymeric fluid where the stress on each particle consisting of a large number
of molecules depends on history of shear strain and/or shear rate. We have investigated the
simplest case of polymeric flow problems, and then obtained the desirable results.
Our multiscale simulation has extensibilities to deal with more complex phenomena on
polymeric fluid by upgrading the dumbbell model to either a direct polymer simulation such
as the Kremer-Grest model[20] or a more effective model to introduce the idea of poly-
mer reptation and entanglements such as the slip-link model[13] and the primitive chain
network model[14]. Our application to flow problems on complex boundaries, e.g. con-
traction/expansion flow or free boundary flow, can be straightforward. Microscopic level
simulations are independent of others, and therefore they can be highly parallelized.
Although we referred only to polymeric fluids in the present paper, our multiscale ap-
proach can be applied to general flow problems, e.g. granular materials and powder systems,
only if the density of materials is sufficiently uniform in the macroscopic scale in the frame-
work of this paper. When we apply our multiscale simulation to nonuniform density case,
we need to delete the incompressibility condition at macroscopic level, and we should con-
sider the grand canonical ensemble at microscopic level simulations in order to exchange
microscopic internal freedom degrees among macroscopic particles.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all members in the group of Multiscale Simulation for Softmatters
for their advices and fruitful discussions. This research was supported by Core Research
for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) of Japan Science and Technology Agency
Corporation (JST).
[1] Boger, D. V.; Walters, K. Rheological phenomena in focus; Elsevier: Amsterdam ; London,
1993.
[2] Bird, R. B.; Armstrong, R. C.; Hassager, O. Dynamics of polymeric liquids; Wiley: New York
; Chichester, 1987.
[3] Laso, M.; O¨ttinger, H. JOURNAL OF NON-NEWTONIAN FLUID MECHANICS 1993, 47,
1-20.
[4] Phillips, T.; Williams, A. JOURNAL OF NON-NEWTONIAN FLUID MECHANICS 1999,
87, 215-246.
[5] Ren, W.; Vanden-Eijnden, E.; Maragakis, P.; E, W. JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS
2005, 123, 134109.
[6] Yasuda, S.; Yamamoto, R. PHYSICS OF FLUIDS 2008, 20, 113101.
[7] Laso, M.; Picasso, M.; Ottinger, H. AICHE JOURNAL 1997, 43, 877-892.
[8] Halin, P.; Lielens, G.; Keunings, R.; Legat, V. JOURNAL OF NON-NEWTONIAN FLUID
MECHANICS 1998, 79, 387-403.
[9] Zhang, G.; Batra, R. COMPUTATIONAL MECHANICS 2004, 34, 137-146.
[10] Monaghan, J. REPORTS ON PROGRESS IN PHYSICS 2005, 68, 1703-1759.
[11] Ellero, M.; Espanol, P.; Flekkoy, E. PHYSICAL REVIEW E 2003, 68, 041504.
[12] Doi, M.; Edwards, S. F. The theory of polymer dynamics; Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1986.
[13] Shanbhag, S.; Larson, R.; Takimoto, J.; Doi, M. PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 2001, 87,
195502.
[14] Masubuchi, Y.; Takimoto, J.; Koyama, K.; Ianniruberto, G.; Marrucci, G.; Greco, F. JOUR-
NAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS 2001, 115, 4387-4394.
[15] Koshizuka, S.; Oka, Y. NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 1996, 123, 421-434.
[16] O¨ttinger, H. C. Stochastic processes in polymeric fluids : tools and examples for developing
simulation algorithms; Springer: Berlin ; New York, 1996.
[17] Larson, R. G. The structure and rheology of complex fluids; Oxford University Press: New
York ; Oxford, 1999.
[18] Branka, A.; Heyes, D. PHYSICAL REVIEW E 1998, 58, 2611-2615.
[19] Rapaport, D. C. The art of molecular dynamics simulation; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, 2003.
[20] Kremer, K.; Grest, G. JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS 1990, 92, 5057-5086.
TABLE I: Fixed parameter values in this paper.
∆t 1.0×10 2t
(L ,L ) (20a,30a)
f (1.0×10 3,0.0)×m/(a2t2)
FIG. 1: Initial configuration for Lagrangian fluid simulation.
t=50t t=100t t=150t
FIG. 2: Profiles of Newtonian flow (t = 50t ,100t ,150t ).
t=50t t=100t t=150t
FIG. 3: Flow profiles in case of Maxwell model (t = 50t ,100t ,150t ) with λ = 10.0t and
G = 0.1m/a (upper group), or λ = 1000t and G = 0.001m/a (lower group). In both cases,
FIG. 4: The stress histories under the constant shear rate κ = 1.0/t for the systems consists of
the dumbbells with N = 100, N = 1000, and N = 10000, and for the Maxwell constitutive
equation. The thermal fluctuation depends on the number of dumbbells.
t=50t t=100t t=150t
FIG. 5: Flow profiles obtained by performing multiscale Lagrangian fluid dynamics (t =
50t ,100t ,150t ) with λ = 10.0t and G = 0.1m/a (upper group), or λ = 1000t and
G = 0.001m/a (lower group). Each fluid particle has 1000 dumbbells instead of Maxwell model.