RUSSIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
NATIONAL GEOPHYSICAL COMMITTEE
NATIONAL REPORT
International Association of Geodesy
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
Presented to the XXVI General Assembly
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
RUSSIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
National Geophysical Committee
NATIONAL REPORT
International Association of Geodesy
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics
Presented to the XXVI General Assembly
In this National Report are given major results of researches conducted by Russian
geodesists in 2011–2014 on the topics of the International Association of Geodesy (IAG) of the
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG). This report is prepared by the Section of
Geodesy of the National Geophysical Committee of Russia. In the report prepared for the XXVI
General Assembly of IUGG (Czhech Republic, Prague, 22 June – 2 July 2015), the results of
principal researches in geodesy, geodynamics, gravimetry, in the studies of geodetic reference
frame creation and development, Earth’s shape and gravity field, Earth’s rotation, geodetic theory,
its application and some other directions are briefly described. For some objective reasons not all
results obtained by Russian scientists on the problems of geodesy are included in the report.
Citation: Savinykh V.P., V.I. Kaftan Eds. (2015), National Report for the IAG of the IUGG
2011–2014, Geoinf. Res. Papers, 3, BS1003, GCRAS Publ., Moscow, 99 pp.
 2015 National Geophysical Committee of Russia
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 6
Reference Frames ...................................................................................................................................... 8
Gravity Field ........................................................................................................................................... 27
Geodynamics ........................................................................................................................................... 37
Earth’s Rotation ...................................................................................................................................... 59
Positioning and Applications .................................................................................................................. 73
Common and Related Problems .............................................................................................................. 89
Executive Summary
This review, submitted to the International Association of Geodesy (IAG) of
the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), contains the results
obtained by Russian geodesists in 2011-2014. This review was prepared for the
XXVI General Assembly of IUGG (Czech Republic, Prague, 22 June – 2 July
2015). It briefly describes the results of principal research in geodesy,
geodynamics, gravimetry, in the studies of geodetic reference frame creation and
development, the Earth’s shape and gravity field, the Earth’s rotation, geodetic
theory, its application and some other areas of research.
The review is organized as a sequence of abstracts of principal publications
and presentations for symposia, conferences, workshops etc. Each of the review
paragraphs includes a list of scientific papers published in 2011–2014 including
those prepared in cooperation with Russian scientists and their colleagues from
other countries. Some interesting international and national scientific events are
also mentioned in the review.
For some objective reasons not all the results obtained by Russian scientists
on the problems of geodesy are included in the review.
The more principal studies are listed below.
The investigation of the impact of the Galactic aberration on the CRF, TRF,
end EOP. For accurate modelling of this effect, the current best estimate of the
Galactic aberration constant was obtained as A = 5.0 ± 0.3 µas/yr.
Study of systematic errors of the ICRF and various aspects of combination
procedures. In particular, the analysis has shown that using the full correlation
matrices leads to substantial change in the orientation parameters between the
compared catalogues.
New algorithms of Molodensky theory application for determining the Earth’s
shape.
Construction and development of new absolute gravity meters.
Propagation of the international gravity reference system to the national
gravity reference frame.
Study of coseismic gravity changes in relation with the May 24, 2013
Okhotsk deep-focus earthquake.
Geodynamic study of the West Pacific, Near Baltic, Caucasus and Lake
Baikal regions.
First geodetic observations of coseismic crustal displacements caused by a
deep-focus (611 km) earthquake
Complex geophysical research of theTohoku earthquake phenomenon.
‘Paradox’ resolution of high and low strain velocities under the concept that
the anomalous recent geodynamics is caused by parametric excitation of
deformation processes in fault zones in conditions of a quasistatic regime of
loading.
Research on relation between core nutation and geomagnetic activity.
It was found that the amplitude and phase of the Free Core Nutation (FCN)
variations derived from VLBI observations are correlated with geomagnetic jerks.
The comparison of the epochs of the changes in the FCN amplitude and phase with
the epochs of the GMJs indicated that the observed extremes in the FCN amplitude
and phase variations were closely related to the GMJ epochs.
The detailed investigtion of the structure of the Chandler Wobble (CW)
revealed that it consists of six principal components with the periods from 11 to 75
years. It was also found that the CW variations may be connected with the Sun
activity, Markovits's waves, and the Kp and Ap geomagnetic indices.
The algorithm of calculation of plan rectangular coordinates, declinations and
scale of Gauss projection in 6º zone by geodetic coordinates.
The weighted modifications of correlation coefficient and Allan variance.
The implementation of the Finsler geometry in geodesy to take a new look at
its traditional tasks and to contribute to the construction of new approaches to
problem areas of space geodesy and astrometry.
Section of geodesy
Dr. V.P. Savinykh, Chairman, Corr. Member of RAS
Dr. V.I. Kaftan, Vice-chairman
Reference Frames
Kaftan V.1, Malkin Z.2, Pobedinsky G.3, Stoliarov I.A.3
1Geophysical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
2Pulkovo Observatory, Saint Petersburg, Russia
3Federal Scientific-Technical Center of Geodesy, Cartography and Spatial Data Infrastructure,
Moscow, Russia
The latest research is devoted to the problems of International Celestial
Reference Frame (ICRF) development.
In recent years much attention has been paid to the astrometric implications of
the galactic aberration in proper motions (GA). This effect causes systematic errors
in ICRF at a µas level already substantial for results of the VLBI observations used
for simultaneous determinations of CRF, TRF and EOP [Malkin, 2011b, 2012c,
2014b; Liu et al., 2012]. Therefore, this correction must be taken into account
during highly accurate astrometric and geodetic data processing. Its accuracy
depends, in the first place, on accuracy of the Galactic rotation parameters. It was
found from analysis of the all available determinations of the Galactic rotation
parameters R and Ω made during last 10 years that the most probable value of
the Galactic aberration constant A = 5.0 ± 0.3 µas/yr [Malkin, 2012d; 2013d,
2013t, 2013f, 2014c].
Systematic errors of the ICRF are discussed in more detail in several papers.
As follows from the many-decades experience of classical astronomy, the most
accurate catalog of celestial objects forming the ICRF can be obtained from a
combination. Various aspects of combination procedures are discussed in
[Sokolova, Malkin, 2012, 2013a, 2013b, 2014]. In particular, the analysis has
shown that using the full correlation matrices leads to substantial change in the
orientation parameters between the compared catalogues.
Correct estimate of the random errors of the catalogs is important for many
tasks, such as catalog comparison, computation of the weights of the catalogs
during combination etc. Formal uncertainties of the source positions provided in
the catalog are generally substantially smaller than the real position accuracy.
These estimates can be improved if the correlation between catalogs is accounted
for. In [Malkin, 2013a; 2013b, 2013g, 2014a] one of possible approaches to solve
this task using a modified and generalized "3-cornered hat" method is considered.
An international project of a use of a radio-telescope in Sierra Negra for
VLBI method realization is presented in [Krilov et al., 2014].
Compact satellite laser ranging (SLR) meters “Sazhen-TM” produced by
Open Joint-stock Company “Research-and-Production Corporation “Precision
Systems and Instruments” are installed at Quasar VLBI network observatories
[Finkelstein A. et al, 2013]. The measurement system allows determining distances
of 400-6000 km (day) and 400-23000 km (night) with the accuracy of 1 cm. Local
ties between GNSS and SLR markers are determined with the precession of 1-3
mm [Finkelstein A. et al., 2012].
VLBI antenna rotation centers were connected with Fundamental Astro-
Geodetic Network (FAGN) points with the accuracy of 1-5 mm for plan and 1-10
mm for height components. Loop misclosures were determined as sums of local tie
vectors and baseline VLBI and GNSS vectors between points of VLBI and FAGN.
Root mean square errors of vector components were received as m =15 mm,
m =11 mm и m =14 mm for distances of several thousand kilometers.
The latest International Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) realizations are
derived from four space geodesy techniques: VLBI, GPS, SLR, and DORIS,
whereas the International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF) is a result of global
VLBI solution. The latter is tied to the ITRF datum using an arbitrary set of
reference stations. VLBI also shares responsibility with SLR for ITRF scale. All
the techniques contribute to positions and velocities of ITRF stations. As a
consequence, we faced with systematic errors and mutual impact of CRF and TRF
realizations, which cannot be fixed by datum correction during current
combination. These problems have been discussed in [Boehm, 2012a 2012b;
Malkin, 2012a, 2012b; Malkin et al., 2012].
The International Terrestrial Reference Frame considers the position at a
reference epoch plus a linear velocity term for station coordinates. However, the
actual station movement also includes several tidal and non-tidal corrections (e.g.,
solid Earth tides, ocean and atmosphere loading) recommended by the IERS
Conventions as well as unmodelled non-linear displacements. The increasing
accuracy of Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) observations and the
growing time span of available data allow the determination of seasonal signals in
station positions which still remain unmodelled in the conventional analysis
approach. It was shown that neglecting the seasonal station motion leads to UT1
systematic errors at the μs level [Malkin, 2013g]. It was also found that the
seasonal station movements do not yield any significant systematic effect on the
CRF but can cause a significant change in position of radio sources with small
number of sessions non-evenly distributed over the year fraction [Krasna et al.,
2013, 2014]
DORIS analysis center operates at the Institute of Astronomy of the Russian
Academy of Science (INASAN). It produces SINEX weekly free network
solutions, geocenter motion, EOP and STCD series. The latest Gipsy software
version (GIPSY 6.0) is used for time series production. Dynamic Regression
Modeling is proposed and used for geocenter motion prediction at 6-25 weeks
intervals [Kuzin S., Tatevian S., 2011].
Fig.1 Russian Fundamental Astro-Geodetic Network (FAGN)
Global space reference frame realized as precise GLONASS ephemeris was
developed by the Federal State Budgetary Establishment "Federal Scientific-
Technical Center of Geodesy, Cartography and Spatial Data Infrastructure". The
mode. Permanent observations of the Russian Fundamental Astro-Geodetic
Network (FAGN) are used for precise ephemeris production (see Fig.1). Figure 1
shows that the FAGN fragment is in the possession of the Federal State Budgetary
Establishment "Federal Scientific-Technical Center of Geodesy, Cartography and
Spatial Data Infrastructure". FAGN fragments of other ownerships are reflected in
[Savinykh V.P. et al., 2014].
New state geocentric coordinate reference system (reference frame) GSK-
2011 is developed and officially adopted [Demianov G.V. et al., 2011c,
Gorobets V.P. et al., 2012, 2013a, b, c, Kaftan V.I., 2011]. Coordinate
transformation parameters between the national coordinate system SK-95 and
GSK-2011 are determined [Gorobets V.P., 2013]. SK-95 operates in remote
Russian areas. The special study of the SK-95 state in the Russian Arctic is
emphasized in [Khodakov P., Basmanov A.]. The national coordinate system SK-
95 is realized by FAGN and two more dense satellite geodetic networks: Precise
Geodetic Network (PGN) and 1st order Satellite Geodetic Network (SGN-1)
[Demianov G.V. et al., 2011].
GLONASS system has a space realization of the global coordinate reference
frame PZ-90.11. Its main development results, role and place in the national
coordinate infrastructure are studied and described in [Vdovin V.S., 2013].
The results of a first experiment on the use of full constellation of the
GLONASS system for the precise positioning are described. To compare the
positioning accuracy estimated by the use of GLONASS and GPS, measurements
obtained at 15 sites of the Russian FAGN were analyzed. The outcome of the
performed computations shows that sites of the Russian geodetic network were
determined with the precision (rms) 3-10 mm in spite of short period of
measurements. The differences between coordinates of these sites, estimated by
only GPS or GLONASS measurements, are in the same limits. It is considered that
the models used for data processing with GLONASS should be more studied and
developed [Tatevian S.K., Kuzin S.P., Demjanov G.V., 2013].
A combined use of GPS/GLONASS techniques for the development of the
Russian geodetic reference network is studied and described in [Tatevian S., Kuzin
S., 2011].
Academy of Sciences announced an initiative on unifying the observation
networks affiliated to different national and departmental organizations into a
single regional cluster. A number of meetings of the Geodesy Section held in
2012-2103 were devoted to solving the organizational problem. During this period,
the texts of the Statute of the International Commission on the Regional Terrestrial
Reference Frame for North East Eurasia (NEEREF) and the Agreement between
the institutions and organizations were elaborated, and the signing of the
Agreement started. The NEEREF structure should be established by approximate
analogy with EUREF. The entire research is based on the unified observation
network which provides the initial observation data obtained not only by GNSS but
also by other satellite and terrestrial observation techniques. The observation data
will be transmitted to the data centers and/or analysis centers for primary treatment
and/or final solution determination. The measurement data and processing results
should be available to a wide range of users [Savinykh V.P. et al., 2014].
Fig.2 Russian Precise Geodetic Network
One of NEEREF objectives is to conduct research not only in the frame of
conventional geodetic problems but also the related geophysical ones. For
example, the interaction with geomagnetic observation networks, which is
significant for better understanding of the interrelationship of the terrestrial and
natural external processes, is proposed [Kaftan V.I., Krasnoperov R.I., 2015].
The first kinematic coordinate reference frame of Russia is a common work
result of the above mentioned Russian institutions. The coordinate solutions were
obtained based on the ITRF08 catalogue. The coordinate accuracy values of daily
Bernese solutions were 0.8 and 1.7 mm for the horizontal and vertical components,
accordingly. The velocity vector values of the sites of the Russian Fundamental
Astro-Geodetic Network (FAGN) are derived from the data of continuous GPS
observations conducted in 01/2010-12/2011. The velocities are determined from
the time series analysis of two-year observations. The accuracy of determination of
the displacement rates obtained from the time series of daily coordinate solutions
attained 0.2-0.3 and 0.4 mm/yr for the horizontal and vertical components,
respectively [Gorobets et al., 2012].
Fig.3 Russian 1st order Satellite Geodetic Network
National vertical precise reference frame (the Main height frame) is
developing permanently. The modern state of the Russian vertical reference frame
is presented in Fig.4. The Russian vertical reference frame was recently connected
with national leveling networks of Belorussia, Finland and Norway. The works on
the 1st and 2nd order leveling modernization are initiated at the Crimea territory.
The Russian vertical reference frame realizes the Baltic normal height system of
1977.
The history of creation and development of the Russian leveling network is
briefly described in [Basmanov A.V., 2013]. The oldest Russian leveling city
network of Saint-Petersburg is inspected and reconstructed [Bogdanov A.S. et al.,
2013].
The research on registration and identification of measurement gross errors on
results of leveling network adjustment by parametric method is described in
[Stoliarov I.A., 2013].
The development of state gravity network in Russia (USSR) has begun in the
fourth decade of the 20th century. All gravity measurements of that epoch were
performed at the four reference stations in Moscow, Pulkovo, Poltava and Kazan,
that were directly connected to Potsdam station. The further advancements of
gravity measurements resulted in creating the State Gravimetric Reference Frame
of the First order during the period from 1965 to 1970.
The modern State gravimetric network was established using differential
pendulum method from 1979 to 1994. More than 1000 stations were installed and
observed during that time, creating the foundation for further densification of the
network and gravimetric surveys. The First order network consisted from 11
fundamental stations where measurements were made using Russian ballistic
gravimeters with high precision. The gravimetric network for epoch 1995 was
created by combining measurements from fundamental and First order stations.
The special attention is given to the development of Fundamental gravimetric
network in the last decade (see Fig.5). Newly created stations are included in
complex sites of the FAGN and PGN and joined with First order stations of the
previous period if possible. Thus repeated gravity measurements are being made
over all national territory more than 20 years later that allowed the accuracy of the
previous generation network to be checked and the crustal motion together with
repeated leveling to be studied.
All measurements at the stations of the Fundamental Network are made using
absolute ballistic gravimeters. New generation of gravity meters of GBL-M series
were produced since 2009 in IAiE RAS. TSNIIGAiK has three instruments of the
series that are used during regular field measurements. Some measurements are
also made with FG-5, GBL-P, GABL-E and other gravity meters. The root mean
square errors of the latest gravity measurement vary from 0.8 to 3.3 μGal at the
stationary fundamental gravity points. The extension of the gravimetric network on
the Russian part of Arctic has started in 2012. There are plans to develop a
fundamental gravimetric network in Antarctica from 2014 to 2017 at the sites of
active Russian Antarctic stations. National and international comparisons of
absolute gravity meters are being made at Russian gravimetric stations.
Fig.4 Main Russian vertical reference frame (1st and 2nd order precise levelings). Black solid lines are the 1st order leveling. Thin black lines are the 2nd
order leveling. State border of Russia is indicated by gray line. Blue dots – connection points between national networks. Red lines – resent relevelings.
Fig.5 Russian Fundamental Gravity Network
Fig.6. The Journées 2014 participants at Pulkovo Observatory 22 - 24
September 2014
The Journées 2014 "Systèmes de référence spatio-temporels", with the sub-title
"Recent developments and prospects in ground-based and space astrometry" were
organized at Pulkovo Observatory from 22 to 24 September 2014. The main
purpose of the meeting is to provide an international forum for advanced
discussion in the fields of space and time reference systems, Earth rotation,
astrometry and time. These Journées are included in the program of celebrating of
the 175th anniversary of the Pulkovo observatory. Common photo is presented in
Fig.6.
The information on gravity study is presented in the Gravity Field section.